DMGR3 2123 


—.. /Advanced 
0150 05 


7"5 Edition 


Dungeon Master's Rules 
Guide Supplement 


and 
Equipment 
Guide 


Du ኤች 


Edition‏ 92م 


Rules 
Supplement 


Table of Contents 


۸80197 S oi CU الب ل‎ E ue نا مو‎ ፡ e ido Rs t یناو ممیت‎ 4 
Equipment for Mounts u... eS nenn 41 
۷۷۰۷۶308190 ን «ከን Maa sme d ott ዣ፣ንያ፡.፡ او ف قش‎ qm و و می سیر ھا‎ 53 
Equipiienb sand ل اما‎ ndr ERE et beu سک‎ ቀ: ን ماما بر عا‎ do suba 110 
Clothing ہیام مب‎ eot Poe سا میم‎ ER 118 


Credits 


Design: Grant Boucher (Armor) 
Troy Christensen and Jon Pickens (Equipment for mounts, Equipment) 
John Terra (Weapons) 
Scott Davis (Clothing) 

Editing: Anne Brown, Jon Pickens 


Color Art: Daniel Horne, Erik Olson, Keith Parkinson, Michael Weaver 
Black and White Art: Kelly and Laura Freas, Mark Nelson, Karl Waller (Armor) 
Valerie Valusek (Equipment for mounts) 
Stephen Sullivan (Weapons) 
Ken Frank (Equipment) 
Ned Dameron (Clothing) 


Typography: Gaye O'Keefe 
Production: Sarah Feggestad 


This book is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material 
contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of TSR, Inc. 


Distributed to the book trade in the United States by Random House, Inc. and in Canada by Random House of Canada, Ltd. 
Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR, Inc. 
Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors. 


AD&D and ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
The TSR logo is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc. 

Printed in the United States of America. 

©Copyright 1991, TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. 


TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd. 
POB 756 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 Cambridge CB1 3LB 
U.S.A. United Kingdom 
ISBN 1-56076-109-1 2123 


Introduction 


free to disallow any items that don't fit the 
grand scheme of your campaign. 


Historical Accuracy: Every attempt has been 
made to ensure that the information present- 
ed here is historically accurate. However, 
scholars of history often disagree among 
themselves, resulting in conflicting opinions 
among resources. If you find that the infor- 
mation in this volume disagrees with what 
you know of history, consider checking one 
of the resources listed below. Or chalk it up 
to to a different historian. (If you're con- 
vinced we've blundered, we're always happy 
to hear about it in a letter. Any documenta- 
tion you can provide would be appreciated.) 


Weapons: As the longest section in this book, 
the weapons chapter has some unique fea- 
tures. You'll find comments from seasoned 
adventurers in italicized type. These are in- 
tended to offer new ideas for role-playing. 
You'll also find numerous boxed entries. 
These boxes contain interesting historical tid- 
bits that might provide role-playing ideas 
and are just plain fun to read. 

With these things in mind, you're ready to 
go forth and conquer. Here's hoping that the 
Arms and Equipment Guide will help you do 
it! 


Dungeon Masters of the world, relax! 

Until now, you've all had to duck or dodge 
questions about armor, lengths of swords, 
and the blades (or lack of them) on pole 
arms. At best, you've said, "It kinda looks 
likea..." At worst, you've had to go to the 
library to look up such information. 

‚A few of you are fortunate to be scholars 
of history and already know the answers to 
such questions. But for the rest of you, this 
book contains the information you've been 
waiting for. 

The Arms and Equipment Guide is the 
most complete compilation of information 
about armor, weapons, and equipment for 
the AD&D? game to date. It is intended to 
help both DMs and players to understand 
and better use the wide variety of equipment 
available. We've included a plethora of illus- 
trations to make this volume as user-friendly 
as possible. 


For DMs: Be aware that the information in 
this work encompasses a wide variety of 
equipment suitable for many campaign styles. 
Don't be afraid to veto certain weapons or ar- 
mor to suit your own campaign world. The 
intention of this book is not to provide adven- 
turers with every weapon known to man; it is 
merely to expand the choices available. Feel 


References and Additional Reading 


Sichel, Marion. History of Men's Costume. Bats- 
ford Academic and Educational Ltd., London, 
1984. 


Stone, George Cameron. A Glossary of the Con- 
struction, Decoration and Use of Arms and Ar- 
mor in All Countries and in All Times. Jack 
Brussel, New York, 1961. 


Tarassuk, Leonid, and Blair, Claude, editors. The 
Complete Encyclopedia of Arms and Weapons. 
Simon and Schuster, New York, 1979. 


Yarwood, Doreen. The Encyclopedia of World 
Costume. Bonanza Books, New York, 1978. 


Introduction ® 3 


Ashdown, Charles Henry. European Arms & Ar- 
mour. Brussel & Brussel, New York, 1967. 


Brooks Picken, Mary. The Language of Fashion. 
Funk and Wagnalls Company, New York, 1939. 


Cassin-Scott, Jack. Costumes and Settings for 
Staging Historical Plays—Volume 2, The Mediae- 
val Period. Plays, Inc., Boston, 1979. 


Duggan, Alfred. Growing Up in 13th Century En- 
gland. Pantheon Books, New York, 1962. 


ffoulkes, Charles. The Armourer and His Craft 
From the XIth to the XVIth Century. Dover Pubii- 
cations, Inc., New York, 1912 and 1988. 


Gorsline, Douglas. What People Wore. Bonanza 
Books, New York, 1952. 


mor has seen its last days, the armor class of 
the armor drops one place (AC 9). The ar- 
mor, now rotted and torn, is little more than 
bulky clothing. Importantly, heavily soiled 
armor reduces the wearer's saving throws 
against disease and disease-causing spells by 
=7 

Under ideal conditions, a set of padded ar- 
mor should be replaced monthly. However, 
when travelling through heavily infested 
swamps or in monster-laden forests, padded 
armor may require replacement as often as 
every few days. On any long journey, spare 
sets of padded armor should be taken along 
as if they were spare sets of clothing. Too 
much frugality before a journey can lead to 
much discomfort later. 

Naturally, those who have no access to bet- 
ter armor try to make the best appearance 
whenever they can. Nobody wants to appear 
cheap or desperate, especially when they are. 
Therefore, decorating one's padded armor is 
the most common form of "upgrading" the ap- 
pearance of one's forces. All armies and na- 
tions have banners and shields adorned with 
their own colors, and these colors are often re- 
peated in intricate patterns on their padded ar- 
mor. This is most often seen when the local 
king or noble quickly recruits the local 
farmers' militia to defend his lands or aid him 
in launching an assault. The wives, sisters, 
and daughters quickly whip up anything they 
can to protect their ill-trained husbands, 
brothers, and sons. The colors of the lord are 
either quilted into the design of the armor in 
checkerboard fashion, or painted or dyed on- 
to the hastily prepared protection. 

In similar fashion, the most nefarious of 
evil knights have been known to use quilted 
armor to camouflage their own soldiers as 
peasants of the opposing ranks, taking devi- 
ous advantage of the militia's known lack of 
combat training. 

This is only one of many reasons why 0- 
level fighters are neither feared nor respected 
by the armed forces. Certainly in the case of 
padded armor, one can tell a knave by his 
suit. 


CHAPTER 


Padded Armor (AC 8) 


Description: Padded armor, also referred to 
as quilted armor, is the simplest form of man- 
made armor. It consists of two or more layers 
of spun cloth stuffed with thick batting and 
quilted together. 

Padded armor typically covers the chest 
and shoulders, but full-length suits are some- 
times seen. 


Campaign Use: Padded armor is mostly 
found among the poor and unskilled. Only 
the poorest excuses for armed forces would 
be caught dead in padded armor. The bulky 
and restrictive nature of the armor makes it a 
poor substitute for a stout set of leather 
(q.v.). 

Village militias, neophyte bandit packs, 
urban street gangs, and primitive barbarian 
hordes are the most common users of padded 
armor. In short, this includes anyone who 
cannot afford leather armor (i.e., the truly 
destitute), cultures without the technology to 
tan hide (i.e., the truly primitive), or those 
who have no other option at their time of 
need (i.e., the truly desperate). 

Padded armor can be made by any race or 
nation. Thus, it is common protection for the 
poorer classes. Since making a padded suit of 
armor requires little more than a crude nee- 
dle and thread, low-level or desperate adven- 
turers in need of additional protection can 
usually whip up a set of padded armor in less 
than two days. The durability and level of 
comfort afforded by the homemade suit nat- 
urally varies in direct proportion to the skill 
of the would-be armorer. For game purposes, 
several layers of heavy cloth or furs can be 
considered padded armor for the purposes of 
determining a character's base armor class. 

Padded armor, being little more than mul- 
tiple layers of clothing, tends to soil and wear 
out easily. Although newly fashioned sets 
may sell cheaply, padded armor must be re- 
placed often, even if it is well cared for. Lice, 
woe dirt, fleas, and insects all take their 
toll. 

If the DM judges that a set of padded ar- 


4 * Chapter One 


፦= کے‎ 
Ce 


/ 19 VG 


“== 


EFF IE کے‎ 


ی 


Armor ۶ 5 


tanning. Horses, sheep, and camels can be 
used just as easily. In short, the creature must 
have a thicker skin than that of a normal 
man, but not quite as thick as that of an ele- 
phant or bear. The skins of these well- 
protected creatures, when tanned, becomes 
hide armor (q.v.). 

Irregular human forces (e.g., militia and 
levies, freemen, commoners above peasant 
level, barbarians, light infantry, and ma- 
rines) are the primary users of leather armor, 
for the following reasons: A) leather armor is 
drastically cheaper and more readily availa- 
ble than metal armor; B) the armor can be 
worn for long periods of time without lead- 
ing to increased fatigue or disease; C) the 
method of production is so simple that many 
armies can make new sets of armor from cat- 
tle seized in newly raided territories, often 
scant days before meeting the defenders in 
battle; and D) they can be stockpiled for 
years without the need for the excessive 
maintenance required by metal armors that 
are prone to rust. 

Another benefit of leather armor, much ex- 
tolled by those of a more disreputable per- 
suasion, is the ease with which it can be 
silenced. While leather armor is not typically 
noisy, its buckles and fasteners tend to rattle 
and clink. Unlike metal armor, leather armor 
is easily muffled by clothing and as such 
makes little sound during normal movement. 
Additional layers of clothing further dampen 
sounds made by the wearer while hiding. 
More rogues than can be counted owe their 
lives to muffled leather armor. 

The freedom of movement, adequate gen- 
eral protection, lack of noise, high availabil- 
ity, and low price make this the armor of 
choice for the general human population. 


Leather Armor (AC 8) 


Description: Leather armor, despite the pop- 
ular misconception, is not soft and supple 
like the leather used to make a ranger's boots 
or a druid's robe. That kind of leather offers 
no better protection than common clothing. 

Leather armor is actually strong and stiff, 
having been hardened in boiling oil and then 
stretched over a wooden or stone model of a 
man's or woman's chest. The resulting breast- 
plate and shoulder guards are combined with 
a tunic or kirtle and, in colder climes, leg- 
gings of wool or soft leather. 


Campaign Use: This is the most common 
form of "modern" armor. The materials 
(leather and oil) are readily available in all 
civilized lands. Only the technique for boil- 
ing and shaping the leather is necessary, and 
this is not a difficult feat for a leatherworker. 

This armor is both inexpensive and dura- 
ble. While the leather is extremely stiff, it is 
never fashioned into anything larger than a 
breastplate, which keeps restriction of move- 
ment to a minimum. Naturally, this arrange- 
ment means leather armor affords no 
protection to the joints, but this is true of 
most types of armor, and is a challenge all 
civilized races have been attempting to over- 
come since wars began. 

In severe combat situations, leather armor 
may need to be replaced weekly. However, 
the armor is easily cleaned, reasonably unaf- 
fected by weather, and resists all but the se- 
verest of abrasions. This means a good set of 
leather can be worn daily for many months 
without need for replacement. Many retired 
warriors and middle-class militia have a set 
of leather armor stored away that they take 
out and polish at least annually. 

Because raw leather comes from a by- 
product of medieval daily life (i.e., eating 
beef and other meats), in civilized societies 
leather armor is very common. Even rural 
communities have little trouble manufactur- 
ing leather armor for the troops within a few 
days. 

Cows are not the sole source of hide for 


6 * Chapter One 


1 


/ : 2 f 0 7 


:, እሻዩበበዝ ur ፡ 
— ኤተ NEN N | I / 
VU EE ር / / 
ye (5 
77۱۳ سے‎ S / ۱ اک‎ 


an 


/ ‚ ® 
IN 

m es 
MEN 


Armor * 7 


gents, however, whose main function is 
boarding, usually wear normal leather and 
carry a shield. 

Miserly merchants, who shave pieces of 
gold more than they like to admit, will often 
buy studded leather to outfit their hired 
guards. However, these copper-pinchers pay 
for the protection one way or another, as 
studded leather tends to wear out rather 
quickly. Not only does the soft backing wear 
out as quickly as thick clothing, but the 
metal studs can be affixed only by driving 
them through the leather, considerably 
weakening the overall strength of the back- 
ing. Eventually, the holes open up and the 
rivets drop out. Studded leather is also prone 
to the same problems of sweat, grime, and 
insects as padded armor (q.v.). 


Spiked Leather 


A variation of studded leather that is 
sometimes seen among barbarians of north- 
ern climes (and, oddly, among some hill giant 
clans) is spiked leather. Much as it sounds, 
spiked leather armor is studded leather ar- 
mor in which the rivets have been augmented 
by sharp spikes. (Most intelligent beings 
would be worried about mounting spikes in- 
to their armor, just in case they should trip 
and fall, not to mention the problems pack- 
ing or storing the armor). 

Overbearing and grappling while wearing 
such armor inflicts additional damage based 
on the wearer's size. A small creature inflicts 
1-2 points of piercing damage, a man-sized 
creature inflicts 1-3 points, and a large crea- 
ture inflicts 1-4 points. These values are con- 
sidered for each individual attack, not for 
every round that a creature is grappled. 

Spiked armor is usually made specially for 
the wearer and costs about 150% of the price 
of a normal set of studded leather. 

Spiked armor is occasionally used to equip 
gladiators, pit fighters, and other specialists. 


Studded Leather Armor 
(AC 7) 


Description: Studded leather armor has little 
in common with normal leather armor. 
While leather armor is a hardened shell, stud- 
ded leather armor is soft and supple with 
hundreds of metal rivets affixed. The rivets 
are so close together that they form a flexible 
coating of hard metal that turns aside slash- 
ing and cutting attacks. The soft leather 
backing is little more than a means of secur- 
ing the rivets in place. 


Campaign Use: Studded leather armor is 
known as "poor man's mail" because of its 
metallic components and low price. It is 
more common among the general population 
than most people would first believe because, 
unlike other types of mail armor, studded 
leather is relatively easy to make. 

While a soft leather backing is the most du- 
rable and comfortable, any stout cloth can be 
used as a backing for the rivets. The rivets 
themselves are also easy to acquire, as every- 
thing from nails to pebbles have been substi- 
tuted at one time or another in times of 
desperation. In general, as long as the backing 
is secure and the rivets are hard enough to 
withstand a glancing blow, the armor so com- 
prised should be considered studded leather 
for purposes of weight and protection. 

Studded leather, like brigandine (described 
later), is commonly worn by pirates and oth- 
er seafarers. The protection afforded is better 
than normal leather armor, which is an im- 
portant point during sea combat when a 
shield may not be practical (a shield is useless 
when climbing or fighting in a ship's rigging). 

With regard to swimming, the weight of 
studded leather is significantly less than 
metal armor, and the flexibility of the soft 
leather backing is better for such demanding 
activity. Indeed, for short times in the water, 
it is as easy to maneuver in studded leather as 
it is to move in a normal leather breastplate. 
Therefore, most sea-going mercenaries and 
pirates prefer to wear studded leather as their 
all-purpose armor. Trained marine contin- 


8 * Chapter One 


الى ኋዔ ኒ=,ን‏ ۹۔ 
ኢ T uS NS en‏ ےر 
مه ሪን ላውሠ‏ 9( “ 

wer ہم‎ E 


nr ۰4 2‏ ره 


ام eux‏ 
ف برف 


Armor ® 9 


Like padded armor, hide armor is often 
decorated to show tribal allegiances. Com- 
monly, the type of creature used to make the 
armor is sufficient to denote clan alliance, as 
with the Hydra clan fire giants or the Black 
Bear ogres. 

Unique to the humanoid races is the habit 
of affixing some part of one's notable kill to 
one’s hide armor. While this doesn't affect the 
armor class rating of this armor in any sub- 
stantial way, it does tend to make one less 
popular around the civilized campfire but 
more important around the humanoid or 
barbarian camp. Importantly, these trophies, 
which often include such grisly things as 
skulls, scalps, teeth and claws, are consid- 
ered a sign of ferocity and ruthlessness and 
are therefore seen most commonly among 
high leaders and shamans. 

The equivalent of hide armor among hu- 
mans and demihuman races is layered leather 
armor, wherein many layers of normal leath- 
er armor are bonded to one another to form a 
heavy, thick plate of protection. This armor 
is considered hide armor with regard to 
weight and cost, but does not suffer the prob- 
lems of odor and disease seen in hide and 
padded armors. 

Few human cultures employ hide armor 
extensively. Most notably, certain northern 
barbarian tribes commonly wear thick hide 
armor. Some of these tribesmen actually be- 
lieve that the hide armor gives them animal- 
like strength and powers, and that human 
armors like chain and plate mail actually rob 
them of their innate combat instincts. While 
this may be dismissed as ignorant supersti- 
tion, there are shamans of the northern 
wastes who tell great tales of famous suits of 
hide armor, blessed with the spirits of the ani- 
mals from which they came. 

Whether or not special hide armor exists 
(like the White Skin of Umpluutu, which al- 
lows the wearer to shapechange into a polar 
bear) is up to the DM, but hide armor offers 
unique avenues in a barbarian or primitive 
campaign. 


Hide Armor (AC 6) 


Description: Hide armor is made from the 
thick hide of a very large animal (an ele- 
phant, for example) or from many layers of 
normal leather from common animals, like 
cows. 


Campaign Use: Hide armor is much too 
thick, heavy, and inflexible to be used much 
in the advanced human cultures. Its weight is 
comparable to chain mail, but its protection 
is less. However, among the barbaric human- 
oid masses throughout the dark forests and 
misty jungles of the world, hide armor is 
common. 

Because of its simple construction, any 
race with Low Intelligence or better can 
make suitable hide armor. All that is re- 
quired is a dead animal and someone to 
wear its skin. Since no effort to tan the hide 
is necessary to get basic protection, crea- 
tures with a desire for excellent protection at 
a fair price (i.e., usually free) find hide ar- 
mor ideal for everyday use. Proper tanning, 
of course, improves the armor's life (and ac- 
ceptance in polite society). 

The smell of untanned armor, as any ogre 
can testify, is something a warrior must get 
used to. 

As mentioned in the section on leather ar- 
mor, the stiffness that results when hide ar- 
mor dries completely isn’t considered a 
drawback by humanoids. (In fact, without 
that stiffness, the hide would lose one level of 
armor class protection.) For only a little bit 
of work, any humanoid worth his hit dice 
can start adventuring at AC 6 and begin 
hunting for a shield. 

Ironically, while leather armor may allow 
greater freedom of movement, durability, 
and a more pleasant appearance and smell, 
hide armor is actually two levels of protec- 
tion better (AC 6 instead of AC 8). It illus- 
trates that humans trust their dexterity and 
intelligence to aid in avoiding wounds during 
combat, while less-intelligent humanoids 
typically rely on reducing the chances of a vi- 
tal strike with a thicker armor. 


a‏ و ور تن 


10 * Chapter One 


y ip‏ مت 
" 


hi hd l 
ያ ۲ گے‎ ۱ Eosi : 7 J = 
re. ግ i A aS ٦ 
à ^ uy 
١ 1 ۱ j p ۱ oL 


x « 
ሀ//#/ፖሥ., A 
'1፤ سیا‎ መሊ t 
NY 


N سے‎ 
ነነ አፍ z= 


کک ہم 
۱ 


ኢዲ! V 
de = = 


A) 


۱ » ۳ ^ 1 4A | 
71 | 
yi 
ر7‎ f, “/// 


Armor * 11 


Scale mail does offer protection as good as 
that of brigandine for the same price and at a 
comparable weight. The choice between 
scale mail and brigandine armor is likely to 
be determined by the nature of the cultures in 
the DM's campaign world. 


Sea Elf Scale Mail 


The most intricately constructed demi- 
human scale mail is found in the undersea 
kingdoms of the sea elves. More as a matter 
of appearance and ceremony than for addi- 
tional protection, the sea elves adapted the 
idea of scale mail to their own peculiar de- 
signs. Their armor can be worn underwater, 
as it is made of metals that do not rust, and 
the scales are affixed to a backing of eel-skin, 
which does not disintegrate as leather does in 
salt water. Brought forth only in times of war 
or of great ceremony, this expensive armor is 
worn only by the noble elven elite. 

This scale mail is unique among others for 
its beautiful silver coating. Some armorers 
wonder whether this coating is silver, plati- 
num, or even mithril. It is generally agreed 
that the rare scale mail of the sea elves is 
nearly as valuable as elven chain mail (q.v.). 


Coin Armor 


A variant of scale mail is armor made with 
the common coins of the realm. This coin ar- 
mor is seen only rarely, and then usually 
among dignitaries and high generals. Each set 
of armor can stock a large quantity of coins 
(up to 1,000!). Rarely are they stolen, how- 
ever, as the people who are rich enough to 
wear them are also rich enough to see to their 
personal security. 

There are many variations possible, from 
armor scaled wholly of gold or silver coins to 
mixed suits wherein the coins themselves are 
arranged in a personal, family, clan, or other 
heraldric pattern. 


. Scale Mail (AC 6) 


Description: This is a coat of soft leather cov- 
ered with overlapping pieces of metal, much 
like the scales of a fish. It is just as heavy as 
chain mail, but offers slightly worse protec- 
tion. It has no significant advantages over 
hide or brigandine armor. 


Campaign Use: Scale mail is an old type of 
armor, much like splint mail (described lat- 
er). It never became popular in western medi- 
eval culture for very long; its production was 
found to be too time-consuming and thus less 
efficient to make in comparison to other ar- 
mor types. In the AD&D® game context, 
scale mail is most common in Dark Age peri- 
ods, in foriegn cultures, or in those areas 
where its materials are unusually plentiful. 

Some human cultures, notably those simi- 
lar to the Byzantines and other eastern and 
southern kingdoms, did not pursue the evo- 
lution of armor made of large plates, but 
rather chose to make use of small plates. 
Where metal is not forged but is instead cut 
from sheets of malleable metal ores, the tech- 
nology of scale mail and its successors 
(splint, brigandine, and banded armor) pre- 
dominates. 

This is not a matter of primitive versus civ- 
ilized, but rather two separate approaches to 
the same problem. Where western cultures 
stress protection, eastern cultures seek to 
maximize flexibility (and ventilation in the 
hotter climates). 

The scales in scale armor are made smaller 
in order to make the suit more flexible and 
comfortable when worn. Indeed, in this re- 
spect, scale mail far exceeds either plate or 
banded mail. 

However, all those scales require more 
maintenance, as the more items attached to 
an armor's backing, the greater the chance 
some will fall off. Scale armor not properly 
maintained loses one level of armor class 
protection. 

Scale mail suffers the same problems of 
dirt, grime, lice, and odor that studded leath- 
er and padded armor suffer. 


12 * Chapter One 


Armor * 3 


۷ 1 إلا 


1118 


በ4 
0ن‎ 


0 


2 


E n 


attacks (the most common types encountered 
in these professions). 

As mentioned, brigandine is easier to muf- 
fle than most metal armors and mails and 
thus is the armor of choice among many 
rogues and the less reputable members of the 
campaign society. 

Rangers often own a set of brigandine as a 
field combat backup to their normal armor 
of either studded leather or leather. Poor or 
novice rangers and warriors might be able to 
afford or acquire brigandine armor when 
other armors might not be accessible. 

Brigandine armor can also be useful for 
smugglers, allowing items to be concealed 
within its multiple layers. Not only coins and 
precious metals might be concealed, but trea- 
sure maps, personal defense traps, and con- 
cealed weapons are all possibilities for the 
clever character. Whether these are actual 
machinations of devious minds or just ru- 
mors spread to discourage personal thievery 
is a subject of some debate among adventur- 
ers and legal authorities. 

What is known is that it is possible to con- 
ceal such items, either within the padding or 
by interleaving them with the metal plates. 
This potential for use (or abuse) of brigan- 
dine armor in the campaign should not be 
overlooked by the DM or player. Secret 
pockets for use by thieves or prestidigitators 
might be revealed in the heat of combat, or 
local authorities may miss a valuable clue the 
PCs are lucky enough to discover on their 
own. Much like gnomish workman's leather 
(described later), an adventurer's set of brig- 
andine may hold many welcome or unwel- 
come surprises. 


Brigandine Armor(AC 6) 


Description: A development of both scale 
mail and studded leather, brigandine armor 
is composed of a layer of small metal plates 
riveted to an undercoat of soft leather, thick 
cloth, or coarse canvas. A further overcoat 
of cloth is applied to the exterior of the suit, 
making for a layered protection that is lighter 
than scale mail. An alternative configuration 
is for the plates to be sandwiched between 
two layers of soft leather. 


Campaign Use: Brigandine is a light armor of 
composite construction, often worn by brig- 
ands and other rogues. The armor is essen- 
tially a variant of studded leather with an 
overcoat of cloth. The cloth covering serves 
both to strengthen the entire framework as 
well as to make the armor less conspicuous 
from a distance. Brigandine armor is quieter 
than chain, splint, or banded mail, but less 
quiet than studded leather or leather armor. 

Brigandine weighs more than hide but less 
than scale mail. It is generally more flexible 
than hide, but its three layers make it some- 
what stiffer than scale mail. 

Brigandine armor is generally the best ar- 
mor a run-of-the-mill village armorer can 
make and still get good results. For anything 
with a higher armor class, a professional 
master armorer is required. This means that 
brigandine armor is the highest level of pro- 
tection afforded many low-level AD&D® 
game cultures and campaigns. 

This represents the limit for the early Mid- 
dle Ages period AD&D campaign. If a cam- 
paign resembles the Dark Ages more than the 
Age of Chivalry, scale mail and brigandine 
armor probably represent the pinnacle of 
personal armor. 

Pirates and bandits (i.e., brigands) find 
that brigandine can be made from anything 
on hand from sails to canvas sacks, and from 
coins to brass shavings. Such armor still of- 
fers decent protection against most slashing 


14 * Chapter One 


Armor * 15 


1 EN 
"MM, 


ኣኒ 


ኣዒ - 
, 


Sr: e 1 ና 
MES ለ ہا رپ تی ف‎ 


1 
In 


የ / 4 


De 
ہے‎ > 


Ld 
LA 


۸ እ) 
ኣ SMANUZS 


‘TA Far? 


74۶ 


ዶ 


۰ -9፻ያ 


8 ج 


2 


ss 


= 1 
A 


P US 


1 


Typically, town guards and noble patrols 
are bedecked in chain mail armor. It is perfect 
for short duty tours and gives the noble war- 
rior a great advantage over the local rabble. 
Just the difference between chain mail and 
leather armor alone can give the officer a sig- 
nificant advantage over most ruffians. Any- 
one wearing chain mail armor with any sort 
of heraldic crest or uniform is usually as- 
sumed to be a local official of some kind by 
the experienced and perceptive traveler. 

In general, chain mail is the basis for all of 
the more advanced and more protective ar- 
mors found in most AD&D® game cam- 
paigns. The potentially low cost of chain 
mail is a reflection of the fact that many sets 
of chain mail are bought as a base for banded 
mail and the more sophisticated plate ar- 
mors. 

Because chain mail armor is not usually 
worn for long periods at a time, its underly- 
ing padding rarely suffers the problems of 
padded armors. The metal mail, however, 
will rust if not oiled and scrubbed with a wire 
brush weekly. After a month of neglect, 
chain mail armor loses one level of armor 
class since it is no longer as flexible and links 
may have begun to rust. (Naturally, this ap- 
plies only to ferrous armor mail and not to 
chain mail constructed of non-ferrous 
metals). | 

Chain mail is certainly the best armor val- 
ue for adventurers who cannot yet afford the 
heavier armors. 


Ring Mail 

This form of chain mail is made by sewing 
large metal rings to a leather or cloth back- 
ing. Ring mail has the same role in early- 
period campaigns that chain mail has in later 
ones. In later campaigns, it is more expensive 
to buy than chain mail, weighs a comparable 
amount, provides worse protection (AC 7), 
and suffers all the maintenance problems of 
padded and studded leather armor. Few hu- 
man groups, other than town militias and 
bandit gangs, use ring mail to any significant 
degree. 


Chain Mail (AC 5) 


Description: Chain mail is made of interlock- 
ing metal rings. It is always worn over a layer 
of padded fabric or soft leather to prevent 
chafing and lessen the impact of blows. 


Campaign Use: Chain mail is the standard 
medium armor in most fantasy campaigns. 
In many places, it is so common that the 
price of a good suit of chain mail may actu- 
ally be cheaper than less sophisticated ar- 
mors like scale mail and brigandine. This 
makes the appeal of chain mail armor very 
high indeed. 

Chain mail is only slightly heavier than 
hide or brigandine armor and much lighter 
than any of the plate armors. Important to 
the wearer, however, is the fact that the 
weight of a suit of chain mail does not rest 
evenly upon the body. Rather, most of the 
burden of a chain suit rests upon the shoul- 
ders, making chain armor feel heavier than it 
really is. 

In game terms, this means chain mail can 
be worn for only about a day before the 
shoulders of even the strongest warriors be- 
gin to fatigue. Experienced warriors usually 
carry a second set of lighter armor (often 
leather or studded leather) for use when trav- 
eling or at night when not on watch. 


Optional Rule: Prolonged shoulder fa- 
tigue from wearing chain mail more than 


one day at a time affects combat (-2 to 
hit) and leads to headaches and back- 


aches. 


In general, chain mail is worn by mid-level 
fighters, guardsmen, mercenaries, and men- 
at-arms with some official capacity. The 
price of chain mail is equivalent to many 
years income for most peasants, and is thus 
out of reach for most common folk. How- 
ever, some middle-class families have a set or 
two of heirloom chain mail armor handed 
down from glorious days past for use in dan- 
gerous days to come. 


16 * Chapter One 


Armor © 17 


timation of one's peers would certainly be 
diminished, as a well-tended suit of banded 
mail can gleam most beautifully if cared for 


properly. 


Splint Mail 


Splint mail is a variant of banded mail in 
which the metal strips are applied vertically 
to the backing of chain, leather, or cloth rath- 
er than horizontally as in banded mail. Since 
the human body does not swivel in mid-torso 
as much as it flexes back to front, splint mail 
is more restrictive in battle. 

In game terms, splint mail is to banded mail 
as scale mail is to brigandine: splint mail is the 
style of the earlier and less efficient armoring 
techniques. Much like scale and ring mail 
(q.v.), splint mail will be used by the less 
advanced cultures and poorer warriors. Its 
relatively low street price in a western cam- 
paign when compared to banded mail and 
even chain is due to the fact that few western 
warriors will even touch a set of splint mail 
unless they are destitute or desperate. 

The protection splint mail affords is equiv- 
alent to that of banded mail, but it is much 
more fatiguing to wear in a lengthy battle. 
Furthermore, broken splints tend to work in- 
ward toward the wearer in the course of a 
battle. More than a few warriors have found 
themselves painfully cut across the ribs when 
broken banded mail would have merely 
shifted up or down. Maintenance problems 
for splint mail are otherwise the same as for 
banded mail. 

For characters with a light purse, splint 
mail can be picked up in seedier armor shops. 
Its price makes it ideal for adventurers who 
want the extra bit of protection over chain 
mail. 


Banded Mail (AC 4) 


Description: Banded mail armor is made of 
overlapping horizontal strips of laminated 
metal sewn over a backing of normal chain 
mail and soft leather backing. Lamination in 
this context refers to a process in which many 
thin sheets of metal are hammered or riveted 
together to form each individual metal strip. 


Campaign Use: This type of armor is most 
commonly worn by eastern warriors and 
would be as common as plate mail in a cul- 
ture based on the Turks, for example, late 
period Mongols, or the Japanese. 

In a western campaign, banded mail can be 
considered to be the precursor of plate ar- 
mor. Since banded mail inevitably will have 
gaps between the metal strips, however, the 
total protection of vital areas is not quite as 
good as heavier plate armors. The result is 
the slightly poorer armor class rating of 
banded mail. 

The strength and flexibility of chain mail 
makes it ideal for protecting the jointed areas 
where large metal plates are traditionally in- 
capable of providing adequate protection. 

One advantage of this metal-and-chain ar- 
rangement over chain mail alone is the fact 
that the construction of banded mail natu- 
rally restricts movement of the metal plates 
across the torso. The beneficial side effect is 
that the weight of the armor is more evenly 
distributed on the wearer, making it easier to 
wear banded mail for longer periods of time. 

In game terms, while banded mail does 
have an overall higher level of protection 
than normal chain mail, the durability of 
banded mail, especially at the joints, is about 
half that of a standard suit of chain. While a 
fine set of chain armor might last six months 
or more, a set of banded mail rarely lasts 
three months, even with constant upkeep. 

Much like chain mail, ferrous metal bands 
are subject to rust. However, since the metal 
strips found in banded mail are already in- 
flexible and designed to remain that way, the 
armor class of rusty banded mail is no differ- 
ent from that of a new suit. However, the es- 


M —— MÀ‏ —— € سسسب ساح بحي 
Chapter One‏ * 18 


"AN , ፆያ 
57 ف‎ ۱ " (4 
í ۱ 
M 2 0 Y 
1 if ^ ۳1 ሽ 
“ወ ۱ اس‎ 6 


1 
D 
|. 
۳ | i 
, 


Armor * 19 


warhorse. If a knight can scrape up 400 gold 
pieces but can't get the extra 200 gold pieces 
to buy a real set of plate, bronze plate is the 
only real choice open to him. 

More than a few low-level adventurers 
with perhaps a little too much gold to spend 
and not enough experience or training in 
such matters often are cheated into buying 
bronze plate mail that has been painted sil- 
ver. They immediately lose 200 gold pieces in 
the deal by taking home the inferior armor. 
After even one such sucker-sale, the charla- 
tan salesman skips town for a few weeks or 
moves to a different part of the city. Natu- 
rally, such gullible warriors usually don't dis- 
cover their mistake until the heat of battle, 
when a weapon strike that would have 
bounced off a real set of plate mail dents or 
cuts through the bogus plate. Caveat emptor! 


Not all bronze plate is part of a hoax or 
scam, however. There are versions of bronze 
plate used by cultures who for one reason or 
another haven't learned the fine art of forg- 
ing iron and steel. There is much precedent 
for this in history and fantasy, and many 
advanced cultures have lost the art or never 
struck the right mix of metals throughout 
their long history. These cultures may have 
developed the skill of forging bronze into a 
high art, making armor that looks like gold 
but wears like steel. 

Note that these types of bronze mail last 
much longer than the typical medieval forms 
and may have a backing of solid bronze 
chain and leather. These suits wear like real 
plate, and the relative softness of the metal is 
often worked into a decorative design. Easy 
to emboss with one's family crest or tribal in- 
signia, well-worked bronze shines like gold 
and can be polished to the sheen of a mirror. 
Some tribes have literally won entire battles 
on the distracting beauty of their exquisite 
armor alone. 


Bronze Plate Mail (AC 4) 


Description: The softest of the true plate mail 
armors, bronze plate mail is made of heavy 
metal plates attached to a layer of brigandine 
or composite layers of metal scales and leath- 
er or padded armor. 


Campaign Use: Historically, by the time the 
armorer's craft had advanced to the point 
that plate mail had become common, steel 
had replaced bronze as the best metal for 
constructing armor. Thus, aside from cer- 
emonial armor, most bronze plate mail ap- 
pears in areas where copper and tin are 
plentiful and iron is rare. In general, since 
bronze plate mail is designed to be lighter 
and more flexible than normal plate mail 
(q.v.), bronze plate armorers use leather and 
padding under the bronze plates instead of 
the heavier chain mail. Also, to reduce the 
overall weight of the armor, there are no 
bronze plates attached to the moveable 
joints. A large bronze breastplate and 
greaves are often the only difference between 
bronze plate mail and bronze scale or brigan- 
dine armor. 

Bronze plate offers better protection than 
normal brigandine or chain mail and a lower 
price tag than standard plate mail. Since 
bronze plate is usually backed with stiff lay- 
ered armor rather than loose chain mail, 
bronze plate mail isn't as flexible as banded, 
splint, or plate mail. 

Who would use bronze plate mail in a 
standard campaign, when so many other al- 
ternatives exist? Plate mail, as will be dis- 
cussed later, is a sign of nobility to the 
general population. What does the lowly 
peasant or innkeeper know of the advantages 
and disadvantages of various types of plate 
mail? Little to be sure. In fact, this armor is 
one piece of equipment whose price is not de- 
termined by its true value in combat but by 
its perceived value to persons around the 
wearer. 

Any knight worth his salt acquires full 
plate armor (q.v.) as soon as he can, even if it 
means selling prized items of magic or a stout 


.ااا ——————— € M‏ س 
Chapter One‏ * 20 


4 


Cy 


Armor * 21 


Because the plates are carefully fitted to 
combine with the chain suit beneath, the lay- 
er of leather or padding beneath the chain is 
often much thinner and more flexible than 
that found in banded or brigandine armor. 
Many long years have gone into perfecting 
the construction of plate mail, which makes 
even the most basic of suits a wonder of me- 
dieval engineering. With regard to cost, the 
purchaser of a set of plate mail may have to 
fork out a considerable sum of money com- 
pared to banded mail, but no wearer of plate 
mail doubts for long the value and summary 
wisdom of his purchase. 

Knights, royal guards, and mercenary cap- 
tains often wear plate mail. Even as a prize of 
battle, plate mail is infinitely easier to fit to a 
new owner than either field or full plate ar- 
mor. Plate mail is the preferred protection of 
the vast percentage of the world's most expe- 
rienced warriors, because it is not nearly as 
cumbersome to don or remove as other 
heavier types of armor. 

It is a matter of pride among many king- 
doms that even the slightest improvement to 
the general plate mail design was quickly at- 
tributed to the armorer who invented the al- 
teration and the king whose wisdom it was to 
accept the change. 

As such, most sets of plate mail were con- 
stantly upgraded throughout the known 
world, and now are very similar indeed. In 
fact, the perfection of the basic plate mail de- 
sign was so nearly complete that many ar- 
morers had already begun devoting most, if 
not all, of their time and resources to work- 
ing field and full plate armor with similar 
care and precision. 

Plate mail is the heaviest armor commonly 
used by adventurers, both as a matter of 
pride and for the general necessities of daily 
use and efficiency. 


Plate Mail (AC 3) 


Description: Plate mail is a combination of 
chain or brigandine armor with metal plates 
covering the vital areas such as the chest, ab- 
domen and groin. Similar in construction to 
bronze plate mail, true plate mail comprises 
heavy steel plates riveted to a sturdy backing 
of chain and leather. These metal plates are 
often better constructed than those found in 
bronze plate and banded mails, relying on 
superior metallurgy and advanced lamina- 
tion techniques to produce a lightweight steel 
with excellent combat characteristics. 

Brigandine backing for this type of armor 
is rare, because the stiffness of brigandine ar- 
mor makes this type of backing an unpopular 
choice among plate armorers and warriors 
alike. 

For all of these reasons, plate mail protects 
the human body more effectively than 
bronze plate mail. 


Campaign Use: The development of plate 
mail heralded the beginning of the age of 
chivalry and knighthood. Associated most 
often with classic French medieval culture, 
the names given to the segments of plate mail 
reveal their French origin to this day. 

The most important metal plate on the ar- 
mor is called the plastron-de-fer, or breast- 
plate. It protects the vital chest and 
abdominal areas from attack. Typically, the 
shoulders were protected by metal shoulder 
guards called epaulieres. Lower leg protec- 
tors, called grevieres (or greaves), and metal- 
plated chain gloves, or gauntlets, are also 
common accessories to a plate mail suit. Any 
manner of helm is also desirable (see the sec- 
tion on Helms). 

Plate mail is the most common form of 
heavy armor in fantasy campaigns. It pro- 
vides maximum protection for a fraction of 
the cost of field or full plate armor, and can 
take month after month of grueling combat 
punishment. It is only moderately heavier 
than banded or chain mail, and because of its 
custom fitting and sturdy straps, wears easier 
than either. 


22 * Chapter One 


Armor * 3 


umphant battle celebrations. Full plate ar- 
mor is reserved for such occasions where 
style is more important than combat. 

Field plate can be fixed much more cheaply 
and easily than full plate, and is built to with- 
stand the rigors of long-term use and com- 
bat. The entire body is encased in metal 
plates, and even the joints are protected with 
metal caps and sturdy chain mail. A great 
helm bearing the emblem of the house or 
name of a legendary knight is common and is 
one of the few ways a knight can recognize a 
friend or foe from a distance. 

Field plate, while expensive and painstak- 
ingly crafted by master armorers, is normally 
not adorned with many trappings or embel- 
lishments. Since legendary knights make a 
habit of battling great armies and dragons al- 
most daily, their armor rarely lasts longer 
than a year without needing to be completely 
replaced. 

A DM may decide that being allowed to 
wear field or full plate armor is a sign of no- 
bility or knighthood in his campaign. In such 
campaigns, wealthy warriors had better have 
a legitimate noble crest or recognized royal 
patron before parading themselves about 
town. 


Optional Rule: This rule may be invoked 
if a player insists on wearing badly re- 
paired or patchwork plate mail. Following 
every strong jolt to the wearer, whether 
from a good hit in battle or a fall from a 
cliff, the material binding the patchwork 
plate to the backing (as stated at the time 


of repair) must make a saving throw ver- 
sus Crushing Blow. Failure means the 
plate falls off, while success means the 
next saving throw is made with a —1 pen- 
alty to the roll. Note that this penalty is 
cumulative, so any patchwork plate is 
bound to fall apart eventually. 


Field Plate Armor (AC 2) 


Description: Field plate is actually a more 
commonly used form of full plate armor (de- 
scribed later). It consists of shaped and fitted 
metal plates riveted and interlocked to cover 
the entire body. Like plate mail, a set of field 
plate usually includes gauntlets, boots, and a 
visored helmet (see Helms). A thick layer of 
padding must be worn under the armor. 


Campaign Use: This armor is rarely used, ex- 
cept by noble knights on a military cam- 
paign. In theory, the bulk of a set of field 
plate armor is so evenly distributed over the 
whole body that the encumbrance rating of 
field plate compares quite favorably with 
that of plate mail and banded mail. In prac- 
tice, the increased protection is paid for with 
reduced mobility and increased fatigue. 

Each suit of this extremely rare and expen- 
sive armor is custom-made and fitted for its 
prospective wearer. Only a master armorer 
can create field or full plate armor, and only 
a master armorer can re-size captured pieces 
of a suit for a new owner. The new owner 
must be of at least a similar size and build as 
the previous owner, or the effort required to 
modify the piece in question exceeds the ex- 
pense and effort necessary in forging an en- 
tire new set. 

Aside from its expense, the main disadvan- 
tages of field plate armor are the lack of ven- 
tilation through the suit, which make 
moisture and fungus a problem, and the time 
required to put it on and take it off. As de- 
tailed in the AD&D? 2nd Edition Players 
Handbook, 106 + 4 rounds are required to 
dress in field plate armor with outside assist- 
ance. Triple that amount of time is required if 
the wearer is alone. Similarly, it takes 104+ 1 
rounds to remove such armor, and half that 
time (fractions rounded up) if pressed for 
time or assisted by an attendent (see Full 
Plate Armor). 

Field plate armor is typically used by the 
high knights of a kingdom, like King Arthur's 
legendary Knights of the Round Table, for 
everything except formal ceremonies and tri- 


24 * Chapter One 


Armor ® 25 


0 ነ ۱ "f at 
መ x | 


y 


S 
4 3 9 


ters the attendent. 

For most knights, the attendent is a vassal 
or squire who tends to the knight's every 
need. He sharpens his lord's sword and 
brushes his horse. However, the great knight 
chooses his attendent carefully, for he knows 
his life may depend on this decision. 

Without the assistance of a capable atten- 
dent, a knight requires 1d10 +10 rounds to 
don his armor. An attendent cuts this time by 
half. As most combat veterans know, cutting 
the average armoring time in half can mean 
the difference between being at the battle and 
missing it entirely! 

Warriors in a hurry can cut this dressing 
time by half again. The ramifications of this 
haste is that a knight and his attendent who 
are extremely lucky might, at best, be able to 
get dressed in only 3 rounds (i.e., best roll of 
1, add 10 equals 11 rounds; 11 rounds cut in 
half for attendent's assistance equals 6 
rounds; 6 rounds halved again for rushing 
yields 3 rounds). 

However, a knight hurrying in this manner 
suffers penalties in combat. His straps are not 
adjusted correctly, meaning his plates are too 
loose or too tight and will hamper his overall 
effectiveness in battle. The knights suffers a 
—1to all attack rolls and his armor class like- 
wise drops one place, meaning his hasty 
dressing has given him armor equivalent in 
protection to that of field plate armor. 

If a knight discovers that his loose fittings 
are causing him to miss his mark or be struck 
by his enemies too often, he need only spend 
as many rounds tightening his straps as he 
neglected by rushing his preparations (twice 
that if unattended, of course). 

Example: Sir Hujer rolls a 6 on 1d10 when 
attempting to don his armor, thus needing 16 
rounds. An attendent reduces this to 8 
rounds, and rushing reduces this further to 4 
rounds. The rushing penalties would be re- 
moved if Sir Hujer took 4 rounds (attended) 
or 8 rounds (unattended) to readjust his ar- 
mor. 


Full Plate Armor (AC 1) 


Description: Full plate armor is the best ar- 
mor a warrior can buy, both in appearance 
and protection. The perfectly-fitted inter- 
locking plates are specially angled to deflect 
arrows and blows, and the entire suit is care- 
fully adorned with rich engraving and em- 
bossed detail. 


Campaign Use: Suits of full plate armor are 
as rare as powerful magical items in most 
fantasy campaigns. Magical sets of full plate 
are artifacts to be treasured and hidden 
away, the objects of glorious quests. 

In most campaigns, the number of sets of 
full plate armor can be counted as easily as 
the numbers of crown knights who owe their 
allegiance to the king. In many kingdoms, it 
is a crime to possess a set of full plate armor 
without royal permission, as a wise king 
keeps any armorer capable of such crafts- 
manship at his beck and call. 

Full plate armor is one of the greatest gifts a 
great lord can bestow upon his followers. It is 
a prize as coveted for the status it confers as its 
monetary value. À suit of full plate armor will 
often be a gift presented to great knights upon 
great service to the realm, or as an incentive to 
attract a knight errant of unquestioned prow- 
ess to the king’s private circle. 

In addition, full plate armor is the most 
technologically advanced armor available in 
the later medieval and high chivalry settings. 
The special touches and custom enhance- 
ments added by the few living master armor- 
ers are what give full plate armor its 
increased armor class rating over the more 
traditional forms of field plate. At prices that 
start at 4,000 gold pieces for a simple, un- 
adorned suit, full plate armor represents the 
crowning achievement of the armorer's ulti- 
mate goal—to forge for man a new skin of 
steel, as flexible as his own, but as invulnera- 
ble as anything in the land. 

This increased protection comes only with 
a price. While full plate armor wears well 
when correctly fitted, it is cumbersome to 
don or remove without assistance. Herein en- 


26 * Chapter One 


Armor ® 27 


N / f^ ) , 
«Mua ነ 
M vl | | = 


IN A 
! A 0 
»; 


ሠ 


X dE 
MEI سس‎ 
۳9 


No 


ats 0 
پا‎ OC 


)لا 


| | 4 = 
2 af ) 
| ራሻ 
N N. መ" 


fered, find the concept distasteful and the ap- 
pearance much too garish for their otherwise 
stoic tastes. Halflings have displayed a weak- 
ness for the many secret compartments found 
in gnomish workman's leather, and halfling 
thieves in particular might treasure this type 
of armor above all else. Indeed, the black 
market for gnomish workman’s leather is ru- 
mored to be funded entirely by halfling-run 
thieves’ guilds. This only adds fuel to any 
fires of discontent between halfling and 
gnomish clans. 

In human settlements and cities, gnomes 
only don workman's armor when working 
privately, deep in their secret workshops. 
Since no one around them either appreciates 
or respects the trappings of "master crafts- 
manship, there seems to be little need to 
flaunt them. 

Within the gnomish clan, however, there is 
a constant competition between all gnomish 
craftsmen, among both masters and appren- 
tices. In some clans, the competitions have 
become formalized, with actual categories 
(most items carried, best personal trap, most 
secure pouch, nicest appearance, etc.) and 
prizes (clan contracts or a special badge to be 
sewn onto the armor). These contests are 
held on high festival days, much like a mer- 
chant's bazaar (just another special guild tra- 
dition to confuse the newcomer or overnight 
visitor). 

In the largest of clans, many competing 
craftsman's guilds might sponsor and sup- 
port individual designs or candidates. Every 
craftsman in the hall will spend long nights 
tinkering with his own armor to emulate or 
duplicate the desired effect. Those who suc- 
ceed will claim partial credit for "testing and 
perfecting" the basic design. Those who fail 
might offer small sums of gold for the secret 
of the new invention. 


Gnomish Workman's Leather 
Armor(AC 7) 


Description: Gnomish workmans leather ar- 
mor is a variation of high-quality gnomish 
leather armor (as described in the Equipment 
Chapter of The Complete Fighters Hand- 
book). Gnomish workman's leather is 
adorned with dozens of tiny tool holders and 
pouches, typically filled with the most bi- 
zarre collection of coins, nails, tools, weap- 
ons, widgets, and sprockets ever assembled 
on one body. For this reason, a set of gnom- 
ish workman's leather provides protection 
identical to studded leather armor. 


Campaign Use: Typically, gnomish work- 
man's leather is as silent as normal high- 
quality gnomish leather armor (no Thieving 
Skill Armor Adjustment). However, this is 
before a gnomish workman has gotten any- 
where near it. As with most things of gnom- 
ish design, the whole is a rather sundry 
compilation of many disjointed parts. 

Strange inventions, secret compartments, 
locked and trapped pockets, and a dizzying 
array of tool holders and layered item racks 
are added, modified, moved, and camou- 
flaged almost daily. From week to week, a 
gnomish workman's armor may change dras- 
tically in appearance and function. The ar- 
mor has a stowage capacity of 10 lbs., up to 
half of which can be considered hidden. 

Importantly, the special benefits of gnom- 
ish high-quality leather armor are lost when 
a gnomish workman begins collecting items 
to tuck into this leather garb. While a few 
items on the belt do not significantly ruin this 
feature of the base armor, enough gadgets to 
alter the armor class cannot help but clink 
and bang into each other, crinkle and spill 
out when the owner bends over, or acciden- 
tally drop off or explode in the most heated 
battle or flight. 

Outside of gnomish society, this type of ar- 
mor has been rarely seen by non-gnomes. 
Humans and elves rarely steal things they 
cannot use, unless hired to do so, and 
dwarves, who might squeeze into a suit if of- 


28 * Chapter One 


۱ © ፡ 
Ye RA. 14 
:>: ሚረ CS 


N ۲۱: 
እን = di — À = 


( ይ ሯን 
٠ AAN | 8 
Se Gu 
AW 
ها‎ 
J E 


ሙ= 


Armor ® 29 


don't even bother trying anymore. Life is too 
short, they feel, to waste time on creating 
something that would be easier stolen or dis- 
covered in a dragon's horde. 

Elven chain mail is used by elven troops, 
both cavalry and infantry. It is common 
among the grey (faerie) elves and advanced 
elven cultures, but less common among the 
high elves. It is extremely rare among the 
wood elves. 

Since the material is so strong and valu- 
able, in those rare instances when a suit of 
elven chain mail is damaged to the point of 
needing repair, the suit is never discarded, 
but returned to the armorer for repair or re- 
placement. 

By the numbers of suits estimated to exist 
by human military planners and master ar- 
morers, best estimates are that it might take 
upwards of ten years to make just one suit of 
elven chain. Otherwise, they reason, there 
would be a lot more of the armor in use by 
the elves, and many more suits would be 
found in the lairs and treasure hordes of 
monsters across the realms. 


Magical Elven Chain Mail 


Ordinary elven chain mail is rare in the ex- 
treme, but magical elven chain is so precious 
a gift that only a handful of suits have been 
rumored to exist anywhere but in royal elven 
hands. 

In addition to the normal weight and flexi- 
bility advantages of elven chain, magical el- 
ven chain mail is so weightless that it can be 
worn under one's normal clothes. It is so 
comfortable and unrestrictive that it can be 
worn constantly, even while sleeping. Magi- 
cal elven chain is so soft to the touch that it 
can be worn without any padding beneath it. 
This makes magical elven chain the ideal ar- 
mor for travelers, excluding only the greatest 
of knights, who by tradition prefer plated ar- 
mors over all others. 

For rogues especially, a set of magical el- 
ven chain mail is a more prized possession 
than even full plate armor + 1. Adventurers 
have lost their lives over mere rumors of 
magical elven chain. 


Elven Chain Mail (AC 5) 


Description: Elven chain mail is the only 
form of armor made of a legendary elven al- 
loy, a light-weight silvery steel of great 
strength. Even without enchantment, elven 
chain mail is typically half the weight of its 
human-forged counterpart. 


Campaign Use: The elves guard the secret of 
making elven chain mail with more ferocity 
than they protect even their own children. In 
the entire multimillennia-long history of the 
elven race, the number of elven armorers 
who learn the secrets of forging elven steel 
can be counted on but one hand. Needless to 
say, these masters of the art tend to be an- 
cient in the extreme, and the choice of an ap- 
prentice comes but once every thousand 
years. This is the highest honor accorded to 
any single elf, save being chosen by his peers 
to lead the elven race. 

Apprenticeship is not a gift bestowed by 
the wealthy or powerful, but chosen by mag- 
ical testing in a secret ceremony. Some out- 
siders would argue that the training makes 
the armorer, but tradition holds great sway 
in elven circles. 

Human and dwarven armorers have been 
able to divine at least some of the secrets of 
the elven armorers, but not the most impor- 
tant ones. They know, for example, that 
mithril silver, that part of mithril which gives 
this purest of metals its glimmer in the moon- 
light, is somehow alloyed with other materi- 
als. The process of alloying has never been 
duplicated outside of an elven master forge, 
so most armorers believe some form of magi- 
cal manipulation is involved in the process 
somewhere. Furthermore, anyone hoping to 
forge elven armor must be able to see the 
magical emanations radiating from it. While 
this may be done artificially through magic, 
this task is geared more toward the elves’ nat- 
ural eyesight. Drow armorers (described lat- 
er) work under similar conditions. 

Naturally, when one has a thousand years 
to perfect the skills for one’s job, just about 
anything is within grasp. The dwarves call 
this an unfair advantage, while the humans 


30 * Chapter One 


e 


NN 
OMAN = 
L SAKO 
ኣ fel 
1 ی‎ 
AN 


Armor * 31 


and returned to complete darkness (e.g., a 
light-proof chest or vault) before the break of 
day. However, the armor must be returned to 
the drow homeland once every two weeks to 
be re-exposed to the radiation. Armor must 
remain in the homeland two days per day 
spent above ground. If the armor is not re- 
turned to the underdark before two weeks 
have passed, the magic of the armor is per- 
manently lost. Decay then begins as de- 
scribed above. 

The fragments of metal that remain after 
drow armor deteriorates may be collected 
and reused for future forgings. However, the 
metal is nonmagical until the forging process 
imbues the enchantment. 

The surface elves contend that these condi- 
tions are poor workmanship on the part of 
the drow, but scholars have noted many par- 
allels between elven and drow alloys. 

For example, one possibility is that just as 
the strange magical emanations of the drow 
homeland aid in the construction of their spe- 
cial adamantite objects, it is has been sur- 
mised that moonlight, pure and cool, may 
have something to do with the forging of el- 
ven mithril armor. The fact that mithril is as 
reflective, light, and pure as adamantite is 
dull, heavy, and dense has not escaped obser- 
vation. 

What is certain about the two magical 
types of armor is that such parallels cannot 
be sheer coincidence. Somewhere in the dis- 
tant past of the two races, when times were 
better and before the dark elves retreated to 
the earthen depths, there must have been one 
common armor technology. The drow took 
the secrets of forging elven metals with them 
when they left, but had to discover some- 
thing to replace both the mithril and moon- 
light components of the ancient secret art. 

What they eventually discovered, perhaps 
after many centuries of experimentation, was 
a magical alloy more abundant than mithril, 
yet not as stable as elven chain. 


Drow Chain Mail (AC 4) 


Description: Drow chain mail is a finely- 
crafted, satiny black metal mesh that does 
not encumber its wearer in the least. It is sim- 
ilar, but not identical to, the magical elven 
chain mail described previously. It is typi- 
cally fashioned only into tunics, as drow 
elves share their forest-bound cousins' pref- 
erence for armor that adequately protects 
without being overly weighty or restrictive. 


Campaign Use: Much like their cousins in the 
sunlight, the drow have invented their own 
form of special armor. 

What is known for certain is that drow 
chain mail uses adamantite, the strongest 
metal known, as the principal component of 
their mystical alloy. It is mined by myriad 
drow-allied races in great quantities, and the 
drow war machine is wholly dependent on 
adamantite-related technologies. 

This alloy has special properties due to the 
peculiar nature of the radiation emanating 
from the drow homeland, giving even the 
basest form of the alloy the equivalent of a 
magical +1. Drow weapons, shields, armor, 
etc., all begin with a +1 bonus, and based on 
the alloy, the amount of time spent in the 
forge, and the secret processes used, it can in- 
crease to as much as +5. The alloy does not 
radiate magic in the traditional way (a detect 
magic spell reveals no trace of magical prop- 
erties). 

Whenever drow-alloyed creations, includ- 
ing armor, are exposed to direct sunlight, 
their magical bonuses are immediately lost 
and they begin to utterly and irreversibly de- 
cay. This happens even after one short expo- 
sure, meaning that even a set of drow armor 
that is immediately returned to utter dark- 
ness or the nearest drow homeland will still 
decay. Physical decay begins 1012 +8 days 
after exposure to sunlight. The armor com- 
pletely falls apart after another 1d12 days 
have passed. 

If extraordinary precautions are taken, an 
adventurer could theoretically use a set of 
drow armor, if worn only in the dead of night 


— —— HÀ س‎ qd (€ — ንን ከከከ... ص‎ ሌሌ ከጨ 
32 * Chapter One 


7 7ئ 
=f 2 N‏ 
A‏ 
mex f 1‏ 
a X P. "‏ 


7 f Ci, 0 ۳ 
መ 1 ۱ de 


P W 
PA 


ع جم 


LA 


it #፲/ 


ا >= 


Armor * 33 


fit, break it!" Along those lines, another pop- 
ular dwarven saying is "Never let your armor 
impede a good fight" 

Dwarven field and full plate armor do not 
exist. Not only would dwarves look like min- 
iature iron golems when so protected, but 
dwarves prefer to let their facial expressions 
speak for them in combat. The problem of 
free movement plays a big part in this practi- 
cal decision as well. 

No human has ever managed to convince a 
group of dwarves to forge a set of full plate 
armor for them. If such a task were even to 
get past the bargaining phase, it would 
quickly become apparent to all concerned 
that the dwarves have no experience or 
knowledge of such constructions and lack the 
motivation to learn it. Dwarves themselves 
claim they'd rather be "beating their ham- 
mers on orc skulls than beating them in the 
forge.” 

Curiously, gnomes have offered to give full 
plate their “best shot” from time to time, but 
so far, no human has been brave or foolish 
enough to accept the offer. 

Dwarven plate mail lasts longer than its 
human counterpart. As detailed in The Com- 
plete Fighters Handbook, dwarven plate 
mail can sustain twice as many points of 
damage as normal plate mail (if the optional 
armor damage point system presented there- 
in is being used). 


Magical Dwarven Plate Mail 


Magical dwarven plate mail is only as en- 
cumbering as ordinary plate mail. The en- 
chantment is cumulative with the natural +1 
to armor class dwarven plate possesses. 
Therefore, dwarven plate mail +1 is actually 
equivalent to ordinary plate mail +2 for pur- 
poses of armor class (but not saving throws). 
It may be easier for the DM and player if the 
base armor class for dwarven plate is remem- 
bered to be 1, equivalent to field plate armor 
for humans. 


Dwarven Plate Mail (AC 2) 


Description: The forged black iron plate 
made by the dwarves exclusively for their 
own warrior leaders is both heavy and unat- 
tractive by human and elven standards. 
However, dwarves have traditionally placed 
less emphasis on appearance than on person- 
al defense. Dwarven warriors who wear 
dwarven plate are often called “waddling 
cauldrons” by their enemies due to the bulk 
of this armor. 


Campaign Use: As detailed in both The Com- 
plete Fighters Handbook and The Castle 
Guide, high-quality dwarven plate is the 
boilerplate version of human plate armor. It 
is 50% heavier than equivalent mails, mak- 
ing a single suit of dwarven-sized plate mail 
armor weigh approximately the same as a set 
of human-sized plate mail. 

Additionally, the denser armor affords 
protection equivalent to plate mail + 1, and 
the armor itself saves against equipment 
damage at +6, in addition to any bonuses 
permitted if the dwarven plate in question is 
also magically enchanted. Stories about 
dwarven plate armor withstanding the smelt- 
ing fires of a red dragon's breath may be 
boastful exaggeration, but it is an established 
fact that dwarven plate often survives an at- 
tack that its wearer does not. 

As mentioned, dwarves prize combat ef- 
fectiveness over a warrior's appearance. It is 
therefore very rare for the iron appearance of 
dwarven plate mail to be adorned in any 
way. 

Much like the elves, dwarves do not make 
dwarven plate for non-dwarves. Not only is 
it considered impractical to spend one's time 
building a suit of armor no dwarf can ever 
hope to wear (a waste of time), but the 
dwarves will admit to having no skill in 
working with the peculiarities of the human 
body. Dwarves tend to ignore things like 
flexible joints, as their range of movement is 
already restricted by nature. An ancient 
dwarven warrior's saying goes something 
like "If it doesn't fit, bend it. If it still doesn't 


34 * Chapter One 


| 
ER መመመ ا‎ 


» à J it 
| ; 
3 == - / 
! 
0 ነ 
~ ددا‎ 1 ) 
Ly ነ 1 à - 
"n : ۱ i 
۱ | ١ N / 2 
NC / ۱ 2 ۱ / 1177 
| \ | N | AO | pil 
۱ 77ھ‎ ' í 
ሻ ነ 
١ AAWA N 


uA گے‎ 


ኣኒ 
\ [ ' ۱ ids ' 
Q 6 v VB 1 ۱ 
\ ۷ ; N M C Zu E ا‎ 
€ N ነ ‹ E lA 2 | 
ነ N 1 1 3 ی‎ “eg 
N D [ A do o o \ / | N | PN ቹ 7 
0 ۲۳ ۵ | ھ/‎ nm D ý | 
= / 0 ۱ 1 2 
N BET 
Ñ ۱ * ۶ 


ኒ ROC 
ነሕ ' 
NS 


tae 
سس‎ ማፕ 
E بر‎ 


Armor ® 35 


Medium Shield 


A medium shield is carried in the same 
manner as a small shield (i.e., on the fore- 
arm). Unlike the small shield, however, its 
weight prevents the character from using his 
shield hand for anything other than carrying 
the medium shield. Medium shields are usu- 
ally made of metal, range from 3'-4' in diam- 
eter, and can be of any shape, from round to 
square to a spread dragon's wings. A typical 
medieval shield resembles a triangle with one 
point facing downward. 

With a medium shield, a character can de- 
fend against any number of frontal or flank- 
ing attacks in a given round. In this instance, 
the character applies the +1 armor class bo- 
nus (not including magical bonuses) for the 
shield to his overall armor class rating, pro- 
viding he remembers to disregard the shield 
bonus during the occasional attack from the 
rear. 


Body Shield 


The body shield, also known as the kite or 
tower shield, is a massive metal or wooden 
shield reaching nearly from the chin to the 
toe of the user. It must be firmly fastened to 
the forearm and the shield hand must firmly 
grip it at all times. Naturally, this precludes 
use of the shield hand for anything but hold- 
ing the body shield in place. 

Standing around 6' tall, the body shield 
provides a great deal of protection to the 
user, improving the overall armor class of the 
character by 1 against melee attacks and by 2 
against missile attacks. As with all shields, 
these bonuses apply only against frontal and 
flanking attacks. 

Since the body shield is very heavy, the 
DM may want to use the optional encum- 
brance system if he allows its use in the cam- 
paign. This will help to prevent overuse of 
body shields in combat. 


Shields ( +1 AC) 


Shields ordinarily improve a character's 
armor class by 1 (or more if magical). Shields 
cannot be used to block attacks from the rear 
or rear flanks. 


Buckler or Target Shield 


A buckler, also known as a target shield, is 
a small round shield of wood or metal that 
fastens to the forearm. It can be worn by 
crossbowmen and archers with no hindrance 
to their attacks with their chosen weapons. 

Because of its small size (approximately 1' 
in diameter), a buckler protects against one 
attack per melee round. The user can chose 
which attack he wishes to use his buckler 
against, but he must declare this before the 
attack roll has been made. This increases the 
defender's armor class only by 1 (more if 
magical) against that single attack. 

Note: Bucklers should be treated not as full 
shields when determining the armor class of 
the user, but more as a special item that can 
be called upon to add extra protection for 
one attack per round. 


Small Shield 


A small shield is usually round and is car- 
ried on the forearm, gripped with the shield 
hand. Its light weight as compared to a medi- 
um shield permits the user to carry other 
items in that hand, although he cannot wield 
or carry another weapon. 

A small shield (approximately 2' in diame- 
ter) can be used to protect against two frontal 
attacks of the user's choice. Like the buckler 
above, the user can choose which attacks to 
use his shield against, but must decide before 
the attacks are rolled. 

Note: Like the buckler, the small shield 
should be considered a special item used for 
defense, not as a general addition to frontal 
armor class. 


36 * Chapter One 


8 


ff. í SS ; 5 P ١ à 5 
0 v መ 3 3 3 - | ው. ብሽ 
ZA FS ቁ ا اک‎ Y መሪ کا‎ 


M 
Y [^u 
۲ ፡፡ 
2 / P) 
n7 ME 
“ፌ። ae 


۰ 


Armor * 7 


a better view of the field while maintaining a 
fair level of head protection. 

Vision and Hearing: Identical Vision and 
Hearing check penalties as those associated 
with a cap (above). If a great helm is worn, 
penalties are assigned for the great helm and 
are not cumulative with those of the coif. 


Open-Face Helmet 

This class of open-face helmet, made of re- 
inforced leather or metal, covers most of the 
head, save the face and neck. These helmets 
commonly provide protection for the nose 
(this piece of the helm is called a nasal). 

Open-face helmets are popular with offi- 
cers and leaders, and are appropriately worn 
with medium-weight armors like brigandine 
and chain mail. 

Vision and Hearing: —1 penalty to Vision 
checks; —2 penalty to Hearing checks (such 
helms cover the ears entirely except for a 
small hole). 


Closed-Face Helmet 

The closed-face helmets are identical to the 
open-face helmets (above), but include a vi- 
sored faceplate. 

These tend to be worn by officers and 
sergeants-at-arms. They are most commonly 
worn with plate mail. 

Vision and Hearing: When the visor is up, 
Vision and Hearing check penalties are iden- 
tical for those of open-face helmets. Other- 
wise, the visored wearer suffers a —2 penalty 
to all Vision checks and a —3 penalty to 
Hearing checks. 


Great Helm 

A great helm is any massive metal helm 
that covers the entire head, including the 
neck and often the upper shoulders. The only 
gaps in the protection are found in the nar- 
row slits that allow limited vision, and some 
small holes to permit breathing. The visor is 
not normally removable. 

It is rare to find a great helm used with ar- 
mor lighter than banded mail. Great helms 
are most often found in combination with 
plate mail or heavier armor. 

Vision and Hearing: —3 penalty to Vision 
checks; —4 penalty to Hearing checks. 


Helms 


Campaign Use: Helms are part of a warrior's 
basic protection. Failure to use proper head- 
gear leaves a character open to called shots 
by opponents or to other disadvantages at 
the DM's option. All headgear except that 
which does not cover the ears must be re- 
moved when making rolls for listening. 

The Complete Fighters Handbook offers 
an optional rule for Hearing and Vision 
checks. All helms restrict Hearing and Vision 
checks to some degree. (A Vision or Hearing 
check is a 1d20 roll against a character's Intel- 
ligence or Wisdom, whichever is higher. 
These checks can be used when a character 
has a chance to hear or see something of im- 
portance. This check ísn't used when charac- 
ters listen at doors; that has its own check.) 

Optionally, great helms and closed-face 
helmets, when worn with plate armor, gain 
bonuses against dragon's breath and spells 
that affect the eyes (see the Equipment sec- 
tion in The Complete Fighters Handbook). 

Helms and Thieves: Thieves suffer auto- 
matic penalties to hearing if a helm is worn. 
The following descriptions include penalties 
to Hearing and Vision checks. If these rules 
are not used, the penalties for Vision checks 
should be ignored; for Hearing checks, substi- 
tute a “5% penalty to the thief's Hear Noise 
ability for each —1 Hearing check modifier 
(e.g., a —3 to a Hearing check is a “15% to 
the thief's Hear Noise roll). 


Cap 

A cap is a padded, leather, or steel skullcap 
worn much like a close-fitted cap, beret, or 
bonnet. Caps are usually worn with padded 
armor, leather, studded leather, hide, or any 
other lightweight protection. 

Vision and Hearing: —1 penalty to Hear- 
ing checks; no penalty to Vision checks. 


Colf 

A coif is a padded chain mail hood. It fits 
snugly around the neck and over the head, 
except the face. It usually comes with or is 
built into a suit of chain mail or mail-based 
armor. Often, a heavily armored knight will 
wear a chain mail coif under a great helm. 
This allows him to remove his great helm for 


38 * Chapter One 


“ጋሪ LAA هی‎ 
; 7 e 5 
y መ DER d 


á Dd 
PRE کو‎ 2f, 7 


Armor e 39 


CHAPTER 


Equipment for Mounts 


Medieval Barding 


Most forms of barding, other than padded 
or quilted cloth, required massively heavy 
and powerful mounts. The weight of barding 
and the man, including his armor and weap- 
ons, easily strained even the largest war 
horses. For this reason, later barding was re- 
designed using lighter materials such as 
boiled leather or thick padded cloth. One of 
the most common historical bardings was 
made of boiled leather (sometimes more than 
2 inches thick), with specially reinforced 
parts made of steel bands and wooden planks 
or short strips of thick, hard wood. 

Late medieval barding comprised a num- 
ber of pieces of armor covering different 
parts of the mount. These included the chan- 
fron (for the head and neck), the crinet (for 
the side of the neck), the cuello (for the for- 
ward chest), the poitrel (for the flanks and 
broad chest), the flanchards (covering areas 
around the saddle), and the crupper (for the 
hindquarters). Barding almost never protect- 
ed the legs of the mount. 

In warmer and more humid climates, full 
barding is less common than half barding. 
When used at all, lighter forms are preferred. 
Half barding usually includes only the chan- 
fron and poitrel (plus the crinet and cuello 
for plate barding). 


Barding in Campaigns 


In the AD&D? game worlds, the use of 
barding varies by culture and race. Although 
individual variations are up to the DM (and 
are encouraged), a few generalizations are 
useful. Most barding will be used by human 
forces. Other than humans, elves (and some- 
times halflings) will use horse barding. It is 
rare to see gnomes or dwarves mounted, ex- 
cept as members of adventuring groups. It is 
much rarer to see them on barded mounts, as 
they prefer fighting on foot. 

Besides horses, war elephants are some- 
times outfitted with leather or metal barding. 
Camel riders tend not to bard their mounts, 
as the bulky armor makes them more diffi- 


Equipment for Mounts * 41 


The following information expands the de- 
tails found in the Player's Handbook with re- 
gard to barding, tack, harness, and other 
items used with horses and mounts. Optional 
rules are provided to allow the DM to match 
the armor of mounts and their riders (which 
can be used to simplify the record keeping 
when large numbers of mounted troops are 
encountered). In addition, partial barding is 
covered in an optional table that allows cal- 
culation of a mount's armor class if only par- 
tial barding is available. 

The information in this section centers on 
horses, because this type of mount is the 
most commonly encountered. Much of this 
material, however, can be easily adapted for 
other types of mounts. The following sec- 
tions deal mainly with barding, as this will 
have the most direct effect on adventuring 
and combat. 


Barding 


Barding refers to armor designed for 
mounts. Mounts are most commonly horses, 
but also include the huge beasts that carry 
fighting platforms into combat (such as ele- 
phants with howdahs). The vast majority of 
mounts will wear no barding at all. Such pro- 
tection is expensive and time-consuming to 
construct, tires the mount quickly, and re- 
duces the speed and maneuverability of the 
mount in combat. 

Historically, barding reached its peak de- 
velopment in the medieval era. After the in- 
troduction of gunpowder and the gun, 
barding quickly degenerated into little more 
than parade trappings. The development of 
barding was controlled by two factors: the 
breeding of horses strong enough to wear the 
protection and carry an armored rider, and 
the technical problems of designing such ar- 
mor to be ever lighter and more flexible than 
that worn by men without sacrificing protec- 
tion. In many ways, the development of 
barding parallels the development of armor 
for the fighting man. 


steel, while orcs and other humanoid races 
tend to favor leather and sylvan elves use 
wood or strong, fibrous plant materials. 


Crinet: This neckpiece is found only in plate 
armor. It covers the upper side of the mount's 
neck and is made of narrow strips of steel ar- 
ticulated with six to eight inches of mail. 


Cuello: Found only in plate barding, this is 
armor for the underside of the horse's neck 
(the throat). It is hung from the crinet with a 
number of straps and buckles. In more 
advanced barding, the cuello has fully articu- 
lated plates hinged with wide bands of tight 
chain links. 


Poitrel: This part of the horse's barding cov- 
ers its chest and flanks. The poitrel is also 
known by names such as the peytrel, pecto- 
ral, or poitrinal. It covers the front of the 
chest and sides as far as the saddle. Early poi- 
trels used heavy cloth with scales, rings, or 
studs; later ones used plates or bands of steel. 


Flanchards: These are plates of armor for the 
horse's side, including the area behind the 
front shoulders, across the saddle length, and 
ending at the hindquarters, protecting areas 
not covered by the poitrel or crupper. 


Crupper: This piece covers the hindquarters 
of the horse and is sometimes referred to as 
the croupiere bacul. The lightest form of this 
armor is made of light leather sewn together 
into small squares, then joined together by 
straps and stitches. The most advanced crup- 
pers are made of several thick steel bands 
joined with pieces of chain or mail, bound to 


the saddle and the flanchards. 
Light Barding 
Padded Barding (AC 6) 


This style of quilted barding has only mi- 
nor protective value, giving the mount an 
AC bonus of 1. In the standard AD&D® 
game campaign, padded barding is function- 


cult to handle, reduces their carrying capaci- 
ty severely, and interferes with their ability 
to survive desert conditions much more so 
than with horses. 

Worgs and war dogs are occasionally 
barded with leather, though this is rare. 

Aerial mounts can be barded with leather 
or lighter materials. 


Types of Barding 


Full barding: This is a complete set of 
horse armor that provides the rated protec- 
tion when attacked from any side. Note that 
the term "full plate" is used to denote a new, 
more advanced type of horse armor, like the 
fighter's full plate armor. 

Half barding: The difference between half 
barding and full barding is that half barding 
covers only the front and forward sides of 
the animal. Attacks from the rear or rear 
flanks use the mount's base armor class. 

Partial Barding: This is an option that al- 
lows the averaging of a mount's armor class 
if full barding is not available. See Table 4. 


Note: All "suits" of barding, including half 
barding, are complete units; that is, half 
barding is not achieved by leaving off half a 
horse's armor. The pieces are made to be used 
together—they are specially formed, fitted, 
and balanced to provide a certain level of 
protection and a certain degree of mobility in 
a fight. Cobbling together odd or ill-fitting 
pieces degrades the effect of the whole, to the 
degree ruled by the Dungeon Master. 

In the following section, barding is dis- 
cussed in order of least protective to most 
protective. New types of barding are includ- 
ed. Tables summarizing the information can 
be found on pages 50-51. 


Pleces of Horse Armor 


Chanfron: This piece of armor covers the 
mount's head, neck, and mane. In its most 
primitive form, the chanfron is made of 
boiled leather. Chanfrons made by humans 
and dwarves are usually made of iron or 


` 42 © Chapter Two 


civilized lands. Leather barding weighs 0 
pounds. 

Halflings and elves tend to use leather on 
their light mounts. Halfling barding is usu- 
ally decorated with colorful beads and bits of 
shells. 

Although dwarves and gnomes generally 
don't use barding, they will occasionally 
make leather barding to protect pack mules 
and similar animals. 

Humanoids, if they use barding on their 
mounts at all, often make use of this type. 

Half Leather: This is leather barding that 
protects only the front half of the horse. It 
weighs 30 pounds. 


Medium Barding 
Scale Barding (AC 5) 


Scale barding is an early form of medium 
protection barding, generally superceded by 
chain in more advanced regions. It is most 


Equipment for Mounts ® 43 


ally the same as leather barding and weighs 
60 pounds. Padded barding tends to wear out 
rapidly with use. 

Halflings and elves occasionally use this 
type of armor on their ponies and light 
horses. 

Half Padded: Half padded barding gives 
protection only to the front and front sides of 
the mount. It is used mainly in poorer or less 
civilized cultures. In more civilized cultures, 
parade decorations might be considered half 
padded. This protection weighs a mere 25 
pounds. 


Leather Barding (AC 6) 


This barding is the most common type of 
light barding. Leather barding has most of 
the characteristics of the leather armor worn 
by warriors. Among humans, leather bard- 
ing is used primarily by irregular horsemen 
and occasional bands of nomads, whose 
mounts are usually smaller and able to carry 
less weight than the specially bred mounts of 


FG | جرب‎ d 7 AR Wal 
LD bes 29 DI. 
fi 7۸ ۳ Af ۲ [rox 
۱۵ AE 1 قر‎ 85 
۳ x E^ HA, 


Studded Leather Barding (AC 5) 


This early barding is made of layers of soft 
leather, reinforced with many small metal 
studs intended to turn aside slashes. In all im- 
portant respects, it is equal to ring barding 
and weighs 80 pounds. 

Half Studded Leather: This barding covers 
the front of the horse. It weighs 50 pounds. 

Humanoids tend to use studded leather 
barding. In some instances, the studs are long 
and filed to sharp points. The damage- 
causing ability of these short spikes is ques- 
tionable, but they certainly add to the 
ferocious appearance of a mount. 


Chain Barding (AC 4) 


This barding is the standard armor for me- 
dium war horses. It is put on in sections, with 
the main pieces being attached to the saddle 
or laid over the horse and buckled under- 
neath. A heavy cloth or blanket is placed un- 
der the chain to prevent rubbing and 
abrasions from the barding, which would 
cause the horse to quickly become fatigued. 
Only in the cooler climes can a horse wear 
such armor for long (the horse cannot move 
all day with the armor on; it must have suffi- 
cient rest and free grazing). Chain barding 
weighs approximately 70 pounds. 

Chain barding is used by grey elf medium 
cavalry companies. 

Half Chain: This is chain barding covering 
the front areas of the horse. It weighs 45 
pounds. 


Elven chain barding: This type of barding 
exists, though it is extremely rare. It has a 
weight of 25 pounds. Such barding cannot be 
purchased and is generally unavailable to 
anyone other than elven nobility. 


common in Dark Ages, eastern, or frontier 
settings, where it will still be somewhat less 
common than chain barding in a western me- 
dieval setting. Refer to Chapter 1 for more 
information on the construction and appear- 
ance of scale armor. Full scale barding weighs 
75 pounds. 

Half Scale: Half scale barding includes a 
much lighter mesh of scale and covers only 
the head and front quarters of the horse. It is 
the heaviest armor commonly found on a 
light horse. Half scale weighs only 50 
pounds. 

Half scale is sometimes used by successful 
orc and goblin war bands. Other humanoid 
races may also be found using the barding in 
their cavalry units. 


Brigandine Barding (AC 5) 


A late period composite armor made from 
small metal plates sandwiched between lay- 
ers of leather, brigandine is the most 
advanced barding that a typical village ar- 
morer can make. It is not as encumbering as 
the more restrictive scale, weighing 70 
pounds. 

Half brigandine: This barding protects the 
front half of the horse and weighs 45 pounds. 

The rogues of the road (including occa- 
sional adventurers) tend to use half brigan- 
dine because it is light, generally 
non-encumbering, and easy to care for. 


Ring Barding (AC 5) 


This early form of barding is made of 
metal rings sewn onto a heavy cloth or leath- 
er backing. It is heavier than standard scale 
barding, and in most campaigns will be used 
only by those who can't get anything better. 
(In fact, whether a barding like ring barding 
actually existed is open to question; it may 
have been too heavy for the horses of the 
time.) Ring barding weighs 80 pounds. 

Half Ring: This is ring barding for the 
front areas of the horse. It weighs 55 pounds. 


ር... ፈር... IM MC M متت‎ SE ለ I | 
44 * Chapter Two 


Half Splint: This covers only the front half 
of the horse. Its weight is 60 pounds. 


Plate Barding (AC 2) 


This type of barding corresponds to plate 
mail, and is the standard protection for a 
fully armored war horse. Only heavy war 
horses can bear the weight of this armor and 
still fight effectively. 

This barding includes the chanfron that 
covers the head, the cuello that guards the 
neck and mane, the poitrel that covers the 
forward chest and quarters, the flanchards 
that protect the side quarters and flanks, and 
the crupper that defends the rear. 

This barding is made of chain mail and 
small steel plates linked together and hinged 
with articulated joints. Over this metal and 
chain rests a thick padded or quilted cloth 
equipped with metal studs. The complete set 
weighs about 85 pounds. This is extremely 
fatiguing to the mount, and usually such ar- 
mor is put on the horse only when battle is 
imminent. 


ط۵ 


۱ ۱ 


a Pa 


በበ] 
ييا لا‎ 


Equipment for Mounts * 45 


Heavy Barding 
Banded Barding (AC 3) 


This is similar to chain barding, but is rein- 
forced with horizontal strips of metal. Offi- 
cers and riders wealthy enough to afford this 
type of barding are usually the only persons 
who use it. Only the large war horses can 
bear its weight. It remains a hybrid form, 
and the frequency of its appearence depends 
on the technological level of the campaign. 
Such armor weighs 85 pounds. 

Half Banded: This is banded barding cov- 
ering the front of the horse. It weighs 60 
pounds. 


Splint Barding (AC 3) 


Splint barding is similar to banded bard- 
ing. The main difference is that the strips of 
metal are vertical instead of horizontal. The 
weight and protective value are the same at 
85 pounds and AC 3. 


Horse Tack and Harness 


Bit 


The bit is the general name for the two 
principle kinds of equestrian mouthpieces 
used to control a horse's movement. Each of 
the two bit types are described below. 

Snaffle: This bit is composed of a steel rod 
or bar with two rings at either end. The reins 
are fastened to these rings. The snaffle is a 
gentler bit than the curb designs, and is usu- 
ally used for riding horses as opposed to war 
or work horses. The snaffle bit tends to give 
less control over a spirited mount. 

Curb: This bit has a plate that is inserted in 
the mouth of the beast. Short vertical bars 
are attached to either side of the plate. Each 
bar has a ring at the top and bottom of the 
bar. The reins are attached to the two bottom 
rings, while the two upper rings are connect- 
ed by a stout strap or chain passing under the 
jaw of the horse. This allows great physical 
force to be brought upon the animal, allow- 
ing great control over the movement and 
speed of the horse. The curb bit is much more 
severe than the snaffle bit and is often used 
with war horses. 


Bridle 


A simple bridle is nothing more than a 
heavy ring of rope or leather hitched around 
the mount's lower jaw and used to guide or 
lead the animal. 

There are three basic parts of a bridle: the 
bit, the headstall, and the reins. The bit was 
discussed previously. The headstall is the set 
of straps and cords that secures the bit to the 
horse's jaw. The reins are the straps that run 
from the bit around the horse's neck that en- 
able the rider to steer the animal. 

Bridoon: This is complex bridle with a 
snaffle bit and wide reins. A bridoon is much 
more difficult to snare or cut than a normal 
bridle. It is also more expensive than the 
standard bridle (150% of bridle cost). 

Cavesson: A type of bridle used to train 
and break horses. The cavesson looks much 


Plate barding is used almost exclusively by 
human heavy cavalry. Elf lords may also 
have plate armor for their mounts. 

Only in very rare instances will an orc, 
goblin, hobgoblin, or other humanoid have 
access to such armor. In such cases, usually 
only the commander or chieftain of the tribe 
owns such barding, and then only if allied to 
a ruler or wizard with the ability to construct 
such armor. 

Half plate: This gives the horse plate bard- 
ing protection to its front. It weighs 65 
pounds. 


Field Plate Barding (AC 1) 


Field plate barding is the heaviest barding 
normally used in battle. It is rare even in late 
period campaigns, and should be restricted 
to nobles, high officers, and unusual individ- 
uals. The construction of field plate barding 
requires a master armorer. The barding must 
be constructed and fitted to a particular 
horse. Field plate barding weighs 90 pounds. 

Half Field Plate: This gives the equivalent 
of field plate protection to the front of the 
horse only. This configuration is never en- 
countered, except perhaps as ceremonial ar- 
mor. It weighs 70 pounds. 


Full Plate Barding (AC O) 


Full plate barding, like full plate armor, is 
the highest achievement of the best armorers. 
It is available only in late period campaigns 
and will be very rare at the best of times; on- 
ly the most advanced and richest kingdoms 
can master the techniques of its construction. 
The services of a master armorer are re- 
quired. Full plate barding weighs 90 pounds. 

Half Full Plate: This gives the equivalent 
of full plate protection to the front of the 
horse only. Again, this barding, if encoun- 
tered, is almost certain to be ceremonial ar- 
mor. It weighs 70 pounds. 


سس سس سسپٹئٹئیوٹھھویییوئئنکئگننینییینئٹسٹوویویھتییٹٹکپیتیییسونزنننیییئس ل لب ل سح 
Chapter Two‏ * 46 


(i 


ል 
uU X, 
ም 


m it. 
ZW 
: 


LE 


Equipment for Mounts ® 47 


Throwing a horseshoe or getting a stone 
lodged between the shoe and the hoof are 
events that need extra attention if the horse is 
to be kept in good condition. 

Magical Horseshoes: Any number of dif- 
ferent types of magical horseshoes can be 
added to the game: those that allow unusual 
speed, the ability to move on water or 
through the air, those that act as magical 
weapons, and so forth. 


Saddle 


Saddle use is assumed in the Land-based 
Riding proficiency unless a character is specif- 
ically from a culture proficient in riding bare- 
back. Any other character who tries to ride 
without a saddle is subject to special riding 
checks at the discretion of the DM. (A general 
no-saddle penalty of —2 is suggested.) 

In a typical campaign, available saddles 
will be based on types used in the mid-to-late 
medieval period. 

By this time period, the saddle had evolved 
through many changes in design. The basic 
saddle includes the frame (called the tree), 
the front end (called the pommel), and the 
back end (called the cantle). 

Elven saddles are made of wood and plia- 
ble, fibrous plants. Halfling saddles are soft 
and well cushioned. Gnomish saddles are 
painted and decorated with thin layers of sil- 
ver, gold, or semi-precious gems. 

Orcs and goblins use saddles that are quite 

small, with fairly distinct pommels and near- 
ly invisible cantles. 
War Saddle: The knight's war saddle takes on 
huge dimensions. They typically exhibit high - 
pommels and cantles, and are often covered 
with steel or brass plates or are decorated 
profusely with silver and ivory inlays. These 
usually have rings and straps for attaching 
barding and heavy stirrups. 


Saddlebags 


Saddlebags rest directly behind the rider, 
on the rump of the horse. They come in 
many different sizes and varieties. The most 


like other bridles except for two extra rings at 
the base of the bit, where lead ropes can be 
attached to be held by a trainer or tied to a 
pole. The horse can then be led easily and 
slowly broken and trained. The cost is com- 
parable to that of a standard bridle. 


Horseshoes 


In the wild, horses wear down their hooves 
as fast as they grow them. But domesticated 
horses, with the extra weight of rider and 
equipment, will wear away hooves much 
more quickly. Without protection, the horse 
would quickly become lame and useless. 

Metal horseshoes are used to counteract 
the wear and tear on the mount's hooves. 
The horseshoe is nothing more than a steel 
bar hammered into a "U" shape, then nailed 
tightly into the hoof of the horse. The nails 
cause no discomfort to the animal. With 
horseshoes, the mount can travel farther and 
faster. 


48 * Chapter Two 


charge effectively with a leveled lance, a feat 
nearly impossible without them. 


Optional rule: Mounted fighters 
without stirrups who are struck in 
combat must make a save vs. para- 
lyzation or fall from the horse. 


Bridle Cutter 


A bridle cutter is a sharp, hooked instru- 
ment used in battle to cut the reins of an ene- 
my and essentially strip him of his ability to 
control his mount. These tools look like 
short, bladed axes with several wicked, an- 
gled cuts. Bridle cutters are sometimes used 
by front line troops who face cavalry. Many 
bridle cutters find their way into kobold, orc, 
or goblin brigades and are used as melee 
weapons rather than to cut reins. A bridle 
cutter inflicts 1-4 points of damage to small- 
and medium-sized creatures and 1-3 points of 
damage to large creatures. Refer to Table 1 
on page 50 for other weapon statistics. 


#ዞ 
ah 


1 
ph 


nuQ 
7 

ae 

Tw 


$ 


Equipment for Mounts * 49 


common type is made of leather and has two 
large packs, one on either side of the horse. 
Each pack or bag can hold about 3 square 
feet of material or about 25 pounds of weight 
(for the large saddlebags). Small saddlebags 
hold 2 square feet and 15 pounds. Saddlebags 
may also be made of heavy cloth. Variant 
saddlebag designs might have anywhere 
from one to four packs instead of the stand- 
ard two. 


Saddle Blanket 


This is a typically a warm woven blanket 
laid underneath the saddle, protecting the an- 
imal from abrasion and preventing the saddle 
from shifting. A rider who uses a saddle 
without a saddle blanket will quickly wear 
his horse down (and might find himself un- 
ceremoniously dumped when the saddle 
shifts). 

Elven and halfling saddle blankets are 
wonderfully woven and often decorated with 
colorful tassles or jingling bells. 


Spur 


A spur is little more than a small metal at- 
tachment to the heel of a boot or shoe. The 
spur has one to six sharp projections that can 
be used to jab the horse in the sides, causing 
the animal to move at a quicker gait. 


Stirrup 


A stirrup is a leather strap ending in either 
a conical shielded foot rest or an iron ring. A 
stirrup is attached on each side of the saddle 
by a hook and several ties. 

The stirrup has many uses. Its primary 
function is to expedite the mounting of the 
beast. The stirrup also helps the rider control 
the mount and stay on if struck by a forceful 
blow; stirrups are essential in a jousting 
match. 

Stirrups steady the mounted warrior, al- 
lowing greater force to be put behind blows 
with less chance of falling off the mount. 
They allow mounted warriors with lances to 


Table 1: Bridle Cutter Wielded as Weapon 


Speed Damage Damage 


Type Factor S-M L 
S 4 1d4 1d3 
Chain Banded Plate 
Yes — — 
Yes Yes Yes 


* Padded includes quilted armor. 


* Scale includes studded leather, brigandine, 
and ring mail (weights will differ). 


* Banded includes splint. 


Item Cost Weight Size 
Bridle Cutter 3 gp 4 lbs. M 
Table 2: Horse Barding 

Warhorse Padded Leather Scale 
Light Yes Yes — 
Medium Yes Yes Yes 
Heavy Yes Yes Yes 


* The light warhorse category includes po- 


nies and riding horses (the latter reflects 
custom and use rather than the ability of 
the horse to carry actual weight). 


Limits: A horse can wear half barding one 
class heavier than its maximum full bard- 
ing. Flying creatures are limited to leather 
and padded barding only. 


Table 3: Optional Barding Armor Class 


(This can replace the Creatures with Natural Armor Class section in Chapter 6 of the Player's 


٠ AC Bonus is the amount of protection a 
type of barding affords. For example, a 
heavy warhorse (AC 7) in plate barding 
(+5) has an adjusted AC of 2. 


e Maximum AC is the best AC conferred by 
non-magical barding of this type. Past this 
point, the innate toughness of the creature 
renders this type of barding redundant. 


Handbook.) 

AC Maximum 
Type of Barding Bonus AC 
Leather (Padded) +1 4 
Scale, Brigandine, 

Studded, Ring +2 3 
Chain +3 2 
Banded, Splint + 4 1 
Plate +5 0 


50 * Chapter Two 


Table 4: Optional Partial Barding 


The following chart may be used to determine the armor class of partial barding. Bonuses are 
added to the mount's base AC. | 


Armor Full Chanfron/ Cuello/ Flanchard/ 
Type Barding Poitrel Crinet Crupper 
Leather 6 — (see notes) ٹب سس‎ ee 
Scale 5 (see notes) 

Chain 4 = 0 3 
Banded 3 de ایت‎ ia 

Plate 2 1 ea. ER lea. 

Field Plate 1 lea. 1 lea. 

Full Plate 0 lea. lea. lea. 
Notes: 


Leather: The only effective combination less than full leather is half leather, which gives protec- 
tion to the front of the horse only. 


Scale: Half scale protects the front of the horse only. Any other combination of at least three 
pieces (except crinet) gives a +1 bonus to armor class. 


** Any two pieces givea +1 bonus to AC. 


Table 5: Additional Barding Types (Combined Table) 


Armor Type AC Wt Cost Time Half Wt. Half Cost Time 
Leather 6 60# 150 مع‎ 4 25# 100 gp 2 
Padded 6 60# 150 مع‎ 4 25# 100 gp 2 
Scale 5 75# 1,000 gp 8 50# 500 gp 6 
Brigandine 5 70# 1,000 gp 8 45# 500 gp 6 
Ring 5 807 800 gp 8 554 400 gp 6 
Studded Leather 5 80# 800 مع‎ 8 50# 400 gp 6 
Chain 4 70# 500 مع 300 45# 10 مع‎ 8 
Banded 3 85# 1750 gp 14 60# 1,000 gp 12 
Splint 3 85# 1750 gp 14 60# 1,000 gp 12 
Plate 2 85# 2,000 gp 16 65# 1,500 مع‎ 14 
Field Plate 1 90# 5,000 gp 18 70# 3,000 gp 16 
Full Plate 0 90#  8-20,000 gp 20 70#  5-15,000gp 8 


Half weight and half cost are the weight and cost for half barding. 


Time is the time an armorer requires to make the barding (as per The Complete Fighter's Hand- 
book). Half barding takes 2 weeks less than full barding. 


Equipment for Mounts * 51 


ፍነ 


CHAPTER 


Weapons 


quebus refers to the large, two-handed primi- 
tive gun with a smooth bore barrel as 
opposed to a rifled barrel. Hence, the gun is 
technically not a rifle. This form of arquebus 
often has a hooklike projection on the under- 
side of its barrel. 

The arquebus was developed in order to 
give the average infantry the use of smoke 
powder, whose destructive potential is only 
newly recognized in many areas. 

The musket arquebus is loaded by pouring 
smoke powder from a flask or horn into the 
muzzle and firmly packing it with a piece of 
paper. The projectile, an iron ball, is rammed 
in after this. Once the barrel is ready, the pan 
is filled with smoke powder, the pan's cover 
is closed, and a burning slow-match (a piece 
of cloth or paper rolled into a fuse) is placed 
in the mechanism called the serpentine (the 
curved piece of metal where the trigger 
would someday be on a modern rifle). Pres- 
sure on a metal plate releases the serpentine 
into the pan, and BOOMI 

Since this weapon involves smoke powder, 
DMs may forbid its use. Players should 
check with their DM as to whether it is al- 
lowed in the campaign. 

Smoke powder is considered a magical 
item. The historical arquebus required two 
types of gun powder, a finer variety for pan 
loading and a coarse variety for muzzle load- 
ing. Each type was carried in a separate con- 
tainer. If the DM desires, the gunner may 
require the two different powder types in or- 
der to operate the arquebus. 

The arquebus is a very dangerous instru- 
ment, nearly as dangerous to the user as to 
the target. In order to reload, the gunner has 
to hold the smoldering slow-match in his left 
hand while reloading with his right. A slow- 
match burns for eight rounds. 

An arquebus can be fired only once every 
three rounds providing the character is not 
being attacked while loading. Treat the gun- 
ner the same as a spellcaster casting a very 
long spell. When firing an arquebus, all 
range penalties are doubled. 

If an arquebus attack roll is a 1 or 2, the 
gun backfires, inflicting 1d6 points of dam- 
age to the gunner. It is also fouled and cannot 


One of the most common events in the life 
of an adventurer, regardless of profession, is 
the need for armed combat. Some adventur- 
ers make a career of hacking and slashing, 
while others use combat as a last resort, after 
diplomacy, negotiation, or spellcraft fail. 

Fortunately for adventurers, there are as 
many different types of weapons as there are 
reasons for using them. This chapter details 
the vast majority of weapons available to the 
discerning adventurer. A fair warning, 
though: a weapon is only as effective as the 
hero who wields it. Sometimes, a smaller, 
less lethal-looking weapon may be called for. 
Most of the entries that follow include com- 
mentary from distinguished adventurers. 
Heed their advice, look over the list careful- 
ly, and choose well; your PC's life may de- 
pend on it! 


Notes: During the research into the vari- 
ous weapons, conflicting backgrounds arose 
for several of the weapons. The terminology 
and history that follow were chosen for con- 
sistency with what has already been estab- 
lished in the AD&D® game universe. 

Many references are made to an item 
known as the Bayeux Tapestry. This is a tap- 
estry that depicts the Battle of Hastings in 
1066 AD, in which William the Conqueror 
led the Normans from the European Conti- 
nent to England. The Normans defeated the 
Anglo-Saxons under King Harold. This tap- 
estry has given scholars many clues on how 
warfare was conducted at that time. 


Arquebus 


The arquebus is a musket used by cultures 
just learning the technology of guns. It is a 
two-handed weapon, fired like a rifle except 
that the arms absorb the recoil, not the 
shoulders, since the weapon does not rest on 
the latter. The gun is also called a “hackbut.” 

Years after its development, the term "ar- 
quebus" expanded to include handguns of the 
same era, and eventually the word lost its 
original meaning and was used instead to de- 
scribe small handguns used by cavalry. In 
terms of AD&D® game campaigns, the ar- 


SS‏ € ا 
Weapons * 53‏ 


can be determined, the arquebus is good for 
making gods-awful noise that will either 
scare the Nine Hells out of any enemy, or 
possibly anger the target into attacking with 
even more ferocity." 

— Grymwand, Professional Mercenary 


The arquebus gets its name from the 
German Hakenbuchse, meaning "gun 
with a hook.” 


Battle Axe 


Contrary to popular artwork, the most 
common version of the battle axe is a stout 
pole about four feet in length with a single- 
edged, trumpet-shaped blade mounted on one 
end. Battle axes are also called broad axes. 

The battle axe is a footman's weapon, giv- 
ing these soldiers a longer reach and a fight- 
ing chance against mounted opponents. Its 
long handle allows the wielder to put consid- 
erable force into his swing. Despite the shaft 


be used until cleaned, a process which takes 
at least 30 minutes (and relative peace). 

When an arquebus scores a hit, it does 1-9 
points of damage on 1d10. If a 10 is rolled, 
the die is rolled again and this amount is add- 
ed to the 10. Each time a 10 is rolled, the die is 
rolled again and added to the total. 

There are no Strength modifiers to an ar- 
quebus' damage. 

If the arquebus' smoke powder is exposed 
to water, the powder is ruined. 


"As far as many folk are concerned, smoke 
powder and magic don't mix! Sure, the ar- 
quebus is a newfangled weapon, but not all 
new things are necessarily better! With an ar- 
quebus, the firer has to take time to reload, 
unless he wants to have someone tag along 
and supply him with an extra arquebus, al- 
ready loaded, in order to keep up a steady 
rate of fire. Oh, certainly that can be done— 
or the more intelligent adventurer will go out 
and get himself a long bow which fires ar- 
rows quicker than an arquebus can throw 
shot, and has comparable range! As far as 


Arquebuses 


54 * Chapter Three 


good momentum, is not a good horseman's 
weapon, as the wielder has to put a lot of his 
weight into the swing, something hard to do 
from a saddle. It is also useless as a missile 
weapon. Still, its damage is respectable, and 
it looks nasty, especially the dwarven styles. 
A battle axe is good for the foot soldier or 
adventurer who needs to strike at a large 
creature or at someone on horseback. 

"Battle axes are good for their percussive 
and cutting effects against armor. If adven- 
turers want to use a battle axe and still gain 
some measure of protection, it is wise to fight 
alongside a companion who is armed with a 
sword and shield. The companion acts as the 
axe-wielder's defense while the latter is busy 
chopping away. This is a good exercise in 
teamwork, which may keep both adventur- 
ers alive much longer. 

"As for dwarves, our center of gravity is 
low enough that we can swing a battle axe 
and not topple over from the momentum. It 
is a fine weapon for hewing the legs of a giant 
out from under him, and it is a weapon that 


length, a battle axe is a one-handed weapon. 

The typical dwarven battle axe is a double 
bladed weapon, usually with a spiked top. 
Dwarves favor these weapons since the long 
handles compensate somewhat for the short- 
er dwarven stature, especially against large 
humanoid opponents. They are often wield- 
ed. with two hands. In many dwarven cul- 
tures, the battle axe is a symbol of dwarven 
might. 

A thrust with the spiked head of a battle 
axe inflicts 1d3 hit points of damage. 

Dwarves are not the only race that favors 
the battle axe. Gnolls often are encountered 
with battle axes. Troglodytes use a stone ver- 
sion of the battle axe, with all of the disad- 
vantages of stone weapons (i.e., prone to 
chipping and shattering). 

Two-handed battle axes have the same sta- 
tistics as the bardiche. They are called "great 
axes.” 


“Though the battle axe is a one-handed 
weapon, its longer handle, which gives it 


Battle Axes 


Weapons * 55 


below the axe-head. 

English knights of the 14th century 
adopted the battle axe as a favored weap- 
on in foot combat. Its long handle afford- 
ed a great reach, and allowed for a great 
amount of force to be focused in the blow. 


Naval crews used battle axes as board- 
ing weapons until the tactic of boarding 
parties became obsolete. 

The dwarven battle axe design is based 
on an actual design by the Swiss, who 
called their version the mordaxt. 


Belaying Pin 


Not intended as an actual weapon, the be- 
laying pin is a wooden or metal rod that is 
inserted in holes bored through a ship's rail. 
Ship's ropes are secured to these belaying 
pins. The pins are usually found in rows, 
bringing a series of ropes together to one lo- 
cation. The pins may be pulled out and used 
as a melee weapon, more often than not dur- 


lets us put all of our weight into the swing." 
— Dagalor Goldenbeard, of the Dwarven 
Clan Goldenbeard 


The battle axe has the distinction of be- 
ing one of the oldest tools and weapons of 
man. The first battle axe dates back about 
35,000 years, when weaponers began at- 
taching the blade to long wooden handles. 
The double-bladed battle axe was born in 
Egypt during the Bronze Age, but the de- 
sign did not gain widespread acceptance. 

During the Greco-Roman times, the 
battle axe was seen as a barbarian weapon 
used by the Franks, Celts, Lombards, and 
Vikings. 

The earliest modern battle axes were a 
Danish weapon of the ninth century. 
These weapons did not have double-blad- 
ed heads, but were still two-handed weap- 
ons. The Danes often decorated these axe 
heads with carvings. Some shafts reached 
six feet in length, which caused great 
structural strain on the point immediately 


Blowgun 


Blowgun 


Blowgun needle 


56 * Chapter Three 


an ideal arrangement for someone who wish- 
es to avoid causing excessive bloodshed. It is 
certainly better suited for that sort of work 
than combat on the field, since the blowgun 
is a very fragile weapon." 

— Cedric D'Abalone, Sage 


Blowgun Darts: The blowgun dart is a 
small arrow with a wad of cotton or other 
plant fibers instead of fletching. This allows 
for a build-up of pressure from the user's 
wind. The fibers make a better seal in the 
tube, allowing more force to gather behind 
it. A blowgun dart is not the same as a regu- 
lar dart, and the latter cannot be shot out of a 
blowgun. 

Needles: Needles are sometimes used to de- 
liver a poison, often a paralytic poison such 
as curare. Needles do less damage than other 
blowgun missiles, but this is not a disadvan- 
tage, since their function is to carry the poi- 
son to the target, not to cause damage. 

Blowgun Pellets: Most blowgun pellets are 
of hardened clay, and are used for hunting. A 
solid hit from a pellet can stun a small bird. 


Bola 


The bola is a missile of prehistoric origins. 
Currently, it is still used by arctic tribes and 
by savages who dwell on temperate plains. 
The main function of the bola is to provide a 
hunter with a good missile weapon that will 
catch the prey off guard and entangle it so as 
to make escape impossible. 

The bola is basically a leather strap or 
straps with weights fastened to the ends, al- 
though there are many variations to the de- 
sign. Arctic bolas are generally used for 
hunting birds. The bola may have four, six, 
or ten weights made of walrus ivory or bone. 
The weights are egg-shaped, spherical, or 
carved into the likeness of animals. All of the 
straps or cords join together to make a sort of 
handle. The thrower grasps the handle, jerks 
back the strand to straighten them, whirls the 
bolas over his head, and releases them. Each 
bola strand is about 28 inches long and each 
weight is about two inches in diameter. 


Weapons * 57 


ing boarding actions at sea when no other 
weapons are in reach. 

The pin is a one-handed weapon. If hurled 
in combat, it is treated as a club. 


"When a bloke is at sea, unarmed and sur- 
rounded by degenerate pirates, a belaying 
pin makes a fine on-the-spot weapon, even 
though its primary function is to hold rope, 
not bash heads. No warrior in his right mind 
would bother to specialize in or stock up on 
belaying pins!" 

— Captain Ar, of the Galleon Flameburst 


Blowgun 


Blowguns are long, hollow tubes com- 
posed of wood or metal, ranging from four 
to seven feet in length. They are used to fire 
darts, needles, and pellets. The weapons date 
back to primitive times, when they were used 
mostly for hunting. 

Blowguns may have had a part in the in- 
vention of guns, since the blowgun demon- 
strated that one end of a tube needs to be 
closed off in order for the propelling force to 
shoot the missile in the proper direction. 

Tribes still exist, especially primitive peo- 
ples in tropical jungle cultures, that use the 
blowgun. In most cases, these tribes are not 
advanced in terms of inventions, especially 
weapons of war. Some tribes use stands to 
brace their blowguns. If a stand is used, the 
firer gains a +1 bonus to his attack rolls. 

The grippli have been known to use blow- 
guns on rare occasions. 


"Though the blowgun has poor range, it is 
a quiet weapon which may be fired twice per 
round. Desperate adventurers who find 
themselves weaponless may make blowguns 
out of the local flora, such as reeds, if they 
are resourceful. 

"Blowguns can also be used as makeshift 
breathing tubes if adventurers are crossing or 
hiding in a body if water. 

"Being virtually noiseless, the blowgun is a 
good weapon for use in infiltrating a strong- 
hold. Darts dipped in a sleep drug may 
knock out sentries quickly, and this may be 


Strength checks are made at - 2 penalty due 
to lack of leverage. 

A successful Called Shot to the victim's 
head wraps the bolas around his neck, stran- 
gling him (unless the character is wearing a 
great helm or closed-face helm). The bolas 
cause normal damage on the round in which 
they hit, then an additional 1d3 hit points of 
strangulation damage every round the bolas 
are still in place. 


"This is a good weapon to trip someone 
up, in case ya wanna take an opponent alive. 
But ya gotta make sure ya got enough room 
to give the bola a good swing. Bolas only 
work outside or in huge rooms. They work 
good if yer on horseback." 

— Barkhan, Bounty Hunter 


Bow 


In one form or another, bows have been 
used since the early days of man. They repre- 
sented a great step in man's ability to cause 
damage, since the attacker was at a consider- 
able range from the target, not within reach 
of the enemy's claws or melee weapons. The 
first bows were long, slender rods (also called 
staves) with a string of animal tendon or 
plant fiber. 


Short Bow 


Short bows were the first to be developed, 
although they were not called such. This is 
more of a default term that refers to anything 
which is not a long bow. Short bow staves 
are about 51/2 feet long on the average. As 
the years passed, attempts were made to in- 
crease bow ranges. Bows were either given 
longer staves or flexibility was increased with 
no change to the length. The former resulted 
in what is now called the long bow. 

Bows fell into decline with the spread of 
handguns. It was reasoned that while a 
wounded or weakened soldier might lack the 
strength to pull a bow, he could still pull a 
trigger. In fantasy settings, there is no danger 
of the bow being replaced so quickly. 


Two-ball bolas are called somais; triple- 
ball bolas are achicos. 

Temperate plains bolas are usually twice as 
large and consist of a single leather thong 
with a leather-covered stone at each end. Of- 
ten a second cord is fastened in the center of 
the first cord, with a small weight attached at 
the end. This weight is held by the thrower. 
This version of the bola can bring down a 
man-sized target. When a bola hits, the vic- 
tim is held fast and must take a round to 
make a Strength check in order to get free. 
Failure means the bolas are still holding fast. 

If an attacker makes a Called Shot to the 
target's legs and succeeds, the bolas wrap 
themselves tightly around the victim's legs 
and prevent further movement. The target 
must make a Dexterity check in order not to 
fall down, incurring a —3 penalty if the vic- 
tim was moving when the bolas hit. 

If the attacker succeeds in a Called Shot to 
the victim's arms, the bolas wrap themselves 
tightly around the torso, preventing the vic- 
tim from using a weapon or employing the 
protection of his shield until he frees himself. 


58 * Chapter Three 


bows adapted to enable them to take advan- 
tage of their Strength. Elves in particular are 
adept at making and using bows, of both the 
long and short varieties. Exactly how the 
elves happen to be so good at archery is up 
for debate. Some say elves are trained to 
shoot beginning in childhood. Others say 
that their skills are no different than those of 
humans, but the uncanny, keen elven senses 
enable the fair folk to anticipate the target's 
location at the time of the arrow's impact. 

"Whatever the reason, no one argues that 
the elves exhibit clear evidence of the super- 
iority of the bow as the best missile weapon 
available to the aspiring adventurer. 

"Bows are not without their faults. Bow- 
strings must be kept dry, the staff must not be 
allowed to crack, and a certain amount of 
strength is required to string and pull a bow. 
Still, even a short bow is a good thing to have 
when a warrior wants to inflict damage on 
someone from a long distance! 

"A short bow can fire only flight arrows, 
while the long bow can fire any type of ar- 
rows. However, the short bow is easier to 
carry and is good for the fighter who relies 
primarily on a melee weapon but wishes to 
have a respectable missile weapon." 

— Lady Adriennedar Ironedge, Ranger of 
Hawkhaven 


Bows were used extensively for war by 
the Egyptians, Babylonians, Jews, and 
other peoples of the eastern Mediterrane- 
an world. In ancient Greece and Rome, 
bows were used mainly for hunting. 

The Huns were the deadliest archers of 
all the invading barbarian peoples who at- 
tacked Rome. Charlemagne made the bow 
a mandatory weapon for the "civilized" 
armies. 

At the Battle of Hastings in 1066, many 
historians claim that the Normans, led by 
William the Conqueror, beat the enemy 
by unleashing a rain of arrows on them. 
Some speculate that Harold died from an 
arrow through his eye. The bow used was 
only five feet long. 


Weapons * 59 


Short bows can fire only short bow arrows 
(identical to flight arrows for game terms). 


Long Bow 


The long bow is similar to the short bow, 
except that the staff is about as high as the 
archer, usually 6 to 61/2 feet. It has better 
range than the short bow, and can fire both 
flight and sheaf arrows. 


Composite Bows 


Composite bows are long bows or short 
bows whose staves are made from more than 
one type of material. This gives greater flexi- 
bility, and thus better range. These were de- 
veloped after the normal long bow. 

The second material that makes up a long 
bow may be anything from another type of 
wood to bone, sinew, or metal. The different 
materials are usually glued together. 

An adventurer who wishes to gain a dam- 
age bonus from high Strength when wielding 
a bow must purchase specially crafted bows. 
Such a bow costs the normal price for a bow 
plus the normal price again for every bonus 
point desired. Thus, a warrior with 17 
Strength who wants a long bow (base cost 75 
£p) that gives him his +1 bonus to damage 
rolls would have to pay a total of 150 gp. The 
same fighter with 18/00 Strength ) +6 bonus 
to damage) would pay 525 gp. These bows 
can be strung and drawn only by characters 
of that Strength or higher. Others attempting 
this must make a successful bend bars/lift 
gates roll. 

Most archers protect their wrists from the 
snap of the bowstring by fastening a piece of 
horn, bone, or leather to them. Such an item 
is known as a bracer. 


"In our times, bows still are preferable to 
the primitive firearms or even the crossbows 
offered. A high rate of fire, low noise, and 
good range make the bow a better choice 
than the other missile weapons. 

"Centaurs favor bows, usually composite 


Bows The English, learning from the lessons 


Short bow of Hastings, continued to refine and adapt 
their bows, making the staff longer and 


y longer, copying the Welsh long bow. This 
Composite became known as the English long bow 

MU bow within England. 
The long bow proved very effective, es- 


pecially in the British victories at Crecy 
and Agincourt. In the former, British 
archers outshot their Genoese counter- 
parts who were using crossbows. Just as 
the Italians and French gained reputations 
as excellent crossbowmen, the English 
gained a reputation for archery. In the 
time of Henry VIII, English law required 
all males to learn the use of a long bow by 
the time they reached their teens. 

European bows were most often made 
of ash and yew wood. Short bows were 
called Continental bows, while long bows 
were sometimes called Welsh bows. 

An example of the potency of the long 
bow can be found in a particular historical 
incident. An arrow fired by a Welsh bow- 
man is reported to have pierced a knight's 
leg armor, his leg, the armor on the other 
side of the leg, the knight's saddle, and to 
have finally lodged in the horse, pinning 
the knight to his mount. 

Medieval archers did not always use 
quivers, but rather kept their arrows tied 
in bunches and secured to their belts by 
loops. Mounted archers used quivers that 
were attached to the saddle. 

Bows were used as late as 1807, when 
Russian irregulars harassed Napoleon's 
armies, and in World War II, when de- 
tachments of American archers were used 
in special actions in Asia. 

Even today, certain African pygmy 
tribes and indigenous folk of the Amazon 
use bows. 


| Long bow 
6 Arrows 


In general, arrows range in length from 20 
to 40 inches. The feathers, or fletching, of the 
arrow consist of two or more feathers set co- 


Unstrung 


60 * Chapter Three 


damage on the round of impact unless the 
target makes a saving throw vs. death magic. 
At the DM's option, flaming arrows may ig- 
nite combustible materials contacting it. 


Sheaf Arrow 


Sheaf arrows, also known as war arrows, 
are heavier arrows with less range than flight 
arrows, but cause more damage. The arrow- 
heads are steel and quite sharp. Sheaf arrows 
are used in warfare and can be fired only by 
long bows. These arrows range in length 
from 20 to 27 inches. 


Stone Arrow 


Stone arrows are considered flight arrows 
for game purposes, except that the stone ar- 
rowheads cause less damage and have a ten- 
dency to shatter if they impact armor or 
similarly hard surfaces. If a stone arrow hits 
any object made of metal, stone, or a harder 
substance, it has a 20% chance of surviving 


Weapons * 61 


axially to the shaft. This gives the arrow its 
aerodynamic lift. If the feathers are instead 
set diagonally, the arrows rotates in flight. 
Goose feathers and parrot feathers are used 
most often in fletching, though pressed paper 
and leather are sometimes used. 


Flight Arrow 


The flight arrow, as its name implies, is 
built for distance. These are lightweight ar- 
rows and are often used for hunting. Most of 
these arrows are made of ash or birch and are 
30 to 40 inches long. 


Incendiary Arrow 


An incendiary arrow is any arrow type 
(except bone or stone) with a wad of hemp 
soaked in a bituminous substance (such as 
tar) placed just beneath the head. The hemp 
is lit before the arrow is fired. 

In addition to its normal damage, the ar- 
row causes one additional hit point of fire 


«4 ሺን 
۷۷6۸ 
RE ای کی‎ 
0 na N, er 
MEL ሕ ሄ ; 
NU ZA Wilay 


۹20و 
N, 5 ۷ A‏ 


move at only one-half his normal rate until 
the caltrop is dislodged from his foot. The 
victim must also make a second saving throw 
vs. paralyzation, with failure indicating that 
the character is lame for 24 hours (unless 
magically healed), and can move at only one- 
third his normal movement rate. In any case, 
the victim must spend one round removing 
the caltrop from his foot. 

If half the number of caltrops are dropped 
in an area (five in a 25 square foot area), the 
first save is made with a + 4 bonus. For every 
five extra caltrops over the required 10 
dropped in a 25 square foot area, the saving 
throw is made at a -2, up to a maximum 
penalty of —6. A new saving throw must be 
made for each five-foot section entered in 
which caltrops have been dropped. 

Characters moving at less than one-third 
their normal movement rate through an area 
of caltrops need not make a saving throw. 
They are moving slowly enough to avoid the 
caltrops (although they must be able to see 
the terrain in order to do so). 


the hit without damage to the arrow. If a die 
roll does not indicate success, the arrow is 
still allowed a saving throw vs. crushing 
blow with a + 4 bonus using the figures for 
Rock Crystal. Failure indicates that the ar- 
row shatters. 

Stone arrowheads are almond shaped or 
rhomboid and are usually made from stone 
splinters of flint or obsidian. 


Caltrop 


A caltrop is a metal ball bristling with 
metal spikes or prongs. When a caltrop is left 
on the ground, there is always at least one 
spike standing more or less upright, ready to 
pierce the foot of the unwary. 

In order to be effective, at least 10 caltrops 
must be dropped in an area of 25 square feet 
(a 5' X 5' square). Each character entering the 
area must make a saving throw vs. paralyza- 
tion. Failure means that the pursuer has 
stepped on a caltrop, suffering 1d4 hit points 
of damage. The character will be able to 


Caltrops 


62 * Chapter Three 


outside the arena have missile weapons, 
spells, long melee weapons such as spears, 
polearms, and swords, or benefits due to 
size, a fighter using a cestus may find himself 
badly chewed up, if not dead, before closing 
in enough to use the weapon. And using a 
cestus in tavern brawls will probably accom- 
plish little more than calling the city guard's 
wrath on the owner of the cestus. 

"The cestus is just a dramatic device meant 
to draw blood and make a contest look more 
terrible. Few monsters will care about the 
drama produced by a cestus if the glove is 
used in real combat." 

— Tisha, Swordswoman Extraordinary 


Club 


Most clubs are stout, hardwood sticks, 
narrow at the grip and wider at the end. This 
simple weapon has been used since mankind 
first began using tools. Anyone can find a 
good stout piece of wood and swing it; hence 
the club's widespread use. 


Cestus 


The cestus is a leather glove that has spikes 
and razor edges on the back and across the 
knuckles. Other forms of cesti are loaded 
with lead or other heavy filler in order to give 
a punch more force. The weapon is mainly 
used as a gladiator weapon in the arenas of 
sport. 

The damage caused by the cestus (1d4 vs. 
small and medium creatures; 1d3 to large) re- 
places the damage caused by a punch. Al- 
though this may seem to be a disadvantage, 
remember that punching damage is tempo- 
rary while damage from the cestus is perma- 
nent until healed. There is no proficiency in 
the cestus, though a warrior can spend a pro- 
ficiency slot and specialize in it. 


"A cestus isn't a true weapon of battle. It's 
just a cruel way to add damage to a fighter's 
punch. A cestus is a good weapon only if you 
like to punch opponents. 

"But since most combatants inside and 


Crossbows 


ANASASANS ANAS SSL SNS ARLS nn 


وود دم موچ p‏ مو مر وہ TP‏ ووو y  ںىںودرب Foo‏ 


Stirrup 


Weapons * 63 


21 


f ۵ 
በ6 በበኩ 

m — 
ር ጋ 2 CURIAM NESEY AAN, 
PSOE ያቤ 22 % 


S 


Light crossbow 


Ses 
VA 
j 


City guards who do not intend to shed blood 
use clubs in law enforcement, thieves who 
wish merely to steal a purse carry them, and 
humble peasants or street urchins who can- 
not afford a sword may wield a stout piece of 
wood. If anyone anticipates a life filled with 
tavern brawls, proficiency with the club is a 
must. 

"Druids favor clubs, since they can cast 
shillelagh spells on the wood. Carrying a 
weapon made of wood, an organic, natural 
material, is preferable to using iron, since 
many self-respecting druids will use metal 
weapons only as a last resort." 

— Archdruid Heather Rose 


The versatility of the club is shown in 
the Bayeux Tapestry, which depicts squads 
of Saxons wielding clubs as both melee 
weapons and missile weapons. Some cul- 
tures decorate their clubs or even carve 
the club heads into representations of the 
creatures they expect to hunt. 


Crossbow, Light and Heavy 


A crossbow is a bow mounted crosswise 
on a wooden or metal shaft, the latter called 
a tiller. The bow is usually made of ash or 
yew. The crossbow fires a quarrel (also 
called a bolt). 

Crossbows are loaded by pulling the string 
back until it locks onto a nut fitted on the till- 
er. À man's strength is enough to pull the 
bow to the locking position, although heavi- 
er crossbows with more powerful bows re- 
quire a mechanical aid. The most effective of 
these devices is the windlass, a series of pul- 
leys and crank handles fitted at the cross- 
bow's stock. For crossbows that do not have 
the windlass, a stirrup is fitted on the front of 
the crossbow. When resetting the bow, the 
firer places his foot in the stirrup in order to 
keep the bow off the ground while he is pull- 
ing the string up to the locking position. 

The main differences between the light and 
heavy crossbows are the size of the quarrel 
and the presence of a stirrup, which is found 


Weapons * 65 


The club is the ancestor of the mace, since 
warriors eventually fitted their clubs with 
spikes and metal heads in order to increase 
their deadliness. . 

As centuries passed, cultures began em- 
bracing civilization and advanced technolo- 
gy. They looked down on the club as a 
primitive tool and a barbarian weapon. Peas- 
ants often arm themselves with clubs, some- 
times adapting them by adding iron spikes, 
resulting in the morningstar. 

Centaurs are often seen wielding clubs, 
since sylvan settings have ample wood for 
fashioning such weapons. Ogres also use 
clubs, since the weapon does not require 
brains to use or make. 


"Despite the lowly status of the club, it is a 
useful proficiency. A stout tree branch, a 
wooden chair leg, or a metal rod all may be 
considered clubs, and all can be found most 
anywhere. When an adventurer is without a 
weapon, knowing how to wield a common 
stick may save his life. 

"Clubs are common among adventurers. 


Quarrels 


"Hand crossbows are easily concealed, 
have an adequate rate of fire, and good range 
for such a small weapon. On the other hand, 
damage potential is worse than that of a dag- 
ger, and the weapon may be banned in some 
lawful kingdoms or cities. Some societies, 
such as the drow, place poison on their bolts 
in order to immobilize an opponent." 

— Emryl Aelorthas, Professional Bowyer 


Quarrels 


Quarrels or bolts are the ammunition fired 
by crossbows regardless of the weapon's size. 
Crossbows are rated as one-footers or two- 
footers, according to the bolt's length. Quar- 
rels are shaped like arrows, but the shafts are 
shorter and thicker. The quarrel heads used 
for warfare are conical or pyramid-shaped 
iron heads. 


European crossbows have existed since 
the 4th century AD and at first were used 
primarily for hunting. By 1000 AD, cross- 
bows had been adopted for warfare. Use 
began to wane upon the advent of the En- 
glish long bow, for despite the fact that the 
crossbow was a more powerful weapon 
with better range and was easier to use in 
close quarters, the rate of fire of a bow 
was a huge psychological advantage. The 
most talented makers and users of the 
crossbow were the Italians, whose Geno- 
ese mercenary crossbowmen were the best 
in the world. 

Although heavy and light crossbows 
enjoyed a favorable reputation among 
military commanders, these weapons suf- 
fered a bad reputation. The crossbow was 
so lethal that Pope Innocent II banned its 
use in 1139 AD. The edict was later 
changed, however, so that Crusaders 
could use it against Moslems. 

Light crossbows were considered uneth- 
ical weapons, and were often banned be- 
tween the 16th and 18th centuries. The 
light crossbow was primarily used as a 
hunting weapon. 

The crossbow was originally developed 


only on the heavy crossbow. Heavy and light 
crossbows are more correctly referred to as 
two-foot and one-foot crossbows, respec- 
tively. This term refers to the length of the 
quarrels. 

The one-foot crossbow is made with a steel 
tiller and is quite rugged. It may be easily 
concealed beneath flowing garments such as 
cloaks or robes. It is frowned upon by the 
more lawful, civilized cities. 

Although bows cannot be used under- 
water, the crossbow can, since the tension 
produced by the weapon overcomes the wa- 
ter resistance. Underwater races such as the 
locathah, mermen, and tritons use crossbows 
of both heavy and light varieties. 


Crossbow, Hand 


This deadly little bow is a pistol-sized 
weapon made with a steel tiller. It is more 
easily concealed than the light crossbow and 
its use is considered unethical in civilized so- 
ciety. Hand crossbows have a reloading 
mechanism built into the tiller. 


"Apparently, the drow couldn't care less 
about the hand crossbows reputation, since 
they favor this weapon in all encounters. 
Derro also use hand crossbows, probably a 
habit they picked up from their fellow sub- 
terranean dwellers, the drow. 

"Of all the crossbows, light crossbows 
were the first to be developed. Their rate of 
fire and range are their main advantages. But 
damage potential is less than that of a bow 
and arrow. 

"Heavy crossbows have better range and 
damage potential, but they can fire only once 
every other round. If a warrior does not kill 
his opponent with the first shot, he may not 
get another chance. 

"It would be foolish to dismiss the cross- 
bow completely. Heavy and light crossbows 
have better ranges than their respective bow 
counterparts, the long and short bows. The 
best tactic when using a crossbow is to as- 
semble a line of people, all armed with these 
weapons, who unleash a devastating volley 
at an enemy. 


—————————— ————————M —'———————————————————T'Y———————————náÓ"n 
66 * Chapter Three 


Dagger 


The typical dagger has a pointed, usually 
double-edged blade, as opposed to a knife, 
which has a single edge and is a bit shorter 
than the dagger. 

The dagger is one of man's oldest weapons. 
The first daggers were most likely hand-held 
spearheads used by cavemen, made of bone 
or stone. Bone daggers are made from the 
bones of large animals such as reindeer and 
bison, with one end sharpened and the han- 
dle carved to resemble the animal from 
which the bones came. Such daggers are rela- 
tively fragile, and stone replaced bone when 
early man discovered how to work with 
stone. 

Stone daggers are more difficult to make 
due to the composition of stone. Most stone 
daggers are made of flint, a hard stone that 
can be worked easily. The flint is chipped un- 
til the proper shape is achieved, usually that 
of a broad leaf, then it is sometimes lashed to 
a wooden handle. This sort of stone dagger 


in China, culminating in a sturdy, reliable 
model during the Han Dynasty, circa 206 
BC. This particular crossbow model, 
some scholars believe, was seen as early as 
about 36 BC by about 100 Roman soldiers 
who were taken prisoner in Central Asia. 
Such experiences or the trade routes that 
eventually opened passed the concept of 
the crossbow from East to West. 

Initially, the European crossbow was 
made with a wooden stave. This construc- 
tion, however, does not give optimum 
power to the bolt's flight. By the end of the 
11th century, it is believed that many 
crossbow staves were made of composite 
construction, usually horn and sinew in 
conjunction with wood (usually yew). 
This method of crossbowmaking came 
from the Saracens, and the Saracen influ- 
ence in southern Europe explains why the 
area became well known for crossbow 
manufacturing and use. 


Daggers 


እ Parrying Dagger 


Weapons * 67 


"976.9. 
80 OR 


has 


Weapon Breaker 


EDEN .ےک‎ 


not carry a dagger, but his Teutonic bar- 
barian enemy used them. As the barbari- 
an's influence swept over Europe, the 
dagger was given new life. 

Daggers with steel blades became neces- 
sary in order to penetrate armor. Al- 
though knights carried daggers, they were 
considered a weapon of last resort. 


The modern handshake derives from a 
habit used by bodyguards. They would 
take the hand of anyone visiting the king 
and shake his arm, hoping to dislodge any 
dagger concealed in the visitor's sleeve. 


Dagger, Dirk 


A dirk has qualities of both the dagger and 
the knife. While useful as a weapon, it was 
designed for a variety of uses. It is a version 
of the ballock knife (or "kidney dagger"). 
The dirk has two round, symmetrical globes 
at the base of the handle, where the handle 
meets the blade. The grip itself emerges from 
between the globes and is flared at the top. 
The blade is often made from a large shard of 
a sword blade. The dirk is a single-edged, 
grooved weapon with a back edge near the 
point. It usually features a decorative notch 
at the base. 

Most dirks have a special scabbard that 
has two small pockets in the front, one for a 
knife and one for a fork, used by warriors in 
the field as an early mess kit. 


The dirk is a Scottish weapon, carried 
by Highlanders, making its appearance in 
the late 17th century. The grip is usually 
leather, ivy root, or ivory. In the 18th cen- 
tury, the dirk was sometimes mounted in 


silver or gold. Though normally consid- 
ered a civilian weapon, the dirk was pro- 
duced as a military blade when Scottish 
men were incorporated into Britain's regu- 
lar army. 


has a major weak point: the place where the 
blade is attached to the handle. Primitive 
tribes know that the best stone dagger is 
made from a single piece of stone with the 
dagger's handle consisting of a straight sec- 
tion of stone. The handle is then wrapped in 
hide for a good grip. The average stone dag- 
ger measures 12 inches long. 

When man began working with copper 
and bronze, the technique of making a dag- 
ger's handle and blade from a single piece of 
material remained. Blade lengths increased 
up to 24 inches long, and when the length ex- 
ceeded this, a new weapon, the short sword, 
was born. 

Some weaponsmiths have turned dagger 
making into an art form, decorating the han- 
dles, crossguards, and even the blades, with 
beautiful carvings. Some daggers are deco- 
rated with carved scenes derived from a cul- 
ture's mythology. 


With the advent of swords, the dagger 
was relegated to the role of back-up weap- 
on. In fact, the average Roman soldier did 


Darts 


68 * Chapter Three 


Weapons * 9 


Flails 


"A dagger is great because it's easy to con- 
ceal, it's good in close-fighting or as a backup 
weapon, and it's shape allows it to be hurled. 
It has only a few problems—its a short 
weapon, with neither the reach nor the dam- 
age potential of a sword. 

"A dagger makes a handy tool as well. Sol- 
diers and adventurers use their daggers as 
eating utensils. Owning a sharp blade that is 
easily carried makes life easier (just try draw- 
ing a long sword to cut some bread or a piece 
of rope!). 

"My favorite advantage of a dagger is that 
when you rely on stealth, you can use a dag- 
ger to dispatch a foe and draw less attention 
than resorting to a sword, in which case you 
might as well yell out your intentions. This is 
one reason why those of us who attack our 
enemies indirectly savor the dagger and usu- 


ally carry at least two." 
— Jasmine, Halfling Thief 


Dagger, Parrying 


This specialized type of dagger is used in 
conjunction with a sword. It is used to catch 
or break an opponent's sword. Some ver- 
sions of this dagger are equipped with spring 
blades that split into three blades at the push 
of a button. When such a dagger is employed 
in this fashion, it cannot be thrown success- 
fully. 

Most parrying daggers have long, straight 
or curved quillons, and a tough side ring that 
extends perpendicular to the blade in order to 
protect the user's fingers. 

Unlike the main-gauche, the parrying dag- 
ger is made for a specific purpose, to deflect 
or break an opponent's weapon. The main- 
gauche, while also good for parrying, is less 
of a weapon-breaker. 


Dart 


The dart is a small, easily concealable mis- 
sile weapon that is thrown rather than fired 
from a bow or other launcher. 

Darts are known to exist among advanced 
caveman tribes. These darts are usually 


they are unable to cast a spell but see an ene- 

my spellcaster about to cast, a dart can ruin 

the spell. It helps to be a sharp-eyed, quick- 

thinking, nimble, handsome fellow such as 

myself." 

— Malraz Alizar the Magnificent, Illusionist 
Without Peer 


Hail 


The flail is a sturdy wooden handle at- 
tached to an iron rod, a wooden rod with 
spikes, or a spiked iron ball. Between the 
handle and its implement is either a hinge or 
chain link. The weapon was originally used 
as a tool for threshing grain. Whether a flail 
is used by a foot soldier or a horseman, the 
principle is the same. 

Rumors tell that the flinds' flindbars are in 
fact a variation of the flail. This has not been 
substantiated, and the flinds have no wish to 
cooperate in the research. 


Hand Axe 


FE: ee = 3 
7 ፖ JA EA S SE -- ጋ 7 
er 


W Wi 


| 
1 1 
{ 


“ንር 
TT 


small, wooden shafts fitted with a head of 
bone or stone. 

In modern cultures, darts have leaf or ar- 
row-shaped heads and stabilizers on the 
shaft's butt end, much like miniature arrows. 

Many cultures use darts for sport, hunting, 
and warfare on land and sea. Lizard men use 
barbed darts. 


"Darts are small, easy to hide, and have a 
good rate of fire. Range is slightly better than 
a dagger, but darts cause less damage. Darts 
may be smeared with various toxins to make 
them more effective. It makes sense to fire 
darts at their maximum rate (three per 
round), which not only gives the thrower 
three changes of hitting, but also offsets the 
low damage potential by offering the possi- 
bility of multiple hits. 

"A dart is a good weapon to throw at a 
spellcaster. As long as one dart hits a spell- 
caster, the latter's spell is ruined, regardless of 
the damage caused. Of course, this is why 
many spellcasters carry darts. Most are nim- 
ble enough to use them effectively, and if 


Gaff 


u 


III 
ES 


4 
پاچ وت 
ہے 
BREITEN‏ 
و سر مج 


8 
Wort s A. 
89 - 


| ነታ: 
| 3: ይ: سے سس مع‎ 
3 


70 * Chapter Three 


mans flail is a two-handed weapon, whereas 
the horsemanss flail is one-handed. 

"There is certainly no problem in a foot- 
man using a horsemans flail, although it is 
not a good habit. A foot soldier would be 
better off with a different blunt weapon that 
can cause more damage or have more versa- 
tility, such as a warhammer." 

— Brother George, Cleric 


The followers of Peter the Hermit who 
fought in the Crusades in the 11th and 
12th centuries used flails, placing spikes 
on the short flail heads. This adaptation 
gave rise to other modifications, such as 
replacing the second bar with two or more 
iron balls attached by chains. 

Footman’s flails were used mostly in the 
13th and 14th centuries by foot soldiers, 
especially peasant troops, while the horse- 
man's version enjoyed use by cavalry 
troops during the same time period. 

Flails were used as late as the 1920's by 
Polish peasants against Soviet troops. 


Footman's Flail 


The footman’s flail has a handle approxi- 
mately four feet in length. It otherwise con- 
forms to the above description. 


Horseman's Flail 


The horseman's version of the flail has a 
two-foot-long handle. The horseman already 
has a good positional advantage, sitting atop 
a horse, and consequently does not need the 
greater reach afforded by the long handle of 
the footman's flail. This is a one-handed 
weapon. 


“In the adventurer's world, a flail can be 
used by warriors or priests, especially if the 
latter is not allowed edged weapons. The 
footman's flail causes more damage, since the 
longer pole enables the wielder to make a 
stronger swing. This is a good weapon to use 
in subduing someone, or even for a disarm- 
ing maneuver. Bear in mind that the foot- 


Harpoon 


Weapons * 71 


Eee... መ 
9 رر‎ ሠ መ 


ااا 


m 


Gaff/Hook 


The gaff or hook is actually a tool used to 
hook and land fish. It is commonly found 
where fishing boats are encountered, and the 
hooks are in plentiful supply, affording the 
disarmed adventurer a weapon of last resort. 

The gaff consists of a metal hook with a 
wooden or metal crossbar at the base. A one- 
handed tool, the hook protrudes from be- 
tween the middle and ring fingers. 

Some sailors who have lost a hand have a 
cup with a gaff hook attached to the stump, 
guaranteeing that they are never without a 
weapon. 


"Ya don't often see adventurers whacking 
away with gaffs. To them, it's only a tool. But 
more often than not, dock workers, press 
gangs, pirates, and sailors have a pretty good 
swing with those hooks." 

— Rych the Seeker, Harbormaster 


Hand or Throwing Axe 


The hand axe or throwing axe is also 
known as a hatchet. The axe blade has a 
sharp steel tip, counterbalanced by a pointed 
fluke. The short handle has a point on the 
bottom and the head may have a spike on 
top. 

This weapon is often used by barbarian 
tribes. Some hand axes are carried on the 
saddles of knights and horsemen, who re- 
spect this weapon after seeing barbarians 
wield the axes effectively. 

Despite this acceptance by civilized folk, 
the throwing axe is often relegated to backup 
weapon status since the creation of the bat- 
tleaxe, whose longer handle gives the wielder 
greater force in his swing. The maximum 
length of the hand axe's handle is about 18 
inches, not very great, though better than a 
dagger's reach in hand-to-hand combat. The 
throwing axe's last advantage, its ability to 
be hurled, was eclipsed with the advent of 
better bows such as the long bow. 

Short races such as gnomes make good use 
of hand axes. The gnomes' traditional ene- 


nn 


Javelins 


72 * Chapter Three 


made and the victim is of a size and weight 
that makes this possible (e.g., a harpooned 
whale cannot be hauled in by a fighter with 
13 Strength). 

Certain primitive jungle tribes tradition- 
ally use harpoons to hunt wild boar. Kuo- 
toa, the aquatic subterranean fish-men, 
favor the harpoon with as many nasty barbs 
on the weapon as possible. 

Harpoons may be used one- or two- 
handed, and there is no change in speed fac- 
tor for using it one way or the other. This is a 
definite advantage. On the other hand, the 
harpoon has a poor throwing range, and 
damage potential is less when it is used one- 
handed, much like a bastard sword. The har- 
poon is a common weapon in coastal areas, 
but its primary function is not as a weapon 
against an intelligent opponent. 

Adventurers on ships may experiment 
with fitting harpoons onto ballista launchers, 
if the DM permits. This may be especially 
handy if the PCs are hunting some sea crea- 
ture that they must haul back to port. 


Javelin 


Javelins are classified as light spears, suit- 
able for melee or missile combat, usable ei- 
ther on horseback or on foot. The weapon 
has been around since man's earliest days. 
The javelin head is not very large, and is usu- 
ally leaf-or lancet-shaped. Javelin heads may 
have barbs. 

As a weapon of war, the javelin has low 
popularity, though it is often used for hunt- 
ing purposes. Javelins are also used as a cer- 
emonial weapon of bodyguards in civilized 
nations. Halberdier yeomen are often as- 
signed javelins. 

Javelin throwing is a common contest of 
the games of sport of ancient civilizations. 

Javelins may be used either one- or two- 
handed, and like the harpoon, there is no dif- 
ference in speed factor between the two 
styles. The javelin has a respectable throwing 
range, certainly better than that of a spear, 
with damage potential comparable to the 
spear. Like the harpoon, the javelin gives the 
adventurer the advantage of a weapon that 


Weapons * 73 


mies, the kobolds, also use hand axes. The 
weapon's size is small enough to be wielded 
properly, and it can be hurled as a last resort. 
Dwarves, of course, are far more interested 
in the heavier battleaxe. 


"The throwing axe is a good backup weap- 
on for an adventurer. It can be used in melee 
combat or as a missile weapon, although 
with mediocre range. The weapon is also use- 
ful as a general tool, especially to outdoor 
types such as rangers, who often need a good 
tool to hack away at undergrowth in order to 
blaze a trail." 

— Dalraun Ironedge, Ranger 


Harpoon 


The harpoon is a hunting weapon, which, 
in times of duress, may be used for defense. 
Its development by primeval man was for 
hunting marine mammals and large fish. 

The first harpoons were merely pointed 
sticks. Later, these became sticks with a 
sharp head of horn or bone. The heads often 
had hooks cut into them for increased dam- 
age and to hold the harpoon fast in the beast's 
flesh. The head was then fitted or attached 
to the end of the shaft, secured by animal 
sinews. 

Metal harpoon heads evolved later, most 
with pointed or barbed heads. These heads 
are usually detachable from the shaft, but are 
connected to the thrower by a cord attached 
between the point and the barb. 

When a hunter throws the harpoon and 
hits an animal, he follows the victim as best 
he can, playing out as much rope as needed 
until the beast tires and dies. 

Some creatures may be of sufficient intelli- 
gence to try to free themselves from the har- 
poon. If the target has Intelligence of 2 or 
greater and some means of dislodging the 
hook or breaking the line, it is allowed a sav- 
ing throw vs. poison. Success means the vic- 
tim is freed. Failure means the harpoon is still 
attached, the victim takes another hit point 
of damage, and is drawn 10' closer to the har- 
poon's wielder. The victim is pulled toward 
the wielder only if a concentrated attempt is 


from a single piece of bronze, with a single 
straight edge or slightly curved blade. The 
curvature is often accentuated near the point. 

When man began using iron, knife handles 
went through a change. The malleability of 
iron made it easy to create and keep a sharp 
edge, while also enabling the maker to extend 
the blade into a flat tang, which was then 
covered with sidepieces of wood, bone, or 
horn. This made the handles easier to deco- 
rate. In primitive civilizations, knives are 
used as an all-purpose tool, on the hunting 
grounds, and as a tool of sacrifice. 

Different forms of knives may be found 
among the different peoples who depend 
heavily on this useful tool. Small knives are 
made for domestic uses, longer knives for 
hunting and war. 

Small knives exhibit their own evolution, 
resulting in the common man's small knife 
with a four-inch blade and a plain handle of 
bone or horn. The more influential citizen 
may have a knife with a handle of rock crys- 
tal or other stone, enclosed in a precious 
metal. Despite the great value of these 


may be used effectively either as a melee 
weapon or as a missile weapon. 

Many drow carry javelins, often coating 
the weapons with the same poison they use 
on crossbow bolts. Kobolds also use javelins, 
as any weapon which inflicts damage from a 
long distance is embraced by that cowardly 
race. Advanced races of lizard men are also 
javelin users. 


Knife 


A knife consists of a single-edged, pointed 
blade with a handle mounted asymmetrical- 
ly. It is an early weapon, used even by primi- 
tive tribes. In these cultures, a knife is little 
more than a flint blade with one or two cut- 
ting edges. 

Bone knives are little more than a sharp- 
ened piece of bone, often decorated in the 
same way as daggers. Like other bone weap- 
ons, bone knives are apt to shatter. 

True knives appeared when man began us- 
ing alloys such as bronze. A knife was cast 


Knives 


74 * Chapter Three 


verse applies to the knife. 

"An adventurer of high station way wish 
to have a knife and a sword of similar design, 
both housed in one scabbard. Such a thing is 
certainly considered a status symbol (defin- 
itely a mixed blessing). 

"A big advantage of knives is that they are 
found everywhere. Cooks, trappers, and 
hunters are but three occupations that justify 
carrying a knife." 

—Peripim Furfoot, Halfling Adventurer and 

Professional Cook 


Knife handles historically exhibited 
wide variations in materials and work- 
manship. Cast silver knife handles were 
popular in the 16th century, inlaid mother- 
of-pearl was in vogue in the 17th century, 
porcelain handles were popular in the 18th 
century, and carved ivory and bone with 
fine silver plate was the trend in the 19th 
century. 

Nations or cultural groups created 


COTS ዚር e nae RAN 
ملک می‎ TONG 
ES ای ا‎ 


ኔ5 "(Quoc OWN.‏ هنن 
ዓባ. ዋቾ‏ 


Weapons * 75 


knives, they are not as effective in combat as 
the larger knives ( —1 to attack and damage 
rolls). 

Non-domestic knives, or outdoor knives, 
have stronger blades and sharper points. 
They are carried in their own sheaths, or in 
the scabbard of a larger weapon, such as a 
sword, creating a specialized set. 

In some areas, knife makers are prohibited 
from selling knives with leaf-shaped blades. 
Such decrees are an effort to prevent such 
knives from being carried casually. The leaf 
shape causes a large, gaping wound that 
bleeds heavily. 


"Though it seems as if a dagger and a knife 
are very much alike, there are important dif- 
ferences. A knife is lighter than a dagger. Its 
shape does not allow it to be thrown as easi- 
ly, which explains why the lighter knife has 
the same throwing range as a dagger. The 
knife causes only slightly less damage than 
the dagger. Both weapons have the same rate 
of fire. The dagger is less a tool and more a 
weapon, while it can be argued that the re- 


D. 
ام‎ 


Seg: NR ል کات ماع‎ 


by making them heavier. 

One of the biggest problems with using a 
lance is the jarring impact on the user. In or- 
der to address this problem, a thick leather 
ring called a graper is fitted to the shaft just 
behind the wielder's hand. This acts as a stop 
against the armpit, halting the lance's rear- 
ward motion upon impact. 

Another important part of a lance is a rest. 
The rest is a small, sometimes folding bracket 


fixed to the right side of the knight's breast- . 


plate armor. The graper is leaned against this 
rest when the lance is in use. The rest enables 
the knight to get the maximum push from his 
lance, inflicting the most damage. 

The difference between the light, medium, 
and heavy, lances stems from the length (10' 
for a light, 12' for a medium, and 14' for a 
heavy), and weight (five pounds, ten 
pounds, and fifteen pounds for light, medi- 
um, and heavy respectively). 

Each lance type can be used only if the 
rider is on a horse of corresponding type or 
greater. Thus, a knight on a heavy warhorse 
can use any lance, while the scout on a light 
warhorse is limited to the light lance. 


Jousting Lance 


Jousting lances, used in "jousts of peace,” 
are the heaviest lances, weighing 20 pounds 
and measuring at least 13 feet long. These 
lances are fitted with a three-pronged head in 
order to prevent armor penetration. The 
prongs are short, blunt projections that 
emerge from the headpiece, as opposed to a 
sharp point. This lance is also known as a 
“courtesy lance.” In a full tilt, a joust of war, 
the head is blunt and may actually cause fa- 
talities. 

Locathah riding on the backs of giant eels 
use light lances. 


"Light lances can be used as a polearm by 
adventurers who do not relish combat on 
horseback, preferring instead to meet the en- 
emy on foot. It can be hard to wield a heavy 
lance in a forest, so a medium lance may bea 
good compromise. 

"Lances are best used as a mounted weap- 


knives that suited their particular styles or 
customs. À common knife in southern Eu- 
rope, for instance, had a blade that folded 
toward the handle, with the cutting edge 
housed in a special groove. In Spain, these 
were called the Navaja, and in Italy the 
Serramancio. We know them today as 
clasp knives or jackknives. 

By far the most famous knife of the past 
two centuries was a heavy, single-edged, 
sharply pointed blade with a small handle 
with wooden sidepieces. The knife was de- 
signed for melee combat. This knife was 
much in use in the American West, and 
was named for its creator: Colonel James 
Bowie. 


Lance 


The term "lance" originally referred to 
spears wielded by footmen and cavalry. It 
eventually referred only to cavalry spears. 

Lance design varies between cultures and 
eras. Generally, the lance is a long shaft of 
tough wood, usually ash, with an iron head 
in the shape of a laurel or willow leaf, with 
cutting edges and a sharp point meant to pen- 
etrate armor. 

Lances are meant to be gripped close to the 
bottom, putting a great distance between the 
wielder and his target. As a rule, the lance is 
aimed diagonally above the horse's neck. The 
opponents face each other with their left 
sides oncoming. 

Along with almost any variety of sword, 
the lance is considered the best offensive 
weapon for mounted soldiers. Some knights 
carry a small fabric pennant affixed just be- 
low the lance head. These pennants are either 
triangular or square, and carry the colors or 
symbols of the knight's family or liege. 

In parades, lances are held vertically, with 
the butt set in a stirrup or on the horseman's 
right thigh. On a march, the lance is held 
across the shoulder, across the saddlebow, or 
horizontally alongside the horse. 

Through evolution, weaponsmiths sought 
to increase the damage caused by the lance 


76 * Chapter Three 


Maces 


Weapons * 77 


on. When used from the back of a charging 
mount, it inflicts double damage. 

"Nothing is more awe-inspiring than a 
mounted knight, wielding her lance and 
charging a dragon. Of such things legends 
are made, and no mounted warrior worth his 
salt should be without his lance, especially a 
paladin. I know I have mine!" 

— Maura Smallwood, Paladin 


The lance's history can be traced to the 
Middle East, and was widely used by Gre- 
co-Roman horsemen. 

Though rendered obsolescent in 1600 
by the advent of firearms, lances were still 
used by light cavalry until the 19th centu- 
ry, with many European armies maintain- 


ing use of the lance in the Russian Civil 
War and World War I. Two of the most 
well-known uses of the lance in the 20th 
century were the Polish lancers' charges 
against German armor in 1939, and the 
Italian charges against the Russians in 
1942. 


Lasso 


A lasso is a length of rope with a loop at 
one end, tied with a knot that enables the 
loop to be tightened. The wielder twirls the 
lasso and throws the loop at the intended tar- 
get. If it hits, the lasso has encircled the tar- 
get, enabling the attacker to dismount the 
victim, make him fall, pin him, strangle him, 
etc. The wielder must specify exactly what he 
wants the lasso to accomplish before making 
his attack roll. 

A successful hit does not cause damage to 
the target, but incidental damage can occur 
from the results of certain actions performed 
with the lasso, such as making someone fall 
or strangling a victim. 

The many tricks which can be performed 
with a lasso are outlined in the Equipment 
Chapter of The Complete Fighters Hand- 
book. 

A lasso may be severed by 2 hit points of 
cutting damage. A victim's Strength can 


Mace 


The mace is a direct descendant of the ba- 
sic club, being nothing more than a wooden 
club with a stone or iron head mounted on 
one end. The head design varies, with some 
being spiked, others flanged, and still others 
with pyramidical knobs. 

The mace has existed since man began 
working with metal. The first maces were 
made in order to give the club wielder more 
power in his swing. 

High-level priests, knights, and even pala- 
dins may have a personalized, decorated 
mace that serves primarily as a symbol of 
rank. 

Since the mace is a weapon that requires 
very little in the way of specialized training, 
it is a favored weapon among goblins. 


Footman's Mace 


Footman's maces originated as heavy 
wooden truncheons, about two and a half 


cutting damage. À victim's Strength can 
break a lasso, using the characters Bend 
Bars/Lift Gates roll. Only one attempt can be 
made on any one lasso. 

Lassos are also called lariats. Characters 
can take lasso as a weapon proficiency, but 
they should remember that the Rope Use 
nonweapon proficiency gives a +2 bonus to 
hit with a lasso. 


"Lasso? What sort of heroic weapon is a 
lasso? What is a warrior going to do, tie up 
his victim and make him die of embarrass- 
ment? Bah! If a warrior is so keen on using a 
length of hemp rope, let him learn Rope Use. 
That way, not only is there a better chance at 
hitting a victim with a lasso than if he were 
proficient with the lasso as a weapon, but the 
adventurer will also pick up many more 
tricks, rather than wasting time trying to be- 
come expert at throwing silly loops of rope! 
Lassos, indeed!" 

—Kedar the Dark, Warrior Lord of 
Adauntlynn 


Main-Gauche 


| ገ ۷ ፲ 
y 
ma 
gent 


78 * Chapter Three 


Mancatcher 


04 


=> [ f 
۲ تا‎ Alten ڪڪ رڪڪ‎ ራሪ c 
1 


N 


t 
0 
7ہ‎ Ahr ۳-۳۳۳ E 


۳ 


//# 


መመመ 
4 


2 
سره‎ D LIE 


ፍፍ SNNT 
a 
۳ سح‎ 
W 
ንን 
ces H 
NN à SS 
EJ 


ui 


r 


کی ںہ تج حت 


ትትት ኢሕን 
جح‎ N N 


| 
OL መመ 0007 رھ‎ ፖ22ፖፖፖ።መ።ፖፖፖቻ aa کے‎ Tp 
1 


SS 


A 


ONSSNNNNNNNN 


Dny 
5 


2 
مو مسب EE‏ — 


III AA. oz: 


f 
/ 0 
/ i 1 
4 f / 
| 
1 / 
N A 
f ው መመ A 'ሥያ ፓሪ የበ 
/ h 
/ T 
/ M 
/ | | 
/ j 7 
narra እ 1 DIEZ ELIE: 
/ / 
AR / 
۸ ከ] / 
سح‎ Le 1 
4 s 1 


دد 


IS 


h 


y. ۸ 
اک‎ CR PEELE ELE ie ፖራሪቹ፤ 
2 


ሪ 


/ 
\ 
4 ےے ہے یت 
0 


N 
N 
ከ 
a 
ኑ1 
5 
N 
5 
N 
a 
A 


ARNT 


۱ 
d 22 / 
AN jr 
# 


j 
2 


` 


Weapons * 79 


feet in length and covered with iron studs. As 
time went by, flanged heads similar to the 
horsemen's mace were used instead. This 
mace is a two-handed weapon. 

There are two different types of footman's 
maces: an emergency weapon made from 
materials at hand and thrown together by a 
blacksmith, and the maces made by profes- 
sional weaponsmiths for troops. In order to 
reflect the difference between the two types, 
the homemade mace should be given a -1 
penalty to attack and damage rolls. 

The hasty, emergency maces are usually a 
wooden handle with any sort of metal head 
attached. 


Horseman's Mace 


The first horseman's maces were a wooden 
handle, about 18 inches long, with a leather 
wrist strap at the bottom of the handle so the 
weapon would not be dropped, and a metal 
head. As time progressed, knights preferred 
to have maces made entirely of metal. 

The horseman's mace became an impor- 
tant weapon to the knight. Knights usually 
keep a mace slung over a hook on the saddle- 
bow. Not surprisingly, an alternate name for 
the horseman's mace is the knight's mace. 
This type of mace is a one-handed weapon. 


"Maces are a step up from the basic club, 
and are a good weapon especially for priests 
who cannot use edged weapons. Adventur- 
ers may find that the horseman's mace is ac- 
tually a good secondary weapon for a 
footman, though the reverse is certainly not 
true! 

"A mace is specially made for crushing 
things, especially helmets and armor." 

— Brother "Helmsbane" Maynard 


The Romans armed their allied auxilia- 
ries with bronze-headed maces, although 
they never used maces themselves. 


Two styles of mace head patterns em- 
erged before the 14th century. The first 
was a ferrule from which extended knot 


or node-shaped pieces, and the second 
was a geometrically designed head with 
vanes (conical or diamond-shaped 
flanges). 

Gothic influence in the 14th century 
made maces more decorative, a trend 
which ended in the 16th century, when 
maces were given a more military form. 
Eastern European maces, especially those 
from Poland and Hungary, had onion- 
shaped heads, an idea taken from the 
Turkish maces. Maces were used as a 
weapon up until the 18th century. 

During the Middle Ages, arming oneself 
with a mace took on significance among 
nobles and army commanders. The mace 
became a preferred weapon among 
wealthy or illustrious users, and it became 
symbolic of power, wealth, and renown. 
These maces were shaped or decorated in 
a manner that represented the wielder. 
Thus, the owner of a mace became recog- 
nized as a person of prominence and rank, 
with the number of ribs and flanges on the 
mace indicating the owner's status. 


Main-Gauche 


The main-gauche (French for "left hand") 
is a large dagger with a basket hilt. Since 
most swordsmen use their right hand to 
wield a sword, this dagger is meant for the 
left hand, wielded as a defensive weapon 
when a warrior is using the two-handed 
fighting technique. The main-gauche is also 
called a “left-hand dagger.” 

The heavy basket of the main-gauche is the 
equivalent of an iron gauntlet for the pur- 
poses of hand-to-hand combat. 

Fighters proficient with main-gauche gain 
a +1 bonus to hit with Disarm and Parry 
maneuvers. More information on fighting 
styles and maneuvers can be found in The 
Complete Fighter's Handbook in the Combat 
chapter. 


“A main-gauche causes the same damage 
as a normal dagger, but the former is de- 


Morning Stars 


SATA 


80 * Chapter Three 


the opponent is caught, losing shield and 
Dexterity bonuses. In addition, the victim 
can be pushed and pulled around at the whim 
of the mancatcher's wielder. 

While caught in the mancatcher, the victim 
suffers 1d2 hit points of damage per round. 
There is a 2596 chance that the trapped char- 
acter will fall to the ground. 

The victim may attempt to escape the grip 
of a mancatcher by making a successful bend 
bars/lift gates roll, but he suffers an extra 
1d2 points of damage while breaking away. 


"Mancatchers are good for pulling horse- 
men off their mounts and pinning them to the 
ground, but the weapon is only good on 
man-sized opponents. Smaller creatures like 
goblins and kobolds can just slip on through, 
and the larger creatures don't have the right 
frame, though why anyone would want to 
capture any of these disgusting things alive is 
beyond me. 

"Mancatchers are used often by that foul, 
subterranean race of fish-men, the kuo-toa. 
Some adventurers who may have suffered 


Weapons * 81 


signed especially for defense. It's important not 
to confuse the main-gauche with the parrying 
dagger. The latter has a different design, in- 
cluding longer quillons and sometimes a triple 
blade. A parrying dagger also has a greater 
likelihood of breaking an opponent's weapon. 
A main-gauche offers better protection to the 
user's hand. In any case, it is quite a sight to see 
a warrior using a sword in one hand and a 
main-gauche in the other." 

—Mendrill Halfeloen, Bard 


Mancatcher 


A mancatcher is a polearm with a special 
function: to capture an opponent without 
killing him. The weapon consists of a long 
pole with a set of spring-loaded, sharpened 
jaws at one end. The victim is caught be- 
tween the jaws, which then snap shut. 

The target, regardless of armor and other 
defensive devices (magical or otherwise), is 
treated as AC 10, though appropriate Dex- 
terity bonuses are allowed. If a hit is scored, 


us 
a “Ce 
A ہم‎ = 
"ያራ, P gg, 
و‎ ۰ 
| U 
REIISSI 'ጭ'ቃ 
4 
2 
— 
u 
= 
0 


اسنا و 


کی و م 
بصم Th ጠና፣።‏ 
ርፈ‏ 
መጽፓሪ ei‏ 
کت دای 
Eh,‏ رس ےہ ھا 
war የሽ “-“ ሁራ‏ 
TT‏ 
سم 
- 
اد 
HEC‏ سے 
1 
wa vt:‏ 
ሇ LJ‏ 


4ے 2ئ 
t 8‏ 


ራ 


72 


sions are used by horsemen. It is a very popu- 
lar weapon due to its effectiveness and its 
simplicity of production. 

The morning star traces its ancestry to the 
mace, which in turn traces its lineage back to 
the club. 

Hobgoblins, a race that takes great delight 
in inflicting pain, often use morning stars. 
Troglodytes use stone morning stars. 


"Morning stars are clubs with a real nasty 
attitude. They can cause as much damage to 
a man as a longsword, probably because of 
them spikes. I hear tell that the morning star 
is called a bludgeoning weapon as well as a 
piercing weapon, but tell me, have you ever 
seen a sharp spike hit someone at high speeds 
and have that called bludgeoning?" 

— Suriel, Cleric of Tyr 


The morning star was derived from the 
Swiss Morgenstern (literally: "morning 
star"), and was used during the 16th and 
17th centuries, especially in England. The 


Military Pick 
رکز کر رم‎ Ay 


N 
// 


= 


1 


UM 22 


eat 


JA 


1 / 


መሪ መወ 
7)0 RU 


the depredations of the kuo-toa and who see 
a character wielding a mancatcher may get a 
bit upset. Often, its best to steer clear of 
weapons that remind certain people of cer- 
tain races, unless of course, someone is really 
good with the weapon in question!" 

— Troxel the Unpredictable 


Morning Star 


The morning star is a wooden shaft topped 
with a metal head made up of a spiked iron 
sheath. Morning stars have an overall length 
of about four feet. Some such weapons have 
a round, oval, or cylindrical shaped head 
studded with spikes. Extending from most 
morning star heads, regardless of design, is a 
long point for thrusting. 

The weapon is designed to allow the wield- 
er to inflict greater damage with his swing. 
The weighted, spiked head adds to this abili- 
ty significantly. 

Long-handled morning stars are used by 
foot soldiers, while the short-handled ver- 


ANN 


IE 


<= 


82 * Chapter Three 


A properly folded net allows the attacker 
to perform Disarm, Parry, and Pin maneu- 
vers. Such attacks are at a —3 to hit if the net 
is unfolded. 

Certain underwater races, such as nixies 
and sahuagin, use nets not only for fishing, 
but also as a combat weapon, usually when 
they wish to take a victim alive. 


"This weapon is rather unusual, but it can 
be quite effective. Imagine, a weapon which, 
if it hits, will immobilize an opponent in just 
one round. Of course, such a weapon is not 
very effective on larger than man-sized or ex- 
ceptionally strong creatures (such as an 
ogre), though it may buy a wounded adven- 
turer some time, since a successful hit means 
that the victim must abandon plans for at- 
tacking and concentrate instead on getting 
out of the net. 

"Characters who can set snares and traps 
ought to consider the net when making their 
little traps. It could come in handy for de- 
fense or in a hasty retreat." 

— Bramm Po, Illusionist 


Pick, Military 


The medieval military pick was a special- 
ized weapon. It probably originated from the 
common mining tool. As armor grew heavi- 
er, the pick's form and function were soon 
adapted to a specialized role. This role was to 
penetrate the heavier armor types, from 
chain mail up through full plate armor. The 
military pick was a modification of a weapon 
called the martel-de-fer, a type of war ham- 
mer that had a hammerhead balanced by a 
thick, curved piercing fluke or "crow's beak.” 

The military pick generally consists of a 
heavy piercing fluke mounted on a haft. The 
weapon might have either one or two flukes, 
and the haft might be spiked. 

The weapon is popular with knights and 
the heavy foot soldiers of certain mercenary 
companies. Dwarves and gnomes are also 
fond of the weapon, and deep gnomes 
(svirfneblin) in particular use great numbers 
of them. 


Weapons * 83 


weapon had the perverse nickname of 
“holy water sprinkler.” 
The morning star was popular from the 


Middle Ages to the late 17th century, 
though its use continued among peasants 
and poor urban militiamen and gangs up 
to the 19th century. 


Net 


The net is a tool that has been used as a 
weapon since the days when emerging civili- 
zations held gladiatorial arena combat. This 
version of the net is an eight- to twelve-foot 
diameter circular net with weights around the 
edges and a trailing rope used to guide the net 
and pull it away. It is usually folded in such a 
way that it twirls open when thrown. It is 
tossed with one hand, with the attacker hold- 
ing onto the guide rope with the other hand. 

A successful hit with this weapon means 
that the victim is netted and must try to 
break free by making a Strength check once 
per round until successful. The netted victim 
cannot make any sort of attack until the net 
has been shaken off. 

On the round after the victim is netted, the 
attacker has several options for his next 
action, including using another weapon to 
strike the entangled victim. The victim loses 
his Dexterity and shield bonuses to armor 
class until he is freed. 

The attacker may improve his grip on the 
victim by looping the trailing rope around 
the netted character. This requires a normal 
attack roll for success, and the victim loses 4 
points of effective Strength (for determining 
success of freeing oneself from the net) per 
successful round of attack. If the victim’s 
Strength is reduced to zero, he is hopelessly 
tangled and cannot escape unless helped by 
someone outside the net. 

If a warrior throws a net and misses, it is 
open and unfolded. It may still be thrown, 
but it is no longer folded correctly and is con- 
sequently an unwieldy weapon. Attackers 
suffer a —3 penalty to hit when throwing an 
unfolded net. 


Polearms are easy to make and are used of- 
ten by peasants and common foot soldiers. 
The polearm is a great equalizer for these 
troops, who often must fight armored men on 
horseback. A polearm gives the wielder a long 
reach without exposing himself to the swing of 
a sword. Setting polearms to receive a charge 
grants the wielders an initiative bonus. 

A primary use of the polearm is to allow 
warriors in the second rank to attack over 
the shoulders of the front rank. Often times, 
a fighter with a hand weapon and shield will 
team up with one using a pole arm, and they 
will fight as a coordinated unit. 

Polearms that have special attachments to 
topple mounted targets have a base 20% 
chance of success. 

Special optional rules for implementing po- 
learm tactics may be found in the Combat 
chapter in The Complete Fighters Handbook. 

Gnolls and hobgoblins make it a point to 
carry polearms often. A band of such crea- 
tures encountered carrying polearms will be 
knowledgeable in polearm tactics. Orcs fa- 
vor halberds, pikes, and glaives. 

While the Master Weapons Chart at the 
end of this chapter shows which polearms 
cause extra damage when set to receive a 
charge, any polearm can be used to receive a 
charge regardless of whether it causes extra 
damage. 


The Real Way To Use A Polearm 

"Alright, listen up, for I am only going to 
say this once. I grow weary of seeing groups 
of bumbling amateurs running around with 
polearms, each person with a different type. 
One uses his halberd, another uses a pike, 
still another has a guisarme-voulge, and he 
cannot even pronounce it, let alone use it! 
This is ridiculous. If you are going to use a 
polearm, use it correctly! Here's how. 

"First of all, for the gods' sake, try to get 
some idea of where your group is going. Are 
you going to the jungle or a dense forest? You 
are? Then why buy a polearm, you fool!? 
You will have no room to wield it, and more 
often than not you'll wind up poking your 
comrade's eye out. Make sure that the terrain 
suits the weapon. 


Footman's Pick 


The footman’s version of this weapon has 
a longer haft (up to 5’), enabling it to wielded 
with two hands. The weapon weighs about 
six pounds and can be swung with great pen- 
etrating force. 


Horseman's Pick 


The horseman's pick is lighter (about 4 
pounds) and has a shortened haft (about two 
feet), making it easier to wield from horse- 
back. It is commonly used by knights and 
heavy mercenary horsemen, who face more 
heavily armored opponents. The deep 
gnomes' weapon is also of this lighter variety. 


"Races who particularly enjoy mining, such 
as gnomes, svirfneblin, and dwarves, can be 
found with these weapons. They usually 
know how to use a pick both as a tool and as 
a weapon, though they will first use normal 
weapons if given the chance. Sometimes they 
have to wield these as weapons against an- 
other race known for its subterranean dig- 
gings, and who also use the pick as a 
weapon: the duergar." 

— Nahac the Gnome Sage 


Polearms 


Also called staff weapons, polearms are 
defined as hafted weapons—edged weapons 
mounted on a short handle or on a longer 
shaft wielded with two hands. The shafts are 
usually made of wood, though metal shafts 
sometimes exist. 

An alternate term for polearm is pollaxe, 
which is used to describe any weapon which 
has a metal head in a combination of axe, 
beak, or hammer, mounted on a pole ranging 
four to six feet in length. Poll is the contem- 
porary word for a steel head mounted on a 
staff, and the term should not be confused 
with ۱ 

Though descriptions of the various po- 
learm types follow, there are certain charac- 
teristics common with all pole weapons, as 
outlined here. 


———————  —  E—Q ——————————————s"————————sm————À——————v T — '[!—————nan——"'ÜM Lt 
84 * Chapter Three 


value, except when used en masse on the 
battlefield. 


Bardiche 


The word bardiche is the corrupted spell- 
ing of berdysh. The berdysh (Russian term) is 
in effect an elongated battleaxe with a large, 
narrow, curved axe head measuring 24 to 32 
inches long, mounted on a pole five to eight 
feet long. 

The upper part of the head can be used for 
thrusting, while the lower part is in the form 
of a langet. À langet is an iron strap used to 
increase the strength of the head and protect 
the most exposed part of the weapon from 
blows. 

Berdysh require more room to wield than a 
pike or a spear, but the weapon has a unique 
function: it can be used as a gun rest. The 
smaller berdysh have two rings for attaching 
to a shoulder strap. This arrangement is pop- 
ular among horsemen. 


Bec de Corbin 


Also called the bec de faucon, the names 
mean "crow's beak" and "falcon's beak" re- 
spectively. This pole weapon has a hook 
much like a bird's beak and is ideal for cut- 
ting open armor like some great can opener. 
The weapon also has a hammer or axe side 
that delivers a solid hit. This is a highly spe- 
cialized weapon, designed for the purpose of 
cutting armor then striking the now unar- 
mored victim with the other side of the weap- 
on. The pole shaft is eight feet long. 


Bill-Guisarme 


Also known simply as a “bill,” this weapon 
is derived from an agricultural tool, the bill 
hook. Throughout its years of use, the bill's 
head went through many changes. Its most 
common head form is a sharp spike 
with a sturdy hook whose inside and outside 
edges were sharpened, and a cutting blade 
reminiscent of a cleaver. The pole length 
ranges around eight feet. 


Weapons * 85 


"Next, once you know that the destination 
justifies a polearm, each person should get 
the same type of polearm. The weapons vary 
in the speed with which they can be swung 
and the amount of space needed to wield the 
things. Different polearms complicate what 
should be a simple operation. 

"When you see an enemy charging at you, 
have all the polearm bearers line up in the 
front row, with weapons set to receive the 
charge. In order to set for a charge, the wield- 
er should stand sideways, leaning forward so 
the left shoulder faces the oncoming foe. The 
polearm should be set at an angle, with the 
head pointing away from the ground, facing 
up at the enemy. The end of the handle 
should rest against the instep of the right 
foot. Both hands hold the pole firmly. You 
are now ready to receive a charge. 

"Once the enemy impales himself on the 
blades, you cannot just pull out the staff 
weapon and begin hitting the creature. Your 
non-polearm-wielding comrades behind you 
should begin throwing spells, hurling mis- 
siles, spears, whatever, at the impaled foes. 
Try your best to keep the enemy on the 
blade, and out of your reach. 

"Now that's the way to use a polearm! It is 
a team effort that needs to be practiced often. 
Remember this, and perhaps it will save your 
life!" 

— Fiona the Ranger, Daughter of Dierdre 


Awl Pike 


Also known just as a "pike" and a Morris 
pike (corruption of Moorish), this is an in- 
fantry spear ranging 16 to 22 feet in length. 
Awl heads are usually leaf- or lozenge- 
shaped. The pole is made of a strong wood, 
such as ash. Many pike heads are made with 
two tongues of steel, nailed down the sides of 
the shaft in order to prevent the head from 
getting hacked off. The grip is often bound 
with cloth and the butt capped in steel to pre- 
vent the shaft from splitting. The awl pike 
has the dubious distinction of being the slow- 
est polearm available. Add to this its medio- 
cre damage against man-sized opponents, 
and one is left with a weapon of questionable 


Guisarme 


Also called the gisarme or the giserne, the 
guisarme is an elaborately curved blade, 
much like the crescent blade of an axe, at- 
tached to a six-foot long staff. Thrusting 
spikes are often attached to the top of the 
shaft. The guisarme is supposed to have 
come from the farmer's pruning hook. The 
weapon may have contributed to the devel- 
opment of the berdysh and the halberd. 


Guisarme-Voulge 


This term describes the guisarme in its later 
stages, with a curved axe-head. It features a 
back spike, the fluke, for punching through 
armor, and the blade's end tapers for thrust- 
ing attacks. Often, the fluke is replaced with 
a sharp hook for use in dismounting riders. It 
is a slower weapon than the plain guisarme 
but causes comparable damage. 


Halberd 


By far the oldest and most often used pole- 
arm, the halberd consists of a cleaverlike axe 
blade mounted on a staff averaging six feet in 
length. The axe blade is balanced at the rear 
with a fluke, and surmounted by a sharp spike, 
usually of quadrangular design. The fluke is 
sometimes replaced by a hook used to dis- 
mount cavalry. A halberd can be best described 
as a cross between a spear and an axe. 

Though a halberd's main function is to dis- 
mount cavalry, it may also be employed as a 
thrusting weapon and a cutting weapon. It is 
not a fast weapon, even compared to other 
polearms. Still, it does more damage to a 
man-sized opponent than all other polearms. 


Hook-Fauchard 


Like the fauchard-fork, the hook-fauchard 
is another attempt to improve the fauchard. 
This weapon has a hook fitted on the blade's 
back. The hook is used to dismount cavalry. 
Like its predecessors, it was not a very effec- 
tive weapon. Its damage potential is horrible 


Fauchard 


Developed from the common agricultural 
sickle or scythe, the fauchard consists of a 
long, curving blade with a large, pointed 
head and a fluke (a small, curved hook found 
on many polearms). The head is mounted on 
a wooden pole about eight feet long. Peas- 
ants can often change scythes into fauchards. 

The fauchard is classified as a glaive. It is 
not very good as a thrusting weapon, but is 
used mainly as a slashing weapon. It fulfils 
the need for a weapon that puts some dis- 
tance between the wielder and his enemy. 

Since the fauchard is not an instrument de- 
signed foremost as a weapon but rather a 
farm tool adapted for war, it is inefficient as a 
weapon of war, being rather bulky and need- 
ing a large area to be used properly. 


Fauchard-Fork 


This term denotes a fauchard with the 
fluke attached. The fluke was added in order 
to improve the weapon's thrusting capability, 
but the effort was fruitless. It is still a bulky 
weapon, requiring much space to be wielded 
effectively. 


Glaive 


The glaive is a pole weapon with a large 
head shaped like a knife or a sword mounted 
on an eight- to ten-foot long shaft. The blade 
usually turns outward in order to increase 
the cutting area. Some glaives are fitted with 
flukes. Overall, the glaive's damage potential 
is not spectacular, but its long reach makes 
up for this. It effectively takes a normal 
sword blade and gives it a great reach. 


Glaive-Guisarme 


This term describes a glaive with a fluke 
mounted on the back of the blade. It is slower 
and heavier than a glaive, and its potential 
damage is nothing noteworthy. 


86 * Chapter Three 


wooden staff is about seven feet long. 

Forks are useful not only as thrusting 
weapons, but as tools for climbing the de- 
fender's ramparts, setting up ladders, and 
hoisting baskets of supplies. 


Partisan 


The partisan (alternatively spelled "parti- 
zan") is a staff weapon consisting of a long, 
tapering, double-edged spear blade with two 
diagonally-set flukes at the base. The shaft is 
about eight feet long. The partisan's flukes 
may be used to catch and break opponents' 
weapons, as well as to inflict extra damage. 
Partisan heads are large enough to allow en- 
graving and ornamentation. 


Ranseur 


Also known as the rancoon and the raw- 
con, the ranseur resembles a partisan, except 
that the ranseur's flukes are longer, resulting 
in a three-pronged head. The flukes are, 


compared to the fauchards that it was sup- 
posed to improve upon, and it is slower than 
the original fauchard. 


Lucern Hammer 


The lucern hammer is a hammerhead with 
a spike at its rear, mounted on a long pole, 
reaching as much as ten feet in length. In 
some cases, the end is fitted with a spike to 
keep enemy soldiers at bay. It is one of the 
heavier pole weapons and is rather slow. The 
entire weapon is usually made of steel, in- 
cluding the pole, and often it is decorated 
with carvings and precious metal gilding. 


Military Fork 


The military fork is the warrior's version 
of a simple agricultural farming tool. The 
head consists of two parallel spikes, often fit- 
ted with hooks for pulling horsemen off their 
mounts. Certain versions of the fork have a 
blade mounted just below the spikes. The 


Pole Arms 


Awl pike 


Fauchard-fork 
Fauchard 


Weapons * 87 


Bill-guisarme 


Bardiche 
Bec de corbin 


Though it is a simple weapon to make, this 
advantage is offset by the fact that it is one of 
the slowest polearms available. 


"Taken as an entire weapon group, pole- 
arms are a useful weapon especially in an 
outdoor setting. Their advantages include a 
good reach, excellent defensive capability, 
and the ability to knock opponents off their 
mounts. Among the drawbacks of polearms 
as a whole are the amount of room needed to 
wield them, their diminished usefulness in 
close-quarters melee, their overall slowness, 
and their encumbrance. Also, with so many 
polearm types to choose from, it is unlikely 
that a group of adventurers all have the same 
weapon or that everyone in the group will 
want a polearm of any sort in the first place. 
Polearms are more effective if several people 
have them; a single adventurer wielding a 
halberd is not going to stop a row of four 
charging orcs. Remember the advice given 
earlier and try to co-ordinate polearm 
choices before going off to adventure." 

— Fiona, Daughter of Dierdre 


٦ 0‏ 
شرت تا 
له رو 


7 aA 
5 N 
m SE 
; 
ES. 


Hook-fauchard 
Halberd 


Guisarme-voulge 


however, shorter than the middle blade. Par- 
tisans are sturdier than ranseurs. The three 
prongs are large enough to puncture armor 
or trap a weapon and disarm the opponent 
(considered a Called Shot, —4 to hit, see 
Combat chapter of The Complete Fighter's 
Handbook). 


Spetum 


Spetums are similar to ranseurs, except that 
the side blades sometimes angle backward, in- 
creasing the damage when the blade is pulled 
out of a wound. When the weapon is pulled 
out of a victim, he suffers an additional 1d2 hit 
points of damage due to the side blades. The 
spetums shaft is eight feet long. 


Voulge 


Also called the vouge and the Lochaber axe, 
this weapon is a large, long blade, narrowing 
to a spike at the top, with a hook-shaped fluke 
at the blade's rear. The staff is eight feet long. 


Pole Arms 


MENS PY AT 


8 
ራማን 

CENA 
ر‎ E 


Glaive-guisarme 


Glaive Guisarme 


88 * Chapter Three 


The bill was a popular weapon with the 
English, and, along with the halberd, re- 
mained in use longer than all other po- 
learms, well into the early 17th century. 
The English bills had a shorter shaft 
length, usually around four feet, and were 
rather tough. 

The glaive (derived from the Latin gla- 
dius, meaning "sword") blade increased in 
size over the years until it was big enough 
to have a nation's or ruler's coat of arms 
engraved upon it. It was often carried in 
parades. Glaives were introduced in the 
14th century and favored by the French. 
The blade is said to resemble a large bread 
knife. The 16th century Italians and Ger- 
mans favored the glaive as a palace guard 
weapon. 

The guisarme was used extensively be- 
tween the 12th and 17th centuries. 

Halberds were introduced sometime be- 
tween the 6th and 9th centuries AD, when 
foot soldiers of Northern europe mounted 


The sarisa, a Macedonian infantry 
spear, was the ancestor of the pike. The 
Swiss rediscovered the idea of mounting a 
spear head on a very long pole, and it be- 
came so popular that they adopted the 
pike as their national weapon in the 15th 
century. Their prowess with the pike, not 
only as a defensive weapon but as an of- 
fensive one, prompted other European na- 
tions to adopt it. The pike remained in use 
until the end of the 17th century, when 
muskets and bayonets made the long 
spears obsolete. 

The berdysh were created by the 
Russians and used by Muscovite infantry 
during the 16th and 17th centuries. They 
were also used in Scandinavia and eastern 
Europe. 

The bec de corbin (and faucon) was 
used by the upper classes during the Late 
Middle Ages and early Renaissance. The 
terms are French, but the weapons were so 
named by English writers! 


Pole Arms 


Lucerne hammer 


Voulge 


Weapons * 89 


Partisan 
Military fork 


France and Italy. After its retirement as a 
weapon of war, partisans continued to be 
used as ceremonial weapons in royal 
courts. In fact, the Swiss Guards of the 
Vatican and the Yeomen of the Guard at 
the Tower of London still use partisans at 
state occasions or when in full dress. 

The term voulge has been used to de- 
scribe many types of polearms, thus its 
true meaning is obscure. À number of 
texts associate the voulge with the English 
bill, the French glaive, and the Swiss 
vouge, the latter of which is the accepted 
voulge form. The lochaber axe is a Scot- 
tish polearm used in the 16th to 18th cen- 
turies, most likely descended from the 
gisarme. 


Quarterstaff 


The simplest and humblest of staff weap- 
ons, the quarterstaff is a length of wood 
ranging six to nine feet in length. High quali- 
ty quarterstaves are made of stout oak and 
are shod with metal at both ends. The quar- 
terstaff must be wielded with both hands. 


"Such a simple weapon, yet so popular. 
Any class of adventurer, be he an armored 
warrior, spell thrower, cutpurse, or man of 
faith, can use a quarterstaff. The staff is also 
a fine practice weapon, especially in place of 
other two-handed weapons such as two- 
hand swords or polearms. The staff is held in 
the middle with the left hand, while the right 
hand holds on at one-quarter of the whole 
staff's length from the end. 

"Quarterstaves are popular among the 
kenku, the mysterious, Oriental, birdlike hu- 
manoids. This blunt weapon is usually used 
to knock out an opponent as opposed to kill- 
ing him. 

"Wizards may decorate their staves, even 
cast spells on them in order to make the 
weapons look magical. It may fool someone 
into thinking that a simple wooden staff is in 
fact a staff of the magi.” 

— Albertus, Battle Mage 


their swords, called scramasax, on poles. 
The Swiss refined this weapon and wield- 
ed it with devastating skill. In fact, hal- 
berds were known to split a man's head 
from pate to jaw, armor notwithstanding! 
The halberd got its name during the first 
primitive versions made by the Swiss. 

The word halberd comes from the Ger- 
man words halm (staff), and barte (axe). 

Primitive halberds had a wide blade 
with a straight cutting edge. The staff fit 
through two sockets in the back of the 
blade. This design was probably inspired 
by the guisarme. By the end of the 15th 
century, the halberd was modified in order 
to increase its effectiveness. This is the 
halberd type most often referred to when 
using the term. The primitive halberds 
were soon referred to as the Swiss vouge 
(voulge). Like most polearms, the halberd 
fell into decline with the introduction of 
firearms. 

Confusion often exists whether a lucern 
hammer is a hammer. It is safe to say yes, 
it is a hammer, and is alternately called a 
war hammer. A short-handled version of 
the lucern hammer was used by mounted 
troops as early as the mid-13th century. It 
is longer than the weapon most adventur- 
ers call a war hammer and is used mainly 
by massed units on the battlefield. The lu- 
cern hammer gets its name from the Swiss 
city of Lucerne, whose armories were 
well-stocked with the weapon, so much so 
that scholars named them after the city. 

Military forks are descended from 
farmer's pitchforks, though the former's 
spikes were straight as opposed to the 
curved spikes of the latter. This weapon 
appeared frequently during the Crusades 
and peasant revolts from the 15th to 19th 
centuries. In 1920, Polish peasants used 
forks to fight off Soviet troops attacking 
Warsaw. 

Partisans are a derivative of the langde- 
beve, a broad-bladed spear. The name 
partisan came from the people who wield- 
ed it, the partisans, in late 15th century 


90 * Chapter Three 


causes damage and can be used as a weapon. 

The only creatures known to wield scourg- 
es with any sort of consistency are the Balor 
Tanar'ri, chaotic evil denizens of the Abyss. 
This should give the idea of the type of crea- 
ture who wields such an instrument. 


"A scourge? Why would any self- 
respecting adventurer want one? Those 
dreaded things are most associated with tor- 
ture, not combat. No one raises an eye when 
an adventurer walks into town with a sword; 
a man has to protect himself, and, times be- 
ing what they are, no one will begrudge an 
adventurer's right to carry a sword. But car- 
rying a scourge will probably mark someone 
as a follower of some cruel, torturing deity, 
or at the very least, as an evil person. Any 
adventurer with a shred of decency will 
avoid the scourge and get something that will 
put an enemy out of its misery, not prolong 
it!" 

— Strang of Tempus 


on taff 


2 | 
M 


ZEN 


سي » 


SNN 


ኪክ በመ 


BP ا‎ 
-———— À——— a, 


4 
1 
| 
| 
| 
J 


IV 


دج جج ہیں 


سس 


-fMissasamssga mm. 


4 
7 


N کہ‎ 


J 


Weapons * 91 


Sap 


Alternatively called a blackjack, the sap is 
a small leather bag filled with sand, lead 
shot, coins, or other weighted materials. It is 
used to quietly knock out a victim by admin- 
istering a blow to the head or back of the 
neck. Thus, the sap has no effect on helmeted 
targets. If the sap strikes any other part of the 
body, the damage is halved and there is no 
other effect. 

Of the damage caused by the sap attack, 
25% is actual physical damage, and the other 
7596 is temporary damage that wears off in 
1d6 turns. 

In order to effectively use the sap, the at- 
tacking character makes a Called Shot at - 8 
to hit. If a hit is scored, damage is determined 
normally. The attacker then has a 5% chance 
per hit point of damage to knock out the vic- 
tim, up to a maximum of 40%. This maneu- 
ver works only against targets that are 
man-sized or smaller. 

When a sapping maneuver is performed on 
a sleeping or magically held victim, the ma- 
neuver automatically hits, but the chance of 
knockout increases to 10% per hit point of 
damage, to a maximum of 80%. 


"A sap is more suited to an urban environ- 
ment than to the great outdoors or dungeon 
crawl. It is a weapon favored by thieves 
looking to cosh someone on the head and 
take his purse. If a party of adventurers is in- 
filtrating a stronghold in order to capture 
someone, however, a sap may come in 
handy.” 

— Kyrian Darkstar, the Infiltrator 


Scourge 


The scourge is a short whip with several 
leather tails or thongs. Each thong has metal 
barbs, broken glass, or any other sharp frag- 
ments attached along its length. A similar de- 
vice, the cat-o-nine-tails, is a nine-tailed 
whip with knots tied in each thong. 

The scourge is not so much a weapon as it 
is a means of inflicting great pain. Still, it 


by peasants or adventurers who have no 
weapon and are forced to make do with 
whatever they can find. Most farms have 
sickles, which are used for cutting weeds, 
grass, and grains. 

Druids favor the sickle due to its strong as- 
sociation with agriculture. Golden sickles are 
used to harvest mistletoe as components for 
druid spells. 

As a weapon, the sickle is as effective as a 
dagger, but is slower overall. 


Sling 


Slings have existed since the beginning of re- 
corded history. The basic sling consists of a 
leather or fabric strap with a pouch for holding 
the missile. The weapon is held by both ends of 
the strap and twirled around the wielder's 
head. When top speed is attained, the missile is 
launched by releasing one of the strap's ends. 

The sling is a cheap weapon and is easy to 
make. Thus, it is common among peasants, 
especially since it makes a good hunting 
weapon. 


Sickle B2 


“How odd. Personally, I find the scourge 
to be of great value in temple worship. It is 
also a great motivator.” 

— Leeahn, Priestess of Loviatar, Mistress of 
Pain 


The scourge is truly a monument to 
man's ability to cause suffering. When a 
scourge hits a victim, the thongs curl 
around the trunk and limbs, with the 
barbs digging into the flesh. The torturer 
then pulls the scourge away, ripping even 
more of the victim's skin. In ancient 
Rome, certain soldiers were trained with 
the scourge to cause the maximum 
amount of pain without killing the victim. 
Roman citizens were exempt from scourg- 
ing, while subject peoples were not. 


Sickle 


The sickle is a farming implement consist- 
ing of a crescent-shaped blade mounted on a 
short handle. It is used in combat primarily 


92 * Chapter Three 


Slings were heavily used by the peoples 
living around the Mediterranean basin. 
The Romans did not assign slings to their 
soldiers, but allowed their auxiliary 
troops to use them. The sling was used 
during the Middle Ages, and slingers are 
depicted on the Bayeux Tapestry, not as 
soldiers, but as hunters. 


Spear 


One of man's earliest weapons, dating 
back to the most primitive of times, the first 
spears were simply wooden poles or sticks 
sharpened at one end. When fire was discov- 
ered and mastered, spear points were hard- 
ened by charring. As man became more 
adept at using tools, spears were either fitted 
with a stone head or the point was reinforced 
with splints of stone or bone. 

When man mastered metals, spear heads 
were made from iron and steel. Having 
reached this end, weaponers began experi- 


The sling's missile is either a smooth, 
rounded stone or a ball of lead. While stones 
are easier to find (most shallow streams have 
an abundance of smooth stones), the lead 
bullet causes more damage and flies farther 
than the stone. 

A sling's projectile is capable of producing 
severe bruising or even broken bones against 
a man or his mount. Against armor, how- 
ever, the sling loses most of its effectiveness. 

Halflings are known to be quite good at us- 
ing the sling, and it is a common weapon 
among members of that race. 


"Slings are a fine missile weapon for 
thieves, since the weapon is easily concealed 
and quiet. Actually, it is not a bad proficien- 
cy for anyone to pick up, since making a 
sling and finding ammunition is easy. The 
sling's missiles have a good range. If using a 
sling out-of-doors, one never lacks for am- 
munition, though lead bullets fly farther and 
cause more damage." 

— Ariane, Professional Cutpurse 


Scourge 


Weapons ® 3 


Spears have existed since the Paleolithic 
era, some 500,000 years ago. Horsemen of 
20,000 BC began using them as missile 
weapons, complete with the hurling de- 
vices explained earlier. 

The Greeks were fond of large forma- 
tions of spearmen in their armies. 

The Franks began producing what we 
know as the spear. These spears had long, 
leaf-shaped blades and two triangular 
“wings” set just below the head. These 
wings prevented the spear from penetrat- 
ing too far into a victim (and consequently 
making it harder to pull out), and enabled 
the spear carrier to parry more easily with 
his weapon. 

In the 14th century, spears used by 
horsemen evolved into the lance. Long 
spears in the 15th century developed into 
the pike. 


menting with different types of spear heads, 
thus leading to the development of certain 
polearm types such as the ranseur. 

Spear shafts are usually made from yew or 
ash, since these woods are both flexible and 
strong. The shafts range five to eleven feet in 
length. In melee, spears may be used either 
one or two handed, with more damage in- 
flicted if used in the latter mode. Spears 10 
feet or longer cannot be wielded with one 
hand. 

Though spears are normally used for 
thrusting, they can also be thrown. Special 
devices exist for hurling spears. These de- 
vices are variously shaped pieces of wood, 
horn, or bone with hooks, hollows, or 
grooves meant to house the spear butt. When 
using one of these throwers, the spear's 
throwing range is doubled. The cost of a 
spear thrower is 1 gold piece. The thrower 
weighs two pounds. 

A character wielding a spear gains an at- 
tack bonus for high Dexterity and a damage 
bonus for high Strength. 


Long Spear 


A long spear is like a normal spear, except 
that its shaft ranges 12 to 13 feet in length and 
cannot be thrown. 

Orcs and ogres use spears often in battle. 
They are simple weapons for simple-minded 
creatures. 


"Spears are versatile, since they can be 
used by footmen and horsemen alike. The 
former can set their spears into the ground, 
in hope of impaling a charging enemy. Foot- 
men can use spears as melee weapons or as 
missile weapons. Horsemen use spears in 
much the same way as lances. 

"As for long spears, unless one is prepared 
to forego shield protection and use the weap- 
on with two hands, it is not worth selecting 
over the normal spear. Long spears need 
room to be wielded properly, they cannot be 
thrown, their damage is not much better than 
a normal spear, and they are slower than 
their smaller bretheren." 

— Lord Boris Vladimir, Professional Warrior 


94 * Chapter Three 


save successfully attack at a —2 penalty due 
to nausea and watering eyes. The effects last 
as long as the subject remains in the area and 
for 1d4 rounds thereafter. 

The stink cloud lasts for 103 +1 rounds, 
then dissipates. Optionally, stinkpots in un- 
derground settings may give off clouds that 
last 1d6 * 1 rounds due to lack of open air. 

Due to the trajectory that a staff-sling 
gives a missile, it cannot fire at short-range 
targets. It has less range than a sling and is a 
slower weapon, but the staff-sling can hurl a 
heavier object. 


"Anyone who gets a staff-sling in the hope 
of seeing his sling bullet fly into the next 
kingdom is in for a rude shock. The weapon 
is only good for hurling large loads a healthy 
distance. The stinkpot idea is perhaps the 
best way to get the most use out of the staff- 
sling. One thing's for sure, as much as half- 
lings like slings, you'll rarely catch one using 
this thing!" 

— Severian, Master Swordsman 


Staff-Sling 


Also called the fustibalus, the staff-sling 
consists of a wooden rod, three to four feet in 
length, with a sling attached to one end. The 
rod is used to increase the range that a heavy 
object can be thrown by enabling the slinger 
to twirl the sling harder. It is not meant to 
increase the distance of the average sling bul- 
let. In fact, it has poorer range for stones or 
bullets. 

An optional form of ammunition is the 
stinkpot, a clay vessel filled with burning sul- 
fur or quicklime. This is considered a 
grenade-like weapon and is subject to the 
combat rules found in Chapter Nine of The 
Players Handbook. For range, the stinkpot 
has a short range of 20 feet, medium range of 
40 feet, and long range of 60 feet. 

When the stinkpot breaks, everyone in a 
20-foot diameter circle who does not leave 
the area within one round must save vs. poi- 
son or be unable to attack or move at greater 
than half their movement rate. Those who 


Spears 


Spear Heads 


Weapons * 95 


dagger. Since the dagger is a thrusting 
weapon, early swords were also designed 
for thrusting. Eventually, the need arose 
for a weapon capable of slashing blows, 
so swords developed the double-edge, still 
retaining the sharp point. 

Sword handles went through their 
own stages of development. In southern 
Europe, sword handles were decorated 
with ivory, gold, and semi-precious 
stones, while in northern Europe, the han- 
dles were decorated with engravings. 

The discovery of iron revolutionized 
sword making. Bronze was rare, while 
iron was plentiful, though the latter was 
harder to work with. The change from 
bronze to iron was slow. For three centu- 
ries, both iron and bronze swords were in 
use. 

The Romans developed the gladius, a 
short sword, in order to have a weapon 
that their rigidly-trained troops could use 
with swiftness and precision. 


Staff Sling 


Stiletto 


Also known as a stylet, the stiletto is a 
short dagger with a strong, triangular or 
square-sectioned blade that tapers to a sharp 
point at the tip. The stiletto is designed for 
thrusting, in particular to pierce armor such 
as leather or mail. Therefore, the stiletto 
gives the wielder a +2 bonus to attacks 
against plate mail, ring mail, chain mail, and 
all forms of leather armor. Most stilettos are 
made completely of steel. 

Most cities, except those involved in a war, 
prohibit the carrying of a stiletto since it is an 
easily concealed weapon. 

Stilettos are narrow enough to be con- 
cealed in sword canes or even in the handle of 
a large sword, such as the long, bastard, or 
two-handed swords. 


Sword 


General Information 


History of the Sword 
The most common definition of a sword 

is an edged weapon with a long blade 

made for cutting blows, thrusts, or both. 

Swords first appeared in the prehistoric 
period when humans, who had been using 
daggers of stone, began working with cop- 
per. The copper dagger could be fashioned 
with a long blade, and in the ensuing 
years, the blades got longer and longer. 
Eventually, the blade reached such a 
length that it could no longer be called a 
dagger. 

This new, improved weapon was supe- 
rior to the dagger, which was quickly rele- 
gated to a secondary role in melee 
combat. 

Copper eventually gave way to bronze. 
Swords of varying lengths (what we now 
know as the long sword and short sword) 
came into being, with blades ranging from 
27 to 35 inches. 

Sword design was influenced by the 


96 * Chapter Three 


protect the grip against damage from the 
metal mouth of the sheath. It also protect- 
ed the user's hand. 

Early stories of famous knights include 
lore about their swords, even mentioning 
the craftsmen who made the weapons. 
Siegfried had Balmus, Roland had Duran- 
dal, and Charlemagne had Joyeuse. King 
Arthur, of course, had Excalibur. 

In the Carolingian period, the sword's 
grip was altered, becoming more special- 
ized and defined. The oval attached to the 
grip was turned into a four-sided bar 
about four inches long. This became the 
guard. The wooden grip ended in a large 
pommel, which balanced the weapon. 
Such a sword measured about 40 inches in 
length. 

At the start of the Romanesque Period 
(11th-12th centuries), the sword's form re- 
mained the same, but the blade became 
broader. These swords are considered 
broad swords by some scholars. 


Weapons * 97 


Stiletto 


With iron proving itself superior to 
bronze, the latter was relegated for accesso- 
ry parts, such as the grip or the sheath. The 
Hallstatt culture developed longer sword 
blades (31-35 inches) as advances in iron- 
working enabled them to make lighter and 
stronger blades. These blades were so plia- 
ble that they could be twisted into a spiral 
for three or four turns before breaking. 
This was known as "pattern welding” One 
drawback of this, however, was the fact 
that the blade could become misshapen 
when it struck something, often forcing the 
wielder to stop fighting and straighten out 
the blade with his foot or a rock! This was 
the type of sword that Gallic and Teutonic 
armies used against Roman legions, and is 
considered a long sword. Often, the crafts- 
man making a sword placed a trademark 
identifying the maker. 

As swords evolved, a small oval plate 
was placed between the shoulder of the 
blade and the grip. This was designed to 


NII 


እ LSID‏ >. ويم 
ቁ ግሎ” e “x‏ ای 


RER EEE 


۱ 


ی 
el.‏ 
الس 


NS 


ی 


۲ 


N 
N 


ቀን 


four feet and four feet ten inches. 
Some bastard swords are equipped with 
knuckle guards, and others have asymmetri- 


cal pommels shaped like animal or bird 
heads. 


"The bastard sword is an excellent, versa- 
tile edged weapon which can be used one-or 
two-handed. Using it two-handed gives a 
warrior better damage potential, but makes 
him unable to use a shield. It is also a slower 
weapon. Using it one-handed allows the use 
of a shield, but causes less damage, compara- 
ble to that of a long sword." 

— Lord Jon Ironedge, Ruler of Hawkhaven 


Broad sword 


The broad sword is a heavy military sword 
with a double-edged blade. Overall sword 
length is about three and one-half feet, and the 
sword is designed mostly for cutting. Most 
broad swords have a basket hilt or a shell 
guard. A favored cavalry weapon, the broad 
sword is known in different cultures by differ- 
ent names, usually dependant on the hilt con- 
figuration. The basket hilt broad swords offer 
a +1 bonus to Parry maneuvers. In addition, 
punching attacks done with the basket hilt are 
treated like a metal gauntlet (see the Player's 
Handbook, Chapter 9). 


"The broad sword is as fast as a long sword 
and causes comparable damage to man-sized 
targets, but lacks the same ability against 
larger creatures. Its benefits in parrying and 
hand-to-hand combat are good, but if an ad- 
venturer is more of the ‘forget finesse, let's 
just hack them to bits' school, a long sword 
or a bastard sword may be a better choice. 
Someone who likes showing off, such as a 
swashbuckler, would favor a broad sword." 
— Rushlight of Tethys, Ranger 


Claymore 


The claymore is a large, cross-hilted sword 
consisting of a straight, broad, double-edged 
blade and long quillons angling toward the 


During this period, the sword was used 
primarily for slashing blows, as reflected 
in the Bayeux Tapestry, which shows 
armed men using swords in this manner. 

The Gothic period saw swords becom- 
ing more specialized, depending on the 
knight's intentions. The knight's sword 
was a thing of beauty and strength, and it 
is this sword that resembles the long 
sword of fantasy. Knights usually owned 
several swords, each with its own use. 

In the 15th and 16th centuries, swords 
were given to common foot soldiers, and 
their designs changed accordingly. There 
were more ring-guards (to protect fin- 
gers), knuckle bows, and other such de- 
vices. The two-handed sword emerged 
from this era. 

During the 16th century, fighters began 
emphasizing sword thrusts, and blades 
changed to accommodate this. Elaborate 
basket hilts were perfected to give the 
hand better protection. This gave birth to 
swords such as the rapier. 

By the end of the 16th century, with 
guns rising in prominence, swords were 
increasingly relegated to duelling. 

The longsword is considered by some to 
be the principle weapon of nobility, the 
broad sword the typical weapon of the 
commoner, and the bastard and two- 
handed swords the specialized weapons of 
mercenaries. 

Eventually, the sword became a symbol 
of tradition, and is still worn on many mil- 
itary dress uniforms out of respect for that 
tradition. 


Bastard Sword 


Also known as the hand-and-a-half sword, 
the bastard sword derives its name from the 
fact that it is halfway between the two- 
handed sword and the long sword. 

The bastard sword has a double-edged 
blade and a long grip, which can accommo- 
date both hands if preferred. The overall 
length of the bastard sword ranges between 


|... ፌርፌር... اا‎ O ————— ——— Àa€R——Á— I > oüà———A— ÓÜo"moÁonenme———— ص ص‎ 


98 * Chapter Three 


Swords 
ሃሃ... an ull 
y 


| 


nl 


10 


ET 


Broad Sword 


Bastard Sword 


Claymore 


Weapons ® 99 


blade. The grip is leather-covered and topped 
with a wheel-shaped pommel. The sword is 
slightly shorter than the two-handed sword. 

Claymores are treated as bastard swords in 
terms of damage, weight, and weapon speed. 


Claymores are greatswords of Scottish 
origin, used by Highlanders and Scottish 
mercenaries in Ireland. The sword was 


popular from the end of the 15th century 
to the early 17th century. The term clay- 
more is from the Gaelic claidheamohmor, 
meaning great sword. 


Cutlass 


The cutlass is a sword with a single-edged, 
curved, broad blade attached to a basket hilt. 
The blade is short and heavy. The sword is 
favored among pirate crews and is easily 
found in port communities, but is rare in- 
land. Cutlass users enjoy the same advan- 
tages in Parrying as broad sword users. 


"Cutlasses cause damage compared to 
short swords, but are slower and heavier. A 
broad sword is a better weapon, since it gives 
the same Parry benefits and causes more 
damage." 

— First Mate Arlundar, of the galleon 
Angelwing 


Falchion 


The falchion is a sword with a single- 
edged, heavy blade. The blade's back is usu- 
ally straight, while the edge has a curve. The 
blade also broadens close to the tip, which 
gives the blade a cleaver-like appearance and 
increases the damage inflicted. The sword is 
heavy, which also contributes to a fearsome 
cutting blow. 


Gladius 


The gladius is the first refined version of 
the short sword. It has a double-edged blade 
and a strengthened tip. The grip is made of 


wood, bone, or ivory and is topped with a 
round pommel. The sword is carried on a 
warrior's right side, slung from a baldric 
passing over the left shoulder. In terms of 
damage and length, the gladius or drusus re- 
sembles the short sword. 

A drusus is a gladius of exceptional quali- 
ty, and consequently has a series of special 
things associated with its care in order to 
maintain a sharp edge. The restrictions are 
listed in The Complete Fighters Handbook 
(Equipment Chapter). 


Khopesh 


This Egyptian weapon has approximately 
six inches of handle and quillons. The blade 
extends straight out about eighteen inches 
from the handle, then curves into a slight 
sickle shape for another two feet. In effect, 
this only adds another eighteen inches to the 
overall length. The entire sword is usually 
made of bronze or iron. 


"The khopesh is a slow sword, heavy and 
unwieldy. Its damage is unremarkable as 
compared to other swords, especially when 
one realizes the drawbacks that must be suf- 
fered when wielding the khopesh. All in all, 
it is a primitive weapon of a culture that has 
not grasped the finer techniques in sword- 
smithing. 

"Still, the weapon resembles a sickle in 
some ways and is usable by druids. This 
gives these nature priests a chance to wield a 
sword, yet stay within their weapon restric- 
tions." 

— Eibhelin Hathleah, Warrior/Priestess 


Long Sword 


These swords are usually referred to as 
doubled-edged swords, war swords, or mili- 
tary swords. In many cases, the long sword 
has a single-edged blade. There is no single 
version of the long sword; the design and 
length vary from culture to culture, and may 
vary within the same culture depending on 
the era. 


100 * Chapter Three 


y 7 


| | 


7 ۰ i ۱ | " | ] 
vill] HIT i ell. in ۱ Ini BUT ۷ کن‎ 180 
| | 2 (jem ۱ Al 5 [ jh 
| eb 


MAUS ۱۱۷١۸۰۸۰ حب‎ one | | dre Pese Y. 


Weapons * 101 


Among the most common characteristics 
of all long swords is their length, which rang- 
es from 35 inches to 47 inches. In the latter 
case, the blade is known to take up 40 inches 
of the total length. 

Most long swords have a double-edged 
blade and a sharp point at the tip. Despite the 
tip, the long sword is designed for slashing, 
not thrusting. 

Often, long swords have two grooves that 
run the length of the blade, one on each sur- 
face. These grooves are called fullers, and are 
meant to make the sword lighter and more 
flexible. If a sword did not have some elastic- 
ity, it would shatter when it hit a target. 

The handles of all long swords fit only one 
human-sized hand. Most long swords have a 
small, oval, metal plate between the blade's 
base and the grip. This oval protects the grip 
from getting damaged against the metal in 
the mouth of the sheath. It also offers some 
modest protection to the hand. A second 
piece of metal, either oval or round, is fitted 
onto the pommel. 


224 
H 


ያ‏ کو ری 
لت 
d AT‏ 


RY 
SEN وید‎ 
IE 
sates 
SEER: 
SEES 
Se 
IE 


TONE 
IR 
AS 
FIN 
NAT 


SE‏ می 
SES OR EE NAS‏ 
SSS‏ 
c - SE‏ 
SESS ኢር ረ‏ 
با تیه 
متشگ 
UA‏ 
EON‏ 


er oy N d 


TEENS — ane SE ና کی‎ 2 
ب یج ہاج‎ 


SS 


e 1 ; 0 ne ያህ ሠሪ MK | | : 

DR Ia 
ያ HA NE Sat | AS 
| Ris 
y | 7 TURA 
ተያያ Sd. ሆነና JENA 
ፈር [2227 : file 
AN A We 
CA ase W 
5 ረ PI ESI we AES 
አ ORDRES DR 
ON PRAG ነሪ 
22 ያ ሪፌ GANA 
2 ንን | UA ያፈ 
ND, 2 ما‎ AN ^ 


"Ah, the long sword! A warriors best 
friend! It is without a doubt the most com- 
mon melee weapon among skilled adventur- 
ers, and rightly so. It inflicts a respectable 
amount of damage to both man-sized and 
large opponents, is fairly fast for its size, and 
is relatively light. 

"Elves favor long swords, and most are 
trained from childhood in their use. One 
guess as to the reason for this is the fact that 
the sword is light and quick and can cause a 
lot of damage when in battle, much like the 
elves themselves. That's only a guess, of 
course, and the truth may never be known, 
at least if I have anything to say about it.” 
— Lord Noro Goldentree, High Elf 


The classic long sword depicted in fan- 
tasy gets its design from the Gothic peri- 


od. This is the longest variety of long 
sword, with a 40-inch blade. 


Rapier 


The rapier is a light weapon with a 
straight, double-edged, pointed blade. It is 
designed to be a light, thrusting sword. The 
term rapier is often used to describe a civilian 
weapon, as opposed to the heavier and dead- 
lier swords of soldiers and mercenaries. Ra- 
piers are fashionable among nobles and 
gentlemen. 

As a new art of fighting evolved with em- 
phasis on thrusting with the blade as opposed 
to slashing, a new weapon was required. 
This art is known as fencing, and it requires a 
rapier. As the sport grew in popularity, the 
rapier was required to be narrower and 
lighter. It became not a slashing weapon at 
all, but a weapon purely for thrusting. 

The early rapier handles have straight quil- 
lons (cross guards), side guards, and knuckle 
bows. The later versions have shell guards, 
similar to the basket hilts of the broad sword 
and cutlass. As a result, the rapier wielder 
enjoys the same Parry and punching bonuses 
outlined earlier. 


102 * Chapter Three 


"The rapier isn't as fast as the short sword, 
but it does a slight bit more damage. The ra- 
pier is a good dueling weapon, and is popular 
with rich young nobles and swashbucklers." 
— Rollo, Aspiring Swashbuckler 


Sabre/Scimitar 


Alternatively spelled saber, this sword is a 
long, curved, single-edged blade intended 
mostly for horsemen. It is a popular weapon 
for light cavalry. The sabre's hilt grants the 
user the Parry and punching bonuses of the 
rapier. 

Members of the foul race of yuan-ti often 
use scimitars. 


"Another curved, single-edged blade? 
Well, the sabre is a bit different since it's 
meant to be a slashing weapon instead of a 
thruster like the rapier. Both swords cause 
the same amount of damage and are equally 
as fast. 

"As for the scimitar, it is merely another 
form of sabre, but with heavier Oriental in- 


Weapons * 103 


Two-handed Sword 


——r 


١ 1. ህዞ) ሌነ ፈተ 1 ted 


ቺ M l 


ኮ 


١ 
ቀ 


۱ 
۳ 
e 


Mn‏ کا 


length is compatible with their stature. 

“Elves are trained in use of the short 
sword. It is a common elven weapon for two 
reasons: the elves favor the swiftness and 
lightness of the weapon, and, since many 
elves are archers, the short sword becomes a 
good fallback weapon should the enemy 
close ranks into melee range. 

"The short sword is often seen on the belts 
of the average man, or at least the average 
man who can afford one and knows how to 
use it! It is a good weapon to have in a city, 
provided one follows any local rules for se- 
curing the weapon. A short sword enables a 
man to discreetly wear a sword in the city, 
not calling as much attention to himself as he 
would if he wore a bastard sword or two- 
handed sword strapped to his back!" 

— Cendril, Elf Warrior-Mage 


The short sword is a descendant of the 
Roman gladius. In essence, it is a gladius 
made by improved metalworking tech- 
niques. 

The Germans developed the baselard 


short sword, common in the 16th century, 
while the Italians had the cinquedea, a 
short sword with a blade that was broader 
at the base. Both versions of short sword 
were popular with civilians, not profes- 
sional soldiers or knights. 


Two-Handed Sword 


The two-handed sword is a derivative of 
the long sword. Weaponsmiths have always 
looked for ways to improve existing weap- 
ons. In an effort to improve the long sword, 
the blade was lengthened (having a longer 
reach than one's enemy is always preferable). 
Eventually, the handle had to be extended 
and two hands became necessary in order to 
properly swing the sword. The primary func- 
tion of two-handed swords is cleaving 
mounted knights and breaking up pike 
formations. 

The blade on the two-handed sword is a 
long, double-edged blade. The blade point 
may be sharp or rounded. The hilt has 


fluences. It causes slightly better damage 
than the sabre, and is just a bit slower. 
Druids favor scimitars." 

— Gwynne Arendahl, Fighter 


The sabre was initially developed in 
Central Asia, used by tribes that wander- 
ed the steppes. By the 9th century, the 
Slavs, who battled the Asians, had adopt- 
ed the weapon. The term sabre is Slavic- 
Hungarian. 

Sabres were used extensively in central 


and eastern Europe and by the Turks. 

The Persian style of the sabre was dis- 
covered by Napoleon's troops. This ver- 
sion was known as the shamshir, which is 
commonly called the scimitar. This blade 
has a greater curve to it and is tapered to 
an elongated, sharp point. 


Short Sword 


The short sword is the first type of sword 
to come into existence. In the simplest of 
terms, a short sword can be considered a 
dagger with a blade so long that it can no 
longer be called a dagger. The term short 
sword does not exist in sword classifications. 
However, it has come to be used to describe a 
double-edged blade about two feet in length. 
The sword tip is usually pointed, ideal for 
thrusting. 

Short swords are fitted with a handle that 
can accommodate only one hand. 


"The short sword is a good weapon for 
archers, crossbowmen, and other warriors 
whose primary weapon is not a sword, but 
who see the necessity for having an edged 
weapon that causes respectable damage. The 
small size and lightness of the sword makes it 
an ideal weapon to carry without the warrior 
worrying about getting encumbered with too 
much weight. Short swords are quick weap- 
ons, almost as fast as daggers, and causing 
more damage. À short sword with even a mi- 
nor enchantment becomes an extremely 
valuable weapon. 

"Halflings, gnomes, and d'warves are known 
to favor short swords, since the weapon's 


104 * Chapter Three 


The two-handed sword was a weapon 
of 13th century Teutonic origin. It was ex- 
tensively used by German and Italian foot 
soldiers from the mid-15th to the late 16th 
century. In later years, the two-handed 
sword became largely a ceremonial or 
processional weapon, usually heavily dec- 
orated. 


Trident 


A trident is a long pole measuring four to 
eight feet with a metal, triple-bladed fork on 
one end. It is not used as a weapon by profes- 
sional armies, but has seen some limited use 
from peasant guerrillas. The trident is nor- 
mally a tool used for fishing, with some lim- 
ited uses as an agricultural or hunting tool. It 
is a two-handed weapon. 

Several aquatic races, such as locathah, 
mermen, sahuagin, and tritons, use tridents. 
They realize the versatility of the trident, 
since it is effective as both a fishing tool and a 
weapon. 


Tridents 


Weapons * 105 


straight or slightly curved quillons. The 
pommel may be faceted, triangular, or pear 
shaped, though whatever the shape, it tends 
to get larger toward the top, as a counterbal- 
ancing measure. 

As its name implies, this sword is a two- 
handed weapon and cannot be used in one 
hand, even if the wielder has high Strength. 
The weapon and its hilt are balanced for two- 
handed use. A fighter wielding a two-handed 
sword cannot use a shield. 

An average two-handed sword measures 
five to six feet in length. It is a favored weap- 
on among foot soldiers. 

The astral race known as the Githyanki fa- 
vor two-handed swords. These weapons 
tend to be decorated with gems, beads, and 
precious metals. 


"This is the sort of weapon that makes a 
statement to all who see the wielder, and the 
statement is beware. The two-handed sword 
is correctly associated with lots of damage. 
In fact, wearing such a sword slung across 
your back may make the impression that the 
wielder is not so much interested in saving 
his own neck (since he cannot use a shield 
and is consequently easier to hit) as he is in 
relieving an enemy of his head. 

"This sword is slow and heavy, but then 
again, it needs to have great mass in order to 
cause the damage that it does. Warriors who 
carry a two-handed sword usually don't car- 
ry any other large or medium-sized weapon. 
At best, a dagger is carried as a backup weap- 
on of desperation. 

"Despite the impressive features of the 
two-handed sword, a bastard sword is a bet- 
ter weapon. First of all, the bastard sword 
gives the warrior the choice of using it one- 
or two-handed, thus enabling him to use a 
shield. 

"Furthermore, the bastard sword is faster. 
The two-hander does a bit more damage than 
the bastard sword wielded two-handed, but 
the difference is insignificant. Still, when it 
comes to hitting those extra large beasties 
such as dragons, a two-handed sword comes 
in mighty handy." 

— Finnegan Bospur, Paladin 


"A warhammer is a good secondary melee 
weapon. It causes a little more damage than a 
dagger and can be thrown just as far. The 
weapon is terrific against skeletons, better 
than edged weapons. In a pinch, the war- 
hammer can also be a tool for things like 
hammering in spikes. A lot of clerics who 
can't use edged weapons have found the 
hammer an acceptable alternative." 

— Pandar Goldsmith, Dwarven Warrior 


Whip 


The whip or bull whip is a long, heavy, 
plaited lash usually made of leather or raw- 
hide (untanned hide). The braided leather is 
thicker toward the handle, narrowing to a 
slender cord at the end. Some handles are 
wooden rods attached to the lash, while oth- 
ers are part of the same piece of rawhide. The 
whip's length varies from 15 to 25 feet. A 
whip is carried coiled and attached to the 
user's belt. 

Common uses for the whip include leading 
herd animals and as a tool for punishment. 

If a character wishes to knock a weapon 
out of an opponent's hand, this may be at- 
tempted with a whip using a Called Shot 
with intent to disarm. The attacker getsa —4 
penalty on his attack roll. Further details are 
found in The Complete Fighters Handbook 
in the Combat chapter. 

A character proficient with the whip can 
entangle an opponent's limbs or weapon. Be- 
fore rolling the attack die, the user declares 
whether or not he intends to entangle. If a hit 
is scored, some sort of entanglement occurs. 
If wielded by a non-proficient user, the 
chance to entangle is only 5%. If wielded by 
someone proficient, there is a 596 chance per 
level that entanglement occurs (to a maxi- 
mum of 95%). Percentile dice are rolled to 
determine the exact effect. The entanglement 
chances are 50% (01-50 on 1d100) for one 
limb, 10% (51-60) for two limbs, 20% (61- 
80) for the weapon arm and the weapon, and 
20% (81-00) for the head. 

Hobgoblins are known to carry whips, but 
this is probably more for keeping prisoners 
and slaves in line than as a combat weapon. 


Warhammer 


Mounted knights cannot effectively use 
long pole weapons while on horseback, and 
as a result, many weapons have been fitted 
with shorter shafts so they may be wielded 
with just one hand. Maces and flails are two 
previous examples of this—the warhammer 
is another. 

The horseman's warhammer is the de- 
scendent of the Lucerne hammer. It is made 
entirely of steel, with rondels protecting and 
strengthening the grip. Rondels are small 
disks of metal, often shaped into decorative 
designs. The shaft is about 18 inches long. 

Dwarves favor warhammers as a primary 
weapon. It is guessed that, given the 
dwarves' skill in using the hammer for non- 
combative purposes, they naturally devel- 
oped the skill for using it as a weapon of war. 
The warhammer personifies the dwarven 
race: short, tough, and blunt. 

Some warhammers are fitted with a spike 
at the top. This can be used as a thrusting 
weapon and causes 1d3 points of damage. 


War Hammer 


106 * Chapter Three 


that causes damage and is a good parrying 
tool, the whip is not it. If you enjoy fancy 
maneuvers and bizarre trick shots, then the 
whip is the right thing. The whip is better 
suited for the city environment, where there 
are more humans, demi-humans, and other 
such races which fear the lash, as opposed to 
the wilderness, where myriad monsters 
abound who do not shrink from a little pain. 

"A whip is a slow weapon. Someone using 
a whip must have at least 10 feet between 
himself and the enemy, since a whip will not 
work too well in close quarters. 

"A whip is great for a fighter who wants to 
disarm an opponent, snare a victim, or even 
wrap the whip around a beam and use it to 
swing over a chasm." 

— Gorin Grimblade, Veteran Warrior 


Weapons * 107 


Still, a hobgoblin wielding a whip should be 
presumed to be skilled at it, and able to make 
the special attacks with it. 


"The whip is another example of something 
designed for one purpose that gets used for an- 
other, much like a pitchfork, pruning hook, or 
harpoon. As a weapon, the whip is unimpres- 
sive if you're talking about raw damage. The 
whip is great for Called Shots and such, but try 
using a whip on a troll, and all you'll get is one 
slightly stung, very mad troll. 

"The same holds true for armored targets. 
A whip is designed for hitting bare skin. Any 
sort of armor, including leather and padded, 
will help protect the wearer from the whip's 
sting. 

"No, if someone is looking for a weapon 


Whip 


A AT AY iva m 


ae’. 


AA 


TABLE 6: Master Weapons Chart 


| | دی | هم | 


3 
Sul 
تم‎ 


ሠሣሠ‏ صر | ፳| al]‏ | دادج بج بج بی بج ود اه | -3ኋ | ጮ!ጋኮጋ‏ | خر خر | ص چا ند تح بم | 6 و © تہج ند د د ى | بن 


e 


“2 د دا‎ ፡4 
| vyv] هه 991 بجي روج‎ | vul oni ود و و و وه وه‎ | vi vl w| wows] v| و‎ | | | መጭ | ص هه‎ 5 


P/S 


e 


፦| ک کی ص ام | مس اس ب سم بسع و اسع کے کے‎ | ሆ፦1| سہ 5 > ے ہہ "ا ےج | هه ص 2 2 ہہ ی ص ہہ > 2 | صصص > | سس‎ 5 ۱ ሯ سی ی سر و ص‎ ጅጅ 


Weight 
(Ibs) 


10 
7 


++ رح ++ دن‎ | N ++ ++ ی‎ N 


قو 
N >‏ 
o‏ 


N 
M 
m 
[*] 


Be ርን ++ | won‏ ++ چا در يريم ترح و صن | oo| ANN‏ | تح بحم | تح بح 


HM oH 
o 
N N 


65 س دم‎ 5 ርካ ፻3 9 


10 


12 


Cost 
500 gp 
5 gp 


Item 


Arquebus*** 


Battle Axe 


Belaying pin 
Blowgun 
Barbed Dart 
Needle 


Bolas 
Bow 


Composite long bow 
Composite short bow 
Flight arrow 

Long bow 

Sheaf arrow 

Stone arrow, flight 
Short bow 

Caltrop 


Cestus 
Chain 
Club 


Crossbow 


Hand quarrel 
Hand crossbow 
Heavy quarrel 
Heavy crossbow 
Light quarrel 
Light crossbow 
Dagger or dirk 
Bone dagger 
Parrying dagger 
Stone dagger 


Dart 

Flail, Footman’s 
Flail, Horseman’s 
Gaff/Hook 


Attached 

Held 
Hand/Throwing axe 
Harpoon 
One-handed 
Two-handed 


Javelin 


One-handed 
Two-handed 


Javelin, Stone 


One-handed 
Two-handed 


Knife 


Bone knife 
Stone knife 


Lance @ 


Heavy horse lance 
Jousting lance 

Light horse lance 
Medium horse lance 


Lasso 
Main-Gauche 
Mancatcher ** 


Morning star 


Net 
Polearm 


Awl pike # 


108 * Chapter Three 


Weapons * 109 


Speed 
Factor 


9 
9 
10 
8 
8 
8 
9 
8 
10 
9 
9 
9 
7 
9 
8 
8 
10 
4 
2 
5 
4 
6 


| ሽ | መፎውው | ww] ውው | 


| © مه ص ‹ጸ ወ‏ س ص ሀወ ዕዕ‏ جر هر ن ሠ‏ 5 | ټه یھ ص 


| سه‎ | ፔፔ | ۳ ۲۵ | ዝዝ | owl] مه‎ | wun ۳0 0 و و‎ 


| ص صصص ہہ ص ی ص و مہ ص ہہ DUD!‏ | 


o 
ኡ 
® 


سر بح بح بنج سح بح بنج نج بنج بح بنج ምም”‏ بنج مج پم مج و ی و هل ماہ InnZzZzZ|rr| ZZ|‏ 


| کہ کا کم کا کا کا کہ کا کا کا کا کے ኗ፳፦:፦| ٣‏ 


oo] aw |‏ | یہ دحم بح 


~ 
N 


| 5 کے 5 جر تن م کہ صر Reub‏ | ہہ 


Item 
Bardiche 
Bec de corbin 
Bill-guisarme 
Fauchard 
Fauchard-fork 
Glaive * 


Glaive-guisarme* 


Guisarme 


Guisarme-voulge 


. Halberd 
Hook fauchard 


Lucern hammer # 


Military fork * 
Partisan # 
Ranseur # 
Spetum # 
Voulge # 
Quarterstaff 
Sap 
Scourge 
Sickle 
Sling 
Sling bullet 
Sling stone 
Spear 
One-handed 
Two-handed # 
Spear, long 
One-handed 
Two-handed # 
Spear, stone 
One-handed 
Two-handed 
Staff sling 
Stinkpot 
Stiletto 
Sword 
Bastard sword 
One-handed 
Two-handed 
Broad sword 
Claymore 
Cutlass 
Drusus 
Falchion 
Khopesh 
Long sword 
Rapier 
Sabre 
Scimitar 
Short sword 


Two-handed sword 


Trident 
One-handed 
Two-handed 

Warhammer 


Whip 


* This weapon inflicts double damage against charging creatures of L or greater size. 


** This weapon can dismount a rider on a successful hit. 
*** This weapon available only if allowed by the DM. 


© This weapon inflicts double damage when used from the back of a charging mount. 
# This weapon inflicts double damage when firmly set to receive a charge. 


1 These items weigh little individually. Ten of these weigh one pound. 


CHAPTER 


Adventurer's Equipment 


adventurer is suspended upside down. 
Experienced tailors or leatherworkers may 

be commissioned to construct special back- 
packs. This may include special pockets to hold 
commonly used items or a special padded sec- 
tion of pockets to hold valuable breakables 
such as potions. Cost of such bags is generally 
double that of the deluxe backpack. 
Cost: Sack 4 sp 

Basket 5 sp 

Deluxe Leather 2 gp 


Block & Tackle 


A block and tackle is a set of ropes and 
pulleys that increases the ability to lift heavy 
objects. When a rope is passed through the 
multiple wheels of the blocks, it allows char- 
acters of any degree of strength to pull heavy 
objects (more than their normal strengths 
would allow). 

A block and tackle has limited use and 
normally can be used only to lift objects ver- 
tically. In addition, the block and tackle must 
be able to be securely suspended above the 
object and have enough room for the adven- 
turer's to work. 

A block and tackle may be considered to 
add a +4 bonus to any one character's 
Strength, for purposes of lifting, to a maxi- 
mum of 19. If a number of persons work to- 
gether, a bonus of +2 is added to the 
Strength score of each participant. 

Block and tackles vary in weight depend- 
ing on the load they can support. A block 
and tackle suitable for lifting objects of less 
than 200 pounds weighs 10 pounds; a set ca- 
pable of lifting 1,000 pounds weighs 50 
pounds; and a set suitable for lifting up to 
5,000 pounds weighs 200 pounds. 

A block and tackle comes equipped with a 
series of square wooden blocks with greased 
internal wheels, straps and harnesses to at- 
tach the blocks to a wall, tree limb, or other 
attachments, and 50 feet of rope appropriate 
to the set (depending on the weight of the 
block and tackle, the rope may be light, 
heavy, or chain). 

Cost: 8 gp (light), 15 gp (Medium), 25 gp 
(Heavy) 


The following section includes informa- 
tion about the general equipment used by ad- 
venturers. In addition to armor and 
weapons, a character also needs equipment 
to fight the elements and rugged terrain that 
he will encounter on his journeys. 


Backpacks 


Adventurers’ backpacks come in a wide 
variety of shapes, sizes, and materials. The 
least expensive variety is a simple canvas 
sack equipped with shoulder straps. These 
may be purchased or constructed by the ad- 
venturer. 

A backpack may also be a woven basket 
with a woven or wooden lid. This is carried 
on the back by means of shoulder straps. 
They are durable, but cumbersome due to 
their rigid form. 

The preferred style of backpack is a leather 
bag equipped with multiple pockets and 
slung over the shoulders with padded 
shoulderstraps. Some types of leather may be 
waterproofed. Such a bag has a leather flap 
that is secured with one or more buckles. If 
the bag is loaded properly and secured cor- 
rectly, the contents will not spill even if the 


سیت 
ماس 
1 0 اليل yt‏ 
gn‏ 
ነ MEM, Mi‏ 
EN '‏ 


110 * Chapter Four 


Clawed Gloves and Shoes 


Similar to crampons, claws give climbers 
and mountaineers greater ability to cling to 
handholds and ledges. Both types are held on 
with leather straps and add a +5% to Climb- 
ing and a +1 to Mountaineering. 

Cost: Gloves 3 gp, Shoes 5 gp 


Ny P 


= 


Flint and Steel 


More than the name suggests, flint and 
steel may include a number of items. The 
equipment is carried in a small leather pouch, 
often waterproofed, and includes a large 
piece of flint, several coarse steel bars, tinder, 
and scraps of charred cloth. With such tools, 
a character can start a small smoldering 
flame in 1d6 rounds (longer in windy condi- 
tions or if the kindling is wet). 

Starting a fire with flint and steel requires 
practice, but is not difficult. A wad of tinder 
(frayed cedar bark, thistledown, or dried 
grass) is placed in a dirt depression. A scrap 
of charred cloth (a one-inch square is suffi- 
cient) is placed on the tinder. The flint is 
struck against the steel, knocking sparks off 
the metal. The carbon content of the charred 
fabric is highly ignitable and lights quickly 
when touched by a spark. This, in turn, 
lights the tinder and the fire may gradually 
be fed with larger bits of wood. 

Cost: 5 sp 


Adventurer's Equipment ® 111 


| 
| 
| 


| 
4 


Crampons 


Crampons are sold in pairs to be attached 
to hard boots by several leather straps. 
Crampons are spiked and gnarled bands of 
steel that increase the traction of smooth- 
soled boots. They can be used to scale rocky 
cliffs or cross icy plains. When worn, cram- 
pons increase Climbing ability by +15% or 
Mountaineering proficiency by +1. Cram- 
pons can also be used as a weapon. If a vic- 
tim is prone, stomping on the victim while 
wearing a pair of crampons inflicts 1d2 
points of damage per 100 pounds of weight 
of the character. If the victim is in melee, a 
successful attack roll must be made. Success 
causes 1 point of damage (only one foot can 
thrust). If an attack roll indicates a miss, the 
wearer must make a successful Dexterity 
check to avoid falling. Using crampons in 
this way ruins them in a 1d10 rounds of ac- 
tive use. 

Cost: 4 gp 


LIEN 


١ 


` سحت" جح‎ f), 
-ONNAN SNR ፡ 


in 


Healer’s Bag 


This bag may come in any shape or size, 
but is usually made of leather or heavy can- 
vas. It is used primarily by characters who 
have the Healing Proficiency. A healer's bag 
allows such a character a +1 bonus to his 
chance to successfully heal a victim. 

A healer's bag may be purchased new, 
complete with all supplies, or may be assem- 
bled by a healer. A complete bag includes 30 
rolled bandages of varying size, 20 feet of 
rolled gauze, a tiny metal mixing bowl, a ce- 
ramic mortar and pestle, and ten jars of vari- 
ous herbs that can be crushed and mixed with 
water to form a paste to be applied to 
wounds. The kit also includes three curved 
needles (often made of gold to prevent rust) 
and a spool of white or black silk thread (50 
feet) to be used to stitch gaping wounds. 
Some kits may include several ceramic vials 
to be filled with clean water. 

Cost: 6 gp 


Adventurer's Equipment * 113 


Grappling Hook 


A grappling hook is used to secure a rope 
for climbing. A grappling hook is normally 
made of two, three, or as many as four cast 
iron bent bars welded or fused together. De- 
luxe grappling hooks are sometimes availa- 
ble with folding hooks; thus, they can be 
folded flat for easy carrying. Such a hook 
costs approximately twice the price of an or- 
dinary hook. 

The grappling hook can be thrown easily 
into a tree, roof ledge, or rocky crevice. In 
determining whether a grappling hook 


N 


(M 9 ۷ 
AP رج‎ A 


0 id 10 1 


catches in the target object, a normal attack 
roll is made vs. AC 10. One round is required 
to throw the hook; another round is required 
to retrieve it. 

In an emergency, the DM might allow clev- 
er adventurers to fashion a makeshift grap- 
pling hook from a rope and a wooden slat or 
metal rod. This may be used as a normal 
grappling hook. 

Cost: 8 sp 


Lantern 


An adventurer’s lantern is similar to a 
common lantern, but is usually made of 
more rugged material. Adventurer's lanterns 
rarely have a glass plume or tower. In gen- 
eral, lanterns come in three varieties, as de- 
scribed below. 


Beacon Lantern: A beacon is more than a 
simple lantern. The light source weighs as 
much as 50 pounds and is normally found in 
a light house or mounted on a ship rather 
than with a group of adventurers. À beacon 
provides a focused beam of light reaching 
240 feet, with an additional 120 feet of semi- 
darkness (a total of 360 feet of light). A bea- 
con is fueled by lantern oil which lasts 2 
hours per pint. 

Cost: 150 gp 


Bullseye Lantern: A bullseye lantern is an 
easily portable light source, similar in design 
to the beacon lantern. It has a metal housing 
with a panel of glass to keep wind away from 


Housebreaker Harness or 
Spider 


This leather halter is essential for any thief. 
The harness, sometimes referred to as a spi- 
der, is an assortment of straps that are 
hooked around the thighs and over the 
shoulders. A broad leather strap is secured 
around the waist. Attached to the belts are 
small hooks, safety clips, and adjustable 
clamps. From these various clips, the thief 
can hang small tools or attach ropes or tether 
lines. Using this harness can prevent a thief 
from falling, secure him to a wall, or free his 
hands to use his picks. 

One possible drawback to such a harness is 
the jangling noise it may make. If a thief 
spends two rounds securing all clips and re- 
moving any unused clips, he operates under 
his normal chance to move silently. If such 
precautions are not taken, the thief's chance 
to move silently is penalized 15%. 

Cost: 8 gp 


114 * Chapter Four 


n A 
00 8 4 


locks may be made of gold, silver, or other 
precious metals. They may have a hidden 
keyhole or multiple keys. 

Inset locks are usually commissioned to fit 
a specific door. Padlocks may be available 
for ready sale from a locksmith or sometimes 
a blacksmith. Single key locks are most com- 
mon; double key locks are available from 
perhaps 20% of locksmiths. 
Cost: Good - 100 gp, Poor - 20 gp 


Provisions 


Dry provisions generally consist of a few 
basic foodstuffs. In general, rations include a 
hard biscuit called hardtack, made of ground 
wheat and water, and beef or buffalo jerky or 
dried fish. Dried fruits such as apples, apri- 
cots, cherries, and raisins may also be includ- 
ed in dry rations. 

Many hard cheeses can survive several 
days or weeks on the trail. Cheese, however, 
is not part of standard rations and must be 
acquired in addition to the standard package. 

Rations are not meant as a substitute for 
meals for any length of time. Foraged herbs, 
greens, berries, and vegetables are necessary 
to maintain good health. Without such sup- 
plements, various nutritional diseases may 


Adventurer's Equipment * 115 


the flame. The metal is usually polished on 
the inside to reflect light outward. A trap 
door or shutter can be set in place over the 
glass to block out the light. Even when the 
shutter is closed, some light still escapes from 
the lantern. Closing off every crack in the 
lantern's assembly would quickly extinguish 
the flame. Such lanterns are often equipped 
with adjustable vents to regulate airflow. 
Adventurers must remember that even if the 
shutter is closed, the lantern will shed enough 
light to give away their position in a dark 
dungeon. 

This lantern projects light in a funnelled 
path. A bullseye lantern's light reaches 60 
feet, with an additional 20 feet of semi-dark- 
ness. A bullseye lantern burns six hours per 
pint of oil. 

Cost: 12 gp 


Hooded Lantern: A hooded lantern projects 
light in 360 degrees and is capped overhead 
to limit the radiation of heat. This allows it to 
be carried with a handle located at the top of 
the lantern. 

Hooded lanterns generally have a metal 
reservoir for the oil and a metal cap. Between 
the two is a cylinder of thick glass that allows 
light to escape. Some models have metal 
spines between panes of glass or a metal as- 
sembly with disks of thick glass set in. The 
latter type is the most durable. 

Few hooded lanterns can be covered to re- 
strict light, but the DM may allow such lan- 
terns to restrict light to a few feet. 

This lantern projects light 30 feet in all di- 
rections and burns six hours per pint of oil 
supplied. 

Cost: 7 gp 


Locks 


Locks are available for a variety of pur- 
poses. These range from simple padlocks 
suitable for securing a small chest to elabo- 
rate inset door locks for houses and man- 
sions. Simple locks are usually made of iron, 
steel, or bronze and have a simple mecha- 


Silk Rope: A silk rope is made of long 
threads of silk. The threads are braided to- 
gether with other strands of silk to make thin 
cords, and these in turn are braided together 
into a pliable and stiff braid. A silk rope is 
less encumbering and easier to work with (its 
smooth texture is not as rough on the hands), 
but does not have the ability to hold as much 
weight as a hemp rope. Usually no more than 
200 pounds can be held by the line at once. A 
silk rope weighs about eight pounds for a 50- 
foot length. 

Cost: 10 gp 


7 F Yj 
MM yyy, 
2229 N ቃሪ 


# 77 
YY 


/ f 7 po Fy 
j 0 / 7 
j / yy Wf. 7 1777227 


LIZ 


“ፖም ال‎ 
pat NAA: 1 177777777 
Dir 


Thieves’ Picks and Tools 


A thieves’ toolkit comes in a flat, folding 
leather case or a rolled suede case and in- 
cludes dozens of small tools. A set normally 
contains 20 wires, ranging in gauge from the 
thickness of string to that of a slender pencil. 
Each is approximately 12 to 18 inches long. 
These are used to poke into small holes or 
push triggers or buttons from a short dis- 


set in. The disease most likely to plague ad- 
venturers is scurvy. This can be avoided by 
the inclusion of fruits, especially citrus, and 
onions. 

Both beef jerky and hardtack are relent- 
lessly hard; the biscuits have very little taste. 
Considerable quantities of water (as much as 
double a normal ration of water) must be 
consumed when living on such rations to 
make such food digestible; lack of water can 
also result in dehydration. 

If a party attempts to live on rations for 
more than three to four weeks at a time, the 
DM may rule that 1 point of Constitution is 
lost due to nutritional deficiency. This may 
be recovered by eating foods other than ra- 
tions for one week. 

Hardtack, jerky, and the like are generally 
carried by human adventurers. Other races 
have their own variations on rations. Elves in 
particular carry a mixture of nuts, corn, 
seeds, dried fruit, and small candies. This is 
sometimes carried as a loose mix, and is 
sometimes carried in small patties held to- 
gether by brown sugar, honey, molasses, or 
lard. Either variation requires the consump- 
tion of extra water as explained above. 
Cost: 7-15 gp (per one-week supply) 


Rope 


Rope is one of the most important items of 
equipment to an adventurer. A 50-foot 
length of rope will be used when climbing 
surfaces, pulling heavy loads, repelling down 
sheer cliffs, and traversing deep ravines. 
There are two basic types of ropes. 


Hemp Rope: Hemp is a tough, fibrous plant 
used to make stout rope. A hemp rope is rug- 
ged and durable, but very bulky and heavy. 
The diameter of a hemp rope can range from 
1/4-inch to three inches or more (found pri- 
marily on ships). A fifty-foot length of hemp 
rope weighs nearly 20 pounds and is capable 
of holding more than 500 pounds of weight. 
Cost: 1 gp 


116 * Chapter Four 


Weaponblack 


This oily substance comes in small vials or 
jars. Such vials could potentially be mistaken 
for potions (consumption causes 1d10 points 
of damage). 

Weaponblack is used to smear the surfaces 
of weapons and metal armor to coat them 
with a pasty, matte black finish, rendering 
them nearly invisible in darkness. Thieves 
who coat their blades gain a +590 bonus to 
their chances to Hide in Shadows. After a 
typical melee, the weaponblack will be wiped 
from most of the blade from its heavy use. 
The weapon must be blackened again if de- 
sired. Armor will need its black coating 
touched up following a melee. 

A jar of weaponblack contains enough ma- 
terial to coat one full set of plate armor, two 
sets of scale mail, or three sets of chain mail. 
The same size jar can coat a long sword 10-12 
times. 

Cost: 1 gp 


Adventurer's Equipment * 117 


tance. The toolkit also includes a set of 12 
skeleton keys that fit many standard locks. 
Also in the set are several screwdrivers, a 
wire clipper, clamps, and pincers ranging in 
three sizes from minute, small, and average. 
Bundled with this package may be a small 
chisel, hacksaw, and hammer. 

In some of the more deluxe toolkits, small 
vials of metal-eating acids may be found, 
along with magnifying glasses and slender 
pieces of high-tempered steel that are used as 
miniature crowbars. A thieves’ tookit will 
range in weight and size greatly, depending 
on the initial cost of the package. 

Cost: Basic 30 gp 
Deluxe 50 gp 


Waterskin/Wineskin 


Water and wine skins come in a variety of 
shapes, sizes, and materials. The most com- 
mon type is the kidney-shaped goatskin bag 
with a metal cap on the narrow end. Other 
types may be encountered made of sheep- 
skin, bearskin, or other hide. Barbaric races 
and humanoids (especially orcs, goblins, and 
hobgoblins) may adorn their waterskins with 
teeth, horns, or hooves of the animal that 
gave up its hide for the item. 

A waterskin of normal size can hold two 
quarts of water. Players should remember 
that a normal human requires two quarts of 
water per day to maintain good health. More 
water will be required in hot conditions or in 
cases of high physical activity. Characters 
subsiding on dry rations also require more 
water. An active character may drink a gal- 
lon of water a day, and those trekking 
through deserts and open savannahs may 
find it necessary to drink as much as two gal- 
lons per day. 

Cost: 8 sp 


CHAPTER 


Clothing 


Introduction 


Clothing for the fantasy adventurer varies 
drastically between character classes, among 
social classes, from one city or province to 
the next, and from campaign to campaign. 
The types of apparel presented here are the 
most commonly worn items of the medieval 
period. 

Many variations exist in each article of 
clothing. Fabrics, fasteners, embellishments, 
and the quality of craftsmanship can all cre- 
ate wide variations in style, comfort, and du- 
rability. For example, a doublet might be 
made of silk, linen, or woolen cloth, depend- 
ing upon the skill or location of the tailor. 
This must be taken into account when using 
the prices presented here. The price ranges 
are intended to be guidelines only. Prices 
should be adjusted to suit the occasion within 
the adventure, taking into account the avail- 
able materials and workmanship and the 
needs of the character. 


ፎ 


ኗ 


fs- N 
ተኪ? DAP 


General Styles and Trends 


Peasant Clothing 


The peasant or poor beginning adventurer 
generally has few resources and wears what- 
ever is available and functional. Such indi- 
viduals rarely bother with fashion. Keeping 
warm is usually the first priority. Therefore, 
peasants tend to wear as many layers as pos- 
sible. 

The most typical, basic, and fundamental 
peasant garment is the chemise, which is a 
loose shirt that covers the body from the 
neck to the thigh or mid-calf. A chemise may 
have long or short sleeves or may be sleeve- 
less. 

The next layers of clothing add two gar- 
ments to the basic costume, a cote and sur- 
cote. These two articles of clothing are worn 
over the chemise, with the surcote over the 
cote. These items may vary in the extreme, 
ranging from a style resembling a knee- 
length tunic to variations on a simple or 


hooded cloak. 


118 * Chapter Five 


countries. Therefore, specific materials may 
be hard for the adventurer to find for sale in 
the open market. Such laws will undoubtedly 
add flavor and color to role-playing and may 
provide the basis for unusual adventures. 
Adventurers traveling from one kingdom 
to another could easily and unknowingly of- 
fend the local aristocracy by wearing a for- 
bidden color or material. Common 
punishments include a specified term of hard 
labor, a whipping, or imprisonment. The se- 
verity of the punishment varies widely, de- 
pending on the kingdom and other factors. 


Materials Used in Medieval 
Clothing 


Brocaded Material 


A rich fabric, often silk, woven with raised 
designs, usually with gold or silver thread. 
Highly sought by the upper classes. 


Academical Dress 


Early universities are often associated with 
the church, so many of the educated people, 
especially teachers, are of a Holy Order. 
Therefore, priestly and academic dress are 
practically identical. 

"The earliest medieval Ecclesiastical dress is 
the same as the everyday clothing of the av- 
erage person. This consists of many loose, 
long tunics (down to the ankles), a hood with 
shoulder cape, hose, and shoes. À round hat 
with a tab or nub on the top may also be 
worn. 

While secular styles change, the dress of 
priests and academics tends to remain the 
same. This stagnant style has the effect of 
distinguishing the academic community from 
other members of the equivalent class level. 
Many priests wear similar types of clothing 
and can therefore be immediately identified 
as either an educated person or a member of 
a priestly society. 


Sumptuary Laws 


The Sumptuary Laws, historically passed 
from 1300 to 1700 A.D., were designed to re- 
strict the import of foreign goods, and, more 
importantly, to maintain a social class struc- 
ture by permitting only members of a certain 
class level and position to wear specific gar- 
ments, fabrics and styles. For example, at 
one time, the most important indication of 
one's status within the upper class was the 
type of fur that lined the edges of garments. 
Furs permitted only to the aristocracy includ- 
ed marten, vair, and ermine. In descending 
social importance order, other furs were ot- 
ter, fox, beaver, lamb, goat, and wolf. Any 
commoner wearing restricted materials was 
subject to harsh punishment. 

Another example of a Sumptuary Law is 
the reservation of the color purple for per- 
sons of royalty. Specific purple dyes are 
made available only to the tailors of the aris- 
tocracy. 

At the DM's option, sumptuary laws might 
be created for certain cities, provinces, or 


NUDZURIZ Mm MOM CEN ፒቲ ቲቲ ቲቲ ሲሲ... ርር ርር ايا‎ ND CIL D Mí ا‎ ዱፈ 
| Clothing * 119 


Brocatelle 


An imitation of brocaded material executed 
with a combination of colored yarns. This 
material is used by members of the lower 
class to emulate genuine brocaded material. 


Camlet, camelot 


This refers to a fabric that is rumored to be 
composed, in part, from an exotic animal's 
coat, namely camel hair. It actually refers to 
an elegant fabric that is a mixture of silk or 
velvet and some camel hair. Used only by the 
upper classes. 


Fur 


Fur is the dressed pelt of various animals, 
used in the making of garments. It is used as 
the predominant material of some garments, 
while used only as trimming and decoration 
in others. 

Many outer garments that are designed 
specifically for warmth are made of fur, and 
may line the inside or the outside of such a 
garment. Peasant cloaks and other fur-lined 
garments are usually composed of sheepskin, 
wolfskin, or other smaller mammals. Other 
furs used primarily by the lower classes in- 
clude rabbit and common squirrel. The poor- 
er people tend to stitch pieces of smaller 
animal furs together to provide protection 
from the cold. 

Some furs are restricted and are allowed to 
be worn only by the upper class. Furs re- 
served for the aristocracy included sable, er- 
mine, and vair. Especially prized by royalty 
is the darker skinned sable and black-tipped 
white ermine. À vair is a highly sought spe- 
cies of squirrel. 

An adventurer could make a good deal of 
money selling furs if a good furrier and a 
willing buyer of the furs were discovered. 
Such entrepreneurs should remember that 
some furs are not only restricted for wearing, 
but merely owning the animal's hide may be 
illegal. 


120 * Chapter Five 


; 


D 


و 
v»‏ 
ን‏ 


۳ 


33101۳1, ۲ 


Usually made of leather (or silk for those 
who can afford it), this article of clothing is 
slung around the body from one shoulder to 
the opposite hip and is used to carry a dag- 
ger, pouch, bugle, or sword. Some baldrics 
are decorated with bells or tassels along the 
bottom edge. Baldrics are used both for deco- 
ration by the lords and ladies of the aristoc- 
racy, and for practical purposes by 
adventurers and government officials. Wom- 
en of the upper class may wear silk baldrics 
with gold bells for ornamentation. 
Decorative baldrics always have tassels, 
bells, or other adornments and are made of 
fashionable materials such as silk or brocade. 
Functional baldrics, in contrast, are com- 
posed only of leather and a buckle, for eas 
of use and practicality. | 
Cost: Ornamental 25-50 gp, Leather 7-10 gp 


Band 


Bands are variations of collars that include 
the ruff that is favored by royalty. Some 
bands simply fold over the outer shirt and 
are called a falling band, while others are de- 
signed to stand up, and are appropriately 
called a standing band. The ruff is reserved 
for formal occasions, while a falling band 


Leather 


Leather may be created from the hide or skin 
of any animal, bird, or reptile. The skin is 
tanned or treated to preserve it. Leather is 
used in the creation of many objects of cloth- 
ing and armor. The major advantage of 
leather is that it provides adequate protection 
while remaining flexible and supple, for quiet 
and complex maneuvering. 


Articles of Clothing 
Apron 


Aprons are worn for a variety of reasons. 
The most common uses are to protect cloth- 
ing and the wearer of the apron. This can 
range from a simple cloth apron worn while 
preparing a meal to the wearing of a leather 
apron by a blacksmith. Such aprons are 
made of thick leather and are intended to 
protect the wearer from flying sparks and 
chips of metal. 

Cost: Cloth 5-8 sp, Leather 8-12 gp 


Bag, Pouch, Almoner, Gipser 


These pouches are made from a variety of 
fabrics including leather, silk, wool, or linen 
and come in a variety of sizes. À special type 
of pouch is called the almoner. It is worn by 
members of the upper class and is used espe- 
cially for holding money to be given as alms, 
hence the name. 

All such items are usually attached at the 
belt or girdle. The pouch might be in plain 
sight, or, often in populated areas, it might 
be belted to the undertunic so the wandering 
eyes of thieves wouldn't see it. 

Cost: 4-8 cp 


Baladrana 
This is a full, wide cloak with a hood used by 


travelers to protect against the rain. 
Cost: 6-9 sp 


———————s—————————— ————j—Á————]—————nÁ———————————wa 
Clothing ® 121 


might be made of soft leather and even silk, 
embroidered or inlaid with gems. These are 
more for show than any practical purpose. 
See Shoes for more information about foot- 
wear. 

Cost: 2-8 gp 


Boot Hose 


These hose are cloth stockings worn inside 
the boot to protect the silk stocking under- 
neath. They are not visible outside the boot 
and are generally used only by the upper 
class. 

Cost: 1-5 cp 


Braies 


Braies are shapeless trousers held up by a 
drawstring at the waist, worn by men. They 
are usually kneelength or longer, with the 
bottoms either being tucked into stockings or 
bound with leg wrappings. Braies form the 
basic daily legwear for the commoner. 

Cost: 6-10 sp 


Breeches 


This outergarment is worn by males. Breech- 
es cover the hips and legs down to the knees. 
This garment has many different styles, from 
full, puffed designs made from expensive ma- 
terial to tights made with common cloth, 
similar to the braie. 

Cost: 2-5 gp 


Buckle 


A. seemingly inconspicuous piece of a per- 
son's clothing, buckles actually hold great 
significance. The buckle is one of the items 
that denotes wealth and status within society. 
Materials used to create buckles include sil- 
ver, gold, iron, steel, copper, and even ce- 
ramic. Along with the basic form of the 
buckle, these items might be engraved, inset 
with jewels, or otherwise adorned. 
Cost: Common 1-4 gp, 

Ornamental 10-20 gp 


. ሚእ) 


1 


SIT 


= I 


might be used for daily wear by an official. 
Most peasants and adventurers believe the 
wearing of these bands to be snobbish and a 
blatant attempt to emulate the aristocracy. 
Cost: 1-4 sp 


Boots 


Boots are an important part of the wardrobe 
for traveling and outdoor work and adven- 
turing. They are vital for protection against 
cold and wet conditions as well as hot and 
rocky terrains. Many peasants need to wear 
boots indoors as well, as their living condi- 
tions preclude much comfort or heat. 

Boots may be found in many stages of de- 
sign. One of the most popular is the pointed 
toe variety. The extended toe is especially 
popular among performers and jugglers, al- 
though thieves would do well to avoid them. 
The pointed toe tends to get in the way while 
climbing and running. 

Another common and functional boot is 
the leather, mid-calf boot with roll-tops, 
laced up the side. A variation on the mid-calf 
boot is the knee-high boots, worn by peas- 
ants and called cockers. 

Elegant designs reign at court. Such boots 


122 * Chapter Five 


Caul 


These are netted caps worn by women, made 
of silk and wool with various designs. For 
practicality, a caul is used by women to keep 
long hair out of the way. For decoration, a 
more elaborate caul is used during formal 
functions and gatherings. 

Cost: 3-7 gp 


Chainse, Chemise 


This is a white linen undertunic worn under 
the bilaud, the overtunic. The sleeves of the 
chainse are fitted at the wrists and are visible 
beneath the overtunic. The neckline is a sim- 
ple roundcut with a short slit. This is the 
most common garment for the peasant. Men 
of higher classes wear other outer coverings 
over the chemise. 

Cost: 1-6 gp 


Cloak, Mantle 


The cloak can be made in every possible 
shape with just about every type of fabric. 
The most common forms are a circular piece 
of fabric with a hole in the center for the 
head, and fabric draped from neck, connect- 
ed by a chain, brooch, cord, or pins. 

A common double use of the cloak is as a 
blanket in the wilderness. Outdoor cloaks 


Clothing * 123 


Cannons 


Cannons are tube-like breeches that fit snugly 
over a man's thighs, down to his knees. This 
article of clothing is usually embroidered in 
colored silk, gold, or silver thread. Cannons 
are worn chiefly by the upper classes. 

Cost: 8-12 gp 


Caps 


Many types of caps exist, but the most useful 
type for adventurers is a fur cap necessary in 
cold climates. High quality versions of this 
cap may have ear-coverings attached. Gener- 
ally, caps fit closely on the head and are usu- 
ally brimless. 

Cost: 1-4 sp 


Cassock 


A cassock is a long coat or cloak worn out- 
doors. It is used chiefly by soldiers and 
hunters. It is worn unbelted, and buttons 
down the front. This garment is used, espe- 
cially by hunters, for extra warmth while out 
in the cold. The soldier's version also serves 
as an identifying uniform. 

Cost: 6-10 gp 


Ferronniere 


This item of jewelry is a thin chain worn 
around the forehead with a small jewel set in 
the center. The ferroniere is worn exclusively 
by ladies of the upper class. The wearing of a 
ferronniere is considered to be an elegant touch 
within the aristocracy. An adventurer hoping 
to impress someone of high station might bene- 
fit from wearing a tasteful ferronniere. 

Cost: 50-100 gp 


Fitchet 


Not an item of clothing but a feature on a 
garment, a fitchet is a vertical opening at the 
hip of a gown or surcoat, used to reach the 
belt and pouch concealed within. This is con- 
venient for hiding valuables in a pouch under 
many layer of outer garments, making it dif- 
ficult for a thief to filch the bag. 


are large and made of durable, thick fabric to 
keep the adventurer warm during those cold 
nights under the stars. 

Cost: 2-8 sp 


Coif 


Coifs are white linen caps worn by both 
sexes. They fit closely on the head and are 
tied under the chin. The coif is used as a 
sleeping cap and as an underlayer beneath 
another hat. 
Cost: 1-6 gp 


Doublet 


This is a shirt, usually fastened up the front 
with buttons, and sometimes having a short, 
skirt-like section or peplum. There are many 
style variations of doublets. 

Cost: 1-6 sp 


Drawers 


Drawers are an undergarment for the body 
and legs, usually made of white linen. 
Drawers are worn under other trousers to 
provide additional warmth. 

Cost: 4-8 sp 


—————————————————————ÓÓUÓÓHÁHÓÁÁÓÓÁÓÓÓÓOEEó.Ae.ALL.LEÍÀOALLiLLLOODOOÜO.6ékx4kAALLL/LGiAL LLL أذ‎ | | 1 | | 1 <1 


124 * Chapter Five 


Gloves 


Gloves come in many different types and 
styles. The most common type is a leather 
glove worn to protect the wearer from cold 
weather and from injury. A heavier leather 
gauntleted glove is used for falconry and 
hawking, to provide a perch for the bird and 
to protect the falconer. 

Another functional glove is one designed 
for archery. Designed to be worn with a nor- 
mal pair of gloves, the archery glove has two 
or three reinforced leather fingerstalls which 
are buttoned across the wrist to provide pro- 
tection when firing arrows. 


we 


0ر 
ps‏ رسپ 


Decorative gloves are also worn by men of 
the noble class. These gloves are made of soft 
leather, suede, or kid and are adorned with 
embroidery, jewels, and fringes. 

In general, gloves are worn mainly by the 
upper class. Peasants make do with either 
cloth mittens or by wrapping their hands in 
the extra long sleeves of their shirts. 

Many customs have been built around 
gloves. Knights wear them as favors in their 
helmets during tournaments. They may be 
used as pledges and can be tossed down as a 
challenge. 

Cost: Leather 1-3 gp, Archer 3-8 gp, Ornate 
10-20 gp 


Clothing * 125 


Gamash 


These long leggings are worn outside other 
leg garments to protect the wearer from cold 
and wet weather. They are made of cloth and 
are buttoned down the outside of the leg. 
Cost: 3-8 sp 


Garnache 


This outer garment covers the wearer from 
the neck down to the ankles. It has wide, 
elbow-length sleeves cut as part of the gar- 
ment, like a cape. This allows the wearer to 
hide bulky items, such as weapons or 
pouches, under the garnache without attract- 
ing attention. 

Thieves and fighters especially favor this 
garment for its excellent ability to conceal 
objects and allow the wearer full, unhindered 
movement. 

Cost: 5-10 sp 


Girdle 


The girdle, in its usage as it applies to the me- 
dieval period, is a belt for the hips or waist. It 
is worn by both men and women. The girdle 
is made of metal, leather, cord, or fabric and 
often has one or two ends hanging loosely. 
Objects may be hung from the girdle to add 
embellishment to the overall outfit. 

Cost: 1-6 gp 


velvet and silk for the wealthy. This article of 
clothing is worn instead of drawers. The 
main difference is that hose have a tighter fit 
than drawers. Both garments serve the same 
function, keeping the wearer's legs warm. 
Cost: 1-3 sp 


Liripipe 


This is a hood with a long peak that can 
reach a length of 2 to 6 feet. The length of the 
peak varies with the fashion of the day. 
Jokers, jugglers and other performers espe- 
cially favor the liripipe. 

Cost: 5-10 sp 


Pantaloons 


These are various forms of loose coverings 
for the legs, reaching from the waist to the 
calves. Pantaloons are tight fitting at the 
waist and calves, emphasizing the owner's 
stockings and footwear. They are worn pri- 
marily by the upper class while indoors, such 
as in court. 

Cost: 1-6 sp 


Gorget 


The gorget is a collarlike article of clothing 
for the neck, full and broad in front. This 
originally referred to a piece of armor that 
protected the neck, but it also applies to the 
article of clothing men and women of the up- 
per class wear around the neck. 

Cost: 1-3 gp 


Mr eu 


| 

۲ 

0 

R 
ای‎ 
Å "i 


፥ 
ኳ.- “ር. 
A 


Hoods 


Hoods are used to keep the head dry and 
warm in inclement weather. Hoods were 
originally a simple head covering, but 
evolved into more elaborate designs such as a 
hood with a small cape attached. See liripipe 
for a specific version of a popular hood. 
Cost: 1-6 sp 


Hose 


Hose are a common covering for the legs. 
The original design was as roughly-fitting 
trousers; they evolved into a tighter-fitting 
garment. The material used to make hose can 
range from homespun cloth for peasants to 


126 * Chapter Five 


Shirt 


Any undergarment covering the top half of 
the body may be considered a shirt. This is a 
basic piece of clothing worn next to the skin. 
Cost: 1-3 sp 


Shoes 


Peasants and poor adventurers often wear a 
simple piece of rawhide as footwear, often 
with the fur still on it. A leather thong is 
threaded through the top of the piece of 
leather and tied at the top in order to hold the 
leather in place. 


222 


سیر ری ےھ / 


Clothing e 127 


| DA 
S nl//// 
mH! YY 


Ruff 


This tight, ruffled collar is worn encircling 
the entire neck. The ruff is highly admired 
within the upper class and is used almost ex- 
clusively by aristocracy. Although held in 
disdain by the lower class and most adven- 
turers, the ruff is an excellent piece of cloth- 
ing for a thief to own, especially one who 
enjoys disguises. Wearing an authentic ruff in 
conjunction with other appropriate upper 
class clothing will almost always guarantee 
entrance to aristocratic functions with little 
or no fuss over invitations. 

Cost: 8-12 gp 


i , $ : 
| | | : 


[| TM 0 


"M 


er, but has developed into clothing adopted 
by non-armored men and women. A person's 
symbol, colors, coat of arms, or other identi- 
fying marks are commonly placed on this 
garment. 


Cost: 4-8 sp 


ممه 0× 555 


መል. 
ፌክ 
ል 0رر مسر‎ 


Tunic 


This body garment is slipped over the head 
and may be styled with or without sleeves. It 
may be girded at the waist. This garment can 
be knee- or ankle-length and is sometimes 
called a cote. 


Cost: 5-10 sp 


Wealthier people wear a basic leather shoe, 
constructed with a pointed toe. The length of 
the toe varies according to the individual shoe- 
maker. Some shoe points are so long that they 
must be chained up and fastened at the knee. 
This type of shoe would be a hindrance to an 
adventurer, but might be worn in a city. 
Cost: Rawhide 1-3 sp, Leather shoe 8-12 sp 


Slop 


This term describes many loose fitting arti- 
cles of clothing such as cloaks, mantles, 
gowns, or baggy breeches. The term slop in- 
dicates a particularly cheap, ready-made gar- 
ment; therefore the low cost. 

Cost: 5-8 cp 


Surcoat, Surcote 


A surcote is a loose-fitting garment worn 
over a cote or tunic. There are many styles of 
surcotes, some with sleeves, hoods, capes, or 
any combination thereof. The surcoat is used 
primarily as another layer for warmth and is 
worn by the middle class. 

Cost: 5-10 sp 


Tabard 


A tabard is a loose-fitting, rectangular piece 


of cloth that hangs back and front over the . 


tunic. It was originally used to cover armor 
from the sun's rays, keeping the wearer cool- 


128 * Chapter Five 


Dungeon Master's Guide / Rules Supplement 


Arms 


and 
Equipment 
Guide 


At one time or another, every Dungeon Master faces 
questions like, ‘‘What’s the difference between band- 
ed mail and splint mail?” and ‘‘What do all these pole 
arms look like?’’ DMs and players alike will be thrilled 
to find answers to these and other equipment ques- 
tions all in this book, the Arms and Equipment Guide. 
Lavishly illustrated, this book provides valuable de- 
scriptions and diagrams for a variety of armors, 
weapons, and barding, as well as important items of 
clothing and equipment. This is the essential volume 
for the well-equipped character! 


$15.00 U.S, 


۲9,99 U.K. 1-56076-109-1 
TSR, Inc. r- m TSR Ltd. 
POB 756 — 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, T ۱ Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 2 =) Cambridge CB1 318 
U.S.A. ——— 2 United Kingdom 
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and AD&D 
0 " "46356021 "8 


are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
The TSR logo Is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc 
2123XXX1401 ©1991 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A 


