PHBR13 
Druid’s 


Dungeons ragons 


nd K 
Players Handbook 2" Edition Rules Supplement 


2150 


The 
Complete 


Druid’s 
Handbook 


yyragzOns 


nd Editi 
Edition Rules Supplement 


Dunge 


Player’s Handbook 


O 
2 


The 
Complete 


Druid’s 
Handbook 


by David Pulver 


Table of Contents 


EnttvOduicH OT 6. css casks 3 
| Chapter 1: 
Druid Characters............. 4 
Druidic Organization.......... a 
The Essential Druid ........... 5 
Druidic Branches ...........-. 8 
Branch Portraits ............. 10 
AUCEU :as6i6.0 6-0 )6:0teracece 10 
Desert Druids es m0cces ox 12 
Cray Di he oseese acesa nitya aerala 13 
naa ET Eae r S OE EA 14 
PUEBLA oo gece n esa 16 
MODRAN e annee a gi Spin e e E 17 
PAG OTs eassa wa 5 8 onia niasa alls 17 
D EE ERAR a i r aaa E a A C 18 
Multi- and Dual-Class Druids..........2..22.... 20 
Agriculture: Expanded Rules ...............0065 22 
Chapter 2: 
Wem WANS DALO EONA A 24 
E A E E L + siai0-0's 24 
A Look at Druid Kits ........, 25 
: an a a OA arse AEF OO 
: NOTE a a pies onic I OEN 27 
N EE a a LLE ESAT 28 
CROA «ora e entire 30 
FHVEMASIPE: v: iraia ti ell ADAE EAD a a nals a 31 
WE aT EES S E E AE ERS 7 
Natural Philosopher. .........- SERVAT comeesiere 33 
OR E E AEN A T NE 
PARSE oe SS eee E E E E A EA A 
a SAS E C E a EEE E 
DARED n LEE, POC S ITE NEER E ERIN 
Tome Deasa ise a rs enni aaa 39 
VEE ENT eas aA a SEAS 39 
PANE AA EAA A E AAAA AANER AT 41 
n E a a ESE E T T EE OS 42 
Modifying and Creating Kits .......-....00s50- 42 
Chapter 3: 
/ The Druidic Order........... 43 
=A EY Se -T O AN OA 43 
High-level Druids ........... 45 
The Shadow Circle ........... 53 
Creating a 
Druidic History ............ 56 


2 * Table of Contents 


Chapter 4: 
Role-playing Druids ......... 58 
DUH GIG PARE seein n o-> aye 5.95639 58 
The Neutral Alignment ..... .. 59 
A Druid’s Responsibilities. . . . . 62 
Character Strategy. .......... 69 
A Relations with Others......... 3 
Personality Types ............ 76 
TRV AC is 15 oreiwsieinrsizins« oeeo Ea IETA RNE 76 
SEE scents Os ci tiia bon 9.8 Oe Ee en 77 
TQEANSE o ea aeara ld ailera 77 
a N la T RO EE E T 78 
NUET 5055 co anino aol islarare p ras arela Fess 78 
AIONE OR AEE CE E E DA 79 
ARAGIFIGNAUSE etsii iior asistos reis orais oia Hisi aTE s e's © 79 
PATA REE E AE PE E S EIT 79 
MHO E nense n saa ngeka aiala alajaina aiT 80 
BREIE n Ta ei AAPEEE OE C T 80 
Chapter 5: 
Druidic Magic.............+. 86 
New SPOUB aarme rensnnsosa os 86 
E i O E 86 
Second-level........-6.26. 05 87 
paipai aen RRA. ENSEN 90 
Fourth-level sissen senses 90 
En a CE E ET. 93 
SIMENSTRVGE sasinan arenae ora iiE 95 
a a A E N E A A E PAE ET 96 
Nep Magical BEME a n oiana UA a a aa 98 
Farba MANE o ar enirn e RA 103 
Chapter 6: 
Sacred Groves........+.+++ 107 
Features of a Sacred Grove ... 107 
OWASP a S 108 
Sanctifying and Awakening 
BOVE. ora cet A OT 111 
Magical Sacred Groves....... 112 
Defiled and Cursed Groves... 115 
RSMINCIN IANO yrds AE 117 
Appendixes: 
A: AD&D” Original 
Edition Druids... ......... 119 
B Bibliography ............. 124 
Druid Character 
Record Sheet... o.s sosser 125 
Druid Kit Record Shet, e.e. .:.0s.0.0:0 o:ersioiei naoa s 127 


Tables: 


LCs L GREE PTS E N E are apie 
2::Farm Random Events. ...2......0sce see eee eas 23 
silesser: Grove POWETS s, rro re ere Da eera pien nash 112 
4: Greater Grove Powers ssni saian sanna 114 
5: Properties of Cursed Groves ..........-..... 115 
6: Powers of Standing Stones ........0...0..04 118 
7: Original Druid Experience Points ........,... 120 
8: Original Hierophant Experience Points ..-.. . 121 
9: Elemental Conjurings. ........-..<..seee-e0> 122 
10: Druidic Spells by Class and Level ........... 123 
CREDITS 


Design: David Pulver 
Editing: Sue Weinlein 
New Black and White Art: Jeff Easley 
Color Art: Larry Elmore, 

Keith Parkinson, Alan Pollack 
Typography: Angelika Lokotz 
Production: Paul Hanchette 
Special Thanks: Peter Donald, Chris Murray, 
Bruce Norman, and Tim Pulver. 


TSR, Inc. TSR, Ltd. 
POB 756 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, Cherry Hinton 
W1 53147 Cambridge CB] 3LB 
U.S.A. United Kingdom 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, DRAGON, 
SPELLJAMMER, DUNGEON MASTER, FORGOTTEN REALMS, 
and WORLD OF GREYHAWK are registered trademarks owned 
by TSR, Inc. PLANESCAPE, MONSTROUS MANUAL, and the 
TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 

All TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses 
thereof are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc 

© 1994 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the U.S.A. 


Random House and its affiliates have worldwide distribution 
tights in the book trade for English language products of TSR, Inc. 
Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by 
TSR Ltd. Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distrib- 
utors 


This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United 
States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the 
material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the 
express written permission of TSR, Inc. 


Mysterious guardian of a sacred grove, 
wise counselor to monarchs, cunning master 
of many shapes, friend of animals, and ter- 
rible defender of unspoiled Nature: This is 
the druid of the ADVANCED DUNGEONS & 
DRAGONS” game. 

Although the priests of the Celtic tribes of 
Western Europe in the time of Rome called 
themselves druids, the druids of the AD&D* 
game are not Celtic priests, nor do they prac- 
tice the bloody rites that made the ancient 
druids infamous in the eyes of Rome. Rather, 
these druids more closely resemble creatures 
of Victorian romance and modern fantasy, 
Merlin figures who revere Nature and wield 
power over plants, animals, the weather, and 
the elements. 

This book is designed to illuminate the 
many abilities of druids and show how the 
neutral and “unaligned” druid can best ad- 
venture with a party of predominantly good 
characters. It also reveals what a druid does 
when not adventuring and demonstrates how 
a druid can become the center of a new and 
exciting campaign. 

The Complete Druid’s Handbook adds numer- 
ous options to the druid class from the Play- 
er's Handbook, including druids from regions 
other than the woodlands, and introduces 
many specialized druid kits. Also included 
are new spells and magical items, as well as 
rules for a druid’s sacred grove. 

Those using this book with the AD&D 
Original Edition game should know that page 
references correspond with the AD&D 2nd 
Edition Player’s Handbook (PH) and DUNGEON 
MasTER® Guide (DMG). The original druid 
class appears here as an appendix, with some 
material from the AD&D Original Edition ref- 
erence book Unearthed Arcana. 


——— 


Introduction « 3 


CHAPTER 


Druid Characters 


The traditional druid is a guardian of the 
woodlands. Nature, however, is vast and 
diverse; thus the druids detailed in this book 
might live their lives protecting jungle rain 
forests, arctic tundra, or even the subter- 
ranean Underdark. As a result, several dis- 
tinct branches of druid are presented here, 
each essentially a new subclass built around 
the basic concept of the druid class, Asa 
player, choose your druidic branch right after 
deciding to play a druid character. 


Druidic Organization 


The basic druid as described in the PH is 
referred to here as the “forest druid.” The 
names of the other branches reflect their geo- 
graphic specialty: arctic druids, desert druids, 
and so on. 


——— ae 


4 ¢ Chapter One 


Members of all the branches of the druidic 
order have the same alignment—true neu- 
tral—and worship Nature. They share one 
ethos and owe at least nominal allegiance to 
the world’s Grand Druid. But, as befits the 
infinite diversity of Nature, every branch dif- 
fers in details and approach to its mission. 
The granted powers and spells that Nature 
finds appropriate for a druid in one region 
are often inappropriate for a druid froma 
very different climate and terrain. 

For instance, while the forest druids de- 
scribed in the PH have major access to the 
Plant sphere of priest spells, the branch of 
desert druids has only minor access to that 
sphere, reflecting the less abundant plant life 
in the desert. Similarly, while a forest druid’s 
ability to pass through overgrowth is very 
useful in the woods, it has much less utility 


for a desert druid. Instead, the branch of 
desert druids has granted powers enabling 
them to survive in arid country. 

Some rivalry exists between the different 
branches of druids. On most worlds, the for- 
est druids belong to the dominant branch. 
However, on a few worlds (such as one in the 
midst of an ice age) another branch might 
wield the most power. For more details on 
rivalry between branches, see Chapter 3: The 
Druidic Order. 

The Dungeon Master can restrict some 
branches to nonplayer characters (NPCs) or 
even prohibit them to suit the background or 
direction of a campaign. For example, the 
Dungeon Master (DM) might decide that the 
gray druids of the Underdark would make 
exciting adversaries for the characters. Since 
having player characters (PCs) as gray druids 
would water down the impact of the gray 
druids as foes, the DM can prohibit players 
from choosing that branch. Later in the cam- 
paign, after the party has encountered the 
gray druids, the DM might open the branch 
to players. 

Similarly, some druid branches simply may 
not seem very logical or useful in certain cam- 
paigns. A wise DM would discourage players 
from selecting the arctic branch for their 
druid characters in a campaign set in a jungle. 


The Essential Druid 


Some characteristics and limitations apply 
to all branches of the druidic order. The fol- 
lowing section expands on the rules for druid 
characters in the PH (pgs. 35-38). 


Alignment and Ethos 


All druids are of neutral alignment and 
share an ethos devoted to protecting the wil- 
derness and maintaining natural cycles and a 
balance between good and evil (PH, pgs. 37, 
47). For a detailed discussion of the neutral 


vy / 

E 
alignment and the beliefs of druids, refer to 
Chapter 4: Role-playing Druids. 


Experience and Hit Dice 


All druids must use the druid column of 
Table 23: Priest Experience Levels (PH, p. 33). 
Druids, like other members of the priest 
group, use eight-sided Hit Dice (HD), gaining 
one die per level from Ist through 9th level. 
After 9th level, druids receive an additional 2 
hit points per level, but gain no special bonus 
for high Constitution. 


Proficiencles and Crossovers 


Druids gain proficiencies just like other 
priests (PH, p. 50), starting with two weapon 
and four nonweapon proficiencies. 

It is strongly recommended that you, the 
player, use the optional nonweapon profi- 
ciency rules when creating druid characters 
with this book. The various branches of 
druids (and the druid kits described later) 
make extensive use of the nonweapon profi- 
ciency system to differentiate among types of 
druids. 

Note that druid nonweapon proficiencies 
come from the general, priest, and warrior 
groups. Druids have access to the warrior 
group (even though many other priests do 
not) because it contains many of the profi- 
ciencies associated with outdoor skills the 
druid needs to operate in the wilderness. 


Money and Equipment 


Druids start with 3d6x10 gp, which they 
can use to purchase equipment. All but a few 
coins (less than 1 gp) must be spent prior to 
entering play. 

If using the optional druid kit rules de- 
scribed later in this book, both the initial 
money and the equipment allowed might 
vary depending on the kit. 


eee eer eee 


Druid Characters * 5 


Ni 


AES 
i 


Magical Items 


Druids use all magical items normally per- 
mitted to priests, with the exception of writ- 
ten items (books and scrolls) and those types 
of armor and weapons that are normally for- 
bidden them. (The weapons and armor per- 
mitted to members of each branch and kit do 
vary, but they remain similar to those allowed 
to druids in the PH.) 

Thus, a druid who finds magical chain mail 
may not wear it, since druids must use only 
nonmetallic armor. Similarly, a druid cannot 
wield a magical mace, since maces are not 
among the permitted druidic arms. 


The Secret Language 


All druids can speak a secret language in 
addition to other tongues they know. Using 
the optional proficiency system, the secret 
language does not require a proficiency slot. 


The secret language of the druids has its 
roots in British tradition. A language 
called Thari, derived from Celtic roots, 
apparently was spoken as a secret tongue 
throughout the British Isles by a small 
number of traveling folk such as tinkers 
and bards. It later was adopted by some 
Gypsy clans in addition to Romany, their 
own Indic language. Thari may predate 
the Dark Ages, and some claim fluency in 
it even today. Certain researchers seeking 
the roots of Thari as a language distinct 
from Gaelic have linked its origins to both 
ancient Celtic craft guilds and to the his- 
torical druids. If the DM wants to name 
the druids’ secret language, Thari pos- 
sesses some historical relevance. 


Not only can druids use the secret lan- 
guage to provide passwords, they can speak 
this private tongue when they wish to baffle 


——— 


6 + Chapter One 


nondruidic eavesdroppers. It is a precise tool 
for discussing Nature; a druid can say “dense, 
old-growth pine forest” in one word rather 
than a whole phrase. 

The secret language has a specialized and 
detailed vocabulary limited to dealing with 
Nature and natural events; beyond this 
sphere, it is very basic. A druid could use the 
secret language to talk about the health of a 
person, animal, or plant; discuss the weather; 
or give detailed directions through the wil- 
derness, The language also can describe dru- 
idic spells, ceremonies, powers, and any nat- 
ural and supernatural creatures known to the 
druids. However, it contains no words for 
sophisticated human emotions, for most tools 
or artifacts (beyond those used for hunting, 
farming, or fishing), or for weapons and 
armor (other than items druids use). The lan- 
guage also contains few words that refer to 
concepts peculiar to sentient beings, like prop- 
erty, justice, theft, or war. Tense distinctions 
blur in this secret tongue; usually the con- 
cepts druids express bear a certain immedi- 
acy or timelessness. 

Finally, the secret language of the druids 
remains a purely spoken tongue. A few 
simple runes or marks (symbolizing danger, 
safe water, safe trail, and so on) exist for mark- 
ing paths and leaving messages, but the lan- 
guage cannot communicate actual sentences 
and complex ideas in writing. 

Here’s an example of how the secret lan- 
guage works in practice. Suppose two druids 
are discussing a magical item and want to 
converse entirely in the secret language, 
using no words borrowed from other tongues. 
One druid wishes to say: 


This magical long sword was a gift to 
Melinda, wife to King Rupert, from Ru- 
pert’s court wizard Drufus. The mage 
gave it the power to throw lightning 
bolts. But then King Rupert grew jealous 
of Melinda. He had her executed and 


took the blade for himself. After Rupert 
died, the sword was left buried in the 
dungeons under his castle. 


In the secret language, the story might come 
out something like this: 


This magic scimitar was for the Tall 
Golden Female, mate of the Man-Leader, 
from the Wielder of Magic from the Vale 
of the White Eagles. He put the call light- 
ning power in it. But the Man-Leader 
wanted it. He killed the Tall Golden 
Female and took it for himself. He died. 
The scimitar stayed in the cave under his 
big stone man-den. 


See the difference? There’s no word for long 
sword, so our druid has substituted “scimi- 
tar.” (All druidic weapons have names.) The 
idea of a gift is described in more basic terms. 
In addition, the concept of naming has no 
place in this Nature-oriented language; 
people and creatures are known by descrip- 
tion, status, or place of origin. 

Wizard becomes the more generic “wielder 
of magic.” Lightning, a natural phenomenon, 
has an equivalent in the secret language. But 
the secret language cannot convey a human 
emotion such as Rupert's jealousy, so the 
druid has had to substitute less precise phras- 
ing. Similarly, the private tongue does not 
cover execution or murder, so the druid used 
the more generic “killed.” Finally, no druidic 
term corresponds to dungeon or castle, so the 
druid has had to use other words—" cave 
under his big stone man-den”—to convey 
that image. Of course, a druid not worried 
about being overheard might mix the secret 
language and normal speech in a single sen- 
tence. 

The secret language helps bind the world- 
wide druidic order together. Druids from dif- 
ferent circles (See Chapter 3: The Druidic 
Order) or branches all speak the same secret 


T a) 
“hy 


language. However, they may have devel- 
oped their own regional accents or dialects. 
These could enable a listener to identify the 
region the druid comes from, or provide a 
clue to the speaker’s branch. 

In a SPELLJAMMER® or PLANESCAPE” cam- 
paign and through the use of certain spells 
and magical items, druids from different 
worlds can meet. The DM should decide 
whether their secret languages resemble each 
other enough to allow communication. 

Finally, the druid’s secret language, while 
private, is not supernatural—theoretically, 
others can learn it. However, because the 
tongue provides druids with code phrases or 
passwords, they simply will not teach it to 
nondruids. The great druid of the region will 
punish any who break with this tradition. 


Shapechanging 


Characters belonging to almost all druidic 
branches (discussed later in this chapter) can 
shapechange into various animal forms upon 
reaching 7th level. For more than the follow- 
ing guidelines, consult the description of a 
particular branch's granted powers. 

Normally, the druid can assume only a lim- 
ited number of shapes each day, depending 
on the character’s branch; the choice of branch 
usually restricts the types of forms the druid 
can assume. 

Shifting shape takes one round, during 
which the druid cannot take other actions. 
The druid can remain in the new shape indef- 
initely—the duration of a form ends only 
when the druid turns back to the original 
shape or assumes another one. A druid can 
shift from one shape to another without re- 
turning to human form first. 

Upon assuming a new form, the druid 
heals 10% to 60% (1d6x10) of all damage. 
(Round fractions down.) For example, a druid 
who has suffered 15 points of damage rolls a 
3 on a d6. Therefore, the character regains 


—— EE 


Druid Characters © 7 


am, 


Ñ 


30%x15 hp, or 4.5 hp. This value becomes 4 
hit points after rounding. 

The animal form a druid assumes can vary 
from the size of a bullfrog or small bird to that 
of a black bear. Unless noted otherwise, the 
druid can assume only the form of a normal 
(real-world) animal in normal proportions. A 
druid in animal form takes on all the beast’s 
physical characteristics— movement rate, 
abilities, Armor Class (AC), number of 
attacks, and damage per attack. The druid 
retains original hit point and saving throw 
values. 

The druid’s clothing and one item held in 
each hand also become part of the new body; 
these reappear when the druid resumes nor- 
mal shape. Generally, a druid in animal form 
cannot use such items, but in particularly 
challenging campaigns, the DM may allow 
protective devices, such as a ring of protection, 
to function normally. 

A shapechanged druid radiates strong 
Alteration magic. 


Turning Undead 


No druid has the granted power to turn 
undead. Such creatures are not of the living 
world—the only world that concerns druids 
—so members of this class have no control 
over them. 


Higher-level Druids 


The worldwide organization of the druids 
allows for the existence of only a limited 
number of 12th- or higher-level druids, as- 
signing them special titles, servants, and 
responsibilities. Druids who gain enough 
experience to reach 12th level can advance 
only if they find a vacancy within the Order’s 
ranks or wrest a position from another druid 
through the challenge. (See Chapter 3: The 
Druidic Order.) 

Only one 15th-level druid exists in any 


8 « Chapter One 


campaign world: the Grand Druid, chief of all 
druids in the world. The Grand Druid can 
come from any branch, though on many 
worlds this position requires a member of the 
usually dominant forest druids. A Grand 
Druid who retires and continues to gain expe- 
rience can become a hierophant druid, of 
which a world can have any number. 

The rules for druids of 12th and higher lev- 
els described in the PH on pgs. 37-38 apply to 
all druidic branches. For more details on the 
hierarchy of druids and the special responsibil- 
ities of higher-level characters, see Chapter 3: 
The Druidic Order. 


Druidic Branches 


Each branch within the druidic order oper- 
ates, effectively, as a separate priest class 
under the standard druid rules. Here’s how 
the pages that follow describe the characteris- 
tics of each branch: 

Minimum Ability Scores, The druidic 
prime requisites of Wisdom 12 and Charisma 
15, or slightly modified scores, serve as the 
minimum ability scores necessary for a char- 
acter to choose a particular branch. 

Races Allowed. Standard (forest) druids 
are usually humans or half-elves, but mem- 
bers of other races can choose some druidic 
branches. (Details on these options appear in 
The Complete Book of Humanoids.) A number in 
parenthesis shows the maximum level these 
characters normally reach; they can achieve 
higher levels only with high ability scores, as 
stated in the DMG, pgs. 14-15. 

Armor and Weapons Permitted. Most 
druids wear natural armor (leather) and use 
wooden shields. Other armors, especially 
metallic kinds, are forbidden to all druids. 

Most of the weapons permitted to druids of 
a particular branch resemble tools used in 
herding, hunting, and farming, or hold sym- 
bolic meaning to the druid. For instance, the 
curved scimitar and khopesh represent both 


The Complete Book of Humanoids offers four 
new races for use as druid PCs: alaghi, cen- 
taurs, saurials, and swanmays. Other non- 
humans can become druids, at the DM’s 
option, though details on these characters 
should be carefully worked out within the 
guidelines of The Complete Book of Human- 
oids. Possible allowable races include: 
Dryads. A dryad is quite shy and unable to 
travel far from her home tree. Unusual cir- 
cumstances might allow a dryad PC to be- 
come a druid and travel within a large forest 
using magical items that link her with her 
home tree, but it remains unlikely that the 
dryad will advance beyond 4th level in abil- 
ity. DRAGON® Magazine (#109, “Hooves and 
Green Hair”) has suggested that half-dryads 
(born of a union of human male and dryad) 
might reach 7th level or higher. Dryads and 
half-dryads always become forest druids. 
Elves. The AD&D Original Edition Un- 
earthed Arcana reference book allowed elves 
to become druids. Only sylvan elves may 
achieve druidhood, perhaps in remote areas 
such as lost islands or other worlds. Sylvan 
elf druids can reach 12th level (like regular 
clerics) and can take the Herbalist kit from 
The Complete Book of Elves (pgs. 83-84). They 
always fall under the forest druid branch. 
Interested players might develop a druid- 
like priest kit for an elf, such as the halfling’s 
Leaftender. Though drow cannot become 
druids, half-drow (like all half-elves) can; 
these almost always become gray druids. 
Giant-kin. Firbolgs and voadkyn, de- 


the sickle used in the harvest and the crescent 
moon, which stands for birth, death, and 
rebirth in the cycle of Nature. 

The standard druid can use the following 
weapons: club, sickle, dart, spear, dagger, 
scimitar, sling, and staff (optional: scythe). 

Use of metallic weapons and tools usually 
remains unrestricted, but local availability can 


scribed in The Complete Book of Humanoids, 
might become forest druids in certain remote 
regions of a campaign. They could reach the 
7th level of ability. Again, players could 
develop a druidlike priest kit for this race. 

Halflings. The AD&D Original Edition 
game allowed halflings to reach the 6th level 
of ability as NPCs; Unearthed Arcana allowed 
halfling druid PCs to reach higher levels. In 
the AD&D 2nd Edition Complete Book of 
Gnomes and Halflings (pgs. 119-120), halfling 
priests gained the Leaftender kit, which 
strongly resembles the druid class. Leaf- 
tender priests normally may achieve 8th 
level. If halflings become true druids, they 
can reach 8th level, too, usually in the forest 
or plains branches. 

Lizard Men. A civilized group of lizard 
men on a world in the SPELLJAMMER setting 
might have druids among them. Though 
some lizard men aboard the ship Spelljammer 
(detailed in The Legend of Spelljammer boxed 
set) achieved high levels of clerical ability, 
most lizard man druids would not advance 
beyond 7th level. These beings become 
jungle or swamp druids. 

Satyrs. As a rule, satyrs concern themselves 
too much with having fun to bother with the 
serious side of a druid’s life. Satyr druid PCs 
should not gain levels above 4th. An article in 
DRAGON Magazine issue #109, “Hooves 
and Green Hair,” allowed half-satyrs (born of 
human women and satyrs) to reach 6th level 
or higher. Satyrs and half-satyrs always 
belong to the forest druid branch. 


prove a problem, especially in areas like the 
arctic tundra. Nonmetallic materials can make 
effective weapons, with the following modi- 
fiers (compared to similar metallic items): 

Bone: 30% cost; 50% weight; -1 damage; —1 
to attack roll. 

Stone: 50% cost; 75% weight; -1 damage; -2 
to attack roll. 


e ———— 


Druid Characters °% 9 


{v 


: Yk: 


in 4 


i 


Wood: 10% cost; 50% weight; -2 damage; -3 
to attack roll. 

The damage modifier reduces the damage 
normally done by the weapon, with a mini- 
mum of 1 point of damage. The attack roll 
modifier does not apply to missile weapons, 
as the attack roll reflects the character’s aim 
and is not a function of the material used to 
make the weapon. Damage modifiers do 
apply to missile weapons, however. 

Enchanted nonmetallic weapons must 
overcome the negative modifiers, too; thus a 
bone dagger +1 works just as well as a normal 
steel dagger. 

Whenever a nonmetallic weapon inflicts 
maximum damage in combat, it has a 1 in 20 
chance of breaking and becoming useless. 
(The DM rolls a d20.) 

Nonweapon and Weapon Proficiencies. A 
druid of a particular branch must have cer- 
tain proficiencies required by the branch. Rec- 
ommended proficiencies are only strong sug- 
gestions. If the DM permits the optional 
druid kits from the next chapter, select the 
druid’s proficiencies only after you, the 
player, have chosen a kit, since kits have their 
own proficiency requirements. 

If the DM prefers to use secondary skills 
rather than nonweapon proficiencies, choose 
appropriate druidic skills from Table 36 in the 
PH, p. 53. 


The scythe is a weapon available to many 
druidic branches. Its large curved blade, 
sharp only on its inner edge, attaches to a 
handle 5 to 6 feet long. A harvesting tool 
used to reap grain, the scythe costs 5 gp and 
weighs 8 lbs. This medium-sized (M) 


weapon must be used two-handed. It causes 
piercing/slashing (P/S) damage with speed 
factor 8. A scythe inflicts 1d6+1 points of 
damage vs. small or medium-sized oppo- 
nents, or 1d8 vs. large opponents. 


10 » Chapter One 


Spheres of Influence. Each branch allows 
its members access to different clerical spell 
spheres. (An asterisk indicates a sphere to 
which branch members have only minor 
access.) Druids gain bonus spells for high 
Wisdom. 

Granted Powers. A druid has a wider vari- 
ety of granted powers than a standard cleric, 
an advantage balanced by a druid’s more lim- 
ited sphere selection and inferior armor. 

Special Limitation. Some branches suffer 
from unusual disadvantages. For example, 
heat debilitates an arctic druid. 

Holy Symbol and Grove. Many branches 
of druids use plants as holy symbols and 
spell components—mistletoe, for instance, 
symbolizes the forest druid. In habitats where 
mistletoe is not available (such as deserts or 
arctic regions), druids use other symbols. 

Forest druids worship in groves of ancient 
trees, which have become sanctuaries, meet- 
ing places, and sites of power for them. Alter- 
nate worship sites can replace groves for 
branches whose primary terrain does not fos- 
ter tree growth. (See Chapter 6: Sacred 
Groves.) 


Branch Portraits 


The following section of this chapter de- 
scribes the various branches of druids that 
might exist in a campaign world. The DM 
may freely create other branches as desired, 
such as wildspace druids (from unusual 
worlds in the SPELLJAMMER campaign), aquatic 
druids (tending ocean life on the continental 
shelves), aerial druids (living on semisolid 
cloud islands), and so on. Note that kits func- 
tion within and in addition to branches. 


Arctic Druid 


Description: Arctic druids feel at home on 
the frozen polar tundra or on the slopes of 
snowcapped mountains and ancient glaciers. 


They even venture at times across lifeless ice 
fields to assist lost animals. If an Ice Age took 
place in the distant past, arctic druids may 
very well claim to belong to the oldest druidic 
branch, tracing their ancestry all the way back 
to the days when humans huddled within 
caves. 

Glydo, a typical arctic druid, (illustrated 
above) concerns himself more with animals 
than with plants. Guardian of caribou herds, 
penguins, auks, seals, polar bears, and other 
arctic and subarctic animals, he relentlessly 
pursues those who exploit animals out of 
desire for profit. However, he faithfully be- 
friends hunters and trappers who respect the 
land and take from it no more than they need. 

Minimum Ability Scores: Wisdom 12, 
Constitution 13, Charisma 15. 

Races Allowed: Human, half-elf. Optional 
—alaghi (11). 


Armor and Weapons Permitted: Leather 
armor, wooden shield; club, dagger, dart, har- 
poon, knife, sling, spear, staff. Arctic druids 
can use metallic weapons if they find them, 
but mining is extremely rare in arctic areas, 
making such items rare as well. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
knife, harpoon, spear. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required 
(general) fire-building, weather sense; (war- 
rior) survival (arctic); Recommended— (gen- 
eral) animal handling, animal training, 
direction sense, fishing, swimming; (priest) 
ancient history, healing; (warrior) endurance, 
hunting, mountaineering, tracking. 

Spheres of Influence: All, Animal, Divina- 
tion’, Elemental, Healing, Plant’, Weather. 
(The arctic druid’s minor access to the Plant 
sphere reflects the less abundant plant life in 
arctic climes.) 


Druid Characters * 11 


we 


Granted Powers: An arctic druid like Gly- 
do has the following granted powers: 

e Receives a +2 bonus to all saving throws 
vs. cold-based attacks. 

e Learns the languages of intelligent mon- 
sters whose natural habitats are tundra, arc- 
tic, and subarctic regions, The arctic druid 
gains one extra proficiency slot for this pur- 
pose every three levels (at 3rd, 6th, etc.). Such 
languages include those spoken by ettins, 
frost giants, ice toads, selkies, werebears, 
white dragons, winter wolves, verbeeg, yeti, 
and others. 

è Ignores the effects of freezing weather 
upon himself at 3rd level. 

e Identifies with perfect accuracy arctic 
plants and animals, thin ice (ice that would 
give way under the weight of a person or a 
sled), and pure water at 3rd level. 

¢ Passes over ice and snow without leaving 
a trail and can move over such terrain at full 
movement rate at 3rd level. 

e Shapechanges up to three times a day at 
7th level. The druid can assume the form of a 
land mammal, marine mammal, or bird that 
dwells in arctic and subarctic climates: a cari- 
bou, penguin, polar bear, seal, reindeer, snowy 
owl, wolf, wolverine, and so on. The druid 
can’t take the same animal's shape more than 
once each day. 

Special Limitation: An arctic druid is used 
to a cold climate and suffers a -1 penalty to 
attack rolls, saving throws, and ability checks 
in environments with temperatures above 80 
degrees Fahrenheit. 

Holy Symbol and Grove: Glydo, as an arc- 
tic druid, uses as his holy symbol a bone of an 
arctic animal that has been carved into the 
shape of a knife, whistle, flute, or other 
instrument. If the druid dwells beyond the 
arctic tree line, he chooses as his “grove” — 
usually near a glacier—an ancient cave whose 
walls are covered with prehistoric paintings 
of animals. 


12 * Chapter One 


Desert Druid 


The deserts prove as inhospitable to most 
normal plant and animal life as the arctic 
regions. However, deserts remain vital to the 
worldwide order of druids. 

Desert druids such as Otaq (pictured on p. 11) 
are either members of native nomad tribes or 
hermits who have moved to the desert to 
escape civilization. Valued for their abilities to 
heal sick animals (and people) and to find or 
create pure water, they normally remain on 
good terms with desert nomads. Although 
desert druids revere all the flora and fauna of 
a desert, from cacti and scorpions to vultures 
and camels, they most fiercely protect the few 
fertile oases, which house their sacred groves. 

Desert druids also may reside in semidesert 
areas, hot scrub lands, and chaparral. Unless 
a DM sets a campaign in actual desert land, 
this branch best suits an NPC the party may 
encounter traveling through the wastes. 
Many desert druids live as hermits, not fond 
of disturbances, and can be short tempered or 
downright eccentric. However, no one can 
top their knowledge of their own desert area. 
If a party seeks something in the trackless 
wastes or finds itself lost, facing a sandstorm, 
or running out of food or water, a chance 
encounter with a desert druid like Otaq may 
spell salvation. 

Minimum Ability Scores: Wisdom 12, 
Constitution 12, Charisma 15. 

Races Allowed: Human. 

Armor and Weapons Permitted: Leather 
armor, wooden shield; club, sickle, dart, 
spear, dagger, khopesh, scimitar, sling, short 
bow, staff. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
scimitar, short bow, staff. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required— 
(general) direction sense, weather sense; 
(warrior) survival (desert). Recommended— 
(general) riding (land-based); (priest) healing, 
local history; (warrior) endurance, tracking. 


Spheres of Influence: All, Animal, Divina- 
tion’, Elemental (air, earth, fire), Elemental’ 
(water), Healing, Plant’, Weather. 

Granted Powers: A desert druid like Otaq 
has the following granted powers: 

e Receives a +2 bonus to all saving throws 
vs. fire or electrical attacks. 

e Goes without water for one day per level 
without suffering thirst. Regaining use of this 
power requires the druid to have resumed a 
normal intake of water for a time equal to the 
days of deprivation. 

e Learns the languages of desert-dwelling 
intelligent creatures (brass dragons, drag- 
onnes, lamias, thri-kreen, etc.), gaining one 
extra proficiency slot for this purpose every 
three levels (at 3rd, 6th, etc.). 

e Infallibly identifies desert plants and ani- 
mals and pure water at 3rd level. 

e Sees through nonmagical mirages at 3rd 
level and gains a +4 on any roll to save against 
illusions cast within a desert. 

e Crosses sands and dunes on foot without 
leaving a trail and at full movement rate at 
3rd level. 

e Senses the distance, direction, and size of 
the nearest natural water source (well, spring, 
oasis, sea, etc.) if one lies within 1 mile per 
level. This power, gained at 3rd level, is usable 
once per day. 

e Shapechanges up to three times per day 
at 7th level, once each into a normal mammal, 
reptile, and bird. The druid can shapechange 
only into animals whose natural habitat is the 
desert. Common desert-dwelling animals 
include camels, eagles, hawks, lizards, mice, 
rats, snakes, and vultures. Otherwise, this 
power functions identically to that described 
in the PH, p. 37. 

Special Limitation: None. 

Holy Symbol and Grove: A desert druid’s 
grove normally lies within a beautiful oasis in 
the deep desert. Branch members use as their 
holy symbol a vial of water from a sacred 
oasis, filled under a full moon. 


E 


My 


vA 


Gray Druid 


The rare gray druids inhabit and tend the 
shadowy realms of the hidden life that exists 
without sunlight—fungi, molds, and slimes— 
and the nocturnal creatures that dwell in 
lightless, subterranean realms. Gray druids 
are more closely associated with the earth 
than with other elements of Nature. While 
many of them live in underground caves or 
ruins (especially in the Underdark), they are 
found any place fungal life grows abun- 
dantly, either above or below ground. 

Gray druids tend to oppose dungeon 
delvers, especially dwarves, who they believe 
defile and exploit the underground environ- 
ment. They have very good relations with 
deep gnomes and passable relations with 
drow, who they feel show more appreciation 
of the beauty of the Underdark than most 
dwarves or men. 

But the gray druids don’t always oppose 
surface dwellers. Suppose a maze of caverns 
has developed a complex ecology: fungi, 
slimes, rust monsters, subterranean lizards, 
purple worms, and so on. Then an evil wiz- 
ard and his ogres move in and begin “clear- 
ing” the caverns, destroying the monsters in 
preparation to establish an underground 
stronghold. In this situation, the gray druid 
Rybna (pictured on p. 11) might recruit a 
party of adventurers—not to loot the caverns 
(though the PCs may take the wizard’s trea- 
sure) but to defeat the wizard’s forces—and 
in so doing, save the local ecology from de- 
struction. 

Minimum Ability Scores: Wisdom 12, 
Charisma 15. 

Races Allowed: Human, half-elf (drow). 

Armor and Weapons Permitted: Leather 
armor, wooden shield; club, sickle, dart, 
spear, dagger, scimitar, sling, staff. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended—dart, 
scimitar. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required— 


— 


Druid Characters ¢ 13 


i: 


Wi 


(general) direction sense; (priest) herbalism; 
(warrior) blind-fighting. Recommended— 
(general) animal training, fishing; (priest) 
ancient history, healing. 

Spheres of Influence: All, Animal, Divina- 
tion’, Elemental (earth, water), Elemental’ (air, 
fire), Healing, Plant, Weather’. 

Granted Powers: A gray druid like Rybna 
has the following granted powers: 

e Identifies with perfect accuracy pure 
water, fungi, subterranean animals, and all 
slimes, puddings, jellies and molds (includ- 
ing monster types) at 3rd level. 

e Learns the languages of subterranean 
creatures (orcs, goblins, troglodytes, xorn, 
etc.), gaining one extra proficiency slot every 
three levels (at 3rd, 6th, etc.) for this purpose. 

* Controls fungi, jellies, molds, oozes, pud- 
dings, and slimes (nonintelligent or of animal 
Intelligence) at 7th level. The druid can use 
this power once per day to control 1 Hit Die 
of creatures per level. It affects only a 30-yard 
radius around the druid. For instance, Rybna, 
a 10th-level druid, could control two 5 HD 
slimes or one 10 HD pudding. The creatures 
receive no saving throw, but remain con- 
trolled only as long as they stay within 30 
yards of the druid. An uncontrolled creature 
reverts to its normal behavior patterns. A 
gray druid like Rybna will not send a con- 
trolled monster to its death unless by doing 
so she can protect the subterranean ecology. 
This power does not animate a stationary 
entity or grant it any new abilities. (Rybna 
could command a shrieker to shriek or be 
silent or move, but not to sing or speak.) Con- 
trol lasts for one turn per level of the druid, 

e Shapechanges into a normal reptile, a 
normal mammal, or a nonpoisonous giant 
spider at 7th level; the druid can assume each 
form once per day. The druid can change only 
into a reptile or mammal that dwells under- 
ground, such as a mole, badger, tunnel snake, 
etc. The ability is otherwise identical to dru- 
idic shapechanging in the PH. 


—— aaa 


14 * Chapter One 


Special Limitation: Gray druid Animal 
sphere spells affect only animals native to 
subterranean environments. So, Rybna could 
cast animal friendship on a rat, a huge spider, 
or a badger, but not on a wolf or horse. 

A gray druid has a —2 penalty on saving 
throws against spells creating bright light, 
such as continual light. 

Due to long enmity, dwarves react to gray 
druids at -2. (The reverse is also true.) 

Holy Symbol and Grove: Gray druids use 
a puffball mushroom grown and harvested in 
complete darkness as their holy symbol. They 
usually take part of an underground cavern— 
a thriving subterranean ecosystem—for a 
grove. 


Forest Druid 


The forest druid—the druid described in 
the PH—serves as the guardian of both the 
great forests of the wilderness and the smaller 
woodlands and orchards that lie next to culti- 
vated fields in flat lands, rolling plains, or 
wooded hills. Forest druids hold trees (espe- 
cially ash and oak) sacred and never destroy 
woodlands or crops, no matter what the situ- 
ation (although a druid could act to change 
the nature of a wood enchanted with evil, for 
instance, without destroying it). The forest 
druid acts as a living bridge between the wil- 
derness and those humans—such as hunters, 
loggers and trappers—who dwell on its bor- 
ders. 

As the player, you can choose to role-play 
one of two kinds of forest druids: one from a 
temperate deciduous forest, or one from a 
subarctic conifer forest. The former type is 
better known and more numerous on most 
worlds; though conifer forests grow to vast 
sizes, they exist within often hostile environ- 
ments and lack the great variety in wildlife of 
warmer forests. 

For quick reference, the information on the 
temperate-forest druid branch is repeated 


here, along with suggested proficiencies. 
Unless otherwise noted, information applies 
to both temperate- and cold-forest druids. 

Minimum Ability Scores: Wisdom 12, 
Charisma 15. 

Races Allowed: Human, half-elf. Optional 
—alaghi (11), centaur (14), saurial (9), swan- 
may (12). (Only humans, half-elves, alaghi, 
and centaurs can become cold-forest druids.) 

Armor and Weapons Permitted: Leather 
armor, wooden shield; club, sickle, dart, 
spear, dagger, scimitar, scythe, sling, staff. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended—any 
two of the above weapons. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
(general) animal training; (priest) healing, 
herbalism; (warrior) animal lore, survival 
(forest), tracking. 

Spheres of Influence: All, Animal, Divina- 
tion’, Elemental, Healing, Plant, Weather. 

Granted Powers: The forest druid has the 


following granted powers: 

e Receives a +2 bonus to all saving throws 
vs. fire or electrical attacks, 

e Learns the languages of woodland crea- 
tures (centaurs, dryads, elves, satyrs, gnomes, 
dragons, giants, lizard men, manticores, nix- 
ies, pixies, sprites, treants, etc.), gaining one 
extra proficiency slot for this purpose every 
three levels (at 3rd, 6th, etc.). (The languages 
of cold-forest druids include those of the 
giant lynx, giant owl, pine treants, and cold- 
dwelling groups of centaurs, elves, gnolls, 
gnomes, etc.) 

e Identifies plants, animals, and pure water 
with perfect accuracy at 3rd level. 

e Passes through overgrown areas at 3rd 
level without leaving a trail and at full move- 
ment rate. For instance, the temperate-forest 
druid Garon (pictured above) can move with 
ease through dense thorn bushes, briar 
patches, pine trees, tangled jungle vines, and 


———— EEE a 


Druid Characters ¢ 15 


Ge: 


Wh 


so on. He also is immune to poison ivy, poi- 
son oak, and similar irritating plants. When 
using this power, Garon must be on foot, not 
riding an animal. 

e Has immunity to charm spells cast by 
woodland creatures such as dryads at 7th 
level. The druid’s immunity does not extend 
to charm spells cast by creatures who merely 
happen to be living in or passing through a 
forest, such as a woods-dwelling human 
mage or vampire. 

e Shapechanges into a normal, real-world 
reptile, bird, or mammal up to three times per 
day at 7th level, exactly as described in the 
PH. Each animal form (reptile, bird, or mam- 
mal) can be used only once per day. The druid 
cannot assume giant forms, 

Special Limitation: See “Holy Symbol and 
Grove.” 

Holy Symbol and Grove: The grove of a 
forest druid is just that: a stand of hallowed 
trees. Druids of this branch—such as Gatha, a 
cold-forest druid (illustrated on p. 15)—use 
mistletoe as a holy symbol. For full effective- 
ness, Gatha must gather the mistletoe by the 
light of the full moon using a golden or silver 
sickle specially made for this task. If a spell 
requires a holy symbol and Gatha only has 
mistletoe harvested by other means, halve the 
damage and area of effect (if any) and add +2 
to the target’s saving throw (if applicable). 


Jungle Druid 


The protectors of tropical rain forests, jungle 
druids usually grow up in tribes, as jungle 
pests, vegetation, and climate discourage 
farming, herding, and city-building. Because 
most tribal members live closely attuned to 
the natural world, jungle druids have a greater 
likelihood of involving themselves directly in 
the affairs of humans than other druids might. 
In fact, a jungle druid like Sima (pictured on 
p. 15) usually holds a position of power and 
respect, wielding great political authority. 


16 « Chapter One 


However, jungle druids do not associate 
themselves with a particular tribe or people, 
as do most tribal priests or witch doctors. 
Instead, they adopt a neutral position, medi- 
ating intertribal feuds and handling relations 
between human tribes and jungle-dwelling 
humanoids, demihumans, or intelligent mon- 
sters. In some cases, a great druid becomes a 
virtual “king of the jungle,” wielding power 
over a coalition of several tribes, nonhumans, 
and animals. 

Minimum Ability Scores: Wisdom 12, 
Charisma 15. 

Races Allowed: Human. Optional—saurial 
(9). 

Armor and Weapons Permitted: No armor, 
wooden shield; blowgun, club, dart, knife, 
spear, staff. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
blowgun, knife. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required— 
(priest) healing, herbalism. Recommended 
(general) animal taming, weather sense; 
(priest) local history; (warrior) survival 
(jungle), tracking. 

Spheres of Influence: All, Animal, Divina- 
tion’, Elemental, Healing, Plant, Weather. 

Granted Powers: The jungle druid has the 
following granted powers: 

e Passes through overgrown areas, such as 
thick jungle, without leaving a trail and at full 
movement rate. 

e Learns the languages of tropical forest 
and swamp creatures (couatl, lizard men, 
naga, tasloi, yuan-ti, etc.), gaining one extra 
proficiency slot for this purpose every three 
levels (at 3rd, 6th, etc.). 

Identifies plants, animals, and pure water 
with perfect accuracy at 3rd level. 

¢ Shapechanges into a normal (not giant) 
reptile, bird, or mammal up to three times per 
day at 7th level. The druid can use each ani- 
mal form (reptile, bird, or mammal) only once 
per day and can choose from only those ani- 
mals that make their normal habitat within 


jungles or tropical swamps. 

Special Limitation: None. 

Holy Symbol and Grove: The jungle druid 
uses a tom-tom (jungle drum) as a holy sym- 
bol. Constructing a replacement takes two 
weeks. The grove is usually a circle of trees, 
often near a waterfall. 


Mountain Druid 


The mountain druid dwells in areas of 
rugged hills, alpine forests, and peaks and 
rocks above the tree line. Members of this 
branch, such as Dansil (illustrated on p. 19), 
wield over their environments a power 
gained from the element of earth and espe- 
cially from stone. They also draw power from 
the weather, especially storms and clouds. 
Dansil and his fellows protect mountains and 
alpine flora and fauna from those who would 
exploit them. This role frequently brings them 
into conflict with miners, especially dwarves. 
Mountain druids often ally themselves with 
storm and stone giants, which further angers 
dwarves. 

Minimum Ability Scores: Strength 9, Wis- 
dom 12, Charisma 15, 

Races Allowed: Human, half-elf. 

Armor and Weapons Permitted: Leather 
armor, wooden shield; club, sickle, dart, 
spear, dagger, scimitar, sling, staff. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
club, sling, spear. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required— 
(warrior) mountaineering, survival (moun- 
tain). Recommended—(general) animal train- 
ing; (priest) healing, herbalism; (warrior) ani- 
mal lore. 

Spheres of Influence: All, Animal, Divina- 
tion’, Elemental (earth, air), Elemental (fire, 
water) Healing, Plant, Weather. 

Granted Powers: The mountain druid has 
the following granted powers: 

e Receives a +4 bonus to all saving throws 
vs. electrical attacks and to mountaineering 


J 


či PM 


proficiency checks. 

e Gains a modifier of +3 to experience level 
when determining the effects of a spell from 
the Elemental (earth or air) or Weather spheres 
cast while in the mountains. 

For instance, say Dansil, a 5th-level moun- 
tain druid, cast the Weather spell obscurement 
while in his mountain environs. That spell, 
which has effects normally lasting 20 rounds 
(four rounds per level), has an adjusted dura- 
tion of 32 rounds, as though Dansil were 8th 
level. Modify its normal area of effect of 50 
feet x 50 feet (10 feet x 10 feet per level) to 80 
feet x 80 feet. 

e Senses avalanches, volcanic eruptions, 
and rockfalls one turn before they happen 
when the player rolls 1 to 5 on 1d6. This abil- 
ity also enables the druid to detect deadfall 
traps and falling blocks on a roll of 1 to 3 on 
dé. 

e Learns the languages of mountain- 
dwelling sentient creatures (such as dwarves, 
red dragons, stone or storm giants, etc.), gain- 
ing one extra proficiency slot for this purpose 
every three levels (at 3rd, 6th, etc.). 

e Identifies plants, animals, and pure water 
with perfect accuracy at 3rd level. 

e Shapechanges into a normal, real-world 
reptile, bird, or mammal up to three times per 
day at 7th level, exactly as described in the 
PH. Each animal form (reptile, bird, or mam- 
mal, excluding giant forms) can be used only 
once per day. 

Special Limitation: None. 

Holy Symbol and Grove: The mountain 
druid uses an eagle feather as a holy symbol. 
The grove of a druid (such as Dansil) usually 
lies in the higher elevations, often a glade 
near a beautiful waterfall on a slope or an 
ancient circle of standing stones on a peak. 


Plains Druid 


The plains druid lives on open grasslands 
with few or no trees: temperate prairies and 


———— Ee 


Druid Characters © 17 


pampas, hot veldts and savannas, cool steppes, 
and the like. Yalla is such a druid. (See illus- 
tration next page.) She often finds herself in 
the company of nomadic hunters and herders. 
Her powers and interests resemble those of a 
forest druid, but she has a closer interest in 
the weather and the health of great herds 
roaming her lands than in trees and crops. 
Second only to the forest branch, plains 
druids remain among the most common and 
best known of all druids. 

Minimum Ability Scores: Wisdom 12, 
Charisma 15. 

Races Allowed: Human, half-elf. Optional 
—centaur (14), 

Armor and Weapons Permitted: Leather 
armor, wooden shield; club, sickle, dart, 
spear, dagger, scimitar, scythe, sling, staff. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
club, sling, spear. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required— 
(general) riding (land-based), weather sense; 
(warrior) animal lore, tracking. Recommended 
—(general) animal handling, animal training; 
(priest) healing; (warrior) endurance, hunt- 
ing, survival (plains/steppes). 

Spheres of Influence: All, Animal, Divina- 
tion’, Elemental (air, earth, fire), Elemental’ 
(water), Healing, Plant, Weather. 

Granted Powers: Yalla, a typical plains 
druid, possesses these granted powers: 

* Receives a +2 bonus to all saving throws 
vs. fire and electrical attacks (due to this 
branch’s need to fight such natural dangers as 
prairie fires, lightning strikes, etc.). 

ə Has a +4 bonus to any animal handling, 
animal lore, or animal training proficiency 
checks concerning plains-dwelling herd 
beasts or riding animals. 

% Learns the languages of plains-dwelling 
sentient creatures (such as centaurs), gaining 
an extra proficiency slot for this purpose 
every three levels (at 3rd, 6th, etc.). 

* Identifies plants, animals, and pure water 
with perfect accuracy at 3rd level. 


rr 


18 ~ Chapter One 


e Speaks with any land animals that humans 
can ride, as well as plains-dwelling herd ani- 
mals, at 3rd level as though she had cast a 
speak with animals spell. 

e Shapechanges into a normal, real-world 
reptile, bird, or mammal common to the 
plains up to three times per day at 7th level, 
exactly as described in the PH. Yalla can use 
each animal form (reptile, bird, and mammal) 
only once per day and cannot assume giant 
forms. 

Special Limitation: None. 

Holy Symbol and Grove: Plains druids 
typically wear their holy symbol: a diadem or 
arm band woven from prairie grass under a 
full moon. They often choose as their grove a 
circle of standing stones on the open grass. 


Swamp Druid 


The swamp druid’s role centers around 
guarding marshes, fens, bogs, wetlands, and 
swamps, as well as the abundant plant and 
animal life within them. Willoo, an average 
swamp druid (pictured next page), resembles 
a normal forest druid, but his particular habi- 
tat makes him less socially acceptable. He 
opposes anyone who would drain his swamp 
in the name of “progress,” even if such land 
were needed for farming or urban construc- 
tion. Swamp druids often live as hermits; the 
more sociable among them sometimes serve 
as priests for outlaws hiding in the swamps 
or for lizard men who lack their own sha- 
mans. 

Minimum Ability Scores: Wisdom 12, 
Charisma 12. 

Races Allowed: Human. Optional—saurial 
(9). 

Armor and Weapons Permitted: Leather 
armor, wooden shield; club, dagger, dart, 
khopesh, scimitar, scythe, sickle, sling, spear, 
staff. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended 
two of the above. 


any 


\ y 
= th 


Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required— 
(general) swimming; (priest) herbalism; (war- 
rior) survival (swamp). Recommended— (gen- 
eral) seamanship (for small boats), weather 
sense; (priest) healing, local history; (warrior) 
animal lore. 

Spheres of Influence: All, Animal, Divina- 
tion’, Elemental (earth, water), Elemental’ (air, 
fire), Healing, Plant, Weather. 

Granted Powers: A swamp druid has the 
following granted powers: 

e Has an immunity to insect-transmitted 
diseases common to swamps, such as malaria, 
and a +2 bonus on saving throws vs. any 
other diseases. 

e Receives a +1 reaction adjustment from 
normal animals that live in swamps (such as 
crocodiles) and from monsters whose habitat 
is a swamp or marsh—for instance, black 
dragons, bullywugs, and lizard men. 


e Learns the languages of intelligent 
humanoids and monsters that inhabit the 
swamp (black dragons, bullywugs, lizard 
men, shambling mounds, will o’ wisps, etc.), 
gaining one extra proficiency slot for this pur- 
pose every three levels (at 3rd, 6th, etc.). 
(Note that to “speak” with a will o’ wisp, a 
swamp druid needs a light source, such as a 
hooded lantern, to signal with.) 

e Identifies plants, animals, and pure water 
with perfect accuracy at 3rd level. 

e Passes through overgrown areas and mud 
at the full movement rate without leaving a 
trail at 3rd level. The swamp druid can use this 
power to cross quicksand without sinking. 

e Uses the animal friendship spell (which 
usually affects only normal or giant animals) 
at 5th level to influence semi-intelligent 
swamp-dwelling monsters or those of animal 
Intelligence. The effects on such monsters, 


LLL 


Druid Characters * 19 


Wi 


including catoblepas, hydra, lernaean hydra, 
and pyrohydra, remain those of animal friend- 
ship. The druid has to want to befriend the 
monster, not use it as sword-fodder. 

e Shapechanges into a normal reptile, bird, 
or mammal up to three times per day at 7th 
level. The druid can assume only the form of 
real-world creatures that live in swamps or 
wetlands (crocodile, frog, marsh bird, snake, 
etc.). The druid can adopt each animal form 
(reptile, bird, or mammal) once per day. 

è Casts an insect plague (as the spell) once 
per day at 7th level. This power works only 
when the druid is within the boundaries of a 
swamp or marsh, 

Special Limitation: Willoo’s clothes, like 
those of most swamp druids, frequently look 
caked with mud and often drip with swamp 
water. He always has a faint odor of the 
swamp about him. His lack of cleanliness 
gives him a -1 penalty to reaction adjustment 
from most people and a -3 penalty regarding 
upper-class individuals, such as gentry or 
nobles. 

Holy Symbol and Grove: The grove usu- 
ally lies deep within a marsh or swamp—a 
stand of beautiful mangroves, weeping wil- 
lows, swamp oak, or the like. Many groves 
are actually islands, sometimes guarded by 
natural traps such as quicksand. A swamp 
druid uses as a holy symbol a vial of water 
from a sacred swamp grove. 


Multi- and Dual-Class Druids 


This section elaborates on the options for 
players who wish to role-play multi- or dual- 
class druids, The choices and descriptions are 
culled from a variety of sources, including the 
PH and DMG. 


Multi-Class Druids 


Only half-elves can be multi-class druids. 
Multi-class druids must abide by the weap- 


20 e Chapter One 


on, shield, and armor besten of their 
branches. The PH (pgs. 22, 44) mentions the 
half-elf’s options of druid/fighter, druid/ 
ranger, druid/mage, and druid/fighter/ 
mage. (Some earlier printings incorrectly cite 
only the druid/fighter combination on 
p- 44.) 

Druid/Fighter. The core AD&D rules per- 
mit the druid/ fighter. 

Druid/Ranger. The core AD&D rules per- 
mit the druid/ranger. The Complete Ranger's 
Handbook, p. 79, gives guidelines for playing 
such characters: A Nature deity of good 
alignment must exist whose specialty priests 
are all druids. This priesthood must ally with 
a group of rangers. Any half-elf druid / ranger 
must obey the level limits for demihumans 
(DMG, p. 15), making it unlikely for the char- 
acter to compete for high levels of druidic 
power. The druid/ranger’s multiple interests 
antagonize conservative druids, and the 
character usually suffers from divided loyal- 
ties. (Create a similar character with fewer 
problems by giving a druid/fighter the 
Avenger or Beastfriend kit, described in the 
next chapter.) 

Druid/Mage and Druid/Fighter/Mage. The 
core AD&D rules permit the druid /mage and 
druid/fighter/mage. While these combina- 
tions exist, they remain rare and require the 
DM’s permission. They cannot wear armor or 
use shields, and must limit their weapons to 
those permitted to druids. 


Dual-Class Druids 


All normal rules for dual-class characters 
apply to druids. The druid’s restriction to 
neutral alignment limits the options to bard / 
druid, fighter/druid, wizard/druid, and 
thief /druid. Some druids prefer to see the 
upper ranks of the Order filled by “pure” 
druids—those who have devoted their lives 
solely to the Order. Dual-class characters 
sometimes face prejudice from other druids. 


Fighter/druids. Often acting as wandering 
guardians of Nature and country folk (much 
like neutral rangers), fighter /druids also can 
become hermit-knights, living away from 
society and defending a particular grove with 
their lives. Fighters who become druids often 
do so because they seek spiritual growth, 
because they have grown disgusted with the 
world of man, or occasionally as penance for 
a particular misdeed. 

Druids who become fighters, on the other 
hand, want to take a more direct approach to 
defending the wilderness; others seek to 
attune themselves to Nature by mastering 
their own bodies using eastern-style fighting 
arts, often becoming rather enigmatic Zenlike 
warrior-mystics. 

Wizard/druids. Looked upon with deep 
suspicion by most other druids, wizard / 
druids generally find themselves stereotyped 
as untrustworthy or scheming. Conservative 
elements within the druidic order often at- 
tempt to block wizard/druids from reaching 
12th level. If they fail, they deliberately en- 
courage rising druids to challenge the dual- 
class character to a duel in preference to other 
targets. 

Wizards usually become druids for philo- 
sophical reasons: either a fear that unre- 
strained use of magical or divine forces threat- 
ens the cosmic balance, or a desire to learn the 
druidic arts to better understand the work- 
ings of Nature. Druids who study wizardry 
most often see this magic as another part of 
Nature to study and master. 

Thief/druids. Such combinations appear 
rarely, since the city serves as the optimum 
home base for the thief. As with wizard/ 
druids, people tend to distrust thief/druids. 
A druid who becomes a thief usually does so 
after becoming disillusioned with the druidic 
order. A thief becomes a druid usually as the 
result of highly unusual circumstances—an 
outlaw flees to the wilderness to escape pur- 
suit only to befriend a local druid, come to 


J 


vi 


love Nature, and decide to adopt a new way 
of life. 

High-level Dual-Class Druids. A dual- 
class character who achieved a high level as a 
fighter or wizard before becoming a druid 
has an edge in the challenge a druid faces to 
advance beyond 11th level. For fairness, the 
Order generally bans such player characters 
from initiating challenges; they can gain 
experience levels above 11th only to fill a 
vacancy. 

DMs with a taste for political intrigue may 
permit an exception if the character receives 
special dispensation from the druidic order. 
This means a dual-class druid must have a 
sponsor: in theory, a higher-level druid who 
attests to the character's fairness and commit- 
ment to the Order. In practice, the sponsor is 
often a druid who wants a dangerous rival 
removed and believes the dual-class charac- 
ter has a good chance of doing so! In the case 
of wizard/ druids, however, the Order often 
(but not always) forbids wizard spells during 
the challenge. 

A peculiar situation can occur if a character 
has achieved 12th to 15th level as a druid, 
then adopts another class. In effect, such char- 
acters have “dropped out” of the Order. Al- 
though inactive as druids, they retain their 
former Hit Dice and hit points. When they 
wish to use their druidic powers again (after 
achieving one level more in the new class 
than their druid level), they must challenge 
an incumbent for the high-level druidic posi- 
tion they once held. 

A dual-class character who loses the chal- 
lenge must drop a level, as usual—but then 
may face another challenge and another, until 
the player character eventually wins a posi- 
tion or falls to 11th level. As a result of this 
danger, dual-class player characters usually 
prefer to switch classes before reaching 12th 
level or after exceeding 15th level. 


—— 


Druid Characters * 21 


Agriculture: Expanded Rules 


The DM may use this expansion of the agri- 
culture proficiency when druid characters 
assist a small village facing tough times or if a 
PC takes up farming. These rules can figure 
the prosperity of an entire village if the DM 
groups area farms together and uses the pro- 
ficiency rating of the village leader or druid 
with Tables 1 and 2. Before applying the fol- 
lowing rules, the DM must decide how many 
people the farm in question is designed to 
support. 

A medieval farm needs a manager with the 
agriculture proficiency. At optimum level, a 
farm has one worker per every two people it 
supports. A farm with more workers may 
produce a slight surplus; if it has fewer work- 
ers, it will yield less, since the crew would 
have more chores than hands. Children be- 
tween ages 7 and 11 count as half a worker 


NNN Nn SSS 


22 * Chapter One 


each, and those 12 and older each count as 
another full worker. 


How Did the Farm Perform? 


To quickly determine the success of a farm 
(or garden or village) for the year, the DM 
looks at the number of people it can support. 
For instance, a family farm might produce 
enough to support six people. If the family 
has five members, the farm shows a profit. 
With six, the farm merely scrapes by. A family 
of seven is starting to get hungry. 


Figuring Farm Profitability 


DMs wanting more precise details about a 
farm’s performance can follow these steps: 

1, Determine Proficiency Base. Every year 
the DM rolls 1d6 and adds the result to the 
farmer's Intelligence score. Then, the DM 
locates the farmer’s adjusted agriculture pro- 
ficiency rating (base score) on Table 1. 


TABLE 1: Farm Rating 


Base Score Farm Profitability 
1-5 Disastrous year 
6-10 Poor yield 

11-16 Average harvest 
17andup Bumper crop 


2. Apply the Worker Modifier. The num- 
ber of farm workers modifies the base profi- 
ciency score. For each 10% by which the farm 
crew falls below its optimum number of 
workers, the DM applies a —1 penalty to the 
base score in Table 1. If the farm has 20% 
more workers than optimum, the DM adds a 
+1 bonus to the base score in Table 1. (Having 
more workers gives no extra bonus.) 

3. Figure the Random Events Modifier. As 
any farmer would tell you, what makes the 
farming life interesting is Nature’s eternal 
cussedness: random events. The DM should 


roll on Table 2 to see what’s in store for the 
farm, then apply the random events modifier 
to the adjusted base score. 


TABLE 2: Farm Random Events 


d20 Event Check Modifier 
1 Ruinous weather —6 
2-3 Bad weather —4 
44 Animal! disease —2 
7-8 Building damaged -2 
9 Predators -1 
10 Poachers or bandits -1 
11-14 Nobad news 0 
15-17 Used good seed +1 
18-19 Good weather +2 
20 Special DM 


Note that often the actions of the farmers (or 
PCs helping them) and available priestly or 
druidic spells can reduce the penalty from 
random events. See the descriptions below: 

e Ruinous weather may include flooding 
or a long drought. A successful weather sense 
proficiency check by the farmer halves the 
penalty. (The farmer had advance warning 
and prepared for the weather.) If the farmer 
knows a druid to use the control weather spell, 
the DM can negate the penalty. 

e Bad weather might mean an early frost, a 
slight drought, or excessive rain. The weather 
sense proficiency and control weather work as 
in “ruinous weather,” above. 

e A disease breaks out among the farm's 
domestic creatures. A successful healing pro- 
ficiency check (one try) by the farmer halves 
the penalty; the cure disease spell negates this 
penalty. 

e Building damage may result from a se- 
vere storm, fire, or other disaster. The penalty 
applies only if the farmer cannot afford to fix 
things, and continues to apply every year 
until repairs are made. Paying 10 gp for every 
person the farm supports “repairs” each 
penalty point. 


thy 


è Predators, poachers, or bandits repeat- 
edly steal food or animals. If PCs negotiate 
with, drive off, or destroy the menace(s), the 
penalty does not apply. 

è A special roll means something unusual 
occurs. Perhaps a wizard war or a dragon 
devastates the farm—apply -10 to all checks 
this year! If a god's avatar stops by and 
blesses the crops, apply +5 to farm rolls. 

Note: A plant growth spell can add 20% to 
50% to a farm’s annual yield (PH, p. 212). 

4. Find the Farm’s Profitability. After 
applying the worker and random events 
modifiers to the base proficiency score, the 
DM determines profitability using Table 1. A 
disastrous year means the farm produces 50% 
less than it should. A poor harvest yields 20% 
less than normal. An average year means the 
farm produces at capacity. Finally, a bumper 
crop comes to 20% above normal yield. (Nor- 
mal yield is the amount required to feed those 
the farm supports.) 


The Harvest’s Cash Value 


DMs also can measure farm productivity in 
cash terms. The value of the harvest equals 
the number of people the farm can support 
times 36 gp (the minimum annual cost of liv- 
ing for a person in squalid conditions—DMG, 
p. 34). The DM subtracts the yearly cost of liv- 
ing of the farmer and workers from the har- 
vest value, leaving the farm’s profit. With this 
information, the DM can see if any families 
are starving and how much aid would get 
them back on their feet. 

Determining a farm's profitability can pro- 
vide role-playing opportunities for druids in 
a party. The guidelines of many branches and 
kits require druids to offer aid to farms and 
villages in need. In the course of helping, the 
druid can stumble on a number of adventure 
hooks. DMs can even design whole cam- 
paigns around a party’s effort to get a farm- 
ing village back on its feet. 


—— aaa 


Druid Characters è 23 


CHAPTER 


Druid Kits 


A kit is a collection of proficiencies, restric- 
tions, hindrances, and benefits intended to 
make a druid more colorful. A kit helps you, 
the player, create a detailed personality and 
background for your PC, which makes the 
character fit easily into the DM’s campaign. 


Using Kits 


A druid kit works with the basic PH druid 
or with any of the branches described in the 
previous chapter. Thus, a desert druid could 
be a Savage (coming from a primitive desert 
tribe), a Wanderer (traveling the desert 
wastes), a Guardian (protecting a certain 
oasis), or some other kit. 


Branch and Kit 


When building your druid character, 
choose the branch first, as it has specific abil- 
ity score requirements. After that, pick from 
any of the applicable kits. However, make 
sure you have enough proficiency slots to 
take the weapon and nonweapon proficien- 
cies required by both the branch and the kit— 
although in many cases branch/kit profi- 
ciency requirements overlap, 


DM Restrictions 


Prior to letting players select kits, the DM 
should examine each kit and decide whether 
it fits the overall campaign. The DM might 
want to restrict some kits to NPCs or prohibit 
others altogether. 

The DM also may wish to make changes or 
add material to some kits, to better match the 
conditions of a particular campaign. Take the 
Savage druid, for instance. If the campaign 
already features a primitive tribe of, say, pearl 
divers, the DM might adjust the Savage kit to 
fit established details of that tribe’s cultural 
background—for instance, the DM might make 
swimming a required or bonus proficiency. 


— 


24 + Chapter Two 


Reaction Bonuses and Penalties 


Druid kits occasionally receive reaction 
bonuses or penalties as part of their special 
benefits and hindrances. A reaction adjust- 
ment due to either the druid kit’s require- 
ments or an extreme Charisma score (PH, 
p. 18) is expressed as a bonus (+1, +2, etc.) or 
a penalty (-1, -2, etc.). 

When rolling 2d10 for encounter reactions 
(Table 59, DMG, p. 103), the DM must subtract 
the bonus or add the penalty—not the other 
way around. For instance, the druid Snap- 
dragon has a combined +7 reaction adjust- 
ment bonus for her high Charisma and her 
druid kit. The DM then subtracts 7 from the 
2d10 encounter reaction roll to reflect the 
bonus, due to the way Table 59 in the DMG is 
designed. 


Kits and the Character Record Sheet 


To record a druid kit on your character 
record sheet (pgs. 125-127), take the follow- 
ing steps: 

e Add the name of the druid kit following 
the druid’s branch. For instance, a druid with 
the Hivemaster kit and the plains druid 
branch would be written as: plains druid 
(Hivemaster). 

e When recording the character's proficien- 
cies, put an asterisk next to those the charac- 
ter received free through the druid kit. This 
will help you and your DM remember how 
many proficiencies the character is due. 

e Where you have space (on the back of 
your character sheet or on a separate piece of 
paper), write down the kit’s special benefits, 
hindrances, and any other features you wish 
to recall quickly. You also can use the space 
provided on a copy of the druid character 
sheets. 


A Look at Druid Kits 


This section provides a short explanation of 
the structure of kit entries. The entries them- 
selves follow in alphabetical order. 


Kit Structure 


Each kit entry begins with a description 
discussing the nature of the kit and listing 
any special requirements a character needs to 
take it. (For instance, to live as a Savage 
druid, the character must have been born 
into—or adopted by—a primitive tribe.) This 
description introduces an archetype character 
designed to demonstrate general attributes of 
the kit, not to serve as a character you, the 
player, have to role-play in a campaign. A 
character of either gender can take any kit. 

The kit entries also include the following 
sections: 

Role. Role-playing suggestions are offered, 
as druids of varying kits can play widely dif- 
ferent roles in a campaign. 

Branch Restrictions. If a member of a spe- 
cific druidic branch cannot take this kit, that 
restriction is noted. 

Weapon Proficiencies. A druid with the kit 
in question should take recommended profi- 
ciencies but must take required ones. 

Secondary Skills. If your DM uses the 
rules for secondary skills, you may choose 
from Table 36 (PH, p. 53) or select one of the 
choices listed here, in addition to those skills 
appropriate to the character’s druidic branch. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies. A given druid 
kit usually requires the character to choose 
certain nonweapon proficiencies. Sometimes 
a proficiency merely is recommended—the 
character doesn’t have to take it. Often kits 
offer a bonus proficiency, which does not use 
up a proficiency slot. Druids can take both 
priest and warrior proficiencies at normal 
cost (PH, pgs. 54-55). 

Equipment. A few druid kits limit the type 


and amount of equipment the character can 
start with, acquire, or use. 

Special Benefits. This paragraph details 
additional abilities of druids with this kit. 

Special Hindrances. This section discusses 
any kit's restrictions, limitations, or disadvan- 
tages. 

Wealth Options. Usually the character 
starts with the priest’s standard 3d6x10 gp. 


Adviser 


As a druid, your character can act as (or 
work to become) counselor to a ruler— per- 
haps a local knight or a high king. Think of 
Merlin, whom older tales cast as a druid. 

An Adviser like the druid Elam (pictured 
above) tries to make himself indispensable to 
his lord. The class’s well-known neutrality 
makes a ruler perceive his advice as nonparti- 
san, while the druid’s high Charisma almost 


——— aaa 


Druid Kits * 25 


guarantees that the lord listens to his counsel. 
Elam can use his “eyes in the wilderness” 
(described in Chapter 4: Role-playing Druids) 
to provide his master with timely and vital 
information. 

At the same time, the druid subtly manipu- 
lates his master to serve his own ends. For 
example, Elam might encourage his lord to 
hunt in a beautiful forest the druid wishes to 
protect. Why? Because Elam knows the lord 
is a jealous man. Once he sees the beautiful 
forest and its fine animals, the lord will pass a 
law making the forest a royal game preserve. 
As a result, the lord’s foresters will keep 
poachers away and prevent peasants from 
cutting the trees down. The ruler and his 
courtiers will hunt there only once or twice a 
year—not enough to threaten the animals 
seriously. 

For similar reasons, a druidic Adviser like 
Elam might take over part of the education of 
the lord’s children, ostensibly to teach them 
herb lore, history, survival, and similar skills. 
Actually, he uses the opportunity to instill in 
them a respect for Nature and the neutral 
world view—and perhaps encourage them to 
become druids when they grow up. 

Role: As an Adviser, Elam is a man of sub- 
tlety and mystery. He rarely speaks unless he 
has something important to say, and he al- 
ways thinks carefully before he says it. While 
not a fixture at his lord’s court, he keeps an 
eye on things from a distance, often using ani- 
mals to observe the ruler. He tends to pop up 
when most needed or least expected, stay a 
day or a month, then vanish into the wilds. 

Always hungry for information, Elam often 
roams the land disguised as a common trav- 
eler (or, at high level, in animal form), listen- 
ing to the gossip of peasants, traders, and 
innkeepers to better serve his own interests 
and those of his lord. As a PC, he carefully 
considers the purpose and long-term ramifi- 
cations of each adventure and insists on care- 
ful preparation and information gathering 


26 * Chapter Two 


before taking action. 

Branch Restrictions: None. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
staff. 

Secondary Skills: Scribe. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus— eti- 
quette. Recommended—(general) heraldry, 
weather sense; (priest) healing, local history, 
spellcraft; (rogue, double slot) reading lips; 
(rogue, one slot, per “Special Benefits”) dis- 
guise. 

Equipment: The Adviser need not spend 
all starting money on equipment, but can 
retain any leftover coinage. 

Special Benefits: As an Adviser, Elam can 
purchase the rogue’s disguise proficiency at 
normal rather than double cost. He stays free 
at the ruler’s stronghold (no cost of living), 
and has the ear of the ruler. 

The DM should establish an NPC ruler for 
the druid to advise. Help the DM develop a 
reason why the ruler trusts the PC, beyond 
his druidic background. Perhaps Elam is a 
relative (a cousin and younger son who failed 
to inherit and so joined the druidic order), or 
the apprentice of a (recently deceased) older 
druid who used to tutor the lord. For play 
balance, the DM should place a Ist-level 
player character as only one of several coun- 
selors to a lord of a small domain—perhaps a 
knightly manor or a barony. (If you, the 
player, really want to role-play an Adviser to 
a king, make it an exiled king trying to regain 
his crown.) It’s up to the PC to increase the 
lord’s influence. 

Special Hindrances: People of the lord’s 
domain (and immediate neighbors) easily 
recognize Elam as the court druid. If the lord 
favors him or if the populace knows him to 
give good advice, many will ask him to inter- 
cede for them with the lord. In addition, he 
may become a target for his lord’s enemies or 
jealous rival courtiers. 

On the other hand, if Elam fails to please 
his master, he will find himself in disfavor at 


court: He suffers a minimum -2 reaction 
penalty from the lord and court—possibly 
from all in the region (if his bad advice led to 
a spectacular failure, like defeat on the battle- 
field). Depending on the lord’s temper, an 
Adviser who has fallen into disfavor may face 
exile or worse until he makes amends. 
Wealth Options: 3d6x10 gp. 


Avenger 


The Avenger druid has seen Nature suffer 
great wrongs. Take the case of the druid Tor- 
rens. (See illustration.) He had hoped to live 
as a Guardian or Village Druid (listed later in 
this chapter). However, during his training, 
forces defiled the area under his protection 
and slew his mentor. Maybe he feels he was 
too gentle, too weak. It doesn’t matter. He 
won't let it happen again. 

Torrens the Avenger no longer holds the 
defensive. Instead, he roams the world seek- 
ing wrongs to right and foes to fight. And 
whether his opponent is a brutal king cutting 
down an ancient forest to build a fleet of war 
galleys, or an evil vampire menacing a peace- 
ful halfling village, the Avenger acts to stop 
him. Permanently. 

Role: This druid is a grim, strong, and 
silent warrior of the wilds. Torrens has little 
time for anything but his mission, although 
he’s as patient as a spider when it serves his 
plans. A loner, he avoids love or friendship, 
fearing either could compromise his mission; 
if he associates with a party of adventurers, 
he treats them as allies, but not as friends. 

The Avenger rarely speaks more than ab- 
solutely necessary to humans and most demi- 
humans (although he may talk to animals or 
sylvan races like wood elves). He doesn’t 
bother to explain or justify his actions. The 
Avenger dislikes remaining in one place, and 
frequently moves on after finishing a particu- 
lar job. 

Branch Restrictions: None. 


X 


Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
scimitar, spear. 

Secondary Skills: Hunting, weaponsmith. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus— track- 
ing. Recommended—(general) animal training; 
(priest) herbalism; (warrior) animal lore, 
endurance, set snares, survival. 

Equipment: The druid should spend his 
initial allotment of gold pieces entirely on 
equipment, for he loses any unspent starting 
money in excess of 1 gp. 

Special Benefits: The Avenger receives an 
additional free weapon proficiency slot to use 
for any proficiency his branch allows. 

Special Hindrances: The druid’s grim and 
silent demeanor gives the character a —1 
penalty to reaction adjustment from people in 
encounters. Torrens, like all Avengers, cannot 
have henchmen, hirelings, mercenaries, or 
servants until he reaches 13th level. He can 
have any amount of treasure, but cannot own 


——— aaa 


Druid Kits è 27 


more treasure and equipment than he can 
carry on his back—any excess must go toa 
worthy cause. 

Wealth Options: 3d6x10 gp. 


Beastfriend 


A deep—perhaps instinctive— knowledge 
of the habits, actions, and behavior of animals 
comes naturally to a Beastfriend. Lasell, a 
typical Beastfriend character (pictured on the 
next page) feels quite protective of animals 
and fiercely punishes those who inflict unnec- 
essary harm upon them. She has nothing 
against people hunting for food (which, after 
all, animals also do) but considers hunting for 
sport repugnant and the use of animals in 
gladiatorial games a horrible crime. 

Role: A Beastfriend like Lasell spends most 
of her time in the company of animals. In fact, 
she lives so much of her life around animals 
that sometimes she lacks social graces among 
humans. Many Beastfriends are gruff and 
hostile, preferring the company of honest nat- 
ural creatures to deceitful humans, demihu- 
mans, and humanoids; others like people, but 
feel shy or tongue-tied around them and 
sometimes behave with poor manners. Lasell, 
like most with her kit, usually travels with 
one or more animal companions to whom she 
feels especially devoted. 

Branch Restrictions: None. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended 
staff. 

Secondary Skills: Groom, hunter. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus— animal 
lore. Recommended—(general) animal handling, 
animal training, riding (land-based), riding 
(airborne); (priest) healing. 

Equipment: The druid should spend her 
initial allotment of gold pieces entirely on 
equipment, as she loses any unspent starting 
money in excess of 1 gp. 

Special Benefits; If Lasell, as a Beastfriend, 
carefully but fearlessly approaches a tamed or 


28 ¢ Chapter Two 


untamed animal, she can try to modify the 
beast’s reaction. The druid can affect only nat- 
ural animals—that is, those found in the real 
world (bears, wolves, snakes, etc.), as well as 
giant or magically enlarged versions of nor- 
mal animals. When dealing with a nonhostile 
or domestic animal, the druid can approach 
and befriend it automatically. Wild beasts or 
animals trained to fight (like attack dogs or 
war horses) get a saving throw vs. rods to 
resist the druid at a minimum penalty of —1. 
An additional -1 penalty applies for every 
four full levels the druid has achieved: -2 at 
4th level, -3 at 8th, etc. (The druid’s power is 
not magical, though.) If the animal fails to 
save, the druid may choose to shift its reac- 
tion one category either direction on Table 56 
(DMG, p. 103). 

The Beastfriend receives a +4 bonus on ani- 
mal lore, animal training, and animal handling 
proficiency checks. If she does not have the 
actual proficiency, she can function as if she 
did, without the +4 bonus. 

If Lasell, as a Beastfriend, casts an Animal 
sphere spell on an animal, the subject saves 
against it at a -2 penalty. 

Thanks to her knowledge of animals, a 
Beastfriend can recognize a lycanthrope 
(whether in human or animal form) on a suc- 
cessful animal lore check. The Beastfriend 
notes subtle differences in the behavior of a 
lycanthrope in animal form compared to a 
normal animal; she also notices subliminal 
clues in the movement and behavior of a 
lycanthrope in human form that point to its 
animal nature. The Beastfriend may make her 
one check only after she has been in the lycan- 
thrope’s presence for a round. 

Special Hindrances: A Beastfriend does 
everything she can to help and treat a hurt 
animal or free an abused one and will kill an 
animal only to put a dying beast out of its 
misery. A Beastfriend who has come to know 
an animal may not harm it, allow others to 
hurt it, or send it suicidally into harm’s way. 


In general, the Beastfriend does not recruit 
animals specifically as bodyguards; rather, 
she accumulates friends and pets, who may 
choose to do favors for her, such as scouting 
or defending her. In return, the druid feeds 
and shelters them, heals their injuries, and 
rescues them from captivity. 

As with all Beastfriends, Lasell’s lack of 
social grace prevents her from learning the 
etiquette proficiency and gives her a —1 
penalty to encounter reactions with those of 
her own race (except another with her kit). 

Wealth Options: 3d6x8 gp. Beastfriends 
have little interest in civilized matters such as 
money, and seldom venture into towns. 


Guardian 


Some druids establish themselves as the 
guardians of a particular place—the habitat of 
an endangered species, a stand of ancient 
trees, the lair of a dryad, or a sacred grove. 
Often the druid watches over a sacred grove 
with magical powers that others try to exploit 
for selfish or evil purposes. 

The DM should decide the extent of the 
Guardian’s responsibility—usually one druid 
protects no more than a few acres of wilder- 
ness—and establish why the area needs spe- 
cial druidic attention. For instance, a moun- 
taintop might serve as the nesting place of a 
rare breed of hawks prized by nobles as hunt- 
ing falcons, forcing the druid to continually 
guard against those who want to steal the 
chicks or eggs. 

A druid with the Guardian kit may act as 
the protector of several places in a lifetime. 
Say the druidic order places Wazir, a low- 
level Guardian druid, in charge of a nonmagi- 
cal grove. If he fulfills his charge (and rises to 
at least 3rd level), the Order may grant him 
the responsibility of a magical grove, while a 
lower-level druid takes over his old position. 

In order to abandon this kit, a Guardian 
like Wazir has to find someone else (usually a 


a 


30 * Chapter Two 


druid of similar level) to take over his guardi- 
anship. He must abandon the kit involuntar- 
ily if someone destroys or irreparably dese- 
crates his grove. In this case, the Guardian 
might become a Lost Druid or devote his life 
to revenge as an Avenger. 

Role: A Guardian lives deep in the wilder- 
ness, away from humanity. Like most Guardi- 
ans, Wazir normally feels wary of strangers, 
suspecting that they come to exploit or 
threaten the site he defends. 

Some Guardians can become fiercely pro- 
tective: If Wazir were to witness the near- 
extinction of a particular species of plant or 
animal, the last few examples of which now 
live only in his grove, he could grow into an 
angry and ruthless protector. Such druids 
may strike out without warning to frighten 
off or kill intruders or even may make pacts 
with local monsters to protect the grove. 

Other Guardians are simply shy hermits 
who welcome good-intentioned visitors. Per- 
haps Wazir lives as a lonely, dedicated sen- 
tinel; he misses human contact, but his strong 
sense of duty prevents him from leaving his 
post undefended. 

Frequently, a Guardian goes years without 
seeing another human; Wazir may have as his 
only friends just the animal or nonhuman res- 
idents of his protectorate. As a result, he may 
seem eccentric or awkward relating to humans 
—even other druids, 

Branch Restrictions: None. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
staff. 

Secondary Skills: Hunter. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus—local 
history (of his guardianship). Recommended— 
(priest) herbalism, ancient history, religion; 
(warrior) animal lore, set snares. 

Equipment: The druid should spend his 
initial allotment of gold pieces entirely on 
equipment, as he loses any unspent starting 
money in excess of 1 gp. 

Special Benefits: The druid receives a +1 


bonus on saving throws and attack rolls when 
fighting to protect his guardianship. Enemies 
suffer a —2 penalty to saving throws while 
they remain in this protectorate. 

As a Guardian, Wazir receives the respect 
of other druids (+1 reaction adjustment) in his 
circle. (See Chapter 3: The Druidic Order for 
more on circles.) 

Although not all Guardians serve as 
warders of sacred or magical groves, some 
receive this responsibility. (For details on 
these special sites, see Chapter 6: Sacred 
Groves.) A low-level druid character should 
watch over a grove with no more than one 
lesser power. In addition, the DM must come 
up with a good reason why a magical grove 
falls into the hands of a low-level druid; per- 
haps the original Guardian, the PC’s mentor, 
met with an unexpected fate while still 
grooming the character to take over. 

Whenever a grove has any special abilities, 
the DM always should take care to limit the 
power they give the druid. For instance, a 
grove containing a magical pear tree with 
unique golden-hued fruit that gives the eater 
the effect of a treasure finding potion could 
unbalance a campaign. Perhaps the tree pro- 
duces only one such magical pear a year—the 
remaining fruit is normal, although excep- 
tionally succulent. When the special fruit 
ripens, the druid must turn it over to a mes- 
senger from the great druid. 

Special Hindrances: The druid needs to 
guard a site containing something others 
eventually will want. The DM should encour- 
age the player to have the character devote 
some time to defending the place, setting up 
magical or normal traps, checking with ani- 
mal spies, and so on. 

If the druid, such as Wazir, fails in his 
guardianship, he becomes seriously de- 
pressed. He suffers a—1 penalty on all attack 
rolls, saving throws, and ability and profi- 
ciency checks until he recovers from his loss. 
He also loses standing in the Order (-2 reac- 


tion penalty from other druids in the region, 
instead of the previous +1 bonus), Wazir can- 
not recover from this depression until 1d4+1 
years pass and he performs some action to 
atone for his failure. 

For instance, if a dragon destroyed the 
ancient stand of elder trees Wazir guarded, he 
must either defeat the dragon or find a way to 
restore the forest to life. 

Wealth Options: 3d6x10 gp. 


Hivemaster 


The Hivemaster druid lives to foster insec- 
toid and arachnid life wherever it exists. Most 
low-level Hivemasters, such as Cagua (pic- 
tured on the next page) work as beekeepers 
or the like. 

Role: Hivemasters appear somewhat enig- 
matic. Many attempt to instill insectoid 
virtues in their followers, such as patience, 
hard work, and close cooperation. Some 
higher-level Hivemasters even attempt to 
influence human societies to adopt a commu- 
nal pattern modeled on that of hive insects. 
Others—often styling themselves Webmas- 
ters—take on the patient, deadly personas of 
predator arachnids or insects such as dragon- 
flies or spiders, ruthlessly hunting down (or 
lying in wait to trap) the enemies of the dru- 
idic order. A Hivemaster’s grove usually cen- 
ters around the dwelling place of the creature 
for which the druid has the greatest affinity— 
a forest covered with spider webs, a field 
with beehives, etc. 

Branch Restrictions: None. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
scimitar, staff. 

Secondary Skills: Farmer, woodworker/ 
carpenter. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
(general) agriculture; (warrior) animal lore, 
endurance, set snares. 

Equipment: The druid should spend her 
initial allotment of gold pieces entirely on 


LL 


Druid Kits « 31 


\ a —— 


f = 


Ger) eg 


equipment, as she loses any unspent starting 
money in excess of 1 gp. 

Special Benefits: A Hivemaster receives a 
+4 bonus to saving throws against stings or 
bites of poisonous insects or arachnids, in- 
cluding giant versions. 

The druid also gains a +4 bonus on agricul- 
ture, animal training, and animal lore profi- 
ciency checks concerning insects or arach- 
nids, and can apply the animal training profi- 
ciency to giant insects and arachnids. 

A Hivemaster like Cagua may pass harm- 
lessly through spider webs of all sorts, includ- 
ing webs created by the web spell. When she 
casts a summon insects, giant insect, creeping 
doom, or insect plague spell, the player in- 
creases her effective level by three. 

Upon reaching 7th level, the druid gains 
the ability to shapechange into a giant insect 
or arachnid type once per day. She can take 
the form of a nonpoisonous giant ant, giant 


—— ae 


32 * Chapter Two 


centipede, giant spider, or giant wasp. The 
Hivemaster may assume this insectoid form 
instead of one of her other shapechanging 
choices Sasa mammal, or reptile). For ex- 
ample, C agua may choose to avoid the bird 
form today in favor of the insectoid form, but 
tomorrow she may decide not to shapechange 
into reptile form. The druid still can assume 
only three forms per day, just like the normal 
druidic shapechanging ability. Note: Gray 
druids with the Hivemaster kit may assume 
the insectoid form instead of any one of their 
usual shapechanging choices: mammal, rep- 
tile, or nonpoisonous giant spider. 

Special Hindrances: The Hivemaster’s ani- 
mal friendship, speak with animals, and summon 
animals spells allow her to summon or com- 
municate with only insects, giant insects, or 
arachnids. Hivemasters receive a —3 penalty 
when using animal proficiencies (animal lore, 
animal training, etc.) on creatures that are not 
insects or arachnids. 

Wealth Options: 3d6x10 gp. 


Lost Druid 


The strangest members of the druidic order, 
Lost Druids find that many other druids no 
longer consider them kin. The Lost Druids 
come from lands that have been maliciously 
destroyed—forests burned to the ground, 
swamps drained, mountains ruined by min- 
ing, and so on. Rather than try to rebuild or 
move on, a Lost Druid such as Struma (pic- 
tured next page) allows his heart to darken 
from brooding on the devastation and em- 
braces strange magic to seek revenge. 

Under extreme stress (and the DM’s discre- 
tion), a druid may renounce a particular kit 
forever and become a Lost Druid. Druids of 
2nd or higher level lose one level as a result of 
the change but suffer no other penalties. Note 
that this is an exception to the rule on aban- 
doning kits (p. 42), so the DM may wish to 
restrict it to NPCs. 


Role: Lost Druids always feel bitter. Some- 
times they go insane, their hearts filled with 
an insatiable, often impossible, desire for ven- 
geance against those who destroyed their 
land. For instance, say Struma became a Lost 
Druid when he found his forest destroyed by 
orcs. He may attempt to plot the downfall of 
the entire orcish race and the death of every 
last orc. Most Lost Druids live solitary exis- 
tences, but sometimes they group together, 
often within the sinister Shadow Circle. (See 
Chapter 3: The Druidic Order.) 

Branch Restrictions: None. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
scimitar, staff. 

Secondary Skills: Hunter, weaponsmith. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
(priest) herbalism, spellcraft; (warrior) animal 
lore, endurance, set snares, survival. 

Equipment: A Lost Druid such as Struma 
should spend his initial allotment of gold 
pieces entirely on equipment, as he loses any 
unspent starting money in excess of 1 gp. 

Special Benefits: The druid gains minor 
access to the Necromancy spell sphere. Upon 
reaching 6th level, he gains an additional 
power, the ability to animate dead animals. 
Treat this power as the priest spell animate 
dead; however, the druid may use it only once 
per day, and it affects 1 HD of normal (real- 
world) animals per level of the druid. 

Special Hindrances: The Lost Druid cast 
only the reversed versions of heal or cure spells. 

As a Lost Druid, Struma may never attain 
Grand Druid status, and thus may not pro- 
gress past it to hierophant rank. A character 
of Grand Druid or hierophant rank may not 
become a Lost Druid. 

All rangers and druids with other kits react 
to Lost Druids at a —4 penalty, usually with a 
mixture of pity and fear. (Other Lost Druids 
have only a -2 penalty to encounter reactions.) 
Most druids consider Lost Druids enemies 
and attempt to hunt, slay, or imprison them. 

Wealth Options: 3d6x10 gp. 


Natural Philosopher 


From youth, the unbridled curiosity of Nat- 
ural Philosophers has lent them a fascination 
about everything from the characteristics of 
plants and animals to the workings of natural 
forces like lightning and weather, in addition 
to the ancient history of the druidic order, 
Besides the usual ability score requirements, a 
druid needs at least Intelligence 15 for this kit. 

Role: Xenia, a typical Natural Philosopher, 
delights in the study of new plants and ani- 
mals. She thinks nothing of venturing into a 
haunted forest to observe a rare circle of toad- 
stools or visiting a dragon’s den to observe 
firsthand the miracle of a hatching. She rarely 
interferes with her subject of study, preferring 
to observe and sketch rather than bring home 
specimens. 

Natural Philosophers often undertake 
adventures out of sheer curiosity. This 


e 


Druid Kits ° 33 


becomes a good role for an NPC druid: Xenia 
(as either a doddering old sage or a brash 
young student) hires a party to accompany 
her on a dangerous scientific expedition to 
visit a living island spotted in a sahuagin- 
controlled ocean. A party also might accom- 
pany her to study the ecology of the salaman- 
der on the Elemental Plane of Fire or to check 
out a rumor that a previously extinct species 
of giant owl now lives in the woods by a 
lich’s castle, 

Branch Restrictions: Arctic and jungle 
druids cannot take this kit, as their harsh 
home terrain forces them to devote their time 
to mere survival, not scientific pursuits. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
staff. 

Secondary Skills: Hunter, navigator, scribe. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus— ancient 
history. Recommended—(general) artistic abil- 


34 * Chapter Two 


ity, languages (modern), weather sense; 
(priest) herbalism, languages (ancient), read- 
ing/ writing; (warrior) animal lore. 

Equipment: The druid should spend her 
initial allotment of gold pieces entirely on 
equipment, as she loses any unspent starting 
money in excess of 1 gp. 

Special Benefits: The Natural Philosopher 
may use weapon proficiency slots for non- 
weapon proficiencies. This allows Xenia to 
devote multiple slots to a single proficiency 
(such as animal lore, herbalism, or weather 
sense), making her an expert in zoology, 
botany, or meteorology. 

Special Hindrances: Remember to reflect 
in your role-playing the Natural Philoso- 
pher’s insatiable curiosity. For instance, Xenia 
would rather study a new monster than kill it 
or run away. She finds puzzles and riddles 
irresistible and risks even her life to find the 
answers. 

Wealth Options: 3d6x10 gp. 


Outlaw 


In a region where evil forces have tri- 
umphed and hold a position of authority, 
good people who resist have turned outlaw. 
From their exile in the wilderness, these folk 
conduct guerrilla warfare against the cruel 
victors in the fashion of Robin Hood and his 
Merry Men. Since the balance has swung so 
far to the side of evil, the druid may freely act 
as a military commander in the struggle to 
overthrow the oppressors. In some situations, 
the druidic order itself may be outlawed; then 
the Outlaw druid faces threats like wide- 
spread persecution of druid followers and 
burning of sacred groves. 

Role: Because an outlaw band often fights 
in the wilderness (ambushing enemies along 
forest roads or defending against patrols), the 
druid’s powers and skills naturally come to 
the forefront. One such Outlaw druid is 
Mackay. (See illustration on this page.) Out- 


side combat, he proves excellent at gathering 
information and using his priestly curative 
powers. Depending on the nature and align- 
ment of those in the group, you can role-play 
the Outlaw druid as just another party mem- 
ber or as the band’s spiritual (or actual) 
leader. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
scimitar, sling, staff. 

Secondary Skills: Farmer, forester, hunter, 
weaponsmith. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus—set 
snares. Recommended—(general) animal train- 
ing, brewing, rope use, singing, weather 
sense; (priest) healing, herbalism, local his- 
tory, religion; (rogue, double slot) disguise; 
(warrior) animal lore, tracking. 

Equipment: The druid should spend his 
initial allotment of gold pieces entirely on 
equipment, as he loses any unspent starting 
money in excess of 1 gp. 

Special Benefits: None. 

Special Hindrances: Local authorities are 
always hunting for Outlaws like Mackay. 
Capture means imprisonment—or worse. 

Wealth Options: 3d6x10 gp. 


Pacifist 


The Pacifist druid believes in the sanctity of 
all life, but especially that of creatures with 
animal Intelligence or higher. 

Role: The restrictions on the druid’s actions 
(below) make this a challenging role to play, 
and one that works best within a party of 
good-aligned adventurers. To give the player 
of a Pacifist druid a chance to shine, the DM 
should design adventures in which the char- 
acter can help negotiate a diplomatic settle- 
ment of a crisis between neighboring lords or 
where party members sometimes can win 
over opponents by negotiation or moral per- 
suasion. 

For example, suppose a tribe of goblins 
menaces human lands. The DM alone knows 


that the goblins actually were displaced from 
their old caverns by an evil vampire and 
would return home if someone destroyed the 
vampire. A scenario like this gives a clever 
Pacifist druid, such as Lark (above) a chance 
to talk to the goblins, discover why they 
intruded into human land, then convince the 
party to ally with them against the vampire. 

Branch Restrictions: None. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended 
staff. 

Secondary Skills: Farmer, groom. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus— heal- 
ing. Recommended—{general) brewing, cook- 
ing; (priest) herbalism, religion, spellcraft; 
(warrior) animal lore, survival. 

Equipment: A Pacifist like Lark can pur- 
chase no weapons except darts or a staff. She 
should spend her entire initial allotment of 
gold pieces on equipment, as she loses un- 
spent starting money in excess of 1 gp. 


S 


Druid Kits * 35 


Special Benefits: The Pacifist druid can use 
some or all of her weapon proficiency slots to 
buy nonweapon proficiencies. 

Pacifists such as Lark have the ability to 
speak soothing words to ease tempers and 
calm savage beasts. This power can remove 
the effects of a fear spell, calm an enraged ani- 
mal, or pacify a hostile crowd. Lark can use 
this power a number of times per day equal 
to her experience level. Using soothing words 
accomplishes one of the following: 

è Negates one fear spell (or similar monster 
ability) on a single victim; 

e Halts a single creature’s berserker rage; 
or 

8 Temporarily calms down a number of ani- 
mals, characters, or monsters (whose com- 
bined levels or Hit Dice total no more than 
twice the druid’s level). A calmed group usu- 
ally remains calm for 1d4+1 rounds, as long as 
others refrain from hostile action against them, 
their allies, or their property. During this time, 
the druid or others can attempt to escape or to 
negotiate a resolution to the situation. 

Special Hindrances: You, the player, must 
role-play this druid as a strict pacifist. A char- 
acter like Lark does not totally oppose others 
who do harm when necessary—after all, ani- 
mals kill for food. However, she never injures 
a person or animal herself. In addition, she 
encourages her companions to use the mini- 
mum required force during encounters: to ask 
foes to surrender before attacking them, let 
retreating enemies flee if she thinks they 
won't be a menace again, and so on. 

Use of herbal brews or magic that does not 
permanently harm enemies is perfectly 
appropriate. For instance, Lark can entangle 
foes, turn them into trees, use sleeping poi- 
son, etc. However, she absolutely refuses to 
let harm come to captives or innocents under 
her care; in fact, she uses her powers and 
risks her life to protect them. 

The Pacifist druid’s code against violence 
does not extend to evil undead. These crea- 


36 * Chapter Two 


tures are already dead but need help finding 
their rest; in other words, the druid will 
destroy them. 

Like all Pacifists, Lark eats only vegetarian 
meals. (You, the player, decide whether your 
Pacifist character eats fish.) She won't prevent 
others from eating meat, but usually 
expresses disapproval. 

High-level Pacifists find themselves disad- 
vantaged when attempting to advance a 
level, as winning a druidic challenge usually 
requires violent behavior. However, if Lark 
wanted to even up her chances in the chal- 
lenge, she either could get her opponent to 
agree to a nonviolent contest, or she could 
win using harmless tricks or magic. 

Finally, the player cannot roll or choose the 
following secondary skills: armorer, hunter, 
trapper/furrier, or weaponsmith. 

Wealth Options: 3d6x10 gp. 


Savage 


This druid lives in primitive Stone Age 
tribe, usually in a rain forest. Haro, a typical 
Savage druid (pictured on the next page), dif- 
fers from a savage priest, shaman, or witch 
doctor in that he belongs to the worldwide 
druidic order and, of course, to a druidic 
branch. Some Savage druids work and live 
among primitive tribes as missionaries from 
more civilized cultures. 

Role: Rather than associate with a particu- 
lar tribe—as do most shamans or witch doc- 
tors—the Savage druid adopts a neutral posi- 
tion, mediating intertribal feuds and handling 
relations between human tribes and neigh- 
boring humanoids, demihumans, or intelli- 
gent monsters. Most Savages live as hermits 
in the wild, although if Haro gains high rank, 
he could control a coalition of tribespeople, 
nonhumans, and animals. 

If Haro joins a party in more civilized lands, 
he occupies the role of outsider and observer. 
The Savage character should act puzzled by 


some aspects of more advanced civilization, 
impressed, amused, or disgusted by others. 
The Savage druid’s reaction to big cities is 
unlikely to be favorable! 

Branch Restrictions: None. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Savage druids are 
restricted to a choice of blowgun, club, dag- 
ger, harpoon, knife, spear, or staff. After 
adventuring in civilized lands (advancing at 
least one level doing so), they can learn other 
weapon proficiencies. 

Secondary Skills: Hunter. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus—fire- 
building, survival. Recommended—(general) 
direction sense, fishing, swimming, weather 
sense; (priest) healing, herbalism, local his- 
tory, musical instrument; (warrior) animal 
lore, endurance, mountaineering, running, set 
snares, tracking. 

Equipment: The Savage druid can buy no 
armor (though he may acquire a wooden 
shield) and can buy only those weapons 
listed above under “Weapon Proficiencies.” 
He should spend his entire initial allotment of 
gold pieces on equipment, as he loses any 
unspent starting money in excess of 1 gp. 

Special Benefits: The Savage druid’s body 
is covered with ceremonial scars and tattoos. 
These eliminate the need to use the holy sym- 
bol of Haro’s branch when casting spells—his 
tattoos and other markings are as effective as 
holy symbols other druids use. 

Special Hindrances: Haro, like most Sav- 
age druids, has an unusual and imposing 
appearance. While he could alter his primi- 
tive dress easily, his strange accent, weath- 
ered appearance, tattoos, and scars mark him 
as a foreigner when he travels in civilized 
lands. These alien features give him a -2 reac- 
tion penalty among civilized NPCs; players 
can decide how their PCs react. 

Wealth Options: 3d6x5 gp. Savage druids 
begin adventuring unfamiliar with money; all 
their starting wealth is actually an equivalent 
value in goods. 


Shapeshifter 


Shapeshifter druids master their shape- 
changing powers at a lower experience level 
than other druids. This ability takes a special 
gift (perhaps a taint of lycanthropic or silver 
dragon blood in the druid’s family tree) and 
intense training. But, those who persevere, 
such as Rimi (pictured on the next page) gain 
unusual metamorphic powers. 

Role: Shapeshifters have mercurial person- 
alities. Although by no means chaotic, they 
are quick to anger, and easily moved to joy or 
tears. Rimi, like many Shapeshifter druids, 
makes an excellent spy or messenger and 
stands a good chance of being picked as a ser- 
vant to a high-level druid, an archdruid, or a 
great druid. 

Branch Restrictions: Only forest, plains, 
and mountain druids can take this kit, as 


———— a, 


Druid Kits © 37 


Sf: 


> ; ee 
z 


at 


druids in other branches have limits on their 
shapechanging powers. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
staff. 

Secondary Skills: Hunter, groom. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus— animal 
lore. Recommended—(priest) spellcraft; (war- 
rior) endurance, survival, tracking. 

Equipment: The druid should spend her 
initial allotment of gold pieces entirely on 
equipment, as she loses any unspent starting 
money in excess of 1 gp. 

Special Benefits: As a Shapeshifter, Rimi 
gains her branch’s shapechanging power at Ist 
level rather than at 7th level. However, until 
she reaches 7th level, the druid can assume 
only the form of natural creatures whose Hit 
Dice total no greater than half her level. (A 1st- 
level Shapeshifter only assumes the form of a 
creature with 4 HD or less.) Rimi can shape- 


a 


38 © Chapter Two 


change twice as often as her branch normally 
allows, which doubles the number of changes 
she can make daily. (Forest Shapeshifters, then, 
can change to animal, reptile, and bird form, 
each twice per day.) However, using this 
power more than the normal three times per 
day may have dangerous consequences. (See 
“Special Hindrances.”) 

At 7th level, Rimi the Shapeshifter can 
transform a portion of her body. Instead of 
turning into a reptile, she can give herself a 
snake’s fangs, which she can use in an attack 
to cause 1d2 bite damage plus poison. Rather 
than turning into a bird, she can transform 
her arms into a bird’s wings and fly ata 
movement rate of 21. Short of transforming 
into a bear (or other mammal), she can sprout 
a bear’s claws from her fingers and make two 
attacks causing 1d3 points of damage each, 
plus Strength bonus. Each of these actions 
counts as one change for the day. 

Special Hindrances: A Shapeshifter regains 
hit points only when resuming her human 
form, and then recovers only 1d4 hp. If the 
druid has 0 hp or fewer, she regains none 
with her human shape. 

If Rimi uses her Shapeshifter power more 
than three times per day, she must make a 
saving throw vs. spell after each extra use. A 
failure locks her into her current form until 
the next day, when she can attempt a new 
saving throw. However, for each failed save, 
the druid’s next one bears a -1 penalty. If 
Rimi fails three saving throws in succession, 
she keeps her current animal form perma- 
nently, as if she had been reincarnated as that 
creature. Only a polymorph any object, limited 
wish, or wish can turn her back to human or 
another form. 

Wealth Options: 3d6x5 gp. Shapeshifters 
spend too much time in animal form to con- 
cern themselves with money. 


Totemic Druid 


The Totemic Druid closely identifies with a 
particular species of mammal, reptile, or bird. 
While Vanier, a typical Totemic Druid, stops 
short of worshiping his totem animal, he 
believes that particular animal represents his 
spirit. The Totemic Druid picks a normal 
(real-world) wild mammal, reptile, or bird as 
his totem. This creature cannot be larger than 
a bear or smaller than a mouse. Some com- 
mon choices include the black bear, bobcat, 
eagle, owl, wolf, rattlesnake, and beaver. In 
addition, Vanier’s totem animal must corre- 
spond to his branch; if Vanier belongs to the 
desert druid branch, he can select as his totem 
only an animal that normally lives in the 
desert. 

Role: Totemic Druids tend to adopt charac- 
teristics associated with their totem animal. 
They feel especially protective of their totem 
animal in the wild and want to befriend the 
creatures. As a Totemic Druid, Vanier acts to 
promote the interests of the totem species and 
its individual members. 

Even if his totem is traditional prey (a deer, 
for example), Vanier never hunts the animal 
himself, nor does he eat its meat. While he 
usually does not try to ban hunting of his 
totem (except in the case of endangered 
species), he opposes cruel or wasteful hunt- 
ing practices. 

Branch Restrictions: None. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
staff. 

Secondary Skills: Groom, hunter. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus— track- 
ing. Recommended—(general) animal 
handling, animal training; (priest) healing, 
herbalism; (warrior) animal lore, survival. 

Note that Totemic Druids have a reduced 
number of proficiency slots. (See “Special 
Hindrances.”) 

Equipment: The druid should spend his 
initial allotment of gold pieces entirely on 


equipment, as he loses any unspent starting 
money in excess of 1 gp. 

Special Benefits: A Totemic Druid like 
Vanier can shapechange into the form of his 
totem animal a number of times per day 
equal to his experience level divided by three 
(rounded down), plus one. So, a 3rd- to 5th- 
level Totemic Druid can change twice per day, 
a 6th- to 8th-level druid can change three 
times per day, and so on. This ability func- 
tions as normal druidic shapechanging, 
except that the druid does not regain hit 
points when shapechanging into or out of the 
totem form; the druid’s spirit remains so 
closely bound with the totem that he fully 
experiences any damage the animal form 
took. The Totemic Druid can use this shape- 
changing ability in addition to his shapechang- 
ing granted powers. 

A Totemic Druid can communicate freely 
with normal or giant examples of the totem 
animal species (as with the speak with animals 
spell). He receives a +4 bonus to any healing, 
animal training, animal lore, or animal 
handling proficiency checks related to the 
totem. A druid who doesn’t have one of these 
proficiencies may behave as though he did 
when dealing with his totem animal, but does 
not apply the +4 bonus. 

Special Hindrances: A Totemic Druid has 
one fewer nonweapon proficiency slot than 
normal, as a result of spending so much time 
in animal form. So, Vanier would start with 
three slots rather than four. 

Wealth Options: 3d6x5 gp. Totemic Druids, 
like Shapeshifters, have a less pressing need 
for money due to the amount of time they 
spend in animal form. 


Village Druid 


Kabil the Village Druid (next page) associ- 
ates himself closely with a single rustic vil- 
lage or hamlet. As he gains experience, his 
influence can extend to cover a shire, barony, 


LL 


Druid Kits « 39 


TAA N 


{Fe 


or entire region. However, his focus remains 
rural. A Village Druid always hopes to see 
ordinary folk live in harmony with Nature. 

As a Village Druid, Kabil’s aim is twofold: 
to keep people from exploiting Nature (by 
short-sighted agricultural practices, etc.) and 
to defend and protect villagers who follow 
the proper druidic path. Thus, although he 
will not stand idly by to see the wilderness 
threatened, his more vital interest lies with 
the local crops, domestic animals, and his 
own followers. Kabil uses his skills and magic 
to protect all living things within his village 
from foes, disease, drought, forest fires, or 
natural disasters. 

Role: A Village Druid normally replaces a 
conventional priest or cleric in villages where 
most inhabitants subscribe to the druidic 
ethos. As well as offering protection and 
guidance, the druid leads the citizenry in cer- 
emonies to observe births (of humans and 


40 è Chapter Two 


animals), deaths, marriages, harvests, the 
changing of the seasons, and so on. (See 
Chapter 4: Role-playing Druids for details.) 

This kit suits PCs when the DM decides to 
set the campaign in a rural area under a threat 
or perhaps near unexplored ruins. 

Branch Restrictions: None. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Required—sickle or 
scythe. Recommended—staff. 

Secondary Skills: Farmer, forester, groom. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus— agri- 
culture. Recommended—(general) animal 
training, brewing, rope use, weather sense; 
(priest) healing, herbalism, local history, reli- 
gion. 

Equipment: The druid should spend his 
initial allotment of gold pieces entirely upon 
equipment, as he loses all unspent starting 
money in excess of 1 gp. 

Special Benefits: With the DM, decide 
which village a druid like Kabil protects; the 
druid lives in or near this village. 

Locals respect Kabil highly and provide 
him with information about happenings in 
the area. He receives a +2 reaction bonus from 
people and domestic animals in the village— 
as long as he remains diligent about his 
duties. In addition, the villagers support 
Kabil at a middle-class lifestyle (DMG, p. 34). 
This hospitality, rather than tithes, represents 
the generosity of a grateful people willing to 
provide their Village Druid with the best of 
everything he needs to live in their midst. 

Special Hindrances: As a Village Druid, 
Kabil doesn’t have a lot of free time. Locals 
ask him for help with all their problems, 
ranging from bandit raids to a child lost in the 
woods. In addition, the druid must spend at 
least one day each week attending to village 
matters: listening to grievances, mediating 
disputes, finding lost livestock, tending ani- 
mals, offering advice on crops, curing dis- 
eases, delivering babies, etc. lf he misses a 
week, his reaction bonus drops by 1 point 
(minimum 0) and his income declines a step 


(from middle class to poor to squalid) as 
people become less hospitable. The druid can 
avoid these penalties if he arranges with 
someone else (another druid or a ranger) to 
look after the village in his absence. 

Kabil's villagers also expect him to protect 
them from serious harm. If he fails—or if no 
one sees him at least making an honest effort 
—the DM may reduce or eliminate his re- 
action bonus and benefits for as long as the 
villagers likely would feel resentful. Role- 
playing can win back a Village Druid’s lost 
respect; Kabil can regain his lost reaction 
bonus and benefits quickly by doing a great 
deed to benefit the village, or slowly by sim- 
ply completing his duties diligently for sev- 
eral months. 

Wealth Options: 3d6x10 gp. 


Wanderer 


While most druids eventually settle in a 
specific locale, Wanderers travel widely, 
delighting in Nature’s infinite variety of life. 
They typically have a better idea of the “big 
picture” in the world than other druids and 
usually remain on good terms with local 
bards and rangers. Druidic leaders often use 
Wanderers as messengers or missionaries. 

Role: Wanderers like Fife (right), more gre- 
garious than most druids, enjoy meeting and 
talking with people—especially rural folk. 
Although Fife acts carefree, this genial nature 
masks a keen mind and a strong interest in 
everything going on around her. Many Wan- 
derers have animal companions. 

Branch Restrictions: None. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended— 
staff, one other weapon. 

Secondary Skills: Hunter, navigator. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus— direc- 
tion sense. Recommended—(general) animal 
training, singing, weather sense; (priest) heal- 
ing, herbalism, religion; (warrior) moun- 
taineering, running, survival, tracking. 


pex A 
AHA, 
y 


PAN 


Equipment: The druid should spend her 
initial allotment of gold pieces entirely on 
equipment, as she loses all unspent starting 
money in excess of 1 gp. 

Special Benefits: A Wanderer like Fife 
receives a +1 reaction adjustment bonus from 
bards, rangers and traveling folk such as tin- 
kers and Gypsies. 

When traveling over long distances, Fife 
covers ground at a one-third faster rate than a 
normal traveler would—that is, if a normal 
person can walk 24 miles in a day without 
force-marching, the druid can walk 32 miles 
with the same exertion. Fife, like all Wander- 
ers, simply feels more accustomed to walking 
long distances than most—plus, she knows 
short cuts and secret trails. (This heightened 
speed is cumulative with the ability of many 
druids 3rd level and higher to travel through 
overgrowth or other difficult terrain without 


penalty.) 


S 


Druid Kits « 41 


With a Wanderer guide, a party can increase 
travel time by one-sixth; thus, an unencum- 
bered party led by a Wanderer would travel 
28 miles in a day, not 24. 

Special Hindrances: Constantly on the 
move, a Wanderer never allows herself to be 
burdened. Fife cannot have retainers, hire- 
lings, mercenaries, or even servants until she 
reaches 12th level (but animal companions 
can travel with her). The druid cannot pos- 
sess more treasure than she can carry; she 
either converts the excess into a portable form 
(gems, etc.) or donates it to a worthy cause, 
such as the druidic order. 

Wealth Options: 3d6x10 gp. 


Abandoning Kits 


A character who started with a druid kit 
later may desire to abandon it. There should 
be a good campaign reason for this decision. 
For example, an Adviser whose lord has died 
or whose schemes have been thwarted repeat- 
edly might decide to give up politics in favor 
of more personal involvement with Nature. 
Or, an Outlaw who has won a pardon has no 
reason to remain an Outlaw. 

Discuss the question of abandoning the 
current kit with your DM. If this decision 
hinges on a specific event that happened to 
the character, change the druid’s kit as soon as 
it’s convenient. If, on the other hand, you 
have simply grown tired of playing a certain 
kit, the DM should come up with a scenario 
whose story line presents the character with a 
good reason for abandoning the kit. 

Suppose, for instance, that you have been 
role-playing an Avenger—a druid who be- 
came an Avenger because orcs destroyed his 
forest. It can become boring to play a charac- 
ter whose sole goal is vengeance. Here are 
some possibilities for retiring the kit: 

e The DM arranges a scenario in which the 
Avenger destroys the orc leader, then realizes 
he has sated his thirst for revenge. 


ene eee ———e————eeee 


42 « Chapter Two 


è The DM sets up an adventure in which 
the Avenger chances upon a village threat- 
ened by marauding monsters. After saving 
the villagers, he decides to devote his time to 
continuing to protect them, rather than hunt- 
ing down his one-time foes. 

e The DM designs a story in which the 
Avenger, in his obsessive thirst for vengeance, 
comes close to harming innocent people or 
wildlife. As a result, the Avenger decides to 
alter his approach to life. 

The player whose druid character aban- 
dons a kit must role-play the decision and 
any consequences that arise from it. The 
druid gives up all the kit’s benefits and hin- 
drances. The PC does not lose any bonus pro- 
ficiencies (marked with asterisks), but they 
are no longer bonuses. The former Avenger in 
the above example must pay for them as soon 
as possible by spending the next proficiency 
slots he gains on them. 


Modifying and Creating Kits 


You and your DM may change the kits to 
customize them for your own campaign 
world, or even restrict the availability of some 
kits to NPCs. Similarly, feel free to create 
totally new kits. For guidelines on doing so, 
refer to the kit creation rules in The Complete 
Fighter's Handbook (PH, pgs. 37-38). However, 
make sure that no kit is more powerful than 
any in this book. 


CHAPTER 


The Druidic Order 


The druidic order—often simply called the 
Order—can be thought of as a federation of 
regional priesthoods that form a loosely orga- 
nized worldwide faith, all of whose members 
worship Nature and follow a similar ethical 
philosophy. 

Druids divide up their world into regions, 
here called domains. A domain is a well- 
defined geographic area bounded by moun- 
tain ranges, rivers, seas, or deserts— druids 
normally divide a good-sized continent into 
three or four domains. Druidic regions do not 
rely on national borders, or on racial or ethnic 
groups; a domain can encompass several 
countries, races, and peoples. 

For example, in a fantasy world based on 
our Earth, one European domain might in- 
clude England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, and 
the Channel Islands; a second could consist of 
Western Europe (west of the Rhine and north 
of the Alps and Pyrenees, bounded by the 
North Sea and the English Channel to the 
north and the Bay of Biscay to the west); a 
third might contain Southern Europe (south 
of the Alps and bounded by the Mediter- 
ranean Sea and Danube River); another 
would include the Iberian peninsula. 

North America could be divided into an 
Atlantic domain (east of the Mississippi River 
and south of the St. Lawrence River and Great 
Lakes), a Pacific domain (west of the Rocky 
Mountains), a Central domain (between the 
two domains above, roughly south of the 
Missouri River), a Caribbean domain, a 
Southern domain (south of the Rio Grande 
and east of the Rockies), and a Northern 
domain (all of North America roughly north 
of the Missouri and Ohio rivers and east of 
the Rocky Mountains). 


The Circles 


All druids dwelling within the bounds of a 
domain are organized into a circle. Circles 
typically are named for the geographic area 


their domain occupies, but sometimes they 
bear other names, harking back to their foun- 
ders or the gods the druids worship (if they 
worship deities rather than Nature itself). For 
instance, druids might have formed “The 
Dragon Isles Circle” or “The Circle of Danu.” 

The members of a circle hold themselves 
responsible for the well-being of the wilder- 
ness and the continuation of the orderly 
cycles of Nature within their domain. This 
doesn’t mean a circle remains unconcerned 
about what occurs in other domains—form- 
ing circles is just the druidic order’s way of 
recognizing that those druids who live in a 
particular region can best serve to protect it, 
and should therefore hold formal responsibil- 
ity for the domain. 

Circles operate within a very loose structure. 
They use no large temples or abbeys, for rarely 
do more than a few druids live together. When 
they do, their dwelling places are usually less 
than ostentatious: small cottages or huts of the 
style of local hunters or farmers. All druids 
within the circle acknowledge a single great 
druid as their leader and recognize this fig- 
ure’s moral authority. The great druid gives 
the circle’s members great freedom compared 
to most other religious leaders. The druids 
adhere to a rather informal hierarchical struc- 
ture and require their initiates to hold true to 
the basic ethos of the druidic order and respect 
higher-ranking druids. 

A few traditions described in this chapter 
have grown up to govern the harmonious 
workings of a circle: initiations, the challenge, 
the ban, the moot, and selection of acolytes. 
All druids, from the humblest initiate to the 
great druid, may freely follow their own 
interpretation of druidic beliefs and act how- 
ever they believe best serves Nature. 


Druidic Demographics 


A typical domain (one that has seen no per- 
secution of druids but includes other priestly 


a 


The Druidic Order © 43 


faiths as well) contains, on average, one druid 
for every 10 square miles of rural farmland or 
400 square miles of lightly inhabited wilder- 
ness or steppe. Druids dwelling in rural areas 
usually are initiates (1st to 8th level, gener- 
ally). Those in the wilderness usually have 
reached higher experience levels, frequently 
7th to 11th level. A circle may include a maxi- 
mum of nine 12th-level druids, three 13th- 
level druids, and one 14th-level druid. Often 
circles have no higher-level druids at all. 
Below 12th level, the number of druids of a 
given experience level stands at about double 
the population of the next level up. So, a typi- 
cal circle may include 18 initiates of 11th level, 
36 initiates of 10th level, etc., all the way down 
to some 18,000 Ist-level initiates. The entire 
circle thus consists of more than 36,000 druids. 
A domain might feature one druid per 500 to 
1,000 citizens, although this statistic gives a 
distorted picture, since druids are concen- 
trated in some locales and rare in others. 


Circles and Branches 


Chapter 1: Druid Characters examined the 
different branches of the Order: forest druids, 
desert druids, and so on. A given circle nor- 
mally covers a domain vast enough to include 
members from several, but usually not all, 
branches. A domain with a temperate climate 
might contain a circie composed of forest, 
swamp, and mountain druids. In contrast, a 
circle in a tropical domain with flat terrain 
would consist of jungle, plains, desert, and 
swamp druids. 

All druids should possess an equivalent 
number of advantages and disadvantages 
regardless of branch. However, equality is 
never guaranteed, In most fantasy worlds, the 
forest druids exercise the most influence. Due 
to the resources of the woodlands and human- 
ity’s desire to clear them for use as farms, for- 
est druids often consider their problems the 
most pressing. The Order’s priorities fre- 


44 * Chapter Three 


quently reflect this stance; circles dominated 
by forest druids try to make sure that a mem- 
ber of that branch ends up as Grand Druid, 
the leader of the druidic order. As jungle 
druids and swamp druids share many of the 
forest druids’ concerns, they often become 
allies. 

A well-balanced druid sees each branch as 
part of a single tree, all equally important. 
Unfortunately, though, not all druids have 
this vision. Members of the informal forest- 
plains-swamp-jungle coalition sometimes 
look down upon desert and arctic druids due 
to the relative infertility of their habitats. 
Sometimes druids fall too deeply in love with 
their own particular part of the world—forest 
druids who see trees as the be-all and end-all 
of Nature may hold arctic, desert, and gray 
druids to be inferior. The victims of such prej- 
udice, in turn, can come to resent the forest 
branch. Great druids from the few circles 
dominated by arctic or desert druids often 
ally to try to keep a forest druid from becom- 
ing Grand Druid— although more often than 
not, they fail. 


Initiates 


Initiates constitute the 1st- to 11th-level 
druids within a circle. Their experience level 
determines their role in the circle. 

A typical 1st- or 2nd-level initiate (an NPC) 
often works part time as a Village Druid. This 
initiate keeps up a rural occupation (bee- 
keeper, farmer, herder, etc.) while studying 
under a higher-level druid mentor. The excep- 
tions to this stereotype are rare individuals 
(PCs). An average person finds it tough to 
recognize beginning druids, since most seem 
just like other peasants. 

Initiates between 3rd and 6th level have 
achieved most of their granted powers, with 
the exception of shapechanging. The corner- 
stones of the druidic order, they frequently 
devote their full time to their faith. They 


normally live in stone, wood, or mud-brick 
cottages and act as the protectors of a small 
tract of wilderness—a wood or river valley— 
or of a village or group of hamlets. Most 
druids of this status have the Village Druid or 
Guardian kit, and those who choose to pro- 
tect a village usually have become respected 
community leaders. 

Initiates between 7th and 11th level have 
received all their branch's granted powers. 
Such druids live simply but have widened 
their areas of influence, perhaps becoming 
the guardians of entire forests or mountains, 
or of all the villages in a barony. These druids 
often dwell near a sacred grove surrounded 
by a few acres of virgin wilderness—a sanctu- 
ary for rare and magical plants, animals, and 
supernatural creatures. This natural setting 
may be magically defended as well. Temporal 
rulers of the area respect (or fear) druids of 
such level. 


High-level Druids 


Only a limited number of druids in a given 
circle can reach the inner circle—nine of druid 
rank, three archdruids, and a single great 
druid. A character cannot replace one of these 
druids without having sufficient experience. 
In addition, a vacancy must open up, or the 
rising druid must defeat one of the current 
higher-level characters the druidic challenge 
to assume a new rank. 

Some tension exists between druids of the 
inner circle, since they remain constantly 
aware that a subordinate may be preparing a 
challenge. Unlike clerics, who normally settle 
down by this point, high-level druids con- 
tinue adventuring as part of their duties and 
to stay in shape to fend off challengers. 


Druids 


Upon reaching 12th level, a character re- 
ceives the official title druid, of which a circle 


never has more than nine. (Lower-level char- 
acters, though called “druids” by most, are 
technically “initiates.”) A druid’s role in the 
circle resembles that of a 7th- to 11th-level ini- 
tiate, with some exceptions. 

At 12th level, a druid has gained access to 
the commune with nature spell and should use 
it along with other druidic resources to 
aggressively root out emergent threats to the 
wilderness within a domain. Druids attend 
the High Council of the Moot (described later 
this chapter) and always act based on the 
needs of the circle as a whole. The circle’s 
great druid at times asks 12th-level druids for 
advice and sends them on missions for the 
good of the circle. 

But the life of a druid involves more than 
just adventuring—serving as a mentor takes 
up much of a druid’s time, too. Selecting 
young people to train as druidic candidates 
constitutes a major responsibility of those 
who reach druid rank. Each year druids (and 
other inner circle members) pick the single 
most worthy of their advanced students to 
initiate into the Order as Ist-level druids. (For 
more on initiations, see Chapter 4: Role-play- 
ing Druids.) 


Archdruids 


A 13th-level druid is called an archdruid. 
Each circle can have only three archdruids 
and, as with the druid rank, advancement 
requires either filling a vacancy or winning a 
challenge against a seated archdruid. 

An archdruid’s role resembles that of a 
druid, with two differences. Archdruids con- 
cern themselves more with maintaining the 
balance of Nature, making sure no one align- 
ment or ethos comes to utterly dominate the 
domain. Also, archdruids spend time training 
to step into the role of the great druid. To 
accomplish both these goals, they devote 
much time to travel, ensuring their familiarity 
with the geography—human, natural, and 


—— 


The Druidic Order * 45 


magical—throughout the domain. 

The Moot. The three archdruids share the 
druid’s responsibility for initiating newcom- 
ers to the Order. In addition, they each have 
the right to summon a moot: a gathering of 
the entire circle, traditionally held at the sol- 
stices and equinoxes. By ancient custom, 
moots are called four times a year at these set 
dates, once by each archdruid and once (usu- 
ally in spring) by the great druid. A moot ona 
nontraditional date means the summoner 
sees something so deeply amiss in the domain 
that the entire circle must discuss it as soon as 
possible. 

These gatherings enable the circle to cele- 
brate the changing of the seasons, to gossip 
and socialize, to exchange information on the 
state of the domain, and to fight druidic chal- 
lenges before an audience. Druids at a moot 
perform ceremonies to celebrate Nature, 
honor their dead, marry a couple within the 


46 « Chapter Three 


Order, and initiate new 1st-level druids. 
Along with these ceremonial duties, small 
groups at moots disappear together into the 
wilds to talk quietly while searching for herbs 
or mistletoe. 

Fhe climax of any such gathering is the 
High Council of the Moot; the circle’s nine 
druids, three archdruids, and great druid 
meet in a secret location to discuss the state of 
the domain and make plans to rally the circle 
against a particular problem, if necessary 
Sometimes an ambassador from a neighbor- 
ing circle (usually a character of at least druid 
rank) or an emissary of the Grand Druid at- 
tends a council. These personages bring news 
and greetings—and sometimes requests for 
help. After the High Council, the great druid 
(or an archdruid) addresses the entire moot, 
answers questions, and takes advice 

To call a moot, an archdruid (or the great 
druid) sends messengers out across the 


domain to spread the word to druids of all 
branches. All members of the circle above 7th 
level must attend or explain the absence. 
Members of 3rd to 6th level may come, but 
usually do so only if their journeys bring 
them to the vicinity or if they have business 
with others there. Those of 1st or 2nd level 
may attend a moot only with the permission 
of a member of the inner circle. 

The moot is scheduled to begin two weeks 
after the summoner dispatches the announce- 
ments, giving all druids in the circle enough 
time to settle their business and arrive. Such a 
gathering generally takes place at a sacred 
grove under the stewardship of the sum- 
moner. Though most moots last about four 
days, the meeting cannot end until the sum- 
moning archdruid or the great druid dis- 
solves it. 

Bards, elves, rangers, swanmays, and other 
sylvan folk often are invited to a moot, but its 
location remains a secret to others. In troubled 
times, elves, rangers, friendly beasts, or forest 
creatures may patrol the moot and take tres- 
passers prisoner. 

If the domain’s circle is on good terms with 
the land's rangers, a spring or autumnal moot 
may take place in conjunction with a rangers’ 
forgathering. (See Chapter 10: Forgatherings 
in The Complete Ranger's Handbook.) However, 
like rangers, druids prefer to keep their gath- 
erings to themselves, and such cooperation 
usually results from personal friendships 
between the great druid and notable rangers 
—or signals a desperate alliance against a 
greater foe. 


Great Druids 


As stated earlier, the great druid leads a 
circle, Like other inner circle members, the 
great druid usually has won the position 
through the challenge and has to maintain the 
ascendancy by defeating other challengers. 
However, some great druids become so 


respected (or feared!) that subordinate arch- 
druids forgo challenging them, instead pre- 
ferring to enter the service of the Grand Druid 
or wait until the great druid advances in 
level. 

All druids within a circle know the name of 
their great druid—even if they have never 
met in person—because this figure wields a 
certain amount of power over their lives. The 
DM should decide how strongly the great 
druid influences the members of the circle. 
For instance, a great druid who is loved, 
respected, or feared holds more sway over 
NPC druids than would a weak or unpopular 
leader. While PCs remain free to pursue their 
own goals, opposing the policy of a strong 
great druid means a character has little chance 
of receiving support from superior druids. 
Supporting the leader’s policy, on the other 
hand, can win lesser druids praise and aid 
from the top. 

Turmoil can erupt within a circle governed 
by a weak or unpopular great druid, as the 
ranking archdruids vie for the head post or 
ignore the leader’s advice to follow their own 
paths. Player characters may get occasional 
assistance from inner circle druids in this sce- 
nario, but for the most part, individuals all go 
their own way. 

The great druid has the same power to ini- 
tiate druidic candidates and summon a moot 
as archdruids. In addition, this figure has the 
job of maintaining harmonious relations 
among all the druids of the circle—prevent- 
ing factional battles and infighting, other than 
what is allowed through the challenge. To do 
so, the great druid has one special tool: the 
ban. 

The Ban. The great druid can impose a 
strong, nonviolent sanction upon those who 
have offended the circle. All must shun some- 
one placed under the ban; no druid in the 
circle will aid, speak to, or associate with the 
target of the ban. When an entire town or vil- 
lage suffers the ban, no druid may enter that 


LS 


The Druidic Order * 47 


area or speak to or aid any resident. Some 
druidic allies volunteer to follow the custom 
of the ban as well. For instance, a clan of 
sprites or centaurs on good terms with a circle 
may receive word of a ban and choose to 
honor it. 

The great druid has the right to pronounce 
a ban on any druid in the circle. A ban also 
can cover nondruids, whole communities, or 
druids visiting from other domains (except 
the Grand Druid and personal servants), to 
demonstrate the circle’s displeasure. 

To pronounce the ban, the great druid 
stands up during a moot and announces to 
the group the reasons to impose the ban. 
Then the subject of the ban—if present— 
answers the accusations before the assembly. 
Finally, the High Council of the Moot votes 
on the matter openly, usually at sunset. If a 
majority of the council votes in favor of the 
ban, it passes. If not, the great druid should 
start keeping an eye on the circle’s arch- 
druids—the opposition to the ban likely 
reflects an impending challenge. 

A ban punishes a druid for violating the 
tenets of the druidic order or reprimands a 
character whose actions, while within the 
bounds of the druidic ethos, nevertheless 
were contrary to the Order’s interests. For 
instance, suppose an angry druid massacred 
the inhabitants of a human hamlet because 
they would not turn over two hunters who 
slew a stag in the druid’s sacred grove. The 
druid acted within the bounds of the druidic 
ethos, but the great druid might call the char- 
acter’s indiscriminate vengeance out of pro- 
portion to the crime, adding that the slaughter 
has threatened to make local commoners hate 
and fear all druids in the circle. So, the great 
druid imposes the ban, both as a punishment 
and as incentive for the character to change. 

Nondruid individuals are less likely to fall 
victim to a ban—usually the great druid finds 
that direct action against the offender proves 
more effective. However, if the people of an 


ce 


48 » Chapter Three 


area depend on druids rather than other 
priests for healing and religious ceremonies, a 
ban sends them a message of disapproval. 
And sometimes a ban can serve as a symbolic 
gesture against a subject too powerful or 
influential to confront directly—a baron or 
king, for instance. 

A ban generally lasts 10 summers. How- 
ever, the inner circle can vote to lift a ban 
early or (once the time is up) to extend it. The 
shunning does not extend outside the 
domain, so banned druids usually choose to 
go into exile—the result the great druid prob- 
ably intended in the first place. 

The Challenge. The traditions of the Order 
prohibit an inner circle from including more 
than nine druids, three archdruids, and one 
great druid. If a character gains enough expe- 
rience to achieve official druid level but finds 
no vacancy in the inner circle, the only way to 
advance involves ceremonial combat: the 
druidic challenge. 

The challenge remains one of the oldest 
druidic traditions. It purges the weak and 
complacent, ensuring that the highest ranks 
of the druidic order remain filled with strong 
and cunning individuals. The masters of the 
druidic order are not politicians, but men and 
women of action. They believe that the chal- 
lenge, by bringing ambition into the open, 
allows them to by-pass some of the worst 
excesses of hypocrisy and behind-the-scenes 
power plays found in other religions. 

A circle’s great druid expects at any time to 
face a challenge from one of the archdruids, 
while the archdruids keep an eye on rising 
druids. Those of druid rank, in turn, look out 
for ambitious 11th-level initiates. This system 
puts a constant strain on the Order’s upper 
ranks: It’s hard to stay on good terms with 
folk who want your job and eventually will 
challenge you to a battle to gain it. As a result, 
most friendships and alliances form among 
druids of equal level or among characters 
several levels apart. 


All inner circle druids do their best to ap- 
pear strong, to avoid looking like easy targets. 
Many actively adventure to enhance their 
reputations and gain power through acquir- 
ing magical items and experience. Others 
simply try to remain popular among the 
other members of the Order. If an inner circle 
member takes an unpopular or controversial 
stance, fellow druids may decide to encour- 
age the ambitious to aim for that particular 
target; the replacement would likely prove 
more cordial. 

The challenge operates under prearranged 
rules: Characters who violate the letter of the 
rules will fail to advance in level, just as if 
they had suffered defeat. Always a one-on- 
one battle, the challenge does not allow even 
servants or animal companions of the com- 
batants to participate. 

First, the two parties must agree upon the 
time of the duel—if they can’t agree, it will 


take place at the next moot. Druids consider it 
impolite to set a challenge outside of a moot, 
although it’s still done. 

Second, the challenge needs a witness—a 
druid whose level equals or exceeds the chal- 
lenger’s. Hierophant druids (described later 
in this chapter) work well as witnesses, as do 
druids or archdruids visiting from different 
circles or from the Grand Druid’s entourage. 
This individual must witness the terms of the 
challenge and make sure the combatants obey 
the rules. The great druid of the circle always 
names the witness, even if the challenge 
involves that very leader. 

Third, the terms by which the battle will be 
fought are set out by mutual agreement. Once 
agreed upon and witnessed, the terms may 
not change. If neither side can agree on the 
terms, the witness selects them and proclaims 
the duel an all-out battle until one druid sur- 
renders or becomes incapacitated. 


a RE IĖĖ——Ė——M IMI 


The Druidic Order * 49 


Terms to discuss include: 

$ The size of the battlefield. Until the duel 
ends, leaving the bounds of the area means 
conceding defeat. Usually the space is no 
more than a dozen yards across, to ensure the 
battle does not take too long. 

$ Whether to allow weapons, magical 
items, granted powers, and spells. (Note: 
Nondruidic spells cannot be used.) Most con- 
tests involve full use of weapons and spells, 
although many commonly disallow magical 
items. Some memorable duels have permitted 
only granted powers—no spells or weapons. 
The combatants used only the claws and 
fangs of their different animal forms. A few 
challenges have forbidden all weapons and 
magic—they became simple wrestling 
matches. 

+ Whether to alter the normal battle- 
oriented conditions of the duel. Although 
rare, methods less stringent than actual com- 
bat have been honored, especially between 
two friendly rivals. Such unorthodox formats 
include a race, a scavenger hunt, a competi- 
tion to defeat a particular monster, a drinking 
contest (the first druid to fail three Constitu- 
tion rolls loses), or even a game of hide and 
seek. 

The challenge begins with the witness’s 
invocation, asking Nature (or a druidic deity) 
to watch over the duel. This means that chal- 
lengers who defeat foes through cheating will 
find themselves unable to gain a level after 
all, and incumbents who cheat automatically 
lose the level. Once the witness concludes the 
invocation, the druids enter the battlefield 
from opposite ends, and the contest begins. 

Appointment of Acolytes. Great druids, 
archdruids, and druids have the traditional 
right to select initiates as their servants. The 
number and level of these retainers depends 
on the level and position of the inner circle 
member. (See the PH, p. 37, for details.) The 
chosen initiates are called acolytes. 

Acolytes, chosen from the high-ranking 


50 * Chapter Three 


druid’s own circle, are restricted to serving 
only certain inner circle members (again, 
based on their experience level). The appoint- 
ing druid must determine which eligible initi- 
ates will serve him. 

An inner circle druid usually approaches a 
favored initiate quietly and offers an acolyte 
position. The initiate then decides whether to 
accept the post. While serving as an acolyte 
holds honor, it also entails a loss of freedom. 
Therefore, the decision depends on factors 
such as the reputation of the inner circle 
member. 

An acolyte swears an oath of service: to be 
loyal and obedient, to listen and learn, to 
keep no secrets from one’s master, but to 
guard the master’s secrets. An acolyte who 
breaks this oath faces the wrath of the high- 
ranking druid. In addition, unless the acolyte 
can prove the master’s commands violated 
the spirit of the druidic ethos, the servant 
usually becomes subjected to the ban. 

The advantage of serving as an acolyte is 
that the character wins the patronage, and 
perhaps the friendship, of a powerful druid. 
The position enhances the initiate’s prestige 
in the eyes of the entire circle. Furthermore, 
acolytes injured or wronged by an enemy can 
expect assistance from their master. 

The disadvantage? The character— always 
at the beck and call of a master— loses per- 
sonal freedom. An acolyte fulfills all the nor- 
mal duties of a loyal retainer but, most impor- 
tantly, acts as an emissary and representative 
of the inner circle druid. As high-level druids 
cannot be everywhere at once, acolytes often 
go on long journeys to do their master’s bid- 
ding. Whether the mission involves finding a 
reclusive swamp-dwelling initiate to notify of 
the next moot’s date and location or deliver- 
ing a stinging ultimatum to a dwarven king 
to shut down his mines or face the circle’s 
wrath, acolytes can expect to visit a lot of in- 
teresting—though sometimes unpleasant— 
places. 


An acolyte’s term of service lasts until the 
master’s experience level changes or until the 
acolyte advances a level. In the latter case, the 
acolyte leaves service, and the inner circle 
member must select a replacement. 


The Grand Druid 


Above all others within the Order stands 
the figure of the Grand Druid, the highest- 
ranking (although not the highest-level) 
druid in the world. The Grand Druid, a 15th- 
level character, attains this position through a 
selection process rather than by the challenge. 
Since only one person can hold the title of 
Grand Druid, each world can have only one 
15th-level druid at a time. 

Duties of the Grand Druid. First and fore- 
most, the Grand Druid acts as a politician, 
responsible for keeping harmony between the 
great druids of each domain and between the 
various druidic branches. 

The Grand Druid also rallies the circles 
against the rare global threat to Nature or the 
cosmic balance. This always proves a difficult 
task, as many circles fiercely cherish their 
autonomy, believing each one should remain 
self-sufficient and not meddle in other do- 
mains’ affairs. Few circles willingly send con- 
tingents off to aid other circles unless they 
feel absolutely certain that the threat will 
menace their own domain as well. To make 
matters worse, the inflated pride of many 
circles prevents them from accepting help 
from “foreign” druids. As a result, often only 
one thing can convince the Order a threat 
warrants a combined effort: the destruction of 
an entire circle. Fortunately, such occurrences 
are few and far between. 

The Grand Druid and entourage (detailed 
below) spend most of their time visiting dif- 
ferent regions and speaking to the great 
druids, archdruids, druids, and, rarely, lowly 
initiates. In particular, this leader serves as a 
diplomat and peacemaker, who mediates dis- 


putes between druids of neighboring circles 
and struggles involving members of the mys- 
terious Shadow Circle (described later in this 
chapter). 

Normally the circles act with autonomy. 
However, if a circle appears in great disar- 
ray—for instance, an enemy has killed most 
of its members or forced them into hiding— 
the Grand Druid may try to rally the circle or 
recruit aid from other domains. If a circle has 
been effectively destroyed, the Grand Druid 
might decide to rebuild it from scratch. After 
selecting a rising archdruid from a neighbor- 
ing circle to step in as the new great druid, the 
Grand Druid helps recruit volunteers from 
nearby domains to replenish the circle. Often 
this assignment proves difficult and danger- 
ous; whatever destroyed the previous circle 
probably still lurks nearby, ready to pounce 
on the new circle that, while wary, will remain 
understrength for some time. 

Servants of the Grand Druid. Like other 
inner circle druids, the Grand Druid has per- 
sonal servants: an entourage of nine druids of 
various levels. These druids no longer owe 
allegiance to their original circles but are sub- 
ject only to the Grand Druid. All druids con- 
sider it a high honor to serve the leader of the 
Order, an honor that bears great responsibil- 
ity but gives a druid prestige and influence 
far beyond others of similar level. Assuming 
a vacancy arises—and service involves enough 
danger that openings occur reasonably often 
—a druid of any level can seek out the Grand 
Druid and petition to become a retainer. This 
relationship lasts as long as both sides wish— 
often many years—and can end by mutual 
agreement at any time. 

Three archdruids, often called the Emis- 
saries, always serve the head of the Order. 
They act as the Grand Druid’s personal agents 
—their leader’s eyes, hands, and voice. To aid 
them in their duty, they receive four addi- 
tional spell levels (one 4th-level spell, two 
2nd-level spells, etc.), usable as they see fit. To 


Eee 


The Druidic Order « 51 


keep the Grand Druid informed on the opera- 
tions of the circles in every land, they roam 
the world, visiting the various circles as well 
as other places of interest to their master. The 
arrival of an Emissary often coincides with 
the ascendance of a new great druid. While 
conveying the respects of the head of the 
Order, the archdruid takes the new leader’s 
measure and reports back to the Grand Druid. 
These servants also visit a circle in response 
to a great druid’s request for aid. 

Traveling Emissaries normally find them- 
selves welcomed, for their visits give circles a 
chance to learn news from far-off lands. An 
Emissary also may offer counsel about a men- 
ace or carry a request for help to the Grand 
Druid or neighboring circles. 

But Emissaries also must remain on the 
alert for problems within a circle that the great 
druid has failed to adequately handle—such 
as widespread conflicts between druids or 
corruption in the ranks. In such cases, it is the 
Emissary’s solemn duty to take action to rem- 
edy the problem or, lacking sufficient power, 
to report it the Grand Druid. For this reason, 
some circles— particularly those secretly 
dominated by the ruthless Shadow Circle— 
regard the arrival of an Emissary with deep 
suspicion. In their role as agents of the Grand 
Druid, these archdruids sometimes resemble 
spies. More than one Emissary has met a 
mysterious end while visiting a supposedly 
friendly circle. 

Besides the Emissaries, a Grand Druid has 
six other servants. These druids, usually of 7th 
to 11th level, come from a variety of branches 
but have all proven their dedication to the 
Order. Many Grand Druids have been known 
to take on the occasional lower-level druid, 
either because they feel the need for a fresher 
viewpoint or because they sense a special 
worthiness in a particular individual. These 
six druids of mixed level act as servants, coun- 
selors, bodyguards, and useful agents. 

Selection of the Grand Druid. One of the 


52 © Chapter Three 


duties each Grand Druid must perform is 
appointing a successor, always an acting 
great druid. After serving usually a minimum 
of four years, a Grand Druid steps down to 
allow the chosen successor to assume the 
mantle of leadership. 

In theory, selecting a new Grand Druid is 
solely up to the last Grand Druid. In practice, 
druidic order politics plays a major role. For 
instance, if the forest druids have held the 
position of Grand Druid for several genera- 
tions, they may come to consider it “their 
right” to do so. However, in the name of fair- 
ness and harmony, druids from other 
branches may lobby to convince the current 
Grand Druid to pick a successor from a differ- 
ent branch. On the other hand, choosing a 
Grand Druid from a minority branch could 
alienate large segments of the druidic order's 
membership, even with an extremely compe- 
tent Grand Druid. 

As a result, when a Grand Druid begins 
getting on in years, the impending choice of 
successor becomes the subject of much gos- 
sip, speculation, lobbying, and intrigue by 
archdruids, great druids, and hierophant 
druids. For instance, a great druid afraid of 
being passed over for the position in favor of 
a rival may encourage a powerful, ambitious 
archdruid to challenge that rival, hoping to 
put the favorite out of the running before the 
Grand Druid can finalize the succession. 


Hierophant Druids 


The hierophants make up a unique part of 
the druidic order. Some even go so far as to 
say they are the Order, and that the other 
ranks represent mere practice for hierophant 
status. Check p. 38 of the PH for details on 
achieving the rank of hierophant (pictured on 
the next page) and the powers that go with it. 

Hierophant druids live as free agents. They 
are encouraged to respect the Grand Druid, 
but need not obey the druidic leader’s man- 


dates nor operate within the borders of any 
circle. Although a few settle down in particu- 
lar groves, many become famous wanderers, 
some even visiting other planes or (by spell- 
jamming) distant worlds. They often travel 
about in disguise, using their appearance- 
alteration powers. Wherever they go and 
whatever they do, they always aim to pro- 
mote the ethos and values of the druidic order. 

Unlike lesser druids, hierophants typically 
have a global perspective and agenda. They 
concern themselves with the rise and fall of 
empires, the migrations of peoples, the 
growth or extinction of species, and the role 
of each race in the destiny of the world. Some 
devote their lives to a particular cause, such 
as reclaiming the forests of a continent in- 
fected by evil, or acting as the personal neme- 
sis of a being whose actions threaten the 
world’s balance. 

Hierophants are notorious behind-the- 
scenes manipulators. They use their long life 
spans to weave subtle schemes with far- 
reaching plots that might take decades to 
hatch, but which—they believe—ultimately 
will benefit their cause. The 17th-level druidic 
ability to hibernate enables most of them to 
appear effectively immortal: some hiero- 
phants will hatch the initial elements of a 
scheme, go into hibernation, then awaken 
decades later, unaged, to bring the next stage 
into play. Such druids might become patrons 
of gifted families of adventurers, recruiting 
the latest generation when they need heroes. 

The existence of hierophant druids tends to 
make great druids and Grand Druids very 
nervous, for they represent a power beyond 
their control—and sometimes beyond their 
ken. Whether any hierophant druids belong 
to the Shadow Circle is not known. 


The Shadow Circle 


The druidic order tolerates a wide range of 
philosophies under the umbrella of its loosely 


AN A 
SS SA 
SV 2 
` g 
= = 
= ae 
om z 
s z 
—_ —_ 
= _ 
- == 
1 


N 


; 

Wit Sv 
Ui SS 
MIE X 


organized structure. The variety of different 
branches demonstrates this scope. So does the 
existence of the Shadow Circle. 

A secret society of druids within the larger 
druidic order, the Shadow Circle accepts 
members who see Nature as a hostile, cleans- 
ing force that ensures the survival of the 
fittest. According to their philosophy, civiliza- 
tion—especially the building of towns and 
cities—has weakened humankind and many 
demihuman races. 


Methods 


The Shadow Circle sees barbarian humans 
and more primitive races as inherently more 
vital than civilized peoples. Thus, the Shadow 
Circle often allies itself with barbarian tribes 
or hostile humanoids such as orcs, giants, 
and goblins, especially those who choose to 
live in forests or mountains in the wilds. 


— 


The Druidic Order * 53 


They deliberately encourage people to aban- 
don civilization’s “decadence” and return to 
the more natural existence of hunting and 
gathering. 

But while their intentions are neutral, the 
methods of Shadow Circle members tend to 
promote chaos and evil. They behave as they 
do not due to an evil nature—their enemies 
include powerful evil empires as well as good 
kingdoms. Rather, they feel their cruel activi- 
ties work toward the best interests of evolu- 
tion and of Nature itself, For instance, the 
Shadow Circle may provide magical assis- 
tance to barbarian hordes trying to sack a city 
or lead humanoid tribes in raids against 
human or dwarven towns. 

Sometimes the Shadow Circle even assists 
the cause of good. For instance, members 
would consider an evil city-state based around 
slavery a fair target, and they would feel as 
eager as any lawful good paladin to support a 
slave revolt in the hopes of toppling the city. 
The difference? The Shadow Circle would 
encourage the slaves in revolt to burn the city 
to the ground and then settle down as farm- 
ers, hunters, or outlaws in the countryside. 

Lower-ranking members of the Shadow 
Circle often wage campaigns of terror against 
small settlements, usually working behind 
the scenes. Their favorite puppets are intelli- 
gent monsters like evil lycanthropes. 


Membership 


The members of the Shadow Circle keep 
their allegiance secret from other druids while 
maintaining their parallel “circle” rankings. 
An archdruid in the Shadow Circle is also an 
archdruid in a mainstream circle, for example. 
Shadow Circle druids of 11th level or higher 
follow the normal druidic practice of advanc- 
ing in level through the challenge; in fact, 
Shadow Circle druids encourage each other to 
challenge nonmembers in mainstream circle 
hierarchy, thereby increasing their number 


a III IaM 


54 « Chapter Three 


among inner circle members. These duels 
almost invariably turn quite bloody. 

An arc of the Shadow Circle exists in any 
domain where druids live, and its members 
may come from any druidic branch. Typically 
only one in five initiates—but as many as one 
in three 12th-level or higher druids—secretly 
belongs to the Shadow Circle. A great druid 
usually is not a member, but one never can 
tell for sure. In some troubled domains—par- 
ticularly those in which druids face persecu- 
tion and the wilderness displays signs of 
wanton destruction from human cities—most 
of the druids may join the Shadow Circle! 

Shadow Circle druids adopt secret names 
to conceal their identities from each other. 
When they meet, they do so while shape- 
changed or wearing masks carved to repre- 
sent predators native to the domain. This 
secrecy is important. Although the Shadow 
Circle ethos corresponds to that of the Order, 
most druids disdain the group’s methods— 
and therefore, its members. 

A known Shadow Circle initiate faces the 
enmity of other druids—and possibly the 
ban, for refusing to recant—as well as the ire 
of local authorities. Lower-level druids con- 
stantly challenge exposed Shadow Circle 
druids 12th level and higher, seeking to de- 
pose—and possibly destroy—offenders. 

In turn, the Shadow Circle often tries to 
cause trouble within the druidic order. For 
instance, in order to recruit disaffected druids 
into their midst, group members covertly 
encourage rivalry between druidic branches 
(such as the jealousy between the dominant 
forest druids and the members of less influen- 
tial branches). Characters may learn of the 
Shadow Circle when they discover a plot to 
ferment such trouble between druids from 
rival branches. 

Note that these are the methods of a group 
of extremist druids, not evil ones. Their anti- 
civilization feelings do not alter their neutral 


alignment. 


Shadowmaster. The highest-level druid in 
the Shadow Circle—usually an archdruid or 
druid—takes command of the group as the 
Shadowmaster. If two or more druids of equal 
level seek the post, they generally duel to the 
death, though one combatant—usually the 
younger—could agree to serve under the 
other. Unlike the semiautonomous main- 
stream circles, the Shadow Circle maintains 
strict discipline over its various far-flung arcs. 
The Shadowmaster exercises absolute author- 
ity over the membership. 

Inner Circle. Under the Shadowmaster are 
the members of the inner circle, which con- 
sists of all the druidic order’s Shadow Circle 
druids (12th level) and archdruids (13th 
level). (The Shadowmaster remains apart 
from the inner circle.) Together, the Shadow- 
master and the inner circle make policy and 
direct the initiates. Only the Shadowmaster 
knows the real names of members of the 
inner circle—the identities of even these high- 
ranking members remain unknown to each 
other. 

The 1st- through 10th-level initiates within 
this secret society, unlike the more indepen- 
dent initiates of mainstream circles, are ex- 
pected to obey all orders from inner circle 
members and the Shadowmaster. Failure 
means punishment—death. 

Shadowed Ones. Initiates who have 
reached 11th level have special status in the 
Shadow Circle. These initiates are known as 
“Shadowed Ones,” the Shadowmaster's spe- 
cial tools. In particular, they act as enforcers 
and assassins for the secret group, hunting 
those who have disobeyed their fearsome 
leader or have been expelled from the myste- 
rious society. The Shadowmaster sometimes 
encourages Shadowed Ones to serve as am- 
bassadors to arcs of the Shadow Circle oper- 
ating in other domains. Shadowed Ones auto- 
matically advance to the inner circle in this 
secret group when they achieve 12th level in 
their mainstream circle. 


Shadowclave 


Members of the Shadow Circle work in 
secret, pretending to be mainstream druids. 
For example, they attend all druidic moots. 
But every season each arc of the Shadow 
Circle also holds its own secret meeting—the 
Shadowclave—in the dark of the moon. The 
meeting lasts three nights, during which the 
membership celebrates its own version of tra- 
ditional druidic ceremonies and receives new 
orders from the Shadowmaster and inner 
circle. Prisoners the Shadow Circle has taken 
throughout the season—along with disloyal 
or disobedient members—are kept alive until 
the Shadowclave. There, the inner circle tor- 
tures and publicly executes them, to remind 
the membership of what happens to traitors 
and enemies of the Shadow Circle. 


Recruitment 


The Shadow Circle does not take volun- 
teers—it finds new members on its own. 
Recruitment, by invitation only, is in the 
hands of the Shadowmaster and the inner 
circle, always on the lookout for druids who 
seem ready to embrace the ruthless Shadow 
Circle philosophy. 

For example, if a druid massacres a party of 
travelers who ventured into a sacred grove, 
the Shadow Circle soon comes looking for 
this prospective candidate. Another good 
possibility is a character who has destroyed a 
village whose peasants dared to clear a wood 
for use as farmland. 

A Shadowed One spies on the potential 
member for a few weeks or months, often 
using animal spies as additional eyes. If the 
druid’s deeds and words seem in sympathy 
with the Shadow Circle's goals, the character 
receives a visit from this Shadowed One (or a 
pair for a candidate 11th level or higher) 
before the next Shadowclave. The Shadowed 
One explains the group’s purposes, inviting 


The Druidic Order « 55 


the newcomer to join. Of course, druids who 
refuse—or even waver—coincidentally turn 
up dead shortly thereafter. 

Candidates who agree to join are blind- 


folded, given a mask, and taken to the 
Shadowclave. There the Shadowmaster gives 
each a secret name. After receiving their 
sworn allegiance, the Shadowmaster formally 
welcomes the new members into the Shadow 
Circle and commands them to perform some 
symbolic but dangerous task to prove their 
ruthlessness and dedication. (The difficulty of 
the assignment depends on the character’s 
experience level.) 

This kind of mission usually involves assas- 
sinating a specific enemy of the Shadow 
Circle, such as a noble or priest in a city the 
group has targeted for destruction. However, 
the task might be physically much simpler— 
say, poisoning a town well. The Shadowed 
One who recruited the druid will follow 


56 * Chapter Three 


along (secretly), ready to slay a newcomer 
who shows weakness, risks capture, or tries 
to betray the group. Those who succeed, the 
Shadow Circle embraces as full members. 


Creating a Druidic History 


The druidic order and hierarchy presented 
here are designed to work as a default or base 
system. Many circles of druids have their 
own customs, and on many worlds the dru- 
idic order has its own unique history that 
shapes its structure. 

The DM always should understand the his- 
tory of the druidic order before beginning a 
campaign involving druids. A typical Order, 
like the one this chapter has detailed, is an 
ancient organization whose origin has be- 
come lost in the dim reaches of the past. 

But that doesn’t have to be the case. Instead, 
the druidic order may have an origin alive in 
history or myth. This background should 
explain where the first druids came from, 
why they worship Nature (or a specific 
Nature deity), why they protect the wild, and 
their purpose in standing at the crossroads 
between good and evil. The druidic origins 
might reflect true history, a legend whose 
truth remains uncertain, or a mixture of both. 
In any case, the origin tale must have a pro- 
found effect on how druids see themselves in 
the campaign. 

As an example of how the druidic order 
springs from a more detailed history, three 
very different possible beginnings for the 
druidic order are sketched out below. 


The Exiles 


The secret founders of the druids were the crew 
of a spelljamming vessel, long-ago exiles from a 
world that would not accept their neutrality fol- 
lowing the final triumph of evil—or good. (Exile 
was prefe rable to the fate of the members of the 
vanquished alignment, however.) The present 


druidic order traces its legacy to these ancient 
castaways, 

As victims of an unbalanced world, the exiles 
and their descendants and followers vowed to pre- 
serve the volatile relationship between good and 
evil in their adopted home. They can see this bal- 
ance best illustrated by the forces of Nature. In 
addition to their normal druidic duties, the mem- 
bers of the Order remain on guard against inva- 
sion from their ancestors’ home world. 


The New Faith 


The druids belong to a relatively new faith, 
founded less than twenty years ago by a charis- 
matic Nature priest. This amazing leader also 
preached that the older gods constitute only one 
small aspect of great Nature. 

Active missionary work, the charisma of this 
founder, and the simplicity of the Order's beliefs 
draws more and more converts to druidism every 
day from the old, tired, polytheistic religions. But 
the largest rival religion considers druidism a 
threat; its priests have convinced the region's 
rulers to begin persecution of the “godless, trouble- 
making” druids, 


The Myth of the Great War 


Almost two thousand years ago a terrible war 
broke out between the two mighty guilds of wiz- 
ards—one good and one evil—that controlled 
great empires. Wizards on both sides vowed to 
fight until they were utterly triumphant, seeking 
to purge their rivals from the earth. With fearsome 
magic and dragon armies they battled for cen- 
turies, neither side winning final victory. 

In the process of their warfare, the wizards 
wrought vast devastation on the world—forests 
blazed up, islands sank into the sea, entire races 
became extinct. Eventually, the great goddess of 
Nature awakened from her sleep to witness the 
savage conflict. Shocked by the destruction, the 
Goddess sent a vision to a single human: the 
woman who would become the first Grand Druid. 


Through the vision, this chosen figure saw that 
she must found a druidic order to preserve the 
fragile remains of her world’s ecology. With the 
guidance of her goddess, the Order grew in 
strength until finally it had the power to intervene 
in the wizard war. The force of young druids 
pooled their powers and together vanquished the 
members of both battling guilds, transforming the 
combatants into innocent wild beasts. Once the 
former wizards—now unable to fathom the con- 
cept of good versus evil—slithered, bounded, 
loped, and crawled off into their ruined habitats, 
the Order began to heal the world. 

Since then, the druidic order continually works 
to prevent such destruction from ever occurring 
again. Druids pledge to make sure the wars of 
good and evil no longer mar the precious earth. 
But, the Order also has bitter enemies in the 
ancient remnants of the guilds of warring wiz- 
ards—those good and evil mages who luckily 
escaped the fate of their fellows. Each guild claims 
it had been on the verge of victory and would have 
won, had druids not interfered. 


Each of these backgrounds—or one that 
you, the player might create with your DM— 
provides the druids of a world with a history, 
a purpose, and some idea of who their ene- 
mies might be. Add more details to these 
options as desired, to explain the Order’s tri- 
umphs and failures, the history of its relation 
to other faiths, and perhaps the attempts of 
factions within the druidic order to deviate 
from its original purpose. 


———— EE cal 


The Druidic Order » 57 


CHAPTER 


Role-playing Druids 


So, now that you have learned about the 
druidic order and selected your branch and 
kit, you think you’re ready to assume the 
challenge of role-playing this colorful class? 
Well, there’s still a lot more to know about 
druids. For example: 

$ What is a druid’s world view like? 

$ How can a druid fit into a normal adven- 
ture? 

© How does one role-play the neutral align- 
ment? 

+ How do members of the Order relate to 
others? 

What are some typical druidic duties? 

+ Can druids become the center of entire 
campaigns? 

+ What strategies do druids follow as 
champions of Nature and the balance? 

+ How can a player make a specific druid 
stand out? 

This chapter gives you, the player, hints for 
making your character really come alive. 


Druidic Faith 


Druids fit into the hierarchy of a world- 
wide Order that espouses a well-defined 
ethos yet grants each member considerable 
freedom of action. This liberty makes druids 
much more diverse than many other priest 
classes—reflected in the different druidic 
branches and kits—as they pursue their 
shared goals in their own ways. 

Druids serve the force of Nature and its 
inherent natural cycles, such as that of birth, 
growth, death, and rebirth (PH, p. 37). Though 
some druids do choose to worship Nature 
embodied in a particular god, Nature, as a 
force, has no specific form or personality. (The 
Complete Priest's Handbook, on p. 11, defines a 
force as a process, natural or unnatural, that 
influences the world.) 

The processes of Nature generate magical 
power its worshipers can tap. Failure to per- 
form the ceremonies and follow the tenets of 


58 » Chapter Four 


druidism leads a druid to fall out of touch 
with Nature and lose spell access, just as 
other unfaithful priests do. 


Druids Who Worship Gods 


Not all druids worship Nature as a force. 
Some see it personified by a great deity of 
Nature, often either formless or possessing 
many forms. 

The most common manifestation of a dru- 
idic Nature deity is that of the Great God- 
dess—Chauntea and the Earthmother in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS” setting or Beory in the 
WORLD OF GREYHAWK”® setting, for example. 
The Great Goddess embodies Nature through 
multiple avatars that represent her different 
aspects: a virgin warrior-huntress, an adult 
mother, and an ancient crone. 

The Great Goddess sometimes has a Con- 
sort (often appearing as an antlered hunts- 
man), the subordinate lord of the hunt, death, 
and animals. Followers frequently worship 
both Goddess and Consort as a single power 
rather than as two deities. 


Life after Death 


Since they see the universe as a cycle or 
series of cycles, druids tend to believe the life 
force of a person (especially one who follows 
the druidic faith) is reborn again and again. A 
being’s reincarnation will not remember a for- 
mer life but may possess a similar personality. 

All druids believe a person’s soul may be 
reincarnated into an animal instead of a sen- 
tient being—yet another reason they revere 
all the world’s creatures. 

Are the druids correct? That depends on 
the nature of the DM’s universe. 


Nature and the Gods 


Druids differ in their attitudes toward non- 
Nature gods. Before beginning a new cam- 


paign, it’s important for you and your DM to 
establish a circle’s position toward other 
gods. Some possible beliefs include: 

Nature as Supreme, These druids consider 
Nature a force beyond mere gods. Other 
faiths do exist, but they are mere aspects of 
the greater whole. To worship one of them 
means celebrating just a fragment of Nature 
(like the thunder, the ocean or death) rather 
than the whole, as druids do. 

Most druids in AD&D game worlds use 
this approach. They believe their own faith is 
somewhat superior, but do not actively op- 
pose other faiths and may ally themselves 
with the worshipers of natural, agricultural, 
or elemental deities. 

Nature as Progenitor. Followers of this phi- 
losophy see Nature as an integral part of a 
pantheon of gods. In this case, druids identify 
the other gods as “children of Nature,” per- 
haps born in some mythic way. For instance, 
the druids may teach that, in the time before 
the world, first came formless chaos, and out 
of it emerged Nature. From Nature was born 
the Great Goddess, who married the Sky and 
gave birth to many children: all the other gods. 

Nature by Another Name. Druids may 
identify Nature as one aspect of an existing 
god—usually a powerful and primal earth or 
natural deity. For instance, if the DM wants 
druids in a fantasy world involving the gods 
of Greek myth, Nature may be worshiped as 
the great earth goddess Gaia without causing 
other changes in druidic behavior. This belief 
pattern enables the druids to participate 
directly in a pantheon of deities. 

Nature is All. Other gods do not exist! 
Druids who hold this belief see other priests 
either as deluded or worshiping Nature under 
a different name. Unless the druids are right, 
(in which case, no other class of priest would 
function in the campaign!) this philosophy 
leads them to have a rather close-minded and 
inflexible faith. Druids may live apart from 
mainstream society as hermits or work as mis- 


sionaries to recruit people to the “one true 
faith.” Quite possibly, believers in other faiths 
would take a dim view of such druids, as no 
one likes to hear their beliefs called lies! 

The Gods Threaten Nature. Other gods are 
acknowledged as powerful entities, but the 
druids consider them unnatural— interlopers 
from the outer planes or beings and philoso- 
phies created by the belief of foolish mortals. 
Followers of aggressive, proselytizing reli- 
gions that actively seek converts and start 
religious wars become dangers to the natural 
order. Druids with this belief tend to act hos- 
tile to those of most other faiths, considering 
them instruments of “outside influences” that 
threaten the balance of Nature! 

Nature as Equal with Other Forces. These 
druids believe that other primal forces exist 
on the same level as Nature, such as Magic or 
Entropy. The priests of these forces may 
become either rivals or allies to druids. 


The Neutral Alignment 


True neutral, the most misunderstood of all 
alignments, often causes problems for players. 
One common mistake is for neutral charac- 
ters, such as druids, to seek a balance by delib- 
erately acting chaotic evil one day and lawful 
good the next. Such behavior makes charac- 
ters unpredictable, and the cumulative effect 
promotes chaos more than anything else. 

Druids consider each alignment equally 
valid in a cosmic sense. They try to remain 
nonjudgmental and uncommitted to any spe- 
cific moral, legal, or philosophical system 
beyond the basic tenets of the druidic order. 
Because a druid’s main charges—plants, ani- 
mals, and the health of the planetary ecol- 
ogy—essentially lack alignment or ethos, the 
character feels free to use almost any means 
necessary to protect them. 

Chapter 4 of the Player’s Handbook discusses 
alignments in a general sense; the druidic 
order works to maintain the natural balance 


ae 


Role-playing Druids * 59 


among these alignments. (See “Keeper of the 
Balance” later in this chapter.) However, 
druids do realize that most individuals’ 
actions—including their own—will not prove 
significant to the cosmic balance. The druid 
sees the friction between alignments as the 
driving force in the world. Although most 
druids personally may prefer to live among 
good people, they recognize that the exis- 
tence of evil keeps intelligent beings from 
stagnating. 

Despite their neutral status, druids don’t 
resent being pulled into the struggle between 
alignments. Neutral individuals do not lack 
interest, ambition, or passion—they value 
their own well-being and that of friends and 
loved ones. They may struggle passionately 
on behalf of themselves and others, as well as 
feel a compassion blanketing everything that 
makes up the Nature they swear to protect. 
Never doubt that druids will act for their own 
goals and the Order’s. 

For example, the druid Rebecca has no 
philosophical objection to helping a group of 
lawful good paladins and clerics defeat an 
evil dragon—if they can demonstrate a good 
reason. She won't agree to kill the dragon 
merely “because it is evil.” But, she might 
help if the dragon had harmed or threatened 
her friends or a forest or village under her 
protection. She might also offer assistance 
simply because she realizes the danger of liv- 
ing near a powerful and unpredictably evil 
creature inclined to wreak havoc upon the 
natural surroundings. Finally, she might join 
the party in return for a pledge that the mem- 
bers aid her in protecting a wilderness area 
from those who would exploit it—or in order 
to get treasure and magical items to do the job 
on her own. 

Clearly, playing a druid true to alignment is 
no easy task. The character must consider 
carefully all the variables in a situation before 
acting. Remember that, when faced with a 
tough decision, a druid usually stands behind 


en 


60 * Chapter Four 


the solution that best serves Nature in the long 
run. So, Rebecca could have an equally valid 
reason to join a band of evil adventurers hunt- 
ing a lawful good dragon as she has to join a 
good party hunting an evil dragon. Although 
a gold or silver dragon is unlikely to threaten 
Rebecca or her sacred grove, she might wish 
to use its treasure to purchase equipment to 
fight a greater threat or win the trust of an evil 
party she can use for her own ends. 

Of course, druids understand that others 
may not take so pragmatic a view. Rebecca 
knows a party of adventurers wouldn’t be 
pleased to find she has stymied its efforts. 
Alignment struggles constitute just another 
aspect of Nature, so Rebecca would never 
seek to stop the members of a party from con- 
tinuing the struggle unless she deems it 
harmful to her own interests or those of the 
force she worships and safeguards. 

A druid allied with a party of adventurers 
usually goes along with the party’s actions 
unless they threaten trees, crops, wild plants, 
and other things the druid holds sacred. At 
the same time, the character needs a reason 
for joining a party—often something as 
simple as a desire to gain the experience and 
power needed to become a more effective 
guardian of Nature. 

Druids tend to react nonjudgmentally 
toward other races. With the possible excep- 
tion of undead, they feel that every race and 
species has its place in the world. For instance, 
a druid recognizes most orcs as evil and cruel. 
The character might not enjoy the company of 
orcs, but doesn’t consider this feeling an 
excuse to exterminate the entire race. Conflict 
between orcs and humans is the way of the 
world, some druids say. They point out that 
orcs live a harsher existence than humans, 
often dwelling in the deadly subterranean 
world. And, while the average human may be 
less cruel than the average orc, mankind is 
capable of greater evil through superior orga- 
nization and civilization. 


OE BALL F 
SSY 
» HANS 


a 
- 
LN 


Druids who stray from their alignment or 
cease to follow the tenets of the Order lose 
major sphere spell access and granted powers 
until they make atonement. In addition, the 
circle’s great druid may place any subordi- 
nate druid under the ban as a temporal pun- 
ishment for such violations. 


A Druid’s Responsibilities 


The beliefs and ethics of druids cover two 
main areas: keeping the balance between the 
alignments and serving as guardians of 
Nature. When role-playing a druid character, 
keep in mind that the character’s behavior 
should reflect the importance of these duties. 


Keeper of the Balance 


Druids have seen that a balance between 
the forces of good and evil, law and chaos, 
best fosters the continuance of life from one 
generation to the next. This druidic duty is 
not so much a personal matter as the ethical 
responsibility of the entire Order. 

Only an event or threat of considerable 
magnitude can cause the balance to tilt 
toward one alignment or another—a matter 
that could affect the destiny of nations. Decid- 
ing that a menace of this degree exists and 
how best to handle it is traditionally left to 
those of archdruid or higher rank, or the High 
Council of the Moot. However, lesser druid 
PCs may decide they know better and take 
action on their own! 

Remember, keeping a balance doesn’t spell 
stagnation. Druids view a slight shift in the 
balance—like the ascendancy of one align- 
ment—to be as natural as a change in the 
weather. An individual druid may prefer a 
period of good (or of law) just as one might 
prefer a warm summer day. But autumn and 
winter remain just as necessary—in a world 
of eternal summer, the autumn harvest never 
comes. 


62 » Chapter Four 


But druids also believe in free will, and 
with free will comes the danger that the bal- 
ance will tilt too far in one direction. Many 
druids believe—rightly or wrongly— that 
powerful beings (gods and extraplanar enti- 
ties) manipulate mortals for just such an end: 
to see their own alignment or faith perma- 
nently triumphant. 

When druids perceive the balance tilting 
too far in any direction, the Order becomes 
concerned. Some individual members may 
profess that the balance will swing back by 
itself, regardless of the actions of mankind. 
Such druids contentedly sit back and let 
events pass without taking action. A druid 
with this belief would not make an interest- 
ing PC, although such a mindset gives the 
DM a good excuse to have senior druids 
refuse to aid the player character! 

But most druids do not share this belief. 
The majority see human and demihuman 
races in general and the druidic order in par- 
ticular as pivotal to maintaining the cosmic 
balance. They look at the cycles of the world 
as driven by the actions and machinations of 
mankind (and other intelligent races) and 
believe that, as individuals play their part in 
the great cycle, they can also upset it. 

This means that, when the cosmic balance 
is obviously in danger of being tilted in favor 
of one alignment or faith, druids will ally 
themselves (openly or covertly) with the 
opposing side. Normally an archdruid or 
great druid makes this decision and devotes 
all energies to rallying the circle against the 
threat. Sometimes a circle of druids becomes 
divided about the situation: Is it serious 
enough to warrant intervention? The circle 
leaves it up to individual druids to decide 
whether to offer assistance. However, keep in 
mind that druids who frequently refuse to aid 
their circle’s cause will find themselves un- 
able to attract help from senior druids when 
they need it. 

Although the balance could swing too far 


in any direction, DMs should set their cam- 
paigns at times when evil has grown alarm- 
ingly in strength, for such periods allow 
druid PCs to become heroes. With the balance 
threatened by the power of evil, most druids 
find themselves in the position to serve the 
cause of good willingly. This motivation is 
good for the game, as it provides plenty of 
adventure for good-aligned PCs while giving 
druids a chance to fight by their sides. 

Similarly, in a game featuring the PCs as 
rebels or outlaws against authority, the bal- 
ance may have swung in favor of inflexible 
law. In such a case, druids may side with the 
forces of chaos—good, neutral, and maybe 
even evil—in the struggle of liberty against 
oppression. 


Defense of the Wilderness 


The second major responsibility of druid 
characters is to defend the wilderness and its 
wildlife. Players sometimes feel uncertain as 
to the limits of a druid’s concern for Nature, 
especially in regard to how druids treat those 
who make a living hunting or farming. 

Since all druids are charged with protecting 
natural wilderness, trees, wild plants, wild 
animals, and crops, they also protect the 
people who follow druidic beliefs, such as 
peasants and hunters living in harmony with 
Nature. (See the Guardian and Village Druid 
kits, Chapter 2.) 

Druids realize all creatures have basic 
needs for food, shelter, and self-defense. 
Humans must hunt animals for food and 
must clear trees to farm and build houses. 
These actions constitute a necessary part of 
the natural cycle. But druids do not tolerate 
unnecessary destruction or exploitation of 
Nature. Sensing violations, a druid investi- 
gates the motives of the people involved, 
weighing them against the risk to the land. 
Then the druid decides whether to take 
action. 


Protecting Animals. Only a very few druids 
(like those with the Pacifist kit) oppose hunt- 
ing or raising animals for food, skins, or fur. In 
fact, many druids hunt animals for food and 
clothing themselves. They do frown upon 
killing animals simply for sport, over-hunting 
(or over-trapping) a region, and treating ani- 
mals with excessive cruelty. And most druids 
do not even take this feeling to extremes. They 
know that feudal nobles, for instance, enjoy 
the hunt; few such hunters are cruel killers, 
and their game ends up on the lord’s tables. 

Druids oppose trapping or hunting beasts 
to use their fur or other body parts for frivo- 
lous reasons. A hunter may kill a single wolf 
and take its pelt to make a wolfskin cloak, 
according to druidic philosophy. If the hunter 
kills a couple wolves every year and sells 
their pelts, a druid may or may not be upset, 
depending on the prevalence of wolves in the 
area. But if a hunter regularly traps dozens of 
wolves and makes a fortune selling their pelts 
to local merchants, a druid will become angry 
and take action. 

Even more than trapping for food or fur, 
druids hate to see animals captured for use in 
events like bear baiting, bullfighting, or other 
such “sports.” Druids always try to stop these 
spectacles and free the animals. They may 
wreak terrible vengeance on those who cap- 
ture wild beasts for sport or operate the arenas 
where animals are forced to fight. 

Protecting Trees and Woodlands. Druids 
have nothing against most forms of farming, 
even if it means clearing woodlands or drain- 
ing swamps to create new fields. Although 
druids feel a special reverence for trees, crops 
are plants too, and civilized races have a right 
to practice agriculture. 

The druid may object to destroying a wil- 
derness area for a farm extension that is 
strictly for profit. For instance, clearing a for- 
est for a large plantation to grow cash crops— 
especially ones intended for pleasure, such as 
tobacco—would raise a druid’s ire. 


——— 


Role-playing Druids * 63 


A druid also will oppose farming that re- 
quires the destruction of ancient wilderness 
areas, large spreads of land, or any region 
that serves as a sanctuary for rare, endan- 
gered, or magical plants and animals. Most 
importantly, no druid ever tolerates the de- 
struction of a sacred grove! Druids also dis- 
courage farming practices that harm the soil 
and selfish irrigation schemes (dams, aque- 
ducts, etc.) intended to parch one region to 
slake another’s thirst. 

Druids sometimes tolerate logging or clear- 
ing land to mine useful minerals like salt, 
copper, tin, and iron. After all, they use man- 
ufactured items themselves. Whether to 
accept such land use depends on the motives 
and need of those involved and the nature of 
the region in question, just as with farming. 

Cutting down a forest to build houses is 
one thing—especially if the builder makes 
some effort at replanting. Using the wood to 
build a fleet of warships to satisfy the ambi- 
tions of a tyrant is much less likely to find 
sympathy with the druid. On the other hand, 
if the proposed fleet will oppose the invasion 
force of a king whose conquests threaten to 
tip the balance of good and evil, some druids 
may justify the forest's loss. 

Cleansing Nature. Some acts defile the 
very essence of Nature and require immedi- 
ate opposition. For instance, the magical 
forced transformation of a large forest into a 
bizarre, otherplanar landscape instantly 
draws the enmity of the circle. If a sacred 
grove falls under a curse, druids will work to 
lift it and reclaim the land. 

A more common perversion of Nature is 
the undead. The fact that no druidic branch 
has the power to turn or control undead does 
not mean druids tolerate them. Rather, the 
druid’s lack of power over the living dead 
reflects the absolute aversion this class has 
toward them. Things exist in a natural cycle: 
birth, growth, death, rebirth, The undead 
break this cycle—worse, they are the enemies 


64 + Chapter Four 


of life. Therefore, most druids see the undead 
as abominations to stamp out to restore the 
proper workings of Nature. 

Yet, druids do not actively hunt undead. 
This is primarily because undead rarely 
directly invade a druid’s sphere of interest. 
However, if a vampire starts menacing a 
peaceful village, a banshee begins stalking 
the moors, or a lich introduces a reign of ter- 
ror to the wilderness, a druid may intervene. 
Because druids lack the key powers necessary 
to fight undead (although their elemental 
magic can prove useful), they will ally with a 
good-aligned party also interested in wiping 
out the undead. 

Defending Croplands and Farmers. A 
druid feels an obligation to protect farmers 
who worship Nature and to safeguard fields 
and livestock. For details, see the Village 
Druid kit (Chapter 2) and the “Festivals” sec- 
tion in this chapter. 


Eyes in the Wilderness 


Defending an entire tract of wilderness and 
safeguarding the balance of forces within it 
spells a lot of work for one druid. (In addi- 
tion, sometimes druids are asked to give 
reports on their section of the domain at 
moots.) Clearly, to do a good job, the druid 
needs reliable sources of information and 
early knowledge of possible threats. 

Druids’ own powers do go a long way in 
keeping them aware of the goings-on in and 
near their area. The ability to pass without a 
trace and blend into the woods allows druids 
to maintain watch on anyone entering the 
wild. Even better is their shapechange power. 
Druids risk detection when using it, but very 
few people—unless they know they have a 
druidic enemy—ever would suspect that a 
spy lurks in the form of the mangy hound 
munching a bone under the lord’s table or the 
cat hiding under the bed. To infiltrate a foe’s 
stronghold, druids often assume the shape of 


a domestic animal, allowing themselves to be 
bought at market or given as a gift—although 
those shapechanging into an edible animal 
should take care to avoid the stew pot! 

At high levels, the ability to cast speak with 
plants or stone tell proves very useful. If the 
druid is looking for general information, 
good recipients for such a spell include trees 
or standing stones at crossroads, at wells, or 
near town or castle gates. 

Animal Aides. Still, druids can be in only 
one place at a time. In addition to their own 
powers, they also use animal resources. Speak 
with animals gives druids an ability enemies 
always regret underestimating. 

Druids rely on animals mostly in the wild: 
a spread of furry, feathered, and scaly “spies” 
all over the land to keep watch on the move- 
ments of friends and enemies alike. Normally, 
small, inconspicuous animals work best— 
especially birds, with their excellent mobility, 
aerial vantage point, and good eyesight. 
Rodents, from squirrels to mice, rarely get 
noticed. Domestic animals constitute another 
good choice due to their intelligence. They 
have the added bonus of being able to tell the 
druid about the activities inside a building. 

To this end, a druid who can speak with 
animals should use every opportunity to 
insinuate these aides into important areas, 
such as the lord’s stronghold—perhaps a 
character can even covertly cast animal friend- 
ship (or better, charm person or mammal) ona 
foe's animals. Some individuals may protect 
their servants from charm, but few think to 
check domestic animals. 

One problem with using animals kept 
inside a building involves the difficulty of 
staying in touch with them. Animal helpers 
should have an opportunity to slip out to 
meet the druid (like a cat that is put out at 
night) or should remain in magical contact 
with the druid. (See the animal spy spell in 
Chapter 5: Druidic Magic.) With this logistical 
problem solved, domestic animal spies can 


prove exceedingly effective. People may 
search high and low to discover a traitor, 
never dreaming that traitor is actually a fal- 
con, pet dog, or war horse! 

Animals have a limitation, though: They 
often don’t understand what they see and 
hear and sometimes can’t determine what is 
worth reporting. A dog can recognize certain 
people and usually has a general idea what its 
owners are doing, but it cannot understand 
speech. A mouse or bat probably cannot tell 
one person from another. Animals can tell 
druids of unusual events, like the passage of a 
large body of men. They can warn druids 
when people have entered or left buildings or 
mention when a new monster appears. But, 
for detailed and reliable intelligence, the druid 
needs just that: intelligent spies. To this end, 
all druids should make use of the eyes and 
ears of other inhabitants of the wilderness. 

Human and Demihuman Assets. Druids 
who have lived in an area for a long time 
should cultivate friendly contacts among the 
surrounding manors and villages. If the 
people openly follow druidism, they gener- 
ally inform the druid of unusual happenings 
as a matter of course. Otherwise, druids try to 
place one “agent” in each village or castle in 
their area; low-ranking servants often have 
reason to go into the wilds every now and 
then (chopping firewood, grazing the animals, 
etc.), giving them an excuse to secretly meet 
the druid. Some druids befriend children for 
this purpose, since no one will miss them 
when they go out to play, nor will most people 
suspect children of passing information. 

Druids try to keep in touch with a friend at 
every roadside and village inn within their 
territory. This source isn’t necessarily the 
innkeeper: Someone less obvious, like a ser- 
vant or stablekeeper, works better. Since 
adventurers and other interesting travelers 
usually stop at inns, the source can update 
druids on newcomers. 

The druid must contact these aides regularly 


—— 


Role-playing Druids * 65 


to advise them of the sort of information they 


should look for and receive their news. Just as 
important as having agents is having a means 
of collecting updates from them, after all. The 
2nd-level messenger spell suits this purpose 
ideally. Innkeepers and the like tend to stay 
terribly busy, so providing them with a trained 
messenger animal (often a bird) can ensure 
periodic reports. If the agent (or druid) cannot 
read or write, the pair can arrange a simple 
code: a red ribbon on the bird’s foot means, 
“Come immediately,” a blue ribbon means, 
“Interesting strangers staying at the inn.” 

\ druid’s agents almost never work profes- 
sionally as spies, and few know much about 
the druid’s doings (helpful, if an enemy ques- 
tions them). Most are just ordinary (0-level) 
men and women. Druids don’t have to reveal 
their identity to these contacts—they just use 
their natural charm (Charisma of 15 or better) 
to appear as romantic, mysterious figures 


ee  ——————————————————————————————— 


66 * Chapter Four 


who will pay well if kept informed of local 
gossip. Just as often, druids recruit from 
among those who are in their debt. For in- 
stance, a druid who used magic to save a 
child from disease might recruit the grateful 
mother as another set of eyes. Also, druids 
utilize members of families that have fol- 
lowed the druidic faith for generations (often 
in secret). Finally, druids do not hesitate to 
use charm person or mammal to create excellent 
involuntary spies when necessary! 

Besides these local folk, druids should also 
strive to be on good terms with travelers like 
tinkers, Gypsies, bards, merchants, entertain- 
ers, and rangers. These people, often the first 
to bear news from the next county, always 
know what the neighbors are talking about 
Being on “good terms” usually requires mak- 
ing friends with a few prominent members of 
these groups and offering magical assistance 
at times. 


Sylvan Creatures. Elves, satyrs, dryads, tre- 
ants, sylphs, and similar native creatures rep- 
resent a priceless resource every druid should 
cultivate to the utmost. Their special powers 
and ability to blend into the wilderness make 
them excellent scouts. In addition, their goals 
usually parallel those of the druid—the pro- 
tection of the woodlands and wilderness—so 
their information likely will prove timely and 
reliable. A character tends to receive a more 
regular flow of gossip by befriending particu- 
lar sylvan beings—make friends with Shay- 
lara the Pixie rather than just staying on good 
terms with a “band of pixies.” To foster this 
comradeship, the druid should often visit the 
dwellings of local pixies, sprites, elves, and 
the like, and always stand ready to offer help, 
such as magical cures or protection from 
adventurers or monsters. 

Humanoids and Evil Monsters. Druid 
characters should not forget that their neutral 
alignment enables them to make use of all 
sorts of information sources. Those who live 
near a monster and stay on speaking terms 
with it sometimes receive a messenger with 
information from the creature—which un- 
doubtedly hopes for a favor or bribe. This 
relationship generally requires that the druid 
first win the monster’s trust: by providing 
food in a harsh winter, using magic to heal 
injuries, etc. 

However, druids must use the stick along 
with the carrot—most evil creatures prove 
truly helpful only after the character demon- 
strates the fury of druidic wrath! Even so, 
humanoids and monsters usually feel happy 
to alert the druid if something mysterious is 
making them uneasy—or if good forces are 
infiltrating the wilderness. 

Remember, evil creatures are notorious 
liars: They will tell the druid only what suits 
them. A tribe of forest-dwelling goblins at- 
tacked and routed by two high-level rangers 
and a paladin might warn the druid of these 
intruders—after changing some details of their 


encounter with “. . . dozens of human war- 
riors! We got many, but they were too much 
powerful. We see them chop down tree .. .” 
Caveat emptor. 


Druidic Ceremonies 


Besides protecting the wilderness and main- 
taining the cosmic balance, druidic responsi- 
bilities include worshiping Nature through 
the appropriate ceremonies. This duty also 
involves casting spells and presiding over 
rites, many of which involve the use of the 
druids’ secret language. (See Chapter 1.) 
Other ceremonies benefit the druid’s flock— 
those rural folk who worship Nature (or a 
Nature deity) and follow the druidic ethos. 
The exact rituals vary from circle to circle and 
branch to branch, but all druids practice the 
common ones, including: 

Prayers. Druids almost always pray in the 
form of poems or songs celebrating the beauty 
and power of Nature and the druid’s role in 
it. These poems are valued as much for the 
beauty of their language and imagery as for 
their ritual value; dual-class bard/ druids cre- 
ated some of the most memorable ones. A 
druid should create new prayers after per- 
sonal inspiration. Many prayers celebrate a 
specific aspect of Nature, such as the begin- 
ning of spring, and are sung, chanted, or spo- 
ken only certain days. 

Wild Dancing. The ceremonies of druids— 
especially younger initiates—often involve 
dancing. The movements, rarely formal or ritu- 
alized, are wild, impulsive, individual, and 
ecstatic—a spontaneous celebration of Nature’s 
energy. Druids may dance while praying to 
regain spells; although in motion, the druid 
remains in deep communion with the powers 
of Nature during the dance, as oblivious to the 
rest of the world as if deep in study. 

Holy Days. Like other priests, druids offer 
brief prayers one or more times a day, but 
they also have holidays in which they devote 


eee ————————e 


Role-playing Druids * 67 


the entire day (or night) to sacred ceremonies. 
Druids typically spend two full days every 
month observing the holy days of their partic- 
ular branch and of the Order as a whole. 
Minor celebrations usually take place in 
accordance with the lunar calendar; on the 
highly important first days of the full moon 
and new moon, most druids hold daylong or 
nightlong rites, either on their own or in the 
company of other druids. 

Even more important are those ceremonies 
held four times a year to celebrate the chang- 
ing of the seasons. At such times, an arch- 
druid or the great druid summons most 
druids in the circle together for a great moot. 
Initiations and challenges often, but not 
always, occur at these times. 

Festivals. Festivals are holy days cele- 
brated not just by druids but by the entire 
community. If a village or tribe openly fol- 
lows the druidic philosophy, some or all the 
seasonal rites include a joyous public festival. 
Druids praise Nature and bless the village, 
livestock, and crops. Then, with the locals, 
they sing, dance, and make merry for the rest 
of the day around a tree or Maypole in the vil- 
lage green. 

Following the day of celebration, the 
assemblage builds bonfires on the hills to 
ward off evil, enjoys performances by visiting 
bards, and watches locals dressed as animals 
dance to ensure good hunting. Springtime 
rites, the most important, end with the cast- 
ing of plant growth on the fields to guarantee 
their fertility come harvest time. 

Private rites involving only the druids usu- 
ally follow a festival—often late at night. 

Appeasement. Druids, while they do not 
always object to replacing wilderness with 
cropland, insist on performing a ceremony 
before any land is cleared. These rites, de- 
signed to appease, comfort, and lay to rest the 
spirits of the trees and plants about to be cut 
down, normally require a druid’s presence 
for half a day per acre of wilderness slated for 


ee aaa 


68 » Chapter Four 


clearing. In some cases, a druid high enough 
in level casts a commune with nature spell to 
determine if permitting the destruction is the 
right thing to do. 

A druid unable to perform the rites before 
the clearing of the land begins will become 
very upset. At the DM’s discretion, this lack 
of appeasement also may lead to the appear- 
ance of creatures such as treants, who seek to 
avenge the destruction. 

Rites of Passage. A young person coming 
of age usually undergoes a rite of passage 
into adulthood. A druid living among the 
local folk administers this usually secret rite, 
which may involve anything from a spiritual 
revelation to a painful ordeal, depending on 
the culture. 

For example, the druid, after invoking a 
blessing, might lead the candidate into the 
deep woods, then leave the adolescent to find 
the way home. Along the way, the druid may 
appear in shapechanged forms to act as a 
guide. Candidates who make it out of the 
woods (very likely, unless they ignore or mis- 
treat their animal guides) are considered 
adults from that day forward. If they guess 
that the druid had been watching over them 
in animal form, they may find their destiny 
lies in a druidic career. 

Marriages. Druids perform marriage cere- 
monies for locals under their spiritual care, 
usually simple affairs in a druid’s grove or 
village green. There, the man and woman 
share vows to love, respect, and protect one 
another, with the druid serving as witness. 
Following the vows comes an exchange of 
tokens, prayers for the couple’s health and 
fertility, and finally a party and feast. 

Druids themselves, rarely celibate, usually 
choose to marry and raise children. Some 
circles prefer their druids to limit their choice 
to “suitable” mates: druids or bards, and per- 
haps elves, dryads, or sylphs. Independent 
rural folk like tinkers, rangers, Gypsies, or 
foresters also constitute good choices. Love 


can be blind, but a druid generally prefers a 
mate of neutral alignment, from a rural back- 
ground, who follows the druidic faith. 

Funerals. Most druids bury their dead 
(although some prefer cremation), returning 
the body of a loved one to the earth near a 
sacred grove. Mourners celebrate the de- 
ceased through poems and prayers, and a 
hired bard may offer additional memorials in 
song. Finally, the presiding druid blesses the 
departed spirit and—since most druids be- 
lieve in reincarnation—prays for its safe 
rebirth. Friends and family then hold a wake 
to remember the departed person through 
song, dance, and merrymaking. 

Initiations. Worthy aspirants seeking to 
enter the druidic order must be initiated by 
an inner circle member. The initiation takes 
place at a moot or in a sacred grove on a holy 
day. The candidate, after being purified with 
holy water, takes the druidic oath: a promise 
to preserve the balance of the world, to follow 
the druidic ethos, to respect the freedom of 
other druids in and beyond the circle, to act 
as a guardian of Nature (or the deity that per- 
sonifies Nature to the Order), and to live true 
to the druidic order and keep its secrets safe. 


Character Strategy 


Exactly how do druids go about fulfilling 
the responsibilities discussed above? In role- 
playing terms, there are some interesting 
strategies you, the player, can use to make the 
most of your druid character’s potential. 

Suppose the druid Dannay wished to pre- 
serve an old wood, but the local baron and his 
peasants want it cut down, claiming they 
need the land to plant crops to keep from 
going hungry. What does the druid do? 


Find the Root of the Problem 


First, Dannay must determine the truth of 
the situation—what lies behind the decision 


to chop down the wood? Are the peasants 
really in need or just greedy? Is their lord sim- 
ply attempting to increase his own income? 
Why are the peasants likely to starve? Is there 
any other land to plant? 

After investigating, Dannay decides the 
peasants do have a legitimate need to develop 
the old wood. Next, he considers the threat- 
ened trees themselves. Is the woodland 
ancient? (Druids prefer to preserve the eldest 
trees.) Does it harbor species of rare animals or 
plants? Will its destruction displace sylvan 
races? Is this forest one of the few unspoiled 
areas left in the region? Does a sacred grove lie 
within the forest? All these, particularly the 
last, constitute good reasons for a druid to take 
a stand opposing the destruction of the wood. 

Assume that, for one of these reasons, Dan- 
nay finds this wood of ancient oak worth pre- 
serving. In most cases he first seeks a peaceful 
compromise. 


Negotiate a Solution 


For instance, if the area possesses no other 
available Jand, Dannay might show the peas- 
ants that expansion isn’t necessary. Say the 
peasants’ problem is that their current crops 
don’t yield enough to feed them and cover 
their tithes. Dannay might offer his services 
as an adviser if the lord agrees to lower the 
peasants’ taxes. If the baron refuses—or 
already levies merely reasonable taxes—the 
druid could try to help directly. 

How should Dannay help? As an expert in 
agriculture, he can suggest techniques to 
increase the yield of the peasants’ current 
crops so they don’t require expansion. Or he 
might make a bargain: In exchange for the 
peasants agreeing not to encroach on the 
wood, he will use druidic magic to cure (or 
prevent) disease among their animals, or heal 
sick villagers and livestock. High-level druids 
could promise to control the weather to 
extend the growing season or to prevent 


Lt 


Role-playing Druids * 69 


droughts or floods. Most useful of all, a druid 
with access to the 3rd-level spell plant growth 
can increase the prosperity of any farm dra- 
matically. 

But suppose the idea of a compromise does 
not meet with favor. Maybe the peasants have 
a priest of their own who already provides 
this sort of magical aid. Perhaps they follow a 
religion that distrusts druids. Maybe the 
baron has determined to expand his land at 
all costs—or perhaps he just doesn't like a 
druid telling him what to do! In any event, 
Dannay may have to turn to harsher mea- 
sures. Exactly what he does depends on his 
assessment of the strength and character of 
the opposition and the importance of the 
wilds in question. 

Several options make themselves available 
when negotiation fails. Many call for the 
druid, short of destroying an enemy, to break 
that enemy’s morale instead. 


Ultimatum 


Dannay could simply announce to the 
peasants and lord, “Violate my wood, and 
you will regret it.” This threat may work for 
prestigious druids; it also may prove success- 
ful if backed up with a flashy demonstration, 
like a wall of thorns around a portion of the 
threatened wood or a call lightning spell in the 
midst of the speech. 

The DM should judge the effect of the ulti- 
matum depending on the alignment of the 
NPCs involved, how desperately they want 
the land, and the reputation and actions of 
the druid. Most likely the lord and peasants 
will not be so easily cowed, and Dannay will 
have to turn to direct action. 


Harassment 


The druid could choose to use passive, 
nonviolent resistance to prevent the leveling 
of the wood. Suppose a party of lumberjacks 


a aMMa 


70 » Chapter Four 


enters to begin work. Dannay could have 
enchanted plants entangle or snare them, 
order chipmunks and squirrels to steal their 
food, cast summon insects to harass them, 
make them lose their way using obscurement, 
summon rain and wind down on them, and 
so on. 

Strong, determined loggers may succeed in 
clearing a few acres despite Nature’s torment. 
But, what will they do when, upon waking 
the next day, they see all their work undone 
thanks to a hallucinatory forest spell? If they 
are wise, they'll turn around and head for 
home! 


Fear 


Alternately, Dannay might try to convince 
the locals that the wood is haunted; he wants 
them to stay out just for their own safety. 
Even if the wood was previously safe, the 
druid may convince the peasants that their 
intentions to cut it down have awakened 
ancient wood spirits ready to rise against any 
intruders. 

Careful use of spells like faerie fire and dust 
devil can simulate ghosts; obscurement makes 
mysterious mists; control temperature, 10° 
radius creates eerie chills; and druids also can 
call up packs of howling wolves or flocks of 
bats. Props like an erected gallows with a 
human skull or two lying around in the wood 
strike terror into the hearts of peasants and 
common soldiers alike. 

Naturally, some people will suspect Dan- 
nay is behind this, especially if he tried nego- 
tiating with the locals and lord earlier. So, 
some druids simply use fear tactics before 
attempting a compromise! 


Hit-and-Run 


A ruthless druid facing a determined foe 
may combine fear with violent actions, such 
as killing intruders and leaving their bodies 


for others to find—or just allowing the vic- 
tims to vanish without a trace. This technique 
can prove very effective, especially when the 
deaths are mysterious and not directly trace- 
able to the druid’s magic. But Dannay should 
be wary of doing the job too well: Misleading 
the natives into believing that murderous 
undead roam the wood, for instance, may 
lead them to call upon outsider paladins or 
clerics to purge the area. 


Defense 


Dannay may decide merely to defend his 
land aggressively, attacking anyone who 
enters the wood. Druids frequently resort to a 
defensive stance when fear or harassment 
fail. The character aims to convince intruders 
exploitation is too costly to be worthwhile. 
The druid’s tactics resemble a more violent 
form of harassment. In particular, Dannay 


would mobilize native creatures (using animal 


friendship and sometimes animal growth spells) 


to attack intruders and—if he has time— 
would set lethal traps, such as pits and dead- 
falls. The druid also may recruit allies, per- 
haps other druids or monsters who could lose 
their lairs to the axe. 

Like many good generals, Dannay himself 
often stays back from the fighting, instead 
setting up magical traps and sending animals 
and plants into battle. Normally a druid 
would risk himself to save an animal, but in 
this case he is battling not just for one crea- 
ture, but for an entire habitat. Dannay knows 
he must spare his own life so he can continue 
to preserve the lives of others. 


War 


Usually as a last resort, the druid may 
choose to carry the fight to the enemy’s castle 


S ae 


Role-playing Druids « 71 


or village. Typically, only a high-level druid 
has the ability to do this. And remember, 
Dannay has no obligation to use “honorable” 
tactics. If he has chosen to fight, it is because 
he believes his opponents have failed to com- 
promise. 

A druid’s actions in war may range from 
subtle tricks, like stealing some or all the local 
plow animals and war horses, to something 
direct but nonviolent, like shapechanging 
into a bird, sneaking into the offending lord's 
bedchamber, and taking his first-born hostage 
for his good behavior. Or, Dannay could use 
spells like call lightning, conjure fire elemental, 
creeping doom, or earthquake to wreak destruc- 
tion. Even low-level spells like produce flame 
can easily set fire to a peasant’s cottage or a 
field of grain. 

Please note that Dannay will direct his 
every action solely against those who cause 
the problem. If a greedy baron represents the 
threat to the wood, the druid targets the 
baron. If the problem lies with the peasants, 
he tries to intimidate them or drive them 
away. A druid never engages in wanton vio- 
lence for its own sake. 

When a PC druid uses any of these strate- 
gies, the DM should work out the response of 
the factions opposing the druid’s interests. 
For instance, perhaps the baron sends up to 
three village work parties daily into the 
wood, each of which can clear one acre of for- 
est if allowed to work unimpeded. If the 
druid decides to harass them or frighten them 
off, the DM should refer to the rules for 
morale and NPC reactions (DMG, pgs. 69-72, 
114-115) and make morale checks any time 
the druid succeeds with an action the DM 
deems would frustrate, impede, or frighten 
them. If a work party fails enough checks, the 
workers either get nothing done that day or 
return home, too scared to come back. Per- 
haps soldiers or the lord's mage escort the 
next work parties. If Dannay succeeds in 
dealing with this new threat, the DM may 


72 + « Chapter Four 


wish to check the baron’s morale. Failing this 
check, the baron may negotiate. 


Revenge 


A druid who has failed to stop the defile- 
ment of Nature often seeks vengeance, for 
one of three reasons. First, the druid removes 
his foe to make sure the defilement doesn’t 
happen again. Second, a druid’s act of re- 
venge sends a message to others. And third, 
as most druids are human, they can succumb 
to anger and feelings of injustice as easily as 
anyone else, 

Vengeful druids must consider this ques- 
tion carefully: Who is the intended object of 
revenge? For example, a druid may immedi- 
ately target as foes trappers massacring win- 
ter wolf cubs for their fur. But, upon investi- 
gation, the druid discovers that the trappers 
are merely poor yeomen or peasants simply 
trying to earn money to support their fami- 
lies. The real enemies become the gentleman 
furriers who grow rich off the sale of the 
pelts, and the lords and ladies who demand 
winter wolf fur as this year’s high fashion. 
The druid should take revenge on these 
people. 

A character seeking vengeance will wait 
patiently and make careful plans. This behav- 
ior sometimes makes them seem cold- 
blooded, but the druid has a long memory—a 
foe who appears too strong today may prove 
weaker tomorrow. 

Druids prefer subtle forms of vengeance. If 
a wicked sheriff were responsible for the 
destruction of a druid’s grove, the druid might 
try to frame the sheriff for treason against his 
lord rather than risk a direct attack. For the 
sheriff to be executed as a traitor would be a 
fitting revenge! 

Some druids enjoy irony. Suppose a noble 
cleared an ancient forest to set up a vineyard. 
After the first pressing, a druid might sneak 
into the wine cellar and spoil the vintage. 


A druid carefully considers the conse- 
quences of an act of vengeance and works 
them into the overall plan. For instance, if a 
king's sheriff were the druid’s enemy, the 
druid would not try to destroy the sheriff 
without knowing what would happen after- 
ward. In particular, the druid would not try 
to destroy an enemy who might be replaced 
with an even worse foe. Instead, the druid 
might take vengeance in a different form— 
perhaps by kidnaping the sheriff’s infant to 
raise as a druid who one day would prove a 
foe to the sheriff. 


Relations with Others 


Here’s how relations often stand between 
druids and the people and monsters that live 
in or near the wild. 


Woodcutters and Hunters 


Druids act much as game wardens do, let- 
ting woodcutters know which trees they may 
cut and which they must leave standing, and 
telling hunters which species they may hunt 
and which are protected. 

Sometimes these folk resent or even dis- 
obey such orders, but most druids temper 
their restrictions with reason and balance 
punishment with reward. People who live or 
work in the wild and follow a druid’s laws 
remain under druidic protection. Druids use 
their spells when necessary to cure injury or 
sickness in hunters’ families, prevent starva- 
tion among woodcutters in harsh times, and 
so on. Those who don’t follow druidic rules 
cannot expect help, even in cases of dire need. 


Local Animals 


Druids try to get to’know most wild ani- 
mals within a few miles of home, learning 
their daily habits, the locations of their lairs, 
and so on. A druid makes a point of keeping 


Role-playing Druids © 73 


track of animals that are pregnant, weak, or 
sick, and usually aids (or puts down) dis- 
eased, mad, or injured local creatures. How- 
ever, a druid does not interfere with normal 
cycles of predators and prey. Think of this 
attitude as that of forest rangers or game war- 
dens: Protecting species holds greater impor- 
tance than safeguarding individuals. Still, 
druids often befriend a few local animals, 
whom they respect and protect as they would 
human companions. Animals frequently 
serve as a busy druid’s eyes and ears. 


Sylvan and Faerie Creatures 


Druids respect certain creatures as sentient 
embodiments of the “spirit” of Nature. Forest 
druids, in particular, would risk their lives to 
protect sylvan or faerie beings and would 
oppose other humans to protect the wilderness 
where they live. In return, these creatures often 
give druids official standing in their communi- 
ties, perhaps as ambassadors to human realms. 
A druid might receive an invitation to speak at 
a sylvan or faerie council to offer a “human 
viewpoint,” although only rarely would 
humans extend the same courtesy. 


Outlaws, Fugitives, and Bandits 


Folk living away from society sometimes 
find themselves operating in the same wilder- 
ness areas as druids. As druids know their 
woods intimately, they can become vital 
allies—and bitter enemies, for they know 
exactly where outlaws hide and can lead pur- 
suers to them if they choose. Thus, any out- 
laws exist on the druids’ sufferance. 

Druids usually prefer to avoid becoming 
involved with criminals. They sometimes 
shelter individual fugitives and, rarely, offer 
assistance to entire bands of outlaws whose 
activities further druidic goals and show 
proper respect toward Nature. Druids’ actions 
generally depend on the situation. 


74 * Chapter Four 


For instance, a character wishing to dis- 
courage farmers or loggers from making 
inroads into a forest might consider an 
alliance with bandits, while one on good 
terms with neighboring villagers and nobility 
would seek to drive them away or reveal 
their location to the law. But most often, the 
druid remains uninvolved, acting only to pro- 
tect the wilderness from threats. 


Local Monsters 


Druids usually stay on good or neutral 
terms with local monsters, opposing them 
only if they threaten the entire area or the 
druid personally, For instance, a beholder 
that uses a woodland cave as its sanctuary 
makes a fine neighbor for a druid; one that 
tries to enslave large numbers of sylvan folk 
to conquer a nearby elven kingdom means 
trouble and should be eliminated before it 
engulfs the forest in a devastating war. 

In general, the druid will act more favor- 
ably to creatures that “belong” in an area. A 
green dragon, a native of woodlands just as 
much as an elf or bear, finds it only natural to 
prey on elves and men. A druid has no argu- 
ment with this tendency. After all, the humans 
and elves can always send a knight to slay the 
dragon. 

Most druids make an effort to stay on 
speaking terms with intelligent monsters, 
good, evil, or neutral. The druid may do occa- 
sional favors for a creature on a quid pro quo 
basis. For example, the druid might volunteer 
to heal a sick or injured monster; the druid 
wants something in return, like a promise 
that the beast will refrain from attacking a 
certain village, will free its captives, or will 
aid the druid in battle. 


Evil Humanoids 


The druid knows these evil humanoid 
races make up a natural part of the world and 


have a right to struggle for existence. As a 
result, druids will not act against orcs, gob- 
lins, or the like simply because of their race or 
“evil” nature. In fact, in the eyes of the druids, 
these races represent less of a threat to the 
wilderness than do humans or dwarves: Few 
humanoids organize beyond the tribal level, 
they rarely build big cities above ground, and 
they prefer hunting and gathering to exten- 
sive farming. 

A few druids—especially Shadow Circle 
members—ally with native humanoids to 
protect the wilderness against encroachment 
or to aid weaker tribes being persecuted for 
no good reason. However, they make these 
agreements with care and in utmost secrecy, 
for they realize the humanoids’ evil nature 
makes them treacherous comrades. More- 
over, if word of such an alliance got out, it 
could damage the druidic order’s reputation 
among humans and elves. 

Evil humanoids hold the druids in fairly 
high regard—some tribes always release 
druid captives. While these races couldn’t 
care less for the sanctity of Nature or the wel- 
fare of animals, most humanoids respect 
Nature’s mighty power and its servants. 


Rangers and Elves 


The ranger class and the elven race resemble 
each other in that both consist of good aligned 
beings dwelling in the wild, protecting it from 
evil forces. Elves and rangers sometimes argue 
with druids over how best to guide the sylvan 
peoples and maintain the guardianship of the 
forests, but this is usually a friendly disagree- 
ment. If an area has a particularly effective 
ranger presence, druids may agree to divide 
up responsibility for its guardianship: Rangers 
handle human and demihuman affairs, while 
druids take care of sylvan creatures and the 
problems of native animals and plants. Such 
informal arrangements, however, often prove 
subject to swift change. 


Druids consider it a courtesy for a ranger of 
equivalent or lower level to ask permission to 
operate in an area they occupy and usually 
resent those who neglect this courtesy. If a 
ranger does ask permission, a druid generally 
feels pleased to cooperate. 

Occasionally druids find elven or ranger 
actions one-sided, impetuous, or insuffi- 
ciently ruthless to the job at hand. On the 
other hand, some elven council chambers and 
ranger gatherings ring with the accusation 
that druids would give as much credence to 
the word of an orc or a green dragon as they 
do an elf or a treant. Those outside the Order 
fear the overly cunning druidic stratagems do 
not have the best interests of the elven nations 
at heart. But despite the occasional suspicion, 
many friendships grow up between druids 
and rangers or elves, and each group respects 
the other as protectors of the wild. 


Gnomes and Halflings 


Druids generally get along with the small 
folk and help them when the need arises. In 
turn, a majority of gnomes and halflings 
(even those that do not follow the druidic reli- 
gion) respect druid characters. 

Most gnomes and halflings follow an ethos 
compatible with druidic beliefs: Live in har- 
mony with the environment and rarely take 
from it more than needed. Moreover, druids 
see them as practical people who, though 
inclined toward good, rarely develop the 
fanatical opposition to “evil” the druids have 
seen in some humans, elves, and dwarves. 


Dwarves 


The dwarven affinity with the earth pri- 
marily extends to unliving stone and metal, 
while the druids prize living trees and ani- 
mals. As a result, druids and dwarves have 
very different philosophical outlooks. 

It doesn’t help relations when dwarves cut 


DSSS 


Role-playing Druids * 75 


down forests and dig ugly mine shafts in 
green mountainsides in their quest for the 
coal and firewood needed to feed their hun- 
gry forges. Nor do dwarves enjoy seeing 
druids favor elves and advocate a “live and 
let live” policy with the dwarves’ arch-foes, 
the goblin races. The result? Druids and 
dwarves remain on poor terms and have 
harsh words for each other when they meet. 


Personality Types 


You’ve now read how typical druids act in 
a variety of situations. But every druid—just 
like every other PC or significant NPC— 
should be different, with unique habits and 
personality traits. Chapter 2: Druid Kits illus- 
trated the “role” of each kit and how a druid 
with a certain kit usually behaves. But not 
every druid of the same branch and kit acts 
the same way. To expand on this idea, a half- 


76 * Chapter Four 


dozen common personality archetypes for 
druids follow. 

Please note that using these personality 
types is totally optional—feel free to make up 
your own! This section, while intended for use 
primarily by novice role-players, can prove 
quite useful for experienced players who feel 
temporarily stumped for role-playing ideas or 
for DMs wanting a quick personality for an 
NPC druid. 


Diplomat 


The diplomat serves Nature best by resolv- 
ing conflicts between intelligent beings 
through negotiation; wars must be avoided, 
as fields and forests burn regardless of which 
side wins. The fabled druidic neutrality 
makes these characters the clear choice for 
settling disputes, especially between human 
and nonhuman races. 


For instance, if a heated dispute between 
wood elves and sylvan centaurs threatened to 
flare into war, the character might step in as a 
peacemaker, discover the root of the conflict, 
and arrange a just compromise. Or, the druid 
could act as an ambassador for a kingdom of 
sylvan folk, representing them in a human 
court. 

In role-playing, the diplomat behaves with 
fairness and empathy. He always tries to see 
someone else's point of view, whether that 
someone else is an angry green dragon or a 
frivolous pixie, a proud knight or a hard- 
working farmer. But this fairness often masks 
an adamantine core of ruthless pragmatism. 
The character prefers solutions that benefit an 
entire region—including animals and plants 
—rather than a single faction. The diplomat 
isn’t necessarily a pacifist—he may fight if 
talking fails or to enforce a peace he’s bro- 
kered—but he prefers that a velvet glove 
mask the iron fist. Even so, the character gen- 
erally takes the long view and values the har- 
mony of the whole over the good of the indi- 
vidual. 

This personality type works especially well 
with the Adviser, Pacifist, and Wanderer 
druid kits. It doesn’t fit the Avenger or Guard- 
ian, but it can work with any other druid kits. 
The diplomat is best suited to an all-druid 
campaign, since other classes prefer fighting 
to talking. However, a peacemaking role can 
lead to adventure and intrigue (providing 
roles for bards, thieves, illusionists, and other 
characters skilled in subtlety), especially if— 
as often happens—a third party or warlike 
faction secretly works to foment wars or 
quarrels. And trying to mediate a dispute 
between an angry green dragon and a human 
baron can prove both exciting and dangerous! 


Gardener 


The gardener views the world as a garden: 
It needs loving care and someone to cut down 


the weeds. The character remains very much 
aware of her responsibilities as a druid. A 
deep love for the land—with all its animals 
and people—drives her to take decisive action 
to nurture and protect it. 

A gardener believes a druid should actively 
intervene to promote the goals of the druidic 
order. She won't isolate herself in a grove in 
the wilderness. On the other hand, she usu- 
ally stays in a particular region or country, 
feeling a close kinship to her own land, and 
knowing that she cannot take responsibility 
for the entire world. 

The gardener sees combat as a job that 
sometimes has to be done: Avoid the unnec- 
essary battles, but win the necessary ones. 
She uses her head when she fights, trying 
whatever tricks and tactics might give her an 
edge. However, she does not believe the ends 
justify the means and will not resort to strate- 
gies that go against the druidic ethos or her 
own conscience. 

The character will see other people's points 
of view. Nevertheless, she lives devoted to 
the druidic ethos and actively carries the fight 
against anyone who threatens the land she 
holds dear. 

The gardener personality is common 
among druids. It suits the Adviser, Savage, 
Wanderer, and Village Druid kits, but avoid 
using it with the Guardian kit—a gardener 
doesn’t limit her attention to just one area. 


idealist 


An idealist character—usually a young ini- 
tiate—feels convinced that Nature needs sav- 
ing, and he’s the one to do it. Always opti- 
mistic, he sometimes bites off more than he 
can chew. He prefers to seek simple solutions 
to complex problems. 

The idealist is usually pure of heart, mean- 
ing he doesn’t lie or cheat and has few vices. 
While he seems fond of saying “Nature 
doesn’t lie,” he has yet to learn that many 


ee Ee 


Role-playing Druids * 77 


people do. Perhaps for that reason, people 
find it relatively easy to trick this character. 
However, if he realizes he’s been manipu- 
lated or if he discovers corruption in someone 
he considered honest, his temper will flare in 
a fierce fit of anger. 

In combat, the idealist rarely uses sophisti- 
cated tactics. He prefers to wield flashy spells, 
but will fight with physical weapons if neces- 
sary. 

A young idealist usually doesn’t feel ready 
to settle dow n, so sedentary kits like the 
Guardian or Village Druid don’t work for 
him. He does not possess the bitterness of an 
Avenger and lacks the discipline of a Natural 
Philosopher and the subtlety of a good 
Adviser. The best kits for him are Beastfriend, 
Shapeshifter, or Wanderer. 


Mysterious Figure 


The mysterious figure is a druid with an 
enigmatic nature. She tends to appear and 
disappear regularly—show up, take swift 
action, vanish suddenly, and appear again 
when least expected and most needed. 

The mysterious figure normally has a per- 
sonal mission to fulfill: a wrong to right, an 
archenemy to defeat, or a balance to redress. 
Often she has returned from exile, escaped 
death, or overcome some other personal 
tragedy, and uses her secretiveness to sur- 
prise and confound foes. 

The mysterious figure travels regularly, 
often going about in disguise or in animal 
shape. She makes many friends in unlikely 
places, but reveals her real identity or pur- 
poses only to her closest companions. Her 
fondness for drama leads her to save her best 
spells for a grand entrance or for the crucial 
moment where she casts aside her disguise. 

Some druids with this personality have a 
quirky sense of humor. For instance, the 
druid may shapeshift into an animal before 
joining a party, becoming “adopted” as a pet 


78 » Chapter Four 


before revealing her true form (if she does 
reveal it), This mischief works best for an 
NPC among PCs, or vice versa. 

But for all her showmanship, the mysteri- 
ous figure remains a careful and cunning 
strategist. She always makes sure she has a 
few tricks up her sleeve that even her friends 
don’t know about. If she has a flaw, it is an 
unwillingness to share with others the details 
of her plans. 

The mysterious figure works well as an 
Adviser, Outlaw, Shapeshifter, or Wanderer. 
Avoid pairing this personality with the 
Guardian or Village Druid kits. 


Nurturer 


The nurturer always seeks to help those 
around him, whether the beneficiary is a 
plant, beast, or human; he feels especially 
drawn to the suffering of others. Unlike the 

gardener, the character concerns himself 
more with individuals than with communi- 
ties or members of a particular alignment. 
The character may work as a professional 
healer, but also may take a more active role. 
For instance, he might go adventuring to seek 
and rescue captives and victims of oppres- 
sion. Whatever his reason for joining a party, 
he cannot resist a genuine cry for help. 

The character does well providing emo- 
tional support to others, and people fre- 
quently turn to him with their troubles. He 
often proves a tower of strength in a crisis, 
rarely losing his courage. In combat, the char- 
acter prefers to take a defensive role, protect- 
ing others and healing the injured. The char- 
acter, while not a pacifist, remains reluctant to 
engage in violence, except to defend those 
under his care. 

The nurturer comes as close to a good align- 
ment as any other druid personality arche- 
type. However, he does provide care without 
regard to the victim's alignment. Also, unlike 
most good characters, this druid gives as high 


a priority to the suffering of beasts as to the 
plight of humans. 


Rustic 


This druid champions the common people. 
She prefers a roadside inn to a noble’s castle 
and would rather visit a village fair than a 
knightly tournament. Depending on whether 
she likes to stay in one place or move around, 
she'll usually have either the Outlaw, Village 
Druid, Avenger, or Wanderer kits. She has no 
interest in wealth—what she earns or finds 
she either gives to the needy or devotes to 
projects aimed at improving people’s lives. 

The rustic won't take any actions she be- 
lieves would endanger or exploit peasants; 
she always tries to suggest plans by which the 
party's actions might benefit the commoners. 
For instance, instead of rescuing a noble from 
a band of ores, she'd prefer to take action 
against a robber baron who has been oppress- 
ing his tenants. Afterward, she'll try to make 
sure the peasants reclaim some of the treasure 
their greedy overlord took from them. 

If the character witnesses any kind of op- 
pression of the common people, she becomes 
angry and wants to do something about it. If 
possible, she'll try to fix the situation—over- 
throw the evil baron, free the slaves, etc. If she 
doesn’t believe she can win, she'll usually try 
to make some gesture to help the victims, per- 
haps by giving agricultural advice, suggest- 
ing means of passive resistance, curing dis- 
ease, donating money, or even helping a 
single family escape to a better life. Then 
she'll vow to come back and do more when 
she gains the power to help. In short, the rus- 
tic believes in treating all fairly, regardless of 
social class. 


Traditionalist 


The traditionalist takes pride in the old 
ways and opposes change for the sake of 


change. This mindset applies to alterations in 
land use, shifts in the structure of the druidic 
order, and fluctuations in the pattern of daily 
life in the character’s region. 

The traditionalist’s philosophy means the 
druid vehemently opposes destroying the 
wilderness to replace it with crops, towns, or 
mines. Of course, he stands equally against 
radical druids like Shadow Circle members, 
who advocate the destruction of towns or 
cities. (However, some clever Shadow Circle 
members use a traditionalist facade.) 

Traditionalist druids usually think things 
were better in the past and talk incessantly 
about how the present doesn’t match ancient 
glories. They take pride in the history and 
accomplishments of the druidic order and 
usually have the ancient history nonweapon 
proficiency. A traditionalist believes unshak- 
ably in the basic tenets of druidism, such as 
protecting the wilderness and maintaining the 
balance of Nature, as well as protecting dru- 
idic customs, such as the challenge. Often the 
character takes an active interest in druidic 
politics to make sure that suitably tradition- 
minded druids find their way to high-ranking 
positions. 

Almost any druid kit suits a traditionalist 
personality, provided the Order has an 
ancient history. On the other hand, say the 
DM decides that druids have developed the 
powers of the Shapeshifter kit only recently. 
In such a campaign, a traditionalist would 
avoid that kit. 


Fanatic 


A character with this personality has a 
drive to accomplish a particular self- 
appointed mission. All his personal efforts 
must go toward its fulfillment; he feels guilty 
if he has to devote time to other activities. 

A fanatic believes the ends justify the means. 
Anyone and anything could become a sacri- 
fice to the cause. One can inject fanaticism 


$e ee 


Role-playing Druids * 79 


into any druid character by exaggerating the 
normal behavior of his branch or kit. Possible 
fanatics include the characters below: 

è Druids with the Avenger kit may seek 
revenge for the defilement of a particular area 
of wilderness. 

e Village Druids may act fanatically in 
defense of their villages, seeing all outsiders 
as potential threats and ruthlessly destroying 
anyone who harms “my people.” 

è Guardian druids can have a fanatical 
bent toward preserving the area under their 
protection. They have been heard to say 
things like, “You may travel through my for- 
est, but if you cut even one living branch for 
firewood, damage one single leaf, or kill the 
smallest animal, you will regret it!” 

e Druids with any kit may act like fanatics 
about duties to the Order, taking extreme 
actions against anyone who harms the wil- 
derness. This kind of druid often adopts the 
viewpoint of the Shadow Circle. 

The fanatic archetype does not normally 
suit a PC, but this personality can make an 
interesting NPC. In particular, fanatics make 
good rivals for more moderate druids, who 
work to rein in the excesses of extremists to 
maintain the Order’s good name. 


Misanthrope 


The misanthrope doesn’t like the company 
of people. Usually she considers mankind 
bad for Nature. A misanthrope may have had 
a particularly bad experience that soured her 
on mankind. Depending on her kit, she may 
prefer the company of animals or the solitude 
of the wilds. 

In role-playing, the misanthrope generally 
assumes the worst of people. She may not act 
hostile, but it takes a lot of effort from the 
party to encourage friendliness. By her very 
nature, she tends toward dour, pessimistic 
behavior. She trusts no humans, and few 
demihumans or humanoids. 


80 » Chapter Four 


The misanthrope’s unselfish love of Nature 
partially redeems her hostility; characters 
who display a similar affection for animals or 
the wild find her a true friend. Even so, deeds, 
not words, are the only things that can win 
her friendship. 

The misanthrope has trouble verbalizing 
feelings—even if she likes or approves of 
someone, she won't say so. She'll simply offer 
her assistance. If she dislikes someone, or if 
something makes her angry, she’s likely to 
turn her back and leave without a word. 

In combat, she doesn’t bluff and rarely 
utters a threat more than once. If she must use 
violence to protect herself or something she 
cares for, she'll strike without warning. 

A misanthrope doesn’t fit in with a party of 
human adventurers, but she makes a good 
NPC, especially if the party has a particular 
reason to seek her friendship. 

This personality type works well with 
Beastfriends, Guardians, Shapeshifters, and 
Totemic Druids. It can fit Avengers, Natural 
Philosophers, and Wanderers, but does not 
suit Advisers, Savages, or Village Druids. 


Druid Campaigns 


So far this chapter has dealt with ways to 
role-play druid characters in normal AD&D 
campaigns. But it’s quite possible to use this 
information to run an adventure focusing on 
druids alone. A DM could handle such a cam- 
paign one of several ways. 


All or Mostly Druids? 


The DM of a druid-centered campaign can 
choose to restrict players to druid characters 
only. This setup works best with fewer than 
four players. On the other hand, druid- 
centered campaigns involving many players 
can benefit from the presence of one or two 
appropriate nondruid characters. The DM 
may allow bards, rangers, and those clerics, 


mages, or fighters with Peasant or Outlaw 
kits. (See The Complete Priest's Handbook, The 
Complete Wizard's Handbook, and The Complete 
Fighter's Handbook.) 

After DMs choose to run an all-druid cam- 
paign, they must next decide whether to have 
a party of druids from a variety of branches 
or from only one. 

Single-Branch Campaigns. Some cam- 
paigns center around druids in a single circle 
and the doings of those native to the area. 
Most PCs will represent the same branch: that 
of the area's dominant terrain. For example, 
campaigns set in mountainous terrain feature 
mostly mountain druids; if the campaign 
were set in the Underdark, most of the char- 
acters would be gray druids. 

This campaign gives the PCs a strong sense 
of identity and creates a united party, since all 
its members have similar goals. It also allows 
the DM to focus on interdruid politics (such 


N lieu) 
T ‘ 


Af 
i 


wo 


as the rise of the Shadow Circle or the rivalry 
between various druidic branches). A single- 
branch campaign involving an unusual 
branch (like the arctic druids) gives the DM 
an opportunity to run a change-of-pace 
adventure set in a different environment. PCs 
can venture to remote locations, meet mem- 
bers of little-known cultures, and encounter 
monsters they otherwise would rarely hap- 
pen upon. 

On the down side, although players can 
distinguish the characters from each other by 
giving them each different kits, players still 
may wish for more variety within the party. 
Try making some of the characters druids 
from associated branches; for instance, if the 
adventure takes place near a forest on a 
mountainside, some of the characters re- 
semble a mix of both the forest and mountain 
druid branches. 

Multibranch Campaigns. In a campaign 


Role-playing Druids ¢ 81 


involving only druids, the DM may encour- 
age players to choose characters from differ- 
ent branches. The advantage of this arrange- 
ment? It provides a strong variety of charac- 
ters—especially since they also may have dif- 
ferent druid kits. However, a disadvantage is 
the difficulty of explaining why a jungle 
druid and an arctic druid want to adventure 
together in the first place. 

One way to get around this problem re- 
quires bringing the PCs together for a reason. 
Perhaps the characters each represent their 
particular region in a quest the Grand Druid 
has launched to help fight a world-shaking 
problem. This scenario gives them the single- 
branch campaign’s sense of shared mission, 
but more variety. 

And, there could be any number of reasons 
why this special group of beginning charac- 
ters was selected. Pick one of the following 
justifications: 

+ The Grand Druid chose them because 
they fit an ancient prophecy. 

e The upper ranks of the druids are too 
conservative (or filled with untrustworthy 
agents of the Shadow Circle), and only these 
members of the younger generation see the 
true threat facing the world. 

e There are few druids left—a growing evil 
wiped out most of the Order’s upper ranks. 
(A very nasty situation indeed!) 

A more serious problem in game balance 
for multibranch campaigns lies in the fact that 
each branch works best in a single terrain 
type: the desert druid operates best in the 
desert; the gray druid has optimal powers 
only in the underworld, and so on. As a result, 
a multibranch druid campaign needs to in- 
volve a fair bit of traveling; if the characters 
stay in the forest or the dungeon all the time, 
the player of an arctic or swamp druid will 
feel useless! Forcing the characters to travel 
widely, fighting an evil that recurs in several 
guises, can make for an exciting adventure 
involving all the characters. 


82 * Chapter Four 


For example, in a campaign with the goal 
of defeating the followers of a chaotic evil 
god corrupting Nature, the first adventure 
might take the party to a swamp that had 
been defiled into a place of horror. The druids 
would deal with toxic water, mutant giant 
insects, will 0’ wisps, black dragons, and 
other swamp monsters. A clue then can lead 
them to an adventure in the frozen arctic, 
where the PCs hear of a blizzard without end 
and the creatures that lurk within it. With this 
kind of approach, every branch of druid has a 
chance to shine. 


Guardians of the Wild 


In this campaign, the druids must defend a 
tract of wilderness from those who wish to 
exploit it. To make this story stronger, develop 
druid characters with a personal stake in the 
area. For example, the region could hold an 
ancient grove in which a PC was initiated into 
the druidic order. Or maybe it serves as home 
to a tribe of sylvan beings who have be- 
friended a character. 

An interesting problem develops if the 
druids discover that the individuals cutting 
down their wood or draining their swamp 
have a very good reason to do so. As a result, 
the druids—and players—find themselves 
faced with a more complex moral dilemma 
than simply, “Run those exploiters off the 
land.” They must look behind the problem to 
get at its heart. 

This campaign suits players who enjoy 
diplomacy and politics, and generally works 
best with relatively high-level druids. This 
scenario lets the characters explore a key ele- 
ment of the druid’s ethos: the need to see 
everyone's point of view, then judge which 
path best serves druidic interests. 

For instance, suppose the druids learn of a 
problem in the area when hundreds of 
migrant laborers—mostly poor folk with no 
farms of their own—descend like locusts on 


Druid Mini- Adventures 


Try these druid-centered adventures. 

* The druid is approached by a female 
bard who loves a Shapeshifter druid. 
While she worked in town, he spent too 
long in the form of a bear and became 
trapped in that shape. Worse, hunters cap- 
tured him and sold him to an arena, where 
handlers will force him to fight other ani- 
mals (or humans) to the death. The games 
begin in a week. The bard beseeches the 
PC—the nearest druid—to help her free 
her love. 

e A dryad heard that a group of pixies is 
tormenting a green drag laying tricks 
on it while invisible, stealing trinkets, and 
the like, The dragon can’t find the ones 
responsible, and the dryad fears its rage 
will devastate the wood. Someone must 
tell the pixies to stop—and calm the dragon 
down. 

e While hunting a stag in the forest, the 
king's youngest son was killed by a great 
wolf. The grief-maddened monarch has 
decreed that every wolf in the wood must 
die, enticing hunters with a bounty of 50 gp 
for each pelt. What should the druid do? 

¢ A young elf and a human ranger love 
each other, but their parents do not ap- 
prove. They run away to the woods, beg- 
ging the druid to marry them. But the 
angry parents are not far behind. . . . 

¢ A strange blight is afflicting the forest, 
turning leaves a luminous white. The druid 
must discover this disease’s secrets before 
all greenery disappears from the forest. 

+ Someone has stolen a sylph’s egg! She 
left it only an hour to visit her nymph 
friend. Now, heartbroken, she asks the 
local druid for help. Suspects or witnesses 
in this forest whodunit include a flighty 
pseudo-dragon, a pool of nixies, a jealous 
aerial servant, and a drunken satyr. 


the characters’ ancient forest, chopping down 
trees and bearing them away. Worse, several 
species of rare animals live near here, and the 
logging threatens to destroy their home. 

Where did these laborers come from? The 
party learns they work for a nation of 
dwarves living nearby. These mountain 
dwarves, having exhausted their supply of 
coal, had to turn to wood to keep the forges 
burning. They pay the poor human laborers 
in gold for every log they bring in. Already 
the dwarves’ own mountain stands denuded 
of trees. The druids’ verdant preserve seems 
the only nearby source of firewood. 

The migrant laborers have more immediate 
concerns than the dangers of exfoliation. A 
lean harvest this year has meant little work, 
and without the dwarves’ bounty, the humans 
risk starvation. As long as the dwarves pay, 
they will be able to buy food for the winter. . . . 

But what made the dwarves decide to ex- 
pand their activities so much that they ex- 
hausted their coal resources? 

War. The mountain dwarves are forging 
weapons for a small elven kingdom two day’s 
journey away, struggling against an alliance 
of migrating bugbear and ogre tribes. Except 
for the royal guard, these elves—caught by 
surprise—lacked proper armor and weapons 
to withstand the onslaught. The dwarves 
didn’t want to get involved, but agreed to 
forge the elves fine long swords, armor, and 
arrowheads in exchange for a share of the 
valuable emerald deposits located within the 
elven kingdom. 

The DM could stop here and decide to call 
the bugbears and ogres the villains. But per- 
haps things are not quite that simple. What 
started the bugbear-ogre migration? Perhaps 
a powerful dragon drove them from their 
land; now they have become refugees them- 
selves, wishing to settle in empty areas within 
the elven wood. However, the elves refused 
(not desiring such rude neighbors). 

A campaign of this sort gives druids many 


—— Ee 


Role-playing Druids * 83 


options. The characters could merely drive 
the woodcutters from the forest—but terroriz- 
ing them may spur the dwarves to hire adven- 
turers to deal with the druids! The party 
could play it sneaky—help the elves win a 
quick victory by destroying the ogre-bugbear 
alliance. (The druids slay the bugbear chief- 
tain, but make it look like a rival ogre chief 
did it.) Or, the solution could prove complex, 
if the druids decide to try negotiating a peace 
treaty between the elves and the bugbear- 
ogre alliance. If the DM works out the person- 
alities and goals of the major figures, each of 
the druids’ actions could carry its own set of 
consequences. 


The Evil Woods 


In the center of a once beautiful sylvan for- 
est lies a place of power—a grove at one time 
sacred to the druids. Unfortunately, its 


84 « Chapter Four 


defenders were not as strong as they thought 
and, in a weak moment, allowed a dreadful 
evil to creep into the land. These forces cap- 
tured and defiled the sacred grove; now dark- 
ness has fallen over the ancient woods. 
Nature itself has felt the corrupting power 
of this evil. Flocks of vampire bats, clusters of 
stirges, and clouds of stinging insects darken 
the skies. Bugbears and goblins roam the out- 
skirts of the wood, but even they do not ven- 
ture into the interior, which rumor calls home 
to horrors beyond imagining: flesh-eating 
treants, cannibal elves, undead animals, and 
dark unicorns with poisoned horns. All these 
creatures manifest the terrible cancer ema- 
nating from the once sacred grove, which 
now bears a terrible curse—a curse that is 
spreading. ... 
This campaign will prove a challenge for 
any druidic party. The evil forces include a 
mix of standard woodland monsters like bug- 


bears and green dragons, and twisted, evil 
versions of normally good or neutral sylvan 
beings like dryads and elves. The druids— 
possibly allied with good-aligned adventur- 
ers—do not know exactly what evil corrupted 
the sacred grove, so they have to move care- 
fully at first, scouting the forest. The cursed 
woods resembles a dungeon: The farther the 
characters penetrate, the more deadly it be- 
comes, with the power that destroyed the 
original Guardians waiting, spiderlike, in the 
center of the sacred grove. 


Against the Shadows 


The Shadow Circle can spark adventures 
rife with intrigue, betrayal, and druid vs. 
druid conflict. Composing such an adventure 
requires a good understanding of the local 
druidic hierarchy. The DM should sketch out 
the personalities of the domain’s NPC druids, 
then secretly decide which (if any) belong to 
the Shadow Circle. PCs can glean some infor- 
mation about the NPCs but will not know 
their secret allegiances, 

Here are some adventure ideas: 

The Horde. A rumor now circulating says 
druids from the Shadow Circle have set up a 
secret meeting with chieftains of nearby orc 
or barbarian tribes. Obviously they plan to 
mount an assault on one or more human 
towns or cities—but when, how, and where 
will they strike? As druids opposed to 
Shadow Circle policies, the PCs may try to 
find out what is going on so they can sound 
the alarm or nip the plan in the bud—but get- 
ting anyone to believe word of an impending 
invasion may prove difficult without concrete 
evidence, for few know the truth about the 
Shadow Circle. 

If infiltrating the secret society seems like 
too great a challenge, the characters could 
kidnap an orc leader for questioning. And 
this step might be only the beginning; the PCs 
might learn that Shadow Circle druids have 


found a secret weapon—a dragon or a magi- 
cal war machine. . . . 

The Invitation. The DM can send a Shad- 
owed One to recruit a PC druid who has been 
especially ruthless. This isn’t good news for 
most PCs: Few want to become the obedient 
pawns of the faceless, secretive organization’s 
inner circle. However, those who refuse must 
foil the dreaded Shadowed Ones intending to 
kill uncooperative druids. 

The Traitor, One of the PCs—a druid loyal 
to the Order—learns that one of the three 
archdruids in the domain belongs to the 
Shadow Circle. This inner circle member has 
hired assassins to kill the circle’s great druid 
next month, rather than have to face the 
leader in a duel. Unfortunately, the PC’s 
informant mysteriously dies before revealing 
the traitorous archdruid’s identity. Can the 
PC uncover the traitor in time to prevent the 
Shadow Circle’s victory? 

The characters may want to talk to those 
who know the three suspects and examine 
each archdruid’s behavior for any hint of alle- 
giance to the Shadow Circle. Of course, the 
real traitor may speed up the Shadow Circle’s 
agenda if the PCs are discovered—or try to 
do away with the investigators! 

The Defector. A druid defecting from the 
Shadow Circle has important information 
about the sinister organization’s plans, but 
she will talk only to the Grand Druid, whom 
she knows stands outside the group. Her 
defection has not gone unnoticed—the dread 
Shadowed Ones plot her death—so the PCs 
must protect her on her way to an Emissary 
of the Grand Druid. They will face magical, 
monstrous, and personal attacks, as well as 
treachery from those they thought were allies. 


ee 


Role-playing Druids * 85 


CHAPTER 


Druidic Magic 


As detailed in Chapter 3 of the Player's 
Handbook (p. 35), druids have access to priest 
spells in certain spheres and can use a variety 
of enchanted weapons, armor, and other 
magical items. This chapter expands the 
magic available to player characters in the 
druid class, adding many spells and magical 
items along with the new field of herbal 
magic. 


New Spells 


Druids have major access to spells in the 
following spheres of influence: All, Animal, 
Elemental, Healing, Plant, Weather; they have 
minor access to the Divination sphere. (Note 
any sphere restrictions due to kit or branch.) 
As druids concern themselves with plants, 
animals, and natural phenomena more than 
most priests, they specialize in casting 
Nature-oriented spells. 

Characters of any priest class have the 
potential to use these spells if they have 
access to the relevant spheres. However, DMs 
may make this magic available only to the 
druid class, on the grounds that these spells 
represent secret lore of the Order. 


First-level Spells 


Beastmask 
(Ilusion/ Phantasm) 


Sphere: Animal 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 12 hours 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Beastmask may affect any single person or 
animal, or characters may cast it on them- 
selves. It allows the subject to take on the illu- 
sory form of a single animal species—but 


SSS 


86 * Chapter Five 


only that species of animal can perceive the 
illusion. The subject may not assume an ani- 
mal form more than twice or less than one- 
quarter the character's size. 

The almost perfect illusion the spell creates 
deceives the animal's sight, hearing, smell, 
and touch. For instance, once a character casts 
a “bear” illusion on a subject, bears believe 
that subject to be a bear, while to humans, 
other races, and other creatures, the subject 
remains the same. 

Characters normally use beastmask to travel 
among or hunt a particular species. This spell 
lets a druid assume the guise of a caribou to 
move among a herd without causing them to 
panic. A character also could avoid being 
attacked by a pack of dire wolves by wearing 
a wolf’s “mask.” 

Beastmask does not allow communication 
with the animal species, though it can be used 
with animal communication spells. 

The material component is a miniature 
wooden mask carved to look like the animal. 


Optional Sphere Expansions 


Some existing Nature-related spells re- 
main unavailable to druids due to sphere 
restrictions. To offer these spells to druids, 
DMs may expand the selection of spells 
accessible through certain spheres of magic: 

e Call woodland beings becomes part of 
the Animal sphere. 

* Commune with nature becomes part of 
both the Animal and Plant spheres. 

e Insect plague becomes part of the Ani- 
mal sphere. 

¢ Reincarnate becomes part of the Ani- 
mal sphere. 

An expansion does not remove a spell 
from a sphere that already contains it, but 
merely makes the spell accessible from an 
additional sphere or spheres. 


Puffball (Alteration) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 2 rounds/level of caster 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: 1 mushroom, etc. 
Saving Throw: Special 


A character who casts puffball on a normal 
mushroom, truffle, or toadstool (up to 6 
inches in diameter) transforms the fungus 
into a magical puffball, which the character 
may drop or throw. The DM should decide 
what type of roll, if any, is required to hit the 
target (Strength, Dexterity, etc.) See the DMG, 
pgs. 62-63, for rules on grenadelike missiles. 

The puffball bursts upon landing, releas- 
ing a cloud of spores 10 feet in diameter. 
Those caught in the spore cloud must save vs. 
poison or suffer an attack of coughing and 
choking. Victims can make no attacks and 
lose all Dexterity bonuses to Armor Class and 
saving throws. The cloud dissipates in 1d3+1 
rounds; residual effects still afflict characters 
one round after they escape the cloud or it 
fades. 

The spell’s effects do not affect undead or 
similar nonbreathing creatures. If no one 
throws (or drops) the missile by the time its 
duration expires, the enchantment is lost. 

The caster sprinkles the material compo- 
nent—a pinch of ground puffball— over the 
fungus to be enchanted. 


Whisperward (Alteration) 


Sphere: Guardian, Weather 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Permanent until triggered 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: 1 item 

Saving Throw: None 


Whisperward can be cast on any single item, 
portal, or closure (such as a book, door, or 
lid). It may ward up to a 30-foot radius. 

The character keys the ward to become 
activated (like a magic mouth spell) under spe- 
cific conditions—such as when a certain indi- 
vidual enters the area or opens the warded 
closure. When the ward is triggered, a soft 
whispering breeze blows across the caster’s 
face. The caster must stay within 1 mile per 
experience level of the ward to receive the 
warning. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 


Second-level Spelis 
Animal Spy (Divination) 


Sphere: Animal 

Range: 10 yards 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 turn/2 levels of caster 

Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: 1 animal 

Saving Throw: Wizard familiars may save vs. 
spell to negate. 


Only a normal (real-world) animal or a 
giant version of a normal animal species may 
become an animal spy. This spell enables the 
caster to share the animal's senses—see 
through the animal’s eyes, hear with its ears, 
smell with its nose, and so on. The animal is 
completely unaware of the spell’s effect, 
unless the druid warns the beast before cast- 
ing. Animal spy grants no control over the 
creature. However, most casters will use it on 
a trained animal or one befriended via the 
animal friendship spell. 

For the duration of the spell, the caster 
remains in a trance, unable to move or use 
human senses. This consequence can prove 
dangerous; for instance, characters attacked 
while using the spell cannot feel injuries to 


e 


Druidic Magic * 87 


their bodies. However, at the start of any 
round, the caster may choose to return the 
animal’s senses to the creature and resume 
control of the human body. This decision ends 
the spell immediately. The spell also ends if 
the animal travels more than 100 yards away 
per level of the caster. 


Beastspite (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Animal 

Range: 10 yards 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 hour/level of caster 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: 1 person 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


Beastspite afflicts a single person with a 
magical aura that induces one species of ani- 
mal to hate and fear the character. The charac- 
ter becomes loathed by any species of normal 
(real-world) animal. While this range ex- 
cludes monsters, it includes giant animals of 
the same real-world species. (For example, if 
beastspite causes bats to hate the subject, giant 
bats will react similarly.) 

When the character comes within 30 yards 
of an animal from the target species, the crea- 
ture will make warning signals (barks, 
growls, etc.). Its further reaction depends on 
the animal’s nature. 

e Aggressive animals, including all preda- 
tors and most trained guard animals, attack 
the spell recipient. 

e Nonaggressive beasts shun the character, 
fleeing or attacking if approached. 

e Owners can restrain their domesticated 
animals, but the beasts show obvious distress 
and may become very hostile if the character 
tries to touch them. 

e If the subject was riding when the spell 
took effect, the mount tries to throw off the 
character. The subject must make a riding 
proficiency check each round to stay astride 


ee er 


88 ¢ Chapter Five 


and to avoid a fall if thrown off. 

è An animal extremely loyal to the subject, 
such as a pet dog, a creature influenced by an 
animal friendship spell, a wizard’s familiar, or a 
paladin’s war horse does not become utterly 
hostile to its owner. Instead it notices some- 
thing “wrong” about the character and acts 
unusually nervous. 


Fortifying Stew (Necromancy) 


Sphere: Healing 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Stew retains enchantment 1 turn 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: 1 bowl of stew, etc./level 
Saving Throw: None 


Any bowl of broth, porridge, or stew the 
priest has concocted can become subject to 
fortifying stew, A character can enchant one 
bowl of stew (about 8 ounces) per experience 
level. Someone must consume the enchanted 
meal within one turn of the casting. 

Anyone partaking of an entire bowlful 
reaps magical benefits. First, the diner gains 
nourishment for an entire day from the single 
meal. In addition, for two hours plus one 
round per the caster’s level, the character 
receives 1d4+1 temporary hit points. Any 
damage suffered comes off the extra hit points 
first. The effects of multiple helpings of forti- 
fying stew are not cumulative. 

For example, Snapdragon, a 7th-level 
druid, cooks a meaty broth, casts fortifying 
stew on it, and eats the bowlful. A roll of 2 
gives her 3 extra hit points. When the spell’s 
effects wear off just over three hours, she 
loses these extra points. If she suffers 5 points 
of damage in the meantime, she actually loses 
only 2 hp of her own, since 3 hp came off the 
extra hit points. 

The material component is a vial of stock 
made of the first fruit of the harvest. 


Gift of Speech (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Animal 

Range: 10 yards/level of caster 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn/level of caster 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: 1 animal 

Saving Throw: None 


The gift of speech spell grants a normal ani- 
mal (or a giant version of a normal animal) 
the ability to speak any one of the languages 
the caster knows, whichever the caster 
chooses, along with the ability to understand 
words and simple concepts expressed in that 
language. The affected animal’s reactions do 
not change, nor does its Intelligence increase. 
The spell has no effect if cast on a creature 
with an Intelligence score of less than 1. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest’s holy symbol. 


Third-level Spells 


Pass Without Trace, 10' Radius 
(Enchantment/ Charm) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn/level of caster 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: Radius 10 feet around caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Identical in function to pass without trace, pass 
without trace, 10’ radius affects everyone within 
10 feet of the caster. The effect moves with the 
caster, so creatures must stay within 10 feet of 
the caster to continue to avoid leaving tracks. A 
creature who leaves the area of effect can then 
be tracked normally. Creatures moving into the 
area of effect after casting are unaffected. 

The material component is a sprig of pine 


burned to ash. Upon casting the spell, the 
character scatters the powder in a circle. 


Shape Wood (Alteration) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Permanent 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 9 cubic feet+1 cubic foot/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of shape wood, the caster can re- 
form wood. For example, the character can 
cast it upon any appropriate-sized piece of 
wood to fashion a wooden weapon, make a 
rough door, or even create a crude figurine. 

The spell also allows the caster to reshape 
an existing wooden door, perhaps to escape 
imprisonment. Again, the volume of the 
wooden object must be appropriate to the 
desired result and fit in the area of effect. 

While a character might form a wooden 
coffer from a tree stump or a door from a 
wooden wall, the result does not bear high- 
quality detail. If a shaping has moving parts, 
there is a 30% chance they do not work. 

The alteration endures permanently, at 
least until the wood rots or is physically 
destroyed. The caster blows the material com- 
ponent, a pinch of fine sawdust, over the 
wooden subject of the spell. 


Fourth-level Spells 
Detect Animal Attacker (Divination) 


Sphere: Animal 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


90 + Chapter Five 


Depending on how it is cast, detect animal 
attacker gives the druid a visual image either 
of a creature that injured an animal or of an 
animal that attacked any victim. 

While casting the spell upon any victim of 
an attack by a natural animal (a victim whose 
body still bears the marks of claws, fangs, or 
other natural weapons), the druid touches the 
victim’s wound. This brief touch gives the 
caster a fleeting vision of the animal that 
caused the injuries as it looked at the time of 
the attack. 

Likewise, a druid casting the spell upon an 
injured real-world animal can touch its 
wound and receive a vision of the person, 
monster, or animal that harmed it. 

Even if the caster receives a vision of an 
unfamiliar attacker, the character usually can 
get an idea of its size, primary attack method, 
and alignment. (The druid senses good, evil, 
or neutrality.) 

In addition, if the creature still lives and 
fails a saving throw vs. spell, the caster senses 
its current position, location, and direction of 
travel. 

Detect animal attacker works only within one 
hour per level of the caster after the victim 
receives the injury in question. The spell is 
effective regardless of whether the attack 
proved fatal. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 


Earthmaw (Alteration) 


Sphere: Elemental (earth) 

Range: 50 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round 

Casting Time: 7 

Area of Effect: 10-foot diameter circle 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Earthmaw causes a patch of ground 10 feet 
in diameter to open and form a gigantic 


mouth with stalactite teeth. The mouth 
springs forth on a short serpentine neck, 
much like a water weird, and attacks once in 
a direction the caster dictates. Then it retracts 
into the earth and closes solidly. The site of an 
earthmaw spell appears as if the ground has 
been tilled recently. 

The mouth can attack one large creature, 
two man-sized creatures, or four small-sized 
creatures within 10 feet of its outer edge. It 
can strike multiple creatures only if they 
remain clustered within a 10-foot diameter 
circle adjacent to the maw. 

The earthmaw attacks as a monster with 
Hit Dice equal to the caster’s level. Creatures 
standing on the site of the maw suffer a +3 
penalty to Armor Class for purposes of this 
attack only. Creatures standing next to the 
maw suffer no AC penalty. 

A successful hit inflicts 1d4 points of dam- 
age per level of the caster. An unmodified roll 
of 19 or 20 means the maw has swallowed the 
victim whole, burying the character 2d4 feet 
below ground. Victims can be dug out manu- 
ally, with appropriate spells (such as dig), or 
with magical items (such as a spade of colossal 
excavation). A creature trapped underground 
will suffocate unless freed within a number of 
rounds equal to one-third its Constitution 
score. 

Earthmaw may be cast on any area of loose 
or packed earth, sand, or vegetation-covered 
soil. It may be cast indoors on an earthen sur- 
face: for example, on the dirt floor of a barn or 
basement, but not on the marble floor of a 
home or temple. It may not be cast on an area 
containing a tree, any portion of a building, or 
any type of pavement. 

An object present on the site of the maw 
(such as a campfire or a tent, etc.) counts as a 
creature of that object’s size in attacks. 

The material component is a tooth from 
any predatory creature. 


e 


Druidic Magic * 91 


Hunger (Alteration) 


Sphere: Animal, Plant 

Range: 10 yards 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 day/level of caster 
Casting Time: 7 

Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Those affected by hunger no longer gain 
sustenance from food. No matter how much 
they eat, they still feel hungry. If the spell did 
not end, victims eventually would starve, vis- 
ibly wasting away. 

After one day under the spell’s effect, vic- 
tims’ concentration suffers (due to their pre- 
occupation with their constant hungry feel- 
ing), causing them to suffer a -2 penalty to all 
ability and proficiency checks. On the eighth 
day without food, victims who have been 


a 


92 + Chapter Five 


maintaining normal activity levels lose 1 
Strength point; on the ninth day, they lose 1 
Constitution point. This alternating pattern 
continues until one of the character's ability 
scores falls to 3; at this point, the character 
becomes comatose. If a score reaches 0 before 
the hunger spell ends, the recipient dies. The 
victim regains lost points after the spell ends 
at a rate of 1 Strength and 1 Constitution 
point per day. 

When casting the spell, the character 
secretly whispers a particular type of food; by 
eating the specified food, the victim breaks 
the spell. It must be a single, natural food 
(such as lamb, honey, or an apple) but can be 
exotic (dragon meat)—as long as the caster 
has tasted it personally at some point. 

Hunger cannot be dispelled, but can be bro- 
ken by the remove curse spell. Failing all else, a 
sufferer must wait to find relief until the 
spell’s duration elapses. 


The spell’s material component is a pinch 
of the food that can end the spell. 


Knurl (Alteration) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: 5 yards/level of caster 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn/level of caster 
Casting Time: 7 

Area of Effect: 1 person 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


Casting a knurl spell transforms a creature's 
arm into a tree branch of the same thickness, 
covered with bark and twigs. The new limb 
possesses neither elbow nor wrist joints—not 
even a hand. The “arm” remains attached to 
the shoulder. The spell’s recipient can use it 
as a club but not to manipulate tools, weap- 
ons, or spell components. 

The caster chooses which of the recipient's 
arms to affect. A character could use multiple 
knurl spells to transform both arms of a 
humanoid. The arm is treated for all purposes 
as a tree branch: It becomes subject to fire, 
wood-altering spells, and tree diseases. Dispel 
magic ends the spell’s effects. 

The material component is a small twig. 


Needlestorm (Alteration) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: 60 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 7 

Area of Effect: 1 tree or plant 

Saving Throw: Save vs. spell for half damage 


A favorite of cold-forest and desert druids, 
needlestorm causes the spines on any pine tree 
or similar needle-bearing plant to spray out 
in a deadly barrage. The shower of needles 
has a radius of approximately 1 foot for every 


2 feet of the subject plant's height. 

Everyone within this area suffers one 
attack, which inflicts 1d12 points of damage 
for every three full levels the caster has 
achieved. Thus, a spruce tree enchanted by a 
7th-level character attacks with a THACO of 
16 and inflicts 2d12 points of damage. 

The material component is a spine from a 
needle-bearing tree or plant. 


Fifth-level Spells 
Cloudscape (Alteration) 


Sphere: Weather 

Range: 120 yards 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 3 turns/level of caster 

Casting Time: 8 

Area of Effect: 1,000 cubic feet/level of caster 
Saving Throw: None 


A character can cast cloudscape on a single 
cloud or part of a cloud bank, usually from a 
nearby mountaintop or while flying. It causes 
1,000 cubic feet of cloud per level of the caster 
to become solid enough to support any 
weight. The solidified clouds remain airborne 
and feel like a thick carpet. 

A creature that falls onto the magically 
strengthened cloud sustains falling damage 
per the PH, p. 104. An animal or individual 
that flies into the solidified cloud falls, 
stunned, for a round and must make a suc- 
cessful Dexterity check to recover. If a crea- 
ture is flying through a cloud at the moment 
it becomes solidified, it may make a saving 
throw vs. petrification. Those who succeed 
escape the cloud in time. Creatures that fail 
the save become trapped as the cloud solidi- 
fies around them. However, as the cloud is 
porous, they can continue to breathe until the 
spell’s duration elapses. 

The solidified cloud itself continues to drift 
with the wind as usual. While the caster 


Druidic Magic * 93 


cannot use this particular spell to propel the 
cloud at all, a control winds spell can summon 
a great gust of air to turn the cloudscape into 
a unique flying conveyance easily enough. 


Nature’s Charm 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Elemental (earth, water) 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 2 hours/level of caster 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 15-foot radius/level of caster 
Saving Throw: Creatures native to the area of 
effect are not affected. 


Nature's charm causes a particular place to 
exert a special fascination beyond mere 
beauty to anyone entering the area except the 
spellcaster. 

This spell must target a site of notable nat- 
ural splendor that possesses both edible 
plants and fresh water. The spot may not be 
larger than the spell’s area of effect. For 
instance, a 12th-level druid could cast this 
spell on a forest glade up to 360 feet across, 
with flowers and fruit-bearing trees centered 
around a waterfall. 

Anyone coming upon the enchanted region 
must save vs. spell; those who fail invariably 
make up excuses to remain there long after 
they should have left. They say they want 
only to bathe, rest, admire the beauty a bit 
longer, eat the berries or fruit, paint a picture 
of the area, or defend the spot jealously from 
others. 

Whatever the reason, those who fall victim 
to the enchantment forcefully resist all 
attempts to make them leave until the spell’s 
duration ends. 

The spell’s material component is the 
druid’s holy symbol. 


Le 


94 « Chapter Five 


Strengthen Stone (Alteration) 


Sphere; Elemental (earth) 
Range: 10 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Permanent 

Casting Time: 1 hour 

Area of Effect: 1 building or wall 
Saving Throw: None 


Strengthen stone can reinforce any stone 
construction (house, tower, wall segment, 
aqueduct, etc.), against physical damage. The 
DM adds +4 to the structure’s saving throw 
against any kind of damage, from siege 
engines to natural earthquakes. The stone 
object gains a saving throw vs. the earthquake 
spell. (See the PH, p. 233.) The spell may be 
cast only once on any stone object. 

If a character casts this spell on a stone 
golem or other animated stone being (like one 
created by animate rock), the creature receives 
a -1 bonus to its Armor Class and adds a +1 
bonus to its saving throws for the duration of 
the spell. Strengthen stone has no effect on 
earth elementals or galeb duhr. 

The material component, a diamond chip 
worth at least 500 gp, must be crushed and 
sprinkled on the construction. 


Thornwrack (Alteration) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 thorn/level of caster 
Casting Time: 8 

Area of Effect: 1 person 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


Thornwrack causes long, painful thorns to 
grow out of the spell recipient's flesh, pierc- 
ing the skin from the inside. One thorn ap- 
pears each round, inflicting 1d3 points of 
damage, until all the thorns have appeared. 


When the number of thorns exceeds the sub- 
ject’s experience level or HD, a victim still 
conscious becomes immobilized by the pain, 
unable to take any action. 

One round after the last thorn erupts from 
the victim’s flesh, the first one disappears. 
The thorns continue receding at a rate of one 
per turn. Immobilized subjects can move 
again once the number of thorns falls below 
their HD or experience level. For instance, say 
the body of a 4th-level character has seven 
thorns. After four turns had passed, only 
three thorns would remain, so the victim 
would no longer be immobile. 

Cure spells can restore hit points but do not 
eliminate the thorns. Dispel magic will end the 
spell but prevents existing thorns from reced- 
ing. A heal spell cancels the thornwrack, elimi- 
nates all existing thorns, and cures all dam- 
age. Without the benefit of magical remedies, 
the spell ends when the last thorn has re- 
ceded. 


Sixth-level Spells 
Earthwrack (Alteration) 


Sphere: Necromantic, Plant 

Range: 20 yards/level of caster 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 2d4+10 years 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 30-foot radius/level of caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes an area of soil to become 
barren and blighted. Healthy plants wither 
and die within 1d4 days of casting. No seed 
planted there will grow for the duration of 
the spell. Plant-based creatures entering the 
despoiled area can see the ruin and feel an 
intense “wrongness” within the soil. Each 
round they remain within the area, they suf- 
fer 1d4 points of damage. 

The blight can be cured using a limited wish, 


a wish, or by casting a remove curse spell (at 
the 12th level of experience) and a plant growth 
spell simultaneously. 

Most druids consider earthwrack an abomi- 
nation, although some Shadow Circle druids 
use it as last-ditch “scorched earth” ven- 
geance against an unruly hamlet. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 


Ivy Siege (Enchantment) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: 90 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 6 turns 

Casting Time: 9 

Area of Effect: 1 building or similar structure 
Saving Throw: Special 


The ivy siege spell must be cast upon a stone 
or brick building constructed upon the earth; 
flying castles and the like remain unaffected. 
Immediately after casting, ivy begins to grow 
at a fantastic rate, climbing from the ground 
up the building’s walls. At the end of one 
turn, the ivy has climbed the walls. At the end 
of the second turn, green creepers have cov- 
ered the structure. On the third turn, the ivy 
has deepened to a black-green and begins to 
squeeze the building. 

Starting on the third turn and every turn 
thereafter, the building must make a saving 
throw vs. siege damage, as if attacked by a 
small catapult (DMG, p. 76). Two cubic feet of 
the building crumbles away for each point by 
which the saving throw misses each turn. 
This cycle continues until the spell’s duration 
expires or the building is destroyed. The ivy 
rots away instantly at the spell’s end. 

A druid can cast only one ivy siege per 
building at a time. After the ivy has rotted 
away, the druid may cast the spell on the 
same building again. However, multiple 
druids can cast several ivy siege spells on the 


m ———————————— 


Druidic Magic * 95 


same building. In the case of a large, intercon- 
nected series of buildings (like a castle), each 
casting affects only a single tower, keep, or 
wall segment, to a maximum of 1,000 cubic 
feet per level of the caster. 

The DM may choose to prohibit arctic and 
desert druids from using this spell if they are 
not familiar with ivy. 

The material component is an ivy leaf. 


Seventh-level Spells 
Tree Spirit (Necromancy) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: 1 tree 
Saving Throw: None 


96 • Chapter Five 


Tree spirit permanently links the soul of the 
caster with a tree, usually chosen carefully for 
its health, vigor, and remote environment. 
Casting this spell joins the life force of the 
druid with that of the tree; as long as the tree 
lives, the caster ages at one-tenth the normal 

rate. (Because the spell causes the tree to 
devote all its energy to maintaining health 
rather than growth, it always remains exactly 
the size it was at the time of casting.) More- 
over, the caster’s spirit merges with the tree at 
the character’s death. No form of reincarna- 
tion or resurrection (except a wish) on the 
character’s body will work unless it lies 
within 10 feet of the tree. 

One year after the caster dies, the druid’s 
spirit animates the tree as a treant. (DMs 
should roll up treant statistics for the tree at 
the time the spell is cast, to determine the 
tree’s Armor Class, Hit Dice, etc.) The chosen 
tree must be of treant height; the exact size 


determines the size of the new treant, which 
possesses the caster’s memories and person- 
ality but has no granted powers or spellcast- 
ing ability. It must communicate as a treant. 

The DM decides whether to consider this 
treant an NPC or allow the player to control 
it. (DMs should use the guidelines that apply 
to PCs who become lycanthropes or undead.) 

However, when a druid uses tree spirit to 
link with a tree, the character suffers any 
physical damage inflicted on the tree. For 
instance, if someone hacks at the tree with an 
axe and causes 4 points of damage, the caster 
also loses 4 hit points; the druid knows the 
tree has been harmed, but does not know the 
nature of the injury. 

If the tree dies but does not sustain enough 
damage to kill the caster, the character feels 
stunned for 1d6 rounds and must make a suc- 
cessful system shock roll to avoid death. 
Spells that heal the druid do not affect the 
tree. 

Damage to the caster does not affect the 
tree, as the extra energy the tree expends on 
strength and health makes any damage the 
player sustains negligible to the tree. How- 
ever, it’s usually in the druid’s best interest to 
have an animal friend or two guard the tree. 

In addition, the druid should choose the 
tree carefully; if the surrounding land is 
cleared for construction work or lumber 
before the druid’s prolonged life span finally 
ends, the character is in trouble. 

Casting tree spirit first requires a full mon- 
th’s preparation. The druid lives near the tree 
during this time of prayer and mediation. 
Then the character conducts a private bond- 
ing ceremony at the height of a solstice. This 
spell often is cast by ancient druids, who wish 
to preserve their wisdom or make sure their 
groves remain defended even after their 
death. 


Unwilling Wood (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: 5 yards/level of caster 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Permanent 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 10-yard radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


A caster can transform one or more living 
creatures within a 10-yard radius into unwill- 
ing wood, causing them to sprout roots, 
branches, and leaves. The victims become 
trees of a type native to the region and of the 
characters’ age before the transformation. The 
spell works only if cast on beings occupying 
ground that could support a tree; recipients 
flying or suspended in water at the time of 
casting remain unaffected. 

This spell can mutate a number of creatures 
equal in total Hit Dice (or levels) to the cast- 
er's level—within the area of effect, of course. 
If this area holds a group of creatures with Hit 
Dice (or levels) totaling a number greater 
than the caster’s experience level, the charac- 
ter may decide the order in which the crea- 
tures become affected. 

For instance, say a 14th-level druid casts 
unwilling wood into a target area containing a 
giant with 12 Hit Dice and two 3rd-level war- 
riors. The druid can transform either the giant 
or two warriors, but not all three. “Leftover” 
Hit Dice or levels are lost. 

Each creature affected may attempt to save 
vs. polymorph. The spell mutates all those 
failing their saving throw, along with any 
items they carry. A new tree has a height of 5 
feet per level (or Hit Die) of the victim. The 
effect is permanent; a person transformed 
into a tree ages as a tree and dies as a tree. 
However, affected characters retain aware- 
ness, memories, personality, and intelligence. 
Only damage severe enough to kill the tree 
can kill an unwilling wood victim. 


—— 


Druidic Magic * 97 


Tree-characters can return to normal if a 
spellcaster of greater level than the original 
caster uses remove curse. The original caster 
can release a transformed entity at will. 

The material components are a bit of tree 
root and the priest’s holy symbol. 


New Magical Items 


Druid characters can use the magical items 
generally permitted priests except written 
ones, such as scrolls or books. They can wear 
magical armor only when it is natural, such 
as wooden shields. Any magical weapon a 
druid uses must be of a type permitted to 
priests, as well as by the character’s druidic 
kit and branch. 

This section contains new magical items 
that fit the druid’s role of Nature priest, 
keeper of the balance, and dweller in the 
country. In addition, a small number of the 
items are designed for use against druids. 

Although this listing contains some power- 
ful items, many are fairly low-key. Items like 
the bountiful spade, or seeds of plenty represent 
the kind of magical item a high-level charac- 
ter would create as a gift for a favored farmer 
or lord. Druids might offer cursed items like 
the necklace of beast speech to someone as pun- 
ishment for wronging the Order or the land. 


Creating Magical Items 


The normal rules for priests creating magi- 
cal items (DMG pgs. 83-88) apply to druids as 
well. In almost all cases, gathering the rare, 
unique, or impossible components and com- 
bining them properly remains more impor- 
tant than purchasing expensive materials; 
quest and ritual take precedence over the 
depth of the druid’s purse. 

The personal touch is vital: Druids must 
make the vessels for enchantment using their 
nonweapon proficiencies. Characters needn't 
be expert artisans, but they cannot create a 


98 * Chapter Five 


magical scimitar merely by enchanting a 
weapon someone else has made. As a result, a 
druid who completes an arduous series of 
tasks to collect the necessary components 
may not actually have to spend any money to 
build the item, although major magical items 
require components easily worth the 1,000 to 
10,000 gp noted in the DMG (p. 87). 

Priest characters must spend up to three 
weeks meditating, fasting, and purifying 
themselves before they can enchant an item. 
Druids must begin this process at a sacred 
time, like an equinox, for the enchantment to 
have any chance of success. Druids purify the 
vessel and pray for its consecration not at an 
altar, but at their grove. 


Potions 


Potion of Plant Health. This potion vital- 
izes a living plant when poured upon its 
roots. It cures the plant's illnesses and keeps it 
free from natural parasites and disease for a 
year. During this time, the plant grows 50% 
better than normal, and 10% better than nor- 
mal the next year. Edible fruit, berries, or sap 
from the plant taste unusually succulent, 
while flowering plants bloom exceptionally 
well. If a vegetable monster such as a treant 
or shambling mound drinks this potion, treat 
it as a potion of extra-healing. XP value: 400. 


Sap of the Eldest Tree. Usually found in an 
earthen flask, this potion resembles thick corn 
or maple syrup. Characters who drink the sap 
(or bake it in a cake and eat it) will not age a 
day for the next 10 years! However, unlike a 
longevity potion, it does not make the drinker 
any younger. A person must consume the 
entire potion to gain the full benefit; if five 
characters share the syrup, each stops aging 
for two years. Additional doses are not cumu- 
lative—later imbibings supplant earlier ones. 
XP value: 500. 


Wands and Staves 


Wand of Shape Binding. Characters often 
use this item against druids. When hit by its 
multicolored beam (projected up to 80 feet), 
beings with the ability to shapechange or 
polymorph must save vs. wands at a -3 
penalty. Victims who fail cannot voluntarily 
alter shape for 2d10 turns. Attempts to shift 
shape using spells, magical items, or innate 
powers result in failure. A use of this 
rechargeable wand consumes one charge per 
4 HD or levels of the subject. XP value: 800. 


Wanderer’s Staff. This resembles a stout 
oaken staff, which radiates magic and, in fact, 
functions as a quarterstaff +1. However, its pri- 
mary power is locomotion. If carried as a 
walking stick, users hiking at a steady pace 
do not tire or need sleep. Any time spent 
walking counts as sleep for the purpose of 
resting the character. If desired, the character 
can walk night and day, taking only brief 
breaks for food, drink, etc. XP value: 2,000. 


Rings 


Ring of the Hierophant. Only druids can 
utilize this ring, which enables characters to 
speak the language of elementals. This, the 
ring’s lesser power, uses up no charges. 

More impressively, a druid wearing the 
ring may shapechange into an elemental. 
Druids in elemental form retain their own hit 
points and saving throws, but otherwise pos- 
sess the characteristics of a 12 HD elemental. 
The transformation functions just like a 
druid’s shapechanging power—this recharge- 
able ring even restores hit points when the 
druid changes back. However, transforma- 
tions last only for a maximum of one hour. 
Each elemental form (air, fire, earth, and 
water) may be assumed only once per month. 
XP value: 4,000. 


Weapons 


Lunar Sickle. This weapon, a sickle crafted 
from silver and bound to the moon, may have 
been forged for druids as a symbol of the 
cyclic nature of time. The sickle boasts its 
greatest strength during the waxing moon. It 
has a +2 bonus from the new moon to half 
moon, a +3 bonus from the half moon to full 
moon, and +4 during the full moon. When the 
moon begins to wane, the lunar sickle drops to 
a +1 bonus. During the dark of the moon it 
loses all magical bonuses; until the new moon 
rises, it no longer affects creatures that can be 
hit only by magical weapons. XP value: 1,500. 


Sickle of the Harvest. This sickle appears 
to be a normal farm implement, albeit of 
superior quality. If used in combat, it func- 
tions as a +1 weapon. However, its real power 
is as a magical harvesting tool. 

Anyone who grasps the sickle and speaks 
in the secret language of the druids can order 
the sickle to harvest a field on its own. When 
so commanded, the sickle takes to the air and 
harvests up to half an acre of grain per turn. It 
can accept precise orders, such as, “Cut down 
all stalks of ripe grain within a mile, save for 
Farmer Dowd’s field.” 

The sickle continues working until: three 
hours pass; its owner orders it to stop; or it 
moves a mile from its owner. Characters can 
also halt the sickle by destroying it or snatch- 
ing it out of the air. Anyone trying to grab the 
sickle must make a successful attack roll 
against AC +4. Those who fail suffer 1d6+1 
points of damage; success means a character 
grabs it and stops the harvesting. 

Treat attacks on the sickle as attacks against 
a sword of dancing; the sickle, while physically 
unstoppable, can be affected by failing a sav- 
ing roll against a spell such as fireball, light- 
ning bolt, or transmute metal to wood. 

XP value: 1,300. 


i e 


Druidic Magic * 99 


Heartwood Cudgel. This club, made from 
the heartwood of an oak, is a club +1— club +2 
in a druid’s hands. XP value: 500. 


Mistletoe Dart. The body and tip of this 
dart are fashioned from enchanted mistletoe. 
Magical armor, shields, or rings give no bonus 
protection against it; for example, a person 
wearing chain mail +4 would have AC 5, not 
AC 1. Darts, while not innately poisonous, 
can be coated with any venom. Characters 
usually find these darts in groups of 2 to 8 
(2d4). XP value: 50 each. 


Armor 


Antlered Helm. This metal-reinforced 
leather helm, adorned with a stag’s antlers, 
allows the wearer to run like a deer, with a 
base movement rate of 18. Moreover, stags 
and deer see, hear, and smell wearers of an 
antlered helm as if they were stags, and react 
accordingly. This power makes the item very 
useful for hunting. XP value: 800. 


Miscellaneous Magic 


Bountiful Spade. Characters who use this 
enchanted farm implement to turn over the 
earth prior to planting a field receive a +3 
bonus on their agriculture proficiency check 
for that year. XP value: 500. 


Cloak of the Beasts. This plain brown 
cloak bears patches of many different animal 
skins. A character who speaks a word of com- 
mand while wearing it instantly becomes 
transformed into a random animal for 1d6 
hours. The cloak and the person’s other cloth- 
ing become part of the new form. 

The type of animal varies with each use of 
the cloak’s power—roll 1d100 on the reincar- 
nate spell table (PH, p. 235), rerolling any 
nonanimal result. The nature of the change is 
identical to a druidic shapechange, except 


100 + Chapter Five 


that wearers have no control over which ani- 
mal form they take on and cannot change 
back until the enchantment wears off. 

Upon returning to normal, the wearer re- 
gains 10% to 60% of any lost hit points (10d6). 
The cloak cannot be used again until 12 hours 
pass. XP value: 1,000. 


Druid’s Yoke. While this item looks like an 
ox yoke, it is small enough to fit a donkey or 
human. Worn by an animal, it offers no bene- 
fit. If fastened onto a human, demihuman, or 
humanoid, it transforms the wearer into a 
full-sized ox; the yoke expands to fit. The ox 
retains the wearer's mind, but cannot speak 
or use spells and becomes vulnerable to 
magic that affects normal animals. The effect 
lasts as long as the yoke stays on—the wearer 
can’t remove it, but a friendly humanoid can. 
A character reverts back to normal immedi- 
ately after the yoke comes off. Wearers killed 
in ox form die; their bodies revert back to 
humanoid form once the yoke is removed. 

XP value: 2,000. 


Herbmaster’s Pouch. This small bag of 
finely woven grass keeps herbs—including 
herbal magical ingredients—as fresh as if 
newly harvested. The -2 penalty for using 
preserved herbs to create magical herbal 
brews does not apply to ingredients kept in 
an herbmaster’s pouch. XP value: 500. 


Necklace of Beast Speech. This gold 
choker bears the image of a particular beast. 
To determine what kind, roll on the reincar- 
nate table (PH, p. 235), rerolling any result 
that’s not an animal. 

Anyone who dons the device loses all 
power of speech, except with the animal 
species on the necklace. The character cannot 
remove the choker without a wish spell; a 
carefully worded wish might allow a wearer 
to retain the necklace and beast speech and 
regain human speech. XP value: 0. 


Seeds of the Hedge. Usually found in a 
leather bag or pouch, these seeds resemble 
flower or grass seeds. A pinch of hedge seed 
sprinkled on earth or grass instantly causes a 
thorny hedge to grow. The user can decide to 
make this 10-foot x 10-foot x 5-foot hedge 5 
feet long, 5 feet high, or 5 feet wide. 

Creatures caught in the hedge’s growth or 
trying to break through the hedge suffer 8 
points of damage plus additional points 
equal to their Armor Class (excluding Dexter- 
ity adjustments). It takes two turns to safely 
cut through each 5-foot thickness. Normal fire 
does not harm it, but magical fire sets it 
ablaze in one turn, creating a temporary wall 
of fire effect (as if cast by a 9th-level wizard) of 
the same size. One bag of seeds sows three 
hedges. XP value: 600. 


Seeds of Plenty. An ample sack holds mag- 
ical seeds of the crop most important to local 
farmers—enough to sow a single large field. 
The only thing unusual about the seed is that 
it radiates magic (noticeable if a character 
checks). Fields sown with this seed produce 
superior crops: exceptionally large plants that 
prove resistant to disease. 

Seeds of plenty double a normal harvest, 
increasing a typical farm family’s income 50% 
to 100% for the year. Furthermore, products 
made from the crop are superior. Porridge or 
bread made from a grain harvest prove espe- 
cially tasty and nutritious; clothes made from 
flax crops have exceptionally high quality; 
and so on. For this reason, a known sack of 
seeds of plenty sells for up to 2,000 gp. 

XP value: 200 per sack. 


Seeds of Doom. A sack holding these seeds 
appears identical to one filled with seeds of 
plenty. However, sowing a field with these 
seeds leads to disaster. The night after the 
planting, a dense field of noxious weeds 
springs up, each weed 5 to 7 feet high. Any- 
one less than giant size passing through the 


weeds can move only 10 feet per round. One 
turn after spending any time in the weeds, 
those not fully covered in armor (generally, 
anyone not wearing plate mail or better) must 
save vs. poison. Those who fail instantly 
develop a painful rash that lasts 2d6 days (-2 
penalty to all attack rolls, as well as attribute 
and proficiency checks; — penalty if wearing 
armor or tight clothing). 

Weeds set ablaze do burn, producing a foul 
stench that lasts 2d6 turns (equivalent to a 
stinking cloud spell over the field) and leaves a 
residual unpleasant smell for 2d6 days. Fur- 
thermore, the black ash left behind poisons 
the field so nothing will grow there for 2d6 
years. Uprooting the weeds manually 
requires 100 people working for a week, due 
to the weeds’ fast growth. XP value: 0. 


Serpent Seeds. Normally available ina 
packet of 1d3 seeds, a serpent seed springs up 
into a 20-foot tree one round after being 
planted in an inch of dirt, watered, and told to 
grow in the druids’ secret language. A serpent 
tree has no branches; its limbs are 1d8 brown 
serpents with green eyes, barklike skin, and 
wooden fangs dripping with poisonous white 
sap. 
While the tree cannot move, its branches 
can reach out up to 20 feet and follow the 
druid’s orders. Each serpent-branch’s bite is 
poisonous. A person who fails to save vs. poi- 
son becomes incapacitated within one turn; 
the character does not die, but slowly becomes 
transformed into a “serpent of the tree,” a 
nonpoisonous version of the branch-snakes. 

Despite its barky appearance, this new 
creature resembles nonpoisonous snakes of 
the region in appetite and attacks. While ser- 
pents of the tree are not attached to the ser- 
pent tree, they remain subject to the druid’s 
orders, just like the tree itself. 

A victim can be restored with a cure serious 
wounds or heal spell administered within one 
day of the bite. On the second day, the trans- 


Druidic Magic * 101 


formation to a serpent of the tree is nearly 
complete; only a wish can return the victim to 
normal then. 

The serpent tree remains permanently 
where planted and stays loyal to its maker as 
long as it exists. XP value: 1,000 per seed. 


Serpent tree: Int Low (5); AL N; AC 6; MV 0; 
HD 6+6; THACO 15; #AT 1/limb; Dmg 1d4/ 
limb; SA poison changes victims into ser- 
pents of the tree; ML 8; SZ H; XP 875. 

Serpent of the tree: Int Animal (1); AL N; AC 5; 
MV 15; HD 2+1; THACO 19; #AT 1; Dmg 1; 
ML 8; SZ S (5 ft.); XP 90. 


Stone of Lost Ways. This pebble might be 
mistaken for any other magical stone. How- 
ever, those who carry it through trackless wil- 
derness (not following a road or path) increase 
their chances of becoming hopelessly lost. Hav- 
ing a character with a stone of lost ways ina 


ee I SS 


102 * Chapter Five 


Bf 


4 
“Ë 


party adds 20% to the group’s chance of becom- 
ing lost, in any terrain. (See Table 81 in the 
DMG, p. 128.) Furthermore, two checks instead 
of the normal one are needed, one for each half- 
day’s travel. The stone affects only characters 
traveling on the ground. XP value: 0. 


Swarm Queen’s Crown. This dread item 
resembles a gold tiara set with a piece of 
amber encasing an insect—usually a queen 
bee. The crown has a value of 2,000 gp. 

With a command word, a user’s body mu- 
tates into a human-shaped mass of stinging, 
venomous wasps, bees, and spiders: a minia- 
ture, living creeping doom. The user's new 
“body” contains 10 insects per hit point. For 
example, a character with 10 hit points be- 
comes a mass of 100 insects. 

The user attacks by touching someone (a 
normal attack roll). After a hit, the user 
decides how many insects sting or bite the 


victim. Either 10, 20, or 30 insects may swarm 
over a victim per attack; for every 10 insects 
that hit, the victim loses 1d10 hit points, and 
the wearer of the crown loses 1 hp—each 
insect dies after its attack. So, a character may 
inflict up to 3d10 points of damage per attack 
at the cost of 3 hp. 

While in insect form, the user has a move of 
3, but can climb walls and ceilings. The user 
cannot employ any weapons, spells, magical 
items, tools, or armor. The swarm, which has 
AC 0, suffers no damage from piercing weap- 
ons (P), 1 point of damage from slashing weap- 
ons (S), and half damage from bludgeoning 
weapons (B). Magical bonuses and fire inflict 
full damage. Every point of damage to the 
wearer kills 10 insects. The user remains trans- 
formed as long as desired, but the crown can 
be used only once per day. XP value: 4,000. 


Treeship. A living tree shaped like a cur- 
rach (PH, p. 71), a treeship unites the magic of 
druids and the craftsmanship of elves. The 
mast is a magical tree, from which hang 
branchlike rigging and leaf-sails. The roots 
form the hull’s ribs, covered by thick bark 
instead of hide. A ship carries up to eight 
people and 5 tons of cargo. While the vessel 
cannot sail by itself, a crew finds it quite sea- 
worthy and swift (seaworthiness 80%, base 
move 3/6, emergency move 12). 

Treeships can sail only in freshwater lakes, 
rivers, and seas; salt water poisons them 
within a week. When beached on grass or soil 
(not sand) for more than a week, they grow 
additional roots into the soil and require 1d6 
days of pruning to become seaworthy again. 
XP value: 6,000. 


Herbal Magic 


A character with the herbalist proficiency 
may use herbs as an adjunct to the healing 
skill, as explained in Chapter 5 of the PH 
(p. 59). However, some druids possess excep- 


tional herb lore, which enables them to pro- 
duce magical herbal brews. Druids who de- 
vote at least three slots to the herbalism profi- 
ciency can create these brews. 

An herbal brew is a concoction of several 
herbs (and sometimes fungi or tree bark) that 
produces exotic effects. The name of a brew 
does not refer to the herbs in it, but to its 
effects. Herbal brews require no magical 
plants; power comes from the combination of 
herbs and the secret techniques herbalist 
druids use in each stage of preparation. 


Locating the Herbs 


Finding an herbal brew’s ingredients re- 
quires first locating the right place to look. 
The druid must search in the proper terrain 
for the time indicated in the brew’s listing 
(starting on p. 105). Then, make an herbalism 
proficiency check, applying the brew’s search 
modifier and a —4 penalty for snow-covered 
ground or darkness, if applicable. 

Success means the druid locates enough 
herbs to produce one brew; failure means the 
character finds none. In either case, addi- 
tional searches may be made, though a druid 
really should search only once per square 
mile of appropriate terrain. Repeated searches 
of an area carry a cumulative —2 penalty— 
there may be nothing there to find! 


Some Common Herbs 


their magic. Others may bi achded, real 
or unique to your own campaign world. 


Druidic Magic 8 103 


Preserving Herbal Ingredients 


Most herbs work best while fresh, but 
druids may wish to store some for future use 
rather than immediately turning them into 
brews. Preserving ingredients by drying, 
powdering, and packing the herbs takes six 
hours per set of ingredients (enough for one 
brew) and requires a successful herbalism 
check. 

The DM makes this roll, informing the 
player whether the ingredients have spoiled 
only when the druid tries to use them in a 
brew. A successful roll ensures the herbs stay 
fresh while in a waterproof container. Failure 
indicates they will spoil in 1d6 days. 


Making an Herbal Brew 


To create an herbal brew, the druid must 
have the appropriate ingredients, either fresh 
or preserved. The brewing process requires a 
quiet place that fosters deep concentration. It 
involves both physical work (chopping and 
cleaning herbs, mixing the ingredients in 
proper portions, steaming them, etc.) and rit- 
ual gestures and prayer. As with granted 
powers and spells, if the druid has not re- 
mained faithful to the Order, the herbs fail to 
take on their magical properties. 

After preparing the concoction as long as 
the brew’s description requires, the druid 
rolls another herbalism proficiency check, 
using the modifiers shown. In addition, a —2 
modifier applies if the druid used preserved 
rather than fresh herbs. A successful check 
means the druid creates the brew. Failure 
means the druid ruins the ingredients; a roll 
of 19 or 20 always fails. 

A druid with several sets of ingredients for 
the same herbal brew may mix multiple 
batches at the same time. If the final profi- 
ciency check succeeds, the druid concocts all 
the batches; if it fails, the ingredients all go to 
waste. 


104 * Chapter Five 


Types of Herbal Brews 


The next several pages offer descriptions of 
various herbal brews. Feel free to create new 
ones for your own druid characters. 

Each brew entry includes these details: 

Terrain tells where to find ingredients for 
the brew, as well as any special notes (gather 
only at night, etc.). 

Search Time/Modifier indicates how many 
hours a druid must search for the brew’s 
ingredients and offers a modifier to the herb- 
alism proficiency check that determines 
whether the druid finds them. 

Preparation Time/Modifier suggests how 
many hours it takes the druid to prepare the 
brew and offers a modifier to the herbalism 
proficiency check needed for successful brew- 
ing. 

Application tells how to apply the brew: 
either as a tea, ointment, poultice, or vapor. 

A tea consists of a mix of broken or crushed 
dried herbs infused into water. The rules for 
drinking potions apply to herbal teas, which 
keep indefinitely in dry form. 

An ointment is a brew mixed with lard, 
beeswax, lanolin, or another similar base and 
rubbed onto skin. Treat it as a magical oil. 

A poultice consists of a damp herbal brew 
bandaged onto a wound or area of skin. The 
contents of the poultice soaks into the skin 
gradually. Applying a poultice takes two 
rounds; it can be applied only to an unresist- 
ing or grappled subject. 

A vapor, a mixture intended to be inhaled 
rather than drunk, usually affects an area. The 
dry ingredients must be stirred into boiling 
water so the brew’s recipient can breathe in 
the steam. Administration requires two 
rounds and a source of hot water. 

Effects describes what the brew does. 

Save explains what kind of saving throw, if 
any, can resist the brew’s effects. Most saving 
throws are against poison— even if a brew is 
not actually deadly. 


Crawlbane 

Terrain: Swamp and deep forest 

Search Time/Modifier: 6/-1 

Preparation Time/Modifier: 2/-1 

Application: Ointment 

Effects: This ointment strongly repels in- 
sects. Anyone covered head to foot in it re- 
mains unaffected by normal insects, even 
those summoned by spells such as creeping 
doom and insect plague. Giant insects stil] may 
attack the character, but do so at a -3 penalty, 
due to their revulsion. 

Save: None 


Darkweed 
Terrain: Desert oasis 
Search Time/Modifier: 6 /—2 
Preparation Time/Modifier: 10/—4 
Application: Ointment 
Effects: A character who smears this oint- 
ment over both eyes becomes blind within 


two rounds. However, the character can see 
invisible, astral, ethereal, or illusory objects as 
if they were real and fully visible. 

Save: Neg. if save vs. spell 


Deathmock 

Terrain: Mountain slopes 

Search Time/Modifier: 4/—3 

Preparation Time/Modifier: 6/-3 

Application: Tea 

Effects: Deathmock causes drinkers to fall 
into a cataleptic trance; characters display 
muscle rigidity and do not appear to breathe 
or have a heartbeat. While injuries cause 
them little bleeding, they otherwise suffer 
normal damage. Those under the influence of 
this tea sleep for 2d4 days, during which time 
they need no food or water. They need only 
one-twentieth the air unaffected people do 
and can survive freezing temperature. 

Save: Neg. if save vs. poison 


Druidic Magic * 105 


Fiendflower 

Terrain: Deep forest or jungle 

Search Time/Modifier: 12/—4 

Preparation Time/Modifier: 8/-3 

Application: Tea 

Effects: Characters who drink this bitter tea 
see horrifying visions that drive them tem- 
porarily mad. After 1d20 turns, drinkers suf- 
fer an episode of 2d6 minutes, during which 
they turn enraged, violent, and homicidal; 
such a PC should be played by the DM. After- 
ward, drinkers cannot recall what happened 
during the episode, which recurs once per 
day (at irregular intervals) for the next 2d4 
days. A neutralize poison spell ends fiend- 
flower’s effects. 

Save: Neg. if save vs. spell 


Ghostroot 

Terrain: Old graveyards at night 

Search Time/Modifier: 8/—4 

Preparation Time/Modifier: 4/—6 

Application: Vapor 

Effects: This mixture’s luminous vapors 
repel undead. Any undead attempting to 
draw near must save vs. spell. Failure pre- 
vents them from approaching within 10 feet 
of the steaming brew. Success allows them to 
ignore its effects; once they save, they remain 
immune to the brew for the rest of the day. 
The vapors last for one turn. 

Save: Neg. if save vs. spell 


Nevermind 

Terrain: Forest clearings or caverns 

Search Time/Modifier: 8/-3 

Preparation Time/Modifier: 8 /—7 

Application: Tea 

Effects: Characters develop amnesia one 
minute after drinking this tea, permanently 
forgetting all events since they last slept. 

Save: Neg. if save vs. spell 


Hushthorn 

Terrain: Forests at night 

Search Time/Modifier: 4/-3 

Preparation Time/Modifier: 4/-3 

Application: Tea 

Effects: This tea causes drinkers to fall into 
a deep, natural sleep, from which they cannot 
be awakened for 2d10+13 hours. 

Save: Neg. if save vs. poison 


Snakesalve 
Terrain: Jungle 
Search Time/Modifier: 6/—1 
Preparation Time/Modifier: 2/—1 
Application: Poultice 
Effects: If applied to a living snake-bite vic- 
tim, this poultice neutralizes the poison. 
Save: None 


Springberry 

Terrain: Moonlit spring meadows 

Search Time/Modifier: 8 /—3 

Preparation Time/Modifier: 8 /—7 

Application: Tea 

Effects: Within an hour of drinking the tea, 
characters fall in love with the first person of 
the opposite sex they see. The drinkers, while 
not charmed, act besotted and devote all efforts 
to wooing their love. The effects last for 2d4 
days unless a player rolled a 20 on the save; in 
that case they are permanent. 

Save: Neg. if save vs. spell 


Wintersalve 

Terrain: Mountain slopes or tundra 

Search Time/Modifier: 6/—3 

Preparation Time/Modifier: 6/—3 

Application: Ointment 

Effects: This ointment, when smeared over 
exposed body parts, provides the same pro- 
tection against cold that a heavy fur coat 
would, but without the encumbrance. Com- 
bined with winter clothing, it allows for sur- 
vival below zero and gives a +1 bonus to sav- 
ing throws against cold-based attacks. 

Save: None 


| 


106 ¢ Chapter Five 


When not adventuring, druids prefer to 
live near a sacred grove and worship there as 
well. While the term “sacred grove” usually 
calls to mind a stand of trees within a forest, 
here it refers to any sacred place where druids 
worship Nature. All sacred groves are places 
of great natural beauty—and sometimes mag- 
ical power. Areas with a history of druidic 
veneration tend to acquire wondrous abilities 
from their prolonged contact with druidic 
magic and rites. 

Sometimes several druids share a single 
sacred grove. This arrangement enables them 
to take turns adventuring or traveling, leav- 
ing someone always on hand to protect and 
tend the grove. Druids occupying a sacred 
grove singly have to arrange for its safety 
before departing: setting various wards and 
traps, or arranging for allies to protect it in 
the druid’s absence. 


Features of a Sacred Grove 


Each branch of the druidic order prefers 
certain sites for sacred groves. These include 
the woodland groves of the forest druids, the 
oases of the desert druid, the fungus-rich 
caves of the gray druid, and so on. In nearly 
every case, the overriding requirement is that 
the sacred grove possess a natural splendor. 
This splendor may range from the stark 
grandeur of a ring of standing stones atop a 
hill on a windswept moor to the gardenlike 
beauty of a tended forest glade. 

A sacred grove is typically between 60 feet 
and 360 feet across (6d6 x 10 feet). Besides the 
expected grass, undergrowth, bushes, trees, 
or other local features, desirable groves share 
certain elements. 


Distinct Boundaries 


Sacred groves reveal themselves readily to 
those who know what to look for. A grove’s 
boundary markers often result from the 


CHAPTER 


Sacred Groves 


efforts of generations of druids. For example, 
the trees in a woodland grove may form con- 
centric circles, the outermost layer reserved 
for the largest, most ancient trees. 

Often the trees in a sacred grove are of an 
unusual size or a type distinct from others in 
the wood. For example, a sacred grove ina 
birch forest might have many oaks. Their 
branches may even entwine to form natural 
arches to welcome visitors. In more open ter- 
rains, sacred groves may surround them- 
selves with high, thorny hedges or evena 
river. Some groves have artificial borders, 
such as an outer ring of standing stones. A 
few are small islands. 


A Clearing 


A quiet place of meditation blanketed with 
soft moss or grass lies in the center of the 
grove. Druids prefer groves carpeted with 
soft ground cover that encourages dancing 
over a floor of simple dirt or stone. 


Source of Water 


A spring, well, brook, or pool (often fed by 
a waterfall) provides the grove with pure, 
drinkable water. Druids use this water in 
their rituals and in their day-to-day life as 
well. Some druids prefer still water to a brook 
or spring, since the quiet water is less dis- 
tracting during meditation and can prove 
useful in divination. 


Central Feature 


A commanding structure—perhaps the 
source of water—acts as a natural altar in the 
grove or as a focus for worship. Other com- 
mon central features include a single great 
tree, a standing stone, or a fairy ring (a circle 
of toadstools or other fungi). These and other 
features sometimes possess magical powers, 
detailed in a later section. 


—— 


Sacred Groves * 107 


Native Animals 


An owl] lives in a grove’s great tree, a snake 
dwells under a stone—the druid is never 
really alone in a sacred grove. The place feels 
alive in every sense, and druids usually be- 
friend a grove’s inhabitants. 


Living Quarters 


While the druid and any servants or family 
members rarely live within the sacred grove 
proper, home lies not far away. A forest druid, 
for instance, generally has a stone, log, or sod 
cottage within a mile of the grove, with a veg- 
etable and herb garden, and perhaps a few 
domestic animals. 


Stewardship 


” 


Although druids do not claim to “own 
sacred groves, they take responsibility for 
them very seriously. The druid associated 
with a grove normally goes by the title of 
steward, keeper, or caretaker. Stewardship of 
a sacred grove is traditional: Keepers always 
designate their successors. 


Guards and Wards 


The steward of a sacred grove is first and 
foremost responsible for the grove’s safety, 
especially if the grove has “awakened” with 
magical powers (explained later in this chap- 
ter) or if beings such as dryads live there. 
Therefore, druids devote considerable effort 
to protecting a sacred grove—in some cases, 
through secrecy. Only a few trustworthy 
people and creatures know the grove’s loca- 
tion. A druid obscures the pathway to the 
grove, while hallucinatory forest spells and 
better-cleared false trails twist away from it, 
leading a searcher astray. 

More active defenses include pits covered 
with branches and leaves (perhaps sharp 


108 + Chapter Six 


stakes, poisonous spiders, or snakes). Druids 
of at least 5th level use the snare spell liberally, 
as its defenses remain fixed until triggered. 
Using plant growth to set up permanent dense 
barriers around the grove is a very good strat- 
egy, especially if a druid plans to lace the 
obvious paths through these barriers with 
traps and snares, leaving only one or two con- 
cealed “safe” passages. 

If enemies are on their way, the druid should 
strive to prevent them from using fire to dam- 
age the grove. Controlling weather to create a 
rainstorm before foes even reach the grove 
keeps the enemy miserable and stops the grass, 
bushes, and wood from igniting. Of course, one 
of the best ways a druid can defend a grove is 
to discover potential enemies and strike before 
they even reach the sacred natural site. (See 
“Eyes in the Wilderness,” Chapter 4.) 


Tending the Grove 


While safeguarding the grove remains 
most important, stewards must not neglect 
regular care. This day-to-day work involves 
tending the plants and animals in the grove, 
talking to them, and dealing with illnesses or 
parasites that might appear. In addition, if a 
druid prefers a gardenlike appearance to a 
wild one, the steward cleans up loose 
branches, prunes trees and bushes, and so on. 
Druids should devote 12 days per month to 
this job, or about three days per week. If a 
druid fails in this duty, the DM can assume 
the sacred grove’s health and appearance 
deteriorates (as does the magic of awakened 
groves, lesser powers first). Deterioration is 
immediately obvious to any visiting druid. 

Several druids may use the same sacred 
grove as a place of worship, sharing the work 
detailed above, but only one is its steward; 
the others usually consider themselves the 
sacred grove’s tenders. By tradition, if the 
keeper dies or retires, one of the tenders takes 
over the stewardship. 


It is considered a crime for one druid in the 
Order to forcibly displace another from a 
stewardship. Such an incident, when reported 
to the great druid, constitutes grounds for the 
ban. In response, several druids will join 
together to expel the offender from the grove, 
finding a more suitable replacement—the 
original steward, if that druid did not die in 
the grove’s defense. 

An exception is allowed when a druid’s 
negligence results in the deterioration or 
defilement of a sacred grove. In this case, an 
inner circle druid or the great druid appoints 
a new keeper for the grove. It becomes that 
druid’s responsibility to reclaim the grove, by 
force if necessary, from its inept steward. 


Grove Law 


Druids, far stricter about protecting their 
sacred groves than any other wilderness area, 
have established a law to safeguard these spe- 
cial sites. The following points make up the 
law of the grove, upheld by all except the 
steward and those with special dispensation 
from the steward: 

® No trees or plants within the grove may 
be harmed, cut, or pruned. No one may pick 
or cut branches, berries, nuts, or fruit, either; 
visitors can eat or otherwise use only that 
which has fallen to the ground. 

* No one may fight within the grove. 

® No bird or animal within a sacred grove 
may be harmed. If a hunted creature flees into 
the grove, hunters must break off the chase; 
they cannot shoot at the beast from outside 
the grove once it enters. 

* No one may fish in the waters of a grove, 
nor foul these waters in any way. 

* None may light a fire within a grove’s 
bounds—not even tinder or a pipe. 

The maximum penalty for violating the law 
of the grove is death, though a druid may 
apply a lesser penalty in certain cases. The 
punishment for violating these rules—or for 


110 * Chapter Six 


more serious defilement of a sacred grove— 
depends on the offender’s motives, the dam- 
age, and the druid’s inclination. If a cruel wiz- 
ard damaged a sacred grove with a fireball in 
an attack on the steward, the druid would 
think death a proper punishment— prefer- 
ably death by fire. On the other hand, if a 
careless toddler did the same damage by acci- 
dentally setting fire to the grove, the druid 
seeks a more suitable punishment: kidnaping 
the child to raise as a druid. Thus the child 
devotes a lifetime to atonement. 

Note that there is no law against folk enter- 
ing the grove. While some druids keep visi- 
tors away, others welcome people and ani- 
mals who come to admire the grove or wor- 
ship, and even shelter needy travelers. Simi- 
larly, the steward may allow visitors to collect 
fallen deadwood, fruits, nuts, and berries. 
Since druids usually can speak with the ani- 
mals, plants, and (sometimes) stones in their 
grove, they can determine easily how a per- 
son acquired suspicious bounty. 


Becoming a Steward 


A druid player character can acquire stew- 
ardship of a sacred grove in four ways: 

First, the keeper of a grove might nominate 
the PC to become the successor to the stew- 
ardship. This tactic allows the PC to take over 
when the existing steward dies, disappears, 
or decides not to care for the grove any longer. 
The successor must have the current stew- 
ard’s trust and respect, and usually has spent 
time worshiping in the grove and tending it 
under supervision. Most of all, the nominee 
must prove worthy to defend the grove. If the 
grove has magic, the character should have 
reached at least 7th level to deserve consider- 
ation. However, young sacred groves lacking 
magic often receive the protection of lower- 
level druids. 

Second, a player character can find an aban- 
doned sacred grove and reclaim it. Sometimes 


a powerful monster or other foe eliminates 
both the steward of a sacred grove and the 
chosen successor. Such groves often are 
cursed, haunted by undead, or frequented by 
local monsters. But a druid who overcomes 
these obstacles and reclaims the grove proves 
worthy of the stewardship. 

Third, a stewardship may come with a title, 
although this practice varies from circle to 
circle. For instance, a circle may award the 
responsibility for certain sacred groves to its 
archdruids or great druid, and—unlike a nor- 
mal grove—this stewardship changes hands 
as new druids assume the high ranks. At the 
DM’s discretion, the world might even hold a 
wondrous “high sacred grove”— the respon- 
sibility of the Grand Druid. 

Fourth, a PC can find a virgin grove site 
and sanctify it. Virgin groves match the phys- 
ical requirements listed earlier for a sacred 
grove, but have no magical powers and have 


never been tended. Finding such a spot is 
simply a matter of the druid’s knowledge of 
local geography. A virgin grove rarely has 
clear boundaries, so the druid may make 
“improvements,” such as planting a circle of 
trees or erecting standing stones to mark the 
new grove’s borders. 


Sanctifying and 
Awakening a Grove 


Druids may wish to consecrate a sacred 
grove, perhaps awaken it to its magical prop- 
erties. To this end, they must find a suitable 
natural site with the features described earlier. 

After preparing a site, the druid performs a 
ritual to sanctify it. This ceremony, a blessing 
and invocation of Nature—takes a day of 
uninterrupted prayer. Once sanctified, a site 
becomes a sacred grove—a living shrine to 
Nature, where druids can perform their rites. 


i eee ———_ ee 


Sacred Groves « 111 


As druids worship there over the years, a 
sacred grove tends to absorb power from the 
rituals, becoming a holier place. If druids con- 
sistently venerate a grove, it may awaken to 
the magical powers described earlier. Vener- 
ating a grove means that druids (not neces- 
sarily just the one who sanctified it) pray and 
meditate there on a regular basis. Further- 
more, the druid appointed the grove’s stew- 
ard must faithfully tend it. 

A sanctified sacred grove actively visited 
and tended for seven years has a chance to gain 
magical powers. This time need not be contigu- 
ous—that is, a sacred grove can be active for 
five years, then abandoned, then active for 
another two years. After the seven years have 
passed, the DM begins rolling 1d10 each spring. 
On a roll of 10, the grove “awakens.” Awak- 
ened groves gain the basic powers of a lesser 
sacred grove and a special ability (Table 3). 

Sacred groves with a long history of dru- 
idic use become the most potent, their power 
slowly increasing over the ages as a result of 
continued exposure to druidic magic. For 
every seven years an awakened grove re- 
mains active, it has a further 10% chance of 
gaining additional powers, to a maximum of 
six powers. Roll on Table 3 at each success, 
rerolling duplicated powers. 

A lesser magical sacred grove becomes a 
greater grove only through millennia of use 
by druids or direct divine intervention. DMs 
may assume a 10% chance of gaining greater 
grove status (and 1d4 such powers) per thou- 
sand years of veneration by druids. 


Magical Sacred Groves 


Not all sacred groves have magical powers, 
but many of them do. A grove may have been 
innately magical since the creation of the 
world or have gained its magic through an 
unusual event, such as a visit by a deity, the 
birth of a unicorn, or a dryad or nymph’s 
long-time residence in the grove. 


112 * Chapter Six 


Lesser Magical Groves 


An enchanted lesser sacred grove always 
radiates magic, although never good or evil. 
It has the following properties: 

è Druids entering the grove feel a watching 
presence and a sense of power. For every 
three rounds they spend within its bound- 
aries they learn one power of the sacred 
grove, through a vision or intuition. 

è All druids receive a +1 bonus to saving 
throws vs. spell, death magic, and wands 
while within a lesser magical grove. The 
grove’s steward receives a +2 bonus. 

è All in the grove are rendered immune to 
magical fear while within it. 

e Dig spells never work within a grove. 

Natural (nonmagical) lightning never 
strikes trees or beings in the grove. 

è Evil enchanted creatures cannot enter the 
grove unless it has been defiled. (See “Defiled 
and Cursed Groves” in this chapter.) 

In addition to these abilities, lesser magical 
sacred groves may possess other powers. To 
quickly create a grove the PCs might stumble 
upon while adventuring, the DM first decides 
how many lesser powers the grove has 
(chooses or rolls 2d4—2). Then, the DM selects 
the powers from Table 3 or rolls 1d10 to pick 
from the table randomly. (Descriptions of the 
powers follow.) 


TABLE 3: Lesser Grove Powers 


Power 
Awakened plants 
Bountiful 
Control temperature 
Faerie fire 
Healing 
Prophecy 
Protective aura 
Still winds 

Sweet water 
Special 


a. 
jà 
( 


COON DUS WN 


—_— 


Awakened Plants. The grove’s magic has 
“awakened” 1d3 10-foot-square patches of 
weeds, creepers, or bushes with semi- 
intelligence, 4 Hit Dice, AC 10, and the ability 
to attack as an entangle spell. They will act to 
protect themselves and defend the grove. 

Bountiful. If the sacred grove contains 
plants that produce edible fruit, nuts, or 
berries, 3d6+20 enchanted examples sprout 
each spring along with the usual crop. The 
magic fruit, nuts, or berries—the largest and 
most healthy of their species—confer the ben- 
efits of a goodberry spell’s products on the 
characters who eat them. Once picked, no 
more will grow until the following year. 

Control Temperature. Any Nature wor- 
shiper in the grove may make a grove’s tem- 
perature rise or fall within 30 degrees. This 
ability, possible once per day, affects the 
entire grove. Arctic or desert groves com- 
monly feature this power, which enables 
those in the grove to survive brief climatic 
extremes, especially combined with the 
power to still winds (below). 

Faerie Fire, A Nature worshiper (even a 
nonpriest) may cause a faerie fire luminance to 
appear, centered on the character or upon any 
of the trees, rocks, or standing stones in the 
grove. The faerie fire, which lasts one turn per 
level of the caller, can be summoned once per 
person in a given day. Faerie fire that druids 
call endures for two turns per level of the 
druid and can flicker about the grove at will. 
When a druid casts a faerie fire spell within the 
grove, its duration triples. 

Healing. Beings of neutral alignment or 
those allied to the druid may heal wounds at 
twice the rate of natural healing while in the 
magical sacred grove. Healing-related spells 
produce the maximum benefits; for instance, 
cure light wounds restores 8 points of damage. 

Prophecy. A druid who spends the night 
sleeping in the grove may receive a magical 
portent in a dream concerning the past, pre- 
sent, or future. The nature of the prophecy 


remains the DM’s decision, but it should 
never contain more information than would 
come to light using a properly cast commune 
with nature spell. The portent usually warns 
of danger or hints at a task Nature wishes the 
druid to perform. 

Protective Aura. Any creature but a druid, 
dryad, or nymph who sees the grove must 
save vs. spell. Those who fail perceive the 
grove as nothing other than a normal clearing 
(or the like) until they are led into it. The 
sacred grove also generates a continual pro- 
tective field similar to protection from evil, 10’ 
radius, except it covers the entire grove and 
has the powers of both protection from evil and 
protection from good spells. 

Still Winds. Worshipers of Nature in the 
sacred grove (even nonpriests) can cause 
winds to calm for up to one turn per level, as 
long as they concentrate on maintaining this 
power. Triple the duration when a druid 
invokes it. This power, possible once per day, 
is quite common in desert, mountain, and arc- 
tic groves, as it protects the sacred grove and 
those in it from sandstorms, tornadoes, or 
snowstorms, and the like. 

Sweet Water. Water from a source within 
the grove or dew gathered from the grass in 
the area has the properties of sweet water, but 
loses these special properties as soon as it is 
removed from the site. 

Special. The DM can create a power associ- 
ated with the branch or kit of the druid that 
sanctified this grove. For instance, the grove - 
of a Hivemaster might contain a wasp’s nest 
or beehive from which a druid could call an 
insect plague once per day, while a swamp 
druid’s grove could feature a patch of firm 
ground that turns suddenly to quicksandlike 
mud (as in a rock to mud spell). 


Greater Magical Groves 


A greater magical sacred grove possesses 
exceptional enchantments. Each domain 


LL 


Sacred Groves * 113 


includes fewer than a score of such groves, 
most of which fall under the control of druids 
of 12th or higher level. 

A greater grove has all the basic powers of 
the lesser grove, mentioned earlier. In addi- 
tion, druids who sleep overnight in the grove 
before praying for spells receive an extra 
spell. Thus, a druid who chooses two 1st- and 
one 2nd-level spell receives another 1st- or 
2nd-level spell of the DM’s choice. 

A greater magical sacred grove has 2d4 
lesser grove powers (rolled on Table 3) and 
id4 greater grove powers (rolled on Table 4), 
Descriptions of the greater powers follow. 


TABLE 4: Greater Grove Powers 


di2 Power 
1 Awakened tree 
2 Beast speech 
3 Concealment 
4 Earthpower 
5 Know alignment 
6 Peaceful 
7 Reincarnation 
8 Waters of life 
9 — Scrying pool 
10 = Magic fruit 
11 Forbiddance 
12 Special 


Awakened Tree. A large, ancient tree living 
in the grove gains Intelligence and Wisdom 
(2d6+6), the spellcasting ability of a 3rd-level 
druid, and the power of speech. It can use any 
two of its branches at once like arms. It speaks 
—in a deep, slow voice—in the secret lan- 
guage of the druids. In combat, treat it as a 
treant created by the liveoak spell. Roots bind 
it to the earth like a normal tree. 

Beast Speech. Any normal or giant animal 
with an Intelligence score between animal 
and low can speak and understand the secret 
language of the druids for as long as it re- 
mains within the sacred grove. The animal's 


114 © Chapter Six 


Intelligence does not increase. Also, casting 
animal summoning calls a 50% greater number 
(or Hit Dice) of animals than usual. 

Concealment. All mobile beings (not nor- 
mal plants) within the grove when this power 
is invoked become invisible for three turns per 
level of the druid or until they leave the 
grove. This power, possible once a day, ceases 
to conceal anyone who attacks. 

Earthpower. When druids in the sacred 
grove cast a Plant or Earth Elemental sphere 
spell within its boundaries, they double the 
spell’s duration, area of effect, and range. 

Know Alignment. A druid may know the 
alignment of others in the sacred grove by 
concentrating one round. (The druid and sub- 
ject must remain in the grove during this 
time.) This spell-like power can be used any 
number of times. Nonpriest worshipers of 
Nature can use this power after two rounds of 
concentration (and two successful Wisdom 
checks), but can make only one attempt. 

Peaceful. Anyone entering this grove may 
notice odd sights, like predators and prey 
playing together. Those who make a success- 
ful attack against another within this grove 
must make a saving throw vs. wands. Attack- 
ers who fail suffer all the damage themselves; 
the wounds they meant to inflict appear on 
their own bodies. If they save, they suffer 
only half damage. 

Reincarnation. If a druid’s ashes or remains 
are buried in the sacred grove, the character 
becomes reincarnated (per the priest spell). 
The new incarnation appears within a mile of 
the grove in 1d6 days. 

Waters of Life. Any source of water within 
the grove has unusual healing properties. 
Anyone bathing in the water (maximum of 
once per day per person) gains the benefit of 
simultaneous neutralize poison, cure disease, 
and cure serious wounds spells. The water loses 
all special properties outside the grove’s 
boundaries, however, so characters cannot 
use it as a healing potion. 


Scrying Pool. A source of still water within 
the grove, such as a pool or well, may be used 
for divination. Once per day a druid can com- 
mand the pool or well to act as a reflecting pool 
cast at the druid’s level. 

Magic Fruit. The grove has a tree whose 
fruit or berries have a magical effect when 
eaten. In a given year, 1d6 fruits ripen, each 
with a distinct appearance to set it apart from 
common fruit—lustrous golden apples, for 
example. The magic fruit’s effects are equiva- 
lent to one of the following: 

è Potion of animal control 

è Potion of heroism 

è Potion of longevity 

è Potion of treasure finding 

è Philter of love 

o Philter of glibness. 

Forbiddance. A druid can invoke the for- 
biddance power (per the spell) to cover the 
boundaries of the grove. The effects can be 
called up only once per day and, once called, 
last one hour per level of the druid. 

Special. The DM should devise a power 
associated with the branch or kit of the first 
steward of the greater magical sacred grove. 


Defiled and Cursed Groves 


Some sacred groves tell a tragic story: Their 
plants have been dug up, trees burned or 
chopped down, water sources fouled, or 
standing stones overturned and broken. Per- 
haps their clearings once served as altars to 
other priests in the worship of strange gods. 
Such groves have been defiled, stripped of all 
their powers until druids reclaim them (de- 
scribed below). 

Other events may result in a still worse 
fate—a grove becoming cursed. For instance: 

e A terrible event takes place within the 
grove’s boundaries: Someone reads a cursed 
scroll, a deity’s avatar passes through, a druid 
dies violently, or another highly charged 
event takes place. 


e The grove is deliberately defiled but not 
destroyed. When plants begin to grow back, 
the grove may retain some twisted vestige of 
its original power. 

e If the druid who sanctified the grove 
strays badly from the neutral alignment, 
abandons the Order, or takes up the path of 
the Lost Druids, the grove’s beauty and pow- 
ers may become warped—perhaps as a warn- 
ing to the erring steward. 

To determine what curse has struck a par- 
ticular sacred grove, the DM may roll on 
Table 5. A druid who discovers a cursed 
grove nearly always tries to find a way to lift 
the curse and ultimately resanctify the land. 
Some typical curses are described below. 


TABLE 5; Properties of Cursed Groves 


Property 
Entrancing 
Poisoned ground 
Haunted 
Perpetual season 
Hungry trees 
Special 


auh wn & 


Entrancing. This curse can apply to any 
grove containing a source of water or plants 
bearing fruit, nuts, or berries. Those who eat 
natural fruits of the grove or drink its water 
must save vs. spell or become charmed: They 
refuse to leave the grove, claiming they must 
defend this beautiful place. They resist force- 
fully if anyone tries to harm the grove or take 
them from it. The charm is broken if those it 
has entranced leave the grove, or it can wear 
off, per the charm person spell. 

Poisoned Ground. A terrible poison lives 
within the ground, although the plants in the 
grove are immune. Those who touch the vegeta- 
tion (including grass) with bare skin must save 
vs. poison each round of contact or suffer 1d6 
points of damage. Characters who eat fruits, 
etc., from the grove must save vs. poison or die. 


eee ee errr EOE 


Sacred Groves è 115 


Haunted. The life forces of people who die 
in a haunted grove or within a mile of its 
boundaries are drawn into one of the grove’s 
trees or standing stones. The trunks of the 
trees or the surfaces of the stones contain 
twisted images of the dead trapped within. 
While trapped, these souls cannot be raised, 
resurrected, or reincarnated. 

To defend itself, the grove can summon any 
of its prisoners’ spirits as ghosts or banshees 
(described in the Monstrous Manual™). Each 
summoning takes two rounds, but only one 
ghost or banshee can exist at any time. Re- 
sanctifying the grove (described below) ends 
the curse and frees the trapped spirits, who 
now may be reincarnated, raised, or resur- 
rected. Destroyi ing the grove before resancti- 
fying releases all the trapped spirits as malev- 
olent ghosts or banshees to haunt the region 
henceforth. 


116 * Chapter Six 


Perpetual Season. The grove, locked into a 
single season, never experiences a change in 
climate. Though a grove locked into winter 
isn't ever popular, a grove of perpetual spring 
or summer may seem like a blessing. While 
winter blizzards rage outside, the day is 
warm and sunny within a grove of perpetual 
summer; grass is always green, trees always 
leafy, and flowers ever blossoming. Neverthe- 
less, druids consider this redundant setting 
horribly unnatural. 

Hungry Trees. The trees in this grove have 
been animated by a hunger for flesh. Treat the 
2d8 hungry trees of this cursed grove as evil 
treants. Masquerading as normal trees, they 
suddenly attack anyone entering the grove. 
They never cross its borders unless attacked 
from outside the grove, though; in that case, 
they re-enter the grove after defeating (and 
consuming) foes. 


Reclaiming Cursed or Defiled Groves 


Druids whose sacred grove becomes de- 
filed or destroyed must perform a ritual of 
atonement, plus find and punish the guilty 
party. Failing deprives druids of all granted 
powers and major access to priestly spheres. 

The first step in reclaiming a defiled grove 
involves repairing any damage it has sus- 
tained: planting new trees, restoring dam- 
aged standing stones, and so on. Then, a 
druid must perform an uninterrupted day- 
long ceremony within the grove to ask for the 
renewed blessings of Nature. 

Reclaiming a cursed grove poses additional 
difficulties. After performing the above steps, 
the druid must complete a task to balance the 
forces behind the curse. The nature of the task 
is up to the DM, but it usually involves a dan- 
gerous quest in a real or symbolic attempt to 
“undo” the curse, punish those who caused 
it, or make amends for the act that led to it. 
After concluding the task, the druid must 
return to the grove to invoke Nature and cast 
a remove curse spell. 


Standing Stones 


Standing stones are large, shaped stones 
that rise from the ground to towering heights. 
In some cases, their presence in a forest, on a 
bleak moor, or atop a lonely hill automatically 
qualifies an area as a sacred grove, even if it 
lacks other natural beauty. Druids may have 
erected the standing stones, or they may 
mark a holy place that predates the druids’ 
arrival in the area— perhaps a site sacred to 
prehuman peoples (elves, for instance) or pre- 
historic tribes. 

Though sometimes stones stand alone, they 
more often join together to form various 
arrangements. A single standing stone is 
called a megalith—either a shaped slab or a 
more natural, tapering obelisk. Two shaped 
stones placed upright with a third laid across 


their tops constitutes a trilithon. Several 
megaliths or trilithons frequently form pat- 
terns, usually circles or horseshoe shapes. 

Individual stones may weigh 5 to 25 tons 
each and stand 10 to 30 feet tall. A large circle 
may take a generation to build, unless power- 
ful earth magic or suitable monsters (treants, 
earth elementals, or giants) help in the con- 
struction. Because druids possess the neces- 
sary magic, they often create these monu- 
ments for their sacred groves. 

Standing stones fall into one of two cate- 
gories: magical and nonmagical. 


Nonmagical Standing Stones 


Many standing stones have no innate magi- 
cal properties, although they may have been 
built by magic. In “awakened” groves, these 
nonmagical stones may share in the general 
magic of the grove. The DM decides on the 
purpose, type, and number of stones. 

Boundary Markers. Stones can simply 
mark the grove’s borders, a common practice 
when a circle of trees is inappropriate. Moun- 
tain druids, in particular, use stone circles to 
mark borders. 

Natural Observatory. The stones might 
serve as a primitive astronomical calculator 
(as in the case of Stonehenge), their positions 
marking eclipses, equinoxes, and other 
important solar and lunar dates whose exact 
times remain important for religious reasons 
and for maintaining the agricultural calendar. 
Usually one such astronomical circle of stones 
exists in every major druidic domain. Creat- 
ing such a circle requires two proficiencies: 
astrology and engineering. In some cases, 
these circles are relics left behind to mark the 
visits (and predict the eventual returns) of 
spelljamming space druids. 

Monuments. The lives of particularly not- 
able historical figures can merit great mega- 
lith memorials. Sometimes treasure or a body 
lies buried under the stone. In rare instances, 


a 


Sacred Groves * 117 


although the stone has no magic, the body 
beneath it rests in magical suspended anima- 
tion—think of King Arthur, waiting for Mer- 
lin to awaken him. 


Magical Standing Stones 


Magical standing stones can serve any of 
the nonmagical variety’s purposes. Lesser 
magical sacred groves ‘containing standing 
stones possess a 10% chance of having one 
with magical powers. This chance increases 
to 20% for groves with five or more stones, 
and 30% for groves with 25 or more stones. 
Standing stones within greater groves have 
triple the chance of being magical. 

Standing stones may become magical 
through association with druidic rites, divine 
intervention, or via the normal process used 
to create druidic magical items. DMs decid- 
ing that a stone has magic either pick its pow- 
ers from those described below or roll on 
Table 6. Add a +1 bonus to rolls for standing 
stones that help form a trilithon. 


TABLE 6: Powers of Standing Stones 
d Power 
Petrified entity 
Stone guardian 
Peaceful stones 


Speaking stones 
Trilithon gate 


Ol wm U N ee ie 


Petrified Entity. The magical stone is actu- 
ally a huge being—often a giant or titan—that 
has been so weathered and overgrown with 
moss or ivy over the years its original human- 
oid form is no longer discernable. It radiates 
magic and may return to life if a dispel magic or 
stone to flesh spell succeeds. Depending on its 
alignment and the reason it became petrified, 
the creature may feel either grateful or hostile 
to its rescuer. A ‘petrified entity oe, ro 
to the work of dual-class wizard /drui 


118 * Chapter Six 


Stone Guardian. Once per day, the steward 
of the grove can order the stone to come to 
life for one turn per level of the druid. The 
animated stone fights as a 16 HD earth ele- 
mental, but if it leaves the grove it reverts to a 
normal stone and may not be reanimated 
until returned to the grove—a herculean task, 
since it weighs several tons! If injured, the 
magical stone heals at a rate of 1 hit point per 
turn—within the grove only. 

Peaceful Stones. The standing stones exert 
a calming influence on the earth. No earth- 
quake spells may succeed within a radius that 
measures (in feet from the center of the stone 
or cluster) a distance equal to the number of 
stones in the circle. Since no earthquakes or 
volcanic eruptions occur in this area, peaceful 
stones often stand near volcanoes or faults. 
Removing them could spell disaster for near- 
by forests and towns! 

Speaking Stones. Any druid can cause any 
standing stones in the grove to speak, per the 
stone tell spell. Characters can use this power 
as often as desired, but the stones speak for 
no more than three rounds per day. Stewards 
use this power to learn whether intruders 
have visited the grove while they were away; 
druids who find a strange grove could use it 
to become familiar with the grove’s history 
and keepers (if any). 

Trilithon Gate. Characters passing under 
the stones may emerge from any other sacred 
grove in the world that also has a trilithon 
gate, no matter how distant. Those who have 
a particular gate in mind reach it; otherwise, 
characters come through a random gate. Any- 
one can travel via trilithon gate only once per 
day; it is impossible to go through and return 
again immediately. 


APPENDIX 


AD&D” Original Edition Druids 


The following represents a summation of infor- 
mation on druids from the AD&D Original 
Edition Player’s Handbook and the Un- 


earthed Arcana reference book. Some of these 
rules may not coincide with the rules for druids 
in the AD&D 2nd Edition game. 


The druid is a subclass of the cleric, a neu- 
tral priest of nature who views good and evil, 
law and chaos, as necessary and vital balanc- 
ing forces. Druids hold trees (especially ash 
and oak) sacred, venerate the sun(s) and the 
moon(s), and serve as protectors of forests, 
wild plants, crops, and—to a lesser extent— 
animals and the human followers of their reli- 
gion. They never destroy woodlands or crops, 
no matter what the situation (although druids 
could act to change the nature of an evil en- 
chanted wood, for instance, without destroy- 
ing it). Similarly, they avoid slaying wild or 
domestic animals, except as necessary for 
self-preservation and sustenance. However, 
druids rarely risk their lives to prevent dam- 
age to woodlands or animals—instead, they 
favor retribution after the fact, in a manner, 
time, and place of their own choosing. 

To become a druid, a character must have a 
minimum Wisdom of 12 and Charisma of 15; 
if both these scores exceed 15, the druid gains 
a 10% bonus on earned experience. Human, 
elven, half-elven, and halfling PCs may be 
druids, although halflings and some types of 
elves are subject to level restrictions. 

Druids fight and save as clerics, but get a 
+2 bonus to save vs. fire or vs. electrical 
attacks. They can wear only leather armor 
and use only wooden shields. Their weapon 
options are limited to club, dagger, dart, ham- 
mer, khopesh, scimitar, scythe, sickle, sling, 
spear, and staff. 

A druid can use those magical items per- 
mitted to clerics, except for written items 
(books and scrolls) and weapons and armor 
forbidden to their class. 


General Abilities 


All druids speak their own secret language. 
Upon reaching 3rd level, and each level there- 
after, a druid gains the language of one of the 
following creatures: centaur, dryad, elf, 
gnome, green dragon, hill giant, lizard man, 
manticore, nixie, pixie, satyr, sprite, treant. 

Druids gain powers as they rise in level. 

At 3rd level: 

Identify plant type. 

e Identify animal type. 

e Identify pure water. 

e Pass through overgrown areas without 
leaving a trail and at the normal movement 
rate. 

At 7th level: (in addition to above) 

è Immune to charm spells. 

e Shapechange into a bird, reptile, and ani- 
mal, each form once per day. 


High-level Druids 


The number of druids above 11th level in a 
given land is limited. (See Table 7.) 

Druid. A land can have only nine 12th- 
level Druids; when druids earn enough expe- 
rience to achieve 12th level, they gain this lev- 
el’s powers only if the land presently has 
fewer than nine 12th-level Druids. A charac- 
ter also could gain the level by defeating one 
of the land’s nine Druids in magical or hand- 
to-hand combat. Losers that survive must 
drop just enough experience points to place 
them at the beginning of the next lower level 
(11th). 

Archdruid, Great Druid. The same proce- 
dure applies when a 12th-level Druid gains 
enough experience to become an Archdruid, 
and when an Archdruid reaches Great Druid 
level. There are only three positions for Arch- 
druids in a given region, and only one Great 
Druid. 


AD&D” Original Edition Druids è 119 


TABLE 7: Original Druid Experience Points 
Experience Experience Accumulated Qty./ Level 
Points Level hp Land Title 
0—2,000 1 1 any Aspirant 
2,001—4,000 2 2 any Ovate 
4,001—7,500 3 3 any Initiate of the 1st circle 
7,501—12,500 4 4 any Initiate of the 2nd circle 
12,501—20,000 5 5 any Initiate of the 3rd circle 
20,001—35,000 6 6 any Initiate of the 4th circle 
35,001—60,000 7 7 any Initiate of the 5th circle 
60,001—90,000 8 8 any Initiate of the 6th circle 
90,001—125,000 9 9 any Initiate of the 7th circle 
125,001—200,000 10 10 any Initiate of the 8th circle 
200,001—300,000 11 11 any Initiate of the 9th circle 
300,001—750,000 12 12 9 Druid 
750,001—1,500,000 13 13 3 Archdruid 
1,500,001—3,000,000 14 14 1 Great Druid 
3,000,001—3,500,000 15 15 à The Grand Druid 


“Only one Grand Druid governs all the lands of the world. 


Grand Druid. Ranking above the Great 
Druids stands a single Grand Druid, the ulti- 
mate overseer of all a world’s druids. Besides 
knowing six spells of each level, the Grand 
Druid has the ability to cast up to six spell 
levels (as one additional spell or in any com- 
bination that totals six levels—one 6th-level 
spell, six 1st-level spells, one 4th- and one 
2nd-level spell, etc.). 

Hierophant. The Grand Druid has an 
essentially political job, and most adventurers 
eventually tire of it. After attaining 500,000 
experience points as a Grand Druid, the char- 
acter may appoint any worthy Great Druid 
with 1,500,001 or more experience points as 
the successor. The former Grand Druid then 
rises to the 16th experience level, becoming a 
Hierophant. 

As a Hierophant, the character relinquishes 
the Grand Druid’s six bonus spell levels and, 
furthermore, loses all but 1 experience point 


a 


120 * Appendix A 


(yet remains at 16th level). The character then 
begins counting experience points again and 
progressing using Table 8 (next page). 

Attendants. Each 12th- or higher-level 
druid acquires an entourage of devoted 
lower-level druids. The least experienced 
12th-level druid has three Ist-level aspirants, 
the next has three 2nd-level ovates, and so on. 
The most experienced has as followers three 
initiates of the 7th circle. Three 10th-level ini- 
tiates of the 8th circle always serve Arch- 
druids, while three 11th-level initiates of the 
9th circle attend the Great Druid. 

The Grand Druid is attended by nine 
druids unattached to any specific land. Any 
character of at least Druid level may seek out 
the Grand Druid and offer service. Three of 
these servants, Archdruids, roam the world 
as the Grand Druid’s personal agents and 
messengers. Each has four additional spell 
levels, as explained above. 


TABLE 8: Original Hierophant Experience Points 


Experience 
Points 
1—500,000 

500,001—1,000,000 
1,000,001—1,500,000 
1,500,001—2,000,000 
2,000,001—2,500,000 
2,500,001—3,000,000 
3,000,001—3,500,000 
3,500,001 and up 


Hierophant Abilities 


No bonus spells are awarded to Hiero- 
phants (as above for the Grand Druid and 
attendants), but they do receive additional, 
cumulative spell-like powers. 

At 16th level: 

+ Immune to all natural animal or veg- 
etable poisons, including those of monsters, 
but not mineral or gaseous poisons. 

* Blessed with extra longevity equal to 
experience level times 10 years. For instance, 
a 16th-level druid lives 160 extra years. 

* Maintains vigorous health (prime of life) 
regardless of actual age. 

* Alters appearance at will in only one- 
tenth of a round. Hierophants can alter their 
facial and body features to those of any 
human or humanoid, change their height and 
weight by up to 50%, and alter their apparent 
age to anything from child to old. This non- 
magical power cannot be detected except by 
true seeing or similar magic. 

At 17th level: 

* Hibernate for a number of years equal to 
experience level times 10. For instance, a 
17th-level druid can hibernate 170 years in 
suspended animation (without aging). 

* Enter the Plane of Elemental Earth. 

* Conjure water elemental. 


Experience Accumulated 


Level 

Title 

Hierophant Druid 
Hierophant Initiate 
Hierophant Adept 
Hierophant Master 
Numinous Hierophant 
Mystic Hierophant 
Arcane Hierophant 
Hierophant of the Cabal 


At 18th level: 

e Enter the Plane of Elemental Fire. 

è Conjure air elemental. 

At 19th level: 

% Enter the Plane of Elemental Water. 

* Conjure magma/smoke para-elemental. 

At 20th level: 

* Enter the Plane of Elemental Air. 

® Conjure ice/ooze para-elementals. 

At 21st level: 

% Enter the para-elemental planes. 

At 22nd level: 

% Enter the Plane of Shadow. 

At 23rd level: 

% Enter any of the Inner Planes. 

* Roam the Inner Plane probability lines 
(the 7th dimension). 

% Enter the Plane of Concordant Opposi- 
tion. 

Entering Other Planes. It takes the druid 
one round to shift into a plane (or back to the 
Prime Material Plane), but the character can 
stay there as long as desired. The ability to 
enter a plane also confers the ability to sur- 
vive there. So, a druid who can enter the 
Plane of Elemental Water will not drown dur- 
ing the visit, one entering the Plane of Ele- 
mental Fire will not burn, etc. 


———— aaa 


AD&D? Original Edition Druids * 121 


Conjuring Elementals. This ability works 
like a conjure fire elemental spell, but it calls for 
a percentile dice roll when the druid makes a 
conjuration attempt. If the roll is equal to or 
less than the character’s experience level, use 
Table 9 to choose which elemental creature 
appears. Otherwise, roll on Table 9 to see 
what the druid summoned. 


TABLE 9: Elemental Conjurings 


Fire: 

01-85 16 HD fire elemental 

86-94 1d3+1 salamanders 

95-98 efreeti 

99-00 21-24 HD fire elemental 

Earth: 

01-85 16 HD earth elemental 

86-94 1d3+1 xorn 

95-98 dao 

99-00 21-24 HD earth elemental 

Water: 

01-85 16 HD water elemental 

86-94 1d6+6 tritons (5th-8th level) 
riding hippocampi 

95-98 marid 

99-00 21-24 HD water elemental 

Air: 

01-85 16 HD air elemental 

86-94 1d3+1 invisible stalkers 

95-98 djinni 

99-00 21-24 HD air elemental 

Para-elemental, any: 

01-85 16 HD para-elemental 

86-95 Special 

96-00 21-24 HD para-elemental 


' Special: Choose 1d4+4 lava children, 1d4+4 
winter wolves, 1d4+20 mud-men, 1d4+20 
vapor rats, or similar creatures associated 
with the appropriate para-element. 


EEE ae 


122 » Appendix A 


A single entity, when conjured, has as many 
extra hit points added to its total as the druid 
has levels; it may not exceed its maximum hit 
points, though. 

All conjured creatures serve the Hiero- 
phant selflessly and obediently, regardless of 
their alignment and temperament. 


Druidic Spells 


Druids use mistletoe as their religious sym- 
bol when casting spells, though holly and oak 
leaves both hold lesser mystic power for them 
as well. 

All druidic spells with a material compo- 
nent assume the caster uses greater mistletoe. 
Druids seek the mistletoe themselves on Mid- 
summer’s Eve, cut it with a gold or silver 
sickle, and catch the cuttings in a golden bowl 
before they touch the ground. Lesser mistle- 
toe results when druids harvest the plant 
themselves in any other fashion. Borrowed 
mistletoe is any mistletoe not cut personally 
by the druid casting the spell. 

If a druid does not use greater mistletoe, 
the effectiveness of the character’s spell is 
reduced as follows: 

e Lesser mistletoe: 75% duration’. 

e Borrowed mistletoe: 75% range’, 

50% duration”. 

e Holly: 75% range’, 50% duration”, 
75% area of effect’. 

e Oak leaves: 50% range”, 50% duration”, 
50% area of effect”. 


‘or +1 bonus to saving throw if category 
not applicable. 

” or +2 bonus to saving throw if category 
not applicable. 


1 Lae 3 


BESeconuanuewne 
‘fe 
Pm ie ibe 
NNN 


U YI YI 
(SLES e 
UJ Ww 


aay 
SOX. ~ 
rs 
is oi 
| Af 


Ist-level spells: Animal friendship, ceremony, 
detect balance, detect magic, detect poison, detect 
snares and pits, entangle, faerie fire, invisibility to 
animals, locate animals, pass without trace, pre- 
cipitation, predict weather, purify water, shille- 
lagh, speak with animals. 


2nd-level spells: Barkskin, charm person or 
mammal, create water, cure light wounds, feign 
death, fire trap, flame blade, goodberry, heat metal, 
locate plants, obscurement, produce flame, reflect- 
ing pool, slow poison, trip, warp wood. 


3rd-level spells: Call lightning, cloudburst, 
cure disease, hold animal, know alignment, neu- 
tralize poison, plant growth, protection from fire, 
pyrotechnics, snare, spike growth, starshine, stone 
shape, summon insects, tree, water breathing. 


4th-level spells: Animal summoning I, call 
woodland beings, control temperature, 10’ radius, 
cure serious wounds, dispel magic, hallucinatory 


TABLE 10: Druidic Spells by Class and Level 


Spell Level 
4 


| 
1 | | 
Lt 
hed 


V) Q) 
UNK 
ne | 


wl] 


forest, hold plant, plant door, produce fire, protec- 
tion from lightning, repel insects, speak with 
plants. 


5th-level spells: Animal growth, animal sum- 
moning II, anti-plant shell, commune with nature, 
control winds, insect plague, moonbeam, pass 
plant, spike stones, sticks to snakes, transmute 
rock to mud, wall of fire. 


6th-level spells: Animal summoning III, anti- 
animal shell, conjure fire elemental, cure critical 
wounds, feeblemind, fire seeds, liveoak, transport 
via plants, transmute water to dust, turn wood, 
wall of thorns, weather summoning. 


7th-level spells: Animate rock, changestaff, 
chariot of sustarre, confusion, conjure earth ele- 
mental, control weather, creeping doom, finger of 
death, fire storm, reincarnate, sunray, transmute 
metal to wood. 


AD&D” Original Edition Druids è 123 


APPENDIX 


A good many works of modern fantasy fic- 
tion deal with druids or druidlike figures 
who act to magically preserve and protect 
Nature. Some of the best are listed below, but 
many more Arthurian (Merlin was a druid!) 
or Celtic-inspired fantasies await in book- 
stores and libraries. 


Novels and Series 


The Mists of Avalon, Marion Zimmer Bradley. 
The story of King Arthur, Merlin, and Mor- 
gan le Fay told from Morgan’s point of 
view. Beautifully written. 

The Dreamstone, C. J. Cherryh. Arafel, the last 
of the Sidhe and immortal protectress of 
the wood, makes a good model for an 
eccentric Guardian druid. Sequel: The Tree 
of Swords and Jewels. 

Moonheart, Charles De Lint. This novel has a 
modern setting, but its compelling tale of 
bards, druids, shamans, and the meeting of 
Celtic and Amerind magic has relevance to 
any fantasy campaign—as do most of De 
Lint’s other novels (especially Greenmantle). 

The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant the Unbe- 
liever series, Steven R. Donaldson. An out- 
cast from our world becomes drawn reluc- 
tantly into a struggle to save the magical 
Land from evil. The forces rallied in defense 
of the Land hold ideas usable in a druidic 
campaign. Also relevant is the theme of 
protecting a world against a corrupting 
evil. 

Moon of Gomrath, Alan Garner. This tale, re- 
garding the return of “wild magic” to Eng- 
land, contains useful enchantments. 

Mythago Wood, Robert Holdstock. This award- 
winner full of powerful images brims with 
druidic magic and ancient mystery in Eng- 
land’s woods. The Mythago Wood is the 
archetypal primal forest; mythagos them- 
selves would make an exciting mystery 
encounter—and an interesting alternative 
to avatars. Sequel: Lavondyss. 


124 * Appendix B 


Druid, Morgan Llywelyn. Clearly, this novel 
is superior historical fantasy. 

Nausicaa and the Valley of the Wind, Hayao 
Miyazaki. Nausicaa, the heroine of this ex- 
cellent science-fantasy comic (and movie), 
resembles a gray druid with the Hive- 
master kit. 

Moonshae and Druidhome trilogies, Douglas 
Niles. These six books center around a 
druid who worships the Earthmother in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 

The Forest of Forever, Thomas Burnett Swann. 
This is one of several novels by Swann that 
focuses on sylvan folk, dryads, and the like 
within an ancient setting. 

Lord of the Rings, J. R. R. Tolkein. The encoun- 
ters with the Old Forest, Tom Bombadil, 
Radagast, and Treebeard contain many 
ideas usable within a druidic campaign. 
Some think Gandalf resembles a druid far 
more than a wizard. 

The Seedbearers trilogy, Peter Valentine. This 
series postulates a druid migration to Great 
Britain following the sinking of Atlantis. Its 
action continues up to Rome’s destruction 
of the druids. 


Game Supplements 


Halls of the High King (FA1), Ed Greenwood. 
This FORGOTTEN REALMS adventure contains 
information on druidic groves in the 
Realms, including their unique “moon- 
wells.” 

Celts Campaign Sourcebook (HR3), Graeme 
Davis. This book provides rules on how the 
very different Celtic druids of ancient 
Britain, Gaul, and Ireland can work within 
a historical fantasy AD&D game. It has a 
useful bibliography on historical druids. 


Character 
Alignment Druid 
Class 

Player’s Name 


Personality Type 


Age 
Hair 


ABILITIES MOVEMENT SAVING THROWS 


Base Rate Paralyze 
Poison 


Rod, Staff 
or Wand 
Petrify 
No of Spell Polymorph 
Lang immun 3 


Mag Def S Spell Ph bis 
Adjus fi immun Weapon 


Max No Retn 


— ils 
Hench p ra Modifier jäi 


Adjusted AC Armor Type (Pieces) HIT POINTS 
Surprised 

Shieldless 

Rear 


WEAPON COMBAT 
Attack Adj/Dmg Adj THACO Dam (SM/L) 


Special Attacks 


Granted Powers Proficiencies/Skills/Languages 


: 


z 


Spheres 
Major Access: 
Minor Access: 


: 
sh 


~, 
NN 
ed 


Kit Benefits 
and Hindrances 


or t As Reserved. 
Tha fore may fe ptermcopeed Mr Serena! uae clei ADIL gamers BDs TSA, tne As Rights 


Supplies 
Water/Wine 


Item Location Wt. Item Location Wt. 


Experience Treasure 


Other Valuables 


Miscellaneous Information (Magical Items, Command Words, Small Maps, etc.) 


B ee 


Henchmen/Animal Companions 


The Grn cay be PLOSO te perenne! van) perg ADAD” pares 


Druid Character Kit Design Sheet 


Character Class: 
Campaign: 
Player: 

Dungeon Master: 


OVERVIEW: 
Forbidden branches: 
ROLE: 


WEAPON PROFICIENCIES 
Required: 
Recommended: 


NONWEAPON PROFICIENCIES 


Bonus Proficiencies: 


Required Proficiencies: 
Recommended, General: 
Recommended, Warrior: 
Recommended, Priest: 
Recommended, Wizard: 
Recommended, Rogue: 
Forbidden: 


EQUIPMENT: 


SPECIAL BENEFITS: 


SPECIAL HINDRANCES: 


WEALTH OPTIONS: 


Creda TEA me At Rights Reserved 


Game 


— 


nt just happen! 


They take imagination, knowledge, and skill. These five AD&D® game 
fundamentals are a “must-own” for your adventuring party. 


AD&D® Player’s Handbook 

It's the indispensable encyclopedia of adventure gaming, with everything 
players need to know: how to create characters, differences between races, 
mapping and combat rules, and more. 

TSR #2101 


Sug. Retail $20.00 __/Rivepced 
ISBN 0-88038-716-5 Character Record Sheets Dangeont or eC agons 
Quick! Your hero is face-to-face with a dragon . .. what 

will he do? For faster, more spontaneous play, record 

ability scores, possessions, background, and much 

more on these sheets! 

TSR #8264 

Sug. Retail 95 

ISBN 0-88038-152-1 


Character Record 
Sheets 


DUNGEON MASTER™ Guide 
The more versatile and knowledgeable the DM™, the livelier 
the adventure! The DUNGEON MASTER™ Guide is your 


complete source of information on how to be the best leader 
of the game! 


TSR #2100 
Sug. Retail $18.00 € 


ISBN 0-88038-729-7 DUNGEON MASTER™ Screen paren a 
The easy-to-use charts of the DUNGEON MASTER™ is > DASTER 
Screen organize all the statistics and figures the DM™ 
must have to run a quality AD&D® campaign. Includes 
a 16-page mini-adventure. 
TSR #9263 
Monstrous Mannal Monstrous Manual Sug Reta: 5 
) The ultimate monster reference! Descriptions and full- ISBN 0-88098-747-5 
color illustrations for over 600 monsters, including all the 
creatures from MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM® Volumes 1 
and 2, and many more beasties. 
TSR #2140 


Available at book, game, and hobby stores everywhere! Ao 


wn Dungeonsf;Dragons) 


The 
Complete 


Druid’s 


Handbook 


Druids love forests, true—but they love the arctic tundra, 
tropical rain forests, broad savannas, and fungi caverns of 
the Underdark too. This 128-page accessory expands the 
living world of the druid in the AD& D® 2nd Edition game, 
bringing new homes, character kits, personalities, spells, 


magical items, hebral lore, and a hundred details on 
druidic society, sacred groves, and high-level aspirations. 
This book has it all—don't leave the woods without it! 


TSR, Inc. WT + TSR Ltd. 
201 Sheridan < 120 Church End, 
Springs Rd. r J Cherry Hinton 
Lake Geneva, } Cambridge CB1 3LB 
WI 53147 U.S.A > United Kingdom 


698892409SL8246 


X-983-9209S-L NƏSI 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and AD&D 
are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
The TSR logo is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc. 
©1994 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the U.S.A. 


<OO8LS 


$18.00 U.S. $23.00 CAN £10.99 U.K. 


