2154 


PLAYER’S OPTION’: Skills & Powers 


yp — 


DüfiZcóns& Dragons: 


D Advanced 


jungeons cons Dragons 


Rulebook 


^l — á———— —O nnnm 


Credits 


Design: Douglas Niles and Dale A. Donovan 
Psionics Design: Bill Slavicsek and Dale A. Donovan 
Development and Editing: Jean Rabe 
Design Contributions: Rich Baker, Skip Williams 
Editing Contribution: Dori Hein 
Project Coordinator: Steve Winter 
Typography: Angelika Lokotz 
Graphic Design: Dee Barnett 
Production: Paul Hanchette 
Cover Art: Jeff Easley 
Interior Art: Thomas Baxa, Doug Chaffee, Les Dorscheid, Jeff Easley, Ken Frank, Eric Hotz 
Thanks to: Wolf Baur, Tim Beach, Michele Carter, Roger E. Moore 


TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd. 
201 Sheridan Springs Road 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton 
Lake Geneva Cambridge CB1 3LB 
WI 53147 USA 


United Kingdom 


Apvancep DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, DUNGEON MasteR, Dark Sun, DRAGONLANCE, and AD&D are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
Puaver’s Ommon, DM, Monstrous Manual, Planescape, and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 


Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English language products of TSR, Inc. 
Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd. Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors. 
©1995 TSR, Inc, All Rights Reserved, 
This work is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. 
Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork presented herein is prohibited without the express written consent of TSR, Inc. 
2154XXX1501 


First printing: July 1995 Printed in the U.S.A. 


Foreword 


When | first began playing the AD&D* game (more years ago than | care to 
remember), the system seemed to offer rules for every conceivable eventual- 
ity—indeed, the books contained more systems and procedures than any player 
or DM could possibly need. 

It didn't take long to disabuse myself of that notion. As | recall, it was the first 
time the players asked me, the DM, if their characters could swim. How well? How 
fast, and for how long? And if their characters couldn't swim, could they float for 
awhile? And how many gold pieces could you carry before you sank like a stone? 

Many of those questions have been subsequently answered in accessories 
and, most significantly, in the AD&D 2nd Edition game rules. However, for every 
situation defined by rules, and every new procedure introduced to the game, 
more questions were asked by creative (dare | say “devious’?) players, and more 
systems were improvised by every DM. 

It would nice the say that the PLaver’s OenoN"*: Skills & Powers system will put 
all that to rest—but we'd all recognize that as an exaggeration, to say the least. Nor 
would that be a realistic objective. Part of adventure gaming is the discovery of the 
; unknown and the unexpected, and we'll always need a referee to oversee this. 

- . However, | believe that this book adds a lot to the game, and ! hope you will 
agree that it does so without increasing the game’s complexity. The word 
option’ is in the title for a very good reason: We have attempted to add to the 
number of choices. avaiable t pues a alike, without adding to the 
complications of resolving these Ou j 

| sincerely hope that you'll decide tha 


All things in nature must Sohn in n order to kee e! 
Organisms must adapt as their be E e they 
also is true in gaming. The AD&D game is one o the oldest 
systems around. And it's a great system; its Tro PEE 
in the time that the AD&D game has existed, gaming P y 
has the game. The original AD&D game evolved | om the D 
1970s. Then, in the early '80s, the Unearthed Arce 
lution of the AD&D game, was published. More eveluions i6 inating. 
in 1989 with the publication of the AD&D 2nd Edition game ART Now, the 
Piaver’s Option books (and the DM™ Option: High-level Handbook to be pub- 
lished later this year) represent the latest evolutions of the AD&D game. 

The central concept behind the Player's Option books is player choice. We 
wanted to expand the AD&D game in ways that had never been explored before. 

e hoped to offer the players and DMs of the AD&D game more options 
(the re's that word again) than they ever had. We wanted to give those who play 
2 game more choices, more control over their game and their charac 
was previously considered possible. We hope we've succeeded, but in 
t decision is not in our hands. You, the DMs and players of the game 

the final say in this matter. 

' hope you use these rules in your games. We also hope you'll give us your 
feedback on these rules and the AD&D games you play using them, thus insur- 
ing that the game will continue to evolve. 

Me, l'm just happy to have had an impact on the game that has influenced 
my life for so many years. 

Dale Donovan, April 26, 1995 


Table of Contents 
D- : Ch Poi 6 Chapter 4: Character Cl 46 


Character Generation ............-..000000- 7 
Character Backgrounds ...............sssue 9 
Chapter 2: Ability Scores .............4-. 12 
Strength, Stamina, Muscle ................. 13 
Dexterity, Aim, Balance ................Lse 14 
Constitution, Health, Fitness ................ 15 
Intelligence, Reason, Knowledge ............ 16 
Wisdom, Intuition, Willpower ............... 17 
Charisma, Leadership, Appearance .......... 18 
Alternate Subability Method ................ 19 
SUDORE Derls. o oori airne mens 20 
More About Ability Checks ................ 21 
Chapter 3: Racial Requirements .......... 22 
Racial Ability Adjustments .............-..-- 23 
PIDEN DIR LL uA aare nets 23 
CONO POMMES Lee erem mia woe metes 23 
DEO APUnAn EDEETETTTOETCIETUTTTTTTRL S 23 
I EEE eins ss wis in Sco TE e 26 
oL rh Bos ee ee TE 30 
ovas Gan OOO hee! 32 
OS0COUINS SONDERN CON 34 
D vat uo METTRE 34 
DEDE. Letra ANTEESet 36 
ES a. S PROTET UN LE RERUM 36 
COLSÓPONS ON RENOITQRREM NR Ne S 37 
DPEN NE Liu erem rn eee Scr 4] 
Aarakocra, Alaghi, Bugbear, Bullywug, 

Centaur Find, Giff ............. ses 41 
GRO. QUI LLureev enses eren E REUS 42 
Goblin, Hobgoblin, Kobold, Lizard man, 

Minotaur, Mongrelman ............... 43 
Ogre, Orc, satyr, Swanmay, 

Thri-kreen, Wemic ..........sesssesee 44 


WOES: voy iss owes oe to een te eee 47 
Figli coa em aana SUES eee 47 
Palade: Lotus Pate ierk were 48 
Ranger sen bon oe oie miris om RIA OH 49 

ROGUES. zaair esent mri nee ere eae 51 
THEE e ee NC n nu 51 
Bard. oso e namero Fen IEEE 54 

PGMS: aai cli ns orkan OUR ee E 56 
CHORES o eeerre er oe cee 57 
Specialty Priests. oiei viv cose AEREE 58 
Diuldé -oea n VL ERRARE 58 

MAPAS Lu eren tie hne d Boo! 60 
Varo coeur nie d RS ETOEEEEEE 60 
Specialist WENES: Ae an IEEE E 61 

Multi-classed and 
Dual-classed Characters ..............ue. 63 

Non-adventumeis ...... 00:5 oe eoe ROSE TR 63 

Chapter 5: Character Kits ................ 64 

The Social Ranks System .................. 65 

NS rsen trementes taro EE ER 65 

Acrobat, Amazon. ium tesso d REED 66 

Animal Master, Assassin ...............0-5- 67 

Batbanan, Beaesr iorden esos Mere tne EN 68 

Cavaliet u eese bw Lee DERE 69 

COipiómat, EET osse ERE eects 7 

Gladiston ester os ee see wan, ONERE TOUR 72 

Mariner, Merchant... 0. 0.0 Se eee edd 73 

VETS NoDIB Loss sone CORTE 74 

Outlaw, Peasant Hero .................000 75 

Pirata, POSEE o.oo saran A eee 77 

AEE cos d Un rcr ordiri o eR Te 78 

Seven: SCHO S od ove E 79 

5codt, SNADNO. sa rie aa e emend 80 

SUE. E cece ens aaen i A E 81 

SEE SIV noo esp merena A, 82 


AS E ELO, MAEI E PEER Dd 83 


Table of Contents 


WHEE Sica casera dig AEE ede CROAT ESO 84 Chapter 8: New Schools of Magic .......- 136 
WONG NOUIS anata eae ae 82 E Meena <i n. eo er een 138 
DICOUIB FUIS rese ho oS ate Sales alee it The Geometer eren ENSE EOETEME 138 
The Shadow Mage .......... renari 140 
Chapter 6: Nonweapon Proficiencies ...... 86 The Song Waard ........... eee reete 141 
Proficiencies and the 
Character Point System ...........seeese 87 Chapter 9: Psionics ........ sen n 142 
NOE Sapa ices ee aM 6 gm Using PsIonKS «eee eon he SISSE 143 
Acquiring Character Traits ........ sees 88 Closed anid Open Minds c 5: n 143 
Selecting Character Disadvantages .......... 89 iernii Anaddas scc UN MEME 143 
Using Proficiencies in Play ............ sese 89 Psionic Strength Points MERE o 144 
Modifying Proficiency Rolls . . .......... sess 92 meee! A le ee 
“ies Psionic Combat... +. os cis deer epe EN 145 
Proficiencies and Level Advancement ........ 92 The Flac Peru Mtid c NN 146 
du "— by The Five Psionic Defenses .............. 147 
Ponprotdent P sns D RD ai = Adding Substance to Psionic Combat . . . . . 148 
ds Reena ees VW AQ M a Ere i: Using Psionic Powers ....... eee 149 
a... ged oe i 04 Closing an Open Mind ..............-. 149 
Disadvantage iipon Ee No A T 109 Psionics in. a Round .. sca ni «.« cc rry nea 150 
Den PM Wi Limitations to Psionic Powers ...........150 
PSIONICS and Magic... cocer 150 
Chapter 7: Psionicists and Wild Talents ............... 151 
Weapon Proficiency and Mastery ........ 112 PSION os cases: occas a eR OBERE 151 
Selecting Weapon Proficiencies ............ 113 as d Tes Did ESAE o. ie 
oe Psionic POWERS: «o2: askina vu] VIEN CR RR 157 
RUNNONCOUESEESUIMORS ones emnes Me Clairsentient Powers .......... eese 158 
le na corm cle oe cipe cue Pine YES Psychokinetic Powers ..........2++00+6: 161 
Nonproficiency and Weapon Familiarity ..... 114 Psychometabolic Powers 164 
Weapon Group Proficiencies .............. 115 Poychdporiiie PUS a s ETE 168 
Shield PIMIGeDO, creer rrt mmn? 115 tins En (cc. = 7 172 
a I. 115 Palme Powers S 3 © 2 | A 175 
Fighting Style Specialization .............-. 116 a seeker ae ee 
Weapon Specialization and Mastery ........ 118 
Monsters and Weapon Mastery ............ 119 Appendix: Compiled Tables ............. 178 
Equipe cache cae ese ke N IE 120 
Different Forms of Wealth ................ 122 o INSTRUIT ER SEC RUE CILE. 188 
Ways to Spend and Save Money ........... 122 
Encumbrance and Movement ............. 124 


Equipment Tables 1.1.2 xcbeces no rena 126 


Chapter 1: 
Character 
Doints 


e 


| T Welcome to PiveR's OPnoN Skills & Powers, the com- 
Intr oduction panion to the Prayer’s Option Combat & Tactics book. 
This volume unveils new role-playing possibilities without increasing the com- 
plexity of the AD&D* game. Just as the Combat & Tactics book widened the 
scope of encounters, this tome expan 5 cha cter creation. seid these: 
books heighten players’ involvement with the 
the AD&D game as a whole. Use what you like, 
above all have fun! 
The chapters in this book are building blocks for 

characters. AD&D game players will find several familiar terms, such as kits. But 
these kits are different than those presented in supplements such as The Com- 
plete Fighter's Handbook. Instead, PLaver’s Onion kits are packages coupled with. 

special skills that add depth and flavor to characters. There are other changes 
and additions, and these will unfold as you read this book. One such change is 
eine: character abilities using a character point system. Here's an overview of 
what character points do: 


Character Every character begins play with a number of character 
SEN points determined by his race and class. Further, every time a 
Doint & character advances a level, he gains 3 to 5 character points. 
The character point system is a new concept for the AD&D 
game. The points serve numerous purposes, and these are summarized below. 
Note: This book assumes that a typical campaign will award 3 CPs per level, and 
that most characters will use one of these during play (see below). Larger char- 
acter point awards will result in a higher-powered campaign, but if both DM and 
players agree, that's fine—enjoy yourselves. 


Character Points 


Character points are used to purchase weapon proficien- 
cies. New weapon proficiencies usually cost 2 or 3 char- 
acter points. This is discussed in chapter seven. 
Similarly, character points are used to purchase non- 
weapon proficiencies. Purchasing a nonweapon profi- 
ciency usually costs from 2 to 5 points. Also, character 
points are used to purchase traits, and bonus character 
points are awarded for taking disadvantages. This is dis- 
cussed in chapter six. 

Points can be used to increase proficiency scores. One 
character point improves a proficiency score by a +1 
permanent bonus. For example, A wizard with an Intelli- 
gence of 17 has a spellcraft proficiency score of 11. The 
character will successfully use this proficiency on a d20 
roll of 11 or less. The wizard could improve this score 
from 11 to 12 by spending 1 character point. This is cov- 
ered in chapter six. 

Points can be spent to acquire racial abilities for demi- 
humans, such as infravision or the elves' attack bonus 
with swords or bows. Racial abilities cost 5 to 10 charac- 
ter points. Humans have no racial abilities and can spend 
their points in other ways. This is discussed in chapter 
three. 

Player characters can spend points on acquiring class abil- 
ities, such as the paladin's capacity to lay on hands. Each 
class ability usually costs 10 character points. There is 
more information about this in chapter four. 

Priests and wizards can spend points to gain extra spells. 
Only one additional enchantment per spell level can be 
purchased in this way, and the cost is 5 character points 
per level of the spell purchased. Of course, priests and 
wizards cannot purchase higher level spells than they 
can cast. Look to chapter four for more information on 
magic and character points. 

Points can be spent to improve a character's roll for addi- 
tional hit points when advancing a level. For every 2 
character points spent, the player can roll one additional 
die when determining new hit points, taking the highest 
number from the dice rolled. 

Character points also can be used in the course of play, 
not just during character creation or between adven- 
tures. During a game session, a player can spend saved 
points to give his character a second chance to accom- 
plish a feat, or to reroll a failed attack, saving throw, profi- 
ciency check, or even a low damage roll. 

For example, Leon chooses to save 2 character points 
after creating his fighter. During a game, Leon's fighter 
tries to strike an ogre. The attack roll fails. However, the 
ogre strikes the fighter, wounding him badly. In the next 
round, fearing for his fighter's life, Leon declares that he 
will spend a character point if his attack misses. The roll 
indeed fails, and Leon now can spend a point and reroll 
his attack. If this attack roll succeeds, the first roll is 
ignored and Leon's fighter has struck the ogre. If the reroll 
failed, Leon's character still misses and play continues. 


Regardless of any reroll's success, any character 
points spent are lost. Players can continue to spend 
points as long as they declare so before rolling any dice— 
and as long as they have points to spend. This mechanic 
allows characters a second chance to accomplish impor- 
tant tasks or to achieve feats vital to the story. 


More information about character points can be found 
throughout this volume. The following section discusses 
establishing character statistics. 


The Player's Handbook details sev- 
Character eral methods for determining a char- 
Generation acters six ability scores. These are 
summarized below, in addition to a 
few new ideas that allow players more control over their 
characters. DMs should review all the options and choose 
one for their campaign so that all characters are created 
using the same method. 

The six systems of character creation from the Player's 
Handbook generate different types of heroes. Methods | and 
Ill yield characters with few scores of 15 or above. These 
methods are best for campaigns in which the heroes arise 
from the common people. These characters usually have 
average ability scores, and are often less capable of amazing 
feats. Low-fantasy or low-magic campaigns with a grim or 
gritty tone are the perfect settings for such characters. 

However, if epic story lines filled with rousing adventure 
and swashbuckling action are preferred—and the characters 
are expected to perform three miraculous quests before 
breakfast—higher ability scores are called for. Characters 
generated using Method IV are particularly suited for this 
type of campaign. The other generation methods give vary- 
ing results. 


Method I: Roll 3d6 for each of a character's six ability 
scores and record the dice total in the following order: 
Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and 
Charisma. 

Method II: Roll 3d6 twice for each ability. Choose the 
highest total of each pair of rolls and record the scores in 
the order: Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wis- 
dom, and Charisma. 

Method III: Roll 3d6 six times, noting each total. Players 
place the totals in the abilities of their choice. 

Method IV: Roll 3d6 12 times and note the totals. Play- 
ers can choose the six highest totals and assign those six to 
abilities in any order they want. 

Method V: Players roll 4d6 for each ability score and 
select the three highest numbers. Then the numbers are 
assigned to characters’ abilities as desired. 

Method VI: All six abilities begin with a score of 8. The 
player has an additional 7d6 to divide among those scores. 
All the points from a d6 must be applied to one ability score. 
Scores of 18 are possible only if the total of one or more 


2 dice, added to the base of 8, add up to exactly 18. Scores rolled for that ability are discarded. 


higher than 18 are not possible—except in some campaigns, 
such as the Dark SuN* setting, 


Example: Leon wants to use Method VI to create his char- 
acter. His 7d6 rolls are: 5, 1, 5, 1, 5, 3, and 4. Remember, his 
PC already has the following base points as well: 

Strength 8 
Dexterity 8 
Constitution 8 
Intelligence 8 
Wisdom 8 
Charisma 8 


Leon wants to create a cleric, who should be wise but 
also capable of defending himself well in combat. Leon 
chooses to place the points he rolled on the 7d6 as such: 

Strength 8+5=13 
Dexterity 8--4—12 
Constitution 8+3=11 
Intelligence 84-3211 
Wisdom 8+5+1=14 
Charisma 8+1=9 


Leon need not add any of his 7d6 results to an ability 
score if he is willing to accept an 8 in one or more abilities. 


New Systems 


Here are three new methods of determining a charac- 
ter's six ability scores. 


Method VII: Each player has 75 points to divide among 
a character's six ability scores. No score can be lower than 
3, and none can be higher than 18. Also, all racial maxi- 
mums and minimums must be observed. When all six abil- 
ities have numbers assigned, double-check the math by 
adding the ability scores together. They should total 75. If 
not, there is a mistake somewhere. Start again. 
Leon wants to create a wizard character using this sys- 
tem, and divides his 75 points as follows: 
Strength 9 
Dexterity 15 
Constitution 15 
Intelligence 18 
Wisdom 9 
Charisma 9 


Method VIII: The player assigns 24d6 among a charac- 
ter's six ability scores. Each ability score must have at least 
3d6, but no more 6d6, devoted to it. If the player desires a 
character with a high Strength, he could devote 4d6, 5d6, 
or even 6d6 to that ability. Next, the appropriate number of 
dice are rolled for each ability, and the total of the three 
highest results become the score. Any and all other dice 


For example, Leon wants to create a rogue character 
using this method. He decides to divide his 24d6 as follows: 
Strength 4d6 
Dexterity 6d6 
Constitution 3d6 
Intelligence 4d6 
Wisdom 3d6 
Charisma 4d6 


Leon rolls the number of dice he assigned to each ability 
and records the results: 
Strength 5, 2, 5, 4 
Dexterity 6, 5, 5, 1, 5 
Constitution 6, 1, 2 
Intelligence 5, 4, 5, 5 
Wisdom 4, 4, 2 
Charisma 6, 4, 2, 4 


Taking the three highest results from each set of dice and 
discarding the results of the other dice, Leon's rogue char- 
acter has the following ability scores: 

Strength 14 
Dexterity 15 
Constitution 9 
Intelligence 12 
Wisdom 10 
Charisma 14 


Method IX: A player rolls 2d6 to randomly determine 
the number of points that can be divided among his char- 
acter's six abilities and the maximum score of each ability. 
No ability score can be lower than 3. The 2d6 result is 
found on the chart below. 


Doint Generation 
2d6 roll Points Maximum 
2 68 18 
3 70 18 
4 72 17 
5 72. ]8 
6 74 17 
7 74 18 
8 76 17 
9 76 16 
10 78 16 
11 78 15 
12 80 15 


For example, Leon wants to create a character using this 
method. His 2d6 result is a 4. Consulting the chart, Leon 
notes that he has 72 points to work with, and no ability scores 
can exceed 17 (excepting racial bonuses, etc.) Leon is now 
free to assign his 72 points. 


Method X: Players use character 
points to create their adventurer's statis- 
tics. A player divides 75 points among 
his PC's Strength, Intelligence, Wisdom, 
Dexterity, Constitution, and Charisma 
scores. Fighters can purchase 10 points 
of exceptional Strength for each extra 
character point spent. For example, it 
costs 21 of the 76 character points to 
give a fighter an 18/30 Strength (184-5 
=21). Racial minimums and maxi- 
mums must be observed. 


Now that the 
Character character's 


Backgrounds numbers have 
= been gener- 


ated, it's time to flesh out a background. 
This PLaveR's Option book introduces 
several new elements to developing 
characters' histories and personalities. 
Two of these elements, traits and disad- 
vantages, are detailed in chapter six. 
Briefly, traits are minor benefits or ad- 
vantages that players can purchase with 
character points, These include: internal 
compass, keen eyesight, light sleeper, 
lucky, and precise memory. 

Disadvantages are minor hindrances 
or inconveniences that yield bonus char- 
acter points. Some disadvantages are: 
allergies, clumsy, colorblind, greedy, lazy, 
unlucky, and a number of phobias. Play- 
ers might want to look ahead to the traits 
and disadvantages section of chapter six 
to get an idea of which traits and disad- 
vantages they want to work into a char- 
acter's background. 


ound Events 


Another new aspect of character cre- 
ation is determining the events that 
turned a player's character into an ad- 
venturer. 

Below is a list of 20 sample events 
that might have sent a character on a 
life of adventure. After all, every charac- 
ter needs some reason to live such a 
dangerous life. The list can be expand- 
ed, and details can be added about 
each event. Recommended non- 
weapon proficiencies that could fit with 
the listed background event are in- 
cluded for reference and inspiration. 


Chapter 1 


Roll 1d20 to randomly determine a background, or choose 
one that suits the character. 


Event 

Accused of a crime 
Apprenticeship 
Enslaved 

Exiled 

Failed business venture 
Fell in love 

Fled a disaster 

Found or stole a valuable item 
Homeless 

Ideological differences 
Joined the circus 


— 
OMNAUBAWN-F 
o 


12 Kidnapped 

13 Killed someone 

14 Made a powerful enemy 
15 Orphaned 

16 Ran away from home 

17 Reformed 

18 Touched by magic 

19 Went to sea 

20 Witnessed a crime 


Accused of a crime: The character is publicly accused of 
a crime he did not commit. It might be a case of mistaken 
identity, or the character could have been framed for a 
crime. The character was forced to flee and become an 
adventurer rather than face certain punishment. Suggested 
NWPs; Any. 

Apprenticeship: The character entered into an appren- 
ticeship—an arrangement where a practiced craftsman 
taught him a skill in exchange for money or services. 
Apprenticeships need not be limited to mundane trades; 
characters can enter into apprenticeships with other adven- 
turers. Many a fighter began his career as a mere squire, 
and more than one young person with a talent for the Art 
signed with the local hedge wizard. Suggested NWPs: Voca- 
tional skills such as animal handling, animal training, black- 
smithing, boat piloting, cobbling, engineering, gem cutting, 
sculpting, weaving, and so on. Adventuring skills such as 
blind-fighting or spellcraft also might be learned. 

Enslaved: The character was a slave or indentured ser- 
vant. The details of the character's escape are left to the 
player and the DM. It is likely such a character will carry a 
grudge against those who owned him or will strive fervently 
to free other slaves. Suggested NWPs: Survival, hunting, 
fishing, foraging, bowyer/fletcher, and weaponsmithing. 

Exiled: For some reason—bad behavior, an unacceptable 
profession, an incompatible alignment, shady associates, 
etc.—the character is banished from his family. Or perhaps 
the character is cast out from the society in which he was 
raised. The offense could be a breach of some tribal or 


10 


community law or religious taboo. With nowhere to turn, 
the character is forced to live by his wits. The PC might 
develop many skills, including thieving abilities. Suggested 
NWPs: Fire-building, fishing, tracking, hunting, healing, 
herbalism, set snares, and survival. 

Failed business venture: Perhaps the character was a 
cobbler and opened a shoe store. Maybe he owned a tav- 
ern, was a brewer, or made a living painting portraits. No 
matter the character's profession, his business venture 
failed and he had to pursue another line of work—as an 
adventurer. Suggested NWPs: Any appropriate to the char- 
acter's previous profession. 

Fell in love: The character becomes attracted to some- 
one, and their relationship propels the character toward an 
adventuring career. Perhaps the love interest is an adven- 
turer, whom the character accompanies on quests. The love 
interest might be outside the character's social class, and 
either or both families could protest or attempt to end the 
courtship. The outcome of the romance is left to the player 
and the DM. Questing to find a lost love or to avenge the 
loss of one can make for powerful role-playing and exciting 
adventures. Suggested NWPs: Dancing, etiquette, gaming, 
musical instrument, and so on. 

Fled a disaster: The character's homeland suffered a 
tremendous disaster—an earthquake, flood, plague, or war. 
The character managed to escape, perhaps just barely. 
Without a home to return to, the character becomes an 
adventurer, maybe with the goal of preventing the spread or 
future occurrence of the disaster that cost his horne. Or it 
could be he searches for loved ones lost when the disaster 
struck. Suggested NWPs: Hunting, fishing, set snares, fire- 
building, and survival. 

Found or stole a valuable item: The character uncov- 
ered or stole something of value or interest to others. It 
could be gold; jewelry or gems; a minor magical item; a 
map to a dungeon, lost city, or treasure hoard; a prized 
horse and carriage; or a glass slipper. Whatever the item, 
someone wants it back. The previous owner might believe 
the character stole the item—whether the PC actually did. 
Or the owner might try to reward the observant character 
for recovering the item. Either way, this item can be the 
cause of a long-term relationship between the character 
and the owner. This background event also helps explain 
how a Ist-level rogue gained his abilities. Suggested 
NWPs: Appraising, forgery, gem cutting, heraldry, and other 
skills that allow the character to notice the item's true 
worth. 

Homeless: The character has no place to live. Perhaps 
he sold the homestead to raise money for an adventuring 
career. Maybe his property was seized by unscrupulous 
means. The landlord could have foreclosed, or the land 
could have been confiscated by the crown for back taxes. 
With nothing to hold the character in one place, he sets out 
on a life of adventure—and, perhaps, revenge. Suggested 
NWPs: Agriculture, mining, carpentry, and local history. 


Character Points 


ideological differences: The character wasn't comfort- 
able in the society in which he was raised. The character 
could be religious in an agnostic culture, lawfully-indined in 
a chaotic society, or disgusted by his homeland's evil prac- 
tices. One example of the latter is Drizzt Do'Urden and his 
loathing of the drow culture from which he came. The char- 
acter leaves his society behind to find one that suits him 
better. Suggested NWPs: Any. 

Joined the circus: Many are fascinated by the color, 
excitement, and romance of a traveling troupe of perform- 
ers. The character was one such person, and he left home 
and hearth behind to take up a life with entertainers. Sug- 
gested NWPs: Juggling, jumping, musical instrument, 
tightrope walking, throwing, singing, dancing, tumbling, and 
ventriloquism. 

Kidnapped: The character was kidnapped as a young 
child. The kidnappers could be evil relatives, people wan- 
dering through the character's homeland, monsters, or sim- 
ply strangers who want to raise a family and can't have chil- 
dren of their own. The details are left to the player and DM. 
As many kidnappers might not make effective parents, the 
character likely would become self-sufficient. Perhaps the 
character is obsessed with finding his natural parents or 
discovering where he is from and who he really is. Sug- 
gested NWPs: Survival, hunting, fishing, foraging, bowyer/ 
fletcher, and weaponsmithing. 

Killed someone: Either through intent or accident, 
someone dies and the character is accused. The authorities 
and the victim's relatives are after the character, and if 
caught, the character will likely face death. Suggested 
NWPSs: Skills such as disguise, survival, and forgery would 
be useful in evading capture. 

Made an enemy: The character has an eternal foe. This 
foe could be a business competitor, a rival for a lover, a rel- 
ative overcome by jealousy, or a villain the character de- 
feated but did not kill. Whatever the case, this enemy 
caused the character to flee and take up the adventuring 
life. Suggested NWPs: Any. 

Orphaned: The character's parents died when the charac- 
ter was young. Causes include: sickness, war, assassination, 
accident, or mysterious disappearance. Parents who mysteri- 
ously vanished might be alive, but they've been gone so long 
that everyone, including the character, believes them lost for- 
ever. Perhaps the character was raised in a group home or in 
a state or religious institution. Maybe the character became a 
street urchin with budding thief skills. The particulars are left 
for the player and the DM. Suggested NWPs: Any. 

Ran away from home: The character fled home early 
in life. Possible reasons include: boredom, wanting to see 
the world, breaking free from an unhappy home life, and 
wanderlust. Perhaps someone searches for the character, 
and the character believes someone is hounding him. Sug- 
gested NWPs: Any. 

Reformed: The character was a criminal who decided to 
change his lifestyle. Perhaps he saw how his villainous acts 


n 


hurt others, or maybe he became a victim, too, and 
decided it was time to change professions. Because the 
character is likely wanted in one or more communities, he 
had to take on the adventuring life, traveling from place to 
place with no plans to settle down. Such an individual 
might go out of his way to help those victimized by crimes 
or to prevent young people from pursuing criminal careers. 
Suggested NWPs: Appraising, forgery, disguise, gaming, 
and gem cutting. 

Touched by magic: The character became an adven- 
turer because something magical happened in his life. Per- 
haps he was ripped from his home world or plane because 
he unknowingly triggered a portal. Maybe he was an ani- 
mal who became a man because of a wizard's experiment. 
Or he could have been a priest killed in a disaster and rein- 
carnated into a new form—and he must start a career from 
scratch. The possibilities are endless. Suggested NWPs: 
Any. 

Went to sea: The character is from an ocean-going 
community or culture and decides to seek his fortune on 
the waves. The many lands and peoples he encounters 
open his eyes to the diversity in the world. Suggested 
NWPs: Boat piloting, rope use, seamanship, navigation, and 
weather sense. 

Witnessed a crime: The character saw, heard, or has 
evidence that a terrible crime took place. However, turning 
in the culprits is not possible. The culprits might be power- 
ful in local politics, they could be foreign spies or saboteurs, 
or the crime may be so out of character for them that sim- 
ply no one would believe the character's outrageous accu- 
sation against them. In any case, the culprits would not be 
made to pay for their crimes and thus would be free to 
take vengeance against the witness. Perhaps the player 
character's family sent him away to avoid retribution. Or 
maybe the character fled on his own to protect others. 
Suggested NWPs: To flee the criminals, the character might 
need to learn disguise, reading lips, running, endurance, 
ventriloquism, navigation, boat piloting, charioteering, and 
seamanship. 


Chapter 2: 
Ability Scores 


& 


Once a player character's six ability scores have been established, it's time to 
introduce the Player's Option concept of subabilities. Each standard ability 
score—Strength, Intelligence, Wisdom, Dexterity, Constitution, and Charisma—is 
divided into two subabilities. These are more specific definitions of what makes 
up a character. For example, a character's Strength score is divided into the sub- 
abilities of Stamina, which reflects being able to physically exert oneself over a 
period of time, and Muscle, which measures the raw power needed to force 
open locked doors or overturn banquet tables oe on ce 

To determine a character's subabilities, simply double the score of the parent 
ability (Strength, Wisdom, etc.) and divide that total between the subabilities. 
The scores for the two subabilities must be within four points of each other. Only 
whole numbers are allowed, no subability score can be lower than 3, and—with 
the exception of Strength—no subability score can be higher than 18. Racial 
modifiers to ability scores are also exceptions to this rule, 


Ability Scores 
-M 


For example, Leon is determining the subabilities for his 
fighter. The fighter's six ability scores are: 


Strength 16 Intelligence 12 
Dexterity 14 Wisdom 8 
Constitution 12 Charisma 11 


Leon doubles the fighter's Strength score (16x2=32), 
and divides the 32 points as follows: Stamina—15, Muscle— 
17 (15+17=32). Leon records this on his character's 
record sheet. 


Strength 16 Constitution 12 
Stamina 15 Intelligence 12 
Muscle 17 Wisdom 8 

Dexterity 14 Charisma 11 


Subabilities are used as the base numbers for many pro- 
ficiencies in the Ptaver’s OPnoN system. See chapter six for 
more information. 

Subability scores also are used in place of the six stan- 
dard ability scores when ability checks are called for. For 
example, if Leon's fighter wanted to lift a large piece of 
fallen masonry that is trapping a fellow adventurer, the DM 
normally would call for one Strength check to see if the 
fighter is capable of lifting the heavy block of stone, and 
another Strength check to see if the fighter can hold the 
block aloft long enough for the other character to crawl 
free. Without subabilities, the fighter stands an equal 
chance of succeeding at both attempts. 

Using the same scenario with the PLAYER'S OPTION sys- 
tem, the DM would call for a Muscle check (Muscle score 
of 17) to see if the fighter has the sheer power to lift the 
stone block off his friend. Assuming that roll is successful, 
next a Stamina check (Stamina 15) would be needed to 
- hold the masonry in the air long enough for his friend to 
move out from under it. 

The 12 subabilities are listed below, along with their 
effects on characters. 


The subabilities derived from a character's 
Strength Strength score are Stamina and Muscle, 
and these are the only subabilities that can have scores 
higher than 18—provided the character is a fighter. Such 
characters can have exceptional subability scores, just as 
they can have exceptional Strength scores. If a fighter qual- 
ifies for exceptional subability scores, roll percentile dice 
(1d100) and consult the charts under Stamina and Muscle. 
A fighter with an 18 Strength score might decide to have 
18s in both subabilities, at which point he would roll per- 
centile dice for both. Or, the fighter might have a 20 Sta- 
mina or Muscle, with the other subability having a score of 
16—or any combination in between. 

Characters from other classes can have scores of 18 in 
Strength subabilities, but cannot have exceptional sub- 
end scores, and do not roll percentile dice for these sub- 
abilities. 


Table 2: Stamina 
. Stamina Score ^ Weig 


Stamina 


The Stamina subability score determines muscle effi- 
ciency. A character with a Stamina score higher than his 
Muscle score may not have masses of huge muscles, but 
the muscles he has will be rock hard. Characters like these 
may surprise others—not because they can lift four hay 
bales at once, but because they can lift one or two at a time 
for 10 hours straight. 


Weight Allowance: This is the weight in pounds a char- 
acter can carry without being encumbered (see Encum- 
brance, chapter seven, for more information). Characters 
carrying less than or equal to their weight allowance move 
at their full normal speed. 

Sprinting: Stamina is used when a character needs to 
make a Sprinting check. 

Fatigue: A character's Stamina influences when he 
becomes fatigued. 

Proficiencies: Stamina is the base number for proficien- 
cies such as blacksmithing, swimming, carpentry, and stone- 
masonry. 


Muscle 


The Muscle subability measures the sheer power a char- 
acter can exert at a moment's notice. A character with a 
Muscle score higher than his Stamina score will look quite 


Chapter 2 


If the number rolled on 1d100 is equal to or less 
Table 3: Muscle than the listed score, the character bends the 
Muscle X Att. Dam. Max. Open Bend Bars/ bars or lifts the gate. If the roll fails, the character 


Score Adj. Adj. Press Doors Lift Gates cannot attempt the same feat again. The charac- 
ter could, however, attempt to bend the bars of a 
gate he failed to lift, or vice versa. 

Proficiencies: One example of a proficiency 
(0) 
0 


0 
0 


5 1 that uses the Muscle score as a base number is 
6 2 jumping—an ability that utilizes the muscles’ 
explosive power rather than endurance. 


" This ability score is divided 
Dexterity into the subabilities of Aim, 


which represents hand-eye coordination and 
18/01-50 +1 manual acuity, and Balance, which denotes 
18 reflexes and overall agility. Leon chooses to use 
these Dexterity subabilities for his character: 


90 


Strength 16 Dexterity 14 
50 Stamina 15 Aim 12 
60 Muscle 17 Balance 16 
Constitution 12 Wisdom 8 
Intelligence 12 Charisma 11 
Aim 


A character with a high Aim score might be an 
expert marksman or a sleight-of-hand artist. 
strong. Males will have bulging biceps, broad chests, and 
wide shoulders. While females don't generate the muscle 
mass of males, they will have well-defined, strongly toned 


Table 4: Aim 
= Aim Missile Pick Open 
Attack Adjustment: This modifier is subtracted from or Score 


added to d20 rolls during combat. A bonus with a + sign 
makes an opponent easier to hit, while a penalty with a — 
sign makes an opponent more difficult to strike. 

Damage Adjustment: This modifier is applied to dam- 
age rolls after successful physical attacks in combat. 

Maximum Press: This is the most weight a character 
can lift over his head. He cannot walk more than a few 
steps with it, nor can he hold it very long. 

Open Doors: This indicates the chance a character has 
to force open a heavy door or one that is stuck closed. To 
open such a door, a player rolls 1d20. If the result is equal 
to or less than the number listed for the character's 
Muscle score, the door opens. A character who failed can 
try again, but each successive attempt takes more time 
and makes more noise. The numbers in parentheses are a 
character's chances to open a locked, barred, or magically 
held door. Only one attempt for each such door is 
allowed. 

Bend Bars/Lift Gates: This represents the character's 
chance (rolled on 1d100) to bend iron bars, lift a vertical 
gate or portcullis, or perform a similar feat of Muscle power. 


14 


Ability Scores 


Table 5: Balance 
Balance Reac. 


Missile Adjustment: This modifier is applied to the d20 
combat roll whenever a character attacks with a missile 
weapon, such as firing arrows or hurling a spear. As above, 
negative modifiers are penalties to the die roll, and positive 
numbers are bonuses. 

Pick Pockets: This modifier applies only to rogue charac- 
ters who have the ability to pick another character's pockets 
(see chapter four). 

Open Locks: Similarly, this modifier is used only by 
rogue characters with the open locks ability. 

Proficiencies: The juggling, cobbling, pottery, rope use, 
seamstress/tailor, musical instrument, forgery, and gem cut- 
ting proficiencies all use Aim as their base number. 


Balance 


A character possessing a high Balance score may be an 
acrobat or a tightrope walker. A new rule for the PraveR's 
OPrioN system is that all unarmored warrior and rogue 
characters gain an additional --2 bonus to armor class 
while unencumbered. This bonus is in addition to any the 
characters might receive for high Balance scores. 


Reaction Adjustment: This modifier is applied to a 
d10 to determine if a character is surprised by an unex- 
pected encounter. The more positive the value, the less 
likely the character is to be surprised. 


Defensive Adjustment: This modifier is applicable to 
a character's saving throws versus attacks that can be 
dodged, such as lightning bolt spells, hurled boulders, 
etc. It also modifies the character's armor class, represent- 
ing the character's ability to dodge normal missile attacks 
and parry melee attacks. The lower the negative value, 
the more difficult the character will be to strike. 

Move Silently: This concerns only those rogue char- 
acters who have the move silently ability. The higher the 
positive value, the easier the skill becomes for the char- 
acter. 

Climb Walls: This modifier also applies to those rogue 
characters with the climb walls ability. 

Proficiencies: Balance is used as a base number for 
such proficiencies as tumbling, dancing, seamanship, tight- 
rope walking, and charioteering. 


1 1 Constitution is divided into the sub- 
Constitution abilities of Health, which is a mea- 
surement of a character's ability to resist diseases and 
other hardships, and Fitness, which indicates overall physi- 
cal condition and the character's ability to endure punish- 
rent: Leon sets up his character's Constitution subabilities 
like this: 


Table 6: Health 
Health 
Score 


System 
Shock 


Chapter 2 
—————— ÉÉÁÉ—————À 


Table 7: Fitness 
Fitness 
Score 


Resurrection 
Chance 


Hit Point 
Adjustment 


10096 
10096 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 


Parenthetical bonuses apply only to warrior charac- 
ters. All other character classes are limited to a +2 
maximum bonus per hit die. 


' All 1s rolled on hit dice are considered 2s. 
2 All 1s and 2s rolled on hit dice are considered 3s. 
* All 1s, 2s, and 3s rolled on hit dice are considered 4s. 


Strength 16 Constitution 12 
Stamina 15 Health 12 
Muscle 17 Fitness 12 

Dexterity 14 Intelligence 12 
Aim 12 Wisdom 8 
Balance 16 Charisma 11 

Health 


A character with a high Health score would seldom get 
sick and be little affected by allergies and other ailments. 


System Shock: This is the percentage chance (on a 
1d100) that the character has to survive magical effects 
that age or alter his body—such as petrification (and revers- 
ing it), polymorphing, magical aging, etc. If the system 
shock result is equal to or less than the listed chance, the 
character survives the process of alteration. 


16 


Poison Save: This modifier applies to saving throws 
made versus poisons. 

Proficiencies: Health serves as the base number for 
such proficiencies as Running. 


Fitness 


A character with a high Fitness score has great en- 
durance and can suffer more damage than other characters 
while continuing to function. 


Hit Point Adjustment: This modifier is applied to the hit 
dice roll every time a character advances to a new experi- 
ence level. No roll yields fewer than 1 hit point, regardless 
of any modifier. 

This bonus ends when a character reaches 10th level 
(9th for warriors and priests). Hit points gained after this are 
given on the experience point table for each class. See the 
Player's Handbook for details. 

Resurrection Chance: This is the percentage chance 
(on a 1d100) that a dead character has of being success- 
fully brought back to life through magical resurrection or 
raise dead spells. If the roll is equal to or less than the 
listed chance, the character is brought back to life. 

Proficiencies: Fitness serves as the base number for 
such proficiencies as Endurance. 


1 This becomes the subabilities of 
Intelligence Reason, which measures a charac- 
ter's capacity for learning and deduction, and Knowledge, 
which shows a general level of education, experience, and 
the ability to remember information. Leon assigns his char- 
acter's subability scores like this: 


Strength 16 Constitution 12 
Stamina 15 Health 12 
Muscle 17 Fitness 12 

Dexterity 14 Intelligence 12 
Aim 12 Reason 11 
Balance 16 Knowledge 13 

Wisdom 8 Charisma 11 

Dcason 


This ability defines how well a character handles new 
information. A character with a high Reason score would be 
good at solving riddles and puzzles, and would be talented 
at using deductive, logical thinking. 


Spell Level: This is the highest level of magical spells 
that can be cast by wizards with corresponding Reason 
scores. 

Max. # Spells: This is the most spells per level that a 
wizard with that Reason score can memorize. 

Spell Immunity: This is the level of illusion/phantasm 


Ability Scores 


Table 8: Reason 
Reason 
Score 
3-8 


Max. # Spell 
Spells Immunity 


Spell 
Level 


1 

2 

3 
4 
Si 
6 

7 


spells that a character with that Reason score is immune 
to. All immunities are cumulative, so a character with a 21 
Reason score is immune to first-, second-, and third-level 
illusion spells. 

Proficiencies: Reason is used as the base number for 
such proficiencies as engineering, navigation, armorer, 
weaponsmithing, spellcraft, and astrology. 


Knowledge 


This score is a measurement of the character's educa- 
tional experiences—whether in a school or on the streets, 
his grasp of languages, and his memory capacity. A charac- 
ter with a high Knowledge score can speak many lan- 
guages, knows something about several subjects, and can 
remember the slightest detail of a past event. 


Bonus # Proficiencies: This is the maximum number of 
additional languages a character with the appropriate 
Knowledge score can learn. If you are using the character 
point system introduced in the previous chapter, this is the 
number of bonus character points the character gains when 
buying proficiencies. For example, Theodor the fighter has 
an Intelligence/Knowledge of 12, which gives him 3 bonus 
proficiencies under the standard rules, or 3 extra character 
points under the character point system. 

9o Learn Spell: This is the percentage chance (on 
1d100) that a wizard can learn to cast a particular spell. If 
the roll is equal to or less than the listed chance, the wizard 
can learn the spell. If the roll is higher than the listed 
chance, the wizard can try to learn the spell later—after gain- 
ing an experience level. 


17 


Proficiencies: Knowledge is the base number used with 
proficiencies such as ancient and local history, ancient and 


modern languages, and reading/writing. 

" Wisdom is divided into the subabilities of 
Wisdom Intuition—which determines the character's 
awareness of his surroundings, grasp of a situation, and 
understanding of other people, and Willpower—which mea- 
sures the character's strength of will and commitment. Leon 
decides his character has little Willpower. The character's 
statistics now read: 


Strength 16 Intelligence 12 
Stamina 15 Reason 11 
Musde 17 Knowledge 13 

Dexterity 14 Wisdom 8 
Aim 12 Intuition 10 
Balance 16 Willpower 6 

Constitution 12 Charisma 11 
Health 12 
Fitness 12 

Intuition 


A character with a high Intuition score likely would be 
very perceptive and good at making educated guesses, and 
would be difficult to fool or lie to effectively. 


Bonus Spells: This is the number of additional spells that 
priest characters receive, according to their Intuition scores. 


Table 9: Knowledge 
Knowledge 
Score 


Bonus # 
Profs. 
vere i 


$^ 
5 
2 
3 
c 
5. 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 


z listed under each number below. These immunities are 


Failure - 


- 359b 
30% 
25% 


Note that the extra spells are cumulative, and the priest can 
cast only those spells allowed by his experience level. 

% Spell Failure: This is the percentage chance that a 
priest's spell will fail when cast. Those priests with low Intu- 
ition scores run the risk of having spells misfire. 

Proficiencies: Intuition is the base number for such 
diverse proficiencies as tracking, artistic ability, healing, 
direction sense, weather sense, religion, and hunting. 


Willpower 


This score gauges a character's strength of will, ability to 
resist magical forces, and sense of commitment to a cause. 
A character with a high Willpower would be difficult to harm 
with mind-affecting magic spells, could be quite stubborn, 
and would resist interrogation. 


Magic Defense Adjustment: This modifier applies to 
the character's saving throws versus magical spells that 
affect the victim's mind—beguiling, charm, fear, hypnosis, 
possession, suggestion, etc. This modifier is applied auto- 
matically, without any effort on the part of the character or 
player making the saving throw. 

Spell Immunity: This grants those characters with ex- 
tremely high Knowledge scores protection from the spells 


18 


cumulative. 

1. Immunity to: cause fear, charm person or mammal, 
command, friends, and hypnotism spells. 

2. Immunity to: forget, hold person, ray of enfeeble- 
ment, and scare. 

3. Immunity to: fear. 

4. Immunity to: charm monster, confusion, emotion, 
fumble, and suggestion. 

5. Immunity to: chaos, feeblemind, hold monster, magic 
jar, and quest. 

6. Immunity to: geas, mass suggestion, and rods of 
rulership. 

7. Immunity to: antipathy/sympathy, death spell, and 
mass charm. 


Proficiencies: This score serves as the base number for 
such proficiencies as animal handling, animal training, rid- 
ing—land-based, and riding—airborne. 


Table 11: 


Willpower 
Score 


Spell 
Immuni 


Magic Def. 


° Charisma is split into the subabilities of 
Charisma Leadership, which measures forcefulness 
of personality and how willing others are to follow the char- 
acter's lead, and Appearance, which gauges physical attrac- 
tiveness, presence, and poise. Leon decides his character 
will have these Leadership and Appearance scores: 


Strength 16 Intelligence 12 
Stamina 15 Reason 11 
Muscle 17 Knowledge 13 


Ability Scores 


Leadership 10 
Fitness 12 Appearance 12 
Leadership 


A character with a high Leadership often may be a 
group's leader, or at least its spokesman. Generals and 
those who can calm or incite a mob with a few words all 
have good Leadership scores. 


Loyalty Base: This modifier is applied to henchmen's 
loyalty scores (see the DunGceon MasrER* Guide). This mod- 
ifier can be crucial during battles, where good morale is 
vital. 

Max. st of Henchmen: This is the maximum number of 
permanent allies and retainers a character can attract. This 
does not affect the number of hirelings, mercenaries, or 
other servitors a character can have. 

Proficiencies: This score is used as the base number for 
such nonweapon proficiencies as gaming and etiquette. 


Appearance 


This determines the physical presence and attractiveness 
of the character. A character with a high Appearance score 


would be handsome or beautiful, perhaps even famous for 
outstanding looks (such as Helen of Troy). 


Reaction Adjustment: This number modifies the Reac- 
tion Roll made when a character interacts with NPCs and 
intelligent creatures for the first time (see the DMG). 
Obnoxious behavior can negate bonuses for a high Appear- 
ance score, just as solicitous manners can overcome a 
weakness. 

Proficiencies: This score acts as the base number for 
proficiencies such as singing, dancing, and disguise. 


Alternate Subability Method 


Rather than simply assigning numbers to subability scores, 
players can determine the scores randomly. First, generate 
the basic ability score; for example, Leon rolls 3d6 for his 
character's Strength score and gets a 13. Second, the player 
assigns the base score to one of the subability scores; Leon 
assigns his roll of 13 to his character's Strength/Stamina 
score. Third, roll a die or flip a coin to see if the remaining 
subability score will be better or worse than the base score. 
Leon rolls 1d6 and gets a 4, so his character's Strength/ 
Muscle score will be higher than Strength/Stamina. Last, add 
or subtract 1d4 to the base score to determine the what the 
second subability actually is; Leon rolls a 3, so his character's 
Strength/Muscle score is 16. 


-fe Subabilities are more specific defini- 
Subability tions of a character's aptitudes. They 
Checks 


can be used more often to determine 
the success of actions beyond simple 
proficiency checks. The concept of ability checks was intro- 
duced in the Player's Handbook. This concept is expanded 
with subabilities. Specific examples of the various subability 
checks follow. The lists are not intended to be all-encom- 


passing, but simply guidelines of the uses of subability 
checks. 


Ste : This subability is used to ascertain a character's 
Pene exertion over a period of time. Sample opportuni- 
ties to call for Stamina checks include a character holding a 
heavy weight or propping up a collapsing ceiling. When a 
character is in pursuit of an NPC or monster that has the 
same movement rate, the Stamina check determines who 
will tire first. Other checks could involve long-term physical 
exertion such as swimming vast dis- 
tances, defending the castle walls from 
attackers over the course of hours or 
days, or staying awake long enough to 
memorize spells for the next day—after 
a long ay of adventuring. 

: Times to call for Muscle 
checks indude when characters try to 
pick up heavy objects, leap chasms, 
arm wrestle, and display feats of 
strength. 

Aim: Potential times to use Aim 
checks include when characters enter 
games of skill, such as darts; when they 
try sleight-of-hand maneuvers; and 
when they try to catch things thrown at 
them, such as balls, coins, or books. 

ila ; Balance checks can be 
called for en a character walks along 
a narrow ledge to reach a window, 
when he flees across a rope bridge 
while trying to avoid attackers' missile 
weapons, and when he catches a hand- 
hold after an enemy damages that rope 
ondge and causes it to collapse. 

Health: : Health checks can be used 
to determine a character's resistance to 
a disease, and to find out if a character 
catches the flu going around the king- 
dom. They also determine a character's 
resistance to intoxicants, drugs, or poi- 
sons. 

ss: Fitness checks can be used 
to gauge an adventurer's resistance to 
longer-term hardships such as forced 
marches, food or water deprivation, and 
non-lethal torture. 


on: Good times to call for Reason checks include 
when a character is searching for clues at the scene of a crime, 
when someone is trying to leam new information, or when a 
character is attempting to read a code or decipher a cryptic 
message. 

Know :: Knowledge checks can be used when char- 
acters try to pn ne a strange language or recall bits of 
information they have seemingly forgotten. 

In Y: These checks are called for when adventurers 
think evs are being followed, that their NPC friend is acting 
Monge or when someone attempts to con them. 

: Willpower checks are needed when a char- 
acter's force of will is challenged, such as when he is 
offered a bribe, is interrogated, or is blackmailed. Other pos- 
sibilities include when a character tries to persuade an NPC 
about an important issue or point, or when a character is 
tortured to surrender valuable information. 

Leadership: Situations calling for Leadership checks 


Ability Scores 


include when an adventurer leads NPCs into battle, when 
one adventurer asks a favor of another, or when a charac- 
ter attempts to instill a belief or attitude into a crowd or 
mob. 

Appearance: Appearance checks can be used in social 
circumstances where the involved character has no estab- 
lished reputation. Or the checks might determine if an NPC 
becomes romantically interested in the character. 


More About 
Ree “Leon, see if your 17 Muscle 
Ability Checks fighter can lift that iron chest” 


(Rolling a d20) “Missed it. | rolled a 19” 
“Tomas, check if your 6 Muscle wizard can do it” 
"Yes!— made it with a 4!" 


One problem with ability checks 
as they now stand follows: 


The above reflects that sometimes a character with a 
high score will fail, only to have a character with a lower 
score get lucky and succeed. The chart below offers a 
solution to this problem. Depending on the number of 
points in each subability score, the character can make 
additional attempts at feats. The rule is: for each point in a 
subability above 15, the player can roll an additional 1d20 
for checks against that subability. For example, because 
Leon's fighter has a 17 Muscle, the character can make up 
to three checks—the initial check, plus two more. So if 
Leon's fighter wants to force open a trap door, Leon rolls 
3d20. If any of the dice register a successful check, the 
fighter lifts the chest. Tomas’ character, with a 6 Muscle 
only rolls 1d20. 

This multiple d20 system does not eliminate the possi- 
bility of a character with a low ability score succeeding 
where a character with a higher ability score fails. But the 
system does reduce the number of times such an improb- 


able incident will occur. 
> An additional benefit of this system 
Hei htened is that the DM can set particularly 
Difficulties difficult checks for characters with 
high ability scores—requiring two or 
more successes on the characters’ multiple d20 rolls. 

For example, if the iron chest Leon's fighter wants to lift 
had been welded in place, the DM could claim that two or 
even all three of the fighter's d20 rolls be successful for the 
chest to come free. This further reinforces the idea that 
characters with low scores are not as capable as their com- 
rades with higher scores. 

For those occasions when a lone adventurer cannot 
succeed at an ability check due to insufficient dice, addi- 
tional characters might be able to help. If the DM rules that 
more than one character can attempt the feat, roll the 
d20s of the character with the highest ability score, then 
add 1d20 for each additional character assisting the pri- 
mary character. 


21 


This system also can be used to determine the out- 
come of direct ability-vs.-ability contests between charac- 
ters. The winner of such a contest is the one who success- 
fully rolls the highest result—if that result is equal to or 
under the ability score in question. For example, if two 
characters with 14 Aim scores compete to see who can hit 
a far-off boulder with thrown stones—and the results of the 
d20 rolls are a 14 and a 6—the character who rolled the 14 
wins the contest and strikes the boulder first. Both charac- 
ters' rolls succeeded, but the 14 is a higher degree of suc- 
cess than the 6. If the character with the 14 result had 
instead rolled a 15 or a 5, the other competitor would have 
won, in the first case because 15 is not a successful Aim 
check, and in the second because a 6 is higher than a 5. 

Another common example of such a contest is an arm- 
wrestling match. Marshall has a ranger with a Strength of 
15 and subability scores of Stamina 13 and Muscle 17. 
Brian has a fighter with a Strength of 13 and subability 
scores of 13 in both Stamina and Muscle. These characters 
decide to arm wrestle to see who gets the first choice of 
treasure. The first ability check would be against Muscle to 
see if either character could overwhelm the other with a 
burst of Strength. Marshall and Brian roll 1d20, and both 
Muscle check results are 11. The characters have matched 
power for power. 

The next check (and all subsequent checks) would be 
against Stamina to see which character tires first. Marshall 
rolls a 7 and Brian rolls a 12. Both are successes, but 
Brian's roll was higher. Brian's character wins the arm- 
wrestling match despite having lower Strength and Muscle 
scores. Simply put, Brian's character got lucky, and the next 
match between the characters could turn out differently. 

A A note should be made regarding 
Abilities M ability checks that mirror the class 
Thief Skills abilities of rogues. Characters with 
high Balance scores may, by the 
numbers, seem to be better at thieving skills than some 
rogues, especially low-level ones. DMs should take care 
not to let nonrogue characters steal the spotlight away 
from the real rogues. The climb walls ability is a good 
example. Most characters with above average Balance 
scores would have a relatively simple time climbing a 
craggy rock face or cliff, but only thieves can climb brick 
walls or sheer surfaces. 

DMs who wish to grant characters with high ability 
scores some chance of success at feats similar to thieving 
abilities could require multiple successes for such charac- 
ters to succeed. 


Chapter 3: 
Racial 
Requirements 


© 


PLAYER'S Option characters can be humans, elves, dwarves, gnomes, and half- 
lings—or they might be half-elves, half-ores, or even half-ogres. DMs can devise 
additional races for characters, too, so the choices can be as wide and as color- 
ful as the campaign in which they adventure. 

Players should consult the following table, which lists minimum and maxi- 
mum ability scores for the common races. Minimum scores are listed to the left 
of the slashes, maximums to the right. Starting character statistics must fall within 
these ranges, though the statistics can increase and decrease during the course 
of play. For example, if an elf has his Dexterity score reduced to less than 6 
because he fell afoul of a magical curse, the character is still an elf. Ifa halfling 
drank a potion that increased his Intelligence to 19, he is still a halfling. 


Table 14: Racial Requirements 

Ability Dwarf Elf Gnome Half-elf Half-orc Half-ogre Halfling Human 
Str 8/18 3/18 6/18 3/18 6/18 14/18 7/18* 3/18 
Dex 3/17 6/18 3/18 6/18 3/17 3/12 7/18 3/18 
Con 11/18 7/18 8/18 6/18 8/18 14/18 10/18 3/18 
Int 3/18 8/18 6/18 4/18 3/17 3/12 6/18 3/18 
Wis k ) 5/18 3/18 3/18 3/14 3/12 3/17 3/18 
Cha 5/17 8/18. 3/18 5/18 3/12 3/8 3/18 3/18 


B 


Halfling fighters cannot possess exceptional Strength scores. 


Racial Requirements 


. *{74. Once the character's ability scores 
Racial Ability have been determined, the race 
j chosen, and the Racial Require- 
Adj ustments ments table consulted, modify the 
ability scores based on the Racial Adjustments table—and 
determine the subability scores as per the rules in chapter two. 


Race Adjustments 

Dwarf +1 Con, —1 Cha 

Elf +1 Dex, -1 Con 

Gnome +1 Int, 1 Wis 

Half-elf None 

Half-orc +1 Str, +1 Con, -2 Cha 
Half-ogre +1 Str, +1 Con, -1 Int, —1 Cha 
Halfling +1 Dex, -1 Str 

Human None 


: The Racial Level Limits chart lists the 

Racial Level maximum experience levels attain- 

imi able by the various races. For more 
Limits on classes, see chapter four. 


Table 16: Racial Level Limits 
Class Dwarf Elf 


Bard — — U = 


Cleric 10 ° 32 9 14 
ids 2: 


Paladin P m = 
Ranger 15 16 
Thief 12 12 


U This symbol represents unlimited class advancement for characters of those races. 


— Amember of this race cannot choose this class. 


Exceeding These Limits 


The DunGeon Master Guide included an optional rule 
where demihuman characters could exceed level limits if 
they possessed high prime-requisite ability scores. This rule 
is official in the Player's Option system. See the chart below 
for bonus levels granted to those characters with high 
scores in their class prime requisites. 


Table 17: Prime Bonuses 
Ability Score Bonus Levels 
14-15 +] 
16-17 +2 
18 +3 
19 +4 
20+ +5 


Gnome Half-elf — Half-orc Half-ogre Halfling Human 
- - U 


The bonus levels are added to the character's maximum 
experience level shown in the Racial Level Limits table. 


Each race detailed below receives a 
Char acter number of character points that can be 
Doints spent on racial skills and other abilities. 
This lets players personalize their char- 
acters. No longer must all dwarves have exactly the same 
abilities, skills, and bonuses. Players can purchase packages 
of abilities, or they can customize their characters. 
Demihumans can save 5 character points from this 
process and apply them to weapon and nonweapon profi- 
ciencies. Humans gain 10 points for these proficiencies. 
And nonstandard races, such as lizard men and thri-kreen, 
cannot apply any racial character points to weapon and 
nonweapon proficiencies—any points not spent disappear. 


Racial Variants 


Numerous off-shoot races can be player characters. For 
example, a player fond of dwarven characters could choose 
from the hill, mountain, 
gray, or deep varieties. 
Players who select such a 
character purchase the 
standard package of abili- 
ties for the subrace. Op- 
tionally, a player can cus- 
tomize a character by 
choosing individual abili- 
ties from the list for that 
race. Generally, buying a 
package of abilities is the 
most efficient way to 
spend character points. 

Racial Languages: A 
character from a demi- 
human subrace receives 
an initial package of lan- 
guages for no additional cost in character points. However, 
no character can know more languages than his or her Intel- 
ligence/Knowledge score allows (see Table 9). If a racial 
package offers more languages than a character can know, 
the player can choose which languages the character knows. 


4 U 


Dwarves are a short, stocky race, averaging 
Dwarves about 4—47' tall. They often have ruddy 


complexions, dark hair, and piercing, dark eyes. The natural life 
span for a dwarf is about 350 years. They are a serious lot, 
given rarely to frivolity. They prefer a good, hard day's work. 
Though sometimes considered dour or taciturn, few doubt the 
dwarves’ courage or bravery. They have little talent for magic, 
but excel at fighting, war craft, and arts such as engineering. 
Dwarves typically live in hilly or mountainous regions, en- 
joying the strength of the earth and rocks that make up their 


underground homes. Dwarves mine 
the earth for precious metals and gems, 
and they are particularly fond of gold. 

Because of their resistance to magic, 
dwarves have difficulty using enchanted 
items. All magical items not specially 
suited to the dwarf's character class 
have a 20% (on 1d100 roll) to mal- 
function. A check for malfunction is 
made every time the dwarf attempts to 
use the item. If the check is passed, the 
item works until it is turned off, put 
away, or its duration expires. If the 
check fails, the magical qualities of the 
item cannot be called upon, though the 
item might function normally the next 
time the dwarf tries to use it. Malfunc- 
tion checks apply to magical wands, 
rods, staves, rings, amulets, potions, 
horns, and jewels. The checks do not 
apply to dwarven clerics using clerical 
magical items, and to weapons, shields, 
armor, gauntlets, and girdles. If a dwarf 
possesses a cursed item and it mal- 
functions, the dwarf will recognize the 
nature of the item and can safely dis- 
pose of it. 

The standard dwarven subraces are: 
hill, mountain, deep, and gray. ^ dwar- 
ven character might choose to be a 
fighter, cleric, or thief. A dwarf also can 
be multi-classed as a fighter/cleric or a 
fighter/thief. 

Players who choose dwarves for 
their characters have 45 character 
points to spend on racial abilities. 
These points can be spent to customize 
a dwarf from the general skill list below, or they can be used 
to purchase a subrace's skill package. Only 5 points can be 
retained for use later in the character creation process. 


Deep Dwarves 


Character point cost: 45 

As their name implies, deep dwarves live farther under- 
ground than their hill or mountain relatives. They prefer the 
security and the isolation that living far beneath the earth 
provides. 

The typical deep dwarf is 4—47' tall and weighs 120 
pounds. They are large-boned, but thinner than their 
cousins who live closer to the surface. And they can move 
easily through the narrow tunnels they dig in the bedrock. 

Deep dwarves seldom have contact with creatures from 
the surface—few such creatures can reach remote under- 
ground places—and the deep dwarves feel no need to dig 


tunnels to the surface. Most deep dwarves are neutral, law- 
ful neutral, or chaotic neutral. Players may choose any align- 
ment for their deep dwarf characters. 

Languages: Deep dwarves can speak their own racial 
dialect, gray dwarf, illithid, troglodyte, deep gnome, and 
undercommon (the trade language of all Underdark races). 


Deep Dwarves' Special Abilities 
Infravision, 90' Saving Throw Bonuses 
Melee Combat Bonuses* Mining Detection Abilities 


* Attack bonus applies vs. drow, troglodytes, and orcs. 


Deep Dwarf Racial Penalties 

Deep dwarves suffer a —1 penalty to all rolls when in 
bright sunlight or within the radius of a continual light spell. 
Light spells and all other light sources have no effect on a 
deep dwarf. 


Racial Re 


Gray Dwarves 


Character point cost: 45 

Also known as duergar, gray dwarves live far underground— 
at times even beyond the deep dwarves. However, since 
they occasionally reside near each other, gray and deep 
dwarves tend to come into conflict over the resources of 
the Underdark. 

An average gray dwarf is about 4' tall and weighs 120 
pounds. The thinnest of the subraces, gray dwarves almost 
appear emaciated. Most are bald, and those who are not 
usually shave their heads. Their beards are white. Gray 
dwarves rarely venture above ground, as they find sunlight 
to be painful to their eyes. 

Most gray dwarves are lawful evil in alignment, with neu- 
tral tendencies. Player character gray dwarves can be of any 
alignment. 

Languages: Duergar begin play with knowledge of their 
own tongue, deep dwarf, dark elf, illithid, kuo-toa, troglo- 
dyte, and undercommon. 


Gray Dwarves’ Special Abilities 

Infravision, 120' Saving Throw Bonuses 
Melee Combat Bonuses* Stealth 

Mining Detection Abilities 


* No attack bonus applies , the character receives only the 
defensive benefits. 


Gray Dwarf Racial Penalties 

Gray dwarves suffer a —1 penalty on all rolls when 
exposed to bright sunlight or continual light spells. Other 
light sources do not impair them. Other types of dwarves 
distrust duergar, and as such, duergar suffer an initial —2 
penalty to reaction rolls from their cousins. 


Hill Dwarves 


Character point cost: 40 

Hill dwarves live in areas of rolling headlands—often 
dwelling underground, though they are known to have out- 
posts on the surface. 

A typical hill dwarf stands 4' tall and weighs about 150 
pounds. He is well-muscled and stocky, with tan or brown 
skin, dark hair, and bright eyes. Hill dwarves prefer earth 
tones and seldom wear jewelry. They are the most com- 
mon of all the dwarven varieties, as they adapt well to life 
above and below ground. Most hill dwarves are lawful 
good, but player characters can be of any alignment. 

Languages: Hill dwarves can speak their own tongue as 
well as other dwarven dialects. In addition, hill dwarves can 
speak gnome, goblin, orc, and gnoll. 


Hill Dwarf Special Abilities 
Hill dwarves have the following racial abilities: the dwar- 


quirements 


— O 


25 


ven saving throw bonuses versus poison and magical 
attack; the dwarven melee combat bonus; infravision to a 
range of 60 feet; and the dwarven mining detection abili- 
ties. 


Hill Dwarves' Special Abilities 
Infravision, 60' Saving Throw Bonuses 
Melee Combat Bonuses Mining Detection Abilities 


Hill Dwarf Racial Penalties 

Hill dwarves are not accustomed to traveling over water. 
They suffer a —2 penalty to reaction rolls when they are in 
or adjacent to rivers, lakes, and seas. 


Mountain Dwarves 


Character point cost: 40 

This variety of dwarf lives beneath the mountains in isolated 
strongholds. Most mountain dwarves value their privacy and 
avoid contact with outsiders. A typical mountain dwarf 
stands 47' tall and weighs 170 pounds. Their hair is lighter 
than their hill dwarf cousins’, and their skin tends to have a 
reddish tint. 

Mountain dwarves are often wary of hill dwarves, as they 
are suspicious of their cousins' dealings with the outer 
world. Most mountain dwarves are lawful good, but player 
characters can be any alignment. 

Languages: Mountain dwarves can begin with their own 


tongue, hill dwarf, gnome, hill giant, gnoll, bugbear, and common. 


Mountain Dwarves' Special Abilities 
Infravision, 60' Saving Throw Bonuses 
Melee Combat Bonuses Mining Detection Abilities 


Mountain Dwarf Racial Penalties 

Like hill dwarves, mountain dwarves are not accustomed 
to traveling over water. However, they are comfortable 
around rivers and small lakes. They suffer a —2 penalty to 
reaction rolls only when on board sea-going vessels or 
when in large bodies of water. 


A character with leftover character points 
Dwarven may select additional racial abilities after 
Abilities taking one of the standard subrace pack- 
ages. Or, if the player wishes to create his 
own customized dwarven character, he can pick and 
choose from the list of dwarven abilities listed below. Abili- 
ties cost either 5 or 10 character points; refer to the descrip- 
tions below. 


& Axe bonus (5): +1 to attack rolls with hand or battle 
axes. 

& Better Balance (10): +1 to the Balance subability score. 
This allows a dwarven character to have more than a 4 
point difference in the Dexterity subabilities. 


Brewing (5): +2 to the Brewing proficiency score. The 
dwarf must have this proficiency to gain this benefit. 
Close to the earth (5): Dwarves with this ability heal 
faster in subterranean settings. When this character is 
underground, he heals 2 points of damage overnight 
rather than the 1 point normally healed by other races. 
This bonus does not apply if the character is above ground. 
Constitution/Health bonus (10): A Constitution/ 
Health score bonus of +1, because the dwarf is accus- 
tomed to the cold and often damp Underdark. 
Crossbow bonus (5): Because dwarves favor crossbows, 
they gain a +1 attack bonus with any crossbow. Hurled 
weapons are limited in tunnels, and other bows require 
large pieces of wood which are not readily accessible. 
Determine stability (5): The character is an expert at 
determining if the ground is stable. By concentrating for 
one round, the character can determine if there will be a 
dangerous tremor, collapse, rockfall or slide when the 
character enters an area. The chance of success is 1-4 
on 1d6. 

Determine age (5): By examining a building or ruins, 
the dwarf stands an excellent chance of determining the 
approximate age of the structure. The chance of success 
is 1-5 on 1d6. 

Dense skin (10): If the dwarf is struck by a blunt 
weapon, the character suffers only half the damage the 
attack would normally inflict. 

Detect poison (5): By sniffing food or drink, the dwarf 
can determine if it has been poisoned. The chance of 
success is 1—4 on 1d6. 

Evaluate gems (5): A dwarf with this ability can deter- 
mine within 1096 the value of any given gem. 

Expert haggler (5): This dwarf drives a hard bargain. 
Anything he purchases costs 10% less than the listed 
price. 

Hit point bonus (10): The dwarf gains an additional hit 
point each time the character attains a new level. 
Illusion resistant (5): These dwarves gain a +2 bonus 
on attempts to disbelieve illusions. 

Improved Stamina (10): +1 to the Stamina subability 
score. This allows a dwarven character to have more 
than a 4 point difference in the Strength subabilities. 
Infravision (10): Dwarves have infravision to 60 feet— 
the ability to see heat patterns given off by living warm- 
blooded creatures in the dark. 

Mace bonus (5): +1 to attack rolls with the footman's 
mace. 

Meld into stone (10): Once a day a dwarf with this abil- 
ity can meld into stone as a priest of the same level. 
Melee combat (10): Dwarves have a --1 bonus to their 
attack rolls vs. orcs, half-orcs, goblins, and hobgoblins. 
Further, when ogres, half-ogres, ogre magi, trolls, giants, 
or titans fight dwarves, these aggressors suffer a —4 pen- 
alty on all attack rolls. Dwarves are small and have defen- 
Sive tactics against these large foes. 


Chapter 3 


e Mining Detection Abilities (10): A character with this 


26 


skill is familiar with mining, tunneling and stonework. By 
concentrating for one round the character can: 

Determine the approximate depth underground, 1-3 
on 1d6. 

Detect any sliding or shifting walls or rooms, 1—4 on 
1d6. 

Detect any grade or slope in the passage they are 
passing through, 1-5 on 1d6. 

Detect stonework traps, pits, and deadfalls, 1-3 on 
1d6. 

Detect new construction in stonework., 1-5 on 1d6. 

« More muscles (10): +1 to the Muscle subability score. 
This allows a dwarven character to have more than a 4 
point difference in the Strength subabilities. 

è Pick bonus (5): +1 to attack rolls with military picks. 

è Saving Throw Bonuses (10): Dwarves gain bonuses to 
saving throws vs. poison and against magical attacks 
from rods, wands, and spells based on their Constitu- 
tion/Health scores. Determine the dwarf's Constitu- 
tion/Health score and consult the chart below: 


Score Bonus 
4—6 +) 
7-10 +2 
11-13 +3 
14-17 +4 
18-20 +5 


* Short sword bonus (5): +1 to attack rolls with short 
swords. 

* Stealth (10): If the dwarf is not in metal armor, a -2 
penalty is applied to opponent's surprise rolls if the 
dwarf is at least 90 feet ahead of a party of characters 
without this ability, or accompanied only by characters 
with equivalent stealth skills. The dwarf is also difficult to 
surprise himself and receives a +2 bonus to his own sur- 
prise rolls. 

* Stone tell (10): Once a day a dwarf with this ability can 
use the stone tell ability, as a priest of the same level. 

* Warhammer bonus (5): +1 to attack rolls with the war 
hammer. 


Elve S Elves tend to be taller than dwarves, and shorter 
and slimmer than humans. Their features are 
angular and finely chiseled, and although elves may appear 
thin and weak, they are actually quick and strong. When cir- 
cumstances dictate, elves can be fierce warriors, taking any 
steps necessary to protect themselves, their homes, and 
their friends. Most elves are between 5 and 5%' tall and 
weigh about 110 pounds. They prefer to live in natural set- 
tings such as secluded forests and groves. They are chaotic 
by nature, and other races sometimes consider elves frivo- 
lous and aloof. 
Elves are an extremely long-lived race, averaging about 
1,200 years. This may explain some of their attitudes—life is to 


Racial Requirements 


be taken slowly and enjoyed; never rush 7 


about to accomplish things; there is 
plenty of time for all activities. Elves enjoy 
singing, dancing, and looking for the nat- 
ural beauty in everything they see. 

Perhaps because they live so long, 
elves find it difficult to make friends 
with the shorter-lived races. Some elves 
don't want to bother getting close to 
humans when those friends will die of 
old age so soon. However, elves who 
do make friends outside their race treat 
their comrades as equals. Friends—and 
enemies—are never forgotten. 

Elves are fascinated by magic and 
devote time and energy to studying 
arcane forces. Even powerful human 
mages respect and admire elves’ 
understanding of magic. 

The standard elven subraces are: 
aquatic, dark, gray, high, and wood. 
Player character elves can be the fol- 
lowing classes: fighter, mage, cleric, or 
thief. They also can take the following 
multi-class combinations; fighter/mage, 
fighter/thief, fighter/mage/thief, or 
mage/thief. 

Players who choose elves for their 
characters have 45 character points 
to spend on other racial abilities. 
These points can be spent to customize 
an elf from the general skill list below, 
or they can be used to purchase a sub- 
race's skill package. Only 5 points can 
be retained for use later in the character 
creation process. 


Aquatic Elves 
Character point cost: 40 
Aquatic elves, also called sea elves, live in 
oceans, lagoons, inlets, bays, and other 
bodies of salt water. They patrol the shal- 
lows and depths and rule from their 
courts of living coral. Though not often 
seen, when they are encountered it is 
common to find dolphins among them. 
Aquatic elves serve to keep the evil 
inhabitants of the depths in check. 
Sahuagin are particularly hated foes, as 
are sharks that are large enough to 
threaten sea folk. 
Skin colors vary from silver-green to 
pale blue. Hair is usually green or blue- 
green, matching the kelp beds where 


; most sea elves make their homes. Their coloring helps con- Dark Elf Racial Penalties 


ceal the elves from their natural predators. Aquatic elves 
have gill slits like fish, and they process the air they need 
out of the water. Unlike most fish, aquatic elves can live for 
some time out of water. 

Aquatic elves can move about on land for a number of 
days equal to their Fitness scores. However, the longer they 
spend out of water, the weaker they become. For every two 
days spent out of the water, aquatic elves suffer a —1 penalty 
to all ability scores, and to proficiency checks and attack and 
damage rolls. If any ability or subability score reaches zero, 
the elf dies. Weakened elves recover within two tums when 
they return to salt water. Elves who enter fresh water do not 
recover, but the process of dehydration halts. Aquatic elves 
can stay in fresh water indefinitely. However, if an aquatic elf 
leaves fresh water, the dehydration process starts again. 

Most aquatic elves are chaotic good, but player charac- 
ters can be any alignment. 

Languages: Aquatic elves begin play with knowledge of 
their own tongue, kuo-toa, sahuagin, dolphin. merman, and 
undersea common. 


Aquatic Elves’ Special Abilities 


Confer Water Breathing Secret doors 
Infravision, 120' Stealth 
Resistance Trident Bonus 


Aquatic Elf Racial Penalties 

Aquatic elves can be out of water only for a number of 
days equal to their Fitness scores. They cannot gain the 
elven attack bonus for bows, as such weapons are ineffec- 
tive underwater. 


Dark Elves 


Character point cost: 45 
The dark elves, also known as drow, live underground. 
Nearly all of them are evil, and they have used their cunning 
to become masters of much of the Underdark. Most intelli- 
gent creatures shun them. In many ways, dark elves are the 
twisted, corrupt versions of their above-ground relatives. 

Drow have jet black skin, the better to hide their move- 
ments underground. And they tend to be shorter than other 
elves. The only other physical difference drow exhibit is their 
eyes, which glow a feral red—evidence, perhaps, of the 
hatred that bums in their hearts and minds. 

Very few dark elves are of good alignment, and these are 
usually player characters. 

Languages: Dark elves begin play with: drow, elf, gray 
dwarf, illithid, undercommon, kuo-toa, bugbear, and orcish. 


Dark Elves' Special Abilities 


Infravision, 90' Spell abilities 
Resistance Stealth 
Secret doors 


Dark elves suffer a —1 penalty on all rolls when exposed 
to bright sunlight or continual light spells. Lesser light 
sources do not bother them. All other elves hate dark elves, 
resulting in an initial reaction roll penalty of —2. 


Gray Elves 


Character point cost: 45 

Gray elves are considered the most noble and reclusive of 
elvenkind, devoting time to improving their minds. Also 
known as the faerie, this race has withdrawn from the 
world around them, stepping forth only to combat great 
evils. To some—even other elves—this retiring nature 
makes gray elves seem aloof and uncaring. Indeed, the 
faerie can be haughty, disdaining contact with their cousins 
and considering themselves to be the highest, purest, most 
noble form of elf. 

Tall and slender, gray elves have amber or violet eyes 
and silver or pale golden hair. They prefer to dress in white, 
silver, or golden yellow with cloaks of dark tones such as 
deep blue or purple. 

Most gray elves are chaotic good, though player charac- 
ters can be any alignment. 

Languages: Gray elves begin with six languages of their 
choice. The languages are subject to the DM's approval. 


Gray Elves' Special Abilities 


Bow bonus Secret doors 
Infravision, 90' Stealth 
Resistance Sword bonus 
Reason bonus 

Gray Elf Racial Penalties 


Due to their reclusive and often haughty ways, gray elf 
characters suffer a —1 reaction roll penalty when dealing 
with other elves, and a —2 penalty when encountering other 
races. 


High Elves 


Character point cost: 40 
The most common type of elf, these are also the most 
open, friendly, and cooperative. High elves set the physical 
standards for elves, being about 5' tall and weighing about 
110 pounds. High elves are the palest of all elves, with a 
skin tone resembling the color of fine cream. High elves 
usually have blond hair and blue eyes or darker hair, ranging 
from sandy brown to jet black, with intensely green eyes. 
High elves like to wear pastel shades. When out on a hunt 
or adventuring in the forest, high elves typically cover them- 
selves in a doak of forest green in the spring and summer 
and one of tan or russet in the autumn. 

Most high elves are chaotic good, though as player char- 
acters they can be any alignment. 


Racial Re 


Languages: High elves begin with high elf, common, elf, 
gnome, halfling, goblin, hobgoblin, orc, and gnoll. 


High Elves’ Special Abilities 


Bow bonus Secret doors 
Infravision, 90' Stealth 
Resistance Sword bonus 


High Elf Racial Penalties 

Because high elves are so friendly and open, they often 
take things—including illusions—at face value. High elves 
attempting to disbelieve something which is actually an illu- 
sion suffer a —2 penalty to the attempt. 


Sylvan (Wood) Elves 


Character point cost: 40 

Sylvan elves, or wood elves as they also are known, 
descended from the same stock as other elves. However, 
they prefer to live a more primitive lifestyle, more in touch 
with their roots in the primeval forests they have made their 
homes. They are geared toward simple survival, and they 
concentrate on their environment rather than on philosoph- 
ical debates and the study of magic. Sylvan elves enjoy the 
beauty of a singing bird, the patterns of an intricate spider 
web, and their own practice of tattooing. They are the most 
temperamental and emotional elves. 

Sylvan elves are more muscular than other elves, and 
their complexions are darker. They have yellow to coppery- 
red hair and brown eyes, though some rare cases of hazel 
or blue eyes are known. Any sylvan elf born with hazel or 
blue eyes is considered a good omen for the tribe, 
believed to be destined for personal greatness. Sylvan 
elves normally dress in browns and greens, the better to 
blend in with the forest. 

Unlike most of their brethren, sylvan elves tend toward 
neutral alignments, though player characters can be of any 
alignment. 

Languages: Sylvan elves begin with their own dialect, in 
addition to elf, centaur, pixie, dryad, treant, and brownie. Syl- 
van elves rarely learn the common tongue, as they wish to 
have as little to do with the outside world as possible. 


Sylvan Elves’ Special Abilities 


Bow bonus Secret doors 
Infravision, 90' Stealth 
Resistance Spear bonus 


Sylvan Elf Racial Penalties 

On rare occasions when a sylvan elf leaves his forest 
(most often as a player character), the elf's discomfort is 
visible. Anyone encountering a sylvan elf outside his home 
suffers a —1 reaction roll penalty, as the elf is uneasy around 
strangers. 


quirements 


A character with leftover character points 3 


29 


a may select additional racial abilities after 
iliti taking one of the standard subrace pack- 
Abilities ages. Or, if the player wishes to create his 
own customized elven character, he can pick and choose 
from the list of elven abilities listed below. Abilities cost either 
5 to 15 character points; refer to the descriptions below. 


* Aim bonus (10): +1 to the Aim subability score. This 
negates the requirement that Dexterity subabilities must 
be within 4 points of each other. They can be within 5. 

» Balance bonus (10): +1 to the character's Balance sub- 
ability score. This negates the requirement that Dexterity 
subabilities must be within 4 points of each other. They 
can be within 5. 

+ Bow bonus (5): +1 on attacks with long or short bows. 

* Cold resistance (5): +1 bonus on saving throws vs. 
cold- and ice-based attacks, as the elf's body is less sus- 
ceptible to extreme temperatures. 

* Companion (10): The elf gains the companionship of a 
cooshee or an elven cat. See the Animal Master kit for 
more specifics on companion animals. 

« Confer water breathing (10): Once a day, the elf can 
confer the ability to breathe water upon another individ- 
ual or creature. This ability lasts one hour for every level 
of the elf conferring the ability. For example, a 6th level 
aquatic elf thief could confer water breathing on another 
for six hours. 

» Dagger bonus (5): +1 attack roll bonus with daggers. 

» Heat resistance (5): +1 bonus on saving throws vs. 
heat- and fire-based attacks, as the elf's body is less sus- 
ceptible to extreme temperatures. 

* Infravision (10): 60' infravision range. 

* Javelin bonus (5): +1 attack roll bonus when using a 
javelin. 

* Less sleep (5): The elf requires only four hours worth of 
sleep to be rested. This is especially valuable to spell- 
casters. 

* Magic identification (10): A 596 chance per experience 
level of identifying the general purpose and function of 
any magical item, reflecting their interest in the arcane. 
This is as per the bard ability-see The Player's Hand- 
book for more information. 

* Reason bonus (10): +1 to the Reason subability, due to 
gray elves' devotion to developing their intellects. 

* Resistance (10): 90 percent resistant to s/eep and 
charm-telated spells. 

* Secret doors (5): because of their acute senses, elves 
are quick to spot concealed doors and hidden entrance- 
ways. Merely passing within 10' of a concealed door 
allows an elf a one-in-six chance (a 1 on 1d6) to notice 
it. If actively searching, an elf's chances improve to a two- 
in-six chance (1 or 2 on 1d6) to find secret doors, and a 
three-in-six (1, 2, or 3 on 1d6) to notice a concealed 
door. 


` è Speak with plants (10): Once a day, the elf can use the also can be multi-classed, mixing any two—but not more—of 


speak with plants ability, as a priest of the same level. 

è Spear bonus (5): +1 attack roll bonus when using a 
spear. 

è Spell Abilities (15): Once a day the elf can cast faerie 
fire, dancing lights, and darkness as a priest or wizard 
of the same level. When the character reaches 4th 
level, he can add levitate, detect magic, and know 
alignment. 

» Stealth (10): When the elf is alone and is not wearing 
metal armor, he gains a bonus to surprise opponents. 
The opponent suffers a —4 penalty, a —2 if the elf has to 
open a door. 

è+ Sword bonus (5): +1 on attack rolls using a short sword 
or a long sword. 

è Trident bonus (5): +1 on attack rolls when using a tri- 
dent. 


Distantly related to dwarves, gnomes are 
Gnomes smaller—averaging 3—37' tall and weigh- 
ing about 70 pounds. Gnomes have deep tan or brown skin 
and white hair. The most distinguishing feature are their 
noses, in which they take great pride. For some reason, all 
gnomes have very large noses—compared to the rest of 
their facial features. 

The average life span for a gnome is 350 years. Gnomes 
tend to live in hilly meadows and rocky woodlands. Their 
small size makes them wary of larger races, though gnomes 
are not hostile unless the larger folk are evil. 

Gnomes are much less dour than their dwarven rela- 
tives, with sly and lively senses of humor. Many people— 
mostly gnomes—say that gnomes have elevated practical 
jokes to an art form. Gnomes also love living things and 
finely wrought items of all types. But most especially they 
love gems and jewelry and are considered by many to be 
the best gem cutters and jewelers in existence. 

Gnomes have some difficulty using enchanted items. All 
magical items used by a gnome-that are not specially 
suited to his class—have a 20% chance (on 1d100 roll) to 
malfunction. A check for malfunction is made every time 
the character attempts to use the item, and a malfunction 
affects only the current attempt. If the check is passed, the 
item performs until it is turned off, put away, or its duration 
expires. Malfunction checks apply to magical wands, rods, 
staves, rings, amulets, potions, horns, jewels, and all other 
items except weapons, shields, armor, gauntlets, illusionist 
trappings, girdles, and—if the gnome is a thief—items that 
mimic thieving abilities. Malfunction checks do not apply to 
gnome priests using clerical magical items. 

Also like dwarves, if a gnome possesses a cursed item 
that malfunctions, he will recognize the nature of the item 
and can safely dispose of it. 

The standard gnomish subraces are deep, rock, and for- 
est gnomes. Gnome characters can choose from the fol- 
lowing classes: fighter, thief, cleric, or illusionist. Gnomes 


the above classes. 

Players who choose gnomes for their characters 
have 45 character points to spend on other racial abili- 
ties. These points can be spent to customize a gnome from 
the general skill list below, or they can be used to purchase 
a subrace's skill package. Only 5 points can be retained for 
use later in the character creation process. 


Deep Gnomes 


Character point cost: 45 

Most surface dwellers consider deep gnomes, or svirfneblin 
as they call themselves, to be the gnomish equivalents of 
gray dwarves and dark elves—evil counterparts of their 
above-ground cousins. This is untrue. Deep gnomes are no 
more or less evil than their surface-dwelling cousins, and 
their notorious reputation is a result of ignorance and mis- 
taken association. 

Deep gnomes tend to be smaller than other gnomes, 
but their wiry frames are just as strong. They also prefer to 
wear cool tones that reflect their stony underground habi- 
tats. Most males are bald, while females tend to have 
stringy gray hair. 

The majority of deep gnomes are neutral with good ten- 
dencies, but player characters can be of any alignment. 

Languages: Deep gnomes begin with the following lan- 
guages: svirfneblin, gnome, common, undercommon, dark 
elf, kuo-toa, and the bizarre language of earth elementals. 


Deep Gnomes’ Special Abilities 


Dart bonus Mining detection abilities 
Freeze Saving throw bonus 
Infravision, 120' Stealth 


Melee combat bonus* 


* Svirfneblin only gain defensive adjustments; they have no 
attack roll bonuses versus particular enemies. 


Deep Gnome Racial Penalties 

Due to their unfortunate reputation, deep gnomes suffer 
a —2 reaction roll penalty when initially encountering indi- 
viduals of other races. 


lorest Gnomes 


Character point cost: 45 
Forest gnomes are less common than rock gnomes. They 
fill an important niche in the ecology of the woodlands, car- 
ing for small plants and animals that other races sometimes 
overlook. Unlike other gnomes, forest gnomes prefer to 
make their homes above ground in small log cabins or in 
large, hollow trees. 

The smallest of gnomes, they average only 2' in height. 
They share the physique of rock gnomes—though their 


Racial Re 


noses are not quite as large. Forest gnomes wear their hair 
and beards long, and the color runs from brown to black in 
their youth, fading to gray or white with age. Their skin tends 
toward a greenish cast to tan, rather like some tree barks, 
and their eyes are blue or brown. 

Although most forest gnomes are neutral good, player 
characters can claim any alignment. 

Languages: Forest gnomes speak their own dialect, 
gnome, treant, dryad, brownie, satyr, and pixie. 


Forest Gnomes’ Special Abilities 

Animal friendship Melee combat bonuses* 
Forest movement Saving throw bonus 
Hide 


* Forest gnomes may apply their defensive adjustment 
when fighting any man-sized or larger creatures; their 
racial enemies are orcs, lizard men, troglodytes, or any 
creature which they have directly observed damaging 
woodlands. 


Forest Gnome Racial Penalties 
Forest gnomes cannot have infravision. 


Rock Gnomes 


Character point cost: 40 

Rock gnomes are the most common gnomes, and they can 
be encountered in a variety of climates and environments. 
The most noticeable feature of the rock gnome is his nose. 
All gnomes have large noses, but rock gnomes sport the 
biggest noses of all. Rock gnomes love gems, especially dia- 
monds bigger than their noses. 

Rock gnomes stand about 3¥%' tall and weigh about 70 
pounds, Eye color is predominately blue, although green or 
brown are seen occasionally. Their hair is usually white or 
pale gray. 

Rock gnomes are typically neutral good, but player char- 
acters can choose any alignment. 

Languages: Rock gnome player characters start with: 
common, dwarf, gnome, halfling, goblin, kobold, and the 
simple languages of burrowing mammals—moles, badgers, 
etc. 


Rock Gnomes’ Special Abilities 
Infravision, 120' Mining detection abilities 
Melee combat bonuses Saving throw bonus 


Rock Gnome Racial Penalties 


None. 
Gnome Abilities ^ character with leftover 
character points may select 


additional racial abilities after taking one of the standard 
subrace packages. Or, if the player wishes to create his own 


quirements 


customized gnome character, he can pick and choose from : 


31 


the list of gnome abilities listed below. Abilities cost either 5 
or 10 character points; refer to the descriptions below. 


« Animal friendship (10): Once a day a gnome gains an 
animal friendship spell ability, as the priest spell, with 
respect to burrowing animals. 

Melee Combat bonus (10): +1 bonus on their attack 

rolls vs. kobolds and goblins—the gnomes’ traditional 

rivals for space and resources. Also, gnolls, bugbears, 
ogres, half-ogres, ogre magi, trolls, giants, and titans suf- 
fer a —4 penalty on their attack rolls vs. gnomes. 

è Dagger bonus: (5) +1 to attack rolls with daggers. 

« Dart bonus (5): +1 to attack rolls with darts, their pre- 
ferred missile weapon. 

e Defensive bonus (5): +1 to Armor Class when in their 
native underground environment. 

* Engineering bonus (5): If the gnome has the engi- 
neering proficiency, he gains a +2 bonus to the profi- 
ciency score. 

» Forest movement (10): The ability to pass without 
trace through their native woodland as the druidic ability. 

è Freeze (10): the ability to "freeze" in place in their 
underground environment. This gives them a 6096 
chance not to be noticed by passersby. 

* Hide (10): the ability to hide in woods with a chance 
equal to a thief of the same level's hide in shadows 
ability. 

* Infravision (10): 60' infravision range. 

* Mining Detection Abilities (10): A character with this 
skill is familiar with mining, tunneling and stonework. By 
concentrating for one round the character can: 

Determine the approximate depth underground, 1-4 
on 1d6. 

Determine approximate direction underground, 1-3 
on 1d6. 

Detect any grade or slope in the passage they are 
passing through, 1-5 on 1d6. 

Detect unsafe walls, ceilings, or floors, 1—7 on 1d10. 

* Short sword bonus (5): +1 to attack rolls with short 
swords. 

* Saving Throw Bonus (5): like dwarves, gnomes are re- 
sistant to most magic. This grants them a bonus to all 
saving throws vs. magical wands, staves, rods, and 
spells. This bonus is determined by the character's 
Health sub-ability score. For every 34 points of Constitu- 
tion/Health, the gnome receives a +1 bonus. These 
bonuses are summarized on the chart below. 


Score Bonus 
4-6 +] 
7-10 +2 
11-13 +3 
14-17 +4 
18-20 +5 


* Potion identification (5): A gnome with this ability has 
a percentage chance equal to his Wisdom score of iden- 
tifying a potion by appearance and scent. 

» Reason bonus (10): +1 bonus to the Reason subability. 

» Sling bonus (5): +1 bonus "to hit" when using a sling. 

è Stealth (10): If the gnome is not in metal armor, a —4 
penalty is applied to opponent's surprise rolls if the 
gnome is at least 90 feet ahead of a party of characters 
without this ability, or accompanied only by characters 
with equivalent stealth skills. The gnome is also difficult 
to surprise himself and receives a --2 bonus to his own 
surprise rolls. 


: Most halflings are about 3' tall and weigh 
Halflings 60 to 70 pounds. They are generally 
plump, with round, broad, and often florid faces. They 
have curly hair atop their heads and on the tops of their 
typically bare feet. The average life expectancy of a halfling 
is 150 years. 

Halflings are a sturdy and industrious people, generally 
quiet and peaceful. They enjoy all the creature comforts, 
and while not overly ambitious, they are friendly and open. 
Their homes are well-furnished burrows, and most of their 
work is done out in the sunshine. Halflings get along with 
the others races, including humans, and they can be found 
in practically any civilization. 

The standard halfling subraces are: hairfoot, stout, and 
tallfellow. Halfling characters can be of the following 
classes: cleric, fighter, or thief. The race's multi-class op- 
tions are limited to fighter/thief. 

Players who choose halflings for their characters 
have 35 character points to spend on other racial abil- 
ities. These points can be spent to customize a halfling 
from the general skill list below, or they can be used to 
purchase a subrace's skill package. Only 5 points can be 
retained for use later in the character creation process. 


Hairfoot Halflings 


Character point cost: 30 
The most common halfling, hairfoots prefer rural settings. 
They are a practical people, and there are many bakers, 
millers, farmers, and innkeepers in their society. Averaging 
3' tall, hairfoots are stockier than their cousins. Their com- 
plexions run from pale peach to ruddy to dark brown, and 
their eyes are usually black or dark brown. Their hair can 
be blond, brown, red, black, and shades in between— 
though with few exceptions it is always curly. Hairfoots are 
‘ering cada from other halflings by their lack of facial 
air. 

Most hairfoots are lawful good, though player charac- 
ters can be of any alignment. 

Languages: Hairfoots can begin with any four halfling, 
human, or elf dialects. 


Chapter 3 


32 


Hairfoots’ Special Abilities 
Attack bonus 
Infravision, 60' 


Saving throw bonuses 
Stealth 


Hairfoot Racial Penalties 
None. 


Stout Halflings 


Character point cost: 35 

Stouts are not as common as hairfoots, and they tend to be 
stockier. As a result, they also tend to be stronger. Stouts 
usually live apart from human societies, choosing instead to 
live near dwarves. There may be some dwarven blood 
somewhere in the stouts’ ancient past. 

Ruddy in complexion, stouts vividly blush when pleased 
or embarrassed. Their hair tends to be light, and their eyes 
usually are blue, gray, or green. They favor practical, sturdy 
clothes, such as well-cured leather. They are the most 
industrious of all halflings, and are even comfortable around 
bodies of water and boats. 

Most stouts are lawful good, though players can choose 
any alignment for their characters. 

Languages: Stouts can begin with any six halfling, 
human, or dwarven dialects. 


Stout Racial Abilities 
Attack bonus Saving throw bonuses 
Infravision, 60' Stealth 


Mining detection abilities 


Stout Racial Penalties 
Stouts suffer a —1 penalty on reaction rolls from elves 
because of the halflings' friendship with dwarves. 


Tallfellow Halflings 


Character point cost: 35 

These halflings are the tallest and slimmest of their kind, 
averaging a little over 4' tall. Their favorite locale is temper- 
ate woodlands. As such, they often live nearer to elves than 
humans. 

They usually wear their hair long, sometimes covered 
with small caps. And they tend to wear clothes of greens 
and tans to help them blend into the woods. Tallfellows are 
the best carpenters, and they often live in spacious above- 
ground wooden houses. When they need to travel, tallfel- 
lows prefer riding small ponies to walking. 

Most tallfellows are lawful good, but player characters 
can be of any alignment. 

Languages: Tallfellows begin with the following lan- 
guages: common, halfling, elf, gnome, centaur and dryad. 


Racial Requirements 


Tallfellow Racial Abilities 

Attack bonus Secret Doors 
Hide Stealth 
Saving throw bonuses 


Tallfellow Racial Penalties 
Tallfellows suffer a —2 reaction roll penalty vs. dwarves, 
due to the halflings' friendship with elves. 


H a Í fli n A character with leftover character points 

8 may select additional racial abilities after 

Abilities taking one of the standard subrace pack- 

ages. Or, if the player wishes to create his 

own customized halfling character, he can pick and choose 

from the list of halfling abilities listed below. Abilities cost either 
5 or 10 character points; refer to the descriptions below. 


& Aim bonus (10): +1 to the halfling's Aim subability 
score. 

* Attack bonus (5): +1 attack bonus 
with hurled weapons and slings. 

* Balance bonus (10): +1 to the Bal- 
ance subability. This allows the char- 
acter to have up to a difference of 5 
in the Dexterity subability scores. 

* Detect evil (5): Halflings are very 
perceptive. Once a day a halfling with 
this ability can detect evil in creatures 
or individuals. This ability does not 
function on items or locations. 

* Detect secret doors (5): The half- 
ling can detect secret and concealed 
doors, as an elf 

& Hide (10): the ability to hide in 
woods with a chance equal to a thief 
of the same level's hide in shadows 
ability. 

* Health bonus (10): 41 to the half- 
lings Health subability score. 

* Infravision (5): Infravision with a 30' 
range, which indicates some stout 
blood in the character's lineage. 

s Mining Detection Abilities (5): A 
character with this skill is familiar 
with mining, tunneling and stone- 
work. By concentrating for one 
round the character can: 

Determine approximate direction 
underground, 1—3 on 1d6. 

Detect any grade or slope in the 
passage they are passing through, 
1-3 on 1d4. 

$ Reaction bonus (5): +1 to reaction 
rolls due to other races’ acceptance 
of halflings. 


& Saving Throw Bonuses (10): Halflings have a high 
resistance to magical spells and poison. This natural 
block grants halfling characters a bonus to all saving 
throws vs. magical wands, staves, rods, and spells, and 
applies vs. any poisonous or toxic substances. This 
bonus is determined by the character's Constitution/ 
Health score. For every 3% points of Health, the character 
receives a +1 bonus. These bonuses are summarized 
below. Halflings—unlike dwarves and gnomes-—are not 
hindered when using magical items. 


Score Bonus 
4-6 +1 
7-10 +2 
11-13 T5 
14-17 +4 
18-20 +5 


Chapter 3 


è Stealth (10): Like elves, halflings gain a bonus to sur- 
prise opponents, but only if the halfling is not wearing 
metal armor. The halfling can move so quietly that oppo- 
nents suffer a —4 penalty to their surprise rolls. If the half- 
ling must open a door or move aside some other ob- 
struction, this penalty is reduced to —2. 

« Taunt (5): Once a day the halfling can taunt someone, 
as per the 1st level wizard spell. 


if Half-elves are the offspring of human 

Half elves and elf parents. They average 57' tall 
and weigh about 150 pounds. They possess elements of 
both parents’ heritages, and can be the following classes: 
cleric, druid, fighter, ranger, wizard, specialist wizard, thief, or 
bard. Multi-class combinations are: cleric (or druid)/fighter, 
cleric (or druid)/fighter/mage, cleric/ranger, cleric (or 
druid)/mage, fighter/mage, fighter/thief, fighter/mage/thief, 
and mage/thief. 

Half-elves can be any alignment. 

Half-elves comprise a single subrace (see below). 

Players who choose half-elves for their characters 
have 25 character points to spend on racial abilities. 
These points can be spent to customize a half-elf from the 
general skill list below, or they can be used to purchase the 
subrace’s skill package. Only 5 points can be retained for 
use later in the character creation process. 


Half-Elf Standard Racial Abilities (20) 
Infravision, 60' Resistance 
Languages* Secret Doors 


* Common, elf, gnome, halfling, goblin, hobgoblin, orc, and 
gnoll 


If the player wishes to create his own cus- 
Half-Elf tomized half-elf character, he can pick and 
Abilities choose from the list of half-elf abilities 
listed below. Abilities cost either 5 or 10 

character points; refer to the descriptions below. 


» Bow bonus (5): +1 to attack rolls with any bows other 
than crossbows. 

+ Cold resistance (5): +1 bonus on saving throws vs. 
cold- and ice-based attacks, as the elf's body is less sus- 
ceptible to extreme temperatures. 

« Detect secret doors (5): because of their acute senses, 
half-elves are quick to spot concealed doors and hidden 
entranceways. Merely passing within 10' of a concealed 
door allows an elf a one-in-six chance (a 1 on 1d6) to 
notice it. If actively searching, an elf's chances improve to a 
two-in-six chance (1 or 2 on 1d6) to find secret doors, and 
a three-in-six (1, 2, or 3 on 1d6) to notice a concealed door. 

» Health bonus (10): +1 bonus to the character's Health 
subability score; the score can be up to 5 points higher 
than the character's Fitness score. 


+ Heat resistance (5): +1 bonus on saving throws vs. 
heat- and fire-based attacks, as the elf's body is less sus- 
ceptible to extreme temperatures. 

è Infravision (10): Infravision with a range of 60". 

è Less sleep (5): The half-elf requires only four hours 
worth of sleep to be rested. This is especially valuable to 
spellcasters. 

è Resistance (5): 30% resistance to sleep and charm 
spells. 

è Stealth (10): When the half-elf is alone and is not wear- 
ing metal armor, he gains a bonus to surprise opponents. 
The opponent suffers a —4 penalty, a —2 if he has to 
open a door. 

* Sword bonus (5): +1 to attacks with long swords or 
short swords. 


c Another example of a hybrid, half-orcs are 
Half orcs products of human and orc parents. Of a 
height similar to half-elves, half-orcs usually resemble their 
human parent enough to pass for a human in public. Their 
skin ranges from peach to olive to deep tan, and their hair 
can be blond, red, brown, black, gray, and shades in be- 
tween. Half-orcs can be members of the following classes: 
fighter, cleric, or thief. They can be multi-classed in any two 
classes, but not three. Half-orcs can be of any alignment. 

Players who choose half-orcs for their characters 
have 15 character points to spend on racial abilities. 
These points can be spent to customize a half-orc from the 
general skill list below, or they can be used to purchase the 
subrace's skill package. Only 5 points can be retained for 
use later in the character creation process. 


Half-Orc Standard 
Racial Abilities (10) 
Infravision, 60' 
Languages* 


* Common, orc, dwarf, goblin, hobgoblin, and ogre. 


If the player wishes to create his own cus- 
Half- Orc tomized half-orc character, he can pick 
Abilities and choose from the list of orc abilities 
listed below. Abilities cost either 5 or 10 

character points; refer to the descriptions below. 


è Active sense of smell (5): The character's sense of 
ics is sensitive enough to give a +1 bonus to surprise 
rolls. 

« Acute taste (5): The character's sense of taste is so 
sensitive he gains a +2 bonus to saving throws vs. 
imbibed poisons. 

è Attack bonus (5): +1 attack bonus with one weapon of 
the player's choice. 

« Damage bonus (5): +1 damage bonus with one 
weapon of the player's choice. 


Af 


; & Fitness bonus (10): +1 bonus to the character's Fitness & Fitness bonus (10): +1 bonus to the character's Fitness 


subability score, due to his hardy heritage. The charac- 
ter's Fitness score may be up to 5 points higher than his 
Health subability score. 

è Infravision (10): Infravision with a 60' range. 

s Mining Detection Abilities (5): A character with this 
skill is familiar with mining, tunneling and stonework. By 
concentrating for one round the character can: 

Detect any grade or slope in the passage they are 
passing through, 1 on 1d4. 
Detect new construction in stonework., 1-2 on 1d6. 

è Stamina bonus (10): 4.1 bonus to the character's Sta- 
mina subability score. The character's Stamina score may 
be up to 5 points higher than his Muscle subability score. 


Half-orc Penalties 
In human societies, half-orcs suffer a —2 reaction roll 


penalty. 


V This hybrid comes from ogre and 
Half ogres human parents. They average 7—8' tall, 
have ruddy complexions, dark hair, and dark eyes. They look 
like huge humans. Half-ogres can be fighters or clerics, and 
they cannot be multi-classed. Half-ogres can be any align- 
ment. 

Players who choose half-ogres for their characters 
have 15 character points to spend on racial abilities. 
These points can be spent to customize a half-ogre from 
the general skill list below, or they can be used to purchase 
the subrace's skill package. Only 5 points can be retained 
for use later in the character creation process. 


Half-Ogre Standard Racial Abilities (10) 
Infravision, 60' 

Languages* 

Tough Hide 


* Common, ogre, orc, troll, stone giant, and gnoll. 


Half-ogre Penalties 

Half-ogres qualify as Large creatures and suffer more 
damage from many weapons. Also, certain smaller races 
enjoy combat bonuses against half-ogres. 


If the player wishes to create his own 
Half-Ogre customized half-ogre character, he can 


Abilities Pick and choose from the list of half- 
b ogre abilities listed below. Abilities cost 
a 5 or 10 character points; refer to the descriptions 
below. 


* Attack bonus (5): +1 attack bonus with one melee 
weapon. 

* Damage bonus (5): +1 to damage rolls with one 
melee weapon 


subability score, due to his hardy heritage. The charac- 
ter's Fitness score may be up to 5 points higher than his 
Health subability score. 

s Hit point bonus (10): One additional hit point when- 
ever new hit points (for advancing to a new level) are 
rolled. 

* Infravision (5): Infravision with a 30' range. 

* Muscle bonus (10): +1 bonus to the character's Muscle 
subability score, due to his great size. The character's 
Muscle score may be up to 5 points higher than his Sta- 
mina subability score. 

s Poison resistance (5): +1 to saving throws versus poi- 
son. 

+ Tough hide (5): Half-ogres have a natural Armor Class 
of 8. If the character wears armor that would improve his 
AC to better than 8, this ability has no effect. If the char- 
acter wears armor that gives him an AC of 8 or worse, he 
may add a +1 bonus to his Armor Class. 


Humans can advance without limit in all 
Humans character classes. This is a standard human 
ability and costs no character points. Humans receive 10 
bonus character points. These can be spent on various 
weapon or nonweapon proficiencies or saved for use dur- 
ing the game. In addition, humans can spend the points to 
choose from the following abilities. 


s Attack bonus (5): +1 to attack with any weapon of the 
human's choice. 

s Balance bonus (10): +1 bonus to the character's Bal- 
ance subability score. The character's Balance score may 
be up to 5 points higher than his Aim subability score. 

s Experience bonus (10): +5% experience point bonus. 
This is cumulative if the human meets the class require- 
ments to gain a 1096 experience point bonus. 

è Health bonus (10): +1 bonus to the character's Health 
subability score. The character's Health score may be up 
to 5 points higher than his Fitness subability score. 

è Hit point bonus (10): One additional hit point when- 
bes new hit points (for advancing to a new level) are 
rolled. 

8 Secret doors (10): A human with a trace of elven blood 
may have the ability to spot concealed doors and hidden 
entranceways. Merely passing within 10' of a concealed 
door allows the character a one-in-six chance (a 1 on 
1d6) to notice it. If actively searching, the character's 
chances improve to a two-in-six chance (1 or 2 on 1d6) 
to find secret doors, and a three-in-six (1, 2, or 3 on 1d6) 
to notice a concealed door. 

s Tough hide (10): A few rare human characters have a 
natural Armor Class of 8. If the character wears armor that 
would improve his AC to better than 8, this ability has no 
effect. If the character wears armor that gives him an AC of 
8 or worse, he may add a +1 bonus to his Armor Class. 


Racial Requirements 


R: 


Other At the DM's option, players may choose 
almost any manner of being as a player char- 
Daces acter. For example, the Dark SuN* campaign 
allows players to run half-giant characters, 
dwarf/human crossbreeds, or feral halflings—all with ability 
scores ranging from 5 to 20 instead of 3 to 18. If a player 
has a specific character race from an unusual campaign 
world that he wishes to use, DMs can simply skip the selec- 
tion of Racial Abilities and take the character race with all its 
benefits and hindrances exactly as it appears. Generally, 
players may not customize these unusual races, and they 
receive zero character points for selecting a non-standard 
race. 

For the DM's convenience, a short list of common 
humanoid and monstrous character races is provided be- 
low, with standard abilities and hindrances. These creatures 
appear in The Complete Book of Humanoids and The 
Monstrous MANUAL", and more detailed descriptions of 
their lifestyles and societies can be found in those books. A 
player can choose one of these races for his character if the 
DM agrees, but the character gains no additional character 
points in this step. 


e. Surprise opponents: When alone or with a group of 
similarly stealthy creatures, the character gains a bonus on 
his chance to surprise his enemies. Bugbears inflict a —5 
penalty on opponents' surprise checks. A bullywug using its 
chameleon power inflicts a —2 penalty to opponent's sur- 
prise checks, or a —6 if the bullywug attacks with a leap 
from a place of concealment. 

f. Amphibious: The character is at home in either water 
or air environments. Combat penalties for fighting in water 
do not apply to the character, although using Type S or B 
weapons underwater is still very difficult. Bullywugs are true 
amphibians and can breathe water; lizard men are still air- 
breathers, but they can hold their breath for a number of 
rounds equal to % their Constitution score before checking 
for drowning. 

g. Leap: The character's powerful leg muscles enable 
him to make astounding leaps, bounding up to 30 feet for- 
ward or 10 feet into the air. Leaping to close with an 
enemy is considered a charge attack, and the character 
suffers double damage if he lands on a spear or similar 
weapon set against a charge. Bullywugs gain the special 
ability to inflict double damage with a leap. Note that thri- 


The races described here include: 
aarakocra, alaghi, bugbear, bullywug, 
centaur, flind, giff, githzerai, gnoll, gob- 
lin, hobgoblin, kobold, lizard man, min- 
otaur, mongrelman, ogre, orc, satyr, 
swanmay, thri-kreen, and wemic. 


Ability Score Requirements 


Just like demihumans, characters must qualify for these optional races by 
meeting certain ability score criteria. The ability score adjustments noted are 
applied after a character has met the required scores. Some of these adjust- 

“trp: TT ments can elevate a humanoid or monstrous character to ability scores of 
Abilities and Restrictions 19 or 20, or reduce a characteristic to 2. 


a. Charge Attack: The creature is 


capable of making a charge attack, gain- Race Str Dex Con Int Cha 
ing a +2 bonus to attack and inflicting ' 41  7n8 = 6/18/18 3/7 5/18 
double damage with an impaling weap- aghi .— 10/17 . 3/17. 32/18. » SANG! —3/16 — 3/16 
on such as a spear, javelin, or lance. Bugbear 7/18 8/1 8/18 4/1 3/18 4/15 
Aarakocra perform a diving attack, cen- 6/18 4/18 6/18 4/17 4/15 
taurs charge like knights, and bullywugs 11/18 5/18 10/18 3/16 3/18 
leap at their enemies. i 7/18 6/18 6/18 3/16 4/17 
b. Move Silently: The creature can AES. 14/18 3/15 10/8 3/15 3/16 3/17 
move silently, as the thief ability, with a Gi jo S098. SPB: 3/8 ASB SAI 
base success of 40%, +5% per level. 5/17 8/18. 5/18. - 4/15. 
c. Hide in natural settings: The i 5/16 4/17 5/16 3/18 
creature can hide in natural settings, 6/18 6/18 5/18 3/18 
just as a thief can hide in shadows. The 4/15 4/18 — 5/16 3/17 
base success chance is 3596, plus 596 j , 0/18 ^ 3/19 .. 6/18. :3/17 
per level. If a flat percentage score ap- 12/18 5/14 10/18 5/14 
pears next to this ability, use this score elr 6/7 6/18 8/18 4/17 
instead; for example, a satyr's abilities 14/18 3/8 12/18 4/10 
include c(90%), which means that a 5/17 3/1 8/16 3/16 
satyr has this ability with a 90% success / 6/18 — 8/18 — 7/1 X 4/18 
chance. Swanm 13/18 12/18 14/18 9/18 ‘1E 
d. Infravision: The character pos- ik 8/18 12/18 5/18 5/18 5/1 


1/18 3/8 3/18 3/18 


10/8 7/17 


sesses infravision (the ability to see in 
the dark) to a range of 60 feet. 


Chapter 3 


qp ————————— 


Racial Ability Score Adjustments 


After selecting a race, modify the character's ability scores as shown below. 


kreen can actually leap 50 feet forward 
or 20 feet in the air, but they do not 
gain this ability until they reach 3rd 
level. 

h. Detect new construction: The 
creature has natural skills for mining, 
and can spot new or unusual construc- 
tion with the percentage score noted. 
This is similar to the dwarven or gnome 
abilities as described earlier in this 
chapter. 

i. Detect sloping passages: The 
creature can note subtle grades or 
slopes in underground passageways 
and chambers with the percentage 
score noted. 

j. Detect sliding or shifting walls: 
The creature can detect walls that move 
or shift with the percentage score 
noted. 

k. Attacked last: The character 
comes from a race notorious for its 
cowardice and ineffectiveness in com- 
bat. Consequently, enemies are likely to 
dismiss the character as a negligible 
threat and concentrate their attacks on 
other, more impressive, members of 
the character's party unless the charac- 
ter displays some unusual prowess, 
powerful magic, or skill. 

|. Hard to surprise: The monstrous character's keen 
senses make it very difficult to surprise him. The character 
receives a +2 bonus to all surprise checks. 

m. Tracking: The character's sense of smell is so acute 
that he can track, as per the tracking proficiency, with a 50% 
chance of success. Normal modifiers for old or confused 
trails may apply. 

n. Spell immunity: Minotaurs have the unique power of 
immunity to maze spells, due to their familiarity with 
labyrinths and other such places. 

o. Fearlessness: Minotaurs also enjoy a +3 saving throw 
bonus versus fear, including fear, scare, cause fear, or emo- 
tion spells, dragon fear, and similar effects. 

p. Sound mimicry: Mongrelmen have the ability to 
perfectly imitate any sound they hear. They cannot create 
magical effects such as a harpy's song, a sphinx's roar, or 
a shout spell by imitating these sounds, although they can 
duplicate the non-magical aspects of these sounds 
exactly. 

q. Pick pockets: Mongrelmen also have the ability to 
pick pockets as the thief ability, with a success chance of 
70% plus 5% per level. 

r. Create magical pipes: Satyrs can create pan pipes 
that can cast charm, sleep, or cause fear effects within a 60 
foot radius. To gain this ability, the satyr must invest 4 char- 


Race 
Aarakocra 
Alaghi 
Bugbear 
Bullywug 
Centaur 
Flind 

Giff 
Githzerai 
Gnoll 
Goblin 
Hobgoblin 
Kobold 
Lizard man 
Minotaur 
Mongrelman 
Ogre 

Orc 

Satyr 
Swanmay 
Thri-kreen 
Wemic 


Adjustments 

+1 Dexterity- 1 Strength, —1 Constitution 

+2 Strength, -2 Intelligence 

+1 Strength,-1 Intelligence, -1 Charisma 

+1 Dexterity,-1 Intelligence, ^1 Charisma 

+1 Constitution, +1 Wisdom, —2 Dexterity 

+1 Strength, —1 Charisma 

+2 Strength, —1 Dexterity, —1 Intelligence 

None 

+] Strength, —1 Intelligence, —1 Charisma 

—| Strength, —1 Charisma 

—] Charisma 

—1 Strength, —1 Constitution 

None 

+2 Strength, +2 Constitution, —2 Wisdom, —2 Charisma 
—1 Intelligence, —1 Charisma, +1 one other score 

+2 Strength, +2 Constitution, —2 Intelligence, -2 Charisma 
+1 Strength, —2 Charisma 

+1 Dexterity, +1 Constitution, —1 Intelligence, -1 Charisma 
+1 Dexterity, +1 Wisdom 

+1 Dexterity, +1 Wisdom, —1 Intelligence, —1 Charisma 
+1 Strength, —1 Dexterity 


acter points in the music/instrument trait when first created, 
and then devote 2 character points to the Music proficiency 
at least three times. He can't spend more than 2 character 
points per level on the proficiency, so the earliest he can 
gain this ability is at 5rd level. The pipes themselves are eas- 
ily crafted and have no magical properties; it's the satyr's 
unearthly skill that creates the magical effects. 

s. Magic resistance: The character is magic resistant. 
Giff have a flat 1096 magic resistance, while githzerai have 
a magic resistance of 5% per level—for example, a 6th- 
level githzerai has a magic resistance of 30%. 

t. Antennae: A thri-kreen's antennae give it a sensitivity 
to motion and serve to lessen darkness-based combat 
penalties by 1 point while fighting enemies within 15 feet. 

u. Paralyzing bite: At 5th level, a thri-kreen gains the 
ability to paralyze its prey with a bite. The victim must save 
versus poison or be paralyzed 2—16 rounds (1-8 rounds 
if larger than man-sized, or only 1 round if size H or 
larger.) 

v. Dodge missiles: At 7th level, a thri-kreen gains the 
ability to dodge thrown or fired missiles with a roll of 9 or 
better on a d20. 

w. Racial weapons: At 5th level, a thri-kreen automati- 
cally gains proficiency in the chatkcha, a crystalline throwing 
wedge commonly used by the mantis warriors. At 7th level, 


Racial Re 


Humanoid and Monstrous Character 
Level Limits by Class 


quirements 


that they suffer damage as large crea- 3 
tures. 


Wizard ' 


Cleric 9 


the character gains proficiency in the gythka, a thri-kreen 
polearm. Consider these weapons to be equal to a javelin 
and a bill-guisarme respectively for damage, range modi- 
fiers, etc.—but note that the chatkcha returns to its thrower if 
it misses its target. 

x. Swan form: Swanmays may polymorph themselves 
into a swan form at will. While in swan form, they can only 
be struck by +1 or better weapons, can fly at the listed 
rate, and have a magic resistance of 2% per level. A swan- 
may's equipment and belongings remain behind when 
she transforms. The swanmay requires a magical token (a 
cloak, ring, or similar item) to perform her transformation, 
and if she loses it she can no longer transform until she 
gets it back. 


Denalties 


y. Claustrophobia: Aarakocra are extremely claustro- 
phobic and are uncomfortable indoors or underground. An 
aarakocra character suffers a -3 penalty to attack rolls in 
such settings. 

z. Size: A number of monstrous characters enjoy the 
mixed blessings of being a Size Large (L) creature. While 
this permits them to wield large weapons in a single hand, 
or even use huge weapons with both hands, it also means 


39 


aa. Dehydration: A character with 
this restriction is vulnerable to dehy- 
dration if he spends too much time 
out of the water. The character must 
wet his entire body (a water skin full 
will do) three times per day, or lose 2 
points of Constitution per missed bath. 
If the character's Constitution falls to O, 
he dies of dehydration. 

bb. Light: Many humanoids are ac- 
customed to darkness, and they find 
bright light to be disorienting and 
painful. A character with this weakness 
suffers a —1 penalty to attacks in day- 
light or within the radius of continual 
light spells. 

cc. Racial enmity: Some humanoids 
are the natural enemies of common 
demihuman races, who have evolved 
special fighting techniques to combat 
them. Dwarves gain a +1 bonus to 
attack rolls against orcs, goblins, and 
hobgoblins; gnomes gain a +1 bonus 
to attack rolls against kobolds and gob- 
lins. In addition, ogres suffer a —4 pen- 
alty to hit dwarves, and ogres, bugbears, 
and gnolls suffer a —4 penalty to hit 
gnomes. 

dd. Hideous appearance: Mongrelmen are so warped 
in appearance that they have an effective Charisma of 1 
(a —7 penalty) for purposes of Reaction Checks. 

ee. Easily distracted: Satyrs are very susceptible to dis- 
traction. Encountering a female of 15 or higher Charisma 
causes the satyr to forget everything except the idea of 
wooing the woman for 1—6 full turns, or even more if she 
is at all friendly. Even a bitter enemy can fascinate the 
satyr if she makes any effort at all, and in all circumstances 
satyrs have to succeed in a saving throw versus spells to 
consciously harm a beautiful woman—or ignore her. A bot- 
tle of strong drink can have the same effect. 

ff. Inhuman form: Some monstrous characters are 
restricted from wearing armor or some magical items by 
their body form. For example, thri-kreen and alaghi cannot 
wear armor; centaurs, wemics, or bullywugs can't wear 
magical boots or magical armor due to their unusual 
shapes; and so on. In a questionable case, the DM should 
decide if a character can use a piece of equipment or not 
using his best judgment of the situation. 


Racial Requirements 


The Races 


Aarakocra 


Aarakocra are a race of intelligent bird-men who live 
among the highest mountain peaks. The average aarakocra 
stands about five feet tall, with a wingspan of nearly 20 feet. 
An aarakocra's feet are powerful talons that can be used to 
grasp and manipulate objects, and it also has small wing- 
hands about halfway along the leading edge of each wing. 
Like all true avians, aarakocra have hollow bones, and most 
weigh no more than 80 or 90 pounds. The aarakocras' 
voices are not well-suited for common, and they punctuate 
their speech with caws, screeches, and whistles. 

Aarakocra are strong and swift fliers, and they can make 
a special diving attack with a drop of 200 feet or more. They 
receive no penalties for aerial missile fire. Aarakocra avoid 
grappling or combat on the ground, but their talons and 
beak serve as formidable weapons in a pinch. As a race, 
aarakocra are extremely claustrophobic, and dislike being 
indoors or underground. 


Alaghi 

Distant cousins of the yeti, alaghi are forest-dwelling 
humanoids with barrel chests, short legs, and long, power- 
ful arms. Their necks are thick and short, and their heads 
tend to be broad and flat with wide jaws. Alaghi are covered 
from toe to crown in long, thick hair ranging in hue from 
charcoal gray to reddish brown. Alaghi stand well over six 
feet tall and weigh more than 300 pounds. 

Most alaghi live as semi-nomadic hunter-gatherers. They 
tend to be shy and peaceful creatures, with a driving sense 
of curiosity. Alaghi love riddles and games of strategy, espe- 
cially a good game of chess. Alaghi tend to hoot and hiss 
when they speak, and their fearsome size and power can 
often frighten people who are not used to them. 


Bugbear 

Bugbears are the largest variety of goblinkind, standing 
about seven feet tall with muscular frames. They have light 
yellow to light brown hides, with thick coarse hair and bes- 
tial eyes. Their ears are large and prominent, and their 
mouths are full of sharp fangs. Bugbears are true carnivores, 
with keen sight and hearing, and they can move with amaz- 
ing stealth when they try. 

Most bugbears live by plundering and ambush, taking 
slaves and eating anything they kill. A player character bug- 
bear is an extremely unusual representative of his species 
who must struggle to control a vicious temperament and 
natural inclination to bully those weaker than himself. Even 
the most honorable bugbears can be fatally misled by avari- 
ciousness and hunger for power. 


41 


Bullywug 


Bullywugs are bipedal frog-like amphibians inhabiting 
swamps, marshes, and other dank locations. They are cov- 
ered with smooth, mottled green hide, with huge frog-like 
faces and bulging eyes. Bullywugs are strong swimmers and 
comfortable in water or out of it, but they are vulnerable to 
dehydration once they leave their native swamps. 

A player character bullywug is actually a member of an 
advanced variety of this species, since most bullywugs are 
savages and marauders of the worst sort. Common bully- 
wugs are scarcely able to wield a stone spear or club, but 
advanced bullywugs are able to wear armor and use most 
human weapons with little trouble. 


Centaur 


These powerful and noble creatures have the torso and 
upper body of a human and the lower body of a horse. 
They are a strong and proud race, easily offended and 
impulsive. Centaurs can make use of any human weapon, 
but they're especially fond of oaken clubs, longbows, and 
medium lances, the latter of which they can wield in the 
same fashion as a human rider on a medium warhorse. 

Centaur society is generally pastoral and peaceful, but 
they can be fierce warriors when the need arises. Like many 
woodland creatures, they have a great respect for nature's 
balance, and try not to disturb the world they live in. Cen- 
taurs are on good terms with elves, gnomes, and halflings, 
but they are suspicious of humans and dwarves. 


Flind 


Flinds are warlike humanoids with many of the worst traits 
of hyenas and similar scavengers. They are covered with 
mangy brown or reddish-brown fur, with bestial muzzles and 
long, muscular limbs. Flinds are closely related to gnolls, but 
are stronger, smarter, and more fierce than their cousins. 
Gnolls look upon flinds as leaders, heroes, and champions. 

Unlike the chaotic pack-like society of most gnolls, flind 
society tends to be organized and less savage. Flinds are 
quick to resort to violence, just like gnolls, but unlike their 
lesser cousins they're much more likely to consider the con- 
sequences and risks first, and then carefully plan their attack. 


Giff 

The giff are a race of hulking, powerfully-muscled merce- 
naries that resemble bipedal hippopotami. Their legs are cylin- 
drical and stocky, with a heavy torso and clumsy but strong 
thick-fingered hands. Their faces are very hippopotamus-like, 
with small eyes and ears, and their skulls are exceedingly 
dense and strong. Giff are not known as towering intellectuals, 


but they are immensely strong and loyal to their employers. 
The life of soldiering has become the only occupation in 


: giff society, and bands of giff 


hire out their services to all 
causes, Therefore, a giff con- 
siders it his only purpose in 
life to keep himself fit, 
strong, and ready for action. 
They are fascinated by 
weapons (the more compli- 
cated, the better) and the 
trappings of military life, 
such as regimental histories, 
parades, and other forms of 
spit and polish. 


Githzerai 


Native to the chaotic 
plane of Limbo, the githzerai 
are a monastic race of travel- 
ers and traders who can be 
found in almost all the infi- 
nite planes. Githzerai appear 
human, but they tend to be 
thin and gaunt, with drawn 
faces and sharp features. 
They favor plain clothing and 
conservative tones. 

Githzerai society is ex- 
tremely chaotic, but it is not 
without its own laws and 
mores. An individual gith- 
zerai is usually strongly loyal 
to his race, even if he is 
completely out of contact 
with his fellows. It is not 
unusual for a githzerai to 
spend years at a time in a 
single plane, wandering 
and adventuring. 


Gnoll 


Gnolls are hyena-like 
humanoids with mangy yel- 
low or brown fur, drooling 
muzzles full of long, sharp 
teeth, and gaunt but power- 
ful frames. They give the 
impression of starving scav- 
engers, with the disposition 
to match, and they are 
among the most chaotic 
and faithless of all human- 
oids. Gnolls have a hard 
time seeing past the 


Chapter 3 


Racial Abilities and Restrictions 


Naturally, each of the unique races described in this section have their own special 
powers, benefits, and hindrances. When a player selects a character, he must accept the 
standard abilities and restrictions of that race—there are no optional variations or abilities, 
such as those described for dwarves, elves, or the other standard demihuman races. The 
racial abilities are summed up on the chart below. 


Race _ Natural Characteristic: 


. 
m 


a, c (75%), e, f, g aa 
1d6/1d6 (hooves) a, z, ff 
[d 


d, h (25%), bb, cc 

d, h(40%), i(40%), 
j(40%),cc 
d, k, bb, cc 


Goblin 
Hobgoblin 10 


Kobold 


>$ 


z 

d, h(35%), i(25%), 
bb, cc 
c (90%), d, | : 


AC is the creature's natural Armor Class. If the creature wears armor that is superior to its 
natural defenses, it may use the better value as its AC. If the creature wears armor that 
is inferior to its natural AC, its AC improves by only 1 place. For example, a lizard man 
(AC 5) in leather armor (AC 8) is actually AC 4, since the leather armor provides a small 
measure of extra protection. However, a lizard man in plate mail (AC 3) is AC 3. 


HP is the creature's bonus hit points at first level. After the character determines his hit 
points normally for his class and level, he may add this number to his hit point total. 


MV is the creature's normal movement rate while unencumbered. Several monstrous 
character races allow flying or swimming as alternative means of movement. 


Natural attacks describe any natural attacks the character can make without any weap- 
ons. Generally, a character must choose to either use his natural attacks or fight with a 
weapon in a round, but there are three exceptions: centaurs and wemics can attack with 
a weapon and use their natural attacks at the same time, and thri-kreen can attack with 
a weapon and use their bite at the same time. 


42 


Racial Requirements 


moment, and patience is a virtue unheard of in gnoll society. 

Player character gnolls must work hard to overcome the 
strong (and generally well-justified) prejudices they will 
encounter in the world outside their band. Their short tem- 
pers and bestial habits are not much help in dispelling these 
beliefs. Despite these distasteful qualities, gnolls can be brave 
and fierce fighters and valuable companions—provided 
they're not given too many tests of honor, honesty, or loyalty. 


Goblin 


Goblins are small humanoids standing about four feet 
tall, with long arms, bandy legs, and harsh mannerisms. A 
goblin's face is broad and flat, with a wide fang-filled mouth, 
pointed ears, and an olive or dull yellow coloration. Goblins 
are generally cowardly, opportunistic, and untrustworthy. 

Goblin society is fairly savage, and each tribe has an 
exact pecking order. Moving up this ladder by pulling down 
those above them is the typical dream of most goblins, and 
cooperation with others of their kind is always halfhearted. 
Typically, a goblin will let others do his work or fighting for 
him any time he can, and then strike from ambush only 
after he's sure his enemies have been weakened to the 
point where they can't threaten him. Or, if the wrong side is 
winning the fight, a goblin isn't above reevaluating his alle- 
giances in the middle of a battle. 


Hobgoblin 


Hobgoblins are stocky humanoids with hairy hides of dark 
red to gray, and they stand about six and a half feet tall. They 
have yellow eyes and sharp yellow teeth, and favor dressing 
in brightly colored outfits. Hobgoblins wage a perpetual war 
with all other intelligent creatures, especially the other 
humanoid races. And they are proud of their status as the 
pariahs of the humanoid cultures. They feel that they are 
only weakened by alliances or treaties with other creatures. 

Hobgoblin society is built around war, with military organi- 
zation, and they seek out conflict wherever they can find it. 
Unlike the giff, who believe in the "rules" of warfare, hobgob- 
lins seek to terrify and antagonize their enemies at all times. 
A player character hobgoblin is a rare individual indeed, since 
association with “weaklings” and "inferiors" is taken as a sign 
of weakness and decadence in hobgoblin society. 


Kobold 


The smallest and weakest race of goblinkind is the race 
of kobolds. A kobold stands about three feet in height, with 
a scaly hide of dark brown to rusty black, and glowing red 
eyes in a vaguely dog-like face. Kobolds tend to be cow- 
ards and whiners, but are quick to turn on their enemies 
when they find themselves with an advantage of numbers 
or position. Due to their lack of physical prowess, kobolds 
specialize in dirty tricks, distractions, and traps, using these 


45 


to incapacitate or distract larger foes. 

Kobolds strive to be taken seriously by larger races, 
and often try to make up for their shortcomings with 
ferocity and tenacity. Kobold PCs are unusual examples 
of the race, but even the most pleasant kobolds are still 
mean-spirited and spiteful from time to time. 


Lizard man 


A lizard man is a reptilian humanoid standing between 
six and seven feet tall. They weigh between 200 and 250 
pounds, and their hides are covered with tough scales of 
dark green to brown. Lizard men have long, dangerous 
claws and thick, powerful tails up to four feet in length. They 
are exceptional swimmers and can hold their breath twice 
as long as most other air-breathing creatures, but they are 
slow and somewhat clumsy on land. 

Generally, lizard men are dim savages who have not 
even mastered the use of the most basic tools and weap- 
ons, but PC lizard men are members of a more advanced 
variety that is capable of using weapons and armor. Despite 
this, lizard men are barbarians by any definition of the word, 
and human society and behavior is baffling to them. Unlike 
some other barbarians, lizard men are likely to react to this 
with violence instead of curiosity. 


Minotaur 


These are not the minotaurs of the DRAGONLANCE* game 
setting, but instead standard minotaurs as described in the 
Monstrous MANUAL. Most are cursed humans, or the off- 
spring of minotaurs and humans. Minotaurs are powerfully 
built and tower more than seven feet in height, with the 
head of a bull and the body of a human male. Minotaurs 
revere physical strength above all else, and they believe 
that the strong should naturally rule the weak. Minotaurs 
view surrender as an admission of weakness, and are likely 
to fight to the death regardless of the circumstances. 

Many minotaurs are brutal savages, but they are not 
always mindless killers. They are ruthless, harsh, and stub- 
born, but they can be surprisingly intelligent and introspective. 


Mongrelman 


Mongrelmen combine the worst features of many spe- 
cies, including humans, orcs, gnolls, ogres, bugbears, and 
more questionable heritages. No two look alike, but all 
appear to be poorly constructed combinations of various 
humanoid races, with misshapen limbs of different shapes 
and proportions. Without exception, mongrelmen are 
hideously ugly, and most are ashamed of their appearance 
and go to great lengths to conceal their bodies from others. 

Mongrelmen are often enslaved by evil societies, and 
ostracized even by good ones. Without a place in the world, 
they have developed great patience and a surprising degree 


3 human form, they are indistinguishable from other people, 


of human kindness and compassion within their misshapen 
forms. They tend to avoid bloodshed when they can, staying 
in the shadows and living by petty theft and scavenging. 


Ogre 


Ogres are great brutes standing more than nine feet tall, 
with thick torsos, heavy limbs, stringy hair, and warty hides. 
They are usually ill-tempered beings who enjoy violence for 
its own sake, indulging in all manner of cruelty to entertain 
themselves. Ogres are extremely strong and hardy, but their 
lack of mental prowess is the stuff of legend. 

Ogres live by raiding and scavenging, taking what they 
want from those too weak to defend themselves. A player 
character ogre is rare in the extreme—the intelligence and 
character necessary to rise beyond the petty cruelties and 
appetites of their kind just isn’t found in many ogres. 


Orc 


Orcs resemble primitive humans, with gray-green skin 
and coarse hair. They stoop slightly, have low, jutting fore- 
heads, snouts, canine teeth, and short pointed ears. They 
stand between five and a half and six feet tall, and often 
have powerful, stocky builds. Orcs are aggressive hunters 
and raiders who constantly seek to expand their territory at 
the expense of their neighbors. 

Orcs respect skill in battle, and from time to time an orc 
champion approaches human standards of bravery and 
honor in battle. A player character orc is one of these 
heroes. Even the best orcs are quick to take offense and 
are somewhat bloodthirsty. 


Satyr 


The half-human, half-goat satyrs are a race of pleasure-lov- 
ing beings, Like the sylvan locations they dwell in, satyrs are 
personifications of nature, embodiments of all that is wild and 
carefree. Satyrs have the head, torso, and arms of a human, 
with the hind legs of a goat. Two sharp black hors jut through 
the coarse, curly hair on top of the head. They love to spend 
their days and nights in sport, and they never miss an oppor- 
tunity to chase after wood nymphs or other comely creatures. 

Satyrs are an inoffensive race—they just want to have fun. 
And when one takes up the life of an adventurer, he’s usu- 
ally looking for entertainment. They don't understand seri- 
ousness or violence, and while they can fight with the best, 
they're more likely to view a battle as just another kind of 
contest or game. Satyrs are very impulsive, and are generally 
unreliable companions despite their good intentions. 


Swanmay 


Swanmays are human females who are gifted with the 
magical power to transform themselves into swans. In 


44 


although they're frequently women of striking looks and 
grace. In swan form, they are great white birds of extraordi- 
nary beauty. All swanmays carry a magical token of some 
kind—a ring, cloak, or belt, for instance—that allows them to 
change shape. 

Swanmays belong to a special sisterhood of druids and 
rangers, living in communal lodges in hidden forests. Their 
homes are always near silent lakes or marshes. They 
oppose poachers, raiders, and others who disturb the nat- 
ural order of the land, and they act as friends and protectors 
of the forest folk. Many swanmays give up routine adven- 
turing to guard their homes against the forces of evil, but a 
few—player character swanmays—wander the land to fight 
evil wherever they find it. 


Thri-kreen 


The thri-kreen are a race of large, intelligent insects 
often referred to as mantis warriors. They roam the deserts 
and savannas, existing as nomadic hunters. Mature thri- 
kreen are roughly seven feet tall at the shoulder, with six 
limbs and a tough, sandy-colored exoskeleton. They have 
black compound eyes, short antennae, and a complicated 
jaw structure. The thri-kreen's uppermost four limbs are 
equipped with opposable claws that can grasp tools or 
weapons, or serve as weapons themselves. The thri-kreen 
language is made up of clicks and grindings, and they have 
difficulty learning the common tongue. 

Thri-kreen are organized into hunting packs, and they 
constantly roam their territory. It's unusual for a thri-kreen to 
leave its pack-mates and travel alone, and even more 
unusual for one to take up with others not of its kind. A PC 
thri-kreen has probably lost its true family in some disaster or 
another, and accepts its companions as a substitute family. 


Wemic 


Wemics are part human and part lion, combining the two 
as centaurs combine human and horse. The wemic's leo- 
nine body has a human torso where the lion's neck and 
head would be. The leonine body is covered with dusky 
golden fur, with a white underbelly, while the human half 
tends toward a tawny skin tone and a slight catlike cast to 
the face and eyes. Wemics are aboriginal nomads who live 
through hunting—they use fire and craft weapons and tools, 
but rarely build any kind of permanent dwelling. Wemics 
believe that everything in the world is a living thing, from the 
skies to the sun or earth, and they are very superstitious. 

Wemics are playful and curious as cubs, and a small 
number never grow out of this stage. Wemic adventurers 
are most often characters of this sort, although other 
wemics may choose to trade with humans or sell their ser- 
vices as guides, and come into contact with a player charac- 
ter party in that fashion. 


Chapter 4: 
Character 
Classes 


The next step in creating a PLaver’s Orton hero is choosing a vocation. There are 
four basic types of characters in the AD&D game: warriors, wizards, priests, and 
rogues, 

Each character receives a number of points to spend on class abilities, That 
means priests of the same faith no longer are carbon copies of each other. War- 
riors can have widely varying skills. Characters are limited only by their players’ 
imaginations. 

Character points are used to purchase skills, and the number of points avail- 
able vary with classes. 

Character classes share common terminology. Three of the most-used terms 
are: 

Experience points—the measure of a character's learning. They are awarded 
by the DM after each adventure in response to a character's actions and accom- 
plishments. When a character gains enough experience points, he advances a 
level and his abilities improve. 

Level—refers to the stage of the character's development in his class. A begin- 
ning character is first level. When the character earns enough experience points, 
he advances to second, then third, and so on. Different classes advance at dif- 
ferent rates, 

Prime requisite—is the term that refers to the ability score most important to 
a particular class. For example, Strength is the prime requisite for fighters. A char- 
acter needs to meet all ability score and prime requisite requirements to 
become a member of a certain class, Some classes have more than one prime 
requisite. Any character with a prime requisite score of 16 or greater receives an 
extra 10% bonus to experience point awards. 


Character Classes 


> Warriors make their way in the world by 
Warriors the strength of their muscles and the 
swiftness of their swords. Warrior classes include the fighter, 
paladin, and ranger. Using the PLayer’s Option system, all 
members of the warrior group: 


» Have the ability to select any weapon and wear any 
type of armor available in the campaign. 

* Roll d1Os to determine their hit points from 1st to 9th 
level. Thereafter, they gain three hit points per level. 

« Can attract followers at 9th level. Refer to the Player's 
Handbook for more information. 

* Are prevented from using certain magical items. 

* Can become proficient in "shield," which grants them 
an Armor Class bonus. See the proficiencies section for 
more details. 

+ At higher levels make additional melee attacks in a 
combat round. The chart below details this progres- 
sion. 


Table 18: Warrior Melee Attacks By Level 


Level Attacks/Round 
1-6 1/round 

7-12 3/2 rounds 
13+ 2/round 


* Use the table below to determine the rate at which they 
advance in levels. 


Table 19: Warrior Experience Levels 
Paladin/ 


Hit dice 


500, 
750,000 


2400000 9 
2,700,000 
.. 3,000,000 


2,000000 
2,250,000 


4T 


Fighter 

Ability Requirements: Strength 9 
Prime Requisite: Strength 
Allowed Races: All 


Fighters are experts with weapons, and they are often 
masters of tactics and strategy. Perseus, Hercules, Hiawatha, 
Beowulf, and Sinbad are fighters of legend. Hannibal, 
Alexander the Great, Charlemagne, and Spartacus are real- 
world warriors. 

The principal attribute of a fighter is Strength, as he 
needs to heft and use his weapons and carry the weight of 
his armor for long periods. Good scores in Dexterity and 
Constitution also are desirable. Fighters can be of any align- 
ment. 


Building a Fighter 
with Character Doints 


wi 


1d12 for hit points (10): Instead of rolling a 10-sided 
dice to determine initial hit points and how many new hit 
points the fighter receives at each level, a 12-sided dice is 
rolled instead. 

Building (5): The knowledge to construct heavy war 
machines, siege engines, and siege towers. 

Defense bonus (10): +2 bonus to Armor Class if unar- 
mored and unencumbered. 

Followers (5/10): By purchasing this skill, a fighter can 
gain followers as described in the Player’s Handbook if he 
establishes a stronghold and is at least 9th level. If this is 
purchased as a 10-point ability, the fighter can attract fol- 
lowers whenever he establishes a stronghold, regardless of 
level. Refer to the warrior section of the Player's Handbook 
for more details on followers. 

Increased movement (5): A fighter's base movement 
score is 15 rather than 12. 

Leadership (5): The ability to lead large numbers of 
troops into battle. The fighter is able to take charge of up to 
100 soldiers per level. He knows how to use messengers 
and signals, is familiar with military terminology, and under- 
stands the mechanics of moving a large number of men. 

Magic resistance (10): Gain a 2% Magic Resistance for 
each level. For example, a 9th level fighter would have an 
18% Magic Resistance score. 


Chapter 4 


Move silently (10): A fighter with this ability has a 
chance to move silently like a thief. This chance is equal to 
his Dexterity score plus his level. For example, an 8th level 
fighter with a 17 Dexterity score has a 24% chance to move 
silently. The fighter cannot wear armor above studded 
leather. Look to the thief table for penalties for additional 
armor. 

Multiple specialization (10): This ability can be taken in 
place of the 5-point ability to specialize in a single weapon. 
A fighter with this ability can specialize in as many weapons 
as he desires. The character point cost must be met for 
each individual specialization. 

Poison resistance (5): Fighters with poison resistance 
gain a +1 bonus to all saving throws versus poison. 

Spell resistance (5): Fighters with spell resistance gain a 
+1 bonus to all saving throws versus spells. 

Supervisor (5): The authority to supervise the construc- 
tion of defensive works such as ditches, pits, fields of stakes, 
and hastily built wooden and stone barricades. With time 
permitting, the fighter also can supervise the building of 
semi-permanent fortifications. 

War machines (5): The knowledge to operate heavy 
war machines and siege engines such as ballistae, cata- 
pults, rams, bores, and siege towers. 

Weapon specialization (5): This fighter has the ability in 
a particular weapon. The character point cost for acquiring 
the specialization must be met in addition. to this cost. 


Optional Restrictions 


A fighter can gain bonus character points to spend on the 
above abilities by accepting a voluntary restriction on his nor- 
mal abilities. The restrictions with their point values follow: 


Limited armor (5/10/15): A fighter with this restriction 
is limited in his selection of armor. If the character is 
restricted to chain mail or lighter armor, this restriction gives 
him 5 CPs; if he is limited to studded leather or lighter 
armor, he gains 10 CPs; and if he cannot wear any armor at 
all, this restriction is worth 15 CPs. (The character can 
always use a shield.) 

Limited weapon selection (5): A fighter with this 
restriction is limited in his choice of weapons. He can 
choose to gain proficiency only in melee weapons (no mis- 
sile weapons allowed); he can choose to learn only cleric 
weapons (bludgeoning weapons); or he can choose to 
learn only thief weapons (club, dagger, dart, hand crossbow, 
knife, lasso, short bow, sling, broadsword, long sword, short 
sword, and staff). 

Limited magical item use (5+): A fighter with this 
restriction distrusts magic and refuses to use certain cate- 
gories of magical items. For each category that is barred to 
him, he gains 5 CPs . The categories are: potions, oils, and 
scrolls; rings, rods, staves, and wands, and miscellaneous 
magical items; weapons; and armor. 


Paladin 

Ability Requirements: Strength 12 
Constitution 9 
Wisdom 13 
Charisma 17 

Prime Requisite: Strength, Charisma 

Allowed Races: Human 


The paladin is a noble and heroic warrior—often literally 
the knight in shining armor—a symbol of all that is right, 
good, and just in the world. Examples of paladins include 
Sir Lancelot, Sir Gawain, Sir Galahad of King Arthur's 
Round Table, and Roland and the 12 Peers of Charle- 
magne. For more on these men, see Charlemagne and 
His Paladins Historical Reference book for the AD&D 
game. Such a warrior has high ideals to maintain at all 
times. 

Only humans can become paladins. A paladin must be 
lawful good in alignment. Any paladin who changes align- 
ment loses all his special powers. This loss might be tem- 
porary or permanent, depending on the circumstances. A 
paladin who consciously commits a chaotic act must find 
a lawful good cleric of at least 7th level, confess the act, 
and seek penance. If a paladin knowingly commits an evil 
act, the character's status as a paladin is forever lost. If 
such an act is committed by the paladin under duress 
(enchanted or controlled by magic), the loss of status 
remains in effect until the paladin completes a major 
quest for the cause of good. The paladin gains no experi- 
ence points for this quest, but if successfully completed, 
he regains the status and powers of his paladinhood. All 
paladins have the following restrictions: 


* Cannot possess more than 10 magical items. Further, 
these items must not exceed one set of armor, one 
shield, four weapons (magical arrows and bolts don't 
count), and four other objects. 

* Can never retain wealth. He can keep enough treasure 
to support himself, pay his henchmen, and so on, but 
all excess monies must be donated to worthy causes. 
Other characters do not qualify as worthy causes. In 
addition, 10% of all treasure garnered must be given to 
a lawful good religious institution of the paladin's 
choice. 

* Cannot attract a body of followers. However, he can 
hire soldiers and specialists—so long as those individu- 
als are lawful good. 

* Will not abide the company of those he knows to be 
evil. Those of other alignments will be tolerated as long 
as they behave themselves. 


Character Classes 


Paladins receive 60 character points with which to 
t class abilities. Each of the abilities below cost 
55 to 10 character points. Any unspent points can be 
used to acquire nonweapon proficiencies or saved for 
use during the game. A standard paladin spends his 
character points to acquire the abilities of circle of power 
5, curative 10, detection 5, faithful mount 5, healing 5, 
health 5, protection from evil 5, saving throw bonus 10, 
and turn undead 10. 


Circle of power (5): If the paladin has a holy sword, he 
can project a circle of power 10' in diameter. This circle dis- 
pels hostile magic at a level equal to the experience level of 
the paladin 

Curative (10): Cure diseases of all types once a week 
for every three experience levels. For example, a 10th level 
paladin can use his cure disease ability three times a week. 
(This ability is ineffective against lycanthropy and mummy 
rot.) 

Detection (5): Detect evil monsters or creatures up to 
60' away by concentrating. A paladin can do this as often as 
he wishes, but each use takes one round. 

Faithful mount (5): The paladin can summon a special 
steed at 4th level. This faithful steed might not be a horse— 
it may be any creature the DM deems appropriate. This 
steed is bonded to the paladin. However, this steed does 
not simply appear when called. The paladin likely must find 
his mount in a memorable way, such as on a quest. 

Healing (5): The ability to heal himself or another by the 
laying on of hands once a day. The paladin can restore two 
hit points per his experience level. 

Health (5): Immunity to all forms of disease. Lycan- 
thropy and mummy rot are curses, and paladins are not 
immune to these afflictions. 

Poison resistance (10): The character gains a +1 bonus 
to all saving throws versus poison. 

Priest spells (10): The Player's Handbook states that at 
9th level a paladin can cast priest spells from the following 
spheres: combat, divination, healing, and protection. How- 
ever, by purchasing this ability, paladins can cast spells 
beginning at 4th level. Paladins do not gain extra spells for 
possessing high Intuition scores, nor can they cast spells 
from cleric or druid scrolls. The spell progression chart for 
paladins appears below. 

Protection from evil (5): The paladin has a natural aura 
with a 10' radius. Within this aura, summoned or evil crea- 
tures suffer a —1 penalty to all attack rolls. Creatures 
affected by this aura know the paladin to be the source of 
their discomfort. 

Resist charm (10): Paladins with this ability gain a 4-2 
bonus to saving throws versus charm-like spells and abili- 
ties. 

Saving Throw Bonus (10): Paladins with this ability gain 
a +2 bonus to all saving throws. 


49 


Table 20: Paladin Spell Progression 
Paladin Casting Spell level 
Level Level 


Ph ttiw 
| qo E > 


UM OI UU OI 0400 NUT IND IO IO INN —— | — 
TETIUITTICINENES e TEM 


UO UOLUL NJ N N NN | | 


1 
2 
2 
3 
4 
4 
4 
5 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9* 
9g* 
9* 
9* 


* Maximum level of spell ability 


Turn undead (10): When the paladin attains 3rd level 
he can turn undead. This ability functions as if the paladin 
were a cleric two levels lower. For example, a 6th level pal- 
adin would turn undead as a 4th level cleric. See the 
Player's Handbook for information on turning undead. 

Weapon specialization (10): This paladin can specialize 
in a particular weapon. The character point cost must be 
met in addition. 


Optional Destrictions 


A paladin can gain bonus character points to spend on the 
above abilities by accepting voluntary restrictions on his 
warrior abilities. The restrictions are the same as those listed 
for Fighters. 


Ranger 

Ability Requirements: Strength 13 
Dexterity 13 
Constitution 14 
Wisdom 14 

Prime Requisite: Strength, Dexterity, 
Wisdom 

Allowed Races: Human, elf, half-elf 


The ranger is a hunter and a woodsman who lives in 
the wilderness. Robin Hood, Orion, and Jack the Giant 
Killer all are examples of rangers. Rangers must be of one 


Chapter 4 


of these alignments: lawful good, neutral good, or chaotic 
good. They must abide by the following restrictions: 


a Cannot gain followers by building a stronghold or fort. 
However, at 1Oth level the ranger attracts 2d6 followers. 
Refer to the chart in the Player's Handbook to determine 
the followers' composition. 

« Must retain his good alignment. If he intentionally com- 
mits an evil act, he loses all his ranger abilities and be- 
comes a fighter of the same level. His ranger status 
never can be regained. If a ranger commits evil under 
duress or because he has no choice, he cannot gain ex- 
perience points until he has cleansed himself. This may 
entail correcting the wrongs done by his evil act, aveng- 
ing himself on those who forced him to the act, etc. The 
DM should determine the appropriate actions. 

s Can retain only what treasure he and his mount can 
carry. All other treasure must be donated to a worthy 


Cause. 


Bow bonus (5): A ranger with this ability gains a +1 
attack bonus when using any type of bow. 

Climbing (10): A ranger can climb trees, cliffs, and 
other natural formations. The ranger's climbing score is 
equal to his Dexterity/Balance score plus the hide in shad- 
ows percentage (see Table 21) for a character of his level. 
Note that a ranger does not have to have the hide in 
shadows ability to have a climbing ability, the two skill sim- 
ply use similar numbers. 

Detect noise (10): As the thief ability. Use the ranger's 
Intuition score plus his move silently percentage to deter- 
mine his chance for success. 

Empathy with animals (10): When dealing with a 
domestic or non-hostile animal, the ranger can ap- 
proach and befriend it automatically. The ranger also 
can discern the health and nature of such animals. 
When approaching wild animals or those trained to 
attack, the animal must make a saving throw vs. rods to 
resist the ranger's friendly overtures. There is a —1 pen- 
alty to the roll for every three experience levels of the 
ranger. For example, if the approaching ranger is 7th 
level, the animal's saving throw penalty is —2. If the ani- 
mal fails the save, the ranger can adjust the animal's 
reaction by one category. 


50 


Table 21: Rangers' Spell-Casting Abilities 
Ranger Casting Spell level 
2 


Level Level 1 3 


* Maximum spell ability 


Table 22: Ranger Abilities By level 


Ranger's 
nee 


Hide in 
Shadows** 


* Maximum percentile score 
** Also used to determine the character's climbing 
score. 


Find and remove wilderness traps (10): These traps 
include pits, snares, etc. A ranger's chance for success is 
equal to his move silently percentage. See the table farther 
below. 

Followers (10): At 10th level, the ranger attracts 2d6 
followers. Use Table 19 in the Player's Handbook to deter- 
mine what kind of creatures the ranger attracts. 

Hide in Shadows (5): A ranger can hide in shadows, as 
the thief ability, in natural surroundings if he is wearing 
studded leather or lighter armor. See Table 22 for the 
ranger's chance of success. The ranger also can attempt to 
use this ability in other settings, but his chance of success 
is halved 

Move silently (5): A ranger can move silently, as the 
thief ability, in natural surroundings if he is wearing stud- 


Character Classes 


ded leather or lighter armor. See Table 22 for the ranger's 
chance of success. The ranger also can attempt to use this 
ability in other settings, but his chance of success is 
halved. 

Pass Without Trace (10): By selecting this ability at 
character creation, a ranger gains the druid ability to pass 
without trace once a day. 

Priest spells (10): Starting at level eight, a ranger can 
learn priest spells of the plant and animal spheres. He fol- 
lows the normal rules for priest spells, though he does not 
gain extra spells for a high Wisdom/Intuition score. A 
ranger cannot use clerical scrolls. The ranger's spell pro- 
gression is presented below. 

Sneak attack (10): If a ranger successfully moves 
silently and hides in shadows, he can sneak-attack in nat- 
ural settings, as the thief's backstab ability. The ranger 
strikes and does backstab damage as a thief of the same 
level. 

Speak with animals (5): Once a day a ranger can 
speak with animals, as the spell. 

Special enemy (10): Rangers focus their efforts on 
one exceedingly bothersome type of creature. A ranger 
must choose his special enemy before reaching 2nd level. 
Sample enemies include orcs, trolls, bugbears, and lizard 
men. The DM must approve the player's choice. From that 
point on, the ranger gains a +4 bonus to his attack rolls 
when encountering that type of creature. The ranger can 
attempt to hide the enmity he feels for these creatures, 
but he suffers a —4 penalty on reaction rolls vs. that type 


Table 23: Rogue Experience Levels 
C EUN ÁÁÀ Hit dice (d6) 


An 


. 110,000 


160,000 
220,000 
440,000 
k) j ae TEE n , 
nd Mea 

10-12 
10-14 
10+16 


VAS 


of creature. Further, the ranger should seek out such crea- 
tures over other foes in combat, unless there is some 
greater danger. 

Tracking proficiency (5): The ranger gains the tracking 
proficiency, and the character's tracking skill automatically 
improves by +1 for every three levels. For example, a 10th 
level ranger improves his tracking score by +3. 

Two-weapon style (5): A ranger can fight with two 
weapons and suffer no penalties to his attacks rolls. No 
shield can be used when a ranger fights in this manner. If 
the ranger wears armor heavier than studded leather, the 
standard penalties fro two-weapon fighting apply. 

Weapon specialization (10): This ranger can specialize 
in a particular weapon. The character point cost must be 
met in addition. 


Optional Restrictions 


A ranger can gain bonus character points to spend on the 
above abilities by accepting voluntary restrictions on his 
warrior abilities. The restrictions are the same as those for 
Fighters. 


Rogues are scoundrels, living by their wits 
Rogues day to day—often at the expense of others. 
Not all rogues are outright criminals, but many of them 
possess a shady past they'd rather not have made public. 
Rogues have several special abilities, the success of which 
is determined by using percentile dice. Refer to the rogue 
section of the Player's Handbook for more information. 
There are two classes of rogues—thieves and bards. Both 
use the following table to dictate their level advance- 
ments. All rogues roll 1d6 for their hit points from 1st 
through 10th level. After that, rogues add 2 hit points per 
level. 


Thief 

Ability Requirements: Dexterity 9 
Prime Requisite: Dexterity 
Allowed Races: All 


The profession of thief is not a particularly honorable one. 
However, many famous folk heroes have been thieves, rob- 
bing from the corrupt and wealthy and giving to the poor 
and hungry. The thief can be a romantic figure, even a 
swashbuckling one. Examples are Oliver Twist, Hanse 
Shadowspawn, Ali Babba, Aladdin, and Bilbo Baggins. 

Thieves are limited in their selection of weapons to: club, 
dagger, dart, hand crossbow, knife, lasso, short bow, sling, 
broad sword, long sword, short sword, and staff. 


Chapter 4 


Backstab (10): Thieves are practiced in the art of quietly 
eliminating guards and sentries. If a thief strikes a target 
from behind with surprise, the thief gains a +4 bonus on his 
attack roll, and the blow does additional damage. Table 24 
defines the extra damage: 


Table 24: Backstab Damage Multiplier 


Thief's Level Damage Multiplier 
1-4 x2 
5-8 x3 
9-12 x4 
13+ x5 


Bribe* (5): A thief can bribe an official with gifts of 
money or merchandise. Only one bribe can be attempted 
per target. If the attempt fails, the DM should make a reac- 
tion roll for the target to determine how he counters the 
bribe. 

Climb walls* (5): This skill lets thieves climb smooth or 
vertical surfaces. 

Defense bonus (10): +2 bonus to Armor Class when 
unarmored and unencumbered. 

Detect illusion* (10): Thieves can see detect illusions 
within their line of sight, up to 90 feet away. They perceive 
the illusion as a translucent image, seeing through it as 
though it were a light mist. 

Detect magic* (10): Thieves can spot magical radia- 
tions within their line of sight, up to 60 feet away. They can 
determine the intensity of the magic—dim, faint, moderate, 
strong, and overwhelming. 

Detect noise* (5): This is the ability to hear sounds 
others usually can't. 

Escaping bonds* (10): There comes a time in every 
thiefs career when his luck runs out and the he is appre- 
hended. The ability to escape bonds such as ropes, leather 
thongs, manacles, chains, and even straight jackets is a feat 
of contortion and determination. The thief must roll to 
break every device binding him. If he's tied at the wrists 
and at the ankles, then he must make two successful rolls 
to free himself. This skill takes five rounds to use. A thief 
might hurry his efforts, but he suffers a —596 penalty for 
each round he tries to shave. Locked items also require the 
thief to successfully pick the locks. A failure on any attempt 
pee that the thief cannot loose that bond or pick the 

Find/remove traps* (10): Many people try to protect 
their important belongings from thieves with small 


52 


mechanical traps or alarms. As a result, thieves have devel- 
oped skills to find and disarm these traps. 

Followers (5/10): By purchasing this skill, a thief can 
gain followers as described in the Player’s Handbook if he 
establishes a stronghold and is at least 10th level. If this is 
purchased as a 10-point ability, the thief can attract follow- 
ers whenever he establishes a stronghold, regardless of 
level. Refer to the thief section of the Player’s Handbook 
for more details on followers. 

Hide in shadows* (5): A thief can attempt to disappear 
in shadows, bushes, and crannies. A successful thief will be 
effectively invisible as long as he remains all but motion- 
less. Slow, deliberate movements are allowed. 

Move silently* (5): This is the ability to move without 
making noise. The movement rate of a thief attempting 
this is reduced to 1/3 his normal rate. 

Open locks* (10): A thief can try to pick all types of 
locks using skill, tools, finesse, and luck. If a thief fails to 
open a lock, he cannot attempt to open that lock again 
until advancing a level. 

Pick pockets* (10): A thief uses this skill to pilfer small 
items from the pouches, pockets, belts, sleeves, packs, etc. 
of others. A failed attempt means the thief did not come 
away with an item, but it does not indicate the thief was 
caught in the act. To determine if a thief's attempt was no- 
ticed, subtract three times the victim's experience level 
from 100. If the thief’s roll was equal to or higher than this 
number, the attempt was noticed. For example, if the thief 
tried to pick the pocket of a 5th level fighter and failed— 
and the thief's roll was 85 or higher—the thief is noticed. 
(5x3 — 15. 100-15 — 85.) 

Read languages* (5): A thief needs every edge he can 
get, and the ability to read languages can help. 

Scroll use (5/10): At 10th level, a thief can use magical 
spell scrolls. By purchasing this skill as a 10-point ability, he 
has a chance to read scrolls at any level. If a thief fails to 
accurately read the scroll, usually something detrimental 
occurs, such as the spell backfiring. Consult Table 25 for 
the thief's chance to read a scroll: 


Table 25: Thief Scroll Use 
Thief Level % Chance 
1-2 1096 
3-4 20% 
5-6 30% 
7 40% 
8 50% 
9 60% 
10 70% 
11+ 80% 


Thieves’ cant (5): Thieves use slang terms when refer- 
ring to their illegal operations. This lets them converse about 
such dealings in the open without others knowing what 
they are talking about. 


Character Classes 


Tunneling* (10): A thief might need to dig a tunnel to 
get to a cache of riches. His success at tunneling depends 
on several factors. The tunneling table below shows the 
time required to dig through 10 feet of earth with adequate 
tools. Every 10 feet, the thief must make a skill check, fail- 
ure meaning that the front of the tunnel collapses. It can be 
re-dug at the loose earth rate. 


Table 26: Tunneling 


Type of earth Modifier Time 
Sand/loose earth —10% 5 hours 
Packed earth — 10 hours 
Rock +10% 30 hours 


Weapon specialization (15): This thief can specialize in 
a particular weapon. The character point cost for gaining 
proficiency and specialization in the weapon must be met 
in addition. 

Skill points: After a thief's skills are selected, consult the 
thieving tables to determine base scores for certain abilities 
and how to modify those abilities based on race, Dexterity, 
and armor or lack thereof. 

Next, allocate 60 additional discretionary points among 
the thief's "scored" skills. These skills include: pick pock- 
ets, open locks, find/remove traps, move silently, hide in 


Table 28: Thieving Skill Racial Adjustments 
Dwarf Elf Gnome 


Half-elf 


Table 27: Thieving Skill Base Scores 
Skill Base Chance 
Pick Pockets 
Open Locks 
Traps 
Mowe Silently 
Hide in Shadows 
Detect Noise 


Detect illusion 
Bribe 
Tunneling 
Escape bonds 10% 
* These skills can be improved as a thief advances in 
levels. Refer to the appropriate tables. 


shadows, detect noise, climb walls, read languages, 
detect magic, detect illusion, bribe, tunneling, and escape 
bonds. 

Further, each time a thief advances a level, he is awarded 
30 discretionary points to divide among those abilities. 


Half-orc Half-ogre Halfling Human 


Pick Pockets = 


Open Locks 


Move Silently 
Hide in Shadows 
Detect Noise 
Climb Walls 
Read Languages 
Detect magic 
Detect illusion 
Bribe 

Tunneling 
Escape bonds 


+10% 
+15% 


—1096 
-5% 
+5% 

+5 
-5 
+10 


+5% 

—5% 

+5% 
+10% 
+5% 


+10% 
+15 
-10 


+10% - 


-5% 


+5% — 
+5% 
+5% 
+10% 
+15% 
+5% 
—1596 
-5% 
+5 


+5 
+10 


Table 29: Thieving Skill Dexterity Adjustments 


Skill 9 

Pick Pockets —15% 
Open Locks —10% 
Find/Remove Traps — —1096 
Move Silently —20% 
Hide in Shadows —10% 
Climb Walls —10% 
Tunneling —10% 
Escape bonds -15% 


10 11 12 
=10% -5% 
—5% Mur 
-10% -5% 
-15% —10% 
-5% 

—10% 

—5% 
—10% 


Dexterity 


13-15 16 17 18 


20 21 22 
+20% +25% +30% 


+15% +20% +25% 
+20% +25% +30% 
+20% +25% +30% 
+15% +20% +25% 
+15% +20% +30% 


+20% +25% +30% 


Chapter 4 


Table 30: Thieving Skill Armor Adjustments 
Padded or 
Studded 
No Armor Chain Leather 


skil 


Move Silently +10% - 
|] Hide in Shadows +5% 
Detect Noise _ 


Bard 

Ability Requirements: Dexterity 12 
Intelligence 13 
Charisma 15 

Prime Requisite: Dexterity, Charisma 

Allowed Races: Human, half-elf 


AD&D game bards are loosely derived from Celtic poets 
who sang their tribes’ histories. Examples include the Pied 
Piper of Hamelin, Alan-a-Dale, Will Scarlet, and Homer. A 
bard should be glib of tongue, light of heart, and fleet of foot. 

A bard is a jack-of-all-trades, but a master of none. He 
fights as rogue, but he can use any weapon. A bard can 
wear any armor up to, and including, chain mail, but he can- 
not use a shield. 

All bards are skilled singers, vocalists, and musicians. A 
bard character automatically begins play with the proficien- 
cies of Singing and Musical Instrument, in the instrument of 
the player's choice. The character does not have to expend 
character points for these bonus proficiencies, but he may 
choose to use CPs to increase his level of skill by raising his 
proficiency scores or acquiring the appropriate traits (see 
Chapter Six). 


Alter moods (5): When performing before a non-hostile 
group, the bard can alter the group's mood. This can be 
achieved via an inspiring poem, a tragic tale, a collection of 


54 


Table 31: Bard Scroll Use 
Bard Level 
1-2 


% Chance 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 
8 50% 
9 60% 
10 70% 
11+ 80% 


Table 32: Bard Spell Progression 
Bard 
Level 


* These skills can be improved as a thief advances in 
levels. 


Table 33: Bard Skill Base Scores 

Climb ^ Hear Pick Read Detect 
walls noise pockets languages magic 
50% 20% 10% 5% 10% 


jokes, or a lively tune. Everyone hearing the bard's perfor- 
mance must make a saving throw vs. paralyzation. For every 
three experience levels the bard possesses apply a —1 mod- 
ifier to each roll. If the save fails, the group's current attitude 
can be shifted one level in the direction chosen by the bard. 
See the reactions section of the Dunceon Master Guide for 
more details. 

Animal friendship (10): Once a day, the bard can cast 
the equivalent of an animal friendship spell by singing a 
soothing song. 


+ s" (3 ! 


"aeo SECA SD VR Wo UN. 


Charm resistance (5): Bards with this ability gain a +1 bo- 
nus to all saving throws versus charm-like spells and effects. 

Climb walls* (5): This skill lets bards climb smooth or 
vertical surfaces. 

Counter effects (10): Bards are able to counter the 
effects of songs and music used as magical attacks by per- 
forming a counter song. All characters within 30' of the bard 
are immune to such attacks. For example, the bard's adven- 
turing party would be immune to the effects of a harpy's 
song. The bard can perform no actions other than a slow 
walk while countering magic with his music. If he is struck in 
combat or fails any saving throw, the effect of his counter 
song ends. More details of this power can be found in the 
Player's Handbook. 

Detect magic* (10): Bards can spot magical radiations 
within their line of sight, up to 60 feet away. They can deter- 
mine the intensity of the magic—dim, faint, moderate, 
strong, and overwhelming. 

Detect noise* (5): This is the ability 
to hear sounds others usually can't. 

History (10): In his travels, a bard 
learns a great many things. The bard 
can read and write his native language 
and knows his area's local history. In 
addition, a bard has a 596 chance per 
level to identify the general purpose, 
function, and history of any magical 
item he comes across. The bard need 
not touch the item, but he must exam- 
ine it closely. 

Pick pockets* (10): A bard uses this 
skill to pilfer small items from the 
pouches, pockets, belts, sleeves, packs, 
etc. of others. A failed attempt means the 
bard did not come away with an item, 
but it does not indicate the bard was 
caught in the act. To determine if a bard's 
attempt was noticed, subtract three 
times the victim's experience level from 
100. If the bard's roll was equal to or 
higher than this number, the attempt was 
noticed. For example, if the thief tried to 
pick the pocket of a 7th level wizard and 
failed—and the thief's roll was 79 or 
higher—the thief is noticed. (7x3 = 21. 
100-21 — 79) 

Rally friends (5): The bard can 
inspire his compatriots who are about 
to enter battle. If the bard knows the 
nature of the threat they face, the bard 
can spend three full rounds rallying his 
friends with one of the following ef- 
fects: a +1 bonus on attack rolls, a 4-1 
bonus to saving throws, or a +2 bonus 
on Morale rolls during the upcoming 


th. A 41 mM fT ED 4^ 


battle. The range is 10' per level of the bard, and the dura- 
tion is one round per level of the bard. 

Read languages* (5): A bard needs every edge he can 
get, and the ability to read languages could put him ahead 
of his competitors. 

Sound resistance (5): Bards gain a +2 bonus to saving 
throws vs. sound-based magical attacks such as: harpy's 
song, dragonne's roar, sphinx's roar, the shout spell, yeth 
hound howl, and sirine song. 

Scroll use (5/10): At 10th level, a thief can use magical 
spell scrolls. By purchasing this skill as a 10-point ability, he 
has a chance to read scrolls at any level. If a thief fails to 
accurately read the scroll, usually something detrimental 
occurs, such as the spell backfiring. Consult the following 
chart for the thief's chance to read a scroll. 

Weapon specialization (10): This bard can specialize in 
a particular weapon. The character point cost must be met 
in addition. 


Chapter 4 


Wizard spells (10): Bards are dabblers in magic, study- 
ing it in a rather disorganized fashion. They cannot special- 
ize in a school of magic. They can cast spells once they 
reach 2nd level, and they begin with one to four spells in 
their spell books. A bard's spell-casting level is equal to his 
actual experience level. The bard’s spell progression chart 
follows. 

After a bard's skills are selected, consult the table below 
to determine base scores. If the bard has skills from the 
table, record the appropriate scores. These skills can 
improve as the bard gains levels. 

Skill points: Next, allocate 20 discretionary points 
among the bard's "scored" skills. If the bard possesses only 
one of those skills, all 20 points are allotted to it. If the bard 
did not select any of those skills, the 20 points can be spent 
on nonweapon proficiencies or saved for use during the 
game. 

Each time a bard advances a level, he is awarded 15 dis- 
cretionary points to divide among those abilities. 


A priest is a follower and advocate of a par- 
Dricsts ticular fantasy deity—most often one of a 
group, or pantheon, of deities. He acts in a manner appro- 
priate to his deity, and uses his powers and skills to help 
others advance the beliefs of his religion. 

All priest characters can cast spells granted them by 
their deity, wear many types of armor, and use many 
weapons. 

Priest spells are divided into Spheres of Influence, 
which mirror the interests of the priest's deity. A priest 
either has Major or Minor access to a sphere. Major access 
means that a priest potentially can cast any spell in that 
sphere. Minor access indicates that the priest can cast 
only first- through third-level spells from that sphere. The 
spell progression for a priest is presented below. 

In the PLavER's Option system, priests have positive and 
negative modifiers for cleric spells. Modifiers help deter- 
mine the success of spells being cast. Positive modifiers 
are called divine favor and are applied when a priest sup- 
ports his deity. Negative modifiers, or divine disfavor are 
assigned when the priest goes against his god. For ex- 
ample, if a priest of Thor, the Norse god of thunder, is 
fighting evil giants, that priest would gain divine favor. 
Giants are long-time enemies of Thor, and the god of 
thunder could improve the priest's chances of casting 
spells against those giants or increase the effect of suc- 
cessful spells. Conversely, if the same priest were to flee 
from the giants, he could fall into divine disfavor. Thor 
might make it more difficult for him to cast spells, or the 
god might halve the effects of any successful spells. 

It is up to the DM how divine favor and divine disfavor 
affects player character priests (see Chapter Eight). 


Table 34: Priest Spell sion 
Priest Spell level 
Level 


blips 
| ae 


4D (OB 0 | -/ 0) O) OY O» Ut 5 dS UL UL UI 0I OL INT NJ — — 
0 «i - OO OQ u a» o 0 OEN) IN — | Iiga 


SSSITASAN = SOMO shin 
WOOMDYNNGDMDADNS HDEaWWWWN— |] | Nn 


BMDINDUVARWWUNNK— | 
SQOUSBBUNNNN=] || 


8 
9 ies 


* Usable only by priests with 17 or greater 


Scores 


o 
* 


I'd 


OBAWWNNNN—| {| TT! 


NNI)! 


2 


2 
Wisdom 


** Usable only by priests with 18 or greater Wisdom 


Scores 


All priests gain 1d8 hit points for levels 1—9. 
Thereafter, priests earn 2 hit points per level. 


Table 35: Priest Experience Levels 


Cleric Druid 
m 


19. 24 


.20 2,700,000 . 2,000000 | 
* See the Player's Handbook section on 
druids. 


hierophant 


Character Classes 


Clerics 

Ability Requirements: Wisdom 9 
Prime Requisite: Wisdom 
Allowed Races: All 


Clerics are the most common type of priest character, 
and they generally are good-aligned. Clerics are sturdy sol- 
diers in the service of their deity. They can wear any type 
of armor and carry a shield, but they are restricted to using 
only blunt, bludgeoning weapons. They can use many 
magical items, including magical versions of their armor 
and weapons. 

Spells are the cleric's primary tool. Normally, a cleric 
spends character points to gain major access to the spheres 
of all, astral, charm, combat, creation, divination, guardian, 
healing, necromantic, protection, summoning, and sun, as 
wall as minor access to the elemental sphere. 


A deric receives 125 character points to spend on 
TS pats. Av anspent ponts can be used qe 
15 points. unspent points can to acquire 
nonweapon proficiencies or saved for use during the - 


game. 


Access to spheres: Access to a sphere of spells costs 5 
to 15 character points, as shown on the table below: 


Sphere  Minor* E Sphere Minor* Major 
All 3 Healing 5 10 
Animal 5 io Law 5 10 
Astral 3 5 Necromantic 5 10 
Chaos 3 5 Numbers 5 10 
Charm 5 10 Plant 5 10 
Combat 5 10 Protection 5 10 
Creation 5 10 Summoning 5 10 
Divination 5 10 Sun 3 5 
Elemental 10 15 Thought 5 10 
Air 3 5 Time 5 10 
Earth 3 5 Travelers 3 5 
Fire 3 5 War 3 5 
Water 3 5 Wards 5 10 
Guardian 3 5 Weather 3 5 


Casting reduction (5): The deric's spell casting time is 
reduced by 1. All spells still retain a minimum casting time 
of 1. 

Detect evil (10): Clerics with this ability can see ema- 
nations of evil from creatures or objects within a path 10 
feet wide by 60 feet long. It takes one round to scan a 
direction, and the cleric cannot be attempting other 
actions. 

Detect undead (10): Clerics can detect all undead 
within a path 10 feet wide by 60 feet long. It takes one 


51 


round to scan a direction, and the cleric cannot be 
attempting other actions. Clerics cannot detect undead 
through stone or other thick materials. 

Expert healer (5): This ability allows the character to 
cast one cure light wounds spell a day in addition to the 
number of spells the priest can normally cast. 

Followers (5/10): By purchasing this skill, a cleric can 
gain followers as described in the Player's Handbook if he 
establishes a stronghold and is at least 8th level. If this is 
purchased as a 10-point ability, the cleric can attract fol- 
lowers whenever he establishes a stronghold, regardless 
of level. Refer to the priest section of the Player's Hand- 
book for more details on followers. 

Hit point bonus (10): Clerics with this ability use 1d10 
to determine their hit points rather than 1d8. 

Know alignment (10): This ability allows the character 
to cast the know alignment spell once a day. This is in 
addition to the number of spells the priest can normally 
cast. 

Resist energy drain (5): Priests with this ability gain a 
+1 bonus to saving throws vs. the energy drain spell and 
the level-draining attacks of undead. If the attack does not 
normally allow a saving throw, this ability has no effect. 
This ability's saving throw bonus does apply to characters 
protected by the negative plane protection spell. 

Spell duration increase (10): The duration of all non- 
instantaneous spells cast by the cleric increases by 1 
round for every two experience levels of the cleric. For 
example, a 6th level cleric has his spells' durations 
increased by 3 rounds. 

Turn undead (10): The cleric is granted power over 
undead, such as zombies, skeletons, vampires, and liches. 
Clerics can drive away these creatures, and as clerics 
advance in faith and experience levels, they can destroy 
some forms of undead. Below is the chart for turning 
undead. 

Warrior-priests (10): Priests who select this ability use 
the warrior Strength and Constitution bonuses for excep- 
tional scores. For example, a priest could have an 18/30 
Strength, and he could gain bonus hit points for having a 
Constitution score greater than 16. 

Weapon allowance (5): A priest with this ability can 
choose a favored edged weapon of his deity. For example, 
a Cleric of the elven deity Corellon Larethian could use a 
long sword, or a priest of the Norse god, Odin might wield 
a spear. The character must still purchase proficiency in 
the allowed weapon. 

Weapon specialization (15): This priest can specialize 
in a particular weapon. The character point cost must be 
met in addition. 

Wizardly priests (15): These priests gain access to one 
school of wizard spells and can cast them as if they were 
clerical spells. The priests must continue to observe the 
number of various level spells they can cast each day. 


Chapter 4 


9 — — ——————————————————— 


Table 36: Turning Undead 
Type or Hit Dice 
of Undead 


10-11 12-15 14+ 


Shadow or 3-4 HD 
Wight or 5 HD 
Ghast 


Vampire or 9 HD 
Ghost or 10 HD 
Lich or 11+ HD 


Special 


T = automatically turns that type of undead, D= destroys that type of undead. 


D*=an additional 2d4 creatures are turned 


Specialty Priests 


Specialty priests are encountered in campaigns where 
DMs develop or import a mythos or a particular pantheon 
of deities. The many possible types of specialty priests go 
beyond the scope of this book. However, players and DMs 
interested in designing these priests should consult the 
Player’s Handbook, the Complete Priests Handbook, and 
the Legends & Lore book. One example of a specialty priest, 
the druid, is presented below. 


Druids 

Ability Requirements: Wisdom 12 
Charisma 15 

Prime Requisite: Wisdom, Charisma 

Allowed Races: Human, half-elf 


The druids of history lived among the Germanic tribes 
of Western Europe and Britain during the days of the 
Roman Empire. They acted as advisors to tribal chieftains. 
They believed the earth was the mother of all things, and 
they revered it, the sun, the moon, and certain trees as 
deities. 

Druids in the AD&D game are nature priests, protecting 
pristine woodlands from the depredations of monsters 
and civilization. They are only loosely based on their his- 
torical namesakes. 

A druid is allowed to wear only leather armor and use 
only wooden shields—natural materials. A druid may use 
only the following weapons: club, sickle, dart, spear, dag- 
ger, scimitar, sling, and staff. 

A druid's standard selection of spells includes major 


access to the spheres of all, animal, elemental, healing, 
plant, and weather, and minor access to divination. A 
druid can use magical items allowed to priests, except for 
books and scrolls. 


Access to spheres: The standard druid selection (see 
above) costs 55 character points. Or, the druid can pur- 
chase spheres individually just as clerics do (see page xx). 

Bonus spell (5): Once per day the druid can cast an 
animal friendship spell. This is a bonus spell and does not 
count against the druid's spell total for the day. 

Cold resistance (5): +2 saving throw bonus vs. cold- or 
ice-based attacks. 

Communicate with creatures (10): A druid can 
acquire the languages of woodland creatures, at the rate of 
one language per level. For example, a fourth level druid 
could have four such languages. Some woodland creatures 
include: centaurs, dryads, elves, fauns, satyrs, gnomes, 
dragons, lizard men, manticores, nixies, pixies, sprites, and 
treants. 

Elemental spell bonus (5): When the druid casts 
spells from the elemental sphere, all level-based variables 
(range, duration, etc.) are calculated as if the druid were 
€ experience level higher than the character's actual 
level. 

Hit point bonus (10): Druids with this ability use 1d10 
to determine their hit points rather than 1d8. 


Identify (5): At 3rd level, a druid can accurately identify 
plants, animals, and clean water. 
mmunity to « ): According to the Player's 
Handbook, at 7th level a druid becomes immune to 
charm spells cast by woodland creatures. However, by pur- 
chasing this ability for 10 points, a PLAvER's Option druid 
gans this — immediately, 
imunity lisease (10): A druid with this ability is 
immune to » natural diseases. 
5): At 3rd level, a druid with this 
ability c can pass s without trace, as per the spell, at his nor- 
mal movement rate. 

Purify water (5): This ability allows the character to cast 
one purify food and drink spell a day in addition to the 
number of spells he can heii) cast. 

: a +2 bonus to all saving 
throws vs. fire and electrical attacks. 

dide in Shadows (5): A druid can hide in shadows, as 


Fire/Electrical Resistance (' 


the ranger ability, in natural surroundings. See Table 22 in 
the aan section p the chance of success. 

ve silently (5): A druid can move silently, as the 
ranger ability, in dope surroundings. See Table 22 in the 
ranger section for the rapis of success. 

Secre guage Druids can speak a secret lan- 
guage only they ou and they use it to converse with 
each other. 

Shapechange (1 : According to the Player's 
Handbook, at 7th level a druid gains the ability to shape- 
change. However, by purchasing this skill for 15 character 
points, a PLAvER'S Option druid gains the following shape- 
changing abilities: 

At 5th level, a druid can change into a bird once a day, 

At 6th level, he can also change into a reptile once a 
day. 

By 7th level a druid can also change into a mammal. 

The size and shape assumed by the druid can vary from 


Chapter 4 
Bo — — ——————————————— 


that of a bullfrog or small bird to that of a black bear. The 


druid can assume the forms of normal creatures only. When Table 37: Wizard Spell Progression 
assuming a new form, a druid is healed of 10-60% of any 

damage he has suffered (round down). The druid also Wizard Spell Level 
assumes the creature's physical characteristics (armor class, Level 4 


| N 


movement mode and rate, etc.). The druid's clothing and - 
one item held in each hand also become part of his new 
shape—these reappear when the druid resumes his bipedal 
form. 

Weapon specialization (15): This druid can specialize 
in a particular weapon. The character point cost must be 
met in addition. 


Wi zard S Wizards command staggering energies and 

make dangerous opponents. The power to 
control magical energies comes from the mind, and as 
such, Intelligence is very important. 

Wizards cannot wear armor, as it not only interferes with 
the forces they control, but also goes against their way of 
thinking. They are limited in the number of weapons that 
they can wield in combat. Permissible weapons are: knife, 
dagger, staff, darts, and slings. 

All wizards have the ability to cast numerous offensive, 
defensive, and informative spells. The spell progression 
chart for wizards is below. Just as there are spheres of cleri- 
cal spells, there also are schools of wizard magic. There are 
eight schools, and details on them can be found in the All wizards roll d4s to determine their hit points 
Player's Handbook. when they advance from 1st through 10th levels. 

Wizards also possess the capacity to use magical items Thereafter, a wizard gains 1 hit point per level. 
such as wands, rods, staves, rings, scrolls, and potions. 
Finally, wizards can create new magical spells and items— Table 38: Wizard Experience Levels 
from scrolls and elixirs to mighty weapons. 


Em M N P 
MAUNDA ssa WwAnannn =] 

Un uu uU uU Gru Ul I O0 UI UL NN) — | 
uUruuuuugds.»uNKSNKN- | 
UruuuuuUsdsnsuxsN-—-]|! 

d» UM O4 U4 OL NJ NJ NJ — | 

WUWUN == | 


Level Wizard Hit dice (d4) 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
ee 
9 


Mage 
Ability Requirements: Intelligence 9 


Prime Requisite: Intelligence 
Allowed Races: Human, half-elf, elf 


Mages are more versatile than specialist wizards, who 
are limited to casting spells from certain schools. Mages can 
cast spells from any school of magic. Examples of mages 
from legend and literature are: Merlin, Gandalf, Medea, and 
Circe. 


solos have 40 chan poris to spend on site 
from the: list. 


( These abilities range from 5 to 15 

DEREN ee MUN DUNS ante uad 

Senier onweapon proficiencies or saved for use dur- 2,625,000 
ing the game. 3,000,000 
Access to schools: It costs 5 points per school to which | 2€ | 350,000 


the wizard has access. For example, if a wizard wanted to 
have access to six schools, the cost would be 30 character 


Character Classes 


points. Normally, wizards spend 40 points to cast spells 
from the eight standard schools: abjuration, alteration, con- 
juration/summoning, enchantment/ charm, divination, illu- 
sion/phantasm, invocation/evocation, and necromancy. 
Note that the spells that make up the optional schools of 
alchemy, geometry, and elemental magic (from the Tome 
of Magic) are generally included in the standard schools of 
magic. 

Armored wizard (15): This wizard can cast spells while 
wearing the armor of his choice. 

Automatic spells (5): When a wizard with this spell 
gains access to a new level of spells, the character auto- 
matically gains a spell of that level for the character's spell- 
book. 

Casting reduction (5): The casting time of all the 
mage's spells is reduced by 1. If a spell's original casting 
time is 1, it is not reduced. 

Combat bonus (10): A wizard with this ability uses the 
rogue THACO chart. 

Detect magic (10): Characters purchasing this ability 
can detect magic once a day for every two levels. For 
example, a 7th level mage can detect magic three times a 
day. This is in addition to any detect magic spells the mage 
might carry. The character can spot magical radiations within 
his line of sight, up to 60' away. He can determine the 
intensity of the magic—dim, faint, moderate, strong, and 
overwhelming. 

Extend duration (10): The duration of all non-instanta- 
neous spells increases by 1 round for every two experience 
levels of the wizard. For example, if a 6th level wizard casts 
a spectral hand spell, it will last 15 rounds rather than 12 
rounds. 

Hit point bonus (10): These wizards use 1d6 for deter- 
mining hit points rather than 1d4. 

Warrior hit point bonus (5): A wizard with this ability 
can enjoy the benefits of a high Constitution score as if he 
were a fighter. For example, if 
this wizard had a Constitution 
score of 18, he would gain 4 
bonus hit points a level, rather 
than 2. 

Priestly wizards (15): 
These wizards gain access to 
one sphere of priest spells 


School 
Abjuration 
Alchemy 
Alteration 
Conj./Summ. 


Races 


= 


O 


read magic twice a day. This is in addition to any read 
magic spells the mage might carry. 

Resistance to sleep and charm (5): This wizard gains a 
+1 bonus to all saving throws versus sleep and charm 
spells, if the spell or effect allows a saving throw. 

Weapon specialization (15): This wizard can specialize 
in a particular weapon. The character point cost for gaining 
proficiency and then specialization must be met in addition 
to this cost. 


Optional Restriction 


Limited magical item use (5+): A wizard with this 
restriction disdains enchanted items as a crutch for the 
weak and refuses to use certain categories of magical items. 
For each category that is barred to him, he gains 5 CPs . The 
categories are: potions, oils, and scrolls; rings, rods, staves, 
and wands, and miscellaneous magical items; and all 
weapons and armor. 


Specialist Wizards 


Specialist wizards, such as illusionists, are those who 
choose to concentrate their studies on one particular magic 
school. The 12 schools of magic are: Abjuration, Alchemy, 
Alteration, Conjuration/Summoning, Divination, Enchant- 
ment/Charm, Geometry, Illusion, Invocation/Evocation, 
Necromancy, Shadow and Song. (In addition, the Tome of 
Magic describes elemental wizards and wild mages.) For 
each school of magic, there is an opposition school or 
schools. Specialist wizards can never cast any spells from as 
opposing school. The chart that details all the requirements, 
opposition schools, races eligible for each specialization, 
and minimum ability scores follows. 


Table 39: Specialist Wizard Requirements 


Opposition schools 
Alteration & Illusion 
Illusion & Necromancy 
Abjur. & Necromancy 
Gr. Divin. & Invocation 


Divination 
Ench./Charm 
Geometry 
Illusion 
Invoc./Evoc. 
Necromancy 
Shadow 
Song 


Conj./Summ. 

Invoc. & Necromancy 
Enchantment/Charm & Illusion 
Necro., Invoc., & Abjuration 
Ench./Charm & Conj./Summ. 
Illusion & Ench./Charm 

Abjur. & Invocation/Evocation 
Divination, Invoc./Evoc., Necromancy 


and can cast them as if they 
were wizard spells. These 
characters must continue to 
observe the number of vari- 
ous level spells they can cast 
each day. 

Read magic (5): Charac- 
ters purchasing this ability 
can read magic once a day 
for every two levels. For ex- 
ample, a 4th level mage can 


xmmmmm 
mmm 


C) m S xXx Ss 


= 


bad bL GESEZGD ILE 


p 


I 
m 
X 
m 


H= Humans, 4 E=half-elves, E=elves, G=gnomes 


6l 


All specialist wizards (illusionists, enchanters, and so 
on) gain 30 character points to buy skills. The skills 
below cost 5 to 15 points each. Any remaining points 
can be spent on nonweapon proficiencies or saved for 
use during the game. 


Access to sci 5: A specialist wizard automatically has 
access to all wena of magic that are not specifically 
noted as opposition schools for his specialty. (Note that 
spells from opposition schools that happen to be included 
in alternate schools such as song magic, alchemy, or ele- 
mental magic are still not available to the specialist. Wild 
es is e only to wild mages.) 

'ored wizard (15): This wizard can cast spells while 
wening the armor of his choice. 

spel : Each time the specialist wizard is 

able to learn a new level of spells, he can select one spell 
from his specialty school to learn auto- 
matically hardens a check). 

301 ) : Specialist wiz- 
ards gain one additional spell per spell 
level. The extra spell taken must belong 
to the wizard's school of specialization. 
For example, a 5th level mage can cast 
four 1st level spells, two 2nd level 
spells, and two 3rd level spells. But a 
5th level specialist wizard can cast five 
Ist level spells, three 2nd level spells, 
and three 3rd level spells—provided 
the added spells are from his chosen 
school. 


Cast ng reductic 


andi 
Automatic 


: The casting 
time of all the wizard's geh from his 
chosen school is reduced by 2. All spells 
have a minimum cine time of 1. 
ombat bonus : A wizard with 
this ability uses the priest THACO chart. 
): Characters pur- 
chasing this ability € can detect magic 
once a day for every three levels. For 
example, a 7th level mage can detect 
magic twice a day. This is in addition to 
any detect magic spells the mage 
might memorize. The character can 
spot magical radiations within his line 
of sight, up to 60' away. He can deter- 
mine the intensity of the magic—dim, 
faint, moderate, strong, and over- 
priiis 
-xtend duratio ): The duration 
of all non- instantaneous spells from 
the wizard's chosen school increases 
by 1 round for every experience level 
of the caster. For example, if a 6th level 


necromancer casts a spectral hand spell, it will last 18 
founds reiner than 4 rounds. 
nten i : If a specialist wizard casts a spell 
Kom his RAES Shosi the targets of that spell suffer a —1 
saving NOW penny 
ning bonus (5): A +15% bonus when attempting 
to learn new spells belonging the wizard's school of spe- 
cialization. 
components (10): The ability to designate one spe- 
cialty- -school spell per hori level as a spell that does not 
require material components. For example, a 3rd-level spe- 
cialist may have a total of three spells in his spellbook that 
do not ——— material components. 
| ): The reach of all ranged spells (spells 
with a range atie ‘than O, self, or touch) from the wizard's 
chosen school is increased by 25%. For example, the 1st 
level wizard spell charm person has a range of 120 yards. 
That range is increased to 150 yards. 


Character Classes 


Read magic (5): Characters purchasing this ability can 
read magic once a day for every two levels. For example, a 
4th level mage can read magic twice a day. This is in addi- 
tion to any read magic spells the mage might memorize. 

Research bonus (5): When attempting to research and 
create a new spell of his specialized school, treat the spell 
as one level lower than its actual level. 

Saving throw bonus (5): +1 bonus on saving throws 
vs. spells cast at them from their school of specialization. 
This bonus can be purchased several times with a cumula- 
tive effect. 


Optional Restrictions 


Learning penalty (5): A specialist wizard with this 
restriction suffers a penalty of —159/ to all learn spell rolls 
outside his own specialty. 

Limited magical item use (5+): A wizard with this 
restriction disdains enchanted items as a crutch for the 
weak and refuses to use certain categories of magical 
items. For each category that is barred to him, he gains 5 
CPs. The categories are: potions, oils, and scrolls; rings, 
rods, staves, and wands, and miscellaneous magical items; 
and all weapons and armor. 

More opposition schools (5+): A specialist wizard 
with this restriction may choose to take additional oppos- 
ing schools, gaining 5 character points for each additional 
school in opposition to his specialty. Only standard schools 
(i.e., those described in the Player's Handbook) can be 
selected as additional opposition schools. 


All the rules from the Play- 
er's Handbook and the 
DUNGEON Master Guide still 
apply to multi-classed and 


Multi-classed and 
Dual-classed 


Characters dual-classed characters. 
However, character points 
can enhance these divided heroes. 
Multi-classed DCs 


Multi-classed characters are demihumans with two pro- 
fessions,—fighter/thief, cleric/wizard, thief/wizard/fighter, 
etc. Weapon and nonweapon proficiencies are purchased 
with the classes in mind and through spending character 
points. When character points are awarded for advancing 
levels, the player must divide these points by the number 
of classes. For example, if a fighter/thief advances a level 
as a fighter, he is awarded half the number of points a sin- 
gle-classed character gains by advancing—1 14 points 
instead of 3. However, if that fighter/thief advanced a level 
in both classes, he would gain the same amount of char- 
acter points as a single-classed character—3 (or 4, or 5, 
depending on the campaign). 


63 


Dual-classed DCs 


Dual-classed characters are humans who change their 
current classes and adopt new professions. For example, a 
5th level fighter might put away his sword and become a 
Ist level wizard. When he—and any other character— 
changes professions, any unspent character points are lost. 
The 1st level wizard spends his new character point allot- 
ment normally, as if he were adventuring from scratch. 
When the wizard's new level exceeds that of his first class, 
he can freely use the abilities of both classes—following all 
the normal game rules for such a character. 


" PLAvER's OPTION rules gives 
Non Adventurers DMs the opportunity to 
expand nonplayer characters. No longer will every black- 
smith, jeweler, or horse-trainer have a THACO of 20 and be 
limited to 1d6 hit points. A DM's cast of regularly-appearing 
NPCs can have more substance. 


NPC Tiers 


Important NPCs should be created using the Praves's 
Option rules. This includes generating the six ability 
scores, determining the 12 subability scores, and deciding 
the race. Character points should be allotted for weapon 
and nonweapon proficiencies. NPCs who are not adven- 
turers should not be awarded class-based character 
points. Instead, the DM should determine how experi- 
enced the NPCs are. Three levels of expertise are defined 
below. 

Apprentice: These NPCs likely are young people who 
have not yet mastered their trade. Roll 1d6--2 to deter- 
mine their hit points (plus or minus any Constitution 
modifiers that apply). Give these NPCs 10 character 
points to purchase proficiencies, traits, and disadvantages. 
Any character points unspent from the purchase of racial 
abilities also may spent in this way. 

Skilled: These NPCs tend to be young to middle-aged 
adults. Roll 1d8--4 to determine their hit points and add 
any Constitution bonus. Skilled NPCs also 15 character 
points to spend, plus any unspent from the purchase of 
racial abilities. 

Master: NPCs such as these have been at their profes- 
sion a number of years. Masters have 20 character points, 
plus any unspent from the purchase of racial abilities. 
Master NPCs can be quite hardy. Roll 2d6+6 to deter- 
mine their hit points. Add any Constitution bonus. 

If DMs advance an important NPC from one level to 
the next, simply supply the NPC with an additional 5 char- 
acter points and add 2 to 6 to the NPC's hit point total. 
DMs can expand this system if they wish, creating even 
more experienced NPCs. 


Chapter 5: 
arn Kits 


& 


Many AD&D game players are familiar with the character kits in the Player's 
Handbook Rules Supplement series. Player's OrmoN kits are different. They are 
packages of descriptions, proficiencies, benefits, and hindrances that help flesh 
out characters. In short, the kits give adventurers background and depth. 

PravER's OPTION kits are available to more characters than previouly published 
kits are. No longer are fighters and thieves the only ones who can become 
swashbucklers. And rogues aren't the only characters who can excel as acrobats. 
With some exceptions, a character of any class can choose any kit. Many PraveR's 
Option kits are linked to the social ranks system presented below. 

Selecting a character kit is free—it has no character point cost. However, it car- 
ries a character point benefit. A character with a kit can purchase any of the rec- 
ommended weapon and nonweapon proficiencies listed for 1 character point 
less than the cost detailed in the proficiency section. 


Character Kits 


, Rogues, fighters, wizards, and 
The Social priests can come from any back- 
Ranks System ground—from being the 10th son 

in a peasant family to the first- 
born of a noble house. As such, they can be of any social 
rank. 

If a campaign is set in a large kingdom's capital, a char- 
acter with the noble kit could be a member of one of the 
nation's rich, powerful families—perhaps even the favored 
offspring of the rulers. His relatives, however, might not be 
too happy that he spends so much time knee-deep in the 
filthy muck of dungeons, hacking atrocious beasts to bits 
for a living. That is hardly a suitable "noble" image. 
Another character might have the barbarian kit, and the 
player must decide how his rough and rugged fur-clad 
character came to be in a large city at the time the cam- 
paign starts. 

A character's initial social rank should not limit his 
advancement in society. A peasant hero might always feel 
uncomfortable when standing before his king. But if his 
heroic deeds warrant such an appearance, he should be 
granted the opportunity. The only limit on how high a char- 
acter can rise in society—and in social rank—is set by his 
actions. 

Social rank is tied to many character kits. Players can take 
three approaches to selecting a kit. A player can roll at ran- 
dom to determine his character's kit; simply pick a kit, then 
roll on the social rank table underneath that kit; or, he can 
roll on the social rank table below and see what kit possibil- 
ities open up for his character. 

To determine social rank first, roll 2d6 on the chart 
below. Samples of people who might fit into various classes 
follow. Some DMs might allow players to choose a rank that 
fits their character concept. 


Table 40: Social Ranks Table 
2d6 roll Social rank 
2-3 Lower class 
4—7 Lower middle class 
8-10 Upper middle class 
11-12 Upper class 


Lower class: Freed slaves, vagabonds, indentured ser- 
vants, criminals, migrant laborers, beggars, herdsmen, ped- 
dlers, actors, men-at-arms, manual laborers, tradesmen, 
money-changers, fishermen, petty officers, freemen, peas- 
ants, messengers. 

Lower middle class: Artisans, bakers, petty merchants, 
junior officers, scribes, brewers, cobblers, landless knights, 
minor landowners, merchants, weavers, farmers, minstrels, 
gardeners, miners, dockhands, sailors, blacksmiths, shop 
owners, bodyguards, sculptors, healers, gamblers, tailors, 
animal trainers, carpenters, leather workers, stonemasons. 

Upper middle class: Local officials, jewelers, sages, 
senior officers, minor nobles (bannerets, barons) guild 


masters, herbalists, historians, armorers, wealthy mer- 
chants, astronomers, major landowners, navigators, 
weaponsmiths, composers, scholars, minor military com- 
manders, nobles (earls), ship captains, architects, engi- 
neers, shipwrights. 

Upper class: Great landowners, generals, marshals, 
senior officials, knights, viziers, nobles (counts, dukes), roy- 
alty, diplomats, financiers. 


Kit 8 There are a few rules for players to follow when 
selecting character kits. 

A player may not choose a kit that is barred to his char- 
acter's class or race. In the case of multi-classed characters, 
if the kit is barred to any of the character's classes, he may 
not select that kit. 

A player can have only one kit per character, and the 
selection must be made during character creation. The only 
exception is if these rules are added to an already existing 
AD&D game campaign. In this case, the DM and players can 
agree on an appropriate kit for each character. 

Once a kit is chosen, the player cannot later change it. 
For example, if a character has the peasant hero kit, and 
over the course of a long, successful campaign he becomes 
the ruler of his homeland, he does not now assume the 
noble kit. He remains a peasant hero. Characters cannot 
change their pasts. 

Remember, a character with a kit can purchase any of 
the recommended weapon and nonweapon proficiencies 
(but not recommended traits) listed for 1 character point 
less than the cost detailed in the proficiency section. 

In general, any of the following kits can be used with any 
character class. Some combinations, such as paladin/thug 
are not allowed. Let common sense, the campaign setting, 


Table 41: Character Kit Table 
Roll percentile dice to determine an adventurer's 
kit. 


01-035 A = 49-51 Outlaw 
6 | 52-55 . Remy 
Animal Master 56-58 Pirate 
Assassin 59-62  Pugilist 


Barbarian 63—65 Rider 


80-83 Soldier 
84-86  Smuggler 
87-89 ED, 


Gladiator 
Jester 
. Mariner 


; and the DM serve as guides. These kits also can apply to Hindrances: Any acrobat who wears armor heavier than 


the NPCs inhabiting a DM's campaign. If a player wants to 
randomly select a kit, he can use the following table. The 
table also can be used to generate NPCs. 


An acrobat is a general term for performers 
Acrobat of amazing physical feats. These include 
jugglers, tumblers, jesters, and tightrope-walkers. Whatever 
their specialty, these characters make a living by entertaining 
others. Acrobats often travel in groups or with circuses or car- 
nivals. These shows wander from town to town and castle to 
castle. All levels of society wish to be entertained. As such, 
successful acrobats find themselves in much demand. 

A life on the road is not an easy one, however, and many 
acrobats often turn to other avenues to make money. Their 
dexterous skills make them valuable adventurers, especially 
if some larceny or petty theft is involved. 

Social ranks: Acrobats most often occupy the middle 
tier of a society. Most lower-ranked members of a society 
have not the time to develop skills, like those of the acro- 
bat. They must concentrate on putting food on the table. 
Roll 2d6 to determine an acrobat's social rank at the cam- 


paign's beginning. 


2d6 roll Social rank 
2-8 Lower Middle Class 
9-12 Upper Middle Class 


Requirements: To take this kit, a character must have a 
minimum Dexterity/Balance of 14 and a minimum 
Strength/Stamina of 12. The acrobat kit is barred to half- 
ogres, as well as any optional PC race that is size large 
(restriction z from the Other Races section of Chapter 
Three). 

Weapon proficiencies: Small, light weapons are pre- 
ferred by acrobats, as bulky or heavy ones would hinder 
their agile maneuvers. Suggested weapons include the 
knife, dagger, short sword, club, and hand axe. Thrown 
weapons and those with long hafts or handles also are 
common choices among acrobats, as the weapons can be 
used to juggle or pole-vault. These weapons include: quar- 
terstaff, dart, javelin, and spear. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Disguise, 
juggling, jumping, musical instrument, tightrope-walking, 
and tumbling. 

Equipment: Acrobats prefer to be lightly armed and 
armored to allow for the fullest range of movement. 

Recommended traits: Ambidexterity, double-jointed, 
glibness. 

Benefits: If unarmored, acrobats receive a +2 bonus to 
tumbling, tightrope-walking, and jumping proficiency 
checks. In addition, they gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class 
versus hurled missile weapons—provided they have room 
to dodge the attack and are not otherwise prevented from 
moving freely. 


studded leather (AC 7) suffers a —1 penalty to tumbling, 
tightrope-walking, and jumping proficiency checks per point 
of armor class better than AC 7. For example, an acrobat 
wearing chain mail-AC5—~suffers a —2 penalty. Note that 
Dexterity or magical bonuses to Armor Class do not 
increase this penalty. An acrobat wearing studded leather 
armor, a ring of protection +2, and having a 15 Dexterity 
would incur no penalty despite his AC 4 rating. 

Wealth: Acrobats receive the normal amount of starting 
cash appropriate to their class. 


In Amazon cultures, the women are the 
Amazon leaders, rulers, generals, and warriors, 
while the men are the cooks, cleaners, homemakers, and 
simple laborers—if not the outright slaves or property of 
the women. Such matriarchal societies may be large or 
small, savage or friendly. Amazon women can be seen as 
brusque, rude, haughty, or domineering by those from 
male-dominated cultures. The Amazons of legend were 
fierce combatants and famous riders and breeders of 
magnificent horses. As such, many Amazons prefer light 
armor, weapons, and equipment. 

Social ranks: Amazon women can come from any eco- 
nomic background. Roll 2d6 to determine the rank of an 
Amazon female. Males are considered lower class. 


2d6 roll Social rank 

2 Lower class 
3-5 Lower middle class 
6-10 Upper middle class 

11-12 Upper class 


Requirements: Female characters of any demihuman or 
humanoid race can choose this kit. 

Weapon proficiencies: Amazons can choose from: 
battle axe, bow (any), club, dagger, hand or throwing axe, 
javelin, knife, lance, spear, staff, sword (any). Men are 
allowed only one initial weapon proficiency, and it must be 
from the above list. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Riding 
(land-based), rope use, engineering, navigation, endurance, 
animal training, animal handling, armorer, bowyer/fletcher, 
hunting, running, set snares, survival, tracking. 

Equipment: Amazons can begin with only the following 
types of armor: shield, leather, padded, studded leather, scale 
mail, hide, banded mail, or bronze plate mail. Better armor 
can be had once a character has ventured to other cities. 

Recommended traits: Allure, animal empathy, keen 
senses, obscure knowledge. 

Benefits: Amazons are fierce, eager competitors. Many 
male opponents underestimate them. As a result, in any 
melee combat where an Amazon is fighting a male oppo- 
nent, the Amazon gains a +2 bonus to her first attack and 
damage roll. Thereafter combat is run normally. 


Character Kits 


Hindrances: Amazons suffer a —2 reaction roll penalty 
from NPCs of male-dominated societies. Over time, this 
penalty should be reduced or eliminated if the NPCs 
become accustomed to the strong-willed ways of the 
Amazon. 

Wealth: Amazons begin the game with the amount of 
money appropriate to their classes. 


Ani mal Animal masters have an affinity with nature's 
creatures. They can be trainers, keepers, or 
Master guardians of animals. Good-aligned animal 
masters protect and care for animals, evil 
ones use simple creatures to their own advantage. Many 
animal masters spend much of their time outside with their 
furred, feathered, or scaled friends. Animal masters could 
include rangers, huntsmen, falconers, and druids. 
Social ranks: Animal masters tend to be earthy folks 
from the lower echelons of a community. Roll 2d6 to deter- 
mine an animal master's rank. 


2d6 roll Social rank 

2-5 Lower Class 
6-11 Lower Middle Class 
12 Upper Middle Class 


Requirements: To take this kit, a character must have a 
minimum Constitution/Fitness of 10 and a minimum Wis- 
dom/Intuition of 12. This kit is open to all player character 
races. 

Weapon proficiencies: Animal masters can use any 
weapon appropriate to their class. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Animal 
lore, survival, agriculture, animal training, animal handling, 
fire-building, fishing, herbalism, hunting, mountaineering, 
riding (any), swimming, set snares, tracking. 

Equipment: Standard for the character's class. 

Recommended traits: Animal empathy, empathy, cli- 
mate sense. 

Benefits: When this kit is chosen, the player and DM 
must determine a suitable animal companion for the char- 
acter. There are several factors to consider: 1) the climate 
and terrain of the animal master's homeland, where he 
acquired the companion; 2) the character's alignment, as 
companions are attracted only to animal masters of like 
demeanor; 3) the character's race (dwarves and gnomes 
might attract burrowing or underground creatures, while 
elves would attract forest creatures) and; 4) the availability 
of compatible creatures. All animal companions should be 
size S (small). An animal companion is similar to a wizard's 
familiar in that it has a bond with the animal master. The 
master can issue it simple verbal commands, and the ani- 
mal can convey its needs and emotions. 

After making a list of available and compatible crea- 
tures, the player should choose one creature as a com- 
panion. DMs might prefer the animal to be selected ran- 


61 


domly. If this is the case, roll 1d20 and consult the chart 
below. 


Table 42: Animal Companions 

Roll Companion Roll Companion 
1 Badger 11 Raccoon 
2 Dog 12 Opossum 
3 Wolf 13 Fox 
4 Snake 14 Skunk 
5 Brush rat 15 Cat 
6 Owl 16 Falcon 
7 Ferret 17 Monkey 
8 Raven 18 Squirrel 
9 Otter 19 Hawk 
l0 Pig 20 Woodchuck 


Hindrances: The animal master must protect his com- 
panion, not send it into dangerous areas to spring hidden 
traps. Should an animal master lose his companion through 
carelessness or by capriciously placing the animal in danger, 
he loses 10% of his current experience point total, and he 
loses his affinity to that species. No other creature of that 
type will serve as a companion for that animal master. No 
penalties are assessed if the animal dies through natural 
causes, accidentally, or while following orders of a reason- 
able nature. (However, it's reasonable for animals with 
combat skills to defend their masters.) 

Wealth: Standard as per the character's class. 


:« This kit is intended for non-good aligned 
Assassin characters, as the act of killing for pay can- 
not be justified as a good act. In any society there exists an 
element that wishes to dispose of rivals, business competi- 
tors, and any others deemed to be in the way. It is to this ele- 
ment that the assassin, a hired killer, caters. Unlike simple 
warriors or soldiers, the assassin relies on anonymity and sur- 
prise to earn his living. A successful assassin may not even 
be seen by his target. Slipping out of the darkness or a crowd 
of friends, the assassin does his dark deed and disappears. 

Social ranks: Assassins tend to be well-off, as their ser- 
vices are expensive. Further, they often are educated, which 
helps them fit into different segments of society to stalk 
their prey. Roll 2d6 to determine an assassin's rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-3 Lower Class 
4—6 Lower Middle Class 
7-11 Upper Middle Class 
12 Upper Class 


Requirements: To take this kit, a character must have a 
minimum Intelligence/Reason of 10 and a minimum Wis- 
dom/Willpower of 12. The assassin kit is barred to paladins, 
rangers, and druids. This kit is open to all player character 
races, 


3 Weapon proficiencies: An assassin can use any weap- Weapon proficiencies: Barbarians prefer simple, large, 


on allowed to his class. However, many assassins have one 
weapon with which they prefer to perform their acts of mur- 
der. As he grows more notorious, evidence of a particular 
weapon becomes the assassin's calling card. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Etiquette, 
riding (any), healing, disguise, forgery, modern languages, 
tracking, reading lips. If the DM allows poison, the assassin 
must have the herbalism proficiency to use various toxins. 
Herbalism gives the character the knowledge to use natural 
plants and herbs to produce a variety of poultices, salves, 
and toxic compounds. Poison strengths and rules are listed 
in the DuNGEON MASTER Guide. 

Equipment: An assassin must be able to move quickly 
and quietly, and travel as lightly as possible. Light armor and 
small, easily concealed weapons are common accouter- 
ments. 

Recommended traits: Alertness, ambidexterity, glib- 
ness, precise memory. 

Benefits: The assassin's knowledge of poisons allows 
him a 5% chance per level to identify toxic substances. If 
the assassin has the herbalism proficiency, a +10% bonus 
is added to the final number. The means of identifying poi- 
sons include sight, smell, taste, or by a victim's symptoms. 
An assassin with the healing proficiency can treat poison 
victims with a +1 bonus to his proficiency check. 

Hindrances: Assassins suffer a —4 reaction roll penalty 
whenever they encounter someone who knows their pro- 
fession. 

Wealth: Assassins receive 150% of the amount listed 
for their chosen class. 


: The barbarian is perhaps the most 
Barbarian common fantasy-fiction archetype. 


Powerfully built, immensely strong, and clad in furs and 
skins, the barbarian often is seen as a muscle-bound 
bully. However, barbarians are more than that. They arrive 
in the campaign's setting from some distant, primitive 
land where people must still fight the environment at 
every turn just to survive. Playing a barbarian is all about 
working the mystique of a primitive culture into a more 
“civilized” world. 

Social ranks: Barbarians might be wealthy in their own 
villages, but they won't be high on the social or economical 
ladder of the civilized community they are now a part of. 
Roll 2d6 to determine the barbarian's rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-8 Lower Class 
9-12 Lower Middle Class 


Requirements: Barbarians must have minimum Strength/ 
Stamina and Constitution/Health scores of 13. The barbar- 
ian kit is barred to paladins, clerics, and bards. This kit is 
open to all player character races. 


and dependable weapons. Suggested weapons include: 
axe (all), sword (all), club, dagger, knife, war hammer, 
mace, sling, spear, javelin, long bow, and quarterstaff. The 
following weapons are likely inappropriate for barbarians—at 
least until they are immersed in a new culture—crossbow 
(all), polearms (all), flail (all), lances (all). 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Endurance, 
animal handling, animal training, bowyer/fletcher, fire-build- 
ing, fishing, riding (land-based), hunting, mountaineering, 
running, survival, tracking. 

Equipment: A barbarian cannot initially purchase armor 
heavier than splint mail, banded mail, or bronze plate mail. 
Of course, once exposed to superior forms of armor in the 
campaign, the barbarian may choose to purchase other 
armor types. 

Recommended traits: Alertness, direction sense, im- 
munities, keen senses, light sleeper, weather sense. 

Benefits/Hindrances: Barbarians are intense, and NPCs 
tend to have very strong reactions to them. People either 
are drawn by the barbarian's animal magnetism or repulsed 
by his primitive qualities. This effect comes into play when 
NPCs meet barbarians for the first time. If the NPC's reac- 
tion roll result is 8 or less, an additional —2 bonus is applied 
to the result. For example, if the character is acting indiffer- 
ently toward a shopkeeper and the shopkeeper's reaction 
result is a 7, the shopkeeper is indifferent. However, since 
the character is a barbarian, the —2 bonus applies, lowering 
the shopkeeper's result to a 5—a friendly response. The 
shopkeeper has been won over by the barbarian's pres- 
ence. However, if the shopkeeper's reaction roll was a 14 or 
higher, the modifier becomes a +2 penalty, resulting in a 
16—threatening—score. For more information on reaction 
results, see the DuvcEoN Master Guide. 

Wealth: A barbarian begins with the standard amount of 
money for his class, but all of it must be spent before play 
begins. The DM might allow the Barbarian to retain a few 
silver pieces or a handful of coppers, but not much more. 


Beggars earn a living off the generosity of 
Beggar others. They are a raggedy lot who make 


others pity them or who deceive others into giving them 
money. A beggar might dress in rags and huddle on a street 
corner, calling out to strangers for coppers so he can buy 
food. Perhaps he pretends to be maimed, old, or senile, 
and begs coins from those more fortunate. Some beg- 
gars might actually be down on their luck and in need of a 
generous handout. But most of them are capable of work- 
ing. A few have begging perfected to a fine art. These are 
swindlers who create elaborate schemes to separate the 
wealthy from their money. Swindlers might coerce busi- 
nessmen to invest in a nonexistent company, con lords and 
ladies into betting on imaginary horse races, and romance 
people into marriages that leaves the marks copperless and 
abandoned. Beggars adventure to get out of town if city 


Character Kits 


guards are giving them too much trouble or if they want to 
score treasure 

Social ranks: Beggars usually occupy the lower tier of 
society. Roll 2d6 to determine his social rank at the begin- 
ning of the campaign. 


2d6 roll Social rank 
2-7 Lower Class 
8-12 Lower Middle Class 


Requirements: Beggars must be chaotic in alignment 
and have a Charisma/Leadership score of at least 10. This 
kit is barred to all optional races except kobolds, goblins, 
and mongrelmen, as well as paladins, rangers, druids, and 
wizards of all types. 

Weapon proficiencies: Beggars prefer small weapons 
that can be concealed. That way they look defenseless. 
These weapons include daggers, knives, saps, and slings. 


However, when adventuring they use any weapons allowed 
their character class. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Disguise, 
forgery, gaming, ventriloquism, seamstress/tailor. 

Equipment: While begging, these characters dress in 
rags or whatever other clothing is appropriate to their scam. 
However, when adventuring they don the best armor and 
weapons they own. 

Recommended traits: Glibness, impersonation, inher- 
ent immunity to cold, inherent immunity to heat. 

Benefits: Beggars receive one free nonweapon profi- 
ciency at the time of character creation—if the proficiency 
comes from the above recommended list. 

Hindrances: These characters are not accepted into 
upper middle class and upper class social circles—at least in 
the community in which the beggar is plying his trade. This 
equates to a —4 reaction roll penalty if the beggar is trying to 
socialize with the upper crust. 

Wealth: Beggars begin with the nor- 
mal starting gold for their character 
class. 


3 This kit is appropriate 
Cavalier only for good-aligned 


characters, as cavaliers are of brave 
heart and honorable bearing. They are 
the devoted heroes of the realm. War- 
riors, wizards, clerics, and even rogues 
who love their country, their sovereign, 
and their people can be cavaliers. Cava- 
liers are the noblest of nobles, but they 
do not use their positions in society 
simply to further their own ends. They 
strive to aid the less fortunate, protect 
their ruler, and save their country— 
whenever the need arises. Cavaliers 
can be independent, or they might be 
employed as agents of the state, per- 
haps taking orders from the king or 
queen. 

Social ranks: Though anyone with 
the right intentions and determination 
can be a cavalier, it is more likely these 
individuals come from the higher eche- 
lons of a community. Roll 2d6 to deter- 
mine a cavalier's rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2 Lower Class 
3 Lower Middle Class 
4-7 Upper Middle Class 
8-12 Upper Class 


Requirements: Cavaliers must have 
a minimum score of 13 in their class's 


; prime requisite. Also, all cavaliers must 


+ 


a minimum Charisma/Leadership of 
14. Cavaliers can be humans, elves, 
half-elves, or dwarves; this kit is barred 
to rangers, thieves, druids, and bards. 

Weapon proficiencies: Cavaliers 
can choose any weapons allowable by 
their class. Swords and lances are es- 
pecially appropriate for warrior cava- 
liers, as they are suitably noble weap- 
ons for cavaliers to carry. 

Recommended nonweapon profi- 
ciencies: Etiquette, riding (any), her- 
aldry, history (local or ancient), lan- 
guages (modern or ancient), animal 
handling, dancing, reading/writing, 
artistic ability, and gaming. 

Equipment: Cavaliers can equip 
themselves how they choose. How- 
ever, a cavalier must purchase a mount 
as soon as he can afford one. Not only 
does a handsome mount increase the 
cavalier's noble bearing, one will like- 
ly come in very handy on his many 
travels. 

Recommended traits: Allure, artis- 
tic ability, glibness, lucky, music/sing- 
ing, or music/instrument. 

Benefits: So good-hearted and 
strong-willed is the cavalier that he 
gains a +2 saving throw bonus against 
all mind-affecting magics. Such mag- 
ics include, but are not necessarily 
limited to: charm person, friends, hyp- 
notism, sleep, irritation, ray of enfee- 
blement, fear, confusion, geas, com- 
mand, enthrall, cloak of bravery, and 
symbol. 

Hindrances: Most cavaliers have a 
strong sense of honor, meaning they 
will only fight fairly and chivalrously. 
For example, during a combat on a 
high cliff-top, the cavalier's foe might 
slip over the edge and manage to 
catch onto a handhold. The cavalier 
could not leave the miscreant to that 
fate, nor would he loosen his foe's 
grip on the cliff. Rather, the cavalier 
would help the foe up, and then con- 
tinue the combat. Neither would a 
cavalier kill any enemy no longer capa- 
ble of self defense or one who had 
surrendered in good faith. Because of 
this code, a cavalier can be difficult to 


play properly. 


Character Kits 


Wealth: Unless the cavalier comes from the lower class, 
he begins with 150% of the starting cash for his profession. 
If he comes from the lower class, he begins with the normal 
starting cash. 


: In any campaign that involves govern- 
Diplomat ment and politics, diplomats and other 
courtiers are bound to appear. Diplomats can bring impor- 
tant messages to neighboring countries. They might—as 
adventurers—explore uncharted regions and act as emis- 
saries. Or they could be attached to a foreign court as 
their lord's representative, advising the foreign ruler of the 
attitudes and policies of the diplomat's homeland. Diplo- 
mats also act as their rulers’ eyes and ears in a distant 
court. 

Social ranks: Diplomats are groomed from the higher 
stations in society. Roll 2d6 to determine their rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-6 Upper Middle Class 
7-12 Upper Class 


Requirements: A diplomat must have a minimum 
Intelligence/Knowledge score of 10 and minimum Wis- 
dom/Intuition and Charisma/Appearance scores of 12. 
The diplomat kit is barred to half-orcs, half-ogres, and any 
of the optional races except centaurs, githzerai, satyrs, and 
swanmays. 

Weapon proficiencies: A diplomat can wield any 
weapons that fit his character class. However, since a 
diplomat is usually a peaceful individual, if he wears heavy 
armor and carries lots of weapons he might be viewed 
suspiciously. Diplomats are at their best appearing inof- 
fensive. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Dancing, 
etiquette, heraldry, history (any), languages (any, numer- 
ous preferred), reading lips, and riding (any). 

Equipment: A diplomat can equip himself however he 
desires. However, his possessions should be of superior 
quality and appearance. 

Recommended traits: Allure, alertness, artistic ability, 
glibness, music (any), obscure knowledge, and precise 
memory. 

Benefits: Since the diplomat's nature is to put others at 
ease, he receives a +2 bonus to all reaction rolls. 

Hindrances: Diplomats are often far from home, 
essentially at the mercy of a foreign ruler. If the diplomat 
delivers a message that the ruler doesn't appreciate, the 
ruler may take out his anger on the messenger. During 
wartime, diplomats live especially dangerous lives, as they 
frequently must travel across enemy lines and battlefields 
to perform their duties. 

Wealth: Diplomats begin with double the amount of 
gold allotted to their class. 


qi 


Explorers live to see what's over the next 
Explorer mountain or to sail beyond the countries 
at the edge of a map. They yearn to discover new places, 
people, and wonders. And their wanderlust drives them 
ever on. They make perfect adventurers, never staying in 
one town for more than a few days or weeks. And they 
are always eager to explore ruins, abandoned temples, 
and cave complexes. Many explorers are demihumans 
who, not fitting into human-dominated towns, turned to 
traveling. Others are half-breeds, such as half-elves, half- 
orcs, and half-ogres, who found more acceptance in the 
wilderness than in either of their parent's communities. 
Of course, there are human explorers, too, these leaving 
their homes simply because they had to know what's out 
there. 
Social ranks: Explorers come from all walks of life. Roll 
2d6 to determine social rank at the beginning of the cam- 


paign. 


2d6 roll Social rank 

2-3 Lower Class 
4-6 Lower Middle Class 
7-10 Upper Middle Class 

11-12 Upper Class 


Requirements: Explorers must have a minimum of 12 
for Wisdom/ Willpower and Intelligence/Knowledge 
scores. This kit is open to all player character races and 
classes. 

Weapon proficiencies: These characters can select 
any weapon proficiencies allowed their adventuring 
classes. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Direction 
sense, fire-building, fishing, survival, weather sense, sea- 
manship, local history, ancient history, reading/writing. 

Equipment: Explorers are practical and try to carry all 
of their arms, armor, and belongings with them. They prize 
extra-dimensional spaces and magical carts and boxes 
such as: bags of holding, Heward's handy haversacks, 
quivers of Ehlonna, portable holes, mouse carts, flat- 
boxes, and more. 

Recommended traits: Internal compass, inherent 
immunity to cold, inherent immunity to heat, keen eye- 
sight, keen hearing, precise memory. 

Benefits: Explorers gain the survival nonweapon profi- 
ciency at no cost, and they can choose any two terrain 
types to apply it to. Possible terrains are: arctic, woodland, 
desert, steppe, mountain, and tropical. 

Hindrances: These characters cannot stay in one place 
too long, calling no place home unless "home" is a ship or 
a covered wagon. Therefore, explorers cannot spend more 
than a few weeks at best in any given city or keep. 

Wealth: Explorers begin with the maximum amount of 
gold allowed their character class. 


: Gladiators are trained to fight people and 
Gladiator creatures for others’ entertainment. Most 


are flashy, outlandish showmen whose battle tactics often 
cater to the crowd first, their survival second. Gladiators can 
be slaves who are forced to fight, or they can be free men 
who choose to make a living this way. If this kit is used in a 
campaign, there must either be a culture that publicly allows 
this activity, or else the fights might be illegal—held in secret 
places and backed by society's shady element. Legal or not, 
the gladiator definitely makes his living in an urban setting. If 
the campaign doesn't revolve around, or at least contain, a 
sizable city, this kit could be inappropriate. 

Social ranks: Gladiators can come from almost any eco- 
nomic background, though it is more likely they come from 
the lower rungs of the community. Roll 2d6 to determine 
the rank of a gladiator. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-6 Lower Class 
7-10 Lower Middle Class 
11-12 Upper Middle Class 


Requirements: A gladiator must 
have Strength/Muscle and Constitu- 
tion/Fitness scores of 13 or greater. 
This kit is barred to satyrs and swan- 
mays. In addition, paladins, rangers, 
wizards, thieves, and bards may not 
choose this kit. 

Weapon profici ncies: Only melee 
and hurled missile weapons—no bows, 
slings, etc.—can be used by such a char- 
acter, as gladiatorial combats are not 
about firing arrows at one another. A 
gladiator who kills an opponent without 
endangering his own life in mortal com- 
bat is not much of a showman. Possible 
gladiator weapons include: daggers, 
swords (all, but short swords are most 
common), scimitars, spears, tridents, 
polearms (all), war hammers, maces 
(all), scourges, nets, and whips. 


imend 


D amaai 
+ 


necon ended nonweapon proti- 
ciencies: Blind-fighting, endurance, 
gaming, jumping, tumbling, armorer, 
weaponsmithing, healing, and rope use. 

Equipment: Gladiators can have 
whatever weapons fit their classes. 
However, they are initially limited in 
armor types. Gladiators cannot begin 
with anything greater than studded 
leather. 

Recommended traits: Fast healer, 
immunities, keen senses, light sleeper, 
lucky. 


Benefits: Gladiators enjoy a +1 bonus on attack rolls 
with one particular melee weapon. For example, a gladiator 
could choose a +1 attack bonus with the short sword. 

Hindrances: As gladiators are trained to make combats 
last a long while and to play to any crowd, they suffer a +1 
penalty to their initiative rolls. They take this time to show 
off, display their weapon prowess, or bait their opponent. 

Wealth: Standard as per the character's class. 


Jester Comedians, clowns, jokesters, and tricksters— 

these make up the jester kit, and those individ- 
uals who fit this kit live to make others laugh. Jesters strive to 
perfect their humor—whether it be slapstick, dark comedy, or 
simple ribald jokes. Some dress in gaudy costumes and 
adorn themselves with bells and shiny buttons. Others dress 
like the common man and blend in with the crowd. They 
spend their nights in kings’ courts, at nobles’ parties, or in 
crowded taverns, and they tailor their humor to their audi- 


Character Kits 


ence. They adventure to gain wealth and friends—and to 
acquire material for their next performances. The most noted 
jesters are gnomes because of their exaggerated visages. 
Social ranks: Jesters are found at every level in society, 
though the majority of them come from the middle class. 
Roll 2d6 to determine social rank at the beginning of the 


campaign. 


2d6 roll Social rank 
2 Lower Class 
3-7 Lower Middle Class 
8-11 Upper Middle Class 
12 Upper Class 


Requirements: Jesters must have a minimum Intelli- 
gence/Reason of 12 and a minimum Charisma/Leadership 
of 13. Dwarves, elves, and any of the optional PC races ex- 
cept for kobolds or goblins may not choose this kit. Only 
bards and thieves may choose this kit. 

Weapon proficiencies: These characters can select any 
weapon proficiencies allowed their adventuring classes. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Singing, 
etiquette, modern languages, reading/writing, ventrilo- 
quism, juggling, disguise, jumping. 

Equipment: While adventuring, jesters outfit themselves 
with weapons and armor allowed their character class. 
However, they are ever on the lookout for unusual clothes, 
props, noise-makers, and accouterments that can be used 
in their act. 

Recommended traits: Precise memory, obscure knowl- 
edge, lucky, keen hearing, empathy. 

Benefits: Jesters enjoy a +1 bonus to Charisma when 
they are working an audience. 

Hindrances: Jesters are often not taken seriously. When 
trying to conduct business deals or when socializing, NPCs 
have a —1 reaction roll penalty toward them. 

Wealth: Jesters begin with the normal amount of gold 
allowed their character class. 


: Mariners are devoted to the sea. They may 
Mariner be young, old, poor or wealthy enough to 
own the ship they sail. They travel the world's oceans 
because they love it. They live for trading, exploring, and dis- 
covering new lands. 

Social ranks: Mariners tend to be educated individuals 
from families with a reasonable amount of gold. Roll 2d6 to 
determine the rank of a mariner. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-6 Lower Middle Class 
7-10 Upper Middle Class 
11-12 Upper Class 


Requirements: A mariner must have a minimum Intelli- 
gence/Knowledge score of 13. The mariner kit is prohibited 


for dwarves, aarakocra, alaghi, bullywugs, centaurs, mon- 
grelmen, ogres, orcs, satyrs, swanmays, thri-kreen, and 
wemics. 

Weapon proficiencies: Mariners can be versed in any 
weapons applicable to their classes. However, weapons 
such as spears, pole-arms, and nets are practical. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Weather 
sense, navigation, fishing, seamanship, swimming, rope 
use. 

Equipment: Mariners can carry whatever equipment 
they desire, however much of it should be useful in their 
trade. Further, these individuals tend to wear little or no 
armor, as heavy armor is not practical on a ship. They prize 
rings of protection and bracers of defense. 

Recommended traits: Keen senses, light sleeper, lucky. 

Benefits: Mariners enjoy a +2 bonus on reaction rolls 
from sailors, ship captains, and aquatic races. And they gain 
a +1 to hit bonus with nets. 

Hindrances: Because mariners are so at home on the 
sea, they are often uncomfortable on land. When there is 
no water in sight, they are out of their element, and they 
suffer a —2 reaction adjustment penalty. 

Wealth: Standard for the character's class. 


Merchants are vital to any civilization, for 
Merchant they buy, sell, or barter the goods and ser- 
vices that a society demands. Merchants include local fish- 
mongers, street vendors, shop keepers, caravan owners, 
and more. Some have permanent stores established in a 
thriving business district. Others travel to distant lands to 
bring back rare treasures. Adventurers are natural mer- 
chants, as they often visit many strange and exotic places 
and acquire unusual and valuable goods. Merchant adven- 
turers have an outlet to sell many of the material treasures 
such as tapestries, statuary, gems, and jewelry they often 
accumulate. 

Social ranks: Merchants come from many walks of 
life. Roll 2d6 to determine the rank of a merchant. 
Optionally, grant that merchant the appropriate business 
and income. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-3 Lower Class 
4—7 Lower Middle Class 


Business 

Works for someone else 
Owns a stall or rents a 
storefront 

8-10 Upper Middle Class Owns a storefront 
11-12 Upper Class Owns a large storefront 


Requirements: A merchant must have minimum Intelli- 
gence/Knowledge and Charisma/Appearance scores of 9. 
This kit is closed to paladins, rangers, druids and all charc- 
ters of the following races: alaghi, minotaur, mongrelman, 
ogre, satyr, swanmay, thri-kreen, and wemic. 

Weapon proficiencies: Merchants can wield any weap- 
ons appropriate to their classes. However, a merchant who 


z ancient), history, (local or ancient), reading/writing, heraldry, 


wears heavy armor and carries several large weapons might 
make their customers nervous—unless the merchant is in 
the business of selling arms and armor. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Appraising, 
carpentry, cobbling, etiquette, reading/writing, modern lan- 
guages, local history, forgery, tailoring, weaving. 

Equipment: Merchants can carry whatever equipment 
they desire, however much of it should be useful in their 
trade. Many merchants make sure they have plenty of 
leather sacks and other containers to store goods they 
might acquire. They prize bags of holding and flatboxes. 

Recommended traits: Glibness, keen senses, precise 
memory, alertness, obscure knowledge. 

Benefits: Because they are often welcomed into com- 
munities, merchants receive a +1 reaction roll bonus in city 
settings. In addition, merchants with the appraising profi- 
ciency gain a permanent --2 bonus to that skill. 

Hindrances: While they are initially welcomed for the 
goods and services they bring, not all merchants are forth- 
right in their business dealings. Any merchant who is pub- 
licly accused of cheating his customers (whether the accu- 
sation is true), loses the reaction bonus above. Further, he 
suffers a —2 penalty to all reaction rolls until his innocence 
is proven. 

Wealth: A merchant begins with the maximum amount 
of gold allotted to his class. 


M stic Thoughtful and introspective, the mystic seeks 
y to find the answers to the mysteries of the 
universe by traveling across the globe. Nonviolent by 
nature, the inquisitive mystic seeks only truth, and he avoids 
confrontations when possible. However, if the mystic must 
battle his way to enlightenment, he will do so. Mystics are 
usually found among cultures that place a high value on art, 
philosophy, and scholarship. As seekers of knowledge, mys- 
tics often become adventurers while they search for the 
answers they seek. 

Social ranks: Mystics tend to be well-educated, coming 
from the more affluent segments of society. Roll 2d6 to 
determine the rank of a mystic. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-7 Upper Middle Class 
8-12 Upper Class 


Requirements: A mystic must have a minimum Wis- 
dom/Intuition score of 13. This kit is closed to thieves and 
bards. Only characters of the following races can choose 
this kit: human, elve, half-elf, gnome, halfling, aarakocra, 
alaghi, centaur, githzerai, swanmay, and wemic. 

Weapon proficiencies: Mystics can wield any weapons 
appropriate to their classes. However, most prefer lighter 
weapons which do not weigh them down. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Astrology, 
astronomy, religion, etiquette, languages (modern or 


14 


riding (any), herbalism, healing, gem cutting, musical instru- 
ment, navigation. 

Equipment: Mystics can select whatever equipment 
they desire and can afford. However, these characters are 
known to travel unencumbered, so care should be taken in 
what they purchase and acquire. 

Recommended traits: Artistic ability, empathy, obscure 
knowledge, ancient history, precise memory. 

Benefits: A mystic can temporarily boost one of his 12 
subability scores by +2. If the mystic is a ranger with a 16 
Balance score, by meditating the score can be temporarily 
increased to an 18. If the mystic is a warrior trying to boost 
a Muscle score of 18/30, the bonus counts as 20% rather 
than 2 points—each point equates to 10%. The mystic war- 
riors Muscle is temporarily increased to 18/50. To gain this 
subability bonus, the mystic must meditate, building up his 
body and mind for this feat. The subability score remains 
boosted for one-third of the mystic's meditation time. If the 
Mystic mediated for three uninterrupted hours, he could 
boost a subability score for one hour. 

Hindrances: The process of meditation requires effort. 
While a mystic could meditate in the cabin of a ship, he 
could not do so if that ship were in the midst of a terrible 
storm. Attacks or very loud noises also disrupt meditation. 
The time spent in meditation does not alleviate the mystic's 
need for food and sleep. So it is unlikely that a mystic could 
spend three days in meditation in preparation for an adven- 
ture. Further, a mystic cannot gain multiple meditation 
bonuses at one time. 

Wealth: A mystic is interested in knowledge, not mater- 
ial items. As such, he cannot own more than he can carry. A 
mount is an exception, as such a beast is useful in taking 


the mystic to new places. 

Noble Nobles are those born to the highest ranks of 
society. They are rich, dress well, and they usu- 

ally spend money frivolously. They are the privileged few 

the common people idolize. And they are the symbols of 

what others often consider the best in the world. 

This leads many nobles to believe they are better than 
everyone around them—not just in wealth or social stand- 
ing, but in manner and abilities. This sense of superiority 
can manifest itself as overwhelming pride, arrogance, and 
condescending snobbery. These nobles use their wealth, 
standing, and power to take what they want from those 
weaker than themselves. They can be as brutal, savage, and 
unthinking as the horrific monsters they slay. 

Not all nobles are like this, however. Some feel a cer- 
tain sense of stewardship for the unwashed hordes. These 
nobles consider it their duty to do all in their power to bet- 
ter the world—as long as their lifestyles are not jeopar- 
dized. They can be chivalrous toward members of the 
opposite sex, and they might occasionally stop to chat 
with peasants. These nobles mean well, but they may be 


Character Kits 


out of touch with what is important in the lives of the 
common people. 

Nobles need not be played as brutal tyrants or out-of- 
touch fops and dandies, but there are plenty of wealthy 
individuals who fit those two archetypes. 

Social ranks: Nobles are only found in the upper eche- 
lons of society. Roll 2d6 to determine the rank of a noble. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-4 Upper Middle Class 
5-12 Upper Class 


Requirements: Nobles need only meet the require- 
ments of their adventuring class. This kit is open to all 
classes and races except mongrelmen. 

Weapon proficiencies: Any allowed by their adventur- 
ing class. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Etiquette, 
heraldry, riding (any), dancing, languages (ancient or mod- 
ern), history, (local or ancient), reading/writing, religion, 
gambling, musical instrument, animal handling, hunting, 
and gaming. 

Equipment: Regardless of his class, he must purchase a 
mount and tack, as no self-respecting noble would allow 
himself to be seen on foot when out and about. Further, all 
armor, weapons, clothes and accouterments must be of the 
finest quality. 

Recommended traits: Allure, artistic ability, glibness, 
lucky, music (any). 

Benefits: Because of his superior manner of dress, 
speech, and decorum, NPC nobles will recognize the player 
character's status and accord him the proper respect. Player 
character nobles receive a +2 reaction roll bonus when 
interacting with individuals from the upper class and upper 
middle class. 

Hindrances: Because the noble demands the finest 
things in life, he pays more money for meals, board, equip- 
ment, etc. In addition, many vendors recognize the noble as 
being wealthy and raise their prices accordingly. A noble 
must add 25% to the price of any item or service he wishes 
to purchase. 

Wealth: Nobles begin with twice the normal starting 
gold of their class to reflect their higher level of resources. 


Outlaw These characters spit in the face of authority 

and scoff at the mention of “the law” They 
are men and women wanted by the campaign's govern- 
ment officials and law-enforcement authorities. 

Some outlaws are the heroic Robin Hood type. They 
become outlaws because they oppose an evil, corrupt, or 
tyrannical regime. These outlaws are more concerned with 
justice than the strict letter of the law. And while they will- 
ingly break laws, they do it for the common good—robbing 
from the rich to give to the poor, smiting the minions of the 
vile administration, and generally making life as uncomfort- 


able as possible for those who've turned the law to their 
own wicked ends. 

Other outlaws are bandits and highwaymen who inhabit 
the fringes of many civilizations hoping to rob innocent 
passersby of their hard-earned valuables. These despicable 
louts truly give the term “outlaw” a bad name. 

Social ranks: Outlaws typically come from the poorer 
segments of society. Roll 2d6 to determine an outlaw's 
social rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-7 Lower Class 
5-12 Lower Middle Class 


Requirements: As many Outlaws must leave the com- 
forts of civilization behind to avoid capture, they must be 
hardy souls. All outlaws must have minimum Strength/Sta- 
mina and Constitution/Health scores of 12. This kit is open 
to all races and classes, but paladin outlaws require special 
approval from the DM. 

Weapon proficiencies: Outlaws can wield whatever 
weapons are allowed by their class. However, they tend to 
favor missile weapons because they like to strike at the 
forces of the law from a safe distance. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Rope use, 
set snares, survival tracking, fire-building, riding (any), ani- 
mal lore, bowyer/fletcher, hunting, running, local history, 
disguise, tumbling. 

Equipment: Characters who are on the run, such as out- 
laws, are apt to be lightly equipped to allow for quick, quiet 
movements. 

Recommended traits: Alertness, internal compass, glib- 
ness, impersonation, keen senses, light sleeper, lucky. 

Benefits: Outlaws have a designated hideaway, a place 
where they can feel safe. Possible locations include a grove 
in the local forest, a hidden valley, the city's sewer system, 
or a nearby dungeon. The DM and player should work out 
the specifics. 

Hindrances: Outlaws always have someone out to get 
them-—usually the collective force of the campaign's law 
enforcers. They might have some player characters after 
them, too, if the bounty on their head becomes tempting 
enough. 

Wealth: Standard for the character's class. 


A Peasant hero is the "local kid 
Peasant Hero done good” Whatever his class, 


whatever his ambitions, this character always remembers 
that his roots are in the soil of his home—be it a bustling vil- 
lage, a quiet hamlet, or a lone farm miles from the nearest 
neighbors. He might leave his home and become a great 
general, a mighty wizard, a noble priest, or a master thief— 
but his home will always be foremost in his heart. A peasant 
hero might fight against tyrannical nobles who are oppress- 
ing the common people, or he could simply yearn for the 


Character Kits 
Sn 


wealth of the nobles—so he can return to his village and 
build homes, temples, schools, and more. 

Social ranks: Peasant heroes come from the poorest of 
families. Roll 2d6 to determine the hero's social rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-9 Lower Class 
10-12 Lower Middle Class 


Requirements: This kit is open to all classes and races. 
There are no abilty score requirements. 

Weapon proficiencies: Although a peasant hero can 
wield any weapon allowed by his adventuring class, favored 
weapons include: dagger, short sword, quarterstaff, spear, 
short bow, club, hand axe, knife, sickle, sling, and staff sling. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Agriculture, 
fishing, animal handling, animal lore, blacksmithing, carpen- 
try, cooking, cobbling, fire-building, pottery, stonemasonry, 
weaving. 

Equipment: See "Wealth" below. 

Traits: Animal empathy, empathy, immunities, climate 
sense. 

Benefits: The disadvantaged often make it through the 
rough times by helping each other. Therefore, in his home- 
land, a peasant hero always will be given shelter and any 
other help his fellows can give. They will hide him and his 
friends from an evil ruler's troops, heal his wounds, and 
feed and clothe him. Of course, this is conditional—if the 
peasant hero has given up his down-to-earth ways or mis- 
treats his former friends, he'll find all doors in the village 
closed to him. 

Hindrances: As he is viewed as something of a hero, a 
peasant hero will find the people of his homeland coming 
to him for assistance. If livestock are disappearing from the 
pens, or the village elder has been jailed for speaking 
against the nobles, or if another peasant is accused of crime 
he didn't commit, the peasant hero will be called upon to 
help. 

Wealth: Peasant heroes begin with half the starting max- 
imum gold allowed for their adventuring class. 


Dirate Like mariners, pirates love the ocean. How- 

ever, pirates also love wealth. Evil pirates are 
the scum of the seas. They'll attack a ship and kill the crew 
to a man—unless there is a nobleman or wealthy heiress on 
board they can hold for ransom. These buccaneers have no 
lofty goals and fight for no cause other than to net the next 
ship full of booty. 

Privateers are neutral- or good-aligned pirates who are 
usually commissioned by a government to prey on the 
shipping of that government's enemy. Privateers are often 
granted Letters of Marque that state they are in the employ 
of their king or queen. As representatives of a nation, priva- 
teers are expected to behave with a code of honor. They 
accept surrenders, treat prisoners well, and are always def- 


erential to any noble captives—especially those of the oppo- 
site sex. 

Social ranks: Pirates usually come from the middle 
rungs of the social ladder. Roll 2d6 to determine the rank of 
a pirate. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-7 Lower Middle Class 
8-12 Upper Middle Class 


Requirements: A life on the sea is rigorous and de- 
manding. Pirates must have minimum Constitution/Health 
and Dexterity/Balance scores of 12. The pirate kit is prohib- 
ited for dwarves, aarakocra, alaghi, bullywugs, centaurs, 
ogres, orcs, satyrs, swanmays, thri-kreen, and wemics. This 
kit is open to all classes. 

Weapon proficiencies: Pirates can be versed in any 
weapons applicable to their classes. However, rapiers and 
cutlasses are suggested for swashbuckling characters. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Navigation, 
fishing, seamanship, rope use, gambling, tightrope walking, 
direction sense, swimming, weather sense. 

Equipment: Pirates tend to avoid large weapons and 
heavy armor. Characters who are weighted down have a 
hard time climbing around in the ship's rigging and are likely 
to drown if they are pitched overboard during a storm or a 
fierce battle. 

Recommended traits: Alertness, glibness, light sleeper. 

Benefits: Pirates are accustomed to the pitch and roll of 
a ship and have an advantage when engaged in melee on 
deck. They gain a +1 bonus to their attack rolls while fight- 
ing at sea. Pirates also have a designated hideaway. Such 
locations include deserted isles, hidden anchorages, a sea- 
cave complex beneath the port city, etc. 

Hindrances: Pirates suffer a —2 penalty on reaction rolls 
when they enter a port. If a pirate behaves in a manner 
appropriate to the setting, this penalty may be reduced and 
then eliminated upon subsequent visits. Pirates often make 
a lot of enemies. Hence, pirates are sometimes hunted by 
those they plundered. Pirate characters should never get 
too complacent—there's always somebody not too far away 
who wants the character's loot or head to show that this sea 
wolf will prowl the oceans no more. 

Wealth: Standard for the character's class. 


a Pugilists are characters who prefer to fight 
Dugilist with their bare hands. They might make a 
living by fighting in a ring. Or perhaps they specialize in 
martial arts. They are strong, tough, and fit into any society 
that allows professional or street fights. Pugilists make 
excellent adventurers, as they have quick reflexes and are 
good in a brawl with monsters. Adventuring gives them an 
additional outlet for their physical side, and it affords them 
opportunities to travel to new communities and find new 
fights. Players might want to consult the Combat and Tac- 


7 the rider is an elf who was born in the deep wilderness and 


tics book for information on unarmed combat and martial 
arts. 

Social ranks: Most pugilists come from poorer families 
in bad parts of town where people learned to fight to get 
what or simply to defend themselves. Roll 2d6 to deter- 
mine a pugilist's social rank at the beginning of the cam- 


paign. 


2d6 roll Social rank 
2-10 Lower Class 
11-12 Lower Middle Class 


Requirements: Pugilists must have minimum Strength/ 
Muscle and Dexterity/Balance scores of 14. This kit is 
barred to the following races: aarakocra, alaghi, bullywug, 
centaur, lizard man, minotaur, swanway, thri-kreen, and 
wemic. The kit is open to all classes except wizards. 

Weapon proficiencies: These characters can select any 
weapon proficiencies allowed their adventuring classes. 
However, they prefer to fight with their hands. Proficiency 
and specialization in any form of unarmed combat (punch- 
ing, wrestling, or martial arts) is recommended for the 
pugilist. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Blind- 
fighting, endurance, running. 

Equipment: Pugilists prefer to fight in loose-fitting street 
clothes and unencumbered. They seek magical bracers and 
rings to make themselves more difficult to be struck. They 
will wear armor while adventuring—if their character class 
allows it. 

Recommended traits: Keen eyesight, keen hearing, 
keen sense of touch, light sleeper, ambidexterity. 

Benefits: Normally, when a character makes an un- 
armed attack against an armed opponent or a monster with 
natural attacks, his foe gains an immediate attack of oppor- 
tunity with a +4 bonus to his attack roll. This makes it very 
dangerous for unarmed heroes to attack most enemies. 
However, pugilists are skilled at fighting armed opponents 
and monsters with their bare hands; they are treated as if 
they were armed when making unarmed attacks. 

Hindrances: Pugilists are admired when they are in a 
ring and the crowd is cheering them on. However, people 
from the middle and upper class prefer not to associate 
with the ruffians. A pugilist's Charisma is effectively lowered 
by 1 when dealing with those from the middle class and by 
2 when speaking to people from the upper class. 

Wealth: Pugilists begin with the normal amount of gold 
allowed their character class. 


Rider A rider is a character who has developed a 

bond with his mount. When the character was 
younger, he became friends with this animal, and the rider 
and his mount grew up together and grew close. They are 
now all but inseparable. In fact, they share such a bond they 
can sense each other's location and general health. Perhaps 


who rides into the campaign's city on a giant boar. Maybe 
the rider is a halfling lass who—with her giant lizard mount— 
leaves her village behind in pursuit of adventure. 

Ranks: Riders can come from most walks of life. Roll 
2d6 to determine the rider's social rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-4 Lower Class 
5-10 Lower Middle Class 
11-12 Upper Middle Class 


Requirements: Riders must have a minimum Cha- 
risma/Leadership of 13. This kit is open to the standard 
player character races, and to flinds, githzerai, goblins, 
kobolds, orcs, and swanmays. The kit is open to all classes. 

Weapon proficiencies: Riders can select any weapons 
that fit with their adventuring professions. Weapons 
designed to be used while mounted are ideal. These 
include: lances, bow (any), horseman's flail, horseman's 
mace, horseman’s pick, spear, bastard sword, long sword, 
scimitar, morning star. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Animal 
lore, animal training, animal handling, riding (any), rope use, 
charioteering, heraldry, bowyer/fletcher. 

Equipment: Riders can select any weapons, armor, and 
other equipment that fits their adventuring class. 

Recommended traits: Animal empathy, empathy, alert- 
ness, keen hearing. 

Benefits: When this kit is chosen, the player and DM 
must determine a suitable mount for the character. There 
are several factors to consider: 1) the climate and terrain 


Table 43: Mounts 

Natural Creatures Flying Creatures 
Horse/pony | Griffon 
Bull Huge raven 
Camel Hippogriff 
Buffalo Huge bat 
Mule Giant owl 
Cave bear Pegasus 
Stag Giant wasp 
Elephant Giant eagle 


OnNOUDSWN 


Underwater Creatures 
Hippocampus 
Giant crab 
Sea horse 
Dolphin 
Killer whale 
Sea lion 
Giant otter 
Giant ray 


Giant Land Creatures 
Giant beetle 
Giant lizard 
Giant boar 
Giant weasel 
Giant frog 
Giant badger 
Giant goat 
Giant skunk 


Character Kits 


of the character's homeland, where he acquired the 
mount; 2) the character's race (halflings would have a dif- 
ficult time riding elephants, while half-ogres would be too 
big for a pony) and; 3) the availability of the mount. A 
rider's mount is similar to a wizard's familiar in that the 
pair have a bond. Each will know the general state of 
health of the other, the direction the other is in, and the 
distance by which they are separated. Depending on its 
degree of intelligence, the mount might be able to under- 
stand if its friend is in danger. Many a rider has escaped 
certain death on the back of a mount that risked its own 
life to save him. 

After making a list of possible mounts, the player 
should select one. DMs might prefer the mount to be 
selected randomly. If this is the case, use the following 
method. 

Roll 1d6. A result of 1-3 indicates the player should 
roll on the natural creatures table; 4, flying creatures; 5, 
giant land creatures, and; 6, underwater creatures. Then 
roll 1d8 on the appropriate mount table. 

Hindrances: If a rider neglects or mistreats his mount, 
the DM might declare that the mount flees—bolts during 
the night, kicks its way out of a stable, flies away, etc. If this 
occurs, the rider can never again experience an empathic 
rapport with a animal. Further, when the rider's mount 
dies, the rider immediately suffers 2d6 points of damage, 
due to the emotional loss resulting from the death of a 
close friend. This damage can be healed. However, if the 
mount's death occurred as a result of the rider's negli- 
gence, aside from suffering the physical damage, the rider 
must attempt a saving throw vs. spells. Failure means the 
rider operates as if he were under a feeblemind spell for 
the next 2d6 hours. 

Wealth: A rider begins with the amount of money al- 
lowed his adventuring class. He must purchase tack and 
animal feed with this before using what is left to purchase 
weapons, armor, and equipment. 


Savages are characters from primitive soci- 
Savage eties, individuals who lived on their own or in 
extended families. They differ from barbarians in that they 
have no established villages or communities. They live off 
the land by hunting and foraging. They do not herd animals 
or establish farms. Savages find their way into adventuring 
groups simply by crossing paths with player character 
heroes. They are quick to become a part of an adventuring 
family, and they are comfortable traveling and exploring. 
However, savages are uncomfortable in towns, and they are 
suspicious of civilized trappings. 
Social ranks; Since savages do not come from a society, 
their starting social rank is essentially lower class. 


2d6 roll Social rank 
2-11 Lower Class 
12 Lower Middle Class 


Requirements: Savages must have a minimum Consti- 
tution/Fitness score of 13. This kit is open to all races 
except githzerai and swanmays, and to all classes except 
paladins. 

Weapon proficiencies: At the time of character creation, 
a savage must choose from the following wooden weapons: 
quarterstaff, spear, bow, and club. As the character gains in 
levels and adventures with others, he can pick up more civi- 
lized weapons, such as maces, swords, and daggers. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Animal 
lore, hunting, running, set snares, survival, tracking, fishing, 
swimming. 

Equipment: Savages begin without any metal equip- 
ment. Their weapons are limited to those listed above, and 
they can wear nothing greater than hide armor. All of their 
possessions must come from nature, such: as deerskin 
sacks, buffalo hide blankets, vine rope, woven baskets, clay 
jugs, stone arrowheads, etc. 

Recommended traits: Keen eyesight, keen hearing, 
keen sense of touch, keen sense of taste, light sleeper, 
ambidexterity. 

Benefits: Savages gain +1 to any three nonweapon pro- 
ficiencies scores, provided they are selected from the rec- 
ommended list above. 

Hindrances: Player characters with this kit are uneasy in 
cities. They suffer a —2 initiative penalty when traveling 
within the confines of a town or keep. 

Wealth: Savages are allowed to spend up to the normal 
wealth allowed their character class on the weapons, hide 
armor, and equipment mentioned in this kit. However, 
whatever is not spent vanishes. Savages begin play with no 
money. 


Scholar A scholar is driven by his incessant drive for 
knowledge about a particular topic or family 
of topics. Adventuring scholars might want to study under- 
ground ruins, abandoned temples, mythical beasts, giant 
insects, haunted woods, or monsters. When not traveling 
(and taking copious notes at every opportunity), he's likely 
to be found poring over books, maps, scrolls, and clay 
tablets. Scholars choose to adventure because they know 
they can learn more by studying something up close than 
by reading about it in musty libraries. 
Social ranks: Scholars are well-educated and come from 
rather affluent families. Roll 2d6 to determine a scholar's 
social rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-6 Upper Middle Class 
7-12 Upper Class 


Requirements: A scholar must have a minimum Intelli- 
gence/Knowledge of 13. This kit is open to all standard 
player chacter races and to: centaurs, githzerai, and swan- 
mays. Fighters may not be scholars. 


` Weapon proficiencies: Those that fit with the scholar's son, rations and water, flint and steel, rope, bedroll, a small 


adventuring class. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Reading/ 
writing, history (any), languages (any), heraldry, astrology, 
astronomy, herbalism, engineering, gem cutting, religion, 
spellcraft, brewing, etiquette, musical instrument. 

Equipment: Scholars always must be prepared to 
record some interesting new bit of knowledge. Therefore, 
all scholars must carry quills, ink, scrolls, and a journal or 
diary with which to write down any intriguing new facts or 
theories. 

Recommended traits: Artistic ability, keen eyesight, 
keen hearing, precise memory, obscure knowledge. 

Benefits: Scholars gain a +1 bonus either to Intelligence 
or Wisdom checks (player's choice)—including proficiency 
checks based on Intelligence or Wisdom. 

Hindrances: Since scholars spend so much time read- 
ing, theorizing, and studying, they suffer when it comes to 
physical combat. All scholars suffer a —1 penalty on their ini- 
tiative rolls when fighting. 

Wealth: Standard for the character's class. 


Scout Scouts are those characters who are most at 
home in the wilderness. They can be hunters, 
loggers, trappers or furriers. Or they might be employed by 
the campaign's military forces to patrol the country's borders 
and keep a furtive eye on the nation's enemies. As a rule, 
they are brave—even daring. Few others would voluntarily 
cross into enemy territory to ascertain troop movements or 
the locations of the monsters' stronghold. Wilderness is not 
limited to forests. Any geographic region that is untouched by 
civilization qualifies. Such areas can include the desert, arctic 
tundra, tropical rain forests, mountain valleys, or even natural 
cave complexes—perhaps leading to the Underdark. 
Social ranks: Scouts come from the lower tiers of soci- 
ety. Roll 2d6 to determine a scout's social rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-5 Lower Class 
6-12 Lower Middle Class 


Requirements: Scouts must be able to discern a dan- 
gerous situation from a lethal one. All scouts need a mini- 
mum Wisdom/Intuition score of 12. This kit is open to all 
races and classes. 

Weapon proficiencies: Scouts can be proficient in any 
weapons that fit with their adventuring class. Since they are 
frequently outnumbered by foes, most scouts select missile 
weapons to help them even the odds. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Tracking, 
survival, fire-building, hunting, mountaineering, rope use, 
set snares, swimming, carpentry, direction sense, weather 
sense. 

Equipment: Scouts do not enter the wilderness unpre- 
pared. Scouts must purchase adequate clothing for the sea- 


hammer, and pitons. They can purchase any weapons, 
armor, and other equipment with any gold they have 
remaining. 

Recommended traits: Alertness, fast healer, imperson- 
ation, keen eyesight, keen hearing, keen sense of touch, 
light sleeper. 

Benefits: Scouts gain a +1 bonus to all nonweapon pro- 
ficiency checks while in the wilderness or natural cave set- 
tings. 

Hindrances: Scouts are ill at ease in urban or dungeon 
settings. They suffer a —1 penalty on all nonweapon profi- 
ciency checks when in such locales. 

Wealth: Standard for the character's class. 


Sharpshooters devote their time 
Shar pshooter and effort to becoming extreme- 
ly proficient with missile weapons. They might be experts 
with thrown weapons such as the dagger or hand axe. 
Some make their living as trick-shot artists in carnivals and 
circuses. Sharpshooters may be military specialists assigned 
to attack and dispose of enemy officers, wizards, airborne 
foes, or even enemy sharpshooters. Others might be classic 
archers, able to split an opponent's arrow in a target or 
knock a foe’s weapon from his hand. 
Ranks: Sharpshooters usually come from middle- 
classed families who have money to spend on weapons 
and lessons. Roll 2d6 to determine the social rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-6 Lower Middle Class 
7-12 Upper Middle Class 


Requirements: A sharpshooter must have a minimum 
Dexterity/Aim of 13. Bugbears, lizard men, minotaurs, 
ogres, and wemics cannot become sharpshooters. This kit 
is barred to wizards and priests (although the DM may 
allow some specialty priests, such as druids, to become 
sharpshooters). 

Weapon proficiencies: More than half of a sharp- 
shooter's initial weapon proficiencies (or at least six charac- 
ter points) must be allocated on missile weapons. Expendi- 
tures for missile weapon specialization or style specializa- 
tions involving missile weapons count toward the require- 
ments. 

Nonweapon proficiencies: Bowyer/fletcher, hunting, 
heraldry, riding, weaponsmithing. 

Equipment: A sharpshooter's first concern is making 
sure he has enough arrows or other missile weapons. After 
that, he can purchase whatever armor and equipment is 
appropriate to his adventuring class. 

Traits: Ambidexterity, keen eyesight, keen hearing, lucky. 

Benefits: Sharpshooters gain a +1 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls with one particular missile weapon. The 
weapon must be chosen at the time of the character's cre- 


y7 * 4 
"798 4 r rE 6n 
eT" EE N 


AVXIULOD 


ation. This bonus does not apply to a hurled missile 
weapon when it is used in melee combat. For example, if a 
sharpshooter threw a spear at an oncoming hobgoblin, he 
could apply the bonus. If he waited until the hobgoblin 
closed to melee range, the bonus is no longer applicable. 

Hindrances: Because a sharpshooter concentrates on 
missile weapons, he suffers a —1 penalty on initiative rolls 
for melee combat. 

Wealth: Standard for the character's class. 


Characters who earn a living by fencing 
Smuggler questionable goods and moving material 


about behind the backs of government officials are consid- 
ered smugglers. They are opportunists who have the right 
connections to guide stolen or suspicious property about 
from place to place—at a considerable profit to themselves. 
Smugglers rarely steal things themselves. They consider that 
much more risky than transporting the goods and feigning 


ignorance about the goods’ origins. And they rarely keep 
materials they believe stolen—better to move the objects on 
to another city. A few smugglers work as fences on the side. 
Smugglers love the adventuring life because it gives them 
the opportunity to travel and the chance to move goods. A 
smuggler might jump at the opportunity to delve into a 
dungeon when the authorities are on the lookout for a 
matched set of emeralds he has in his belt pouch. 

Social ranks: Most smugglers come from the middle 
class. Roll 2d6 to determine their rank. 


2d6 roll Social rank 
2-8 Lower Middle Class 
9-12 Upper Middle Class 


Requirements: Smugglers must have a minimum Wis- 
dom/Willpower score of 12, as they must have enough 
common sense to help them stay ahead of the law. This kit 
is open to all races and classes, but pal- 
adin smugglers require special approval 
from the DM. 

Weapon proficiencies: These char- 
acters can select any weapon proficien- 
cies allowed their adventuring classes. 

Recommended nonweapon profi- 
ciencies: Appraising, forgery, gem cut- 
ting, ancient history, artistic ability, eti- 
quette, pottery, ancient languages, read- 
ing/writing. 

Equipment: Pugilists seek magical 
bracers and rings to make themselves 
more difficult to be struck in a fight. 
They will wear armor while adventur- 
ing—if their character class allows it. 
However, they prefer to fight in loose- 
fitting street clothes and unencum- 
bered. 

Recommended traits: Keen sense 
of touch, glibness, impersonation, lucky, 
obscure knowledge, precise memory. 

Benefits: If a smuggler chooses the 
appraising nonweapon proficiency, he 
gains a +2 bonus to that proficiency 
score. 

Hindrances: Smugglers on occasion 
run afoul of the law—or of individuals 
who try to pass goods via the character. 
When this happens, a smuggler might 
have to rely on his fellow adventurers 
for protection. 

Wealth: Smugglers begin with the 
maximum amount of gold allotted to 
their character class to reflect the 
money they earn from their shady deal- 


ings. 


z 2d6 roll Rank Military Title 


: A Soldier is a professional warrior. He might 
Soldier be a field officer, a career sergeant, or a sell- 
sword. Any character class can be a soldier. Warriors and 
clerics can lead troops into battle; wizards can decimate 
enemy armies with their powerful, offensive spells; and 
rogues can infiltrate enemy-occupied positions and gain 
valuable intelligence. If a player is interested in this kit, he 
should discuss with the DM whether the soldier is a mem- 
ber of a standing military organization or is a mercenary. If 
the character is a member of a military force, his military 
rank also must be decided. 

Social ranks: Soldiers come from all walks of life. How- 
ever, those from more influential families tend to rise 
higher in the military career ladder. If the soldier is part of 
an organized unit, roll 2d6 to determine his social and mil- 
itary rank. 


2-5 Lower Class 
6-9 Lower Middle Class 
10-11 Upper Middle Class 

12 Upper Class 


Man-at-arms/foot soldier 
Sergeant/horse soldier 
Lieutenant 
Captain/commander 


Requirements: Soldiers must have a minimum Consti- 
tution/Fitness score of 12, as military life is not easy. This kit 
is open to any player character race except; aarakockra, 
alaghi. githzerai, minotaur, mongrelman, satyr, swanmay, 
thri-kreen, and wemic. The kit is open to all classes. 

Weapon proficiencies: Soldiers can be proficient in 
weapons that fit their adventuring class. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: History 
(ancient or local, emphasis on military events), fire-building, 
direction sense, animal handling, cooking, heraldry, riding 
(land-based), seamanship, swimming, disguise, armorer, 
blind-fighting, bowyer/fletcher, charioteering, endurance, 
navigation, survival, weaponsmithing, 
reading/writing. 


Į 1 "7 
W 


Equipment: Soldiers must spend 
more than half of their starting wealth 
on weapons and armor. They can wear 
any armor and use any weapons 
allowed their adventuring profession. 

Recommended traits: Keen eye- 
sight, keen hearing, light sleeper. 

Benefits: At the time of character cre- 
ation, the soldier gains one free non- 
weapon proficiency, provided it is 
selected from the recommended list 
above. In addition, a soldier acquires 
one weapon at no cost—a gift of the mil- 
itary. 

Hindrances: A soldier can purchase 
only those weapons, armor, and other 
pieces of equipment that can be carried 
on his back or on his mount. 

Wealth: Standard for the character's 
class. 


$ In any campaign there is 
py bound to be intrigue, conspir- 


acies, and insidious plots. Uncovering 
these secrets is the job of the spy. As 
the scout crosses enemy lines and infil- 
trates dangerous wilderness areas to 
learn vital information, so does the spy 
wend his way through all levels of soci- 
ety. He attends parties or sits in smoky 
taverns, drinking, dancing, or gambling 
—all the while noting who is speaking 
to whom, what is being discussed, 
(and what isn't being discussed), 
who's present and who's absent, and 


Character Kits 


what are the latest rumors and gossip. Spies often choose 
to become adventurers, as that profession is the perfect 
cover. Few think twice when a new group of heroes comes 
into town. In most campaigns, adventurers are just ac- 
cepted—if not granted a few favors in case their unique tal- 
ents are ever needed. This allows spies to go almost any- 
where without arising suspicion. 

If this kit is chosen, the player should discuss with the 
DM exactly who the spy is supposed to be spying on, and 
who the spy's employer is. It is possible that the spy is 
between missions, or is seeking additional income as an 
adventurer. Spies tend to be educated and versatile. Roll 
2d6 to determine the social rank of a spy character. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-4 Lower Middle Class 
5-12 Upper Middle Class 


Requirements: Spies must be able to think on their 
feet and smoothly talk their way out of situations in which 
their cover may be blown. Therefore, all spies must have 
minimum Intelligence/Reason and Charisma/Appearance 
scores of 13. The spy kit is barred to half-ogres, as well as 
any optional PC race that is size large (restriction z from the 
Other Races section of Chapter Three), and thri-kreen. The 
kit is open to all classes. 

Weapon proficiencies: Spies are only limited in 
weapon choice by their adventuring class. However, 
depending on their cover identity, spies may be limited in 
the weapons they carry. For example, a spy impersonating 
a wizard cannot bring his favorite bastard sword along as 
part of the disguise. Many spies prefer small, easily con- 
cealed, or easily disguised weapons (a walking cane can 
double as a club or hide a thin blade). This lets spies 
defend themselves if they are discovered. Such weapons 
include: club, dagger, knife, and darts. If the campaign 
involves much courtly intrigue, “ceremonial” weapons such 
as various swords also qualify. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Disguise, 
forgery, dancing, etiquette, heraldry, riding, local history, 
modern languages, herbalism, reading/writing, appraising, 
gaming, musical instrument, reading lips, spellcraft. 

Equipment: The spy's cover identity may dictate what 
equipment he can carry without appearing incongruous. 

Recommended traits: Alertness, empathy, glibness, 
impersonation, light sleeper, lucky, music (any), precise 
memory. 

Benefits: Because of the spy's suave charm, he receives 
a +2 bonus for all NPCs’ reaction rolls. 

Hindrances: The foremost problem with being a spy is 
that if his cover identity is blown and he is captured, the 
penalty is often death. It is also possible that old foes may 
later determine the spy's true identity and seek revenge 
against him. 

Wealth: Standard for the character's class. 


85 


A swashbuckler is the lightly 
Swashbuckler armed and armored hero with a 
flashing blade and rapier wit. Most at home in a city-based 
campaign (dungeons tend to ruin their expensive, foppish 
attire), the swashbuckler seems to have stepped right out 
of Dumas’ The Three Musketeers. Swashbucklers may be 
dull bureaucrats, wheezing aristocrats, or meek scribes 
during the day—but at night they don their fanciest 
clothes, gird on their blades, and venture out into the 
darkening city for an evening of raucous revelry, flippant 
conversation, and a helping of derring-do. Despite a gen- 
erally flippant (some might say arrogantly sarcastic) atti- 
tude, most swashbucklers have a strong sense of honor. 
Anyone who dares insult the swashbuckler, his comrades, 
or a member of the opposite sex may well find a blade at 
his throat. 
Social ranks: Swashbucklers are more affluent than 
common fighters. Roll 2d6 to determine a social rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-7 Upper Middle Class 
8-12 Upper Class 


Requirements: Swashbucklers should be witty, and they 
should be light on their feet for those occasions when their 
wit goes unappreciated. As such, all swashbucklers need 
minimum Dexterity/Balance and Intelligence/Reason 
scores of 12. This kit is closed to the optional player charac- 
ter races, and to rangers and druids. 

Recommended weapon proficiencies: Swords are the 
traditional weapons of most swashbucklers, especially 
rapiers and sabres. However, they can use any weapons 
that fit their adventuring professions. 

Nonweapon proficiencies: Tumbling, etiquette, danc- 
ing, riding, blind-fighting, musical instrument, appraising, 
gaming, tightrope walking, jumping. 

Equipment: A swashbuckler can wear any armor and 
weapons allowed to his class, though they should be flashy 
and of good quality. 

Recommended traits: Ambidexterity, artistic ability, glib- 
ness, music, lucky. 

Benefits: When unarmored or wearing armor no heav- 
ier than studded leather, swashbucklers gain a +2 armor 
class bonus. This bonus is in addition to any other AC 
modifiers such as a high Dexterity and magical defensive 
items. (This is equal to the optional defensive bonus class 
ability, and the two cannot be combined.) Also, due to 
their roguish charm, swashbucklers gain a +2 reaction roll 
bonus from NPC members of the opposite sex. 

Hindrances: As the swashbuckler seeks out adventure, 
so too does adventure find him. Life, and the DM, should 
conspire to make reality interesting for the character. For 
example, if a swashbuckler is fleeing the outraged sibling 
of one of his paramours, his flight might carry him across 
the path of a defenseless peasant who is being harassed 


by a gang of ruffians. Or, if a swash- 
buckler leaps overboard to escape the 
buccaneers who shanghaied him, he 
discovers that the waters are infested 
with sahuagin riding sharks. 

Ith: Standard for the character's 
class, plus 20% to reflect his affluent 
background. 


Th This kit is recommended 
US only! d-aligned 
y for non good-aligne 

characters. As the outlaw makes his 
home and living on the fringes of civi- 
lization, the thug makes his way in 
cities. A thug knows the streets and 
alleys, and he knows the shadowy 
places best. In the darkest parts of town 
he lies in wait for unsuspecting prey— 
such as travelers new to the city, those 
who become lost in the maze of streets 
and alleys, and those on their way 
home after having a bit too much to 
drink. Thugs might be street ruffians, 
members of press gangs, gang 
enforcers, or barroom rowdies. In any 
case, they tend to be loud, obnoxious, 
and prone to violence. 

social ranks: Most thugs come 
from low- income e families, and it is this 
background that leads them to their 
questionable lifestyle. Roll 2d6 to 
determine a thug's social rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-8 Lower Class 
9-12 Lower Middle Class 


: Thugs must 
have minimum Strength/Muscle and 
Charisma/Appearance scores of 10. 
This is barred to aarakocra, kobolds, 
satyrs, and swanmays. Only fighters and 
thieves may sete this kit. 

: Small or 
easily yide pu weapons are the 
thug's favorites, as they can be carried 
most anywhere. These include: dag- 
gers, dirks, hand axes, knives, blowguns, 
and slings. However, thugs can carry 
any weapon that is allowed by their 
advenas class. 


: Blind- “fighting, zdhidurance, 
gaming, jumping, rope use, running. 


Character Kits 


Equipment: Most thugs like to wear as little armor and 
carry as few pieces of equipment as possible—as they like 
to move about unencumbered. However, some thugs pre- 
fer wearing bulky armor and carrying big weapons to intimi- 
date others. 

Recommended traits: Fast healer, keen eyesight, keen 
hearing, keen sense of touch, light sleeper. 

Benefits: Due to their rough-and-tumble lifestyle and 
penchant for street brawls, thugs gain a +1 bonus to all 
damage rolls. 

Hindrances: Thugs are often wanted by the local law 
enforcers. In a relatively confined area such as a city, a thug 
can never relax. Around the next corner might be a member 
of the constabulary—or the thug’s next victim. 

Wealth: Standard for the character's class. 


A weapon master is a character who, 
Weapon regardless of class, has chosen to devote 
Master most of his combat training to a single 
weapon. A weapon master's goal is to 
blend weapon and self into one whirling, deadly union— 
one lethal entity. Weapon masters might display their 
prowess as part of a circus or carnival show—knocking lit 
cigars out of unsuspecting peoples’ mouths—or juggling 
three short swords while blind-folded. Or, weapon masters 
might have inherited the family heirloom weapon, and 
mastering it is a family tradition that the character feels he 
must live up to. 
Social ranks: Weapon masters come from families that 
can afford weapon instructors. Roll 2d6 to determine a 
weapon master's social rank. 


2d6 roll Rank 
2-4 Lower Middle Class 
5-9 Upper Middle Class 
10-12 Upper Class 


Requirements: Only fighters, priests, and thieves can 
become weapon masters. Further, they must have mini- 
mum Strength/Stamina and Dexterity/Aim scores of 13. 
The kit is open to all races. 

Weapon proficiencies: Weapon masters always choose 
a melee weapon to study and excel in. The character must 
begin play with at expertise or specialization in at least one 
melee weapon. 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: Blind- 
fighting, juggling, weaponsmithing, bowyer/fletcher, 
endurance. 

Equipment: A weapon master cannot wear any armor 
heavier than chain mail. The weapon master begins play 
with one weapon ot the type he has mastered at no cost. 

Recommended traits: Ambidexterity, double-jointed, 
keen eyesight, keen hearing, lucky. 

Benefits: A weapon master is so skilled with one melee 
weapon that he can, as he enters combat, display his amaz- 


85 


ing level of skill. This causes all opponents who see the dis- 
play to suffer a —2 initiative penalty for the first two rounds 
of combat. 

Hindrances: So total is the weapon master's devotion 
to his weapon that he cannot become proficient with 
weapons of another type. For example, if the character's 
choice weapon is a mace, he can only gain proficiencies in 
bludgeoning weapons. If the chosen weapon is a sword, 
he can only wield slashing weapons without suffering 
penalties to hit. 

Wealth: Standard for the character's class. 


: To design additional kits, DMs should 
Cr caling answer these questions. 

New Kits What role does this kit to serve in the 
campaign? 

What makes this unique from all other kits? 

In what ways is it similar to any other kits? 

What levels of society would generate characters that would 
choose this kit? 


Requirements: What does a character need to take this 
kit? What minimum of ability does this kit require? 

Weapon proficiencies: Does this kit give access to 
weapons not normally allowed certain classes? If so, why? 
Are certain weapons associated with this kit? 

Recommended nonweapon proficiencies: What skills 
would PCs with this kit likely need? 

Equipment: Does this kit grant access to equipment not 
normally available to some classes. If so, why? 

Recommended traits: What characteristics fit an individ- 
ual with this kit? 

Benefits: What extra ability or modifier does this kit grant 
characters? Is this benefit too powerful for a kit? Is it too 
weak? Compare this kit's benefits with the other kit benefits 
in this chapter. 

Hindrances: What penalty or modifier compensates for 
the above benefit without weakening the character too 
much or leaving him too powerful? 

Wealth: Is the starting cash of the character affect by this 
kit? If so, how much? 


Once these questions have been answered, a DM 
should have a pretty good idea of the compatibility of a 
new kit. The most important decision to make is deter- 
mining if this kit unbalances the game. Contrast and com- 
pare it with other kits. It's much easier to fix the kit now 
than try to repair a campaign after an unbalanced kit has 
damaged it. 

The next step is to experiment with the kits in play. Out- 
side the normal campaign, put this kit through its paces. 
Run different character classes through an encounter or two 
to see if it works the way it was intended. If it does, intro- 
duce it to campaign and have fun. If it doesn't, head back to 
the drawing board. 


Chapter 6: 
Nonweapon 
Droficiencies 


a 


Nonweapon proficiencies are an important part of role-playing a character. The 
Skills and Powers book offers several new proficiencies and ways in which they 
can be employed during a game. The new rules are tailored to the character 
point system. 

The use of proficiencies has been modified slightly from straight ability 
checks, providing more flexibility and a little more advantage to characters with 
less than, say, a 15 or 16 score in a certain ability. Now proficiencies can develop 
during the course of a game. Though characters will often start out with less like- 
lihood of success when using proficiencies, they will have many opportunities to 
develop those skills beyond the limits inherent in the old ability score system. 

In addition, players can select or create traits for their characters, which are 
innate advantages such as talents and keen perceptions. A list of traits is pre- 
sented in this chapter. Countering the strengths of the traits is a selection of dis- 
advantages, which also provide opportunities for more elaborate role-playing—as 
well as creating countless situations for a little comic relief. 


Nonweapon Drofici 


The point system lets play- 
ers give their characters a 
wider variety of skills and 
abilities than are available 
with the standard rules. 
However, skills that are not 
related to a character's class are still more difficult and 
expensive to obtain than those tied directly to the adven- 
turer's area of expertise. 

Character points help determine an adventurer's initial 
proficiencies. Players can also assign character points 
earned during play to improve their heroes' chances of suc- 
cess with proficiencies, as well as to add new proficiencies. 

Unlike the original proficiency rules, the Skills and 
Powers system gives each proficiency a rating—a possibility 
for success. This is influenced by a character's ability score 
(see Table 44: Ability Modifiers to Proficiency Scores). It is a 
more realistic approach, since proficiencies can be gradually 
improved. In these rules there is a significant difference in 
performance between someone with a beginning level of 
proficiency and someone who is an expert. 


Proficiencies and 
the Character 
Doint System 


Medus ce ae een 


a : à pP PEN eae 
Selecting Droliciencies 
L 


When a character is created or converted from the stan- 
dard AD&D game rules to the Skills and Powers system, 
character points must be expended for each proficiency 
selected. The more points spent, the better the character 
will be at using that particular proficiency. 

Table 45: Nonweapon Proficiency Groups lists the profi- 
ciencies available. It is broken into five categories—general 
proficiencies, and those relating to the priest, rogue, wizard, 
and warrior classes. Players can choose proficiencies from 
any of the lists, though the costs for some will be increased 
because they don't relate to a character's class. 


87 


Additionally, some characters, because of high Intelli- 
gence scores, can add bonus proficiencies at the time of 
character creation. 


Character Point Costs 


A character point cost is indicated for each specific 
entry—that is the expenditure in points required for players 
to add that skill to their characters’ repertoires. The cost is 
normal if the proficiency is selected from the general list or 
the list relating to a character's class. If it is selected from a 
different character class list, the initial cost for the profi- 
ciency is increased by 2. 

For example, Wingo the thief decides to spend character 
points on an assortment of proficiencies, including fishing 
(for a cost of 3) from the general group, disguise (for a 
cost of 4) from the rogue group, and cryptography (listed 
cost 3) from the wizard's group. His cost in points is as 
stated for the general and rogue proficiencies, but he must 
pay 5 character points, not 3, to acquire the skill from the 
wizard group. 


Relevant Abilities 


Each proficiency on Table 45 is listed with one or two of 
the character abilities and/or subabilities that are most 
essential for the use of this skill. To acquire the proficiency 
at the normal cost, the character must have a score of at 
least 9 in each of the relevant abilities. 

A character with lower ability scores is still allowed to 
purchase the skill. However, the cost in character points is 
increased. Add 1 to the cost for each point needed to bring 
the relevant abilities up to a 9. 

For example, Wingo wants to become proficient at riding 
horses. His 15 Dexterity score is no problem, but his 7 Wis- 
dom score gives him some difficulties. Since the normal cost 
for the riding proficiency is 2 character points, and Wingo 
would need to add 2 more points to raise his Wisdom to 9, 
he must pay 4 points for the riding proficiency. The addi- 
tional cost does not actually improve Wingo's Wisdom score, 
it merely allows him to gain the riding proficiency. 


Campaign Considerations/ Training 


The DM is encouraged to provide a rationale for 
acquiring proficiencies. Certain skills might not be avail- 
able because they relate to vocations not employed by 
the cultures of the campaign environment. Riding and 
blacksmithing, for example, would be unavailable in a set- 
ting based on the pre-Columbian Aztecs, while seaman- 
ship might be unknown to a mountain-dwelling people or 
a character born into a tribe of desert nomads. Of course, 
the DM need only introduce a traveler from a different 
culture to teach or otherwise introduce a new skill to the 
setting. 


Chapter 6 


In other cases, the DM could disallow certain proficien- 
cies at the time characters are generated. Adding profi- 
ciencies later is simply a matter of the players finding 
ways for their characters to learn the new skills—the 
mountain herder who signs on as a deckhand for an 
ocean-crossing vessel will have plenty of opportunities to 
learn seamanship. 

An NPC who possesses a proficiency generally will have 
enough knowledge to impart a basic level of skill to an non- 
proficient character. The amount of time this requires varies, 
but it should be a matter of at least several weeks of inten- 
sive training, or a much longer time of general exposure and 
experience. 

In general, a teacher cannot raise a student's skill to a 
higher level than his own, but here, too, are exceptions. 
Characters who receive proficiency bonuses for high ability 
scores do not have to consider these bonuses when com- 
paring their levels to their teacher's. 


Bonus Proficiencies 


Characters with average to high Intelligence scores can 
gain bonus nonweapon proficiencies. The “# of languages" 
rating for a character, found in the AD&D game rules, is 
treated as bonus character points. Bonus character pints 
from Intelligence cannot be spent earlier in the character 
creation process. 

These points can be used only to acquire languages or 
improve nonweapon proficiencies which use the Intelli- 
gence score as one of the proficiency's relevant abilities. 
However, there is one exception—warriors can use these 
bonus character points as described here, or they can use 
them to purchase or improve weapon proficiencies. 

For example, Wingo the thief has an Intelligence score of 
15, while Bluto the warrior has an Intelligence score of 12. 
Table 9 shows that Wingo is allowed to learn four lan- 
guages, while Bluto is limited to three. Wingo thus gains 4 
character points that must be used for Intelligence-based 
nonweapon proficiencies. He could purchase ventriloquism 
(from the rogue group) or cooking (from the general 
group), since each of these uses Intelligence as a relevant 
ability. 

Bluto, on the other hand, could use his 3 bonus charac- 
ter points to purchase cooking, or add them to his normal 
character points to purchase the armorer proficiency (from 
the warrior group). Alternately, Bluto could use his bonus 
character points to purchase or improve an additional 
weapon proficiency. 


. Once an adventurer possesses a 
Im roving proficiency, spending character 
Dro iciencics Points can improve the adven- 

turer's performance when that 
proficiency is used. The section on using proficiencies 
describes how to determine an initial rating—which varies 


for the different proficiencies and can be modified by char- 
acter ability scores. 

This initial rating can be improved by spending additional 
character points during the course of an adventurer's career. 
For the most part, new characters will have a beginning 
level of proficiency, though the DM and player may agree 
on a rationale to explain a novice character's high degree of 
proficiency. A young woman who embarks on a life of 
adventure, for example, after being raised beside her 
father's potter's wheel, might have a significant level of 
accomplishment at the pottery skill. 

Spending character points can improve an adventurers 
proficiency performance. This is a one for one exchange—1 
character point increases the character's chance of success 
by one. A nonweapon proficiency only can be increased 
through character points once each level. 

As a general rule, adventurers can add 1 character point 
to a given proficiency each time they advance a level of 
experience. They don’t have to use the point at the time 
they reach the new level. 

For example, Bellerana the wizard advances from 2nd to 
3rd level. She spends 1 character point to improve her rope 
use proficiency. And she spends another to improve spell- 
craft. 

It is possible to create exceptions to this limitation. A 
character who ceases adventuring for a while, and devotes 
much of that time to farming or laboring in a blacksmith 
shop, might continually improve his agriculture or black- 
smith proficiency even while he does not advance in levels 
in his character class. 


Maximum Ratings and Automatic Failure 


Characters cannot improve their unmodified ratings in 
nonweapon proficiencies above 16. This can be modified 
upward by the characters’ relevant ability scores, or by a trait 
that improves their score in that specific proficiency. 

Regardless of how high a character's modified profi- 
ciency rating becomes, a roll of 20 on a proficiency check is 
always a failure. 


Acquiring Character Traits 


Not everything an individual does is a matter of training, 
practice, and education. Certain things, such as artistic talent 
or naturally keen senses, are inherent. These inherited char- 
acteristics might be combined with skills to provide a high 
level of mastery, but the talents themselves cannot be 
learned—characters have them or they don't. The greatest 
masters in any field of endeavor, of course, combine a high 
level of natural talent with extensive training. A combination 
of a trait with a high level of nonweapon proficiency can 
allow a character to simulate this level of accomplishment. 
The greatest minstrels of the realm, for example, possess 
the trait of musical ability, probably both vocal and instru- 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 


mental. Additionally, they have gained through practice and 
learning, a high proficiency in playing musical instruments. 

In the Skills and Powers rules, talents and other inherent 
abilities are represented as traits. These traits can confer sig- 
nificant game advantages on a character, and can often 
amplify the effects of related nonweapon proficiencies. 
Since they are significant enhancements, they are also rela- 
tively difficult to acquire. 

Character points must be spent at the time of character 
creation if players want to select traits. Once a trait is 
assigned to a character, it is regarded as permanent. Unlike 
proficiencies, traits cannot be improved as a character 
develops. For the most part additional traits cannot be 
gained by a character who already has been involved in 
adventuring (though if the judge deems it appropriate, a 
rationale can be devised to explain why a character sud- 
denly discovering a hitherto unknown trait). 


When a character is 


Selecting Character crested, the ability 


. scores of that PC in- 
D isadvantages clude inherent advan- 


tages and disadvantages. A character will be strong or weak, 
fast or slow, brilliant or stupid, handsome or ugly. These cat- 
egories are general, and players have a great deal of free- 
dom in interpreting the numbers for their characters. 

Some disadvantages are more specific than these char- 
acter abilities, and they provide background for players who 
like to role-play. A player whose character passionately fears 
spiders, or becomes tongue-tied in social situations, has 
specific suggestions about role-playing. 

At the time of character creation, a player can select one 
or two disadvantages. The choice is purely optional—no 
character must have a disadvantage. Unlike traits and profi- 
ciencies, disadvantages do not cost character points— 
instead, each disadvantage awards a certain number of 
points that the player can use to provide a character with 


Table 44: 
Ability Modifiers to Proficiency Scores 
Ability/ 
eed 


Proficiency 


other enhancements. 

Some disadvantages can be chosen at one of two lev- 
els—the disadvantage of allergies, for example, can be taken 
at a moderate or a severe rating. Characters who choose 
the severe disadvantage will have lower chances of resisting 
the effects of the disadvantage during play. 

A character can never gain more than 15 character 
points by acquiring disadvantages. 

Certain disadvantages will contradict traits, and these 
cannot be selected—a character with keen eyesight cannot 
choose the colorblind disadvantage, for example. These 
conflicts are generally obvious on the basis of common 
sense. 


f . : The normal procedure 
Using Droficiencies is ised for making pro- 


í ficiency checks—i.e., a 
m Play player rolls a d20 
against his character's chance of success. However, the pro- 
cedure for determining a character's rating for success has 
been modified. 

When characters initially acquire proficiencies, their 
chance for success when they attempt proficiency checks is 
somewhat limited. Table 45 lists, for each nonweapon pro- 
ficiency, the starting rating for success when a character 
uses it in play. Note that there are still many opportunities 
for automatic success, so the check is only required on the 
most challenging tasks. 

This base chance of success can be modified by a high 
or low score in a relevant ability. Each proficiency on Table 
45 lists one or two abilities (including subabilities) that are 
beneficial in the use of that skill. In cases where two abilities 
are listed, the player can choose which ability modifies the 
proficiency. 

For example, Blutor the fighter buys an animal handling 
proficiency, which has as its initial chance of success a 5. 
Blutor has a Wisdom/Willpower of 16, however, so this +3 
increases his initial animal handling chance to a roll of 8 or 
less on a d20. 

As usual, a character must have the proper tools and 
other materials, and a suitable amount of time to get the 
job done. No successful proficiency check is going to allow 
a weaver to render a beautiful blanket out of raw wool in a 
single afternoon. The proficiency descriptions give details 
on the use of each skill, as guidelines for the DM. 


Effects of Traits 


Traits often benefit characters’ use of proficiencies, 
improving their chances for success. These improvements 
are explained in the trait descriptions, together with which 
proficiencies they modify. 

The role that traits play on proficiencies should be fac- 
tored into the number needed for success and should be 
listed on the character sheet. 


Chapter 6 


Table 45: Nonweapon Proficiency Groups 


GENERAL 
Proficiency 
Agriculture 
Animal Handling 
Animal Training 
Blacksmithing 
Boat Piloting 


Dancing 

Deep Diving 
Engineering 
Etiquette 
Fire-building 
Fishing 

Gaming 

Heraldry 

Leather working 
Mining 

Modern languages 
Musical Instrument 
Navigation 
Orienteering 
Painting 

Pottery —- 

Riding, Airborne 
Riding, Land 

Rope Use 
Sculpting 


Tailoring 
Weather Knowledge 
Weaving 


PRIEST 
Proficiency 
Ancient History 
Ancient Languages 


Healing 

Herbalism 

Local History 

e ling/Writing 
Religion 

Spellcraft 


Cost* 
3 


UI NJ. UI NJ BUANNNNBWANWWNHNODWNNWNNEANNWWAWN ARU 


Cost* 


Initial Rating 


OM-t«0uro uuco uU -J-owtuur-coudo oo UuuoswswoooUu ««-« 


Initial Rating 


"loo o0oocuuuo 


— 
| 
Wisdom/Willpower 


Wisdor/Willpower, Charisma/Leadership 
Strength/Muscle, Intelligence/Knowledge 
Strength/Muscle, Intelligence/Reason 


Dexterity/Balance, Charisma/Appearance 
Dexterity/Balance, Constitution/Health 
Intelligence/Reason, Wisdom/Intuition 


Charisma/Appearance, Wisdom/Intuition 


Wisdom/Intuition, Intelligence/Reason 
Wisdom/Intuition, Intelligence/Knowledge 
Wisdom/Intuition, rligence/ Knowledge 
Intelligence/Knowledge 
Intelligence/Knowledge, Dexterity/Aim 


Wisdom stamina 
Intellige 

Charisma, 

Intelligence/Knowledge, Wisdom/intuition 
Intelligence/Knowledge, Wisdom/Intuition 
Dexterity/Aim, Wisdom/Intuition 
Dexterity/Aim 

Wisdom/Willpower, Dexterity/Balance 
Wisdom/Willpower, Dexterity/Balance 
Dexterity/Aim, Wisdom/Intuition 
Dexterity/Aim, Wisdom/Intuition 
Charisma/Leadership 


Dexterity/Aim, Intelligence/Reason 
Wisdom/Intuition 
Intelligence/Reason, Dexterity/Aim 


Ability 


ara kiea Intelligence/Knowledge 


Neri Intelligence/Knowledge 
Wisdom/Intuition, Charisma/Leadership 
Intelligence/Knowledge, Wisdom/Intuition 


Intelligence/Knowledge, Charisma/Appearance 


Nonweapon Proficicncies 


Table 45: Nonweapon Proficiency Groups 


Reading Lips 
Set Snares 


WARRIOR 


*Cost in character points 


| 


Initial Rating — 


AM 


l Intelligence/Reason, Wisdom/Intuition 


Wisdom/Intuition, Rhe did 
Wisdom/Willp 


i Intelligence/Knowledge, Charisma/Appearance 


ie ia isa , Wisdom/Intuition 


"nteligenos/Knowiedue. Desderity Aim 


Dexterity/Balance, Voi id 
; ium) Leadersh = 


Strength/Stamina, Constitution/Fitness | 


Dexterity/Aim, Wisdom/Intuition 
ellige owledge 


Intelligence/Knowledge 


kso Paon, Wisdom/Intuition 


Chapter 6 


Automatic Success 


Nearly all proficiencies include skills that will not require 
rolls for success. Many of these are functions of crafts and 
trades, and may have little use in the game beyond their 
economic functions. Given a shop, raw materials, and 
plenty of time, a potter can make a pot, a leather worker 
can make a tent, and a cobbler can make a pair of shoes or 
boots without rolling to see if the attempt is successful. 

e As before, DMs are free to modify 

Modifying proficiency rolls for factors that will 

i influence success—for good or for ill. 
Proficiency If a task is unusually difficult, apply a 
Rolls penalty to the proficiency rating. 
Standard negative modifiers are —2 

for a somewhat difficult task, —4 for a moderately difficult 
task, and —8 for something where success is a real long shot. 

As a general rule, a proficiency should not be modified to 
greater than 19, or less than 2; a roll of 20 is always a fail- 
ure on a proficiency check. Conversely, a roll of 1 always 


should be successful. Remember, if automatic success is 
assured, no roll is necessary. 


Table 46: Traits 
Proficiency - 
All. jre ZO 


Mutes : 
Animal Empathy 
Artistic Ability 
Climate Sense 


Initial Rating 
Tum QU 4 


Glibness 
Impersonation 
Inherent Immunity/Poison 


Inherent sides arn 
Immunity/Cold 


Internal “genes 
Keen eyesight 
Keen Hearing — 
Keen Smell Sense 
Keen Taste Sense. 
Light seaper 
Lucky 
Music/Singing 


a 


4 

5 

B. os 

Bu 

5 

5 

5 "1 
BR 


Modifiers should be considered for some of the follow- 
ing factors: 

Time: If the task must be performed in a hurry, the diffi- 
culty is naturally increased. Some proficiency checks that 
might be automatic successes under most circumstances 
could require checks simply because they must be per- 
formed under a deadline. A cobbler always can make a pair 
of shoes, but if they need to be done in two hours, a profi- 
ciency check might be called for. 

Materials: Tasks performed in the field might require 
jury-rigging of equipment or materials, and these can influ- 
ence success—or require a check where the task might oth- 
erwise by automatic. Our cobbler will need to make a check 
if he's going to repair a mangled boot in the depths of a 
wilderness forest; the same repair in his shop would be an 
automatic success. 

Danger: Doing a task under a shower of arrows, or 
under the threat of imminent attack, adds a strong element 
of tension to the proficient character. A task might again be 
rendered more difficult than usual, or require a check 
instead of automatic success, when there is a serious haz- 
ard nearby. 

Uniqueness: If an unskilled character tries to perform a 
new task, a check might be required. If our cobbler is re- 
quired to make a pair of silken slippers studded with rubies, 
for example, he might have to experiment a bit before he 
gets it right. A unique problem can also modify a task that 
would already require a check. An animal handler used to 
breaking and training horses might suffer a —4 penalty if 
asked to do the same with a pegasus. 

Intricacy: A task that is more involved than any the char- 
acter has attempted before may require a check, perhaps 
with a penalty assigned. A character with the agriculture pro- 
ficiency is normally able to plant and harvest crops—no pro- 
ficiency check is necessary. However, if the character is 
placed in charge of a farming project where land must be 
cleared, irrigation arranged, pests controlled, and precise 
timing used on the harvest, an agriculture proficiency check 
probably will be required. 


Droficiencies and Level Advancement 


Each time a character advances a level, he gains charac- 
ter points (the DM decides how many, see Chapter One) to 
use on weapon and nonweapon proficiencies or to hold for 
use during the game. A character can add only one new 
weapon or nonweapon proficiency per level advancement 
unless that character has a special class ability that allows 
otherwise. Fore example, Blutor has just reach 7th level and 
currently has 5 character points. He can spend these point 
on one weapon proficiency or one nonweapon proficiency, 
but not both. If he has points left after buying a proficiency, 
he can spend them to improve his other proficiencies or 
same them to use during the game. 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 


In general, characters will 
Use of not be able to perform a 
Droficiencies by task unless they have some 


fi ° level of proficiency in it. 
Nonpro icient However, the DM can allow 
Characters nonproficient adventurers 


to attempt proficiency tasks, 
under a few circumstances. In general, the tasks performed 
must be very simple, and the character will not be able to 
perform them very well. Tasks that nonproficient characters 
attempt would generally fall into the automatic success cat- 
egory if they were attempted by a proficient character. A 
nonproficient character must roll a successful check using 
the proficiency's initial success rating, modified by the char- 
acter's relevant ability. If a trait is relevant to the use of the 
proficiency (see proficiency descriptions), a nonproficient 
character with that trait can claim this modifier when 
attempting a check. 

Several considerations might allow these types of 
checks: 

Life or Death: A non swimmer who falls in the water 
might be allowed to make a swimming proficiency check. 
Success means the character is able to stay afloat, perhaps 
moving slowly toward shore. Note that this would be an 
automatic success for any character with the swimming pro- 
ficiency. If modifiers exist that would require a proficient 
character to check (the PC is encumbered, or the water is 
very rough) then the nonproficient character will certainly 
fail. 

All the Time in the World: A character who does not 
have the agriculture proficiency, but is willing to spend two 
weeks planting a small plot of land, should be allowed to 
make a proficiency check. Success means some kind of 
useful crop. 

Excellent Instruction: If the blacksmith's arm is broken, 
but he can sit next to the forge and describe to the novice 
every step of the procedure, the nonproficient character 
should be allowed a proficiency check to create a simple 
object such as a horseshoe or a nail. Anything that would 
require the blacksmith to make a proficiency check, how- 
ever, would be beyond the skills of the nonproficient char- 
acter. 


Usi Disadvantages work well to 
$1 enhance the role-playing of a 

i character, and as such they 
Disadvantages should be the player's respon- 
sibility to remember and employ. A character with an irritat- 
ing personality, for example, can be role-played in such a 
way that the DM never has to do anything to enforce the 
disadvantage. Good role-players will create their own 
trouble, so to speak. 

However, some aspects of disadvantages require DM 
input. Somewhere amid copious volumes of notes, the DM 
should keep a list of each character's disadvantages, making 


sure than none of them are overlooked. For example, if a 
character has a phobia of spiders, the DM can insure there 
will be a chance every once in awhile to encounter some 
big, hairy-legged arachnids. 

If a disadvantage falls to the player's responsibility, and 
that player tends to ignore it, the DM should create a few 
situations where the disadvantage is impossible to overlook. 
For example, if the player does not role-play the character's 
irritating personality disadvantage, NPCs might suddenly 
become enraged at the character for imagined slights— 
insults that the NPCs claim result from the PC's irritating 


personality. 


Moderate/Severe Disadvantages 


A character with a moderate disadvantage checks 
against ability or sub-ability scores, while a character with 
a severe disadvantage rolls at half of the ability scores, 
rounded up. 

For example, a character with a Wisdom/Willpower score 
of 17 would need to roll a 9 or less to resist the effects of a 
severe disadvantage, whereas a roll of 17 or lower would 
resist the effects of a moderate disadvantage. 


Table 47: Disadvantages 
Character Point Bonus 
Moderate _ Severe - 


Disadvantage - 


Clumsy 
Colorblind 
Compulsive Hone 


Greed 
Irritating Personality 


Phobia: Endosed Spaces 
Phobia: Heights 
Phobia: Magic 


Phobia: Undead 
Phobia: Water 
Tongue-tied 
Unlucky 


Chapter 6 


pg 


Z7 i | 
Ld 


Demoving Disadvantages 


If the DM is agreeable, a player can 
remove a character's disadvantage by 
spending character points. Disadvan- 
tages rated as moderate can be elimi- 
nated, while severe disadvantages can 
be reduced to moderate at one level 
advancement for a character, and then 
removed at a subsequent advance- 
ment. 

The cost to remove a disadvantage is 
1 character point more than the points 
gained when the disadvantage is first 
acquired. For example, the colorblind 
disadvantage gains 3 character points. 
Removing this disadvantage costs 4 
points. 

A severe disadvantage is reduced to 
a moderate disadvantage for 1 more 
character point than the difference be- 
tween the severe and moderate costs. 
For example, severe allergies award 8 
character points, moderate allergies 3— 
a difference of 5 points. Thus, the cost 
to reduce severe allergies to moderate 
is 6 character points. 


"o The proficien- 
Proficiency The profici: 
Descriptions ranged alpha- 


betically. Each 
description suggests tasks of varying dif- 
ficulty that characters can accomplish 
with that skill, as well as an overview of 
materials and time required. 

Tasks that are automatically success- 
ful are suggested, but these are not 
complete lists. They are intended to 
give players and DMs an accurate idea 
about a skill's area of expertise. 

The AD&D Player's Handbook in- 
cludes descriptions of many of these 
proficiencies. The Skills and Powers 
entries are designed to complement 
the Player's Handbook, adding details 
and rules that have been modified by 
the character point systern. 


Agriculture: This skill includes auto- 
matic success at planting, harvesting, 
storing crops, using an existing irrigation 
system, tending animals, and butcher- 
ing. Tasks that require proficiency 
checks include designing or making an 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 


irrigation system, and weed and pest control. The animal 
empathy and climate sense traits each provide +2 bonuses 
to relevant agriculture proficiency checks. 


Ancient History: Characters with this proficiency are 
familiar with the legends, rulers, and writings of a specific 
historical period in the campaign world. They will recognize, 
without a proficiency check, items, scrolls, artwork, etc. of 
that period. They will know the main historical figures, such 
as kings and powerful villains, and the major circumstances 
of those individuals’ lives and deaths. With a successful pro- 
ficiency check they will recall lesser figures, such as lords, 
knights, and heroes, and recall legendary tales, important 
sigils, and perhaps be able to decipher a small bit of text, 
symbols, or hieroglyphics. The obscure knowledge trait pro- 
vides a +3 to this character's proficiency rating. 


Ancient Languages: Adventurers with this proficiency 
are familiar with at least one ancient language—i.e. they 
have the reading/writing proficiency with the chosen lan- 
guages. If confronted with an example of a historically- 
related language, they can decipher about a paragraph of 
that tongue with a successful proficiency check. For each 
character point spent on this proficiency (after initially 
acquiring it) add one additional ancient language to the list 
of languages a character knows fluently. The precise mem- 
ory trait provides a +2 to this proficiency rating. 


Animal Handling: This proficiency allows characters to 
automatically steer carts, plow horses, etc. With a successful 
proficiency check, they can soothe domesticated animals 
and beasts of burden which become agitated or frightened. 
The characters receive a +1 bonus to proficiency checks 
made with any of the animal-riding proficiencies, and they 
receive a +2 bonus to their proficiency rating if they have 
the animal empathy trait. 


Animal Lore: Adventurers with animal lore have a store 
of knowledge about animal behavior, and without any profi- 
ciency check will know the basic feeding and social habits 
(i.e. herding, nesting, etc.) of animals with which they have 
past experience. 

With a proficiency check, a character can determine 
whether an observed animal is intending to attack or to flee, 
or predict that animals will come along a trail at a certain 
time of day. This character gets a +2 bonus to checks made 
using the set snares proficiency. 

The character can imitate the calls of wild animals 
(except for very large creatures). A successful check means 
that the imitation is virtually perfect, and even fools animals 
of the same type. A failed check might fool other characters, 
but will not deceive the animals. 


Animal Training: When players choose this proficiency, 
they must declare what type of creature their characters will 


learn to train. Suggestions include dogs, falcons, parrots, 
horses, pigeons, elephants, and ferrets. More exotic animals 
can be chosen at the DM's option. Monsters with animal 
intelligence are another possibility, though they can be diffi- 
cult to control—in effect, requiring more frequent proficiency 
checks, 

Training of an animal requires a rather lengthy period of 
time—a matter of weeks, at least, for even the most basic 
tasks. A character who spends this amount of time will suc- 
ceed at the training (no check necessary). Such tasks 
include dogs being trained to stay, come when summoned, 
and guard a specific location; pigeons returning to the roost; 
falcons hunting and killing game; and horses bearing sad- 
dles and obeying simple riding commands. 

More elaborate tasks also take time to teach, and these 
require proficiency checks: dogs patrolling a circuit, or 
retrieving specific objects; and horses performing the 
maneuvers of a knightly charger are examples. 

A character with the animal empathy trait gains a +1 
bonus to this proficiency rating. 


Appraising: This skill allows the character to make gen- 
erally accurate (+ or — 1096) assessments of common 
objects, including items made of precious metals and gem- 
stones. The character can also assess, to + or —25%, the 
value of objects of art, tapestries, furniture, weapons, etc.— 
provided a variety of these items are present in the game 
world. These assessments require no proficiency checks, 
and the DM can roll (d20 or d100) to determine the accu- 
racy of the appraisal. 

A character who passes a proficiency check will be able 
to identify a forgery of a valuable object, to make a very 
accurate assessment of the value of a common item 
(within 5%), or to make a general assessment of the worth 
of an uncommon item, including artifacts. The DM may 
wish to roll this check, and on a roll of 20 the character 
makes a wildly inaccurate assessment. 


Armorer: A character with this proficiency can make the 
types of armor typically available in the campaign world. 
The armorer requires the proper raw materials (plate metal, 
tough leather, etc.) and enough time to do the job properly. 
Time ranges from about two weeks for a shield to 20 weeks 
for a suit of plate mail armor. No proficiency check is 
required generally, though if the armorer tries to rush the 
job or work with less than adequate materials a proficiency 
check should be rolled to determine if the character is suc- 
cessful. 

The armorer can also make field repairs to armor that 
has been damaged through use. These repairs always 
require proficiency checks, and if the check fails the armor 
or shield is lost. 


Astrology: This character has a general understanding of 
the movement of celestial bodies, and the influence of that 


3 swept away by the current, or turned about, or moderately 


movement upon the beings of the campaign world. The 
astrologer can identify numerous constellations, and knows 
many of the legends behind their naming. The character 
can make limited predictions for the future, always in vague 
terms—whether these are accurate is up to the DM. A char- 
acter with this proficiency gains +2 on all checks made 
using the navigation proficiency, providing the stars can be 
seen. A character with the trait of empathy gains a +1 
bonus to the astrology proficiency rating. 


Astronomy: A character proficient in this skill has a 
detailed knowledge of the relative movement of stars, 
moons, and planets. The character can predict with complete 
accuracy the arrival of eclipses, comets, and other cosmic 
phenomena (evening and morning stars, full moons, etc.) 
The astronomer can identify numerous stars and constella- 
tions, and gains a +3 bonus to all checks made using the 
navigation proficiency, providing that the stars can be seen. 


Blacksmithing: A character with the blacksmithing profi- 
ciency can handle a forge, bellows, hammer and tongs, to 
create tools and other objects out of iron. The character 
cannot make weapons or armor, but can make—without a 
proficiency check—simple items such as horseshoes, nails, 
brackets and buckles. By making a successful proficiency 
check, the character can create intricate objects such as 
wire cages and locks. A blacksmith can make an iron hoop 
for a wheel that has been made by a carpenter; this combi- 
nation of proficiencies is required for a strong wheel. 


Blind-fighting: This allows characters to ignore many of 
the problems inherent in fighting without being able to see. 
In total darkness, the character suffers —2 (not —4) to attack 
rolls, and suffers no penalties to AC versus melee attacks. In 
starlight or moonlight, the character suffers only a —1 pen- 
alty to attack rolls. 

When moving in darkness, the character is allowed to 
make a proficiency check at the beginning of a round; suc- 
cess means no movement penalties are assessed because 
of the darkness, while failure means the normal penalty 
applies. 

When in combat with an invisible creature, the character 
with blind-fighting proficiency suffers only a —2 to attack 
rolls, but gains no benefit toward discovering the creature. 


Piloting: This proficiency is useful for negotiating chal- 
lenging waters with a rowboat, canoe, or small dory. When 
shooting a rapids, trying to stay afloat in a storm, or trying to 
row upstream against a strong current, the character will 
succeed without a proficiency check—unless the water con- 
ditions are very extreme. In this case, the DM will require an 
appropriately modified roll; a successful roll means that the 
character negotiates the challenge and no further checks 
are necessary (until the next stretch of rapids, etc.). Failure 
does not necessarily mean that the boat sinks, but it gets 


swamped—with everything and everyone inside getting wet. 
If the rough water continues, the character must make addi- 
tional proficiency checks (every 1—6 rounds). The charac- 
ter's proficiency rating suffers a —1 modifier for each failed 
check, indicating the difficulty of steering a boat that is 
slowly filling with water. 

The character also knows the basics of sailing, and can 
effectively maneuver a single-masted sailboat. As above, 
challenges will require proficiency checks, with failed checks 
leading to increasingly dire straits. 


Bowyer/Fletcher: This character can make bows and 
arrows (but not arrowheads) of the types available in the 
campaign world. Given appropriate materials, the character 
can successfully make a bow or 2-12 arrows in a day. 
(Note that finding the right branch for the bow, or the 
proper shafts and feathers for the arrows might take several 
days of searching!) 

Weaponsmiths are required to make good steel arrow- 
heads. If none are available, the character can fire harden 
the wooden tips of his arrows, but these weapons suffer a 
—1 penalty on all damage rolls, and any arrow that misses 
its target is 5096 likely to be broken. 


Brewing: This category includes the brewing of malt 
beverages, the making of wine, and the distilling of stronger 
drink. A character can perform all the basic functions of the 
brewer's art without requiring a proficiency check. If the 
brewer chooses to make the check, failure means that a 
batch has been wasted, but success means that a particu- 
larly fine vintage has been created. 


Carpentry: This character knows the basics of working 
with wood and can create—with no check required—small 
structures, fences, platforms, cabinets, carts and wagons. 
The carpenter can make wooden wheels, but a blacksmith 
must form the iron rim or the wheel will have a very short 
life expectancy. 

A carpenter might build a short footbridge, a wooden 
clock, or a dumbwaiter system—these tasks will require a 
proficiency check. Larger projects such as major bridges, 
boats, or catapults, require the aid of a character with the 
engineering proficiency. 


Charioteering: A character with this skill can move a 
chariot at its normal speed, and effectively drive it over a 
smooth, wide road. The proficient character requires no 
check to drive or steer the chariot, including traveling across 
relatively flat, open countryside, charging into battle, and 
performing the turns, stops, and starts that might be 
required on the battlefield. 

By making a proficiency check, the character can guide the 
chariot through obstacles such as deep fords, steeply-climbing 
terrain, ditches, and rough or rocky ground. Also, with a suc- 


cessful check, the character can add 1/3 to a chariot's move- 
ment rate for the duration of a charge or a march. However, 
failure of this check means that the chariot moves at its normal 
rate, but that the horses fatigue in half the normal time. Char- 
acters with the animal empathy trait gain a +1 bonus to their 
ratings with this proficiency. 

Note that certain obstacles are simply impassable to 
chariots, including walls, water too deep (or too muddy on 
the bottom) to ford, thick forests, and mountainous terrain. 


Cobbling: A character with this skill can makes shoes, 
boots, and sandals. No checks are normally required, but if 
the character attempts a field repair of damaged footwear, 
or tries to fashion shoes from wood or leather that has been 
scrounged up, a successful check is needed. 


Cooking: This character knows the basics of food prepa- 
ration, and he can generally cook, bake, fry, and so forth 
without a proficiency check. Checks are 
required if the character attempts to 
prepare truly gourmet meals, or tries to 
make a palatable dinner out of unpalat- 
able ingredients—grubs, roots, and bark, 
for example. 


Cryptography: The character with 
this proficiency has some training and 
skill in deciphering hidden messages 
and codes. In its basic form, the charac- 
ter is allowed to make a proficiency 
check when confronted with a coded 
message. If successful, the DM can 
reveal a general overview of the secret 
missive. 

This proficiency is more fun when 
used as an aid to role-playing. Ideally, the 
use of the cryptography proficiency re- 
quires a great deal of involvement from 
the player—and a certain amount of puz- 
zle design by the DM—instead of simply 
passing a check and demanding that a 
coded message be explained by the DM. 

Rather, a character with the cryptog- 
raphy proficiency should have the 
chance of recognizing a code concealed 
within a written or spoken message, or 
perhaps hidden by some other medium 
—an intricately woven tapestry or 
sculpted piece of heraldry, for example. 
The DM will usually roll this check 
secretly, announcing that the character 
observes something unusual. 

If the character notices the encoded 
sigil, the DM should describe it in con- 
siderable detail—word for word, if it is a 


written message. The character can make an additional pro- 
ficiency check during the course of the decoding; if suc- 
cessful, the DM can provide a significant clue—a name, 
place, or date that is mentioned, for example. The bulk of 
the decoding should still be performed by the player. 


Dancing: The character knows and can perform the 
moves of many types of dances, including some that 
involve precise and detailed steps. All dances common to 
the character's society will be familiar. Rare, archaic, or 
unusual dances will be known with a proficiency check. 
Also, characters who have had a chance to observe an 
unknown dance can perform it (-2 modifier, +1 for each 
time after the first that it is seen performed). 

Truly spectacular dances—the kind that win character's 
campaign-wide acclaim—combine elements of dance profi- 
ciency with skills of tumbling, tightrope walking, and jump- 
ing. 


Chapter 6 


Deep Diving: A character with this proficiency can add 
10 feet per round to his speed of descent when diving 
into the water, or from the surface. Thus, a character with 
the deep diving proficiency can descend 30 feet per 
round, plus modifiers for encumbrance, running start, and 
height. Likewise, a character with the deep diving profi- 
ciency can surface at a rate of 30 feet (not 20 feet) per 
round. 

This proficiency provides characters with the ability to 
hold their breath for 2/3 their Constitution scores in rounds, 
not the 1/3 allowed to most characters. Effects of exceed- 
ing the allotted time are the same, regardless of proficiency 
ratings. 


Disguise: Characters trained in this proficiency can con- 
ceal their appearance through makeup and costuming. If 
they seek simply to alter their appearance without conceal- 
ing size, sex, or race—for example, to go out in a city without 
anyone discovering what they look like—they can succeed 
without a proficiency check. 

If the task is more difficult-the character in disguise 
meets and talks with an acquaintance, for example—a suc- 
cessful proficiency check is required. Characters who try to 
alter the appearance of their sex, race, or size, must make 
successful proficiency checks with a —2 penalty for each 
category. 

Characters who attempt to disguise themselves as spe- 
cific persons must make proficiency checks when they 
encounter and speak with someone who knows the other 
individuals. All of these checks suffer an inherent -2 pen- 
alty. 
Note that the talent of impersonation (see traits) can 
improve a character's success with the disguise proficiency. 


Endurance: A character with this proficiency can per- 
form continual strenuous physical activity for twice as long 
as a normal character before becoming exhausted. If the 
character is ever required to make a Strength/Stamina 
check or a Constitution/Fitness check, the character can add 
his endurance score to his success number. If the fatigue 
rules from the PLarer’s Option: Combat & Tactics book are in 
play, the endurance proficiency is treated differently (see 
Combat & Tactics, Chapter One). 


ing: This proficiency is required for the design 
and construction of objects and installations of all sizes. 
Note that carpentry, stonemasonry, blacksmithing, or other 
proficiencies also might be necessary for the actual building. 
Characters can design and supervise the building of houses, 
boats, small bridges, palisades, and towers—of up to about 
30 feet high without proficiency checks. 

Characters with this skill can try to design large bridges, 
fortresses, ships, war machines, locks and dams, and 
other more complicated projects. Plans for these types of 
objects generally require at least a week—more if an 


exceptionally large project is being attempted. Compli- 
cated tasks require successful proficiency checks before a 
workable design can be made. If a check fails on a roll of 
less than 20, however, the engineer will be aware of the 
failure and can seek to create a new design—go back to 
the drawing board, so to speak. On a roll of 20, the design 
is flawed but the danger will not be discovered until after 
the object is built. 


Etiquette: Characters with this skill are familiar with the 
typical manners of formal interaction—at least as they relate 
to the culture in the campaign world. They know what fan- 
fares are required to greet royal visitors, how to seat the 
lords and ladies at a table, how to organize the reception 
line, and how everyone is to be addressed. None of these 
tasks require a proficiency check. 

When dealing with a foreign or completely unknown cul- 
ture, the characters must pass proficiency checks to cor- 
rectly gauge the required etiquette. The check should be 
modified—+2 if the foreigners are the same race as the 
character, +1 or more if the character has had some time to 
observe the foreigners. 

Characters with the empathy trait gain a +2 bonus to 
their rating with this proficiency. 


Fire-building: A character with this proficiency can build 
a fire in 1d20 minutes, as long as there is dry wood and 
some small bits of tinder. Add another d20 minutes for 
each of these factors: the wood (or tinder) is wet, it's rain- 
ing or foggy, or the winds are strong. A proficiency check is 
required if conditions are bad and the character is forced to 
work without shelter. 


Fishing: A character with this proficiency knows how to 
catch fish with hook and line, net, and spear. If fish are pre- 
sent in a body of water, a successful proficiency check 
means the character has caught something. Typically, with a 
successful check, the fisherman he will catch 1d6 fish in an 
hour. This number can be doubled if many fish are present. 
It is reduced to one fish per hour if the character is seeking 
large quarry—such as sturgeon, muskellunge, giant carp, or 
salt-water fish. 


Forgery: This proficiency indicates a skill at creating false 
documents, mimicking the handwriting of others, and 
detecting forgeries. No check is required if the character is 
simply trying to duplicate a style of writing—the issuing of 
an anonymous military decree, for example. Characters try- 
ing to duplicate the signatures of specific individuals must 
see those signatures; the DM rolls the proficiency checks 
secretly to see if the forgeries are successful. If a character 
writes a longer message in a specific hand, the DM rolls 
the check with a -2 modifier. The DM should also roll the 
check if a character seeks to determine if another docu- 
ment is a forgery. On a 20, the character makes the wrong 


assumption, whereas a failure with less than 20 means 
that the character is not sure of the truth or falsehood of 
the sample. 


Gaming: A character with this proficiency is familiar with 
all manner of gambling games. A successful proficiency 
check means the character will win a given game being 
played with NPCs—although cumulative negative modifiers 
should be assigned for each NPC with the gaming profi- 
ciency. Subtract 1 for each proficient NPC, with —2 for those 
with higher than basic gaming expertise. 

The character might try to cheat, which confers a +3 to 
the gaming proficiency score and requires a check. If the 
proficiency check rolled is a 20, the character gets caught 
cheating, even if no NPCs have the gaming proficiency. Add 
one to this spread for each NPC with gaming proficiency— 
i.e, if two others have this skill, the cheater will be caught 
on a roll of 18-20. 


Gem-cutting: A character with this 
proficiency each day can work 1d10 
uncut stones into finished gems. The 
worker needs good light and an assort- 
ment of chisels, hammers, and hard 
cutting blades. 

The gem cutter can do decent work 
without a proficiency check; the stones 
cut will be valued in the typical range 
for that type of gem. However, if the 
cutter seeks to do a unique and very 
high-quality job, a proficiency check is 
called for. Failure means the stone is 
destroyed, but success results in a gem 
of double the usual value. 


Healing: Characters with this profi- 
ciency can perform first aid on fresh 
wounds and can supervise the recov- 
ery of themselves and others. If the 
characters tend a wound on the round 
immediately after it is inflicted, a suc- 
cessful proficiency check means that 
1d3 points of damage have been 
restored (to a maximum of the dam- 
age inflicted the previous round). If 
they tend a wound within one hour of 
its infliction, they can heal 1 point with 
a successful check. No character can 
benefit from this proficiency more than 
once a day. 

This proficiency can also help with 
long-term healing and resisting poison 
and disease; these procedures are 
detailed in the Player's Handbook. 


Heraldry: These characters are familiar with the heraldic 
symbols of their own lands, and those of neighboring lands. 
The characters can make proficiency checks when con- 
fronted with unusual or rare symbols; success means that 
they can identify the symbols. A character with the obscure 
knowledge trait gains a --2 bonus to the use of this profi- 
ciency. 


Herbalism: This skill indicates that a character is famil- 
iar with the uses of natural plant products for good and ill. 
If a character spends a day searching the woods, and 
makes a successful proficiency check, enough herbs, 
fungi, roots, leaves, pollen, and pulp has been gleaned for 
2d6 doses. 

The most common use of these herbs is as an aid to 
healing; one dose of herbs can be used in conjunction 
with the healing proficiency (by the herbalist or another 
healer). This dose adds +1 point to the wounds cured by a 


= take about 2—12 daylight hours to reach this position, 


successful healing proficiency check. Even if the healing 
check fails, the herbs still restore the 1 hit point. With no 
healing proficiency, the herbs can still be used, but the 
herbalist needs to roll a successful check to restore the 1 
hit point. 

The herbs also can be used to create a poison, either 
ingested or injected. A single use of poison requires two 
doses of herbs. The lethality or other effects of the poison 
(paralysis, unconsciousness, delusions, etc.) must be 
worked out with the DM. 


Hunting: The hunting proficiency allows a character to 
find game and get reasonably close to it. The actual kill is 
handled using rolls to hit and for damage. Hunting is a pro- 
ficiency that always requires a successful proficiency check 
when it is used. 

If the check is successful, the hunter will reach a position 
within 1d100 + 100 yards of the quarry. Generally it will 


though an abundance or scarcity of garne can decrease or 
increase this time at the DM's option. Night hunting might 
be possible for characters with infravision. 

The hunter also possesses a basic skill at removing skin 
from an animal, and butchering the carcass into usable 
meat. These tasks require no checks. 


Juggling: A character with this proficiency can juggle up 
to three small objects without a proficiency check. Addi- 
tional objects can be added, but a check is required; use a 
—] modifier for each item beyond the fourth. Checks are 
also required for spectacular feats, such as juggling lighted 
torches or whirling scimitars, with failure meaning that 1d4 
items are dropped. The potential for damage or disaster is 
left to the DM. 

This skill is primarily useful for entertainment or diver- 
sions, though characters with the juggling proficiency have a 
chance to catch small objects—such as 
darts or daggers—that are thrown at 
them. They must be facing the source 
of the attack to make such an attempt, 
and they must make a proficiency 
check with a —2 modifier. Failure means 
they are autornatically hit by the thrown 
objects. 


Jumping: This skill means that a 
character has unusual abilities to jump 
across distances, leap incredible 
heights, and vault with a pole. 

A human or elven character with the 
jumping proficiency can perform a run- 
ning broad jump of 20 feet without a 
proficiency check; a jump of more than 
20 feet requires a check, with a —1 
modifier for each foot above 20. The 
jumper can do a standing broad jump 
of 8 feet without a check; longer jumps 
require proficiency checks with the 
same penalties. 

The character can high jump 4 feet 
without a check, higher obstacles 
require a check, with a —1 modifier for 
every 6" of additional height. If jumping 
from a standing start, the beginning 
height is 3 feet, not 4 feet. 

Dwarves, gnomes, and halflings are 
more limited in their jumping ability. For 
these characters, the basic distances in 
each category are reduced to 75% of 
the listed amount—e.g. 15 feet instead 
of 20 for the broad jump. 

A vaulting pole must be at least as 
tall as the character using it, but no 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 


more than twice as tall. The character can vault over obsta- 
cles up to the height of the pole. If the obstacles are within 
2 feet of the pole’s length, however, the character must 
make a proficiency check. The vaulter can also jump across 
a space no more than 1% the width of the pole's length. If 
the gap is greater than the length of the pole, a proficiency 
check is required. 


Leather working: The character with this skill can skin 
animals, tan leather, and work that leather into clothing, 
armor, backpacks and saddlebags, harnesses, etc. These 
tasks are automatic successes, but the leather worker will 
have to make a proficiency check when attempting unusual 
jobs—making a leather patch for a boat hull, for example, or 
making a usable tent of scraps of hide. 


Local History: The character knows all about the back- 
ground of a specific area in the campaign world and can 
use this knowledge to entertain and enlighten others, gain- 
ing a +2 bonus to the reaction rolls of NPCs from that area. 
If a specific question comes up—the identity of a knight's 
banner seen in the distance, for example—the character can 
make a proficiency check, with success indicating the cor- 
rect tidbit of information. A character with the obscure 
knowledge trait gains a +3 bonus to the proficiency rating. 


Mining: A character with the mining proficiency can 
select the site of a mine and supervise its excavation and 
operation. Mining proficiency checks are best made for a 
player by the DM, since the character will not learn for some 
time whether his suppositions about a potential mine were 
accurate. 

The Player’s Handbook contains a more detailed 
description of how to role-play a miner's proficiency use. 


Modern Languages: The character has learned one or 
more languages, other than his native tongue, that are con- 
temporary to the campaign world. For each additional char- 
acter point spent on modern Languages, the character can 
speak one additional language. 


Mountaineering: A character with this proficiency is 
skilled in the use of hammer and pitons (spikes) to secure 
a route up a mountainside. He also knows how to use the 
rope and brackets that can link a party of climbers. A profi- 
cient character can make a route across a steep section of 
rocks, and by the use of ropes allow other, non-proficient 
characters to follow. 

No proficiency check is required unless the DM declares 
that a route is very perilous—steeply pitched, with few hand- 
and foot-holds, and those that exist are tiny or loose. If a 
character connected to the mountaineer by rope falls, the 
mountaineering character can make a proficiency check; 
success means that the other's fall has been arrested. Fail- 
ure means that the other character continues to fall, and 


101 


failure by a roll of 20 means that the mountaineer is pulled 
down, too. 

Characters with the mountaineering proficiency can add 
their proficiency rating to their percentage chance of climb- 
ing any surface; this includes thieves using the climb walls 
special ability. 


Musical Instrument: The character can play a specific 
type of musical instrument, adding an extra instrument for 
every character point expended on this proficiency after its 
initial purchase. The skill enables the character to play the 
instrument very well, though a proficiency check might be 
required when attempting a very difficult piece. 

A character with the music/instrumental trait knows how 
to play two instruments immediately (when this proficiency 
is selected). For each character point spent, two (not one) 
additional instruments can be learned. 


Navigation: Characters with the navigation proficiency 
know how to fix their locations on the seas and oceans of 
the campaign world by observing celestial clues. Characters 
with a sextant (not necessarily available in all campaigns) 
and a compass, and who can see the stars or observe a 
sunrise or sunset, will know where they are—no proficiency 
check is necessary. Such a skilled character can navigate 
across entire oceans without becoming lost, though bad 
weather can obscure the celestial clues and blow a vessel 
far off course. 

If a character does not have the proper tools, or is forced 
to work with only a general idea of direction (fog obscures 
the sunset, for example), the DM should secretly make the 
proficiency check. Success means the character is reason- 
ably accurate in plotting the day's course. Failure means an 
off-course error that varies by the extent of the failure—a roll 
of 20 has the character going practically the exact opposite 
direction! 


Orienteering: This is the ability to keep one's bearings 
on roadless, trackless land. Proficient characters will not get 
lost as long as they can either see the sky or have the use 
of a compass. This means that they can maintain track of a 
given direction, keeping themselves and their companions 
traveling in a straight line. 

Characters who possess a map and can track their direc- 
tion of travel can arrive at specific points—towns, ferry cross- 
ings, bridges, monuments, wells, springs, etc.—without profi- 
ciency checks. 

If the map is slightly erroneous, or lacking in crucial 
details, the characters will have to make successful profi- 
ciency checks to accurately arrive at a specific point. This 
check can be modified for increased difficulty based on 
poor weather or major problems with the map. 


Painting: A character with this proficiency is skilled at 
rendering images with oil, brush, and canvas. The artist can 


Cha 


pter 6 


z trait of animal empathy, and +1 if they have the additional 


create reasonable portrayals of people, landscapes, and 
monsters, and he possesses a knowledge of perspective, 
shading, and composition. If this proficiency is coupled with 
the artistic talent trait, the character receives +2 to his base 
painting score and can create stunningly realistic works, 
capable of stirring profound reactions in observers—and 
perhaps worth gold to wealthy NPCs. 


Pottery: The character can create ceramic vessels—jars, 
bottles, plates, bowls, etc.—of whatever type are in use in 
the campaign world. A serviceable piece of crockery can be 
made without a proficiency check. If the character attempts 
to make a fine-quality piece, it will take about three days for 
an average-sized object—and a successful proficiency 
check. Failure means the object is useless; success indi- 
cates the degree of excellence, with a roll of 1 indicating 
that the character has created a work of unique value. 

A character with the artistic talent trait gains a +2 to the 
pottery proficiency rating. Masterpieces of pottery are 
sculpted by these talented characters. 


Reading/Writing: The character is literate in a language 
that is contemporary to the campaign world, provided that 
the character can speak it (see the modern languages profi- 
ciency), For each additional character point spent on read- 
ing/writing, the character is literate in one additional lan- 
guage. 


Reading Lips: Characters possessing this proficiency 
have a chance to understand the speech of those they can 
see but not hear. The speaker must be clearly visible, less 
than 30 feet away, and well-illuminated—characters cannot 
lip-read with infravision. If the speaker is addressing the lip 
reader and intends to be understood, no proficiency check 
is necessary. If lip readers attempt to “overhear” speech not 
directed to them, proficiency checks are required. Success 
means the gist of the words come through. The trait of 
empathy adds +2 to checks using this skill. 


Religion: A character with this proficiency is familiar with 
the basic tenets of the major and minor faiths practiced in 
the campaign world. Observing an act of religious signifi- 
cance—a blessing of warriors before battle, for example— 
means the character understands the importance of the rit- 
ual without a proficiency check. Checks are required to 
understand the activities of unique or foreign religions, 
Additional character points spent on this proficiency can 
expand a character's knowledge to include other religions, 
or can increase the level of detailed knowledge about the 
faiths already studied. 


Riding, Airborne and Riding, Land: The riding proficien- 
cies are well-detailed in the Player's Handbook. Characters 
using the Skills and Powers rules can add +2 to their profi- 
ciency score in either category of riding if they possess the 


102 


proficiency in animal training. These modifiers are cumulative. 


Rope Use: A character with this proficiency can tie knots 
of all kinds without a proficiency check. The character adds 
+2 to all mountaineering proficiency checks that involve 
rope and also gains +10% to climbing chances-if the climb 
involves a rope. 

If the character is tied up with ropes, or seeks to untie a 
permanent knot, a proficiency check is required. Success 
means that the bonds or knots come undone in 2d6 min- 
utes. 


Running: Characters can add 4 their normal top speed 
to their movement rates for up to 1 turn. After this, they 
must spend a turn resting, or 6 turns engaged in normal 
activity before they can sprint again. 

Also, characters can jog steadily, moving at twice their 
normal movement rates over the course of a day. Eight 
hours of rest is mandatory after such a stint. Following rest, 
the characters can make proficiency checks. Success means 
they can run normally during the upcoming day; failure indi- 
cates they cannot use the running ability that day. 


Sculpting: The character with this proficiency can render 
realistic objects out of stone and clay. A high level of sculpt- 
ing proficiency, coupled with the artistic talent trait, means 
the character can create statues, statuettes, busts, and other 
objects of rare and valuable beauty. 


Seamanship: These characters are trained to help oper- 
ate galleys and sailing ships. They can row, hang rigging, 
steer a helm, patch canvas, and repair hulls (with tar or 
pitch). This proficiency does not allow characters to navi- 
gate. 

The captain of a vessel, who presumably possesses this 
skill at a high level, must make proficiency checks to avoid 
certain hazards of the sea. Such a seaman might take the 
ship into a reef-lined bay with no difficulty if a local pilot is 
there to act as a guide. But if the captain has to pick a path 
through coastal breakers, a failed check might mean a bump 
on the bottom of the hull, or that the ship has run aground. 
Bad weather and treacherous currents can penalize these 
proficiency checks, while fair breezes and superb visibility 
should convey positive modifiers. 


Set Snares: A character with this skill can place small 
traps and snares along a game trail—a useful aid to gaining 
food in a non-civilized setting. Given proper materials— 
supple branches, bowstring or heavy thread—the character 
can make two snares in an hour without a proficiency check. 
The character can check the snares after eight hours, rolling 
a proficiency check for each. These checks can be modified 
by +2 if the character has the animal lore proficiency, and an 
additional +2 for the animal empathy trait. Success means 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 


that a small animal, such as a rabbit or partridge, has been 
snared, The checks can be modified up or down by the DM, 
to reflect the population of animals in the area. 

The character can create a larger snare, such as a pit trap, 
by making a proficiency check. An 8' deep, 6' square pit re- 
quires at least eight hours to make if the ground is soft and 
a decent shovel is available. Rocky ground, larger pits, and 
makeshift equipment can increase this time dramatically. 
Whether anything falls into the large pit is a matter of the 
DM's interpretation and generosity. 


Singing: The character knows and can perform the 
many types of songs, including some that involve complex 
or difficult notes. All songs common to the character's soci- 
ety will be familiar. Rare, archaic, or unusual songs will be 
known with a proficiency check. Also, characters who have 
had a chance to hear an unknown song can perform it (—2 
modifier, -- 1 for each time after the first that it is heard). 

The character can compose his own songs, including 
choral works, with a successful proficiency check. If the 
character also has the Music/Singing Talent, the character 
can add +2 to his base score. 


Spellcraft: A character with this proficiency gains no 
actual spell use abilities, but does possess significant knowl- 
edge about spellcasting. Observing or overhearing a spell 
being cast, or a getting a good look at the spell compo- 
nents, lets the character make a proficiency check. Success 

' means the enchantment is recognized. Modify the check by 
+2 if the character can both see and hear, and add another 
+2 if the spell components are spotted. 

Wizards using this proficiency gain +2 to checks made if 
the spell being studied is one from their own specialty or 
school. Characters with this proficiency can also make 
checks to determine if an item is enchanted. 


Stonemasonry: A character with this skill knows how to 
excavate stone from quarries, cut that stone into blocks, 
make bricks, mix mortar, lay stone or brick, and carve simple 
designs and symbols into stone. The mason can lay cobble- 
stones or bricks for roads and courtyards, and the work can 
include small arches and cantilevered platforms. None of 
these tasks require proficiency checks. The character's tools 
include hammers, chisels, trowels, block and tackle, plumb 
lines, shovels, and wedges. If fully equipped, a typical 
mason can build a wall, 10' long, 5' high and 1' thick, in one 
day—if the stone is already cut. The character can erect 
walls, buildings, pillars, stone abutments for bridges, etc. 

The character can step up the work by making a profi- 
ciency check. Also, if the stonemason doesn't have the ben- 
efit of the engineering proficiency, checks must be made for 
wall sections higher than 10', and for structures involving 
arches or elaborate corners. 

A dwarven character receives a +2 bonus when taking 
this proficiency. 


103 


Survival: A character with this proficiency has a basic 
knowledge of the dangers and challenges in certain wilder- 
ness terrain: arctic, woodland, desert, plains, or tropical. 
Mountains are not usually a separate terrain type—a moun- 
tain range may be tropical, wooded, snow-covered, etc. 

Survival skill means the character has a good chance of 
finding food or water in that environment—if there is any to 
be found. The character can roll a proficiency check once a 
day for each category. Success means food, water, or shel- 
ter is found. Typically it will take 1d6 hours to find water, 
and 2d6 turns to forage enough food for one person. 

A character with this skill also understands the perils 
inherent in sudden storms and dangerous topical features— 
avalanches, quicksand, sandstorms, and landslides, for 
example. The DM might allow a player to roll a proficiency 
check when one of these dangers appears on the horizon— 
success means the character has noticed the menace. 


Swimming: This useful proficiency allows characters to 
swim according to the AD&D game rules for water move- 
ment (see the Player's Handbook for more information). 
Characters without this proficiency are considered untrained 
swimmers, and they can do little more than hold their 
breath and float. Proficient characters can perform most 
swimming tasks without any checks. 

For each character point added to this proficiency after 
its initial purchase, swimmers can add 1 to their movement 
rates in water. 


Tailoring: A character with this proficiency can sew gar- 
ments out of all types of cloth—wool, cotton, silk, and well- 
tanned leather being the most common in the typical cam- 
paign world. The character can use needle and thread. The 
amount of time required for a job naturally varies by its 
complexity, but proficiency checks are only required if the 
tailor is attempting to make something truly unique and 
spectacular—a coronation gown for the queen, perhaps. 

The tailor can also make field repairs on clothing that has 
been damaged by the vagaries of adventuring. These 
repairs typically require proficiency checks, with failure indi- 
cating that the patch will hold for only a very short time. A 
halfling character gains a +1 to this proficiency rating. 


Throwing: Characters with this proficiency add 10' to 
each range category of thrown weapons, and increases the 
damage or the attack roll by +1 each time they throw a 
weapon. The player can elect to improve either the damage 
or attack roll, but the choice must be announced before the 
attack is made. 

For each character point spent on this proficiency (after 
its initial purchase) a character adds another 5' to thrown 
weapon ranges. For every 4 additional character points 
spent, another +1 on the damage or attack rolls is gained— 
this can be used as a +2 on one or the other, or split as a 
+1 to attack and +1 to damage. 


Cha 


pter 6 


3 Tightrope Walking: The character with this proficiency 


can balance on ropes, wires, slender beams, and other nar- 
row, perilous surfaces. A typical movement rate is 60 feet a 
round, though an upward angle will slow this. Ascents and 
descents of 45 degrees or more are not possible. 

The character does not require a proficiency check if the 
surface is at least 4" wide. Narrower surfaces require 
checks, with failure indicating a fall. If walking on a flat sur- 
face more than an inch wide, the character receives a +3 
modifier to the check. A balance pole adds another +2 
modifier, though high winds or a moving surface can con- 
tribute significant negatives. 

If the character makes an attack or suffers damage while 
balanced on a rope, a proficiency check is required. Failure 
signals a fall. Subtract the number of points of damage the 
character suffered from the proficiency rating when this 
check is made. Attacks made while on the rope suffer —5 
penalties on attack rolls. Also, a character walking on a 
tightrope has limited maneuverability and therefore does 
not gain an AC bonus for Dexterity. 


Tracking: The detailed tracking procedure described in 
the Player's Handbook is modified as follows for the Skills 
and Powers rules: 

No characters suffer the integral —6 penalty to their abil- 
ity scores; this difference is reflected in the proficiency rating 
itself. 

Rangers gain a +5 bonus to their tracking rating. 

Characters with the animal empathy trait gain +2 to their 
proficiency score when tracking non-domesticated animals. 

Characters with the animal lore proficiency gain +2 to 
their proficiency rating when tracking animals—either wild or 
domesticated. 


Tumbling: Characters with this proficiency can roll, som- 
ersault, stand on their hands, flip forward and backward, 
and otherwise perform feats of acrobatics. They can only 
perform tumbling feats if unencumbered or lightly encum- 
bered. 

Tumbling characters can improve their AC by 4 on a 
given round if: they avoiding attacks directed against them, 
win initiative, and elect not to attack that round. A tumbling 
character can move up to 20 feet, or remain in one place, 
during the course of this evasion. In unarmed combat a 
character with tumbling ability improves attack rolls by +2. 

The character can attempt to dodge through obstacles or 
escape through narrow apertures, but successful proficiency 
checks are required. If the character topples from a height 
of 60 feet or less, a successful proficiency check results in 
suffering only half damage from the fall. 


Ventriloquism: Characters using this skill can make 
others believe that sounds and voices are coming from 
somewhere else. Such a character must pass a proficiency 
check to deceive an audience. This roll might be modified 


104 


by some of these factors: the intelligence of the listeners 
(+/-3); the distance from the ventriloquist to the apparent 
source of the sound (not more than 20 feet); the believ- 
ability of the ventriloquist's words and sounds; whether the 
audience can observe the proficient character; and the 
length of the ventriloquism display. 


Weaponsmithing: This proficiency allows a character to 
create metal weapons. The Player’s Handbook gives the 
time and material cost requirements for various types of 
weapons. 

A character who seeks to create a truly exceptional 
weapon, can make a proficiency check after the item is 
completed. If the check fails, the weapon is useless, melted 
down for its bare metal; if the check succeeds, the character 
has created a weapon that is worth 50% more than the typ- 
ical example. These are the kinds of weapons selected by 
wizards for enchantment. 

Dwarves get a +1 bonus to their rating with this profi- 
ciency. 


Weather Knowledge: A character with this proficiency 
has a knowledge of winds, humidity, clouds, and seasons 
and can accurately predict the immediate weather simply 
by looking at the sky. With a proficiency check the character 
can guess what's likely to happen during the next 12 hours. 
Modify the check up to +/—6, with a O modifier to predic- 
tions for the weather six hours ahead. 


Weaving: A character with this skill can weave yarn into 
cloth, and he can create tapestries, cloaks, and other large 
swaths from thread. The character can spin wool into yarn 
with a spinning wheel, and he needs a loom to artfully 
weave that yarn. A character with the artistic talent trait can 
use this skill to create exceptionally beautiful cloth. Halflings 


get a +1 bonus to their rating with this proficiency. 
Allure: This trait allows a character 


Trait to attract romantic attention from 
Descriptions NPCs, at the player's option. The 
character can conceal the trait any 
time, but when it is in effect it can modify the reaction rolls 
of NPCs who might be affected—perhaps by as much as 
+3. The trait is only effective if there is a reasonable chance 
of the PC drawing romantic attention from the NPC—at the 
very least the NPC must be of the opposite sex and of at 
least young adult age. 

A character with the allure trait can receive one hench- 
man above the normal maximum-—if at least one of the 
henchmen has a romantic interest, however unrequited 
and hopeless, with the player character. Elves can purchase 
this trait for 1 less character point than the listed amount. 


Alertness: These characters are blessed with a combina- 
tion of peripheral vision, good hearing, and mental stamina 


Cha 


pter 6 


: Empathy: The character with this trait has an innate abil- 


that makes them very resistant to surprise. Such characters 
receive a --1 bonus when the DM determines if the alert 
characters and their party must roll for surprise. 


: This character is equally skilled with the 
use of either hand. This trait carries over into training, so that 
the PC can use weapons, bear a shield, and perform acts of 
strength equally well with the right or left hand. The character 
is good at the two weapon fighting style, suffering no penalty 
for the first hand, and only a —2 penalty for off-hand use. 


Animal Empathy: The character possesses an inherent 
ability to relate to animals. The character will generally 
receive a positive reaction from domesticated animals, and 
can soothe the fears of captive wild animals with remark- 
able consistency. For example, with a successful Wis- 
dom/Willpower check, the character can encourage a 
domesticated animal to approach, or silence a barking 
watchdog. The character, as a rule, cannot persuade wild 
animals to lose their fear of humans. Also, the trait is use- 
less if the character attempts to deceive an animal into 
approaching for the cause of harming it—i.e. the cow won't 
be persuaded to walk over to the fence so that the charac- 
ter can butcher it. 


Artistic Ability: The character has talent with the use of 
brushes and paint, charcoal sketching, and the sculptor's 
knife. Even without any related proficiency the character can 
render realistic maps and mold simple objects from clay. 
When this trait is coupled with training, the character can 
create works of real artistic merit. Whether these have worth 
in monetary terms or as relating to the character's status in 
the campaign world are circumstances that must be adjudi- 
cated by the DM. As a general rule, the character's work as 
a potter, tailor, weaver, painter, blacksmith, leather worker, or 
sculptor will fetch 1-50% more than the typical cost for 
such products. 


Climate Sense: This trait provides a character with an 
innate sense of impending changes in the weather. The DM 
might require a successful roll or a Wisdom/Intuition check 
before the character can make the determination. Other cir- 
cumstances may be obvious enough that the character will 
know with certainty that the temperature will fall drastically, 
or that a tremendous rainstorm is about to begin. 


Double-jointed: The character has a unique ability to 
wriggle out of ropes, manacles, brackets, chains, and other 
bonds. The bound character can make a Dexterity/Agility 
check when attempting to twist free of the bonds. Such an 
escape requires 1d6 rounds for each limb that is bound. If 
the character is secured by metal brackets or chains, the 
check is made at 4 (rounded up) of the Agility score. Half- 
lings add a +1 bonus to their modified Agility score when 
using this proficiency. 


106 


ity to sense the motivations, emotions, and possibly the 
intentions, of others. If the character can observe a group of 
NPCs for 1d6 rounds, the DM can allow a Wisdom/Intuition 
Check. Success means that the character has understood 
something significant about the discussion or plans of those 
NPCs. The empathetic character does not have to speak the 
language of the NPCs (though the DM can allow a +2 mod- 
ifier if the tongue is known). 

If the NPCs are of a very different race (such as mon- 
sters), the check can be modified to 4 the character's Wis- 
dom/intuition score. However, the DM can also add posi- 
tive or negative modifiers if the character has an extra long 
or short time to observe, or watches from an especially 
advantageous or disadvantageous position. 


Fast Healer: This highly useful trait allows a character to 
recover 1 hit point of damage within 2—12 turns of receiv- 
ing a wound. Also, the character naturally heals at a rate of 
2 hit points, not 1, per day. 


Glibness: The character has the knack of dissuading the 
suspicions of NPCs. The PC must speak the same language 
as those he is trying to impress, and players are encouraged 
to role-play the glibness attempt. 

Situations where this might arise include characters try- 
ing to talk their way past the guards at a city gate, turning 
aside the hostility of a bullying thug, or disarming the suspi- 
cions of a merchant who suspects the PCs of thievery. Char- 
acters can make Wisdom/Intuition checks to see if their 
glibness is successful. 

Of course, if the guards are looking for a smuggler that 
fits one of the characters’ descriptions, or the bully really 
wants to beat up, say, a blond elven rogue, or the merchant 
saw the fellow steal a bracelet, no glibness attempt is pos- 
sible. 

Halflings can purchase this trait for 1 less character point 
than the listed amount. 


impersonation: This trait represents the acting talent in 
the modern world—the character has a natural ability to fall 
into a role, and to project that role believably to others. A 
character with the impersonation trait gains a +2 bonus to 
all rolls made using the disguise proficiency. 

Additionally, the character can assume a disguise imme- 
diately—i.e., without benefit of costume or makeup. Such an 
impromptu disguise cannot alter the character to assume a 
specific identity, nor can it alter the appearance of his race 
or, except under unusual circumstances, sex. 


Inherent Immunity/Poison: This trait enhances the 
character's natural resistance to poisons—inhaled, ingested, 
and injected. The character receives a +1 bonus to all sav- 
ing throws versus any kind of toxin. Additionally, the dam- 
age done by virulent poisons is reduced by —1 point per die 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 


(to a minimum of 1), and the duration of paralytic and 
other temporary poisons is reduced by 1 round (or turn) 
per die rolled. 

Dwarves can purchase this trait for 1 less character point 
than the listed amount. 


Inherent Immunity/Disease: The character with this 
trait has a strong resistance to diseases of all types. When a 
saving throw is allowed against a possible infection, the 
character gains a +3 bonus. If there is an infection, the 
duration of the disease is reduced—by one day, week, etc.,— 
for each die rolled to determine this time period. This 
immunity does not apply to magical enchantments and 
curses, such as lycanthropy. 


Inherent Immunity/Cold: This character is able to 
remain comfortable in temperatures that most find chilling, 
and he can sometimes avoid the worst effects of cold- 
based attacks such as white dragon breath. In game terms, 
the character gains a +2 bonus to saving throws against 
cold attacks (but only physical cold; not, for example, 
against the chilling touch of a wight). 

Additionally, the character can reduce his level of encum- 
brance caused by winter garments. In those cases where 
the DM might require some penalty for a party that must 
bundle up in furs, parkas, mittens, and boots, the character 
with this trait can dress one level of encumbrance lighter 
and still avoid the effects of the weather. 


Inherent Immunity/Heat: Like the immunity to cold, 
this trait confers an advantage on the character in certain 
types of climates, and improves saving throw chances 
against fire- and heat-based attack forms. The saving throw 
bonus is a +1, and applies to saving throws against such 
magical infernos as red dragon breath and against the 
effects of lava or normal fire. 

The DM can determine the benefits conferred by this 
trait against environmental heat, such as deserts and tropi- 
cal weather. In general, under these types of conditions, a 
character with this type of immunity can travel twice as far 
as his companions without suffering fatigue. 


Internal Compass: Characters with this trait have a gen- 
eral idea of where they are, and in which direction they are 
facing when out of doors. In the wilderness, this means that 
their chance of becoming lost is reduced by 5%. When 
using the navigation proficiency, characters with this trait 
receive a +1 bonus to their proficiency score. 


Keen Eyesight: These characters have “eagle eyes.” That 
is, they can perceive details at about twice the range of 
characters with normal vision. Keen eyesight does not 
improve a character's ability to see in the dark, nor does it 
convey unique peripheral vision. However, if a group of 
companions make out a party in the distance, the keen- 


107 


eyed character might be able to tell the whether the party 
consists of humans or goblins. When the others can discern 
the race of the distant party, this character can tell how 
they're armed and how they're dressed. 

A character with the keen eyesight trait receives a +1 
bonus on all rolls to hit with a missile weapon at long range. 

Elves can purchase this trait for 1 less character point 
than the listed amount. 


Keen Hearing: This trait means that the character pos- 
sesses excellent aural acuity—able to hear the proverbial pin 
drop. In cases where hearing can be a factor in avoiding sur- 
prise, this character receives a +1 bonus. This applies 
whenever the PC approaches an ambush, unless back- 
ground noise (a waterfall, bustling marketplace, windstorm, 
etc.) could be expected to drown out the inadvertent 
sounds of the ambushers. 

If the character is a thief, this trait adds +10% to every 
attempt to detect noise. Halflings can purchase this trait for 
1 less character point than the listed amount. 


Keen Olfactory Sense: This valuable trait elevates the 
character's sense of smell to an uncanny level. In any case 
where the character might detect an approaching 
encounter by smelling the other party, this character gets a 
—1 bonus on chances of being surprised. In addition, this 
trait gives the character a +2 bonus when using the hunting 
proficiency. At the DM's discretion, the character can make 
a Wisdom/Intuition check to determine whether food or 
drink has been poisoned or otherwise tainted. 


Keen Taste Sense: This trait allows characters to detect 
foreign substances and unnatural alterations in anything 
they taste. Characters can make Wisdom/Intuition checks 
with a --3 modifier. Success means they realize some sort 
of alteration has been done to the food or drink. Halflings 
can purchase this trait for 1 less character point than the 
listed amount. 


Keen Touch Sense: A character with this trait has unusu- 
ally sensitive tactile senses, able to feel the difference 
between a silver and gold piece, for example. If the charac- 
ter with this trait is a thief, this inherent advantage gives a 
+5% bonus to pick pockets and open locks attempts. 
Gnomes can purchase this trait for 1 less character point 
than the listed amount. 


Light Sleeper: This character will awaken at the slightest 
disturbance—a significant advantage to a small party on the 
trail where companions would quickly fatigue from alternat- 
ing watch duty through the night. The character will awaken 
if he hears any unusual noise, such as the unmuffled foot- 
steps of someone approaching the camp. This includes the 
approach of anyone wearing metal armor, or creatures car- 
rying weapons or conversing. 


Chapter 6 


If the sleeping character is approached by someone who 
is working very hard at being stealthy, the DM can allow the 
light sleepers to make Wisdom/Intuition checks; success 
means they become aware of the intruder, while failure 
means they continue to sleep. This latter category includes 
NPCs in leather armor, and monsters with natural stealth 
and which are not encumbered by weapons and armor. 

If a light sleeper is approached by a thief who is success- 
ful at a move silently attempt, then the sleeping character is 
not allowed the Intuition check, since there is no sound to 
alert the sleeper. 


Lucky: The luck that seems to bless this character is not a 
matter of improving the odds of various die rolls, nor of gain- 
ing increased benefits to other game situations. Rather, it is 
that this character seems to have a knack for being in the right 
place at the right time. The DM may require a Wisdom/Intu- 
ition check to determine if the character will be lucky. 


¥ 


2277 
Y 


x 


D 
—À P 


If the party is searching for a way to cross a deep, placid 
river—and the lucky character can make an Intuition check, 
the party will stumble upon a boat hidden in the reeds by 
the shore. 


Music/Singing: This trait provides the character with a 
finely-pitched, well-modulated voice—the kind of singing 
voice that everyone likes to hear. If this talent is combined 
with the singing proficiency, the character can impress 
nobles and commoners alike with musical performances, 
perhaps becoming a bard or minstrel of some repute. This 
talent also adds +2 bonus to the character's singing profi- 
ciency score. 


Music/Instrument: The character with this trait has the 
manual dexterity and musical sensibility to skillfully operate 
an instrument such as a harp, flute, lyre, drum, etc. While 
the trait does not convey the knowledge of how to play any 
instrument—that must come from a 
proficiency—this inherent talent assures 
that the character may quite possibly 
rise to a significant level of fame for his 
musical performances. The character 
can more readily learn to play musical 
instruments as note in the musical 
instrument proficiency description. 


Obscure Knowledge: The character 
with this trait is the fantasy version of 
the trivia buff. The character has a mind 
that grasps, permanently, little bits of 
information from here and there—items 
that, at first blush, might not have any 
useful application. The typical proce- 
dure for the character using this trait 
would require an Intelligence/Learning 
check. If the check is successful, the 
character has stored away some trivial 
bit of information about a topic at hand. 

The use of this trait is up to the DM, 
though the player can make requests 
when an opportunity arises. For ex- 
ample, as the character approaches 
Castle Dunleven, the player might ask 
the DM if his character remembers any- 
thing about the castle or its occupants. 
If the Intelligence/Learning check is suc- 
cessful, the DM can inform the charac- 
ter that Lord Dunleven is an elderly wid- 
ower, who has a beautiful daughter 
whom he jealously guards against any 
potential suitors. Or, just as likely, the 
character might remember that Dun- 
leven is known for its fine wines or 
cheeses, and that the vintage of five 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 


years back is particularly prized. Gnomes can purchase this 
Trait for 1 character point less than the listed amount. 


Precise Memory: This trait indicates a character who has 
a "photographic memory" For example, once seeing a piece 
of heraldry, the character will remember what house or 
noble that symbol represents. If this character looks at a 
map, and has the time to study it in detail, he can be 
expected to remember that map with a great deal of accu- 
racy. In most circumstances this memory is fairly automatic. 
But in cases of intricate detail, or if a long time lapses since 
the character first observed something, the DM can require 
an Intelligence/Learning check before providing the player 
with the information. 

This trait refers primarily to the recollection of things that 
the character has seen written down or rendered in artwork. 
If the character has the reading/writing proficiency, it applies 


also to things that he has read. 
. Allergies: This disadvantage is 
Disadvantage typically a hay fever problem, 


inti where the character is subject to 
Descriptions sneezing outdoors. The actual 


campaign environment makes a great deal of difference—in 
winter settings, this isn't much of a problem, for example. 
The DM should be careful to create some settings where 
the character's allergies are in fact a disadvantage. 

The game effects of allergies can come up in several 
ways. A Wisdom/Willpower check can be called upon to 
stifle a sneeze when the character's party is setting up an 
ambush along a forest trail. If the character suffers from 
severe allergies, his Strength/Stamina score and Constitu- 
tion/Health scores must be reduced by 1-6 points when 
the pollen count is high. 

Other allergies can be created. A character who is allergic 
to mold, for example, might suffer these same effects when 
in a damp, underground location. As well, he might suffer 
double damage from mold-based attacks. An allergy to bee 
stings or to certain types of food or animals are less likely to 
affect the game, but the DM could offer to negotiate a lower 
character point bonus for the character who has a lesser 
allergy as a disadvantage. 


Bad Tempered: This character has difficulties with the 
niceties of social interaction, and is quick to take insult at 
any number of slights—real or imagined. The DM should 
require the player to make Wisdom/Willpower checks when 
the character is given some cause to be insulted. If the 
check fails, the character is likely to shoot off his mouth in a 
rude fashion. (Usually, the bad temper will not cause the 
character to attack others, and certainly not with weapons). 
However, it is not inconceivable that the character's remarks 
will insult the NPC to the point where combat results. More 
often, however, the character's bad temper will cause a 
non-violent situation—negotiations with a merchant are bro- 


109 


ken off, a nobleman who was thinking of hiring the PCs 
changes his mind, or a guardsman denies the party 
entrance to a city or castle. Dwarves receive | extra charac- 
ter point when they choose this disadvantage. 


Bruise Easily: This disadvantage can be a real drawback 
for a character who spends a lot of time in harm's way. 
Every time the character suffers damage from a blunt 
weapon, or a mishap such as a fall, he suffers 1 extra point 
of damage for each die of damage rolled. This damage is 
not as long-lasting as normal damage, recovering at a rate 
of 1 hit point per turn after the fight. However, if a charac- 
ter's hit points are reduced to zero, and some of the points 
of damage are bruise damage, he is rendered unconscious 
but not dead—much like the damage inflicted by punching. 


Clumsy: The character with this disadvantage has the 
unfortunate habit of dropping things, tripping, or knocking 
things over at inopportune times. The DM will occasionally 
require the character to make a Dexterity check. Failure 
means the character loses his grip, stumbles, or trips. The 
check can be required as often as the DM desires, though 
as a general rule two or three times a gaming session prob- 
ably will be adequate. 


Colorblind: This relatively innocuous disadvantage 
means that the character cannot distinguish colors. For 
game purposes, he sees things in black, white, and shades 
of gray. 


Compulsive Honesty: The character with this disadvan- 
tage cannot tell a lie and cannot behave in a deceitful fash- 
ion. He tends to be blunt rather than tactful, even if this 
means insulting someone who he and his companions are 
trying to impress. 

The character could participate in a deception—but only 
if it is a matter of life and death. Even then, the character 
must make a Wisdom/Willpower check every time he is 
called upon to speak a falsehood or to act out a role in front 
of witnesses. Failure of the role means that the character 
shrugs and comes clean—"You're right, my lord. l'm not 
here in the marketplace to shop for rugs, but to steal the 
plans for the castle's defenses." 


Cowardice: This is a hefty disadvantage for an adventur- 
ing character. The character might want to be brave and to 
fight heroically, but an inner voice of caution constantly sug- 
gests the merits of flight or concealment. Halflings receive 1 
extra character point when they choose this disadvantage. 

When a violent encounter begins, the character must 
pass a Wisdom/Willpower check to overcome his cow- 
ardice. The roll is 4 the character's Wisdom/Willpower if this 
is a severe disadvantage. If the check is successful, the char- 
acter can behave in any fashion for the duration of the 
encounter. If the check fails, however, the character will 


Cha 


pter 6 


z ing elements of the character's persona, and if encounters 


seek to leave, to hide behind friends, or to otherwise 
cravenly attempt to avoid the fight. 

The character is allowed to make another Wisdom/Will- 
power check each subsequent round during the encounter. 
He flees or hides as long as he fails, but as soon as he 
passes the check he can perform normally—and is exempt 
from any further checks. (Of course, if he tried to hide 
behind his friends, a second violent encounter might occur 
immediately after the first is resolved!) 


Deep Sleeper: The character with this disadvantage will 
only awaken when disturbed by a very loud noise, or by 
physical prodding, shaking, etc. When the character does 
wake up, it will take 1—6 rounds before he is capable of any 
action other than groggily sitting up and trying to figure out 
what's going on. 


Fanaticism: This can be a substantial disadvantage for a 
character, though it requires a significant role-playing com- 
mitment on the part of the player. The fanaticism can be 
dedication to a particular cult, religion, or god, or it can be 
more worldly-based, in the sense of overwhelming loyalty 
to a state, to a military presence, or to a particular leader. 

Whatever their sources, the different types of fanaticism 
have several things in common. If a certain code of behav- 
ior is called for by the belief, then the character must con- 
form to that behavior—even if it conflicts with the immedi- 
ate goals of the PC and his companions. While fanaticism is 
not necessarily evil, it may certainly become tiresome to 
those who do not share the fanatic's beliefs. 


Greed: A character with this disadvantage is compelled 
to seek riches by whatever means possible. His greed will 
interfere with the sharing of expedition spoils, and may 
cause the character to alienate powerful NPCs who would 
otherwise be inclined to help. 

Alternately, a character with this disadvantage can be 
described as greedy for power. In this case, he will seek to 
control others by persuasion, threats, and even force. He 
will seek to amass as many henchmen as possible, and he 
will not hesitate to employ these agents to add to his base 
of power. Dwarves receive 1 extra character point when 
they choose this disadvantage. 


Irritating Personality: This disadvantage can make it dif- 
ficult for the character to obtain cooperation and aid from 
others. During encounters with NPCs, the DM should 
require the character to make a Wisdom/Willpower check 
to resist the effects of the disadvantage. A failed check 
means the irritating aspects of the PC's personality rise to 
the surface. 

It is best to role-play the specifics of the character's 
behavior—is a fighter exceptionally critical, does a wizard 
laugh at inappropriate times, or does a thief behave in a 
very uncouth fashion? The player is free to devise the irritat- 


110 


are role-played the disadvantage will take care of itself. 


Lazy: A lazy character will never do any more work than is 
absolutely necessary. He will rely on his companions to do 
things such as build campfires, cook, and keep watch 
through the night. The character will generally neglect details 
of preparedness in favor of catching a few minutes more 
sleep. However, if he really wants to do something that does 
not have a clear and urgent need (digging a trench around a 
camp in case an attack is made against them, for example) 
the character can roll a Wisdom/Willpower check. A —4 mod- 
ifier applies to the character's Willpower score, however, and 
failure of the check means that the character decides the 
time could be better used by catching a little shut-eye—or at 
least by lying in the shade somewhere. 


Phobias: A character who is consistently afraid of one partic- 
ular thing (or category of things) can have a real problem 
while adventuring. The phobia disadvantages are worth vary- 
ing degrees of character points, based on the frequency of 
encountering that which the character fears, and whether the 
player chooses a disadvantage that is moderate or severe. 

The effects are generally the same. If the character is 
threatened by a violent encounter with the object of the 
phobia, he must roll a Wisdom/Willpower check (4 Wis- 
dom/Willpower, if the phobia is severe). If successful, the 
character can function normally, but if the check fails he 
must flee or otherwise seek to avoid the encounter for 1—6 
rounds. After this time, check again, and continue to do so 
each 1—6 rounds until a check succeeds. 

The DM can modify the Willpower checks for phobic 
characters. Someone who hates enclosed places but is 
being pursued by a dragon, for example, might overcome 
the phobia in favor of saving his life—perhaps gaining a +5 
modifier to the phobia check. 


Phobia—Crowds: The character becomes panicked 
when surrounded by people, demihumans, humanoids, etc. 
Shopping in marketplaces, dining at massive feasts, and cel- 
ebrating at festivals are all problems. The character must 
make a successful Wisdom/Willpower check to enter such a 
setting. If a crowd gathers, the character must check as soon 
as the DM judges that the PC is in the midst of a throng. If 
the character fails the Willpower check, he will seek a private 
nook or cranny to get out of sight, or try to leave the 
premises altogether. Even if he passes, the success only lasts 
2-12 turns—then the character must make another check. 


Phobia—Darkness: A real drawback for a dungeon 
crawler, this disadvantage compels a character find or cre- 
ate, some source of light when surrounded by utter dark- 
ness. The character will be reluctant to enter darkened set- 
tings, only doing so after a successful Wisdom/Willpower 
check. He can repeat the check every 1—6 turns, if neces- 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 


sary, perhaps modified by persuasion or cajolery by com- 
rades. The check is not necessary if some light is present, 
though the character still will be nervous and uncomfortable 
in a role-playing sense. 

If the character passes the check, he can force himself to 
enter the darkness. He also must check if suddenly 
immersed in darkness—for example, if the party's torches are 
suddenly doused within the dungeon. Failure of this check 
can result in the character fleeing headlong down a corridor 
or freezing, terrified, in place (clinging to a subterranean cliff, 
perhaps). If circumstances do not dictate one or the other, 
flip a coin to determine which reaction the character suffers. 


Phobia—Enclosed Spaces: This has effects similar to 
the darkness phobia, though of course the presence of light 
is immaterial—this phobia can strike in a lighted room or in 
a narrow, winding tunnel. In general, when the ceiling is no 
more than two feet overhead, and the walls are within two 
feet of the character's outstretched hands, he'll have 
trouble. As with the fear of darkness, the character must 
check Wisdom/Willpower before entering an enclosed area. 


Phobia—Heights: This character has difficulty climbing lad- 
ders and ropes, perching on walls, and negotiating steep, cliff- 
side trails. He will be eager to look for another way around if 
such a climb is called for, but if he makes a successful Wis- 
dom/Willpower check he can overcome his fear. If the check 
fails, however, the character will do everything possible to 
avoid the dimb. Another check is allowed 2—12 turns later. 


ic: The character with this fear is nervous 
about all things magical—spells, creatures, and items. 
Although he may wear and use magical items that do not 
have visible effects (including magical weapons and armor, 
rings of protection, and the like), he will not ingest potions, 
wear a ring of invisibility, or learn or cast spells. 

If attacked by a magic-wielder using a spell with visible 
effects, the character must make a Wisdom/Willpower 
check or flee as described in the introduction to the phobia 
section. The appearance of a magical creature, such as a 
genie, lycanthrope, or undead, will also force this check. 


Phobia—Monster: The player and DM must agree upon 
a specific monster the character fears. It must be a not-infre- 
quently encountered creature in the campaign world—per- 
haps goblins, orcs, ogres, trolls, giants, etc. When the char- 
acter encounters the feared monster, a check as described 
above is required. 


Phobia—Snakes: This is similar to the monster phobia, ex- 
cept that it relates to all sorts of snakes and worms. It includes 
creatures, such as medusae, which have snakelike parts. 


Phobia—Spiders: Like the monster phobia, this charac- 
ter has a problem with arachnids of all shapes and sizes, 


naturally including the monstrous varieties. Additionally, this 
character must make a Wisdom/Willpower check with a —4 
modifier if ensnared in a web spell. Failure means the char- 
acter panics to such an extent that he enwraps himself in 
the web for the maximum duration of the spell's effect. 


Phobia—Undead: As with the other specific creature 
phobias, this fear requires a Wisdom/Willpower check at the 
beginning of an encounter. Further, the character must pass 
a check before he can enter a location where he reasonably 
expects undead to be. This latter check can be repeated at 
2-12 turn intervals, if necessary. 


Phobia—Water: This character cannot have a swimming 
proficiency. He fears boats and narrow footbridges, and he 
will not be compelled to enter water that is much deeper 
than his waist. 


Powerful Enemy: A powerful enemy is a disadvantage 
that must be incorporated into the background and story of a 
campaign—obviously, with a lot of input from the DM. A char- 
acter with a powerful enemy acquired that bitter foe before 
the start of the campaign. The enemy can be a monster, or 
perhaps a high level wizard or cleric, or it can be a nobleman, 
demihuman ruler, or perhaps a bandit chieftain. The reason 
for this vendetta should be defined by the DM, and can go 
back even to before the character's birth—a family feud, for 
example, or a need to remove the last heir to a line. 

Whatever the enemy's nature, it must be powerful and 
pervasive enough to affect the character wherever he goes in 
the campaign. While this does not mean that the PC's life is 
one long chase scene, he will need to keep a wary eye over 
his shoulder. The enemy will routinely send agents after the 
character. Also, the enemy should have good conduits of 
information, being able to keep general tabs on the PC in city, 
town, and perhaps even wilderness environments. 


Tongue-Tied: This disadvantage crops up when the 
character tries to discuss important topics with companions 
and NPCs. The character has the tendency to incorrectly 
state facts, forget names, and just generally say the wrong 
thing. The main effect of the disadvantage is to enhance 
role-playing, though the DM should modify NPC reaction 
rolls, typically by —2. 


: The character with this disadvantage does not 
suffer penalties on his die rolls. However, he has the knack 
for being in the wrong place at the right time. He can be in 
a city of 10,000 people—and if there’s one person he does- 
n't want to see, chances are good that individual is 
approaching around the next corner. If this character makes 
a pass at a young woman, she turns out to be the Captain 
of the Guard's daughter. And if only one member of the 
party loses his bedroll in a downpour, the unlucky PC is nat- 
urally the one to sleep on the cold, muddy ground. 


Chapter 7: 
Weapon 
Proficiency © 
Mastery 


& 


The weapon proficiency rules of the AD&D game have been expanded with the 
Skills and Powers campaign. Now there is more flexibility in selecting weapon 
proficiencies, and there are opportunities to develop those proficiencies to high 
degrees of expertise. 

Fighters can still specialize in specific types of weapons, gaining bonuses for 
specialization, Character points can be used to advance the weapon specializa- 
tion to mastery, which gives a fighter significant advantages in the use of a 
weapon. 

Characters of other classes, through the use of character points, can gain 
lesser levels of accomplishment in favorite weapons—this is called weapon 
expertise. 


Weapon Proficiencies and 
the Character Doint System 


Character points tailor various levels of advancement, making improved com- 
bat abilities available to all characters. While it is relatively easy for fighters to 
become accomplished in weapons use, it is more difficult for-and requires 
more dedication from—characters of different classes who wish to become truly 
accomplished with a weapon. 


Selecting Weapon Proficiencics 


Weapon proficiencies can be acquired when a character 
is first created, and additionally during the course of that 
character's adventuring career. 

A warrior (including multi-classed warriors) must pay 2 
character points for each weapon proficiency slot. A charac- 
ter who is not a warrior must spend 3 character points for 
each weapon proficiency slot. 


Table 48: Weapon Proficiency CP Costs 
Class Cost 


Warrior 
Rogue 
Priest 
Wizard 


UN UN CI Nh 


Non-warrior characters are 


Character Class normally restricted by the 
Restrictions rules dictating the types of 


weapons they can acquire 
proficiencies for. However, by spending extra character 
points for a weapon proficiency slot, a character can pur- 
chase a proficiency that he would otherwise not be able to 
possess. 

A rogue or a priest can acquire a proficiency for a 
weapon that is normally restricted to a warrior's use. One 
additional character point must be spent when the slot is 
purchased-the slot will cost 4 points, instead of the 3 
rogues and priests usually pay. 

A wizard can spend 2 additional character points to 
become proficient in a weapon normally allowed to a priest 
or a rogue. If the wizard wishes to become proficient with a 
weapon that is normally limited to fighters, however, he 
must spend 3 extra character points. 

For example, if a wizard wishes to purchase a proficiency 
in the short bow, he must pay 5 character points (since the 
short bow can be used by a rogue, he adds 2 points to his 
base cost of 3 character points per slot). If he wants to learn 
to use the longbow, however, he'll have to pay 3 extra char- 


Weapon Proficiency & Mastery 


acter points (for a total of 6), since this weapon is normally 
limited to warriors. 


Using Weapon Proficiency Slots 


A character can learn to use a weapon through several 
different means. Weapon proficiency slots also can be used 
to acquire abilities in unarmed combat, skill with shields, 
and advanced levels of proficiency such as weapon mastery 
or weapon expertise. 

There are varying levels of ability in weapons use 
described in the Skills and Powers rules. The lowest is non- 
proficiency, then weapon familiarity, weapon proficiency, 
and weapon expertise. Characters can advance additionally 
through the levels of weapon specialization, weapon mas- 
tery, and, ultimately, weapon grand mastery. Primarily this 
progression is used by fighters, but characters of other 
classes can advance to high levels of accomplishment by 
the expenditure of additional character points. 


Many weapons are categorized into 
Wcapon groups, either tight groups, or broad 
Groups groups. Often a weapon will be part of a 

tight group, and that tight group will in turn 

be part of a broad group. A character's proficiency with a 

weapon or group will often convey weapon familiarity with 
other related weapons. 

Table 49 illustrates weapons in their various tight and 
broad groups. Note that there is significant overlap in many 
categories—a broadsword is listed in the ancient, Roman, 
and medium tight groups because it can be used in a vari- 
ety of cultures and styles. 

If a character knows several different fighting styles 
(explained later in this chapter) he can use a weapon in any 
of the styles he knows. If he has only learned one style, 
however, his proficiency only applies when he uses that 
weapon with the appropriate style. 


Table 49: Weapon Groups 


As noted in previous chapters, weapons can be classified 
into tight and broad groups. All weapons in a tight group 
are considered to be related to one another; a character 
proficient in one automatically has familiarity with the rest. 
Note that a weapon proficiency includes stone or bone ver- 
sions of the same weapon. 

In the listing below, broad groups are noted in bold type, 
and tight groups are in italics. 


Axes, Picks, and Hammers 

Axes: battle axe, hand/throwing axe, hatchet, two-handed 
axe, sword-axe, mace-axe 

Picks: horseman's pick, footman's pick, pick 

Hammers: war hammer, maul, sledge 

Unrelated: adze 


Chapter 7 
ee 


Short bow, composite short bow, long bow, composite long 
bow 


Clubs, Maces, and Flails 

Maces: footman's mace, horseman's mace, mace-axe 
Clubs: club, great club, war club, ankus, morning star 
Flails: horseman's flail, footman's flail 


Crossbows 
Hand crossbow, light crossbow, heavy crossbow, pellet bow, 
cho-ku-no 


Daggers & Knives 
Dagger, stiletto, jambiya, main-gauche, parrying dagger, 
knife, katar 


Lances 
Light, medium, heavy, jousting 


Polearms 

Spear-like polearms: awl pike, partisan, ranseur, spetum 

Poleaxes: bardiche, halberd, voulge 

Bills: bill, bill-guisarme, glaive-guisarme, guisarme-voulge, 
hook fauchard 

Glaives: glaive, fauchard, naginata, nagimaki, fauchard-fork 

Beaked: bec de corbin, lucern hammer 

Unrelated: military fork, tetsubo, lajatang 


Spears & Javelins 

Spears: spear, long spear, awl pike 
Javelins: javelin, pilum, dart 

Unrelated: harpoon, trident, brandistock 


Swords 

Ancient: broadsword, sapara, khopesh, sword-axe, short 
sword 

Roman: broadsword, drusus, gladius, spatha 

Middle Eastern: short sword, scimitar, great scimitar, tulwar 

Oriental: cutlass, katana, wakizashi, no-dachi, ninja-to 

Short: short sword, gladius, drusus, sapara, dagger, tulwar 

Medium: broadsword, long sword, cutlass, sabre, falchion, 
estoc 

Large: bastard sword, claymore, two-handed sword, great 
scimitar, no-dachi 

Fencing weapons: rapier, sabre, main-gauche, parrying dag- 
ger 


Chain & Rope Weapons 
Chain, kau sin ke, kusari-gama, kawanaga, chijikiri 


Martial Arts Weapons 
Sai, jitte, nunchaku, sang kauw, three-piece rod, bo stick 


114 


Hand match weapons: arquebus, hand gunne 
Matchlocks: arquebus, caliver, musket 

Wheellocks: arquebus, belt pistol, horse pistol 

Snaplocks and Flintlocks: musket, belt pistol, horse pistol 


If a weapon does not appear in the preceding listings, it 
belongs to no weapon group. For example, weapons such 
as the bolas, the boomerang, or the mancatcher are so 
unique in their employment that nothing even comes close 
to being similar. 


A character who is not profi- 
cient in a type of weapon 
suffers penalties on attack 
rolls when using that weap- 


and Weapon 
Familiarity on. The penalties vary by 
character class—for example, 


fighters are much more likely to understand an unfamiliar 
weapon than wizards. The penalties are shown on Table 50: 
Nonproficiency Attack Penalties. 

However, in some cases a character can be familiar 
enough with a weapon that he does not suffer all nonprofi- 
ciency penalties. This is called weapon familiarity. And while 
the character cannot fight as effectively as someone with a 
weapon proficiency, neither is he as inept as a nonproficient 
character. 

A character is assumed to be familiar with weapons that 
are related to ones with which he is proficient. Weapons in 
the same tight group as a character's weapon of proficiency 
are familiar to that character. If a character has proficiency in 
an entire tight group of weapons, he is familiar with all 
weapons in a related broad group. 


Table 50: Nonproficiency Attack Penalties 


Nonproficiency 


Class Nonproficiency Familiarity 
Warrior -2 -1 
Wizard -5 -3 
Priest -3 =2 
Rogue =3 =2 
Psionicist -4 -2 
Nonclassed NPC -4 -2 


A character using a weapon with which he is not profi- 
cient cannot perform any special combat maneuvers, such 
as disarms or parries, with that weapon. He is limited to 
basic attacks, with the die roll penalties shown above. If he 
hits, however, he makes a normal roll for damage. 


Weapon Proficiencies 


A single weapon proficiency slot can be used to acquire 
proficiency in a specific type of weapon. Such proficiency 
means that the character can wield that weapon normally, 
without penalties on his rolls to hit or damage. 


Weapon Proficiency e Mastery 


By spending 2 proficiency 
Weapon Group slots (4 character points), a 


Droficiencies warrior can gain a proficiency 


in all the weapons in a specific 
tight group. If that tight group is part of a broad group, then 
the character also possesses weapon familiarity with all 
weapons in the broad group. 

By spending 3 slots (6 character points), a warrior can 
learn a broad group weapon proficiency. He is assumed to 
be fully proficient in every weapon in that broad group. 

This group proficiency option is only available to warriors. 
All other characters must spend a single proficiency slot to 
become proficient with a specific type of weapon. 


Special Weapon Proficiencies 


Weapon proficiency slots can be spent to gain several 
types of bonuses that are not, technically, “weapon profi- 
ciencies" These are all relevant to com- 
bat situations, however, and improve 
the character's chances to defend or to 
attack effectively—both with and with- 


out a weapon. 
A weapon profi- 


Shield ciency slot can 


{ be spent to gain 
Proficiency a shield profi- 


ciency. Warriors can gain this proficiency 
by spending 1 slot; other characters 
must spend 2 weapon proficiency slots 
to become proficient in shield use. 
Obviously, a character must be able to 
use a shield to acquire this proficiency. 

Shield proficiency improves a char- 
acter's AC against one or more attacks 
per round from in front or from the side 
faced by the shield. This proficiency 
does not help against rear attacks or 
attacks coming from the flank opposite 
the shield. 

Like other weapon proficiencies, the 
shield proficiency must be taken for a 
specific type of equipment—listed on 
Table 51: Shield Proficiency Effects. The 
bonuses conferred vary by the type of 
shield the character chooses, and are 
added to the normal AC benefits of car- 
rying a shield. The Number of Attackers 
category indicates how many attacks, 
per round, the shield proficiency can 
help against. If a character with a buck- 
ler, for example, is attacked by three 
enemies at once, his shield proficiency 
will only benefit his AC against one of 


those attacks. The player should designate which enemy he 
will guard against before attack rolls are made. 


Table 51: Shield Proficiency Effects 

Shield Type AC Bonus #Attackers 
Buckler +] One 

Small +2 Two 
Medium +3 Three 
Body +3/+4 vs. missiles Four 

A character can nd aw n 
Armor character can spend a weapo 


proficiency slot to buy the armor pro- 
Droficiency ficiency, which indicates that he has 

become used to wearing a protec- 
tive shell. Unlike the shield proficiency, the armor profi- 
ciency does not improve armor class. Instead, it reduces the 
encumbrance penalties for the wearing of a particular kind 
of armor. Thus, a character who is fully proficient with the 


use of his plate mail, for example, can move around a lot 
more easily and quickly than can a character who does not 
have this proficiency. 

A character with the armor proficiency suffers only half 
the normal encumbrance load of his armor. For example, full 
plate armor weighs 70 pounds. However, if a character is 
proficient with that type of armor, the armor has the encum- 
brance effect of only 35 pounds. Naturally, the armor retains 
its full weight for all other purposes—such as swimming! 


. : ~ Fighting styles represent broad 
l'ightin Style catepories of battle tactics that 
Specia ization «can be employed by characters. 
They are described in detail in 
the Combat and Tactics book. Even without that volume, 
however, players of the Skills and Powers rules can spend 
weapon proficiencies on fighting styles, gaining some 
bonuses in battle. 


There is a difference between know- 
ing a style and specializing in that style. 
Every character with a weapon profi- 
ciency knows at least one fighting style— 
the style used with that weapon. There 
is NO cost to acquire the fighting style; it 
comes with the proficiency. Indeed, if a 
weapon can be used with two or more 
different styles, the character is assumed 
to know all of those styles. A long sword, 
for example, can be used with the one- 
handed weapon fighting style, the 
weapon and shield fighting style, or the 
two-handed weapon fighting style. Thus, 
a character with proficiency in the long 
sword knows all three of these fighting 
styles. 

Character classes put some limita- 
tions on learning fighting styles. Table 
52 shows the classes that can nor- 
mally learn a specific style. While a 
rogue, for example, can use a long 
sword, he does not automatically learn 
the two-handed weapon style with this 
blade. 

A character can spend an additional 
character point when he purchases a 
weapon proficiency to learn a style that 
is not normally provided to his character 
class. The rogue, for example, spends 3 
character points for his long sword pro- 
ficiency slot, but only learns it as a one- 
handed weapon. If he spends a 4th 
character point, he can learn the two- 
handed style or the weapon and shield 
style as well; or he can spend a total of 
5 character points and learn the long 
sword and all three of its styles. 


hting € 2 " cl 
] 3 IC» L V lidardgcic 


Fighting Style Eligible Classes 
One-handed Weapon All 

Weapon and Shield Warriors, Priests 
Two-handed Weapon Warriors, Priests, Mages 


Two Weapon Warriors, Rogues 
Missile Warriors, Rogues 
Horse Archer Warriors, Rogues 
Thrown Weapon All 

Special* Varies 


*This category includes styles specific to certain weapons 
and/or cultural backgrounds. Examples include the net 
and trident style used by some Roman gladiators, or the 
twin sais of a skilled ninja. 


Weapon Proficiency & Mastery 


A character can spend a weapon proficiency slot to spe- 
cialize in the use of one of these fighting styles, as long as 
he already knows that style. Warriors can specialize in as 
many styles as they wish to purchase. Priests and rogues 
can only specialize in one style. Wizards can specialize in a 
single fighting style, but only by paying an extra character 
point to acquire the weapon proficiency slot. 

Each of the styles has specific benefits when acquired as 
a specialization. These are described below: 


One-handed Weapon 


The character can use his empty hand as a secondary 
weapon, using it to punch, grab, throw, etc. while he is 
wielding his one-handed weapon. Normal penalties for 
using two weapons apply. 

A character who specializes in the one-handed weapon 
style of battle gains an AC bonus of +1 when he fights with 
a weapon in one hand, and no shield or weapon in his 
other hand. By spending 2 additional character points, the 
character can improve this AC bonus to a maximum of +2. 

If the character is also familiar with the two-handed 
weapon style, and is wielding a weapon that can be used 
either way, he can switch back and forth at the start of every 
round of combat. 


Weapon and Shield 


A character who specializes in this style can gain a +1 
benefit to his AC (in addition to his regular shield effects) or 
a +1 on his attack roll during any melee round when he 
holds a shield and wields a weapon. Alternately, this benefit 
can be superseded by the more detailed shield rules in the 
Combat and Tactics book. 


Two-handed Weapon 


A character who specializes in the two-handed weapon 
style improves (lowers) the speed factor of a weapon by 
3—if that weapon is wielded with two hands. In addition, if 
the character is using a one-handed weapon with two 
hands, the weapon gains a +1 bonus to all damage rolls. 


Two Weapon 


The proficiency slot spent to specialize in this difficult 
style requires 1 additional character point when it is first 
acquired—except for rangers, who can buy it for the same 
cost as any other fighting style specialization. 

A character who specializes in the two weapon style 
counters some of the penalties inherent in using two weap- 
ons. Normally, a character suffers a —2 to attacks with the 
primary hand, and —4 to attacks with the secondary hand; 
this specialization reduces the penalty to O for the primary 
hand, and —2 for the secondary hand. Additionally, if a char- 


117 


acter has the trait of ambidexterity coupled with this special- 
ization, he suffers no penalty for either hand. 

The secondary weapon must be one size smaller than 
the primary weapon—unless the primary weapon is size S. If 
a character spends 2 additional character points on this spe- 
cialization, however, he can learn to use two weapons of 
equal size, so long as each of the weapons can be wielded 
in one hand. 


Missile 

A character who specializes in the missile fighting style 
gains a significant bonus. He can move up to half his nor- 
mal movement rate and still make all of his allowed missile 
attacks during a turn. Or he can move his full movement 
rate and make half as many attacks. 

Additionally, a character who has specialized in this fight- 
ing style gains a +1 bonus to his AC when attacked by mis- 
sile fire, but only if the specialist character is also using a 
missile weapon and attacking on that round. 


Horse Archery 


A character who specializes in the horse archery fighting 
style can shoot with accuracy even while mounted. The nor- 
mal penalties for shooting from the saddle are reduced by 
2. Thus, archers suffer no penalty if the horse is moving at 
up to half its normal speed, and they suffer only a —2 pen- 
alty if the horse is moving faster. 


Thrown Weapon 


A character who specializes in this fighting style gains the 
same bonuses as a character who specializes in the missile 


fighting style. 


Special 
There are numerous types of fighting styles that origi- 
nated and were perfected in different historical and geo- 
graphical areas. A character can spend a proficiency slot to 
specialize in one of these types, though the DM is the final 
arbiter of what types of fighting styles might be allowed. 
Players are encouraged to do a little research before they try 
to build a case for a specific fighting style. 
Some suggested benefits for the use of one of these 
styles include: 
—1 bonus to Armor Class. 
+1 bonus to hit or damage rolls. 
The character can ignore penalties for fighting with two 
weapons. 
The character gets a free kick or punch as well as his 
weapon attack. 


: Gaining a weapon proficiency already the character's weapon of choice). Rogues and 


Weapon 


indicates that a character is 
trained in the use of that partic- 
ular weapon, but he is not at 


Specialization 
the pinnacle of accomplish- 


and Maste 
Dy ment. Fighters, and possibly 


other characters, can devote a great deal of effort and 
energy (reflected in character points) to improve their skills 
with a weapon beyond the standard of basic proficiency. 

In the Skills and Powers rules, characters of all classes 
can improve their skills with weapons. The cost in character 
points is higher for non-fighter classes, but if a player wants 
his wizard character to emulate the wizard Gandalf and 
wield a mighty blade such as Orcrist, it is possible. 


Danks of Weapon Mastery 


The rules of this section begin with the assumption that 
a character has already acquired a weapon proficiency. 

Two additional levels of mastery (high mastery and 
grand mastery) might be available to single-classed fighters. 
These are described in the Combat and Tactics book. 


Weapon of Choice 


A character can designate a specific weapon as his 
favorite. He must be proficient with that weapon already, 
and even if the proficiency he possesses applies to an 
entire tight or broad group, the weapon of choice must be 
designated. 

Characters of all classes can designate a weapon of 
choice. Rogues, priests, and warriors can do so for a cost of 
2 character points. Wizards must spend 4 character points 
to gain a weapon of choice. 

A player can declare a weapon of choice when he first 
creates a character, or at any point thereafter—as long as he 
has the character points. They should receive some training 
or extensive practice from a warrior who is proficient in the 
same weapon and has a higher experience level than the 
trainee. Alternately, any character can train someone if he 
possesses a higher level of weapon mastery (weapon 
expertise or better) with that weapon. 

A character receives a --1 bonus on all attack rolls when 
using his weapon of choice. 


Weapon Expertise 

Weapon expertise is a more limited version of weapon 
specialization. Unlike specialization, however, it is available 
to non-warriors. Before gaining weapon expertise, the char- 
acter must be proficient in the use of the selected weapon. 
It may or may not already be the character's weapon of 
choice (see above). 

Weapon expertise costs a ranger, paladin, or multi- 
classed warrior 3 character points (or 2 if the weapon is 


118 


priests must spend 4 character points (or 3, if the weapon 
is already the weapon of choice). Wizards can purchase 
weapon expertise for a cost of 5 character points, though if 
the weapon is already the character's weapon of choice the 
cost is only 4 additional points. 

As with weapon of choice, a player can declare a 
weapon of expertise when he first creates a character, or at 
any point thereafter—as long as he has the character points. 
If the selection is made by an active character, he should 
receive extensive training from a warrior who is proficient in 
the same weapon and has a higher experience level than 
the trainee. 

Weapon expertise allows a character to gain extra attacks 
as if a weapon specialist. At first level, an expert with a long 
sword can attack three times every two rounds. Weapon 
expertise does not confer extra attack or damage bonuses, 
though the character may receive an attack benefit if he has 
weapon expertise in the use of his weapon of choice, as 
explained above. 


Weapon Specialization 

A character receives extra bonuses for using a specific 
weapon by spending character points on specialization. Sin- 
gle-classed fighters can become weapon specialists at any 
point in their careers simply by spending a second weapon 
proficiency slot on a weapon with which they are already 
proficient. 

Characters of a fighter subclass, or multi-classed fighters, 
can specialize in weapon use, though at an increased cost 
in character points. In addition, other characters must 
achieve certain minimum levels of experience before they 
can attain a weapon specialization. These costs, and the 
minimum experience level, are shown on Table 53: Gaining 
Weapon Specialization. 


Table 53: Gaining Weapon 
Character Minimum 

Character Class Point Cost Level 
Fighter 2 1 
Multi-class Fighter 4 2 
Ranger/Paladin E 3 
Priest 6 2 
Rogues 8 6 
Wizards 10 7 


A character who receives a weapon specialization during 
a campaign must be trained by a character with a special- 
ization (or higher) level of skill in that same weapon. The 
training requires a number of months equal to the character 
point cost to purchase the specialization, and this training is 
a full-time occupation. 

The effects of weapon specialization vary by the type of 
weapon, as follows. If a specialist weapon (such as a spear) 


Weapon Proficiency & Mastery 


can be used as a melee or a missile weapon, the character 
gets the appropriate benefits for each type of use. 

Melee Weapons: The character gets a +1 bonus to 
attack rolls and +2 to damage rolls when using the weapon. 
Also, the character gets one extra attack every two rounds. 
At first level, for example, a specialist with the long sword 
would be able to make three attacks every two rounds. 

Missile Weapons: This category includes slings and 
thrown weapons. The character gains a +1 attack bonus at 
all range categories. In addition, specialists enjoy an 
increased number of missile attacks. This is detailed in the 
Player's Handbook. At the DM's option, players can elect to 
use the more detailed specialist attack rules in the Combat 
and Tactics book. 

Also, a character who specializes in any type of bow or 
crossbow gains a benefit for a new range category: point 
blank. Point blank shots inflict +2 points of damage. Point 
blank ranges are 30' for bows, and 60' for crossbows. In 
addition, if the character has a missile loaded and aimed, he 
can shoot at the beginning of a melee round—even before 
initiative is determined. 


Unarmed Combat Specialization 


A character can choose to specialize in a type of unarmed 
combat—either punching (pummeling in the Combat and 
Tactics book), wrestling, or martial arts. Fighters, multi- 
classed fighters, and fighter subclasses can elect to specialize 
in unarmed combat. Like any other specialization, the type of 
unarmed combat chosen is the character's only area of spe- 
cialization—he cannot also specialize in a weapon. 

Specialists in unarmed combat receive a +1 bonus on 
attack rolls and a +2 on damage rolls. In addition, they 
receive the same number of extra attacks any other special- 
ist receives—typically one extra attack every two rounds. 

Unarmed combat procedures, levels of skill, and special- 
ization are covered to a much greater extent in Combat and 
Tactics . That book also introduces a fast, detailed system 
for martial arts combat. 


Weapon Mastery 


Weapon mastery designates those characters who strive 
toward the ultimate level of skill with their weapon of spe- 
cialization. Weapon masters are generally individuals of con- 
siderable reputation and note in their campaign worlds, 
often sought by younger characters for their knowledge. 
Many of these masters take apprentices, acting as mentors 
for the training and development of aspiring masters. Other 
weapon masters live solitary, even hermit-like lives, obsess- 
ing on some important task that will allow no interference 
from the rest of the world. 

The most common weapons employed by masters are 
swords, though bows, axes, and spears are also allowed. If a 
player wishes his character to master in a different weapon, 


119 


he must create (with DM input) a rationale for a strong cul- 
tural or campaign historical background. An archetype such 
as William Tell, for example, can be used to justify a mastery 
in the crossbow in a medieval-type campaign. If the DM will 
not allow a weapon to be mastered, the player should be 
informed before the character specializes in that weapon. 

A fighter character must have reached a minimum of 5th 
level before he can become a weapon master; other char- 
acters must progress even farther. The minimum level for 
weapon mastery in every character class is 4 higher than 
the minimum for specialization, shown on Table 54. A char- 
acter must possess weapon specialization in the weapon 
he will attempt to master. When these criteria are met, char- 
acter points must be spent based on the character's class 
(see Table 54 below) to gain a mastery. 

In addition, the character must find an existing master 
and be trained in weapon mastery. The master will often 
demand a significant payment for this training, or else 
require that the apprentice perform a quest or some other 
task before he will be accepted as a student. Training for 
weapon mastery requires twice as many months as training 
for weapon specialization (i.e. twice the character point 
costs to gain the mastery, shown on Table 54). 

Effects of Mastery: A master's attack and damage 
bonuses with a melee weapon are both +3. With a missile 
weapon, the attack bonus becomes a +2 at all ranges 
beyond point blank. At point blank range the attack and 
damage bonuses are each +3. 


Table 54: Gaining Weapon Mastery 
Character Minimum 
Character Class Point Cost Level 
Fighter 4 5 
Multi-class Fighter 8 6 
Ranger/Paladin 8 7 
No player would be so 
Monsters and unfair as to feel that his 


character should benefit 
Weapon Mastery from weapon mastery rules, 
while the monsters retain their previous level of mediocre 
skill. (Well, okay—no DM would want to allow this!) In a cam- 
paign where characters can achieve levels of specialization 
and mastery, so, too, can the monsters. As with PCs, the 
development of specialization and mastery skills for monsters 
should reflect an unusual level of dedication and training. 


Determining Monster Weapon Mastery 


Naturally, not all monsters have even the basic require- 
ments for one of their number to become a weapon 
master. 

While the final adjudication of monster weapon mastery 
is up to the DM, some basic elements should be taken into 
account: 


Cha 


pter 7 


: unlikely to generate weapon masters from among their 


Weapons 


The monster in question must use an actual weapon— 
mastery cannot be obtained in the use of fangs, claws, 
breath weapons, etc. Neither can simple weapons such as 
clubs or thrown boulders be effectively mastered. 

Additionally, the weapon must be fairly common in that 
monster's culture. Such weapons are usually listed in the 
monster description as part of the monster type's combat 
repertoire. Some examples: a goblin might become a 
master in the spear or short sword; a wemic, the javelin or 
short sword; troglodytes have been known to specialize in 
their unique javelin; tritons, the trident; kuo-toa, the pincer 
staff or harpoon; and gnolls, the pole arm or battle axe. 


Intelligence 


As a general rule, a monster must have a minimum Intel- 
ligence score of 8 to master a weapon. The higher the intel- 
ligence, the greater the likelihood of encountering a 
weapon master among a group of the creatures. 

If the creatures are known to be very intelligent, one of 
them might reach the level of mastery. Only monsters of 
high intelligence or greater can aspire to grand mastery. 

Additionally, intelligence should be the primary indicator 
of how many specialists and masters might be encountered 
in the monsters' population. The relatively stupid goblins 
will have very few individuals even of specialist level, while 
the exceptionally intelligent githyanki will likely include a 
number of masters and probably a grand master in each 
sizable tribe. 


Dopulation 


As with characters, the greater the number of monsters 
in a campaign world, the greater the odds that one or more 
of them will reach the highest levels of weapon mastery 
available. Though this does not rule out the case of the soli- 
tary firbolg giant being a grand master in the use of the hal- 
berd, it is more likely that such a skilled individual will be the 
chieftain of a tribe—or at least the important bodyguard 
standing alertly at the high chief's side. 

For those monsters ranked with improved hit dice for 
their subchiefs, battle leaders, captains, etc, the specialists 
and masters will invariably fall among the improved HD 
members of the band. If there is more than one type of 
elite monster, the lowest of these will be no more than spe- 
cialists, with the masters and grand masters found among 
the second and third tiers. 


Destrictions 


Undead cannot become weapon masters. Likewise 
lycanthropes, highly chaotic creatures, and those of good 
alignment and a generally pacifistic nature will be very 


120 


numbers. Monsters of low intelligence (or less) will be inca- 
pable of any level of weapon mastery. 


Effects of Monster Weapon Mastery 


Monster weapon masters should be more than just 
beasts with increased attack and damage chances—though, 
naturally, they should receive all the benefits commensu- 
rate with their level of weapon skill. Additionally, the DM 
might create some special combat benefits for a monster 
weapon master, reflecting the general tactics of that mon- 
ster in play. A troglodyte who masters the use of his javelin, 
for example, might modify it by barbing the head and 
attaching some kind of light rope. If the weapon hits a tar- 
get, the monster can reel in the victim—unless that victim 
can work free with a successful Strength check. However, 
the victim still suffers extra damage from the weapon. 

Beyond these battle considerations, however, monster 
weapon masters should add important story and role-play- 
ing elements to the campaign. Because of their increased 
power and fearsome reputations, these creatures will be 
generally feared and obeyed by the lesser monsters of their 
clan. They will command these lackeys, sending them on 
raids or posting them to guard the lair. 

Through encounters with these lackeys, the player char- 
acters should learn details about the weapon master. 
Beyond his mere existence, the monster should become a 
fearsome figure to the PCs. Perhaps its extermination can 
be used as the impetus behind an ongoing campaign 
adventure. 


: Every adventurer wants to outfit him- 
Equipment self with the best equipment—and 
plenty of it. The delicate balance of equipment versus en- 
cumbrance is a routine problem for any character. So, too, is 
the matter of finding those items the character desires, and 
coming up with the money (or other barter) needed to 
acquire them. 

This chapter presents new ways that characters can earn 
money, and some simple, accurate options for recording 
the amount of equipment carried—both as bulk and weight. 
Equipment is discussed in terms of campaign environ- 
ments, with different tables ranging from the primitive to 
periods of the late Renaissance. 


Character points can have a 
number of effects on the 
ways that characters earn, 
maintain, and spend their 


Money, 
Equipment, and 
treasure. 


Character Doints 
A player can exchange 
his character's money for character points when that char- 


acter is first created (after initial funds are determined, of 
course), and then a maximum of once per level, including 


first level, throughout that character's career. This opportu- 
nity is not cumulative—if a player makes no money/point 
exchange before his character reaches second level, he can 
still only make one such exchange before the character 
becomes third level. Within the bounds of this restriction, 
however, a player can make such an exchange whenever 
he wants—he doesn't need to wait until the moment of 
level advancement. 

The procedure for making this exchange is always the 
same: The player determines how much total wealth the 
character has, as defined in Character Wealth, Treasure, and 
Money, below. He can only make the exchange if the total is 
at least 30 gp, except that a character can always make the 
exchange with his initial funds. 

This total wealth is divided by three. One character point 
costs one third of the character's wealth, and he can buy a 
maximum of three points by spending all of the character's 
money. The deductions occur immediately, though the 
character does not get to spend or give 
away his lost wealth. The DM will de- 
cide the exact campaign situation. Coins 
and gems are stolen, for example, while 
livestock falls to disease, trade goods 
rot, ships sink, etc. 

Character points, as a general rule, 
cannot be expended for money or items 
of equipment. However, the DM can 
make an exception during character 
creation. If a player wishes to start out 
with an unusual amount of wealth, he 
can cash in a single character point for 
an extra roll on the Initial Character 
Funds Table in the Player's Handbook. 


reasurc, and Moncy 

A character's financial worth can be 
counted in many ways—only two of 
which are relevant in making a trade for 
character points as described above. 

The most obvious, of course, 
remains the metal coins, precious 
baubles, and ornamented jewelry that 
have been standards of wealth for mil- 
lennia. In game terms, this treasure is 
represented by a value measured in 
gold pieces. 

Secondly, wealth can be measured 
in personal possessions (including 
weapons, armor, and magical items), all 
manner of trade goods, livestock and 
beasts of burden, wagons, tack and har- 
ness, boats and ships. 

The total of these two categories 


equals the character's wealth for purposes of the money- 
for-points trade explained above. When making this total, 
however, the character is allowed to hold one weapon and 
one other possession (armor, magical item, horse, etc.) out 
of the equation. 

The DM should insure that players are straightforward 
about their wealth when making such an exchange. There 
are several forms of wealth discussed below which are not 
relevant for purposes of the money/character point trade. 
However, a player who converts most of his assets into 
another form (purchasing an estate for 10,000 gp, for ex- 
ample, in the process spending everything but his last 60 
gp) should not be allowed to immediately trade 20 gp 
increments for character points. In this case, the land and 
holdings should count toward the total, and immediately 
suffer a 1/3 devaluation of their worth. Flooding, earth- 
quakes, tornadoes, or locusts are a few suggested DM tools 
for accomplishing this price decrease. 


Chapter 7 


There are several other kinds 
of character wealth not 


Different Forms 
totaled into the assets when 
of Wealth trading for character points. 


But they can still represent important aspects of a charac- 
ter's financial status. 


Land and Holdings 


In many medieval societies, land is the clearest measure 
of a character's wealth. Large holdings will often include ob- 
ligations for taxes from those who live on the land. At the 
same time, a character such as a knight who owns an estate 
of his own will likely owe some type of fealty to a higher 
lord, who will in turn owe loyalty to a king. 

Although the taxes levied (and owed) by such a charac- 
ter will probably be measured in gold pieces, the land and 
buildings themselves exist as they are. Any attempt to ren- 
der their worth into coinage will be only vaguely accurate, at 
best. 

In addition, any kind of estate or holding will require 
maintenance of its buildings and lands, as well as the hiring 
and feeding of a potentially very large staff of servants to 
perform a variety of tasks. 

The specifics of these costs are beyond the scope of this 
book (See The Castle Guide for more information). Players 
should be aware that owning lands is not simply a matter of 
gaining a piece of property for their characters and then sit- 
ting back and watching the money roll in. 


Titles 

Titles of nobility can signify wealth in several different 
ways. Occasionally, a title will include a straightforward 
annual salary in gold pieces. More often it will entitle the 
owner to a certain amount of tax revenue, based on those 
who labor under the titled character's protection. It is even 
possible that the gaining of a title may cost a character 
money, depending on the deeds and needs of the titled 
character and his liege. 

Sometimes a title will include the right to own an estate 
(see Land and Holdings above). Even if an estate is not 
included, a newly titled character may be forced to pur- 
chase an appropriate piece of property to do justice to his 
exalted rank. 


Dartnerships 


A character who owns a shop or other business—or who 
has contributed money to the owner of such an establish- 
ment—has a form of wealth represented by the business. 
This includes the building where the shop is located, as well 
as the material goods within. Some examples include the 
clay, potter's wheel, and finished crockery in a potter's shop, 
and barrels of ale and foodstuffs for an inn. 


122 


The business itself is often an intangible, but neverthe- 
less very real, aspect of a character's wealth. If "Blutar's 
Place" establishes a reputation in a city as a friendly inn for 
mercenaries, even if the building burns down and is rebuilt 
in a new location, chances are good that the mercenaries 
will find it and keep coming back. (Of course, if they're the 
ones who burned it down in the first place, the owners 
might want to try and upgrade their clientele!) 

This type of asset is most likely to occur in a Middle Ages 
or later campaign setting. 


Debts 


Debts can be owed in exchange for value or services 
provided by one character to another. Indeed, for a transient 
adventurer, being owed money and/or services by others is 
not a bad way to maintain wealth. 

For example, Blutar the fighter drives a pack of bullies out 
of a comfortable inn. The innkeeper, in gratitude, awards 
Blutar the best room in the place—and free food and drink— 
whenever he is in town. Because of this debt, Blutar, even 
when he's broke, can live pretty high on the hog. 

Of course, characters need to take sorne care about their 
debtors. Someone who gets a lot of cash as a loan might 
suddenly decide to relocate, and then the debt is no good. 
Or, our aforementioned tavern owner might get sick of Blu- 
tar's apparently insatiable appetite and find an even better 
fighter to drive Blutar out of the inn—so much for the debt. 

Still, if a character goes through the campaign world fre- 
quently helping others with service and treasure, he stands 
a much greater chance of finding others willing to help him 
in times of need. 


The economies of campaign 


Ways to Spend worlds vary widely. At the 
most primitive level, money 


and Save Money is an unknown concept— 


"economics" is a matter of finding someone with the profi- 
ciency to do a certain task, and then bartering, persuading, 
or cajoling him to do it. 

In a more typical game environment, however, charac- 
ters will have means of counting their money, and an inter- 
est in acquiring as much of it as they can get their hands on. 

But what to do when that treasure sack gets too heavy to 
carry around? Of course, a character can always convert sil- 
ver to gold, and then gold to gems, as a means of keeping 
his money portable. For those players who want to take a 
little more practical approach to the problem, here are 
some suggestions: 


Moneylending 


As explained under Debts, above, a character's wealth 
includes those funds owed him by other characters. 
Whether he wants to charge interest, a character can keep a 


Weapon Proficiency & Mastery 


large sum of money in his own name by allowing someone 
else to use it for awhile. 

There are, of course, risks. Even the most trusting charac- 
ter will want to get something in writing (which may entail 
finding a scribe or some formal witness). Then there is the 
matter of the debtor's honesty, not to mention the misfor- 
tunes that might befall the fortune. Still, by lending his 
money and taking an |.0.U in exchange, a character relieves 
himself of the need to cart all that treasure around. 


Entreprencurism 


The entrepreneurial spirit exists in virtually every environ- 
ment where money is a quantifiable entity. In a campaign, 
the entrepreneur is anybody who spends his money on a 
risky venture that stands a chance of making him a greater 
return than his initial investment. 

There are several means of doing this—a player needs to 
decide if he wants his character involved in the daily work of 
the venture, or if he wishes to give his money to a trusted 
NPC and see what happens. 

A character can offer to sponsor a talented NPC (or PC, for 
that matter). If an apprentice displays a great deal of pottery 
skill, the sponsor might buy him a wheel, clay, dyes, and a 
small shop in which to work. In return, the potter would pay a 
portion of his earnings to his sponsor—either on an ongoing 
basis, or until the debt and interest have been paid off. 

Other subjects of sponsorship can include entertainers— 
jugglers, minstrels, acting companies, and the like—mer- 
chants (see Trading, below), and any character who would 
like to open a small shop or tavern of his own. 

Business opportunities also can be found in many cam- 
paign worlds. Whether a player wants to open his own busi- 
ness, or pay for another character to take his chances, 
money can be spent to set up shops, inns, ferry and other 
transport services, and so on. Virtually any kind of service or 
goods in the campaign world will require some initial invest- 
ment before a PC or NPC can get started. 


Charity 


Charity is not an investment in any calculated financial 
sense, but it can pay big dividends to a generous player 
character. Anyone who makes a practice of sharing his 
wealth with those less fortunate will earn a deep and lasting 
sense of gratitude from those he helps. The archetype of 
this role, of course, is the legendary figure of Robin Hood. 

This gratitude can be manifest in many ways. If fortunes 
reverse, a formerly-wealthy character can find that those he 
once aided are now willing to aid him in return. Too, those 
who benefit from a PC's charity will tend to regard their 
benefactor quite protectively. They will pass along informa- 
tion about the plans and intentions of the PC's enemies, 
and even seek to thwart those plans by diversion, pre- 
tended ignorance, and so forth. 


125 


Sculage 

This medieval form of debtorship represents a payment 
made by a knight or other character who owes fealty to a 
higher lord. In lieu of joining the ruler's current military cam- 
paign, the character can pay a scutage fee. Often the king 
will welcome a payment of gold or gemstones even more 
than he would the services of one more blade. Alternately, 
if the PC is the ranking character, he can find his coffers 
swelled by the ranks of his followers who have more impor- 
tant things to do than help him slay the pesky dragon, or 
drive off the marafding orcs. 

The exact terms of scutage must be negotiated. Relevant 
factors will include the dangers of the contemplated cam- 
paign, the wealth of the underling, and the need of the ruler 
to have help. Also, scutage may be demanded after the 
fact—if the knight didn't show up when he was expected, 
the king will probably come to see him after the campaign. 
In this case the scutage fee will be significantly higher than 
the previously negotiated settlement. 


Trading 


One of the most time-honored means of making money 
involves taking something a character has in plenty, and car- 
rying it where that plentiful item is in great demand. Ideally, 
the character then gathers some cargo that will draw high 
prices when he returns home. Trading missions can occur 
over land or water. 

A character may contribute money to a sea captain 
who's planning to carry a load of local wool, wine, and dye 
across a small sea. On the far shore, the seaman will barter 
for spices, silk, and steel. When he returns and sells those 
goods locally, all the investors will ideally receive their share 
of the profits. 

The trials and tribulations faced by such traveling mer- 
chants are too numerous to count. Ships sink, sandstorms 
scatter desert caravans, and bandits prey on weakly- 
defended parties. 

Trading expeditions can make splendid adventures, if the 
players are interested in sending their characters on such a 
trek. Alternately, a wealthy PC can put his funds at the dis- 
posal of a reputable sea captain or merchant and see what 
kind of profits or losses result. The DM will need to adjudi- 
cate these attempts, factoring in distance traveled, risks of 
weather, terrain and banditry, and the relative worth of the 
goods in their points of departure and arrival. 

For example, a character gathers the funds to purchase 
100 mules, 100 pack saddles, and 400 bolts of fine wool. 
His journey will take him over a mountain range and 
through a forest known to contain goblins. If the PCs 
accompany the caravan, the DM could present attacks by 
griffons in the heights, several harassing attacks by goblins, 
one major ambush, and a challenging river crossing. Each of 
these might cost the caravan one or more mules, and sev- 


Chapter 7 


eral loads might be lost in the river even if the mules make 
it across. When the caravan reaches its destination, the 
characters can also role-play the bartering of the wool for 
other goods or treasure. In the end, the profit or loss of the 
mission will be a matter of gaming adventure. 

Alternately, the character might fund a group of NPCs to 
perform this mission. The DM will then judge the risks and 
losses of the mission, as well as the honesty of the NPCs. 
After a suitable period of game time has passed, those 
NPCs will (hopefully) show up at the PC's home base to 
give him his profits. 


Disposition of Wealth —Example 


Gronyard, a mighty warrior, returns from an extended 
adventure during which he rescues the daughter of the king 
from an evil dragon, slays the dragon, and acquires some 
12,000 gold pieces worth of treasure—gems, coins, and a 
precious artifact, a comb of gold, studded with diamonds. 

Upon his return to civilization, Gronyard is made a baron 
by the king, who is tremendously grateful that his daughter 
was spared. The title includes a large house that is in need 
of some repair, but does not include ownership of any sig- 
nificant lands. 

Up to this point, Gronyard can cash in some of his trea- 
sure for character points—4,000 gp for each point. How- 
ever, he decides not to do this. Instead, he invests 2,000 to 
fix up the house, and another 5,000 to buy a large swath of 
prime farmland. He decides to keep the golden comb 
(worth about 5,000) as his portable treasure, which leaves 
him another 2,000 gp as spendable assets. 

With that money he invests in a caravan of goods which 
can travel through the newly opened mountain pass (now 
that Gronyard has slain the dragon that used to block the 
way.) 

If Gronyard now decides to buy a character point, the 
cost will still be 4,000 gp because he can't divest himself of 
liquid assets just before making this trade. 

Gronyard also has some intangible wealth, in that the 
king is still going to be grateful for his daughter's life. If 
Gronyard needs a hand, chances are that the king will 
remember this debt. On the other hand, the king will also 
remember Gronyard as a mighty warrior—if the monarch 
needs a stalwart battle captain, he may demand Gronyard's 
services. If our hero is unwilling (or perhaps unable, for 
example if he accompanied his goods caravan), than he 
might have to pay a significant scutage fee—perhaps even 
handing over his treasure golden comb! 

As the year passes, Gronyard's wealth will change. His 
house and lands will require upkeep, and servants will have 
to be paid. Still, his tenants might provide him with tax 
income, or his trading caravan might return with goods 
worth two or three times his initial investment! 


124 


The AD&D Master's Options: 
Encumbrance Skills and Powers rules retain 


f vem the encumbrance categories 
"5 d Movement (None, Light, Moderate, Heavy, 


Severe) familiar to players. As always, the level of detail for 
encumbrance rules is a matter for DMs and players alike to 
choose. 

The rules of this section are intended to offer streamlin- 
ing options—ways that players can retain the necessary 
details of encumbrance without quite so much mathemati- 
cal precision. And, as always, they're designed to add a few 
new elements of fun. 

Even the fastest sprinter won't move so quickly when 
he's carrying 140 pounds of armor, weapons, and adventur- 
ing gear. A character's encumbrance falls into five cate- 
gories: None, Light, Moderate, Heavy, and Severe. Encum- 
brance is described in the Player's Handbook in Chapter 
Six: Money and Equipment. 

To determine the character's encumbrance category, find 
his Strength and read across the table. The numbers on the 
table are the breakpoints for each category. A character with 
a Strength of 14 is not encumbered until he has 56 pounds 
of gear, Lightly encumbered until he has 86 pounds of gear, 
Moderately encumbered until he carries 116 pounds of 
gear, and Heavily encumbered up to a load of 146 pounds. 

To calculate a monster's strength for this purpose, add 
3 points per size category (rounded down) to the mon- 
ster's base Hit Dice (ignoring plusses). 


Simplified Enacumbrance 


If the standard encumbrance rules aren't worth the 
trouble, here's an easier way to do it. Most of the weight a 
character carries is in armor and weapons. To streamline 
things, only use the character's armor, shield, and largest 
weapon when figuring the total weight carried. This slightly 
favors PCs, but it's much faster than tracking every addition 
of weight. 


Expanded Base Movement 


Characters who have a high score in either Dexterity/ 
Agility or Strength/Stamina, or both, can increase their base 
movement allowance above the 6 or 12 for characters of 
their race. 

For characters with high Strength/Stamina scores, add 
the character's Attack adjustment (bonus added on rolls to 
hit) to the character's base movement allowance. 

If a character has a high Dexterity/Agility score, add the 
character's Reaction/Attack adjustment to the base move- 
ment allowance. 

A character with multiple high scores can add the bo- 
nuses from both of these categories. 


Weapon Proficiency & Mastery 


Table 54: Strength and Encumbrance 
Encumbrance Category 
Light Moderate Heavy Severe 


111 
136 214 253 


18/51 161 200 259 -278 


A creature's final movement is figured by compar- 
ing current encumbrance with natural base move- 
ment. 


Table 55: Movement and Encumbrance 
Encumbrance Category 
Move None Light Moderate He Severe 


In addition to affecting how far a character can 
move in a combat round, encumbrance also affects 
how well a character can fight. Moderately encum- 
bered characters suffer a —1 penalty to attack rolls. 
Heavily encumbered characters suffer a —2 attack 
penalty, and their Armor Class suffers a --1 penalty. If 
the character is severely encumbered, he suffers a 
—4 penalty to all attacks and a +3 penalty to his 
Armor Class. 


Chapter 7 


Recording Encumbrance (Simplified) 


Characters can simplify the recording of encumbrance 
for purposes of the Skills and Powers rules. For most 
encounters, determine the character's encumbrance by 
considering only his armor, shield and largest weapon. 
These are generally the most significant parts of his load, 
and thus will provide a reasonably accurate rating. 

If the character is carrying camping or exploring equip- 
ment, or trade goods, extra supplies, etc., the additional 
encumbrance also can be simplified. If the character is 
carrying a backpack, figure 10 pounds if he has miscella- 
neous exploring equipment (rope, lantern, oil, spikes, 
etc.), 20 pounds for camping equipment (bedroll, cloak or 
spare clothes, tinderbox and food). Add only five-pound 
increments for extra items—trade goods, treasure, extra oil 
flasks, etc. 


Weight 


The equipment tables at the end of this chapter contain 
a weight for every listed item. Players and DMs can use 
these weights to calculate exact character loads. 


Equipment Tables 


Table 56: Stone Age/Savage Settings 

(Italicized entries are only present in metal-using cultures.) 

Weapons: 

Adze; Axe, stone; Battle axe; Blowgun—barbed dart, needle; 

Bola; Boomerang; Bow, short—arrow, stone, arrow, flight; 

club; Dagger, Bone dagger, Stone dagger; Dart; Hand axe; 

Harpoon; Bone harpoon; Javelin; Stone javelin; Knife; Bone 

knife; Stone knife; Lasso; Machete; Quarterstaff; Rock; 

Sling—Sling stone; Spear; Throwing Knife; War club 

Armor: 

Cord armor; Hide armor; Leather; Padded; Studded leather; 

Wood/Bone 

Transportation/Livestock: 

Animals: Cattle; Dog, war; Donkey; Goat; Horse—draft; 
Sheep 

Wheeled: Chariot; Cart 

Watercraft: Canoe; Curragh; Raft 


Table 57: Bronze Age/Ancient 

(Italicized weapons have a limited availability based on the 
DM's discretion, as they were not as common as the other 
weapons.) 

Weapons: 

Adze; Battle axe; Bow (long bow, short bow, composite 
short bow)—Arrow, flight; Cestus; Dagger; Dart; Hand/ 
Throwing axe; Javelin; Lance, light; Mace, footman; Mace, 
horseman's; Mace-axe; Pike; Quarterstaff; Spear; Spear, 


126 


long; Staff sling—stinkpot, stone; Sword (Broad sword, 

Khopesh, Sapara, Short, Sword-axe; Trident; Two-handed 

axe; Warhammer; War club 

Armor: 

Bronze plate; Cord armor; Hide armor; Leather; Light scale; 

Padded; Ring mail; Scale; Studded leather; Wood/Bone 

Transportation/Livestock: 

Animals: Cattle; Dog—war, hunting; Donkey; Goat; Horses— 
draft, riding, light war; Sheep 

Wheeled: Chariot; Cart 

Watercraft: Canoe; Curragh; Dromond; Raft 


Table 58: Cultures of the Roman Age 

(Italicized weapons are associated with barbarians or 

empire-frontier areas.) 

Weapons: 

Battle axe; Bow (long bow, short bow, composite short 

bow)—Arrow, flight; Cestus; Dagger; Dart; Hand/Throwing 

axe; Javelin; Lance (light, medium); Mace, footman; Mace, 
horseman's; Net; Pilum; Quarterstaff; Spear; Spear, long; 

Staff sling—stinkpot, stone; Sword (Broad sword, Drusus, 

Gladius, Spatha) Trident; Warhammer 

Armor: 

Banded Mail; Bronze plate; Leather; Light scale; Padded; 

Ring mail; Scale; Studded leather 

Transportation/Livestock: 

Animals: Cattle; Dog—war, hunting, guard; Donkey; Ele- 
phant; Goat; Horses—draft, riding, light war, medium war; 
Hunting cat; Sheep 

Wheeled: Chariot; Cart (2 wheeled) 

Watercraft: Canoe; Coaster; Curragh; Dromond; Galley; Raft 


Table 59: Dark Ages 

(Italicized weapons are made in more civilized realms or 

are late developments of the period, and may not be avail- 

able at the DM's discretion.) 

Weapons: 

Battle axe; Bow (long bow, short bow, composite short 

bow), Arrow (flight, sheaf); Caltrop; Crossbow (Light cross- 

bow, Pellet bow), (Light quarrel, Pellet); Dagger; Dart; 

Hand/Throwing axe; Javelin; Lance (light, medium); Mace, 

footman's; Mace, horseman's; Quarterstaff; Spear; Spear, 

long; Staff sling—stinkpot, stone; Sword (Broad sword, 

Long sword, Sabre, Short sword); Two-handed axe; 

Warhammer 

Armor: 

Bronze plate; Chain mail; Leather; Light scale; Metal lamel- 

lar; Padded; Ring mail; Scale; Studded leather 

Transportation/Livestock: 

Animals: Cattle; Dog—war, hunting, guard; Donkey; Goat; 
Horses—draft, riding, light war, medium war, heavy war; 
Sheep 

Wheeled: Chariot; Cart (2 wheeled) 

Watercraft: Canoe; Coaster; Curragh; Dromond; Galley; 


Weapon Proficiency © Mastery 


Weapons: 

Battle axe; Bow (Long bow, Short bow, Composite long 

bow, Composite short bow), Arrow (Flight, Sheaf, Pile); 

Caltrop; Crossbow (Light crossbow, Heavy crossbow, Pellet 

bow), (Light quarrel, Heavy quarrel, Pellet); Dagger, Sti- 

letto; Flail, footman's; Flail, horseman's; Hand/Throwing 
axe; Javelin; Lance (Light, Medium, Heavy, Jousting); Mace, 
footman's; Mace, horseman's; Maul; Morningstar; Pick, 
footman's; Pick, horseman's; Polearm (Awl pike, Bardiche, 

Bec de corbin, Bill, Bill Guisarme, Fachaurd, Glaive, Glaive- 

guisarme, Guisarme, Halberd, Lucern hammer, Military 

fork); Quarterstaff; Spear; Staff sling—stinkpot, stone; 

Sword (Bastard sword, Broad sword, Falchion, Long sword, 

Sabre, Short sword, Two-handed sword); Warhammer 

Armor: 

Chain mail; Improved mail; Leather; Metal lamellar; Padded; 

Plate mail; Scale; Studded leather 

Transportation/Livestock: 

Animals: Cattle; Dog—war, hunting, guard; Donkey; Goat; 
Horses—draft, riding, light war, medium war, heavy war; 
Sheep 

Wheeled: Chariot; Cart (2 wheeled); wagon 

Watercraft: Canoe; Coaster; Cog; Curragh; Dromond; Gal- 
ley; Knarr; Longship; Raft/keelboat 


Table 61: Late Middle Ages/Renaissance 

Weapons: 

Battle axe; Brandistock; Bow (Long bow, Short bow, Com- 

posite long bow, Composite short bow), Arrow (Flight, 

Sheaf, Pile); Caltrop; Crossbow (Light crossbow, Heavy 

crossbow, Pellet bow), (Light quarrel, Heavy quarrel, Pel- 

let); Dagger, Main-gauche, Parrying dagger, Stiletto; Flail, 
footman's; Flail, horseman's; Hand/Throwing axe; Lance 

(Light, Medium, Heavy, Jousting); Mace, footman's; Mace, 

horseman's; Mancatcher; Maul; Morningstar; Pick, foot- 

man's; Pick, horseman's; Polearm (Awl pike, Bill, Bill- 
guisarme, Glaive-guisarme, Halberd, Military fork, Partisan, 

Ranseur, Spetum, Voulge); Quarterstaff; Spear; Staff sling— 

stinkpot, stone; Sword (Bastard sword, Broad sword, Clay- 

more, Cutlass, Falchion, Long sword, Rapier, Sabre, Short 
sword, Two-handed sword); War hammer 

Armor: 

Brigandine; Chain mail; Field plate; Full plate; Leather; 

Metal lamellar; Padded; Plate mail; Splint mail; Studded 

leather 

Transportation/Livestock: 

Animals: Cattle; Dog—war, hunting, guard; Donkey; Goat; 
ee riding, light war, medium war, heavy war; 
Sheep 

Wheeled: Chariot; Cart (2 wheeled); wagon 

Watercraft: Canoe; Caravel; Coaster; Cog; Curragh; Drakkar; 
Dromond; Galley; Great galley; Knarr; Longship; Raft/ 
keelboat 


127 


Weapons: 

Ankus; Bagh nakh; Battle axe; Blowgun; Bow (Composite 

long bow, Composite short bow), Arrow, flight; Chain; 

Chakram; Crossbow (Hand crossbow, Light crossbow, Pel- 

let bow), (Hand quarrel, Light quarrel, Pellet); Dagger, 

Jambiya, Katar; Dart; Flail, footman’s; Flail, horseman’s; 

Hand/Throwing axe; Javelin; Lance (Light, Medium); 

Mace, footman's; Mace, horseman's; Mancatcher; Pole- 

arm (Awl pike, Glaive, Halberd, Military fork) Quarterstaff; 

Spear; Spear, long; Sword (Cutlass, Great scimitar, Long 

sword, Sabre, Scimitar, Short sword, Tulwar); Trident 

Armor: 

Brigandine; Chain mail; Cord; Hide; Improved mail; 

Leather; Light scale; Metal lamellar; Padded; Scale; Stud- 

ded leather 

Transportation/Livestock: 

Animals: Dog—war, hunting, guard; Camel Donkey; Goat; 
Horses—draft, riding, light war, medium war; Sheep 

Wheeled: Chariot; Cart (2 wheeled); wagon 

Watercraft: Canoe; Coaster; Cog; Dromond; Galley; Great 
galley; Raft/keelboat 


Table 63: Oriental Cultures 

Weapons: 

Ankus; Battle axe; Blowgun; Bo stick; Bow (Composite 

long bow, Composite short bow, Short bow), Arrow 

(Flight, Sheaf); Chain; Chakram; Chijikiri; Crossbow (Cho- 

ku-no; Light crossbow, Pellet bow), (Hand quarrel, Light 

quarrel, Pellet); Dagger; Dart; Gunsen; Hand axe; Javelin; 

Jitte; Kama; Kau sin ke; Kawanaga; Kusari-gama; Lance 

(Light, Medium); Mace, footman's; Mace, horseman's; 

Mancatcher; Nunchaku; Polearm (Awl pike, Lajatang, Nag- 

imaki, Tetsubo); Sai; Sang kauw; Shuriken; Spear; Spear, 

long; Sword (Cutlass, Katana, Ninja-to, No-dachi, Sabre, 

Short sword, Tulwar, Wakizashi); Trident 

Armor: 

Brigandine; Chain mail; Cord; Hide; Leather; Light scale; 

Padded; Ring mail; Splint mail; Studded leather 

Transportation/Li k: 

Animals: Dog—war, hunting, guard; Donkey; Elephant; 
Goat; Horses—draft, riding, light war, medium war; Sheep 

Wheeled: Chariot; Cart (2 wheeled); wagon 

Watercraft: Canoe; Coaster; Cog; Dromond; Galley; Raft/ 
keelboat 


Chapter 7 


Master Equipment Tables 


Table 64: Weapons 


Weapon Proficiency 6 Mastery 
———— ENTE 


Table 64: Weapons (cont.) 


7 1d6+1 
10 1d8+1 
B 10 1d3-1 


2d4 
1d8 


^c oe ees CI N Y aie aa DC a Go CN i O00 oo c P Nl T DO DOO DU B t Y 10 121 I IER RE 


129 


Chapter 7 


Table 64: Weapons (cont.) 


es 


| Slin sq) 
Sling stone S(O) 
an 


Spear, stone'* 


1d6+1 1d8+1 
1d6+1 1d4 
1d6 1d8 


Two-handed sword 
Tulwar 
Wakizashi 


| Two-handed axe‘ 
Warhammer B 
War club B/S 


| | Bone or stone weapons have a 1 in 6 chance of breaking any time maximum damage is rolled. 
? These weapons weigh little individually; 10 equal 1 pound. 
* These weapons inflict double damage when set to receive a charge. 
| * These weapons require two hands to use, regardless of the wielder's size. 
* These weapons do double damage when used in a mounted charge. 
* This weapon dismounts a rider on a successful hit. 


Weapon Proficiency & Mastery 
— 


Table 65: Missile Ranges and Rates of Fire 


Range(x5 yds) 


Missile Type ROF Short Med. 
Blowgun 2/1 teak 
Bolas 1 6 12 
Boomerang ] 
*Bows: 
Composite long bow 
—flight arrow 
—sheaf arrow 
Composite short bow 
Long bow 
—flight arrow 
—sheaf arrow 
Short bow 
—flight arrow 
—stone arrow 


Chakram 
Club/hammer 
*Crossbows: 
Cho-ku-no 
Hand crossbow 
Heavy crossbow 
Light crossbow 


Table 66: Armor 
Armor Type 
Banded Mail 
Brigandine 
Bronze plate mail 
Chain mail 

Cord armor 

Field plate 

Full plate 

Hide armor 
Improved mail 
Leather 

Metal lamellar 
Padded 

Plate mail 

Ring mail 

Scale mail 

Splint mail 
Studded leather 
Wood/bone armor 


Cost (Minimum) 


Shields 
Body 
Buckler 
Medium 
Small 


Long 
6 


131 


Missile Type 
Pellet 


Dagger/Knife/Stiletto 
Dagger (bone/stone) 
Dart 
Hand/Throwing axe 
Harpoon 
Harpoon, bone 
Javelin 
Javelin, stone 
Lance, light 
Lasso 
Mace, horseman's 
Rock 
Shuriken 
Sling bullet 
Sling stone 
Spear 
Staff sling stone, 
bullet, stinkpot 
Trident 


Weight (Ibs.) AC (armor only) Bulk points* 
35 3 


OANA git 0» Oo 0 d 0) — NN dox 


ROF 
1 
2/1 
2/1 
3/1 


NN 
— ao — — — pru 


N 
Sud 


# foes 
+2/+3** 
+] 
+] 


3 gp 5 +] 
“For armor, this represents a reduction in the bulk point capacity that the character can otherwise carry.; **against missiles 


Range(x5 yds) 
Short Med. 


NJ d» QUU NJ NO NO N23 O4 d» NJ NJ NO NO NJONJO CO 


-16 


^0 £0) U iU ] 0 U I.) 


Us NJ 4» dS UNS ND UN — dS ND OS Un. 2. NO BW 


Bulk Points 
4 


1 
5 
2 


ogmSbosonmBUOÓS-5oooemo 


> O 


Chapter 7 
f. ——————— —————— 


Table 67: Miscellaneous Equipment 
Item Weight 


Bulk Points! Initial Avail. 


Backpack 

Barrel—small 
—large 

Basket—large 
—small 

Bell 

Belt pouch—large 
—small 

Block and Tackle 

Bolt case 

Bucket 

Chain (per ft.) —heavy 
—light 

Chest-large 
—small 

Cloth (10 sq. yards)—common 
—fine 
—rich 

Candle 

Canvas (sq. yard) 

Chalk 


Crampons 

Fishhook 

Fishing net (10 sq ft.) 
Hint and steel 

Glass bottle 
Grappling hook 
Hourglass 

Iron pot 

Ladder, 10 ft. 


Lock—good 

Magnifying glass 

Map/scroll case 

Merchant's scale 

Mirror, small metal 

Musical Instrument 

Oil (per flask)—Greek fire 
—lamp 

Paper (per sheet) 

Papyrus (per sheet) 

Parchment (sheet) 

Perfume (per vial) 

Piton 

Quiver 

Rope (per 50')—hemp 
—silk 


3 
l 
3 
2 
0 
5 
3 
3 
4 
] 
] 
20 
50 
3 
2 
1 
] 
$ 
Ui 
1 
’ 


T 
a 


Wo- = uD o wW— N 


132 


1@) 
6 
16 

5(5) 
2(2) 
| 
3(3) 

1(1) 
2 
1 

3(2) 
| 

1/2 


10(9) 
5(4) 


O-OCO-OCGONNN 


— 
= 
ws 
w 


— 
m ot 
_~ 
w 


°° e OG Mu 


[e] 


"ug 
NS 


any 
any 
Bronze age 
any 


any 
Roman 


Crusades 
Crusades 
Crusades 
Crusades 
Dark ages 
Dark ages 
Bronze age 
Roman 
Crusades 
Bronze age 
Roman 
any 
Crusades 
Roman 
Bronze age 


Bronze age 
Bronze age 
Bronze age 
Crusades 
any 


Bronze age 
Roman 


Bronze age 
Roman 
Bronze age 
Roman 
any 

Bronze age 
Crusades 


Weapon Proficiency © Mastery 
ťi 


Item Cost Weight Bulk Points Initial Avail. 
Sack—large 0(6) Bronze age 
—small 0(3) Bronze age 
Sewing needle 0 Roman 
Sextant 1 Late Mid. Ages 
Signal whistle 0 Bronze age 
Signet ring/seal 0 Roman 
Soap(per Ib) 1/2 Roman 
pe 1 Late Mid. Ages 
Tent, large 2 (folded) Roman 
—pavilion 4(folded) Crusades 
—small 1(folded) Bronze age 
Thieves’ picks 0 Roman 
Torch 0 any 
12 Crusades 
1/2 Bronze age 
] any 
Wineskin 0(1) Bronze age 
Winter blanket | Bronze age 


Writing ink (vial) 8 gp ; Roman 
, base: points in parentheses represent the carrying capacity of the item; the number before the parentheses is the bulk points when the item is 


mply. 
3 A backpack can carry bulk points equal to the character's strength. 
* These items weigh little individually; 10 weigh 1 pound and equal 1 bulk point. 


Table 68: Household Provisions/Trade Goods 

Ale (Ig. barrel) Dark ages 

Bamboo (100 10' lengths) 

Bread (loaf) 

Butter (per Ib) 

Cheese (per Ib) 

Coarse sugar (per Ib) 

Dry rations (1 week) 

Eggs (per 100) 

Figs (per Ib) 

Firewood, 1 day supply 

Grain (lg barrel) 

Herbs (per Ib) 

Ivory (per tusk) 

Meat ,fresh per Ib. 

Nuts (per Ib) 

Pickled fish, small barrel 

Raisins (per Ib) 

Rice (per Ib) 

Salt (per Ib) 

Salt pork (per Ib) 1 Bronze age 

Salted herring (100) Bronze age 

TEE (per Ib)—exotic Bronze age 

a 

dudo mon pi 

Cider (Ig barrel) Bronze age 

Wine (Ig barrel)—excellent Roman 
—fair Bronze age 
—cheap any 


Chapter 7 


Special Demihuman Equipment 


Table 69: Dwarven Equipment* 


Item Cost i Bulk Points 


—Glove nail 


—Head spike 0 jd 


| zie, $ 


—small 1,000 gp 10,000 
—medium 2,000 gp 32,000 
5,000 gp 75,000 s 1000 


—lar 
*For further information see The Complete Book of Dwarves. 
Table 70: Elven Equipment* 


Table 71: Halfling Equipment 
Cheesemaker (converts barrel of milk to 10# cheese) 
—sharp E. gp 


—mild i 


—Carving knife 10 gp 
—Cooking kettle 2 gp 


zn P x 


Table 72: Gnomish Equipment 
Coinminter 10,000 gp 1,000 
ee Panes gem (causes light to sparkle in 

uthentic gems within 10' radius 


134 


Weapon Proficiency & Mastery 
< 


Table 73: Common Magic Items 


Campaign Occurrence 
Item Low Medium High Cost Weight Bulk Points 
Healing salve 05% 25% 60% 10+ gp [ 1/4 
(per dose; heals 1—3 hp) 
Lock 10% 30% 75% 25+ gp 
(open and close on command) 
Peephole gem; allows user to see through 02% 20% 50% 50+ gp 
up to 6" thickness wood or stone 
Permanently—attached horseshoes 10% 30% 75% 5+ gp 1/2 
Permanently lighted gold piece 05% 20% 50% 50 gp 
Poison antidote (per dose); 15% 50% 90% 10+ gp 1/2 
allows second saving throw vs. poison 
*Campaign occurrence indicates the likelihood of a character finding this item in a well-stocked bazaar or marketplace. The categories represent 


campaign settings of low, medium, and high incidence of magical items, spells, and equipment. The cost listed is generally the price in a high 
magic setting; where the items are more rare, the cost will tend to be higher 


Chapter 8: 
New Schools 
of Magic 


This chapter introduces four new types of specialist wizards: the alchemist, 
geometer, shadow mage, and song wizard. The schools of magic that these wiz- 
ards specialize in are unusual because they are artificial: they contain only spells 
drawn from other, existing schools. All of the usual rules regarding specialist wiz- 
ards apply to these four, unless the description states otherwise. Using these as 
a guide, players and DMs can ssi with creating their own, unique spe- 
cialist wizards. i 


Mi a gic The Skills and Powers rules ac a 
= ing character classes. Use of these ı 


Wizards and Character Pointa. 


spell for his Fane ter's  spelibook: This is similar to » list wizard's ability. 
to automatically add one spell of his specialty to his repertoire each time he 
gains a level. The player is allowed to pick any spell his character could normally 
cast (i.e., he can't pick spells from opposing schools), and no roll for learning the 


The spell purchased with character points must be of equal or lower spell level 
than the highest-level pes currently entered into the character's book. The cost is 
2 character points for a 1stJevel Spelt +1 character point for each level of the spell 

first. For example, a 3rdJevel spell would cost 4 character points; a 7th- 
| would cost 8 points 
] e additional spell can be acquired with character points when 
2 a character can add no more than one such spell 
level of experience. However, this ability is cumulative 
fs bonus spell—when a specialist wizard gains a level, he 
pecialty school free can spend additional character 
points to autornatically leam a second spell from any school he knows. 


New Schools of Magic 


Wizard Specialists: 
New Schools of Magic 


As magic users in the multitude of campaign worlds 
have progressed in their arts, an ever-greater diversity of 
styles and types of wizardry have been developed. Grow- 
ing from the rigid schools of opposing magical powers 
outlined in the Player’s Handbook, more and more disci- 
plines have branched out as young wizards have taken a 
more liberal interpretation of their masters’ teachings. 
These developments have resulted in new types of spell- 
casting, each of which focuses on the way in which magic 
is drawn from the environment and bent to the wizard’s 
will. 

When a wizard character is created (or an existing 
AD&D character is converted to Player’s Option rules), the 
player can elect for his character to specialize in one of the 
following new schools of magic. These schools are similar 
to the elemental wizard or wild mage introduced in the 
Tome of Magic, but the new specialist wizards defined 
here—the alchemist, the shadow mage, and the song wiz- 
ard—have developed alternate styles of spellcasting and 
spell organization. 

The main purpose for specializing in a magic type is as an 
aid toward effective role-playing, though the specialties can 
benefit and hinder characters in various game situations. The 
use of these new magic types, like any other subsystem in 
the AD&D game, is subject to the DM's approval. Several of 
these new schools require a certain amount of campaign or 
encounter background. The powers of the shadow mage, for 
example, vary with the prevalent lighting conditions, and the 
DM must be prepared to answer a player's questions about 
these conditions any time the player character wishes to cast 
a spell. 


Choosing a Magic School Specialty 

To select a specialty, a wizard character generally has to 
meet more demanding ability score criteria than a stan- 
dard mage, and he may have certain backgrounds or ori- 
gins (in other words, character kits) barred to him. A 
player is free to choose any specialty the requirements of 
which his character meets. Naturally, a player may wish to 
select his character's specialty based on his own inter- 
ests—song wizards provide good role-playing for players 
inclined toward music, while scientifically-minded players 
might enjoy an alchemist who can constantly fuss with 
odd ingredients and complicated formulae. 

Creating New Schools: The magic types listed in this 
chapter are the most common examples of alternate 
spellcasting techniques. However, other approaches are 
certainly possible. If a player comes up with a great con- 
cept for defining a new school or discipline of magic, he 
can do so with the DM's approval. In turn, the DM should 


137 


carefully review the player's design for concept, playability, 
and game balance before allowing the new specialist in 
game play. 

Generally, a specialist mage should have spells that he 
can cast with superior skill, balanced by a loss of spells from 
outside his specialty. All specialists should gain the standard 
extra spell memorization slot at each level, as well as advan- 
tages in learning spells from their specialty and penalties for 
learning generic spells. Last but not least, a specialist may 
have non-spellcasting benefits or hindrances, such as the 
alchemist's ability to create potions, or modifiers to their 
saving throws. 


Effects of Magic School Specialization 


s Choosing a specialty provides a wizard character with a 
number of benefits. For all the schools introduced in this 
chapter, the following advantages apply: 

s A specialist gains one additional spell per spell level, pro- 
vided the spell is taken in the specialist's school. Thus, a 
Ist-level alchemist can memorize two spells instead of 
only one, as long as at least one of them is from the 
school of alchemy. 

+ Specialists receive a bonus of +15% when learning 
spells from their school, and a penalty of —1596 when 
learning spells from any other school. The bonus or pen- 
alty is applied to the percentile roll the player must make 
when the character is attempting to learn a new spell. 

« Whenever a specialist reaches a new spell level, he auto- 
matically gains one spell of his school to add to his spell 
books. This can be selected by the DM or he can allow 
the player to pick. No learn spells roll need be made. 

s When a specialist wizard attempts to create a new spell 
using the rules given in the DMG, the DM should count 
the new spell as one level lower if the spell falls within 
the school of the specialist. An alchemist attempting to 
create a new 2nd-level alchemy spell conducts his 
research as if it were a 1st-level spell, since the character 
has a superior understanding of his school. 


Note that the saving throw modifiers granted to spe- 
cialists in the Player's Handbook and Tome of Magic 
aren't abilities of the specialist wizards described in this 
book. They have other abilities that are more specific to 
their particular methods of spellcasting, described later in 
this chapter. 

Specialist wizards also have several significant disad- 
vantages to balance their bonuses. First and foremost, 
each of the new schools described here have opposition 
schools, just like specialists in the Player's Handbook. A 
specialist cannot learn or cast spells from an opposing 
school, or use magical items that duplicate the effects of 
spells from that school. Secondly, the character has a 
reduced chance to learn spells of other non-opposing 
schools, as noted above. 


Chapter 8 
mist can ever understand is limited by his Intelligence score 


The Alchemist 


Minimum Ability Requirements: 
Intelligence/Knowledge 15; Dexterity/Aim 14 

Races Allowed: Human, half-elf, gnome 

Prohibited Kits: Amazon, barbarian, peasant hero, savage 


The puttering, scientifically-minded wizard who enjoys 
working with various material components is likely to find 
the School of Alchemy to be a welcome source of inspira- 
tion and magical might. Alchemists are inventors and exper- 
imenters, always striving for a way to create new and 
greater effects through the use of magical powders, 
reagents, and potions. 

The exact nature of the alchemist's materials is not very 
important for game play, although it is good role-playing for 
a player to note which substances and minerals are vital to 
his character's spells. Unlike most wizards, who define the 
world by the four classic elements of earth, air, fire, and 
water, the alchemist believes that each subtle combination 
of these elements is a new element of its own. Gold may 
be nothing more than a rare type of earth with a small glim- 
mer of fire in it, but the alchemist considers the properties 
of gold as a unique substance with no other components. 
In other words, alchemists describe their world in the mod- 
ern terms of a Periodic Table of Elements, even though 
notions such as atoms, electrons, or atomic weight have no 
meaning in their universe. 

As scientific characters, alchemists will always maintain a 
large and well-equipped laboratory to pursue their experi- 
ments. The laboratory must be well-stocked with all kinds of 
materials, including samples of every metal or alloy imagin- 
able, equipment such as burners, beakers and bottles, and 
natural curiosities like magnets, incendiaries, and other such 
things. An alchemist is assumed to begin play with an ap- 
propriate laboratory in his home town or base of operations, 
but building and outfitting a new laboratory costs at least 
1,000 gp per character level, and existing laboratories re- 
quire at least 50 gp of materials a level per month to be 
functional. An alchemist without access to his laboratory 
loses the bonus alchemy spell he could normally memorize 
at each spell level, and can't conduct research, make 
potions, or add new spells to his spellbook. 

Alchemists have no modifiers to their saving throws or 
their victims' saving throws, but instead they have the spe- 
cial ability to create potions, starting at 6th level. The alche- 
mist must first research the potion's formula, as if conduct- 
ing normal spell research; consider the potion's level to be 
equal to its XP value divided by 100, so a potion of clairau- 
dience (XP value 250) is considered a 3rd-level spell, and a 
potion of undead control (XP value 700) is a 7th-level spell. 
The research time is two weeks per effective level, and the 
Cost is 500 gp per effective level. The alchemist must pass 
a learn spells check to successfully research the formula. 
Just like spells, the number of potion formulae the alche- 


Maximum Number of Spells per Level, except that all 
potions are counted together for this purpose. A character 
with an Intelligence of 12 can never know how to make 
more than seven types of potions. 

Once an alchemist knows the potion's formula, he can 
produce one dose by investing in 300—1800 gp worth of 
materials and spending one uninterrupted week in his labo- 
ratory. Again, a learn spells roll applies to see if he followed 
the directions carefully, or if he ruined the batch instead. If 
the DM finds that a player is abusing this ability, he can 
insist on specific adventures to acquire rare and unusual 
materials such as a griffon's heart, a beholder's eye, and 
other such hard-to-get items. 

The School of Alchemy: The school of alchemy is 
opposed by the Schools of Illusion/Phantasm (things that 
aren't real are of no interest to alchemists) and Necro- 
mancy (similarly, life forces and spirits are too intangible for 
alchemy.) All the spells in the school of alchemy are con- 
sidered to have no verbal component when employed by 
an alchemist, which means that an alchemist has little to 
fear from a silence spell or any other magic that prevents 
speaking. The School of Alchemy consists of the following 
spells; italicized spells appear in the Tome of Magic. 


The Geometer 


Minimum Ability Requirements: 
Intelligence/Reason 15; Wisdom/Intuition 14 

Races Allowed: Human, elf, half-elf 

Prohibited Kits: Barbarian, savage 


Potent magical forces can be locked in designs, symbols, 
and diagrams of mystical significance. Geometers are wiz- 
ards who study the summoning and control of magic 
through the creation of intricate geometrical patterns, rang- 
ing from runes drawn on paper or carved in stone to free- 
floating constructs composed of brilliant lines of energy. For 
a geometer, the somatic component of a spell—the gestures 


required to unlock the spell's energy— 
represent the creation of an extra- 
dimensional doorway through which 
magic is drawn and shaped into the 
form the wizard desires. 

Geometers, quite naturally, excel in 
the casting of any spell that involves the 
use of a mark, rune, or diagram drawn 
upon the target of the spell. In fact, a 
number of spells that are not normally 
cast in this fashion have been adapted 
to the geometers’ philosophy. For 
example, geometers cast a hold portal 
spell by placing a minor rune of power 
upon the door to be barred, and ani- 
mate dead by drawing complicated 
designs upon the face and hands of the 
creature to be reanimated. Geometers 
can also create effects with less sub- 
stantial materials by sketching a design 
in the air, as if they were drawing imag- 
inary circles and angles; depending on 
the power of the spell, this design may 
be visible as a glowing web of blue or 
green energy created by the motion of 
the geometer's hands. 

Geometers enjoy the normal bene- 
fits and penalties of specialist wizards, 
but they have no modifier to their sav- 
ing throws and do not inflict any penal- 
ties to their target's saving throws. They 
do have the special ability to create 
scrolls, much like alchemists can pre- 
pare potions. At 4th level, the geometer 
can commit a spell that he knows and 
can cast to a scroll. He may read the 
scroll at any time after transcribing the 
spell, just like casting a normal spell 
from a scroll. However, the character 
may not have more than one scroll per 
character level prepared at any given 
time—the incomplete magical diagrams 
become too confusing and complex for 
the geometer to keep track of if he tries 
to keep too many scrolls ready for cast- 
ing. 

Transcribing a spell to a scroll 
requires one full day per spell level, so 
preparing a 5th-level spell for use in this 
fashion would take the wizard five days 
of uninterrupted work. The materials 
(rare inks, fine parchment, etc.) cost 
100 gold pieces per spell level, and the 
wizard requires a suitable laboratory or 
library to work in. The geometer can 


x r S. / 
z — 1 


transcribe any spell of the School of Geometry that he 
knows, or he can engage in normal spell research to find a 
diagram to convey a spell that he knows outside the School 
of Geometry. (Once he successfully researches a new spell 
diagram, it is considered to be part of the School of Geom- 
etry for that wizard.) In any event, the geometer must suc- 
ceed in a learn spells check to see if he successfully tran- 
scribed the spell. 

Geometers may also attempt to create protection scrolls, 
beginning at 7th level. The geometer must first research the 
scroll's diagram through normal spell research; scrolls with 
an XP value of 1,000 are considered to be equal to 4th- 
level spells; scrolls with an XP value of 1,500 are equal to 
5th-level spells; scrolls with an XP value of 2,000 are equal 
to 6th-level spells; and scrolls with an XP value of 2,500 are 
equal to 7th-level spells. The research time is two weeks 
per effective level, and the cost is 1000 gp per effective 
level. The geometer must pass a learn spells check to suc- 
cessfully research the formula. Once the geometer knows 
the diagram, he can produce one scroll by investing in 
300-1800 gp worth of materials and spending one unin- 
terrupted week in his laboratory. Again, a learn spells roll 
applies to see if he followed the directions correctly. 

The School of Geometry: As noted above, the School 
of Geometry consists of both diagrams that can be drawn 
on the target, as well as geometrical designs that can be 
created through gestures. Often, spells of this school 
require unusual writing implements—the material compo- 
nents for the spell—but generally, no verbal components are 
necessary. The School of Geometry is opposed by the 
Schools of Enchantment/Charm and Illusion. 

The following spells are part of the School of Geometry; 
spells from the Tome of Magic are in italics, and spells from 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook are in boldface. 


^ Q1 t^ Í ba M PI 
LNC onadow "lage 


Minimum Ability Requirements: 
Intelligence/Reason 15; Wisdom/Will 14 

Races Allowed: Human 

Prohibited Kits: Gladiator, pugilist 


The places where light and darkness meet have long 
symbolized opposition and balance, the clash of good and 
evil, even of chaos and law. The School of Shadow 
teaches mages to use these contrasts to reach the secret 
source and union of all shadow and harness its power. 
Shadow mages tend to be grim sentinels who have ex- 
changed the bright spark of a normal existence for the 
power of twilight and darkness. Very few shadow mages 
are of good alignment; a great number are neutral, and 
some have embraced the darkness completely and 
turned to ways of evil. 

Shadow mages are closely tied to the Demiplane of 
Shadow. They have discovered that every shadow in the 
real world has a mystic connection or source in Shadow- 
land. A wizard with skill and a strong heart can use the 
most mundane shadows as a doorway to this realm of 
dusk, calling forth its powers for their own purposes. A 
number of shadow mages eventually become shades, or 
creatures whose physical forms have been completely 
replaced by shadow-stuff, although this doesn’t happen to 
player character shadow mages except in extraordinary cir- 
cumstances. 

In addition to the normal advantages and penalties 
associated with specializing in a school of magic, a 
shadow mage's effectiveness is tied to the lighting condi- 
tion at the time he casts a spell from this school. Naturally, 
shadow mages are weakest in broad daylight and progres- 
sively stronger in weak daylight or dusk, partial darkness, 
and finally complete darkness. It's not the strength of a 
shadow, but instead the overall absence of light that 
strengthens the connection to the plane of gloom. 


Modifier to 
Condition Opponent's Saves 
Bright daylight or continual light +2 
Weak daylight, dusk, or light none 


Late twilight, strong moonlight, lantern light — —1 


Weak moonlight, torch light -2 
Candlelight, starlight -3 
Total darkness -4 


Due to their intimate connection with shadow, shadow 
mages gain an ability to see normally in darkness. As a 
shadow mage advances in level, he becomes more attuned 
to darkness and ignores changes in visibility that would par- 
tially or completely blind other characters. 


New Schools of Magic 


Condition Attack Damage Saving AC 
Penalty Bonus Throws Penalty 


Moonlight -1 Normal -1 0 
Starlight -3 Normal -3 -2 
Total darkness — -4 None -4 -4 


At Ath level, the shadow mage sees as well in moonlight 
(or equivalent light) as a normal human would see in 
broad daylight, and he can lessen penalties for more com- 
plete darkness by 1 point. In other words, he would only 
suffer a —2 penalty for attacking in starlight, or a —5 penalty 
for total darkness. At 7th level, he sees by starlight as well 
as a normal human sees by day, and he lessens combat 
penalties for total darkness by 2 points. At 10th level he 
can see perfectly in total darkness, negating all penalties. 
However, magical blindness or fog can still hinder a 
shadow mage's sight. 

The School of Shadow: Many wizard spells derive their 
energy from extraplanar connections, but spells of the 
School of Shadow are exclusively tied to the Demiplane of 
Shadow. The School of Shadow is opposed by the Schools 
of Invocation/Evocation and Abjuration, both of which rely 
on more positive energies than the subtle, pervasive power 
of shadow. The spells of the School of Shadow are listed 
below; italicized spells can be found in the Tome of Magic, 
and bold spells can be found in The Complete Wizard's 
Handbook. 


The Song Wizard 


Minimum Ability Requirements: 
Intelligence/Knowledge 14; Charisma/Appearance 15 

Races Allowed: Human, elf, half-elf 

Prohibited Kits: Gladiator, rider 


141 


The power of music and words has long been acknowl- 
edged as an important source of inspiration and amuse- 
ment. The School of Song concentrates on spoken spells, 
using the wizard's skill at weaving melody, lyrics, and 
rhythm to create enchantments of great power. Elves and 
great bards have tapped into this source of magic for count- 
less years, but now more wizards are investigating the 
intriguing possibilities of this school of magic. Musical profi- 
ciency or knowledge is not a strict requirement for this 
school, but most song wizards are also virtuoso vocalists— 
the subtleties of pitch and expression can have tremendous 
effect in the casting of the spell. 

Song wizards gain the normal benefits and hindrances 
of a specialist wizard, including the +1 bonus to saves ver- 
sus spells of their own school, and a —1 penalty for their 
target's saving throw when casting song spells. Note that 
magical song or vocal attacks, including a harpy's song, a 
banshee's wail, or a sphinx's roar are all considered to be 
magical sound or song attacks for purposes of the mage's 
saving throw. 

The School of Song: The School of Song is opposed by 
the Schools of Necromancy, Greater Divination, and Invoca- 
tion/Evocation; magical songs are much better suited to 
tasks of influence, change, or summoning. All spells appear- 
ing in this list are considered to have neither somatic nor 
material components for specialist song mages—song wiz- 
ards can cast these spells with nothing more than a verbal 
component. While this renders song wizards particularly vul- 
nerable to silencing, it also means that they can cast spells 
while bound, restrained, or stripped of all their possessions. 
The spells of the School of Song are listed below; spells 
from the Tome of Magic are in italics. 


Chapter 9: 
Dsionics 


© 


With psionics, a character can read the minds of others, move 
objects without physically touching them, or travel across vast 


Dsionics 


distances in an instant. This chapter explains the game mechanics used to run 
psionic characters and provides enough powers to get wild talent and psionicist 
heroes started. Consider the definitions of the following terms: 

Psionics: The practice of extraordinary psychic powers. A character who has 
psionic abilities harnesses the power of his or her mind to produce a particular 


effect. Characters who have psionic powers are either psionicists or wild talents. 

Psionicist: A character who uses the force of his or her mind to affect the 
environment and inhabitants around them. 

Wild Talent: A character from any class who has a natural psionic ability and 
at least one psionic power. 

The psionic system presented in this chapter provides descriptions of the 
core powers. This chapter presents the same psionics rules that appear in the 
revised Dark Sun boxed set. 


Whats Dillerent? 


If players are new to psionics, skip this section because the changes to the 
original rules from The Complete Psionics Handbook discussed below may be 
confus ing If players are familiar with the previous psionics rules, then a brief dis- 
cussion of the changes to look for should be noted. 

Many of the terms and powers used in The Complete Psionics Handbook 
have been retained for this new system. However, the definitions and descrip- 
tions may have changed, so read this section carefully. The most important 
changes to watch for are the following: 


Dsionics 


* Attack and defense modes are no longer powers, but 
bonus proficiencies. The new terms are psionic attacks 
and psionic defenses. Psionicists gain psionic attacks and 
defenses automatically by level advancement. Existing 
characters with attack modes must select other tele- 
pathic devotions to replace them. 

* The contact power is now the contact bonus profi- 
ciency. The proficiency allows characters to participate in 
psionic combat. In addition, psionic combat has been 
simplified to work like other AD&D combat forms (that is, 
using attack and damage rolls). Characters who had the 
contact power must select another telepathic devotion 
to replace it. 

e Tangents have been eliminated. 

« Maintenance costs for powers have been eliminated. 
All powers now have a standard PSP cost per round of 
use and can be maintained each round by paying that 
cost. 

* Power scores and the optional effects of rolls of power 
scores and 20s have been eliminated. All characters now 
have mental armor classes (MAC) and mental attack 
numbers (MTHACO). MTHACO stands for "mental 
THACO" or "mental attack roll" The acronym refers to the 
number (or higher) a particular character needs to roll on 
1d20 to hit an opponent with a mental armor class of O. 
This mechanic has two distinct uses that work in basically 
the same manner. 

» The power check has been eliminated. To determine 
the successful use of a psionic power, a character makes 
an MTHACO roll. In psionic combat, a character makes 
MTHACO rolls to break through a target's mental de- 
fenses and open the mind. To use a psionic power on an 
open mind, an MTHACO roll is made against the power's 
MAC instead of the target's MAC. (All psionic powers 
have base MAC scores.) Some minds are considered 
open automatically (like the psionicist's own mind for 
the purposes of using a power on himself). In these 
cases, no psionic combat is needed, for the mind is 
already open. 

* The metapsionics discipline has been eliminated; its 
powers have been redistributed among the remaining 
five disciplines. 


1 wi Psionic energy can be shaped 
Using Dsionics and used by psionicists and wild 


talents to produce desired effects, called psionic powers. 
All psionic powers are grouped into one of five categories, 
or disciplines, based on how the energy is used. The major 
powers of a given discipline are called sciences. 

Two key concepts need to be presented before the rules 
for using psionics in the AD&D game are detailed. These are 
psionic strength points (PSPs) and mental attack rolls 
(MTHACOs). These are described below. 

Psionic Strength Points (PSPs): Every psionic character 
has an internal store of psionic energy, represented as 


psionic strength points. These are used to activate sciences 

and devotions, to focus psionic attacks, and to determine 

how much psionic damage a hero's psionic defenses can 
stand. 

Mental Attack Rolls: The success of psionic attacks 
against closed minds is determined by the number a char- 
acter needs to roll on 1d20 to hit a specific mental armor 
class (MAC). The mental attack number (MTHACO) is the 
number the character needs to hit a MAC of 0. When used 
on open minds, the roll is made against a power's MAC. 
Each power has a base MAC number used to determine 
the difficulty of activating a psionic power against an open 
mind. 

All psionic powers belong to one of five disciplines: 
clairsentience, psychokinesis, psychometabolism, psy- 
choportation, and telepathy. Within each discipline, the 
powers are divided into two categories: major powers, or 
sciences; and minor powers, or devotions. The five disci- 
plines are defined as follows: 

s Clairsentient powers allow characters to perceive things 
beyond the natural range of human and demihuman 
senses, 

s Psychokinetic powers move objects across space using 
only the energy of the mind. 

* Psychometabolic powers affect the user's body by alter- 
ing it in some manner. 

+ Psychoportive powers allow psionic travel, moving char- 
acters from one location to another without crossing 
space. 

s Telepathic powers involve the direct contact of two or 
more minds. 


Closed and Open Minds 


The minds of all characters and creatures exist in one of 
two states: either closed or open. A closed mind has either 
natural or enhanced defenses that protect it from unwanted 
intrusion. Only those things that enter through the normal 
senses (such as sight, sound, taste, touch, or smell) can 
impact on a closed mind. The minds of all characters and 
creatures are naturally closed. ^ character can voluntarily 
open his or her mind to psionic contact, or a closed mind 
can be opened by psionic attack. 

An open mind is not a natural state. For a mind to be 
open, psionic defenses must be voluntarily lowered (in the 
case of a willing subject) or breached by psionic attack (in an 
unwilling opponent). A psionicist'Ss own mind is considered 
open when using a psionic power with an area of effect of 
"personal" (such as the heightened senses devotion). 


Mental Armor Class (MAC) 


All characters and creatures have mental armor classes 
(MACs). While physical Armor Classes protect a body from 
physical attacks, MACs provide protection from psionic 


Cha 


pter 9 


; attacks. The MAC rating ranges from minimal defense (MAC Each time a character uses (or attempts to use) a psionic 


10) to maximum defense (MAC —10); there are no MACs 
worse than 10 or better than —10. 

As with standard Armor Class, the higher the MAC num- 
ber, the more vulnerable the character is to psionic attack. 
Likewise, with all attacks, a roll of 20 always hits and a roll of 
1 always misses, regardless of the target's MAC number. 


To determine a base MAC number, find the character's 
Wisdom score on Table 74 below. Then find the character's 
Intelligence score and add the indicated MAC modifier. 
MACs can be improved through proficiencies and other 
means, as detailed later. 


Table 74: Base MAC and PSP Bonuses 


Ability Base MAC PSP 
Score MAC Modifier Bonus 
15 or less 10 0 (8) 
16 9 -] +] 
17 8 -1 +2 
18 7 -2 T3 
19 6 —2 +4 
20 5 -3 +5 
21 4 -3 +6 
22 3 -3 +7 
23 2 -4 +8 
24 1 -4 +9 
25 0 -4 +10 


Example: 7y/k of the Westwoods has a Wisdom score of 
18, which yields a base MAC of 7. He has an Intelligence 
score of 16, which gives a modifier of —1. Without other 
enhancements, Tylk has a MAC of 6 (7-1 = 6). 


Dsionic Strength Points (DSPs) 


Every psionicist and wild talent character has psionic 
strength points, or PSPs. In many ways, PSPs are like mental 
hit points, though with a different function. Not only do they 
determine a character's current psionic strength, they also 
power psionic abilities. This mental strength is used to create 
psionic attacks, activate psionic powers, and keep psionic 
defenses in place. As long as any PSPs remain, psionic 
defenses keep the mind closed to psionic intrusion of any sort. 
When a psionic character's PSP total falls to zero, his defenses 
crumble and his mind is left open to psionic contact. 


144 


science, devotion, or attack, he must pay the listed cost 
from his current PSP total. Damage caused by psionic 
attacks is also subtracted from PSP totals. 

The PSP total for a psionicist depends on four factors: 
the psionicist's Wisdom, Intelligence, and Constitution 
scores, and his experience level. Together, these factors 
determine the psionicist's PSP pool. A 1st-level psionicist 
automatically gets 15 PSPs. This number is modified by 
bonuses granted by high ability scores. Lastly, the psionicist 
rolls 1d6, which is added to generate a PSP total. 

The PSP total for a wild talent is determined with slight 
modifications. A wild talent automatically receives enough 
PSPs to use his power (or powers) once. In addition, he 
gets 10 PSPs (instead of 15) and any bonuses granted for 
high Wisdom, Intelligence, and Constitution scores. He also 
rolls 1d4, instead of 1d6. 


Example: 7y/k of the Westwoods has a Wisdom score of 
18, an Intelligence score of 16, and a Constitution score of 
17. At Ist level, he gets 21 PSPs (15 +3 + 1-221) 

plus a 1d6 die roll. Garon, a wild talent with the same abil- 
ity scores, gets 16 PSPs (10 +3 + 1 +2 = 16), a 1d4 die 
roll, and enough PSPs to use his psionic power once. 


Gaining PSPs 


The PSP total of psionicists and wild talents increases with 
every level advancement. Psionicists receive 1d6 PSPs with 
each level increase up to 9th level, plus any bonuses for 
high Wisdom, Intelligence, and Constitution scores. Starting 
at 9th level, psionicists gain just 3 PSPs, and they receive 
bonuses only for high Wisdom scores. Regardless of their 
Intelligence or Constitution scores, they no longer receive 
bonuses for these abilities. Wild talents, on the other hand, 
receive only 4 PSPs at each level increase, regardless of their 
level. Further, no die rolls or additional modifiers are applied. 

Example: 7he psionicist Tylk of the Westwoods has a 
Wisdom score of 18, an Intelligence score of 16, and a 
Constitution score of 17. When he advances from 1st to 
2nd level, he receives 1d6+6 PSPs; the automatic 1d6 die 
roll and a +6 bonus for his high ability scores. 


Recovering PPs 


Characters recover expended PSPs by resting for specific 
lengths of time (minimum of one full hour). The only states 
of rest that allow for PSP recovery are sleep or meditation. 
Any other physical activity or the use of psionic powers 
(which expend PSPs) negates the recovery process for that 
hour. A character can never recover more PSPs than his 
maximum total. 

During each hour of rest, characters recover one-eighth 
of their total PSPs (bearing in mind that they never recover 
more than their maximum total). To do this, divide a char- 


acter's PSP total by eight and round up. 
This is the number of PSPs the charac- 
ter recovers after one full hour of rest. 
So, if a psionicist is reduced to O PSPs, it 
takes eight full hours of rest to recover 
the expended PSPs—regardless of 
whether he has 20 or 100 PSPs. 


Example: Neecha Nightmoon has a 
total of 48 PSPs, and she has lost 24 of 
them during a recent psionic battle. 
After an hour of sleep or meditation, 
Neecha can recover 6 of the expended 
PSPs (48 — 8 — 6). She is now at 30 
PSPs. 


Psionicists automatically receive the 
contact bonus proficiency when they 
are created. Contact gives them access 
to psionic attacks and allows them to 
participate in psionic combat. The 
psionic attacks come naturally and don't 
take up any proficiency slots. 

Wild talents, however, must select the 
contact proficiency and place it in an 
open nonweapon proficiency slot. (Note 
that this should occur at the point when a 
character becomes a wild talent, whether 
when he is first created or later in his 
career when his psionic ability becomes 
known.) Along with the proficiency, wild 
talents receive only one psionic attack 
form. However, as a wild talent rises in 
level and gains nonweapon proficiency 
slots, he may select additional attack 
forms. These fill open slots, and the wild 
talent may choose more forms (for a total 
of three) as he gains slots. Wild talents 
may never have more than three of the 
five psionic attacks. 

Psionic combat is used to assault 
closed minds so that they can be 
opened to further psionic contact. This 
is accomplished like other attacks in the 
AD&D game system: The attacking 
psionicist selects an attack form and 
makes an MTHACO roll equal to or 
exceeding the defender's MAC. Regard- 
less of that MAC, a roll of 1 always fails 
and a roll of 20 always succeeds. 

Psionic attacks can be used against 
psionic and nonpsionic minds. A non- 
psionic mind is defined as any character 


R All psionic attacks require line of sight, as do the use of all 


without a PSP pool. The procedures are the same, but the 
results are slightly different. 

When attacking a psionic mind, psionic combat contin- 
ues until one opponent is reduced to O PSPs or until the 
battle is broken off. That mind is now open and can be sub- 
jected to other psionic powers. When attacking a non- 
psionic mind, however, only one successful attack is 
required to open the mind. 

Psionic powers only can be used on open minds, 
whether willingly opened or attacked until that state occurs. 
A psionic power can be used in the same round that a mind 
is opened by psionic attack. 

Psionic defenses, like armor and shields in physical com- 
bat, remain in place until the defender's PSP total is 
reduced to O (in the case of a psionic character) or one suc- 
cessful psionic attack breaches the defenses (of a non- 
psionic character). 

Psionic attacks require concentration. A psionicist who 
uses one during a combat round can move at only half his 
walking rate. A character using a psionic attack also can be 
disrupted the same way as can a wizard casting a spell. In 
the round when a character using a psionic attack is dis- 
rupted, the attack can't be used. A disrupted psionic attack 
costs 1 PSP for the attempt. 

Psionicists can make a number of psionic attacks in a 
round according to their level: 1-6, 1/1 round; 7-12, 3/2 
rounds; 13+, 2/1 round. Wild talents can never make more 
than one psionic attack in a round. 

Psionicists and wild talents receive MTHACO bonuses 
depending on their Intelligence scores, making it easier to 
accomplish psionic attacks. 


Dsionic Combat Sequence 


s The DM secretly decides what actions the monsters or 
NPCs will take—including choosing psionic attacks and 
defenses (if they have access to any). The DM doesn't 
announce that decision to the players. 

* The players indicate what their characters will do, includ- 
ing choosing psionic attacks and defenses from the ones 
they have access to. 

s Initiative is determined. Note that psionic attacks and 
powers don't have initiative modifiers. 

1 Attacks are made in order of initiative. 


Table 75: MTHACO Modifiers 

Intelligence MTHACO 
Score Modifier 

15 or less 0 

16-17 +] 

18-19 +2 

20-22 +3 

23+ +4 


146 


psionic powers—with a few exceptions, such as those in the 


clairsentience discipline. 

. The five psionic attack forms 
The l'ivc are ego whip, id insinuation, 
Dsionic Attacks mind thrust, psionic blast, and 
psychic crush. Psionicists have 
access to all five forms (depending on their levels), whereas 
wild talents can never have more than three of the five. The 

psionic attacks are described below. 


Ego Whip (EW) 


This attack assaults a target's self-esteem and individual- 
ity. It strikes like a glowing whip, its crack slicing open the 
wells of inferiority and worthlessness buried deep behind 
the target's defenses. For every 4 PSPs put into the attack 
(declared after a successful attack roll is made), the attacker 
rolls 1d6 to determine psionic damage against his foe. If hit, 
the defender loses that many PSPs or has his mind opened 
to further psionic contact if no PSPs remain. A failed attack 
costs 2 PSPs. 

Ego whip has three ranges: short (40 yards), medium 
(80 yards), and long (120 yards). At medium range, the 
defender receives a +2 bonus to his MAC; at long range, 
the bonus is +5. 

If used against an open mind, ego whip leaves the target 
dazed for 1d4 rounds, costing the attacker 4 PSPs. Though 
no psionic defenses remain, the attacker must roll the 
defender's MAC to successfully hit (this attack receives a +2 
bonus). While dazed, all of a character's die rolls (attacks 
rolls, saving throws, etc.) receive a —5 penalty, and the char- 
acter can't cast spells above 3rd level. 


Id Insinuation (II) 


This attack assaults a target's subconscious, like a mental 
battering ram tearing through the walls that separate primi- 
tive needs from social constraints. For every 6 PSPs put into 
the attack (declared after a successful attack roll is made), 
the attacker rolls 1d8 to determine psionic damage against 
his foe. If hit, the defender loses that many PSPs or has his 
mind opened to further psionic contact if no PSPs remain. A 
failed attack costs 5 PSPs. 

Id insinuation has three ranges: short (60 yards), 
medium (120 yards), and long (180 yards). At medium 
range, the defender receives a --2 bonus to his MAC; at 
long range, the bonus is +5. 

If used against an open mind, id insinuation leaves its 
victim confused and powerless to act for 1d4 rounds. While 
no psionic defenses remain, the attacker must roll the 
defender's MAC to successfully hit (the attack roll receives a 
+2 bonus). This use of the attack costs 6 PSPs. 


Dstonics 


Mind Thrust (MT) 


This attack stabs the mind of the defender, piercing 
thoughts and memories. For every 2 PSPs put into the 
attack (declared after a successful attack roll is made), the 
attacker rolls 1d4 to determine psionic damage against his 
foe. If hit, the defender loses that many PSPs or has his 
mind opened to further psionic contact if no PSPs remain. A 
failed attack costs 1 PSP. 

Mind thrust has three ranges: short (30 yards), medium 
(60 yards), and long (90 yards). At medium range, the 
defender receives a +2 bonus to his MAC; at long range, 
the bonus is +5. 

If used against an open mind, mind thrust causes the tar- 
get to lose the use of one psionic power (chosen ran- 
domly) for 1d6 days. While no psionic defenses remain, the 
attacker must still roll the defender's MAC to successfully hit 
(with a +2 bonus to the attack roll). This use of the attack 
costs 2 PSPs. Beyond opening a closed 
mind, mind thrust has no effect on non- 
psionic minds. 


Dsionic Blast (DB) 


This attack takes the form of a wave 
of mental force that jolts a defender's 
mind. For every 10 PSPs put into the 
attack (declared after a successful attack 
roll is made), the attacker rolls 1d12 to 
determine psionic damage against his 
foe. If hit, the defender loses that many 
PSPs or has his mind opened to further 
psionic contact if no PSPs remain. A 
failed attack costs 5 PSPs. 

Psionic blast has three ranges: short 
(20 yards), medium (40 yards), and 
long (60 yards). At medium range, the 
defender receives a +2 bonus to his 
MAC; at long range, the bonus is +5. 

If used against an open mind, 
psionic blast causes 1d8 points of phys- 
ical damage (hit point loss) for every 10 
PSPs put into the attack. While no 
psionic defenses remain, the attacker 
must still roll the defender's MAC to 
successfully hit (with a +2 bonus to the 
attack roll). 


Dsychic Crush (DsC) 


Like a terrible mental weight, this 
attack seeks to crush a defender's 
mind. For every 8 PSPs put into the 
attack (declared after a successful 
attack roll is made), the attacker rolls 


147 


1d10 to determine psionic damage against his foe. If hit, 
the defender loses that many PSPs or has his mind opened 
to further psionic contact if no PSPs remain. A failed attack 
costs 4 PSPs. Psychic crush has a range of 50 yards. 

If used against an open mind, psychic crush causes 1d6 
points of physical damage (hit point loss) for every 8 PSPs 
put into the attack. Although no psionic defenses remain, 
the attacker must roll the defender's MAC to successfully hit 
(with a +2 bonus to the attack roll). 


Both psionicists and wild tal- 
ents develop psionic de- 


The Five Dsionic 
Defenses fenses naturally when they 
progress in experience, as 


detailed on the Psionic Progression chart. Psionic defenses 
are gained without using up any proficiency slots. As with 
psionic attacks, wild talents may never have more than 
three of the five psionic defenses. 


: 32 a 
goat 
d 


JJ 


Chapter 9 


A character activates a psionic defense at the beginning 
of a combat round. This defense protects against all psionic 
attacks launched at the character in that round. The PSP 
cost is only paid once per round, no matter how many 
attacks it defends against in that round. 

Some psionic attacks are more effective against certain 
psionic defenses. The reverse is also true. This is repre- 
sented by modifiers that apply to the attacker's MTHACO. 
See the Psionic Attacks vs. Psionic Defenses, below, for a 
cross-referenced list of penalties and bonuses. 

When a psionic attack clashes with a psionic defense, 
cross-index the attack with the defense on the table. The 
resulting modifier is applied to the attacker's MTHACO. 
Thus, positive modifiers are bonuses and negative modi- 
fiers are penalties. 

Combat cards that list psionic attacks and defenses are 
strongly recommended. Use 3x5 cards; one for each attack or 
defense that a character has. During a round of psionic com- 
bat, each player puts an attack and a defense in front of him, 
face down, to lock in his action. After all declarations have 
been made, cards are turned over and combat commences. 

There are five psionic defenses. They are intellect 
fortress, mental barrier, mind blank, thought shield, and 
tower of iron will. These are described below. 


Intellect Fortress (IF) 


This defense encases the mind in a powerful keep of 
mental energy to protect it from psionic attack. Intellect 
fortress provides the best protection against ego whip, but 
it's extremely vulnerable to psionic blast. The cost is 4 PSPs 
per round to use this defense. 


Mental Barrier (MB) 


This defense throws up a wall of thought to protect 
against psionic attack. A mental barrier is extremely effective 
against a psionic blast, but vulnerable to a psychic crush 
attack. It costs 5 PSPs to use this defense in a round. 


Mind Blank (MBk) 


This defense hides the mind from psionic attack, forming a 
vast, featureless area that makes it harder to target the closed 
mind. Mind blank protects best against id insinuation, while 
mind thrust easily slices through the defensive fog. It costs 3 
PSPs per round to use this defense. 


Thought Shield (TS) 


This defense forms a glowing shield to tum away a psionic 
attack. Thought shield defends most effectively against psychic 
crush but is vulnerable to ego whip. The cost is 2 PSPs per 
round to use this defense. 


148 


Tower of Iron Will (TW) 


This defense builds an unassailable haven for the mind. 
Mind thrust has a difficult time penetrating this defense, 
while id insinuation can breach its protection. The defense 
costs 6 PSPs per round. 


Table 76: Psionic Attacks vs. Psionic Defenses 
Mind Thought Mental Intellect Tower of 
blank shield barrier fortress iron will 


Mind thrust +5 +3 -2 -3 -5 
Ego whip +3 +4 +2 -4 -3 
id insinuation —5 -3 —] +2 +5 
Psychic crush +1 -4 +4 -1 -2 
Psionic blast -3 +2 -5 +4 +3 


Adding Substance to Dsionic Combat 


All psionic combat takes place in the minds of the com- 
batants. This mindscape has its own rules and reality. Each 
combatant reaches into his or her own nexus of power, the 
place where the energy of mind, body, and spirit come 
together. The trained psionicist can readily draw upon this 
nexus of power, as can the wild talent. Nonpsionicists can't 
access this energy, but it springs forth to protect them in the 
form of natural Mental Armor Class (MAC). 

The attacker and the defender appear as glowing forms, 
mental pictures of themselves in the mindscape. Psionicists 
can shape these psionic forms as elaborately as they see fit. 
Wild talents, however, appear as crude, featureless shapes 
of humanoid light. Nonpsionicists are simply glowing balls 
surrounded by mental armor, usually in the shape of a lumi- 
nescent wall. 

While the only thing that determines the success of 
psionic combat is the MTHACO rolls and the choices of 
psionic attacks and defenses, players and DMs are encour- 
aged to add flavor by describing how their characters' 
psionic forms look and how the powers they use manifest 
themselves. Being creative and having fun with the mind- 
scape as a psionic battle progresses enhances the roleplay- 
ing experience for all. 


Example: Tylk of the Westwoods, a psionicist, decides to 
use the mind thrust attack against Neecha Nightmoon 
(also a psionicist). A glowing sword of energy takes shape 
in his psionic form's hand. The sword slashes out, but 
Neecha calls forth a thought shield, and a luminescent 
shield forms suddenly to block Tylk's attack. Then Neecha 
shapes her own attack, unleashing a psionic blast. Energy 
swells up from her nexus, forming the image of a glowing 
tiger. The claws of the great beast slash through the maze 
of ruins Tylk has formed from his mind blank defense, then 
scrape across Tylk's psionic defenses, reducing his PSP total 
as the psionic blast finds its target. 


Dstonics 


Using Psionic Powers 


All psionic powers have a MAC score. To determine if a 
psionic power works against an open mind, a player must 
make an MTHACO roll against the power's MAC score on 
1d20. Any roll equal to or greater than the number means 
the power has been activated and its effects are applied for 
that round of play. 

All powers have a cost per round of use. The cost 
listed to the left of the slash is the number of PSPs 
needed to use the power for a single round. The cost 
listed to the right of the slash is the number of PSPs 
expended if the MTHACO roll fails (in which case the 
power's effects aren't applied). 

Powers that have been successfully activated can be 
maintained from round to round without making additional 
MTHACO rolls. The psionicist simply expends PSPs to pay 
for the power's cost. The first round that the character fails 
to pay the cost (either voluntarily or because his PSPs have 
been depleted), the power's effects cease to function. If the 
psionicist wishes to reactivate the power in a later round, 
even against the same target, he must make a new 
MTHACO roll. If an MTHACO roll to activate a psionic power 
fails, and the character has enough PSPs remaining, he can 
try to activate the power again in the next round by making 
another MTHACO roll. 


Table 77: THACOs & MTHACOs 


A roll of 1 is always a failure and a roll of 20 is always a 
success, no matter what the power's MAC or the psionicist's 
MTHACO scores are. 


Closing an Open Mind 


A nonpsionic mind is one that has never had any PSPs. 
Its natural state is closed unless willingly opened or 
opened by psionic means. If such a target's mind has been 
opened, but the subsequent psionic attack or power used 
against it wasn't successful, the target can attempt to re- 
close its mind in the next round. This requires a saving 
throw vs. paralyzation at no penalty. If a psionic power was 
used successfully against the newly opened nonpsionic 
mind, the target can still attempt to close its mind, but its 
saving throw is at a —4 penalty. The target may attempt to 
close its mind every round thereafter. 

For a newly opened psionic mind (one whose PSPs 
have been reduced to 0), the target can't attempt to re- 
close its mind until 1d4--1 rounds have passed. After the 
required rounds have passed, the target can make a Wis- 
dom check at a —3 penalty every round thereafter to 
attempt to close its mind. 

When either a nonpsionic or psionic character succeeds 
at re-closing his mind, the following occurs: any psionic 
power currently in use against the character ceases to func- 


Psionicist's Level 
12 34 5 6 7 8 91011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 


THACO 


20 20 19 19 18 18 17 17 16 16 15 15 1414 135 13 121211 11 1010 99 8 8 7 7 6 6 


Psionicist's Level 
123 4 5 6 7 8 91011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 


MTHACO 


3019 18.17 16: 15 14 13 1211 10 9 87 6 5 4 3 2 t 0-1 -2-3-4 -5.—5 7 -8——9 


Wild Talent's Level — 
12 34 5 6 7 8 91011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 


MTHACO 


Table 78: Psionicist Saving Throws 
Paralyzation, Poison, 


or Death Magic or Wand 


15 
13 
11 
9 
7 
5 


Excluding polymorph wand attacks. 


Excluding those that cause petrification or polymorph. 


Rod, Staff, 


20 20 19 19 18 18 17 17 16 16 15 15 14 14 13 135 12121111 1010 9 9 8 8 7 7 6 6 


Breath 
Weapont 
16 


Petrification 
or Polymorph* 
12 
10 
8 


T7 
6 
5 


Excluding those for which another saving throw type is specified. 


Chapter 9 


tion, and contact between the two minds is broken. If the 
power's effect already took place in the round in which the 
mind re-closed, the psionicist expends the full PSP cost. If 
the power's effect didn't take place yet in the round, then 
the lower PSP cost is subtracted from the psionicist's PSP 
total (as if the activation attempt failed). If the psionicist 
wants to reestablish contact, he'll have to once again open 
the target's mind. 


Dsionics in a Dound 


A psionicist can do several actions during a single round. 

He can: 

s Make as many psionic attacks as his experience level 
indicates. 

* Use one psionic defense. 

s Activate one psionic power against an open mind. 

* Maintain as many previously successfully activated 
powers as he wishes, provided he can afford to continue 
paying the PSP costs. Further, if a psionic attack succeeds 
and opens a closed mind, a psionic power can be used 
against the mind that same round. 


Limitations to Dsionic Powers 


Psionic powers have definite limitations. Some of these 
already have been discussed, but are repeated here to 
emphasize them. Other limitations are new. 

+ PSPs: Psionicists and wild talents have a finite amount of 
psionic strength available to them at any given time. This 
strength, expressed as PSPs, must be expended to use 
psionic attacks, defenses, and powers. The total also 
indicates how much damage a hero's psionic defenses 
can withstand before his mind opens. As such, the 
psionic character must always balance the use of 
powers, attacks, and defenses with how strong he wants 
his own internal walls to remain. 

+ Line of Sight: All psionic attacks and most powers 
require line of sight to use. If line of sight is blocked, 
rnost psionics won't work. 

* Touch: Some psionic powers have a range of “touch.” 
These can be used in melee combat, but they require a 
physical attack roll and an MTHACO roll to work. Like all 
psionic powers, they only can be used against open 
minds. 

* Obstructions: Anything that hinders a character's normal 
vision blocks line of sight. Unless the description states 
otherwise, psionicists require a line of sight to use a 
power. Obvious exceptions to this rule are the clairsen- 
tient powers and many of the telepathic powers. How- 
ever, certain materials can obstruct these psionic powers 
if they completely block the target. These are lead and 
iron (at least 1 inch thick), obsidian (at least 2 inches 
thick), stone (at least 1 foot thick), and the antimagic 
shell spell. 


150 


Dsychic Contests 


Sometimes two or more psionicists try to use a psionic 
power on the same target. For example, two psionicists 
might try to use telekinesis to move a stone in two different 
directions, or they might attempt to teleport the same char- 
acter to different locations, or they might use any psionic 
powers in such a way as to be in direct conflict with each 
other. Which power use prevails? The struggle results in a 
psychic contest. 

To resolve a psychic contest, compare the competing 
characters’ MTHACO rolls made to activate the powers. The 
character who has the lowest successful MTHACO roll wins 
the contest. If none of the competing characters roll suc- 
cessfully, none of the power uses succeed. If one character 
succeeds and the others fail the rolls, then that character 
wins the contest. If competing characters have the same 
MTHACO score and they roll the same numbers on the 
dice, then a psychic lock occurs. 

In a psychic lock, neither competing character wins the 
psychic contest that round. Both are applying equal 
psionic pressure, thus creating a stalemate. To resolve the 
contest, both characters must pay the power's PSP cost 
and engage in another round of psychic contest. If either 
character fails to pay the cost—effectively giving up—that 
character suffers a psychic backlash and loses 4d4 PSPs 
immediately. 


Dsionics and Magic 


Psionics and magic use completely different forces. 
Psionics uses internal energy, while magic taps into extra- 
planar power. Both arts can produce similar effects, but 
they do so in very different ways. For this reason, psionics 
and magic don't ordinarily mix. Magical spells, for in- 
stance, can't be used to detect or dispel psionic activity, 
unless otherwise stated. Likewise, psionic powers can't 
detect magic that simulates psionic abilities. Lastly, if a 
psionicist uses a psychokinetic, psychometabolic, psy- 
choportive, or telepathic power against a magical illusion, 
he automatically gets a saving throw vs. spell to disbelieve 
it. Specific spells, as listed below, intermix with psionics in 
the following ways. 


Antimagic shell: This spell blocks the effects of psionic 
powers. 

Detect charm: This spell detects telepathic control, such 
as domination. 

Detect invisibility: This spell allows the caster to see 
Clearly psionic invisibility, astral travelers, shadowform, and 
ethereal creatures. It doesn't work against characters in 
other dimensions. 

Detect magic: This spell has no effect on psionics. 

Detect scrying: This spell will detect psionic scrying, 
though psionicists get a save vs. spell to avoid detection. 


ESP: |f this spell is used against psionicists, they get a 
Save VS. Pa with a +2 bonus to negate the effects. 

‘alse vision: This spell works against psionics, though 
pau get a a save vs. spell to negate effects. 

yrbiddance: This spell effectively blocks all teleporta- 

tion por metabolic powers. 

Free action: This spell overcomes all psychokinetic 
effects against ihe subject: S ; body, as well a as ee 

Globe of invulnerabilit y/minor globe yf invulnera- 
mee bol have no effect on psionic. 
Mag r: Psionicists use their combined Wisdom and 
Conaisieon scores when determining the differential 
modifier. 

Mind blank: Psionicists get a save vs. spell to over- 
come this enchantment 
: This spell has no effect on psionics. 

Misleac A psionic attack reveals this spell, but the first 
attack automatically fails. 

Nondetection: This spell works 
normally against ponie. 

Otiluke's resilient rere: Psion- 
ics can't penetrate this spell’s protec- 


tion. 
Protection from evil/pr 


fi 
IVI lisdirec 


otection 
from evil, 10-foot radius: These 
spells provide +2 bonuses to MACs. 
Spell immunity: This spell has no 
effect on psionics. 


Trap the sou 


: Psionicists trapped 
by this spell can't use any psionic 
powers. 


Psionic powers can be used by any 
character class, though one class spe- 
cializes in the use of psionics: the 
psionicist. Wild talents are a subclas- 
sification within other character 
classes. These characters possess one 
or two psionic powers. Their main 
vocation is that of their class. For 
instance, a priest could have a psionic 
ability or two, but he relies primarily 
on the skills of his class. A psionicist, 
on the other hand, relies almost 
entirely on his psionic gifts. The differ- 
ences between the two types of psi- 
onic characters are explained in the 
section that follows. 


: JE The psionicist character works to mold 
Dsionicists mind, body, and spirit into a unified, 
powerful whole. The hero’s internal energy, or psionic 
strength, comes from deep within himself—from a place 
psionicists call the nexus. This energy is given form and pur- 
pose by the individual's strength of will. Through extraordi- 
nary discipline, long contemplation, and deepening aware- 
ness of self, the psionicist taps the vast potential of his 
mind. 

Psionicists must meet or exceed the following prerequi- 
sites. 
Ability requirements: Constitution 11, Intelligence 12, 
Wisdom 15 
Prime requisites: Wisdom, Constitution 
Races allowed: Any 


Dsionics 


Because the pursuit of psionics require strict mental and 
physical discipline, a psionicist has two prime requisites: 
Wisdom and Constitution. His primary mental ability score 
is Wisdom. As the measure of his willpower and enlighten- 
ment, Wisdom promotes the understanding and mastery 
of the inner self—the essence of psionic ability. Likewise, 
the tremendous stress of using psionics requires a healthy 
body to house a fit mind. This is where Constitution comes 
into play. Lastly, Intelligence is important to psionicists 
because of the reasoning and memorization necessary to 
the class. 

All races eligible for use as player characters can be- 
come psionicists. Human psionicists have no limit on the 
levels of experience they can attain in their chosen class. 
Half-elves, half-orcs, and half-ogres (due to their partial 
human heritage) can reach 12th level. Halflings and 
gnomes can attain 10th level. Dwarves and elves can reach 
only 8th level as psionicists. All creatures not listed here 
can reach 10th level. 


Dual-Classed and 


Multiclassed Dsionicists 


A human character who has scores of 15 or more in the 
prime requisites of his first class and scores of 17 or more 
in the prime requisites of the class he switches to can be a 
dual-classed psionicist. See the Player's Handbook, for 
more details on dual-class benefits and restrictions. 
Demihuman characters can be multiclassed psionicists if 
they meet the requirements in the Player's Handbook. 


Alignment 


Psionicists can be of any alignment, save chaotic. The 
discipline integral to psionics can't be maintained by chaotic 
characters. If a psionicist's alignment shifts to chaotic for any 
reason, he quickly begins to lose psionic powers. Every day 
his alignment remains chaotic, the character must make an 
ability check against one-half his Wisdom score, rounded 
down. Each time the character fails this check, he loses 
access to one psionic discipline and all the powers related 
to it. The discipline is selected randomly by the DM. 

Psionicists who change to chaotic alignment can't 
recover PSPs. If a psionicist's alignment turns from chaotic 
back to nonchaotic, he begins to recover lost disciplines at a 
rate of one per day. This is accomplished by making the 
same halved Wisdom check described above—success indi- 
cates the return of a random discipline from those that 
were lost. 


Weapon and Armor Restrictions 


Psionicists disdain using weapons of any sort. Further, 
they don’t have the time to properly train in their use. If a 
psionicist character wants to use a weapon, he must select 


153 


it from the following small-sized items: hand crossbow, 
dagger, dart, dirk, knife, scourge, sickle, and short sword. 

Psionicists can only use the following types of armor: 
padded, leather, studded leather, and hide. They may also 
carry small shields. 


Dsionicist Benefits 


Psionicists have their own THACOs, which are listed on 
the THACOs and MTHACOs, above, along with their respec- 
tive MTHACOs. MTHACOs for wild talents are listed on the 
same table, though these characters must refer to their 
class's own THACO tables for calculated attack rolls. 

Psionicists gain a --2 bonus on all saving throws vs. en- 
chantment/charm spells. This is in addition to any magical 
defense adjustments for high Wisdom scores. the Psionicist 
Saving Throw table lists saving throws for this character 
class. 

At 9th level, a psionicist becomes a contemplative 
master. Such a master can build a sanctuary to use as his 
headquarters and can attract followers. A 1st-level psioni- 
cist arrives monthly to study with the master, regardless of 
whether he builds a sanctuary. The maximum number of 
followers is equal to the master's Charisma score if he 
builds a sanctuary, or half that number rounded down if he 
doesn't. 

A master's followers want to learn. They serve in any 
capacity the master chooses as long as the master spends 
at least 10 hours per week instructing them. If the master 
doesn't live up to this schedule, the followers leave to find 
someone else. 


Dsionicist Advancement 


A psionicist earns experience points and advances in 
level like members of other classes, as outlined on Table 79 
below. 


Dsionicists and DSDs 


A psionicist determines his initial PSP total by adding 
bonuses awarded for high Wisdom, Constitution, and Intelli- 
gence scores to a base of 15, then adding the result of a 
1d6 die roll: 

Wis bonus + Con bonus + Int bonus + 15 + 1d6 = 

Ist-level PSP total. 

With every level increase, up to the 9th level, a psionicist 
iiia additional PSPs by adding the bonuses to a 1d6 die 
roll: 

Wis bonus + Con bonus + Int bonus + 1d6 = PSPs 
gained per level (2 through 8). 

Starting at 9th level, a psionicist gains just 3 PSPs per 
level, plus his Wisdom bonus. 

Wis bonus + 3 = PSPs gained per level (9th level 
and higher). 


Chapter 9 
———$—$—— 


Table 79: Psionicist Experience Levels 
Psionicist Experience Hit Dice 
Points Roll (d6 


Gaining Disciplines and Powers 


Every psionic power belongs to one of the five psionic 
disciplines: clairsentience, psychokinesis, psychometabo- 
lism, psychoportation, and telepathy. Powers are either 
major (and are called sciences) or minor (called devotions). 
Before a psionicist can learn a psionic power, he must have 
access to the appropriate discipline. 

At Ist level, a psionicist selects one discipline. This is his 
primary discipline. As a psionicist advances in level, he 
gains access to additional disciplines (as shown on the 
Psionic Progression table. A psionicist starts out at 1st level 
with four powers within his primary discipline: one science 
and three devotions. With each advance in level, the psion- 
icist gains additional disciplines and powers, as outlined. 
Some additional points to consider include the following: 

* A player can select new powers for his character as soon 
as the character reaches a new experience level. These 
new powers can be selected from any discipline the 
character has access to, including a discipline that was 
just gained. 

+ Within a single discipline, a character must have twice as 
many devotions as sciences. For example, a player can't 
select a third telepathic science until his character has at 
least six telepathic devotions. 

* A character can never learn as many sciences and devo- 
tions in another discipline as he knows in his primary dis- 
cipline. This provides a focus for a hero that he can 
adhere to throughout his career. 


154 


Table 80: Psionic 
Exp. Total Total Total 
Level Disciplines Sciences Devotions 


Psionic 


Proficiencies 


Like all character classes, psionicists have various profi- 
ciencies available to them. The Psionicist Proficiency Slots 
table below, lists the initial number of weapon and non- 
weapon proficiencies available to this class, as well as the 
rates at which these characters earn new slots. Characters 
start with the initial two weapon and three nonweapon pro- 
ficiencies available to psionicists. Psionicists can learn a 
weapon proficiency for any weapon they can use. 


Table 81: Psionicist Proficiency Slots 

Weapon Proficiencies | Nonweapon Proficiencies 
Initial #Levels Penalty Initial # Levels 

2 5 -4 s 3 

Initial Refers to the number of proficiency slots avail- 
able to 1st-level psionicists. 
Indicates how many levels a psionicist must 
advance before receiving a new slot. He 
receives one new weapon slot at levels 5, 10, 
15, and 20. He receives one new nonweapon 
slot at levels 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, and 18. 
A modifier to a psionicist's attack roll when he 
uses a weapon he isn't proficient with. 


# Levels 


Penalty 


Dsionics 


Bonus Proficiencics 


A psionicist receives bonus proficiencies upon creation. 
They don't take up any of a psionicist's available slots. 
These bonus proficiencies are contact and psionic 
defense, which allow the psionicist to participate in 
psionic combat. 


The Dsionicist Group 


The table below (along with the "General" group table in 
the PHB) lists the nonweapon proficiencies available to 
psionicists at the regular slot cost. Add one to the cost for 
proficiencies taken from other groups. 


Table 82: Nonweapon Proficiencies 

———General Group——— 
Proficiency Slots Ability Modifier 
Contact 1 Wisdom 0 
Mental Armor 1 Wisdom -2 

———Psionicist Group——— 
Proficiency Slots Ability Modifier 
Gem Cutting 2 Dexterity -2 
Harness Subconscious 2 Wisdom -] 
Meditative Focus 1 Wisdom +1 
Musical Instrument 1 Dexterity -] 
Reading/Writing 1 Intelligence +1 
Rejuvenation 1 Wisdom -l 
Religion 1 Wisdom 0 


Note: Italicized proficiencies are described in this book. All 
others are in the Player's Handbook. 


Contact: This proficiency gives characters access to the 
psionic attack forms necessary to open a closed mind. 
Contact allows characters to gain psionic attacks as they 
become available with level advancement. 

Psionicists automatically receive this proficiency. It 
doesn't take up any of their available slots. As a psionicist 
increases in level, he autornatically receives psionic attack 
forms as outlined on the Psionic Progression table. Psionic 
attack forms don't fill up a psionicist's proficiency slots. 

Wild talents, on the other hand, must select contact 
and place it in an available nonweapon proficiency slot if 
they want to gain its benefits. Once contact is slotted, a 
wild talent selects one psionic attack. He may select an 
additional attack by placing it in an available nonweapon 
Slot after he has advanced the appropriate number of lev- 
els, according to his group's progression rate. Wild talents 
may never have more than three of the five psionic attack 
forms. 

Harness Subconscious: Through the use of this profi- 
ciency, a psionicist temporarily boosts his PSP total. To 
procure these extra PSPs, the psionicist's PSP total must 


155 


be at its maximum. Two full days (48 consecutive hours) 
must be spent gathering energy from subconscious 
reserves. At the end of this time, the psionicist makes a 
proficiency check. Success increases his PSP total by 
20%, rounded up. 

The extra PSPs remain available for 72 hours or until 
they are used up, whichever comes first. At the end of 72 
hours, the psionicist loses as many PSPs as he gained from 
his current total (though the total won't drop below 0). 

During the 72 hours of boosted energy, the psionicist 
can't recover PSPs if his current total equals or exceeds his 
usual maximum. Once all of the bonus PSPs have been 
used, PSPs can be recovered normally up to the usual 
maximum. 

Meditative Focus: This proficiency allows a psionicist to 
focus his mental energy into one discipline, causing all 
powers within that discipline to receive MTHACO roll 
bonuses; powers related to other disciplines receive 
MTHACO roll penalties. 

The psionicist must meditate for 12 consecutive hours. 
He recovers PSPs normally during this meditative state. 
When the period ends, the character makes a proficiency 
check. Success means he has focused his energy into the 
chosen discipline. All MTHACO rolls for powers within that 
discipline receive a +2 bonus for the next 24 hours or until 
his PSP total is reduced to 0, whichever comes first. All 
other disciplines get a —1 penalty for the same period. 

Mental Armor: This proficiency allows a character to 
improve his mental armor class (MAC). Each time this pro- 
ficiency is placed in an available nonweapon slot, the char- 
acter's MAC improves. Nonpsionicists improve by +1 for 
each slot; psionicists improve by +2. The proficiency may 
only be slotted once per level advancement. 

Rejuvenation: This proficiency allows a psionicist to 
recover PSPs more quickly than is usual by entering a reju- 
venating trance. This state of deep concentration requires a 
successful proficiency check. For every hour a hero main- 
tains this trance (and makes the check), he regains PSPs at 
twice the usual rate (one-quarter of his total instead of one- 
eighth). He can't expend PSPs while in this trance, and his 


state is much like deep sleep. 
A wild talent is a hero from any 


Wild Talents character class other than the 


psionicist class who has natural psionic potential. This 
potential can be present in any character, regardless of 
class, alignment, or race. The alignment restrictions of the 
psionicist class don't apply to wild talents. 

Wild talents have one or two psionic powers, up to three 
psionic defenses, and up to three psionic attacks at their 
disposal once they've reached full power. The psionic 
defenses come naturally, one at a time, according to the 
Psionic Progression table. 

Psionic attacks are only gained after the PC places the 
contact proficiency in an available nonweapon proficiency 


Chapter 9 
——— 


* Round fractions up. Apply this penalty only once, even if 


slot. A wild talent chooses one of the five attack forms at 
that time. He may select a second and a third attack form 
when slots become available according to his group profi- 
ciency progression (as outlined in the Player's Handbook). 


Testing for Wild Talents 


Testing for wild talents involves risk. The test must be 
performed when a character is created, when a character's 
Wisdom score increases, when psionics are introduced into 
a campaign, or the first time a character receives psychic 
surgery. 

Every character and monster has a base chance of 196 to 
be a wild talent. This is modified as follows: 


Each Wis, Con, or Int score of 18+ +3% 
Each Wis, Con, or Int score of 17 +2% 
Each Wis, Con, or Int score of 16 +1% 
Character is 5th to 8th level +1% 
Character is 9th level or higher +2% 
Wizard, priest, or non human* yA 


Table 83: Wild Talents 
Roll 
1d100 Wild Devotion 

— Clairsentient Devotions 
All-round vision 
Combat mind 
Danger sense 
Feel light 
Feel sound 
Hear light 
Know direction 
Know location 
Poison sense 
Radial navigation 
See sound 
Spirit sense 


Roll 
1d100 Wild Devotion 

- Psychometabolic Devotions 
Absorb disease 
Adrenaline control 
Aging 
Biofeedback 
Body control 
Body equilibrium 
Body weaponry 
Catfall 
Cause decay 
Cell adjustment 
Chameleon power 
Chemical simulation 
Displacement 
Double pain 
Ectoplasmic form 
Enhanced strength 
Expansion 
Flesh armor 
Graft weapon 
Heightened senses 
Immovability 
Lend health 
Mind over body 
Reduction 
Share strength 
Suspend animation 


— Psychokinetic Devotions - 
Animate shadow 
Control light 
Control sound 
Molecular agitation 
Soften 


checking a non human wizard or the like. 


Once a character's chance to be a wild talent is deter- 


mined, roll percentile dice. Results are as follows: 


Roll 
1d100 


— -— Psychoportive Devotions — 


— Telepathic Devotions — 


82-84 
85-87 
88-89 
90-91 
92-93 


If the result is more than the modified chance and less 
than 97, the character is not a wild talent. 

If the result is less than or equal to the modified chance, 
the character is a wild talent. The player rolls percentile 
dice and consults the Wild Talents table. His character's 
PSPs are determined as under the Psionic Strength 
Points section. 

If the result is 97, the character must save vs. death or 
his Wisdom is permanently reduced by 1d6 points. 

If the result is 98, the character must save vs. death or 
his Intelligence is permanently reduced by 1d6 points. 
If the result is 99, the character must save vs. death or 
his Constitution is permanently reduced by 1d6 points. 
If the result is 100, the character must save vs. death at 
—5 or his Wisdom, Intelligence, and Constitution scores 
are all permanently reduced to 3 points. 


Roll 
1d100 Wild Science 
— Clairsentient Sciences — 

01-06 Aura sight 

07-14  Clairaudience 

15-22  Clairvoyance 

23-27 Object reading 

28-32  Precognition 

33-36 Sensitivity to psychic 
impressions 


Wild Devotion 


Astral projection 
Dimensional door 
Dimension walk 
Dream travel 
Phase 


Conceal thoughts 
Empathy 

ESP 

Life detection 
Psychic messenger 
Send thoughts 


-— Psychokinetic Science -— 
37-44  Telekinesis 


— Psychometabolic Sciences — 
45-49 Animal affinity 

Roll two devotions 50-53 Complete healing 

Roll one science 54-55 Death field 

Roll one devotion and 56-61 Energy containment 

one science 62-63 Life draining 

64-72 Metamorphosis 

72-80 Shadowform 


— Psychoportive Sciences — 
81-83 Probability travel 
84-86 Teleport 


— Telepathic Sciences — 


87-92  Mindlink 
93-95 No science gained 
96-100  Rolltwo sciences 


$ +. There are five parame- 
Dsionic ters integral to each 


Dowers psionic power. They 
are: 

: The number that the user 
must roll against with an MTHACO roll 
to activate the power against an open 
mind. Bonuses to a power's MAC score 
make it lower, thus harder to hit. While 
penalties make it higher, and thus eas- 
ier to roll against. See "Using Psionic 
Powers" for more details. 

P: : The number of PSPs that 
must be spent per round to use a 
psionic power. The secondary number 
is the PSP cost if the MTHACO roll fails. 

: The maximum distance from 
the user at which the power has an 
effect. "Touch" requires the user to 
make physical contact with the target— 
that is, a THACO roll. 

The physical area or 
number of beings a power affects. "Per- 
sonal" only affects the user. 

Prereqt : Other sciences or 
devotions a character must know 
before being able to use a particular 
power. Some prerequisites will list a 
level. This is the lowest level a psionicist 
using this psionic power can be. 

Once a psionicist has mastered the 
powers of his mind, the results can be 
as spectacular as the explosive force of 
the psychokinetic science called deto- 
nate or as subtle as the clairsentient 
devotion called see sound. Originally 
from The Complete Book of Psionics, 
Dragon Kings, and The Will and the 
Way, the psionic powers described in 
this chapter have been revised to reflect 
the new psionics system. 

Obviously, not every psionic power 
could be contained here. For the most 
part, however, changes have been kept 
to a minimum and are listed on the 
Psionic Powers Summary. The sum- 
mary provides the statistics needed to 
convert existing powers to the new sys- 
tem. The revised statistics, the MAC 
score, and the reconfigured PSP cost 
replace the power score, initial cost, and 
maintenance cost from the old psionics 
system. 

The powers are divided alphabeti- 
cally into the five disciplines (clairsen- 


Chapter 9 


tience, psychokinesis, psychometabolism, psychoportation, 
and telepathy). The major powers (sciences) are presented 
first in each section, followed by the minor powers (devo- 
tions). Each entry includes certain parameters, as described 
in the accompanying sidebar. 

If you're new to psionics, skip the following paragraph. 
The explanation of the changes from the old psionics sys- 
tem to the new may be confusing. If you've used psionics 
often in your past campaigns, however, the following para- 
graph may help you understand the why behind some of 
the system changes. 

Power scores have been replaced by MAC scores, as the 
base mechanic for psionics has been changed from a profi- 
ciency system to a combat system. Initial costs and mainte- 
nance costs have been combined into a single PSP cost. 
Preparation time has been eliminated. Optional results also 
have been eliminated, though they can still be used if DMs 
and players desire. 


: è Clairsentient powers allow char- 
Clairsentient acters to perceive things beyond 
Dowers the natural range of human and 


demihuman senses. Revised sci- 
ences and devotions are presented below. 


Aura Sight 
(clairsentient science) 
MAC: 7 (base) 
PSP Cost: 9/3 
Range: 50 yards 
Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


With this power, the user can detect auras (the nor- 
mally invisible envelope of colored light that surrounds all 
living things). Each use of the power gives the user one 
piece of information—either the target's alignment (one 
portion of it) or relative level of power, but not both simul- 
taneously. 

This power can be used twice per round (for two PSP 
costs and with two MTHACO rolls) to examine two different 
auras or the same aura twice. The user can be discreet, but 
he needs to gaze at the target. Using the power from a dis- 
tance is less noticeable than using it up close. 

The level (or Hit Dice) of the target character affects the 
MTHACO roll. The higher the level of the target, the tougher 
it is to interpret the aura. The power's MAC should be 
improved by 1 for every three levels (or HD) the target has, 
rounded down. For example, an 8th-level target improves 
the power's MAC by 2, making it MAC 5 (and therefore 
harder to roll against). 

The DM should relate game-related information in a 
story sense, rather than in mechanical terms. In the case of 
alignment, the user sees colored light that represents an 


158 


element: 1) blue (lawful); 2) gray (neutral); 3) red (cha- 
otic); 4) white (good); or 5) black (evil). Relative level of 
power can be described as follows: 1) dim aura (a low- 
level target, 1st to 5th level); 2) bright aura (a mid level tar- 
get, 6th to 13th level); 3) dazzling aura (a high-level target, 
14th to 20th level); and 4) blinding aura (a target above 
20th level). 


Clairaudience 
(clairsentient science) 
MAC: 8 (base) 
PSP Cost: 5/2 
Range: Unlimited 
Area of Effect: Special 
Prerequisite: None 


This power allows the user to hear sounds from a distant 
area. The user picks a location he knows, makes an 
MTHACO roll, then listens to everything he would be able to 
hear normally if he were standing in that spot. If the user 
has enhanced hearing, that ability also applies to the use of 
clairaudience. The power doesn't screen out noise around 
the user's physical body, which may make it difficult to hear 
sounds elsewhere. The power doesn't provide any abilities 
to understand languages or interpret sounds. The distance 
of the listening spot modifies the power's MAC, as shown 
below. 

Range Power's MAC 

100 yards 

1,000 yards 

10 miles 

100 miles 

1,000 miles 

10,000 miles 
Interplanetary* 


NON 500 


* Clairaudience only works within a given plane or crystal 
sphere. 


For example, a user trying to hear something 10,000 
miles away would require a roll against a lower MAC. 
Instead of 8, for the closest range, the mental armor class 
would now be —2. If the user's MTHACO is 15, he needs to 
roll a 17 to successfully employ this power. 


Clairvoyance 
(clairsentient science) 
MAC: 7 (base) 
PSP Cost: 5/2 
Range: Unlimited 
Area of Effect: Special 
Prerequisite: None 


Dsitonics 


This power allows the user to see images from a distant 
location. The user picks a spot he knows, makes an 
MTHACO roll, then looks at everything he would be able to 
see if he were standing in that spot. The user's field of 
vision is the same as normal, and turning his head allows 
him to scan the area. 

Clairvoyance doesn't replace normal vision. The user still 
sees what's around his physical location, with the distant 
scene superimposed. Closing one’s eyes blocks the double 
vision and leaves only the distant scene. This power doesn't 
enhance vision, so hidden or invisible objects remain unde- 
tected. The distant scene is visual only; there is no sound. 

The distance of the viewing spot modifies the power's 
MAC, as shown below. 


Range Power's MAC 
100 yards 7 
1,000 yards 5 
10 miles 3 
100 miles 1 
1,000 miles -] 
10,000 miles -3 
Interplanetary* -5 


* Clairvoyance only works within a given plane or crystal 
sphere. 


Object Reading 
(clairsentient science) 
MAC: 7 

PSP Cost: 12/6 
Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Touch 
Prerequisite: None 


This power allows the user to detect psionic impressions 
left on an object by a previous owner. These impressions 
include the owner's race, sex, age, and alignment. The 
power can also reveal how the owner came to possess the 
item and how he lost it. An object can be read successfully 
only once per experience level. Additional readings at the 
same level reveal no new information. 

The amount of information gained depends on the 
MTHACO roll. Success rolls start with the number the user 
needs to get MAC 7 and then improve from there, as noted 
below. The user learns the information listed, plus all results 
above it. 


Success Roll Information Gained 
Oto +2 Last owner's race 
+3 to +4 Last owner's sex 
+5 to +6 Last owner's age 
*7 Last owner's alignment 
+8 andup How last owner gained and lost object 


159 


All-Dound Vision 
(clairsentient devotion) 
MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 5/2 
Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power lets the user see in all directions simultane- 
ously. This has obvious benefits, including a +2 surprise roll 
bonus to the user for encounters where being able to see is 
an advantage. There is a penalty, however. While this power 
is in effect, gaze attacks against the user receive a +4 bonus. 


Combat Mind 
(clairsentient devotion) 
MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 4/2 
Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power gives the user an unusually keen under- 
standing of his enemies and their fighting tactics. As a result, 
the user's side gains a —1 bonus to all initiative rolls during 
combat for every round the power is in effect. This bonus is 
in addition to any other modifiers that may apply. 


Danger Sense 
(clairsentient devotion) 
MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 3/1 
Range: 50 yards 
Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power produces a slight tingling sensation at the 
back of the user's neck whenever a hazard or threat is near. 
When a character wants to activate this power, the DM 
makes the MTHACO roll for the character in secret. The DM 
informs the user whether the power has been successfully 
activated, but not how high the roll was. For every round 
that the user keeps the power in effect, he receives 
advance warning about the general direction of a threat. 

No details about the type of danger are learned, or how or 
when the danger will strike. How much warning depends on 
the MTHACO roll. If the roll succeeds by +1 to +6, the user 
receives warning just moments before danger strikes. This 
gives him the opportunity to act before the danger strikes in 
the round, but no time to warn others. If the roll succeeds by 
+7 or better, the user knows whether danger is lurking within 
the area of effect a full round before it shows itself. 


Cha 


pter 9 


3 tractions. While in the trance, the user gains a +1 bonus to 


In addition to the above benefits, the power gives the 
user a +2 bonus to surprise rolls. 


Feel Sound 
(clairsentient devotion) 
MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 4/2 
Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power makes the user's body sensitive to sound. It 
allows the user to continue to hear even if his ears are dis- 
abled. He can't detect sound where there is none, and the 
power doesn't work within areas of magical silence. The 
user gains a +2 bonus against all sonic attacks or effects, 
including a siren's song. 


Know Location 
(clairsentient devotion) 
MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 8/3 
Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power aids characters who travel via teleportation, 
gates, or other planes of existence. When used successfully, 
it reveals general information about the user's location. The 
information is no more detailed than the responses of a 
simple farmer to the question "Where am I?” Some typical 
responses are “A few miles southwest of Wingot Mountain"; 
“in the house of Fletch the Blind"; and "On a tropical island 
in the Turomil Sea.” 

The higher a successful MTHACO roll, the more precise 
the location. A roll of +1 to +4 higher than the MAC speci- 
fies a location within 10 miles. A roll of +7 or +8 higher 
than the MAC targets an area within a mile. A roll of +9 or 
higher than the MAC gives the location in a planar context 
(‘the Astral Plane”). 


Martial Trance 

(clairsentient devotion) 

MAC: 7 

PSP Cost: 7/3 

Range: 50 yards 
Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: 3rd level 


This power helps the user in psionic combat. By entering 
a trance before combat begins, the user focuses his com- 
plete attention on the psionic activity, tuning out other dis- 


160 


all mental attack rolls, in addition to any other modifiers that 
may apply. 

The trance ends when the user chooses to end it, by any 
moderate physical contact (a blow, shake, or slap), or when 
his PSPs are reduced to O. As his attention is completely 
focused on the psionic battlefield, any melee attacks against 
him hit automatically and cause maximum damage. 


Doison Sense 
(clairsentient devotion) 

MAC: 10 

PSP Cost: 1/1 

Range: 1-yard radius 
Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power enables a user to detect the presence of poi- 
son and identify its location within 1 yard of his body (or 
presence, if he uses clairvoyance or astral projection). The 
type of poison and how it can be negated aren't revealed, 
only its presence. 


Dsionic Sense 
(clairsentient devotion) 

MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 2/1 

Range: 200-yard radius 
Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: Mindlink 


This power allows the user to detect psionic activity any- 
where within 200 yards of his location. Any expenditure of 
PSPs constitutes psionic activity. The first successful use of 
this power reveals whether someone or something is psion- 
ically active within range. A second successful use of the 
power in the following round reveals how powerful the activ- 
ity is and where the psionic activity is taking place (direction 
and distance). If psionic activity is occurring in more than 
one location within the range, the user detects all of it. 

Power levels are as follows: 1) low psionic activity (1 to 
5 PSPs per round); 2) moderate psionic activity (6 to 12 
PSPs per round); and 3) high psionic activity (13+ PSPs per 
round), 


See Sound 
(clairsentient devotion) 
MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 4/2 
Range: Special 
Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


Dsionics 


This power enables a user to perceive sound waves visu- (0 Intelligence) plants and inanimate objects. The power : 


ally by converting those waves into light impulses. Only a 
character who can see with normal vision can use this 
power. He can see sound even in darkness, as sound waves 
don't require light. The user can be "blinded" by silence, 
however. 


Psychokinetic 


Dsychokinctic Powers Sowers move 


objects across space using only the energy of a character's 
mind. Revised sciences and devotions are presented below. 


Create Object 
(psychokinetic science) 
MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 7/3 
Range: 20 yards 
Area of Effect: Special 
Prerequisite: Telekinesis 


This power allows a user to assem- 
ble matter from air and the surrounding 
area to create a solid object. Only mate- 
rials within 20 yards of the user can be 
used in the construction. The object 
remains in existence for every round 
that the user continues to pay the PSP 
cost. During the round that the PSP cost 
isn't paid, the object breaks apart. An 
object created with this power can have 
any shape, color, and texture the user 
desires, provided it fulfills at least one of 
these conditions: 

* Fits within a sphere no more than 4 
feet in diameter. 
* Fits within a cylinder no more than 

20 feet high and 1 foot in diameter. 
* Fits within a cylinder no more than 2 

feet high and 6 feet in diameter. 
+ Weighs no more than 10 pounds. 


Detonate 
(psychokinetic science) 
MAC: 5 

PSP Cost: 15/5 
Range: 60 yards 


Area of Effect: 
Prerequisite: 


1 item, 8 cubic feet 
Telekinesis, molecular 
agitation 


With this power, the user harnesses, 
focuses, and explosively releases the 
latent psionic energy inside non sentient 


also works against animated undead (skeletons and zom- 
bies), but doesn't affect incorporeal undead. It can't be used 
against animals, intelligent creatures, or free-willed undead. 
The explosion causes destructive damage to the target, 
based on the MTHACO roll. If the roll is equal to the power's 
MAC, 10% of the target area is destroyed. For every number 
rolled above the MAC, an additional 10% is destroyed, up 
to a total of 8 cubic feet of material (by a single power use). 
Monsters such as skeletons and golems targeted by the 
detonate power take damage based on the percentage of 
their mass that was destroyed, losing an equal percentage 
of hit points. Magically animated material, like golems, can 
make a saving throw vs. spell to resist detonation. 
Weapons and armor that have been detonated receive 
penalties of —1 to attack rolls and AC values for each 1096 
destroyed. Magical items make a saving throw vs. disinte- 
gration to resist detonation. Vulnerable objects or living 


z For example, if a hero whose THACO is 15 wants to attack a 


things within 10 feet of the target suffer 1d10 points of 
damage from the resulting explosion. A save vs. breath 
weapon reduces damage to half. 


Project Force 
(psychokinetic science) 
MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 10/4 
Range: 200 yards 
Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: Telekinesis 


This power allows the user to focus a psychokinetic 
"punch" against a target up to 200 yards away. If used 
offensively, this punch causes damage equal to 1d6 points 
plus the target's Armor Class (negative armor classes are 
subtracted from the die roll). Only AC provided by actual 
armor is added to or subtracted from the roll—not Dexterity 
or magical bonuses. A successful save vs. breath weapon 
reduces the damage to half. 

Project force can also be used to trigger traps, throw 
levers, open doors (not locked or latched), break windows, 
etc. No attack roll is needed, just the MTHACO roll to acti- 
vate it. 


Telekinesis 
(psychokinetic science) 
MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 34/1 
Range: 30 yards 
Area of Effect: — 1 item 
Prerequisite: None 


This power allows the user to move objects without 
touching them. Telekinesis tends to be physically taxing, as 
it takes a lot of internal energy to move objects. Small 
objects are easy. But larger, more massive objects are signif- 
icantly more difficult. 

The cost listed above assumes the object being moved 
weighs three pounds or less. For heavier objects, use the 
following: 

» PSP cost equals the item's weight in pounds. 

» The power's MAC improves by a bonus equal to one- 
third of the item's weight, rounded down. For example, 
moving a 1O-pound rock requires rolling against a MAC 
of 5. 


Telekinesis moves the targeted item up to 60 feet per 
round. Items moving at such a slow rate of speed don't 
make effective weapons, but items weighing more than 
three pounds can be used to disrupt spellcasting or psionic 
use. The user rolls his base THACO score to hit, with a pen- 
alty equal to one-third of the item's weight, rounded down. 


162 


priestess whose AC is O, he needs an 18 or better to hit her 
with a 10—pound rock. 

Telekinesis can be used to perform very fine work, such 
as writing or sewing. The user must be capable of perform- 
ing the work himself, and a second MTHACO roll (and sec- 
ond round of power use) is needed to complete fine work. 
If the hero wants to use the power to pull an item away 
from an opponent, use the rules for psychic contests, 
except that the defender uses his Strength score to decide 
the contest. 


Animate Object 
(psychokinetic devotion) 

MAC: 7 (base) 

PSP Cost: 5/2 

Range: 50 yards 

Area of Effect: — 1 item, 100 pounds 
Prerequisite: Telekinesis 


This power allows the user to control the movement of 
an otherwise inanimate object, giving it the appearance of 
life. For example, animate object can make chairs walk or 
stones dance, though objects being animated must weigh 
100 pounds or less. The material the item is made of 
affects the difficulty of the task, as indicated below. 
Material Power's MAC 
Cloth, paper 
Live wood, dead animal 
Dead wood, bone 
Water 
Thin metal 
Thick metal 
Stone 


-NU AVON 


Once animated, all materials become flexible to some 
extent, though fluid motion is uncommon. Animated 
items move like puppets, with jerky, clumsy motions. If 
the item was rigid initially, it makes loud creaking, groan- 
ing, or grating sounds as it moves. An animated item 
moves up to 60 feet a round (movement rate 6). It can 
be used to attack, acting like a club with a THACO of 20 
and a damage score of 1d6 points. 


Control Light 
(psychokinetic devotion) 

MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 6/2 

Range: 25 yards 

Area of Effect: 400 square feet 
Prerequisite: None 


Dsionics 


the round that the PSP cost is not paid. ; 


This power allows the user to manipulate ambient light. 
He can't create light from darkness, but he can create 
darkness from light. Use of control light can accomplish 
the following: 

s Deepen existing shadows. A thief hidden in such shad- 
ows receives a +20% bonus to his hide-in-shadows 
rolls. 

s Brighten existing shadows. This reduces a thief's hiding 
ability by 20%. 

» Brighten a light source until it becomes blinding. Those 
exposed to the light receive a —2 penalty to attack rolls. 

s Dim a light source. This has no effect on attack rolls. 

+ Extend shadows into areas that are well lit. Only exist- 
ing shadows can be lengthened, increasing in size by 
200%. 

* Extend light into areas that are in shadow. Shadows can 
be reduced by 50%. 


Control Sound 
(psychokinetic devotion) 

MAC: 5 

PSP Cost: 3/1 

Range: 100 yards 

Area of Effect: 1 specific sound 
Prerequisite: None 


This power allows the user to shape and alter existing 
sounds. A man's words could emerge as a lion's roar, or 
the noise of marching soldiers can be made to sound like 
the wind of a sandstorm. Sounds also can be layered, so 
that one singer can be made to sound like a choir. Control 
sound can also dampen a noise. The player must specify 
what sound his character intends to eliminate. For 
example, the user might quiet the strike of a hammer or 
erase the creak of a door. He couldn't eliminate both at 
once, however. 


Control Wind 
(psychokinetic devotion) 
MAC: 5 

PSP Cost: 12/5 
Range: 500 yards 
Area of Effect: — 1,000 yards 
Prerequisite: Telekinesis 


With this power, a user can gain limited control over wind 
speed and direction. The speed of any existing wind can be 
increased or decreased by 10 miles per hour or 25%— 
whichever is greater. The direction of the wind can be 
changed by up to 90 degrees. These changes are tempo- 
rary, lasting only as long as the PSP cost is paid. The 
changes occur in the round that the power is successfully 
activated. The wind returns to its original course and speed 


165 


Wind above 19 miles per hour prevents anything smaller 
than a human from flying and imposes a —4 modifier on 
missile fire. On the water, such wind makes sailing difficult. 
Wind gusting at more than 52 miles per hour causes minor 
damage to ships and buildings. This wind also kicks up 
clouds of dust and prevents all but the largest creatures 
from flying. Wind more than 55 miles per hour prevents all 
flight, knocks down trees and wooden buildings, and may 
swamp ships. Wind more than 73 miles per hour is a hurri- 
cane gale. 


Inertial Barrier 


(psychokinetic devotion) 

MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 6/2 

Range: 0 

Area of Effect: — 3—yard diameter 
Prerequisite: Telekinesis 


This power is used as a defense, creating a barrier of 
psionic energy around the user and anyone within three 
yards of him. This barrier softens missile blows, shielding 
the user from damage by slowing and absorbing some or 
all of the potential damage caused by incoming attacks. 
However, the barrier also slows outgoing missile attacks—a 
drawback the user should consider. 

The power protects against damage from these forms of 
attack: any nonmagical missile weapon; any physical missile 
created by magic; any missile with magical bonuses; 
flames; some breath weapon attacks (depending on the 
nature of the breath); acid; gas; all forms of disintegration; 
and falling (damage is halved). Inertial barrier cannot stop 
missiles conjured from pure magic or protect against raw 
heat or cold, pure energy or light, or gaze weapons. An iner- 
tial barrier cannot keep enemies out, but it does slow them. 
Anyone trying to cross a barrier must stop moving when 
contact is made. In the next round, the barrier can be 
crossed (either entering or exiting). 

Missile weapons, whether passing into or out of the bar- 
rier, inflict damage in a modified fashion because the power 
saps energy from the missile. If a missile strikes its target 
after passing through the barrier (in either direction), the 
attacker rolls for damage as normal. However, the defender 
then rolls the same die to see how much damage the bar- 
rier absorbed. (Note: The defender doesn't include any 
magical bonuses the weapon may have.) The defender 
subtracts his die roll from the attacker's damage total. If any- 
thing remains, the defender loses that many hit points. If 
the defender's roll equals or exceeds the total damage, the 
weapon falls harmlessly to the ground. If the missile is 
explosive, the barrier prevents weapon damage but not 
explosive damage. 


Chapter 9 


Levitation 
(psychokinetic devotion) 
MAC: 8 (base) 
PSP Cost: 5/2 
Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: Telekinesis 


This power allows the user to float by using telekinesis 
on himself. The user can lift himself at the rate of 1 foot a 
second, or 60 feet a round. He can descend as quickly as 
he wants by simply letting himself fall, then slowing down 
as he nears the ground. The user can always levitate his 
own weight. Additional weight, such as equipment or pas- 
sengers, is a hindrance. Every 25 pounds of added weight 
improves the power's MAC by 1. 

Levitation isn't flying. The power provides no horizontal 
movement. The user can hover motionlessly and drift with 
the wind, or he can push off a wall or other fixed object and 
drift up to 60 feet a round in a straight line. He can't stop, 
however, until he meets another solid object, lowers him- 
self to the ground, or stops paying the PSP cost. Two 
powers—control wind and project force—can help the levi- 
tating user propel himself forward and change direction. 
The use of these additional powers requires the extra 
expenditure of PSPs and MTHACO rolls. 


Molecular Agitation 
(psychokinetic devotion) 

MAC: 10 

PSP Cost: 7/5 

Range: 40 yards 

Area of Effect: — 1 item, 20 pounds 
Prerequisite: None 


This power enables the user to excite the molecules of a 
substance, causing paper to ignite, wood to smolder, or skin 
to blister, for example. The degree of destruction is as follows, 
depending on the number of rounds the item is agitated: 

One round. Readily flammable materials, such as paper 

and dry grass, ignite; skin becomes red and tender (1 

point of damage); wood becomes dark. 

s Two rounds. Wood smolders and smokes; metal 
becomes hot to the touch; skin blisters (1d4 points of 
damage); hair melts; paint shrivels. 

» Three rounds. Wood ignites; metal scorches (1d4 points 
of damage); skin burns away (1d6 points of damage); 
water boils, lead melts. The damage inflicted doesn't 
increase beyond this round, but targets continue to suf- 
fer the 1d4 or 1d6 points for each subsequent round 
the power continues. 

s Four rounds. Steel grows soft. 

* Five rounds. Steel melts. 


164 


Magical items receive saving throws against magical fire, 
but a +10 penalty is applied to the number needed. The 
heat produced by this power is highly destructive as it 
comes from inside the item instead of outside. 


Molecular Manipulation 
(psychokinetic devotion) 

MAC: 7 

PSP Cost: 6/2 

Range: 15 yards 

Area of Effect: — 2 square inches 
Prerequisite: Telekinesis 


This power allows the user to weaken an object's mol- 
ecular bonds. When stress is applied to the object or a 
blow is struck, it snaps. The user can create one "weak 
point" of approximately 2 square inches each round. 
Deterioration occurs across a plane (in two dimensions, 
not three). One round's application is enough to fatally 
weaken most small objects (knives, ropes, saddle straps, 
bows, etc.). Larger objects require more time and are sub- 
ject to the DM's discretion. 

The DM must decide how vulnerable molecular manip- 
ulation makes larger, oddly shaped items (such as doors 
and shields). An object need not be in two pieces to be 
useless. A small boat, for example, is unsafe if it has a 
crack in its hull. 


Psychometabolic powers 


Dsy chometabolic affect the user's body by 
altering it in some way. 


Dowers | 
Revised sciences and 


devotions are presented in this section. 


Animal Affinity 
(psychometabolic science) 
MAC: 5 

PSP Cost: 7/3 
Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


With this power, the user develops an affinity for a particular 
animal type. Roll on the list below to determine the animal 
type (see the Monstrous Manuat for descriptions). The user 
undergoes a physical change when this power is used, de- 
pending on the animal and ability. For example, he may 
gain wings or claws. 

When the user activates this power, he temporarily gains 
one of the animal's attributes. He can gain the animal's 
Armor Class; movement rate and mode; physical attacks, 
damage, and THACO; hit points; or any other special abil- 
ity—though only one of these can be gained at a time. The 


attribute lasts for every round that the 
cost is paid. Switching to a different 
attribute requires a new MTHACO roll. 


1d20 Result 

Ape 
Barracuda 
Boar 

Bull 
Crocodile 
Eagle, giant 
Elephant 
Falcon 
Griffon 

10 Grizzly bear 
11 Lion 

12 Panther (black leopard) 
13 Draft horse 


WOON O») Ut I» GN NJ — 


14 Peregrine falcon (hawk) 
15 Rattlesnake 

16 Scorpion, giant 

17 Shark 

18 Stag 

19 Tiger 

20 Wolf 


MAC: 7 


PSP Cost: 25/5 
Range: o 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power allows the user to heal 
himself completely of all ailments, 
wounds, and normal diseases. He 
must place himself in a trance for 24 
hours to accomplish the healing. The 
trance is deep; it can't be broken 
unless the user loses 5 or more hit 
points. During the healing trance, the 
user's body repairs itself at an incredi- 
ble rate. At the end of the 24 hours, he 
awakens, restored to complete health 
in every regard except for the PSPs 
expended to use the power. If the user 
fails his MTHACO roll, the power can't 
be activated; the trance breaks after 1 
hour, costing 5 PSPs. 


Chapter 9 


Metamorphosis 
(psychometabolic science) 
MAC: 4 

PSP Cost: 6/3 
Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power resembles magical polymorphing, but it has 
a wider application. The user can change himself into any- 
thing with approximately the same mass as his body: a 
wolf, a chair, or even a tree. While in this form, the user 
retains his own hit points and THACO, but he gains the AC 
of the new form. He also gains all physical attacks the 
form allows, but no magical or special abilities. A new 
attack ability depends on the form chosen; a tree, for 
example, can't attack, so it has no THACO. Nonmagical 
movement is also gained. If the user metamorphs into 
another character race, use the Monstrous Manual book's 
descriptions for that race. 

Some forms have intrinsic advantages. Changing into a 
fish or rock renders the user immune to drowning, though 
he doesn't retain any senses not normally associated with 
his new form. He may opt to keep some of his own 
senses when he transforms, but these are likely to give 
him away. 

Like any massive change of shape, metamorphosis 
causes great physical stress. The user must make a sys- 
tem shock roll. If the roll fails, he expends 6 PSPs, changes 
form only for 1 round, and immediately passes out for 
2d6 turns. 


Shadowform 
(psychometabolic science) 
MAC: 5 

PSP Cost: 5/2 
Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power transforms the user into living shadow. 
The user, his clothing, armor, and up to 20 pounds of 
equipment all transform. He can blend perfectly into any 
other shadow. His movement rate, however, is 6 
(regardless of what it was before), and he can only travel 
through darkness and shadow. Areas of open light are 
impassable. 

While in shadowform, the user only can be noticed by 
life detection, other types of psionic detection, or by a 
true seeing spell. He can't harm anyone physically or 
manipulate any corporeal objects, but he can use psionic 
powers. 


166 


Adrenaline Control 
(psychometabolic devotion) 
MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 5/2 

Range: 0 

Area of Effect: — Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power temporarily boosts the amount of adrenaline 
in the user's system, giving him physical advantages. He 
gains 1d6 points to divide among his Strength, Dexterity, 
and Constitution scores as he chooses, thus increasing 
them while the power is in effect. He receives all of the nor- 
mal bonuses for high ability scores during this period. (If 
used to increase Constitution, the user might temporarily 
gain bonus hit points. Damage suffered is subtracted from 
the extra hit points first.) 

Exceeding racial maximums is dangerous. When an 
attribute is increased beyond the racial maximum and the 
user stops paying the PSP cost, he must make a system 
shock check; he suffers 1d6 points of physical damage if 
the roll fails. 


body Control 
(psychometabolic devotion) 
MAC: 5 

PSP Cost: 6/2 

Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power allows the user to adapt his body to a hostile 
environment. The change must be keyed to a specific sur- 
rounding: water, acid, extreme heat, extreme cold, an ele- 
mental plane, etc. If the power works, the user not only sur- 
vives, he behaves like a native organism. He can breathe 
and move normally, suffering no damage from the environ- 
ment. However, a character who can survive extreme cold is 
still vulnerable to a cone of cold spell. 


body Equilibrium 
(psychometabolic devotion) 
MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 2/1 

Range: 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power allows the user to adjust his body weight to 
correspond to the surface he's standing on. Thus, he can 
walk on water, quicksand, silt, or even a spider's web with- 
out sinking or breaking through. If the user is falling when 


Dsionics 


he activates this power, he falls slowly enough to escape 
injury. Because of how light weight the user becomes when 
this power is in effect, he must be wary of wind gusts, which 
can easily blow him about. 


Body Weaponry 
(psychometabolic devotion) 
MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 6/3 

Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power allows the user to convert one of his arms 
into a weapon. Virtually any sort of weapon can be imitated, 
except ranged weapons (such as bows) or any weapon the 
user isn't proficient with. The arm actually becomes rock, 
bone, wood, or metal and assumes the weapon's form. It 
behaves in every respect like a normal weapon of the cho- 
sen type, with the bonus that it can't be dropped or stolen. 


Cannibalize 
(psychometabolic devotion) 
MAC: 7 

PSP Cost: 0 

Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: 5th level 


This power allows the user to cannibalize his own body for 
extra PSPs. When activated successfully, the user can take 
Constitution points and convert thern directly to PSPs at a ratio 
of 1:8 (1 Constitution point equals 8 PSPs). The user can 
access these PSPs any time, as if they were part of his total. 

The Constitution reduction isn't permanent, but it is 
debilitating and long-lasting. The user immediately loses 
bonus hit points that accompany high Constitution scores. 
His system shock and resurrection survival chances are 
reduced. All psychometabolic powers receive MAC bonuses 
(making them harder to use) equal to the number of Con- 
stitution points that were cannibalized. The user recovers 
one cannibalized point of Constitution per week of rest. 
Rest means staying quietly in a safe place; adventuring is 
not allowed. 


Cell Adjustment 
(psychometabolic devotion) 
MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 5+ 

Range: Touch 

Area of Effect: — Individual 
Prerequisite: None 


167 


This power allows the user to heal wounds and cure 
nonmagical diseases—excluding such unnatural diseases as 
mummy rot and lycanthropy. He can cure a disease in 1 
round by spending 5 PSPs and making a successful 
MTHACO roll. If the roll fails, the disease is too widespread 
in the victim's system. The user must continue spending 5 
PSPs each round until he succeeds in activating the power. 
Note that a cure performed through this power doesn't 
automatically restore lost hit points. However, the user can 
heal up to 4 points of damage in each subsequent round 
by spending 5 PSPs per hit point recovered (4 hit points for 
20 PSPs per round maximum). The user can't cure a dis- 
ease and restore hit points during the same round. 


Chameleon Dower 


(psychometabolic devotion) 
MAC: 7 (base) 
PSP Cost: 4/1 

Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power changes the coloration of the user's skin, 
clothing, and equipment to match the nearest background. 
The match is automatic; the user doesn't choose the 
appearance. The change takes several seconds to occur. As 
the user moves, the coloration shifts to reflect any changes 
in the surroundings. 

This power makes the user extremely difficult to spot. For 
every round the power is in effect and the user remains still, 
he can avoid detection simply by successfully rolling against 
the power's MAC. If the user moves, the MAC score 
increases (to MAC 5). Chameleon power is most effective 
in natural surroundings, where the user's coloration can 
best conceal him. In an urban setting, or in an area without 
natural cover during broad daylight, the power's MAC score 
is improved to MAC 3. 


Heightened Senses 

( bolic devotion) 
MAC: 7 

PSP Cost: 3/1 

Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power allows the user to sharpen all his normal 
senses: sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch. (DMs might 
allow other applications as they see fit.) With heightened 
senses, the user has a good chance to notice thieves hiding 
in shadows or moving silently. This is represented by a 
thief's skill chance being cut in half if someone with height- 
ened senses is observing him. Even if the thief is already 


Chapter 9 


3 after arriving, suffering a —2 penalty on all die rolls for initia- 


hidden, he must roll again when the user of this power 
enters the area. 

Someone with heightened senses can also track by 
sense of smell. He must make an Intelligence check every 
turn to stay on the trail or to recover it if he loses it. While 
tracking, the user's movement rate is reduced by 50%. The 
trail can be no more than 24 hours old. Ranges for the 
user's hearing and seeing are tripled while this power is in 
effect. Further, he can ingest small quantities of possibly 
poisoned or impure foods, identifying the substance with- 
out causing himself harm. The user can identify almost any- 
thing by touch. He can identify any item he has previously 
handled and can also tell if an item was handled in the last 
five minutes. 


These powers 


Dsychoportive Powers slow psionic 


travel, moving a character without physical action. Revised 
sciences and devotions are below. 


Banishment 
(psychoportive science) 
MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 15/6 
Range: 5 yards 
Area of Effect: — Individual 
Prerequisite: Teleport 


With this power, the user can teleport a creature against 
its will to a pocket dimension and hold it there for as long as 
he chooses to continue spending 15 PSPs per round. The 
creature being banished must be within 5 yards of the user. 
The pocket dimension is featureless, with a benign environ- 
ment—hot or cold, light or dark, but not so much as to 
cause injury. 

The banished creature returns to its original location as 
soon as the user stops paying the PSP cost. This 
boomerang feature won't harm the creature. If the creature 
has access to the Astral or Ethereal Planes, or if it can tele- 
port between planes, it can try to return prior to the expira- 
tion of the power by rolling an Intelligence check at —3. 


Summon Planar Creature 


(psychoportive science) 

MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 40/20 or 80/40 
Range: 200 yards 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Prerequisite: Teleport 


With this power, the user can reach into another plane, 
grab whatever creature he happens to find there, and teleport 
it to his own plane. The creature is disoriented for 1 round 


168 


tive, attacks, and saving throws. The user can make the sum- 
moned creature appear anywhere within 200 yards of his 
position. If the user rolls the MAC number exactly, the crea- 
ture appears within 10 yards. The PSP cost is 40 for a crea- 
ture from the Astral or Ethereal Planes, 80 for one from the 
Inner or Outer Planes. Failure costs half the indicated PSPs. 

The user chooses the plane from which the creature will 
come. He doesn't choose the creature, however; that's 
determined at random. A creature from the Elemental 
Planes is usually an elemental of the appropriate type. A 
creature from the Outer Planes could be a native or a visitor. 
DMs are encouraged to see the PLanescape™ line for ideas. 

This power offers no control over the summoned crea- 
ture and doesn't return it to its home plane after a set 
amount of time—it merely teleports something from there 
to here. To be rid of the creature, the user must banish it, 
teleport it again, kill it, or somehow control it. 


Teleport 


(psychoportive science) 
MAC: 9 (base) 
PSP Cost: 10+/5+ 
Range: Unlimited 
Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power allows the user to travel to a familiar spot. 
Teleport is instantaneous and always takes a character to a 
fixed location. There is a slight audible pop at both ends, 
signaling use of the power. The destination must be a place 
the user knows or can picture mentally. Even if the user 
never has been there, he may still know a location via use 
of ESP or another power. He can also teleport to a place 
even if it has changed from the way he pictures it; 
rearrangement won't hamper the teleport power. 

Restraints don't affect this power. The user can bring his 
clothes, small items, and equipment (up to one-fifth of his 
body mass). Doubling the amount of PSPs spent to activate 
the power lets the user carry up to three times his body 
mass, or to take along up to two others he has a firm grasp 
on. The cost to use this power varies with the distance trav- 
eled, as indicated below. 


Distance PSP Cost Power's MAC 
10 yards 10/5 9 
100 yards 20/10 8 
1,000 yards 30/15 7 
10 miles 40/20 6 
100 miles 50/25 5 
1,000 miles 60/30 4 
10,000 miles 70/35 3 
Interplanetary* 100/50 2 


* Teleport only works within a given plane or crystal sphere. 


Cha 


pter 9 


8 if the user travels to another location on the same plane as 


Teleport Other 
(psychoportive science) 

MAC: 8 (base) 

PSP Cost: 104/54 
Range: Unlimited 

Area of Effect: — 1—3 individuals 
Prerequisite: Teleport 


This power is identical to teleport, except that it is used 
to teleport characters other than the user. The user stays 
where he is while someone else is teleported. The charac- 
ter must be willing to be teleported or otherwise have an 
open mind. If the user pays twice the usual PSP cost, he 
can teleport up to three characters—provided they are firmly 
grasping one another. 


Distance PSP Cost Power's MAC 
10 yards 10/5 8 
100 yards 20/10 7 
1,000 yards 30/15 6 
10 miles 40/20 5 
100 miles 50/25 4 
1,000 miles 60/30 3 
10,000 miles 70/35 2 
Interplanetary* 100/50 1 


* Teleport other only works within a given plane or crystal 
sphere. 


Astral Projection 
(psychoportive devotion) 
MAC: B 

PSP Cost: 3/1 

Range: Not applicable 
Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: None 


This power allows the user to travel without his physical 
body by creating an astral form that immediately leaps into 
the Astral Plane. Only creatures or characters who are also 
on the Astral Plane can see it. A silvery cord connects the 
astral body to the physical one. This translucent string 
stretches 10 feet from the astral body before becoming 
invisible. If the cord is severed, both the astral and physical 
bodies die—killing the user. The cord is nearly indestructible, 
however. It only can be severed by a powerful psionic wind 
or the silver sword of a githyanki. 

The Astral Plane is used to get to other destinations—a 
distant point on the Prime Material or a location on another 
plane, for example. When the user reaches his destination, 
a temporary physical body is formed there. It resembles the 
user's real body, and the two remain connected by the sil- 
very cord. However, a temporary physical body isn't formed 


170 


his real body. He can view that distant location in astral 
form, but he can't affect the area in any physical, magical, or 
psionic way. 


Blink 

(psychoportive devotion) 
MAC: 9 

PSP Cost: 4/2 
Range: 0 

Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: Teleport 


This power allows the user to make a series of random, 
short-range teleportations that make him very hard to hit in 
combat. Each round, the user autornatically blinks once at a 
randomly determined time in the initiative order. Roll 1d10 
and note the initiative number of the blink. To strike at the 
user, his opponents must have a better initiative than his 
blink time. The user may attempt to strike before he blinks, 
but he must beat the blink initiative with his own roll or hold 
his action until the end of the round. Each blink carries the 
user 3d10 feet in a random direction. (Roll 1d8: 1 = straight 
ahead; 2 — ahead and to the right; 5 — to the right; and so 
on.) However, the user's blink won't carry him into a solid 
object or any kind of danger, such as into a fire or over a cliff. 


Dimensional Door 
(psychoportive devotion) 
MAC: 7 (base) 

PSP Cost: 3/1 

Range: 50+ yards 
Area of Effect: Not applicable 
Prerequisite: None 


With this power, the user opens a human-sized portal 
that leads to the edge of another dimension. The edge acts 
as a lightning-quick transit system, carrying travelers to a 
destination chosen by the user. A gleaming portal appears 
in front of him. At the same time, an identical portal 
appears wherever the user wants it (within the power's 
range). The door can have any orientation desired. Step- 
ping into either portal allows a character to immediately 
step out of the other. Both doors remain in place as long as 
the PSP cost is met. 

A door has only one side and no thickness; it doesn't 
exist from the "back" and can't be used to screen missile 
attacks. Up to five characters each round can use a door. If 
a group lines up, 10 can step through a round. 

Commuting via this power is disorienting. Indeed, a trav- 
eler emerges dazed and can't attack or move for a round. 
Even just poking a head through a door requires a system 
shock roll. Failure means the hero loses 50% of his current 


Dstonics 


hit points and passes out for 1d6 rounds. Attacks made realm. If anything lives in the gray, it never bothers (or can't 
through a door suffer a —4 penalty. Distances between interact) with dimension walkers. 
doors improve the power's MAC, as below. 

Distance Between Doors MAC Bonus Dhasc i , 

50 yards 7 (psychoportive devotion) 

75 yards 5 MAC: 10 

100 yards 2 PSP Cost: 6/2 

150 yards 0 Range: 0 

200 yards -3 Area of Effect: Personal 

Prerequisite: None 

Dimension Walk This power allows the user to shift his body into a differ- 
(psychoportive devotion) ent frequency of motion, making him transparent to the 
MAC: 8 unphased world around him. While this power is in effect, 
PSP Cost: 5/2 the user can walk through solid matter. No physical force or 
Range: Not applicable energy can harm him, though other phased objects or crea- 
Area of Effect: Personal tures can do so. 
Prerequisite: None 


With this power, the user opens a 
vaguely shimmering portal, which lets 
him travel from place to place in his 
own dimension by piercing other 
dimensions at right angles. This has 
two advantages over a dimensional 
door. The first being that a dimension 
walk isn't physically traumatizing, and 
the second being that the range of 
travel is greater. The user can actually 
travel through this dimension at the 
speed of 21 miles per turn. However, 
this power allows only the user to 
travel, and the portal closes behind 
him instantly. 

The user finds himself engulfed in a 
featureless, inky grayness. He can't see 
where he is or where he's going. He 
has only his instinct to guide him, and 
he must make a Wisdom check every 
turn. If these checks succeed, he'll find 
himself at his chosen destination 
when he steps out of the dimensional 
realm. If any check fails, he strays off 
course by several miles. The DM can 
place the character in any location 
within the maximum distance he trav- 
eled from his starting point. It's up to 
the user to figure out his location, as 
the power does nothing to help him 
gain his bearings. 

The user can take with him whatever 
he can carry, though bags of holding 
and other dimensional devices spill 
their contents if taken into the gray 


3 This power only can be used on an open mind. With it, 


A phased character can move vertically at 10 feet each 
round; over solid ground at his normal movement rate; over 
water or silt at half normal; and through solid matter at one- 
fourth the normal rate. If a character fails to pay the cost 
while moving through solid matter, he suffers 3d10 points of 
damage, falls into a coma for 1d6 hours, and phases imme- 
diately into the Ethereal Plane. Note that a phased character 
isn't affected by gravity. If a hero is falling off a cliff and acti- 
vates this power, he retains any momentum he had and 
phases into the ground 27 feet for every 10 feet he falls. He 
must then have enough PSPs to reverse his fall and phase 
out of the ground or suffer the consequences noted above. 

A phased character receives a +2 bonus to his MAC dur- 
ing psionic combat and gets a +2 bonus to all saving throws 
vs. mind-affecting magic or effects. Conversely, his MTHACO 
receives a —2 penalty. 


Teleport Trigger 
(psychoportive devotion) 
MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 2 per hour/1 
Range: Unlimited 
Area of Effect: Personal 
Prerequisite: Teleport 


This power allows the user to establish a specific event 
that will instantly activate his teleport power. It is a reflexive 
event, occurring as soon as the conditions are met without 
any conscious effort on the part of the user. After success- 
fully rolling the power's MAC number, the user must specify 
where he wants to teleport and define very specifically what 
conditions will trigger that teleport. These conditions can be 
anything he chooses, but they must happen in his immedi- 
ate vicinity to activate the trigger. 

When the teleport is triggered, the user must have 
enough PSPs remaining to pay the teleport cost. (If he 
doesn't, the power fails to activate.) He must also make a 
teleport MTHACO roll. If the roll fails, the power doesn't 
work. The trigger remains active as long as the user pays the 
PSP cost. 


: Telepathic powers in- 
Telepathic Dowers volve the direct contact 


of two or more minds. Revised sciences and devotions are 
presented below in this section. 


Domination 
(telepathic science) 

MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 6+/3+ 
Range: 30 yards 
Area of Effect: — Individual 
Prerequisite: Mindlink 


172 


the user projects mental commands into the mind of one 
other being. The dominated target knows what's happening, 
but he can't resist the user's will, so he is forced to do nearly 
anything the user wishes. The target's abilities remain unaf- 
fected by this power, and he can be made to use any power 
he possesses—assuming the user knows about it. Domina- 
tion doesn't reveal facts or secrets about the target. 

When domination is attempted, the target makes a saving 
throw vs. spell. If successful, the target isn't dominated. If the 
save fails, the target falls under the user's control for as long 
as the user pays the PSP cost. The PSP cost is dependent on 
the target's level, as shown below. Later, if the target is forced 
to do something against his alignment, he can attempt 
another saving throw to regain his free will. 


Target's Level PSP Cost 
1—5 levels or HD 6/3 
6-10 levels or HD 12/6 
11-15 levels or HD 22/11 
16—20 levels or HD 32/16 
21+ levels or HD 50/25 

Mindliak 

(telepathic science) 

MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 7+/3+ 

Range: Unlimited 

Area of Effect: — Individual 

Prerequisite: None 


This power only can be used on an open mind, allowing 
the user to communicate wordlessly with any intelligent 
creature. This is two-way communication. It isn't the same 
as mind reading, because the user receives only those 
thoughts the target wants to send. Language isn't a barrier 
to mindlink. The PSP cost is determined by the target's 
level, as shown below. 


Target's Level PSP Cost 
1-5 levels or HD 7/3 
6-10 levels or HD 8/4 
11-15 levels or HD 9/5 
16-20 levels or HD 11/6 
21+ levels or HD 12/6 

Probe 

(telepathic science) 

MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 8+/4+ 

Range: 2 yards 

Area of Effect: — Individual 

Prerequisite: ESP 


Dsionics 


This power only can be used against an open mind. 
With it, the user can dig deeply into a target's subcon- 
scious. If the target fails a saving throw vs. spell, then all of 
his memories and knowledge are accessible to the user— 
from memories deep below the surface to those still fresh 
in the target's mind. The information is true (or at least the 
target believes it to be true). 

A probe can be tried during melee if the user is close 
enough and the target's mind is opened. The user knows 
when a probed spellcaster is casting a spell and what the 
general effects of that spell are. The user can learn the 
answer to one question per round, though DMs can alter 
this rate. Complex questions and answers may take longer 
than a round to resolve. The PSP cost is per the target's 
level, as shown below. 


Target's Level PSP Cost 
1-5 levels or HD 8/4 
6-10 levels or HD 9/5 
11-15 levels or HD 10/5 
16-20 levels or HD 11/6 
21- levels or HD 13/7 

Dsychic Surgery 

(telepathic science) 

MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 9+/5+ 

Range: Touch 

Area of Effect: — Individual 

Prerequisite: Mindlink, 7th level 


This power allows the user to repair psionic damage. 
He can operate on himself if need be, but the power's 
MAC improves to 5. Phobias, aversions, idiocy, comas, 
seizures—all these mental ailments and more can be 
treated and cured. However, curses or magical conditions 
such as charms can't be cured by this power. Nor can the 
surgery cure possession, though it can identify such a con- 
dition and force psionic combat. Most such ailments can 
be cured in 1 turn. If the MTHACO roll fails, the problem is 
too great for the user; he can try again when he gains a 
new experience level. 

This power has two special uses. First, it can help char- 
acters unleash their wild talents. If the user performs this 
kind of operation successfully, the patient gains a +2% 
bonus to his wild talent roll. 

Second, the user can make the effect of any telepathic 
power permanent without any PSP costs. The power isn't 
bestowed upon the recipient, only the effect. This has the 
following restrictions: 1) The power must have a range 
greater than 0; 2) the surgeon must know the power and 
successfully use it on the patient; 3) the user can't do this 
type of operation to himself or another psionicist; 4) only 
one power can be made permanent per turn, and 5) if the 


IB 


MTHACO roll equals the MAC number, the procedure 
takes 2 turns. Likewise, this power can also remove a per- 
manently implanted power. The PSP cost is determined 
by the target's level, as below. 


Target's Level PSP Cost 
1-5 levels or HD 9/5 
6-10 levels or HD 10/5 
11-15 levels or HD 11/6 
16-20 levels or HD 12/6 
21+ levels or HD 14/7 

Awe 

(telepathic devotion) 

MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 4+/2+ 

Range: 0 

Area of Effect: 20 yards 

Prerequisite: Mindlink 


This power only works on an open mind. With it, the 
user can cause another character to hold him in awe. 
Characters affected by this power are mentally cowed— 
they sense the user's “awesome might" They have no 
desire to serve or befriend the user, but they won't attack 
him unless forced to do so. If possible, they'll avoid the 
user completely and take the first opportunity to escape 
his presence. The PSP cost for this power is based on the 
target's level, as shown below. 


Target's Level PSP Cost 
1-5 levels or HD 4/2 
6-10 levels or HD 5/2 
11-15 levels or HD 6/3 
16-20 levels or HD 8/4 
21+ levels or HD 9/5 

Conceal Thoughts 

(telepathic devotion) 

MAC: 10 

PSP Cost: 4/2 

Range: 0 

Area of Effect: 3 yards 

Prerequisite: None 


This defensive power protects the user against psionic or 
magical ESP, probes, mindlinks, and other powers and 
spells that read or detect thoughts. It gives the user a +2 
MAC bonus and a +2 to saving throws when defending 
against such effects. 


Chapter 9 
Target's Level PSP Cost | 


ESP 

(telepathic devotion) 
MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 6+/3+ 
Range: Unlimited 
Area of Effect: Individual 
Prerequisite: None 


This power only works on an open mind. Extrasensory 
perception (ESP) allows the user to read someone else's 
mind. The user can perceive surface or active thoughts. He 
can't use ESP to explore a target's memories or to delve 
into his subconscious. Most intelligent creatures tend to 
think in words, so language can be a barrier to understand- 
ing. Unintelligent creatures think in pictures. Magical 
thought, such as when a wizard casts a spell, is unintelligible 
to this power. However, the user can recognize such 
thoughts as part of the spellcasting process. The PSP cost is 
shown below. 


Target's Level PSP Cost 
1-5 levels or HD 6/3 
6-10 levels or HD 7/4 
11-15 levels or HD 8/4 
16-20 levels or HD 9/5 
21+ levels or HD 11/6 

Inflict Dain 

(telepathic devotion) 

MAC: 5 

PSP Cost: 3/2 

Range: Touch 

Area of Effect: — Individual 

Prerequisite: Mindlink 


"This power only can be used on an open mind. It is a 
particularly nasty form of torture, although no actual harm is 
inflicted on the target, and the power leaves no physical 
scars or marks. Only evil characters can learn this power 
freely; others find their alignments twisting toward evil if 
they learn and use inflict pain. 

If the target is an NPC who is being questioned, he is 
allowed a saving throw vs. paralyzation to withstand the 
agony. If he fails, he begs for mercy and answers questions 
as the DM sees fit. If the user finds a way to employ this 
power in combat, the target is still entitled to a saving throw. 
Success means he grits his teeth and keeps on fighting. Fail- 
ure means the pain imposes a —4 penalty to his attack rolls 
that round or disrupts and ruins spellcasting. PSP costs 
depend on the target's level. 


174 


1-5 levels or HD 
6-10 levels or HD 
11-15 levels or HD 
16-20 levels or HD 
21+ levels or HD 


3/2 
4/2 
5/5 
6/5 
8/4 


Invisibility 

(telepathic devotion) 
MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 3+/2+ 
Range: 100 yards 
Area of Effect: — Individual 
Prerequisite: Mindlink 


This power only can be used on open minds. It differs 
significantly from the spell invisibility. This is a delusion that 
affects specific minds, not an illusion that affects everyone; 
the only real change occurs in those whose minds were 
opened. Thus, the user must.open each mind he wants to 
deceive, for only to these minds will he appear invisible. He 
can see himself, and so can anyone whose mind wasn't 
opened. Only beings within 100 yards can be affected by 
this power. 

The user must make a separate MTHACO roll for each 
delusion and pay a separate PSP cost for each. A delusion is 
defined as one invisible character as perceived by one other 
being. The user can make anyone who is human size or 
smaller invisible with this power, not just himself. Note that 
this power affects vision only; observers may still be able to 
hear or smell "invisible" characters. PSP costs are as follows. 


Target's Level PSP Cost 
1-5 levels or HD 3/2 
6-10 levels or HD 4/2 
11-15 levels or HD 5/3 
16-20 levels or HD 6/3 
21+ levels or HD 8/4 

Life Detection 

(telepathic devotion) 

MAC: 7 

PSP Cost: 3/1 

Range: 100 yards 

Area of Effect: Varies 

Prerequisite: None 


This power allows the user to scan for the presence of 
living, thinking creatures within a limited area. If he is scan- 
ning at short range, he can cover a large angle. At long 
range, the angle is significantly reduced. He can scan 180 
degrees to a range of 40 yards, 90 degrees to 60 yards, or 
30 degrees to 100 yards. One round of scanning detects 


Dsionics 


humans, demihumans, humanoids, mammals, and mon- 
sters with 8 or more Hit Dice. A second round detects all 
creatures with less than 8 Hit Dice. In either case, the user 
receives an accurate count. 

The DM should make the MTHACO roll and keep it 
secret from the player. If the user doesn't detect anything, 
he won't know whether nothing's there or the power failed. 


Send Thoughts 
(telepathic devotion) 
MAC: 8 

PSP Cost: 34+/2+ 
Range: Unlimited 
Area of Effect: — Individual 
Prerequisite: None 


This power only works on an open mind, allowing the 
user to send his thoughts to another mind via one-way 
communication. He can send information or simply use the 
power to distract the target. If the target is a wizard casting a 
spell, he gets a save vs. spell. If the wizard fails his save, his 
concentration is broken and the spell fails. If the target is 
distracted while in melee combat, he receives a —2 penalty 
to all attack rolls. 


Target's Level PSP Cost 
1-5 levels or HD 3/2 
6-10 levels or HD 4/2 
11-15 levels or HD 5/3 
16-20 levels or HD 6/3 
21+ levels or HD 8/4 

Sight Link 

(telepathic devotion) 

MAC: 6 

PSP Cost: 5+ per turn/3+ 

Range: Unlimited 

Area of Effect: — Individual 

Prerequisite: Mindlink 


Only usable against open minds, this power lets the user 
tap into another's visual senses, allowing him to see what- 
ever that being sees. The user's own vision is unaffected. If 
the linked character is subjected to a gaze attack, the user 
must make an appropriate saving throw or also be affected 
by the gaze. 


Target's Level PSP Cost 
1-5 levels or HD 5/3 
6-10 levels or HD 6/5 
11-15 levels or HD 7/4 
16-20 levels or HD 8/4 
21+ levels or HD 10/5 


Jers Below is a listing of all psioni 
Dsionic Powers powes crenti in the AD&D 


game. Each has two new sta- 
Summary tistics, a MAC score and a PSP 


cost, replacing the old power score, initial cost, and mainte- 
nance cost from the original source. The number to the right 
of the slash is the cost if the MTHACO roll fails. All other 
details of the powers remain the same, unless new descrip- 
tions have been provided in this book. Powers are from The 
Complete Psionics Handbook unless noted otherwise. 


Table 84: Psionic Powers 

—— Clairsentient Sciences —— 
Power MAC PSP Cost 
Appraise 6 14/6 
Aura sight' 7 9/3 
Clairaudience' 8 5/2 
Clairvoyance' 7 5/2 
Cosmic awareness? 7 12/6 
Detection? 9 8/3 
Object reading' 7 12/6 
Precognition 8 18/10 
Psychic clone? 6 16/6 
Sensitivity to psychic impressions 8 5/3 
Spirit lore? Fi 13/5 
Subjective reality?* 8 14/7 
True sight?* 8 10/4 

— Clairsentient Devotions —— 
Power MAC PSP Cost 
All-round vision! 8 5/2 
Bone reading?* 10 15/5 
Combat mind! 6 4/2 
Danger sense! 8 3/1 
Environment* 7 5/3 
Feel light 8 5/3 
Feel moisture* 9 3/] 
Feel sound' 8 4/2 
Hear light 8 4/2 
Know course? 7 4/hour/2 
Know direction 8 1/1 
Know location! 8 8/3 
Martial trance'? 7 7/5 
Poison sense! 10 1/1 
Predestination?* 9 9/year/4 
Probability manipulation? 6 10/5 
Psionic sense’? 8 2/1 
Radial navigation 7 6/hour/3 
Retrospection? 8 120/40 
Safe path? 8 6/3 
See ethereal? 7 3/1 
See magic? 9 6/2 
See sound! 8 4/2 
Sensitivity to observation? 10 5/2 
Spirit sense 8 8/4 
Trail of destruction?“ 9 5/2 


3 Watcher's ward? 7 3/hour/1 Metamorphosis! 6/3 


4 
Weather prediction?“ 7 10/4 Nerve manipulation? 6 14/5 
Poison simulation?^ 6 16/6 
—— Psychokinetic Sciences —— Regenerate 5 8/turn/4 
Power MAC PSP Cost Shadowform' 5 5/2 
Create object'? 6 7/5 Split personality? 8 15/6 
Detonate'? 5 15/5 
Disintegrate? y 30/10 —— Psychometabolic Devotions —— 
Kinetic control? 7 8/3 Power MAC PSP Cost 
Megakinesis?* 8 20/104 Absorb disease 6 10/4 
Molecular rearrangement? 6 12/hour/6 Accelerate* 6 10/5 
Project force! 6 10/4 Adrenaline control! 6 5/2 
Suppress magic? 5 8+/4+ Alter features? 7 4/turn/2 
Telekinesis’ 8 3+/1+ Aging 5 9/5 
Telekinetic barrier” 6 12/5 Biofeedback 6 4/2 
Telekinetic flight? 8 7/5 Body control' 5 6/2 
Body equilibrium! 6 2/1 
——— Psychokinetic Devotions —— Body weaponry! 6 6/3 
Power MAC PSP Cost Cannibalize'? 7 0 
Animate object'? 7 5/2 Carapace* 8 2/1 
Animate shadow 8 4/2 Catfall 7 4/2 
Ballistic attack? 6 5/3 Cause decay 6 4/2 
Compact* 9 4/1 Cause sleep? 9 4/2 
Concentrate water?^ 6 10/3 Cell adjustment' 6 5+/3+ 
Control body? 6 8/4 Chameleon power! 7 4/1 
Control flames? 8 4/2 Chemical simulation 5 7/5 
Control light 8 6/2 Cognitive trance* 8 4/2 
Control sound' 5 3/1 Displacement 6 4/2 
Control wind’? 5 12/5 Double pain 6 7/2 
Create sound? 7 5/2 Ectoplasmic form 5 9/3 
Cyrokinesis? 10 7/5 Enhanced strength 8 varies 
Deflect? 8 4/2 Enhancement? 9 14/6 
Ghost writing? 9 5/2 Expansion 6 3/1 
Inertial barrier’? 6 6/2 Fighting trance* 9 2/1 
Levitation'? 8 5/2 Flesh armor 6 5/2 
Magnetize* 8 2+/1+ Forced symmetry* 7 12/5 
Mass manipulation?* 7 9/3 Gird? 7 2 _ cost 
Molecular agitation’ 10 7/3 Graft weapon 5 5/2 
Molecular bonding?* 8 4/2 Heightened senses' 7 3/1 
Molecular rnanipulation'? 7 6/2 Immovability 5 7/2 
Momentum theft?* 7 5+/3+ Intensify? 6 6+/3+ 
Opposite reaction?“ 7 5/2 Iron will* 10 4/2 
Return flight 7 3/1 Lend health 7 4/1 
Soften 8 3/1 Magnify? 8 varies 
Stasis field? 6 20/10 Mind over body 8 10/day/4 
Static discharge? 7 5/2 Pheromone discharge* 8 2/1 
Photosynthesis* 7 3/tum/1 
—— — Psychometabolic Sciences —— Prolong? 5 3/1 
Power MAC PSP Cost Reduction 6 varies 
Animal affinity' 5 7/5 Rigidity?* 6 5/3 
Complete healing' 7 25/5 Share strength 5 3/1 
Death field 3 35/15 Spider touch? 8 3/1 
Elemental composition? 5 8/3 Splice? varies varies 
Energy containment 6 9/3 Strength of the land?^ 6 4/2 
Life draining 6 6/3 Suspend animation 6 12/5 


176 


Dsitonics 


——— Psychoportive Sciences —— 
Power MAC PSP Cost 
Banishment”? 8 15/6 
Planar transposition? 6 varies 
Probability travel 8 11/hour/5 
Summon planar creature'? 6 40/20 or 80/40 
Summon planar energy?* 8 30/10 
Teleport' 9 10+/5+ 
Teleport other'? 8 10+/5+ 
Time travel? varies 30+/hour/15+ 
Wormhole? 7 12+/6+ 

—— Psychoportive Devotions —— 
Power MAC PSP Cost 
Astral projection’ 8 3/1 
Blink'?5 9 4/2 
Dimensional door’ 7 3/1 
Dimensional screen? 6 7/5 
Dimension blade?5 7 5/2 
Dimension walk' 8 5/2 
Dream travel 7 1/25miles/1 
Duodimension* 6 6/3 
Ethereal traveler* 8 5/2 
Phase! 10 6/2 
Phase object?? 9 6+/3+ 
Pocket dimension* 10 6/turn/3 
Shadow walk? 7 9+/4+ 
Spatial distortion? 6 54/5 
Summon object?? 6 304/124 
Teleport lock? 8 4/2 
Teleport object?“ 7 25+/10+ 
Teleport trigger'? 8 2/hour/1 
Time dilation?5 8 varies 
Time duplicate?5 8 22/11 
Time shift? 8 16/6 
Time/space anchor 8 3/1 
Wrench 8 10/5 

——— Telepathic Sciences —— 

Power MAC PSP Cost 
Aura alteration? 8 10/5 
Domination'? 8 6+/3+ 
Empower? 4 varies 
Fate link? 5 6/turn/3 
Hallucination?* 7 varies 
Mass domination? 6 varies 
Mindflame?+ 7 30/15 
Mindlink' 8 7+/3+ 
Mindwipe? 5 8/3 
Probe'? 8 84/44 
Psychic surgery! 8 9+/5+ 
Superior invisibility 6 6/rd/target 
Switch personality? 5 40/15 
Ultrablast? 5 75/25 


—— Telepathic Devotions —— 
Power MAC PSP Cost 
Acceptance* 8 4/tum/2 
Alignment stabilization* 9 11/day/4 
Amnesia?? 9 varies 
Attraction? 7 8/3 
Aversion? 7 8/3 
Awe"? 6 4+/2+ 
Beast mastery?* 8 6+/day/3+ 
Conceal thoughts! 10 4/2 
Convergence? 10 8/3 
Daydream? 10 4/2 
Empathy 10 3/1 
ESP! 6 6+/3+ 
False sensory input? 6 5/2 
Focus forgiveness* 8 4/hour/2 
Hivemind* 9 2/1 
Identity penetration 8 6/3 
Impossible task* 9 6/day/3 
Incarnation awareness 7 12/5 
Inflict pain'? 5 3+/2+ 
Insect mind^ 7 3/1 
Invincible foes? 8 6/2 
Invisibility"? 6 3+/2+ 
Life detection’ 7 3/1 
Mind bar i 5/2 
Mysterious traveler* 9 2/1 
Phobia amplification? 9 5/2 
Plant mind? 6 4/2 
Post-hypnotic suggestion? 7 3/HD/3 
Psionic inflation? 8 7/3 
Psionic residue‘ 8 15/5 
Psionic vampirism? 8 varies 
Psychic blade? 6 5+/2+ 
Psychic drain? 7 14/6 
Psychic impersonation? 10 5/hour/2 
Psychic messenger 5 4/2 
Receptacle? 8 0 
Reptile mind^ 7 2/1 
Repugnance? 8 8/5 
Send thoughts! 8 3+/2+ 
Sensory suppression?* 7 varies 
Sight link! 6 5+/turn/3+ 
Sound link? 6 5+/turn/2+ 
Suppress fear? 10 5/2 
Synaptic static? 6 11/5 
Taste link? 6 5+/tum/2+ 
Telempathic projection? 9 5/2 
True worship* 10 5/2 
Truthear? 10 3/1 
Notes 
' Revised power described in this book. 


? Power requires a prerequisite to use. 
* Power described in The Will and the Way (TSR 2431). 
* Power described in Dragon Kings (TSR 2408). 


” Table 2: Stamina 
Stamina Score 


Table 3: Muscle 


Muscle 
Score 
3 
4-5 
6-7 
8-9 
10-11 
12-13 
14-15 
16 
17 
18 
18/01-50 
18/51-75 
18/76-90 
18/91-99 
18/00 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 


Weight Allowance 
5 
10 
20 
35 
40 
45 
55 
70 
85 
110 
135 
160 
185 
235 
335 
485 
535 
635 
785 
935 
1,235 
1,535 
Max. 
Press 
10 2 
25 3 
55 4 
90 5 
115 6 
140 7 
170 8 
195 9 
220 10 
255 11 
280 12 
305 13 
330 14 
380 15(3) 
480 16(6) 
640 16(8) 
700  17(10) 
810 — 17(12) 
970  18(14) 
1130  18(16) 
1,440  19(17) 
1,535  19(18) 


Open Bend Bars 
Doors Lift Gates 


0% 
0 
0 

1% 


Table 4: Aim 
Aim 
Score 


Missile 
Adj. 
=3 
-2 
-] 


oOOoOOooOoooo 


+1 
+2 
+2 
+3 
+3 
+4 
+4 
+4 
+5 
+5 


Table 5 Balance 


Balance 
Score 
3 


Reac. 


Pick 
Pockets 
-30% 
-25 
-25 
—20 
-20 
-15 
-15 


N e 1 1 Ti 


ams 


í 1 | 1 1 
C'amniled Ianmles 
d C) i n » 1 || LL Si AJ a D AM (CJ 


Table 6: Health Table 8: Reason 
Health System Poison Reason Spell Max. # Spell 
Score Shock Save Score Level Spells Immunity 
3 35% 0 3-8 = vot a 
4 40% 0 9 4th 6 - 
5 45% 0 10-11 5th 7 - 
6 50% 0 12 6th 7 — 
7 55% 0 13 6th 9 -— 
8 60% 0 14 7th 9 — 
9 65% 0 15 7th n - 
10 70% 0 16 8th n - 
n 75% 0 7 8th 14 -= 
12 80% 0 18 9th 18 — 
13 85% 0 19 9th All ] 
14 88% 0 20 9th All 2 
15 90% 0 21 9th All 3 
16 95% 0 22 9th All 4 
17 97% 0 23 9th All 5 
18 99% 0 24 9th All 6 
19 99% +1 25 9th All y 
20 99% +1 
21 99% +2 
22 99% +2 Table 9: Knowledge 
23 99% +3 Knowledge Bonus # % Learn 
24 99% +3 Score Profs. Spell 
25 100% +4 3-8 1 -— 
9 2 35% 
10 2 40% 
Table 7: Fitness 11 2 45% 
Fitness Hit Point Resurrection 12 3 50% 
Score Adjustment Chance 13 3 55% 
3 -2 40% 14 a 60% 
4 -| 45% 15 4 65% 
-1 50% 16 5 70% 
-1 55% 17 6 75% 
60% 18 7 85% 
65% 19 8 95% 
70% 20 9 96% 
75% 21 10 97% 
80% 22 n 98% 
85% 25 12 99% 
90% 24 15 100% 
92% 25 20 100% 


5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
1 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 


0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
+1 
+2 
+2(+3) 
+2(+4) 
+2(+5) 
+2(+5)* 
+2(+6)"* 100% 
+2(+6)* 
+2(+6)"* 
+2(+7)*** 
+2(+7)** 


Com 


Point Allotments for Starting Characters by Race 


Race Character Points 
Dwarves 45 

Elves 45 
Gnomes 45 
Halflings 35 
Half-elves 25 
Half-orcs 15 
Half-ogres 15 
Humans 15 

Racial Abilities 


Racial abilities cost 5 to 15 character points each, or they 
can be purchased for varying amounts as character pack- 
ages. 


piled Tables 
—_____1_______@ 


Table 1: Background Events 
T 


d20 


Event 

Accused of a crime 
Apprenticeship 

Enslaved 

Exiled 

Failed business venture 
Fell in love 

Fled a disaster 

Found or stole a valuable item 
Homeless 

Ideological differences 
Joined the circus 
Kidnapped 

Killed someone 

Made a powerful enemy 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 


Orphaned 
Ran away from home 
Point Allotments for Starting Characters by Class Reformed 
Class Character Points Touched by magic 
Fighter 15 Went to sea 
Paladin 60 Witnessed a crime 
Ranger 60 
Thieves 80 
Bards 70 Table 27: Thieving Skill Base Scores 
Clerics 125 Skill Base Chance 
Druid 100 Pick Pockets 15% 
Wizard 40 Open Locks 10% 
Specialist Wizard 30 Find/Remove Traps 5% 
Move Silently 10% 
All class abilities cost 5 to 15 character points. Hide in Shadows 5% 
Detect Noise 15% 
Climb Walls 60% 
Nonplayer Character Point Allotment Read Languages 0% 
Class Character Points Detect magic 5% 
Apprentice 10 Detect illusion 10% 
Skilled 15 Bribe 5% 
Master 20 Tunneling 15% 
Escape bonds 10% 
Bonus Points 


Bonus proficiency points for a high Intelligence can be 
spent on Intelligence-based nonweapon proficiencies. 
Fighters can spend the points on weapon proficiencies or 
on Intelligence-based nonweapon proficiencies. 


181 


Appendix 


Ability Dwarf Elf Gnome Half-elf  Half-orc ^ Half-ogre Halfling Human 
Str 8/18 3/18 6/18 3/18 6/18 14/18 7/18* 3/18 
Dex 3/17 6/18 3/18 6/18 3/17 3/12 7/18 3/18 
Con 11/18 7/18 8/18 6/18 8/18 14/18 10/18 3/18 
Int 3/18 8/18 6/18 4/18 3/17 3/12 6/18 3/18 
Wis 3/18 3/18 3/18 3/18 3/14 3/12 3/17 3/18 
Cha 3/17 8/18 3/18 3/18 3/12 3/8 3/18 3/18 


*Halfling fighters cannot possess exceptional Strength scores. 


Table 15: Racial Adjustments Table 40: Social Ranks Table 

Race Adjustments 2d6 roll Social rank 

Dwarf +1 Con, -1 Cha 2-3 Lower class 

Elf +1 Dex, —1 Con 4—7 Lower middle class 
Gnome +1 Int, 21 Wis 8-10 Upper middle class 
Half-elf None 11-12 Upper class 
Half-orc +1 Str, +1 Con, —2 Cha 

Half-ogre +1 Str, +1 Con, —1 Int, -1 Cha 

Halfling +1 Dex, -1 Str 

Human None 


Table 16: Racial Level Limits 


Class Dwarf EIf Gnome Half-elf ^ Half-orc ^ Half-ogr Halfling Human 
Bard - = - U te <i - U 
Cleric 10 12 9 14 4 4 8 U 
Druid - = - 9 = = = u 
Fighter 15 12 11 14 10 12 9 U 
Illusionist - - 15 — -= — = U 
Wizard - 15 ~ 12 — — - U 
Paladin e -* Ha = ae = - u 
Ranger - 15 - 16 - - - U 
Thief 12 12 13 12 8 ~ 15 U 


U This symbol represents unlimited class advancement for characters of those races this. 
— A member of this race cannot choose this class. 


Table 41: Character Kit Table 
Roll percentile dice to determine an adventurer's kit. 


01-03 Acrobat 33-35 Jester 66-68 Savage 

04-06 Amazon 36-39 Mariner 69-72 Scholar 

07-09 Animal Master 40-42 Merchant 73-76 Scout 

10-12 Assassin 43-45 Mystic 77-79 Sharpshooter 
13-16 Barbarian 46-48 Noble 80-83 Soldier 

17-19 Beggar 49-51 Outlaw 84-86 Smuggler 
20-22 Cavalier 52-55 Peasant Hero 87-89 Spy 

23-25 Diplomat 56-58 Pirate 90-93 Swashbuckler 
26-29 Explorer 59-62 Pugilist 94—96 Thug 

30-32 Gladiator 63-65 Rider 97—00 Weapon Master 


182 


Compiled Tables 


Table 28: Thieving Skill Racial Adjustments 
Skill — art Elf E Half-elf Half-orc Half-ogre 


yn 
Bol. 


Escape bonds - - - - - +5 +10 - 
Table 29: Thieving Skill Dexterity Adjustments 


<a a ae I. E. E SS ae 


Move Silently -20% -15% -10% -5%  — -— 459b +10% +15% +20% +25% +30% 
Hidein Shadows -10% -5%  —  -— — — 459 +10% +15% +20% +25% +30% 
Climb Walls _-10% -10% -5% +5% +10% +15% _ +20% +25% 


Table 30: Thieving Skill Armor Adjustments 
Skill — — à s Elven Chain Padded or Studded Leather 


4 4 


MoveSienty ^ — 40e w A 
Hide in Shadows +5% -10% -20% 
Detect Noise E 50 = -10% 


Table 31: Bard Scroll Use 

Bard Level % Chance 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 


Io all a ala 


— 


95% 


183 


Table 45: Nonweapon Proficiency Groups 


GENERAL 
Proficiency 


Agriculture 
Animal Handling 
Animal Training 
Blacksmithing 
Boat Piloting 


Dancing 
Deep Diving 
Engineering 


Etiquette 
Fire-building 
Fishing 


Gaming 

Heraldry 

Leather working 
Mining 

Modern languages 
Musical Instrument 
Navigation 
Orienteering 
Painting 


Sculpting 
Singing 
Seamanship 


Weather Knowledge 
Weaving 


PRIEST 
Proficiency 
Ancient History 
Ancient Languages 
Astrology 
Healing 
Herbalism 

Local History 
Reading/Writing 
Religion 
Spellcraft 


Q 
uu — ua — uhi a a aaa —2 


a 
— o E 


Initial Rating 


ONNU co Ur ur 0 O0 Ul - MO MEO Ur - 0 UO 0 Oo 01 01 O SJ SEE OO O1 OY UT dd 


Initial Rating 


"oo ocoouuuo 


184 


Appendix 


Wisdom/Will 

Wisdom/Willpower, Chari i 
Strength/Muscle, TE EE E eee 
Strength/Muscle, Intelligence/Reason 
MIU SL Said 
Strength/Stamina, Intelligence/Knowledge 
Deneriy/Aim, Intelligence/Knowledge 
ntelligence/Reason 


e EET Charisma/Appearance 
Dexterity/Balance, Constitution/Health 
Intelligence/Reason, Wisdom/Intuition 
Charisma/, 
Wisdom/Intuition, Inteligence/Reason 
Wisdom/Intuition, Intelli 
Wisdom/Intuition, Intelligence/Knowledge 
Intelligence/Knowledge 
Intelligence/Knowledge, Dexterity/Aim 

i tuition, Stren ina 


| 
Charisma/Leadership 
Intelligence/Knowledge, Wisdom/Intuition 
Intelligence/Knowledge, Wisdom/Intuition 
Dexterity/Aim, Wisdom/Intuition 
Dexterity/Aim 
Wisdom/Willpower, Dexterity/Balance 
Wisdom/Willpower, Dexterity/Balance 
Dexterity/Aim, Wisdom/Intuition 
Dexterity/Aim, Wisdom/Intuition 
Charisma/Leadership 
Wisdom/Intuition, Dexterity/Balance 
Strength/Stamina, Wisdom/Intuition 
/Stamina 


Strength 

Dexterity/Aim, Intelligence/Reason 
Wisdom/Intuition 
Intelligence/Reason, Dexterity/Aim 


Ability 

Wisdom/intuition, Intelligence/Kn 
Intelligence/Knowledge ipu: 
Wisdom/Intuition, Intelligence 
Wisdom/Intuition, Charisma/Leadership 
Intelligence/Knowledge, Wisdom/Intuition 
Intelligence/Knowledge, Charisma/Appearance 
Intelligence/Knowledge 

Wisdom/Intuition 

Intelligence/Reason 


ROGUE 
Proficiency 
pio shite 


Blinc fighting 
Cryptography 
Disguise 
Forgery 


Jumping 

Local History 
Reading Lips 
Set Snares 
Tightrope Walking 
Throwing 
Tumbling 
Ventriloquism 
WARRIOR 
Proficiency 
Animal Lore 
Armorer 
Blind-fighting 
Bowyer/Fletcher 
Charioteering 
Gaming 
Endurance 
Hunting 
Mountaineering 
Running 

Set Snares 
Survival 

Tracki 
Weaponsmithing 


WIZARD 
Proficiency 
Ancient History 


Astronomy 
Cryptography 
Gem Cutting 
Herbalism 
Reading/Writing 
Religion 
Spellcraft 


*Cost in character points 


aii AG. ATU annr 
Table 45: Nonweap« L 


D 82.2 as 
rroricenc 


O 
-^ d wad è ee oS bia- i 


— - ed [i 


y Group 


s (continued) 


Initial Rating 
6 


8 
N/A 


U'-«-ouroc-oo0 gu uo 


Initial Rating 


wocoouswoooSus 


Initial Rating 


NODOOAODOANUUD 


Ability 

Intelligence/Reason, Wisdom/Intuition 
Intelligence/Reason, Wisdom/Intuition 
Wisdom/Intuition, Charisma/Leadership 
Dexterity/Aim, Wisdom/Willpower 


sassy 


Dexterity/Ai 

Strength Muse Dexterity/Balance 
Intelligence/Knowledge, Charisma/Appearance 
Intelligence/Knowledge, Wisdom/Intuition 
Dexterity/Aim, Wisdom /Intuition 


Intelligence/Knowledge, Dexterity/Aim 
Dexterity/Balance, Wisdom/Willpower 
Charisma/Leadership 

N/A 


, Wisdom/Willpower 
Strength/Stamina, Constitution/Fitness 
Dexterity/Aim, Wisdom/Intuition 
Intelligence/Knowledge, Wisdom/Willpower 


Wisdom/Intuition 
Intelligence/Knowledge, Dexterity/Aim 


Ability 

Wisdom/Intuition, Intelligence/Knowledge 
Intelligence/Knowledge 
Wisdom/Intuition, Intelligence/Knowledge 
Intelligence/Knowledge 
Intelligence/Reason, Wisdom/Intuition 
et ad 


ee oe kein 


Intelligence/Reason 


Appendix 


Trait . .. Character Point Cost 


Impersonation 


ERES 


Internal Compass | 
Keen eyesight 


Ur Ui Uu 


Table 44: Ability Modifiers to Proficiency Scores 


Ability/ Proficiency 
Subability Modifier 
3 -5 
4 -4 
5 -3 
6 -2 
7 -1 
8-13 0 
14 +1 
15 +2 
16 +3 
17 +4 
18+ +5 
Weapon Proficiency Slots 
Class Character Point Cost per Slot 
Warrior 2 
Rogue 3 
Priest 3 
Wizard 3 


z Table 46: Traits Table 47: Disadvantages 
— 


Character Point Bonus 


Dose Uo i: 


Clumsy 
Colorblind 


4 
3 
8 


Greed 
Irritating Personality 


PUTET TI 


NONG 
l 


Table 48: Initial Character Point Expenditures for 
Weapon Proficiencies 


Class — .  .. Maximum Minimum 


Thief 9 
Bard 6 x 
6 E 


Purchasing Weapon Proficiencies Out of Class 


Character Class Weapon Character Point 
Class is From Cost 
Rogue Warrior 4 

Priest Warrior 4 

Wizard Rogue 5 

Wizard Warrior 6 


Warriors can purchase a proficiency in any single weapon at 
a cost of 2 character points. 


Compiled Tables 


Class Nonproficiency Familiarity 
Warrior -2 -] 
Wizard -5 -3 
Priest -3 -2 
Rogue -3 -2 
Psionicist -4 -2 
Nonclassed NPC -4 -2 


Table 52: Fighting Styles by Character Class 


Fighting Style Eligible Classes 
One-handed Weapon All 

Weapon and Shield Warriors, Priests 
Two-handed Weapon Warriors, Priests, Mages 
Two Weapon Warriors, Rogues 
Missile Warriors, Rogues 
Horse Archer Warriors, Rogues 
Thrown Weapon All 

Special* Varies 


* This category includes styles specific to certain weapons 
and/or cultural backgrounds. Examples include the net 
and trident style used by some Roman gladiators, or the 
twin sais of a skilled ninja. 


Two Weapon Style 

The proficiency slot spent to specialize in this difficult 
style requires 1 additional character point when it is first 
acquired—except for rangers, who can buy it for the same 
cost as any other fighting style specialization. 


Gaining Proficiencies in Weapon Groups, 
Warriors Only 


Character Point Cost Group 

4 tight 

6 broad 
Designating a Weapon of Choice 
Character Class Character Point Cost 
Warrior 2 
Rogues 2 
Priests 2 
Wizards 4 


187 


Minimum 
Level 


Character 
Character Class Point Cost 
Fighter 
Multi-class Fighter 
Ranger/Paladin 
Priest 
Rogues 
Wizards 


OPAAN 
- OY Ur UON — 


Gaining Weapon Expertise 
Character Class Character Point Cost* 
Warrior 
Rogues 
Priests 

Wizards 


Un Ul 


* The character point cost is reduced by 1 if the character 
elects to gain an expertise with his weapon of choice. 


Gaining Weapon Mastery 

Character Minimum 
Character Class Point Cost Level 
Fighter 4 5 
Multi-class Fighter 8 6 
Ranger/Paladin 8 7 
Buying Character Points 


Characters can buy character points with wealth. Exchang- 
ing one-third of a character's money nets 1 point. At the 
DM's discretion, up to 3 point can be gained this way. 


Gaining Character Points 

Each time a character gains an experience level, he also 
gains 3 to 5 character points—at the DM's discretion—that 
can be used on weapon and nonweapon proficiencies or 
saved for use during the game. 


A 

PABMSKOCIN coe canis accuse sere stelnnanesist? 41 
Abilities, dwarven ......... sees 25 
HTESIS A N RIP RERENTIO Pets S MR 29 
BhOITWs cose O O dec 31 
d ED ARES EAST IS TREES. 36 
Halls A eeieeriepes ew Eodem 34 
MS ES LORD GORIDEEERALOTIDES EIE 34 
WARING eere OA AO 33 
relevant to proficiencies ............544 87 
Abilities and restrictions .............++. 37 
re. MORE A E E AE E S ROO 42 
Abilities vs. thief skills ..............0.000. 21 
Ability adjustments, racial... ............5 23 
ADV CHEEKS ...oeuevorveerenernrere eus 21 

Ability modifiers 
to proficiency scores... 89 
Ability point generation . .......... sese 8 
Ability score adjustments, racial ........... 38 
Ability score requirements ............+.. 37 
Ability score systems ...........2...20205 7 
s iN Rieter Cen OCDE one DIGQERAT 8 
Apt SOMES - ue erre cis rr rience n 
MERRIN zoo coe ioon e TT OQ COE 22 
M E ERARA OA AAN A vai 22 
Access ak ae o. E 60, 62 
Access to spheres ...............--- 57-58 
Accused of a crime a saisine asmia 9 
Acquiring character traits ............0.0. 88 
PETC des pine te presi 66 
Active sense of smell ..............0005 34 
PRE TSSIB 1. sisicisicceie naw siete ESI euh 34 
Adrenaline control .... 0... e ee ec es 166 
ALNE s tvier zr RET yer xS 94 
A UTERE OSTT S TOTIO CERO CERNIT 14, 20 
Atri: DONIS c cesceness i coxa) Coss 29, 33 
DT EXSISTERE 41 
Hi S REOT IIO TEE 138 
S RARE E ND NA 104 
Alignment, psionicists |... 153 
All-round vision ......0.0 00.5 00ee eae 159 
Aleniles. Gswiss a eraa E 9, 109 
PME ETETA S EES 104 
Aet Io0dS E vcons 54 
Alternate subability method .............. 19 
ANGI AAN AAAA T YT UST EE: 66 
PEACOAT LLLA DPI ER 106 
ATmDhIDIQUS «.. sic o10)a)s 02059 nere E 37 
Ancent RIIUy consseessseevaca tena 95 
Ancient languages ..........-.......+-4 95 
Ancient settings equipment ............. 126 
Animal affinity ...............ceceeeeee 164 
Animal empathy ..........00s00eeees 106 
Animal friendship ................... 31,54 
Animal HANGING Juno erreur acs 95 
ARKOBLIGBE 16s eese ramen net EROR 95 
Annal MOSES, ascsrrrree rrr xr iE 67 
Animal training ...........0. aia ed 95 
Animate object ........... eee een 162 
SLE TRU TOC UT iE Re 38 
Prio ei TOT E E a biolureielojece seis 19-20 
ARNIS IG A IO SO A REAA 95 
Pa A AANE TEE OT 63 
E AA E P ANE 10 
E N n E E T, 26 
Armor adjustments, thieving skills ......... 54 
Armor proficiency aa era iaa eiia 115 


Index 


OA HONE EO AEE CO ere meee 131 Characters, classes T 46 
Armored wizard ........ esee 61-62 ba "V E A IT D S DUELTE 8 
A LSI-ASHERECEEEERE CCS EPOD T. 95 disadvantages, selecting..............4 89 
MUSIC ADS e ER e REIR alanine’ 106 S eS SOAS T c E 9 
s ec XCTI L RIOOLIGA 67 POCO OT DO IE IE 64 
Astral projection... 170 Character points ..............0.00s0d 6, 23 
EEFE EE Ua MA RR E Ei 95 and proficiencies ....................87 
aE P MO COL MOC Eo CREA DE 96 T RR TETTAATTEET T D E T 120 
Attack adjustment ........ 0.0660 cece eens 13 DEOR CORE. eire ce mcn as 87 
AMack BONUS <iisccaccncnesccesuiua 33-34, 36 weapon proficiencies ..............4. 113 
Attack modes 2... 2.0.06... .00005 143, 146 acquisition OE ssassn einai 88 
Attack penalties, nonproficiency ......... 114 Charge ati veevere reero Ao VET SAM 37 
inched lack rc ce a ean EI 38 CHEAGIERIAE occas coves or eere AS 96 
Attacks by level, warriors .............56% 47 CHEFS: cre coeecsk ker s ne322791 9X3 3134. 18 
Aura Soho PAAR ANIA PAIR ADE: 158 appearance LEPNE TEVOET. 19, 21 
Automatic proficiency failure ............. 88 rE EEIT cto EOT 19-20 
Automatic spells ESE 61-62 REL E EAE yas 123 
Automatic SUCCESS 22... cece eee ence el 92 Charm resistance... 55 
I. CEST YS CERIS ACER EIN OOY 173 Choosing proficiencies .......... sisi 87 
ME Dons Tes cepe eie esi In mE CS 25 COR OF DOWER S v nra ln inet ee 49 
CIEETIOS. P Luck cese See Apes SOMME 158 
B Clairsentient powers ...... 2... .0.0ee008 158 
CBU anCe is Sallis cose e 3/0 cloning 158 
Background events ...........6eeeeee rene 9 Class level limits, humanoid 
aan e s core S L T 125 or monstrous characters ............4. 39 
RACKS o MEET LEECO taser east 52 CASES onoo exa ES eia oer EKNE a 46 
Bad tempered ........0. 00. .0ec cess 109 Glaüstrophobia. 52540 12 eee aaaau cata 39 
BENE Ls etsy coe stre  NSINSIPR 14, 20 CK EL eov eese TENES TRO 57 
o UT ss cae mes ei arn A N 29, 33, 36 CORE: SEnSB 6,0: rere mee rtm 106 
Banishment. «c vexcoe ss ee eetenore a 168 Climb Walls voee evo enn worn oaa 15, 52 
rar 1 LPEPIITIDA TT DTEP ESIPYSCTEISEAS DOCE, 68 COMING BATIBORT ER SG TET YT CET CT 50 
Bald MEAE EPES S eusiceven 54 Close to the earth .............. see eee 26 
Base movemerit «1er ree rns 124 Clasaid FANGS .. v.e er rr hr 143, 149 
Base scores, bard skills.........-.....055 54 Gutsy. E E L R A eee viae 9, 109 
fhuef SH E EOE E ee enira es 53 CODDMIG IA A ACET 97 
e AT EEE TEE. 68 Cold peste oss oer 29, 34, 58 
Bait Bouches coo cerces emere err RERO 125 COlOI DAD R sce emere rrr samen 9, 109 
Bend bars/lift gates .... 2.0.0... - 20.0005 14 Combat, psionic ......20seeceunecesese 145 
Better balance ..............0e0eecsueee 25 Combat bonus ..........0.....00044 61-62 
Blacksmithitg inc eere se Ter Usern Ue sd 96 Gombst mind... cc vr cis isvee rtr 159 
BN ores reed RAF C ENSE 96 Combat sequence, psionic ............. 146 
BWR oo saae Ate AA DOO Toric 170 Common magical items .............0. 135 
Body ooftitol. E OA A 166 Communicate with creatures ............. 58 
Body equilibrium ............ isses 166 COMPANIGA Soave cose sies wes AT 29 
BHO WPSDONUC. a on cis correre onead 167 Complete EDIE .—...—. cvi ETT. 165 
Bonus proficiencies ..............s. 17, 88 Compulsive honesty ...........000000- 109 
Bonus spells siisii s 17, 58, 62 Conceal thoughts ............. 0000000. 173 
BOW DONUS: penisen caerra .29, 34, 50 Confer water breathing ................4 29 
Bowyer/fietcher- .......... OO e 96 CODD Leere pnr E ETEYRR REVUES 15 
BIAME. enoseneer esens e xs ener 25, 96 UU EESTI 16, 20 
LU E STER A A EA ET 52 liealth: i eror TEVE 16, 20 
Broad groups, weapons ................ 113 Constitution/health bonus .............. 326 
Bronze age equipment ................ 126 ar PISTOLS PO EAO 145, 155 
Up UNI rere cor ED ERID 109 COUno WR. ccna nxn esas ot eer 162 
B A «elesieisv A O ie v Med 41 Cont SOHNE soe eb iaaitewcaw a eee 163 
Building a fighter ..........2.2.220..0..4 47 Contiol wind... e eere er reu 163 
T qug A NE RC 125 Qu oo AR A 97 
BOUE e nip tev ore clejasipe nowy SCC sled 41 Counter effects of song ..........0.00eee 55 
Buying character points .........-..0005 120 COWNOKB v: iere oak E ner vd EE 109 
Create magical pipes .................. 38 
C CIE OUP EE ETO N A 161 
Creating new kits. E a eeeecend 85 
Campaign considerations ...............4 87 Crossbow bonus ..........0..0..0ees eee 26 
Cannibalge 508.6% Se cco ss ec 167 Crusader equipment ..............2.4. 127 
Campenity 35:2: voci Er erc UI 96 MEEN ARR AERO OR 97 
Casting reduction ................ 57, 61-62 CUE a eoe raara er ETNE EIS 49 
CENE. T E r nck bis wie’ ace 69 
Cell adjustment ............-...-22005 167 
COMA IAS REIP TREE TERETES Y TITIO. 4) 


D 
Dagger ODON O L a 
Damage adjustment ANETO E 
Damage bonus oss sscan 
L9 o AR sie nie. A EAE 
Danget SENSE oora a ipi s aaa 
Dark Ad equipment ......... " 
Dok ees... reecverx tr rne 
Darkness, MN mage 
DEn DOMIS ACID ASAVARPUYANQY Y VARIANT 
ro uM 
DéeD QNInB Lecce nes tE ex extr ead 
Deep. OWMNVES s ss ocv eve xyercer nne rua 
Deep GNOMES sis veeeev ese rawvs s ves 
DP a a Locum vue EOT TY 
Defense DONS AO N O or Ys 
Defense modes, psionic 
Defensive adjustment ...............004 
DEFENSIVE bonus. ....- esser esas 
SOGOU) votre aris E ES EET PERS S0 0s 
Demiplane of shadow ................. 
Denseskn 1:4 oco rr eres 
oou BE REGTEUOOOG  COGUURPCCE 
[o ed eR ESTO ERSTE 
Detect MAGIC... vvicineec nen 
Detect new construction 
pees cc ERO ANAL ARINC 
DEINUEDOROINL deer RRERAEDESS S Race dS 
Detect secret doors ..........ssessue 
Detect sliding or shifting walls ............ 38 
Detect sloping passages ...........-.... 38 
Deétectundeld [esos eo rerL reet her AR 57 
Dein esser ECECOTE Et ETT AT 49 
Determine age ............ eee 26 
Determine stability ........02..02.0.00.. 26 
Det | ESO OCORD CIRO DICED TOU 161 
OERO grrr cig coisas ERNECHRTS 14, 20 
PRONG cececes eene cna rente 15, 20 
muscle. 2. cceeies xv reena cesses 13 
Dimension: Walk 55s ie- rre o ee 171 
Dimensional door....u creer S 170 
DIDIOTMU eere errERerS IX n 71 
Disadvantage descriptions .............. 109 
Disadvantages Si Sis sri ero b aio cs ena Rar aos 9 
moderate/severe .......... 0. cece eee 93 
GITE eese ccr pORE m ne Seite 94 
SOMONE cial 6eeeine A tm io nm o 89 
UL AROA ESA TENIS ANN TET 93 
Disciplines, psionic ............... 143, 154 
DEDISSE corner certnm» cere nee ees don 98 
Dodge missiles ...........0ceeeeeeeeees 38 
DOr'inatióri i522 zv. rea ra qu «ARA 172 
Qoubie-isintind oo os ri cass wegen 106 
als Mee EET 58 
Dual-class psionicists ............2...4. 153 
Düabciass PCS: coim caasa afa la cie ed 63 
Dwarven abilities ............. Lus. 25 
Dwarven equipment ......ssssssssssss 134 
DWBIVES. eere neret oai 23 
GOOD ORIGO IU SUTEOU SERE ERE E ENTE 23 
V CERE SSE BOOS CE ORCUTT 25 
WESCE EIE EO US 25 
TODO eeri eonenn eise UOS Keren te 25 
E 
RESP a esieea Ws wei resis tetas T N 174 
Ensily distracted. iscsi creer 39 
Effect OF Uit 1:52:02 04/24 4/3 Vals d.d 89 


Ead Whi v eret I EEUU 146 
Elemental spell bonus ........... sss 58 
Elven abilities ........... 00... cece eee .29 
Elven equipment ............0...0005. 134 
ET Pe Cee Te UE A 26 
PMI CERO sin le visto ste CCOUO OBERE 27 
C LL OOA TAS ERE UTI COE 28 
CO EET EZ TETTE SAP EST EY EYE 28 
DIL Ee Renae er es are eee 28 
SYNE (WOGQ) «(0.05 cscs terere O 29 
n o D voiceed Vena dies vikrz ee nas et 106 
Empathy with animals ..............000. 50 
Encumbrance, and movement .......... 124 
IDOL oT BAPESSENSUSTP CEU EPINSE 116 
T PRAE TTA n acie rebeees vex 125 
simplitied He 5.4205 Emna S ES 124, 126 
EEA ESN SANO STAAN EAN 98 
LA E O N Oa 98 
Engineering bonus ............-..0..05. 31 
Enslaved: Sse saws eee rre erro rre 10 
Entrepreneurism E sosro nrin Aani 123 
EOUIDIDETE EIS A TA ST 120, 126 
aa ot EO O OTT 132 
Escaping DONOS iere ever t erro 52 
Etiquette caus ODORE Y PIOS EY XO 98 
Ente GENTS. v5.0.5 eeeaicamoresee etg eise 26 
Exceeding level limits .........--+e0se00- 23 
ED cocer esa rrr eer xexSR 10 
ONCE BONUS «suus deer 36 
Experience levels, priests ................ 56 
TORING EEEE TNI LESSE ILIO II XI 51 
WAITING eea aaao een key RECCOCO S 47 
WENdS 1 cocoa ue ertr rema Rd 60 
Biperlénce DOINS- osse opine seit yAn 46 
DIG ANE ERSO tint 26 
Expert hesler i... cese rre 57 
Expertise, weapon ................ 112, 118 
DIDIOIUF 65.6 csi econ rer Ser ert gU 71 
pend QUON oreet rus 61-62 
F 
Failed business venture ................. 10 
FORNU MOUE -—. oreo, eve eres cix si sin 49 
Familiarity, weapon ....... see 114 
FeriatiaStn i.e re neas e ver i on si es dia 110 
PESE OR LE TECEE E TAE 106 
FONA a aane a E ALDOTIDOD CODI 13 
AEOS eneo rran are in iea a 38 
Feel’ SOUND 5. eos leseersevie edlen ees 160 
FOR WEE CI Lo dora os CEPR Se S BIET 10 
Ua RD E E 47 
Fighting style specialization ............. 116 
Find and remove wilderness traps ........ 50 
Find/remoie 08057..ceererrenrees eher 52 
Hre-Dulldig 3er errrr rre ne 98 
Fire/electrical resistance ..............0.. 59 
Saad. 1) PEETA A RTT RON ESE 98 
FUSES Lc desee earam mes Sessions 16, 20 
Hines BONUS Ges A AD A A 34, 36 
Fled 8 disaster... errem rers 10 
EET TTE EO HOSTS I EY EN. 41 
FOllOWEIS. »oorove x qn Yxvv A 47, 50, 52, 57 
cod SAL S EEEa rE E aT EEA 30 
Forest movement ........ eere rre 31 
SI ERREUR EXTA UY VIDISSE 98 
Found or stole a valuable item ........... 10 
TOURER N eae na ie SUCUS Ka RNC a BI. 31 


G 
GB: Vy veo r e ET A n 99 
ORNE c eueceere ot See EM 99 
General proficiencies ..........lsssuusse 90 
TUTTO SS AA Y EN ER TOC 138 
IS USO IE CET ETT T T OO ERE USC 41 
GUEMBE oreet tiene 42 
Me e MARRE T T E 72 
CUDIIBSS. Loxeres ees vos ees eoa arvo 106 
More. AOAN AATA S CE TOT P 42 
Gnome abilities ................ee eee 3) 
M LER RIONTY TIR YD bt EAr dash US 30 
GOED cries Niniwa okei aseo so 30 
Le SPICE TEES TSPICI ERE EY S PAGE? 30 
ORS M E TUA e; 31 
Gnomish equipment ..............sss. 134 
er PERRO TITLED GEL UE 43 
Grand THaoBMY. AESA IAAT TAA 118 
GIBy ONORS: sirnane ere OAA 24 
ONENE iaaea rA E A EIRA .28 
LS ME ERE ETT LITT DO 9, 110 
GIO d. ooreis Sica sho awe une waa ria 124 
Groups, weapons ...........seeeeeeee 113 

H 
Hairfoot halflings ..........-.......00008 32 
PANGS RAM EMEN ROMO 34 
HEROINES ARENIS IIO T IE 36 
HONS ES TEISTYEEITITI TETTE 34 
Halfling abilities... 2.02... .......00.0. 32 
Halfling equipment ...............0.005 134 
PA M ee ae 32 
PBUOOE corset user essen eno Ys 32 
ut WESS TTTES AET 32 
WHOION o oir EE RUM 32 
HOGG SNES ET T masters 38 
Harness subconscious ............0.05% 155 
La SPARE CARAS ST 49,99 
COTTIDIBE on sinis'se sina Foie odes 165 
MACON oe ce ene ap T 15, 20, 49 
Health bonus ............0..55. 33-34, 36 
Heat resistance ................0.. 29, 34 
Heightened difficulties .............0005 31 
Heightened senses ...............ssu. 167 
Henchmen, maximum number . .......... 19 
Herald. uo rera oro Ga 99 
PDT pcre once eM 99 
Hii epe a mE reece 3135 
Hide in natural settings .......... usus 37 
Hide in shadows ................ 50, 52, 59 
Hideous appearance .................. 39 
Hi eles a aoe ene INE A 28 
ADONIS. V MERNOEE EEERET DU ERE TETTE 118 
Hill OWMVES: «L1 255.2 0 Ya a tiana daa 25 
FESÍOI- erro rERASENECEUSU S mur VY nena 55 
Hit point adjustment ................05- 16 
Hit point bonus .......... 26, 36, 57-58, 61 
SALLE ETATE TNE 43 
OAS: E EA SEED E RE 122 
E I T PE E 10 
Horse archer style ....... eseon 116-117 
Household provisions ................. 133 
Humanoid character level limits .......... 39 
USCLU OG RP E RU conan SETTE 36 
PRBS (a cre os T IQQ ODD IUD DOES. 100 


T RAO BEC CEI CEERI OOO 164 Molecular agitation .............22.0005 164 
* insinuation . 6... 666s eee eee seen ees PA e RON a a S 174 Molecular manipulation ...............- 164 
$E SK (s eomm s WIS dioe vie noire e m RUSS TET RIO DOREM LY MONA. 0:0 6 csc cocci tereentesnis stato ud 
Ideological differences .................. 10 i ope SD eee pm sare 9, 107 character points .............0ee0005 120 
Illusion resistant .....-.-.0eeeeeeenene -26 n o AON E 48 Moneylending .............0.0.....005 122 
Immunity, inherent -o.ae sees 106 Limited magical item use ......... 48, 61, 63 Mongiéman |... eere ttt eei 43 
Immunity to charm ........ isse 59 Limited weapon selection ........... s... 48 Monster intelligence, 
Immunity to disease ....... eee 59 Line of sight, psionic powers ............ 150 weapon mastery >. o oooi 120 
Impersonation ......6-seeeseeeeeeeees 106 Lizard mát oie Wese erus ea aad 43 Monster population .............6...4. 120 
Improved stamina... 26 Ti ans ae ee eme te S We 122 Monsters, weapon mastery ............. 119 
Improving proficiencies ..........+....+4 88 MT Loc tete 101 Monstrous character level limits .......... 39 
I movement .....-+-.+-+++s00+4 47 LOWES CESS ION E N eme ERR A ood 65 More RISES cs cccecec R 26 
Inertial barrier .....-.- 0s eee eeeeeee ees 163 Lower middle dass ...........00..000004 65 More opposition schools ..............+4 63 
Inflict pain ,. csse 174 Loyalty base cesse 19 Mountain dwarves o... n.se reenen 25 
Infravision ....... 26, 29, 31, 33-34, 36, 37 E a a MR RE 9, 108 MOUINE cocayovinesraeedannicl 101 
Inherent immunity ....--.++sseeee sees. 106 MÁOUIMS Loves ever 3TARZE CERA SYS 78 
IRAE TONE icc a A SOIT EHE 39 Move silently ......... 15, 37, 48, 50, 52, 59 
Ine cor S eoorceeeenss eir rree mess 148 M Movement, and encumbrance .......... 124 
Intelligence .... eee 16 MAGUS te ent 143, 149, 157 expanded base ..........ccseeeeeues 124 
knowledge .......----...20+-000. 17, 20 MIBACU e A E 143, 149 Multi-class psionicists ..........-...0005 153 
monster csse enne 120 Mee DONUS. simis reriainisss aaeei 26 Mull cies PCS 2 erreerei eene 63 
(EASON oon eevee eee e ery e eee ee ens 16, 20 Made an enemy osseous saana r Eron n Multiple specialization ................+- 48 
Intense MAIC... 6... eee reese eee eee e eed 62 EES Lo aoe So RO d 60 NN OD exea diti 12-13, 20 
Internal compass ......-. isses 9, 107 Magic defense adjustment .............. 18 MOSR DONUS -oo esros eese rome re Trace 36 
Intuion ..... csse 17, 20 identification ...... c eese 29 Mic spelis 1sererise rire ise 141 
Investments «isses 123 and:psiorics. «««55 lied crece T 150 Music/instrument -noaee eraan 108 
Invisibility ...... LL V4 MUNERE 38, 47 IRAE... error rec eed 108 
Imitating personality .... isses 110 MUS E E 136-137 Musical instrument ...........0-2-06005 101 
specializing...cccio cer xe ra ecu 137 MUSUC iie eE rero dre van Dre aide 74 
J Magical items, common ...........656- 135 
intaini ionic DOWETS 4. 00 5:3:4 vino ] 
Mdh oe ee 25 | Rae ere DAMME seme eterni - N 
Jester eese ng 72 Martial ance 1. cce nero erre 160 D Nels EET TENET TIU LI 63 
Joined the circus isse n il: erre A ea) 63 Navigation ............... ds s c edis 101 
Jugging |... eee 100 Mastery, weapon .............20. 118-119 New ability score systems .............0.4 8 
Jumping 20.0. e ee eee eee e erences 100 Maximum ability scores ...............0+ 22 NO CONIDODBIMS, —csesmekrcse cce 62 
Maximum number of henchmen ......... 19 Noble .2uuccxnrercek essre EET 74 
K Maximum number of spells ..........-... 16 Non-adventurers ........ssssseeeeeees 63 
: MEET DISSE rre erae dir hers 14 NOODIODOeney e eres nieve tns dd 93 
Keen eyesight... -n.a osse 9, 107 Maximum proficiency ratings ............. 88 Wesnon. ecce se prre TE em 114 
Keen heating ........-..++5 I 107 Meditative focus .........00.cceeeeeeee 155 Nonproficiency attack penalties .......... 114 
Keen olfactory sense .... csse 107 Meld into stone... 2... seres serena 26 Nonpsionic minds ............00000e08 149 
Keen taste sense... csse 107 Melee attacks by level, warriors ........... 47 Nonweapon proficiencies ............... 86 
Keen touch sense ...... 20... sree ees 107 AE T e A 26 Nonweapon proficiency groups ....... 90-91 
Kidnapped ....... cen n bons voe seas uus gavivs E 31 
KEE SORTING Lore LUR EOS tate 11 Mental amor: nean a Na eea 155 re) 
gree CPI GUB OCIO PITSOS S bisieare = Mental Armor Class .......seecee0e 143-144 
OTA De DUO Mental attack roll... 0.0... cece eens IAS Object AMINE roce mehrrm ern ie valgo 
Know locaton ...... cene 160 rer poen RM: 148 Obscure knowledge ............sssse 108 
Knowledge ........ eee 16, 20 MIRDNEE 17. ecco iino ese YS: 73, 123 OE S55 Sse sae positus «aee Era 
Kobold ...... ccce 43 Metamorphosis .........2-.0ceeeesees 166 One-handed weapon style ......... heim 
Metapsionics ..... eese nnn 143 Gpen GOONS O T vais 
L e Eastern equipment ............. 127 Open nih Say nai E EI GERE UTREA 15, ie 
; Mi Ages equipment ............... 127 Open minds 7.2 laevo rs e eae pe 143, 149 
Laboratory, alchemist's ,......... esses 138 C TT SE NARS CRIME Le RC 148 Optional restrictions . . ..... 48-49, 51, 61, 63 
Land. 122 MOTUUM E Uer CI E e 147 (oR AR ORS Lr 44 
Languages, racial ....- 0.2.2.0... sss ee. 23 MINGMIE EEA E 172 Oriental equipment ............6-.0005 127 
lazy... eee n ned 9, 110 Minds, open and closed ............... 149 enl orionas EE ET TT TO 101 
Leadership |... csse 18, 20, 47 Minimum ability scores .......... 20... 22 DIN. ea A ER oA EEE n 
leap «eem 37 WME co ake ts dini cios 101 CO WEE Skis vetet 37 
Learn spell percent chance .............. 17 | Mining detection abilities ......... Pe Re |) MMMM ciere a hon RR emer OR 75 
Leaming bonus eene 62 Mining detection bonus ................ 33 
Leaming penalty ........ esee 63 (roo ees Eoo UT NEN Eo tr 43 D 
Leather working ..cssssecerrissesoriis 101 Miscellaneous equipment .............. 132 
Less sleep essen 29,34 Missile adjustment ......... esses 14 PIDE cas A sare een ae 143-144 
Level... -seeese eens EE 46 ME sio errin isse 116-117 CG O A E, 157 
advancement and proficiencies ........ 92 Missile Desnice enansa 131 NE oro nan CS e ean 144 
Level limits, exceeding ........ esses 25 Moderate/severe disadvantages REOR 93 ACRES OR EET T OR 150 
humanoid or monstrous characters ..... 39 Modem languages .............0000008 101 DOWER COSIS) corcsvcecseoXa qv Eran sae 149 


Poison resistance ............66 36, 48-49 
POISOITSMUE 1. < gisi:casvinie 10a cialavinit 2o oto 16 
POISOM seTISB «2, nne 2o eaa sec aula a a 2/6 160 
Population, monster ....-..- +--+ sees 120 
Potion identification .............--...6- 31 
Potions, alchemist .............e0.000s 138 
ia) ASICS IRIS Ce n8 102 
Powedulenemy. ccs sina 111 
Precise memory... 9, 109 
Priest, weapon proficiencies ............ 113 
experience levels 2.20... .....-000 005 56 
profidendes <<a «vede ease es E. 90 
Shell DIORIGSSION EEE A rentre tin 56 
SDENS acera ex e eios Femvie rer acing 49, 51 
Priestly wizards .. cocer oca xe venere 61 
i EYES EES S EVE EY THE 56 
Pumaiy. disable... cse eere 154 
Pri (eqUISIUE. TE A 46 
PDE ERE EET TCI SI ES ERTIDO ET TET 
Proficiencies, and character points 
automatic failure ............... 
automatic success 2.2... 6. eee es ori 
DOINIS-. ees oa UxEVk rui e PES Cd 
character point costs .............0.45 
general ..... eee nne 
Ee EAE E E vA cer c MAE 
level advancement ...........0.020004 
maximum ratings... eee) 
DOIWeBDOn: 242 vei 22d aa AR reed 
o JAPAN PPS: 
DSU 5 revu e ve rene hm 
TORQUE 12.0 721222 4:49 8192:1:8 9 alesis LU 91 
E a n AAA n AE esas alais a a ta d V VIA 87 
use by nonproficient characters ........ 93 
USO DI Leseuecer eye ee N OE 89 
U PESE CERE TI T COE RECEDIT TES TE 91 
WIBADOFT ceu Ze N 112-113 
WABI S. ere sania engine ERE TR 91 
Proficiency, amor. «:6:.0:0-0 cecussccceci¢ees 115 
Shield uiocverceszasects esten et 115 
WeSpod cose roe esda 114-115 
Proficiency descriptions ................. 94 
Proficiency rolls, modifying .............. 92 
Proficiency scores, 
ability modifiers to ..........0....0005 89 
Project IOE 222,252: dds sweasenesre 162 
Protection from evil ...... 0... pee e ee eee 49 
Protection scolls ,... ern eni 140 
Psionic attack modes ...........ssssuun 146 
Pslonic DNASE asia a asia vin vafa nata acu in 147 
PSIORICCOImDBE Lnreriie eem TT 145, 148 
pSvehic CORBIS... oicis soise orron iei 150 


CT oo OOOI T EE CERE ORO nase 146 
Psionic defense modes ................ 147 
Psionic disciplines, gaining . ............-. 154 

PAO. cuisant aeaa aanaeio 154 
Psionic powers, ESP ..........000000205 174 

adrenaline control ..........e0seeees 166 

allround vision . .. eor eren 159 

animal affinity |... sees 164 

animate object .........sisisssseee 162 

Anal PROPOR AU esee a nas era rae ES 170 

BUSSE OS renews 158 

C EE RETI EI OU E A T A E 173 

banishiment: 27:210: 1/2/2127 /: 2193-658 168 

on ate ae A roe 170 

DOG COON cs. 9 ste A ne nx eene 166 

body equilibrium ...............0005 166 

body weaponry ..... isses 167 

CADDIDBIIE. = cy, ROOS L T ves 167 

Coll ROGSWWEPE e cia E 2 arr eterno 167 

chameleon power .........sssssses 167 

dairaudienee. 221r rer siano 158 
Clairsentient powers .. 2... 6.6... eee eee 158 

GARUOVAROR inspite let e icu HA ER RE 158 

combat Inind. eorr b aas eros 159 

complete healing ............0..0085 165 

conceal thoughts ...............008. 173 

CORTON RI VA EE epit DEEST 162 

Conor SANA 1. enp ana i DOEKE 163 

COMMON WANG A eee ni vias 163 

credte-Object 5 Si ions EEEO 161 

E SEA E A AEA 159 

detonalp E T E il 161 

dimension walk... 171 

dimensional door ................04. 170 

WIRD NTE sine caciag anaes 172 

Test SOUNG). Erron eatas iUt EAA 160 

BANWIB. corres secs e darstdis Sus ej pro m 154 

healing, complete ........... 6.0.05. 165 

heightened senses ...............--5 167 

vli AO CORE RETE T ORE 163 

AOE DON Loeceo rero quie sro Y 2X 174 

MUSS VERIS REESE TV OP NS 174 

know location ;.....5:.. o re er 160 

isst co cack AERIS S NERONE NAE 164 

Ife detechol) loo 0 cce.0i0 e esee nes et nito 174 

lbs ec E revo xax lese Eale us 162 

LUCA asoson reena araia 150 

ORE t cioe cis a siasianaioess 150 

maintaining ....... see 149-150 

martial trance . 20... sic e eee eee eee ee 160 

metamorphosis ........... esses 166 

fot E sche xh UN DETTA 172 

molecular agitation ............e0008 164 

molecular manipulation .............. 164 

object reading . .-.. -uues eisai esea 159 

OARE a A A 150 

BOA E eee 171 

PORON SENSE: occse 3.0.0 515 i eis owe sie 160 

primary discipline .................-. 154 

POSNER, cia on pe net ME NUR TG 172 

INGIGCE TOUR Loc SE NE yer tes 162 

psionic Sense... ocolos eee nus 160 

psychic surgery .............0..00008 173 
Psychokinetic powers ..........0..5000+ 161 
Psychometabolic powers .........sssuse 164 

ive powers .... esee 168 

She SoUnd) isum esse tirer cr VR 160 

sendthoughiy: OENE E E ees 175 

SDN L.C IET CUSCO It 163 

ShadoWIDITI. 52a cnsirgaccereesswsices 166 


Sight link asics capcevenwaKciosescaes 175 
EE a y ES REARS EET 175 
summon planar creature ............. 168 
telelinesis O E A eet rea 162 
Telepathic powers .............0.000008 172 
C | NA EE = J 168 
teleport other ......... useless 170 
teleport trigger ....... eee 172 
TOUGETANRS Goose rares iszu ce eripe d 150 
Ee ane a O 149 
Panlo SENSE occorre s rers err p vire 160 
Psionic strength points ...........- 143-144 
Psionicist character class ............... 151 
Psionicist proficiencies ...........0000es 154 
POONER 0S oeque peas Kis xem x ee E 142 
Te aaa E OC C 143 
and MPRICGOOGOORODITYES IQ 150 
wild talents ....-.......0.. 151, 155-156 
Poche Conde cr ro T 150 
Povhie QUI. Lie oecsosaeesce A 147 
PECTIC SUEY c1 aseo e vis ves ea Rus 173 
Psychokinetic powers ..... 0.2.02. 6008s 161 
Psychometabolic powers .............4. 164 
Psychoportive powers .......... 000s ee 168 
PURSE: E A E OL Y: 77 
Purfy a A EAN 59 
R 

aa = AAA E OTAN RER NAAT, 41 
Racial abilities and restrictions ............ 42 
Racial ability score adjustments ...... .22, 38 
Racial adjustments, thieving skills ........ . 53 
ae AANA ACI 39 
Racist languages: euer verte Pelo 23 
RAGSI evel RTMS iniga eraen re mere 323 
Racial requirements ........:. esses. 21 
Rácial VARAS.. reinen 23 
RECA wenpuns..... eene reni neon E dae 38 
RUM TRIES A e psive esos nl 55 
Ran away from home ..........ssesesses 11 
Range boost cassano reses satina 62 
RANGE EEE A 49 
Rangers’ spell-casting abilities ........... 50 
Reaction adjustment ............2005 15, 19 
Réaction DOns DRR eo Seneca eh 33 
Read languages ....-..........0.055 52, 55 
es eco AEEA sour ees 61, 63 
MORGENS eonesereenrsextieosenw emu 102 
Reading/writing ......... uses 102 
ROBSON a Ue zes oos OP EUUS ewe s v de 16, 20 
vci PAM UTE 39, 32 
Recoverng PSPS). eic mie ora exte lo 144 
REIOITIBd orit e Neve Cree va a YEN n 
RERIVENBUON oos oes sevens PRESE 155 
becas A.) E NRBEM UNE Mn 87 
PORDE e exuere vinee Xs ust rue «Ka 102 
Removing disadvantages ...............4 94 
Renaissance equipment ............... 127 
KESSMON DOQUST. eR. ori ceo I S ine 63 
ROSE QIBIITeeoieeeeere ner exse noto 49 
Resist energy drain «2.26... 6 esc c eee ee 57 
RESIONGS etait coii ee rre aa 29, 54 
to sleep and charm .................. 61 
Restrictions, optional ...... 48-49, 51, 61, 63 
[27 MEL T TIME CUN 42 
iD'abillies 1.51, esiaans sinew ee e ws 37 
Resurrection chance ...........-..-00005 16 
Ve» pUteA04 9/04 e[S PIA 9:49) «(4 EUR EIE EUR T a 78 
Riding, airborne 2... 2... 6. cece eee ees 102 


Index 


ROCK GOMA ECOUTER 30 WU ooo sides E RES 16, 18, 38 HONS cy ence res EIS ORT T AQUCOE EET ET VS: 6, 92 
Rogue, weapon proficiencies ............ 113 b PES ESI a3 SCORES PE OT CODE 16 descanidne. orc ra ver REPE aden 104 
profidencies R SO S OT 91 progression, paladin ...........-...06% 49 PHOS Of OANA rer» s er «a 89 
RUS ET TT TRIER nian braid a Mis CES CA ernie 5] Progression, priests... 56 Tident bonus 2356s 0 rer E 30 
Roman equipment .....--....-eee eee 126 progression, wizards ............2-.6+% 60 to LOOAD AOE EES OSGI ick. 104 
RODE USB Sce eec rc EREEVA A 102 SPUN TESSMDUR = 5 cr onc ca eer pr cis eie mel 48 MANO ESERE ES ARES 53 
Round, psionic actions ...............+. 150 Spell-casting abilities, rangers’ ............ 50 Tuming undead ..............55: 49, 57-58 
Ritining (cue tos sue N ree eue ER EFE 102 Spelicialt I. o EOE OE 103 Two-handed weapon style ......... 116-117 
Spending money ..........seeeee 122 Two-weapon style ............ 51, 116, 117 

E LN IET EET AERA TET ERA 13 

a AAA LO TA ODIO COP DO PICO OT QT 82 U-V 

SaddleDags oorr Ver PRESS 125 SUIminW ceeceecex vise vea sarees 12-13, 20 
SIE ex vie VLA EENCUUDSIRI ERESER 44 BONUS: -coore eap) Reis erT ers 36 Unarmed combat specialization ......... 119 
SWORE EO D A coon heen bn ees 79 OMAN cC cies e OS 26, 30, 32-34 Unde ANTA, oer eee ronem aao 58 
Savage settings equipment ............. 126 Stone age equipment .............ssee 126 ines E L E OR 9,111 
Saving throw bonuses .... . 26, 31, 33, 49, 63 CU LJ Dos Satine cxaetsieiieoburewesves 26 PON cis (or iocos prr rev Eee 65 
SOROS uereseccves eese ve serus UD 79 Stonemasofnly 2445. rea ee ta ae aa 103 red middle Class. 1:55 rive re rena) 65 
SCHOO OF MIEN E T snes 138 d IL. DGIO CETERO DE TOS 32 UE GONE. ooo oc orci eec de S 143 
SML S DCR COCOD EEE Ore eee 140 Sena oen eorne er tentEn reso ie 12-13 VentrloQUISm 3-0 nice nes T 104 

SHAGOW saoo ET TETUR TT DD 141 MUSEO) Loocrsvcssssa did sie X EVEN 20 

HE RSNA AA AAR TY RSPSSRTYS PEU Sot 141 Lp INGA AANA ATP EPS AS E W-Z 

Schools of magic .........sssesese 136-137 SUUS. FO ote dud duct SON 12 
SCDUE crier e «ceo diese ea Unes ow AS: 80 SubsbIMy Checks: cocer ener tret nte 19 War Td nes coercere prre ES 48 
SCION USE. ois eoeee s pains renale Sana 52, 55 Summon planar creature ......... suus. 168 Warhammer bonus... 26 
geometere .. corse esi duy aera 139-140 EL lin SPP ES UD PET RP I CE VICE YT E 48 Warrioc-priests iiss vae roe r a rera aad 57 
SODIBUSG ss cupere dere ET ge E c1) 102 Surprise opponents .........sssesesee 37 WINE OPA ENOT 77 47 
SON a's ect PCIE Gruss ST ERE SB 123 SUNL. oe. ka aAA Ore ER SS 103 Bi DOR DONS Foie verre ym 61 
SEMmbnstip «qoe esae ves nr xe vPaY v7 102 Swan TOCITI «eoe reso e pho eX vao ya ehe 39 melee attacks by level ..............4: 47 
SOC COONS ia stasis e zd ww eta eoa ala 29, 36 n LA E EE VOCI ER TACRIDS IET DE PIC: 44 profidlendes 2: uuu ev araa 91 
Secret language ees eo eva eer o YER RES 59 Swashbückler- ..- 1a ere eerie eee eod BS MRR, Seen onec PT tem 121-122 
SEN SDUnd icccaelacrnemoam racers A 160 SMUT erre cin der rene US EE eR 103 Weapon allowance ...........-..0es00ee 57 
Selecting disadvantages ...............44 89 Sword bonus .......... reisas 30, 34 Weapon and shield style........... 116-117 
ing proficiencies ............0 cee es 87 UNN OWES <5 caldeuasscnawecaceliws 28 Weapon expertise ................ 112, 118 
Send DioUghlls PAR E T 175 System SHOCK vc» 9s arantaaseere niaes 16 Weapon familiarity .............s00eees 114 
SOLES catecesiniainaenie reU S E 102 Weapon groups TAS E O n 113 
Severe disadvantages ..........ssssuuuese 94 T Weapon master. 2l cesses dioi 85 
SNAG os eios Reserve wile wannes 163 Weapon mastery ............0.02. 118-119 
Shadow mage. sesinin ananos 140 Tong eire eaa esPTEeCUUPVY 103 Weapon of choke... oer sees 118 
SISTERE SENTO OHES CERE 166 RRO A ATA E R EA 32 Weapon proficiencies ......... 112, 114-115 
SDapechNnge .oeerorrver extr tet 59 Tongents; DSyChie«eevceos ese pe tmr eno 143 character points 1... 113 
Sha pshoolBl 1o rveesecerk Y eule presion 80 DU PERITETESELILISRE DOO 34 dass restrictions .............6000005 113 
Shield proficiency ............ 0.002.045 ns Telekinesis uinna eSa 162 Weapon restrictions, psionicists .......... 153 

Short sword bonus ...........ssses 26, 31 Telepathic poWels T TATE enorme ni 172 Weapon specialization 

Sig Bü I ET ES 175 WOME. 2:4 A E E O cad 168 | ise 48—49, 51, 53, 55, 57, 60-61, 118 
Simplified encumbrance ........... 124, 126 TMlepait other i1 ai esx cw iene A 170 Weapons table ..............suuuueue. 128 
SINGING ores secca va PU UrEeSEE TIS Tea 103 Teleport trigger ..........ssseueeeeeee 172 Weaponsmithing ...........sssessssse 104 
E OPERE ED EROR ESSE EET S nd REL EC ET TR COP REESE NER S 51 Weather knowledge ................... 104 
SWB DONIS. rseyeecucenenaseeetc t 53, 56 Thief skills vs. abilities... 22.0.0... 2.00008 21 WEAVING: sinees sips as. cence rar Nation 104 
SHEE aire: seis in: E A A O T NR 63 MEVES CA aiite anan aa e rev d 52 WG eai eea iN ares A era ac 126 
Sling a E E AIN AOAN A A ATAT 32 Thieving skills, armor adjustments ......... 54 SONNE cose erni odiy ree tE 15 
T. ted 81 Die SONGS PPE EO A E TUS 53 E L T E OE E 44 
SOMMER ET S A re 51 racial adjustments .....sessssesosnnes 53 Went Io $88... Los ierresecon dii S n 
SOCGBUTADKS, Liceo esee Ir exero (gie vomere at 65 Thought shield... cererre eee 148 Wild talents oeisio oinaan 151, 155-156 
SOME roe Lv vos serez Pi eres 82 IST E WAIANAE TAT VESTI SWISS, 44 WROOWES [ouo ESSE YU nY 18, 20 
SONG WIEN rerin aar o EReZEVS S sS 141 red AERA TEES CER 103 WOO rris corres scbKca ise E 17 
CARL SARC os cos cer ras KANS 38 Thrown weapon style ............. 116-117 BRUN, i saiscur rae regata vs 17, 20 
Sound (esistan ce E esee reo 55 Ue ECCE TATTOO ET. 84 mental Armor Class ...........0..... 144 
Speak with animals .................... 51 Tight group, proficiency ...............5 115 WEOWE os sisson sins coisa mrt ees 18, 20 
Speak with plants ........ EA Sopcast 29 WERDONS nc ce eua Pas AURA 113 WARNER BOWTIE eere erecto rre ErSÁ 11 
Spest DS, eaer re EN F ceca eaa -30 Tightrope walking .... -n.e esessursesen 104 WINS. peoe saa aeann oa had 60 
Special enemy. RAL N E, 51 e aE N A TE 122 weapon proficiencies ................ 113 
Specialist wizards 2.2.2.0... 0. eee eee ed 61 WORSUGNED 212222222. A CER 111 experience levels ..........-..50--003 60 
a ain: dy a WAI OT 116 enaska ir enne rto ott 11 OIE a A E ee 91 
NaS PA ERES OR ELO 119 JOUg NOE Ls os ts sos pp re'a.e nens DOSE SDECIBIIBS. 11s src asas eie 6S5 Stel 
437869852 CO SY Sie ws d SUN e cn 118 Tower of iron will ...........6.0.004-..148 Wizard spell progression ................60 
Specialty priests. cocoesssesiseco cera ovo 58 MOCKING: Lovuceei case e ry rr waa 38, 104 bore on PY PEEEI TRITT ED 56 
factor, two-handed weapon ....... 117 ENUBCRDOR suivie veros say veneer ca 51 MINOV DUNS S or veu 57 
Seul WEE cV. os ross see 30 Loo TRE Sed Ma Id nee EB DAC 123 ELO I OU t SS d 29 

duration increase E T E E 57 ea aa e E A 133 


D Advanced 


ungeons& Dragons 


PLAYER’S OPTION": 


Skills & Powers 


hese pages hold the keys to humans who 

spot secret doors as easily as do elves, 

thieves who sense illusions, half-ogre 

sword masters, and a multitude of other 
unique characters. PLAyer’s Ornon” Rulebooks 
present an alternative approach to AD&D char- 
acters. Custom-craft your next PC, selecting the 
profession, skills, and abilities you want! 
Characters can even have additional ability 
scores such as Stamina, Muscle, Balance, and 
others. New proficiencies, talents, and updated 
psionics round out the PLayer’s OrrioN character. 
Be ready for anything with Skills & Powers! 


TSR, Inc. ; TSR Ltd. 
201 Sheridan Springs Rd. 4 S 120 Church End 
Lake Geneva ! ^5 Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 Cambridge CB! 3LB 
U.S.A. United Kingdom 


Sug. Retail 
$20.00 US $26.00 CAN £11.99 UK 


©1995 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the U.S.A. 
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & Dracons and AD&D 
are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
PLAvER'S Option and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 


ISBN 0-7869-0149-7 


| | 52000» 
9^780786"901494 | 


