The 
Complete 
Book of 


Hamanoids 


The 
Complete Book of 


Humanoids 


by Bill Slavicsek 


Table of Contents 


Introduction... 
Kulung's Tale 
What are Humanoids? 
Humanoids in Campaigns 
The Purpose of This Handboo 
A Note About Optional Rules .. 


Done ee 


Chapter One: Humanoid Characters 
Creating Humanoid Characters 
Getting Started........... 
Generating Ability Score: 
Humanoid Races ......... 
Groups, Classes, and Kits 

Multi-Class Characters. 
Character Class Maximu: 
Exceeding Level Limits ........... 
Adding Humanoids to a Campaign 
Campaign Model #1.. 
Campaign Model #2... 
Campaign Model #3.. 
Campaign Model #4.. 


Q m E oio 000 0 uu uw 


Chapter Two: Humanoid Race 
How to Read the Entries. 
Aarakocra 
Alaghi... 
Beastman .. 
Bugbear 
Bullywug, Advanced 
Centaur 
Fremlin 


TEARRE RAPELANT 


oo —— 


2 * Table of Contents 


Pit Fighter... 
Saurial Paladin. 


Sellsword ..... 70 
Wilderness Protector. 72 
Wizard Kits... 73 
Hedge Wizard 74 
Humanoid Scholar 75 
Outlaw Mage . 76 
Priest Kits... 77 


Humanoid Bard... 


Proficiencies and Specializatio 
Nonweapon Proficiencie: 
Actin; 


Alertness. 92 
Animal Noise. 92 
Begging... 92 
Blind-fighting. 92 
Chanting. 93 
Cheesemaking. 93 
Close-quarter Fighting. 93 
Craft Instrument 94 
Crowd Working 94 
Danger Sense... 94 


Table of Contents 


Information Gathering 
Intimidation ...... 
Looting, 
Natural Fighting 
Observation 
Poetry... 
Voice Mimicry... 
Whistling/ Humming . 
Wild Fighting... 
Winemaking 


94 
4 
5 
5 
5 

96 

96 

96 

96 


7 
7 
97 
7 
7 
8 


Chapter Five: Role-Playing Humanoids ..100 
Life as a Humanoid 
Tribal Life... 
Social and Racial Disadvantages 
Humanoid Traits .. 
Campaign Complications .. 


Chapter Six: Superstitions.. 

A Mysterious World....... 
Superstitions in Game Terms 
Using Supersnnone' in cd 
The Superstitions..... 


Chapter Seven: Arms and Armor. 1n 
Armor Restrictions... 
Weapon Size Restrictions ..... 
Weapon Breakage (Optional) 
Close-quarter Weapons.. 
Special Humanoid Weapons 


Humanoid Comparison Chart. 


Humanoid Character Sheets. 


INDEX TO TABLES 
1: Humanoid Group Limits... Pu 
2: Bonus Levels for Single-Classed 
Humanoids.... 
3: Nonweapon Proficiency Group 
Crossovers ... 
4: Nonweapon Proficiencies 
5: Personal Superstitions .. 
6: Optional Weapon Breakage 
7: Weapons.... 
8: Character Kit Summary 
9: Average Height and Weig] 
10: Age...... 
11: Aging Effec 
12: Racial Ability Requirements 
13: Multi-Class Combinations... 
14: Thieving Skill Racial Adjustments 
15: Reincarnation Table 
16: Monstrous Traits . 
17: Bestial Habits... 
18: General Superstitions 
19: Campaign Complications 
CREDITS 
Design: Bill Slavicsek 
Editing: Jon Pickens 
Black and White Art: Doug Chaffee 
Color Art: Doug Chaffee, Sam Rakeland, 
Thomas Baxa, Clyde Caldwell 
Typography: Tracey Zamagne 
Production: Paul Hanchette 


TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd. 
POB 756 120 Church End 
Lake Geneva Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 Cambridge CB1 3LB 
USA. United Kingdom 


This book is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America, 

Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material contained herein is prohibited 

without the express written permission of TSR, Inc. 

Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the 

book trade for English language products of TSR, Inc Distributed in the book and 

hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd. Distributed to the toy and hobby 

trade by regional distributors, 

ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, DRAGONLANCE, FORGOTTEN 

REALMS, WORLD OF GREYHAWK, and SPELLJAMMER are registered trade- 

marks owned by TSR, Inc. 

DUNGEON MASTER DM, MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, and the TSR logo are 
lemarks owned by TSR, Inc. All TSR characters, character names and distinctive 

likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 


Printed in the U.S.A. 1993 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 


Table of Contents * 3 


Introduction 


Kulung’s Tale 


I travel the back roads of human civilization, fol- 
lowing a quest I do not always understand. Some 
unseen force, some inner desire, drew me away from 
my tribe and brought me to the towns and cities of 
humanity. Does this mean I reject my place as an 
ogre mage? I do not think so. Instead, I believe I am 
trying to enhance it. 

I wander the edges of human settlements, drawn 
like an insect to the brightly burning torch of civi- 
lization. Like an insect, I cannot turn away from the 
intense heat. Like an insect, I will be destroyed if I 
get too close to the flame. I am fascinated, capti- 
vated, afraid. 

But the fear flows both ways. While I fear the 
screaming mobs of humans with their swords and 
clubs and sharp-tipped arrows, they also fear me. To 
most of them, I am a monster. I look different. I 
sound different. I pray to different gods. Humans 
are quick to show fear toward that which is differ- 
ent. And what they fear, they often destroy. 

Why did I leave my tribe? The answer is at once 
simple and complex. I was not like my tribe mates. I 
rejected the practice of catching and keeping slaves. 
I followed a path that was closer to good than to 
evil. I even sought out knowledge and scholarly 
endeavors while my tribe mates reveled in combat 
and conquest. In short, I was different, much differ- 
ent, and humanoids are less tolerant of differences 
than even the humans and demihumans whose 
lands I now roam. 

I live in humanity's shadow, but I am not a 
shadow of humanity. Indeed, those few humans who 
I have come to call friend proclaim that I am more 
human than most of their kind. Sometimes I take 
this as a compliment, sometimes a foul curse, for I 
have seen the heights that humanity can reach and I 
have witnessed the dark depths it can sink to. They 
are grand, these humans, but they are also desper- 
ately dangerous. And the greatest danger lies in the 
bright center of civilization’s flame, for it draws me 
toward its scrolls and books and epic ballads, where 
its searing heat can consume me. Perhaps it is bet- 
ter in the shadows, for the darkness offers some 


—_eoO— aaaaaaaaaaaaaaasssssssssusiÃiÂħIōI5s- 


4 * Introduction 


small protection from the flame. 

Am I a monster? It depends on the point of view. 
To my own people, I am a weakling, a coward, a fail- 
ure. To the humans and demihumans who know me, 
lam a trusted companion, a learned associate and a 
friend. To those who refuse to see beyond my appear- 
ance, I am a foul creature, a hated enemy, a monster. 
Iam all these things and none of them. Iam Kulung 
the Ogre Mage, the Tribeless One, the Searcher. 

I am the Humanoid, and I walk the perimeter of 
humanity's blazing flame. 


What are Humanoids? 


Every AD&D® game has them. Most often, 
they are under the control of the DUNGEON 
MASTER". When player characters encounter 
them, they usually appear in the role of villain 
or opponent. They are the humanoids, mon- 
sters that have two arms, two hands, at least 
two legs, and stand generally upright. 

From a distance, within the folds of a hooded 
cloak, or obscured by deep shadows, 
humanoids can be mistaken for humans. Only 
on closer inspection and in the light of day are 
they immediately seen for what they are. They 
bear the general shape of humanity, but they 
have startling — and often times frightening 
— differences. Some are taller or broader than 
the average human. Others are smaller, frailer. 
Many have misshapen features, wicked claws 
and fangs, thick fur or long, dank hair. Human- 
ity is one race, humanoid races are legion. 

Humanoids have their own cultures, soci- 
eties, morals, values, and attitudes. These vary 
greatly from the general human experience. 
They are more than "humans in funny suits," 
or at least they should be in a well-developed 
campaign world. The world looks vastly dif- 
ferent through the cruel eyes of a minotaur or 
the bulging eyes of a bullywug. It is these dif- 
ferences that separate the human from the 
humanoid — and these differences create the 
greatest challenges and most fun when playing 
a humanoid character. 


Humanoids in Campaigns 


Humanoids have been a major part of the 
AD&D* game from the beginning. Who has not 
sent his or her favorite character up against a 
horde of goblins, a dungeon full of hobgoblins 
and bugbears, or an ogre of monstrous propor- 
tions? And yet, over the years, the same charac- 
ter may have received timely help from a flock 
of screeching aarakocra, been guided to safety 
by a herd of noble centaurs, or have been given 
critical information by a beautiful swanmay. 

Now it's time for something different. Just as 
not every thief is a greedy scoundrel and not 
every warrior is a dim-witted bully, not every 
humanoid fits the mold that we have come to 
know over the years. Some decide to leave 
dungeon and lair behind to take up the life of an 
adventurer — though these fellows are rare 
indeed! Not only must such humanoids go 
against the norms of the very societies they were 
born into (in most cases), but often they find 
prejudice and rejection wherever the spirit of 
adventure leads them. The adventuring human- 
oid ever struggles to find acceptance and a place 
to fit in, while taking on the quests his spirit 
demands. Perhaps the next adventure will bring 
him to such a place, for it always seems to be just 
over the next hill and around the next bend. 

This is the drama and tension of which good 
stories are made — and great role-playing 
game campaigns. By opening a campaign to 
humanoid player characters, players and 
Dungeon Masters alike are opening a mysteri- 
ous box. Ultimately, what's in the box depends 
on the attitudes of everyone involved. It could 
contain a wondrous reward of challenge and 
fun, or it could hold the key to a campaign's 
destruction. It all depends on how humanoid 
PCs are used. 

This book attempts to show you how to use 
humanoids in a positive way to add new 
dimensions to your role-playing experiences. 
With moderation, planning, and the coopera- 
tion of all involved, humanoid PCs can become 


important parts of ongoing campaigns. But 
that doesn't mean every player should imme- 
diately roll up a humanoid PC. Too many of 
these characters will spoil a good thing. We 
suggest no more than one humanoid PC be 
used in an adventuring group at any given 
time. If more than one player wants to try his 
or her hand at running these unique charac- 
ters, then they should take turns bringing their 
humanoid PCs into the game. All of this will 
be discussed detail later in the book. 


The Purpose of This Handbook 


The Complete Book of Humanoids is designed to 
provide rules that allow players to create 
humanoid player characters. In short, to design 
and role-play their own monsters! 

Every player will use this book in a different 
way, depending upon a number of factors. 
Long-time players will turn these pages in 
search of new role-playing challenges. Some 
gamers will seek out new abilities to increase 
the power of their characters. Others will look 
for a way to combine these for a new role-play- 
ing game experience. It all depends ona 
player’s interests and experience, the shape of 
the campaign world in which the adventures 
are set, and the interest and commitment of the 
Dungeon Master. 

Skilled players seeking new role-playing 
challenges should read this book carefully. 
Others can use the table of contents to find 
areas of special interest to themselves. 

At the end of this book, you'll find new 
humanoid record sheets. These have been 
designed to help role-play humanoids, while 
providing room for all the pertinent game 
material. There is also a sheet for creating new 
humanoid kits. These sheets may be photo- 
copied for your personal use. 

The back of the book has the tables necessary 
to create and run humanoid characters. These 
have been gathered here for convenience and 
ease of use. 


Introduction * 5 


If you need it to create, play, or run a human- 
oid character, then you'll find it in here. In 
addition to the basics, there are special sections 
about superstitions, monstrous traits, social 
and racial disadvantages, personalities, cam- 
paign models for introducing humanoid char- 
acters into your game, and campaign 
complications that a Dungeon Master can use 
to keep a humanoid character in character. 


A Note About Optional Rules 


This book is full of new rules, humanoid kits, 
suggestions on role-playing, new proficiencies 
and spells, and other details concerning the 
use of humanoids by the players. This infor- 
mation adds to the rules presented in the 
Player's Handbook. However, this is only a sup- 
plement to that volume. All of the rules in this 


——————————————————————————————————————————? 


6 * Introduction 


prepared to abide by your Dungeon Master's 
decisions about how to use any of these new 
rules in the campaign. 

Even if your Dungeon Master decides that 
none of the rules presented here can be used in 
his campaign, much can be learned in the 
pages that follow. Humanoids, after all, are a 
part of every AD&D® campaign world, and to 
know them better is to know your game world 
better. The best way to use this book is to create 
a humanoid character and play it in a game. 
Without humanoids, there would be no Kaz™ 
the Minotaur or Dragonbait" the Saurial or 
Kulung" the Ogre Mage. 

And without The Complete Book of Humanoids, 
you won't be able to add your own characters 
to the ballads of the bards and the tales of the 
storytellers! 


CHAPTER 


Humanoid Creatures 


Creating Humanoid Characters 


This chapter includes the basic information 
needed to generate a humanoid character. It 
explains how to roll ability scores, how to 
choose classes and kits, and gives guidelines 
on selecting the humanoid’s racial type. 

Humanoid characters aren’t quite the same 
as the human or demihuman characters you're 
used to playing. They often have different 
motivations, different world views, different 
limitations. Before you decide whether your 
humanoid character is going to be noble and 
misunderstood, suspicious and quick to anger, 
or some other type, you need to generate and 
record the characters basic statistics. 


Getting Started 


A collection of humanoid races has been 
gathered in this chapter. These races have been 
selected for their playability and plausibility as 
player characters. You won't find any undead 
or spirits among them. There are no monsters 
that have "instant kill" powers. With few 
exceptions, all of the humanoids range in size 
from small to large. We've included a tiny 
humanoid for variety, but none above the large 
(7 to 12’) size. 

Each entry includes background information, 
role-playing suggestions, monstrous traits and 
superstitions inherent to the race, minimum 
and maximum ability scores, racial ability 
adjustments, class restrictions, and level limits. 
These will be important when you begin gen- 
erating ability scores and filling out a character 
sheet. 

Take a few moments to look over the selec- 
tion of humanoid races. Try to find a race that 
you want to role-play, not just a race that will 
generate a powerful character. The goal of this 
book is to show you how to create characters 
that can be role-played powerfully, not how to 
create all-powerful monster PCs. In fact, the 
more powerful a humanoid PC is, the harder it 


will be for that character to operate in a cam- 
paign setting (see Chapter Five: Role-Playing 
Humanoids for more information). 

After you've selected a race and a couple of 
alternates, discuss your choices with your 
Dungeon Master. The one you decide to go 
with should be the one that you are both com- 
fortable with and fits easily into your DM’s 
campaign. You may have to provide your DM 
with suggestions on integrating your choice 
into the campaign setting. By working together 
to come up with clear campaign hooks and 
explanations for the humanoid PC’s presence, 
you'll be building something you can both live 
with. In the long run, cooperating on develop- 
ing the campaign story will be a rewarding 
experience for both the Dungeon Master and 
the players. 

When choosing a humanoid race to play, 
keep in mind the following things. You want 
to choose a humanoid race that you like, 
because it’s no fun playing a character you 
can’t stand. Your selection should spark 
plenty of ideas for role-playing the character 
you want to create. If you have no idea how to 
run or role-play the ape-like alaghi, or you 
just hate the thought of playing a lizard man, 
then you should not choose those races. 
Finally, you want to select a race that will add 
positive elements to the story you, the other 
players and the DM are telling through the 
role-playing game campaign. A disruptive 
character, like a disruptive player, will spoil 
the fun for everyone involved. 


Generating Ability Scores 


After you've selected the humanoid race you 
want to play, it’s time to create a humanoid 
player character. You can use any of the six 
dice rolling methods described in the Player's 
Handbook, provided the method is approved by 
your DM. If you want to generate a specific 
character class, and your DM approves, use 
either method V or VI. 


Humanoid Characters * 7 


Each humanoid race entry in this chapter 
includes ability score modifiers. These are 
applied to the numbers you generate when cre- 
ating a humanoid character of a particular racial 
type. Each humanoid race has its own set of 
ability minimums and maximums. No ability 
score can fall below the minimum or rise above 
the maximum without magical or divine aid. 

If you have your heart set on playing a partic- 
ular humanoid race and you roll ability scores 
that are too high or too low, your DM has the 
option to allow you to use the racial minimum 
or maximum for that ability score. 


Humanoid Races 


Every humanoid race has a maximum experi- 
ence level it can reach in a given class group 
(see Table 1: Humanoid Group Limits, on page 
10). You may want to look this over before 
deciding which race you want to play. 

Each humanoid race has advantages and dis- 
advantages. If the humanoid race you select 
has a lot of advantages, it will take more expe- 
rience points to progress in level. Also, many 
advantages are often balanced by monstrous 
traits and superstitions, as described in Chap- 
ters Five and Six. 

Special Note: Except for swanmays, no 
humanoid can benefit from a raise dead spell. 
As with elves, other methods of reviving a 
slain humanoid must be used. 


Groups, Classes, and Kits 


All four major character groups (warrior, 
wizard, priest, and rogue) can be found among 
the humanoid races, though not every charac- 
ter group is open to every race. The individual 
race entries will list the restrictions, if any, 
which apply. Similarly, the classes within these 
groups may be off limits to certain humanoid 
races. 

This book also features character kits for the 
humanoid races. A kit is a specialized role, 


— 


8 * Chapter One 


designed to augment and enhance the charac- 
ter class system. Kits do not replace classes. 
Every character who uses a kit still belongs to a 
particular character class. Kits add detail to 
characters after their class has been selected. 
Kits are entirely optional, though they are 
recommended. Humanoid characters can be 
created without them, but the kits add detail 
that might otherwise be missing. Only one 
humanoid kit is allowed per character. 


Multi-Class Characters 


Most humanoids can be multi-class characters, 
though the combinations available to them 
varies depending upon what race a humanoid 
is. If you decide to play a multi-class character, 
read over the benefits and limitations of such 
characters as outlined in the Player's Handbook. 
As an option, if a character is ineligible to be 
multi-classed due to low ability scores, and later 
has the scores raised to the point of eligibility, 
the DM may allow the character to declare 
immediately for multi-class status. 


Character Class Maximum Levels 


The maximum levels humanoids can attain 
depend upon the character's race, as listed on 
Table 1. Multi-class characters can attain the 
maximum level of each group. Single-classed 
characters with exceptional scores can attain 
even higher levels, as listed on Table 2. See 
individual race entries for further information 
on groups and classes open to humanoids. 


Exceeding Level Limits 


As an optional rule, DMs may allow human- 
oid characters to advance to any level, but they 
must earn two, three or even four times the 
amount of experience points normally required 
for each level. This effect is cumulative with 
other experience point multipliers that a 
humanoid race might have. 


Adding Humanoids to a Campaign 


There are any number of ways to introduce — | 


humanoid player characters into a campaign. 
While the method chosen will be determined 
by you and your Dungeon Master, this section 
has a few models that might make the process 
easier. Consider these models as adventure 
hooks to introduce a newly-created humanoid 
player character into the action. 


Campaign Model #1: 
“A Friend in Need...” 


Bright Mane found himself at the bottom of a deep 
pit. The wemic, a cross between lion and human 
just as a centaur is a cross between human and 
horse, had stumbled into the trap while hunting for 
food. The pit, which smelled of humans and their 
strange tools, was deep enough to keep Bright Mane 
from leaping out, even if he hadn't injured his hind 
leg in the fall. The sides of the pit were too steep to 
climb, and he was quickly running out of ideas. 
Soon, he knew, the humans would come to see what 
they had caught in their pit. Then his exploration of 
the world beyond his nation's territory would end 
—as would his freedom, and perhaps his life. 

As twilight stretched across the land, Bright 
Mane heard the sound of clanking armor approach- 
ing. He tensed, tightening his grip on his primitive 
spear. He would not give up without a fight! That 
was not the way of a warrior of the pride! 

“What have they caught this time?” a gravelly 
voice asked. Bright Mane looked up to see a dwarf 
peering down at him. Behind the dwarf was a 
human, dressed in the polished armor of a paladin. 

“Whatever it is, I won't see it taken as slave by 
those vile predators,” the paladin proclaimed. "Let's 
see if we can extract it before Barrot and his men 
return ...” 


In this campaign model, the human and 
demihuman PCs who have been operating in 
the DM's campaign world come to the rescue 
of the newly-created humanoid PC. Like the 


Table 1: Humanoid Level Limits 


[e Character Group 

Race Wr Wz Pr Reg 
Aarakocra no — al 
Alaghi ipe. Wuip 
Beastman 12 — — 10 
Bugbear 12 — 8.15359 
Bullywug l0 — y 29 
Centaur 4208312: 1 eal A 
Fremlin — 10 = n 
Giant-kin, firbolg 12 — 7 — 
Giant-kin, voadkyn 11 8 7 10 
Gnoll a 2g aie 
Gnoll, flind 122 — DE Ti 
Goblin 2 — E EA 
Hobgoblin il — 9 ~H 
Kobold 8 = 9 p 
Lizard Man 12 — y 
Minotaur 49 IB vot 
Mongrelman A0 105. 10 12 
Ogre 2 — 3 — 
Ogre, half- D2* — 4 = 
Ogre mage 9 8 7T 8 
Orc 10 — B Ji 
Orc, half- 1 — 4 8 
Pixie 7 — — 132 
Satyr mo — — 1 
Saurial, bladeback 9 9 U 9 
Saurial, finback U 9 9 9 
Saurial, flyer 9 9 J Ü 
Saurial, hornhead 9 U 9 9 
Swanmay Me = 
Wemic 12 — Zo 10) 
* See Table 2 


Table 2: Bonus Levels for 
Single-Classed Humanoids 


Prime Requisite Score Total Bonus Levels 


Racial Maximum +1 +1 (+1) 
Racial Maximum +2 +2 (+4) 
Racial Maximum +3 +3 (+7) 


Use the parenthetical number if the prime requisite is Strength and if 
the humanoid is a human crossbreed (half-orc, half-ogre) 


Humanoid Characters * 9 


lion with a thorn in its paw, the humanoid is in 
some kind of trouble that only the non-human- 
oid PCs can save him from. They take on the 
role of the mouse, who pulls the thorn free and 
earns the respect and favor of the terrible lion. 
By saving the humanoid, the other PCs gain a 
companion — and perhaps even a friend. 

Once saved, the humanoid PC forms a bond 
with his rescuers. He feels he owes them a debt 
he can never repay, or at least that he owes 
them a debt which must be paid off through 
the course of subsequent adventures. Even if 
the other PCs protest, the humanoid will not 
be swayed from paying back his debt in what- 
ever way he can think of. He will follow his 
saviors, protect them, aid them in their quests, 
and seek to return the great favor that they 
have bestowed upon him. 

Humanoids can be saved from a variety of 
situations, including angry mobs, other adven- 
turers, town guards, hostile monsters, natural 
disasters, and even other humanoids. A 
humanoid PC who has been rescued will be 
totally devoted to his saviors if he is of the 
proper alignment and personality. Even the 
most independent and chaotic humanoids will 
see the other player characters as companions 
who will keep them from getting into deadly 
trouble again. 


Campaign Model #2: 
“ls a Friend Indeed." 


The trolls were closing in on Grellor at last, and 
the ranger had nowhere else to run to. He had 
reached the end of the path. Above him was the 
steep cliff walls of the mountain pass, below him 
was a dizzying drop into oblivion. His only option 
was to turn and face the trio of trolls, though this 
would only delay the inevitable. His sword and tir- 
ing muscles were no longer a match for the regener- 
ating monsters. 

The trolls appeared from around the bend, first 
one with drooling jaws and outstretched talons, 
then another, and another. They moved slowly, 


sensing that the chase had ended and wanting to 
continue the game for a while longer. Grellor swung 
his sword before him, hoping to keep the monsters at 
bay. By the look on the lead troll's face, that tactic 
wasn't going to work. He watched as the vile crea- 
ture tensed, preparing to leap across the remaining 
space and sink its claws into his tender, tired flesh. 

What happened next was a confused jumble. The 
lead troll leaped. Grellor screamed and jumped back, 
plunging over the side of the cliff. He heard another 
scream over his own, like the cry of a huge bird. 
"Skree-ya!" it called, and Grellor felt bony hands 
grasp him. He looked up to see a winged humanoid 
— an aarakocra, he believed it was called — grab 
him. While it could not hold his weight and main- 
tain flight, it could slow their fall toward the water 
below. 

"Breeka save human," the aarakocra crowed in 
broken common as they glided downward. "She 
have wings enough for both of us ..." 


In this model, it is the human or demihuman 
player characters who are in deadly trouble. 
While this model works best on an individual 
level (one human/demihuman PC, one 
humanoid PC), it can be developed to apply to 
an entire player character group. 

On an individual level, the human and the 
humanoid form a bond due to the heroic efforts 
of the humanoid character. This bond can start 
as one of gratitude and a debt to be repaid, but 
it often develops into a long-term adventuring 
companionship or even a close personal friend- 
ship between the human in need of help and 
his humanoid savior. 

On a group level, the humanoid character 
provides the means for adventurers to get out 
of a terrible jam. She may know a secret pas- 
sage out of the dungeon, or a hidden pass 
through goblin territory, or she may even 
charge into battle to save the adventurers from 
certain doom. In this way, the entire group 
owes a debt to the humanoid. They may not all 
become fast friends with their savior, but they 
will show a grudging respect and will feel 


Humanoid Characters * 11 


obligated to her. 

Adventurers get into all sorts of situations 
that they might need to be rescued from. A 
trap in a dungeon could leave them all uncon- 
scious and dying until the humanoid pulls 
them to safety. Hordes of monsters could be 
closing in and the adventurers must prepare to 
fight to the death, when the humanoid shows 
them a way to escape. Or perhaps the human- 
oid leads them to a pool of healing, or to a 
much needed cache of supplies, or even inter- 
cedes on behalf of the adventurers to save 
them from her own people. 

Whatever the situation, a humanoid who 
helps a group of adventurers out of a life-or- 
death encounter becomes very attached to her 
charges. She believes that they will always 
need her help, that if she leaves them to their 
own devices they will simply wind up back in 
trouble again — or worse. Because of this, the 
humanoid decides to accompany them on their 
adventures. For their part, the adventurers feel 


——————————————————————————————————————————S 


12 * Chapter One 


beholden to the humanoid, so they tolerate her 
presence. As the humanoid shows her 
resourcefulness and ability to help over and 
over again, she will become an important part 
of their group. Perhaps over several gaming 
sessions, she will even become their friend. 


Campaign Model #3: 
“Hello, Again..." 


Freg the Rogue sat staring into the dying camp- 
fire, trying not to think about what his beloved 
Dreeya might return as. The woman warrior was 
struck down in their escape from the Underdark, 
and the only option that had been open to Freg was 
to allow the priest Joun to cast her miracle. Now he 
could only wait. 

“Are you certain you have no idea what form 
Dreeya will come back in?" Freg asked the cleric for 
the tenth time since they had finished dinner. 

“Reincarnate is not an exact spell,” Joun 
explained again. "She may return as an animal, or 


perhaps even as a humanoid.” 

Freg jabbed a long stick into the fire, producing a 
burst of sparks. “If you knew Resurrection we 
wouldn't be sitting here waiting to see ..." 

The conversation ended abruptly as a sound broke 
the stillness beyond the camp. The thief and the 
priest turned in the direction of the noise, trying to 
make out shapes in the darkness beyond the fire's 
glow. They heard it again. Someone or something 
was approaching the camp. 

“Dreeya?” Freg called cautiously. “Dreeya, is 
that you?” 

“Yes, my dearest,” a voice called back. It was a 
feminine voice, but it was also very deep and not 
quite human. Freg gulped. 

A dark shadow reached the edge of the camp, hesi- 
tated, then slid into the fire's light. Standing before 
Freg and Joun, barely able to contain a smile, was a 
huge, obviously female, bugbear. 

“Dreeya has returned,” the bugbear said, fixing 
Freg with a loving look. “Miss me?” 


A human or demihuman player character 
eventually faces a foe that is stronger, tougher, 
and luckier than he is. On such an occasion, the 
result is often the untimely death of the player 
character. Of course, death is not always final 
for PCs in a campaign. There are a number of 
methods for rescuing a favorite character from 
the bony clutches of death. The method which 
concerns us here is the priest spell, reincarnate. 

The list of possible incarnations has been 
expanded to include the humanoid races listed 
in this book. Now that there are rules for creat- 
ing and playing humanoid characters, it makes 
sense to provide this method for turning a 
dead human or demihuman PC into a live 
humanoid PC. 

This method creates a situation that is unlike 
the other methods for introducing a humanoid 
PC into a campaign. While the other methods 
bring an “uncivilized” humanoid into the com- 
pany of human and demihuman adventurers, 
reincarnate places the memories and personalities 
of deceased humans into the body of a human- 


oid. The character must now cope with life from 
inside a very different body than he was used to. 
He must face all of the prejudices directed at that 
body without the benefit of growing up in the 
culture it belongs to. A new humanoid character 
introduced through reincarnate may look like a 
bugbear or satyr, but it has all (or at least most) of 
the knowledge and understanding of the human 
character it used to be. 

The reincarnated character recalls the greater 
part of his former life and form. The character 
class of the new incarnation can be anything 
the player wants, as long as it fits the rules pre- 
sented in this book and matches the humanoid 
race in question. 

If a humanoid character is being created 
using the reincarnate spell, it follows these 
rules: If the character returns as the same class 
as his previous incarnation, the reincarnated 
humanoid has half his previous levels and hit 
points. If the humanoid returns as a new char- 
acter class, his hit points are half his previous 
total, but he must begin again at first level. 


Campaign Model #4: 
“All that Glitters... 


The goblin sat across from Valkira and her com- 
panions, slurping the mug of wine she had offered it 
with greedy delight. It drained the contents quickly, 
licking the last drops from the bottom of the mug. 
Then it belched loudly, licked again, and finally 
dropped the empty mug before turning its unusu- 
ally bright eyes upon Valkira. 

“Can you really lead us through the passages 
beneath the Sunset Mountains?” the warrior 
woman asked, watching the goblin closely for signs 
of deception or betrayal. 

“Grolip know passages like Grolip know back of 
foot,” the goblin boasted easily. “Grolip lead you — 
if pay is right.” 

“We'll pay what we agreed upon,” Valkira assured 
him. “Half now, half on the other side. Plus, if all 
goes well, we'll give you an additional fifty as a 
bonus.” 


—_—_— ee aaaaaaaasasaasasasasasasasssssssssħÃħĂ 


Humanoid Characters * 13 


The goblin's eyes widened at the promise, and his 
fangs protruded in a lopsided grin. “For that, 
Grolip even help you carry your treasure!” 

“That's okay,” Valkira said quickly. “Just lead us 
through the passages safely.” 

“You safe with Grolip,” the goblin nodded eagerly. 
“Grolip know way ..." 


In this campaign model, the adventurers hire 
the services of a humanoid for a particular 
adventure and wind up getting a life-long 
companion. Perhaps they aren’t able to pay 
him right away and he decides to hang around 
until the money becomes available. Maybe cir- 
cumstances turn employers and employee into 
partners or even friends. In most cases, what 
starts as an honest business arrangement 
evolves into something more. The humanoid 
might be in it for the money in the beginning, 
but circumstances often turn business associ- 
ates into boon companions — especially in the 
violent, dangerous realms where adventurers 
tend to roam. 

Humanoids can be hired for any number of 


a S——— 


14 * Chapter One 


jobs, including hired muscle, as guides or 
interpreters, and even for some particular skill 
or knowledge the humanoid might have. Those 
humanoids who make good player characters 
often hire themselves out in order to earn 
money until they can hook up with an adven- 
turing party that will accept them. Often, the 
only legal employment a humanoid can find is 
as a hireling to adventurers. 

During the course of employment, the 
humanoid will come to enjoy the company of 
the adventurers, perhaps even hooking onto 
one particular character as a friend. He will 
demonstrate his own abilities and worth to the 
party as the adventure progresses, and even 
prove his loyalty on more than one occasion. 
When the time comes to collect his pay and 
move on, the humanoid will make excuses to 
stay. He may admit to wanting to stay out of 
friendship, or he may pretend that only the 
promise of more wealth keeps him around. In 
either case, the party gains the skills of the 
humanoid character, and the humanoid gains 
the companionship of the adventurers. 


CHAPTER 


Humanoid Races 


Basic information on humanoid races can be 
found in the various Monstrous Compendium" 
sets. As the humanoids who become player 
characters are rare examples of their races, the 
information that follows (except for rules 
material) is intended only as a guideline. What 
may be true of one member of a humanoid 
race may not be true of another. Individual 
alignments can vary, as can backgrounds, 
goals, and motivations. 


How to Read the Entries 


Each entry for a humanoid character type 
includes the following elements: 

Ability Score Adjustments. These modify 
the ability scores when the humanoid is 
selected. They are added to or subtracted from 
the scores rolled. The adjusted ability score is 
entered on your character sheet. 

Ability Score Range. This lists the minimum 
and maximum ability scores a humanoid char- 
acter can have when first created. Scores that 
exceed the maximum or fail to meet the mini- 
mum can be adjusted down or up to the limit 
only if the DM allows it; otherwise a different 
character type must be chosen. 

Of course, over time a character's ability 
scores may change. Only at the time of a char- 
acter’s creation must the minimums and maxi- 
mums be adhered to. 

Note that the maximum Charisma score is that 
perceived by other races. A rolled score higher 
than this has its full effect on members of the 
character’s own race. 

Class Restrictions and Level Limits. Which 
classes are open to the humanoid and how far 
the character can advance can be found here. 

Multiclass options are listed on page 119. In 
general, a humanoid must have scores of 14 in 
the prime requisites of both classes to become a 
multiclass character. 

Hit Dice. Humanoid hit dice depend on the 
class selected. Any special hit point bonus the 
humanoid receives is listed here. 


Alignment. The race’s typical alignment is 
listed here. The range of PC options is usually 
more extensive. 

Natural Armor Class. Some humanoid races 
have a natural armor class which provides pro- 
tection without the benefit of artificial armor. 
This rating does not include Dexterity bonuses 
or penalties. 

Generally, protection rated at less than or 
equal to the natural armor class will provide 
+1 AC protection. Thus, a lizard man (with a 
natural armor class of 5) wearing studded 
leather armor is AC 4. Should the character 
somehow contrive to have a set of plate mail 
constructed, it would give him a base AC 3. 

Background. This describes the humanoid in 
general terms, painting a broad picture of the 
particular race and its members. The player 
should also detail the character’s background 
in order to fully integrate the character into the 
campaign. Such additional details are subject 
to the approval of the DM. 

Languages. This section lists the languages 
which are commonly spoken by the members 
of a particular race. A character always speaks 
his native language. Additional languages 
may be known. It is highly recommended that 
all humanoid PCs understand common. 

If the DM uses the nonweapon proficiency 
system, additional languages require profi- 
ciency slots. A humanoid character’s native 
language does not require a slot. Additional 
languages do (see Chapter Four: Humanoid 
Proficiencies). If the DM is not using the non- 
weapon proficiency system, then the human- 
oid characters know a specific number of 
additional languages based upon their Intelli- 
gence scores (see Player's Handbook). 

Role-Playing Suggestions. This gives a few 
suggestions on how to role-play a member of 
this particular race. The players can use these 
suggestions or ignore them as they see fit. 

Special Advantages. This lists any special 
advantages benefitting the members of a par- 
ticular humanoid race. 


LK 


Humanoid Races * 15 


Special Disadvantages. This lists any special 
disadvantages that hinder the humanoid. 

Monstrous Traits. These are the typical traits 
exhibited by the members of this race. Such 
traits help distinguish one humanoid race from 
another. 

Optionally, the DM may require humanoid 
characters to take additional monstrous traits, 
depending on the number of special advan- 
tages the humanoid has (see Chapter Five). 

Superstitions (Optional). This section lists 
sample superstitions that best fit a particular 
humanoid race. 

Proficiencies. The entries for weapon and 
nonweapon proficiencies list each humanoid 
race’s initial selections. Unless the DM 
approves another proficiency, or a special kit is 
taken, PCs of a particular humanoid race must 
select their initial proficiencies from their lists 
(proficiencies available through humanoid kits 
are listed in Chapter Three). When a new profi- 
ciency slot is gained by level advancement, the 
new proficiency can be selected from any 
weapon or group available to the kit or charac- 
ter class. 


Aarakocra 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +1 bonus to Dex- 
terity, and a -1 penalty to Strength and 
Constitution. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 3 16 
Dexterity 8 18 
Constitution 6 16 
Intelligence 3 18 
Wisdom 3 17 
Charisma 3 18 


16 * Chapter Two 


Class Restrictions 
Class 


Maximum Level 
Warrior 
Fighter 11 
Ranger = 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage 3 
Illusionist — 
Priest 
Cleric — 
Druid 
Shaman 
Witch Doctor 
Rogue 
Thief 11 
Bard — 


I3] 


Hit Dice. Player character aarakocra receive 
hit dice by class. 

Alignment. Aarakocra tend toward neutral 
good. PC aarakocra may be of any alignment. 

Natural Armor Class. 7. 

Background. Aarakocra are a race of intelli- 
gent bird-men that live among the highest 
mountain peaks. The average aarakocra stands 


about five feet tall and has a wing span of 
twenty feet. Halfway along the edge of each 
wing is a hand with three human-sized fingers 
and an opposable thumb. An elongated fourth 
finger extends the length of the wing and locks 
in place during flight. 

The hands cannot grasp while flying, but are 
nearly as useful as human hands when an 
aarakocra is perched and its wings folded 
back. Their powerful legs end in four sharp 
talons that can unlock and fold back to reveal 
another pair of functional hands. 

These humanoids have hollow, fragile bones. 
Their faces combine the features of both par- 
rots and eagles. They have gray-black beaks 
and black eyes. Plumage color varies, but 
males generally have red, orange, and yellow 
coloration, while females tend toward brown 
and gray. 

Aarakocra live in small tribes which control 
hunting territories and share a communal nest. 
The eldest male serves as leader, the second 
oldest as shaman. 

Languages. Aarakocra, giant eagle, common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Aarakocra are 
reluctant to engage in ground or grappling 
combat because of their fragile bones. They 
love gems and other shiny objects. Their reli- 
gious ceremonies are simple affairs involving 
whistled hymns. Sunset on the first day of each 
new month is of religious significance. 

These bird-men enjoy peace and solitude. 
They love their freedom, and are extremely 
claustrophobic. Most of them will not enter a 
cave, building, or other enclosed area without 
a very good reason. 

Aarakocra PC adventurers must have clear 
motivations. Some leave on a quest to aid their 
people, others because they do not fit in with 
the rest of their tribe. 

Aarakocra who learn common intersperse 
the language with their native bird-like sounds. 
Caws, screeches, and whistles punctuate their 
broken sentences in typical bird-like fashion 
(like a parrot mimics human speech). 


Aarakocra fighters prefer heavy fletched 
javelins when they must go to battle. An 
aarakocra can carry up to six javelins in indi- 
vidual sheathes strapped to his chest. While 
flying, he can clutch a javelin in each of his 
lower hands, throwing them or stabbing oppo- 
nents as necessary. Aarakocra who have left 
their home territory and traveled to more civi- 
lized lands will sometimes wear pieces of stud- 
ded leather armor to provide additional 
protection. They never carry shields. 

Some tribes of aarakocra carry a special 
weapon, called a flight lance. See Chapter 
Seven: Arms and Armor, for more details. 

Special Advantages. The bird-men have the 
ability to fly, with a movement speed of 36 and 
a maneuverability class of C. 

Aarakocra talons cause 1-3 points of damage 
and can strike twice in a round. Their beaks 
also cause 1-3 points of damage. They receive 
no attack penalties for aerial missile fire. When 
using two javelins, an aarakocra can make a 
diving attack. They must dive at least 200 feet 
to use this special attack. The attacks are usu- 
ally accompanied by a blood-curdling shriek, 
gain a +4 bonus to the attack rolls, and cause 
double damage. 

An aarakocra shaman of 7th level can, with 
four other aarakocra, summon a friendly air 
elemental in three rounds of chanting and aer- 
ial dancing. It will perform favors, although it 
will not endanger its life for them. 

Special Disadvantages. Aarakocra are very 
claustrophobic. Those who engage in combat 
in enclosed areas (buildings, dungeons, etc.) 
receive a -3 penalty to their attack rolls. 

Monstrous Traits. Monstrous speech; 
aarakocra make bird sounds when speaking, 
even if talking in the common tongue. 

Superstitions. Fear of enclosed spaces. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Dagger, dart, javelin, 
flight lance (if available). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Alertness, animal 
noise, danger sense, direction sense, hunting, 
survival (mountains), weather sense, weaving. 


————————————— ——————P 


Humanoid Races j° 17 


Alaghi 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +2 bonus to 
Strength and a 2 penalty to Intelligence. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 12 19 
Dexterity 3 17 
Constitution 12 18 
Intelligence 3 16 
Wisdom 3 16 
Charisma 3 16 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 12 
Ranger = 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage = 
Illusionist 2 
Priest 
Cleric — 
Druid 11* 
Shaman — 
Witch Doctor — 
Rogue 
Thief — 
Bard = 


Maximum Level 


* Int 15*, Wis 12*, Cha 15* alignment neutral 
good. 


Hit Dice. Player character alaghi receive hit 
dice by class. In addition, they receive 9 bonus 
hit points at first level. 

Alignment. Alaghi tend toward true neutral 
alignment. PC alaghi may be of any alignment. 
Alaghi druids are neutral good. 

Natural Armor Class. 4. 

Background. Alaghi, distant relations to yeti, 
are forest-dwelling humanoids. They have bar- 


18 * Chapter Two 


rel chests, short necks, and wide, flat heads. 
Their short legs are thick, their hands and feet 
are large, and their hair is thick: blond, reddish 
brown, or charcoal gray. They stand about 6 
feet tall and weigh over 300 pounds. 

Most alaghi live as semi-nomadic hunter- 
gatherers. Sedentary alaghi set up communi- 
ties of crude huts or large cave complexes. 
Alaghi communities are generally mistrusted, 
though some neighbors will trade manufac- 
tured goods for pelts, game, and ore. The rarest 
alaghi are philosophical hermits that are neu- 
tral good and have druidic abilities. 

The primitive alaghi fashion crude stone 
knives, hand axes, and tools, as well as simple 
wooden javelins. A favorite tactic employed by 
the alaghi is to hurl missile weapons from hid- 
ing, ambushing their opponents. 

Languages. Alaghi, common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. These forest 
dwellers tend to be shy and peaceful. The her- 
mitic alaghi are curious and helpful to those in 
need. They love riddles and games of strategy, 
often seeking competition from willing 
humans and demihumans. They especially 
enjoy a good game of chess. 

Players should pick the alaghi character's 


background — nomadic, hermitic, or sedentary. 
Most will probably be nomadic, traveling in 
search of adventure as their less heroic kin seek 
game and wild plants. Nomadic alaghi do not 
necessarily live in harmony with nature, but they 
respect it and know how to use it without 
destroying it. Sedentary alaghi are like primitive 
humans, often greedy and raiding to survive. 
Hermitic alaghi live in harmony with nature, 
usually serving as druids and enjoying friendly 
relations with their woodland neighbors. 

An alaghi deciding to become an adventurer 
might leave home for a variety of reasons. A 
nomad leaves its group to seek knowledge, 
treasure, or adventure. A sedentary alaghi 
grows tired of community life and again takes 
up the life of a nomad, eventually hooking up 
with a group of adventurers and finding a new 
and exciting activity. A hermitic alaghi may 
decide to give up a life of solitude for some 
grand cause — one that usually involves con- 
cerns of nature and druidic lore. 

Special Advantages. The alaghi's huge fists 
can inflict 2d6 points of damage. Alaghi can 
move silently as per the thief ability, and they 
can hide in natural surroundings. At 1st level, the 
base scores are 40% and 35% respectively. Each 
time an experience level is gained, the alaghi 
receives another 5% in each skill. 

Special Disadvantages. Alaghi take damage 
as large creatures. 

Monstrous Traits. Fearsome appearance, 
punctuate sentences with hisses, hoots, and 
grunts. Sedentary alaghi must suppress the 
urge to slay and eat any non-alaghi they meet. 

Superstitions. Fear things which appear to 
them as unnatural, including wizard spells, 
undead creatures, and metal arms and armor. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Club, hand axe, 
javelin, knife (all stone weapons). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Animal lore, ani- 
mal noise, direction sense, eating, endurance, 
gaming, hiding, hunting, intimidation, natural 
fighting, survival (forest). 


Beastman 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +2 bonus to Dex- 
terity, and a penalty of 2 to Charisma. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 6 18/50 
Dexterity 6 18 
Constitution 6 16 
Intelligence 3 18 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 16 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 10 
Ranger 12 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage = 
Illusionist = 
Priest 
Cleric = 
Druid — 
Shaman — 
Witch Doctor — 
Rogue 
Thief 10 
Bard — 


Maximum Level 


Hit Dice. Player character beastmen receive 
hit dice by class. 

Alignment. Beastmen tend toward neutral 
(good) alignment. PC beastmen may be of any 
alignment. 

Natural Armor Class. 8. 

Background. Beastmen are short, slender 
humanoids with a fine layer of dark green or 
olive colored fur covering their bodies. An 
inner coat of coarse black fur lies beneath this, 
which gives them a natural camouflage ability. 


———————————————————————————D 


Humanoid Races, * 19 


Beastmen can instinctively create patterns of 
stripes or spots across their bodies. The col- 
oration helps them blend in with shadows of 
the forests from which they hail. 

In their native forests, beastmen are danger- 
ous hunters and adversaries. However, they 
seek to avoid combat and even contact with 
others unless they must defend themselves or 
their tribes. They are experts with spears, stone 
axes and knives, bolas, nets, and blowguns. 
Some beastmen know how to create a special 
poison for their blow gun darts. Those who fail 
a saving throw vs. poison at a +4 bonus die in 
2d4 rounds. The toxin can only be prepared in 
the wild and with the proper ingredients. 

Beastman culture is self-sustaining and it 
does not discriminate against either sex. The 
average beastman has no need or desire to 
trade or interact with other races. Of course, 
beastmen PCs are not of average stock. They 
possess a healthy curiosity to learn and see 
new things, though they still hold their own 
culture to be the superior one. 

Languages. Beastmen, common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Beastmen seldom 
wear clothing or ornamentation as it interferes 
with their natural camouflage ability and with 
the use of their language. 

As the beastman language involves spoken 
words, hand and body gestures, and even the 
shifting of fur patterns, all other languages 
they may learn are considered simplistic and 
primitive. This gives beastmen a natural feel- 
ing of superiority over other races. 

In the wild, beastmen take on leadership 
roles depending upon the circumstances. The 
best qualified takes charge as needed. When 
working with non-beastmen, they try to con- 
tinue this honored tradition, usually to the cha- 
grin of their companions. 

Special Advantages. Beastmen can make 
themselves undetected in forest settings, able 
to hide with 90% chance of success. Opponents 
who are not aware of the beastman’s presence 
suffer a -6 penalty to their surprise rolls. 


20 * Chapter Two 


Beastmen do not believe in magic, ghosts, 
spirits, or the supernatural. Only those things 
which can be seen, touched, tasted, smelled 
and heard exist. Beastmen are not hindered by 
superstitions. 

A beastman who is proficient in herbalism 
can expend a proficiency slot to develop the 
ability to make beastman blowgun poison. 

Special Disadvantages. By nature, beastmen 
are nonmagical. They have 80% magic resis- 
tance, even to beneficial effects. They cannot 
use magical items except for magical weapons, 
and cannot themselves initiate any special 
magical functions of such weapons. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance, tendency to 
roar when completing a hunt. 

Superstitions. None. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Bola, blowgun, hand 
axe, knife (stone or wooden weapons). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Alertness, animal 
lore, animal noise, cooking, fire-building, fish- 
ing, hiding, hunting, rope use, set snares, sur- 
vival (forest), tracking, wild fighting. 


Bugbear 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +1 bonus to 
Strength and a -1 penalty to Intelligence and 
Charisma. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 8 18 
Dexterity 8 17 
Constitution 8 18 
Intelligence 3 16 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 14 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 12 
Ranger — 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage — 
Illusionist = 
Priest 
Cleric 8 
Druid = 
Shaman 5 
Witch Doctor 5 
Rogue 
Thief 9 
Bard — 


Maximum Level 


Hit Dice. Player character bugbears receive 
hit dice by class. In addition they receive 3 
bonus hit points at first level. 

Alignment. Bugbears tend toward chaotic 
evil. PC bugbears may be of any alignment, 
usually neutral (in rare cases good). 

Natural Armor Class. 10. 

Background. Bugbears are giant, hairy rela- 
tives of goblins. They are large, standing about 
seven feet tall, with muscular frames and the 


look of true carnivores. They have light yellow 
to yellow brown hides, with thick coarse hair 
that ranges in color from brown to brick red. 
Bestial eyes of greenish white with red pupils 
stare out from savage faces. Wedge-shaped 
ears rise from the top of their heads, and their 
mouths are full of long sharp fangs. 

Bugbears have exceptional sight and hearing, 
and they move with amazing stealth. They live 
in caves and underground lairs. Bugbear 
females are not given the same opportunities 
and privileges as the males, and a good num- 
ber of adventurer bugbears are females look- 
ing for better lives. 

These large humanoids live by plundering 
and ambush. They sometimes take slaves, and 
are often cruel and mean-spirited. They are 
excellent hunters. They eat anything they kill, 
including humans and humanoids smaller 
than themselves. Some adventuring bugbears 
leave their lairs because they cannot stand to 
eat intelligent creatures. 

A bugbear tribe will have shamans or witch 
doctors of up to 7th level, but not both. 

Languages. Bugbear, goblin, hobgoblin, com- 
mon. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Bugbears speak a 
foul sounding language punctuated by ges- 
tures, grunts, and snarls. They even use these 
bestial habits when talking in common, mak- 
ing other races doubt their intelligence. 

Even the bravest bugbear PC has trouble 
breaking away from its tribe. They prefer to 
ambush their foes rather than attack head on. 
If outnumbered or overmatched, most will 
retreat to fight another day. 

Adventuring bugbears remain territorial 
even after they leave their lairs. They mentally 
mark out territory wherever they go, even 
when traveling. Anything which comes into 
this space becomes their property (at least in 
their own minds), or the property of their new 
tribe (their PC companions). They are natural 
bullies, forcing their wills on weaker compan- 
ions. They are an opportunistic race, prone to 


Humanoid Races * 21 


temper tantrums and violent outbursts. 

Bugbears enjoy wine and strong ale — often 
to excess. They are stubborn by nature, finding 
it difficult to negotiate or compromise. Greed 
courses through their bodies like blood, and 
even the most noble bugbear covets glittery, 
shiny objects and weapons. 

Special Advantages. Bugbears have infravi- 
sion to 60 feet. Their stealth gives opponents a 
-3 penalty to their surprise rolls. 

Special Disadvantages. Bugbears take dam- 
age as large creatures. 

Monstrous Traits. Monstrous appearance, 
snarling language, long sharp claws. 

Superstitions. Always watchful for omens 
from the gods; afraid of lightning and violent 
weather changes; seek to keep on the good side 
of Skiggaret, the bugbear god of fear. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Throwing (footman's) 
mace, goblin stick, hand axe, morning star (great 
club), spear, warhammer. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Close-quarter 
fighting, drinking, eating, hunting, intimida- 
tion, looting, natural fighting, wild fighting. 


22 * Chapter Two 


Bullywug, Advanced 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +1 bonus to Dex- 
terity and a -1 penalty to Intelligence and 
Charisma. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 6 18/75 
Dexterity 4 18 
Constitution 6 18 
Intelligence 3 14 
Wisdom 6 16 
Charisma 3 14 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 10 
Ranger = 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage = 
Illusionist — 
Priest 
Cleric — 
Druid = 
Shaman 7 
Witch Doctor — 
Rogue 
Thief 9 
Bard — 


Maximum Level 


Hit Dice. Player character bullywugs receive 
hit dice by class. 

Alignment. Bullywugs tend toward chaotic 
evil. PC bullywugs may be of any alignment, 
but most are neutral or (rarely) good. 

Natural Armor Class. 6. 

Background. Bullywugs are bipedal frog-like 
amphibians inhabiting swamps, marshes, and 
other dank locations. They are covered with a 
smooth, mottled olive green hide that gives 


them a natural protection. They have the faces 
of enormous frogs, characterized by wide 
mouths and bulging eyes. Like frogs, their 
hands and feet are webbed. They wear no 
clothing, but do make use of crude armor, 
weapons, and shields. 

Bullywugs have learned to cooperate with 
each other in order to survive and to work 
together when hunting. They are skilled 
hunters and fishermen, and can use and build 
snares and nets. 

These frog-men grow up in a savage society. 
Males are dominant, as females are looked 
upon as nothing more than egg bearers. Only 
leaders and their god are shown any kind of 
respect. Bullywug shamans can advance as 
high as 7th level, and will always be male. 

Bullywugs need to keep their skin moist, 
which is why they favor swamps and marshes. 
They love treasure, even if the regular benefits 
of wealth are lost on their society. Coins, jewels 
and magical items are hoarded whenever they 
can be found. 

The average bullywug does not display the 
greed or lust for power seen in other chaotic 
races. They rarely fight among themselves, 
except when a leader grows too old or when 
the smaller, more savage bullywugs meet their 
larger, more advanced cousins. Bullywugs 
tend to harm their environment, often hunting 
and fishing an area until its natural resources 
are depleted. Most hate humans, attacking 
them on sight. 

Languages. Bullywug, common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Bullywug PCs 
are assumed to be the larger, more intelligent 
(advanced) bullywugs. These range in size 
from 6 to 7 feet, and are broader than their 
smaller relatives. They are more aggressive, 
better organized, and better equipped than the 
normal bullywugs. 

Often it is the females who decide to leave 
the lair and take up the life of an adventurer, 
for the opportunities in their own society are 
extremely limited. While bullywug PCs tend to 


natures as they try to find a place for them- 
selves in the outside world. 

Of course, as most other humans and 
humanoids fear and detest bullywugs, life for 
adventurer bullywugs is difficult and danger- 
ous. The successful ones will learn to depend 
on and cooperate with whatever adventuring 
group they can latch onto, for their survival 
depends on cooperation. 

Adventuring bullywug shamans often take 
up service with a new god, for they are usually 
fleeing from the wrath of the chaotic evil deity 
of their race. 

Special Advantages. Bullywugs have 
chameleon abilities that make them 75% unde- 
tectable in natural surroundings. This lets 
them ambush opponents, whose surprise rolls 
receive a 2 penalty (-6 if attacked by hop). 

Bullywugs employ a hop attack which can 
carry them up to 30 feet forward and 15 feet 
upward. A hop attack gives them a +1 bonus 
to their attack rolls. If they are using impaling 
weapons, these cause double damage. 

Bullywugs receive swimming as a bonus 
proficiency. 


Humanoid Races, * 23 


Special Disadvantages. Bullywugs must wet 
their entire bodies three times a day (at least a 
waterskin full of water is required). If they are 
unable to find moisture, they begin to lose 
Constitution at a rate of 2 points per missed 
bath. If their Constitution falls to zero, they die 
from dehydration. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance, chaotic ten- 
dencies, webbed hands and feet. 

Superstitions. Bullywugs fear dry heat and 
areas that have little standing water. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Club, dagger, short 
sword, spear, trident. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Direction sense, 
fishing, hunting, survival (swamp), weather 
sense, wild fighting. 


Centaur 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +1 bonus to Con- 
stitution and Wisdom, and a -2 penalty to 
Dexterity. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 11 18 
Dexterity 3 16 
Constitution 11 18 
Intelligence 3 16 
Wisdom 4 18 
Charisma 3 18 


Class Restrictions 
Class Maximum Level 
Warrior 
Fighter 12 
Ranger 10 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage 12 
Illusionist = 


ao — 


24 * Chapter Two 


Priest 
Cleric — 
Druid 14 
Shaman z 
Witch Doctor 

Rogue 
Thief E 
Bard 12 


Hit Dice. Player character centaurs receive 
hit dice by class. In addition they receive 4 
bonus hit points at first level. 

Alignment. Centaurs tend toward neutral or 
chaotic good. PC centaurs may be any align- 
ment, but are usually neutral or chaotic good. 

Natural Armor Class. 5. 

Background. Centaurs have the upper torso, 
arms and head of a human, and the lower 
body of a horse. These woodland beings are 
sociable creatures, living in family groups 
organized into larger tribes. Tribes survive 
through hunting, foraging, fishing, agriculture 
and trade. They tend to shun humans, but 
often trade with elves for food and wine. 

Centaurs welcome elves into their areas, 
sometimes even sharing territory with them. 
Humans and dwarves receive polite invita- 
tions to leave, while halflings and gnomes are 
usually tolerated. 

Centaurs mate for life, and the males clearly 
have the dominant role in their society. They 
are pastoral beings who can be violent when 
the need arises. They live in harmony with 
nature and know how to conserve resources. 
They keep things in balance, planting a tree for 
every one they chop down and taking only 
what the environment can easily give. 

These woodland creatures use a variety of 
weapons, including oaken clubs, composite 
bows and medium horse lances. Some carry 
shields, and a few wear special centaur armor. 

Languages. Centaur, elvish, common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Centaur player 
characters are either young stallions and mares 
who have not yet found their life mates, or 


widows and widowers who have lost their 
mates and taken up a life of adventure in order 
to ease their pain. They are a strong, proud 
race, easily offended and impulsive. 

Centaurs live in balance. They must eat a lot 
to power their great bodies, and have been 
known to over-indulge when it comes to wine 
and ale. Under the influence of alcohol, cen- 
taurs display rowdy, boorish, and aggressive 
behavior. 

Those centaurs deciding to explore the world 
as adventurers usually do so to satisfy an 
innate curiosity and wanderlust that some- 
times becomes a compulsion. They make excel- 
lent companions, good fighters, and hardy 
travelers. While they might sometimes offer a 
two-legged companion a ride, centaurs do not 
consider themselves pack animals or sources 
of transportation. In fact, they often become 
insulted if such a role is suggested. They also 
do not tolerate horse jokes, though otherwise 
they have good senses of humor. 

Special Advantages. Centaurs can make 
three melee attacks in a round: once with their 
weapons and twice with their front hooves. 
Hooves cause 1-6 points of damage each. 

Centaurs armed with lances can charge for 


double damage, but cannot attack with their 
hooves in that same round. 

Special Disadvantages. Centaurs take dam- 
age as large creatures. They have difficulty 
negotiating underground settings. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance. 

Superstitions. Fear of dragons and giants, 
see omens and portents in nature. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Composite long bow, 
medium horse lance, great club. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Animal lore, agri- 
culture, animal noise, armorer, artistic ability, 
bowyer/fletcher, brewing, drinking, eating, 
fishing, hunting, leatherworking, natural fight- 
ing, running, set snares, survival (forests), 
tracking, weaving, winemaking. 


Fremlin 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +2 bonus to Dex- 
terity, a +1 bonus to Intelligence, and a -3 
penalty to Strength. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 2 1 
Dexterity 8 18 
Constitution 4 13 
Intelligence 6 18 
Wisdom 3 16 
Charisma 9. 18 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter — 
Ranger = 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage 10 
Illusionist 10 


Maximum Level 


—————————————————————D 


Humanoid Races * 25 


Priest 
Cleric — 
Druid = 
Shaman = 
Witch Doctor — 
Rogue 
Thief 12 
Bard — 


Hit Dice. Player character fremlins receive 
hit dice by class. 

Alignment. Fremlins tend toward chaotic 
neutral. PC fremlins may be of any alignment, 
but are usually chaotic neutral. 

Natural Armor Class. 6. 

Background. Fremlins are friendly, mostly 
harmless gremlins. Like other gremlins, they 
are small, winged goblinoids, only growing to 
about a foot in height. However, fremlins tend 
to be plump and slate colored. 


26 * Chapter Two 


to fall into hysterical fits of laughter. They have 
large, pointed ears, bat-like wings that give 
them the power of flight, and an innate immu- 
nity to non-magical weapons. 

Fremlins shun clothing and ornamentation, 
believing that they should never hide the won- 
derful bodies they were born with. They refuse 
to use weapons, and are generally worthless in 
combat. 

These magical creatures live to have fun, 
usually at the expense of others. They love 
to play practical jokes, though their humor 
tends to be less harmful than that of their 
gremlin cousins. 

Languages. Gremlin (includes fremlin and 
galltrit), common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Fremlins are 
friendly gremlins who tend to be quite harm- 
less. These plump magical creatures are usu- 
ally whining and lazy, complaining about the 
least thing and always seeking a way out of 
real work. 

Fremlin player characters are tolerable com- 


zm BA 


panions. They usually hook up with a charac- 
ter who befriends them or does something to 
earn their attention. Those they like receive 
companionship, those they dislike become the 
targets of their mischievous pranks. 

Fremlins will stick with an adventuring party 
for a time, remaining as long as they are kept 
fed and entertained. While they have some 
useful skills and abilities, fremlin PCs are usu- 
ally played for comic relief. They seldom assist 
in combat, and often they wind up hindering 
the efforts of their companions by giving away 
hiding locations or making other “innocent” 
blunders. 

These magical creatures are cowards, fleeing 
at the first sign of trouble. They can be annoy- 
ing, obnoxious, and easily insulted. Often they 
will disappear for a time, returning just when 
the rest of their party believes them to be gone 
for good. Apologies sometimes bring them 
back earlier, but usually they stay away until 
they forget whatever it is that made them mad 
or depressed in the first place. 

Special Advantages. Fremlins are immune to 
attacks made with normal weapons. Oppo- 
nents need a +1 weapon or better to hit them. 

Fremlins can fly, with a movement speed of 
12 and a maneuverability class of B. 

Although fremlins rarely fight, they can use 
tiny weapons specially scaled to their size. 
Such weapons must be specially made and 
inflict about one-third normal damage. 

Special Disadvantages. None. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance, size. 

Superstitions. Fremlins are afraid of almost 
everything. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Dagger, pixie sword, 
other weapons scaled for their size. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Begging, danger 
sense, drinking, eating, fortune telling, gam- 
ing, hiding, reading/writing, set snares, spell- 
craft. 


Giant-kin, Firbolg 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +2 bonus to 
Strength and a -2 penalty to Charisma. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 14 19 
Dexterity 8 15 
Constitution 12 18 
Intelligence 8 18 
Wisdom 8 18 
Charisma 3 14 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 12 
Ranger — 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage — 
Illusionist - 
Priest 
Cleric — 
Druid — 
Shaman 7 
Witch Doctor 
Rogue 
Thief — 
Bard = 


Maximum Level 


Hit Dice. Player character firbolgs receive hit 
dice by class. In addition they receive 13 bonus 
hit points at first level. 

Alignment. Firbolgs tend toward neutral or 
chaotic good. PC firbolgs may be of any align- 
ment, but are usually chaotic good. 

Natural Armor Class. 3. 

Background. Firbolgs are the most powerful 
of the giant-kin. They look like normal humans 
who have grown to a height of 10% feet tall and 
weigh over 800 pounds. Stylish firbolgs wear 


Humanoid Races, * 27 


their hair long and grow long, thick beards. 
Their pink skin is very dense and thick, giving 
them a low natural armor class. They have 
smooth voices of deep bass and thick, rolling 
consonants. 

These great giant-kin live in remote forests 
and hills. They distrust most other civilized 
races and tend to avoid them whenever possi- 
ble. They get along with druids and faerie crea- 
tures, including elves. They do not attack or 
kill without reason, but they love to engage in 
pranks which relieve strangers of their valu- 
ables. 

They have close-knit communities centered 
around the family or clan. Clans exist as gath- 
erers or nomads, coming together at least once 
a year with other clans to celebrate or make 
important decisions. 

Firbolgs live off the land, but they also live in 
harmony with it. They trade their great 
strength for food with other peaceful folk, sup- 
plementing their diet by gathering and hunt- 
ing. Few monsters bother firbolgs, and they 
avoid true giants other than storm giants. They 
refuse to allow other giant-kin to roam their 
territories. 

Languages. Firbolg, common, storm giant. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Firbolgs are 
extremely confident and quite fearless in most 
instances. They are a cautious and crafty race, 
and over the years they have learned to dis- 
trust and fear humans and demihumans. They 
are not overly aggressive, preferring to avoid 
encounters through hiding and deception. 
When forced to fight, they employ grand 
strategies which utilize the terrain and situa- 
tion around them to best effect. They are taught 
to operate as a group, not as individuals, and 
they will carry this trait with them when they 
take up with adventuring groups. 

Firbolg PCs usually adventure to gain knowl- 
edge. They are especially interested in increas- 
ing their understanding of magic or their 
collection of treasure. They do not ask for 
much from their companions, nor do they 


—_—_—_—_—_—_————— ŮĖ 


28 * Chapter Two 


fair. 

Firbolgs can use any large weapons. They 
disdain the use of armor and shields. Only the 
lesser races need such protection. 

Like all giant-kin, firbolg PCs seem strange 
and aloof to other player characters. Their 
motivations are different than those of smaller 
folk; for example, they often try to live up to 
the ideals of storm giants, making them seem 
even more strange to lesser folk. 

Special Advantages. Firbolgs have magical 
powers usable once per day. These develop, in 
order, at odd-numbered levels, starting at 3rd 
level. The powers are: detect magic, diminution 
(as double the potion), fools’ gold, forget, and 
alter self. These cannot be used when the fir- 
bolg is engaged in melee combat. 

Firbolgs can use large human weapons (like 
two-handed swords and halberds) with one 
hand without penalty. 

When using weapons of their own make 
(huge double-sized versions of human 
weapons), firbolg can wield them with both 
hands to inflict double damage. 

Firbolgs can swat away incoming missiles 
with a roll of 6 or better on 1d20. With one free 


i 


hand, they can bat away up to two missiles per 
round. Large missiles, such as hurled boulders 
or catapult missiles, can be caught if the firbolg 
wishes. Caught missiles can be hurled back at 
opponents on the next round with a -2 penalty 
to the attack roll. 

Special Disadvantages. Firbolgs have 15% 
magic resistance, even against magic that is 
beneficial. 

Firbolgs never wear armor of any sort, nor do 
they carry shields. 

Firbolgs take damage as large creatures. 

When using man-made weapons, firbolg can- 
not apply their Strength bonuses. 

Firbolgs must earn double the experience 
points of the base class to advance each level 
(for a fighter, 2nd level at 4,000, 3rd at 8,000, 
and so on). 

Firbolg Shamans: Firbold shamans must 
earn triple the experience points of the base 
clerical class to advance as shamans. For each 
level advanced as a shaman, the firbolg 
receives 2d6 hit points and the standard 
shaman spell allotment. 

In addition, firbolg shamans gain additional 
innate magical abilities of the illusion/phan- 
tasm school. At 1st to 5th level, they receive 
two Ist level spells at each level. At 6th and 7th 
levels they receive two 2nd level spells. As 
innate abilities, these are randomly deter- 
mined, and do not change once they are estab- 
lished. Each of these illusionist spells can be 
used once per day. 

Monstrous Traits. Size. 

Superstitions. Firbolg have an innate fear of 
human and demihuman mobs. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Club, halberd, giant- 
kin halberd, giant-kin two-handed sword, two- 
handed sword. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Agriculture, ani- 
mal handling, animal training, blacksmithing, 
cooking, eating, gaming, herbalism, hunting, 
intimidation, reading / writing, set snares, 
weaponsmithing, weather sense. 


Giant-kin, Voadkyn 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +1 bonus to 
Strength, a +2 bonus to Dexterity, a 1 penalty 
to Constitution, and a 2 penalty to Wisdom. 


Ability Score Range 


Ability 
Strength 11 18 
Dexterity 13 19 
Constitution 8 16 
Intelligence 11 17 
Wisdom 3 16 
Charisma 3 18 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 1 
Ranger 11 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage 8 
Illusionist — 
Priest 
Cleric = 
Druid 
Shaman 
Witch Doctor 
Rogue 
Thief 10 
Bard — 


Maximum Level 


Kos 


Hit Dice. Player character voadkyn receive 
hit dice by class. In addition, they receive 7 
bonus hit points at first level. 

Alignment. Voadkyn tend toward chaotic 
good. PC voadkyn may be of any alignment, 
but are usually chaotic good. 

Natural Armor Class. 8. 

Background. Voadkyn are also known by the 
more common name of wood giants. They are 
one of the smallest of the giant-kin races, 


Humanoid Races, + 29 


A 3 d ses 

vaguely resembling giant-sized wood elves. 
They stand about 97 feet tall and weigh 
approximately 700 pounds. They have the 
same physical proportions as humans, which 
gives them a thinner, lighter look than other 
giant-kin. Wood giants have no facial or body 
hair. They have large heads as compared to 
their bodies, and their jaws, chins and mouths 
are especially prominent. Their ears are on a 
higher plane than human ears, resting almost 
completely above the line of the eyes. 

The skin of a wood giant can be any shade of 
brown mixed with yellow or green. They like 
to wear leather armor or ring mail, and they 
carry a special steel-tipped sheath for their 
sword which allows them to use it as a walk- 
ing stick. They often disdain footwear, leaving 
their feet bare, though they do wrap their 
ankles in strips of leather. They dress in loose 
trousers or short kilts stained in forest colors, 
and always wear a leather forearm sheath to 
protect their bow arm. 

Wood giants live in the same forests favored 
by wood elves, whom they are good friends 
with. In fact, the two races often co-exist. They 
share a bond that goes back further than the 


—————————————————————————————————————————————— 


30 * Chapter Two 


oldest legends. They do not make their own 
lairs, preferring to live under the stars or to 
share a wood elf lair when shelter is needed. 

The bond between wood giants and wood 
elves extends to the other elven races. Wood 
giants tolerate the company of any good elves. 
Usually, they do not mix with other intelligent 
creatures, except for the occasional treant. 

A small number of voadkyn have druid pow- 
ers. Voadkyn druids are never found in the 
same community with voadkyn shamans. 

Voadkyn are flighty and frivolous by nature. 
They have a fondness for finely cut gems and 
well-crafted magical items. They also love to 
eat and drink wine, usually in large amounts. 

Languages. Voadkyn, treant, sylvan elf, com- 
mon. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Wood giants give 
in to sudden whims and rarely take anything 
seriously. Those that decide to become adven- 
turers are mostly in it for the fun they believe 
awaits them and for the treasures they believe 
they will earn. They are fun-loving beings. 
More serious companions consider them to be 
irrational, foolish, and even obnoxious. Still, 
most believe wood giants to be friendly and 
enjoyable company. 

Voadkyn PCs are slightly more ambitious 
than those who remain in the forest, but they 
still appear to be unmotivated, plodding, even 
lazy beings. This temperament makes them 
slow to anger, but they will fight to defend 
themselves or their allies. 

Wood giants love to eat, and they always 
have a sack of nuts and seeds from which to 
snack. When traveling with other adventurers, 
a wood giant can be heard munching on some 
plant byproduct almost constantly. They eat all 
kinds of vegetables and plants, including 
leaves and roots that other humanoid races 
find inedible. They do not eat meat. 

Special Advantages. Wood giants, like elves, 
are 90% resistant to sleep and charm spells. 
They have infravision up to 90 feet. 

At 7th level, wood giants gain the ability to 


polymorph (self) into any humanoid creature, 
from three to 15 feet in height. They cannot 
form themselves into another specific person, 
only into a typical member of the race. 

Voadkyn can move silently in forests, and 
any opponents there suffer a -4 penalty on 
their surprise rolls. In fact, voadkyn can blend 
into forest vegetation so well that only crea- 
tures able to detect invisible objects can see 
them. Voadkyn are quick, and can move out of 
hiding, fire an arrow, and return to their hiding 
place in the same round. 

The favorite wood giant weapon, a huge long 
bow, gives a wood giant a +1 bonus to attack 
rolls and a 50% increase in range. The large- 
sized arrows for these bows cause 1d8 points 
of damage. The voadkyn must be at full size to 
use this bow. 

Special Disadvantages. Voadkyn take dam- 
age as large creatures. They get no attack 
bonus for high strength. 

Voadkyn warriors use the Paladin XP table. 

Monstrous Traits. Size. 

Superstitions. Voadkyn dislike enclosed 
spaces. They believe that nights when the stars 
are hidden precede days of ill fortune, and are 
reluctant to do much on such days. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Giant-kin dagger, giant- 
kin long bow, giant-kin mace, two-handed sword. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Alertness, animal 
lore, animal noise, animal training (dire 
wolves), bowyer/ fletcher, direction sense, 
drinking, eating, fast-talking, gaming, hiding, 
hunting, set snares, survival (forests), wine- 
making. 


Gnoll 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +1 bonus to 
Strength, and a -1 penalty to Intelligence and 
Charisma. 


Ability Score Range 


Ability 
Strength 
Dexterity 
Constitution 
Intelligence 
Wisdom 
Charisma 


Maximum 
18 
18 
18 
14 
16 
14 


Minimum 


Quooouo 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 1 
Ranger E 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage = 
Illusionist — 
Priest 
Cleric 
Druid 
Shaman 
Witch Doctor 
Rogue 
Thief 11 
Bard = 


Maximum Level 


uu | o 


Hit Dice. Player character gnolls receive hit 
dice by class. In addition they receive 2 bonus 
hit points at first level. 

Alignment. Gnolls tend toward chaotic evil. 
PC gnolls may be of any alignment, but are 
usually some form of neutral. 

Natural Armor Class. 10. 

Background. Gnolls are large, evil, hyena- 
like humanoids that roam the land in loosely 
organized bands. They stand about 7% feet tall. 


Humanoid Races * 31 


They are humanoid, but the fine details more 
closely resemble a hyena. The skin of a gnoll is 
greenish gray that gets darker near its muzzle. 
They have short manes of reddish gray to dull 
yellow hair. 

Gnolls usually live beneath the ground or 
within abandoned ruins. Underground tribes 
operate mainly during the night. The strongest 
gnolls rule their brothers, using fear and intim- 
idation to best advantage. Gnoll females fight 
as well as the males, though they rarely get to 
use the best armor and weapons available to 
the band. 

Gnoll society uses slaves, and they often 
work with other humanoids, including orcs, 
bugbears, and trolls. This works best when the 
gnolls and their allies are of similar strength 
and numbers. If either gains an advantage, the 
other usually becomes food. To a gnoll, hunger 
comes before friendship or fear. They dislike 
goblins, kobolds, giants, humans, demi- 
humans, and any type of manual labor. 

Languages. Gnoll, flind, troll, orc, hobgoblin, 
common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Gnoll player 


ee OOO n— —————— 


32 * Chapter Two 


characters are extremely rare, for it is very dif- 
ficult for them to overcome their chaotic evil 
upbringing. Those who reject gnoll society 
usually do so out of hatred of the gnolls or to 
gain revenge against their race for some real or 
imagined wrong. 

Those gnolls who become adventurers often 
exhibit evil tendencies. They fight a constant 
battle to keep their bestial urges in check, and 
to overcome their natural aversion to manual 
labor. They find it particularly hard to break 
their taste for intelligent creatures, as they are 
confirmed carnivores. 

Gnoll adventurers will often put up with 
races they don’t like out of necessity. 

Special Advantages. None. 

Special Disadvantages. Gnolls take damage 
as large creatures. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance, bestial habits. 

Superstitions. Revere the phases of the 
moon, avoid bright light. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Battle axe, long com- 
posite bow, morning star, two-handed sword, 
any pole arm. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Animal training 
(hyenodon), close-quarter fighting, hiding, 
hunting, observation, tracking, wild fighting. 


Gnoll, Flind 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +1 bonus to 
Strength and a -1 penalty to Charisma. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 8 18 
Dexterity 6 18 
Constitution 6 18 
Intelligence 3 16 
Wisdom 3 16 
Charisma 3 16 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 12 
Ranger — 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage = 
Illusionist = 
Priest 
Cleric 9 
Druid — 
Shaman 7 
Witch Doctor 7 
Rogue 
Thief 1 
Bard — 


Maximum Level 


Hit Dice. Player character flinds receive hit 
dice by class. 

Alignment. Flinds tend toward lawful evil. 
PC flinds may be of any alignment, but are 
usually lawful neutral. 

Natural Armor Class. 10. 

Background. Flinds appear similar to gnolls, 
though they are shorter and broader. The aver- 
age flind stands 67 feet tall. They are more 
muscular than regular gnolls, and usually 
stronger. Short brown and red fur covers their 
bodies, and their ears are more rounded than 
the gnolls. 

Flinds are looked upon with awe by gnolls, 
revered as leaders and heroes by the hyena- 
like humanoids. Otherwise, they have the 
same lifestyle as gnolls, except that they are 
not as chaotic. Flinds tend to get along with 
orcs, hobgoblins, bugbears, and ogres, but dis- 
like and will not cooperate with trolls. 

Languages. Flind, gnoll, orc, hobgoblin, bug- 
bear, ogre, common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. If any type of 
gnoll is likely to become a player character, it is 
the flind. As they are already looked upon as 
heroes by their gnoll cousins, some flinds reject 
their evil natures to become heroes in the 


larger world. A rare few even become lawful 
good. 

Flind PCs believe themselves to be very spe- 
cial. All of the reverence heaped upon them by 
the gnolls throughout their lives gives them a 
sense of worth not displayed often in human- 
oid cultures. They exhibit the same bestial 
urges as their gnoll cousins, but they can con- 
trol them with less difficulty. 

Special Advantages. A flind can use a flind- 
bar to disarm an opponent. A hit requires an 
opponent to save vs. wands. A failed save 
means the weapon is entangled and ripped 
from the opponent's grasp. 

Special Disadvantages. None 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance, bestial habits. 

Superstitions. Like gnolls, flinds hold a spe- 
cial reverence for the moon and its phases. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Club, flindbar, glaive, 
long bow, long sword. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Animal lore, 
close-quarter fighting, danger sense, direction 
sense, endurance, fortune telling, local history, 
looting, hunting, intimidation, reading /writ- 
ing, religion, spellcraft, weaponsmithing. 


Humanoid Races * 33 


Goblin 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a -1 penalty to 
Strength and Charisma. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 4 15 
Dexterity 4 iz 
Constitution 5 16 
Intelligence 3 18 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 12 


Class Restrictions 


Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 10 
Ranger — 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage 
Illusionist 
Priest 
Cleric 
Druid 
Shaman 
Witch Doctor 
Rogue 
Thief 12 
Bard — 


Maximum Level 


EINE 


Hit Dice. Player character goblins receive hit 
dice by class. 

Alignment. Goblins tend toward lawful evil. 
PC goblins may be of any alignment, but are 
usually lawful neutral. 

Natural Armor Class. 10. 

Background. Goblins are small humanoids, 
growing to a height of about four feet tall. 
They have flat faces, broad noses, pointed ears, 
wide mouths, and small, sharp fangs. Though 


they walk upright, their arms hang down to 
their knees. Their dull, glazed eyes range in 
color from bright red to gleaming yellow. Their 
speech is harsh and of a higher pitch than 
humans. 

These humanoids are generally evil in 
nature, and often they are great cowards as 
well. They avoid direct confrontations when- 
ever possible, preferring the safety of 
ambushes. They use simple, even crude, 
strategies and tactics. They do not believe in 
fair fights, for many-on-one works much bet- 
ter than one-on-one to the goblin mindset. 

Goblins live in dank caves and dismal under- 
ground dwellings. They only come above 
ground at night or on dark, cloudy days. Gob- 
lins and their lairs carry a foul stench, due to 
their lack of sanitation. Their tribes share with 
large common areas set aside for eating and 
sleeping. Treasure and property belongs to the 
entire tribe, though the chief and his sub- 
chiefs watch over it. Only their leaders have 
separate living areas. 

Females are not afforded the same rights as 
males in goblin society, and females never 
learn to fight. Their role is to service the males 
and care for the young. 

Each tribe has an exact pecking order, and 
every goblin knows his exact place in it. The 
way to move up the social ladder is through 
battle, and goblins constantly fight among 
themselves to improve their station in life. 

Tribes regularly take slaves for food and 
labor. They keep their slaves constantly shack- 
led and under guard. 

Goblins take great pleasure in killing. They 
do not eat much, but they eat almost anything. 
Rats, snakes, humans, and other humanoids 
make up the bulk of their diets. When food is 
scarce, they will even eat carrion. They hate 
most other humanoid races, especially gnomes 
and dwarves. 

Languages. Goblin, kobold, orc, hobgoblin, 


common. 


Humanoid Races * 35 


Role-Playing Suggestions. Like most evil 
creatures, few goblins ever become adven- 
turers. Those that do are unusually rare, for 
the individualistic life of an adventurer is 
completely foreign to goblin society. Those 
few members of the race who display such 
tendencies are often killed by their brethren, 
for they are believed to be insane. 

If they can survive the prejudices and fears 
of their own people, goblin PCs generally 
reject their own societies. They leave their 
lairs and strike out to find fame (of a sort) 
and fortune (whatever they can get their 
hands on). They often fight against such gob- 
lin practices as slave keeping and maraud- 
ing, working to make up for the atrocities of 
their people. 

Still, you can’t take all of the monster out of 
goblin PCs. They do their best to control 
their fear and overcome their natural cow- 
ardice, but few goblin PCs will earn awards 
for bravery. Even the cleanest goblin adven- 
turers have trouble eliminating the stench 
they have grown up with. It hangs about 
them like a shroud. Because of their commu- 
nal back-grounds, goblins have no concept of 


-_ 


36 * Chapter Two 


privacy. This can lead to amusing — and not 
so amusing — situations for goblin PCs and 
their companions. 

Special Advantages. Goblins have infravi- 
sion to 60 feet. They can detect new or 
unusual construction in an underground 
area 25% of the time (1 or 2 on 1d8). 

Goblin shamans can reach 7th level and 
have access to the spheres of divination, 
healing (reversed), protection, and sun 
(reversed). 

Special Disadvantages. Bright light hurts 
goblin eyes, giving them a —1 penalty to their 
attack rolls when in bright sunshine. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance, bestial 
habits. 

Superstitions. Eternal hatred and fear of 
gnomes and dwarves, sensitive to unusual 
behavior of worgs and wolves, fearful of 
dreams and visions. 


Weapon Proficiencies: Axe, military pick, 
morning star, sling, short sword, spear. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Alertness, ani- 
mal handling, animal training (worg), beg- 
ging, chanting, close-quarter fighting, 
fast-talking, fortune telling, hiding, hunting, 
information gathering, looting, mining, reli- 
gion, riding (worg), set snares. 


Hobgoblin 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a -1 penalty to 
Charisma. 


Ability Score Range 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 6 18 
Dexterity 6 18 
Constitution 5 18 
Intelligence 3 18 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 14 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 1 
Ranger — 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage = 
Illusionist — 
Priest 
Cleric 9 
Druid — 
Shaman z 
Witch Doctor 7 
Rogue 
Thief 12 
Bard = 


Maximum Level 


Hit Dice. Player character hobgoblins receive 
hit dice by class. 

Alignment. Hobgoblins tend toward lawful 
evil. PC hobgoblins may be of any alignment, 
though they are usually lawful neutral. 

Natural Armor Class. 10. 

Background. Hobgoblins are stocky 
humanoids with hairy, dark red to dark gray 
hides. The typical hobgoblin is 6% feet tall, has 
yellow or dark brown eyes, and sharp yellow 
teeth. They favor brightly colored garments, 
especially outfits of blood red. 

This fierce race wages a perpetual war against 
other humanoid races. They exist in a military 
society, proud of their status, their fighting 
prowess, their battle standards, and the quality 
of their weapons. War is their way of life, and 
to be a warrior is the highest calling a hobgob- 
lin can have. Even when different tribes of 
hobgoblins meet, there will likely be verbal 
abuse (85%) or open warfare (15%) unless a 
strong leader is present. 

Most hobgoblins dwell in subterranean com- 
plexes. A few tribes build fortified surface vil- 
lages (about 20%). Hobgoblins consider 
themselves superior to the “lesser races,” lord- 
ing over goblins and orcs whenever possible. 


The lesser races have only one good purpose to 


the hobgoblin mindset — they make decent 
battle fodder. In mixed groups, hobgoblins 
often serve as officers in units of goblins or 
ores. 

Hobgoblins have an extreme hatred of elves. 
When their opponents consist of mixed races, 
they always seek to destroy elves first. 

Languages. Hobgoblin, orc, goblin, common, 
carnivorous ape (rare). 

Role-Playing Suggestions. To hobgoblins, 
war is almost a religious experience. They fight 
for the glory of battle and to cause carnage, not 
to expand territory or right wrongs against 
them. Their outlook on war is much more pure 
than that. Conflict and strife are their meat and 
drink. 

Hobgoblin PCs are rare in the extreme, but 
those that do take up the life of adventurers 
usually fall into one of two patterns. The first is 
the hobgoblin pacifist. These individuals 
detest war, though they may be extremely 
good at its brutal arts. Having grown tired of 
the constant fighting, they leave their tribes 
and seek to find a new life somewhere away 
from their people. Of course, as battle is what 


Humanoid Races * 37 


they do best, they often find themselves using 
their militaristic arts to earn a living. However, 
at least as an adventurer they only have to 
fight when absolutely necessary. These type of 
characters will often wait until the last minute 
before entering a fray — not because they are 
cowards, but because they grow sick and tired 
of shedding blood. 

The second pattern of hobgoblin PCs are 
those who turn away from the evil of their 
society. They reject the hobgoblin gods and 
perhaps even discover the faith of a non-evil 
deity. These characters seek to make amends 
for their old life styles, trying to repair the 
damage the hobgoblins have done and con- 
tinue to do in the name of glorious war. 

Even the best hobgoblin PCs find it hard to 
overcome all of their natural tendencies. Bru- 
tality, stoicism, courage, and cold-bloodedness 
are always with them, like dark cloaks they can 
never shed. 

Special Advantages. Hobgoblins have infrav- 
ision with a range of 60 feet. 

They can detect new construction, sloping 
passages, and shifting walls in underground 
complexes 40% of the time (1-4 on 1d10). 

Special Disadvantages. Most other human- 
oid and human societies attack hobgoblins on 
sight. Dwarves receive a +1 bonus to attack 
rolls against hobgoblins due to racial hatred. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance. 

Superstitions. Weakness is feared and 
actively destroyed in hobgoblin society. A 
weapon which breaks during combat is an 
extremely bad omen. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Long composite bow, 
morning star, scimitar, spear, whip, any pole 
arm. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Armorer, black- 
smithing, bowyer/ fletcher, brewing, chanting, 
close-quarter fighting, direction sense, fire- 
building, hiding, intimidation, looting, reli- 
gion, weaponsmithing, wild fighting. 


——————————————————————————À————————————e 


38 * Chapter Two 


Kobold 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a -1 penalty to 


Strength and Constitution. 

Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 3 16 
Dexterity 4 18 
Constitution 4 15 
Intelligence 3 17 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 14 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 8 
Ranger = 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage = 
Illusionist = 
Priest 
Cleric 
Druid 
Shaman 
Witch Doctor 
Rogue 
Thief 12 
Bard — 


Maximum Level 


NN | © 


Hit Dice. Player character kobolds receive hit 
dice by class. 

Alignment. Kobolds tend toward lawful evil. 
PC kobolds may be of any alignment, though 
they are usually lawful neutral. 

Natural Armor Class. 10. 

Background. Kobolds are short humanoids, 
growing to a height of three feet. They have 
scaly hides of dark brown to rusty black, and 
smell awful to anything but another kobold. 
The eyes of a kobold glow bright red, and they 


have two small horns atop their dog-like heads. 

Kobolds are masters of trickery, but they pre- 
fer tactics where they can apply overwhelming 
odds. They have a racial hatred of gnomes and 
are willing to attack these demihumans on 
sight. The only way they will go against 
humans and other demihumans is if they have 
superior numbers — at least two to one, more 
if they can manage it. They have learned to use 
swarming attacks, throwing themselves at 
opponents in large waves. 

Most kobolds are a sadistic, cowardly lot. 
Their lairs and ambush sites are studded with 
concealed pit traps. They line the bottom of 
these pits with additional hazards, such as 
spikes or water traps, hoping to catch and inca- 
pacitate larger creatures with them. 

Kobolds set up lairs in dark, damp under- 
ground locations and deep in overgrown 
forests. They are good miners, often settling in 
areas that show mining promise. These 
humanoids set out from their territories to for- 
age for plants, hunt for meat, and to waylay 
humans and demihumans. They capture vic- 
tims to use as food or to sell into slavery (if 
there is a market for such wares in the vicin- 


ity). Strangers are not trusted, and they have a 
particular hatred of brownies, pixies, sprites, 
and gnomes. Gnomes, especially, are shown no 
quarter, and kobolds will never eat them. 

The conquest of land is the ultimate goal of 
all kobold tribes. They rejoice in stripping a 
land of its resources, and they love to accumu- 
late power. As they have a deep hatred of all 
other life, they find great delight in killing. 

Languages. Kobold, orc, goblin, common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Kobolds strive to 
be taken seriously by the larger races. They 
hate jokes directed at their diminutive size and 
strength, and seek to make up for their short- 
comings through ferocity and tenacity. To 
other races, their language sounds like the yap- 
ping of small dogs, and few can take them seri- 
ously unless they are in large numbers. 

Kobold PCs break the model of typical speci- 
mens of the race. There are those who reject the 
racial hatreds and savage practices of their fel- 
lows. Others discover the faith of a kinder god, 
and seek to learn and spread such faith to oth- 
ers. A few have no stomach for fighting and 
bloodshed, and these become rogues who go 
adventuring to escape the life they were born 
into. 

Whatever the case, kobold PCs have a harder 
edge than other character types. They retain 
their dislike of short jokes, and they are often 
belligerent, wise-cracking, and pushy, as they 
must make up for their small size in whatever 
way they can. Even the most pleasant of the 
race are a little mean-spirited. 

Kobolds, especially kobold rogues, like to 
keep in practice with their skills of trickery, 
ambushing, and setting traps. Some few take 
to inventing, applying their cleverness and 
ingenuity to non-fatal mechanisms. 

Special Advantages. Kobolds can see in the 
dark, up to 60 feet with their infravision. 
Unless kobold characters display special capa- 
bilities, intelligent and powerful opponents are 
likely to attack them last of all. 

Special Disadvantages. Bright light hinders 


Humanoid Races * 39 


kobolds, making it difficult for them to see. 
When forced to fight in sunlit conditions or the 
equivalent, kobolds receive a -1 penalty to 
their attack rolls. Gnomes have a +1 bonus 
when attacking kobolds. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance, dog-like 
voices, bestial habits. 

Superstitions. Fear of spellcasters, fear and 
hatred of larger races, hatred of gnomes. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Club (spiked), hand 
axe, javelin, short sword, spear. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Animal noise, 
animal training (giant weasel), animal training 
(wild boar), begging, close-quarter fighting, 
danger sense, fast-talking, gem cutting, hiding, 
looting, mining, set snares, wild fighting. 


Lizard Man 


Ability Score Adjustments. There are no 
adjustments to the basic ability scores. 


Ability Score Range 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 8 18 
Dexterity 3 18 
Constitution 6 18 
Intelligence 3 17 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 16 


Class Restrictions 


Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 12 
Ranger — 
Paladin = 
Wizard 
Mage = 
Illusionist — 
Priest 
Cleric — 
Druid — 


Maximum Level 


CC ee 


40 * Chapter Two 


Shaman 7 

Witch Doctor = 
Rogue 

Thief 9 

Bard — 


Hit Dice. Player character lizard men receive 
hit dice by class. 

Alignment. Lizard men tend toward true 
neutral alignment. PC lizard men may be of 
any alignment. 

Natural Armor Class. 5. 

Background. Lizard men are the natural 
rulers of the swamps they inhabit. These sav- 
age, semi-aquatic, reptilian humanoids live 
through scavenging and raiding. The less hos- 
tile tribes tend to be fishers and gatherers, 
though there seem to be more of the violent, 
war-loving tribes scattered across the land. 

Lizard men grow to heights between six and 
seven feet tall. The average weight of these 
humanoids is between 200 and 250 pounds. 
Their coloration ranges from dark green to 
gray to brown, and scales cover most of their 
bodies. Lizard men have three- to four-foot- 
long tails, which are not prehensile. Only those 
very familiar with the race can tell the differ- 
ence between males and females. They wear 
only the simplest of ornamentation — strings 
of bone and other barbaric items. 

Lizard men usually dwell in marshes and 
swamps. They live underwater in air-filled 
caves, emerging to hunt, forage, and raid 
nearby communities — including other lizard 
man camps. Most tribes have about 150 mem- 
bers, including females and hatchlings. The 
tribes sometimes form loose alliances against 
common enemies, though these last only as 
long as the threat is obvious. 

These omnivorous humanoids eat almost 
anything. The foulest, most savage tribes crave 
human flesh. Tales of these savage lizard men 
ambushing humans abound, for they seek both 
living and dead flesh to feast upon. 

A small number of lizard man tribes have 


evolved to a higher level of civilization, and it 
is from these tribes that PC lizard men are 
assumed to come. These lizard men live in 
crude huts, make and use shields, and have 
discovered the benefits of ranged weapons. 
They make and use barbed darts and javelins, 
use crude clubs in melee, and some have 
learned to capture and use the weapons of 
humans and demihumans. 

Languages. Lizard man, common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Lizard men are 
barbarians. Even those from the advanced 
tribes are considered savages by the civilized 
world. When a lizard man PC enters a cam- 
paign, he faces many of the same problems 
which confront barbaric humans — the ways 
he knows are not the ways of culture and civi- 
lization. The lizard man character has left the 
swamps behind, but his savage nature remains. 
Perhaps, as a member of an advanced tribe, he 
has decided to learn more of the wonders of 
the civilized world. Once he has amassed 
enough knowledge, he will return to his tribe 
to teach them. Or, as a member of a more prim- 
itive tribe, the character has been forcefully 
taken from the swamps and thrust into the 
outer world. Now he fights beside adventurers 
until he can find his way home — or just 
because he likes the violence in which his new 
companions get involved. 

Lizard men are known for their strength, 
their natural cunning, and their alien ways. 
They should be played as true outsiders — not 
only are they from different lands and primi- 
tive cultures, but they are reptilian. Lizard men 
have a much different outlook on the world 
than mammals. They are born from eggs, they 
spend much of their life in water, and they are 
closer to the natural laws of survival than their 
civilized counterparts. They should be played 
as alien minds, with alien tastes, and alien per- 
ceptions. Often, a lizard man will be at odds 
with his companions as to the way to proceed. 
"Eat-or-die" is often the basic instinct running 
through a lizard man’s mind, and this does not 


always go along with adventurers’ ideals of 
honor, chivalry, and fairness. 

As a savage, the lizard man PC is in tune 
with the natural world. This does not mean he 
is an avid protector of nature (as centaurs, for 
example, are wont to be), but that he under- 
stands nature's signs and can survive in places 
others would find inhospitable. Remember 
also, lizard men PCs do not understand civi- 
lization very well. They will often be alarmed, 
frightened, or offended by many of its most 
common features. 

In combat, lizard man warriors fight as indi- 
viduals. The civilized concepts of cooperation 
and strict planning are unknown to him, and 
he will often find his own course in any battle. 
Against equal or lesser opponents, a lizard 
man may charge directly into the fray. When 
facing superior opponents, a lizard man may 
turn to wily tactics or sheer ferocity. The sav- 
age warrior has a few weaknesses, however. 
He can be distracted by food and simple trea- 
sures, even in the midst of battle. 


Humanoid Races * 41 


Special Advantages. Lizard men can move in 
water at a rate of 12. They have no move-ment 
or attack penalties when in water, and receive 
swimming as a bonus proficiency. 

Lizard men can remain under water for long 
periods of time before they need to draw air. In 
game terms, a lizard man can hold his breath 
up to 2/3 his Constitution score in rounds 
(rounded up). 

Special Disadvantages. Lizard men are fairly 
slow and clumsy on land, having a base move- 
ment rate of 6. 

Lizard men must wet their entire bodies once 
a day. If they are unable to find adequate 
amounts of moisture (a full waterskin is 
enough), they begin to lose Constitution at a 
rate of 3 points per day. If their Constitution 
falls to zero, they die from dehydration. 

If food (which could include a fallen friend or 
foe) or treasure appear during a battle, a lizard 
man must make a successful Wisdom check to 
keep his mind on the battle. Failure means he 
turns away from the fight to feast or gather 
spoils. This distraction lasts at least one round. 
Every additional round, the lizard man can 
attempt to break away from the distraction by 
making another Wisdom check. 

Lizard man warriors start with two weapon 
proficiencies. Other classes start with one. 

Lizard men with a SPELLJAMMER?® origin 
cannot be multi-classed; however, these start 
with the normal number of proficiencies and 
access to more advanced weaponry and armor 
(armor costs are double standard prices). 

Monstrous Traits. Monstrous appearance, 
bestial fear, bestial habits. 

Superstitions. Lizard men fear dry heat and 
locations with dry heat, such as deserts. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Battle axe (stone), 
great club (morning star), barbed dart, javelin. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Alertness, danger 
sense, direction sense, fishing, herbalism, hid- 
ing, hunting, natural fighting, survival 
(swamps). 


—_—_— eee 


42 * Chapter Two 


Minotaur 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +2 bonus to 
Strength and Constitution, and a -2 penalty to 
Wisdom and Charisma. 


Ability Score Range 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 12 20 
Dexterity 5 14 
Constitution 12 20 
Intelligence 5 14 
Wisdom 3 16 
Charisma 3 16 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 12 
Ranger 8 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage 8 
Illusionist — 
Priest 
Cleric — 
Druid — 
Shaman — 
Witch Doctor 7 
Rogue 
Thief 10 
Bard = 


Maximum Level 


Hit Dice. Player character minotaurs receive 
hit dice by class. In addition, they receive 6 
bonus hit points at first level. 

Alignment. Minotaurs tend toward chaotic 
evil. PC minotaurs may be of any alignment. 

Natural Armor Class. 6. 

Background. These details are for general 
play in the standard campaign worlds. Mino- 
taurs elsewhere may differ (notably those of 
Krynn, the DRAGONLANCE? setting). 


Most minotaurs are either cursed humans or 
the offspring of minotaurs and humans. All of 
these minotaurs are male, very muscular and 
broad, and very tall (7 to 7% feet tall). They 
have the head of a bull and the body of a 
human male. They usually live in a very primi- 
tive fashion, in caves, forests, or ruins. 

Minotaurs venerate physical strength above 
all else. The strong, they believe, should natu- 
rally rule. Surrender is viewed as weakness, so 
minotaurs fight (or argue) to the death. They 
are extremely cunning and have excellent 
senses. They will attack without fear and 
retreat only if the opponent is obviously 
beyond their ability to defeat. 

While many minotaurs are brutal, uncivi- 
lized savages, they are not mindless killers. 
Most are ruthless, harsh, and stubborn, but 
some are thoughtful and even sophisticated. A 
few are known for gentleness and kindness. 

Languages. Minotaur, common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Much of the 
impetus for role-playing a minotaur can 
involve reclaiming a lost human heritage, or 
finding some way to fit into the campaign 
world in a civilized manner. 


Though the curse that afflicts some mino- 
taurs makes them chaotic, adventuring mino- 
taurs usually reject the evil that others of their 
kind embrace. However, they value strength, 
and may be seduced by the idea that might 
makes right. Also, any opportunity to alleviate 
their curse is grabbed for, perhaps to the exclu- 
sion of reason and safety. 

In general, however, they make valuable, if 
unpredictable, allies. 

Special Advantages. Minotaurs receive a +2 
bonus to their surprise rolls. They can track 
prey by scent 50% of the time. They are 
immune to maze spells and receive a +3 bonus 
to their morale scores (including saves vs. 
magical fear). They have 60’ infravision. 

Special Disadvantages. Minotaurs take dam- 
age as large creatures. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance, bestial habits. 

Superstitions. They dislike spell casters. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Flail, great axe (same 
characteristics as halberd), oaken club. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Alertness, animal 
noise, blind-fighting, direction sense, drinking, 
eating, hunting, intimidation, natural fighting, 
religion, seamanship, tracking, wild fighting. 


Mongrelman 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a —1 penalty to Intel- 
ligence and Charisma. The player can add a +1 
bonus to any other ability score, not to exceed 
the starting maximum. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 6 17 
Dexterity 6 18 
Constitution 8 18 
Intelligence 3 17 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma Z 8 


Humanoid Races * 43 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 10 
Ranger — 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage 10 
Illusionist — 
Priest 
Cleric 10 
Druid — 
Shaman 7 
Witch Doctor — 
Rogue 
Thief 12 
Bard 8* 


* Can adjust crowd reactions only among own kind. Other 
crowds will react negatively. 


Maximum Level 


Hit Dice. Player character mongrelmen 
receive hit dice by class. 

Alignment. Mongrelmen tend toward lawful 
neutral. Player character mongrelmen may be 
of any alignment. 

Natural Armor Class. 5. 

Background. Mongrelmen combine the worst 
features of many species, including humans, 
orcs, gnolls, ogres, dwarves, hobgoblins, elves, 
bugbears, and bullywugs. No two mongrel- 
men look the same, but all appear as poorly 
constructed combinations of various human- 
oid races. 

Always misshapen and ugly, mongrelmen 
grow to heights ranging from five to seven feet 
tall. In general, they are ashamed of their 
appearance and do their best to keep their bod- 
ies hidden from those they encounter. Mon- 
grelmen speak common, though they intermix 
intelligible words with grunts, whistles, 
growls, and gestures. Their names often mimic 
animal noises. 

Mongrelmen receive no welcome in lawful 
and good societies. Among evil and chaotic 
groups, they meet with enslavement and 


—————————————————————— 


44 * Chapter Two 


abuse. Most of these reactions are in response 
to mongrelmen appearances — they look like 
deformed monsters and are treated as such by 
society at large. 

They work as slaves or serfs, toiling endlessly 
for cruel and evil masters. Mongrelmen have 
infinite patience and an unswerving belief that 
their oppressors will eventually be punished 
by outside forces. Because of this belief, 
enslaved mongrelmen refuse to rebel against 
their masters, even when the opportunity pre- 
sents itself. Those remaining free often take up 
residence in abandoned ruins or other long- 
forgotten places. 

Mongrelmen are survivors. To remain alive 
and relatively unharmed is their ultimate goal 
— they do not seek power or treasure or fame 
like other races. An orderly day-to-day exis- 
tence is a mongrelman's perfect state of being. 
Patience is the greatest virtue, not the ability to 
destroy. They are by no means pacifists, but 
they will only fight in self-defense or on the 
orders of their masters. 

Free mongrelmen have a long tradition of art, 
music, and literature. Of course, mongrelman 
music is an acquired taste, being a bizarre 
cacophony of animal songs mixed with mourn- 
ful dirges and wails. 

Languages. Common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Mongrelmen 
player characters are either escaped slaves 
whose masters finally succumbed to outside 
forces (as the mongrelman knew they would) 
or free mongrelmen who have been inspired 
by some ballad or tale to take up the life of an 
adventurer. While fighting is not in their 
blood, mongrelmen make natural thieves 
and a few aspire to become bards or even 
wizards. 

Even the most outgoing mongrelman is shy, 
quiet, and easily embarrassed. The shame that 
makes them conceal their bodies follows even 
the most successful adventurer throughout his 
or her career. They hate what they look like, 
and sometimes turn to adventuring in order to 


forget for a time. Of course, most people they 
meet are quick to remind them with a gasp, by 
turning away, or by outright insults. 

When speaking in character, players should 
punctuate their sentences with grunts, whis- 
tles, and animal noises. Lots of gestures are 
also used by mongrelmen when they talk. 
Those mongrelmen PCs who believe them- 
selves to be artistically inclined should also 
feel free to make up ballads, stories, and songs 
on the spot to entertain their companions — 
the more awful and abstract the song, the more 
perfect it will be to a mongrelman's ears. 

Mongrelmen are great believers in what will 
be will be. This makes them infinitely patient 
and extremely ordered. Those that become 
adventurers may have decided that fate needs a 
little help now and then, but they still hold to 
the belief that everything is planned and they 
can't change it. Of course, most feel that some- 
thing good is waiting for them in the future. AII 
they have to do is wait patiently for it to arrive. 

Shyness is bred into mongrelmen, and even 
those of the race that work as adventurers tend 


to stay out of the spotlight. They like to avoid 
contact with others (except their companions), 
and have come to believe that stealing what 
they need (but never more than they need) is 
perfectly acceptable. 

They love art, music, and literature. Most 
read everything they can get their hands on. 
Often, when their party discovers scrolls or 
books, mongrelmen PCs will try to acquire 
them instead of seeking magical weapons, 
items, or even gold. 

Special Advantages. Mongrelmen can mimic 
the sounds made by any monster or creature 
they have encountered, though they cannot 
imitate special attack forms. 

All mongrelmen, regardless of class, can pick 
pockets. They have a base score of 70%, and 
receive a 5% bonus in pickpocket per level, 
starting at 5th level. 

Mongrelmen can camouflage themselves and 
their items. It takes one full turn to hide, giving 
them an 80% base chance to go unnoticed. 
Each additional turn spent preparing the cam- 
ouflage increases the chance by 1% to a maxi- 
mum of 95% (after 16 turns). Successfully 
camouflaged stationary persons and items are 
not noticed unless they are touched or other- 
wise disturbed. Camouflaged buildings are 
usually unnoticeable farther away than 50 feet, 
though this depends on the size and type of 
the structure. 

Special Disadvantages. No matter what 
Charisma score a mongrelman has among his 
own kind, when first meeting strangers of dif- 
ferent races his Charisma is treated as 1 for 
reaction adjustments. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance, using animal 
noises when they speak. 

Superstitions. Mongrelmen believe strongly 
in predestination, fear other humanoids (who 
hunt them for sport), and fear manifestations 
of the supernatural. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Broad sword, club, 
long sword, short sword, morning star, quar- 
terstaff, blowgun (rare). 


—_— aaaaaaaaaaaaaamaammmmmmmħōI 


Humanoid Races * 45 


Nonweapon Proficiencies: Acting, agricul- 
ture, animal handling, animal noise, artistic 
ability, begging, brewing, chanting, craft 
instrument, dancing, disguise, etiquette, for- 
tune telling, herbalism, hiding, information 
gathering, observation, poetry, reading /writ- 
ing, religion, spellcraft, ventriloquism, voice 
mimicry. 


Ogre, Half-Ogre 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified as follows: 

* Ogre: +2 Str, +2 Con; 2 Int, 2 Cha 

e Half-Ogre: +1 Str, +1 Con; -1 Int, -1 Cha 


Ability Score Range (Ogre/Half-Ogre) 
Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 16/14 20/18 
Dexterity 2/3 8/12 
Constitution 14/14 20/19 
Intelligence 2/3 8/12 
Wisdom 2/2 9/12 
Charisma 2/2 8/8 


Class Restrictions (Ogre/Half-Ogre) 


Class Maximum Level 
Warrior 
Fighter 12/12 
Ranger —/— 
Paladin a 
Wizard 
Mage =/= 
Illusionist —/— 
Priest 
Cleric —/4 
Druid —/— 
Shaman 3/4 
Witch Doctor —/4 
Rogue 
Thief = 
Bard -f= 


46 * Chapter Two 


Hit Dice. Player character ogres and half- 
ogres receive hit dice by class. In addition, they 
receive 4 bonus hit points at first level. 

Alignment. Ogres tend toward chaotic evil 
Half-ogres tend toward chaotic neutral. PC 
ogres and half-ogres may be of any alignment. 

Natural Armor Class. Ogres have a natural 
armor class of 5. Half-ogres have a natural 
armor class of 8. 

Background. Ogres are big, ugly humanoids 
that stand over nine feet tall. Most are greedy, 
living by ambushing, raiding, and outright 
theft. They tend to be ill-tempered beings, 
nasty and very violent. Dark warty bumps 
cover their dead yellow hides. They have pur- 
ple and white eyes, orange or black teeth and 
talons, and long, greasy hair that ranges in 
color from blackish-blue to dark green. 

Ogres live by raiding and scavenging. They 
will eat anything. In the wild, they havea 
fondness for elf, dwarf, and halfling flesh. 
They use prisoners as slaves or save them for 
food. They have ravenous natures — they 
covet everything they see. As such, they can 
rarely be trusted, and they squabble over trea- 
sure even among their own kind. 

Most ogres are a plague upon humanity. 
They constantly seek gold, gems, jewelry, and 
human and demihuman flesh. Few develop 
crafts of their own, and even fewer perform 
any form of productive labor for themselves. 

Half-ogres: These are the offspring of ogre 
and human matings. They have much of the 
strength and size of their ogre heritage, but 
also retain much of the native intelligence and 
reason of their human side. Half-ogres stand 
between seven and eight feet tall, appearing as 
huge humans. The skin coloration that marks 
ogres is very much subdued in half-ogres: 
swarthy skin, lank hair and usually, but not 
always, human eyes. 

Languages. Ogre, orc, troll, stone giant, gnoll, 
common. Half-ogre player characters will 
nearly always have common as their native 


language. 


Role-Playing Suggestions. The ogre that 
becomes an adventurer is very, very rare. It is 
very difficult for ogres to overcome their 
chaotic evil natures and their love for human 
and demihuman flesh. Those that do have 
rejected ogre society and morals, becoming 
outcasts in their own communities. They have 
turned away from their evil sides, though they 
often retain their chaotic natures. 

Many ogre PCs are kind and gentle — at least 
by ogre standards. They befriend or are 
befriended by adventurers (see Chapter One), 
and decide to join the “tribe” of their new 
friends. As part of the adventuring tribe, ogre 
PCs will do their best to fit in and act like their 
companions, though mistakes and slip ups are 
bound to occur. They especially have a hard 
time containing their avaricious tendencies, 
wanting every piece of treasure the group 
stumbles upon. 

Half-Ogres: Half-ogres have an easier time of 
it, for their monstrous sides are tempered by 
human thoughts and emotions. Except for 


their unusual size, they look much like ugly 
humans. This makes it easier for them to find a 
place in human society, even if they must hide 
part of their heritage. Half-ogre PCs should 
select a monstrous trait which emerges under 
certain circumstances in order to give them the 
feel of playing a humanoid character. 

Special Advantages. Shamans (both types) 
have access to the spheres of combat, divina- 
tion, healing, protection, and sun (PCs are not 
required to reverse sun spells if they are of 
good or neutral alignment). 

Special Disadvantages. Ogres and half ogres 
take damage as large creatures. They have 
attack roll penalties when fighting gnomes and 
dwarves. Ogres are —4 against both, half-ogres 
are —4 against gnomes and -2 against dwarves. 

Monstrous Traits. Size, appearance, bestial 
habits. 

Superstitions. Fear of sickness, fear of physi- 
cal weakness, fear of the god known as the 
Destroyer. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Club, goblin stick, hal- 
berd, spear, two-handed sword, voulge. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Drinking, eating, 
fire-building, hunting, intimidation, religion, 
tracking, wild fighting. 


Ogre Mage 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +1 bonus to 
Strength, and a 2 penalty to Wisdom. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 12 18 
Dexterity 7 18 
Constitution 8 14 
Intelligence 8 17 
Wisdom 3 16 
Charisma 2 14 


m 


Humanoid Races * 47 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 9 
Ranger — 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage 8 
Illusionist — 
Priest 
Cleric = 
Druid 
Shaman 
Witch Doctor 
Rogue 
Thief 
Bard 


Maximum Level 


Ixl 


| œ% 


Hit Dice. Player character ogre magi receive 
hit dice by class. In addition they receive 5 
bonus hit points at first level. 

Alignment. Ogre magi tend toward lawful 
evil. PC ogre magi may be of any lawful align- 
ment. 

Natural Armor Class. 4. 

Background. Ogre magi have light blue, light 
green, or pale brown skin. Ivory horns jut from 
their foreheads. They are 10% feet tall, with 
black nails, dark eyes with white pupils, and 
white teeth and tusks. They favor oriental 
clothing, armor, and weapons. 

These larger, more intelligent ogre magi live 
in fortified dwellings or caves. They raid for 
slaves, treasure and food, and are very protec- 
tive of their young. They follow many oriental 
traditions, including respect and honor for 
their clans and clan symbols. 

Ogre magi are more civilized than their prim- 
itive, smaller cousins. This does not make them 
less fierce or dangerous, just smarter and more 
cultured. They prefer to use magic instead of 
physical force, and are much more reflective 
than normal ogres. 

Ogre magi shamans are usually female. 

Languages. Ogre magi, ogre, common. 


— 


48 * Chapter Two 


Role-Playing Suggestions. Ogre magi that 
become player characters often do so because 
of a particular need, or because they are forced 
into it. Those who strike out for a particular 
need are often driven by the desire to learn 
(usually magic) or to find some special item 
that their clan requires. These individuals will 
work with adventurers for as long as it benefits 
their personal goals. An ogre mage may 
become a forced outcast for some crime against 
the clan (be it real or imagined). The ogre mage 
must find a way to regain honor and status, 
but until then will take up the life of an adven- 
turer. Others are cast out because they fail to 
display the proper attitudes of the ogre magi. 
These individuals might follow good or neu- 
tral alignments, or seek to change long-stand- 
ing traditions. 

A few ogre magi are kidnapped when they 
are very young and raised away from their 
clans. These PCs have little knowledge about 
their heritage, but display tendencies which 
match the people who raised them. In the case 
of those kept as slaves, their adventuring days 
usually begin when they gain their freedom. 
While they might be interested in finding their 


clans, these ogre magi usually find themselves 
alone and without any culture or society to call 
their own. 

Special Advantages. Ogre magi develop spe- 
cial abilities as they gain hit dice: 1) assume 
gaseous form once per day (as the potion), fly for 
12 turns; 2) become invisible at will, charm per- 
son once per day; 3) cast sleep once per day, 
regenerate one hit point per round (lost mem- 
bers must be reattached to regenerate); 4) cause 
darkness in a 10-foot radius at will; 5) polymorph 
to a human or similar biped creature (4 feet to 
12 feet in height), cone of cold once per day (cre- 
ates a 60-foot cone, 20 feet in diameter at the 
far end, that inflicts 8d8 points of damage, save 
vs. spells for half damage). 

Ogre magi are +1 on morale. 

Special Disadvantages. Ogre magi take dam- 
age as large creatures. Oriental equipment is 
often both rare and expensive. 

Ogre magi must earn twice as many XP as a 
human character to advance each level (2nd 
level fighter at 4,000 XP, 3rd at 8,000, etc). 

Monstrous Traits. Size, appearance. 

Superstitions. Ogre magi fear losing honor 
or disgracing their clans. Optionally, the char- 
acter can use the Honor system from the Orien- 
tal Adventures book. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Daikyu, katana, nagi- 
nata, scimitar, tetsubo, wakizashi, whip; oriental 
versions of the halberd, spear, and trident. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Acting, armorer, 
bowyer/ fletcher, etiquette, fortune telling, 
poetry, reading/writing, spellcraft, weapon- 
smithing, weaving, wild fighting. 


Orc, Half-Orc 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified as follows: 

e Orc: +1 Str; -2 Cha 

* Half-Orc: +1 Str, +1 Con; -2 Cha 


Ability Score Range (Orc/Half-Orc) 
Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 6/6 18/18 
Dexterity 3/3 17/17 
Constitution 8/13 18/19 
Intelligence 3/3 16/17 
Wisdom 3/3 16/14 
Charisma 3/3 12/12 


Class Restrictions (Orc/Half-Orc) 


Class Maximum Level 
Warrior 
Fighter 10/10* 
Ranger E 
Paladin =f 
Wizard 
Mage —f= 
Illusionist == 
Priest 
Cleric 9/4* 
Druid =/= 
Shaman 6/4* 
Witch Doctor 6/4* 
Rogue 
Thief 11/8* 
“Bard —/— 


* Single-classed characters can rise higher 


Hit Dice. Player character orcs and half-orcs 
receive hit dice by class. 

Alignment. Orcs tend toward lawful evil, 
half-orcs tend toward true neutral. PC orcs and 
half-orcs may be of any alignment. 

Natural Armor Class. Orcs and half-orcs 
have natural armor classes of 10. 

Background. Orcs look like primitive humans 
with gray-green skin and coarse hair. They 
stoop slightly, have low jutting foreheads, 


ee 


Humanoid Races * 49 


snouts, canine-like teeth, and short pointed 
ears. The average orc stands between 5% and 6 
feet tall. Half orcs have much more human fea- 
tures. 

Orcs are aggressive humanoids that live in 
tribal societies. They band together to hunt and 
raid, believing that to survive they must 
expand their territory. This need to expand 
puts them ina constant state of war with 
humans, elves, dwarves, goblins, and even 
other orc tribes. 

Orc communities are usually found under- 
ground (75% likely), but wilderness villages 
do exist. These lairs are protected by the best 
defenses the orcs can invent or steal. Some of 
these communities are built around active 
mines. All make use of slave labor. 

The orc mentality views aggression as the 
natural order. They believe that other races 
are inferior to them, and bully weaker crea- 
tures. Enslaved orcs will rebel at the first 
opportunity. When allied with others, orcs 
are quick to take offense and break agree- 
ments. 

To orcs, the greatest challenge they can set 
for themselves is the test of battle. They 
value territory above all else, though they 
also take great pride in battle experience 
and prowess, wealth, and lots of offspring. 
Orc society is male dominated; females exist 
to bear young. Though carnivorous, orcs 
prefer game meats or livestock to intelligent 
races. 

Half-Orcs: Half-orcs result from orc unions 
with virtually any humanoid or demihuman 
race except elves. These mixed breeds tend to 
favor their orcish parent, though a small num- 
ber can pass for ugly humans. PC half orcs are 
assumed to be crossbreeds within the upper 
10% of the mongrel orc-humans that can pass 
for human. These have the ability to surpass 
their orcish heritage, rising beyond the limits a 
normal orc can reach. However, they have dif- 
ficulty finding a place in either society, as nei- 
ther culture trusts them. 


50 * Chapter Two 


Languages. Orc, goblin, hobgoblin, ogre, 
common. Half-orcs speak orc and receive com- 
mon as a bonus language. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Player character 
orcs are not as rare as other humanoid races. 
The call to battle is not much different than the 
call to adventure, and orc heroes sometimes 
come to the forefront. If treated with care and 
patience, orc adventurers can become effective 
partners and allies. Because females have few 
rights in orc society, many of them turn to 
adventuring to escape their lot in life. 

A few orcs even attempt to reject their evil 
natures in order to try to become honorable 
warriors. While an orc will never become a 
paladin, some do attain the orcish equivalent 
of holy warriors. However, those orcs that 
attempt to fight fair and with honor are sneered 
at and rejected by their own kind. Why fight 
face to face, the common orc thinks, when 
fighting from an advantageous hiding place is 
so much more effective? 

Half-orcs: Half-orcs have an easier time of it 
as adventurers, for they are usually free of 
tribal ties. Both heritages reject them, so they 
must carve their own destiny out of what life 


throws their way. They often flaunt their supe- 
rior ability in the presence of full orcs, and tend 
to associate with humans who do not care 
about appearances. 

Half-orcs tend to be serious and brooding. 
They seek acceptance and friendship, even 
though most will have little to do with them. 
While most of the half-breeds walk the path of 
neutrality, a few do become lawful good. 

Special Advantages. Orcs (only) are skilled 
miners. They can spot new and unusual con- 
structions 35% of the time, and sloping pas- 
sages 25% of the time. 

Orcs and half orcs have 60-foot infravision. 

Half-orc single classed characters with excep- 
tional ability scores can advance further: 
Fighter 17th at 21 Strength (20—14th; 19—12th; 
18/00—11th). Priests gain one level per point 
of Wisdom up to 7th level. Thieves gain one 
level per point of Dexterity up to 11th level. 

Special Disadvantages. Orcs fight with a -1 
penalty to their attack rolls and morale when 
in direct sunlight. Half-orcs do not have this 
disadvantage. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance. 

Superstitions. Fear of sickness, the weak, the 
lame, cowards, sunlight. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Battle axe, crossbow, 
flail, hand axe, spear, any bow, any pole arm, 
any sword. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Alertness, 
armorer, blacksmithing, bowyer/fletcher, car- 
pentry, chanting, close-quarter fighting, hunt- 
ing, intimidation, looting, religion, set snares, 
spellcraft, tracking, weaponsmithing. 


Pixie 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +1 bonus to Dex- 
terity and Charisma, and a -1 penalty to 
Strength and Constitution. 


Ability Score Range 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 3 14 
Dexterity 8 19 
Constitution 7 16 
Intelligence 6 18 
Wisdom 3 16 
Charisma 3 18 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 7 
Ranger — 
Paladin = 
Wizard 
Mage = 
Illusionist = 
Priest 
Cleric — 
Druid — 
Shaman — 
Witch Doctor = 
Rogue 
Thief 12 
Bard — 


Maximum Level 


Hit Dice. Player character pixies receive hit 
dice by class. 

Alignment. Pixies are true neutral. PC pixies 
can be any neutral alignment. 

Natural Armor Class. 5. 

Background. Pixies are among the most 
intelligent and mischievous of the magical 
faerie-kind. They dwell in idyllic woodlands, 
taking great delight in harassing travelers with 
their pranks and tricks. Fun is the goal for 
nearly all pixies, and they often define fun by 
the merry pranks they pull. 

Pixies are naturally invisible. When they 
make themselves visible, they look like two 
and a half foot tall elves, though their pointed 
ears are much longer. The silver moth wings 
jutting from their backs gives them the ability 


—_— aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaamamamIħĂ 


Humanoid Races * 51 


to fly. They dress in bright colors, often sport- 
ing caps and shoes with curled, pointed toes. 

These elfin beings inhabit deep forest caves. 
They dance in moonlit glades, moving to the 
music of crickets, frogs, and other nocturnal 
creatures. They live in clans or family units 
that seem to mimic human customs. If they 
take anything seriously, it is their loyalty to 
family and community. 

They also take great pride in their martial 
skills. They can appear warlike, and they love 
to play at adventure as much as they love trick- 
ery and celebration. 

Languages. Pixie, sprite, common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Pixie PCs often 
join up with adventurers who display a good 
sense of humor (especially if they were on the 
receiving end of a pixie prank). With childlike 
wonder and a sense of adventure, pixies will 
take up sword and bow and follow other char- 
acters on important missions and grand quests. 
No matter how serious the quest is, however, 
pixies always treat it as a game. 

Even when on an adventure, they cannot 
refrain from pulling pranks on monsters and 
other creatures they meet. If no one else is 


52 * Chapter Two 


available, they may even turn their tricks on 
their companions. If they see a young maiden, 
they must frighten her. If they find a wall, they 
must rap upon it. No candle flame is safe in the 
presence of a pixie, and no inviting frog pond 
or flower field can be ignored. 

Pixies may play tricks to teach lessons, greedy 
misers and humorless bores are prime targets. 
Most often, they play tricks for the sheer fun of 
it. They love celebrations and feasts, and are 
often considered frivolous by the larger races. 
They are graceful, with a love for life. Pixies 
loathe evil, saving their most lethal tricks for 
foul bandits and wicked monsters. When they 
need an item, they have no second thoughts 
about “borrowing” it. 

Pixies can be played for comic relief, but their 
abilities with weapons makes them more than 
simple pranksters. They can become valuable 
members of any adventuring party. 

Special Advantages. Pixies can become visi- 
ble or polymorph themselves at will. Once per 
day they can know alignment. 

Once per day a pixie can create illusions with 
both auditory and visual components, which 
last without concentration until dispelled. 

Once per day pixies can touch a creature or 
being and cause confusion (as the spell) if the 
creature fails a saving throw vs. spells. This 
confusion is permanent unless a remove curse is 
applied or the pixie dispels it. 

Once per day, pixies can use dispel magic (as 
an 8th level mage), dancing lights, and ESP. 

Opponents who cannot detect invisible 
objects attack pixies with a —4 penalty. Pixies 
can attack while invisible without penalty. 

Pixies have the ability to fly, with a move- 
ment speed of 12 and a maneuverability of B. 

Special Disadvantages. A dispel magic suc- 
cessful against 8th level magic will force a 
pixie to become visible for one round. 

A pixie requires twice as much XP to advance 
a level as a human of the same class. 

Monstrous Traits. Size, invisibility, wings. 

Superstitions. Pixies avoid stagnant, filthy 


pools of water, seeing them as bad omens or 
manifestations of evil. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Dagger, pixie bow, 
pixie sword. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Animal lore, ani- 
mal noises, bowyer/fletcher, brewing, cheese- 
making, direction sense, fast-talking, gaming, 
hiding, observation, set snares, ventriloquism, 
voice mimicry, weaponsmithing, winemaking. 


Satyr 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +1 bonus to Dex- 
terity and Constitution, and a -1 penalty to 
Intelligence and Charisma. 


Ability Score Range 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 6 18/75 
Dexterity 8 18 
Constitution 7 18 
Intelligence 3 17 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 17 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 11 
Ranger y: 
Paladin = 
Wizard 
Mage = 
Illusionist = 
Priest 
Cleric = 
Druid — 
Shaman = 
Witch Doctor = 
Rogue 
Thief 11 
Bard — 


Maximum Level 


Hit Dice. Player character satyrs receive hit 
dice by class. 

Alignment. Satyrs are true neutral. PC satyrs 
can be any alignment. 

Natural Armor Class. 5. 

Background. The half-human, half-goat 
satyrs are a race of pleasure-loving beings. 
Like the sylvan locations they dwell in, satyrs 
are personifications of nature, embodiments of 
all that is wild and carefree. 

Satyrs, also called fauns, have the torso, head 
and arms of a man, and the hind legs of a goat. 
Two sharp black horns jut through the coarse, 
curly hair on top of the head. 

Satyrs spend their days and nights in sport. 
They love to frolic and play their pipes, and 
they never miss an opportunity to chase after 
wood nymphs or other comely creatures. 
While they can be friendly to strangers, they 
usually resent intrusion into their territory. 
They get along best with elves, centaurs, and 
dryads, and occasionally mingle with korred. 

These fun-loving creatures often throw wild 
woodland celebrations. During the warmer 
periods of the year, these celebrations can last 
all night. They are attended by dryads, cen- 


Humanoid Races * 53 


taurs, and other woodland creatures. Strangers 
who stumble onto such a party will be invited 
to stay if they can supply drink. Satyrs are 
extremely fond of expensive wine. 

Satyrs refuse to confine themselves to an 
organized society. They live in loose colonies, 
instead, using comfortable caves and hollow 
trees as homes. There are no female satyrs. 
They do have an affection for human females, 
however, and often seek to charm those that 
catch their fancy. 

Languages. Satyr, sylvan elf, centaur, dryad, 
korred (rare), common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Satyrs are an 
inoffensive race. They just want to have fun. 
The rare satyr who becomes an adventurer 
often does so for the sport of it. When adven- 
tures stop being fun, they return to their wood- 
land homes to find a new party. 

Satyrs do not understand seriousness or vio- 
lence. Though they can fight with the best of 
them if need be, they are rarely serious. It’s 
against their nature. They do not like to work 
(though they are excellent wine makers), as 
their hearts are tuned to play. They are impul- 
sive, full of animal passions. If they see some- 
thing they like, then they must have it 
immediately. To want is to get, at least in the 
mind of a typical satyr. 

They believe themselves to be part of nature, 
an extension of its wild side. As such, the satyr 
way is nature’s way — the right way. They are 
not thinkers, preferring instead to live in the 
now. Why contemplate a plan? Just get on with 
it, or don't. That's the satyr's way. Also, satyrs 
do not get angry or insulted. Everything is the 
way it is, so why should they be bothered by 
it? 

Satyr PCs will often be unpredictable, as the 
object of their desire changes from moment to 
moment, and they are quick to act on their 
impulses. They understand that humans and 
demihumans think differently than they do, 
and they can suppress some of their urges. 
However, satyrs will be quick to point out how 


Oo eee ee 


54 * Chapter Two 


absurd it is to try to keep a reign on feelings, 
and may even attempt to teach their compan- 
ions how to loosen up and have fun. 

Special Advantages. Because of their ability 
to be very silent and their keen senses, satyrs 
are surprised only on a roll of 1. 

In forest settings, satyrs can blend into the 
foliage (90% undetectable to creatures who 
cannot see hidden or invisible things). 

Satyrs have infravision to 60 feet. 

In melee, satyrs can head butt for 2-8 points 
of damage instead of using weapons. 

If a satyr has constructed his own satyr pipe, 
and has devoted a minimum of three profi- 
ciency slots to its use (musical instrument, 
pipes) he can use its music to either charm or 
sleep or cause fear to all within 60 feet. All who 
hear the pipes must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell or suffer the effect. No profi- 
ciency check is required to use the pipes in this 
manner. A bard’s singing can nullify the music 
of a satyr pipe. 

Special Disadvantages. Satyrs are very sus- 
ceptible to distraction, especially if this comes 
from a female with Charisma 15 or better or 
from an expensive bottle of wine. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance. 

Superstitions. Satyrs are uncomfortable in 
cities and beneath the ground, they do not like 
mobs of humans or humanoids, and fear bore- 
dom most of all. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Dagger, javelin, long 
sword, short sword, short bow, spear. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Acting, alertness, 
animal lore, artistic ability, bowyer/ fletcher, 
brewing, cheesemaking, craft instrument 
(satyr pipe), dancing, drinking, eating, fishing, 
gaming, hiding, hunting, juggling, musical 
instrument (satyr pipe), natural fighting, 
poetry, survival (forest), whistling /humming, 
winemaking. 


Saurial 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified as follows: 

* Bladeback: +1 Wis, +1 Cha; -2 Dex 

* Finhead: no bonus or penalty 

* Flyer: +2 Dex; -1Str, -1 Con 

* Hornhead: +1 Str, +1 Int; -2 Dex 


Ability Score Range 
Minimum Maximum 

Ability (bb/fn/fl/hh) — (bb/fn/fhh) 
Strength 10/7/3/12  18/18/17/18 
Dexterity 3/5/7/2 14/18/19/12 
Constitution 5/3/3/8 18/18/17/18 
Intelligence 3/3/3/7 18/18/18/19 
Wisdom 7/3/3/3 18/18/18/18 
Charisma 5/3/3/3 18/18/18/18 


Class Restrictions 
Maximum Level* 


(bb/fh/fl/hh) 

Class Maximum Level* 
Warrior 

Fighter 9/U/9/9 

Ranger —/12/—/— 

Paladin —/12/—/— 
Wizard 

Mage 9/9/9/U 

Illusionist —/—/—/12 
Priest 

Cleric U/9/9/9 

Druid 9/9/9/9 

Shaman —/—/—/— 

Witch Doctor ——j—}— 
Rogue 

Thief 9/9/U/9 

Bard —/—/=/— 


* If ability scores allow an XP bonus, then a 9 maximum 
becomes a 10 maximum. These maximums are theoreti- 
cal based on the small sample available for study. 


Hit Dice. Player character saurials receive hit 
dice by class. In addition bladebacks receive 2 


bonus hit points at first level and hornheads 
receive 4 bonus hit points. 

Alignment. Saurial characters can be of any 
alignment. 

Natural Armor Class. Flyers have a natural 
armor class of 6, finheads 5, and bladebacks 
and hornheads 4. 

Background. The saurials are a race of lizard 
people who come from an alternate Prime 
Material plane. To date they have only 
appeared in the Realms, having been kid- 
napped and brought there by the evil god 
Moander. When the god died, the saurials 
decided to make the Realms their home. 

Saurials are intelligent bipedal lizards that 
appear to be descended from creatures much 
like dinosaurs. Those in the Realms live in a 
single village in the Lost Vale, among the 
peaks of the Desertsmouth Mountains east of 
Anauroch. Most are still recovering from the 
physical, mental and spiritual anguish they 
suffered as Moander’s slaves, and few venture 
out of the safety of their valley. 

There are many different races of saurials, 
but only four are currently in the Realms. 
These are the bladebacks, finheads, flyers, and 
hornheads — names given them by the natives 
of the Realms. Their own names are a combi- 
nation of noises and scents that do not trans- 
late into human or humanoid speech. 

Saurials have brightly colored scales, sharp 
claws, and tails. The different races have 
much different body shapes. All, however, are 
roughly humanoid. Bladebacks are tall, stand- 
ing about seven feet, with stocky frames and 
friendly faces. The name given them comes 
from their most prominent physical feature. 
Large, sharp scales jut out along their spines, 
extending from the tops of their heads to the 
end of their almost body-length tails. Fin- 
heads are closest in shape to humans, though 
slightly shorter, standing about five feet tall. 
A pronounced fin sweeps from this saurial’s 
head, and it has a tail that is a little more than 
half the length of its body. Flyers are small, 


Humanoid Races * 55 


56 * Chapter Two 


averaging just three feet in height. They have 
delicate frames, small legs, short tails, and flaps 
of scale-covered skin hanging from each arm. 
This skin serves as wings, giving these saurials 
the ability to fly. Hornheads are the largest of 
the saurials, standing 10 feet tall with tails that 
stretch longer than their bodies. Sharp horns 
protrude from their heads and the great bony 
plates at their necks, giving this saurial race its 
name. All saurials come in shades of green 
mixed with yellow patterns, while flyers some- 
times sport red splotches. Rarely, a pure white 
saurial is born to one of the races. 

More than one hundred adult saurials live in 
the Lost Vale. They consider themselves to be 
of one tribe. Most of the saurials are farmers 
and hunters, though a small number of young 
saurials are becoming adventurers. Saurials 
think of themselves as saurials first and their 
sub-race second. They mate for life, live a long 
time, and both males and females share equally 
in all work. 

Saurial magic-users use memory sticks 
instead of spellbooks. These notched poles 
function like human spellbooks, though they 
are sometimes mistaken for magical staves by 
those unfamiliar with saurial customs. 

Languages. Saurials cannot speak any human 
or humanoid language. Their voices are 
pitched too high for humans to hear, though 
the olfactory portion of their own language can 
be detected. They emit scents which carry their 
emotions, and these can be interpreted by 
humans familiar with saurials. Those saurials 
who are PC adventurers usually have some 
magical item that allows them to communicate 
with their non-saurial companions. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. As time goes on, 
saurial adventurers like Dragonbait™ will 
become more common. The inhabitants of the 
Lost Vale will decide to venture out, and it is 
possible that others from their home plane 
may find their ways to the Realms and other 
campaign worlds. 

Those adults in the Lost Vale are a somber lot, 


hoping the next generation of offspring will 
bring joy back to their lives. Only the finhead 
named Dragonbait is known to have taken up 
adventuring, but the stories he brings back to 
the valley on his visits have begun to inspire 
other saurials. 

Young saurials grow quickly, reaching adult 
size in about five years. However, they take as 
long as humans to mature mentally and 
socially, so very young saurial PCs could be 
played as large children who still have a lot of 
growing up to do. Perhaps they have run away 
from the Lost Vale, their heads filled with the 
tales of Dragonbait. Older saurials could leave 
the valley on some quest, to get away from the 
somber mood that hangs over the community, 
or could even be from their home plane on a 
mission to find their lost brethren. 


Bladebacks are very social beings. They 
enjoy company, and always find time to social- 
ize. They are the most straight-forward and 
trusting of the saurial races, but they also 
understand saurial nature well enough to 
know the motives and desires of the other 
races. Slow to anger, bladebacks become pas- 
sionate fighters when finally roused to battle. 
They have very long memories, which makes 
them slow to forgive insults and offenses. 
Bladebacks tend to be leaders and advisors, 
and many become priests so they can tend to 
the needs of the community. 


Finheads tend to be alert, bright, active, curi- 
ous and highly emotional. They often become 
fighters. Most believe in ultimate good and 
evil, seeing things in terms of black and white. 
To finheads, there is one truth — they tend to 
defend that truth with every muscle in their 
bodies. New tasks and adventures are greeted 
enthusiastically. Being impulsive, they often 
leap into dangerous situations without fully 
understanding what they are up against. Fin- 
heads are the most likely to leave the commu- 
nity to seek out adventure. 


a 


Humanoid Races * 57 


Flyers are nervous and skittish. On the 
ground they are clumsy and ill at ease. In the 
air, they are graceful and fluid. They are easily 
irritated and in turn can be very irritating. 
They are full of nervous energy, constantly on 
the move and bouncing around. They love to 
talk, constantly chattering about gossip and 
any topic that comes to mind. They are nosy, 
often snooping on companions just so they can 
keep tabs on everything that is going on. Flyers 
act as scouts and messengers. 

Flyers flee when danger presents itself. This 
is done almost on reflex, though they will 
return if they are needed in a fight. Every flyer 
knows in the back of his mind that their com- 
panions need them, and they often make up 
stories wherein they save the day for their 
larger companions. They love to tell these sto- 
ries over and over again — even if they have 
no basis in fact. 


Hornheads are careful planners and rational 
thinkers. They never rush into anything. Some- 
times they seem dim-witted because they 
speak slowly and always choose their words 
with extreme care. Their minds, however, are 
sharp and quick, and hornheads often take up 
Science and crafts. They make natural wizards. 
For all their size and strength, they are among 
the most peace-loving of the saurials. They are 
not motivated to demonstrate their own 
strength and power at every occasion. Because 
of their great size, hornheads can often be 
found eating. They require a lot of vegetation 
to maintain their strength. 


Many saurials, especially spellcasters, deco- 
rate themselves with intricate tattoos which 
are carved into their scales or bony plates. 
Though they cannot speak common, some can 
understand it. They usually do not announce 
this fact to everyone, preferring the advantage 
they gain by appearing to be less intelligent 
than they really are. 


— ĖĖ 


58 * Chapter Two 


Special Advantages. All saurials have infrav- 
ision to 60 feet. 

If necessary, saurials can use their ancient 
fighting methods. Bladebacks claw twice (1d4 
damage each) and swing their razored tails at 
rear attackers (1d6). Finheads have claws 
(1d3/1d3) and their whip tail (1d2). Flyers 
employ their claws and bite (1d2/1d2, 1d2). 
Hornheads use claws (1d4/1d4), their tail 
(2d4), can charge with their horns (2d6). 

All saurials receive a +2 saving throw bonus 
against sound-based attacks (such as a harpy 
charm or a shout spell). 

Flyers fly at a speed of 24 and have a maneu- 
ver class of C. 

Special Disadvantages. Saurials do not get 
percentile ratings for Strength regardless of 
class. Saurial wizards cannot use other races' 
spell books or scrolls. 

Saurials forced to use non-saurial weapons 
suffer a -1 attack penalty. 

Gas- or scent-based attacks, such as poison 
gas and stinking cloud spells, have a greater 
effect on saurials. They receive a -2 penalty to 
saving throws against these attacks. 

Bladebacks and hornheads take damage as 
large creatures. 

If exposed to prolonged cold, saurials fall 
into a torpor called cold sleep. They can resist 
this for a number of turns equal to their size 
(flyers, 3 turns; hornheads 10 turns). Times can 
be doubled if they wear insulated clothing. 
Warmth revives them one to two hours. More 
than a day in the cold causes death. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance, size, method 
of speech. 

Superstitions. Saurials fear evil gods due to 
the treatment they endured under Moander. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any saurial weapons 
usable by their class are allowed. Fighters can 
become proficient in non-saurial weapons. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Any usable by 
their class. 


Swanmay 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a +1 bonus to Dex- 
terity and Wisdom. 


Ability Score Range 


Ability Minimum* Maximum 
Strength 13/9 18 
Dexterity 13/9 18 
Constitution 14/12 18 
Intelligence 9/12 18 
Wisdom 14/12 19 
Charisma 9/15 18 


* The second number is for the druid class. These ability score 
minimums include the class minimums. 
Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter = 
Ranger 14 
Paladin — 
Wizard 
Mage — 
Illusionist — 
Priest 
Cleric — 
Druid 12 
Shaman — 
Witch Doctor — 
Rogue 
Thief — 
Bard — 


Maximum Level 


Hit Dice. Player character swanmays receive 
hit dice by class. 

Alignment. Swanmays have the alignment of 
their class, either any good (ranger) or true 
neutral (druid). 

Natural Armor Class. 7. 

Background. Swanmays are human females 
who can transform into swans (but they are 
not actually swans). In human form, they are 
indistinguishable from other people, appear- 


ing by their garb and equipment much like 
rangers or druids. When they shift into swan 
form, their equipment remains behind. Thus, 
swanmays try to hide these items before under- 
going transformation. 

Swanmays belong to a special sorority of 
shapechanging rangers and druids. Their abil- 
ity to transform into swans at will is granted 
by the special token they carry (which only 
functions for them). This may be feather token, 
a feathered garment, a signet ring, etc. The 
token transforms into part of the swan's 
plumage or appears on the transformed swan's 
leg. These magical tokens can be spotted by 
use of a detect magic spell. 

The swanmay sorority is very secretive. Only 
human females are admitted, usually after 
they have unknowingly preformed a great ser- 
vice for another swanmay. Most retire from 
casual adventuring to devote themselves full 
time to their new responsibilities. 

Swanmays live in communal lodges near 
bodies of water in hidden forests. They hate 
poachers and others who disturb the natural 
order of the land. They dislike brash, noisy 
creatures, ferocious beasts, and monsters of 


Humanoid Races * 59 


evil alignment. They are friends and protectors 
of the forest folk, though they tend to avoid 
other humanoids. Swanmays might approach 
nature-oriented priests or close adventuring 
companions when they require assistance 
against some great evil. 

Languages. Sylvan elf, dryad, common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Swanmays are 
independent protectors of the forests and 
wildlife. PC swanmays should try to make 
sure that their adventuring actively opposes 
evil races and monsters that despoil the 
wildlife and countryside. 

Swanmays rarely, if ever, reveal their true 
natures —even to close companions. Even if 
their natures are known, they will reveal noth- 
ing about the sorority they belong to. They 
seek adventures that will ultimately benefit 
nature, the wetlands, and the forests. 

Special Advantages. All special advantages 
apply in swan form only. A swanmay can only 
be harmed by +1 weapons or better. Swanmays 
have an innate magic resistance of 2% per hit 
die. The swanmay can fly at a speed of 19, 
maneuverability class D. 

Special Disadvantages. Without their special 
tokens, swanmays are trapped in their current 
form. If the token is stolen, the swanmay can- 
not change until it is recovered. If the token is 
destroyed, the swanmay must go on a special 
quest in order to replace it. 

Monstrous Traits. Transformation ability. 

Superstitions. Swanmays watch nature for 
signs and omens. Their deep hatred of all 
things evil may sometimes approach fear. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Broad sword, dagger, 
long bow, long sword, short bow, short sword. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Alertness, animal 
handling, animal lore, animal noise, bowyer/ 
fletcher, danger sense, direction sense, fire- 
building, fishing, hiding, hunting, set snares, 
survival (forests, wetlands), swimming, 

Bonus Proficiencies: Ranger — tracking, 
druid — weather sense. 


———————————————————————————————————————————— 


60 * Chapter Two 


Wemic 


Ability Score Adjustments. The initial abil- 
ity scores are modified by a «1 bonus to 
Strength and a -1 penalty to Dexterity. 


Ability Score Range 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 11 18 
Dexterity 6 17 
Constitution 11 18 
Intelligence 3 18 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 18 


Class Restrictions 
Class 
Warrior 
Fighter 12 
Ranger = 
Paladin = 
Wizard 
Mage = 
Illusionist = 
Priest 
Cleric — 
Druid — 
Shaman 7 
Witch Doctor 7 
Rogue 
Thief — 
Bard 10 


Maximum Level 


Hit Dice. Player character wemics receive hit 
dice by class. In addition they receive 5 bonus 
hit points at first level. 

Alignment. Most wemics are neutral. PC 
wemics can be of any alignment. 

Natural Armor Class. 6. 

Background. Wemics are part human, part 
lion, combining the two as centaurs combine 
human and horse. The wemic's leonine body 
has a human torso extending from what would 
be a lion's neck. Wemics grow to 10 feet long, 


reaching heights of six to seven feet when 
standing erect. 

The leonine body is covered with dusky 
golden fur, while the underbelly fur is short 
and white. The tip of the tail is a brush of long 
black hair, and adult males also have a flowing 
mane of long black hair. The face is leonine, 
and the eyes are usually golden with slit 
pupils. The claws of the forepaws are 
retractable, the hind claws are not. 

Wemics blend leonine and aboriginal human 
cultures in a primitive society. They live in 
nomadic groups called “prides”, surviving 
through hunting. They know and use fire, and 
craft stone weaponry, pottery, and ornaments. 
Wemics have human intelligence; if exposed to 
more complex skills they can learn, providing 
they can overcome their superstitious nature. 

Witch doctors and shamans are very impor- 
tant to wemic society, for the primitive hunters 
see everything as supernatural. Weather and 
the changing of day into night are functions of 
the gods. Everything is personified and alive 
and magical — the sun, the moon, the clouds, 
the rivers. Such is how wemics see the world. 

Languages. Wemic, common. 

Role-Playing Suggestions. Wemics are play- 
ful and curious as cubs, and they keep these 
traits into adulthood. They are excellent 
hunters, trackers, and guides, often hiring 
themselves out in exchange for treasure, tools, 
and magical items. This is one way for a wemic 
to come into contact with an adventuring 
party. Others are captured as cubs and raised 
as servants or slaves. PC wemics can be either 
recently freed, or can be free wemics who have 
left home to explore the world. 

The primitive wemics risk exploitation by 
more advanced societies. They are taken as 
slaves, cheated into servitude, or even tricked 
out of valuable items they do not understand. 

Wemics have a great deal of pride and 
courage — except against obvious agents of 
the supernatural. If they cannot defeat a foe 
with weapon or claws, then that foe cannot be 


defeated. They are noble savages, with honor 
and compassion. Once they alley themselves to 
a group or cause, they stick with it to the end. 

Special Advantages. Wemics can attack with 
both foreleg claws for 1-4 points of damage 
each. They can also attack with hand-held 
weapons at the same time. 

These leonine creatures have powerful leg 
muscles which allow them to leap 10 feet 
upward or 30 feet forward. 

Special Disadvantages. Wemics take damage 
as large creatures. 

Monstrous Traits. Appearance. 

Superstitions. All of nature is personified in 
the wemic’s mind, and thus every whisper of 
wind and rumble of earth is an omen. Certain 
modern items frighten them until they learn 
what they are. They especially fear obviously 
supernatural beings and the undead. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Club (stone), javelin, 
short sword, spear. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Animal noise, 
eating, fire-building, hunting, natural fighting, 
religion, spellcraft, survival (plains), tracking, 
weaponsmithing, weaving, wild fighting. 


Humanoid Races * 61 


Humanoid Kits 


This chapter describes the humanoid kits for 
every class. The use of these kits, while 
optional, is recommended. Table 8: Character 
Kit Summary provides a quick reference list of 
which humanoids and classes are eligible for 
which kits. 

All of the kits in this book are designed for 
humanoids. Because each humanoid race is so 
different, the kits are defined in broad terms. 
When matching a humanoid to a kit, be sure to 
add the details from the humanoid’s entry (in 
Chapter Two) to the kit information when set- 
ting up your character sheet. 

Dungeon Masters may allow their players to 
use kits from the PHBR rules supplements 
with their humanoid characters. While this is 
not recommended when first introducing 
humanoid PCs into a campaign, it certainly 
can be explored at a later date. When starting 
out, the special kits in this chapter are the best 
way to create humanoid player characters. 


Proficiencies 


Kits use the proficiency rules outlined in 
Chapter 5 of the Player's Handbook. If you are 
using kits, then these rules are not optional. Be 
sure to review them before selecting a human- 
oid kit. Unless otherwise noted, all humanoids 
will receive the number of proficiency slots 
given to their class according to Table 34 in the 
Player's Handbook. 


Kit Descriptions 


Each kit begins with a brief overview. This 
gives a quick sketch of the type of character it 
can be used to create. Other sections within 
each kit include the following: 

Requirements: This section lists which 
humanoids are definitely eligible for the kit 
and which ones are not. If a particular race is 
not mentioned, it should only be selected after 
consultation with the Dungeon Master. This 
section also notes whether or not both males 


—_ereoo eee eee 


62 * Chapter Three 


and females can use the kit, and lists any align- 
ment requirements that might exist. 

Role: This section provides more details on a 
character’s place in both human and human- 
oid society. It describes how most of the typical 
members of the kit will act. Player characters 
are not required to follow this information to 
the letter. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Some kits indicate 
that specific weapon proficiencies must be 
taken when the character is created. These cost 
the usual number of proficiency slots as out- 
lined in the Player’s Handbook. Otherwise, use 
the standard class guidelines. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Some kits also 
require certain nonweapon proficiencies. 
There are several types of proficiencies that a 
kit might have. First are bonus proficiencies. 
These are free proficiencies requiring no pro- 
ficiency slots. Second are required proficien- 
cies. These must be taken and require 
proficiency slots. Third are recommended pro- 
ficiencies. These are optional and cost the 
usual number of slots. Recommended profi- 
ciencies are organized by group — general, 
warrior, priest, wizard, and rogue. When a 
player selects a proficiency from the groups 
listed for the character's class, it costs the 
usual number of slots. Selecting a proficiency 
from any other category costs one additional 
slot unless a specific kit states otherwise. 
Table 38 from the chapter of the Player's 
Handbook on proficiencies has been reprinted 
here for convenience. 

Note: There are new humanoid proficiencies 
for each group, as well as some important 
restrictions concerning proficiencies from the 
Player's Handbook and the PHBR series (see 
Chapter Four for more information). 

Finally, an entry might include forbidden pro- 
ficiencies. These cannot be chosen by a charac- 
ter who adopts the kit. Later, if there are 
campaign reasons why a character might 
acquire a forbidden proficiency, the DM may 
choose whether or not to allow it. 


Equipment: Restrictions on a kit's use of 
weapons and armor are listed here. This limits 
the character to the weapons and armor typically 
used by other characters employing the same kit. 

Special Benefits: Almost every kit includes a 
special advantage that sets its members apart 
from members of other kits. These could be 
combat benefits, reaction adjustments, or 
learning advantages. Many involve a bonus to 
encounter reactions (see Table 59 in the 
Dungeon Master" Guide, Chapter 11). 

Important Note: All bonuses are expressed 
as positive numbers, and penalties as negative 
numbers. Thus, if a low number is good for the 
character, a bonus is actually subtracted from 
the die roll and a penalty is added. Some bene- 
fits include individual class awards (see Chap- 
ter 8 in the DMG). 

Magical Abilities: This section applies only 
to priests. It lists spheres of access, special ben- 
efits for spell use, and forbidden spells. The 
ability (or inability) to turn or command 
undead is also noted here. 

Special Hindrances: Like benefits, these are 
usually unique to each character kit. They 
often force or prohibit certain actions. 

Wealth Options: A character's starting funds 
are explained here. Note that in general 
humanoid characters start with considerably 
less funds than their human and demihuman 
counterparts. 


Table 3: Nonweapon Proficiency 
Group Crossovers 
Character Class Proficiency Groups 


Fighter Warrior, General 

Paladin Warrior, Priest, General 
Ranger Warrior, Wizard, General 
Cleric Priest, General 

Druid Priest, Warrior, General 
Mage Wizard, General 
Illusionist Wizard, General 

Thief Rogue, General 

Bard Rogue, Warrior, Wizard, 


General 


Warrior Kits 


The most common kits used by humanoid 
characters are the warrior kits. From the semi- 
organized military training sessions of the gob- 
lins and hobgoblins to the humanoid races 
which learn to fight simply through daily sur- 
vival, warrior humanoids are everywhere. As 
most humanoids can only select the fighter 
class in the warrior group, the kits which fol- 
low all belong to that category — with two 
exceptions. There are two kits which simulate 
the paladin and ranger classes. Those few 
humanoid races which can choose these classes 
must take the appropriate kit to simulate the 
abilities of paladins and rangers. Here is an 
overview of the humanoid warrior kits: 


* Tribal defenders protect their tribe's territory 
from all invaders. These warriors represent the 
typical fighters of a given race. They have the 
fewest hindrances, and the fewest special abili- 
ties. 

* Mine rowdies are fighters specially trained 
to fight in underground or enclosed areas. 
They are proficient in subterranean survival 
skills and close-quarters fighting. 

* Pit fighters have been trained to fight for the 
amusement of others. In some cases, their 
training comes not from their masters but from 
the simple act of surviving battle after battle. 

* Sellswords hire themselves out to others. 
They act as guards, mercenaries, bounty 
hunters, and swords-for-hire, taking on any job 
which requires fighting skills and muscle. This 
kit is the closest one to a true professional war- 
rior a humanoid can have. 

* Saurial paladins are holy saurial warriors — 
the equivalent of human paladins. This kit is 
open only to saurials, like Dragonbait of the 
Forgotten Realms. 

* Wilderness protectors are much like rangers, 
with abilities similar to their human and demi- 
human counterparts. 


Humanoid Kits * 63 


64 * Chapter Three 


Tribal Defender 


Tribal defenders are the most common 
humanoid warriors. Every humanoid tribe, 
settlement, clan, and family group must be 
protected from the dangers of the world, and 
these proud warriors are the backbone of every 
tribe’s defense. Some humanoid races organize 
true armies or militias, but most simply place 
their safety in the hands of the strongest, most 
able-bodied tribe members. 

Player character tribal defenders have left 
their tribes for some reason (usually the char- 
acter’s primary motivation). They take with 
them whatever skills they learned while pro- 
tecting their tribes, but now they use these 
skills to ensure their own survival. 

Requirements: None, other than those listed 
in the humanoid race entries (for example, 
female bugbears would not be tribal defend- 
ers, as they do not fight unless absolutely nec- 
essary). All humanoid races have tribal 
defenders, these can be of any alignment. 

Role: Tribal defenders are humanoids with 
fighting skills. All tribe members who are not 
restricted by sexual bias or relegated to other 
tasks (because of abilities or circumstances) are 
taught to fight for the tribe. 

Tribal defenders are rarely thinkers. Some are full- 
time soldiers who protect the tribe and territory. 
Others are part-time warriors who take up club and 
spear when danger threatens. The more organized 
the race, the better trained the defender is. A rare 
few develop heroic abilities after long years of war- 
fare or constant training, as dictated by the charac- 
ter’s background history. In most humanoid tribes, 
tribal defenders can eventually rise to positions of 
power and leadership, since many races have a 
high regard for martial prowess. 

Most tribes do not grant special privileges to 
the tribal defender. These fighters are only 
doing their part for the survival of the tribe. 
However, defenders who leave their tribes to 
chase some crazy dream or quest, or to escape 
their lot in life, are often considered cowards, 


traitors, and outcasts. They are hated, some- 
times hunted, and always shunned. 

Other races are most familiar with humanoid 
tribal defenders as opposed to other humanoid 
kits, for these are the warriors they most often 
find themselves competing with. Reactions to 
tribal defenders depend upon the humanoid 
race in question and the race of those they 
meet. Most are hated, especially by those races 
usually at odds with them. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Members of this kit 
must spend all of their initial weapon profi- 
ciency slots on weapons available to their race. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Required Proficiencies: Hunting or agricul- 
ture. 

* Recommended, General: Animal noise, ani- 
mal training (tribal guard animal), black- 
smithing, direction sense, fire-building, fishing, 
leatherworking, mining, observation. 

* Recommended, Warrior: Bowyer/ fletcher, 
endurance, gaming, intimidation, natural 
fighting, set snares, weaponsmithing. 

* Recommended, Rogue: Information gather- 
ing, local history (tribal). 

* Forbidden: Wild fighting. 

Equipment: Tribal defenders should choose 
weapons and armor typical of their culture. 
Use common sense to decide what would be 
usable and available to adventuring tribal 
defenders. 

Special Benefits: After long years defending a 
particular territory, the character is intimately 
familiar with it. The player and his DM should 
determine where the humanoid's original terri- 
tory is located, and any proficiency checks made 
in the area in regards to interacting with the area 
and its inhabitants receive a +2 bonus. 

Special Hindrances: On the other hand, 
departed tribal defender PCs are no longer 
welcomed in their original territory. Campaign 
complication checks should be made more fre- 
quently if they return (see Chapter Five). 

Wealth Options: Tribal defenders begin play 
with 5d4 x 5 gp. 


SS 


Humanoid Kits * 65 


Mine Rowdy 


Mine rowdies are fighters trained to keep 
order and defend mines and other under- 
ground work areas. They are tough, intimidat- 
ing overseers who are fast to squelch fights, 
quick to give orders, and ready to wade into 
any danger to carry out the job that has been 
given them. These roughnecks keep mine 
workers productive and focused, whether 
those workers are members of the tribe or 
slaves in the tribe's thrall. Every mine rowdy is 
responsible to oversee and protect that portion 
of a mine placed in his care. Any failure can 
lead to banishment, hard labor, or even death. 

Player character mine rowdies have usually 
left their lairs in order to escape punishment 
due to some failure on their part. Perhaps a 
rowdy is the only survivor of a collapsed mine 
or a mine that was overrun by hostile forces. 
Maybe productivity dropped sharply and the 
rowdy was stripped of his position. Maybe the 
slaves and workers in his charge rebelled, and 
the rowdy had to flee in order to escape their 
wrath or the wrath of the tribe’s leaders. Or 
maybe a rowdy, tired of being cruel and over- 
bearing, showed compassion to those laboring 
for him or even set some slaves free. This sim- 
ple action immediately made him a traitor and 
outcast among his own kind. 

Requirements: Mine rowdies must come 
from races that labor beneath the ground or 
keep slaves that do. Of those humanoids 
detailed in this book, the following may select 
this kit: bugbears, gnolls, flinds, hobgoblins, 
half-ogres, minotaurs, orcs, and half-orcs. Mine 
rowdies must have a minimum Strength of 15 
and can be of any alignment. 

Role: Among those humanoids who make 
lairs or labor beneath the earth, the role of 
mine rowdy is well known. It takes vast num- 
bers of workers and slaves to mine ore and dig 
tunnels and lairs. Someone must supervise 
these workers, keep them motivated, and 
make sure nothing delays productivity. That's 


66 * Chapter Three 


where mine rowdies come in. 

Rowdies are strong, cruel, and demanding 
taskmasters. A rowdy has been given a sacred 
duty by his chief or shaman, and that duty is 
never taken lightly. When slaves refuse to 
work or threaten to revolt, the mine rowdy 
appears to put them back in their place. When 
tribal laborers grow lazy, the mine rowdy uses 
muscle and intimidation to motivate them. 
When subterranean dangers invade the work 
areas, the rowdy leaps to protect the area, tak- 
ing his place at the forefront of any defenders 
under his command. 

Members of this kit are tough, brave, forceful, 
and quick to action. They are used to being in 
command, and often throw their weight around 
even among their adventuring companions. If a 
job has to be done, they take it upon themselves 
to make sure the work proceeds. They have 
extremely developed work ethics. 

Player character rowdies have lost honor and 
position in their tribes. They are forced to leave 
the lairs they knew behind to make a life in the 
larger world. They make useful allies because 
of their skills in underground regions and their 
fighting prowess. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Mine rowdies must 
take one bludgeoning weapon and one pierc- 
ing weapon as part of their initial weapon pro- 
ficiencies. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Required Proficiencies: Intimidation. 

* Recommended, General: Chanting, danger 
sense, direction sense (underground), mining. 

* Recommended, Warrior: Close-quarter 
fighting, endurance, gaming, survival (under- 
ground), wild fighting. 

* Recommended, Priest: Engineering. 

* Recommended, Rogue: Appraising 
(ore/gems only), gem cutting. 

* Forbidden: Agriculture, hiding, survival (any 
except underground), weather sense. Note: 
These proficiencies are forbidden initially, but 
may be learned by the mine rowdy, should the 
opportunity for learning these proficiencies arise. 


Equipment: Rowdies cannot begin play with 
armor heavier than chain mail (AC 5). They 
own a footman’s pick initially, the symbol of 
their position in their old tribe. 

Special Benefits: Mine rowdies receive a +1 
bonus to all die rolls when brawling (punch- 
ing, wrestling, or overbearing). 

Special Hindrances: Because of all the time 
spent underground, mine rowdies have prob- 
lems in wide open spaces, such as under an 
open sky. They suffer a—1 attack penalty when 
forced to fight in such locations. When not in 
an underground or enclosed area, they make 
all proficiency checks at —1. 

Wealth Options: Because of their time in 
mines, mine rowdies start play fairly well off 
for humanoids, with 4d4 x 10 gp. 


Pit Fighter 


Pit fighters are humanoids who have been 
trained to put on a good show for paying cus- 
tomers. In every seedy part of every city, 
humans and some demihumans frequent hid- 
den battle pits where humanoid pit fighters are 
matched against each other or some other 
opponent (probably an animal or captured 
monster). Betting takes place at these events, 
but the real entertainment comes from the 
stunts employed by the pit fighters. 

Pit fighters who become player characters 
have given up the life (if they were slaves) or 
have decided to supplement their income by 
adventuring (if they were free pit fighters). 
Even when fighting alongside adventuring 
companions, pit fighters battle like they are 
still in the pits, making fancy moves and play- 
ing with their opponents in anticipation of the 
roar of the crowd. 

Requirements: Any humanoid, male or 
female, except fremlins, can be a pit fighter. 
Because of their exotic natures and because of 
the freedom to excel that this kit allows, many 
female humanoids find their way into the bat- 
tle pits. There are no special alignment or abil- 


ity score requirements for this kit. 

Role: Like cock fighting, humanoid battle 
pits are illegal in most human and demihuman 
cities, towns and villages. However, that does 
not stop criminals and others seeking mone- 
tary gain from engaging in the practice. In 
large cities and towns, battle pits are hidden in 
the less-savory areas. In villages, spectators 
must wait until a traveling show fighting cir- 
cus makes the circuit to their area. The audi- 
ence bets on each match, and winners of each 
match receive a portion of the purse. 

Pit fighters can either be slaves or free, using 
their talents to make money for themselves 
and their masters. As a slave, the pit fighter 
fights exclusively for the profit of the owner. In 
return, the pit fighter receives food and water, 
weapons, training, and the roar of the crowds. 
A free pit fighter enters the pits for personal 
wealth and fame. Free pit fighters usually have 
an "agent" who assists them in return for a cut 
of the profits. These agents are normally 
human or demihuman, so they can more easily 
act on the pit fighter's behalf in the towns and 
cities. 

Some pit fighters use graceful maneuvers, 
stunts, and witty banter to put on impressive 
displays. Such skilled pit fighters are valuable 
to their masters and rarely forced to fight each 
other to the death. Instead, they engage in 
well-choreographed bouts for the entertain- 
ment of the audience. When bloodlust takes 
the crowds, pit fighters are pitted against ani- 
mals or monsters, where they use their supe- 
rior skills to methodically and with great 
fanfare slice their foes to ribbons. 

Pit fighters are among the most urban of 
humanoid character kits. They have an 
accepted place in human society, and use their 
spare time to learn whatever they can (if their 
masters allow it). Even so, they pick up a lot of 
the local culture just because of their proximity 
to it. Many pit fighters love to have a good 
time, often spending the money they earn on 
gaming, drink, and entertainment. 


Humanoid Kits * 67 


ww P 
Many pit fighters take their showy skills 
adventuring with them. They never battle qui- 
etly, rarely go for the quick kill, and often prod 
their companions to compliment them when 
no crowds of spectators are present to lavish 
praise. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Members of this kit 
must have a basic tribal weapon or a short 
sword proficiency. Other weapon slots should 
be filled with exotic melee weapons not nor- 
mally allowed beginning humanoid characters. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Close-quarter fighting. 

* Recommended, General: Acting (stage 
fighting), drinking, eating. 

* Recommended, Warrior: Endurance, gam- 
ing, natural fighting. 

* Recommended, Priest: Reading / writing. 

* Recommended, Rogue: Crowd working, 
jumping, tightrope walking, tumbling. 

* Forbidden: Hiding, running, wild fighting. 
These proficiencies can be learned later during 


_ 


68 * Chapter Three 


the campaign, should the opportunity arise. 
Equipment: A pit fighter is limited to chain 

mail or lighter armor (AC 5). A shield is also 

allowed. A pit fighter also starts play with a 


weapon of specialization (see below). 

Special Benefits: Single-classed pit fighters 
receive a free weapon specialization in any 
melee weapon. 

Any pit fighter is allowed to specialize in 
more melee weapons after first level by using 
additional weapon proficiency slots. In addi- 
tion, any pit fighter can use nonweapon profi- 
ciency slots for weapons. 

A pit fighter can take rogue proficiencies 
without spending an extra penalty slot. 

Special Hindrances: As pit fighters are 
trained to make combat last, they receive a -2 
penalty to all damage rolls they inflict. 

Wealth Options: Though pit fighters can 
make decent money in the battle pits, they 
often spend it as fast as they earn it. Each 
begins play with 3d4 x 10 gp. 


Saurial Paladin 


Saurial paladins are a rare exception to the 
inability of nonhumans to become paladins. 
Saurials come from an alternative setting in 
which they are the equivalent of humans. 
While many of the abilities of the saurial pal- 
adin are like those of human paladins, the sig- 
nificant differences will be detailed here. 

Among humanoid races that are of good 
alignment, saurial paladins are respected and 
even revered. Among savage lizard man tribes 
they may viewed with awe or hostility. The 
reaction of advanced lizard man tribes will 
also vary, but to lesser extremes. The evil 
humanoid races consider saurial paladins with 
as much malevolence and loathing as they do 
human paladins. 

Requirements: Only finhead saurials can 
become saurial paladins. Finhead saurials 
adopting this kit must meet all of the require- 
ments necessary to become paladins, as given 
in the Players’ Handbook. 

Role: Saurial paladins are respected and hon- 
ored members of saurial society. They are 
noble and heroic, the symbol of all that is good 
and true. While many of these holy warriors 
remain in saurial territory to help protect it 
from the evils of the world, a few decide to 
take the battle to the enemy — crusading to 
whatever locations where the forces of evil 
hold sway. Saurial paladins are humble ser- 
vants of good, quietly doing whatever they 
have to in their personal war against evil. They 
are not braggarts or boasters (in fact, they are 
mute) and few press the tenets of their beliefs 
upon those who do not want to hear. However, 
in the presence of true evil, saurial paladins are 
quick to respond with whatever force is neces- 
sary, often taking bold chances and fighting 
against great odds to achieve their objectives. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Saurial paladins are 
not restricted in weapon use, but a sword pro- 
ficiency must be taken at first level. See then 
section on saurials for penalties for the use of 


non-saurial weapons. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: None. 

* Recommended, General: Direction sense, 
etiquette, heraldry, riding (land-based). 

* Recommended, Warrior: Any except wild 
fighting. 

* Recommended, Priest: Ancient history, 
healing, reading / writing, religion. 

* Forbidden: Wild fighting. This proficiency 
cannot be taken at any time. 

Equipment: Saurial paladins can purchase 
any type of armor or equipment. They must 
also acquire the holy symbol of the power they 
serve before beginning play. 

Special Benefits: Saurial paladins have the 
following special abilities: 

* +2 bonus to all saving throws; 

* immune to all diseases; 

* can "lay on hands" to heal 2 hit points of 
damage per level per day; 

* can cure disease once per 5 levels of experi- 
ence per week; 

* has an aura of protection, 10' radius; 

* can turn undead as a cleric of two levels 
less than level of the paladin; 


Humanoid Kits * 69 


* can wield holy swords with all the benefits 
available to paladins; 

* at 9th level, can cast clerical spells as a 1st 
level spell caster (see the paladin description in 
the Player's Handbook for details); 

* instead of being able to detect evil, they have 
the innate ability to know alignment up to three 
times per day. 

Special Hindrances: Saurial paladins do not 
radiate protection from evil, they cannot turn 
undead, and they cannot use clerical spells. All 
of the strictures that apply to paladins apply to 
saurial paladins, as listed in the Player’s Hand- 
book. Like all saurials, saurial paladins do not 
speak. 

Wealth Options: Saurial paladins initially 
receive 4d4 x 5 gp to purchase equipment. 


Sellsword 


Sellswords are the professional warriors of 
the humanoid races. They do not fight out of 
loyalty, or duty, or even to defend their tribe. 
They fight for money, pure and simple. And 
the more money involved, the harder they 
fight. For most of these humanoids, it isn’t 
might that makes right — it’s the weight of 
their employer's purse. 

Sellsword player characters lose little of their 
mercenary tendencies. They still look for mon- 
etary compensation for their skills, and some 
even consider themselves hired warriors 
attached to an adventuring party, as opposed 
to a full-share member of the group. 

Requirements: All races and either gender 
(except fremlins) may become sellswords. The 
character must have a minimum Constitution 
of 12. A sellsword must have at least a partially 
neutral alignment. 

Role: Humanoid sellswords leave their lairs 
to fight for others in exchange for money or 
other compensation. Some may have originally 
taken up the role to escape former lives, others 
because their tribes have turned to less violent 
pursuits and the call of battle still rings in their 


-__ ee — 


70 * Chapter Three 


blood. Now they fight for cash. Many tribes 
consider sellswords to be traitors to their own 
kind, for they have decided to use their abili- 
ties not in service to the tribe but to fill their 
own purses. 

Some sellswords hire into mercenary forces 
and are assigned to defend specific areas or 
wage war in the name of their employers. Oth- 
ers take on more personal jobs as bodyguards, 
enforcers, or extra muscle. In all cases, sell- 
swords consider themselves as professional 
soldiers — not as assassins or hired killers. 

Sellswords might be hired by villages to clear 
out marauding monsters, or by towns and cities 
to guard trade routes, but they are never really 
accepted in these places. Instead, they are 
feared, avoided, and relegated to specific areas 
as part of the terms of their employment. Most 
people consider humanoid sellswords to be a 
necessary evil. They may buy their loyalty, but 
they never trust them completely, keeping one 
eye on them and one hand on their own swords. 
Wizards hire sell-swords for a variety of func- 
tions, and many evil groups will employ them 
as low level leaders, thugs, and added muscle. 

However, every sellsword has his or her own 
scruples, with set lines they will not cross no 
matter how much money is involved. Some 
will only fight for just causes or against equals, 
others will not attack innocents, and a few will 
not battle members of their own race. While 
some sages claim every sellsword has a price, 
most of these humanoids in fact display spe- 
cific compunctions (though they may seem 
strange and alien to non-humanoid minds). 

Player character sellswords may just be coming 
off a job that turned out well but produced no 
cash, or one that went terribly and in the end all 
fees were held back. Maybe they even decided 
not to finish a job because it went against their 
own particular code of honor, and are now look- 
ing for other work. (Of course, the employer they 
left high and dry may come after them at some 
point for recompense.) A humanoid sellsword 
might join an adventuring party for any number 


of reasons, but the bottom line (at least at first) 
will be “what's in it for the sellsword.” 

Weapon Proficiencies: All sellswords must 
start with the short sword or spear, as these 
weapons are common and easy to acquire even 
in the worst of times. A third slot is taken up 
by a character’s weapon of choice (from those 
listed in the race’s initial proficiencies). The 
fourth slot can be any generally available 
weapon (it is assumed the humanoid has 
learned to use the weapon in the service of oth- 
ers after leaving its tribe). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Survival (same as 
humanoid's homeland). 

* Recommended, General: Animal handling, 
cooking, fire-building, riding (land-based), 
weather sense. 

* Recommended, Warrior: Bowyer/ fletcher, 
hunting, gaming, looting, running. 

* Recommended, Priest: Reading / writing. 

* Forbidden: Etiquette, fortune telling, her- 
aldry (other than their own). Sellswords may 
acquire these proficiencies at a later time. 

Equipment: When first starting, sellswords 
may purchase only one of these armor types: 
hide, padded, or scale. After their first 
adventure, they may buy any available armor 


Special Benefits: Sellswords have the ability 
to earn money by selling their services. In any 
situation in which fighters are being hired, the 
reaction roll of the potential employer is 
adjusted by +2 in the sellsword’s favor. Natu- 
rally, employment will not be available all the 
time, and some jobs will conflict with the cur- 
rent goals of the sellsword's party. 

Special Hindrances: Sellswords suffer a reac- 
tion penalty of -2 whenever common people 
encounter them; few trust them and most fear 
them. Any party with a sellsword as a member 
has a penalty of -1. 

Wealth Options: Sellswords begin with 5d4 x 5 
gp. This sum represents what remains of the sell- 
sword's last pay. 


eC eo ee ee 


72 * Chapter Three 


Wilderness Protector 


Wilderness protectors are the humanoid 
equivalent of rangers. Some are respected by 
their tribes and work with them, but most are 
loners who abhor the selfish and destructive 
practices of many races and work to counter 
such excessive behavior. 

Player character wilderness protectors join 
up with adventuring groups in order to accom- 
plish larger goals or to defeat evil monsters 
they cannot hope to best on their own. When 
the goals of the group deviate from the wilder- 
ness protector's, the humanoid may leave to 
carry on his own mission. 

Requirements: The following humanoid 
races may select the wilderness protector kit: 
beastmen, centaurs, voadkyn, minotaurs (rare), 
saurials, satyrs, and swanmays. Wilderness 
protectors abide by the requirements listed for 
the ranger class in the Player's Handbook. 

Role: Like rangers, wilderness protectors 
defend the good and watch over forests and 
woodlands. They are excellent hunters and 
woodsmen, living by weapons and wits in the 
great outdoors. They are also ecological cru- 
saders, near-fanatics who have taken it upon 
themselves to be nature's soldiers in the war 
they believe is being waged against the land. 

Wilderness protectors are preservers of life. 
They defend nature against obvious threats 
while seeking out the secretive, more ominous 
dangers that lie in wait. They consider it their 
sacred mission to keep the wilderness safe 
from those who would exploit or destroy it. 

Even those races with an affinity toward 
nature believe wilderness protectors to be 
fanatics. Most also consider them to be touched 
by the gods, and while they will have little to 
do with the protectors, they will not hinder 
them in any way. 

Wilderness protectors are normally solitary 
beings, though they will team up with others 
in order to carry on their crusade. To many, the 
protectors seem crazed and quick to violence, 


but they never raise sword except in defense of life 
and nature. However, any slight against nature 
receives the same response. They love life and all 
its pleasures, living wild and free in the wilderness. 

Player character protectors will join adventur- 
ing groups for a time, but they always keep their 
personal crusade foremost in their minds. They 
always try to persuade the group to help them, 
often while admonishing or lecturing them on 
their environmentally harmful habits. If the mis- 
sion of the group ever contradicts or totally 
ignores the mission of the protector, he or she will 
depart. If the group ever performs deeds that are 
directly opposed to the protector’s mission, the 
protector may be forced to confront them. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Survival (woodlands), 
tracking. 

* Recommended, General: Animal handling, 
animal noise, animal training, direction sense, 
hiding, leatherworking, riding (land based), 
swimming, weather sense. 

* Recommended, Warrior: Animal lore, 
bowyer/fletcher, fishing, hunting, natural 
fighting, set snares, wild fighting. 

* Recommended, Priest: Healing, herbalism, 
local history, religion, spellcraft. 

* Recommended, Wizard: None. 

* Recommended, Rogue: None. 

* Forbidden: Charioteering, seamanship. 

Equipment: Wilderness protectors cannot 
wear any armor heavier than studded leather. 
They cannot retain more equipment or treasure 
than they can carry. 

Special Benefits: Wilderness protectors have 
all the special abilities of rangers as defined in 
the Player's Handbook. 

Special Hindrances: Wilderness protectors 
have all of the limitations of rangers as defined 
in the Player's Handbook. In addition, they suf- 
fer a 3-point penalty to initial reactions of 
NPCs encountered. 

Wealth Options: Wilderness protectors start 
out poor. Each begins with 3d4 x 5 gp. 


Wizard Kits 


Perhaps the least encountered humanoid is the 
wizard humanoid. Magic and spellcraft are not 
easily learned, and few humanoid races maintain 
formal magical instruction. For one thing, liter- 
acy is not a distinguishing feature of many of the 
less advanced humanoid cultures. All humanoid 
wizards must have the reading/ writing profi- 
ciency. If their native language does not have a 
written form, then they must know a language 
that does. 

These kits represent the rare humanoid indi- 
viduals who leave their homes behind because 
the call of magic flows inside them. These indi- 
viduals have sought out magical knowledge and 
training wherever they could find it, and have 
learned enough to enter the wizard class. Note 
that humanoids cannot become specialist wiz- 
ards (it is difficult enough for them to become 
generalists!). Here is an overview of the human- 
oid wizard kits: 


* Hedge wizards usually dwell alone, if not 
apart from the tribal community, with perhaps 
an apprentice for company. They rely on their 
reputations to keep away the unwanted as 
they pursue their researches. They have some 
facility with potions, and a brisk trade of 
charms, trinkets, and elixirs going on the side. 

* Humanoid scholars leave their tribes to learn 
more about the world at large — and about 
magic in particular. Through their travels and 
studies, they have become wizards. Their quest 
for knowledge and love of ancient history keeps 
them forever on the move. 

* Outlaw mages use the magic they have 
learned to eke out a living through thievery 
and robbery. These humanoids combine thief 
skills with magic to steal from the rich and give 
— to themselves (in most cases), though some 
share the spoils with the oppressed in their 
areas. 


Humanoid Kits * 73 


Hedge Wizard 


Hedge wizards are humanoids who have 
learned magic through private study. Though 
they are usually hermits or social outcasts, 
they will often provide aid in time of need, 
though they realize that no hedge wizards are 
really trusted by those around them. They are 
often blamed for general misfortune: bad 
weather, poor crops, soured milk, bad luck. 

Hedge wizards spend their time puttering 
about, collecting unusual objects for study, 
searching for odd and obscure facts, recording 
keen observations, and carrying on mysterious 
researches that keep the humanoids around 
them in awe and fear. They sometimes disap- 
pear for weeks at a time, only to suddenly 
reappear with unique counsel, a singular item, 
or an experimental solution to a local problem. 

Requirements: This kit can be taken by any 
humanoid wizard, regardless of race, gender, 
or alignment. This kit requires a minimum 
Intelligence of 9. 

Role: While most other humanoids tend to 
leave hedge wizards alone, there is always a 
small traffic in charms, tonics, elixirs, love 
potions, and the like, which the hedge wizard 
provides. Hedge wizards will often work with 
adventurers or most skillful hunters in the 
community, for they always require odd com- 
ponents and rare commodities for their 
researches. In return, the hedge wizard pro- 
vides knowledge, advice, and the odd potion. 

Hedge wizards often take on apprentices to 
keep up their dwelling places and assist with 
their observations and experiments. The most 
adept apprentices may eventually become 
hedge wizards themselves. 

Fremlins taking this kit are usually more inter- 
ested in having the reputation than in actually 
doing any real work. They also tend to develop 
obscure and fairly useless proficiencies, such as 
Blowing Smoke Rings. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Hedge wizards can 
use any weapon allowed to standard wizards. 


-_-__eoeoeoeoeoooo 


74 * Chapter Three 


Nonweapon Proficiencie: 
* Bonus Proficiencies: Herbalism. 

* Required Proficiencies: Reading / writing. 

* Recommended, General: Agriculture (gar- 
dening), cooking, fire-building, fortune-telling, 
observation. 

* Recommended, Warrior: None. 

* Recommended, Priest: Healing. 

* Recommended, Wizard: Languages 
(ancient), local history, spellcraft. 

* Recommended, Rogue: Disguise. 

Equipment: Hedge wizards can have any 
equipment used by standard mages, if it is 
available in the hedge wizard's locale. 

Special Benefits: A hedge wizard can create 
antidote for any poison. Brewing takes up to a 
day (assuming materials are available). The 
brew remains effective for three days per level 
of the wizard. Its chance of successfully coun- 
tering a poison is 25% + 5% per wizard's level. 

At 7th level, the hedge wizard can brew mag- 
ical potions. The formula for each type of 
potion must be researched separately, accord- 
ing to the guidelines in the Dungeon Master's 
Guide. To make the potion, the hedge wizard 
must collect the proper ingredients. 


Special Hindrances: Hedge wizards are 
restricted to the following schools of magic: 
abjuration, conjuration, divination, and 
enchantment/charm. They can also take either 
illusion/phantasm or necromancy. They can- 
not learn spells from forbidden schools. 
Wealth Options: Hedge wizards start with 
(1d4 + 1) x 10 gp. 


Humanoid Scholar 


Humanoid scholars travel the world to study 
and learn everything they can about a given 
subject — always magic, though some 
humanoids have additional areas of scholarly 
interest. This has given them spellcasting 
skills, which they use to continue their studies. 
While humanoid scholars do not have to be at 
odds with their tribes, the nature of their 
lifestyle takes them out into the world at large. 

Requirements: This kit is available to the fol- 
lowing humanoid races: centaurs, fremlins, 
minotaurs, mongrelmen, ogre magi, and sauri- 
als. It is open to all genders and alignments, but 
the scholar must have an Wisdom of 11 or better. 

Role: Humanoid scholars love to search 
through ruins, dungeons, and dusty libraries. 
They spend large amounts of time examining 
books, scrolls and other writings in order to 
add to the wealth of knowledge already filling 
their heads. While humanoid scholars may 
eventually become good teachers, they spend 
their early years too busy gathering informa- 
tion to pass along what they have learned. 

Humanoid scholars are rare among their own 
kind, for few humanoids have the patience or 
desire to learn more than they need to know to 
survive. Members of this kit are motivated to 
learn more and more about the world, specific 
subjects, and magic in general. They practice 
what they learn of spellcraft by becoming 
magic-users of no small skill. 

Some humanoid scholars even decide to 
become historians, recording the chronicles of 
their own lives and the lives of the adventurers 


they work with. In fact, some of these humanoids 
will join an adventuring party just so they can 
write down the events which occur around them. 
Others become adventurers to seek out old 
books and dusty scrolls, to explore lost sites, and 
to meet with ancient beings and forgotten cul- 
tures who can add to their store of knowledge. 

Humanoid scholars are usually not violent, 
and few show many passions that are not 
related to their pursuit of knowledge and 
magic. Most are seen as unopposing and quiet 
—at least until the first artifact or ancient tome 
is uncovered. Then they become animated, tak- 
ing charge of the situation so that the knowl- 
edge in question falls into their care. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any weapon nor- 
mally available to wizards. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Reading/ writing 
(common), two other (see benefits). 

* Required Proficiencies: Ancient history or 
local history. 

* Recommended, General: Heraldry, lan- 
guage (modern), looting (knowledge only), 
poetry, reading/ writing. 

* Recommended, Warrior: None. 

* Recommended, Priest: None. 

* Recommended, Wizard: Ancient history, 
languages (ancient), local history, religion, 
spellcraft. 

* Recommended, Rogue: None. 

* Forbidden: Blind-fighting, close-quarter 
fighting, running, wild fighting. 

Equipment: Humanoid scholars use any 
weapons normally available to wizards. 

Special Benefits: Humanoid scholars 
receive two free nonweapon proficiencies. 
These must be chosen from the recommended 
proficiencies. 

Special Hindrances: Except for one profi- 
ciency, all of the scholar's initial proficiencies 
must be spent on skills relating to the pursuit 
of knowledge. 

Wealth Options: Humanoid scholars start 
play with (1d4 + 1) x 10 gp. 


Humanoid Kits * 75 


76 * Chapter Three 


Outlaw Mage 


The outlaw mage is a humanoid who has 
learned magic and uses it to profit outside the 
law, or at least outside the grasp of the local 
ruling authority. By combining a humanoid’s 
natural thieving tendencies with wizard spells, 
an outlaw mage can survive and become rich 
through illusion, deception, and spellcraft. 
Outlaw mages usually engage in one specific 
rogue-like activity, either banditry or burglary. 
They supplement their physical and stealth 
abilities with spellcasting to waylay travelers 
or break into guarded locations. 

Requirements: This kit is only available to 
the following humanoid races: centaurs, frem- 
lins, voadkyn, minotaurs, mongrelmen, ogre 
magi, and saurials. Outlaw mages can be either 
gender, but they must select a non-good align- 
ment. Members of this kit must have a mini- 
mum Dexterity score of 9. 

Role: Outlaw mages rarely operate within 
the structure of humanoid tribes. They are lon- 
ers who have left the tribe to follow the call of 
magic. To supplement their studies, they 
learned to rob and steal, and now employ both 
magic and rogue-like tricks to survive. Though 
they are loners, outlaw mages frequently oper- 
ate with others. Like witch doctors, outlaw 
mages often advise the leaders of outlaw gangs 
—and sometimes they even take charge of 
such gangs, leaving the advising to others. 

These humanoids are often found in service 
to evil wizards and others who walk the darker 
paths of society. They sometimes indenture 
themselves to such personages in order to 
learn more magic. While not all outlaw mages 
are specifically evil, all operate outside the 
laws of the land — be it human, demihuman, 
or humanoid law. 

Outlaw mages who join player characters 
have not given up a life of crime, they have just 
decided to throw in with adventurers in order 
to put their talents to more structured use. 
Every group of adventurers requires the ser- 


vices of thieves and wizards. The outlaw mage 
provides both sets of skills in the form of a sin- 
gle humanoid character. 

Some outlaw mages steal from the rich to 
give to the poor (at least a little), while others 
engage in robbery to fill their own pockets. No 
outlaw mages like to fight, and they are at a 
decided disadvantage in physical confronta- 
tions. If they cannot win through magic, thiev- 
ery or wits, they usually make a strategic 
retreat. There will always be another traveler 
to rob or a keep to break into, so better to run, 
hide, and wait for a better day than to try to 
fight a stronger opponent. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Outlaw mages can 
take any weapon available to wizards. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Hiding. 

* Required Proficiencies: reading / writing 
(common). 

* Recommended, General: Acting, begging, 
danger sense, fast-talking, looting, riding (land 
based). 

* Recommended, Warrior: None. 

* Recommended, Priest: None. 

* Recommended, Wizard: Languages (mod- 
ern), reading // writing, spellcraft. 

* Recommended, Rogue: Appraising, dis- 
guise, gaming, reading lips, tightrope walking, 
ventriloquism. 

* Forbidden: Blind-fighting, close-quarter 
fighting, natural fighting, wild fighting. Out- 
law mages can never learn these proficiencies. 

Equipment: Outlaw mages may use any 
weapons or equipment available to wizards. 

Special Benefits: Outlaw mages may take 
rogue proficiencies without spending an extra 
slot. Also, the outlaw mage can take thieves’ 
cant as a language selection. 

Special Hindrances: None. 

Wealth Options: Outlaw mages receive (1d4 
+ 1) x 10 gp initially. 


Priest Kits 


Humanoids follow a vast number of gods. 
Some are powerful, some are not, but all grant 
spells to their followers. Most humanoid holy 
men and women are shamans, though clerics 
and specialist priests are available to many 
races. Remember, if a humanoid becomes a 
player character, he or she may have to aban- 
don the gods of his or her race. This is espe- 
cially true in the case of truly evil deities. 
Humanoids who normally would worship a 
deity that is diametrically opposed to their 
player character alignment must select a god 
more in line with his new beliefs. 

A DM using the Monster Mythology and/or 
Legends & Lore rules supplements may allow 
humanoids to become specialty priests, as 
described in the Player’s Handbook. 

Here is an overview of the humanoid priest 
kits: 

* Shamans are humanoids who use their 
divinely given powers to help their commu- 
nity. They are more concerned with their flock 
than with their faith. Most priests in primitive 
tribes will be shamans. Druids and shamans 
will not be found in the same tribe. 

* Witch doctors are humanoids who combine 
priestly abilities with limited magic use. They 
are a variation of shaman, and the two will sel- 
dom be found in the same humanoid tribe. 

* Oracles always look to the future, using 
their skills and powers to interpret omens and 
signs. They are the keepers of the superstitions, 
the priests of fear and folklore. 

* War priests are humanoids who combine 
cleric magic with fighting skills. They adminis- 
ter to the more violent, warlike tribes, often 
wading into battle besides the tribe's soldiers. 
War priests are truly warriors of their faiths. 

* Wandering mystics leave their tribes to 
preach the tenets of their faith to others. Char- 
acters who have rejected their racial gods often 
become wandering mystics dedicated to a god 
not often worshipped by others of their kind. 


————————————————————————————————————————————D 


Humanoid Kits * 77 


Shaman 


As the primitive equivalent of priests in their 
primitive cultures, shamans are the mediators 
between the powers and spirits outside the 
tribe and the tribe members. They are not as 
formal or regimented as other priests, and 
have a far more practical, down-to-earth man- 
ner. While priests are most often identified the 
god they follow, shamans are most often iden- 
tified with their tribe. 

Requirements: The shaman kit is only avail- 
able to the following humanoid races: 
Aarakocras, alaghi, bugbears, bullywugs, cen- 
taurs, firbolgs, voadkyn, gnolls, flinds, goblins, 
hobgoblins, kobolds, lizard men, mongrelmen, 
ogres, half-ogres, ogre mages, orcs, half-orcs, 
and wemics. Shaman gender is restricted only 
by tribal custom, and they can be of any align- 
ment which matches their tribe or god. 

Role: The well-being of the community is the 
most important thing to the shaman, for they 
are the repository of the lore and wisdom of 
the tribe. No problem is too trivial for a shaman 
to care about. They provide divinations, 
though the form is often improvised and the 
source of information is usually dubious. They 
give sympathy and moral support, healing ills 
with skills and folk remedies more often than 
with spells, and teach the young what they 
will need to serve the community. 

Shamans must undergo arduous rituals 
before taking their posts, as well as serving as 
an apprentice to the previous shaman. These 
include long periods of fasting, initiation cere- 
monies that require some amount of pain and 
suffering, and even trials of danger. 

Most adventuring PC shamans have a greater 
purpose. Some adventure to aid their tribe. Others 
adventure as part of their initiation, and have a 
specific quest goal that must be met before they 
can return to their tribe. Still others are the last sur- 
vivors of their tribes. Guilt-ridden because they 
failed to protect their tribes from whatever 
destroyed them, they now consider their adven- 


aS aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaIaIiIħõĂÁ 


78 * Chapter Three 


turing party to be their new tribe. The rarest 
shaman PC is one who has rejected the ways of his 
race. These shamans seek to perform their duties, 
possibly to a new tribe. Until they can find a tribe 
that needs them and that has similar beliefs, these 
shamans will minister to an adventuring party. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Shamans have access 
to the weapons available to standard priests, 
and they can also choose tribal weapons. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Local history. 

* Recommended, General: Agriculture, ani- 
mal training, fire-building, fishing, fortune 
telling, rope use, weather sense, weaving, 
winemaking. 

* Recommended, Warrior: Animal lore, 
mountaineering, set snares. 

* Recommended, Priest: Healing, herbalism, 
religion, spellcraft. 

* Recommended, Wizard: None. 

* Recommended, Rogue: None. 

* Forbidden: Etiquette, heraldry, reading/ 
writing. These proficiencies may be learned 
during the course of a campaign. 

Equipment: Shamans use weapons and 
armor typical for their tribe and the powers 
served. They can use any clerical magical 
items, save scrolls. 

Special Benefits: Shamans can learn the heal- 
ing and herbalism proficiencies at the cost of 
one proficiency slot each. 

At 9th level, shamans can cast the reincarna- 
tion spell as a 5th level spell. 

Magical Abilities: Shamans may only choose 
spells from up to three different spheres from 
the list given for specialty priests. These 
spheres will never change. 

Special Hindrances: Shamans use six-sided 
dice (d6) when determining their hit points, 
not eight-sided dice as other clerics. 

Shamans cannot turn or control undead. 

Shamans never receive direct access to the 
raise dead or resurrection spells. 

Wealth Options: Shamans begin play with 
3d6 x 5 gp. 


Witch Doctor 


Witch doctors are a somewhat rarer version 
of shamans, combining shamanism with magi- 
cal ability. Much of the background and role of 
the witch doctor is identical to that of the 
shaman, and all shaman abilities, benefits, and 
restrictions apply to the witch doctor as well. 
Generally a tribe will have shamans or witch 
doctors, not both. 

Requirements: The witch doctor kit is only 
available to the following humanoid races: 
bugbears, gnolls, flinds, goblins, hobgoblins, 
kobolds, minotaurs, half-ogres, orcs, half-orcs, 
and wemics. Witch doctor gender is restricted 
only by tribal custom, and they can be of any 
alignment. Witch doctors must have a mini- 
mum Intelligence of 9. 

Role: Witch doctors walk within the twilight 
between wizardry and priestly magic. On one 
hand, they function as shamans for their tribe. 
At the same time, they make use of wizard 


spells, employing magic to defend the tribe 
and establish their own power. 

Because humanoids are impressed, awed, 
and made fearful by magic, witch doctors hold 
positions of great influence in their tribes. They 
often act as advisors to the chiefs, giving coun- 
seling and support to their leaders. 

Most primitive humanoids are very supersti- 
tious, and sometimes turn against the witch 
doctor. A witch doctor who cannot regain his 
authority must flee or be killed. (This might be 
the background for a PC witch doctor.) 

If a master witch doctor has more than one 
apprentice, only one will receive the mantle of 
tribal witch doctor when the master retires or 
dies. The others are banished or killed to keep 
the harmony of the tribe intact. Other appren- 
tices leave when there is no more that the 
master can teach them. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Witch doctors have 
access to the weapons available to wizards, 
and they can also choose tribal weapons. 


ee aaaaaaaaaaaaaaamaasaasasasasmsmsmsmsmnmnsniÃÅÅțy 


Humanoid Kits * 79 


Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Local history. 

* Recommended, General: Agriculture, crowd 
working, dancing, singing, winemaking. 

* Recommended, Warrior: None. 

* Recommended, Priest: Healing, religion. 

* Recommended, Wizard: Astrology, herbal- 
ism, languages (ancient), spellcraft. 

* Recommended, Rogue: None. 

* Forbidden: Heraldry. 

Equipment: Witch doctors can use any 
weapon with which they can become pro- 
ficient. They cannot wear armor of any type. 
They can use any magical items normally 
usable by wizards. 

Special Benefits: Witch doctors have all the 
special benefits of shamans. 

Witch doctors can take wizard proficiencies 
without spending an extra slot. 

Special Hindrances: Witch doctors are lim- 
ited to a single school of magic (though they 
have none of the bonuses or penalties of spe- 
cialist wizards). 

Witch doctors cast wizard spells like wizards 
of one-half their level (round up). Thus, a 5th 
level witch doctor can cast wizard spells as a 
3rd level wizard. 

A witch doctor cannot gain priest or wizard 
spells outside the chosen spheres and school. 

Wealth Options: Witch doctors begin play 
with (1d4 1) x 5 gp. 


Oracle 


Oracles are humanoid clerics or druids who 
believe themselves to be the mouthpieces of 
the gods. They foretell the future, interpret 
signs and omens, and speak to their people 
with the authority of the gods. Oracles often 
follow a pantheon as opposed to a single deity, 
bringing the words of all to the ears of the 
tribes. They are the keepers of folklore and 
mystery, the clerics of fear and superstition. 
They tend to be isolated even when they are 
part of a community. 


oS 


80 * Chapter Three 


Oracle player characters usually join adven- 
turing parties as part of a grand quest for their 
deities or to bring the words of their gods to 
others who could profit by them. 

Requirements: This kit is available to the fol- 
lowing humanoid races: alaghi, bugbears, cen- 
taurs, gnolls, flinds, goblins, hobgoblins, 
kobolds, mongrelmen, half-ogres, orcs, half- 
orcs, saurials, and swanmays. Oracles can be 
male or female. Their alignment must match 
that of their deity or the pantheon they follow. 
There are no special ability score requirements. 

Role: Oracles deliver broad statements about the 
future to followers of their faith (or to anyone else 
to whom they feel compelled to preach). These 
humanoids believe that they are receiving visions 
from their gods, and they help other followers to 
act on them accordingly. They provide guidance, 
they interpret omens, and they often assist those 
they are compelled to present prophecy to. When 
they go on these vision quests, they may just 
watch to see how the prophecy comes to pass, or 
they may help it to unfold. 

As humanoids are extremely superstitious, 
these clerics take it upon themselves to admin- 
ister to their fears and superstitious practices. 
For this reason, oracles are sometimes called 
"priests of fear." While it may appear to out- 
siders that they are just taking advantage of 
the superstitious tendencies of humanoid 
tribes, oracles actually serve a legitimate pur- 
pose. They counsel humanoids on how best to 
work through their fears, teaching them to lead 
productive lives despite the many supersti- 
tions that hang over them. 

Of course, they believe that superstitions are 
real — to ignore them is to invite disaster and 
the wrath of the spirit world. At times when a 
superstition completely hampers a humanoid, 
the oracle reads the signs and omens in order 
to find a way to appease the spirits and break 
the paralyzing fear. 

Oracle player characters always speak of 
visions and the future. They will allow nothing 
to be done until they read the signs and por- 


tents. While this could get on the nerves of less- 
superstitious party members, oracles also bring 
with them a number of skills and abilities which 
make them very good companions to have 
around. In addition, these characters can also 
serve as tools of the DM through which valuable 
clues (and red herrings) can be passed along. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Oracles must select 
their weapons from those allowed to priests. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Danger sense. 

* Recommended, General: Chanting, direc- 
tion sense, observation, weather sense. 

* Recommended, Warrior: Survival. 

* Recommended, Priest: Astrology, read- 
ing/writing, religion, spellcraft. 

* Recommended, Wizard: None. 

* Recommended, Rogue: Information gather- 
ing, ventriloquism. 

* Forbidden: None. 

Equipment: Oracles may use any armor and 
equipment allowed to their class. 

Special Benefits: Oracles have the ability to 
receive visions of the future twice per month. 
These visions will be true, although they may 
be highly symbolic and open to many interpre- 
tations. Other visions may come unbidden, but 
these may or may not be true. 

Magical Abilities: Druidic oracles have 
access to the standard druidic spheres. Other 
oracles have following spells. 

* Major Access: All, Divination, Protection, 
Sun. 

* Minor Access: Charm, Guardian, Healing, 
and Necromantic. 

* Forbidden Spheres: All others. 

Oracles can turn or control undead as other 
clerics. 

Special Hindrances: Oracles will receive no 
clear visions regarding events in which they 
are fated to play an active role. Using a vision 
for personal gain immediately draws a curse 
(in the form of a penalty imposed by the DM). 

Wealth Options: Oracles receive 3d6 x 5 gp 
initially. 


War Priest 


War priests are clerics of battle. These 
humanoids preach a doctrine of might as right, 
administering to the body as much as to the 
soul. Not only do they bring the faith to the 
warrior classes, they also fight beside them 
when they march to war. War priests are clerics 
with better than average combat skills. They 
burn with the indignation of their violent gods, 
wielding weapon and holy symbol in harmony 
for the faith they believe. 

When war priests become player characters, 
they may turn away from the evil deities of their 
tribes, but they quickly find new gods to replace 
them. These gods may be less evil, but they are 
no less violent. These priests follow war gods 
and only war gods. 

Requirements: This kit is only available to the 
following humanoid races: bugbears, gnolls, 
flinds, goblins, hobgoblins, kobolds, half-ogres, 
orc, half-orcs, and saurials. War priests can be 
male or female, and they can be of any align- 
ment. The minimum Strength score required for 
members of this kit is 12. 

Role: War priests lead the faithful to battle, 
bringing cleric spells to the battlefield along 
with their weapons of choice. They are respected 
among those races which engage in war as a 
way of life, and feared among those races that 
prefer more peaceful solutions. 

War priests usually attend to the spiritual 
needs of warriors, considering others as less 
worthy of their attention. They foretell when the 
gods want their followers to go to war. They 
prepare the troops with inspirational sermons 
and clerical blessings. They fight alongside their 
followers, bringing the wrath of their gods upon 
their enemies. 

War priests often become adventurers at the 
bequest of their deity. They often go on long 
quests as part of their normal duties. Others 
turn away from their gods to take up the other 
faiths. To prove their loyalty to their new gods, 
these war priests may also take up holy quests 
at the side of adventuring parties. 


—_— IIħÃÁÁț 


Humanoid Kits * 81 


Weapon Proficiencies: War priests wield the 
weapon of their war god. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Wild fighting. 

* Required Proficiencies: Religion. 

* Recommended, General: Endurance, intim- 
idation, riding (land based). 

* Recommended, Warrior: Armorer, black- 
smithing, blind-fighting, close-quarter fight- 
ing, weaponsmithing. 

* Recommended, Priest: Engineering, heal- 
ing, spellcraft. 

* Recommended, Wizard: None. 

* Recommended, Rogue: None. 

* Forbidden: None. 

Equipment: War priests may purchase any 
equipment they choose, including any armor 
and any weapons. They can use any magical 
items normally available to priests. 

Special Benefits: War priests can acquire 
warrior proficiencies without spending an 
extra slot. 

Magical Abilities: War priests are allowed 
the following spells. 

* Major Access: All, Combat, Healing, Pro- 
tection. 

* Minor Access: Guardian, Necromantic, 
Divination, Sun. 

* Forbidden Spheres: All others. 

War priests can turn or control undead as 
other priests. 

Special Hindrances: None. 

Wealth Options: War priests start play with 
3d6 x 5 gp. 


Wandering Mystic 


Wandering mystics are humanoid clerics 
who leave their tribes to preach to others. They 
either go in search of converts to their race's 
faith, or, if they have rejected their race's 
deities, they seek to bring the tenets of a new 
religion to those who have not yet heard them. 

Player character wandering mystics join up 
with adventuring parties to serve as their spiri- 


a —— ee aaaaaaaaaaaasasasasasasmssssmsmsmsnsIa 


82 * Chapter Three 


tual guides or to accomplish some great task 
for their gods. No matter what mission the 
party may be involved with, a wandering mys- 
tic will take every opportunity to find converts 
to his or her faith. 

Requirements: This kit is available to the fol- 
lowing humanoid races: alaghi, bugbears, cen- 
taurs, gnolls, flinds, goblins, hobgoblins, 
kobolds, mongrelmen, half-ogres, orcs, half- 
orcs, saurials, and swanmays. This kit is open 
to all genders and alignments. 

Role: Wandering mystics come in two forms. 
The first is a cleric of a particular humanoid 
race who receives a vision to preach to those 
beyond the limits of the tribe’s territory. The 
second is a cleric who finds faith not in the 
gods of his race but in a totally foreign deity. 
While this cleric may try to convert his own 
tribe, he will quickly decide to find converts in 
less-hostile locations. 

Wandering mystics are voices in the wilder- 
ness, attached to no organized temple or reli- 
gion. They are loners on missions for the gods 
they serve, traveling wherever their faith leads 
them. A wandering mystic can be a strange 
sight, striding out of the wilderness with 


words of inspiration for all who would hear. 
While they might sometimes work with those 
clerics of their gods who are attached to an 
organized religion, more often than not they 
are at odds with these clerics. They do not 
believe in the trappings of tradition and regi- 
ment. They preach a looser, less confining form 
of spiritual worship. 

Player character wandering mystics may 
appear disheveled, distant, and even crazed. 
They follow voices only they can hear and see 
sights meant for no other eyes. When they join 
with an adventuring party, it is because they 
are following the will of their gods. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any weapon nor- 
mally available to mystic’s base priest class can 
be selected by the mystic. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Survival (of choice). 

* Required Proficiencies: Fire-building. 

* Recommended, General: Agriculture, animal 
handling, carpentry, cobbling, cooking, fishing, 
leatherworking, pottery, seamstress/ tailor, 
stonemasonry, weaving. 

* Recommended, Warrior: Endurance, sur- 
vival. 

* Recommended, Priest: Healing, herbalism, 
local history. 

* Recommended, Wizard: None. 

* Recommended, Rogue: None. 

* Forbidden: None. 

Equipment: Wandering mystics may use any 
weapon or armor available to their base priest 
class. 

Special Benefits: None. 

Magical Abilities: Wandering mystics have 
the sphere selection of their base priest class. 
They turn undead like their base class. 

Special Hindrances: Wandering mystics start 
play poor (see Wealth Options). 

Wandering mystics suffer a 2-point penalty to 
reaction rolls when dealing with religious 
NPCs (of any faith, including their own). 

Wealth Options: Wandering mystics start 
with one weapon and 3d6 gp. 


Rogue Kits 


The second most common occupation for 
humanoids to take up is rogue, and most races 
excel as thieves of all kinds. Many humanoids 
are not equipped for the rigors of the warrior 
lifestyle, and fewer still have what it takes to 
advance as priests or wizards. But most share 
traits that make them prime candidates for 
rogue professions — greed, caution, skulking, 
and a love of the dark. Here is an overview of 
the humanoid rogue kits: 


* Scavengers search the wilderness for wealth 
and treasure, living off the discarded goods of 
others. They are crafty, shrewd, and able to 
spot a jewel in a mound of garbage. Many 
make good traders, coming to the cities to offer 
their finds to those with gold to spare. Of 
course, not everything they sell is as it appears 
to be. 

* Tramps are humanoids who frequent towns 
and cities, earning a living by begging and 
engaging in minor thievery. They are excellent 
pick-pockets and informants, sweeping 
through crowds in search of wealth and infor- 
mation to sell. 

* Tunnel rats are humanoids trained to 
explore underground passages for their tribes. 
They are experts at underground survival and 
locating and disarming traps. Other 
humanoids call them “bait,” for they are cast 
out into the tunnels to see what bites. 

* Shadows are humanoids who hire them- 
selves out as eliminators. They are humanoid 
assassins, feared and respected for their deadly 
skills. Most assassin guilds have at least one 
shadow among their membership, for there are 
times when their particular talents are called for. 

* Humanoid bards are just that, humanoids 
with the skills and abilities of bards. While this 
is the closest many humanoids can get to this 
character class, there are certain differences 
that separate them from their human and 
demihuman counterparts. 


_—_——— aaaaaaaaaaaamaaaaaaaamammaiħIħįIe 


Humanoid Kits + 83 


Scavenger 


Scavengers combine a number of skills and 
abilities to create a unique humanoid character 
kit. They are expert hunters and searchers, able 
to locate salvageable items in all types of wilder- 
ness terrain. They are artists and craftsmen, able 
to fix up what they find (at least as far as surface 
details are concerned) to sell it at a profit. They 
are cunning and shrewd, crafty peddlers and 
traders who can usually get the best price for 
their wares — and perhaps a good bit more. 

Player character scavengers have never lost 
their desire to poke around garbage and other 
discarded goods. Nothing thrills a humanoid 
scavenger more than to discover a bright trea- 
sure beneath a mound of junk. Often, an adven- 
turing scavenger takes up with other 
adventurers to secure protection as the hunt 
for salvageable wares continues. 

Requirements: None. Any humanoid rogue, 
regardless of race, can be a scavenger. Scav- 
engers can be of any alignment or gender. 

Role: Scavengers fill a role similar to that of 
their animal counterparts — they live off the 
remains of others. These remains can be figura- 
tive or literal, for scavengers look for salvage- 
able goods among discarded waste and on the 
bodies of the dead. 

Scavengers rarely operate as members of a 
humanoid tribe. More often, they are outcasts 
who turn to picking through the garbage of 
others to survive. Some even team up with 
other outcasts to create scavenger gangs, but 
this is rare. Most scavengers prefer to keep 
whatever treasures they find for themselves. 

Scavengers often look like garbage pickers — 
they are dirty, dusty, grimy, and often have an 
unpleasant stench about them. Those just back 
from a scavenger hunt might also be sur- 
rounded by flies and other insects, though 
most other scavengers would hardly notice. 
Even when a scavenger tries to make himself 
presentable before approaching a village to 
hawk his wares, the telltale signs of dirt and 


oo aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaIaIaIiIiIħÃĂ 


84 * Chapter Three 


stench linger gently about him, marking the 
scavenger for what he is. 

While a scavenger will be proficient with the 
normal thieving skills, these are rarely used 
except in the pursuit of salvage. These 
humanoids do not believe in stealing as such 
(except when haggling for trade, see below), 
for they see garbage and the dead as prime 
treasure to be sought and salvaged. It is not 
stealing to take what has been discarded, lost, 
or forgotten. In fact, scavengers will often fol- 
low war parties to pick at the remains of battle 
the way vultures pick at bones. 

For all his disheveled appearance, the scav- 
enger is a shrewd tradesman. He repairs and 
cleans up the treasures he finds, turning worth- 
less junk into desirable wares. When enough 
items have accumulated, it’s time to go toa vil- 
lage or town to peddle the wares. Few can get 
the better of a scavenger in a trade — this is usu- 
ally where they make most of their wealth. 
While they will sell items of true worth (if they 
do not want to keep them), more often scav- 
engers sell junk disguised as treasure. They can 
clean and repair weapons and armor to make 
them look like new, but the first real use of these 
items will reveal them as well-polished garbage 
that breaks under the least bit of pressure. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Members of this kit 
may select any weapons and equipment nor- 
mally available to thieves. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Looting. 

* Required proficiencies: Appraising. 

* Recommended, General: Artistic ability, 
blacksmithing, carpentry, direction sense, fast- 
talking, leatherworking, pottery, riding (land 
based), seamstress/tailor, weaving. 

* Recommended, Warrior: Survival (as 
appropriate), tracking, weaponsmithing. 

* Recommended, Priest: None. 

* Recommended, Wizard: None. 

* Recommended, Rogue: Ancient history, 
forgery, gem cutting, local history. 

* Forbidden: Reading / writing. Scavengers 


know the value of books and scrolls, but lack 
the ability to read or write. They can learn this 
proficiency during the course of a campaign. 

Equipment: Scavengers can purchase and 
use any equipment and armor usable by 
thieves. In addition, they must spend one- 
quarter of their starting funds on trade wares. 
The money represents all that was involved to 
turn salvaged items into trade goods. 

Special Benefits: When meeting others in 
order to peddle salvaged wares, a scavenger 
receives a +2 reaction bonus. 

Special Hindrances: In all other situations, a 
scavenger’s appearance (and stench) grants 
him a -2 reaction penalty. 

Wealth Options: Scavengers begin play with 
2d6 x5 gp. 


Tramp 


While scavengers pick through the garbage 
of the wilderness, tramps search the waste of 
civilization. These humanoids are beggars and 
thieves, asking for donations with one hand 
and stealing a heavy purse with the other. In 
many ways, tramps resemble scavengers — 
they wear rags and ripped, dirty clothing, they 
smell bad, and they often seem sickly or 
crazed. But tramps live among humans and 
demihumans, surviving on generous dona- 
tions either freely given or secretly taken. 

Tramp player characters often join adventur- 
ing parties for a change of pace. While the 
streets and alleys have excitements all their 
own, tramps sometimes yearn for true adven- 
tures. Of course, they must convince the party 
that they have skills to offer that will make 
their inclusion worthwhile. 

Requirements: Any humanoid rogue can 
take the tramp kit. 

Role: Tramps are humanoid outcasts who 
wind up in human towns and cities. For a vari- 
ety of reasons, they have left their tribes and 
come to the cities to find their fortunes. Unfor- 
tunately, humanoids are not always welcome, 


and honest jobs are hard to find. At first, these 
characters turn to begging in order to earn a 
living, and they quickly become very good at 
it. But as time passes, they discover that they 
must sometimes turn to other means to sur- 
vive. At these times, tramps learn to take what 
they require. They consider the coins and items 
they steal to be alms which are rightfully theirs 
— it’s just that the good people forgot to drop 
these items in their begging bowls. 

Tramps often set up on a busy street, begging 
for coins from passersby. Tramps may appear 
sickly and in need of alms, but they are perfectly 
able-bodied. To them, begging is a career and an 
art, as honorable as any other profession. Using 
disguise and acting skills, a tramp will have one 
particular identity on one corner, and a com- 
pletely different identity on another. They use a 
variety of pity-inducing ploys, fast-talking, and 
sad stories to earn the charity of strangers. 

These humanoids have excellent observation 
skills, and many sell information to those who 
seek it. Tramps know when new people arrive 
in their part of the city, they notice any unusual 
activity going on, and they quickly spot easy 
marks — those who will give generously of 
their own accord, or with a little help from the 
tramp. They are always listening for gossip 
and rumors, and they know when important, 
well-paying members of society are looking for 
particular bits of information. 

When information gathering and begging fail 
to produce enough revenue, tramps wander 
the crowds in search of pockets to pick and 
purses to cut. Some even engage in such activ- 
ity for the fun, excitement and challenge it pro- 
vides, for street begging can become dreadfully 
boring after a time. Tramps will not take unnec- 
essary risks, preferring challenges that are well 
within the scope of their abilities. They even 
turn to shoplifting when a particularly tempt- 
ing item catches their eyes. 

As player characters, tramps provide a vari- 
ety of skills to an adventuring party. They are 
masters of disguise, decent spies, consummate 


Humanoid Kits * 85 


actors, and professional thieves. They are also 
cowardly, unsavory, and greedy to a fault, but 
nobody's perfect. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Tramps choose their 
two initial weapons from the following selec- 
tion: club, dagger, dart, knife, sling, and staff. 
Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Begging. 

* Required Proficiencies: Observation. 

* Recommended, General: Acting, alertness, 
fast-talking, fortune telling, hiding, voice mimicry. 

* Recommended, Warrior: Survival (urban). 

* Recommended, Priest: None. 

* Recommended, Wizard: None. 

* Recommended, Rogue: Appraising, dis- 
guise, forgery, gaming, information gathering, 
juggling, local history, reading lips. 

* Forbidden: None. 

Equipment: Tramps have very little in the 
way of equipment. They cannot afford to 
appear even marginally well off. At most, they 
carry a simple bowl and a weapon that can be 
hidden beneath their beat-up clothing. When 
not engaged in begging or other low-profile 
activities, tramps can wear any armor and 
carry any weapons usable by thieves. 

Special Benefits: Tramps are particularly 
adept at sizing up potential targets. By making 
a successful observation proficiency check, a 
tramp can accurately determine the subject's 
class group. A second check can be made to 
determine the character's level. If this check 
succeeds, the tramp learns whether the level of 
the subject is less than his own (yes or no). A 
roll of 1 on either check reveals exact informa- 
tion. If the subject is disguised, a -5 penalty 
applies to both types of check. 

Special Hindrances: Tramps suffer a -3 reac- 
tion roll penalty when dealing with characters 
who aren't thieves. 

For every point of visible AC better than their 
natural armor class, tramps suffer a -1 penalty 
to their begging proficiency checks. 

Wealth Options: Tramps begin play very lit- 
tle money, receiving only 2d6 gp. 


————————————————————————————————————————— 


86 * Chapter Three 


Tunnel Rat 


Tunnel rats come from the ranks of all human- 
oid races that dwell beneath the earth. They 
serve as advance scouts and explorers for their 
tribes, using whatever skills they can pick up 
to survive the unknown dangers waiting below 
the ground. The good ones have learned to be 
keen observers and decent fighters, for they 
must be able to spot natural and artificial traps 
before they stumble into them, and they must 
be able to defend themselves against other 
subterranean races and the monsters that 
dwell below. The bad ones are all dead. 

Player character tunnel rats perform the 
same services for adventuring parties as they 
did for their tribes. They take the point, using 
their skills and abilities to pick a safe path 
through dungeons and underground tunnels. 
When they encounter dangers, they warn their 
companions and take the necessary steps to 
make the way safe. 

Requirements: Tunnel rats must come from 
the races that live and labor beneath the 
ground. Of those humanoids detailed in this 
book, the following may select this kit: goblins, 
hobgoblins, kobolds, orcs, and half-orcs. There 
are no special alignment or gender require- 
ments. A tunnel rat usually has a lower 
Strength or Constitution than is typical. 

Role: Tunnel rats serve as bait for the human- 
oid tribes which live and work in subterranean 
areas. At least that’s how their fellows view 
them. When humanoids find new tunnels to 
explore and new mines to dig, or when they 
decide to spy on their underground neighbors, 
the first thing they do is select a member of the 
tribe to be “bait.” Ropes are attached to the bait 
and it is sent into the unexplored tunnel to 
search for traps, hostile creatures, and other 
dangers. If the rope reaches the end of its 
length and nothing bad happens, then the rest 
of the tribe knows it’s relatively safe to follow 
the bait into the tunnel. Those that survive this 
particular job often become quite skilled. 


When this occurs, they are no longer called 
bait. They earn the title of tunnel rat. 

Even successful tunnel rats rarely achieve high 
regard in the tribe. They are the butt of jokes, 
seen as poor fighters because they do not get to 
fight with the rest of the warriors. They are also 
considered extremely expendable, for their job is 
to find dangers before the rest of the tribe can be 
hurt. As finding these dangers often means 
death, all tunnel rats are considered to be living 
on borrowed time. If a tunnel rat dies by stum- 
bling into a trap, causing a cave-in, or springing 
an ambush, then he has done his job. There are 
no tears, for more bait is waiting to be tossed 
into the tunnel ahead once a rat falls. 

The best tunnel rats have a stubborn will to 
survive. With a little luck and a lot of determi- 
nation, these characters train themselves on 
the job. They learn to spot and disarm traps, 
for they believe that is a better course than sim- 
ply stepping into them and setting them off. 
They learn to move with stealth and to keep 
hidden so that they may see enemies before 
they are seen. They learn to climb, to hunt, to 
fight, to find their way in the most confusing 
tunnels, for to do less is to fail at the task their 
chiefs have given them. 

Of course, some decide that they do not like 
being unappreciated. These individuals leave 
their tribes in order to find fame and fortune. 
They sell their skills to those who need them, 
often joining adventuring parties about to 
embark on an underground quest. 

Tunnel rats are extremely self-sufficient. They 
are almost supernaturally silent, appearing 
from the shadows without warning when the 
rest of their party least expects them. They are 
not easy to like, and they seldom make good 
friends, but they are invaluable when explor- 
ing the regions below the earth. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Members of this kit 
must take the short sword proficiency. The 
other slot can be filled from the weapons 
usable by thieves. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 


* Bonus Proficiencies: Close-quarter fighting. 

* Recommended, General: Alertness, danger 
sense, direction sense, hiding, navigation (under- 
ground), rope use, survival (underground). 

* Recommended, Warrior: Endurance. 

* Recommended, Priest: None. 

* Recommended, Wizard: None. 

* Recommended, Rogue: Jumping, tightrope 
walking. 

* Forbidden: None. 

Equipment: Tunnel rats can use and pur- 
chase any equipment and armor normally 
available to thieves. They should purchase 
basic survival equipment, including ropes, 
pitons, tools, food and water, etc. 

Special Benefits: Tunnel rats receive a +5% 
bonus to their initial find/remove traps, move 
silently, and climb walls skills. 

Special Hindrances: Tunnel rats have a -10% 
penalty to their pick pocket skill and a -5% 
penalty to their read languages skill. 

Wealth Options: Each member of this kit 
begins play with 1d6 x 10 gp. 


Shadow 


Shadows are humanoid assassins. They have 
made their way in the world by killing others 
for profit. While many have private codes, oth- 
ers hire themselves out to the highest bidder. 
Shadows have a reputation for being compe- 
tent, cold-blooded, and extremely efficient. 
Thus, when they no longer actively take com- 
missions, they tend to drift into related activi- 
ties: spying, bounty hunting, and the like. 

Shadow player characters are extremely rare, 
but they might join adventuring parties with 
similar interests and goals. They are loners by 
nature, however, and seldom stay with a group 
for long. 

Requirements: Shadows can be of the fol- 
lowing races: bugbears, bullywugs, gnolls, 
flinds, goblins, hobgoblins, kobolds, lizard 
men, mongrelmen, ogre magi, orcs, or half- 
orcs. Either gender may become shadows. The 


Humanoid Kits + 87 


character must have minimum Strength and 
Dexterity scores of 12, and a minimum Intelli- 
gence of 11 to choose this kit. Shadows can be 
of any non-good alignment. 

Role: Shadows are spies, assassins, and 
enforcers. Most leave their tribes to practice 
their profession in the outside world. Shadows 
earn their name from the way they live. Most 
are unseen until they strike, maintaining a low 
profile even when not on a job. 

Most assassin guilds have at least one 
humanoid shadow on their rolls. They are 
saved for special assignments and for specific 
clients who favor their dark ways. Active 
shadows are proficient at stealth and killing, 
and spend much of their time honing their 
fighting skills to a fine edge in anticipation of 
the next assignment. Most are cool, calculating 
killing machines, and display a frightening 
lack of emotion when accomplishing their jobs. 

Player character shadows are nearly always 
of neutral alignment and have often retired to 
general adventuring. Those still active as 
assassins often see themselves as agents of the 
forces of justice, the balance, tribal law, or 
some other principle. They consider the deaths 
they cause as justifiable evils, and only take 
commissions that fall into this category. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Shadows may select 
any one-handed weapon, any weapon avail- 
able to thieves, plus others appropriate to their 
profession (e.g.: blowgun, etc.). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Disguise. 

* Recommended, General: Acting, alertness, 
begging, danger sense, hiding observation, 
voice mimicry. 

* Recommended, Warrior: Hunting, intimi- 
dation, tracking. 

* Recommended, Priest: Reading / writing. 

* Recommended, Wizard: None. 

* Recommended, Rogue: Blind-fighting, 
close-quarter fighting, information gathering, 
jumping, tumbling. 

* Forbidden: None. 


————————————————————————————————————— 


88 * Chapter Three 


Equipment: Shadows can use all types of 
deadly equipment, but they are limited to the 
armor types available to other thieves, plus 
shields. Shadows do not make use of poison. 
They prefer to eliminate their targets with 
weapon and combat skills. 

Special Benefits: When attacking with sur- 
prise, a shadow kills the victim if a hit is scored 
and the victim fails a saving throw vs. death; 
provided the victim has hit dice less than or 
equal to the shadow's. Otherwise, damage 
equal to a backstab is inflicted. 

Special Hindrances: All thief abilities except 
backstabbing are rated two levels less than those 
of a thief of equal level. This means that all ini- 
tial thief abilities except hear noise have an 
additional -10% penalty. 

Wealth Options: Each shadow begins play 
with 2d6 x 10 gp. This sum represents all that 
remains of a shadow’s last pay. 


Humanoid Bard 


Humanoid bards are basically humanoid ver- 
sions of the human and half-elf bard. They fol- 
low all of the rules which apply to normal 
bards, though they have some special differ- 
ences that separate them from the bards every- 
one knows. Unlike a true bard, who is a 
jack-of-all trades, humanoid bards (with some 
exceptions) normally focus on a particular 
brand of entertainment. Many sing, some 
dance, some act or tumble. A few even create 
and recite poetry. While most humanoid bards 
attempt to appeal to their particular audience, 
some (like mongrelmen bards) labor to create 
art that few other races can appreciate. 

Requirements: Aarakocra, centaurs, flinds, 
mongrelmen, satyrs, voadkyn, and wemics can 
choose the bard kit. All must have a minimum 
Dexterity and Intelligence of 13. Most must 
have a minimum Charisma of 15. Mongrelman 
bards must have a minimum Charisma of 15 
among their own kind. Humanoid bard align- 
ment must be at least partially neutral. 


Role: While all humanoid races have enter- 
tainers and storytellers, only a select few can 
produce characters which come close to the 
true bard class. These humanoid bards pro- 
duce beautiful and inspiring ballads and songs 
(at least as far as other members of their race is 
concerned), and some even learn to grasp the 
intricate tastes of other cultures. In their own 
communities, humanoid bards are the keepers 
of tribal history, the chroniclers of important 
events, and the ambassadors to other tribes. In 
human society, they are more often entertain- 
ers, tugging a wide variety of emotions out of 
their audiences in exchange for profit, food, or 
shelter. 

Even the best humanoid bards are often con- 
sidered funny by humans and demihumans. 
Though this pains these artists, they accept 
their lot and try to make the best of it. Once in 
a rare while they are able to get across a mes- 
sage besides humor, but these flares of bril- 
liance which cross over racial boundaries are 
fleeting indeed. 

Humanoid bards make excellent adventuring 
companions, using their entertaining skills to 
brighten moods and inspire confidences. They 
have a variety of proficiencies to call upon, and 
while not as versatile as true bards, what skills 
and abilities they do have make them fairly 
formidable and extremely helpful. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Humanoid bards are 
restricted as to weapons carried by thieves. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 

* Bonus Proficiencies: Local history. 

* Required Proficiency: musical instrument 
and one of the following: chanting, dancing, 
juggling, poetry, singing. 

* Recommended, General: Acting, artistic 
ability, chanting, craft instrument, crowd 
working, dancing, drinking, eating, etiquette, 
fortune telling, languages (modern), poetry, 
rope use, voice mimicry, whistling /humming. 

* Recommended, Warrior: Any. 

* Recommended, Priest: Any, except spell- 
craft. 


* Recommended, Wizard: Any, except spell- 
craft. 

* Recommended, Rogue: Any. 

* Forbidden: Spellcraft. Humanoid bards 
never learn this proficiency. 

Equipment: Humanoid bards may purchase 
any type of armor up to and including chain 
mail, and any equipment (except shields). 

Special Benefits: Humanoid bards can influ- 
ence the reactions of groups of NPCs like true 
bards. NPCs not of the bard's race receive a +3 
bonus to their saving throw. NPCs of the bard's 
race have a 2 penalty to their saves. 

Members of this kit can inspire and rally their 
companions with heroic songs and tales. This 
takes four rounds to complete, at the end of 
which time those who heard the inspiration 
(within a 10-foot radius of the humanoid bard) 
receive one of the following benefits (as 
decided by the bard): +1 to attack rolls; +1 to 
saving throws; *2 to morale. Members of the 
bard's race receive an additional +1 bonus. The 
chosen effect lasts one round per level of the 
bard. Companions who are actively engaged in 
battle cannot be inspired. 

The humanoid bard can counter opposing 
sound-based attacks. This benefit can be used 
against songs, chants, wails, and magical com- 
mands or suggestions. This ability requires 
intense concentration, as per the bard rules in 
the Player's Handbook. 

The humanoid bard has a 5% chance per 
level to identify the general purpose and func- 
tion of any magical item. 

Special Hindrances: Humanoid bards do 
have any spellcasting abilities. When attempt- 
ing to entertain groups not of their own race, 
humanoid bards suffer a -3 penalty to all profi- 
ciency checks. Mongrelman bards can only 
affect such crowds negatively. 

Wealth Options: Humanoid bards initially 
receive 3d6 x 5 gp to purchase equipment. 


ee 


Humanoid Kits * 89 


Humanoid characters have different profi- 
ciencies available to them than other character 
races because of the cultures and societies in 
which they live. In this chapter, all of the profi- 
ciencies available to starting humanoids have 
been gathered into one master table. This table 
includes all of the proficiencies listed in the 
Player's Handbook, as well as selected proficien- 
cies from the other books in the PHBR series. 
Those listed in boldface type are new to this 
book and are explained in the text. 

Italicized proficiencies require the player to 
record a specific topic or area covered by the 
proficiency. For example, if a goblin PC takes 
animal training, he must specify a type of ani- 
mal, such as a worg. This would be recorded as 
Animal Training (Worg). Additional slots can 
be used to improve the specified proficiency or 
to gain a new area of expertise, like Animal 
Training (Hawk). 

Those proficiencies marked with an asterisk 
(*) are from one of the other PHBR books, 
though they might fall under a different group- 
ing than those listed here. They are explained 
briefly in this book for ease of reference. 
Important Note: The description given here 
for Alertness replaces the description in the 
Complete Thief's Handbook. 


Proficiencies and Specialization 


As explained in the Player's Handbook, a 
weapon proficiency measures a character's 
knowledge and training with a specific 
weapon. All of the weapons listed on Table 44 
of the Player's Handbook are available to all 
humanoid races, unless otherwise stated in the 
initial racial weapon proficiencies detailed in 
Chapter Two. The new weapons described in 
Chapter Seven of this book are also open to 
many of the humanoid races. Single-class 
humanoid fighters can specialize according to 
the rules in the Player's Handbook for weapon 
specialization. 


See 


90 * Chapter Four 


Table 4: Nonweapon Proficiency Groups 


General 


Proficiency 
Acting* 
Agriculture 
Alertness* 
Animal i 
Animal Noise* 
Animal Training 
Artistic Ability 
Begging* 
Blacksmithing 
Brewing 
Carpentry 
Chanting* 
Cheesemaking 
Cobbling 
Cooking 

Craft Instrument* 
Crowd Working* 
Dancing 
Danger Sense 
Direction Sense 
Drinking 


Etiquette 
Fast-talki 
Fire-building 
Fishing 

Fortune Telling* 
Heraldry 

Hiding 
Languages, Modern 


Riding, Airborne 
Riding, Land-based 
Rope Use 
Seamanship 


PEPE NE BEDE HERE ye o EOS o o eee eee n S 


Slots Relevant 
Req'd. Ability 


Cha 
Int 
Wis 


ebb5boocbooc 


Seamstress /Tailor 
Singing 
Stonemasonry 


Weaving 
Whistling/ 
Humming* 


Winemaking 
Warrior 


Proficiency 
Animal Lore 
Armorer 
Blind-fighting 
Bowyer/Fletcher 
Charioteering 
Close-quarter 
Fighting 
Endurance 
Gaming 
Hunting 
Intimidation* 
Natural Fighting 
Mountaineering 
Navigation 
Running 

Set Snares 
Survival 
Tracking 
Weaponsmithing 
Wild Fighting 


Priest 


Proficiency 
Ancient History 
Astrology 
Engineering 
Healing 
Herbalism 
Languages, Ancient 
Local History 


Bene ee 


== 


Slots 


Dex 
Int 


Relevant 


Req'd. Ability 


mago 


MÜOININ---omBIBOOMNIN 


Slots 


Req'd. 


RPeENNNN 


Int 
Int 
NA 


Wis 
Str/Cha 
Str 
NA 
Int 
Con 
Dex 
Int 
Wis 
Int 
Con 


Relevant 
Ability 
Int 
Int 
Int 
Wis 
Int 
Int 
Cha 


Check 
Mod. 


Musical Instrument 
Navigation 
Reading/Writing 
Religion 


Rogue 


Proficiency 
Acting* 
Ancient History 
Appraising 
Blind-fighting 
Close-quarter 
Fighting 
Disguise 
Forgery 
Gaming 
Gem Cutting 
Information 
Gathering* 
Juggling 
Jumping 
Local History 
Musical Instrument 
Reading Lips 
Set Snares 
Tightrope Walking 
Tumbling 
Ventriloquism 


Wizard 


Proficiency 
Ancient History 
Astrology 
Engineering 
Gem Cutting 
Herbalism 
Languages, Ancient 
Navigation 
Reading/Writing 
Religion 
Spellcraft 


Dex 
Int 
Int 

Wis 
Int 


Slots Relevant Check 


Req'd. 
1 


Nim. = Ree 


See eee ee 


Ability Mod. 
Cha -1 
Int -1 
Int 0 
NA NA 
Dex 0 
Cha -1 
Dex -1 
Cha 0 
Dex -2 
Int Special 
Dex -1 
Str 0 
Cha 0 
Dex =} 
Int E 
Dex - 
Dex 0 
Dex 0 
Int -2 


Slots Relevant Check 
Req'd. Ability Mod. 


Pee Ee eNNNPNe 


Int 
Int 
Int 
Dex 
Int 
Int 
Int 
Int 
Wis 
Int 


Humanoid Proficiencies * 91 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 


New proficiencies and existing proficiencies 
which do not appear in the Player’s Handbook 
are described below. Those not described can 
be found in the Player’s Handbook. 


Acting 


This proficiency allows a character to skill- 
fully portray various roles, often as an enter- 
tainment. It can also be used to enhance a 
disguise. If a character has both acting and dis- 
guise proficiencies, the check for either is made 
with a +1 bonus. 

Proficiency checks are required only if the 
actor must portray a particularly difficult role 
or is attempting to “ad lib” without rehearsal. 


Alertness* 


This proficiency allows a character to instinc- 
tively notice and recognize signs of a distur- 
bance in the immediate vicinity. This ability 
reduces a character’s chance of being surprised 
by 1 if he makes a successful proficiency check. 
(Note that this replaces the description of this 
proficiency in the Complete Thief's Handbook.) 


Animal Noise 


A character with this proficiency can imitate 
the noises made by various animals. A suc- 
cessful check means the character's noise can- 
not be distinguished from that of the actual 
animal, except by magical means. 

A failed check produces a sound that varies 
from the animal's in some slight way. Those 
who are very familiar with the animal will rec- 
ognize the intended mimicry at once. Other 
characters must make successful Wisdom 
checks to determine if they also realize the ani- 
mal noise is an imitation. 


CC rrr 


92 * Chapter Four 


Begging 


Begging serves two functions. First, it allows 
characters to pose convincingly as beggars 
(and many humanoids in civilized areas spend 
some time begging for a living). Success in this 
function is automatic and no checks must be 
made. Second, it allows the character to earn a 
minimal daily income. To use this proficiency 
to earn money, it must be used in an area where 
people are present. 

The following modifiers are suggested to the 
DM as guidelines. They do not take into 
account the wealth of a particular locale, just 
the population density. Impoverished regions 
might have greater negative modifiers, as 
might certain affluent areas with long tradi- 
tions or great reputations for stinginess. 


Begging Modifiers 
Locale Modifier 
Uninhabited/Wilderness ^ Failure 
Countryside -7 
Hamlet, Village -5 
Town -2 
City 0 


A successful check enables a character to beg 
for enough money, goods or services to meet 
his basic needs (a little food and drink, a place 
to sleep). Begging cannot force PCs to give 
away money. Players are always free to decide 
how generous their characters are. 


Blind-fighting* 


See the Player's Handbook for full details on 
this proficiency. In general terms, this profi- 
ciency reduces the penalty for fighting while 
blinded from —4 to -2. It similarly reduces the 
penalty for fighting invisible opponents. 
Because many humanoids have infravision, 
this proficiency is not usually as useful for 
humanoids as it is for humans. 


Chanting 


Chanting is used to keep fellow workers or 
soldiers in pace. Proficiency checks are used to 
determine the effectiveness of a character’s 
chanting. 

Successful checks mean that those who can 
hear the chanting character become slightly 
hypnotized by the rhythmic sound, causing 
the time spent on arduous, repetitive tasks to 
pass quickly. The DM can, at his option, adjust 
results for forced marching, rowing, digging, 
and other similar tasks accordingly. 


Cheesemaking 


This proficiency allows the character who has 
it to expertly create cheese from the curds of 
soured milk. A proficiency check is required 


only when attempting to prepare a truly mag- 
nificent wheel of cheese as a special gift or for a 
special celebration. 


Close-quarter Fighting 


Humanoids with this proficiency have 
learned to fight in the cramped confines of 
dungeons and underground lairs. In such loca- 
tions, or in other extremely close fighting con- 
ditions, characters armed with bludgeoning or 
piercing weapons (or their own natural 
weapons) receive a +2 bonus to attack rolls. 
Slashing weapons cannot be used in close- 
quarter fighting. This bonus is not cumulative 
with wild-fighting. 

A successful proficiency check at the start of 
combat yields this bonus. Failure means the 
humanoid fights normally. 


Humanoid Proficiencies * 93 


Craft Instrument 


Characters with this proficiency must state 
which type of instrument they are skilled at 
crafting: wind, stringed, percussion, or key- 
board. A slot must be used to gain each addi- 
tional type of instrument the character wishes 
to be skilled at crafting. A total of four slots 
used in this proficiency grants a character the 
title of “master craftsman” who can craft 
instruments of all forms. 

Characters must buy material equal to one 
quarter of the instrument's sale value. Wind 
and percussion instruments require 1d6 days 
of crafting, stringed instruments 2d8 days, and 
keyboard instruments 3d10 days. Each day of 
work requires 10 full hours spent crafting the 
instrument. If craftsman tools (cost 25 gp, 
weight 5 pounds) are not available, all times 
are doubled. 

The crafted instrument's quality is deter- 
mined by a final proficiency check. A failed 
check creates an instrument of poor quality, 
while a success indicates good quality. A nat- 
ural 20 indicates that the instrument does not 
work, while a natural 1 produces a masterpiece 
worth twice its normal value. 

Simple repairs to instruments take only 1d4 
hours and require no checks unless the proper 
tools are not available. Repairing severe dam- 
age requires 1d8 hours, and a successful profi- 
ciency check is necessary to complete the 
repairs. 


Crowd Working 


Characters with this proficiency are familiar 
with how to handle crowds. They are skilled at 
observing crowds and adjusting their behavior 
accordingly. Humanoids who normally have 
this skill include all types of humanoid enter- 
tainers, from bards and fortune tellers, to acro- 
bats and pit fighters. 

This skill also can be used to adjust the 
encounter reaction of a crowd. A successful 


—_——eeeeeeeeererree 


94 * Chapter Four 


proficiency check will alter the crowd's reac- 
tion by two levels (or convinces them to donate 
twice as much money to the entertainers as 
they normally would). 


Danger Sense 


This proficiency provides a humanoid char- 
acter with a sixth sense which warns of 
impending danger. On a successful check, the 
character avoids a trap at the last second or 
realizes that opponents wait to ambush him 
due to a sudden warning tingle that cannot be 
ignored. Characters who make successful 
checks spot traps before blundering into them 
and receive initiative against hidden oppo- 
nents. This proficiency does not work against 
opponents who are out in the open and mak- 
ing no attempt to hide their actions. Failure 
indicates that the character senses nothing out 
of the ordinary and play continues normally. 


Drinking 


This proficiency, and its companion profi- 
ciency, Eating, is important to many humanoids, 
including centaurs, satyrs, and wemics. A suc- 
cessful check indicates that the humanoid can 
consume up to twice as much as normal at one 
sitting. This will allow the humanoid to go 
twice as long without drink before beginning to 
suffer adverse effects. If alcoholic beverages are 
involved, a successful check allows the human- 
oid to consume twice as much before adverse 
effects begin to bother him. 


Eating 


Much like the drinking proficiency, this profi- 
ciency allows the humanoid to store up food. 
A successful check indicates that the human- 
oid can consume up to twice as much as nor- 
mal. This allows the humanoid to go twice as 
long without food without suffering any 
adverse effects from hunger. 


Fast-talking 


Fast-talk is the art of distraction and conning 
NPCs. If a successful proficiency check is 
made, the fast-talker weaves a successful scam. 
Modifiers are based upon the Intelligence and 
Wisdom of the NPC target, as shown below. 
DMs may also introduce modifiers according 
to the difficulty or plausibility of what the 
character is attempting, as well as the racial 
preferences of the target character. 


Fast-Talking Modifiers 
Target's Target's 
Intelligence Mod. Wisdom Mod. 
3 or less NA 3 5 
4-5 -3 4-5 -3 
6-8 -1 6-8 E! 
9-12 0 9-12 0 
13-15 *1 13-15 +1 
16-17 +2 16-17 +3 
18 +3 18 +5 
19 +5 19+ NA 
20+ NA 


Modifiers are cumulative. Targets of Intelli- 
gence 3 or less are so dim that attempts to fast- 
talk them fail automatically because they 
cannot follow what is being said. Targets with 
Intelligence of 20 or more or Wisdom of 19 or 
more are impervious to fast-talking. 


Fortune Telling 


Many humans and demihumans believe 
humanoids have mysterious powers and abili- 
ties. While many do have abilities which are 
strange and different, telling the future is not 
among them (except for the rare shaman or 
witch doctor). However, few members of other 
races know this, and that’s where the fortune 
telling proficiency comes in. 

With this proficiency, characters know a vari- 
ety of methods for divining the future — and 


they are all fake. Humanoids with this skill 
employ odd-looking devices, sonorous oratory, 
or other methods to convince others that they 
are authentic soothsayers. Common methods 
include cards, palm reading, counting bumps, 
casting runes, examining animal entrails, and 
more. Humanoid fortune tellers put on a good 
show, then proclaim whatever prediction they 
want. This is done to gain money from the 
gullible, to impress other humanoids, or even 
to substitute for a true diviner when none are 
available. Humanoids are extremely supersti- 
tious, after all, and many tribes are happy to 
have the services of a fake when no true 
shaman is available. Without the fortune teller, 
many tribes might be paralyzed by their fear of 
the unknown. 

A successful proficiency check indicates that 
the target believes the fortune. If it fails, the 
sham is discovered or the fortune is simply not 
believed. Failure for a character trying to con- 
vince his tribe of his powers could prove 
deadly — for the fake! The fast-talking modi- 
fiers can be used if the DM desires. Note that 
PCs are never forced to believe a prediction 
regardless of the roll. 


Optional Rule: As an optional rule, the pre- 
diction made by the fortune teller actually 
comes true on a roll of a natural 1 (or some 
other number chosen secretly by the DM 
before the check is made). 


Hiding 


Hiding is the ability to instinctively select the 
best hiding place under nearly any condition. 
Humanoids who make successful checks can 
virtually disappear from view. Success is deter- 
mined by modifiers based upon the Intelli- 
gence of the character being hidden from. This 
proficiency operates independently of any nat- 
ural camouflage or hiding ability the human- 
oid might already have. 


Humanoid Proficiencies * 95 


Hiding Modifiers 


Opponent's 
Intelligence Modifier 
3or less 5 
4-5 3 
6-8 zi 
9-12 0 
13-15 +1 
16-17 +2 
18 +3 
19 +5 
20+ +7 


Information Gathering 


Through the use of this proficiency, a human- 
oid character can gain information about a spe- 
cific person, place or thing. In appropriate 
circumstances, a character will be aware of 
major rumors circulating around a roguish or 
humanoid area. With a successful check, spe- 
cific information can be gleaned. 

The following modifiers adjust the check: 

Characters’ reaction adjustments (based on 
Charisma) will benefit or penalize the roll, 
assuming contact with intelligent beings is 
involved in the search. 

Thieves’ guild members receive a +2 bonus as 
they have the resources of the entire guild at 
their disposal. Similarly, outside of towns and 
cities, certain humanoid characters may receive 
the same bonus if they have similar contacts 
(satyrs and swanmays have woodland crea- 
tures, a goblin may be able to get information 
from a goblin tribe, etc.). 

When outside friendly territory, specific infor- 
mation suffers at least a -3 penalty. 

Money or treasure is required. Any time a pro- 
ficiency check is required to gather informa- 
tion, the character must make a small 
investment of money or treasure or suffer an 
additional penalty of -3. Humans prefer 
money, and a total of 1d10 gp is typical. Other 


————————————————————————————————————— 


96 * Chapter Four 


races may want some other type of treasure 
(food, magical item, shiny trinket, etc). The 
investment is lost whether or not the desired 
information is found. 


Intimidation 


This proficiency allows characters to bend 
others to their will through fear tactics. NPCs 
who are intimidated are quite likely to do as 
they are told. They are also very likely to har- 
bor much resentment against the character that 
intimidates them. NPCs will keep their resent- 
ment hidden until the first opportunity to 
avenge their pride arises. 

Intimidation can be attempted with either 
Strength or Charisma. Strength indicates a 
threat of immediate bodily injury. Charisma 
uses more subtle threats which need not be 
physical in nature. 

Player characters are never required to sub- 
mit to intimidation. 


Looting 


This proficiency represents a knack for grab- 
bing the best loot in the shortest amount of 
time. A successful proficiency check allows a 
character to recognize and grab the most valu- 
able combination of items that is feasible, 
given the situational limits of time and space. 


Natural Fighting 


This proficiency allows humanoids with nat- 
ural weaponry (claws, fangs, tails, etc.) a +1 
damage bonus on all natural weapon attacks. 
In addition, they receive a free natural attack 
beyond normal attacks they are allowed. A 
successful proficiency check must be made at 
the beginning of combat to gain the benefits of 
this skill. Failure indicates that the benefits 
cannot be used for the duration of the battle. 


Observation 


This proficiency represents a character's 
exceptionally acute powers of observation. 
DMs may ask for checks (or roll them secretly) 
whenever there is something slightly out of the 
ordinary. Characters with this proficiency have 
their chances of finding secret doors increased 
to 2 in 6, and concealed doors to 3 in 6. This 
proficiency covers all the senses. 


Poetry 


This proficiency includes the skills necessary 
to recite poetry and judge its quality. It also 
indicates that a character has a repertoire of 
poems memorized for recital at any time. No 
check is required for a normal recital. 

If the character can read and write, original 
poems can be written. A successful check indi- 
cates that the poem is of above average quality. 


Voice Mimicry 


Voice mimicry is the art of convincingly imi- 
tating the voices of other people. It is a very 
demanding skill, requiring intense training 
and practice. 

A character with voice mimicry can imitate 
any accent he has heard. Success is automatic 
unless confronted by those who speak the 
mimicked accent (which then requires a check 
with a +2 modifier). 

It is more difficult to imitate a specific per- 
son’s voice. Characters can only attempt to 
imitate voices they have heard. A proficiency 
check must be made to determine if the imita- 
tion is detected. Success is certain if the listener 
is a stranger to the mimicked character. There 
is no modifier if trying to fool an acquaintance, 
-2 to fool a friend, -5 a close friend, and -7 for 
extremely close friends and relatives. 


Whistling/Humming 


Characters with this proficiency are excep- 
tional whistlers and hummers. They can pro- 
duce tunes as captivating as most songs. If a 
successful check is made, the character knows 
any particular tune in question. If he also has 
the animal lore proficiency, he can mimic any 
bird call he has ever heard. 

Adventurers also use this proficiency to com- 
municate with each other. This type of commu- 
nication is only possible among the characters 
who have this proficiency. If two or more char- 
acters with this proficiency make successful 
checks, a single concept can be communicated 
between them. 


Wild Fighting 


Characters with this proficiency employ an 
extremely unorthodox and unpredictable 
fighting style. Wild fighting is ferocious and 
deadly, without any grace or discipline. It is 
also extremely tiring, as part of its nature is 
that it focuses every bit of energy a character 
has into the attack. 

The benefits are in the number of attacks the 
character gets and in the amount of damage 
attacks inflict. A wild-fighting character gets 
one more attack per round than normally enti- 
tled to. All damage rolls for attacks that hit 
receive a +3 bonus. 

However, when wild fighting, a character’s 
attack rolls also are reduced by 3. Also the 
attacker’s armor class is penalized by 3, mak- 
ing it easier to hit him. 

To use wild fighting, a character must make a 
successful proficiency check at the start of 
combat. A failure means that the character 
receives only the penalties of the proficiency 
and none of the benefits. 

Wild fighting can only be used twice per day, 
as it is extremely tiring. After a battle ends, the 


Humanoid Proficiencies * 97 


E PN. 
wild fighter must rest for one hour before he 
can again call on the proficiency. Resting 
means doing nothing but resting or engaging 
in light travel (riding a slow-moving horse, 
etc.). If the character must walk, he cannot use 
the proficiency until four hours have passed. 
Without this rest, a tired character suffers a -3 
penalty to all proficiency checks, a —5 to armor 
class, a -5 to THACO, and a -3 from damage 
rolls. These penalties are in effect until the full 
resting period has elapsed. 


——————————————————————————————————————— 


98 * Chapter Four 


ad 


N 
i-e 
Winemaking 
This proficiency allows characters to create 
wine from the fermented juice of grapes or 
other plants and fruits well enough to make a 
living at it. The character will always succeed 
to some extent; proficiency checks are only 
required when attempting to prepare a truly 
magnificent wine as a special gift or for a spe- 
cial celebration. 


CHAPTER 


Role-Playing Humanoids 


Players who decide to create humanoid char- 
acters should have good role-playing as their 
ultimate goal. Avoid choosing a humanoid 
character type by its benefits, hindrances, or 
how powerful it can become. Strange human- 
oid beliefs, uncivilized habits, the reactions of 
others, and the clash of human and humanoid 
cultures are a few of the many hooks upon 
which a humanoid personality can be hung. 
Humanoids are best viewed as unusual per- 
sonas through which character and story 
development can take place. 

This chapter gives suggestions to help play- 
ers create humanoid characters that are well- 
rounded and fun to play, with an eye toward 
keeping any “unfair” advantages in check. 
Further, some of these suggestions can be used 
by the Dungeon Master to restore campaign 
balance if a character gets off track. 

The number of humanoid races given in this 
book require that suggestions be of a general 
nature. It is up to the players and the DM to 
make them work in the context of a particular 
race of humanoids in a particular campaign 
setting. Examples are provided, but space limi- 
tations make covering every possible combina- 
tion impossible. 


Life as a Humanoid 


For the majority of humanoids, life is lived in 
a clan or tribe. These tribes are made up of 
loosely-related families which are led by chiefs. 
The chiefs are normally the strongest and most 
able fighters of the group, though some tribes 
turn to elders and thinkers for leadership. Life 
in the tribes is hard. The wilderness does not 
give up sustenance easily, and tribesmen must 
constantly work to survive. This work could be 
hunting, gathering, fishing, craftworking, 
scavenging, mining, farming, raiding, plunder- 
ing, or some combination of these, depending 
on the tribal race, alignment, and nature. 

In most cases, a humanoid tribe will be less 
civilized, less advanced, and less established 


——————————————————————————————————————————— 


100 * Chapter Five 


than its human or demihuman counterpart. 

Lawful tribes prefer stability and order. They 
organize themselves in all endeavors, setting up 
rules to cover all aspects of life and society. For 
these tribes to function, there must be an obvious 
and unchanging chain of leader-ship. In lawful 
evil tribes, there are severe laws and harsh pun- 
ishments. These are not established to provide 
justice, but to preserve the stability of the tribe. 

Good tribes cherish life. They are more con- 
cerned with finding ways to make their tribes 
prosper than in competing for social positions 
(at least in openly hostile ways). Life is more 
positive among these tribes, though not neces- 
sarily easier. 

On the evil side, might makes right and fear 
keeps the masses in line. Change is still sudden 
and frequent, but it tends to be violent and 
deadly in nature. Many evil humanoids are 
nomads, though some do set up semi-perma- 
nent settlements when they find a location that 
fills their survival needs and greedy habits. 
Once settled, they quickly deplete the location 
of the resources that attracted them. They treat 
the land and its bounties as they treat each 
other — with little respect and as something to 
be exploited. When a region no longer suits 
their needs (due to their own overindulgences 
and uncaring practices), these humanoids 
move on in search of new spoils and plunder. 

Chaotics share a frivolous or capricious 
nature. Change is often welcome, or and even 
sought out on a daily basis. Few activities are 
organized beyond the minimum level neces- 
sary to accomplish a given task. Some chaotic 
cultures seem to find even this level of organ- 
ization difficult; disagreements and in-fighting 
often result. 

On the good side, chaotics like to manage 
their own affairs. They may bow to a single 
leader, but prefer to do as they please so long 
as they stay within broad behavioral guide- 
lines. Even though they love independence 
and despise rules, many chaotic and good 
humanoids come to love nature and respect its 


bounties. Many form such close ties with their 
environments as to become caretakers of a sort. 
Nature may be used, but never abused. 

In a chaotic evil tribe, life is even more of a 
struggle. Not only must tribe members battle 
the elements, nature and other tribes, they 
often fight among themselves for positions of 
leadership and the pick of loot. Life is cheap 
among them, for killing is usually the easiest 
method of advancement up a tribe's social and 
political ladder. This may also be true in other 
evil and neutral communities, but such vio- 
lence is usually less random. 


Tribal Life 


All humanoid tribes share a fear of the super- 
natural, and anything they do not understand 
falls into this category. This results in supersti- 
tions which fill their days and nights, and dic- 
tate the way in which they conduct their lives. 
Superstitions serve to reinforce the opinion 
that humanoids are primitive savages, though 
few humans get to know them well enough to 
see their beliefs in practice. 

Tribal life starts in ernest when humanoid 
children are old enough to understand and 
participate in the world around them. Most 
humanoids relegate different roles and tasks to 
males and females, and children are immedi- 
ately immersed in the social order so that they 
grow to know and embrace it. They receive 
instruction, usually in informal settings, learn- 
ing what they need to survive and prosper by 
observing, participating, and some training. 
The level of training depends on the nature, 
disposition and societal level of the race in 
question. During their early years, children 
spend most of their time with females and 
shamans. Here they learn the legends and 
beliefs of their tribe, as well as many of the 
social rules they will need in tribal life. Chil- 
dren begin to work as soon as they are able, at 
first helping with whatever domestic activities 
the tribe engages in and eventually moving on 


to their life's work. 

When they near maturity, humanoids ap- 
prentice themselves to adults in order to learn 
the trades of the tribe. This apprenticeship can 
be formal, as in the case of orcs, or extremely 
informal where younger tribe members learn 
through observation and proximity as opposed 
to specific instruction. In cases where there is 
even a hint of formality, tribal shamans, witch 
doctors, and chiefs assign children to specific 
trades (hunting, raiding, mining, fighting, etc.). 
They make their decisions based upon their 
observations of the children, the needs of the 
tribe, the social rank of a child's parents, and 
by reading the signs and omens associated 
with a particular child. 

From an early age, a humanoid's role in the 
tribe is set. Most prefer this arrangement, for it 
gives them a function and purpose. A select 
few desire to find their own path, and these 
inevitably are weeded out through violence, 
cast out by decree, or leave of their own accord 
to make their own lives. These are the outcasts, 
the hermits, and the adventurers. The few that 
find their way into human society are the ones 
we are most concerned with. 


Social and Racial Disadvantages 


Humanoids start out with disadvantages in 
non-humanoid societies. All but the most enlight- 
ened civilizations consider humanoids to be 
monsters. Centuries of competition, violence and 
warfare has made humans and humanoids nat- 
ural enemies, striving for the same resources. 
Truth became legends, and legends bred fears 
that haunt both sides, filling their heads with 
truths, half-truths, and lies. But humans are more 
numerous, more advanced, more established. 
They are winning the battle of dominion over the 
world. For better or for worse, though there are 
still vast stretches of untamed wilderness, it has 
become a human world. 

For this reason, humanoids find themselves 
at a disadvantage. When they leave their tribes 


Role-Playing Humanoids * 101 


UIS as N 

to find their own path in the world, it 
inevitably crosses into human civilization. 
Humanoids are strangers to human civiliza- 
tion (or even demihuman, for that matter). 
They know it only as something out of tribal 
legends, or from the scary stories told around 
the evening fire, or from the skirmishes their 
tribe may have had with a town or village in 
the past. They do not know the customs. They 
do not know the social etiquette. They proba- 
bly do not understand many of the “advanced” 
conveniences that dominate civilized life. 

Itis up to players and DMs to work together to 
stress a humanoid’s unfamiliarity with civiliza- 
tion. In the same way as a DM describes newly- 
discovered magical items by their appearance 
without giving away any details, so too must a 
DM describe the items and practices of civiliza- 
tion. From a humanoid’s point of view — cloth- 
ing, armor, weapons, tools, utensils — 
everything is strange, wondrous, frightening, 
and unknown. The trappings which players nor- 
mally take for granted should become new and 


——-—-- ere 


102 * Chapter Five 


VAI A Wea 
mysterious to humanoid characters. 

For example, Breeka the aarakocra enters a 
human town for the first time. What are the 
strange wooden caves that humans go in and 
out of? Why do those humans shake hands? Or 
press their lips together? Or give shiny objects 
to oneanother? And why is that human yelling 
because Breeka ate the pig in front of his 
wooden cave? Breeka, who has never before 
encountered a human town, finds herself sur- 
rounded by unusual trappings and strange 
practices which she will have to spend time 
getting to understand. While players can role- 
play a lack of understanding concerning 
human social customs, it is up to the DM to 
keep in mind that the most obvious thing to a 
human or demihuman is probably a mystery 
to the humanoid, and to describe encounter 
scenes accordingly. 

Beyond the social disadvantages which 
humanoids face when dealing with communi- 
ties beyond their own, there are also racial dis- 
criminations to deal with. Because most 


humans and demihumans see humanoids as 
little more than monsters, there will be extreme 
prejudices directed at them. Humanoids will 
be watched almost constantly when they enter 
a human community — if they are allowed to 
enter at all. Many towns and cities will have 
laws forbidding the entry of humanoids. They 
will be stopped at the gates, turned away, or 
even attacked. Humans fear that a humanoid 
has come to scout out the community for 
attack, or seeks to cause some other type of 
trouble. They believe that humanoids eat 
humans (and some do), and who wants a mon- 
ster walking on the streets of town? 

Many inns have rules against serving 
humanoids. Shops refuse to deal with them. 
Local authorities stay close, watching for the 
least sign of trouble. They have no qualms 
about arresting and locking up humanoids 
that so much as look at a human the wrong 
way — and banishment or confinement are the 
nicest things they might do to them. Mobs 
form quickly in the presence of humanoids, 
ready to take torch and pitchfork to a monster 
in order to protect their loved ones. Again, it is 
up to the DM to enforce this disadvantage. 
Even the most powerful humanoid PC will be 
hard-pressed to find a place to rest or buy sup- 
plies in a hate-filled, fearful town. If a human- 
oid is allowed to operate as any normal PC as 
far as NPCs are concerned, then a great role- 
playing challenge is lost. 

Another problem facing humanoids in 
human communities deals with the fact that 
things are built in human dimensions. Doors 
and rooms are made to accommodate human 
heights and widths. Chairs and beds are made 
to hold human weights. Even most transporta- 
tion modes, such as horses and wagons, cannot 
sustain large-sized humanoids. This is not a 
problem for the man-sized humanoids, but 
tiny-, small-, and large-sized humanoids must 
learn to live in a human-sized world. 


Humanoid Traits 


Humanoids have a number of monstrous 
traits. These may be perfectly normal and 
acceptable in their own society, but in human 
society they are gross and frightening. These 
traits provide bonuses or penalties to PC actions. 
Every humanoid has at least one trait that is 
shared by every member of its race'(this are 
given in the humanoid’s entry in Chapter Two). 
The DM may also require humanoid PCs to roll 
for 1-2 additional monstrous traits, if desired. 


Bestial Appetite 1: Humanoid has the appetite of a 
large beast; must consume twice as much food at 
every meal or suffer a —1 penalty to Strength and 
Constitution scores. 


Bestial Appetite 2: Humanoid has the appetite of a 
huge beast; must consume three times as much food 
at every meal or suffer a 2 penalty to Strength and 
Constitution scores. 


Bestial Appetite 3: Humanoid has the appetite of a 
gargantuan beast; must consume four times as much 
food at every meal or suffer a -3 penalty to Strength 
and Constitution scores. 


Bestial Fear: Humanoid has a beast's natural fear 
of a given thing (PC or DM's choice). In presence of 
this thing, the humanoid must make a save vs. spells 
or suffer effects as per a wizard's fear spell. 


Bestial Habits: Humanoid has a habit that resem- 
bles the behavior of a beast as opposed to the behav- 
ior of a civilized person. These cause a 2 penalty to 
reaction rolls. 


Bestial Intelligence 1: Humanoid has a reduced 
Intelligence score of 1; maximum 14, minimum 3. 


Bestial Intelligence 2: Humanoid has a reduced 
Intelligence score of -3; maximum 12, minimum 3. 


Bestial Intelligence 3: Humanoid has a reduced 
Intelligence score of -5, maximum 9, minimum 2. 


Bestial Odor: A bad smell; -2 penalty to reaction 
checks. 


Role-Playing Humanoids * 103 


Bestial Rage: A monstrous temper; madly attacks 
nearest character for 1d4 rounds if it fails a Wisdom 
check. The rage should have a specific trigger. 


Bestial Speech: Humanoid has a speech pattern that 
includes bestial sounds; -2 penalty to reaction checks. 


Bestial Thirst 1: Humanoid has the thirst of a large 
beast; must consume twice as much liquid in a day or 
suffer a -1 penalty to Strength and Constitution scores. 


Bestial Thirst 2: Humanoid has the thirst of a huge 
beast; must consume three times as much liquid in a 
day or suffer a -3 penalty to Strength and Constitu- 
tion scores. 


Bestial Thirst 3: Humanoid has the thirst of a gar- 
gantuan beast; must consume four times as much 
liquid in a day or suffer a -5 penalty to Strength and 
Constitution scores. 


Light Sensitivity: Humanoid is sensitive to bright 
light; receives a -1 penalty to all attack rolls made in 
daylight or other bright light conditions. 


Monstrous Appearance 1: Humanoid appears 
strange and frightening; 2 penalty to reaction checks. 


Monstrous Appearance 2: Humanoid appears 
strange and frightening; —4 penalty to reaction checks. 


Monstrous Appearance 3: Humanoid appears 
strange and frightening; —6 penalty to reaction checks. 


Monstrous Craving: Humanoid sometimes craves 
a particular item (food, drink, or other), chosen 
jointly by the player and DM. When a monstrous 
craving occurs (not more than once a week), the 
humanoid has a -1 penalty to all ability and profi- 
ciency checks (cumulative per hour) until the crav- 
ing is satisfied. 


Monstrous Dexterity 1: Humanoid has enhanced 
Dexterity; +1 bonus to Dexterity score (minimum 6), 
-1 penalty to reaction checks. 


eee 


104 * Chapter Five 


Monstrous Dexterity 2: Humanoid has enhanced 
Dexterity; +2 bonus to Dexterity score (minimum 8), 
-1 penalty to reaction checks. 


Monstrous Dexterity 3: Humanoid has enhanced 
Dexterity; +3 bonus to Dexterity score (minimum 
10), -1 penalty to reaction checks. 


Monstrous Hearing: Humanoid has keen hearing; 
can hear noise as a thief. Base score 25%; +25% at ages 
below middle age, +15% at middle age, +0% at old 
age, -15% at venerable age. 


Monstrous Sight: Humanoid has keen vision; can 
see to a visibility range 50% greater than a normal 
human. 


Monstrous Size: Humanoid is larger than others of 
his kind (either taller or wider); +1 bonus to Strength 
score, -3 penalty to reaction checks. 


Monstrous Smell: Humanoid has sensitive sense 
of smell; +1 on surprise checks, -2 to saving throws 
against foul odors. 


Monstrous Strength 1: Humanoid has great 
Strength; +1 bonus to Strength score (minimum 6), 
-1 penalty to reaction checks. 


Monstrous Strength 2: Humanoid has great 
Strength; +3 bonus to Strength score (minimum 10), 
-2 penalty to reaction checks. 


Monstrous Strength 3: Humanoid has great 
Strength; +5 bonus to Strength score (minimum 12), 
-3 penalty to reaction checks. 


Monstrous Taste: Humanoid has a very sensitive 
sense of taste; +2 save vs. imbibed poisons. 


Monstrous Touch: Humanoid has a very sensitive 
sense of touch; +5% success chance for delicate 
manipulations, -2 saving throw against physical 
pain or irritation. 


Optional Rule: For every special advantage a 
humanoid has due to its racial type, it rolls for 
an extra monstrous trait. Additional traits may 
result in cumulative penalties. Thus, an 
aarakocra PC starts with bestial speech, then 
rolls for two more traits. 


Campaign Complications 


Table 19: Campaign Complications in the table 
section lists some of the more common problems 
which humanoid PCs face on a daily basis. 
These are presented as suggestions for Dungeon 
Masters to draw from when setting up cam- 
paigns containing humanoid PCs. All Dungeon 
Masters are urged to expand and customize 
these tables for their own campaigns. The more 
powerful a humanoid PC is, the more often a 
complication should arise. Experienced DMs 
need not use the tables directly, but can use them 
as reminders of the types of problems 
humanoids face in human civilizations. 

The campaign complications are divided into 
two groups: wilderness and civilization. When 
humanoid player characters are outside of settle- 
ments, they will face the types of complications 
listed on the Wilderness table. In human or demi- 
human villages, towns, and cities, the complica- 
tions they must deal with are those of civilization. 
A brief description of these complications follows. 


Adventurers: The humanoid character has 
become the target of an adventuring party, and 
must somehow find a way to throw them off 
its trail. The reason for the adventurers’ inter- 
est should be worked into the campaign plot. 


Arrested: The humanoid is arrested for com- 
mitting a crime, for suspicion of a crime, or just 
because the local authorities don’t like its pres- 
ence. Often, when a humanoid commits a 
crime, it does not know or understand the local 
laws and customs, or it has fallen prey to 
unscrupulous exploitation. 


Banished: For inadvertently committing a 
crime or social blunder in human civilization, 
the humanoid is banished from the settlement 
by a local mob, militia, or adventuring party. 


Captured: The humanoid is captured by 
those hostile to it and must escape or be res- 
cued. This complication is often used in con- 
junction with another, such as Banished, 
Arrested, Slavers, etc. 


Challenged: A human or demihuman NPC 
decides to impress his or her peers by chal- 
lenging a humanoid PC to a duel or contest. 


Cleric: A cleric takes an interest in the human- 
oid. This interest can be with an eye to befriend 
or convert the humanoid, or it can be of a nega- 
tive nature — an evil cleric needs the human- 
oid for some foul purpose, or a good cleric 
decides to eradicate the monster. 


Educational Limitation: The humanoid runs 
into a problem due to a lack of knowledge con- 
cerning the settlement currently being visited. 
This could do with reading or language, with a 
knowledge of laws or customs, or even with 
understanding the local currency. 


Exploitation: An unscrupulous human (or 
demihuman) takes advantage of the human- 
oid while pretending to befriend him. 
Exploitation can be overt: slavery, selling a 
humanoid to the battle pits, turning a human- 
oid into a carnival sideshow exhibit; or it can 
be subtle: a swindler's con job, a human trick- 
ing the humanoid into fighting his enemies, 
etc. 


Fear: Many humans and demihumans fear 
humanoids. To them, humanoids are nothing 
but foul monsters. In this type of complication, 
humanoids must deal with people who are 
deathly afraid of them. 


Role-Playing Humanoids * 105 


Humanoids: Other humanoids appear to 
hinder the humanoid character. These can be 
members of the original tribe, others of the 
same race, or humanoids from a different race. 
If they are from a different race, they could be 
hostile to the character’s racial type. 

Hunters: Hunters cross the humanoid’s path. 
They can be searching for that humanoid or for 
one of like race (to sell to a battle pit or wizard, 
for example) or they could be after other game 
entirely and then decide to focus on the 
humanoid. Hunters might be of any race. 


Local Authorities: The local authorities (mili- 
tia, town leaders) take an interest in the human- 
oid. They may want to keep an eye on the 
stranger, hire the humanoid to do a specific task, 
or they harass the humanoid to drive it away. 

Mob: An angry mob gathers and comes after 
the humanoid. They could be motivated by 
something the humanoid did (or is believed to 
have done), or they could simply band together 
out of fear or hatred. 

Monster: The humanoid wanders near a mon- 
ster’s lair, and the monster decides it wants the 
humanoid for some reason (food, slave, etc.). 

Physical Limitation: The humanoid runs into 
something in human society which is a hinder- 
ance based on its size or body type (steep 
stairs, door or furniture too large or small, etc.) 

Prejudice: The humanoid encounters severe 
prejudice or outright hatred. There may not be 
specific restrictions or laws, but humans can 
hinder and abuse humanoids by refusing to 
serve them, throwing garbage at them, calling 
them names, cursing them, or simply going 
out of their way to avoid them. 

Restrictions: A restriction or law hinders the 
humanoid. Samples: no humanoid can be 
served at a particular shop or establishment; 
no humanoid can enter a particular part of the 
city; no humanoid can enter the city itself; no 
humanoid can talk to citizens, etc. 


— ee 


106 * Chapter Five 


Rogue: A rogue exploits the humanoid (see 
Exploitation). 

Sentenced to Death: A death sentence is a 
hard thing to live with, and humanoids often 
blunder into them. These should be used only 
rarely, and they will often become the focus of 
à particular adventure. 

Slavers: Slavers, either humanoid or human, 
hunt the humanoid character. If captured, the 
character might be sold or taken back to the 
slavers’ community and put to work. 

Social Blunder: Due to a lack of understand- 
ing or knowledge concerning social customs, 
the humanoid makes a blunder. This can be 
mild and amusing, or major and unforgiven. 
Any action can become a social blunder, from a 
humanoid not knowing the proper way to 
respond to a greeting, to the humanoid using a 
tribal greeting (which may frighten, anger, or 
amuse the humans at whom it is directed). 

Superstition: One of the humanoid’s super- 
stitions (see Chapter Six) comes into play at an 
inopportune moment. 

Trait: A situation develops wherein one of 
the humanoid’s monstrous traits causes a 
problem. 

Travelers: Traveling humans or demihumans 
encounter the humanoid and react in one of 
several ways: hostile, friendly, suspicious, curi- 
ous, fearful, etc. This is one way to bring the 
problems of cultural interaction to a humanoid 
character in the wilderness. 

Warrior: A fighter type encounters the human- 
oid and decides to test his strength against it, 
banish it, drive it away, or take other “heroic” 
action — usually to the humanoid's dismay. 

Wizard: A mage desires the humanoid. Usu- 
ally, wizards need humanoids to get special 
spell components (which may come from the 
humanoid's dead body), to help with a magi- 
cal ceremony, or to undertake a quest for which 
they have unique talents. 


A Mysterious World 


Like the primitive ancestors of humans and 
demihumans, most humanoids still embrace 
the fears and wonders of the primordial world, 
a world that still exists in its simplest, most 
frightening form. To the humanoid, the world 
beyond his fire is unknown. All manner of 
creatures and supernatural beings roam these 
unknown regions, waiting to harm the human- 
oid who wanders too far from the fire’s protec- 
tive glow. 

Even the most civilized humanoid will often 
use an elaborate system of safeguards that 
appear irrational to non-humanoids. For exam- 
ple, a forest kobold of Amn waking on his left 
side must immediately spit three times or suf- 
fer an unlucky day. 

Many humanoid superstitions are outward 
manifestations of racial or cultural anxieties, 
but others have to do with the external powers 
of the world — the gods, spirits, and other 
supernatural beings that populate the cam- 
paign world. These powers must be bribed or 
charmed into leaving the humanoid alone, lest 
all manner of bad luck and suffering result. 

Humans and demihumans might consider 
these practices to be outmoded, primitive, or 
even absurd, but most humanoids consider 
every such ritual to be of life-and-death impor- 
tance. This belief stays with a humanoid char- 
acter his whole life, no matter how many years 
he stays away from his tribe. Every supersti- 
tion has a legend behind it and comes with a 
ready-made ritual for attracting beneficial 
influences and warding off malevolent ones. 
Thus, many humanoid characters remain per- 
fectly at home in their beliefs, always on the 
lookout for signs and omens, ever ready with 
an oft-practiced ward. 

Humans may well be uncomfortable around 
humanoids for any number of reasons, and 
many commoner folk definitely find the lat- 
ter's constant reference to unseen forces 
unnerving. To the humanoid, however, it is 


CHAPTER 


Superstitions 


just a way of life. 

In a world that is often hostile, dangerous 
and extremely unpredictable, such humanoid 
superstitions offer some measure of comfort 
and control. Naming a fear goes far toward 
conquering it, or at least reducing it to a con- 
crete thing that may be fought. When fear 
sweeps over humanoids, their superstitions 
provide assurance that they can influence their 
fate with simple, time-honored rituals. 

Some rituals require simple actions such as 
gestures. Others need the additional power of 
a physical charm, such as a rabbit's foot or grif- 
fon's quill. Each charm has its own function; a 
humanoid may carry several different types of 
charms to ward off fear or bad luck. These 
charms may be worn openly or kept hidden 
until needed. 

To humanoids, who often feel powerless in 
the face of nature, other races, and even their 
own kind, superstitions are almost a form of 
personal magic. This magic does not produce 
impressive displays of light and sound, nor 
does it strike opponents with deadly force. 
Instead, it helps a humanoid come to terms 
with the unknown. Each small ritual, either 
positive or negative in nature, is repeated over 
and over as a form of cause and effect. If kiss- 
ing her sword once helped a female hobgoblin 
defeat an opponent, then she might have per- 
manently adopted the kissing ritual in order to 
continue her good luck. 


Superstitions in Game Terms 


All humanoid player characters should have 
two or more superstitions that can affect play 
during the course of their adventures and cam- 
paigns. The first superstition is racial or tribal, 
common to all members of a particular human- 
oid race or tribe. (Suitable superstitions are listed 
in the humanoid racial entries in Chapter Two.) 
The second type of superstition is personal. A 
personal superstition can be selected by the 
player or rolled randomly on Table 18: General 


Superstitions * 107 


3 


Superstitions, located in the table section. 

To determine how many personal supersti- 
tions a humanoid PC has, first find that charac- 
ter’s prime requisite on the table below. Select 
or roll that many more superstitions from the 
General Superstitions table (as approved by 
the DM). Of all the PC’s superstitions, one may 
be positive; the rest must be negative. 


Table 5: Personal Superstitions 


Prime Requisite | Number of Additional 
Score Superstitions 
9-11 1 

12-15 2 

16+ 3 


Superstitions have two functions. First, they 
provide more hooks for building a humanoid 
PC's personality, thus providing more fuel for 
good role-playing. Second, they help or hinder 
a character in play, giving bonuses or penalties 
to dice rolls in encounters in which the super- 
stition has manifested itself. 


Using Superstitions in Play 


A humanoid PC who encounters a manifesta- 
tion of a superstition must make a Wisdom 
check at a -2 penalty. (The DM may increase 
the penalty depending on the nature of the 
manifestation. A particularly frightening 
superstition combined with a particularly 
powerful manifestation might have a penalty 
as high as —6.) Success or failure of the Wisdom 
check determines the effects on the PC, 
depending on whether the superstition is posi- 
tive or negative. 

Positive superstitions are manifestations of good 
luck. Using charms or gestures, the humanoid 
receives the benefits of benevolent forces. Negative 
superstitions, on the other hand, are manifesta- 
tions of bad luck, ill will, and outright malevo- 
lence. Charms and gestures allow the humanoid 
to ward off these forces. Even if the charm or ges- 


—e——oooo 


108 * Chapter Six 


ture works, however, the fear generated by a close 
call with harmful forces may cause the humanoid 
to suffer some lesser penalties. 

Positive superstition checks are made when 
the PC chooses when to call upon the power of 
his charm or gesture ritual. 

Negative superstition checks must be made 
every time the superstition manifests itself. 

Penalties and bonuses for superstitions are 
not cumulative. Only one type of penalty or 
bonus can be in effect in any given hour. 


Success, Positive Superstition: A humanoid PC 
succeeding at a Wisdom check when a positive 
superstition manifests will receive a +2 bonus to 
all proficiency and ability checks, and a +1 bonus 
to all attack rolls. These benefits last for one hour 
and can only be gained once per day, no matter 
how often the superstition manifests itself. 


Failure, Positive Superstition: A humanoid 
PC failing a Wisdom check receives no bonus 
or penalty. After one hour has passed, if the 
superstition manifests itself, the PC can make a 
Wisdom check, at a —4 penalty. If the check fails 
a second time, the PC can make one final 
attempt an hour later, at a -6 penalty. If this 
check also fails, the PC cannot try to gain the 
benefits of his positive superstition until 24 
hours have passed — no matter how often the 
superstition manifests in his presence. 


Success, Negative Superstition: A humanoid PC 
making a successful Wisdom check when a nega- 
tive superstition manifests receives a 2 penalty 
to all proficiency and ability checks, and a -1 
penalty to all attack rolls, due to the fear a nega- 
tive superstition generates (failure is much more 
debilitating). These penalties last for one hour. 


Failure, Negative Superstition: A humanoid 
PC failing a Wisdom check receives a —4 
penalty to all proficiency and ability checks, 
and a 2 penalty to all attack rolls. These penal- 
ties are in effect for one hour. 


Important Note: The superstitions suggested 
on Table 18: General Superstitions are pre- 
sented in broad categories. They should be 
refined to a specific type of manifestation, a 
specific ritual for calling upon or warding off 
its effects, and an accompanying legend to 
make the superstition make sense. 


For example, Hegral the female bugbear rolls 
a superstition dealing with noise. Her player 
decides that the superstition will be negative. 
It manifests itself as thunder. Whenever Hegral 
hears thunder, she must blink three times and 
spin once counterclockwise to ward off its evil 
effects. This superstition of thunder relates to 
the sound the bugbear God of Fear makes 
when passing from the Abyss to the Prime 
Material plane in search of a bugbear to carry 
off. 


The Superstitions 


The following suggested superstitions can be 
used to develop the categories provided on the 
General Superstitions table. Dungeon Masters 
and players can expand this list and create 
their own superstitions, using these as guide- 
lines and springboards for other ideas. 


Animal/Insect: A specific kind of animal or 
insect causes this superstition to manifest. 

Armor: A specific type of armor, worn by an 
opponent, frightens or inspires the humanoid. 

Cold: Sudden chills, fear of ice or snow, fear 
or positive belief in icy winds. 

Color: Fear of a particular color, manifested 
in nature, on clothes, or in some other way. 

Demihumans: The humanoid fears a specific 
demihuman race. The race is usually deter- 
mined by the humanoid's racial preferences 
and hatreds. 

Destiny: The humanoid has learned of his 
particular destiny from an oracle or fortune 
teller. Whenever this destiny seems to be 


Superstitions * 109 


occurring, the humanoid receives either a neg- 
ative or positive superstition. For example, a 
humanoid who was told she would die by a 
human’s arrow will be fearful in the presence 
of human archers. 


Dreams: A specific, recurring dream haunts 
or inspires a humanoid. 

Elements: Air, earth, fire or water causes 
either fear or hope in a superstitious human- 
oid. In all cases, the humanoid should pick a 
specific manifestation of the element in ques- 
tion (swirling air, cracked earth, uncontrolled 
fire, foul water, etc.). 

Gods: Humanoid suffers from a fear of a par- 
ticular god, or looks for signs from a particular 
god as a manifestation of good luck. 

Heat: Fear of hot flashes, of hot weather, of 
temperatures above a certain level. 

Humanoids: A specific race of humanoids 
causes this superstition to manifest. Some 
humanoids are even afraid of others of their 
own kind due to the reasons why they left to 
become adventurers. 

Magical Items: The humanoid fears a partic- 
ular type of magical item. This can be general, 
for example a magical wand, or specific, as ina 
magical wand that casts fireballs. 

Monsters: The humanoid fears a particular 
type of monster. This superstition can manifest 
either when the monster is present or when the 
humanoid sees signs of its passage. As a posi- 
tive superstition, the monster in question can 
be the humanoid’s patron creature. 

Moon: Fear or positive belief in one of the 
stages of the moon (full, half, quarter, new). 

Noise: A noise (which must be specifically 
identified) giving either a positive or negative 
manifestation. 

Plants: A specific type of plant causes the 
humanoid’s superstition to take effect. A 
humanoid could be afraid of red roses, but 
inspired by blooming lilies, for example. 


—_ee——_—_———————————— 


110 * Chapter Six 


Priests: Priests of a specific alignment or reli- 
gion frighten or inspire the humanoid. 

Reptiles: A specific type of reptile causes a 
humanoid’s superstition to take effect. Reptiles 
include crocodiles, lizards, and snakes. 

Sickness: The sight of a person or animal 
with a specific type of illness causes the 
humanoid to suffer a negative superstition. If 
the humanoid himself gets the illness, the 
effects of the negative superstition last until the 
illness is cured. 

Specific Location: A specific location or loca- 
tion type (dark caves, twisted forests, babbling 
brooks, human villages, etc.) elicits fear in the 
humanoid. 

Stars: Fear or positive belief in a particular 
star or constellation. 

Storms: A specific type of storm causes a 
humanoid's superstition to take effect. Storms 
can be dust, wind, rain, thunder, lightning, ice, 
sand, hail, snow, etc. 

Sun: Fear of the sun’s rays, of bright sunlight, 
of clouds obscuring the sun's good rays. 

Supernatural Beings: A particular kind of 
supernatural being (or even a specific super- 
natural being) inspires either a positive or neg- 
ative superstition. 

Undead: Either undead in general or a partic- 
ular type of undead creature causes this super- 
stition to manifest. 

Visions: A specific vision, which comes to a 
humanoid while he is awake, inspires good 
luck or bad when it manifests. Visions can be 
any image, and either frightening or positive in 
nature. 

Weapon: A specific type of weapon frightens 
or inspires the humanoid if it is being wielded 
by his opponent. 

Wilderness: A specific wilderness type scares 
or inspires a humanoid. Types include deserts, 
forests, jungles, swamps, arctic wastes, etc. 


CHAPTER 


Arms and Armor 


Humanoids make use of whatever equip- 
ment, arms, and armor they can get their hands 
on. Many of the races are natural scavengers, 
picking up anything they can carry and wield. 
Humanoid characters are subject to class 
restrictions on weapons. 


Armor Restrictions 


Normal armor is often hard to fit upon 
humanoids. While man-sized (M) humanoids 
can wear human-made armor, those of other 
sizes or peculiar body shapes, like centaurs, 
must wear specially-fitted armor or armor of 
their own race’s construction. While human or 
demihuman armorers can build custom-fitted 
armor for a humanoid, time is doubled and 
costs are tripled. 


Weapon Breakage (Optional) 


Humanoids wielding weapons of their 
own make need not check for breakage. 
When large-sized humanoids use human or 
demihuman weapons, the weapon may 
break under their greater strength and force. 
This chance is read directly from the attack 
roll. Use Table 6 to determine if the weapon 
breaks. Weapon Size refers to the weapon's 
size classification. Roll is the number or less 
on the 1d20 attack roll that will break the 
weapon (excluding strength adjustments). A 
broken weapon becomes useless immedi- 
ately upon breaking. A magical weapon 
receives a saving throw vs. ohne blow to 
avoid breaking. 


Table 6: Optional Weapon Breakage 


S 10 
M 5 
L 2 


Weapon Size Restrictions 


Humanoids of large (L) size generally use 
weapons which also fit into this category. They 
cannot use tiny weapons (T), at all. They may 
have trouble wielding small and medium 
weapons (the DM can assess a -1 to —4 penalty 
to hit and damage rolls). Some humanoids 
have bonuses when using weapons of their 
own make (see the individual entries in Chap- 
ter Two). 

Likewise, humanoids falling under the tiny 
(T) size classifications cannot use large 
weapons (L). They can wield melee weapons 
of medium size (M) in both hands. 


Close-quarter Weapons 


Close-quarter weapons are used by those who 
specialize in close-quarter fighting or who regu- 
larly operate in small, enclosed areas, such as 
underground tunnels. While, in fact, all under- 
ground-dwelling humanoids can use these 
weapons, they are preferred by members of the 
mine rowdy and tunnel rat kits. Other 
humanoids with the close-quarter fighting profi- 
ciency can also select from these weapons (as 
long as the weapon in question does not violate 
the restrictions of a class regarding weapon 
choice). Humanoids who are not subterranean- 
dwelling cannot choose these weapons initially, 
but may gain proficiency with them over the 
course of a campaign. To use a specific close- 
quarter weapon, the humanoid must announce 
its use at the beginning of a combat round. Some 
of these weapons are also passive, inflicting 
injury if an opponent gets too close. When used 
aggressively, Strength bonuses apply. 

Body spikes: These are short blades fitted to 
a humanoid's armor. An opponent who grabs, 
grapples, or wrestles with a humanoid wear- 
ing body spikes from the spikes each round. 
Body spikes can be used aggressively if the 
wearer runs at his opponent. The damage 
inflicted by body spikes depends on the size of 


Arms and Armor * 111 


the wearer: T/S = 1d2, M = 1d3, L = 1d4. The 
spikes are permanently fitted to the armor and 
cannot be retracted. Spiked armor costs 150% 
of the normal armor cost. 

Kick-slashers: These are crude blades 
attached to boots or other footwear. The kick- 
slasher slices into opponents when the user 
lashes out with his feet. They are not 
retractable. 

Punch-cutter: This is a crude blade attached 
to open-finger leather gloves. The blade rests 
on top of the hand, protruding above the 
knuckles when the fist is closed. When the 
wearer throws a punch, the punch-cutter slices 
into his opponent. 


Specíal Humanoid Weapons 


Most weapons made or used by humanoids 
can be found in the Player's Handbook. For 
example, a goblin-made short sword is still a 
Short sword. What follows are rare and 
unusual weapons rarely found outside of 
humanoid cultures: 

Club, great: This may be a long cudgel lov- 
ingly carved from a finely-worked length of 
oak, or a crudely fashioned bludgeon. Its 
effects are identical to those of a morning star, 
though it may be blunt or spiked. Races using 
these include bugbears, centaurs, and 
advanced lizard men. 

Dart, lizard man: This is a crude, heavy 
throwing dart that is both fletched and barbed. 
Measuring two to three feet long, it is used by 
advanced lizard men. It has a range of 30 
yards, and is invariably hurled just before a 
charge. 

Flindbar: A flindbar is a pair of chain-linked 
iron bars. In combat, the bars are spun around 
at great speed, striking up to twice in a round. 
In addition, flindbars can be used to disarm 
opponents. Each successful hit requires the vic- 
tim to save vs. wands. If the saving throw is 
failed, the victim's weapon becomes entangled 
in the chain and is torn from his grasp. Flind- 


—————————————————— 


112 * Chapter Seven 


bars are made and used by flinds. 

Goblin Stick: A goblin stick is a forked and 
hooked pole arm, used first by bugbears trying 
to catch the smaller goblins. The goblin stick is 
a wooden staff, six to nine feet long, gripped in 
the middle. Each end is tipped with three 
wicked blades. One hooked blade is used to 
extract hiding creatures. The other blades are 
pointed, sharp, and set at slightly different 
angles to poke into the hardest to reach loca- 
tions. Goblin sticks are made and used by hob- 
goblins, bugbears, and ogres. 

Lance, flight: This lance has a 10-foot long 
shaft of tough wood with a sharp stone head, 
and fletched ends. It is used by flying 
humanoids as a shock or impact weapon. The 
flight lance is hurled at the end of a swooping 
attack and can impale the target. 

Giant-kin weapons: Giant-kin weapons, 
crafted by giant-kin, match their great size and 
strength. The most common are clubs, daggers, 
halberds, maces, two-handed swords, and 
voadkyn long bows. 

When using weapons of their own make, 
giant-kin and other large humanoids suffer 
none of the penalties associated with the 
smaller human weapons. Most giant-sized 
weapons cause more damage than their 
human-made counterparts. Voadkyn long 
bows have ranges 50% greater than human- 
sized long bows. 

Oriental Weapons: Used principally by ogre 
magi and some hobgoblin tribes, most of these 
can be treated as the western counterpart. 
Unusual weapons of note include: 

Daikyu: A great long composite bow, about 
seven feet long. The grip is closer to the low 
end of the bow, allowing it to be more easily 
fired from horseback or when kneeling. 

Katana: An oriental long sword. If worn with 
the wakizashi (short sword), it marks the wearer 
as one of high social standing. It's a serious 
insult for an unprivileged character to wear 
both blades together. 

Naginata: An oriental pole arm much like a 


glaive, preferred by female warriors. It has a 
six to eight foot shaft and swordlike blade. 

Tetsubo: A wooden rod about four feet long, 
the upper half bound with studded iron strips. 
It is often carried by travelers and can serve as 
a walking stick. It is typically wielded in two 
hands. 

Pixie weapons: These are weapons that have 
been scaled down to match pixie and smaller- 
sized wielders. Unless otherwise noted, their 
maximum damage is usually in the 1d2 to 1d4 
range. 

Pixie bow: Resembling tiny short bows of 
elven design, they have half the range of short 
bows. Pixies using these have a +4 bonus to 
their attack rolls. Pixie arrows come in three 
varieties. War arrows inflict damage. Sleep 
arrows render subjects comatose for 1d6 hours 
if they fail their saving throw vs. spell. Forget 


arrows cause subjects who fail a saving throw 
vs. spells to suffer a complete loss of memory. 
Only a clerical heal spell or limited wish can 
restore the subject’s memory. 

Pixie sword: Resembling tiny elven long 
swords, these are of excellent workmanship. 
They otherwise perform like daggers. 

Saurial Weapons: Saurials weapons perform 
much as human-made equivalents. Weapons 
of note include the bladeback mace, the bladeback 
flail, and the hornhead staff. All saurial weapons 
are designed for the saurial physiology, having 
shorter grips, unusual protrusions, and barb- 
like tips. 

Non-saurials trying to use saurial weapons 
suffer a -1 attack penalty. Likewise, saurials 
suffer a similar -1 penalty when using non- 
saurial weapons. 


—_—— ee 


Arms and Armor * 113 


Table 7: Weapons 


Cost 
Item (gp) 
Club, great 8 
Dart, barbed = 
Flindbar 8 
Goblin stick 5 
Lance, flight 6 
Close-quarter Weapons 
Body spikes x 
Kick-slasher ze 
Punch-cutter Gr 
* See entry for information 
Giant-kin Weapons 
bow, long 125 
arrow 1/12 
dagger 5 
halberd 25 
mace 11 
sword, 2-H. 100 
Oriental Weapons (Ogre Mage) 
Daikyu 100 
arrow, leaf head 3sp/6 
Katana 100 
Naginata 8 
Tetsubo 2 
Wakizashi 50 
Pixie Weapons 
pixie bow 50 
forget arrow 100/1 
sleep arrow 10/6 
war arrow 1/2 
pixie sword 30 
* See entry for information 
Saurial Weapons 
Bladeback flail 20 
Bladeback mace 15 
Hornhead staff 5 


** Per foot 


BPAH | « 


pp zosk 


nnn 


*** Per hand 


HAHH orare nDNA 


cee 


m 
"| wns "UU io 


nwl 


QU eu uo "3 
N 


uwa | 


wow 


e 


Speed 
Factor 


[- S] 


NNN 


Bepels 


=| 


€ o 


Damage 
S-M L 
2d4 1d6+1 
1d4 1d4 
1d4 1d4 
1d4 1d6 

1d6+1 2d6 
* * 
1d4+1 — 1d6+1 
1d4 1d3 
1d8 1d8 
1d6 1d8 
1d12 2d8 
1d8x2  1d6x2 
1d10x2  3dex2 
1d8 1d6 
1d10 1d12 
1d8 1d10 
1d8 1d8 
1d8 1d8 


Special* Special* 
Special* Special* 


Special* Special* 
Jdd4-l — 1d4+1 
1d4 1d3 
1d8+1 2d6 
1d8+1 1d8 
2d6 2d6 


-_—eororeoeoeoe 


114 * Chapter Seven 


"K1ogoje2 yore ur asues peoiq e 10} SMOT[E [[H5 19g rpour ou jeu AON 
Son[eA o[eurgj /o[eur OUT paplAIp are 3u219A pue jugrou 10j sraquinu 
seq ou) ‘Sny 'sopeur uey} 12110us pue 194481] aq 07 pua sop[euraj y 


OcPt 029/002 


OLP9 001/— 
OcPP 004/024 
TIP? 79/89 


OLPP OFL/OST 
OPE ses/0ss 


OLP —/0U 
PPP cc/Sc 
OLP9 S6/SE1 
Orp9 06/0£1 


OLPP 082/018 
OLP9 Occ/0Zc 
OcPE 08z/0zE 


OLPP SOL/SPT 
OcPP 06€/0Sr 
OUPE ^ OZL/0Zl 
PPS 8b/7S 


OLP9 OOL/OFL 
OIPS O€L/OST 


PPS 89/74 
OIPP — S#I/S9T 
OIPP 091/081 


OIP9 — 0S9/SZ49 
OIP9 OFZ/08Z 
PPT [40/141 
OcP9 ^ 096/0001 
OIPS — Oll/ScI 
OLP9 081/017 
OIPE S8/S0I 
OzPP ^ O6c/0c€ 
OIPE 02/08 
gpw seg 
spunog ur }3M 


OPE S4/84 
OTP 6s/— 
9pc SOT/ZOL 
PT 0£/c€ 
OIP? cs/vS 
8PZ 94/84 
OIPL —/ss 
OPE €c/vC 
TIPI 89/09 
TIPI 96/88 
9pc 96/Tl 
9pc 8Z/v8 
[41:4 £6/96 
TIP? 65/09 
9pc 08/8 
TIP? 09/09 
PPE 0€/ZE 
OLPZ 68/09 
SPI 89/74 
OIPI 1h/eh 
TIPI 69/74 
TIPI 08/%8 
TIPI 701/801 
ZIPI FLL/0Z1 
9PI [40141 
TIPE 08/78 
SPc 98/8 
OLPc 89/74 
TIPI 0S/SS 
TIPI 19/99 
OPL 85/09 
JegmpoW eg 
saypuy ur 3p] 


omuaM 
Águrue Ms 
peayusroy ^15 
sad “IS 
peaquy ^15 
»peqopelq “I5 
ENS 


a8eur o18() 
-jey 130 
a3o 
uewyparsu0y 
nejourjq 
ueur prezy] 
PIOqO»x 
weumyH 
urqosqoH 
uqo5 

pur our 
eu, 
uÁxpeoA "uppo 
Sqoquy uno 
urug 
aneyua> 
8nmdqing 
avaq3ng 
ueunseog 
rysely 
eiooxeiey 
ary 


3u8I9AM pur 3uSrop 38v19Ay plourwiNnyY :6 AVL 


PI BULU aq aye} jsnur ssep snp YIM 19jeaeup V , 


opua "uÁpeoA 

^Ájes ‘uewyer3uour ‘pury ^mejuao ‘epoyerey 
210-[et ‘940 ^pjoqox ^urpqosqou “uT|GOD 
210-jpeu ^10 Zew 

a130 ^ueuodsuour ‘wew prezy /p[oqo ‘urqo? 
-qoy 'urqo8 ‘pury ‘Tous "3n«Á[nq "reaqsing 
orem 'Keurues ‘ermes ‘e130. 

ey ‘aio ‘Spoquy “mezua? "ruere dəx; 


oua ‘1Aqes 'arxid ‘e8eur 180 ‘a180 “ney 

-oumu ‘wew prezy ‘UAxpeoa ‘Sjoqay ‘uray 

‘Bn mdqng ^ueunseaq e120xe1ee 1da»xo [TV 

Jeunes o10-jpeu ^10 'a180-[eu "pjoqox 

'urqosqoq *ur[qo8 ‘pury 'p[oud ^ieaqaing 
ÁeurueMs ‘jeunes '210- 

'a10-j[eu ^ueuoisiuour *ppoqox "urqosiqou 

'urqos “pur ous mezua aeaqsinq y3ery 

IWIM 

^210-j[eu ‘940 *3180-j[eu '1nejourur *pjoqox 

^urqoSqow "ui[qo3 ‘pury ^[ou “waq8ng 

KeuueAs ‘fermes yes 

anid ^meyourur “uypurayy ^reunseoq jd2. 


Jeunes ‘aew aio 'ueuroit 
-uow ^rnejouru ^uÁxpeoa ‘urua 'nejua- 
qeunes “adeur o1do 
"ueuipoiduour amejourur ^urpuro1j ‘mezua; 
Teunes ^oSeur o180 uetan 
-uow “nejouru ^uÁxpeoa ‘urwa nequa? 


saory 
CIE! 


Áreuruimng yy 1293»v1eu» :g AWL 


„preg 
PUL 
PUL 
Pup Auy 


ysaud Auy 


oue? 


prap ^uo 


QIODoQM 


„ueweyg 


paezim Auy 
paezim Auy 
paezi uy 


UIpeyed 
taduey 


Ioi 
saqysiy 
a343i 
ESTEE 


ssejo 
aqna 


proueumH ‘preg, 
yey PUN, 
mopeys 


ya8uaarog 
andoy 


onsAjN BuuəpueM 


asad Ie, 


spei 


10j20(] YUM 
ueureus 

SAM 
ase mepo 
TOPS proueumpr 


pieziM 98popr 
pavziM 


Termes 'urpepeq 
101293014 PM 


Ápmoy our. 

PIOMSTIAS 

NBH Ud 

Aopuojaq equ 
A01440M. 

Dri 


Appendix 


116 


"sumuumxeur [BDL paadxa 0] SJa}PILYD More JOU Op SPAJ Susy 


SIM Au] L* *u0D/xeC1/1S [7s 
SIM L* ‘U00 [- 'XaQ]/:8S Z-s 
SIM /1U] [+ *u0D/2S l~» 


4SIe9Á QZ s1eoÁ op s1eaÁ cc onuaM 
sieaÁ 06 s1eaÁ 09 s1eoÁ Gp Áeurue Mg 
s1eaÁ GZL sivo cg. sieak 79 — peoquioy “1S, 
s1eaÁ 06 s1e2Á 09 s1eoÁ Gp dady ^is 
saeak (OL savak /9 saeak 0G. peayuy “1S 
saad OTT S1e9Á g4 sivoÁ GG. — »peqopelq “Ig 
sivak 00L svat £9 s1eoÁ Qc 1Ájeg 
s1eaÁ (07 s1eoÁ eer s1eaÁ (OL axd 
s1eoK oo svat 0p s1eaÁ Qc yey ‘40 
sivo Gc. sieaÁ cz. sieoÁ Z1 210 
S1e9Á SZL saeak QL] saeak cg oSeur 3O 
s1eəÁ 6 sxeəÁ Q9 sivak Gp ey 2130 
s1eaÁ 06 s1eaÁ Q9 s1eəÁ Gp 2180 
s1eaÁ Qc svat QZ ^ sroÁg] = ueuno1duojq 
s1eaÁ QT s1eoÁ 001 s1eaÁ GZ myo 
saeak Qt s1voÁ c7 s1vaÁ cc ueu prezy] 
sivak G6 s1eoÁ 79 s1eoÁ gp ploqoyy 
sivat 06 sxeaÁ 09 sieaÁ Gp ueumng 
s1eoK Qc s1eaÁ cc s1eoÁ GZ urqo3qoH 
s1eaÁ op s1eaÁ /z s1eoÁ Qc urqoo 
s1IeaÁ ce s1eaÁ cc saeak ZI pur ‘ouo 
s1eoÁ ce sivo zc s1eoÁ 9[ you 
savak (GZ s1eəÁ /9[ s1eaÁ gz, udypeoa "uppo 
s1eaÁ (QZ s1eoÁ ccr sivak QOL — S[oqug 'urp 
s1eoÁ SZI s1eoÁ cg s1eoÁ 79 [Uu 
S1eoÁ G7 s1eaÁ 0g seat ZE aneyuaD 
sivak Q9. sieaÁ 0p sivak 0g 3nmÁjmg 
s1eəÁ G9 s1eəÁ pp sivad cc aeaq3ng 
sieaÁ 0g S1eaÁ cc sieaÁ 0p ueurseag 
saeak G/ s1veoK Qc s1eoÁ ZE n[dery 
s1eaÁ Qc s1eoÁ cc S1eoÁ Gc viooxeleV 
(xe aseg) (Xew oseg €/Z) (Xew seg Z/T) aed 


«9[qeru3A — ,,99V pIO — ,98y PIPPIN 
$2373 Susy :1] 9Iqer 


SSL 
S6 
[UA 
GZ 
06 
$6 
S9 
989 y umuwe 
oSe19Ay 


OcPc + 04 
OZP + 06 
OOLPL + SZI 
OOLPL + 06 
OOLPL + OOL 
OOLPL + OLL 
OOLPL + OOL 
OOLPZ + 007 
OcPI + 09 
OIPI-* Se 
Ocpc + SZI 
OZPT + 06 
OcPc + 06 
OIPI + 0€ 
OOIPI + OST 
OLPZ + OLL 
OcPpc + S6 
OcPc + 06 
OcPI + OS 
OZPL + OF 
OPI + SE 
PPL + €€ 
OOLPZ + OSZ 
OOLPE + 007 
OZPE + SZI 
OcPz + SZ 
OZPL + 09 
OLPZ + G9 
OcPI + 08 
OCP? + SZ 
CLPZ + OS 
(a]qeureA + aseg) 
sSuey ady unue 


PI ZL omuaM 
ZIPL SI Keuruewg 
OZPL A peoquioq “neg 
OLPL [4 Ál} “nes 
ZIPI FL peoyuy “neg 
ZIPL vL »peqope[q “nes 

PPE oz ELS 

9ps oor axd 

PL [Ai -Jey 240 

PPL OL uo 

PPL oz o8eur 2130 

PPL SI -jreu ‘2180, 

PPL SI 2130 

YPI 9 weur[osuopq 

ope zL nejour 

PL SL uew prezr] 

PL za PIoqo» 

PPL SI ueumH 

9pI tL urqosqoH 

9PL ral urqo 
9PL 8 pur ‘rouo 

TPL ei ous 

9ps GL uÁxpeoA "uppo 

9ps OF Sjoquy ‘UPL 

PPL oz uwag 

PPl 8I Anejua) 

PL OL Snadiing 

9PI OL avaqsng 
OLPL £L ueurseag 

9pl SI rysely 

PPL St viooxerey 

e|qeueA — ady aseg ary 
asy Suniejs 


98y :01 AWL 


Appendix * 117 


“Age ary auo Aur 0) snuoq %¢ ? PPY « 


w= wst Ws %OI- — — %G-  peoquou^ 
est por Wü — —  — xe áy ^15 
Giese Sat dU MIR SN a ui peequyg ^s 
L2] d = %S- %S- %S+ %S+ — »peqapelq “Is 
%0I- | — %G+ %St+  —  *-S- %S+ aes 
=r %S+ 9,0L* %S+ — %01- %S+ eig 
Qu eta = — Ø  %St Hc- JPY ^10 
"Gt WS ASt — = eR S wO 
«Gr -— or ete — — e ageur a130 
%S- = %S+ "5G "5G — — %S+ —,ueu[oiduojq 
%SI- %S+ %S+ - = WS- = %G- 
%S- St %S+ %St fn %S- %S- 
%SI- 601+ 9601* %S+ — — 9t 
of "iX Td m eT MR rc 
dO SOSH SOL =e gk 
pur jou) 
— w wt — — qouy 
— yw $46 —  — uÁxpeoa “UPD 
= zc a — =m urua 
VN =) eos SOC = — Anejua 
T Lt PST eed arri SnaÁpmng 
*"6G- —"5S* *50L* %OIt — — 969- %S- xeəq3ng 
%S+ > %S+  "bG* %S- S- = ueurseag 
%SI+ %S- %01- enoyerey 
MƏ Na SH SW Mi 10 dd sory 
TAS 


yuəuysnfpy PPLY ipis SUNMAYI YI ALL 


81/€ 
8L/SL 
81/6 
8U/€ 
81/€ 
81/€ 
81/8 
ZUV€ 
81/€ 
[473 
ci/€ 
yc 
8/7 
8/7 
8/7 
91/€ 
9t/€ 
vl/€ 
yU€ 
[17/3 
91/€ 
vl/€ 
81/€ 
PL/E 
8l/€ 
81/€ 
PL/€ 
vU/€ 
91/€ 
91/€ 
81/€ 
eyo 


81/£ 
81/71 
81/71 
81/€ 
81/€ 
81/€ 
81/4 
81/£ 
91/£ 
vL/€ 
91/£ 
91/€ 
zc 
6/c 
81/€ 
91/£ 
81/€ 
81/€ 
81/£ 
81/€ 
91/£ 
91/€ 
9L/€ 
81/8 
9t/€ 
81/} 
91/€ 
81/€ 
SI/€ 
91/€ 
LZUV€ 
SIM 


81/€ 
81/71 
81/6 
61/4 
81/€ 
81/€ 
8l/€ 
4V€ 
81/9 
VARAS 
OL/€ 
41/8 
[47/5 
8/7 
4t/£ 
L/S 
LI/€ 
Z1/€ 
81/€ 
81/€ 
9t/€ 
PL/E 
LU TL 
81/8 
81/9 
91/€ 
Tl/£ 
91/€ 
81/£ 
91/€ 
81/£ 
wy 


81/11 
81/ZL 
SL/L 
81/8 
ZEE 
81/€ 
81/6 
81/Z 
91/4 
61/€L 
81/8 
v1/8 
61/¥L 
Oc/vl 
81/8 
Oc/cl 
81/9 
S/F 
81/9 
91/68 
81/9 
81/9 
91/8 
81/ZL 
€L/t 
SL/L 
81/9 
81/8 
91/9 
81/71 
91/9 
uo) 


41/9 
81/6 
81/€L 
cc 
61/4 
81/S 
PL/€ 
81/8 
61/8 
LU/€ 
n 
81/Z 
[4v 
8/7 
81/9 
ys 
8L/€ 
81/} 
81/9 
41/% 
81/9 
81/6 
61/€L 
S1/8 
81/8 
91/€ 
SUr 
41/8 
81/9 
4€ 
81/8 
xed 


81/11 
81/6 
81/€L 
[19/41 
Z1/€ 
81/4 
81/01 
«81/9 
vl/€ 
81/9 
81/9 
81/71 
[17421 
02/91 
41/9 
02/21 
81/8 
91/€ 
81/9 
SL/t 
81/8 
81/9 
8I/IL 
6L/vl 
IL/c 
81/1 
«81/9 
81/8 
«81/9 
61/71 
91/£ 
us 
Anqy 


ora 
pmap ‘Aeuruems 
1o8ue1 Áewuemg 
peayuroy “Ig 
loÁ] “IS 
peayuy “IS 
»peqope[q “IS 
AVS 
apad 

JPY 
9310 
oSeur o18() 
reu ‘2180 
wewu 
Anejourjq 
ueui prez] 
PIoqo» 
uiqodqoH 
urqo5 
pur jou 
Tous 
uÁxpeoA ^upo) 
Sjoquy uD 
inejua 
SnmAqing 
qvaqang 
ueurjseog 
niSepy 
PDOYRIey 
ary 


squswesnbey Qyqy reni ZI ALL 


118 * Appendix 


"Áyunururoo oures 
U} WOY auro» JOU [[IM sueureus pue s10120pu»iIM 'S10120pupi 
PY 9281 Əy} JI sueureus 10} po1njrsqns aq ue» s10]120pu21M x 


ueureus / 193189 onuoM 

(9]qissod jou ssep»-[enp) auou Áewuemg 
9[qissod o1e syajoereyp ssep-penp Jeumeg 
jenp/1oni8y yeg 

jonp /1o148y and 


‘PNP 
^ouop /191q81 ‘Jaryy /ueureus 


ory /193u8 "ueureus / 191031 Jey 10 
Jong /ueureus 

‘gary /19448y ^ueureus /1o1u81 210 
Jong /aseur 193185 
ang /a8eur jong /193u8 

‘ueureys / 193081 'ogeur /19443Y aseut o18 
(+6 ST UOpSIM J! pamore) 

2uop/ 191185 'ueureus / 103035 reu ‘2180 
(+6 St WOpSIM 

jt pomore) ueureqs 193088 21380, 


Pup 
'odeur/2uop ^jonp /aseur 


‘Jop /ueureus ^ueureus/ 19181 ueuisuolq 
oSeur/ 1oju8j ‘Jory / 1943y mejou 
„Suoyeurquiop sse[)-n]n]A aey 


jonp /soyysy 'weweys/19443Y 
Pup up /1343Y 
‘Jony /134748y ^ueureus/1911815 
»uop/1eyu su 

^joup/191481 ^ueureus 1914815 


jonp/2up 'ouop 19189 
ong / 193081 "ueureus/19yu81 
ənə / 1043Y 

Jory /1o1]85 ‘ueureys /19 14345 
ouop/aaysy 

‘ory / 193485 ^ueureus /19 3 


jonp/2S8eur/19]u8y Jory /a8eur 
'odeur/1o8ue1 'oSeur/191q481 
‘Jary / 191483 'ueweys/ 1943Y 
ueureys/19443Y 

JENA /1smorsnqp Jory /aseut 


ueureqs/1oguer 

jon 103135 'oSeur/191]8 
jonp 115 'ueureus /193488 
jonp/2uop 'ouop/1enjag 
erp / 19303 ^reureus 19108] 


Jar /saysy 
ueureus/1o1q8 
jon 1443y "ueuieus/19)u8 


,suoneurquio) sse[5-nIn]A 


uew prezy] 
ploqoy, 
urqo3qoH 


unqoD 
pury ‘ouo 
qouD 


uÁxpeoA uyo 


Sqoqag uro 
uipuro1q 


neue 
SinwÁ[ng 
1eaq8ng 
ueuirjseog 
rysely 
enoyerey 


aey 


suopeurquio) ssv[)-npinw proueuimng :£j AVL 


Appendix * 119 


Table 15: Reincarnation Table ae rg ED 
Wizara ‘i pie 1 Aarakocra n = 7 a 
o! o! incarnation h 
01-08 = Aarakocra* een deu e E 
04-05 01-02 Alaghi* eastman s 
— 03-05 Badger Bugbear 12: .—- 8 9 
— 06-10 Bear, black Bullywug US TS NA 9 
m DRE Bear, brown Centaur 127.130 5 14 12 
= 16-18 Boar, wild Hen cm cs UH 
07-09 cm Bugbear* Giant-kin, firbolg 12 — 7 — 
10-11 zt Bullywug* Giant-kin, voadkyn 11 8 7 10 
= 19-21 Centaur* Gnoll i — 9 11 
Die ee pas Gnoll, flind 2 = 9 nN 
— 24-26 Eagle — 5 LOR Sees AI 
17-21 27-29 El lobgoblin 11 — 9 11 
— 30-32 Faun/satyr* Kobold oe E 
— 33-34 Fox Lizard man 122 — y 9 
2 35 Fremlin* Minota 12 8 a 
2a 36 Giant-kin, firbolg* Maasen T0 E307 102) 19 
= 37-38 Giant-kin, voadkyn* 12 3 
24-27 = Gnoll* Ogre a = 
28-29 — Gnoll, flind* Ogre, half- 1* — 4 — 
30-34 = nome Ogre mage 9 8 7 8 
ae MN or D i 
42-46 = Halfling oe Bs t malu SE 
47-48 — Half-ogre* E a 
49-51 = Half-orc* Satyr 1 — — mn 
= 39-41 Hawk Sr., bladeback 9 9 U 9 
52-54 = Hobgoblin* Sr., finback U 9 9 9 
55-68 42-55 Human Sr, flyer 9 9 9 U 
69-72 — Kobold* Si d 9 U 9 9 
73-75 — Lizard man* r., hornhea 
— 56-58 Lynx Swanmay 4 — 12 — 
z m 59-60 inotaur* Wemic da xe o» 10 
z = Mon; * 
80-81 = x 
82 - Ogre mage” See Table 2. 
83-86 = Orc* 
= 61-63 Owl, giant 
ES 64-65 Owl, talking 
— GERE Pixie* 
= Pseudodragon 
/ faerie dragon 
— 70-71 Raccoon Table 2: Bonus Levels for 
g = S cune Single-Classed Humanoids 
= T., iead* 
89 — Sr, flyer* Prime Requisite Score Total Bonus Levels 
90 PN z hornhead* Racial Maximum +1 +1 (+1) 
n DS — Racial Maximum +2 +2 (+4) 
= 79-80 Swanmay* Racial Maximum +3+ +3 (+7) 
91-93 — Troll 
94-96 81. Wemic* Use the parenthetical number if the prime 
= 83-87 Wolf — requisite is Strength and if the humanoid is a 
= 88-90 Wolverine 
97-00 91-00 DM's choice human crossbreed (half-ogre, half-orc). 
* Humanoid races available as PCs in this book. 


Ve 
120 * Appendix 


able 16: Monstrous Traits 57-58 Monstrous Strength 2 Bestial Habits 
59-61 Bestial Appetite 2 D20 i 
D100 Roll Trait 62-64 Bestial Thirst 2 Rol Peseta ve 
: a 7 v s 
01-05 Bestial Odor 65-67 Bestial Intelligence 2 (D.  Biooding 
06-09 Bestial Rage 68-69 Monstrous Dexterity 2 03 Cheat 
10-12 Monstrous Appearance 1 70-72 Bestial Fear or cowardly 
13-15 Monstrous Strength 1 73-80 Bestial Habit 06. "Destructive 
16-19 Bestial Appetite 1 (roll on Habit Table) 07 Drunkard 
20-22 Bestial Thirst 1 81-84 Bestial Speech Es sn 
23-26 Bestial Intelligence 1 85-87 Monstrous Craving 10 — Filthy 
27-30 Monstrous Dexterity 1 88-90 Monstrous Size n Greedy 
31-36 Light Sensitivity 91-92 Monstrous Appearance 3 T (pg 
3739 Monstrous Sight 93 Monstrous Strength 3 we erect 
40-42 Monstrous Hearing, 94 Bestial Appetite 3 15 Rude ` 
43-46 Monstrous Touch 95 Bestial Thirst 3 E Suspicious 
47-50 Monstrous Smell 96 Bestial Intelligence 3 18 Vidlak 
51-53 Monstrous Taste 97 Monstrous Dexterity 3 19 Whiner . 
54-56 Monstrous Appearance 2 98-00 DM's Choice 20 DM's Choice 
Table 18: General D100Roll Superstition D100 Roll Superstition 
Su erstitions 32-33 Enclosed Spaces 71-72 Plants 
P 3435 Evil/Good /Neutral 73 Priests 
x 3637 Females/Males 7A Reptiles 
D100 Roll Superstition 38-40 Fire 75 Rogues 
01-03 Air 41 Flying 76-77 Sickness 
04-05 Animal/Insect 42 Future 78-80 Specific Location 
06-07 Armor 43-44 Gods 81 Stars 
08-09 Being Alone 45-46 Heat 82-83 Storms 
10 Blood — 47-48 Heights 84 Sun 
8 
11-12 Bright Light 49-50 Humanoids 85 Supernatural Being 
13-14 Civilization 51-52 Humans 86 Touch 
15 Clouds 53-56 Magic 87-88 Undead 
1617 Cold 57 Magical Item 89 Visions 
18-19 Color 58-59 Mobs 90 Warriors 
2021 Darkness 60-61 Modern Technology 91-93 Water 
a Day 62-63 Monster 94-95 Weakness 
aD Demihumans 64 Moon 96-97 Weapon 
26 Destiny 65-66 Night 98 Wilderness 
27-28 Dreams 67-68 Noise 99 Wizards 
2931 Earth 69-70 Open Spaces 100 DM's Choice 
Table 19: Campaign D100 Civilization 
Complications Roll Complications 60-63 Prejudice 
| 01-06 Trait 64-68 Fear 
D20 Wilderness 07-12 Superstition 69-71 Exploitation 
Roll Complications 13 Humanoids 7275 
01-02 Trait 1417 Wizard 76-79 Arrested 
03-04 Superstition 1823 Cleric 80-82 Banished 
05-07 Monster 2428 Warrior 83-86 Challenged 
08-10 Humanoids 29-35 Rogue 87-89 — Slavers 
11-12 — Wizard/Cleric 36-40 Adventurers 90-93 Physical Limitation 
13-4 — Warrior/Rogue 41-42 Travelers 94-95 Educational 
15 Adventurers 43-45 Hunters Limitation 
16-17 Travelers 46-49 Mob 96-98 Social Blunder 
18-19 Hunters 50-55 Local Authorities 99 Sentenced to Death 
20 DM's Choice 56-59 Restrictions 00 DM's Choice 


ew 


Appendix * 121 


Humanoid Character Kit Design Sheet 


Character Class: 


Campaign: 


Player: 


Dungeon Master: 


OVERVIEW: 
REQUIREMENTS: 


ROLE: 


WEAPON PROFICIENCIES 
Required: 


Recommended: 


NONWEAPON PROFICIENCIES 
Bonus Proficiencies: 


Required Proficiencies: 


Recommended, General: 


Recommended, Warrior: 


Recommended, Priest: 


Recommended, Wizard: 


Recommended, Rogue: 


Forbidden: 


EQUIPMENT: 


SPECIAL BENEFITS: 


MAGICAL ABILITIES 
Major Access: 


Minor Access: 


Forbidden Spheres: 


SPECIAL HINDRANCES: 


WEALTH OPTIONS: 


THIEF SKILL BONUSES/PENALTIES 
Pick Pockets: 

Open Locks: 

Find/Remove Traps: 

Move Silently: 


Hide in Shadows: 
Detect Noise: 


= 


Climb Walls: 


Read Languages: 


(81993 TSR Inc. All Rights Reserved. TSR, Inc. grants he right ro reproduce this sheet for personal use. 


Character HUMANOID WARRIOR 
Alignment. 
Class 
Player’s Name Religion 
Sex Age 

Wt. Hair 

Appearance 


SAVING THROWS 
Paralyze 
Poison 


Light 
Mod 
Hvy 


í Rod, Staff 
( 
Svr ( 
( 
( 


or wand 


Jog 

Run 
Run (x4) 
Run (x5) 


Peg —— 


Breath 
x Weapon 


Adjusted AC Armor Type (Pieces) HITPOINTS | Wounds 
Surprised 
Shieldless. 

Rear 

Natural AC __ 


WEAPON COMBAT 
#AT Attack Adj/Dmg Adj — THACO Dam (SM/L) 


=== 


| | 
| (s | 
Ammunition. 
Bnaaau nooauod 
ooo0oa ooooa 


Racial Abilities/Superstitions Proficiencies/Skills/Languages 
(7.71) 


n DRRDRR 


III I I PII P 
IRRIÍSmISPNS NS 


[esse ved sel isi ced pe e hee Te d i i 


F 


F4 pp ad a 


F 


E 


NE 
Hm 
MRRM 


Kit Benefits 
and Hindrances 


©1993 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. TSR, Inc. grants the right to reproduce this sheet for personal use. 


Character HUMANOID WIZARD 
Alignment. 
Class 

Player’s Name Religion. 


SAVING THROWS 
Paralyze 
Poison 


Rod, Staff 
or wand 


Petrify 
— Polymorph 

Breath 

Weapon 


Spells 


Adjusted AC Armor Type (Pieces) 
Surprised 

Shieldless 

Rear 

NatualAC —— 


WEAPON COMBAT 
*AT Attack Adj/Dmg Adj = THACO Dam (SM/L) 


Racial Abilities/Superstitions Wizard Abilities Proficiencies/Skills/Languages 
£—) 


A 


xd id od rud 


engage 


ESSE ESE lL SR 
HHH eH 


TRAORE 
meee 


H 
E 
: 
H 
1 
E 
j 
i 
i 
H 
| 
4 
i 
g 
H 
i 


Character 
Alignment. 
Class 


Player’s Name 


Sex 


HUMANOID PRIEST 


Religion. 


Wt. 
Appearance 


Hair 


ABILITIES 


SAVING THROWS 


Paral: 
Poison. 


Rod, Staff 
orwand | ——— 


polymorph 


Breath 
Weapon = ——— 


Spells 


Adjusted AC Armor Type (Pieces) 
Surprised 

Shieldless 

Rear 


Natural AC 


Attack Adj/Dmg Adj 


sa d ESPON COMBAT 


Dam (SW/L) 


Weight Size Type 


| 


Racial Abilities/Superstitions 


Priest Abilities 


Turn Undead: 


Proficiencies/Skills/Languages 


Skeleton/1HD- 


Zombie: 


Ghoul/2HD- 


Shadow /3-4HD- 


Wight/5HD: 


Ghast: 


Wraith/6HD- 


Mummy/7HD- 


Spectre/8HD- 


Vampire/9HD- 


Ghost/10HD- 


Lich/11«HD- 


Special: 


LEEEEE EEE RNN 


eR RRRSSRSS 
tole eps E Jo E le esee 
E EE ERR 
KEELER EEEKLKER 


Kit Benefits 
and Hindrances 


©1993 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. TSR, Inc. grants the right to reproduce this sheet for personal use. 


Character HUMANOID ROGUE 
Alignment. 
Class 
Player’s Name Religion, 
Sex Age. i 

Wt. Hair 

Appearance 


ABILITIES MOVEMENT SAVING THROWS 
Parah 
ET ue E E 
Mod 


Hvy i 
jd t d 4 Polna oh 
log 

Run — (3) Warn 
Run (x4) 

Run — (x5) — Spels 


(an 
= yea 


Adjusted AC Armor Type (Pieces) HITPOINTS | Wounds 
Surprised 
Shieldless 

Rear 

NatualAC | — 


WEAPON COMBAT 
*AT Attack Adj/Dmg Adj — THACO —— Dam(SM/L) Weight Size Type Speed 


Racial Abilities/Traits Rogue Abilities Proficiencies/Skills/Languages 


Pick pockets: 
Open locks: 
Find/remove traps: 


Move silently: 
Hide in shadows: 
Detect noise- 
Climb walls: 

Read languages: — 
Backstab: 


RRRRIRIRISIRM 


KERERREREER 


as 
scd ied had usd d id rd ah td a tl c 


ISBN. Es Ee LES elle Ves 
Felt lt 


Ht 


Kit Benefits 
and Hindrances 


(©1993 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. TSR, Inc. grants the right to reproduce this sheet for personal use. 


Supplies 

Gear Water/Wine 

i i i uanag 00000 
Hiem Location — Wt. ltem — Location ltem — Location — Wt. BBBBH DOBRBÉ 
Rations 
o0000 §00000 
o0o000 oooo0 
ooooo 00000 
o0000 00000 
o0000 00000 
Feed 
00000 00000 
o0000 gung 
oo000 00000 


Experience 


Other Valuables 


Miscellaneous Information (Magical Items, Command Words, Small Maps, etc.) 


H 
H 
BR 


Spell book or Spheres 


Henchmen/Animal Companions 


©1993 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. TSR, Inc. grants the right to reproduce this sheet for personal use 


B 


[wr | 00k, this is a book of 

| dark secrets,” reveals 
| Teridina. 

| "Monster Mythol- 

' ogy describes the spir- 
its worshipped by goblins, 
orcs, giants, beholders, and 
even worse unseen things. All 
of them are served by shamans 
and witch doctors, and no one 
knows much about them. . . 
until now! This tome could save 
your character some day. The 
monstrous races have their 
icons, and the more your char- 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and ADAD are registered trademarks owned by TSA, inc The TSR logo is a trademark owned by TSA, Inc. 


Monster Mythology 


acter knows about them, the 
better.” 

This new DMGR gives DMs 
new insights to character class- 
es and campaign worlds. The 
Monster Mythology also ex- 
pands on the best-selling Leg- 
ends & Lore. Look for it 
everywhere TSR game acces- 
sories are sold. 


1992 TSR, Inc. Al Rights Reserved. 


The Complete Book of 
Hamanoids 


Look out adventurers, they're here! This handbook 
describes in detail over 20 humanoid races that can 
be run as player characters—from mischieviouss 
pixies to stubborn minotaurs, from lizardlike 
saurial to the savage half-ogre—and many more in 
between. In addition to many new character types, 
this handbook contains new proficiencies, human- 
oid kits, unusual equipment, and a few new surprises 


that will open worlds of adventure within any ongo- 

ing campaign. Move over, common adventurers, The 
Complete Book of Humanoids is 
here! 


TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd 
POB 756 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 Cambridge CB1 3LB 
U.S.A United Kingdom 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and AD&D are registered 
‘trademarks owned by TSR Inc. 
‘The TSR logo is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc. 
©1993 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the USA. 


156076-611-5 


$15.001LS. £9.99UK. $18.00CAN 


