1C 


Spells & Magi 


z 
= 
- 
a 
© 
gn 
: 
S 
a. 


TSR, Inc. 

201 Sheridan Springs Road 
Lake Geneva 

WI 53147 USA 


TSR Ltd. 

120 Church End, Cherry Hinton 
Cambridge CB1 3LB 

United Kingdom 


Credits 


Design: Richard Baker 
Editing: Miranda Horner 
Creative Director: Steve Winter 
Cover Art: Jeff Easly 
Interior Art: David O. Miller, William O’Connor, Thomas Manning, 
Randy Post, Ken Frank, Dennis Cramer, Arnie Swekel & Philip Robb 
Graphic Design: Paul Hanchette, Greg Kerkman & Shan Ren 
Typography: Nancy J. Kerkstra 
Art Director: Stephen A. Daniele 


Special Thanks To: 
Scott Douglas, Duane Maxwell, Steve Miller, Jon Pickens, 
John Rateliff, Lawrence Schick, Steve Winter, David Wise 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, AL-QADIM, BATTLESYSTEM, DARK SUN, DUNGEON MASTER, DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, FORGOTTEN 
REALMS, and RAVENLOFT are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 


BIRTHRIGHT, DM, MONSTROUS MANUAL, PLAYER'S OPTION, and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. All TSR characters, character names, and 
the distinctive likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 


Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English-language products of TSR, Inc. Distributed to the book 
and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd. Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors. 


©1996 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 


This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained 
herein is prohibited without the express written permission of TSR, Inc. 


2163XXX1501 ISBN 0-7869-0394-5 
First Printing, May 1996 
Made in the U.S.A. 


Foreword 


My introduction to fantasy began when I was assigned J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Hobbit 
in my 6th grade reading class. Although I was only eleven at the time, I was 
already a fan of science fiction—I'd read a lot of Robert Heinlein's juvenile SF, as 
well as Doc Smith’s Lensman books and a smattering of other titles. I hadn’t read 
anything in the fantasy genre, and as I recall, I had little desire to do so. The Hob- 
bit changed that for me, and I went back and re-read it as soon as I finished turn- 
ing the last page. After that, I was off and running. The next thing I read was the 
Lord of the Rings. Then I found Terry Brooks’ The Sword of Shannara, followed by 
Ursula K. Leguin's A Wizard of Earthsea. 

And that's where I was brought to a screeching halt. My hometown library 
was on the small side, and all of their fantasy and science fiction books occupied 
one carousel in the kids' section. It may be hard to believe now, but even as 
recently as 1977 fantasy was a poor cousin to science fiction, which was a poor 
cousin to mainstream fiction. Bookstores just didn't have the massive sections 
devoted to fantasy and science fiction that they have today. By hook and by 
crook, I eventually tracked down more and more fantasy titles. But when I was 
still desperately searching for fantastic fiction, sometime in 1978 or 1979, I ran 
across a brand-new game called DUNGEONS & DRAGONS*. So, like many people, I 
came to fantasy role-playing through my love of fantasy fiction. 

In writing this book, I've come to the conclusion that the single defining char- 
acteristic of the fantasy genre is magic. Every fantasy story features a character 
who can use magic, owns a magical item, or is confronted with a magical situa- 
tion or paradox. Movies like Ivanhoe or Robin Hood are wonderful adventures, but 
they're not fantasy stories—there's no magic. On the other hand, the popular Star 
Wars movies are fantasy, not science fiction, because magic (referred to as the 
Force) is part of the story. Science fiction is the literature of things that could hap- 
pen; fantasy is the literature of things that can’t happen. And magic is the very 
essence of the impossible. x 

So, here's a book about magic in the AD&D® game. I've tried to include 
enough options and choices to give you, the reader, the ability to give magic in 
your particular campaign almost any kind of flavor or feel that you like. If you 
want to make magic rarer, more "realistic," or more dangerous, you can find 
rules in here for doing so. If you want rules to add detail and complexity to the 
AD&D magic system, they're here. Or if you just want some new wizard and 
priest character types as well as some complementary spells, you'll find them. 
When I started this project, I thought that I'd have a hard time filling this whole 
book . . . now, I can't believe how much more I could have written if space had 
permitted. 


Have fun, and good gaming! uu 
A. Tel n 


Rich Baker 
January, 1996 
Lake Geneva, Wisconsin 


Table of Contents 


TOGA TO N rte rrr 6 
What You Need to Use 
TE BOOM —M— 7 
Integrating Spells & Magic Into Your 
CHIBDNIBI cores nacen te aene 8 
Making the Switch.............. 8 
The Role of Magic in the Campaign ..... 8 
SEARCHER aseeseen eoe oca giat 8 
Mystery «uusecevo seve eats eos 9 
POWeR.. oes aes Gam ta SRNERR ero 10 
The Cost of Magic ............. 10 
Creating a World-View 
OF MBEIG c serae sas aa ER UR 10 
Magic and Storytelling. .......... s.s. 11 
Chapter 1: Wizards. ............. 12 
Spells from Other Sources....... 13 
Schools of Magle... s.. sia ers asees esime si 13 
Schools of Philosophy .......... 13 
Schools GERE. oues oem 14 
Schools of Thaumaturgy . ....... 14 
The School of Universal Magic. . . 14 
Wizard Characters. «ees ccecrerrrns 15 
The Wizard's Spell Book ........ 15 
NAGS cocci az SAN SRAD REESE 15 
Specialist Wizard................ 15 
Specialists in Schools of 
PROSOPIS oaro eere 16 
Specialists in Schools of Effect . . . 18 
Specialists in Schools of 
TORUNO EI caseo ev 20 
Customized Wizard Characters. ....... 24 
Using the Wizard Character 
Design Reisai eseeexervso 24 
Optional Abilities.............. 24 
Optional Limitations ........... 26 
Dealing with Game-Breaking 
CHATAIN arioso cores 27 
Chapter 2: PHesha «oe venons 28 
Spheres of Access nncs nnsa es 29 
PLAYER's OPTION" and Spheres of 
AE qued EOE AR 31 
Pest Chaurupfers.... ineo nsciu tavern conse 31 
LCS c —— is 32 
Crüsader (vvv rera cx pa vias 32 
Diirid (2. exces vox ES EE E EXTA 33 
MORE iunc ussicus ecu aine iesus stor 33 
SHAMAR i ——ÀM— 34 
Customized Priest Characters ......... 38 
Optional Abilities.............. 38 
Optional Limitations ........... 40 
Dealing with Game-Breaking 
CharaetetS osae asean 41 
Chapter 3: Other Spellcasters... .. 42 
Bards and Custom-Designed 
Characters: ons ans eannan 43 
Bards in PLAYER'S OPTION™: 
Spells & Magic ..........eseu. 43 


Optional Abilities for Bards ..... 43 
Optional Limitations for Bards. . . 44 


Paladins, Rangers, and Minor 
Speellensberg: «uunc ease vaio ores 44 
PaaS i. ovs exe zrko Eswste 45 
BAngere.2. cae rina se 45 
Multi-Classed Spellcasters ............ 46 


Multi-Classed Wizards ......... 46 
Multi-Classed Priests. .......... 46 
Monsters: us espe qvonb serie $ed 47 
Monstrous Spellcasters ......... 47 
Monsters with Spell-like 
ADIIHBS ccce esee ce 48 
Chapter 4: Proficiencies.......... 50 
Proficiencies and Character Points ..... 51 
Proficiency Slots and Check 
MOCCTEIBIB. «iui Qum eite 51 
Character Points and Ability 
Modi Easan eere 51 
Wizard Profciencies. osses canna 51 
Signature Spells ............... 57 
Priest Pióffelencies ,.... ous exem 59 
Chapter 5: Equipment ........... 62 
Labotütorles: J.... nt riter rmm 63 
The Location. «2 eremo 63 
Physical Requirements ......... 63 
Bquipment sos ung sas eis 64 
SES Th Loc: n a 65 
Supplies and Reagents. ......... 66 
Relocating Laboratories......... 67 
Ertbals ANON 1s ons teorema iiie aae 67 
TH DotHtlomisa oec renes 67 
Physical Requirements ......... 67 
Materials and Decoration ....... 68 
Consecrating the Altar.......... 68 
Material Spell Components ........... 68 
Spell Components: 
Nes Gt: NO? ainra 68 


Acquiring Spell Components. . . . 69 
Storage of Spell Components . . . . 70 


The Spell Component List. ...... 70 
Arcanists and Apothecaries ........... 7 
T DU ——Á 71 
Apothecaries and Herbalists ....71 
Wise Women and Hedge 
WAZA Saccus sies poi ee 72 
AnaS oasis sede pcne ens 72 
Buying, Selling, and Trading 
Magical Items ............ ss. 72 
Chapter 6: Magic............0065 76 
The Spell Point System ............... 77 
Selecting Spells. .. ............. 77 
CRI. eere eese 78 
Exceeding the Spell : 
Eeyel Limit 22x estan 78 
Casting Spells for 
Greater Effect ne soises somarea 79 
Reducing Spell Cost............ 79 
Bonus Spell Points for 
High Intelligence ............ 79 
Recovering Spell Points. ........ 80 
Systems OF Magic « vanesa naas 80 
Channelleis; i556 £6 rrr yeu 80 
Warlocks and Witches .......... 83 
Defilers and Preservers......... 85 
Alienists or Summoners ........ 87 
Priests and Spell Points............... 91 
Minor Spheres of Access........ 92 
OPES ess monica ee acsi 93 
Recovering Spell Points. ........ 93 
Priests and Systems of Magic.......... 93 


4 


Channellinig... amem 93 
Kitual Prayer. «o oucs eee 94 
Conditional Magic ............. 96 
Druidical Magic ............... 97 
Other Spellcasters. .......... 2s sees 97 
Paladitis erosoenean 97 
RANGET z:xsxesise hi n EXER 98 
Bards ———Á—— À— 99 
Chapter 7: Spell Research and 

Magical Item Creation.......... 100 
Spell Research.. —— 101 
Proposing a Spell ............. 101 
Describing a Spell... ... 5... 101 
Approval and Modification ....102 
Conducting Research. ......... 103 
New Spells in the Campaign ... 103 
Magical Item Creation............+.+ 103 
Special Ingredients. .. ......... 104 
Ponai M — severe 105 
Salli oi vves dox sow esa 106 
Other Items... eer aii nnn 107 
GUT CS RR II 110 

Items That No Player Character 
Should Create .............. 113 
Recharging Magical Items ..... 115 
Chapter 8: Spells in Combat. .... 116 
Spell Characteristics. sios eos 117 
Casting Subtlety .............. 117 
Sensory Signature. ........... sss. 118 


Strength of Sensory Signature ..... 119 
Sensory Signatures by School. . . 120 


Spells with Attack Rolls. ....... 120 
Knockdowns............ esses. 121 
Spells and Knockdown Dice. . . . 121 
Collateral Spell Effects. .............. 121 
inr — M € 122 
Clear nesa arne avere 123 
Electricity and Lightning. ...... 123 
PN essai aii CE I Sepe e es 124 
o ———— 124 
Other Collateral Effects........ 124 
Crifical Strikes; «us secre SR DREEVSS 124 
When Do Critical Strikes 
OCCUPE. iaceat wore no 124 
Critical Strikes the Easy Way ...125 
Types of Critical Strikes. ....... 125 
Strike Location .......... ee 125 
SOVEHEY cua cusa cea gs een ws 126 
Specific Injuries and Effects .... 126 
BINE scat ahaha dS 128 
Combat Penalties ............. 129 
Armor, Shield, and Equipment 
Danae uxo 2289: 00:958 83 129 
Appendix 1: 
New Wizard Spells............. 129 
First-Level Spells ..............eesee 140 
Detect Phase... minnan ia 140 
Detect Secret Passages and 
POTIS. cisem vor arae ies 140 
PIANON 1 oes tnm niri nr 140 
Expeditious Retreat ........... 141 
Protection from Vermin........ 141 
Ray of Fatigue. vies. cioe as 142 
Second-Level Spells ................. 142 


Table of Contents 


Cal E GPACES e watt ques an aE 142 
DisplaceSel£.. ssa sats £95 es 142 
Moon Rune««s cs ees sva sad. 142 
Protection from Poison ........ 143 
Wall of Gloom.......... sess 143 
Third Level Spells: as 26s wes vows 143 
Bands of Sirellyn.............. 143 
Lance of Disruption........... 143 
Lesser Sign of Sealing ......... 144 
Protection from Amorphs...... 144 
Solvent of Corrosion .......... 144 
Wall GE Water. 1. ome nnne 144 
Fourth-Level Spells. ................ 145 
Conjure Elemental-Kin ........ 145 
Improved Strength............ 145 
isse GUHBL.. sisse en Hin Een 146 
Mordenkainen's Force 
BASSES iaraa ie 147 
Psychic Protection cressoni sse 147 
Ultravistonisz «3 vsvese SES ces 147 
Vitriolic Sphere. ........ sss 147 
Fifth-Level Spells ... 2... 22. soois 148 
Improved Blink. .............. 148 
Leomund's Hidden Lodge ..... 148 
Proofing versus Combustion . . . 148 
REINS Ey65.. ccenvises cor» rk 148 
Rustin’ Grasp.cceee xm vexesen 149 
Tenser's Destructive 
PESE see aneacrp on sima 149 
VG VOTE usen 151 
Sixth-Level Spells... «ener mmn 151 
Arrow of Bone................ 151 
Dimensional Blade............ 152 
Etherealness ................. 152 
Greater Sign of Sealing ........ 152 
Superior Magnetism .......... 153 
Trollish Fortitude ............. 154 
Seventh-Level Spells ........... sie 154 
Descent into Madness ......... 154 
Neutralize Gas ....:....... i. 154 
PersiSleriCBz. eio we ic 155 
Seyen Ey ó uamea cx cv 156 
Eighth-Level Spells .....- 002.025. sas 156 
Analyze Dweomer . ........... 156 
Heart of Stone: osse scan vem cas 157 
THOM BOdy «suene ecu wes 157 
Ninth-Level Spells -soisin seri esa 158 
Programmed Amnesia. ........ 158 
Sphere of Ultimate 
JJestPac BOT. ooer Satu exa 159 
Appendix 2: 
New Priest Spells .............. 160 
First-Level Spells ....2:2 eee 160 
Astral Celetity. oie. v2 rx es 160 
Battlefate..: 46s Rer ex 160 
Blessed Watchfulness.......... 160 
Calctilates osu: vds cxx ve ex 160 
Calm Animals. iss jee vows uns 161 
Dispel Fatigue. vciscevccwaeens 161 
Firelight... assis cies retro 161 
ORISON seca: a acne n 162 
Protection from Chaos......... 162 
Strength of Stone ............. 162 
SUSTE. ais camis eenen 163 
Wintl CON «aoi rte 163 
Second-Level Spells ................. 163 


Astral Awareness ..........+.. 164 
Chaos Ward. «ri oit EYES 164 
Cure Moderate Wounds ....... 164 
Ethereal Barrier. . rise 00.000. 164 
Tron Vigll 5 2225 wae ames restr 165 
Resist Acid and Corrosion ..... 165 
Restore Strength .............. 165 
Soften Earth and Stone ........ 165 
Watery Fists: cssccnaaawcwaaaies 166 
Thir Levet Spells... ro nne 166 
Control Animal.......... cee. 166 
Pere t SPS oua nire eo meters 167 
DEBE uroa e vee eite e 167 
ENGPCSINGSE: oui ensis vbt 167 
NOY 2 cause sepa) cae duit Mesa 167 
Summon Animal Spirit ........ 168 
Hold PolSOTE uos tetro 169 
Repair Injury... onte? 169 
Unfailing Premonition......... 170 
Weather Prediction. ........... 170 
Wind Servant «vv 5$ $995 ü 170 
Fourth-Levels Spells ..............L. 170 
Adamantite Mace............. 170 
Dimensional Anchor .......... 171 
Entreneli.« occisa missas 171 
Omriscient Ejé. ««coceerc sees 171 
Recitatiom.... cere eee eem 172 
Suspended Animation......... 172 
Unfailing Endurance .......... 172 
WIRADI E usos enero armen 173 
Fifth bevel Spells... nme 173 
Animate Flame............... 173 
Dimensional Translocation..... 174 
Impregnable Mind............ 174 
OEE io sie etna rare 175 
Produce Ice x siccccessecnseeawe 175 
Righteous Wrath of the 
Faithfül.« «i ssas nexu vex 175 
Sixth-Level Spells. rure ya 175 
Command Monster ........... 176 
Entopy Shield 13 es 176 
WHhitlitid. zv 176 
Seventh-Level Spells .............. ss 176 
Antimineral Shell............. 178 
Conjure Air or Water 
Elemental eerte 178 
Impervious Sanctity of Mind ... 178 
SOHAIL. coe ero sericis nth 179 
Appendix 3: 
Wizard Spells by School ........ 180 
Appendix 4: 
Priest Spells by Sphere ......... 186 
Inde: -eucsea scs ex 3A Ve cXw Hes. 189 
Tables 
Table 1: Philosophy Specialist 
Requirements... snesen ert o 17 
Table 2: Effect Specialist 
RequitemeHts «222v wre erae 18 
Table 3: Shadow Mage Target Saving 
Throw, Modifiets.. enne 20 
Table 4: Thaumaturgical Specialist 
Requitements «s eeeeera mme ntm 21 
Table 5: Shaman Spirits Per Level ...... 36 


2 


Table 6: Access Costs ......4..--2.0555 38 
Table 7: Monster Casting Levels. ....... 49 
Table 8: New Wizard Nonweapon 

Proficiencies iiec tae auis 52 
Table 9: Signature Spell Costs.......... 57 
Table 10: New Priest Nonweapon 

Proficibricie a inn ciere ee Da. 
Table 11: Building Construction Time 

Cj Reo P ——— 63 
Table 12: Laboratory Cost and Size 

Requirements... «eese sees sans 65 
Tàble 13: Dibtaries. enaa 65 
Table 14: Field Searches. .............. 69 
Table 15: Purchasing Components. ..... 70 
Table 16: Spell Components ........... 73 
Table 17: Wizard Spell Point 

PPPS SION: tus a Si atii AI 78 


Table 18: Spell Cost by Level (Wizard) . . 78 
Table 19: Bonus Spell Points for 


Intelligence ir isin cists stents ee 80 
Table 20: Spell Point Recovery for 

Channellersse: 22s cscs cous pma cvs 82 
Table 21: Spell Fatigue.......... isse. 82 
Table 22: Initiative Modifiers for 

Preservers and Defilers............. 86 
Table 23: Risk of Insanity by 

SPEU TEVE n ——— 87 
Table 24: Random Insanity Chart. ...... 88 
Table 25; PHOBIAS) «seen 88 
Table 26: Priest Spell Point 

FEGPUEGSSIOR 1s oem ec ret aite ed 92 
Table 27: Bonus Spell Points for Priest 

AC EPA CHES RE Eia aot 92 


Table 28: Spell Cost by Level (Priest)... . 92 
Table 29; Spell Point Costs for 


Major and Minor Spheres ........... 93 
Table 30: Initiative Modifiers for 

Ritual Prayer; sc écgswosss suene asa 95 
Table 31: Modifiers to Ritual 

Preparatory Times «c vesocveececere 95 
Table 32: Effects of Conditions ......... 97 
Table 33: Paladin Spell Point 

PROSTESSION,. 22e eene 98 
Table 34: Spell Costs by 

Sphere (Paladin) «4 cceeeaimer me 98 
Table 35: Ranger Spell Point 

dne P— 99 
Table 36: Bard Spell Point 

PYORPOSSION oues veneti etes 99 
Table 37: Spell Cost by Level 

Icio o eR REPRE TRUE 99 
Table 38: Magical Item Cost and 

Time Requirements ............... 109 
Table 39: Spell Subtlety Modifiers ..... 118 
Table 40: Sensory Signatures.......... 119 
Table 41: Armor-Breaching Spells ..... 120 
Table 42: Armor-Observing Spells..... 120 
Table 43: Knockdown Numbers 

by SIZE: «s exce ea os rk er 121 
Table 44: Spells with Knockdown 

DS M ——— 123 
Table 45: Critical Strike Chance by 

Caster E ai au ecea cano mete wabenvew 125 
Table 46: Critical Strike Location ...... 126 
Table 47: Whole-Body Injuries ........ 127 
Table 48: Critical Severity ............ 127 


Introduction 


What's a fantasy game without magic? 

Sure, the AD&D? game can be played without spellcasters, enchanted mon- 
sters, or magical items. Everyone can still role-play brave heroes, confront deadly 
foes, and attempt great quests or deeds of mythical proportions. In fact, it can be 
fun and challenging to do so in a nonmagical setting. But the point remains that 
magic, more than any other characteristic, defines the AD&D game. As a fantasy 
role-playing game, AD&D is anchored in the traditions of fantasy literature, and 
fantasy literature by definition features some element of magic. Even if the 
heroes of a fantasy story distrust or dislike magic, it's still there in the back- 
ground as part of the world they live in. 

Generally, most writers of fantasy literature create their own unique systems 
of magic to explain the supernatural powers their heroes and villains employ. 
With great care and deliberate effort, authors define what magic can and cannot 
do in their worlds. For example, in The Lord of the Rings, J.R.R. Tolkien circum- 
scribes the wizard Gandalf's power by placing restrictions on Gandalf's freedom 
of action. The great wizard is bound by a code of secrecy and noninterference 
that prevents him from directly challenging the power of Sauron, and he can 
only help and advise as the Free Peoples of Middle-earth fight their own battles. 
Jack Vance's Dying Earth stories assume that wizards must study complicated 
patterns and formulae to memorize very specific spells that may only be used 
once before vanishing from the wizard's memory. (Sound familiar?) 

There are very good reasons for limiting magic's power from a literary point 
of view. Modern readers need to see real challenges and obstacles for the charac- 
ters in a story, and magic systems that are too open-ended can wreck a story's 
credibility and sense of suspense. If Gandalf could have just wished the One Ring 
into the fires of Mount Doom from Frodo's living room, what would have been 
the point of the trek to Mordor? Since fantasy role-playing games are flexible 
models of the fantasy genre, the same considerations are true for them. A fantasy 
RPG has to set very precise rules for how magic works and what it can do, and 
the presentation and workings of the magic system inevitably become the game's 
salient characteristics. 


In fantasy literature, it’s common for a magic system to 
be defined for only one world-setting at a time by a single 
author (although shared-world concepts are fairly common, 
too). The AD&D game's magic system represents a common 
framework built up by hundreds of designers, Dungeon 
Masters, and players over more than twenty years. There 
are thousands of spells and magical items defined—a volume 
of material that is an order of magnitude larger than any 
other magic system in games or fiction. The basic assump- 
tions of what magic is and how it works in the AD&D game 
are shared by literally millions of gamers and fantasy fans. 
Despite the immense importance of magic to the game, it is 
one of the few areas that has remained nearly unchanged to 
date in the evolution of the game. Magic never changed in 
function; it simply grew amoeba-like, adding more and 
more spells and items while the basic, underlying assump- 
tions remained the same. 

PLAYER'S OPTION": Spells & Magic examines the AD&D 
magic system from every angle. First, the spellcasting 
classes—wizards, priests, and less dedicated magic wielders 
such as bards or rangers—will be examined in detail. The 
various schools and spheres of spells are reorganized and 
new class abilities are introduced, along with an optional 
point-based character class design system compatible with 
the PLAYER'S OPTION: Skills & Powers rulebook. New profi- 
ciencies and detailed information about wizard and priest 
equipment adds depth and variety to any campaign. A new 


magic memorization and casting system is introduced in 
Chapter 6, providing new ways to customize a character’s 
spell selection. Spells in combat and critical hits with spells 
are detailed in Chapter 8. And last, but not least, there are 
more than 30 pages of new spells included in this book. 

Like any of the PLAYER’s OPTION books, the material in 
this supplement is optional. The DM is free to use as much 
or as little of Spells & Magic as he wishes to in his campaign. 
However, we have tried to present systems that do not con- 
tradict each other, so it is possible to use all the rules addi- 
tions and expansions without any difficulty. 


Yn *11 J— " Qo T ^ 


Cad LO x NMS DOOK 


At a minimum, you should have access to a Player's 
Handbook and DuNGEON MASTER? Guide to make use of this 
rules expansion. Note that PLAYER's OPTION: Spells & Magic 
is compatible with the previous books in the PLAYER'S 
OPTION line; character class design rules in this book are 
expansions of the class design rules from Skills & Powers, 
and the chapter on spells in combat is tailored for use 
with the Combat & Tactics skirmish system. In addition, 
the Tome of Magic is referred to a number of times in this 
book; you don't need Tome of Magic to use this book, but it 
adds many spells and magical items you may find useful 
in your campaign. 


Introduction 


; PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells & 
In Legra Li ng Magic is designed principally 
as an expansion, not a replace- 


Spells E Magic ment. However, there are a 
RT: Y É few special cases where the 
into out information presented here 
Campaign 


should be taken as an update 
and replacement of existing 
rules. Specifically, the wizard 
spell schools and priest spell spheres have been slightly 
rearranged to improve game balance and make the wizard 
and priest specialist classes more competitive with respect 
to the general versions of these characters, the mage and 
the cleric. 

Most of the rest of this book can be integrated piecemeal 
into an existing campaign without any trouble. For 
example, additional proficiencies and new spells can be 
approved or disapproved by the DM on a case-by-case 
basis. These were designed to be completely usable with or 
without the PLAYER'S OPTION rules. 


Making the Switch 

Adding spells, magical items, or the critical hit rules to an 
existing campaign is fairly easy, but a DM may have trouble 
with some other material in this book. In particular, existing 
spellcasters may wish to take advantage of new class abilities 
or optional specializations that weren't available when the 
character was first created. There are several ways to handle 
this. First, there's no reason that a DM couldn't allow a player 
to “re-design” his character, incorporating the abilities he 
thinks his character should have had all along. If a PC cleric 
comes from a savage tribe and portrays himself as a barbar- 
ian, it's perfectly reasonable to allow him to rebuild his char- 
acter as a shaman (see Chapter 2) and continue play. If the 
player is altering his character without any good rationale or 
explanation for why he's making the change, the DM can 
require the character to pay a penalty of 10% to 50% of his 
experience point total, depending on the DM's assessment of 
the scope of the alterations. 

There are a couple of things a player should not be able 
to do by redesigning his character. A character shouldn't 
change specializations without a very good justification, so 
a necromancer shouldn't be rebuilt as an enchanter or wild 
mage, and a specialty priest of Lathander shouldn't become 
a priest of Helm. A character's basic ability scores, equip- 
ment, proficiencies, hit points, and general personality 
shouldn't change. If a player was playing a barbarian cleric 
correctly, he was probably choosing skills and weapons 
appropriate for a shaman—and if he wasn't selecting these 
skills, the reasoning behind the switch becomes much more 
suspect. Finally, a character shouldn't actually change 
classes or become dual-classed or multi-classed. 

The Spell Point System: The most drastic change to the 
AD&D game lies in the new spell point system described in 
Chapter 6. Try running a brief "trial adventure" using the 
rules before incorporating them into your campaign. The 
spell point rules provide spellcasters with a lot more flexi- 
bility than the standard magic system without increasing 
their raw combat or spell power, but if PCs are allowed to 
make use of spell points, NPCs and monsters should be able 
to as well. 


| i f It's safe to say that magic in one form 
The Ro C OL or another is present in virtually all 

€ T. 4 AD&D campaigns; only the most his- 
Magic in the torical or unusual settings do away 


Campaign thissimec altogether. But, beyond 


this simple observation, it’s clear that 
each group of AD&D players has 
their own interpretation of what magic is, how it works, 
how various spells interact with each other, and what 
player characters should and should not be able to do with 
their arsenal of spells and magical items. By altering some 
of the basic assumptions that are part of the AD&D game’s 
magic system, a DM can infuse his campaign with its own 
unique flavor and texture. 

While the greater portion of this book deals with altering 
the rules of the game, this isn’t always a necessary part of 
changing the way that the players (and the NPCs they inter- 
act with) view magic and its effect on their world. For 
example, let's say that the nature of magic in a campaign set- 
ting can be described by a simple scale that rates the 
scarcity, mystery, power, and cost of magic on a scale of 1 to 
10. Obviously, a campaign with magic that is extremely 
scarce and weak in power represents a very mundane world 
when compared to a world where powerful magic is very 
common. 


Scarcily 

How common is magic in the campaign? Are wizards 
and spell-wielding priests so rare that even low-level char- 
acters are figures of legend, or are they so common that any 
hamlet or crossroads village has its own resident spellcast- 
ers? Most AD&D campaigns take a position between these 
two extremes, but lean towards the high end of the scale, 
falling in the 6 to 8 range on the 10-point scale—wizards 
and priests appear as allies, enemies, sources of informa- 
tion, or even window-dressing in literally every adventure a 
typical group plays. At the highest extremes, campaigns fea- 
ture numerous spellcasters and magical items. Even a small 
town has several wizards of skill, plus dozens of minor mer- 
chants, craftsmen, or innkeepers with a spell or two up their 
sleeve. Wizards are so common that even the most remark- 
able mages lose their aura of mystery. 

So, what does this mean? In a normal campaign, it's safe 
to assume that anywhere the PCs go, the locals know a 
nearby wizard, and most people encounter a wizard a cou- 
ple of times a year. Any sizable town has at least one or two 
resident wizards and spell-using priests, plus a handful of 
folks with minor magical powers such as herbalists, hedge 
wizards, and healers. Large towns or small cities may have 
up to à dozen or so magic-using characters, and great cities 
could support several dozen without crowding. Almost any 
NPC above Ist level owns one or more magical items, even 
if they're fairly small or expendable, and player characters 
frequently own about three to five magical items by the 
time they reach 4th to 7th level. 

In campaigns where magic is not as common (say, a 2 to 
4 on the scale), the spellcasting characters become truly 
unique and important. A priest who can actually invoke his 
deity's power in the form of spells may be perceived by the 
great clerical hierarchy as a saint or great patriarch in the 
making, or possibly as a dangerous reminder of the true 


faith in those hierarchies that have become complacent or 
corrupt. A high-ranking hierarch without spells will cer- 
tainly watch a low-level PC cleric very carefully, especially 
if the PC makes no efforts to hide the “miraculous” effects 
he creates with simple 1st- and 2nd-level spells. Similarly, if 
wizard magic is quite scarce, a PC wizard can’t help but 
gather attention, fame, and not a little fear if he publicly dis- 
plays his skills. 
riests vs. Wizards: A wizard's magic and a priest's 

magic are not the same thing, and both forms of magic do 
not have to be present in a campaign to the same degree. 
Imagine a world where wizards are viewed as the worst 
sort of villain and persecuted without remorse for decades. 
Wizards and their spells might be exceedingly scarce, 
while priests are far more common because they are 
socially acceptable—thus, the presence of wizard magic 
might only be a 1 or 2 while priest magic is closer to a 6 or 
7 on the scale. 

Ma ems: Similarly, magical items might be more 
or less common than spellcasters. If no one had ever 
invented the spell enchant an item, it’s reasonable to assume 
that magical items might be a rarity in even the most magi- 
cal campaign settings. The reverse could be true if there was 
a lost civilization of highly advanced wizards who left 
behind great numbers of artifacts and items. The wizards of 
today might be armed to the teeth with magical items, 
despite the fact that they are struggling to grasp the basics 
of spellcasting. 


Can anyone in the campaign be a wizard or priest, or do 
these characters have to belong to a select set in order to 
even begin their studies? Do the common people know 
enough about magic to distinguish between priest and wiz- 
ard spells? Is the study of magic a study of easily-defined 
natural laws, or are the forms of magic deliberately 
obscured by generations of needless rite and ceremony? 
Most importantly, do the PCs know the limits of a spell- 
caster’s powers? 

In most AD&D games, characters “in the know” have an 
excellent grasp of exactly what each spell available can do. 
After all, most players are quite familiar with the Player's 
Handbook and know the spells they can make use of inside 
and out. But most common NPCs aren't as knowledgeable; 
the typical innkeeper doesn't know that a low-level wizard 
can use invisibility to walk out without paying his tab, or 
fool's gold to cheat him. He just knows that wizards can do 
things that ordinary people can't, and if he's a bright 
innkeeper, he never falls for the same trick twice. 

In a less mysterious world, the same innkeeper knows to 
look out for invisibility, charm person, fool's gold, and half-a- 
dozen other dirty tricks. He may even know enough to 
request a wizard to relinquish certain spell components to 
make sure a particularly obnoxious spell (fireball, for 
instance) won't be available to that wizard while he's in the 
innkeeper's place of business. In this kind of setting, every- 
one would know that priests can heal injuries, blindness, or 
disease, or possibly bring back a loved one from the dead, 
and priest characters will be constantly asked to use their 
powers on someone's behalf. 

In a world where the nature of magic is cloaked in super- 


Introduction 


d o o ——————————— 


stition and ignorance—an 8 or 9 on the scale—spellcasters 
will generally inspire fear in anyone who learns of their 
powers. Note that even the wizard character himself may 
not really know why his spells work—imagine a character 
who begins a magic missile spell with a thunderous declara- 
tion of the names of forbidden powers, just because he was 
taught to do it that way. Of course, one of the ‘names’ is 
actually the spell's verbal component, and the rest of the 
nonsense has no effect on the casting of the spell. It's a good 
idea for a DM with this kind of world to forbid players from 
looking up spells and effects in the PHB, since their charac- 
ters only have access to a portion of this knowledge. The 
DM should also feel free to alter standard spell effects and 
create new spells just to instill a sense of dread and wonder 
in experienced, jaded players. 


Dower 


What can magic accomplish in the campaign? Is there 
anything it can’t do, and why? Will 10th-level magic be 
allowed as an option, or is 9th level the most powerful 
magic available? Can wishes change history or reverse 
events that have already occurred? To what degree do 
the gods and their avatars involve themselves in this 
world setting? In most magic systems, setting bound- 
aries to a character's ability to affect events with magic is 
vitally important. Typically, an AD&D game assumes 
that 9th-level spells are the most powerful magic known 
to mortals, and that the player characters encounter a 
deity no more than once or twice over the course of an 
entire campaign. 

The impact of magic on a campaign world can be greatly 
lessened by reducing the maximum level of spells that can 
work there, although this is getting into rules alterations. 
For example, by limiting spells to 8th level, mages can no 
longer make use of wishes or gates. If the maximum is 7th 
level, mages lose the spell permanency, which is a key part of 
the magical item creation process. Without this spell, magi- 
cal items become temporary or disposable—no persistent 
enchantments can exist. 

Another point lies in the emphasis on the power of 
characters versus the power of magical items. Should a 
fighter become a killing machine because he happened to 
find a vorpal blade, or should most of his combat bonuses 
be derived from skills and training? In earlier incarna- 
tions, the AD&D game leaned strongly towards the first 
option, but with the advent of weapon mastery, style spe- 
cializations, and other character-based bonuses, it is now 
possible to create a character who doesn't need a power- 
ful magical item to drastically increase his combat power. 
The real danger to game balance lies in combining these 
two benefits—a weapon master equipped with a powerful 
magical weapon becomes nearly unstoppable. If your 
campaign features a lot of high-powered magic, you 
should strongly consider playing without optional spe- 
cialization or proficiency rules. 


The Cost of Magic 


In fantasy literature, there is often a price to be paid for 
magical power. Wizards may have to make terrible pacts 
with dark powers for the knowledge they seek, priests 


10 


may have to sacrifice something dear to them to invoke 
their deity’s favor, or the spellcaster may pay an immedi- 
ate price in terms of fatigue, illness, or even a loss of san- 
ity. Generally, the AD&D game is quite forgiving in this 
regard; when a character casts a spell, he expends a few 
unusual material components and simply forgets the spell 
he had known. It’s easy to increase the cost of magic by 
strictly enforcing the requirement to procure material 
components for spells, especially if the DM is conserva- 
tive in handing out treasure. For example, find familiar 
requires at least 1,000 gold pieces of special herbs and 
incenses, which means that a 1st-level wizard may have to 
do a lot of adventuring before he has enough money to 
summon his familiar! The spell scare requires a piece of 
bone from an undead creature; requiring the wizard char- 
acter to personally locate and remove such materials can 
force the player to make hard decisions about which 
spells are worth the trouble. 

Now, imagine a game setting in which magic is far more 
costly. What if a character risked insanity every time he 
attempted to learn a spell? Or if the casting of a spell 
required the character to make a saving throw vs. spell or 
pass out from exhaustion? A character might even have to 
risk a permanent loss of hit points or ability scores each 
time he cast a spell in a world where magic is exceptionally 
dangerous. (See Chapter 6 for some of these options.) 
Again, these restrictions are rules changes and not just cos- 
metic matters, but a few changes like these can make a great 
impact on a normally routine campaign. 


Creating a World-View of Magic 


How can the DM put all this together? Let's consider a 
couple of the AD&D campaign settings as examples. First of 
all, take a look at Faerun, the setting of the FORGOTTEN 
REALMs® campaign. Magic is quite common in the Realms, 
and only slightly mysterious; everyone knows of the great 
wizards and the typical powers a wizard is likely to com- 
mand, but there are a number of unique spells and magical 
items to be found. Magic is also fairly powerful in Faerun 
and comes with little cost or sacrifice to any character who 
works hard enough. The magic of the Realms is about aver- 
age for an AD&D campaign. 

The DARK SUN? campaign has an entirely different 
approach to magic. Magic is still fairly common and myste- 
rious, but it can be extremely powerful (the sorcerer-kings 
of Athas command 10th-level magic) and comes at a great 
cost—the defiling of any living vegetation nearby when a 
wizard casts a spell. In fact, the destruction caused by 
Athas' wizards is the chief cause of the planet's dessication 
and the rise of bizarre, mutated monsters. 

Last but not least, the BIRTHRIGHT" campaign setting 
portrays a world in which wizard magic is rare. Mages are 
mysterious figures with unusual powers. Only a handful of 
characters have the heritage required to make use of true 
magic, and fewer still can command the kingdom-shaking 
powers of realm magic. 

Here are a few ideas for alternative magic settings for 
your own campaign: 

The College of Sorcerers: In this setting, all wizards 
belong to a single guild or society cloaked in rite and mys- 
tery. (The imagers of Stephen R. Donaldson's The Mirror of 


Introduction 


————————————— O 


Her Dreams are a good example of such a society.) Spells 
may require a rare or unusual ingredient controlled by the 
College, or the College may treat spells as secrets that must 
be kept at any cost. 

Secrets Man Was Not Meant to Know: Wizard magic is 
the province of horrible pre-human powers of the Outer 
Void, and dealing with them is the worst kind of betrayal. 
Insanity plagues those foolish enough to delve into the 
secrets of these elder powers; H.P. Lovecraft's stories are an 
excellent model of this kind of campaign. Chapter 6 
describes a spell point system of magic that reflects this type 
of setting. 

Smoke and Mirrors: Wizards are far less powerful than 
they appear to be—most are nothing more than alchemists 
and scholars who can command a few feeble spells. Any 
spell that creates something out of nothing or summons 
energy where no energy existed before cannot be cast; illu- 
sions, divinations, and minor alterations and summonings 
are the only types of magic that work. Many magical effects 
are accomplished through nonmagical means; for example, 
a pyrotechnics spell is nothing more than a handful of chemi- 
cal powder thrown on a flame. 

The Magical Renaissance: In this world, almost every- 
one has a magical talent or two. Magic is fully integrated 
into society, not as a replacement for technology, but as a 
part of the common awareness and an augmentation of a 
person's skills. Chambermaids use cantrips to dust and to 
make beds, royal investigators have access to speak with dead 
and ESP to enforce the law, and many brilliant works of art 
are at least partly magical in nature. Even nonwizards may 
have a small selection of spells in this kind of setting. 

The Lost Powers: Priests of this campaign have almost 
no spell powers. The various deities of their pantheon have 
lost the ability to grant spells to their followers or have 
denied their followers spells for some reason. For a particu- 
larly chilling campaign, combine this thesis with the Secrets 
Man Was Not Meant to Know scenario to create a world in 
which the only spellcasters with any power are the insane 
servants of inhuman powers. 


When it comes down to it, an AD&D 
adventure is nothing more than a 


Magic and 
§ story created by the DM and embell- 
ished upon by the players. Every 


Storytelling 
campaign generates volumes of epic 


confrontations, cliffhangers, and sinister villains—it's just 
the way the game is played. Magic is often the central fea- 
ture of these campaign stories; most players couldn't tell 
you a thing about Joe's paladin, but everyone who was at 
the game remembers the time Joe's paladin found the holy 
avenger! An enormous number of player characters are 
remembered fondly not for their personalities or the skill 
with which they were played, but instead the particular 
magical items they owned and the nifty tricks they had with 
their spell selections. 

While this isn't necessarily bad, it can detract from the 
role-playing elements of a game if the players and the DM 
allow it to. After all, when the only tool you have is a ham- 
mer, everything starts looking like a nail—and if you've got 
a flame tongue sword, it looks like the answer to any prob- 
lem is going to involve slashing and burning something. 


Similarly, a wizard whose most memorable achievement is 
his invention of Alkair's inescapable decapitation and subse- 
quent use of the spell in every encounter for the rest of the 
campaign isn't really a well-developed character at all. A 
hero with a magical sword is fine, but when the magical 
sword defines the hero, the hero is diminished. 

Another difficulty that arises in many campaigns is the 
substitution of magic for technology. AD&D game players 
are (quite naturally) creatures of the modern world, and 
modern conveniences such as automobiles, tanks, tele- 
phones, televisions, computers, and any number of other 
devices seem so indispensable that there just have to be 
magical equivalents. While some of this is fine in any cam- 
paign, it desensitizes both players and DMs to the sheer 
wonder that magic should inspire in most characters. After 
all, magic should be magical, full of mystery and terror, but 
when a character routinely uses magic to brush his teeth 
and stir his stew, magic becomes nothing more than a tool. 
Blurring the distinction between magic and technology 
detracts from the strength of both philosophies. 

Last, but not least, it's important to remember that 
magic can do anything that a DM needs it to do for pur- 
poses of advancing the plot or elaborating on an adven- 
ture. If the story calls for a greater tanar'ri to be encased in 
a glass globe, it's not necessary to worry about exactly 
how the tanar'ri was imprisoned there, or what spells the 
old archmage used to defeat the creature; it's okay for a 
DM to simply tell the players that the archmage did it. 
However, PCs and NPCs who are interacting with the 
party should follow the rules—up to the point that the 
rules interfere with the story. 


Chapter 1: 
Wizards 


The wizard may well be the most important character class in the AD&D game. 
Whether or not a particular player character wizard is the most powerful mem- 
ber of a party, it seems that every AD&D campaign has at least one great arch- 
mage or master wizard who holds supreme power. Wizards are responsible for 
the creation of all kinds of adventures and works of magic that other characters 
later become entangled in or discover. In many adventures, the party’s wizard is 
the only character who can use his magic to provide a means to cross a barrier or 
solve a riddle. In fact, in some cases, the only way to resolve the entire adventure 
or quest is through the inventive use of the wizard’s spell arsenal. 

Given this fact, it only makes sense to begin an examination of magic in the 
AD&D game with a thorough look at the wizard character class. In this chapter, 
we'll examine all the varieties of mages and specialist wizards available to a 
player character. Several new varieties of specialist wizards are also described in 
this chapter. In addition to a long look at the existing wizard classes, we'll also 
present a point-based character design system that will allow a player to select 
his wizard's abilities and limitations in order to customize his own character. 
This system is an expansion of the character class rules from PLAYER'S OPTION: 
Skills & Powers, although you don't need that book in order to use this material. 


Wizards 


The information in PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells & Magic 
replaces or revises the Player's Handbook, The Complete Wiz- 
ard's Handbook, the Tome of Magic, and the material on magic 
from PLAYER's OPTION: Skills & Powers. In other words, if you 
have this book, you should use the rules presented here 
when creating your wizard character. However, there is one 
notable exception to this case—if you are using an AD&D 
campaign setting that includes its own rules on character 
generation, such as the DARK SUN or AL-QADIM? game set- 
tings, you should continue to create wizards for those set- 
tings using the appropriate rules. 


Spells from Other Sources 


While the material on creating wizard characters is 
updated for this book, you'll find that spells that appeared 
in previous books have not been altered. As long as the DM 
approves, a player character wizard can learn spells from 
any source the player has available. In fact, the spell lists 
contained in Appendix 3 of this book include spells from 
the Player's Handbook, Tome of Magic, and The Complete Wiz- 
ard's Handbook as well as dozens of new spells introduced in 
this book. Additional spells from the Wizard's Spell 
Compendium, Pages from the Mages, or any other source can 
be approved by the DM on a case-by-case basis. 


All wizard spells belong to one or more 

Schools schools of in A school of magic repre- 

14 sents related spells with common features 
of Magic or characteristics. For a mage, who is the 
basic or general wizard, the school of a spell doesn't matter 
too much; he can learn and cast any spell without regard to 
the spell's school. The only exception to this rule is wild 
magic, which is completely unfathomable to any wizard 
except a wild mage. 

While the majority of wizards are mages, a significant 
number choose to be specialists who concentrate their 
efforts in one particular school. Generally, this increases the 
wizard's abilities within the school of his choice at the cost 
of losing access to any schools with opposing philosophies. 

There are three schemes of school organization used in 
the AD&D game: philosophy, effect, and thaumaturgy. 


Schools of Philosophy 


The eight standard schools of spells presented in the 
Player's Handbook—abjuration, alteration, conjuration/sum- 
moning, enchantment/charm, greater divination, 
illusion/phantasm, invocation/evocation, and necromancy— 
are schools of philosophy. While all spells in this scheme of 
organization are cast in much the same way, the approach 
and method by which they achieve their purpose varies from 
school to school. For example, conjuration spells generally 
bring something to the caster from another location, while 
necromancy spells manipulate the forces of life and death. 

While spells in a school of philosophy generally involve 
the application of a common principle, they vary greatly in 
effect. For example, invocations create anything from solid 
matter such as walls of stone or iron to comprehensive 
enchantments such as contingency or limited wish. Note that 
all spells grouped into schools of philosophy share the same 
execution or method of casting—the use of verbal, somatic, 


and material components to summon and direct magical 
energy. The basic philosophies behind each school are 
briefly described below: 


Abjuration spells are specialized protective spells 
designed to banish some magical or nonmagical effect or 
creature. Protection from evil is an example of an abjuration 
spell, since it creates a barrier that evil or supernatural crea- 
tures are reluctant to cross. 

Alteration spells cause a change in the properties of 
some previously existing thing, creature, or condition. 
Pyrotechnics is an alteration spell, since it takes an existing 
fire and creates special effects from the blaze. 

Conjuration/Summoning spells bring some intact item 
or creature to the caster from elsewhere. Any monster sum- 
moning spell is a good example. 

Enchantment/Charm spells cause a change in the quality 
of an item or the attitude of a person or creature. Charm per- 
son is an enchantment, since it affects the way an individual 
perceives the wizard. 

Divinations are spells that provide the wizard with 
information or the ability to acquire information. Contact 
other plane is a divination, since it allows the wizard to seek 
answers from extraplanar entities. Note that this school has 
been somewhat altered in scope for this book; see The 
School of Universal Magic. 

Illusion/Phantasm spells seek to deceive the minds or 
senses of others with false or semi-substantial images and 
effects. Phantasmal force is a good example, as well as spells 
such as mirror image, invisibility, or blur. 

Invocation/Evocation spells channel magical energy to 
create specific effects and materials. For example, lightning 
bolt manifests this energy in the form of a powerful stream 
of electricity. 

Necromancy is a school concerned with the manipula- 
tion of the forces of life and death. Necromancy spells 
include those that simulate the effects of undead creatures, 
such as vampiric touch, and more direct assaults on life 
energy like death spell or finger of death. 

Universal Magic: In this book, the school of lesser divina- 
tion is expanded and renamed to include a number of spells 
that all wizards should have access to. Consider universal 
magic to be Sorcery 101; without the basic spells in this school, 
wizards are incapable of continuing their studies in the other 
schools of magic. Therefore, all wizards have access to the 
spells in this school, regardless of specialization. The school of 
universal magic is described in more detail below. 

Creating a New School of Philosophy: In most cam- 
paigns, the schools of philosophy represent the baseline or 
standard against which other forms of magic are measured. 
Almost all spells can be described through this system of 
magic, with very few exceptions. For a wizard to develop a 
new school of philosophy, he would have to devise a class of 
spells that all share a common approach or methodology. 
Most likely, a group of related spells that already exist in one 
school or another would have to be used as the starting point 
for a new school. It’s much easier to build a new school of 
effect or thaumaturgy than to build a new school of philoso- 
phy. The Complete Wizard's Handbook suggests a school of 
transmutation that concentrates on spells that change one ele- 
ment or material into one other element or material. Another 
possibility might be a school of animation, centering on spells 
that provide motive force to inanimate objects. 


Chapter 1 


Achools of Effect 


A second scheme for organizing wizard magic is by effect. 
The Tome of Magic presented a new type of wizard who could 
specialize in schools of effect: the elementalist wizard. 
PLAYER's OPTION: Skills & Powers introduced the shadow mage, 
another specialist wizard built around a school of effect. 

Schools of effect differ from schools of philosophy in that 
the spells of the school all share one common result or ingre- 
dient. For example, the spells of the school of fire all involve 
fire in some way, without regard for what the spell accom- 
plishes. Divinations, the direction and control of energy, and 
the summoning of elementals can all be linked by the com- 
mon effect of fire. The schools of effect are described below: 


Air: The elemental school of air naturally includes any 
air-based spell or effect, including spells that control or 
affect wind, breathing, falling and flight, air elementals, and 
other elemental phenomena. Gust of wind or cloudkill are 
examples of air spells. 

Earth: Spells of elemental earth are based around stone-, 
earth-, or mineral-based effects. Die, stone shape and stone to 
flesh are earth spells. 

Fire: Any spell involving the manifestation of flame or 
heat is a spell of elemental fire. Not all fire spells are attack 
spells; fire charm and affect normal fires are examples of fire 
spells that don't cause direct and immediate damage to the 
-wizard’s enemies. 

Water: Last but not least in the elemental schools, spells 
of the school of elemental water involve water in some form 
or another, including spells of ice and cold, since these are 
linked to the element of water. Water breathing, ice storm, and 
part water are all included in the school of elemental water. 

Dimensional Magic: This is a new school introduced in 
PLAYER's OPTION: Spells & Magic. While all AD&D spells draw 
power from outside the mage, dimensionalists go one step 
further—they draw their power from another dimension. 
Like most schools of effect, the school of dimensional magic 
overlaps several pre-existing schools, including alteration, 
conjuration/summoning, and invocation spells. 

Force: The school of force is a new school of effect pre- 
sented later in this book. A force mage relies on spells that 
create or manipulate fields of cohesive energy, such as wall 
of force, magic missile, or any of the various Bigby's hand 
spells. Many spells of this school are borrowed from the 
school of invocation/evocation. 

Shadow: All the spells in this school are linked by the 
common effects of shadow and darkness. The shadow mage 
can make use of a number of illusion spells dealing with the 
Demiplane of Shadow and shadowstuff, including shadow 
monsters, darkness 15' radius, and shadow walk. He also has 
access to a number of necromancy spells. Although necro- 
mancy and illusion are opposing philosophies, schools of 
effect ignore these restrictions and concentrate on results. 

Creating a School of Effect: Again, all spells in a school of 
effect are cast with the standard execution of somatic, verbal, 
and material components. Creating a new school of effect is 
far easier than coming up with a new school of philosophy; 
there are any number of common spell results or special 
effects that can be linked in this way. For example, a school 
of light could be designed around spells that produce bright 
visible effects, or a school of circles could be designed around 
any spell effect that is circular or spherical in form. 


Schools of Thaumaturgy 


A school of thaumaturgy defines a specific method or pro- 
cedure of spellcasting that varies from the standard execution 
of a spell's components. Several schools of thaumaturgy were 
presented in PLAYER'S OPTION: Skills & Powers—the school of 
song, the school of alchemy, and the school of geometry. In 
addition, other schools of thaumaturgy have appeared in spe- 
cific campaign settings. The defiler of the DARK SUN campaign 
is a mage whose spells are executed through the draining of 
life energy from his surroundings. The sha'ir of the AL-QADIM 
setting casts his spells by sending a servant gen, or minor 
genie, to fetch the spell and bring it back to him. 

Spells belonging to a school of thaumaturgy are not 
linked by philosophy or effect—instead, they're related by 
the manner in which they are physically cast. In fact, the 
"standard" approach to wizard magic defined by the eight 
philosophical schools represents one common thaumaturgi- 
cal method. Other thaumaturgical methods include the fol- 
lowing schools: 


The School of Alchemy: In this approach to magic, spell 
effects are achieved through the combination of unusual 
material components. Spells such as affect normal fires, glitter- 
dust, and cloudkill can all be cast through the use of strange 
powders and reagents, and belong to the school of alchemy. 

The School of Artifice: This is a new school introduced 
here for the first time. Artificers are weak in the direct com- 
mand of magic and instead use various devices and magical 
items to focus their energies. Spells such as Melf's minute 
meteors and magic staff are included in the school of artifice. 

The School of Geometry: Geometers use diagrams, sym- 
bols, and complex patterns to cast their spells. Naturally, 
any spell involving some kind of writing, marking, or pat- 
tern belongs to the school of geometry, including spells such 
as explosive runes, sepia snake sigil, and symbol. 

The School of Song: While alchemists rely on material 
components and geometers rely on somatic components, a 
song mage uses the power of his voice to summon and shape 
spell energy. Any spell that involves speaking, singing, or 
some other use of the caster's vocal powers belongs to the 
school of song. Sleep, charm monster, and Otto's irresistible 
dance are all examples of spells of this school. 

The School of Wild Magic: Some wizards have learned 
to make use of the principles of randomness in their magic, 
giving rise to the school of wild magic. Wild mages shape 
the raw, uncontrollable stuff of magic in the hope that some- 
thing resembling their intended spell will appear. A number 
of wild magic spells such as vortex and waveform appeared 
in the Tome of Magic; if you do not have access to that book, 
you should probably ignore this school. 


The &chool of Universal Magic 


As described in the Player's Haridbook, the school of divina- 
tion is actually composed of lesser divinations and greater 
divinations. A few specialist mages are barred from greater 
divination as an opposition school, but every specialist wizard 
is considered to have access to lesser divination. In this book, 
the school of lesser divination is replaced by the school of uni- 
versal magic. This includes a few basic divination and non- 
divination spells that all wizards should have access to, such 
as dispel magic and enchant an item. Any wizard may cast spells 


Wizards 


of this school, regardless of his or her specialty. 

The divination spells of both the schools of lesser and 
greater divination are now considered to be part of one 
school of divination. Spells such as ESP, clairaudience, and 
clairvoyance are part of the school of divination and may not 
be available to wizards who formerly had access to them as 
lesser divinations. Refer to Appendix 3 for the revised spell 
organization. 

Important Note: Wizards do not automatically know uni- 
versal spells. They must study and attempt to learn the 
spells of this school, just like any other spells. However, 
when a wizard character is first created, he automatically 
begins play with any 1st-level universal spells of his choice 
in his spell book, although these count against the charac- 
ter's limit of beginning spells. 

The school of universal magic consists of the following 
spells: 


cantrip (1st) wizard lock (2nd) 
comprehend languages (1st) dispel magic (3rd) 

detect magic (Ist remove curse (4th) 

hold portal (1st) teleport (5th) 

ksh ae ) elepor bout ro (7th) 
read magic (1st teleport without error 
Hpi ine (1st) ency (Bth) 

knock (2nd) . astral spell (9th) 

protection from cantrips (2nd) 


Most of the low-level spells on this list enable the wizard to 
undertake his basic studies in books of arcane lore and safe- 
guard his laboratory and spell book against intruders. Teleport, 
teleport without error, and astral spell are included since the abil- 
ity to travel vast distances in the blink of an eye is a common 
power among wizards in fantasy literature. Last but not least, 
enchant an item and permanency are universal magic because 
every wizard should have the ability to create magical items 
when he or she reaches the appropriate level. 


Wi Zar d A player creating a wizard character has 
one basic decision to make when the 

character is first rolled up— should his 
Charac ters character specialize in a school of magic, 
or should he remain a mage? A mage is equally capable in all 
schools of magic and may freely learn and cast spells from 
any school. A specialist wizard gains several important bene- 
fits when dealing with his own school, but loses access to cer- 
tain spells that belong to opposition schools. 

As noted in the Player's Handbook, wizards may not wear 
armor and are limited in their selection of weapons to the 
dagger, dart, knife, sling, and staff. (Some character kits 
may allow additional weapon choices.) In addition, charac- 
ters constructed with the PLAYER's OPTION: Skills & Powers 
rules or the expanded character point rules in this book may 
pay extra character points in order to gain access to better 
weapons or protective equipment. 

All wizards may create magical potions or scrolls after 
reaching 9th level by using the magical item creation rules 
in this book. (The alchemist and geometer gain this ability 
earlier in their careers.) Wizards may also create other types 
of magical items upon reaching 11th level. Any wizard may 
attempt to research new spells, regardless of level. 


15 


The Wizard’s Spell Book 


A 1st-level wizard begins play with 3d4 1st-level spells in 
his spell book, two of which must be read magic and detect 
magic. Once these two have been included in the spell book, 
the player may select any other 1st-level spells of the school 
of universal magic without making a learn spells roll. In 
addition, a specialist wizard may automatically choose one 
spell of his specialty to begin play with. Beyond these selec- 
tions, the player must attempt a learn spells check for any 
additional spells he wishes his character to know, with the 
normal penalties or bonuses for specialization. Optionally, 
the DM may assign a beginning wizard character read magic, 
detect magic, and four other spells of the DM's choice. 

Adding Spells to the Wizard's Repertoire: As a wizard 
continues with his adventuring career, he will encounter new 
spells that he may wish to add to his spell book. In addition, 
mages may add a spell to their book whenever they reach a 
new spell level, while specialist wizards are allowed to add 
one spell of their specialty to their spell books each time they 
gain an experience level. Last but not least, the DM may allow 
a PC wizard to purchase spells from an NPC wizard or orga- 
nization. The price should be a spell of equal level that the 
NPC doesn't know, a magical item other than a potion or 
scroll, or at least 1,000 gp per level of the spell in question. 


Magc 
Ability Requirements: Intelligence 9 


Prime Requisite: Intelligence 
Races Allowed: Human, Elf, Half-elf 


The mage remains largely unchanged by the material 
presented in PLAYER'S OPTION: Skills & Powers. A mage may 
learn and cast spells of any school (except wild magic) using 
the normal wizard spell progression table and learn spells 
rolls. Naturally, mages may make use of many of the new 
spells and magical items introduced in this book. 

Mages with an Intelligence score of 16 or higher gain a 
10% bonus to the experience points they earn. Mages never 
attract followers, but there's no reason a mage couldn't buy 
property and hire mercenaries whenever he accumulates 
sufficient wealth. 


Specialist Wizard 


Ability Requirements: Varies 
Prime Requisite: Intelligence 
Races Allowed: Varies 


Wizards who concentrate their efforts in one school of 
magic are known as specialist wizards. Generally, a special- 
ist wizard must give up some degree of versatility in spell 
selection—he cannot learn or cast spells belonging to 
schools that oppose his own chosen school. The specialist 
also has several other benefits and restrictions; unless other- 
wise stated, all specialists must abide by the benefits and 
hindrances described below: 


* Specialist wizards may memorize one additional spell 
per spell level, provided the spell selected belongs to the 
specialist's school. Under this rule, a 1st-level specialist 
may have two spells memorized instead of only one. 


Chapter 1 


* Specialists gain a bonus of +1 when making saving 
throws against spells of their own school. Specialists also 
inflict a 1 penalty to their victims’ saving throw 
attempts when casting a spell of their specialty school. 

* Specialist wizards gain a bonus of +15% when learning 
spells from their school, but suffer a penalty of -15% 
when learning spells from any other school. Specialists 
cannot learn spells belonging to an opposition school. 

* When a specialist reaches a new level, he automatically 
gains one spell of his school to add to his spell book. No 
roll for learning the spell need be made. 

* When a specialist wizard attempts to create a new spell 
through research, the spell is treated as if it were one 
level lower if it falls within the wizard's specialty school. 


Specialists in Schools of Philosophy 

A wizard specializing in a school of philosophy adheres to 
the general rules above. Depending on his choice of school, 
the specialist will have anywhere from one to three opposi- 
tion schools. Each specialty has different race and ability 
score requirements, reflecting the unique nature of each field 
of study. See Table 1: Philosophy Specialist Requirements. 

In The Complete Wizard's Handbook, each specialist received 
several additional abilities related to his chosen field at high 
levels. These abilities have been reworked, and specialists 
now receive them much earlier in their careers. They are 
optional; if the DM decides that they aren’t appropriate, the 
additional powers are unavailable for PC specialist wizards. 

Abjurer: The abjurer specializes in the school of abjura- 
tion, commanding magical energies that provide various 
forms of protection to himself and his companions. A wiz- 
ard must have strength of will to master this school of 


» jn n 


magic, so a high Wisdom score (Wisdom /Willpower, if 
PLAYER'S OPTION: Skills & Powers is available) is a require- 
ment for an abjurer. The abjurer cannot learn spells from the 
schools of alteration or illusion. 

Abjurers enjoy the normal benefits and hindrances of 
specialist wizards. In addition, at 8th level the abjurer gains 
a +1 bonus to saving throws vs. paralyzation, poison, and 
death magic. At 11th level an abjurer's base Armor Class 
improves by 1 point due to his command of protective 
magic, and at 14th level the abjurer gains immunity to all 
forms of hold spells. 

Abjurers have few spells that can directly inflict damage, 
but their protective enchantments can help them protect 
their comrades from harm in battle. They are also extremely 
effective against enemy spellcasters and creatures of extra- 
planar or unusual origins. 

Conjurer: Specializing in spells of conjuration and sum- 
moning, the conjurer has access to some of the most useful 
spells in the game. Conjurations are some of the most physi- 
cally demanding spells, and a wizard must have a Constitu- 
tion (or Constitution / Health) score of at least 15 in order to 
be a conjurer. Conjuration/summoning is opposed by div- 
ination and invocation/evocation. 

All the normal benefits and hindrances of specialist wizards 
apply to conjurers. In addition, at 11th level a conjurer gains 
the ability to cast conjuration and summoning spells without 
any material components. At 14th level, the conjurer gains the 
power to instantly dispel creatures conjured by an opponent 
who has used monster summoning or an equivalent spell. The 
conjurer can dispel up to 10 HD worth of creatures with this 
ability simply by pointing at the target and concentrating one 
round. Only creatures with 5 HD or less are affected, so a con- 
ns could dispel three 3 HD creatures, two 5 HD creatures, or 


N 


m 


E 
= 
z 
2 
> 
= 
= 
~ 


mee WW À ~ 


A, 
^ h 


Wizards 


any combination that does not exceed 10 HD. The conjurer 
may use this ability up to three times per day. 

The conjurer’s spells can be very potent in combat, espe- 
cially if used to multiply the party’s numbers through the 
summoning of allies. 

Diviner: It’s unusual for a player character to choose this 
specialty, but NPC diviners are fairly common. Diviners con- 
centrate on spells that reveal or relay information, and infor- 
mation can be a weapon far more dangerous than the sharpest 
sword. Divination requires patience and insight; a wizard 
must have a Wisdom (Wisdom/ Intuition) of 16 or better to be 
a diviner. Divination is opposed by conjuration/ summoning. 

Diviners have the normal strengths and weaknesses of 
specialty wizards. In addition, at 11th level the diviner gains 
the ability to use find traps (a 2nd-level priest spell) up to 
three times per day by pointing in a specific direction and 
concentrating one round. At 14th level, the diviner becomes 
immune to all forms of scrying spells such as ESP, know 
alignment, or clairaudience; characters trying to use these div- 
inations against the diviner simply get no response at all. 

A diviner is very limited in his combat ability and must rely 
on spells outside his school for anything resembling a damag- 
ing attack. However, a diviner in a PC party can be surprisingly 
effective by providing advice and information. With a diviner 
around, a party can look for ways to strike at an enemy's weak- 
est points and to maximize its efficiency in battle. 

Enchanter: The enchanter's specialty lies in controlling or 
influencing his targets with his spells. The school of 
enchantment/charm also includes a number of spells that 
imbue nonliving items with magical powers. Because the 
greater part of their spell selection involves influencing 
other people, enchanters must have a Charisma (Charisma/ 
Appearance, under Skills & Powers rules) score of 16 or 
higher. Enchantment/charm is opposed by invocation/ 
evocation and necromancy. 

Enchanters have the usual benefits and restrictions of a 
specialist wizard. In addition, when an enchanter reaches 
11th level, he gains the ability to cast a special free action spell 
once per day on himself or any creature he touches. The cast- 
ing time is only 1, and no material components are required; 
the spell duplicates the effects of the 4th-level priest spell free 
action and lasts for one hour. At 14th level, the enchanter 
acquires immunity to all forms of the charm spell. 

While the enchanter’s spells are not spectacular in effect, 
they are also among the subtlest of spells. In many cases, 
turning an enemy into an ally is far more effective and 


Table 1: 
Dhilosophy Specialist Requirements 


Abilities Opposition Se 
15 Wis 


Specialist Race 


Diviner Conj./Summ. 


Enchanter 


Necromancer H- 


Transmuter H, 4E 15Dex Abjur., Necro. 


H: Human; XE: Half-elf; E: Elf; G: Gnome. 


Divination, Moe [Boe 


Invoc./ Evoc., Necro. 


Illusion, Ench./Charm — 


desirable than simply incinerating him, and enchanters 
excel at mind-affecting magic. Careful interrogation of 
charmed enemies can also provide a wealth of useful infor- 
mation for the enchanter. 

Illusionist: Masters of deceit and trickery, illusionists have 
access to a variety of powerful spells that can be far more dan- 
gerous than simple attack spells. Illusionists must have a min- 
imum Dexterity (Dexterity / Aim) score of 16 to perform the 
intricate gestures and patterns required by spells of their 
school. The school of illusion/phantasm is opposed by necro- 
mancy, invocation/evocation, and abjuration. 

Illusionists gain the normal benefits of specialist wizards. 
When an illusionist reaches 8th level, he gains an additional 
+1 bonus to his saving throws against illusion spells cast by 
nonillusionists. (This is cumulative with his normal +1 bonus, 
for a total of +2). At 11th level, the illusionist gains the ability 
to cast a special dispel phantasmal force or dispel improved phan- 
tasmal force up to three times per day. The base chance of suc- 
cess is 5096, +5% per level difference between the illusionist 
and the caster of the phantasmal force; for example, if a 16th- 
level illusionist is attempting to dispel an illusion cast by a 
9th-level wizard, his chance of success is 8576. The dispel has a 
range of 30 yards and a casting time of 1; the illusionist need 
only point at the illusion and concentrate. If the illusionist 
attempts to dispel something that turns out to be real, the 
attempt still counts against his limit of three dispels per day. 

An illusionist can be extremely effective in combat despite 
his lack of high-powered damaging spells, especially if he 
concentrates on creating distractions and false opponents for 
his enemies. Every sword swing directed at an illusion is one 
less that's aimed at the illusionist and his companions. Illu- 
sionists should always seek creative and unusual uses for 
their spells; of all the specialist wizards, they require the most 
player originality to be run effectively. 

Invoker: The invoker is the direct antithesis to the illusion- 
ist. Where the illusionist deals in subtleties and suggestion, 
the invoker deals in naked force, summoning and controlling 
massive energies. The invoker requires a Constitution (Consti- 
tution/Fitness) score of 16 or better to withstand the physical 
stress of this specialty. The school of invocation is opposed by 
enchantment/charm and conjuration/summoning. 

In addition to the normal advantages and disadvantages 
of specialization, the invoker gains an additional +1 bonus to 
saving throws vs. invocation/evocation spells when he 
reaches 8th level, for a total of +2. At 11th level, this increases 
to 43. (These bonuses also apply to magical items that simu- 
late invocation spells, such as a ward of fire.) At 14th 
level, the invoker acquires immunity to one invoca- 
tion or evocation spell of 3rd level or lower of his 
choice; however, this immunity does not extend to 
similar magical items or breath weapons. 

The invoker is a valuable asset to the party on 
the battlefield, where his spectacular spells can 
decimate hordes of low-level monsters or severely 
injure tougher opponents. Unfortunately, fear of 
the invoker's firepower leads many opponents to 
attack the wizard in the hope of disabling him 
before he can blast them to ashes. 

Necromancer: Students of this school delve into 
forbidden lore and dark secrets in their quest to 
understand and control the forces of life and death. 
A character must be extraordinarily strong of will in 
order to succeed at these studies—a wizard must 


Chapter 1 


have a Wisdom (Wisdom/ Willpower) of 16 or higher in order 
to choose necromancy as his specialty. Necromancy is 
opposed by illusion and enchantment/charm. 

Necromancers gain the standard benefits for being special- 
ist wizards. At 8th level, his saving throw bonus versus necro- 
mancy spells increases to a total of +2. At 11th level, the necro- 
mancer gains a special speak with dead spell-like ability that 
requires no verbal or material components; the wizard need 
only point at the deceased person and concentrate for one 
round. This spell functions like the 3rd-level priest spell speak 
with dead, except that the necromancer may converse for up to 
one turn and ask four questions of the spirit. At 14th level, the 
necromancer gains a partial resistance to the special effects of 
undead attacks; although he still suffers the normal damage 
of any such attack, he gains a +2 to saving throws against 
strength drain, paralyzation, and other effects. He may 
attempt a saving throw vs. death magic with a —4 penalty to 
avoid the effects of any attack that normally does not allow a 
save, such as a wight or wraith's energy drain. 

The necromancer commands a variety of powerful 
spells, but these are not generally as useful on the battlefield 
as the invoker's powers. The necromancer's best strategy is 
to concentrate on one important enemy at a time, using the 
nefarious spells of this school to disable the enemy's leaders 
and champions. Necromancers can also be very useful in 
dealing with undead of all sorts. 

Transmuter: The most versatile of the specialist wizards 
is the transmuter, specializing in the school of alteration. 
The school of alteration is the largest of the schools of phi- 
losophy, giving the transmuter access to a variety of powers 
and abilities. In order to master the complicated somatic 
gestures of this school, a wizard must have a Dexterity 
(Dexterity / Aim) of 15 or higher to become a transmuter. 
The school of alteration is opposed by the schools of necro- 
mancy and abjuration. 

Transmuters have the normal benefits and restrictions of 
specialist wizards. In addition, they gain an additional +1 
bonus to their saving throws versus alteration spells and 
related magical effects (such as a wand of polymorph) when 
they reach 8th level, for a total of +2. At 11th level, this 
increases to 43. 

Transmuters command a number of useful spells. Their 
offensive and defensive capabilities are quite formidable, 
and they also have access to spells such as haste or strength 
that can drastically enhance the whole party's fighting 
power. Despite their skill in battle, transmuters are at their 
best when overcoming obstacles; there is a great range of 
generally useful alteration spells such as passwall and fly 
which may make it possible for transmuters to 
avoid fights altogether. 


Specialists in Schools of Effect 

The schools of effect are organized along differ- 
ent lines than the schools of philosophy. This alter- 
nate approach to magic and specialization means 
that elementalists and other effect specialists don’t 
necessarily enjoy the same benefits and penalties of 
philosophical specialists. These exceptions are 
explained below in the descriptions of the individ- 
ual specialist wizards. 

Just like the schools of philosophy, specializa- 
tion in a school of effect generally requires a wiz- 


Specialist 
lementalist H 
Dimensionalist H, 4E Int 16 
Force Mage 
Mentalist 

Shadow Mage H 


ard to meet higher ability score criteria than that required of 
a basic mage (see Table 2: Effect Specialist Requirements). 
Elementalist: First introduced in the Tome of Magic, ele- 
mentalists are wizards who specialize in spells dealing with 
one of the four elements—air, earth, fire, or water. Elemen- 
talists ignore the "normal" structure of the philosophical 
school. Instead, all spells are designated as either elemental 
spells or nonelemental spells. Furthermore, elemental spells 
are divided into spells of each of the four elements. An ele- 
mentalist is barred from casting spells of the element that 
opposes his particular specialty; fire mages cannot cast 
water spells, air mages can't use earth spells, and vice versa. 
(Refer to Appendix 3 for a list of wizard spells by school.) 


Fire 
| 
Air — opposes — Earth 
| 


Water 


Elementalists enjoy most of the standard benefits and 
restrictions of specialist wizards, but there are some minor 
differences. They gain the benefit of memorizing an extra 
spell of each level, as long as it is taken from their preferred 
element. An elementalist gains a +2 bonus to saving throws 
against spells of his particular specialty (fire for fire mages, 
etc.) and inflicts a 2 penalty to his opponents’ saves when 
casting spells of his specialty. Elementalists gain a +25% 
bonus to learn spells of their specialty, and a +15% bonus 
for other elemental spells that don’t actually oppose their 
specialty. For example, a fire mage has a +25% bonus to 
learn fire spells, and a +15% bonus to learn air and earth 
spells; he can’t learn water spells at all. Elementalists suffer 
a -25% penalty to learn all other nonelemental spells. Last 
but not least, elementalists research spells of their specialty 
as if the spells were one level lower than their actual level. 

Note that elementalists do not automatically add a spell 
to their spell book when they gain a level, as other special- 
ists do. However, an elemental specialist has the ability to 
cast one memorized spell of his specialty per day as if he 
were 1d4 levels higher. This affects range, duration, area of 
effect, and damage. When an elementalist reaches 11th level, 
he does not need to concentrate to control an elemental of 
his specialty that was summoned through conjure elemental. 
At 14th level, there is no chance for a summoned elemental 
to turn on the elementalist. 

While the elemental schools tend to be small, the elemen- 
talists' abilities generally exceed those of normal specialists. 


Table 2: 


Effect Specialist Requirements 


Race Abilities 
Standard 


Opposition School(s) 


Ench./Charm, Necro. 
H,%E Int12,Con15 Alteration, Divination 

H Int 15, Wis 16 Invoc./Evoc., Necro. 

Int 15, Wis 16 Invoc./Evoc., Abjuration 


H: Human; AE: Half-elf 


Wizards 


Elemental wizards of earth and fire have a potent range of 
attack spells and can equal the firepower of an invoker. Wiz- 
ards of air and water tend to have fewer damaging spells, 
but have access to better travel and support powers. 

Elementalists can be used to portray magicians of 
unusual cultures or origin. After all, the standard philo- 
sophical arrangement of schools implies a scholarly, West- 
ern approach to magic, but not every culture or nation may 
have the same beliefs or practices regarding sorcery. Many 
elementalists are much closer to nature, or more attuned to 
their surroundings, than philosophical specialists. 

Dimensionalist: This uncommon specialist is a student 
of magic that relies on the manipulation of space, time, and 
dimension. The dimensionalist is familiar with all kinds of 
extradimensional pockets, planes, and sources of power. 
While other wizards can make use of these dimensions, the 
dimensionalist has a much clearer understanding of what 
he is doing and why when he casts spells of this school. 
Non-Euclidean geometry and planar relationships are diffi- 
cult material, even for a wizard; a character must have an 
Intelligence (Intelligence/ Reason in the Skills & Powers 
rules) of 16 or better to grasp the more esoteric concepts 
required to master this kind of magic. 

The school of dimensional magic is listed in Appendix 3 
of this book. It includes spells such as rope trick, dimension 
door, distance distortion, and maze. Dimensional magic is 
opposed by the schools of enchantment/charm and necro- 
mancy, since these philosophies have nothing to do with 
extraplanar studies or spells. 

The dimensional specialist gains the normal advantages for 
specialization as described earlier in this chapter; spells 
belonging to the school of dimensional magic are listed in 
Appendix 3. At 8th level, the dimensionalist gains the power 
to disappear by stepping into a pocket dimension once per 
day. While in the pocket dimension, he is detectable only by 
spells that can discern dimensional openings and is immune 
to any attack, but he also has no way of knowing what's hap- 
pening in the place he left until he chooses to step back into 
the real world. The dimensionalist may remain for up to one 
hour before he is forced to exit and can take any actions he 
desires (sleeping, reading, drinking a potion, or so on) while 
inside. Note that the pocket dimension's point of exit is 
always the exact same place the dimensionalist entered the 
dimension. Also, no spells that would allow the dimensional- 
ist to leave the pocket without first reentering the real world 
can function in the extradimensional place, including teleport, 
dimension door, shadow walk, and similar enchantments. At 
11th level, the dimensionalist may bring one other human- 
sized creature or an object weighing less than 500 pounds 
with him; at 14th level, he may bring up to five companions 
or an object weighing 1,500 pounds. 

The dimensionalist is a very unusual wizard, with access 
to some of the strangest spells in the game. A high-level 
dimensionalist can be a confounding opponent, calling on 
rarely seen powers to trap or misdirect his enemies. Dimen- 
sionalists have few attack spells, but excel in avoiding 
trouble or circumventing obstacles. 

Force Mage: Some of the most powerful spells available 
to a wizard consist of force—cohesive magical energy that 
can be shaped into fields, walls, or blades. Force is energy 
that simulates solid matter; it is impervious to normal mat- 
ter and can be used to exert physical pressure on creatures 
or objects. A force mage specializes in spells that conjure 


19 


and manipulate magical force. Force spells are difficult and 
taxing to a wizard, and a character must have an Intelli- 
gence of 12 or better and a minimum Constitution of 15 
(Intelligence/Knowledge and Constitution /Health) to 
choose this specialty. 

Naturally, the school of force includes wall of force and 
the Bigby's hand spells. However, spells such as magic missile 
and Mordenkainen's sword also make use of magical force. 
The schools of alteration and divination oppose the school 
of force, since these have nothing to do with the summon- 
ing or manipulation of magical energy. 

Force mages have the usual advantages and disadvantages 
of specialist wizards. (Refer to Appendix 3 for the complete 
list of spells belonging to this school.) At 8th level, force 
mages gain an additional +1 bonus to their saving throws ver- 
sus force spells or effects, for a total of +2. When a force mage 
reaches 11th level, he gains the ability to attempt a saving 
throw for half-effect against any force spell that causes dam- 
age, whether or not it allows a save. For example, an 11th- 
level force mage struck by a magic missile spell may attempt to 
save for half damage, despite the fact that magic missile nor- 
mally allows no saving throw. At 14th level, the force mage's 
saving throw bonus increases to +3 against magical force. 

Force mages are skilled in battle; most of their spells are 
designed to hinder, incapacitate, or destroy their enemies. 
However, they do not enjoy a great variety of spells and 
must get along without access to two of the most useful 
schools available—divination and alteration. 

Mentalist: In worlds where psionics are rare or 
unknown, some wizards take up the study of mind-affect- 
ing spells and enchantments. The mentalist is such a charac- 
ter. Although the mentalist is closely related to the 
enchanter, the mentalist's spells focus more exclusively on 
the mind. Of course, this is a complicated area of study, and 
a great understanding of the human psyche is required for 
success; the wizard must have an Intelligence of 15 and Wis- 
dom of 16 (Intelligence/Knowledge and Wisdom/Intuition) 
to become a mentalist. 

The school of mentalism includes spells such as ESP, 
domination, and suggestion. It is opposed by the schools of 
alteration and necromancy; a list of the spells belonging to 
the school of mentalism appears in Appendix 3. 

Mentalists gain the normal benefits and hindrances of a 
specialist wizard. When a mentalist reaches 8th level, his 
saving throw bonus against mentalism spells and effects 
increases to +2. At 11th level, the mentalist gains the ability 
to detect charm or mental influence three times per day by 
pointing at the individual to be examined and concentrating 
one round. This power resembles the priest spell detect 
charm, but only one creature can be scanned per use. When 
the mentalist reaches 14th level, he can dispel charm or men- 
tal influence once per day with a 50% chance of success. This 
is modified by +5% per level/Hit Die difference between 
the mentalist and the caster of the charm. The mentalist 
must be within 10 yards of the subject and must concentrate 
for one round in order to use this power. 

The mentalist is a wizard who deals in subtleties and 
influences. The mentalist is not at his best in open battle 
against hordes of enemies, but he can be an extraordinarily 
effective character in investigations or confrontations 
against single enemies. 

Shadow Mage: Shadow mages are students of the power 
of darkness and twilight. While shadow mages are not nec- 


Chapter 1 


Table 3: 


Shadow Mage Target Saving 
Thnow Modifiers 


Modifier 


essarily evil, most tend to be grim characters who are at 
home in the darkness. The school of shadow is built around 
the thesis that all shadows are actually connected in some 
mystical way in the Demiplane of Shadow; the shadow 
mage’s repertoire of spells reflects this belief. Shadow 
mages must be keen-minded individuals; a character must 
have an Intelligence of 15 and a Wisdom of 16 (Intelli- 
gence/ Reason and Wisdom/ Will) in order to select this spe- 
cialty. The school of shadow is opposed by the schools of 
invocation/evocation and abjuration. 

The shadow mage follows the normal rules for specialist 
wizards, with one notable exception: the target's saving 
throw modifiers are tied to the prevalent lighting conditions, 
and range from +2 to —4. The shadow mage himself receives 
no saving throw modifiers versus spells of any kind (see 
Table 3: Shadow Mage Target Saving Throw Modifiers). 

Shadow mages also gain the ability to see in darkness due 
to their connection with the plane of gloom. At 4th level, the 
shadow mage sees as well in moonlight as a normal human 
does by broad daylight, and all darkness-based combat 
penalties are reduced by 1 point. At 7th level, he can see per- 
fectly by starlight and reduces combat penalties for darkness 
by 2 points. At 10th level, the shadow mage can see perfectly 
in total darkness, negating all combat penalties. Note that 
magical blindness or fog can still impair the wizard's vision. 

The shadow mage's spells are both powerful and subtle. 
Of all the specialist wizards, he makes the best spy or infil- 
trator, especially by night. While the shadow mage isn't 
very well-suited for open battle, his spells are perfect for 
solitary confrontations. 


Specialists in Schools of Thaumaturgy 


While the schools of effect and the schools of philosophy 
differ in the way in which spells are assigned to the various 
schools, the schools of thaumaturgy represent an entirely dif- 
ferent way of thinking. The thaumaturgical schools discard 
the normal methods and mechanics of wizard magic to con- 
centrate on new ways of summoning and controlling magical 
power. In this scheme of magic, spells are organized by 
method of casting, not effect or method of operation. 

Since the schools of thaumaturgy represent a more radi- 
cal departure from the normal scheme of magic, the benefits 
and disadvantages of specialization vary from school to 
school. In addition, the thaumaturgical specialists generally 
have high ability score requirements, as shown in Table 4: 
Thaumaturgical Specialist Requirements. 

Alchemist: This specialist was first presented in PLAYER'S 


2 


O 


OPTION: Skills & Powers. The alchemist’s whole work is based on 
the four classical elements of air, earth, fire, and water. In other 
words, the alchemist considers gold (for example) to be a com- 
bination of earth and fire. Alchemists are the most scientifically- 
minded wizards, and they experiment constantly in search of 
knowledge. In order to be an alchemist, a wizard must have an 
excellent education in the sciences (minimum Intelligence or 
Intelligence / Knowledge of 15) and a steady hand for experi- 
mentation (Dexterity or Dexterity / Aim of 14). The school of 
alchemy is opposed by the schools of illusion and necromancy; 
a list of alchemy spells appears in Appendix 3. 

The alchemist must maintain a large, well-equipped lab- 
oratory. The character is assumed to begin play with a suit- 
able facility in his home town or base of operations, but 
building and equipping a new laboratory costs at least 1,000 
gp per character level, and existing laboratories cost 50 gp 
per level each month to maintain. An alchemist without a 
laboratory loses access to the bonus spell provided by spe- 
cialization and can't conduct research, make potions, or add 
new spells to his spell book. 

Alchemists enjoy the normal benefits of specialization, 
but have no saving throw modifiers for their own saves or 
their targets' saves. 

At 6th level, the alchemist gains the ability to create 
potions. This is a special chemical process that doesn't involve 
magical materials or processes, but it tends to be longer and 
more tedious than normal potion brewing. First, the character 
must research the potion's formula, just like conducting spell 
research; consider the potion's level to be equal to its experi- 
ence point (XP) value divided by 100. For example, a potion of 
clairaudience (250 XP) is treated as a 3rd-level spell for this pur- 
pose, while a potion of longevity (500 XP) is equivalent to a 5th- 
level spell. It takes two weeks per potion level to research the 
formula, at a cost of 500 gp per potion level. The alchemist 
must roll learn spells to find out if he learned the spell before 
he can be considered successful in his research. The maximum 
number of potion formulae he can know is limited by the 
maximum number of spells per level score that is determined 
by his Intelligence (see Table 4: Intelligence in the PHB). A 
character with an Intelligence of 15, for example, can know up 
to 11 potion formulae. 

Once a character has successfully researched a potion's for- 
mula, he can produce one dose by investing 3d6 x 100 gp in 
materials and spending one uninterrupted week in his labora- 
tory. Again, he must pass the learn spells check to see if he fol- 
lowed the directions correctly, with a +1% bonus per character 
level. While the alchemist doesn't have to adventure to acquire 
rare or unusual materials for potions, he may still have to take 
time to make arrangements for special requirements, such as 
the delivery of unusual chemicals or glassware. 


Bordun the Chemist wislies to create a potion of fire resis- 
tance, since his thief friend wants to pilfer a dragon's hoard. The 
potion has an XP value of 250, so it must be researched as a 3rd- 
level spell. This requires 6 weeks, and costs a total of 1,500 gp— 
Bordun's alchemical research is more difficult than normal potion 
research, but requires no unusual materials. Bordun makes his 
learn spells check, and his research is productive! 

Having concluded his research, Bordun sets out to brew a potion 
of fire resistance from his formula. This takes one week, and costs 
him 3d6 x 100 gp (the DM rolls a 15, for 1,500 gp—ouch!) He must 
attempt a second learn spells check to execute the formula correctly, 
with a +7% bonus (he's a 7th-level wizard), and he succeeds again. 


Wizards 


Bordun now has one potion of fire resistance and can brew more 
without conducting his research all over again. 


The alchemist has access to a small number of attack and 
defense spells, but he excels in enchantments that alter or 
analyze materials. Note that the spells of the school of 
alchemy are considered to have no verbal component when 
cast by an alchemist, since they consist of combinations of 
reagents prepared by the wizard—an alchemist has little to 
fear from a silence 15’ radius spell. 

Artificer: The school of artifice is composed of spells that 
store or channel magical energy through items carried by 
the wizard. In effect, the artificer is a wizard who creates 
temporary magical items for his own use. The advantages 
of this thaumaturgical method lie in the wizard's ability to 
increase his spell power by carrying extra spells in various 
magical items and to unleash powerful enchantments with 
a single command word. A wizard must have an Intelli- 
gence (Intelligence / Knowledge) of 12 and a Constitution of 
15 (Constitution/ Health) in order to choose this specialty. 
The school of artifice is opposed by the school of necro- 
mancy and those spells in the school of enchantment/charm 
which affect living beings. 

Like the alchemist, the artificer must maintain a well- 
equipped laboratory and workshop. A Ist-level artificer 
begins play with a suitable facility in his base of operations. 
Building a new laboratory costs at least 1,000 gp per charac- 
ter level, and existing laboratories cost 50 gp per level to 
maintain each month. An artificer without a laboratory 
loses access to the bonus spell provided by specialization, 
and can’t conduct research, make magical items, or add new 
spells to his spell book. 

Artificers have the normal benefits and restrictions of 
specialist wizards, but have no saving throw modifiers and 
impose no saving throw penalties on the targets of their 
spells. At 4th level, the artificer gains the ability to store 
spells in prepared items, saving his memorization slots for 
other spells. Once placed in an item, a stored spell may be 
indefinitely retained for ready casting. The spell to be stored 
must be one which the wizard knows and can cast; at any 
given time, a wizard may have no more total spell levels 
stored than his own character level, so a 5th-level artificer 
could store up to five levels of spells. 

Preparing an item to receive one stored spell requires one 
uninterrupted week of work, and the actual process of casting 
the spell into the item requires one day and 500 gp per level of 
the spell. The item must be of the finest workmanship, worth 
at least 100 gp; after the spell it holds has been discharged, the 
artificer can re-enchant it. Only the artificer may release the 


Table 4: 


Thaumaturgical Specialist Requirements 


Abilities 
“Int 15, Dex 14 | 
Int 12, Con 15 
Int 15, Wis14 


Specialist Race 
HE 


Illusion, Ni 
Artticer H,G 


Geometer H, E, 4E 

Son Mage H, E, ME Int 14, Cha 15 

Wild Mage H,E,AE Intió none | 
H: Human; AE: Half-elf; G: Gnome 


Ag uai School(s) 


Necro., Ench. PETS 
Ench./Charm, Illusion — 


Necro., UU Invoc. /Evoc. 


stored spell, with a casting time of 1; in all other respects the 
spell is treated as if the artificer had cast it normally. Also, an 
item can only contain one spell at a time. Any attempt to cast 
another spell into the item will simply replace the current 
spell. In effect, this ability allows the artificer to create one- 
shot magical items such as a ring enchanted with feather fall or 
a cloak prepared with protection from normal missiles. 

At 7th level, the artificer may create a temporary magical 
item. Any magical item in the DMG not specifically 
restricted to nonwizards is allowed, but the item will func- 
tion only for the artificer. This is a special ability unrelated 
to the enchant an item spell. First, the artificer must success- 
fully research the item creation process, taking one week 
per 500 XP value of the item and spending at least 100 gp 
per week. This time is halved if the artificer has a sample of 
the item to copy or if he succeeds in a contact other plane, leg- 
end lore, or other research spell. The artificer must pass a 
learn spells check to succeed and may never know the 
processes for more magical items than his maximum num- 
ber of spells per level. Actually building and enchanting the 
item requires half the research time and 2d6 x 100 gp, plus 
the cost of the item itself. Fine materials must be used, but 
rare and exotic materials and processes aren't necessary for 
temporary items (see Chapter 7). After completing the 
work, the artificer must pass another learn spells check to 
successfully enchant the temporary item. 

A temporary item lasts 1d6 days, plus one day per level of 
the artificer. Once the enchantment fades, the item can be re- 
enchanted with one uninterrupted week of work, the expendi- 
ture of 2d6 x 100 gp, and another learn spells check. If the tem- 
porary item normally possesses charges, the artificer automati- 
cally places one charge per level into the item when creating it. 


Selthos the wizard desires a carpet of flying, since he wishes to 
investigate an old tower perched high on an inaccessible peak. Look- 
ing up the carpet's XP value (7,500 XP), the player realizes that it 
will take 15 weeks just to research the item! Selthos decides that a 
carpet of flying is too formidable a challenge and searches for a 
cheaper alternative. Investigating his alternatives, he decides that a 
cloak of the bat (1,500 XP) is a much more palatable option. 

Selthos begins his research, working for three weeks and spending 
a total of 1,000 gp (an arbitrary amount set by the DM; he would 
have had to spend at least 300 gp, or 100 per week). Fortunately, he 
succeeds in the learn spells check, and his research is successful— 
from now on, Selthos can produce a cloak of the bat anytime he 
desires, without repeating the research. 

Actually making the cloak requires one week and four days (half 
the research time) and 2d6 x 100 gp, plus the cost of the cloak. The 
DM decides that a suitable cloak costs 100 gp (the minimum 
allowed, but it’s only an article of clothing), and rolls 
700 gp for the cost of the enchantment. Again, Selthos 
succeeds in a learn spells check, so he now possesses a 
cloak of the bat that will last for 1d6 days, plus one 
day per level. With some urgency, he sets off at once to 
investigate the tower before his enchantment fades! 

Several months later, Selthos decides that he needs his 
cloak again. He can re-enchant the cloak with one week 
of work, another 2d6 x 100 gp, and a learn spells check. 


Artificers may create permanent magical items 
using the normal magical item creation rules and 
the enchant an item spell when they reach the 
appropriate levels. (If an artificer creates a true 


magical item he once made a temporary version of, his 
research time and expense is reduced to its minimum value— 
see Chapter 7.) Artificers gain a +10% bonus to their chance to 
successfully enchant items. 

In addition, artificers have a 20% chance at Ist level to 
identify the general purpose and function of any magical 
item simply by examining it for one full turn. This is similar 
to the bard’s ability, but is based on the artificer’s ability to 
analyze the construction and enchantments on the item, not 
the item’s historical significance. This chance increases by 
5% per level, so a 5th-level artificer can identify items with a 
40% chance of success. 

While artificers are fairly weak at first, once they reach 
middle levels they can quickly become some of the most use- 
ful and powerful wizards in the game. The DM should always 
consider the artificer’s proposed item research and construc- 
tion very carefully; any item that the DM feels is too powerful 
or out-of-character can be disallowed. In particular, items with 
absorption or negation powers should be considered very care- 
fully—these can be very unbalancing in a game. 

Geometer: Like the alchemist, the geometer was intro- 
duced in PLAYER's OPTION: Skills & Powers. Geometers seek to 
control magical forces by creating symbols and diagrams of 
mystical significance. The tools of the geometer's trade range 
from runes drawn on paper or carved in stone to free-floating 
constructs of energy woven by the somatic gestures of a spell. 
Naturally, geometers excel in the casting of any spell that 
involves the drawing of a rune, mark, or diagram. In order to 
choose this specialty, a wizard must have an Intelligence 
(Intelligence/Reason) of 15 or better and a Wisdom (Wis- 
dom/Intuition) of 14 or higher. The spells used by the school 
of geometry are described in Appendix 3 of this book. 

Geometers gain the usual advantages for specialization, 


but like the alchemist, they gain no modifiers to their saving 
throws and inflict no saving throw penalties on their tar- 
gets. Beginning at 4th level, a geometer may create scrolls 
by committing a spell he knows to paper. He can cast the 
spell from the scroll at some later time simply by reading 
the scroll, which requires one full round; once read, the 
scroll is consumed and the spell expended. The geometer 
may not have more than one spell-scroll per character level 
prepared at any given time, so a 6th-level geometer may 
have as many as six scrolls ready. 

Transcribing a spell to a scroll requires one full day per 
spell level; a 5th-level spell requires five days of uninter- 
rupted work. The materials cost 100 gp per spell level, and 
the wizard needs a suitable laboratory or library to work in. 
Only spells of the school of geometry can be transcribed to 
scrolls, but a geometer can engage in spell research to find a 
diagram for spells outside the school of geometry. In any 
event, a geometer must succeed in a learn spells check to 
see if he is successful in scribing the scroll. 

Geometers may also attempt to create various forms of 
protection scrolls, beginning at 7th level. The geometer must 
first research the scroll's diagram through normal spell 
research. To figure out how much time and money should be 
spent on researching a particular protection scroll, take a look 
at its experience point value. Basically, a scroll's effective spell 
level is determined by dividing the experience point value by 
500 and then adding 2 (i.e., Level = XP/500 + 2) For example, 
if a scroll is worth 500 XP, it is considered a 3rd-level spell 
(500 divided by 500 equals 1; 1 plus 2 equals 3). The research 
time is two weeks per effective level, at a cost of 1,000 gp per 
level; the geometer must pass a learn spells check to success- 
fully research the diagram. Once the geometer knows the dia- 
gram, he can produce one scroll by investing in 3d6 x 100 gp 


Wizards 


worth of materials and spending one uninterrupted week 
working in his laboratory. Again, a learn spells check applies 
to see if he executed the diagram correctly. 


Bordun's rival Teriaz also wishes to pilfer the dragon's hoard, 
but he’s decided to provide his agent with a scroll of protection 
from dragon breath. This is worth 2,000 XP, so it’s the equiva- 
lent of a 6th-level spell. It will take Teriaz twelve weeks to research 
the scroll and costs him 6,000 gold pieces. After passing his initial 
learn spells check and succeeding in his research, Teriaz can pro- 
duce the scroll with one week of work and an additional 600 gp 
(the DM's roll of 346 x 100 gp) if he succeeds in the final learn 
spells check. While the dragon's hoard has suffered at the hands of 
the alchemist's accomplice, Teriaz's champion succeeds in slaying 
the beast and claiming the rest of the hoard. 


The geometer’s spells tend to be defensive in nature, since 
many spells in the school involve drawing or scribing bound- 
aries of some kind. Spells of the school of geometry are consid- 
ered to have no verbal component. The school of geometry is 
opposed by the schools of enchantment/charm and illusion. 

Song Mage: The school of song relies on the wizard’s skill 
at weaving melody, lyrics, and rhythm to create enchantments 
of great power. Elves and bards have tapped into this source 
of magic for centuries, but now more wizards are investigat- 
ing the intriguing possibilities of this school. While a song 
mage does not require proficiency in singing or musical 
instruments, most song mages are also virtuoso vocalists—the 
subtleties of pitch and expression are critically important in 
casting a spell in this fashion. Song mages require an Intelli- 
gence (Intelligence/Knowledge) of 14, reflecting their musical 
studies, and a Charisma (Charisma/ Appearance) of 15. 

Song mages enjoy the standard benefits and penalties for 
specializing in a school of magic. (Spells belonging to the 
school of song are listed in Appendix 3.) The normal saving 
throw modifiers apply, but note that the song mage may 
apply his saving throw bonus to magical song or sound attacks 
such as a sphinx's roar or banshee's wail in addition to song 
spells. At 8th level, song mages gain the ability to enhance the 
effectiveness of any musical or sound-based magical item by 
50%; a song mage wielding drums of panic increases the area of 
affect from 120-foot radius to a radius of 180 feet. If the magical 
item proves to be cursed, its effect is lessened by 50% (if pos- 
sible). At 11th level, the song mage gains the ability to counter 
magical song or sound attacks once per day, negating the 
effects of the attack in a 10-foot radius centered on the mage. 
This allows the song mage to protect those nearby from a 
harpy’s song, a sphinx’s roar, or a shout spell. The mage must 
stand still or walk slowly and sing for at least one full round to 
negate the effect, and may continue singing for up to one full 
turn per level to defeat pervasive or persistent attacks. 

All spells in the school of song are considered to have 
neither somatic nor material components when cast by a 
song mage—while song mages are extremely vulnerable to 
a silence spell, they are also capable of casting spells while 
securely bound or stripped of all their possessions. The 
school of song is opposed by the schools of necromancy, 
divination, and invocation/evocation. 

The song mage commands a variety of useful spells that 
are effective both in attack and defense. While he has few 
spells that can directly damage an enemy, he is very good at 
influencing or hindering opponents with his magic, espe- 
cially at higher levels. 


23 


Wild Mage: The concept of wild magic was introduced 
in the Tome of Magic. Wild magic is a new theory of magic 
that emphasizes study of the forces of randomness; a wild 
mage never knows exactly what's going to happen when he 
casts a spell. While there isn't enough space here to reprint 
all of the wild magic rules and tables, this briefly sums up 
the specialist so that readers who don't have access to the 
Tome of Magic can make use of this material. 

Since wild magic is a new field of study, and a difficult 
one at that, a wizard must have an Intelligence (or Intelli- 
gence/Reason) score of 16 or better to specialize in this field. 
Wild magic has no opposition school—wild mages can freely 
learn any wizard spell they choose, and they're also the only 
wizards who can learn spells of the school of wild magic. 
Like other specialists, they gain the bonus memorized spell at 
each level. They have no saving throw adjustments for their 
own saves or their targets’ saves. Wild mages receive a bonus 
of +10% when learning new wild magic spells, and a penalty 
of -5% when learning magic spells from other schools. When 
a wild mage researches a new wild magic spell, the spell is 
treated as if it were one level lower. 

Wild mages have a special ability to control certain magi- 
cal items that normally behave randomly for other charac- 
ters. A wild mage has a 50% chance to control one of the fol- 
lowing items, selecting the result of his choice: the amulet of 
the planes, bag of beans, bag of tricks, deck of illusions, deck of 
many things, and the well of many worlds. The wand of wonder 
is a special case; if the wild mage successfully controls the 
wand, he may use charges from the wand to cast any spell 
he already knows, whether or not he has the spell memo- 
rized. The number of charges expended equals the level of 
the spell chosen; if the mage fails his roll, he simply expends 
one charge from the wand and rolls for a random result. 

Every time a wild mage casts a spell, the effective casting 
level may vary. While the level variation rules are explained 
in detail in the Tome of Magic, here's a quick and simple 
method for determining the variation. When the wild mage 
casts a spell, roll 1d20: on a roll of 6 or less, the caster's 
effective level drops by 1d3 levels; on a 15 or better, it 
increases by 1d3 levels; and on a roll of 10, the spell results 
in a wild surge. Note that the level variation can't exceed 
the caster’s level, so a 2nd-level wizard can't vary by more 
than two levels either way. Level variation affects all level- 
based aspects of a spell, including damage, duration, range, 
opponent's saving throws, and other such factors. 


Kelmaran, a 5th-level wild mage, casts a fireball spell at a 
band of orcs. He rolls 1420 and comes up with a 1, so his effective 
level will be reduced by 1d3 levels. Rolling 1d3, he is relieved to 
see that he only loses 1 level, so his fireball does 4 dice of damage 
instead of 5 and may suffer a small reduction in range. With a 
lucky roll, Kelmaran's spell could have done as much damage as 
an 8th-level wizard's fireball. 


Wild surges are strange manifestations of the random- 
ness of wild magic. A complete table for wild surges 
appears in the Tome of Magic, but if a copy of this book 
isn't available, use the random chart for the wand of won- 
der, in the magical item descriptions of the DMG. Note 
that a number of wild magic spells appear in the Tome of 
Magic and the Wizard Spell Compendium—if you're really 
interested in playing a wild mage character, you should 
obtain a copy of one or both of those accessories. 


Chapter 1 


> While there is a broad selection of spe- 
Customized cialist wizards to choose from in this 
Wizar book, some players may want to create 


more unique characters. PLAYER'S 

Char acters OPTION: Skills & Powers introduced the 
concept of point-based character design; this section now 
expands that material for wizards. Dozens of new powers, 
abilities, and restrictions are described here, allowing the cre- 
ation of almost any kind of magic-using character imaginable. 

If you want to use the material here in conjunction with 
Skills & Powers, this section takes the place of the character 
class design rules. In addition to the initial allotment of 40 
character points assigned to a character in this chapter, a 
player may also choose to spend points left over from the 
race design chapter and save points in this step for profi- 
ciency selections. Note that there is no restriction on how a 
character spends his points in this system. 

As always, the DM has the final word on whether or not 
a particular character is appropriate for his campaign. If the 
DM doesn't like the way a character is put together, he can 
have the player try again. 


Using the Wizard Character Design Rules 


In case you aren’t familiar with point-based character 
design, here’s how it works: You get to decide which class 
abilities and which hindrances your character will have dur- 
ing his adventuring career. For example, if you want your 
wizard character to have the hit points and fighting ability of 
a priest, you can select the appropriate abilities to do so—but 
chances are good that your character will have to make seri- 
ous sacrifices elsewhere in order to get this advantage. 

When you custom-design a wizard, your character 
begins with 40 character points. Each ability you select for 
your character costs character points, but you can gain extra 
points by choosing limitations. Unless you spend points on 
special powers or select special limitations, your wizard 
character uses a four-sided Hit Die, uses the wizard’s 
THACO and saving throw charts, gains the ability to cast 
wizard spells as noted in the PHB on Table 21: Wizard Spell 
Progression, may use any magical item normally usable by 
wizards, may not wear armor, and is limited to the follow- 
ing weapons: dagger, dart, knife, sling, or staff. Note that 
your customized wizard character must spend points to 
gain schools from which he can cast spells. 

Under these rules, you are under no obligation to build 
your character as a mage or a specialist wizard. Your char- 
acter’s powers and spell schools will be determined entirely 
by your choices here. However, for your convenience you 
may want to use these basic wizard classes as starting 
points. If you decide to begin the customizing process with a 
mage or specialist wizard, your character receives no character 
points to choose new or optional abilities. Since the mage or any 
specialist wizard is already a complete character class, the 
only way to add new powers is to compensate for them by 
selecting new limitations for a net point cost of zero. 

The School of Universal Magic: All wizards have full 
access to this school at a cost of zero character points. This 
school contains spells basic to any wizard's studies. 


Optional Abilities 


A customized wizard is built from a slate of optional 


24 


abilities, ranging from schools he may cast spells from to 
game mechanics such as THACO improvement rate, Hit Die 
size, and weapons and armor allowed. The available abili- 
ties are listed below. 

Delayed Acquisition of Abilities: A character can reduce 
the cost of a special ability by choosing to delay it to a higher 
level. For example, a character may select the ability of 
reduced casting time, but then delay the acquisition of the 
ability to 4th or 5th level. An ability that is not acquired until 
3rd level is 1 point cheaper than the listed cost; an ability 
delayed to 5th level is 2 points cheaper; an ability delayed to 
7th level is 3 points cheaper; an ability delayed to 9th level is 4 
points cheaper than listed; and an ability delayed to 11th level 
is 5 points cheaper than normal. No ability can be reduced to 
zero or less points—everything costs at least one character 
point, no matter how long the wizard waits for the power. 


* Access to schools (54): A customized wizard pays 5 char- 

acter points (CPs) for each school he may learn and cast 

spells from. A standard mage would pay 40 CPs to gain 
access to the eight schools of philosophy: abjuration, alter- 
ation, conjuration /summoning, divination, enchant- 
ment/charm, illusion, invocation/evocation, and necro- 
mancy. Customized wizards may choose to have access to 
thaumaturgical schools or schools of effect if they wish. 

Armor (5/10/15): With this ability, a wizard may ignore 

the normal restriction against using armor. As a 5-point 

ability, the wizard may wear padded armor; for 10 

points, the wizard may wear leather, studded leather, 

hide, or brigandine armor; and for 15 points, the wizard 
may wear any armor he chooses. Note that a wizard may 
not use any kind of shield. 

* Automatic spell acquisition (2/5): The wizard may add a 
new spell of his choice to his spell book every time he 
gains a level, without having to pass a learn spells check. 
The wizard need not have a copy of the spell but must 
have seen the spell used at least once. As a 2-point ability, 
the wizard can acquire spells from one school only; as a 5- 
point ability, he can choose from any school he has access 
to. The wizard must be able to cast the spell he chooses. 

* Bonus spells (10/15): A wizard with this ability increases 
the number of spells of each level that he can memorize by 
one. For example, a 1st-level wizard may memorize two 
1st-level spells instead of just one. For 10 points, the wizard 
may select spells of one school as bonus spells; for 15 
points, the bonus spell can be any spell the wizard can cast. 

* Casting time reduction (2/5): Spells cast by the wizard are 
unusually swift and have a casting time of 1 less than nor- 
mal. For 2 points, the wizard may accelerate spells of only 
one school. For 5 points, all spells are faster. 

* Combat bonus (8/10): A wizard with this class ability is 
much better in combat than normal. For eight CPs, the wiz- 
ard's THACO advances as if he were a rogue of equal level. 
For 10 CPs, the wizard's THACO advances as a priest's. 

* Constitution adjustment (5): The wizard may use the 
Constitution-based hit point bonus of warriors, gaining 
+3 or +4 hp per Hit Die with a Constitution of 17 or 18 
instead of the normal maximum of +2 hp per die. 

* Detect magic (10): A wizard with this power may use 
detect magic once per day per two levels (twice a day at 3rd 
level, three times at 5th, and so on). The wizard doesn't 
need to memorize the spell, but in all other respects the 
power operates as if it were actually cast by the wizard. 


Wizards 


* Dispel (10/15): This power allows a wizard to dispel one 


kind of effect or spell once per day, or three times per 
day for 15 CPs. The range of this power is 30 yards, and 
it requires nothing more than one round of concentra- 
tion. The base chance of success is 50%, +5% for each 
level difference between the dispeller and the creator of 
the effect to be dispelled. The type of effect that may be 
dispelled must be a group of linked spells in the same 
school; for example, charm spells, polymorph spells, or 
shadow magic and monsters are all good examples. 
Enhanced casting level (10): A wizard with this ability 
may cast spells of one school as if he were 1d4 levels 
higher than his actual level (roll each time used). All 
level-based effects of the spell are altered, including, 
damage, range, duration, and area of effect. This power 
may only be invoked once per day. 

Extended spell duration (10/15): Noninstantaneous 
spells cast by the wizard last an additional time unit 
(round, hour, day, etc.) per two levels. The exact time 
unit depends on the normal duration of the spell—if the 
duration is noted in hours, a 5th-level wizard's bonus 
would be an extra three hours. As a 10-point power, 
extended duration applies to spells of one school. For 15 
points, it applies to all spells cast by the wizard. 
Followers (10): Normally, wizards do not attract loyal 
followers at high levels like other characters do. A wiz- 
ard who selects this ability automatically attracts 20 to 
200 0-level men-at-arms at 8th level if he establishes a 
castle, keep, tower, or other place of strength. In addi- 
tion, 1d6 low-level wizards (1st to 3rd level) will also 
appear and request permission to study beneath the PC 
wizard. These loyal apprentices can undertake minor 
errands or research on the wizard's behalf, as long as 
they are treated well. 

Immunity (10+): A wizard with this power gains complete 
immunity to one particular spell, at a cost of 10 CPs plus 1 
CP per spell level. The wizard ignores the effects of the spell 
and cannot be directly damaged or harmed by the spell, 
although he could be indirectly harmed—a wizard immune 
to charm person could be beaten senseless by a charmed 
fighter, for example. The character may gain immunity to a 
group of related spells by spending CPs to become immune 
to the highest-level spell in that group, so a wizard who 
wanted immunity to all charms would spend 18 CPs for 
immunity to mass charm—charm person and charm monster 
are included with immunity to mass charm. The DM may 
disallow any immunity that he feels is too powerful. 
Improved Hit Die (10/20): For 10 character points, the 
wizard uses a d6 for a Hit Die instead of a d4. For 20 
points, the wizard uses a d8. 

Learning bonus (5/7+): The wizard gains a +15% bonus to 
his chance to learn spells of one school; for seven points, 
this increases to +25%. The wizard may apply the bonus to 
learning spells of all schools by doubling the point cost. 
No components (5/8): With this talent, a wizard may desig- 
nate one spell of each level as a spell that requires no mate- 
rial components. For 5 points, the wizard may select spells 
of one school only; for 8 points, the wizard may select 
spells from any school. The wizard may not choose spells 
from the schools of alchemy or artifice for this advantage. 
Persistent spell effect (15 +2/spell level): The wizard 
may select one spell that he knows (and can cast) to have 
a persistent, permanent effect. He must give up one spell 


mm 
m 


slot of the appropriate level, so a wizard who wants to 
have ESP as a persistent power must leave one 2nd-level 
spell slot empty. Only spells with noninstantaneous, non- 
special durations may be selected as persistent powers, 
and the spell must be one which affects the caster. By 
concentrating, the wizard may invoke the power and 
maintain it for as long as he continues to concentrate. 
Changing the persistent spell requires a full week of 
uninterrupted work. If the wizard is struck by a dispel 
magic, the persistent effect fails. First-level spells that are 
appropriate for persistent effects include: change self, chill 
touch, detect undead, feather fall, gaze reflection, jump, protec- 
tion from evil, shield, spider climb, and ventriloquism. 
Priestly wizard (10+): A wizard with this talent may 
select one minor sphere of access for 10 points or one 
major sphere for 15 points. The wizard must still use 
wizard spell slots to memorize these spells; in effect, 
they're translations or adaptations of priest spells the 
wizard knows through special training. Priest spells 
must be learned normally and count against the wizard's 
maximum number of spells per level. 

Proficiency group crossovers (5+): Normally, a wizard 
may select proficiencies from the wizard and general 
groups, and must pay a penalty in character points or 
proficiency slots for choosing proficiencies out of these 
groups. At a cost of 5 CPs each, the wizard may select 
another character group for a NWP crossover. 

Range increase (5/74): All ranged spells from one school 
known to the wizard have their range increased by 25% for 
5 CPs or 50% for 7 CPs. For example, the 1st-level spell hold 
person has a range of 20 yards per level, but with this 
power the range could increase to 25 or 30 yards per level. 
The wizard can gain this bonus to all ranged spells regard- 
less of school by doubling the CP cost. 

Read magic (5): This power allows the wizard to use read 
magic once per day per two levels. The wizard doesn’t 
need to memorize the spell, but in all other respects the 
power operates as if it were a read magic actually cast by 
the wizard. 

Research bonus (5+): When the wizard is performing 
spell research, spells of one school are treated as if they 
are one level lower, just like the standard specialist wiz- 
ard ability. If the wizard doubles the cost to 10, he may 
apply this bonus to all schools. 

School knowledge (5/8): This is a standard benefit for a 
specialist wizard. Due to the wizard's extensive knowl- 
edge of one school of magic, he gains a +1 bonus to sav- 
ing throws versus spells of that school, and inflicts a -1 
penalty to the saving throws of his opponents when cast- 
ing spells of the school. For 8 CPs, the saving throw 
modifiers increase to +2 and —2, respectively. 

Thief ability (104): A wizard with this talent possesses one 
thief ability of his choice. For every 5 additional points he 
spends, he may choose another thief ability. (Note that 
backstab is included as a thief ability.) The wizard's per- 
centage scores increase as noted in the DMG on Table 19: 
Thief Average Ability Table. Modifiers for race, armor 
worn, and exceptional Dexterity score all apply. 

Weapon selection (10/15): For 10 CPs, the wizard may 
expand his selection of weapons to either the cleric or thief 
lists (player's choice). For 15 points, the wizard is com- 
pletely unrestricted in his choice of weapons and may gain 
proficiency in any weapon he spends a slot to learn. 


Chapter 1 


* Weapon specialization (15): With this power, the wizard ° 
gains the ability to specialize in a weapon. Choosing this 
ability doesn’t confer specialization—it merely makes it 
available for the wizard, who is still required to spend the 
necessary CPs or proficiency slots to actually specialize. 


Oplional Limilalions 


Limitations are selected much like abilities. Each limita- 
tion carries a CP bonus that counters CPs spent on abilities. 
If a wizard selects 55 CPs of abilities in the previous section, . 
he must come up with 15 CPs of limitations, since the wiz- 
ard is normally allowed only 40 CPs worth of abilities. 

A "standard" mage or specialist wizard can use limita- 
tions to pay for unusual abilities he wouldn't normally have ° 
access to. For example, if a wild mage also wanted to be 
able to move silently (a 10-point ability from the preceding 
list), he has to find a 10-point limitation to compensate. The 
following is a list of available limitations: 


* Awkward casting method (5): The wizard's spells must 
be cast in an extremely obvious fashion, alerting anyone 
within earshot that the wizard is using magic. The wiz- 
ard might be surrounded by brilliant dancing motes of 
light, he might have to shout his vocal component at the 
top of his lungs, people nearby might feel waves of chill- 
ing cold wash over them—however it works, the wiz- . 
ard's spellcasting activity is immediately noticed. Cast- 
ing spells from ambush is nearly impossible, and casting 
spells discretely is right out, so a quiet ESP in a tavern . 
will never be available to the wizard. 
* Behavior/taboo (2): The wizard has a strong set of beliefs 
that require him to act strangely. For example, he may 
have to dress in certain colors, avoid physical contact 
with other people, avoid certain foods, and so on. The 
behavior chosen is well-known by most NPCs as the 
behavior of a wizard, so it becomes difficult for the wiz- . 
ard to conceal his profession. The wizard's actions may 
also make it easier for enemies to find or harass him by 
exploiting his taboos. Most importantly, a wizard who 
violates his beliefs loses all spells he currently has memo- 
rized; he believes that he can't cast spells until he behaves 
in the required manner again. . 
* Difficult memorization (5): A wizard with this limitation 
can study and memorize spells only in very specific cir- 
cumstances. For example, the wizard must be in his lab 
to memorize spells, he must be in a temple of the god of 
magic, or he must perform a rite lasting one full day and 
using materials worth at least 250 gp per level in order to 
prepare himself to memorize spells. 
* Environmental condition (54): The wizard requires certain ° 
conditions for spells to be effective; for example, a wizard 
may only be able to cast spells by day, while in contact 
with a favored element, or as long as no priests are nearby. 
The DM should evaluate the proposed restriction to deter- 
mine if it applies in everyday circumstances (20 points), 
common situations (15 points), rare circumstances (10 
points), or only under very specific conditions (5 points.) 
For example, the mage who can only cast spells in daylight 
hours has an everyday restriction—each night, he’s almost 
helpless. Another mage who can't cast spells during the 
dark of the moon only has a 5-point restriction, since this 
occurs for only a couple of days each month. 


26 


Hazardous spells (10): A wizard with this limitation 
pays the price for his magic. Each time the wizard casts a 
spell, he must attempt a saving throw vs. breath weapon 
or suffer 1 point of damage per level of spell. Alterna- 
tively, the wizard has a 1% chance per spell level, cumu- 
lative, of going insane. The madness lasts 3d4 days, dur- 
ing which the wizard may be catatonic, psychotic, para- 
noid, or generally disturbed in whatever fashion the DM 
deems appropriate, before the character can recover and 
reset the chance of madness to 0% again. 

Learning penalty (5/8): This is a common restriction of spe- 
cialist wizards. The wizard may learn spells of one school 
without penalty; for all other schools, he suffers a -15% 
penalty to his learn spells roll, or a -25% penalty for 8 CPs. 
Limited magical item use (54): A wizard with this 
restriction cannot use certain magical items. For each 
category of magical item that is unusable, the wizard 
gains a 5 CP restriction. The categories are: potions, oils, 
and scrolls; rings; rods, staves, and wands; and miscel- 
laneous magical items, weapons, and armor. Another 
way for this restriction to operate is by barring all magi- 
cal items that simulate spells of a certain school—for 
example, all items that have invocation/evocation 
effects, and so on. This is a 5-point restriction for each 
barred school. Specialist wizards often take this restric- 
tion for their opposition schools. 

Reduced hit points (10): Wizards with this limitation use a 
d3 for their Hit Die instead of a d4. In addition, the wizard 
is limited to a Constitution hit point bonus of +1 per die. 
Reduced spell knowledge (7): The maximum number of 
spells of each level that the wizard may know is reduced 
to one-half normal, or 10 if his Intelligence is high 
enough to allow him to know all the available spells. For 
example, a wizard with an Intelligence of 16 may know 
up to 11 spells of each level, but with this limitation he 
may only know six spells of each level. 

Reduced spell progression (15): This is the reverse of the 
bonus spells enjoyed by specialist wizards. A wizard 
with this restriction can memorize one less spell than 
normal at each level, so a 1st-level wizard is reduced 
from one spell in memory to none at all—a serious dis- 
advantage for lower-level characters. 

Slower casting time (2/5): Spells cast by the wizard are 
unusually complicated and require more time than nor- 
mal to cast. All spell casting times increase by 3. For 5 
points, the wizard's spells automatically increase to the 
next greater time unit. This means that spells with cast- 
ing times of 1 to 9 increase to one full round. Spells with 
casting times in rounds require a similar number of 
turns, turns go to hours, and hours go to days. 
Supernatural constraint (5+): The process by which the 
wizard gained access to his magical powers transformed 
him into a supernatural creature with unusual vulnerabili- 
ties. Unlike a belief or taboo, these constraints cannot be 
violated by the wizard by any means. Some examples: the 
wizard can't cross running water; the wizard can't enter a 
home or community without an invitation; the wizard 
can't set foot on hallowed ground; the wizard automati- 
cally becomes lost at crossroads; the wizard leaves foot- 
prints that can always be tracked; normal animals are terri- 
fied of the wizard and won't let him near; and any number 
of other such constraints. These constraints can be used by 
clever enemies to render the wizard powerless or severely 


restrict his movements. The DM should evaluate the pro- 
posed constraint and assign a limitation of 5 to 15 points 
depending on how often it comes into play and how much 
it interieres with the character on a daily basis. 

alism ): The wizard’s magical power is inextricably 
linked vith a single object or talisman. He must have this 
object on his person in order to cast spells. Typically, a 
talisman might be a crystal, a staff, an amulet, a ring, or 
some similar item. If the wizard’s talisman is destroyed, 
he can create a new one with 1d4 weeks of work in his 
nia § or home pe 

| stri ): As a 3-point restriction, the wiz- 

ard may never hae proficiency i in any weapon. As a 5- 
point restriction, the wizard is not allowed to attempt to 
wield a weapon at all and may never try to injure another 
creature with a weapon. Doing so renders all spell use 
impossible for the character for at least one full month. 


. TE 779 > En Ni 
»3luno with "nmi Yr n ino ( jar 


C Iii WILULII No Gt 7171 ONIS Suallar LUA S 
3 - 

While the customized wizard rules allow players a 
great deal of flexibility in creating their characters, they 
also allow a clever player to put together a "super-wiz- 
ard" by carefully selecting limitations that he thinks will 
rarely hinder the character. Don't despair; this is a zero- 
sum character creation system, and for every strength a 
character must also incorporate a corresponding weak- 
ness. Here are a few guidelines for handling high- 
recess eins d 

T : The DM always has the final say on 
anything in his campaign. If a player insists on building 
characters that unbalance the game, the DM is within his 
rights to simply not approve the character or disallow cus- 
tomized character creation in his game. 

oint Limits: The DM can limit the number of additional 
powers purchased by a wizard by setting a limit of 60 or 70 
points of optional abilities. After the first 40 points, each 
additional ability must still be paid for by taking limita- 
tions. This prevents a player from building a wizard with 
every ability on the list and balancing it with every limita- 
tion. Optionally, the DM can require that a wizard spend at 
least 30 points acquiring schools to cast spells from, or set 
other S aie in aa areas. 
ations \ ng >: A player might think he's 
getting away with something wher he takes a couple of belief 
or environmental condition limitations, but a good DM can 
always find a way to bring these role-playing disadvantages 
into play. By looking for situations where the super-charac- 
ter's built-in weaknesses cripple him, the DM can graphically 
Ulnstrate how out of Palence the ip oua actually is. 
ad Gu me »: Naturally, if one 
character i isa Te arenal of rowers and abilities, it 
stands to reason that some NPCs might have similar 
skills. No matter how tough a particular PC is, there’s 
always someone in the game world who's a little tougher 
than him, and meeting that NPC is a super-character's 
worst nightmare. While this tactic isn't particularly ele- 
gant, it's quite effective in letting the player know just 
how it feels to be in the place of the poor NPCs his charac- 
ter's been terrorizing. 


Chapter 2: 
Driests 


e 


The Player's Handbook describes two types of priests: clerics and specialty priests. 
While clerics are intended to serve as a generic model for a priest character, DMs 
and Sati in campaigns that feature specific pantheons or mythoi are encour- 
aged to create specialty priests to reflect the particular aims and powers of the 
different deities of the world. The druid is presented as an example of a specialty 
priest, representing any power that stands for nature—or even nature itself. 

In this chapter, we'll examine the basic cleric and druid classes in great 
detail, concentrating on their magical abilities. A number of spells are reorga- 
nized into different spheres in order to provide the specialty priests with basic 
abilities that should be common to all priest characters, while maintaining 
unique spells that can only be cast by certain specialists. We'll also introduce 
three new types or subclasses of specialty priest: the crusader, the shaman, and 
the monk. Last but not least, we'll present a point-based design system for cus- 
tomizing specialty priests. 


Priests 


Hordes of specialty priests have been introduced in vari- 
ous accessories following the Player's Handbook. There are 
specialty priesthoods in Legends and Lore, The Complete 
Priest's Handbook, Monster Mythology, and several of the 
campaign settings. At this point, there are well over one 
hundred varieties of priests in print! Unfortunately, some of 
these specialty priests are far more powerful than similar 
specialty priests presented in different settings. This raises 
the question of which sources are "generic" enough to use 
in any campaign setting, and which should be reserved for 
specific campaign worlds. 

The first rule of thumb is simple: If a campaign setting 
features its own pantheon and specialty priests for those 
powers, you should give that material precedence. For 
example, the deities and priesthoods of the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS, BIRTHRIGHT, or DARK SUN campaign settings are 
described in detail in their respective boxed sets. When a 
player creates a priest character for one of these settings, he 
should refer to the character creation rules specific to those 
settings. Of course, a DM who has assembled this informa- 
tion for his own campaign can certainly require his players 
to create their priest characters accordingly! 

If a world does not feature a fully-developed pantheon 
or special priesthood rules for the various powers of the 
mythoi, then you should consider the material in PLAYER'S 
OPTION: Spells & Magic to take precedence over all earlier 
material. In other words, the rules here are intended to 
replace the specialty priesthoods presented in The Complete 
Priest's Handbook, Legends and Lore, and Monster Mythology. 
Note that the powers and faiths presented in these books 
remain unchanged; PLAYER's OPTION: Spells & Magic just 
changes the way the specialty priests are put together. 


Just as wizard spells are divided into 

Spheres schools of magic, priest spells are orga- 
nized into spheres of access. A sphere of 

of Access access represents a group of related 
spell powers granted by a particular deity, so a power of 
war usually grants access to the spheres of combat and 
war, a power of nature usually grants access to the spheres 
of animal and plant, and so on. All priestly spheres of 
access are organized in the same scheme—there are no 
variant organizations like the schools of effect or thau- 
maturgy for wizards. 

While wizards generally have the ability to learn spells 
from any school unless specifically stated otherwise, priests 
are strictly limited to the spheres their deity grants them 
access to. In other words, the organization of priest spells gov- 
erns which spells a priest can cast, while wizard schools gov- 
ern which spells a wizard can’t cast. This makes it difficult to 
create new spheres of priest spells, since a great deal of work 
must be done to retrofit any new spheres to existing priest- 
hoods that should have had influence in the new sphere. 

The standard spheres from the Player’s Handbook are the 
spheres of all, animal, astral, charm, combat, creation, div- 
ination, elemental (with the lesser spheres of air, earth, fire, 
and water), guardian, healing, necromantic, plant, protec- 
tion, summoning, sun, and weather. In addition, the Tome of 
Magic adds the spheres of chaos, law, numbers, thought, 
time, travelers, war, and wards. 

All: Spells of this sphere represent the basic class abilities 
that should be available to all priest characters, regardless of 


29 


specialization. Spells that deal with direct manifestations of 
a deity’s power, such as bless, chant, and gate are included, as 
well as a few spells that are so general that all priests may 
make use of them, such as detect magic, remove curse, and 
atonement. The sphere of all has been greatly expanded in 
PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells & Magic in order to balance the spell 
powers available to different kinds of specialty priests. 

Animal: Spells that influence or alter creatures are found 
in the sphere of animal. Most animal spells do not affect 
people. Powers of nature or husbandry often grant spells of 
this sphere. 

Astral: The astral sphere deals with communication and 
movement between the various planes of existence. Priest- 
hoods of philosophy or travel sometimes have access to this 
sphere. 

Chaos: Priests with access to this sphere command spell 
powers that increase randomness and confusion to the 
world around them. Deities of mischief and ill luck often 
grant spells of chaos. 

Charm: Charm spells usually affect the attitudes and 
actions of people. Powers of love, trickery, or art often grant 
access to this sphere. The sphere is also useful when dealing 
with hostile enemies or unbelievers, and many expansive 
faiths deal with this sphere as well. 

Combat: Naturally, combat spells are used to attack or 
injure the enemies of the faith. Since most priests have an 
interest in self-defense, a great number of faiths have access 
to the sphere of combat. 

Creation: Creation spells allow the priest to produce 
food, water, light, or other things from nothing. Create water 
and continual light are good examples. Prime creator powers 
often grant access to this sphere. 

Divination: This useful sphere allows the priest to dis- 
cern the safest course of action, detect hidden things, or dis- 
cover hidden knowledge. It is the province of deities of 
learning and wisdom. 

Elemental: The four basic elements of creation—air, 
earth, fire, and water—are dealt with in this sphere. Powers 
of nature or powers with elemental interests typically grant 
access to at least part of this sphere. Very few priests have 
access to all four elements. 

Guardian: Priesthoods charged with the protection of 
holy places often have access to this sphere. Spells that help 
a guardian to perform his task are included as well as spells 
that create or enforce magical barriers over a person or area. 

Healing: This sphere deals with all forms of healing 
spells, except those which restore life or manipulate the sub- 
ject’s life force. 

Law: The sphere of law is the antithesis of the sphere of 
chaos. Law spells concentrate on the principle of obedience 
and the strength of the group over the strength of the indi- 
vidual. Deities of rulership and community are likely to 
have influence in this sphere. 

Necromantic: Spells of the necromantic sphere deal with 
the forces of life and death, including raise dead and resur- 
rect. These spells are also quite useful in dealing with 
undead monsters. 

Numbers: Priests with access to this sphere believe that 
numbers and mathematical relationships can provide 
insight into the nature of the universe. Powers of knowl- 
edge and arcane lore occasionally grant access to this 
unusual sphere of spells. 

Plant: This sphere deals with plants and vegetation of all 


Priests 


kinds, from agricultural to wilderness settings. Priests of 
nature or agriculture are often granted access to this sphere. 

Protection: While this sphere is related to the guardian 
sphere, protection spells generally enable the priest to pro- 
tect people, not places. Many of these spells are very useful 
in combat, and militant priests often have access to this 
sphere. 

Summoning: Summoning spells call creatures to serve 
the priest. Even extradimensional creatures can be sum- 
moned at higher levels. This sphere has been revised to 
include a modest selection of spells suitable for dismissing 
summoned creatures. 

Sun: Solar spells deal with light of different qualities in a 
variety of ways. Spells such as starsltine and Sol's searing orb 
are included in the sphere of sun. 

Thought: The sphere of thought is composed of spells 
that deal with the interaction of the thinker, the thought, 
and the subject of the thought. In effect, priests who have 
access to this sphere believe that thought itself has a certain 
reality that can affect the physical reality of the world 
around the mind. Powers concerned with the mind or 
knowledge are found within this sphere. 

Travelers: Spells of this sphere provide aid and comfort 
to travelers and pilgrims. Deities of wayfarers both peace- 
ful and militant may make these spells available to their 
followers. 

War: Unlike the sphere of combat, the sphere of war 
deals specifically with magic useful on the battlefield in 
clashes between armies. War spells can affect hundreds of 
soldiers at a time. 

Wards: The sphere of wards includes spells that provide 
protection for clearly defined areas, ranging from single 
objects to whole communities. It is related to the sphere of 
guardian, but the sphere of wards only creates barriers or 
obstacles to deter intrusion; ward spells do not necessarily 
enhance the priest's ability to defend the area. In addition, 
many ward spells are cooperative in nature and provide 
protection for bodies of believers instead of holy sites. 

Weather: This sphere is concerned with the forces of 
weather, including wind, fog, lightning, and weather con- 
trol. Powers of nature and tempests often have influence in 
this sphere. 


DLAYER’S OPTION and Spheres of Access 

While the general definitions of the spheres have remained 
the same for PLAYER's OPTION: Spells & Magic, a number of 
spells have been rearranged for purposes of game balance. 
Many spells have been added to the sphere of all in order to 
provide all priests with the basic spell powers that should be 
available to them. Some other spells have been assigned to 
different schools to better define the roles and strengths of 
clerics, druids, and other specialty priests. For example, reflect- 
ing pool was originally designed as a druid spell, but in AD&D 
2nd Edition it became a divination spell available to clerics. In 
this book, reflecting pool has been placed in the sphere of ele- 
mental water, where druids have access to it but clerics do 
not. Refer to Appendix 4 for a complete and accurate listing of 
which spells belong where. 

Cleric Sphere Access: As part of the reorganization of 
the spheres of access, clerics lose access to the sphere of sun 
and the elemental spheres of air and fire. Clerics retain 
minor access to the elemental spheres of water and earth. 


51 


The cleric only loses a dozen or so spells he formerly had 
access to, and most of these were spells that had previously 
belonged to the druid in the original AD&D. 

Druid Sphere Access: Similarly, druids lose access to the 
sphere of divination, but gain major access to the sphere of 
sun. Again, this takes away spells that blur the line between 
the druid and cleric's spellcasting powers, while restoring a 
number of spells that druids formerly had access to in the 
original AD&D game. 


1 All five standard varieties of priest— 
D ricst the cleric, the druid, the sa n the 
monk, and the shaman—can be con- 
Characters sidered generic enough to be used in 
any campaign setting. In addition, some of the existing spe- 
cialty priests described in previous books can be “folded in” 
to these basic five priest archetypes. 

Clerics are militant priests who serve as temple knights, 
defenders of the faith, and guardians of a faith’s holy places. 
They have very good fighting skills and a wide array of 
spells to choose from. The skills, abilities, and spell selection 
available to the cleric can also describe priests of agricul- 
ture, arts, birth/children, community, crafts, culture, dark- 
ness/night, dawn, death, disease, everything, evil, fate /des- 
tiny, fortune/luck, good, healing, life-death-rebirth cycle, 
light, love, marriage, messengers, metalwork, 
mischief/trickery, music/dance, oceans/rivers, prosperity, 
race, redemption, rulership/kingship, sites, sky / weather, 
sun, trade, and wind. 

Crusaders are closely related to clerics, but while clerics 
can be described as defenders of the faith, crusaders are 
weapons against the enemies of the temple they serve. They 
are true soldier-priests, skilled in physical combat and 
armed with spells appropriate for the battlefield. Crusaders 
include specialty priests of fire, guardianship, 
justice/revenge, lightning, metalwork, race, rulership/king- 
ship, strength, thunder, and war. 

Druids are priests of nature. They are the protectors of 
the forests or other wild places and stewards over all living 
things placed in their charge. Druids are weaker in physical 
combat than a cleric or crusader, but their spheres of access 
include a number of powerful offensive and defensive ele- 
mental spells. In addition, they enjoy several unique 
granted powers. Druids can represent the powers of ani- 
mals, druid, earth, elemental forces, fertility, hunting, moon, 
nature, seasons, and vegetation. 

Monks are cloistered priests and adepts who seek 
enlightenment through the rigorous training of mind, body, 
and spirit. Monks are extremely skilled in unarmed combat 
and have access to several unusual spheres of spells. Monks 
may represent specialty priests of competition, divinity of 
mankind, literature/ poetry, magic, oracles/prophecy, peace, 
time, and wisdom. 

Shamans are priests of barbaric or savage cultures. They 
serve as guides and protectors for their tribes. Shamans 
have fair combat ability and spell access, but they also com- 
mand the spirits of animals, ancestors, and nature. The 
shaman is a good choice for any player character who 
comes from a barbaric or nomadic culture, and can also rep- 
resent a specialty priest of ancestors, animals, earth, every- 
thing, fertility, hunting, lightning, oceans/rivers, race, 
sky / weather, thunder, and wind. 


Ability Requirements: Wisdom 9 
Prime Requisite: Wisdom 
Races Allowed: All 


Known as the most common type of priest, a cleric 
makes a suitable representative for a variety of powers. A 
cleric is both a sturdy soldier with formidable spell powers 
and a defender of the faith and proselytizer; overall, he is 
the most versatile and well-rounded priest character. Clerics 
with a Wisdom score of 16 or better earn a 10% bonus to the 
experience they gain. A cleric may be of any alignment 
acceptable to his patron deity. 

Clerics retain all the powers and abilities described in the 
Player’s Handbook, with the exception of their spheres of 
access, which are slightly altered. (See PLAYER’S OPTION™ 
and Spheres of Access.) Clerics have major access to the 
spheres of all, astral, charm, combat, creation, divination, 
guardian, healing, necromantic, protection, summoning, 
and minor access to elemental water and elemental earth. 

Clerics may wear any armor and use any Type B (blud- 
geoning) weapon. They may also wield a variety of magical 
items. Clerics turn undead and attract followers as 
described in the PHB. At 9th level, the cleric may receive 
permission from his order to establish a religious strong- 
hold and govern it in the name of the faith. 


v ` ó 
Cn DD HERE TIU LÍ 


Mi 
Nd 
Ms d we 
di tay 


CU 
su 
npe 


KO zs ee 
| Fusacdct 


Ability Requirements: Wisdom 9 
Strength 12 
Charisma 12 

Prime Requisites: Wisdom, Strength 

Races Allowed: Human, Dwarf, Elf 


The crusader is a priest of a deity of war, combat, or con- 
flict who stands at the forefront of the fight for his faith. 
Crusaders must be either lawful or chaotic in alignment; in 
other words, crusaders may be of any alignment except 
neutral evil, neutral good, or true neutral. Since they are 
often called upon to lead the forces of their faith into battle, 
crusaders require high Strength and Charisma scores in 
addition to a minimum Wisdom of 9. High Constitution or 
Dexterity scores are also very useful for a crusader. A cru- 
sader with Wisdom and Strength scores of 16 or better gains 
a 10% bonus to the experience points he earns. In matters of 
advancement, crusaders use the same column as clerics do 
on Table 23: Priest Experience Levels in the PHB. 

While crusaders are often associated with war gods, they 
may also represent powers of leadership or strong alignment 
that are in conflict with opposing forces. Crusaders often orga- 
nize themselves into a military hierarchy and view their tem- 
ples as fortifications as well as places of worship. In some 
cases, the power of the crusader orders can rival the strength 
of the kingdom that hosts them. This is a situation that some- 
times provokes popular resentment or suspicion. However, 
no one questions their ability and resolve in times of war. 


Priests 


In the adventuring party, the crusader is a natural leader 
whose place is in the front lines of any battle. When pos- 
sible, the crusader should take steps to prepare his com- 
rades for battle through the use of bless, prayer, aid, and simi- 
lar spells. He can also make use of healing spells to assist 
those who fall in valiant battle. 

Crusaders excel in personal combat and are nearly as 
skilled as a warrior of the same level. They may employ any 
kind of armor or shield and learn the use of any weapon, 
although particular orders of crusaders may prefer weapons 
of a certain type—for example, knightly weapons, bows or 
battle axes (for elven or dwarven crusaders), and so on. To 
represent their skill at arms, the THACO of a crusader char- 
acter improves at the warrior's rate of 1 per level. A 2nd- 
level crusader has a THACO of 19 instead of 20, a 3rd-level 
crusader has a THACO of 18, and so on. 

Crusaders are considered to have a nonweapon profi- 
ciency crossover with the warrior group and may learn war- 
rior proficiencies at no extra cost. They may use any magical 
item normally usable by priests or by fighters. In addition, if 
the DM allows, a lawful good crusader may gain the same 
benefits as a paladin when wielding a holy avenger sword. 

While crusaders are formidable soldiers, they also retain a 
good selection of spells that are particularly useful on the 
battlefield. Crusaders have major access to the spheres of all, 
combat, guardian, healing, war, and wards. They have minor 
access to the necromantic and protection spheres. In addition, 
lawful crusaders have major access to the sphere of law, and 
chaotic crusaders have major access to the sphere of chaos. 

Crusaders cannot turn undead, but at 3rd level they gain 
the granted power to cast lighten load (from the Tome of Magic) 
once per day. This spell effectively halves the weight of 
equipment and gear for a day, reducing a party's encum- 
brance. At 7th level, the crusader may cast easy march (from 
Tome of Magic) once per week, which basically allows a small 
party to force march without accumulating fatigue penalties. 

Crusaders gain followers much as clerics do. When the 
crusader reaches 8th level, he automatically attracts 20 to 200 
fanatical followers. These followers are normal 0-level sol- 
diers, armed and equipped with weapons appropriate for typ- 
ical soldiers in the campaign. Unlike the cleric, the crusader 
does not need to establish a permanent place of worship to 
attract these followers. Since he is a great battle leader, the sol- 
diers will serve him as a free-roving company if no stronghold 
is available. At 9th level, a crusader may receive official sanc- 
tion to establish a religious stronghold or fortified temple. 


Crusaders and PLayer’s OPTION: Skills & Powers 

It is assumed that selecting this class for your PLAYER’S 
OpTION character expends all class-derived character points a 
character may have available. In other words, a crusader can- 
not be customized from the model presented here. However, 
if you're interested in building a specialty priest that resem- 
bles the crusader with slightly different powers, you can use 
the Customized Priest Characters information later in this 
chapter to do so—it's generally more complete and allows 
more options than the material in Skills & Powers does. 

In the Skills & Powers character point system, crusaders 
may learn a weapon of their choice, some fighting styles, or 
expertise in a weapon as if they were multi-classed warriors. 
A crusader may specialize in a weapon if the DM allows that 
option from Skills & Powers, but it's expensive; he must pay 
the character point costs as a priest, not a fighter. 


55 


Druid 


Ability Requirements: Wisdom 12 
Charisma 15 

Prime Requisites: Wisdom, Charisma 

Races Allowed: Human, Half-elf 


Known primarily for their love of nature and guardian- 
ship of the wilderness, druids possess remarkable abilities 
in areas dealing with plants, animals, weather, and the ele- 
ments. Druids with a Wisdom and Charisma score of 16 or 
better earn a 10% bonus to the experience they gain. 
Because of their views, druids must be neutral in alignment. 

Except for a slight change in the spheres of access, druids 
keep all of the abilities and powers listed in the PHB. Druids 
have major access to all, animal, elemental, healing, plant, 
sun and weather. 

Druids can only wear leather armor and use wooden 
shields. Their weapons are limited to club, sickle, dart, 
spear, dagger, scimitar, sling, and staff. Aside from written 
magical items as well as armor and weapons forbidden to 
druids, this class can use all other magical items. Druids 
cannot turn undead. See the PHB for details about how 
druids are organized. 


Monk 


Ability Requirements: Wisdom 15 
Intelligence 14 
Constitution 13 
Prime Requisites: Wisdom, Intelligence 
Races Allowed: Human 


The monk is a priest who belongs to a cloistered or 
monastic order, where he withdraws from the everyday 
affairs of the world around him to contemplate his faith. 
Powers of philosophy, thought, and scholarship are com- 
monly represented by monks, as well as any deity that is 
not normally worshipped by the common people of an area. 
Monks must be lawful in alignment, although they can be 
lawful good, lawful neutral, or lawful evil. While monks are 
most often associated with oriental campaigns and settings, 
this specialty priest is not necessarily an oriental class— 
monastic orders can exist in almost any fantasy setting. 

Monks believe that rigorous training of body, mind, and 
spirit leads to enlightenment. Consequently, a character 
must have high Intelligence and Constitution scores to qual- 
ify for this class. Wisdom and Intelligence are the prime req- 
uisites of the monk, and a monk with scores of 16 or better 
in these two abilities gains a 10% bonus to the experience 
points he earns. Monks also advance in level as clerics do. 

While monks do not attempt to minister to the masses or 
gather followers for their patron deity, they believe in 
demonstrating the qualities of their faith by example. A 
monastery or abbey is a place of learning and strength that 
is open to any person who requires shelter, advice, or assis- 
tance. Other monks choose to leave the abbey and travel 
widely, setting an example among the people they meet and 
help. Monasteries devoted to evil powers are sinister places 
where knowledge and wealth are hoarded for the use of the 
order, regardless of whom may need it. 

The monk brings a variety of skills to the adventuring 
party. He is somewhat like the bard in that he is a jack of all 


Chapter 2 


trades and master of none. A monk is not a front-rank warrior, 
but he can be a very capable infiltrator and skirmisher. The 
monk’s selection of spells allows access to some of the most 
unusual and versatile priest spells, even if his spells tend to be 
short on sheer combat power. Like other priest characters, the 
monk’s principle role is to support and guide the party. 

Monks do not wear armor, since the training of the body 
requires quickness, agility, and discipline; monks see armor 
and other ironmongery as crutches for a person of weak 
spirit. To compensate, monks are trained to avoid blows 
through misdirection and positioning, and their base Armor 
Class improves by one point at every even level (AC 9 at 
2nd level, AC 8 at 4th level, AC 7 at 6th level, and so on) toa 
maximum base Armor Class of 2 at 16th level. Note that a 
monk must see the attack coming in order to use this bene- 
fit—backstabs, ambushes, or missile attacks from behind the 
monk will strike him as if he were unarmored. 

Monks may employ any Type B weapon, just like the 
cleric, but they have exceptional skill in unarmed combat. 
When a monk makes an unarmed attack against an armed 
opponent, he disregards the Weapons in Defense rule, since 
he is trained in dealing with armed enemies. (Normally, this 
rule allows the armed character to attack first with a +4 on 
attack and damage rolls when another character makes an 
unarmed attack against him.) In addition, a monk begins play 
with a free weapon proficiency which may be used to special- 
ize in unarmed combat. Martial arts and other forms of 
unarmed combat are described in detail in PLAYER'S OPTION: 
Combat & Tactics; if you don't have access to this book, another 
system appears in The Complete Fighter's Handbook. 

Unarmed Combat with The Complete Fighter's Hand- 
book or The Complete Priest's Handbook: In this system of 
unarmed combat, the monk begins play as a punching spe- 
cialist, a wrestling specialist, or a martial arts specialist. If 
the monk chooses martial arts as his preferred unarmed 
combat form, he must spend one of his initial weapon profi- 
ciencies to do so, since this is more difficult than specializ- 
ing in punching or wrestling. 

Specializing in these combat forms gives the monk a +1 
bonus to attack rolls, a +2 bonus to damage rolls, and a +1 
chart bonus with his unarmed attacks. A monk specialized 
in punching or martial arts gains one extra attack per round, 
while a monk specialized in wrestling gains a +2 bonus to 
his effective Strength score for purposes of maintaining or 
breaking holds. 

Every fourth level after 1st level (5th, 9th, 13th, 17th) the 
monk gains an additional free weapon proficiency which 
can be used to continue specialization in his chosen mode of 
combat. Each additional specialization grants the character 
an additional +1 to attack rolls, damage rolls, and a +1 chart 
bonus, to a maximum addition of +4 at 17th level. 

Unarmed Combat with PLAyer’s OPTION: Combat & 
Tactics: In this system, the monk begins play as described 
above. If he chooses martial arts as his combat form, he 
must spend one of his initial weapon proficiencies to do so. 
At 1st level, the character is considered a specialist; at 5th 
level, a master; at 9th level, a high master; and at 13th level, 
a grand master. The exact benefits are described in more 
detail in Chapter Five of PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & Tactics. 

If you don't have either of these books, the monk must 
choose to be a punching or wrestling specialist, since mar- 
tial arts per se aren't described in the Player's Handbook. The 
paragraph about The Complete Fighter's Handbook details the 


34 


effects of specialization and continuing specialization for 
these forms of unarmed combat. 

Monks may not use magical items that simulate armor, 
such as bracers of defense, but they are allowed to wear cloaks 
or rings. Otherwise, they may use any magical item nor- 
mally usable by priests. Monks have a nonweapon profi- 
ciency crossover with all other classes and may learn any 
proficiency listed at no additional cost. 

Monks enjoy major access to the spheres of all, divina- 
tion, guardian, numbers, and thought. They have minor 
access to combat, healing, necromantic, and time. Monks 
cannot turn undead. Beginning at 5th level, monks are enti- 
tled to a saving throw vs. spell to block detection, scrying, 
or mind-reading through magical or psionic means— see 
the 3rd-level wizard spell nondetection. At 7th level, monks 
gain the special granted power of free action, which dupli- 
cates the effects of the 4th-level priest spell. 

Monks never gain followers, but at 9th level a monk may 
receive permission to establish a monastery as an outpost of 
his order; if he does so, 10 to 40 monks of lower level will 
come to his monastery and take up their studies there, rec- 
ognizing the PC monk as the head of their abbey. 

Monks and PLAYER’S OPTION: Skills & Powers: Selecting 
this class for your PLAYER'S OPTION character expends all 
class-derived character points, so a monk may not acquire 
additional class abilities from the cleric list. If you want to 
create a specialty priest like the monk but with slightly dif- 
ferent powers, you can use the Customized Priest Charac- 
ter information in this book to do so. 

In the Skills & Powers character point system, monks are 
not required to spend CPs to gain their bonus unarmed 
combat proficiencies and specializations unless they choose 
martial arts as their unarmed combat form. In this case, the 
monk must pay the normal cost for proficiency with martial 
arts (3 CPs) when first created, although he can use his 
weapon proficiency CPs to cover this cost. 


Shaman 


Ability Requirements: Wisdom 12 
Constitution 12 

Prime Requisites: Wisdom 

Races Allowed: Human 


The shaman is a tribal priest found in savage, barbaric, or 
nomadic societies. In his homeland, the shaman serves his tribe 
in much the same way that a cleric would serve the common 
people of more civilized lands; he acts as a guide, protector, and 
advisor, using his magical powers to strengthen and defend the 
tribe. Shamans often serve as the keepers of knowledge and 
legend for their people, and lead the tribe in the various rites 
and ceremonies required by the tribe’s belief system. A player 
character shaman may still be associated with his tribe, or he 
may be a wanderer or exile who has abandoned his duties. 

Shamans may be of any alignment. They are always 
found in tribal or barbaric cultures—if a player wishes to 
run a shaman in a more civilized campaign setting, his char- 
acter is considered to be a barbaric foreigner by most com- 
mon folk he meets. The shaman’s arduous life in uncivilized 
lands requires a good Constitution, and Wisdom is required 
for dealing with tribal matters and speaking to the spirits. A 
shaman with a Wisdom of 16 or better earns a 10% bonus to 
the experience points he gains. Shamans also follow the 


same level advancement as clerics do. 

The shaman is an unusual character in the adventuring 
party. Like the druid, he is not a front-line fighter, but he 
also lacks the high-powered combat spells that the druid 
commands. However, his mysterious spirit powers allow 
him to make use of magic that is usually out of the reach of 
low-level characters. A shaman who demonstrates intelli- 
gence and respect in dealing with the spirits can be an 
extremely effective character in a number of situations. 
Shamans view themselves as advisors and guides to a party 
of adventurers and often have an uneducated but insightful 
view on the more civilized societies they visit. 

Shamans may wear any armor normally associated with 
their tribe. In the absence of more specific information, 
tribal armor is usually hide, leather, or studded leather with 
a tough wooden, wicker, or hide-covered shield. Similarly, 
shamans may use tribal weapons, which usually include the 
short bow, club, dagger, dart, hand axe, harpoon, javelin, 
knife, quarterstaff, sling, and spear. Blowguns might be 
appropriate for shamans of jungle tribes, or light lances and 
composite bows for shamans of tribal horsemen. 

Shamans may use any magical items normally usable by 
priests. They have a nonweapon proficiency crossover with 
the warrior group and can learn priest or warrior proficien- 
cies at the normal cost. Shamans have major access to the 
spheres of all, animal, protection, summoning, travelers, 
and wards, as well as minor access to healing and plant. 
Shamans never gain followers or establish strongholds. 
Good-aligned shamans may turn undead, and neutral or 
evil shamans may command undead. 

In addition to their priest spells, shamans have a special 
connection to the spirit world and can call on the spirits for 
guidance, knowledge, or magical aid. While shamans often 
function as priests of a tribal deity, their primary concern is 
the spirit world. To a shaman, the physical world is not the 
entirety of existence; the spirits of animals, nature, and the 
tribe’s dead are always near, and interacting with these spir- 
its is the shaman’s greatest duty and responsibility. 

Shaman Spirit Powers: A shaman begins play with one 
minor spirit ally or guide of his choice; it’s assumed that he 
has already performed the rites to summon this first guide. 
As he rises in level, he learns the rites necessary to call addi- 
tional spirits. Spirits are individuals—speaking to a spirit of 
the dead means the shaman is in contact with one particular 
deceased individual. There are dozens of spirits for each 
species of animal, representing every aspect of the animal’s 
existence, and a near-infinite number of nature spirits. The 
number of spirits a shaman knows how to contact appears 
on Table 5: Shaman Spirits Per Level. 

Performing the ceremony to call a spirit for the first time 
requires a week or more of fasting, prayer, and solitude in the 
appropriate location—if the shaman is trying to call a wolf 
spirit, he must find a location frequented by wolves, and if he 
is trying to call a dead spirit, he should perform the ceremony 
at the individual's burial site. At the conclusion of this week- 
long ceremony, the spirit appears, and the shaman establishes 
contact with it. From that time forward, the shaman may 
attempt to contact the spirit anywhere or anytime to seek infor- 
mation or request a favor of the spirit—see Calling Spirits. 

Spirits of the Dead: These ancestral spirits are individuals 
who were renowned for their wisdom, skill, or courage in life. 
Minor spirits may be recent relatives of the shaman, while 
major spirits are great heroes and wise men of the tribe. A 


Chapter 2 


: Table 5: 
Shaman Spirits Der Level 


Major Great 
Spirit Spirit 


Minor 


Spirit 


Shaman’s 
Level 


1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
4 
5 
5 
5 
6 
6 
6 
7 
7 
7 


DDATA RROWWNNNES | | | 
OR ROKBNNNHE | | | | | | | 


great spirit of the dead is a chieftain or other personage of leg- 
endary standing. While spirits of the dead may seem to be 
frightening allies, they are actually very protective of their liv- 
ing protégé and bear few grudges against the living. 

Spirits of the dead know many things. Naturally, they are 
familiar with any details or events of their own lifetimes. They 
are able to perceive the shaman's future and can offer advice 
in times of tough choices. Dead spirits can also provide some 
measure of protection for the shaman and his allies by using 
their power on the shaman's behalf. Minor spirits can invoke 
the powers of augury, feign death, prayer, or speak with dead on 
behalf of the shaman; major spirits can invoke divination, com- 
mune, or find the path for the shaman; and great spirits can 
invoke raise dead, forbiddance, or astral spell for the shaman. 
Spells invoked by spirits are cast at the level of the shaman, 
unless the spell is normally cast at a level higher than the 
shaman has access to. If the latter is the case, then the spell is 
cast at the minimum required level of that particular spell. 
Note that these are spells normally outside the shaman's 
spheres of access. In addition, there can be other role-playing 
effects gained in conversation with the spirits, such as infor- 
mation or guidance in making difficult choices. 


The 1st-level shaman Shotheri decides that his first spirit guide 
will be the spirit of his grandfather, who was the tribe's shaman 
when Shotheri was a boy. Shotheri can call upon his grandfather s 
spirit for help and advice. When a shaman character begins play, 
it's assumed that he has already performed the ceremony to attract 
his first spirit guide. 


Animal Spirits: The shaman lives in a world in which 
animals are a vital part of human life. Animals provide 
food, shelter, clothing, and tools for the shaman’s people, 
and the animal spirits are revered for their wisdom and 
knowledge. Minor and major spirits are embodiments of an 
archetype, such as the Old Wolf, the Sleeping Bear, or the 


46 


Hunting Eagle. Great animal spirits are the leaders of these 
lesser spirits and contain in themselves everything the ani- 
mal stands for—the Great Bear, the Great Wolf, and so on. 

Animal spirits are powerful, but they’re also less inclined 
to offer advice or guidance to the shaman. Their interest lies 
in ensuring that the shaman is respectful towards their 
species and helps to guide others in dealing with their kin, 
not in aiding the shaman in his own affairs. The spirits of 
game animals such as moose or deer don’t mind if the 
shaman or his people hunt the animal, but they grow angry 
if the hunting is wanton or disrespectful. 

Animal spirits have knowledge of events that have 
affected their species in the local area and have a number of 
powers they can use on the shaman's behalf. Minor animal 
spirits can aid the shaman by using animal friendship, speak 
with animals, or animal summoning I on his behalf. In addition, 
the animal spirit can grant a limited form of clairaudience and 
clairvoyance by allowing the shaman to see through the eyes of 
an animal of that species, with a range of one mile. Animals of 
the species in question will never attack the shaman or any- 
one under his protection unless the shaman has angered the 
spirit or the animals are magically controlled. 

Major animal spirits can use animal summoning II on the 
shaman's behalf, grant him the speed or movement powers 
of the animal (flying, swimming, or running at the animal's 
base speed), or transform the shaman into the shape of the 
animal, similar to a druid's shapechange. Great spirits can 
use animal summoning IIL, heal the shaman or one person 
under his protection, or become tangible and aid the 
shaman in à form resembling Mordenkainen's faithful hound. 


At 3rd level, Shotheri gains the ability to call a second spirit. 
Consulting with his grandfather, he decides that the Wise Owl 
would be a good spirit ally. Because Shotheri is only 3rd level, the 
Wise Owl is a minor spirit. Shotheri spends several weeks study- 
ing owls and their habits, and then performs the ceremony to 
summon the Wise Owl and speak to it. 


Spirits of Nature: The most reclusive and powerful spir- 
its are the elemental spirits of nature. These beings repre- 
sent the physical world around the shaman. The strength or 
power of the feature the spirit represents determines 
whether it is considered a minor, major, or great spirit. A 
stream, copse, or hilltop may be home to a minor spirit; a 
river, moderate forest, or canyon may be guarded by a 
major spirit; and a mountain, large forest, or mighty river 
may be the home of a great spirit. Spirits of nature fre- 
quently take on human-like features or characteristics when 
dealing with a shaman, so a spirit might be known as Old 
Mountain, River Woman, or Forest Walker. 

Spirits of nature are even more distant than animal spir- 
its, but they do feel some attachment for the people and 
creatures who live nearby. A river spirit is likely to be pro- 
tective of the village built on its banks, as long as the people 
show respect to it. Nature spirits often change with the sea- 
sons, so a river spirit in the spring flood may be wild, capri- 
cious, and dangerous to deal with, while a forest spirit in 
winter may be sleeping and hard to rouse, 


At 5th level, Shothert gains the power to summon a major 
spirit. Since he has been spending a lot of time in the forests near 
his home village, he chooses to befriend the Birch Woman, a spirit 
of a great belt of birch trees in the forest's heart. 


Priests 


Spirits of nature are generally well-informed about any- 
thing that has taken place in their location and can relate 
this information to the shaman. Spirits of nature are also 
capable of using potent powers on the shaman's behalf; the 
principle difference between minor and great spirits is the 
size of the area in which they can be summoned. Minor 
spirits are bound to one specific site not more than a few 
hundred yards across, major spirits are limited to five or ten 
square miles, and great spirits can act in areas the size of 
small nations. Note that the areas of effect of spell-like abili- 
ties remain unchanged—a great spirit is powerful because 
the region in which he is available to assist the shaman is 
much larger than a minor spirit's range. 

Spirits of nature can help a shaman by invoking a num- 
ber of spell-like powers for the shaman. Unlike elementals, 
spirits of nature include aspects of vegetation and all the 
elements of their home, so a mountain spirit has influence 
over earth and air as well as the forests that grow on the 
mountain's slopes. The abilities available to spirits of nature 
are described below. 


* Land Spirits: entangle, pass without trace, dust devil, trip, 
meld into stone, snare, speak with plants, commune with 
nature, stonetell, liveoak, wall of thorns, animate rock, and 
changestaff. Land spirits may be associated with moun- 
tains, plains, forests, plateaus, canyons, mesas, or any 
other distinct land feature. 

* Air Spirits: obscurement, call lightning, gust of wind, wind 
wall, commune with nature, air walk, control winds, weather 
summoning, control weather, uncontrolled weather, and wind- 
walk, Air spirits are associated with high peaks, 
windswept plains or valleys, or seasonal winds such as a 
scirocco or the north wind of the winter. 

* Water Spirits: wall of fog, fog cloud, water breathing, water 
walk, lower water, solid fog, reflecting pool, commune with 
nature, part water, and transmule dust to water. Water spir- 
its are associated with lakes, streams, rivers, or seas. 


Calling Spirits: Once a shaman has performed the initial 
ceremony that attracts a spirit and establishes a connection 
to the being, he can summon that spirit anytime to seek the 
information, favors, and powers described above. The 
shaman's location doesn't matter; a spirit can come to him 
anywhere, even though spirits of nature may not be able to 
help him outside their homes. 

To summon a spirit, the shaman must chant, pray, and 
perform a ceremonial dance for at least 1 turn. The base 
chance of success is 10% per character level, plus 10% for 
every additional turn the character chants and dances, to a 
maximum 90% chance of success. If the shaman has already 
attempted to summon a spirit that day, his maximum 
chance of success falls by 10% per summoning attempt—a 
shaman who has called one spirit, tried to call another and 
failed, and is trying a third summoning has a maximum 
success chance of 70%, or possibly less if he's a low-level 
character in a hurry. In any event, a shaman may attempt no 
more than one calling per level in the course of a single day. 
A roll of 96 or higher (91 or higher in the case of spirits of 
nature) angers the spirit the shaman is trying to call. 

If the spirit isn't angry at the shaman for some reason, it 
appears with a successful roll. Only shamans can see the 
spirit or speak to it; other characters may be aware of chills, 
strange odors, shimmering hazes, unusual gusts of wind, 


51 


and other signs. The shaman can converse with the spirit for 
one round per character level, asking one question per 
round. Asking a favor of a spirit, such as the use of a spell- 
like ability, requires one round for minor abilities, two for 
major, and three for abilities that can only be granted by 
great spirits. During this request the shaman explains what 
he wishes of the spirit and why the spirit should help him; 
if the DM thinks it appropriate, the player must role-play 
this conversation. If the spirit agrees to help, the spell-like 
effect is granted to the shaman, who may "hold" it for up to 
one full day until he's ready to invoke the spirit's power. A 
shaman can only hold one favor at a time and can't request 
another of any spirit until he has used the held ability. 


Shotheri and his companions are getting ready to attack an orc 
encampment in the woods. Shotheri decides to summon his grandfa- 
ther and seek aid in the upcoming battle. Since he's now a 5th-level 
shaman, he has a 50% chance of success to summon him after one 
turn, a 60% chance after two turns, and so on. Shotheri decides to 
dance for two turns, and succeeds in calling the spirit. Shotheri 
requests a prayer spell to be used during the battle. Shotheri's on 
good terms with his grandfather's spirit, and he gains the spell. 

Later that day, the ore chieftain escapes Shotheri's party and 
flees into the forest. Shotheri used his grandfather's favor during the 
fight, but now he needs to summon the Birch Woman to ask her 
where the orcs have gone. Fortunately for Shotheri, the orc’s camp 
happened to be located in the Birch Woman's woods. Shotheri has a 
50% chance to summon her, and he decides to dance for three addi- 
tional turns to raise this to an 80% chance—the best he can do, 
since this is the second spirit he’s called today. Shotheri succeeds 
again. This time, he isn’t seeking any favors. He just asks the Birch 
Woman where the orcs went. The Birch Woman agrees to help, but 
only if Shotheri ensures that no fiery spells are used against the 
orcs—she remembers the time that the party's wizard used a fire- 
ball while fighting a pair of trolls in her woods. 

When they finally track down the ore chieftain, Shotheri 
decides that he will try to summon the Wise Owl to learn what 
the chieftain is planning. Since this is his third summoning of the 
day, his success chance can be no better than 70%, and Shotheri 
dances for three full turns to get to that chance. Unfortunately, 
Shotheri rolls a 99 on his check, and the Wise Owl is angered by 
his efforts. The DM decides that Shotheri hasn't done much to 
help the Owl lately, and that the spirit refuses to come until 
Shotheri finds a way to reaffirm his loyalty to the spirit. 


Spirits as NPCs: Spirits are individuals, and they have 
long memories. A shaman who takes actions the spirits find 
offensive, or who asks their help in questionable circum- 
stances, may be denied assistance just because the spirit does- 
n't feel like being helpful. The DM may find it useful to refer 
to Table 59: Encounter Reactions in the DMG; simply rate the 
spirit's frame of mind as threatening, hostile, indifferent, or 
friendly depending on how the shaman's been acting and 
how outrageous the shaman's request is to the spirit. It's a 
good idea to create personalities, motivations, and attitudes 
for the spirits the shaman deals with most often. 

Spirits do not have game statistics; normal mortals have 
no means of injuring them, although other divine creatures 
may be able to do so. Only greater spirits can take a physi- 
cal form, and even then they're reluctant to do so. Greater 
spirits of the dead can briefly resume their living form 
with the appropriate class and abilities; animal spirits can 
appear as a double-sized version of the normal variety; 


Chapter 2 


and spirits of nature can appear as 12 HD elementals. In 
physical form, spirits can only be injured by +2 or better 
weapons, and even if they’re “killed,” they only retreat 
from the scene for a short while. 

Angering the Spirits: A shaman can completely alienate 
the spirits by taking particularly offensive actions. If the 
offense is temporary or unintentional, the spirit simply 
refuses to answer any calls for a suitable period of time— 
one week to a year may be appropriate. If the offense was 
deliberate or permanent in nature, the spirit severs its con- 
nection to the shaman and cannot be called again until the 
shaman atones for his offense, repairs whatever damage he 
did and repeats the week-long summoning ceremony. 

Shamans and PLAYER'S OPTION: Skills & Powers: Select- 
ing this class for your PLAvER's OPTION character expends all 
class-derived character points, so a shaman may not acquire 
additional class abilities from the priest list. If you want to 
create a variant specialty priest resembling the shaman but 
with different powers, use the Customized Priest Charac- 
ters section in this book to do so. 


: At least one of the five priest charac- 

Customi zed ter classes presented in this book are 

Priest appropriate for almost any faith, but 
some unique priesthoods may 

Cha rac te fS require special treatment. The point- 


based character design system 
explained here allows a player to create almost any kind of 
priest character imaginable. Generally, this system works 
much like the point-based wizard design rules introduced in 
Chapter 1; it expands the specialty priest design rules from 
PLAYER'S OPTION: Skills & Powers. 

A priest character receives 120 character points to pur- 
chase the spheres of access, granted abilities, and class abili- 
ties the player desires. Each ability costs a variable number 
of character points. A character can gain extra CPs with 
which to buy abilities by choosing limitations, or reduce the 
cost of an ability by deferring it to a higher level. An ability 
deferred to 3rd level is 1 point cheaper than normal, 2 
points cheaper at 5th, 3 points cheaper at 7th, 4 points 
cheaper at 9th, and 5 points cheaper if deferred until 
11th level. All abilities have a minimum cost of 1 CP. 

The basic priest has a d8 Hit Die, uses the priest's 
THACO and saving throw chart, gains the ability to cast 
priest spells as indicated on Table 24: Priest Spell Pro- 
gression in the PHB, may use only bludgeoning weap- 
ons, may wear any kind of armor, and may use any 
magical item normally usable by priests. The priest 
does not begin play with any spheres of access; he must 
purchase each sphere of access he wishes to have avail- 
able. For example, if a player wishes his priest to have 
major access to the sphere of elemental air, he needs to 
spend 5 CPs. If, on the other hand, he wants the priest 
to have minor access to all of the elemental spheres, he 
needs to spend 8 CPs. 

For minor alterations to an existing priest class, a 
customized character can begin the process with all the 
abilities and restrictions of the cleric, crusader, or any 
other variety of priest. If this is the starting point for the 
customized character, the character receives 0 CPs to 
purchase new abilities; he must take limitations to com- 
pensate for all new abilities he selects. 


Optional Abililics 


A customized specialty priest is constructed from the list 
of optional abilities and restrictions below. A priest begins 
with 120 CPs to purchase abilities and may gain additional 
CPs by taking limitations. 


* Access to spheres (variable): The priest must purchase 
each sphere of access with character points. He may cast 
spells only from spheres he has access to and may only 
cast spells of 4th level or higher if he has major access to 
a sphere. Normal cleric access costs 100 points; druid 
access costs 70 points; crusader access costs 55 points; 
monk access costs 60 points; and shaman access costs 60 
points. See Table 6: Access Costs. 

* Animal empathy (10): This ability is similar to that of the 
ranger character class. If the priest carefully approaches a 
natural animal, he can modify the animal's reactions. 
Domestic or nonhostile animals are befriended automati- 
cally, while wild animals or those trained to attack must 
make a saving throw vs. rod, staff, or wand to resist the 
priest's overtures. The priest imposes a saving throw pen- 
alty of -1 per three experience levels (-1 at Ist to 3rd, 2 at 
Ath to 6th, and so on.) If the animal fails to save, its reaction 
is shifted one category as the priest chooses—for example, 
from hostile to threatening, or neutral to friendly. 

* Armor Class improvement (15): The priest is trained in 
avoiding blows through timing and deception. His nat- 
ural Armor Class improves by one point at every even 
level (AC 9 at 2nd, 8 at 4th, 7 at 6th, and so on) to a maxi- 
mum of AC 2. However, this ability is useless if the priest 
wears any form of armor or magical devices which 
replace armor, like bracers of defense. 

* Casting time reduction (5): The casting time of the 
priest's spells is reduced by 1, to a minimum of 1. 

* Cold resistance (5): The priest enjoys an unusual resis- 
tance to natural and magical cold, gaining a +2 bonus to 
saving throws versus these effects. Ice-based attacks or 
effects are included in the priest's resistance. 

* Combat bonus (20): The priest's THACO advances at the 
warrior rate of 1 per level instead of the normal priest 


Table 6: 
Access Cosls 


nS 
ealing 
Law 
Necromantic 
Numbers 
Plant 
Protection 
Summoning 
Sun 
Thought 
Time 
Travelers 
War 

Wards 
Weather 


Sphere Minor Minor 
All 
Animal 
Astral 
Chaos 
Charm 
Combat 
Creation 
Divination 
Elemental 
Air 
Earth 
Fire 
Water 
Guardian 


Major 


Major 
10 


8 
10 
10 
10 
Dee 
10 
5 
10 
10 
5 
5 
10 
10 


Q3 h3 C2 23 h3 96 1 U1 OI GI ow OI Q9 
WOW 23 O1 Q1 C2 U1 OI Oi Ca 1 O1 Ot 


Priests 


rate of 2 per 3 levels. The effects of this ability become 
more pronounced at higher levels. 

Communication (10): A priest with this ability learns one 
language per level from a related group of racial 
tongues. For example, a druid learns the languages of 
woodland or sylvan races. A priest of a god of the sea 
might learn the languages of aquatic races instead, while 
a dwarven priest could learn the languages of mountain 
races or creatures of stone. 

Detect evil (10): This power allows the priest to use defect 
evil once per day per two levels (twice a day at 3rd, three 
times a day at 5th, etc.). The priest must stand still and con- 
centrate for one round; in all other respects the ability oper- 
ates just like a defect evil spell cast by the priest. 

Detect undead (10): A priest with this ability may use 
detect undead once per day per two levels. He need only 
stand still and concentrate for one round to invoke the 
power. The duration and area of effect are the same as a 
detect undead spell cast by the priest. 

Expert healer (10): A priest with this power gains one 
additional cure light wounds per day in addition to any he 
chooses to memorize. 

Extended spell duration (10/15): The duration of any 
noninstantaneous spell cast by the priest is increased by 
one time unit per two levels. The unit of time varies, 
depending on how the spell's duration is normally mea- 
sured; rounds for rounds, turns for turns, and so on. For 
10 points, this applies to spells of one sphere and for 15 
points to spells of all spheres. 

Fire/electrical resistance (7): The priest gains a +2 bonus 
to saving throws vs. fire or electrical effects, including 
both natural phenomena and magical attacks. 

Followers (5/10): For 5 points, the priest gains followers 
as described in the Player's Handbook for the standard 
cleric—at 8th level, 20 to 200 soldiers arrive to serve the 
character. If the priest spends 10 CPs on this ability, he 
gains these followers whenever he establishes a suitable 
stronghold, regardless of level. 

Hit point bonus (10): A priest with this ability uses a d10 
for his Hit Die instead of a d8. 

Identify plants and animals (5/8): At 3rd level, the char- 
acter gains the ability to identify natural plants and ani- 
mals. He may also identify pure water. For an additional 
3 CPs, the priest has this ability at 1st level. 

Immunity to charm (54): At 7th level, the priest becomes 
immune to cliarm effects or spells cast by a group of 
related creatures, such as woodland creatures, undead, 
plant monsters, extraplanar monsters, or wizards. The 
priest may gain this power at an earlier level for a cost of 
+1 CP per level (6 CPs at 6th level, 7 at 5th, and so on.) 
Each class of monsters or races the priest is immune to 
costs an additional 5 CPs each. 

Immunity to magic (15): The priest enjoys partial immu- 
nity to one type of magic—alterations, invocations, 
necromancy, and so on. Both wizard and priest spells of 
this type are included. The priest gains a +4 bonus to 
saving throws against spells of the type chosen, or a nor- 
mal, nonpenalized saving throw against spells that do 
not normally allow a save. 

Immunity to natural disease (10): The priest is immune 
to normal diseases, although magical diseases such as 
lycanthropy and mummy rot still affect him. This is simi- 
lar to the paladin's ability to resist disease. 


39 


Inspire/enrage allies (5/10): Through his prayers and 
exhortations, the priest can inspire his allies in battle, 
giving them a +1 bonus to their attack rolls and saving 
throws. The priest must do nothing but chant for at least 
three full rounds before his allies gain bonuses, and the 
effects last for 1d3 rounds after he stops. All allies within 
10 feet of the priest are affected. As a 10-point power, his 
allies become enraged, increasing the bonuses to +2. The 
priest can do nothing else while using this power. 

Know alignment (15): Once per day per two levels, the 
priest may make use of know alignment. The spell func- 
tions exactly as if it was actually cast by the priest. 

Lay on hands (10): The priest has the power to /ay on 
hands once per day, curing up to 2 points of damage per 
experience level. This is identical to the paladin character 
class ability. 

Pass without trace (5/7): At 3rd level, the priest gains the 
ability to pass without trace, as per the spell, at his normal 
movement rate, For 7 CPs the character may have this 
ability at Ist level. 

Proficiency group crossovers (5+): Normally, priests 
may learn nonweapon proficiencies from the priest and 
general lists at no extra cost. Each additional crossover 
group costs 5 CPs and allows the priest to learn non- 
weapon proficiencies from another character group’s list 
with no penalty. 

Purify water (5): Once per day, the priest may make use 
of a purify food and drink spell, applying it to water or 
brine only. The power operates as a spell cast by the 
priest in respect to area of effect. 

Resist energy drain (5/15): Priests with this ability gain a 
+1 to saving throws versus the energy drain spell and the 
level-draining attacks of the undead. If the attack does 
not normally allow a saving throw, the power has no 
effect, but the saving throw modifier does apply to char- 
acters under a negative plane protection. For 15 points, this 
ability allows a priest to attempt a saving throw vs. spell 
with a —4 penalty to avoid a level-draining attack that 
normally allows no saving throw. 

Secret language (5): Priests with this ability share a 
secret form of communication that only they understand. 
This permits secure conversations in almost any setting. 
Shapechange (15+): This is the druid's normal shapechange 
power. Beginning at 7th level, he may change into a mam- 
mal, reptile, or bird three times per day—each form may 
be used once. Each transformation heals 10%-60% of any 
damage the character has sustained. The acquisition of this 
power may be accelerated for 2 CPs per level, so for 17 CPs 
the priest may shapechange at 6th level. 

Spell-like granted power (special): Many priests have 
unusual granted powers that simulate the effects of vari- 
ous spells. Unlike spells, these granted powers require 
no material components. A spell-like granted power may 
be invoked once per week and has a base cost of 10 CPs, 
plus the following modifiers: 


1 CP/spell level for priest spells 

2 CPs/spell level for wizard spells 

5 CPs for a once per day use 

1 CP/level for each additional daily use 

10 CPs for a continuous or persistent power 


Chapter 2 


any “overspending” in the previous step. For example, if a 
priest selected abilities totalling 135 CPs, he would be 15 
CPs over the normal limit of 120, so he would have to select 
15 CPs of limitations to pay for his additional abilities. 


For example, a priest who wishes to invoke a fireball 
once per week would pay 10 CPs, plus 6 CPs (3rd-level 
wizard spell), for a total of 16 CPs. The ability to use the 
power once per day would cost an additional 5 CPs, for a 
total of 21 CPs. Using cure light wounds three times per 
day would cost 10+1+5+2, for a total of 18 CPs. 

Regardless of the amount of points paid, a priest may 
not have a spell-like granted power of 6th or higher level 
and is limited to no more than one granted power per two 
levels—one at 1st level, one at 3rd, one at 5th, and so on. 
The DM should carefully review any proposed granted 
powers. Note that when the priest invokes a power, factors 
such as range, damage, duration, and other effects are 
determined as if he had actually cast the spell. 

* Spirit powers (30+): A priest with this ability commands 
spirit powers, as described for the shaman earlier in this 
chapter. For 30 CPs, the shaman may contact one class of 
spirit: dead, animal, or nature. For each additional 5 CPs, 
the shaman may contact one more class, so 40 CPs gives 
the character full spirit powers. 

* Thief ability (10+): For 10 CPs, the priest may select one 
thief ability. Each additional 5 CPs allows the priest to 
select an additional ability, up to a maximum of four 
abilities. (Backstab and thieves' cant may be selected as 
abilities.) The priest's percentile score increases as noted 
on Table 19: Thief Average Ability Table of the DMG. 
Modifiers for race, armor worn, and Dexterity still apply 
to this score. 

* Turn undead (15): A priest with this power may turn 
undead, using Table 61: Turning Undead in the PHB. 
Priests of evil alignment may command undead. 

* Unarmed combat skills (15): The priest is a specialist in 
unarmed combat, as described under the monk entry 
earlier in this chapter. At 1st level, the character is a spe- 
cialist; at 5th level, a master; at 9th level, a high master; 
and at 13th level, a grand master. 

* Warrior ability bonuses (15/20): If the priest has a Con- 
stitution score of 17 or 18, he gains the additional +3 or 
+4 hit point adjustment allowed for warriors instead of 
the normal 42. For an additional 5 points, the priest may 
roll an exceptional Strength score of up to 18/50 if he has 
a strength of 18. 

* Weapon selection (5/10): For 5 CPs, the priest is allowed 
to include one edged weapon in his list of permissible 
weapons, or instead he may have access to a list of tribal 
or special weapons approved by the DM—for example, 
the druid or thief selections. For 10 CPs, the priest may 
wield any weapon he wishes to. 

* Weapon specialization (25): This ability allows a priest 
to specialize in a weapon using the normal specialization 
rules. Note that the priest must still spend the required 
number of proficiency slots or character points to actu- 
ally gain proficiency and specialization in a weapon. 

* Wizardly priest (25): A priest with this power may treat 
one school of wizard spells as another sphere of access. 
Spells memorized from this school count against the 
priest's memorization limits, just as if they were addi- 
tional priest spells. 


Optional Limitations 


By choosing limitations, a priest character can gain extra 
character points to select class abilities, thus balancing out 


40 


If a priest character begins with a standard package (i.e., 


the player chooses to begin with a cleric, crusader, druid, 
monk, or shaman), he can add new abilities by taking limi- 
tations on a one-for-one basis. For example, a standard 
cleric with the wizardly priest advantage must come up 
with 25 points of limitations to balance the 25-point ability. 
The available limitations are as follows: 


Armor restriction (54): The priest is limited in his choice 
of armor. As a 5-point limitation, the priest is restricted to 
chain mail or lighter armor; for 10 points, he is limited to 
studded leather or lighter armor; and for 15 points, the 
priest may not wear any armor at all. 

Awkward casting method (5): Spells cast by the priest 
are unusually obvious—the priest may be surrounded by 
a glowing halo of divine light, he may have to invoke his 
deity's power with peals of thunder and tremors in the 
ground, or some sensation (fear, cold, elation) may be 
noticed by anyone nearby. Any intelligent creature in 
earshot automatically notices the priest's spellcasting, 
even if they weren't paying attention to him before. Cast- 
ing spells from ambush or without being observed is 
nearly impossible with this limitation. 

Behavior/taboo (2): The priest's religion has an unusual 
code of behavior or conduct that may hinder him in cer- 
tain situations. For example, a priest may be required to 
speak a ten-minute prayer every time he crosses a river, 
which could be very inconvenient if he was being pur- 
sued. Another priest might be required to use cure spells 
on anyone in need, expending spells on strangers or 
NPCs instead of his companions. A priest who violates 
his behavior guideline loses access to his spells and must 
perform some appropriate penance for his failing. 
Ceremony/observance (5): The priest's faith demands the 
observance of a special event or ceremony every day, such 
as a prayer at sunrise, a small sacrifice or libation per- 
formed in a certain way, or a lengthy atonement for the 
day's thoughts and actions. The priest must drop what- 
ever he is doing to perform the ceremony; there are no 
excuses for missing it. A priest who skips the ceremony 
may lose his memorized spells or suffer some other sign 
of his deity's disfavor until he finds a way to atone. 
Difficult spell acquisition (5): The priest's deity is par- 
ticularly demanding about granting spells, and the priest 
can pray for spells only in very specific circumstances. 
For example, the priest might only be able to gain spells 
in a temple of his deity, he might have to wait for certain 
celestial alignments or phases of the moon, or he might 
be required to fast and pray for a minimum of three days 
before gaining spells. In general, this limitation should 
make it hard for the priest to gain spells while traveling 
or adventuring. 

Fanaticism (5): A priest with this limitation comes from 
an intolerant faith. Followers of other powers must con- 
vert or forfeit their lives. The priest absolutely refuses to 
accept any companion who does not worship the power 
he represents and suffers a —4 reaction adjustment with 
any NPCs not of his faith—the priest can't hide his con- 
tempt for nonbelievers. 


Priests 


Hazardous spells (10): Channeling the power of a deity 
can be dangerous, and a priest with this limitation can sus- 
tain harmful side-effects from casting spells. The priest 
might suffer 1 point of damage per spell level when he 
casts a spell, with a saving throw vs. breath weapon for 
half damage. Another option would be a chance (5% per 
spell level, -2% per character level, minimum 1%) of losing 
all spells in memory and being feebleminded for 1d3 days. 
Limited magical item use (5+): The priest is banned 
from using certain types of magical items. For each cate- 
gory of magical item he cannot use, he gains a 5-point 
limitation. The categories are: potions, oils, and scrolls; 
rings; rods, staves, and wands; miscellaneous magic; and 
weapons and armor. 

Limited spell selection (5): The prayers required to peti- 
tion the priest's deity for spells are extremely complex. In 
fact, they are as complex as a wizard's spells, and as a 
result the priest is required to build a "spell book" of 
priest spells. First, this limits the priest to a maximum 
number of spells per level, as indicated by his Intelli- 
gence score. Secondly, the priest must make a learn spells 
roll in order to add a new spell to his selection; if the 
priest fails to learn a spell, he may not try to learn it 
again until he gains another level. 

Reduced hit points (10/20): A priest with this limitation 
uses a smaller Hit Die than normal. For 10 points, the 
priest uses a d6 Hit Die; for 20 points, the priest uses a d4 
Hit Die. 

Reduced spell progression (15): A priest with this 
restriction memorizes one less spell of each level than 
normal; a 1st-level priest gains 0 1st-level spells instead 


41 


of 1, and so on. If the priest's spell allocation for any 
given level is reduced to 0 by this limitation (like the 1st- 
level priest above), he gains no bonus spells for an excep- 
tional Wisdom score for that character level. 

* Slower casting times (5): The priest's spells are unusu- 
ally long-winded; all casting times are increased by 3. A 
casting time of one round or longer is simply doubled. 

* Talisman/symbol (8): The priest's spell powers are 
focused through one specific talisman or holy symbol. 
Without this symbol, he is incapable of casting spells. If 
his talisman is destroyed or stolen with no hope of recov- 
ery, he may create a new one with 1d4 weeks of prayer, 
meditation, and fasting in his home temple. 

* Weapon restriction (5/15): Unless otherwise stated, a 
priest character has access to the cleric's weapon selec- 
tion of any Type B weapon. A priest with this limitation 
is further restricted to the staff, club, war hammer, horse- 
man's mace, and horseman's flail. For 15 points, the 
priest is not allowed to gain proficiency in any weapon. 


Dealing with Game-Breaking Characters 


As noted before in the chapter on wizards, a point-based 
character design system allows players a chance to create 
extremely capable characters, especially if role-playing dis- 
advantages are used to finance game mechanic bonuses. 
The DM should carefully review any character assembled 
under these rules and make a special note of weaknesses or 
blind spots. Even a minor role-playing disadvantage can go 
a long ways towards discouraging an unbalanced design if 
the DM is a little creative. 


Chapter 3: 


Other 
Spellcasters 


Naturally, wizards and priests aren't the only spellcasters in the AD&D game. 
Rangers, paladins, and bards are all capable of casting spells. In addition, a vari- 
ety of monsters cast spells as well, or make use of e powers. While magic 
is a secondary skill for most of these characters, it is a r tent tool—or ; 
weapon—and can provide significant advantages even at low levels. For 
example, a bard with spider climb, comprehend languages, and clairaudience will 
never have to worry about missing a crucial climb walls, detect noise, or read 
languages roll. 

In this chapter, we'll take a look at some of these other spellcasters and their 
magical abilities. A character who combines the basic skills of another class with | 
some degree of magical ability is extremely flexible and effective. And of course, 
villains with a similar range of powers are among the most dangerous enemies a 
PC party can face. 

For our purposes, other spellcasters fall into four general categories: bards 
and custom-designed characters; paladins, rangers, and minor spellcasters; 
multi-classed characters; and monsters with magical powers. Bards, paladins, 
and rangers may all make use of the optional spell point rules presented in 
Chapter 6. 


Other Spellcasters 


Bards are versatile adventurers 
whose primary abilities include a 


Bards and 


stom- fair assortment of spell powers. 

C u sto m Unlike rangers and paladins, who 
Desi gned don’t gain spell abilities until rela- 
x © tively late in their careers, bards 

Characters may make use of a limited selection 


of spells at the beginning of their 
careers and cast spells at their actual experience level, not at a 
reduced level of effectiveness. In addition, the rapid level pro- 
gression of the rogue character group means that low-level 
bards increase in magical power almost as quickly as their wiz- 
ard counterparts, especially if player characters share spells. 

Bards are described in great detail in the Player's Hand- 
book. As the jacks-of-all-trades of the AD&D game, bards 
have the weapon choices of a fighter, the skills of a thief, 
and some of the magical power of a wizard. Bards have a 
slower spell progression than true wizards, and they are 
limited to spells of 6th level or less. In addition, bards never 
gain spells automatically and must acquire their spells by 
luck and circumstance, finding them wherever they can. 
Bards are subject to all the normal restrictions concerning 
wizard spells, including maintenance of spell books and use 
of armor while casting spells. 

The term ‘custom-designed character’ refers to any other 
dilettante who has access to spells throughout their adventur- 
ing careers. A character of this type may enjoy the spell pro- 
gression similar to that of a bard, or he may acquire spells in 
some other fashion, but he is not a true wizard or priest. Gen- 
erally, custom-designed characters are created using the char- 
acter class design rules from the DUNGEON MASTER® Guide. 

Bards and customized characters may not specialize in a 
school of magic. Bards do not gain the ability to cast spells 
until they reach 2nd level, at which point they begin witha 
spell book of 1d4 randomly determined spells. Note that bards 
are not guaranteed spells of the school of universal magic, as 
wizards are—their lack of formal training means that these 
spells are as unfamiliar to them as spells of the other schools. 


Bards in PLAYER’S OPTION: 


g Lu p 
? - efc 
Spells & Magic 

While this book is primarily intended for players of 
priest and wizard characters, much of this information is 
relevant for bard characters, too. The chapters describing 
proficiencies, equipment, spells in combat, critical hits, new 
spells, and new magical items are all applicable to bards. In 
addition, the new magical system in Chapter 6 includes 
rules for bards and other such spellcasters. In addition, 
you'll find that this chapter introduces some new variants 
for bardic spell ability. 

The Bard’s Spell Book: Bards must keep spell books, just 
as wizards do, but a bardic spell book is not the same thing 
as a wizard spell book. When a bard discovers a spell in a 
wizard’s spell book or ona scroll and wishes to copy it into 
his own spell book, he may not be able to immediately do 
so. In fact, at 1st level, the bard only has a 40% chance to 
comprehend the wizard spell as it is written. This chance 
increases by 5% per level to a maximum of 85% at 10th 
level. If the bard is able to make sense of the wizard spell (or 
uses read magic to read it), he may then attempt to learn the 
spell and add it to his repertoire by translating the spell into 


bardic spell notes. 

Translating a spell from wizard notation to bardic nota- 
tion requires one week and 100 gp in materials. When the 
translation is complete, the bard attempts a learn spells 
check to see if he can add the spell to his spell book. If the 
check fails, he can always wait until he gains a level before 
examining his notes again. 

Bards add spells to their book only through luck and 
happenstance. With the exception of spell translations, 
bards may not engage in spell research or scroll research. 
Bards may only gain access to new spells by using another 
bard's spell book, chancing upon a wizard spell they hap- 
pen to understand, or translating a wizard spell they don’t. 
If the DM is generous, a bardic college or hall might have 
bardic spell translations available for trade or purchase. 

Bards and Scroll Use: Normally, bards must wait until 
10th level before using wizard scrolls; spells on scrolls are 
recorded in a wizard’s notation, and as described earlier, a 
bard often can't make sense of a wizard's notes. As an 
optional rule, the DM may permit the bard character to 
attempt to read wizard scrolls before 10th level. His chance 
of success is 25% at 4th level, plus 10% for each level above 
4th, to a maximum of 85% at 10th level. If the bard fails to 
read the spell correctly, the effect may be less (or more!) 
than expected, or it may affect someone or something 
besides its intended target. Obviously, this makes low-level 
spell use a very hazardous thing for a bard, but if the char- 
acter’s willing to take a chance, he can try it. 


Optional Abilities for Bards 

Bard characters may modify their spell abilities by select- 
ing optional abilities or restrictions from the following list. 
Note that these concentrate on the bard’s spell powers; the 
other basic class abilities remain unchanged. For each 
optional ability selected, the bard character must take a 
restriction of equal value, so that the total number of charac- 
ter points spent remains 0. Or, these abilities may be added 
to the bard list in PLAYER'S OPTION: Skills & Powers. 


* Accelerated spell progression (15): The bard enters 
Table 32: Bard Spell Progression in the PHB as if he were 
one level higher. A Ist-level bard with this advantage has 
the spell power of a 2nd-level bard, a 4th-level bard is 
treated as a 5th-level bard, and so on. 

* Armor and spell use (5/10): Normally, a bard cannot 
wear armor and cast spells. For 5 CPs, he may wear 
leather or lighter armor and still use spells; for 10 CPs, he 
may wear any kind of armor normally usable by a bard 
and still cast spells. 

* School specialization (10): A bard with this power may 
select a school of magic in which to specialize. He may 
choose enchantment/charm, illusion, or song magic as 
his specialty. Bard specialists gain all the normal benefits 
and restrictions associated with school specialization, 
including opposition schools and penalties to learning 
spells outside their chosen school. However, they may 
not engage in spell research. 

* Scroll use (10): This is the optional ability described 
above under Bards ard Scroll Use. Instead of waiting until 
10th level, the bard may attempt to use wizard spell 
scrolls at 4th level. His success chance is 25%, plus 10% 
per experience level above 4th (maximum 85%). If the 


reading fails, the scroll’s effects usually rebound on the 
bard or his companions with deleterious results. 
Wizard magical item use (10): A bard with this ability 
may make use of magical items normally reserved for 
use by wizards, including wands, rings, and miscella- 
neous magical items, but not rods or staves. 


YS IOF Daras 
Awkward casting hod (5): The bard’s spells require 
either loud singing or the strong playing of an instru- 
ment of some kind, making it impossible to cast spells 
discretely or quietly. He will almost never be able to cast 
spells without revealing a place of concealment or tip- 
ping off an ambush. 
Opposition school (5+): The bard may not make use of 
spells from one philosophical school of magic or make 
use of magical items that duplicate that school’s effects. 
(Schools that are in opposition to any specialty schools of 
the character can’t be selected for this restriction.) For 
each opposing school of philosophy, the character may 
take a 5-point restriction. 
Reduced spell power (10): Since he is not a true wizard, 
the bard’s spells are of less power than a wizard’s. For 
purposes of all level-based characteristics (range, dura- 
tion, area of effect, damage, and so on), a bard of 2nd-5th 
level effective casting level is one level lower, a 6th-9th 
level bard’s effective casting level is two levels lower, 
and a bard of 10th level or higher casts spells as if he 
were three levels lower. 


FA 


Z 
> 


ae 


Ve — S \ 


Reduced spell progression (15): The bard can cast one 
less spell at each level than normal. For example, a 4th- 
level bard may normally memorize two 1st-level and one 
2nd-level spell; with this restriction, he is reduced to 
memorizing only one 1st-level spell. 

Unreliable casting method (5): The bard’s unorthodox 
approach to magic results in occasional failures, with 
spells just fizzling instead of taking effect. The chance for 
failure is 10% per spell level, less 2% per experience 
level. For example, a 6th-level bard casting a 2nd-level 
spell would have an 8% chance (20 minus 12) of failure. 


De [c 1i i Minor spellcasters include those 
atadins, characters whose primary abilities 
. " lie in other areas—paladins 
Y y Tal , 
Ra n ect 5, rangers, and any other characters 


nner inre who gain minor magical abilities at 
a nd Minot higher levels. For these characters, 


Snell oy: apg spells are only a small part of their 
ópellcastet S a ia i of abilities, co 
acquired late in their adventuring careers. 

In many campaigns, the magical powers of minor spell- 
casters tend to be ignored. Since they have to wait longer 
than the wizards and priests of a campaign to gain their 
spell powers, minor spellcasters only have access to spells 
that their enemies can easily counter. When a 10th-level pal- 
adin can cure 20 points of damage by laying on hands, his 
cure light wounds seems insignificant, and his bless spell only 
takes his adjusted THACO from a 5 or so to a 4. The oppo- 


Other Spellcasters 


nents that an 11th-level ranger is likely to be facing will 
have an easy time making their saves against an entangle 
spell. The spell powers of minor spellcasters are far more 
important to a character operating alone or looking for 
spells that support or enhance his abilities. 


Daladins 


Paladins gain the ability to cast priest spells from the 
spheres of combat, divination, healing, and protection at 9th 
level. Unlike true priest characters, paladins do not gain 
extra spells for high Wisdom scores and may not use clerical 
magical items. At 9th level, the paladin’s effective casting 
level is only 1st level; for each experience level past 9th, the 
paladin’s casting level increases by one, to a maximum of 
9th level for a 17th-level paladin. (See Table 17: Paladin 
Spell Progression in the PHB.) 

Since paladins only use priest spells, they may use armor 
with no restrictions while casting spells. However, the char- 
acter should have at least one hand free to present his holy 
symbol or any other material components required, so a 
character might have to drop a shield or second weapon in 
order to cast a spell. 


Optional Spell Abilities for Paladins 

The paladin’s spell powers can be customized, just like 
those of any other class. Some of the options available 
include the following: 


* Alternate Sphere Access (5+): Refer to Table 6: Access 
Costs in the previous chapter. Standard paladins have the 
equivalent of minor access to the spheres of combat, div- 
ination, healing, and protection, totalling 20 CPs. A paladin 
may choose to have minor access to any combination of 
alternate spheres totalling 20 CPs or less. For example, the 
paladin of a sea god might choose all, elemental water, 
healing, weather, and creation. Note that the paladin only 
pays for minor access, but still gains the ability to cast 4th- 
level spells. The paladin may exchange spheres for 5 CPs 
or buy additional spheres at the cost listed in Table 6. 
Increased spell power (7): A paladin with this power 
casts spells with an effective casting level only four levels 
less than his true level and has no maximum casting 
level. Normally, a 9th-level paladin casts spells as a 1st- 
level priest, but with this ability the 9th-level paladin 
casts spells with the power of a 5th-level priest. Spell 
progression is unaffected; only level-based characteristics 
of an individual spell are affected by this ability. 

* Increased spell progression (10/15): A paladin with this 
power gains his spell ability earlier than 9th level. For 10 
points, he begins to gain spells at 7th level; for 15 points, he 
begins to gain spells at 4th level. In all other respects, his 
spell powers are unchanged, and he simply enters Table 17 
in the PHB at the level indicated. Each level he gains from 
that point on advances him one level on the chart, so a 7th- 
level paladin with this ability uses the 9th-level entry and 
goes on to the 10th-level entry when he rises to 8th level. 


Optional Spell Limitations for Paladins 

Since the scope of this book is simply to discuss magical 
powers, the paladin class-design options have not been 
included in their entirety. Players interested in creating cus- 
tomized paladin characters should refer to the PLAYER'S 


45 


OPTION: Skills & Powers book. The abilities above simply add 
to the slate of available powers for paladin characters. 

If you wish to use these special advantages without the 
Skills & Powers rules, you can simply assign the paladin an 
experience point penalty of 30% plus 1% per point spent. If 
a paladin chooses increased spell progression and increased 
spell power, his total penalty would be 30% + 10% + 7%, or 
47%; if the DM awards 3,000 experience points for an 
adventure, the paladin would gain 1,410 less than normal, 
only collecting 1,590 experience points. This slower 
advancement counters the character’s unusual advantages. 


Rangers 


Rangers gain the ability to cast priest spells at 8th level. 
They have access to the spheres of plant and animal. Like 
paladins, rangers don't gain bonus spells for high Wisdom 
scores and may not use clerical magical items. At 8th level, 
the ranger casts spells with the effectiveness of a 1st-level 
priest; for each level past 8th, the ranger's casting level 
increases by one, to a maximum of 9th level for a 16th-level 
ranger. (See Table 18: Ranger Abilities in the PHB.) 

Like paladins, rangers may use armor with no restrictions 
while casting spells. However, the ranger should have at least 
one hand free to present his holy symbol or other material 
components, so a character might have to put down or drop 
a shield or second weapon in order to cast a spell. 


Optional Spell Abilities for Rangers 

The ranger's spell powers can be customized, just like 
those of any other class. Some of the options available 
include the following: 


* Alternate sphere access (54): Normally, rangers have 
minor access to the spheres of plant and animal, totalling 
10 CPs. A ranger may choose to have minor access to any 
combination of alternate spheres totalling 10 CPs or less. 
For example, a ranger might choose travelers, elemental 
air, and healing. If spheres are exchanged on a point-for- 
point basis, this optional ability has a base cost of only 5 
CPs, but a ranger may choose extra spheres of access and 
add the costs listed in Table 6: Access Costs. 

* Increased spell power (7): A ranger with this power casts 
spells with an effective casting level only four levels less 
than his true level and has no maximum casting level. Nor- 
mally, an 8th-level ranger casts spells as a 1st-level priest, 
but with this ability the ranger has a casting level of 4 
instead of 1. Spell progression is unaffected; only level- 
based characteristics of a spell are affected by this ability. 

* Increased spell progression (7/12): A ranger with this 
power gains his spell ability earlier than 8th level. For 7 
points, he begins to gain spells at 6th level; for 12 points, 
he begins to gain spells at 4th level. In all other respects, 
his spell powers are unchanged, and he simply enters the 
Table 18 at the level indicated. Each level he gains from 
that point on advances him one level on the chart. 


Optional Restrictions for Rangers 

Ranger class-design options are discussed in detail in the 
PLAYER'S OPTION: Skills & Powers book. The abilities above 
are simply added to the slate of available powers for ranger 
characters. 

If you wish to use these abilities without the Skills & 


: Restrictions: Multi-classed wizards gain the full benefits 


Powers rules, you can assign the ranger an experience point 
penalty of 30% plus 1% per point spent. If a ranger chooses 
access to two additional spheres totalling 8 points, his total 
penalty would be 30% + 13%, or 43%. If the DM awards 
2,000 experience points for an adventure, the ranger would 
gain 860 less than normal, only collecting 1,140 experience 
points. This experience penalty will counter some of the 
character's unusual advantages. 


Demihuman characters are some of 


MuftisCisssed Teen c ae 
Spellcasters seh ite ADD game inadd 


tion to their various racial advan- 
tages, most demihumans also have the ability to advance as 
multi-classed characters, such as an elf fighter /mage or a 
dwarf fighter/cleric. Generally, a multi-classed character may 
freely use abilities of either class but must also abide by class 
restrictions and penalties. For example, a fighter/mage can't 
cast spells while wearing armor, nor could a fighter /thief try 
to move silently while wearing plate mail. 


Multi-Classed Wizards 


Armed with the spells of a wizard as well as fighting 
ability, stealth, or priestly magic, multi-classed wizards are 
powerful, flexible, and popular characters. The great range 
of powers offered by a wizard's magic serve as a potent 
weapon for the character and augment the abilities of his 
other class. A thief /mage with access to spells such as spider 
climb, invisibility, and wraithform can do things no ordinary 
thief could attempt. A fighter /mage with a strength, stone- 
skin, or fire shield spell in operation is a deadly fighting 
machine. And the versatility and spell selection of a 
mage/cleric is truly impressive. 

Elves, half-elves, and gnomes may be multi-classed wiz- 
ards. Elves may be fighter /mages or mage/thieves; half- 
elves may be fighter /mages, cleric or druid / mages, thief/ 
mages, fighter /mage/clerics, or fighter/mage/thieves; and 
gnomes may be fighter /illusionists, cleric/illusionists, or 
illusionist/thieves. Other PC races from specific world-set- 
tings may be able to multi-class as wizards, too. 

Specialist Wizards: Under most circumstances, a multi- 
classed wizard must be a mage; the single-minded study 
and devotion of a single magical specialty would demand 
the character's full attention. The only exception is multi- 
classed gnome characters, who may be illusionists but can't 
be mages. 

However, if the DM agrees, a limited number of addi- 
tional specialties may be available to the multi-classed char- 
acter. Selecting one of these optional specializations costs a 
multi-classed character 20 character points under the Skills 
& Powers character design rules, or an experience point pen- 
alty of 20% for standard characters. The specializations 
available for each PC race are shown below: 


of all their classes, but must abide by any restrictions that 
aren't specifically negated by a class benefit. For example, a 
wizard /priest can use more weapons than a single-classed 
wizard, but is still limited to Type B weapons. The most 
important restriction is the character's inability to cast spells 
while wearing armor. While a multi-classed fighter/wizard 
may wear any armor he chooses, the armor itself interferes 
with the character's ability to cast spells. In order to cast a 
spell, the character must remove his armor. The only kinds 
of armor that do not interfere with spellcasting are elven 
chain mail and elven plate mail. (Note that single-classed 
wizards can't use these special armors because they're not 
trained in the wearing of armor.) 

Optional powers: With the DM's permission, multi- 
classed wizards may select some of the optional abilities 
described in Chapter 2, including armor, automatic spell 
acquisition, bonus spells, casting time reduction, no com- 
ponents, detect magic, dispel, enhanced casting level, 
extended duration, immunity, learning bonus, range 
increase, read magic, research bonus, and any restriction 
except reduced hit points. These can be paid for by balanc- 
ing advantages with restrictions of equal value, or the 
character can accept an experience point penalty of 30% 
plus 1% for each point he spends on additional abilities. 
For example, a wizard who chooses the read magic ability 
(5 points) reduces the number of experience points he 
earns by 35 percent. 


Multi-Classed Driests 


Priests are versatile characters, with good fighting 
skills, potent spells, and a variety of special powers and 
talents. Combining the priest's range of spell powers with 
the talents of another class results in a very capable char- 
acter. As described in the Player's Handbook, dwarves, 
gnomes, and half-elves may all be multi-classed priests: 
dwarves may be fighter/clerics; gnomes may be 
fighter/clerics, cleric/illusionists, or cleric/thieves; and 
half-elves may be fighter /clerics, fighter/druids, cleric or 
druid/rangers, cleric or druid/mages, or 
fighter /mage/clerics or druids. 

Specialty Priests: Unless otherwise noted, a multi- 
classed priest character must be a cleric and not any other 
kind of specialty priest. Some campaign settings may have 
world-specific guidelines for multi-classed specialty priests; 
the campaign setting rules take precedence over other mate- 
rial in the Player's Handbook, PLAYER's OPTION: Skills & 
Powers, or PLAYER's OPTION: Spells & Magic. 

At the DM's option, some of the varieties of specialty 
priest presented in Chapter 2 may be added to the list of 
multi-classed combinations. (See the chart below.) Since the 
capabilities of the various specialty priests are comparable 
to each other, there is no penalty for choosing to be a cru- 
sader or druid instead of a cleric. 


Restrictions: The only limitation that applies to a multi- 
classed priest is the restricted selection of weapons available 
to a cleric or druid. Regardless of the character's other class, 
he must abide by the weapon selection of his priest class. Of 
course, crusaders are able to wield any weapon, since they 
are not normally limited in this regard. 

Optional powers: With the DM's approval, multi-classed 
priests may select optional abilities described in Chapter 3, 
including animal empathy, casting time reduction, cold resis- 
tance, communication, detect evil, detect undead, expert 
healer, extended spell duration, fire/electrical resistance, 
identify plants and animals, immunity to charm, immunity to 
magic, immunity to natural disease, inspire/enrage allies, 
know alignment, lay on hands, pass without trace, purify 
water, resist energy drain, secret language, spell-like granted 
power, and turn undead. These can be paid for by balancing 
advantages with restrictions of equal value; the priest may 
choose any limitation except armor restriction (for druids) or 
weapon restriction. Optionally, the priest can accept an expe- 
rience point penalty of 30% plus 1% for each point he spends 
on additional abilities. For example, a priest who chooses 
know alignment (15 points) reduces the number of experi- 
ence points he earns by 45 percent. 


Naturally, human and demihuman char- 
Monsters acters aren't the only spellcasters in the 
AD&D game. The most powerful types of undead, the vam- 
pire and the lich, can command devastating magical abili- 
ties. Many extraplanar creatures have some degree of skill 
as wizards or priests, and every tribe of humanoids boasts a 
shaman or witch-doctor of some kind. In fact, many mon- 
sters are more skilled with spellcasting than the player char- 
acters of a campaign. 

In addition to monstrous spellcasters, there are also 
hordes of creatures with magical powers that resemble 
spells. The most dangerous extradimensional monsters have 
a selection of spell-like powers that rivals the spell capabil- 
ity of a high-level wizard. Other creatures, such as dragons, 
gain both spell-like abilities and the power to actually cast 
wizard or priest spells. 


Monstrous Spellcasters 


Monsters who memorize and expend spells in the 
same fashion as player characters fall into this category. 
A monster that has a character level equivalent, such as a 
19th-level lich or a 10th-level vampire mage, is a 
monstrous spellcaster. In general, monstrous spellcasters 
must abide by the same rules and restrictions of human 
and demihuman wizards and priests; monstrous wizards 
may not wear armor (although many monsters have a 
natural Armor Class to compensate), monstrous priests 
and mages may be restricted in choice of weapons, 
monstrous spellcasters must be able to use verbal, 
somatic, or material components required by the spell, 
and they can be interrupted by damage or other distrac- 
tions during spellcasting. 

There are several types of monstrous spellcasters, includ- 
ing humanoids, undead, extraplanar creatures, and (for lack 
of any better word) nonhumanoids. Most monsters have an 
effective casting level equal to their spell ability, so a cloud 
giant with the spell ability of a 4th-level priest casts spells as 


if he were 4th level, while a ki-rin with the spell ability of an 
18th-level mage casts spells as an 18th-level wizard. A few 
rare monsters, such as dragons or kenku, have the ability to 
use spells of a certain level but aren’t wizards or priests 
with levels. Unless otherwise noted, these monsters have a 
casting level equal to their Hit Dice. 

Humanoids: This category includes living monsters that 
are generally bipedal or humanoid in form, ranging from 
bullywugs or lycanthropes to githyanki or giants. In many 
cases, spellcasters are quite rare among their race; only 1 in 
10 cloud giants has the ability to use wizard spells, for 
instance. The MoNsrROUS MANUAL" tome and The Complete 
Book of Humanoids describe dozens of races that have the 
ability to produce priests or wizards. 

Undead: Human or demihuman spellcasters who retain 
their magical abilities after death fall into this category. The 
principle examples are liches and vampires. In both cases, 
the character’s class and level are retained through the 
transformation into undeath. 

Extraplanar: A small number of extradimensional or extra- 
planar monsters have magical abilities. Some aasimon and 
yugoloths fall into this category, but creatures that are or for- 
merly were mortal (githyanki, githzerai, tieflings, or einheriar) 
are considered to be humanoid spellcasters instead. Most 
extraplanar creatures also command a formidable array of 
spell-like abilities in addition to their memorized spells. 

Creatures of this sort do not need spell books or 
extended periods of study to learn their spells; after a good 
rest, or a period of concentration or prayer, extraplanar 
spellcasters may choose their spells just as a mortal spell- 
caster would select spells from a book or pray for spells 


from his patron deity. The actual spell memorization only 
requires 1 to 3 turns, but the creature's resting time or 
other preparations consume several hours at the mini- 
mum. In any event, spells may be memorized no more 
than once per day. 

Extraplanar creatures with wizard spell ability are still 
limited in their total number of spells known—in effect, they 
carry their “spell books” in their own memory, and merely 
select which ones will be available during the course of a day. 
Creatures with priest spell ability are assumed have access to 
the same spheres available to a standard cleric. 

Nonhumanoids: This broad category includes all other 
creatures who memorize and expend their spells. Couatl, 
dragons, lammasu, nagas, and sphinxes are just a few 
examples of nonhumanoid spellcasters. Generally, nonhu- 
manoid spellcasters follow the same guidelines described 
under extraplanar spellcasters: they do not need spell books 
and simply recall their spells once per day. In addition, non- 
humanoid spells have verbal components only; no somatic 
or material components are required, since creatures such as 
nagas or couatl develop variations on standard spells that 
do not require hands to cast. 

Monstrous Specialists: Most monsters with spell ability 
are assumed to be mages or clerics. However, specialist wiz- 
ards and specialty priests are not unheard of. First of all, 
humanoids from races familiar with magic, such as gith- 
yanki or githzerai, could quite easily be specialist wizards. 
Similarly, shamans are common among all kinds of barbar- 


ians, and goblin or bugbear shamans are reasonable. 
Undead spellcasters could be specialist wizards or spe- 
cialty priests of any variety, since they gained their magical 
powers during their lifetimes. On the other hand, extrapla- 
nar and nonhumanoid specialists would be fairly unusual, 
simply because these creatures have a wide array of powers 
to begin with. Some might be appropriate—a red dragon 
elemental fire specialist, an arcanaloth dimensionalist, or a 
planetar with druidic powers are all possible, if rare. 


Monsters with Spell-like Abilitics 

Many monsters have the innate ability to use certain 
spells simply by an act of will. Most extraplanar monsters 
have an array of spell-like powers as formidable as the spell 
arsenal of a high-level wizard or priest, sylvan creatures 
such as dryads or brownies can charm or confuse their oppo- 
nents, and even dragons have a handful of spell-like abili- 
ties based on their color and age. In fact, any monster that 
can use spell effects without an equivalent wizard or priest 
character level falls into this category. 

Spell-like abilities are invoked by one round of concen- 
tration; the monster can do nothing else in that round 
except use a single power, just like a wizard or priest may 
only cast one spell per round. All spell-like abilities have an 
initiative modifier of +3, or fast under PLAYER'S OPTION: Com- 
bat & Tactics rules. Unlike a true spellcaster, a monster with 
spell-like abilities can’t be interrupted by damage or distrac- 
tion—if the creature survives the injury, the power functions 
that round regardless. (However, if a monster has both 
spell-like abilities and normal spells, any spells it actually 
casts can be interrupted.) 

Unless otherwise stated in the monster’s description, 
spell-like abilities are considered to have an effective casting 
level equal to the monster’s Hit Dice, or the minimum char- 
acter level necessary to use its highest-level ability, 
whichever is better. For example, a brownie has only half a 
Hit Die, but its spell-like abilities include confusion and 
dimension door, which are 4th-level wizard spells. Since a 
wizard must be at least 7th level to use 4th-level spells, a 
brownie's spell-like abilities function as if it were a 7th-level 
caster. (Refer to Table 21: Wizard Spell Progression or Table 
24: Priest Spell Progression in the Player's Handbook.) This 
affects range, damage, duration, and all other level-based 
characteristics of a spell. A list of monsters from the 
Monstrous MANUAL tome with spell-like abilities follows, 
along with their effective casting level. Only creatures that 
don’t have a casting level noted are mentioned here in Table 
7: Monster Casting Levels—you may want to note these in 
your copy of the book. 

A creature with a spell-like ability may choose to use it 
simply by concentrating for one round. If the power can be 
maintained, the monster doesn’t need to concentrate to 
maintain it through the spell’s normal duration; after that, 
the monster must spend a round reactivating the power. For 
example, a brownie’s abilities include protection from evil, 
which has a duration of 2 rounds/level, or 14 rounds for a 
brownie. By invoking the power once, the brownie is 
affected by the spell for 13 more rounds, and it can then 
spend a round invoking the power again to be protected for 
another 14 rounds. This means that the monster may be able 
to invoke a power and then engage in physical attacks or 
take other actions while the power is active. 


Other Spellcasters 


On the other hand, some spell-like abilities require the 
caster’s continuing attention while they’re active, such as a 
phantasmal force or ventriloquism spell. Invoking the power 
takes only one round, as described above, but after that the 
monster must spend each round concentrating on the 
power and doing nothing else in order to maintain it. A 
monster with multiple spell-like abilities can have any num- 
ber of powers active at one time, as long as it spends one 
round invoking each and continues to concentrate on any 
powers that need its attention. 

Restrictions: Generally, monsters with spell-like abilities 
are free of any restrictions normally associated with those 
spells; a monster with wizard spells among its spell-like 
abilities is not a wizard and may use any armor or weapons 
it cares to. Similarly, a monster with priest spells doesn’t 
have the ability to turn undead or any granted powers spe- 
cific to a certain priesthood. No components are necessary, 
but the DM may rule that a bound and gagged monster 
may not be able to invoke certain abilities. 

Many monsters with spell-like abilities may only make 
use of them a certain number of times per day; for example, 
a juvenile black dragon may use darkness three times per 
day, while a marilith tanar’ri may polymorph self up to seven 
times per day. 


Table 7: 
Monster Casting Levels 


Monster 

Arcane 

Baatezu, Pit Fiend 
Baatezu, Black Abishai 
Baatezu, Green Abishai 
Baatezu, Red Abishai 
Bat, Azmyth 

Bat, Sinister 

Bird, Talking Owl 
Brownie 

Couatl 

Deepspawn 

Dryad 

Elemental, earth kin, Pech 
Elf, drow 

Genie, Djinn 

Genie, Efreet 

Ghost 

Giant, Firbolg 
Gnome, Svirfneblin 
Gnome, Spriggan 
Imp, Imp or Quasit 
Imp, Fire Mephit 
Imp, Smoke Mephit 
Imp, Steam Mephit 
Kenku 

Ki-rin 

Leprechaun 

Ogre Mage 

Satyr 

Satyr, Korred 

Slaad, Blue 

Sphinx, Gynosphinx 
Sprite 

Squid, Giant, Kraken 
Tanar’ri, Marilith 
Yuan-ti 


' Also casts spells 
? Or by character level 


Level 


Chapter 4: 
Proficiencies 


E 


Wizards and priests have developed a number of unique and valuable skills to 
aid them in their pursuit of both magical and temporal power and knowledge. 
Literacy in ancient languages, knowledge of the maintenance of libraries and 
physical care of dilapidated old tomes, and skills in research and the execution of 
laboratory tasks are absolutely indispensable to a wizard character. Similarly, 
priests should be familiar with the languages in which their holiest scriptures are 
written, the correct observances and customs demanded by their deity, and the 


administration of property and lands belonging to their temples. 

In this chapter, we'll take a look at new proficiencies for the spellcasters of the 
AD&D game. New nonweapon proficiencies describe a number of new skills _ 
available to both wizards and priests, ranging from alchemy to zoology. We'll also 
introduce the concept of signature spells or spell specialization, which represents 
unusual skill with a particular spell. Just as fighters can master their weapons with 
practice and training, wizards can master their spells. 


Droficiencies 


111 1 Since PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells & 
Droficiencics Magic is part of the PLAYER'S 
OPTION series, rules and infor- 
a nd Character mation for proficiencies are 
Doints described in two formats: the 


system of slots and check modi- 
fiers described in the Player’s Handbook and also in terms of 
character points for readers who are using the PLAYER'S 
OPTION: Skills & Powers rules. Players who wish to create 
characters using the material in this chapter should first 
check with their DM to see which system he wants to use in 
his campaign. 

Under either system, characters with high Intelligence 
scores gain bonus proficiency slots or character points, 
based on their maximum number of languages. Generally, 
these slots or points can only be spent on nonweapon profi- 
ciencies. If this optional rule is in play, characters must use 
proficiencies to learn new languages, although all characters 
can speak (but not necessarily read or write!) their native 
tongue without spending a proficiency slot. 


Proficiency Slots and Check Modifiers 


In the Player's Handbook proficiency system, a character 
who selects a proficiency must pay a listed number of profi- 
ciency slots in order to acquire that skill. The character’s 
success chance equals the relevant ability score—Dexterity 
for the skill of tumbling, for example—modified by the pro- 
ficiency’s check modifier. If you are playing with this sys- 
tem, use the slots and check modifiers that appear on Table 
37: Nonweapon Proficiency Groups in the PHB or the profi- 
ciency tables in this chapter. 

If a character selects a proficiency that is not within his 
character group or the general list, he must pay an additional 
slot to acquire the skill. 


In the PHB, the proficiency spellcraft costs 1 slot for a wizard. 
The check modifier is Int - 2; for a wizard with an Intelligence of 
15, the success number is a 13 or less on 1d20. If the character 
was a fighter who wanted to be familiar with spells, spellcraft 
would cost 2 slots. 


Character Doints and Ability Modifiers 


PLAYER's OPTION: Skills & Powers revises the proficiency 
system. Under these rules, the character pays a variable 
number of character points to acquire a skill. His success 
chance begins at the proficiency's initial rating, modified by 
a standard ability modifier based on the relevant score. If 
you are playing with these rules, use the CP cost and initial 
rating listed in Table 45: Nonweapon Proficiency Groups in 
Skills & Powers, and then modify the character's rating using 
Table 44: Ability Modifiers to Proficiency Scores (also in 
Skills & Powers). 


Under the PLAYER'S OPTION: Skills & Powers system, spell- 
craft costs 3 CPs, and has an initial rating of 7. This is modified 
by +2 for a wizard with an Intelligence of 15, for a total rating or 
success chance of 9. Note that the Skills & Powers proficiency 
rules tend to compress character's success chances in the 8 to 12 
range, but success at completely routine tasks is considered auto- 
matic—proficiency checks are only made for difficult tasks or 
adverse conditions. 


1 Because of the unusually high 

Wi za rd Intelligence scores of sc wizard 
11 í characters, wizards tend to accu- 

Droficiencics mulate a diverse array of non- 
weapon proficiencies. Many mages begin play knowing 
three or four proficiencies more than other 1st-level charac- 
ters, and they also enjoy a favorable nonweapon proficiency 
progression in addition to their good starting allocation. 
PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells & Magic expands the scope of wizard 
proficiencies by adding a number of new nonweapon profi- 
ciencies to those described in the PHB. Refer to Table 8: New 
Wizard Nonweapon Proficiencies. 

Alchemy: A wizard with this skill is not necessarily an 
alchemist or a specialist in the school of alchemy, but he is 
well-versed in the physical aspects of magical research and 
the properties of various chemicals, reagents, and sub- 
stances. If the character has access to a decent laboratory, he 
can use his knowledge to identify unknown elements or 
compounds, create small doses of acids, incendiaries, or 
pyrotechnical substances, or (if he is 9th level or higher) 
brew potions. 

Refer to Chapter 5 for information on the size, cost, and 
equipment of an alchemical laboratory. Naturally, a wizard 
may be able to defray some of the costs by sharing his facili- 
ties or striking some kind of deal with a local wizard’s 
guild; the DM can come up with the details. 

Identifying substances or samples of unknown material 
requires 1 to 4 days and a successful proficiency check. Sim- 
ple materials, such as powdered metals or ores, provide the 
alchemist with a +1 to +4 bonus on his check, at the DM's 
discretion. Rare, complex, or damaged or incomplete sam- 
ples might impose a -1 to —4 penalty. 

Creating dangerous substances such as acids or burning 
powders takes 1d3 days and 20-50 gp or (1d4+1) x 10 per 
vial, or 2-5 days and 50-100 gp or (1d6+4) x 10 per flask. 
The alchemist must pass a proficiency check in order to suc- 
cessfully manufacture the substance; failing the check with 
a natural roll of 20 results in an explosion or other mishap 
that exposes the character to the effects of his work and 
damages the laboratory for 10%~60% or 1d6 x 10% of its 
construction value. 

Acid inflicts 1d3 points of damage per vial, or 2d4 
points of damage per flask, and continues to injure the 
victim the next round; the vial inflicts 1 point of damage 
in the second round, and the flask causes 1d3 points of 
damage. In addition, the flask is large enough to splash 
creatures near the target; see Grenadelike Missiles in the 
DMG. Acid can also burn out a lock or clasp, forcing an 
item saving throw. 

Incendiaries ignite when exposed to air. A flask of 
incendiary liquid inflicts damage as per burning oil (2d6 
points in the first round and 1d6 in the second.) Again, 
refer to the DMG. Incendiary powders or liquids can eas- 
ily start fires if used on buildings, dry brush, or other 
such surfaces. 

Pyrotechnic materials resemble incendiaries, but create 
clouds of billowing smoke. A vial creates a cloud of smoke 
5 feet high by 5 feet wide by 5 feet deep, obscuring vision. 

A flask creates a cloud of smoke 10 feet high by 10 feet wide 
by 10 feet deep. The clouds persist for 1d3 rounds, depend- 
ing on the wind and other conditions. 


Chapter 4 


Alchemy is an expensive hobby, to say the least, and it 
can be a dangerous one as well. If a player character is abus- 
ing this proficiency (i.e., walking into a dungeon with 10 
flasks of acid in his pack), the DM can require item saving 
throws for all those beakers anytime the character slips, 
falls, or is struck by an opponent. 

Wizards who specialize in the school of alchemy gain a 
+2 bonus to their proficiency rating in this skill. 

Anatomy: This proficiency reflects a character's detailed 
knowledge of the structure and arrangement of the human 
body, including the location and function of bones, muscles, 
organs, and other soft tissues. This skill has two distinct 
uses for a wizard; first of all, knowledge of anatomy pro- 
vides the character with a +2 bonus on any healing profi- 
ciency checks he attempts. Secondly, the wizard can use this 
skill to repair corpses that have been badly damaged. With 
a successful proficiency check, the wizard can strengthen 
and reinforce a body, making it more suitable for animation 
as a mindless undead. This provides a hit point bonus of +1 
per die for skeletal remains, or a bonus of +2 hp per die for 
a creature to be animated as a zombie. 

Arcanology: The study of the history and development 
of magic is termed arcanology. A wizard with expertise in 
this field is familiar with the works of past wizards. If there 
was a source of powerful magic in the campaign's past—for 
example, Netheril or Myth Drannor in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS campaign setting—the arcanologist has a good idea 
of who the great mages were and what they were able to 


accomplish. Special magical items, spells, or forms of magic 
wielded by these ancient sorcerers are familiar to the arca- 
nologist. With a successful proficiency check, the arcanolo- 
gist can identify the general purpose and function of an 
ancient magical item; the DM may apply a penalty of -1 to 
—4 if the item comes from a region outside the arcanologist's 
normal studies, or is especially rare or obscure. Note that 
this ability doesn't help a wizard to identify items manufac- 
tured by the “modern” school or tradition of magic, what- 
ever that may be. 

Bookbinding: A wizard with this skill is familiar with 
the process of assembling a book. Bookbinding is a 
demanding task; the pages must be glued or sewn to a com- 
mon backing of some kind, protected by various kinds of 
varnishes or treatments, and then fastened to a strong and 
durable cover. Additional chemicals or compounds to ward 
off mildew and deter moths and bookworms are a neces- 
sary precaution. 

Bookbinding is especially helpful for a wizard assem- 
bling a spell book. Normally, a wizard must pay a book- 
binder 50 gp per page for a standard spell book, or 100 gp 
per page for a traveling spell book—see Chapter 7 of the 
DMG. A wizard who does this work himself reduces these 
costs by 50%, although the process takes at least two 
weeks, plus one day per five pages. If the character passes 
a proficiency check, his spell book gains a +2 bonus to 
item saving throws due to the quality and craftsmanship 
of the work. In addition, the wizard must succeed in a 


Table 8: 
New Wizard Nonwcapon Proficiencics 


Proficiency Base Base 
Name Ability Score 


Arcanology 
Bookbinding 


Glassblowing 
Hypnotism 


Papermaking 
Prestidigitation 


Scribe 
Tactics of Magic 


CP # of 
Cost Slots 


Check 
Modifier 


Droficiencies 


proficiency check if he is dealing with unusual or unsuit- 
able materials, such as metal sheets for pages or dragon 
scales for a cover. 

Concentration: A character with this talent has rigor- 
ously trained himself to ignore distractions of all kinds, 
deadening his mind to pain or sensation. This allows a 
wizard to ignore annoyances or disturbances that might 
otherwise interfere with the casting of a spell. In order to 
use this ability, the player must state that his character is 
concentrating when he begins to cast a spell. If the charac- 
ter is struck by an attack that causes 2 or less points of 
damage, he is permitted to attempt a proficiency check to 
ignore the distraction and continue to cast his spell 
(unless, of course, the damage is enough to render him 
unconscious.) The wizard can try to ignore grappling or 
restraining attacks that cause no damage but suffers a —4 
penalty to his check. Spells that incapacitate without dam- 
aging, such as hold person or command, still interrupt the 
caster if he fails his saving throw. 

A character using this ability must focus on the casting of 
his spell to the exclusion of all other activity, even direct 
attacks. Any Dexterity adjustment to his Armor Class is lost, 
and in addition flank or side attacks are treated as rear 
attacks, with a +2 bonus to hit instead of a +1. 

Dowsing: This is the skill of finding lost or hidden items 
by seeking a disturbance in the subtle natural energies that 
permeate the earth. A dowser is attuned to the invisible, 
intangible eddies and currents of the world around him; by 
careful and methodical searching, he can detect particular 
emanations or anomalies. 

Dowsing has two general uses. First, the character can 
attempt to detect natural deposits or minerals in the 
ground, such as water, gold, or other ores. Secondly, the 
character can attempt to find a specific man-made item that 
has been lost or hidden, such as a friend’s dagger, a buried 
treasure chest, or the entrance to a barrow mound. The 
search must be very precise—the dowser will have no luck 
if he sets out to find ‘the most valuable thing in this field’ or 
‘the nearest magical weapon,’ but ‘Aunt Claire’s missing 
brooch’ or ‘the gold buried by the pirate Raserid’ are suit- 
able searches. 

Unlike the spell locate object, the dowser isn’t led or 
directed to the item he seeks; he has to actually pass within 
10 feet of the item, or walk over the place where it is buried, 
and succeed in a proficiency check to detect the item. (The 
DM should keep this check hidden from the players so that 
he doesn’t give away the location with a failed check.) 
Dowsing can take a long time; quartering the dirt floor of a 
cellar 20 square feet might take 1d3 turns, while checking a 
field or courtyard might take 1d3 hours. Searching an area 
larger than 100 square yards is impractical—the dowser gets 
tired of concentrating. 

A dowser can detect items or substances within 100 feet 
of the surface, although very strong or powerful sources 
may be detected slightly deeper. The dowser can guess the 
approximate depth of what he's seeking within +10% when 
he stumbles across it. 

Glassblowing: A character skilled at this trade can 
manufacture all kinds of glass containers, jars, or bottles. 
Creating symmetrical or precise pieces requires a profi- 
ciency check, but if a character is making items for useful- 
ness instead of decoration, he can produce about 10 small 
containers, 5 medium containers, or 2 large ones in a day's 


55 


work. The character must have access to a specialized 
glazier's workshop and furnace in order to make use of 
this skill. 

Hypnotism: With this proficiency, the wizard can hypno- 
tize another character, placing him into a relaxed state in 
which he is susceptible to suggestions. The subject must be 
willing and must know he is being hypnotized. Only 
human, demihuman, and humanoid characters may be hyp- 
notized, and the hypnotist and subject must be able to 
understand one another's language. 

It takes about five minutes to hypnotize someone in a 
reasonably calm or peaceful environment. Once hypnotized, 
the subject is willing to do almost anything that isn't very 
dangerous or against his alignment. However, a hypnotized 
subject can be fooled into thinking he's doing one thing 
when he's actually doing something else. Hypnotism can 
have the following effects: 


* Acharacter can be induced to remember things he has 
forgotten by reliving a frightening or distant event. 

* Acharacter can be made calm and unafraid in the face of 
a specific situation that he has been prepared for, gaining 
a +2 bonus to saving throws versus fear effects or morale 
checks. 

* Acharacter can be cured of a bad habit or addiction (but 
not of curses, physical diseases, or magical afflictions.) 


Hypnotism can't increase a character's attributes, give 
him skills he does not normally possess, let him do things 
that are beyond his capabilities, or give him information he 
couldn't possibly know. As a guideline for adjudicating 
effects, the hypnotism proficiency is substantially weaker 
than magical commands or directions, such as charm person, 
command, or hypnotism. Spells magically compel a person to 
obey the caster's will; a well-phrased hypnotic command is 
nothing more than a strong suggestion. 

Mental Resistance: Through lengthy training and iron 
discipline, a character with this proficiency prepares himself 
to resist magical or psionic assaults on his mind. The char- 
acter receives a +1 bonus to his saving throws against 
attacks of this nature, if the attack normally allows a saving 
throw. Generally, this includes any attack form that a char- 
acter's magical attack adjustment bonus for his Wisdom 
score might affect, including mind-affecting spells, charm or 
fear powers of monsters, and telepathic sciences or devo- 
tions that allow the subject a saving throw. 

Omen Reading: There are hundreds of myths and super- 
stitions about the art of divination, or predicting the future 
through the reading of signs or indications. A character with 
this proficiency is skilled in a form of divination and knows 
the proper ceremonies and observances to use in order to 
obtain a valid reading. He is also familiar with the various 
messages or indications that characterize a form of divina- 
tion. Omen readers use dozens of different methods for 
their auguries, including astrology, numerology, reading 
palms, examining animal entrails, casting bones, dice, or 
runes, and burning incense to observe the smoke, just to 
name a few. The exact nature of the character's expertise is 
up to the player. 

To use this proficiency, the omen reader phrases a gen- 
eral question about a course of action, such as "Is this a 
good day to start our journey?," "Should we try to track the 
orcs to their lair, or wait for their next raid?," or "When will 


the dragon return?” The DM then makes a proficiency 
check in secret; if the character fails, the DM can tell him 
that the signs were inconclusive, or make up a false answer 
for a spectacular failure (a natural 20 on the check, for 
instance). If the omen reader succeeds, the DM can give the 
character a vague answer based on his assessment of the sit- 
uation. An omen is usually good, bad, or inconclusive, 
although an answer of "a day or two" or "proceed, but with 
caution" is acceptable as well. Omens aren't guaranteed; if a 
party ignores a bad omen, they might succeed in their task 
anyway. An omen is nothing more than the DM's best guess 
about a course of action. 

Performing the ceremony of reading an omen requires an 
hour or more. Special tools or supplies, such as runesticks, 
may be necessary depending on the character's favored 
form of omen reading. Some superstitious or primitive cul- 
tures may place a great deal of weight on omen reading, 
and a skilled diviner may be held in high regard by these 
people. 

Papermaking: A character with this skill knows how to 
manufacture paper. This can be an invaluable skill for a wiz- 
ard, since paper may be fairly rare in many campaign set- 
tings. Rag pulp, bark, linen, hemp, and wood were all used 
to make paper in medieval times. The material is pounded 
or pressed flat and treated with various chemical com- 
pounds to bind and strengthen it. At the DM's option, the 
character may also be familiar with the manufacture of 
parchment and vellum. Parchment is finely-scraped animal 
skin, treated with lime and other chemicals; vellum is 
unusually supple and smooth parchment taken from very 
young animals. 

A wizard who makes his own paper can reduce the costs 
of manufacturing a spell book by 50%, although this 
requires one to two weeks of time and a suitable work area. 
Normally, a traveling spell book costs 100 gp per page, and 
a standard spell book costs 50 gp per page. If the wizard 
also knows the bookbinding nonweapon proficiency and 
binds the volume himself, the cost of the spell book is 
reduced by 75% altogether. 

Prestidigitation: This is the art of street magic or sleight 
of hand, the trade of the magician. The character is skilled at 
concealing or manipulating small items and familiar with 
such tricks as pulling a coin from a child's ear, separating 
two joined rings, or causing a pigeon or rabbit to vanish. 

For the most part, nothing more than manual dexterity and 
showmanship are required, and any kind of character may 
learn prestidigitation. 

While true wizards have little time for these parlor tricks, 
many apprentices practice with their cantrips by duplicating 
these feats. A wizard with a cantrip spell handy can really 
manipulate a small object by briefly levitating it, teleport 
something small from one hand to the other, or use a tiny 
dimensional pocket to make an object disappear or seem to 
contain something it shouldn't. 

There is no particular game effect for prestidigitation, 
although it is a form of entertainment and can earn a wizard 
his dinner with a good performance, or possibly distract or 
fool an NPC under very limited circumstances. For 
example, a wizard trying to conceal a wand or precious gem 
from a robber searching him at knifepoint might be able to 
hide the item with a successful proficiency check. 

Research: A wizard with this skill is well-versed in the 
theory and application of spell research. He is familiar 


Chapter 4 


with the use of libraries, laboratories, and other 
resources, and also has a good grasp of the fundamental 
processes of experimentation and problem-solving. With 
a successful proficiency check, the character gains a +5% 
bonus to his success roll when researching a new spell 
and only requires one-half the usual amount of time to 
perform spell research or determine the process neces- 
sary to manufacture a particular magical item. However, 
the amount of money spent on research remains the same 
because the wizard is still expending the same amount of 
books and supplies. 

Sage Knowledge: This proficiency represents a special- 
ized area of knowledge or learning. A character with this 
skill is a fully qualified sage in the area of study chosen and 
is capable of answering questions concerning the topic after 
some lime spent researching. Refer to Table 62: Sage Modi- 
fiers and Table 63: Research Times in the DMG. As noted in 
the DMG, a sage requires an excellent library as a 
resource—at least 50 to 100 books, costing no less than 
10,000 gp altogether. Naturally, a character may be able to 
strike a deal with a university, monastery, or wizards' guild 
hall in order to gain access to their library. 

In addition to his ability to perform sage research, the 
character's high level of learning allows him to make field 
observations or attempt to come up with knowledge off the 
top of his head. For example, a sage who studies botany 
may attempt a proficiency check in order to identify a par- 
ticular plant, while one who studies toxicology may be able 
to identify a poison by its symptoms in a victim. These on- 
the-spot obser vations should be limited to information any 
expert could reasonably come up with in the field— identi- 
fying a common gemstone is one thing for a geologist, but 
making a guess about the electrical conductivity of quartz 
crystal or the enchantments of a magical gem is a different 
matter entirely. 

Purchasing this proficiency at its base cost (2 slots or 5 
character points) gives the sage a broad overview of the 
area of study in question, allowing him to answer general or 
specific questions in the field. For an additional proficiency 
slot (or 2 CPs), the character may become an expert in one 
particular aspect of the topic. For example, a botanist may 
spend another slot to specialize in moss and lichens, ferns, 
or all plants found in a particular climate or ecosystem. This 
detailed knowledge allows the character to attempt to 
answer exacting questions in the field. The fields of study 
available to a sage include: 

Alchemy: This is the study of magical chemistry, espe- 
cially as it applies to elemental transmutations and potions, 
oils, and magical compounds or solvents. Unlike the profi- 
ciency of alchemy, the sage knowledge of alchemy concen- 
trates on theories and principals, not on the practical day- 
to-day manufacture of specific compounds and substances. 
An alchemist specialist wizard or a character with the 
alchemy proficiency gains a +2 bonus to his proficiency rat- 
ing in this area of sage knowledge. 

Architecture: This is the study of the development, theo- 
ries and styles of architecture. (The architecture proficiency, 
on the other hand, represents the practical execution of 
workable building plans.) A sage with this field of study can 
attempt to identify the age, origins, and general purpose of 
ruined buildings or structures. 

Art: The sage is familiar with the great works of the past 
as well as the works of the best contemporary artists. If he 


Droficiencies 


specializes in one particular art form (sculpture, paintings, 
ornamental pottery, etc.) he is able to identify works of the 
masters, spot fakes, and appraise pieces for sale value. 

Astrology: This is the history and theoretical background 
of astrology, not the actual art of prediction. Someone with 
the astrology proficiency knows that Planet x passing in 
front of Constellation Y means trouble, but a sage knows 
why that's a sign of ill fortune. In addition, the sage has the 
ability to perform historical astrology by working back- 
wards to determine the stars’ and planet's alignments for 
thousands of years in the past. An expert in this field may 
be familiar with the constellations and beliefs of vanished or 
dead cultures. 

Astronomy: For the astrologer, planets and constellations 
are representations of greater powers. The astronomer, on 
the other hand, assigns no characteristics or indications to 
these heavenly bodies, and instead concentrates on study- 
ing their movements in the skies. He can predict eclipses, 
anticipate the return of comets or meteor showers, and 
answer questions about the locations or predicted locations 
of various planets or other bodies in the skies. 

Botany: This is the study of plants, ranging from simple 
cataloguing and observation to detailed studies of life- 
cycles and ecologies. Areas of specialization include simple 
plants, water plants, grasses and brush, flowering plants, 
domesticated plants, plant diseases, and ecological systems 
such as rain forest, tundra, prairie, etc. 

Cartography: Cartography is the art of map-making. A 
sage who specializes in this field knows where to find maps 
for any given region or area, knows how to interpret maps 
using various forms of notation, and can attempt to solve or 
complete encrypted or partial maps. 

Chemistry: While alchemy focuses on the study of magi- 
cal substances, chemistry concentrates on the study of the 
properties of mundane substances. Note that a character 
with the alchemy proficiency is assumed to use a fair 
amount of mundane chemistry to produce acids, solvents, 
and pyrotechnic substances. 

Cryptography: This is the study of codes, ciphers, and 
puzzles. A sage with skill in cryptography can attempt to 
break codes or solve written puzzles with time and study. 

Engineering: The character is familiar with the science of 
building devices, engines, and structures. Sage knowledge 
of engineering provides a +2 bonus to the character’s non- 
weapon proficiency score in engineering, if he has both pro- 
ficiencies. The character can specialize in small machines, 
large machines (water wheels, etc.), siege engineering, forti- 
fications, bridges and roads, or buildings. 

Folklore: The sage studies legends and folk tales. By 
spending another proficiency slot, he can specialize in the 
folklore of a particular culture or region. 

Genealogy: This is the study of lines of descent. A sage 
with this skill knows research techniques and sources for 
tracing family trees and is also familiar with the histories of 
the important royal and noble families. 

Geography: A sage with this knowledge has learned 
about the lands and cultures of his world. He knows gen- 
eral principles of cartography, topography, climatology, and 
sociology, and can identify individuals or artifacts from 
other lands. 

Geology: Geology is the study of landforms, rock, and 
the physical makeup of the earth. A sage with knowledge 
in this area can add a +2 bonus to his rating in the mining 


nonweapon proficiency and can attempt a proficiency 
check to identify various sorts of gemstones or precious 
minerals. 

Heraldry: Coats of arms, banners, flags, and standards 
are all emblazoned with heraldic designs. A sage with this 
skill is familiar with the evolution of heraldry and the sig- 
nificance of various symbols and colors. He can identify 
common coats of arms on sight and knows where to 
research obscure or unknown devices. This area of knowl- 
edge adds a +2 bonus to a character’s heraldry nonweapon 
proficiency score. 

History: A sage with this skill has an excellent grasp of 
history and the historical methods. Unlike a character with 
the ancient or local history proficiencies, a sage with this 
skill is a generalist, but he can be considered an expert on a 
particular era or culture by spending an additional slot to 
specialize. Whether or not the historian knows something 
off the top of his head doesn't matter—he knows exactly 
where to look when he needs to find out the details of a per- 
son's life or an important event. Skill in this field of knowl- 
edge provides a +2 bonus to the character's proficiency 
score in ancient history or local history. 

Languages: A character with a modern language profi- 
ciency knows how to speak a second language, and a char- 
acter with an ancient languages proficiency knows how to 
read a second language, but a sage who specializes in lan- 
guages is concerned with the study of the language itself— 
grammar, syntax and constructs, and vocabulary and word 
origin. His expertise is limited to one particular tongue, but 
for each additional slot the linguist may add another lan- 
guage to his field of expertise. This knowledge adds a +2 
bonus to the linguist's rating in any modern or ancient lan- 
guage proficiencies he possesses. 

Law: A sage with this field of study is an expert on mat- 
ters of law. He is familiar with any national constitutions or 
charters, the origin and history of the law, and important 
matters of precedent. He can examine contracts, warrants, 
orders, or decrees and determine if there is a way to enforce 
or avoid them. 

Mathematics: The study of abstract or theoretical mathe- 
matics may seem unusual in a fantasy setting, but it dates 
back thousands of years in our own world; the ancient 
Greeks laid the groundwork for geometry, while algebra 
was a pastime of Islamic scholars and nobles before the 
European Renaissance. A dimensionalist gains a +2 bonus 
on his proficiency rating in this area of study. 

Medicine: A sage with this skill studies both the history 
and development of medicine, as well as current methods 
and treatments. This provides the character with a +2 bonus 
to his healing nonweapon proficiency score. In addition, the 
character may be able to come up with treatments for non- 
magical diseases or injuries. 

Meteorology: This is the study of weather and weather 
patterns. A sage with this skill knows historical records and 
prediction methods. In the field, his knowledge of weather 
provides a +2 bonus to any weather sense proficiency 
checks he makes. 

Music: The sage knows the theory and notation systems 
of music and has studied the works of the great masters. He 
can attempt to identify unknown pieces or decipher musical 
puzzles. 

Myconology: Myconology is the study of fungi. A myco- 
nologist can identify samples of fungus, mold, or spores. He 


is familiar with dangerous or monstrous varieties as well 
and may be able to spot these in the wild before he or his 
companions come to harm. His knowledge of mushrooms 
and molds gives him a +2 bonus to herbalism nonweapon 
proficiency checks. 

Oceanography: A sage with this skill studies the ocean, 
including weather, marine biology, navigation and charting, 
and undersea topography. An oceanographer may be able 
to explain unusual phenomena at sea or discover the loca- 
tion of wrecks or other sites of interest. 

Philosophy: The study of philosophy is the study of 
logic, ethics, aesthetics, and metaphysics (for game pur- 
poses, anyway), and a sage with expertise in this field is 
conversant with the great thinkers and arguments of his 
race or culture. 

Physics: In most AD&D campaigns, the study of physics 
centers around mechanics and thermodynamics; some of 
the more advanced fields of study simply haven’t been 
invented yet. 

Planes, Inner: Most individuals in a campaign have little 
to no knowledge of worlds beyond the one in which they 
live, but a sage with expertise in this field is familiar with 
the characteristics and properties of the Ethereal Plane and 
the various Elemental Planes beyond that. He understands 
how the Inner Planes are aligned and how the multiverse is 
put together. If he spends an additional slot to specialize, he 
can be an expert on a particular plane, capable of answering 
exacting questions on the topic. 

Planes, Outer: The great religions of a campaign tend to 
disseminate a very limited view of the multiverse, centering 
on the home of their deity and that of their deity’s principal 
foes. A sage who studies this field has a general understand- 
ing with the general arrangement of all the Outer Planes 
and the characteristics of the Astral Plane. For an additional 
slot, he can specialize in a particular plane, learning the gen- 
eral properties of its layers, its chief inhabitants and 
domains, and other important details. 

School of Magic: A sage with expertise in a school of 
magic is familiar with the important theories, works, and 
great mages of that field. By engaging in research and pass- 
ing a proficiency check, the sage could identify spells or 
magical items belonging to the school by the item’s general 
effects or appearance. For example, if he was a student of 
the school of force, he could identify a wand of force or beads 
of force as if he were trying to answer a specific question. If 
the sage is also a wizard, he gains a +5% bonus to his 
chance to learn spells from the school in question. A special- 
ist wizard gains a +2 to his score in this proficiency if the 
school of magic is his own specialty. 

Sociology: This is the study of social structures, customs, 
mores, and ways of life. The sage is also acquainted with 
past societies and their customs. 

Theology: A sage with expertise in this area is conver- 
sant with the tenets and beliefs of most major religions, 
gaining a +2 bonus to his religion nonweapon proficiency 
check. In addition, he studies the theories and lore sur- 
rounding the powers and boundaries of the gods them- 
selves. With research, a theologist can determine what a 
particular god might or might not be capable of doing. 

Toxicology: This is the study of poisons, both natural 
and artificial. A sage with expertise in toxicology can iden- 
tify poisons both from samples and from examining the 
symptoms of a poisoned victim. By using toxicology, a sage 


Droficiencies 


can also gain a +1 to any healing proficiency check dealing 
with poisons. 

Zoology: Zoology is the study of animals. A sage who 
acquires knowledge in this area has a good overall grasp 
of the science of zoology, and in addition, he is considered 
a specialist in one general class of animals or monsters. 
Each additional slot he spends on this proficiency adds 
one more type or class to his expertise. Classes of animals 
available include birds, reptiles, mammals, fish, amphib- 
ians, insects, amorphous monsters (slimes, jellies, and 
molds), aquatic monsters, insectile monsters, reptilian 
monsters, mammalian monsters, hybrid monsters 
(griffins, perytons, etc.), and any other reasonable 
class or grouping the DM allows. 

A zoologist can identify common species in the field with 
a successful proficiency check and may be able to predict 
behavior or capabilities based on his knowledge of the crea- 
ture in question. 

Scribe: Before printing came into common use, profes- 
sional scribes created books by copying manuscripts. Even 
after printing presses were in widespread use, scribes were 
in demand for their calligraphy and the quality of their illu- 
minated (or illustrated) pages. A character with this profi- 
ciency is familiar with a scribe's techniques for preparing 
pages and working both swiftly and accurately. This is an 
invaluable skill for a wizard; with a successful proficiency 
check, the character gains a +5% bonus to any rolls he must 
make in order to copy or transcribe a spell into his spell 
book or onto a scroll. 

Tactics of Magic: For many wizards, the principal use of 
their art is on the battlefield. Knowing which spell to 
employ at any given time and creating the greatest effect for 
one's effort is a skill that can be learned with practice and 
experience. A wizard with the tactics of magic proficiency 
can attempt a proficiency check to gauge the range to a tar- 
get, estimate how many enemies will be caught in a given 
area of effect, or determine whether or not he may be in 
danger of a rebounding lightning bolt or a fireball cast in too 
small a space. 

In addition, a character with this skill may recall subtle 
effects or interactions that are not immediately apparent. 
For example, if the wizard is about to cast magic missile at an 
enemy wizard protected by a shield spell, the DM may allow 
the player a proficiency check to see if he suddenly recalls 
that the magic missile will fail—especially if the wizard also 
knows sliield, but the player has just forgotten about the spe- 
cial effects of the spell. However, if there's no way the char- 
acter could know of a special immunity or property of a 
monster, spell, or magical item, this proficiency will not be 
of any help. 

Thaumaturgy: This is the art of the casting of magic, the 
study of the interaction of verbal, somatic, and material 
components in order to produce a desired effect. While all 
wizards have some degree of familiarity with this field of 
knowledge, a character who becomes proficient in thau- 
maturgy has spent time studying the forms and practices of 
magic. This depth of knowledge gives the wizard a +5% 
bonus on his learn spell rolls after a successful nonweapon 
proficiency check has been made. 


Jl 


loo | 


Signature Spells 


Just as fighters can reach unusual levels of skill by spe- 
cializing in a particular weapon, a wizard can spend extra 
proficiency slots (weapon or nonweapon) or character 
points in order to specialize in a particular spell. This spell 
is known as a signature spell. Unlike fighters, who may only 
specialize in a single weapon, wizards may have one signa- 
ture spell per spell level, as long as they have the profi- 
ciency slots or character points available. 

A wizard with a signature spell may still make use of the 
rest of his spell repertoire normally; he is not limited to just 
that one spell. 

Choosing a Signature Spell: The signature spell must be 
a spell that the character already knows and is able to cast; a 
1st-level wizard couldn't select fireball as a signature spell, 
although he could choose an appropriate Ist-level spell 
from his spell book. If the character is a specialist wizard, he 
may only select signature spells from the school of his spe- 
cialty. Mages, however, may select signature spells from any 
school. The actual cost in slots or CPs varies with the level 
of the spell selected. 

Since specialist wizards must select their signature spells 
from their own field of study, they find it easier to narrow 
their specialization down to a single spell. 

Learning a Signature Spell: In order for a wizard to gain 
the skill and practice necessary for a signature spell, he 
must spend a great deal of time and money, studying every 
aspect of the enchantment. For all intents and purposes, this 
is the equivalent of spell research; the character must spend 
a minimum of two weeks and 1d10 x 100 gp per spell level 
to master the signature spell and must succeed in a learn 
spells check to succeed in his studies. If the wizard fails, he 
still knows how to cast the spell normally, but he can never 
use it as a signature spell. The character's proficiency slots 
or character points are not expended if he fails in his 
attempt to learn the signature spell. 

Specialist wizards may apply their spell research bonus 
to their learn spells roll to develop a signature spell. 

Signature Spells in Play: Through hard work and exten- 
sive practice, the wizard becomes quite skilled at casting his 
signature spell. First of all, the wizard casts his signature 
spell as if he were 2 levels higher for purposes of damage, 
duration, area of effect, range, and all other level-based 
characteristics. If the spell has no level-based characteristics 
(charm person, for instance), the wizard can choose to inflict 
a saving throw penalty of 2 on the subject's saving throw 
when he casts the spell, or he can choose to reduce his cast- 
ing time by 3. 


Table 9: 
Signature Spell Costs 


Specialist Cost Mage Cost 

Level Slots CPs Slots CPs 
1st-3rd 2 7 
4th-6th Z 3 10 
7th-9th 10 4 13 


Spell 


ge Mis 2. Oe 
Zr 


nay "^ 


P rT 

i 
NAAT, 

my 


; M" 
Weil 
5 » 


WW 


NY X NN \\ N 
Y NN. N 


NN 


Proficiencies 


Secondly, the wizard may memorize one casting of his sig- 
nature spell at no cost in spells available at that level. In other 
words, the character gains the specialist wizard benefit of 
memorizing additional spells. For example, a 1st-level mage 
may normally memorize one Ist-level spell. If the mage has 
magic missile as a signature spell, he may memorize one Ist- 
level spell, plus an additional magic missile, for a total of two 
Ist-level spells. If the character is a specialist invoker, he can 
memorize tliree 1st-level spells: magic missile, a second invoca- 
tion spell, and the Ist-level spell he normally receives as a 
Ist-level wizard. Note that the character in this example 
could choose to spend his discretionary spells to memorize a 
total of three magic missiles, which wouldn’t be a bad move 
considering that he’s so good at casting it! 

Role-Playing Signature Spells: A wizard with a signa- 
ture spell often becomes notorious for his use of the spell. 
Everyone recalls stories of the transmuter who polymorphed 
folks into frogs, or the fire mage who threw fireballs left and 
right. The DM should encourage the player to develop his 
character’ s motivations for becoming so skilled with one 
particular enchantment. 


D PN sl Like wizards, priests acquire a 
[ICs variety of nonweapon proficien- 
ses e ~i {~g Cies over the course of their 
. ) EN >A 

I [e | ICICNCICS careers. More than any other char- 


acter, a priest is likely to find a use for common or everyday 


skills. In fact, in many cultures, priests are the principal 
teachers, scholars, or craftsmen of their societies. Priests 
have a nonweapon proficiency progression that equals that 
of a wizard, but gain weapon skills much faster. 

In this section, we'll take a look at some new priest profi- 
ciencies. These should be considered addenda to the Table 
37: Nonweapon Proficiency Groups in the Player's Handbook. 
Refer to Table 10: New Priest Nonweapon Proficiencies. 

Administration: Many temples own substantial amounts 
of land and property, wielding power over vast areas. Priests 
who can manage these lands and turn a tidy profit in the 
name of the church are always in demand. A character with 
this proficiency is skilled in the management and accounting 
of enterprises ranging from the agriculture of an entire 
province to the vineyards of a single small monastery. He 
knows how to account for money, plan work, and supervise 
the collection of taxes or the sale of goods. 

\lims: Some orders of priests rely on the charity of others 
for their support and livelihood. A character with this profi- 
ciency is able to find food, shelter, and clothing in return for 
the benefit of his wisdom and a blessing or two for his hosts. 
The quality of the charity the priest finds may vary widely, 
depending on the wealth of his prospective hosts, their piety 
and their recognition of his deity, and the way the priest pre- 
sents himself. Generally, if there's shelter to be had, the priest 

can make use of it, but obtaining food or clothing for his 
companions may require a nonweapon proficiency check at 
the DM's discretion. 


Table 10: 
New Pricsl Nonweapon Proliciencics 


Proficiency Base Base 
Name Ability Score 


Administration Tnt 
Alms Cha 
Bookbinding 

Bureaucracy 

Ceremony 

Diplomacy 

Investigation 

Law 


Observation 


Omen Reading 
Oratory 
Papermaking 


Persuasion 
Sage Knowledge 
Scribe 


Undead Lore 


CP # of Check 
Cost Slots Modifier 


3 *1 


Wn OF OQ Q 


N 4 WN CQ) OQ) WD LO 4 


W 


: See the description under Wizard Profi- 
ciencies. 

: This proficiency encompasses a working 
knowledge af temple or government organization and pro- 
tocol, and the skills necessary to navigate through bureau- 
cracies. The character knows which officials to approach and 
when to approach them, where records are kept and how to 
gain access to them, and how to circumvent unfriendly or 
sluggish bureaucrats. Unless there are extenuating circum- 
stances, the character can get permits or documents com- 
pleted in half the normal time. 

In addition to these skills, the character can attempt to 
turn the system against someone else. With a successful pro- 
ficiency check, the amount of time required to make a deci- 
sion doubles—permits are misplaced or filled out incor- 
rectly, or important documents are held up on the wrong 
desk. For example, a character could keep a shady wizard 
from gaining permission to build a tower in the town, or he 
might QUSE a thief's request for bond or parole. 

: A priest with this proficiency is well-versed 
in the \ various rites, observances, and ceremonies of his 
temple. He is qualified to oversee normal worship or devo- 
tions, but conducting the rites in difficult or unusual situa- 
tions may require a proficiency check. This proficiency also 
includes familiarity with ceremonies such as weddings, 
namings, and funerals, and the priest can perform these 


services appropriniey 

ipl : This is the grand art of high diplomacy 
betweun state or organizations. A character skilled in diplo- 
macy knows the correct procedures and unwritten rules of 
negotiations between states or large organizations. He is 
capable of discerning the true intent of the various declara- 
tions, statements, and gifts or exchanges that make up a 
diplomatic encounter, and he is able to take his own wishes 
and couch them in proper diplomatic terms. 

Normally, the character need only make proficiency 
checks if the negotiations are particularly delicate or diffi- 
cult. However, if there is a specific goal or compromise the 
character is working towards, he may attempt a check to see 
if he can win the other side over to his point. Naturally, the 
DM can apply a modifier of -8 to +8 depending on what the 
diplomat's offer means for the parties involved. Requesting 
the surrender of a vastly superior enemy is next to impossi- 
ble, unless the character can convince them that they stand to 
gain something of great value by giving up. In any event, the 
DM shouldn't use this ability as a substitute for good role- 
playing M me payas 

ition: This is the art of discovering the truth 
dinongh caca examination of a problem or situation. A 
character with this skill is familiar with the process of inter- 
viewing or interrogating witnesses, searching scenes for 
clues or information, and the general execution of a logical 


J 


3 


2 
4 Yea 
ae 
Id" 
Pu 
ARE 
* 
g 


“ 


Droficiencies 


and thorough investigation. Priests who are associated with 
the local government may be called upon to solve common 
crimes against the state, while other priests may be inquisi- 
tors or theological investigators. 

The DM may allow the PC to attempt a proficiency check 
when the player is missing an obvious line of inquiry or step 
of deductive reasoning, although this should be a rare use of 
this ability. An investigation proficiency check can also be 
used to discover clues at the scene of a crime or to extract 
information from a witness or suspect. 

Law: A character with this proficiency is thoroughly 
familiar with the legal system of his homeland and is skilled 
in representing cases before judges, officers, nobles, and 
magistrates. This is a working knowledge of the law, as 
opposed to the theoretical knowledge of the sage area of 
study. With a successful proficiency check, the character can 
build a strong defense for a person accused of a crime; if the 
judge or jury are fair-minded and honest, he stands an excel- 
lent chance of winning his client’s case. Of course, corrupt or 
intimidated officials can still deliver unjust verdicts despite 
the character’s best efforts. 

Observation: Characters with this proficiency have culti- 
vated exceptional powers of observation. The DM may ask 
for a proficiency check anytime there is something subtly 
wrong or unusual in the character's environment. For 
example, the character may note the fact that the tools of a 
potter's shop are caked with a different kind of clay than that 
present in the workshop, or he might notice telltale marks of 
traffic that indicate the presence of a secret door. The DM 
shouldn't let this become a substitute for alertness and good 
thinking on the part of the player; if he's picking up more 
than one or two clues a game session with this proficiency, 
it's probably too many. 

Omen Reading: See the description under Wizard Profi- 
ciencies. 

Oratory: This is the power to move other people with 
words and emotion. By captivating an audience, the priest 
can convince them of the rightness of his words through 
force of will and dramatic speaking. Priests with this skill 
can attempt to proselytize (seek converts) among small audi- 
ences by proclaiming the glories of their faith and the dan- 
gers of nonbelief, but the character must pass his check by a 
margin of four or more to win any long-lasting converts to 
the faith. A convert will listen to the priest's suggestions or 
ideas, but won't necessarily become a follower or hireling of 
the character. 

The DM can decide how any group of listeners is likely to 
be affected by the priest's exhortations. If they're inclined to 
be hostile or are preparing to attack the priest, there's very 
little he can say to change their minds. However, if the priest 
passes a proficiency check, he may be able to modify an 
encounter reaction check by one category—hostile to indif- 
ferent, or indifferent to friendly, for example. Optionally, he 
may be able to encourage the crowd to take a specific action 
that they're inclined to perform anyway. If an angry crowd 
wants to see an important prisoner freed because it's 
rumored he was convicted wrongly, a priest with oratory 
may be able to push them into storming the jail or convince 
them to give up and go home. If the player presents an espe- 
cially moving argument or speech, the proficiency check is 
made with a +1 to +4 bonus. 

Papermaking: See the description under Wizard Profi- 
ciencies. 


Persuasion: Unlike oratory, which relies on emotion and 
rhetoric, the art of persuasion is built around intelligent 
arguments and personal charm. A character with this profi- 
ciency is able to present especially cogent arguments and 
explanations in conversation with an individual or small 
group. With a successful proficiency check, he can convince 
them to take moderate actions they may be considering 
already; for example, he may convince city guards to leave 
without making arrests if a brawl’s already finished by the 
time they get there, or he may convince a court official that 
he needs an audience with the king. If the player’s thoughts 
and arguments are particularly eloquent and acute, the pro- 
ficiency check is made with a +1 to +4 bonus. 

Sage Knowledge: See the description under Wizard Pro- 
ficiencies. 

Scribe: See the description under Wizard Proficiencies. 

Undead Lore: A priest with this proficiency is trained in 
the identification, powers, and vulnerabilities of common 
undead monsters. With a proficiency check, the character 
can recall specific tactics or weaknesses of a monster; for 
example, if confronted by a vampire, he may recall that a 
mirror, garlic, or holy symbol strongly presented can drive 
the monster away for a short time. How the character uses 
this information is up to the player. 


Chapter 5: 
Equipment 


e 


Traditionally, the wizard's laboratory is a wonderland of mysterious devices, 
bubbling retorts, and strange powders, solvents, and reagents. Shelves crammed 
full of arcane tomes, yellow scrolls encased in bone tubes, sheets of parchment 
covered with cryptic notes and designs, candles made from suspicious sub- 
stances . . . all these things and more can be found in the wizard's workshop. In 
this chapter, we'll take a look at some of the equipment and supplies required by 
a working wizard. 

In addition to the supplies and devices required for a laboratory and a library, 


we'll also examine various material spell components. Many powerful spells may 
require unusual or hard to find items, and the DM can create obstacles and restric- | 
tions—or more importantly, adventure opportunities— by requiring players to j 
keep track of spell materials. Lastly, this chapter discusses methods for finding or 
buying spell components, reagents, and magical items. 


Equipment 


1 At some point in his or her career, 
Labora tories just about every wizard is going 
to need a well-equipped laboratory. Without a laboratory, a 
wizard can’t perform spell research or create any kind of 
magical item except a scroll. A laboratory consists of several 
different components, including a physical site or facility; a 
personal library; nonexpendable equipment and furniture; 
and expendable supplies, chemicals, and reagents. 


The Location 


When a wizard is contemplating the construction of a 
laboratory, the first thing he will want to consider is the 
location of the lab. If the wizard travels extensively, like 
many adventurers do, the choice of his laboratory’s location 
may prove to be a difficult decision. Since the character will 
be investing a vast amount of money in the construction 
and outfitting of his laboratory, he will want to make certain 
that the facility is located in a secure and reasonably accessi- 
ble location. There’s a lot of valuable and irreplaceable 
material in a laboratory, and most wizards dread the 
thought of some hooligan sacking their workshops. 

Many wizards locate their laboratories in or near major 
cities. There are several advantages to this 
strategy: first of all, the wizard has easy 
access to skilled craftsmen for unusual 
pieces of equipment; second, the large cities 
attract traders dealing in the rare or unusual, 
making it easier for the wizard to locate 
some material components; third, resources 
such as libraries and fellow wizards or 
alchemists may be close at hand; and last, 
cities are relatively secure from monstrous 
incursions. On the down side, cities also host 
large and well-organized thieves’ guilds, 
and many wizards find themselves forced to 
pay protection money to keep their labs 
intact. Also, a wizard who lives near a large 
population center is generally easy to find, and the charac- 
ter's enemies won't have any problem in tracking him to his 
base of operations. 

Because of these risks, some wizards prefer to conceal 
their laboratories in unpopulated or inaccessible regions. 
The wizard loses the benefits of close contact with civiliza- 
tion, but gains a degree of privacy that an urban wizard 
finds impossible. This can be costly, especially when the 
wizard needs some smithing or glassblowing work done, 
and there's no one nearby who can do it. A wilderness base 
generally costs 20%-50% or (1d4+1) x 10% more to equip 
and maintain than a comparable lab in the city. Note that 
remoteness doesn’t guarantee safety; instead of thieves, a 
wizard in the wilderness has to worry about monsters of all 
sizes and inclinations nosing around the premises! 


Building 
Size 
Small 
Medium 
Large 
Great 


Dhysical Requirements 

Once the wizard has decided where he wants to locate 
his laboratory, he must buy, build, or rent an appropriate 
building or room. The space should be well-ventilated and 
well-lit, although the wizard can do without these comforts 
if he wishes. The room must be dry and sound; dampness 
can destroy libraries or cause important reagents to lose 
their potency. In addition, the laboratory requires at least 


63 


Time 


400 square feet (a 20-foot by 20-foot room or equivalent 
floor space) for the furnishings and work spaces. 

In urban or civilized regions, the wizard may be able to 
set up his laboratory inside another building—for example, 
the castle of his patron noble, a university or library, the 
local wizards’ guildhall, or an inn operated by a fellow 
adventurer. Generally, the rent on the room should be 30 to 
100 gp or (1d8+2) x 10 per month, depending on the exact 
circumstances of the arrangement. Renting a shabby room 
in the thieves’ quarter is far less expensive than paying the 
dues of a guildhall or university membership. A player 
character may be able to avoid paying rent altogether if a 
friend or patron puts him up. 

If the wizard doesn’t want to borrow or lease a room 
from a landlord, he can buy a suitable building. Again, the 
place should have at least 400 square feet of floor space, or 
somewhat more than that if the wizard intends to live there 
as well as maintain a laboratory. (A two-story building of 
about 20 feet x 20 feet would do nicely.) Or, he can choose to 
build a new building instead of buying an old one. The 
table below lists construction times and costs for new build- 
ings; buying an existing structure costs anywhere from 50% 
to 100% or (1d6+4) x 10% of the listed figure. 


Table 11: 
Building Construction Time and Cost 


Wood 
Cost 
200 
400 
900 
2,000 


Stone 
Cost 
6 2,000 
10 3,000 
16 4,500 
32 10,000 


Area 
400 
800 

1,800 

3,600 


Area Time 
400 1 
800 3 

1,800 6 

3,600 12 


Stone buildings are sturdier and more durable than 
wooden buildings, but still feature wooden supports, floor- 
ing, and other features. Some interior partitions or walls 
may be made of wood instead of stone. 

Wooden buildings are much easier to build than stone 
buildings. The disadvantage lies in resistance to siege 
attacks or other forms of damage; wooden buildings can be 
destroyed easily by many spells or heavy weapons. 

Building size is a rough description of the building's 
dimensions. This fits the building types described in DMGR 
2, The Castle Guide. 

Time is the number of weeks required for construction, 
assuming a working crew of 10 laborers with good supervi- 
sion. Obviously, this only applies in the event the wizard 
wants to have someone build him a new laboratory. If the 
wizard wants to save money, he can hire fewer workers, 
doubling the construction time for a savings of 25% off the 
basic cost. On the other hand, if he's in a hurry he can raise 
the building in 75% the usual time by hiring more workers, 
doubling the cost. 

Cost is the amount of gold pieces required to have the 
building raised. This includes permits, bribes, pay for work- 
ers, expendable supplies, and all other expenses incurred. If 
the wizard is buying an existing structure, he need only pay 
(1d6+4) x 10% or 50%-100% of this price, depending on the 


building’s condition, the circumstances of the sale, and 
other factors. 

Area is the square footage of the completed structure. A 
small building suffices for the wizard’s laboratory, but if the 
character wants to live in the same building, it must be at 
least medium-sized. 


Now that the wizard has secured a suitable workroom, 
it’s time to get to the real business of setting up a laboratory. 
The equipment contained in a lab includes alembics, armil- 
lary spheres, beakers, bottles, copper kettles, crucibles, dis- 
tilling coils, ladles, mortars, retorts, scales, specimens, tongs, 
vials, and weights of all description. In addition, specialized 
furniture such as workbenches, stands, braziers, cabinets, 
and tables with special surfaces must be purchased for the 
laboratory. Obviously, all these things can be quite expen- 
sive; equipping a laboratory is often the single greatest 
expense a wizard incurs in his career. 

A wizard's laboratory is customized to the character's 
individual tastes and research goals, and is not particu- 
larly useful to another character. However, if a wizard 
inherits a lab from another character or is allowed to bor- 
row one for a time, he can refit the lab for his own pur- 
poses for a cost of 1,000 gp. 

Wizards' laboratories vary wildly in scope, contents, and 
completeness. There are three varieties of laboratory, each 


with its own special purpose: alchemical laboratories, 
forges, and research laboratories: 
es are intended for the creation of 
potions má nonmagical "i solvents, glues, or pyrotechni- 
cal substances. As a result, the lab is equipped with glassware, 
burners, retorts, kettles, and all manner of devices designed 
for heating, agitating, or otherwise manipulating liquids and 
powders. An alchemical laboratory costs 2,000 gp; wizards 
who specialize in the school of alchemy, characters with the 
alchemy nonweapon proficiency, or mages who want to cre- 
ate potions at 9th level can make use of these facilities. 
Specialist alchemists are assumed to begin play with an 
alchemical laboratory valued at 1,000 gp. Because of their 
special training and skills, this is sufficient for a 1st-level 
alchemist. However, the character's requirements for rare 
and exotic materials increase as he rises in level; keeping the 
lab outfitted requires an expenditure of an additional 1,000 
gp each time he rises in level. If the alchemist's laboratory is 
up-to-date, he can use his special ability to create potions; if 
the lab is not up-to-date but still worth at least 2,000 gp, he 
may use it as if he were a normal wizard using a standard 
alchemical laboratory. 
ges are larger and more complex laboratories that 
include all the materials and equipment required for the 
production of magical items of all types, not just potions or 
scrolls. A forge includes all the materials found in an 
alchemical laboratory, as well as furnaces, anvils, and wood- 
working, leatherworking, or metalworking tools. A forge 


Equipment 


costs 5,000 gp and requires at least 600 square feet of space; 
in other words, a “small” building is not big enough to 
house a magician’s forge. 

The specialist artificer is assumed to begin play with a 
forge worth 1,000 gp. In order to keep his specialist wizard 
benefits, he must invest an additional 1,000 gp in the forge 
each time he rises in level. If the forge is not maintained 
properly but is worth at least 5,000 gp, the artificer can still 
use it for brewing potions or creating magical items using 
the normal procedures. 

Research laboratories allow a character to conduct spell 
research. The research laboratory adds hundreds of rare and 
unusual specimens, samples, and texts to the wizard's labora- 
tory. Depending on the campaign circumstances, a laboratory 
suited for spell research can cost anywhere from 1,000 to 
10,000 gp, but if a wizard already has an alchemical labora- 
tory or a forge, he can purchase the research laboratory for 
50% of its normal cost. Similarly, building an alchemical labo- 
ratory or a forge after first building a research laboratory 
gives the character a 50% break on the costs of the second lab- 
oratory. 

A research laboratory requires at least 400 square feet, 
above and beyond any existing facilities. A character with a 
forge and a research laboratory must have 1,000 square feet 
of room available to house his equipment, furnishings, 
work areas, and supplies. 


Table 12: 
Laboratory Cost and 
Size Requirements 


Cost 
2,000 gp 
5,000 gp 

. 1,000 gp+ 


Size 
400 sq. ft. 
600 sq. ft. 
400 sq. ft. 


Laboratory 
co A— 


' Alchemist specialist wizards must maintain an alchemi- 
cal laboratory worth at least 1,000 gp per character level. 

? Includes an alchemical laboratory. Artificer specialists 
must maintain a forge worth at least 1,000 gp per character 
level. 

* Cost set by DM at 1,000 to 10,000 gp. 


The Library 


The single most important tool in the wizard's laboratory 
is his library. Every wizard has a library, even if it consists of 
nothing more than his spell books and a handful of old texts 
and journals. Depending on the campaign flavor and the 
prevalence of magic, wizards may find that ancient grimoires 
and codices are the only source of new spells, potion formu- 
lae, or procedures for creating magical items. Unless they go 
to extraordinary lengths to unearth, purchase, copy, or steal 
these books, their advancement in the arcane arts can come to 
a dead halt. 


65 


When a character builds and outfits a laboratory of any 
type, a basic library is assumed to be included in the overall 
price. This collection allows the wizard to conduct the basic 
functions of the laboratory—brewing potions and manufac- 
turing special inks for scroll creation, making magical items, 
or conducting spell research. However, the materials in a 
lab's initial collection only allow the character to research 
the formula for one potion or scroll, one magical item, and 
one 1st-level spell. In effect, the library that the wizard 
acquires to outfit his laboratory is only sufficient for the first 
two or three research efforts he undertakes. After these ini- 
tial studies, the wizard must expand his library in order to 
undertake new research efforts. 

Alchemists and Artificers: These two specialist wizards 
do not need to increase the size of their library in order to 
discover new formulae or procedures. Their specialist abili- 
ties bypass this requirement; the character's expertise 
allows him to do without many of the texts and canons 
other wizards find necessary. 

Library Requirements: Expanding a library and collecting 
volumes suitable for advanced research takes time and money. 
The total value of the wizard's library governs the research he 
can undertake there, as shown in Table 13: Libraries. 

Library Expense is the total investment the character 
makes in acquiring books, references, and other research 
materials. The initial library expense is simply the cost of 
the character's laboratory, so if a wizard builds a research 
laboratory and then spends 2,000 gp on expanding his ini- 
tial library, he can research 2nd-level spells. 

Number of Potion Formulae represents the maximum 
number of potions the wizard can research given a library 
of the listed size. Using the correct enchantments and mate- 
rials is a critical part of potion-brewing, and wizards must 
invest some time in researching the correct formula and 
procedure for any particular potion. (See Chapter 7.) For 
example, a wizard who purchases an alchemical laboratory 
can determine the formula for two types of potion (flying, 


Table 13: 
Libraries 


# Potion 
Formulae’ 


Library 
Expense 


# Item Max. Spell 
Formulae? Research Lvl? 
Unita ison A E a valet. 

200gp 3 2 2nd-level - 
6,000 gp 4th-level 
10,000 gp 5th-level 
15,000 gp ... 6th-level 
2000gp 10 = 9  Ttheve 
30000gp — 12. mn — Side | 
50,000 gp " ] any irs any d ety COUR 1 feni 
Libraries for alchemical laboratories and forges 


Libraries for forges 
Libraries for research laboratories 


Chapter 5 


for instance) with the materials at hand, but in order to 
learn the formulae for additional potions, he must spend 
money to expand his reference library. 

Number of Item Formulae represents the maximum num- 
ber of magical item creation processes the wizard can discover 
using a library of the listed size. Each magical item has its 
own unique “formula”—materials and procedures required to 
successfully produce one item. The initial laboratory included 
in a forge allows the wizard to research the creation of one 
type of magical item, such as a rope of climbing or boots of the 
north. Discovering the requirements for additional types of 
magical items requires a larger and more complete library. 

Maximum Spell Research Level is the highest-level spell 
the wizard can research, given the library at hand. The basic 
research laboratory allows the wizard to research 1st-level 
spells, but if he wants to indulge himself in more advanced 
studies, he'll have to obtain additional texts, references, and 
materials. 

Finding Books: Naturally, a library worth 10,000 gp is 
not a heap of treasure waiting to be carted off by the nearest 
adventurer. It is a labor of love and care, created over years 
by the dedicated efforts of an intelligent and well-organized 
character. And, unfortunately, building a library can be a 
tedious and exhausting task. Important volumes may take 
years to find. 

Generally, a library is composed of books ranging in 
value from 50 to 500 gold pieces, although unusual works 
may cost much more. Thus, a library valued at 2,000 gp 
might include 15 to 20 books in the 50-100 gp range, three 
or four valued at 100-200 gp, and maybe one or two in the 
300-500 gp range. While it's not necessary to catalog every 
single book that is contained in the collection, it's a good 
idea for the DM to identify a handful of critical works, or ref- 
erences that are so central to the wizard's studies that the 
library just isn't complete without them. Finding or tracking 
down these rare volumes can be quite a challenge, creating 
many adventure hooks for a PC wizard! 

If the DM is generous, he can assume that the wizard can 
find everything he needs, given time, and assume that one 
week of library-building allows the character to spend up to 
500 gp on books he needs. In other words, increasing a 
library's size and value by 2,000 gp would require four 
weeks of dedicated effort on the wizard's part. Finding a 
rare or unusual text (or, treasure of treasures, an intact col- 
lection!) in an adventure could save a wizard a great 
amount of time and money. 

However, building a library can be far more difficult 
than just spending money. In medieval societies, books were 
hand-written, and there might be only six or seven copies of 
a book the wizard needs to be found anywhere, let alone in 
the local bookseller's shop. Particularly rare or valuable 
tomes may change hands through sale, deceit, or thievery 
dozens of times, disappearing from common knowledge. 

In addition to the problem of scarcity, it's possible that 
some significant works required by a wizard might not be 
written in his native language but instead in the language of 
a far-off kingdom. An ambitious character might be forced 
to learn his campaign's equivalent of Latin, Sanskrit, or 
Mandarin Chinese for no other purpose than to read a sin- 
gle book. Another problem might be suppressed or forbid- 
den books; trading in banned works could get a character 
into a lot of trouble. 

Last but not least, the current owner of the book the 


character seeks may have no wish to part with it, especially 
if it’s considered dangerous or unique. The wizard may be 
able to persuade the book's owner to allow him to make a 
copy of the text, or he may have to consider more direct 
action to acquire the necessary materials. 

Library Size: Large collections of books require space, 
just like laboratories. The basic references included in the 
cost of a laboratory don't take up any additional space 
above and beyond the laboratory's requirements, but 
expanded libraries require at least 25 square feet for each 
2,000 gp value. For example, a library valued at 10,000 gp 
would require 125 square feet (a 10-foot by 12’4-foot room). 
This may sound like a generous amount of space, but keep 
in mind that many of these tomes are extremely large and 
bulky, and require special shelving, displays, and cabinets. 
All these furnishings are included in the cost of the library. 

Care and Protection: A wizard's library is an investment 
of great value to the character eventually exceeding even 
the most complete laboratories and forges. Naturally, the 
owner should be quite interested in making sure nothing 
happens to it. The library should be in a dry, secure room 
that is well-ventilated but not open to the weather. Damp- 
ness can quickly mold or destroy books, especially those 
made without modern preservatives. Last but not least, the 
wizard should consider fire traps or similar spells to guard 
the room against intruders. 


&upplies and Deagents 


Laboratories require a large amount of both common and 
unusual substances. Furnaces and burners must be fueled; 
water, oil, brine, vinegar, and other liquids are required for 
cooling, distilling, and quenching; small amounts of chemi- 
cals, salts, rare earths, herbs, and various specimens are 
expended with each day of research; and glassware and pot- 
tery may be ruined by one use or broken in accidents. Even if 
a lab is not in active use, some of the supplies and reagents 
will go bad or lose their potency with prolonged storage. The 
upshot of this discussion is simple: Once a wizard finishes 
building and outfitting his lab, he will still have to spend 
some money to maintain its supplies and equipment. 

This maintenance cost is assumed to be 10% of the lab's 
total value, not counting the library, for every month of active 
use. For example, a 5,000 gp forge uses up 500 gp of supplies 
each month. This cost does not include any special or unique 
materials, such as a particular item that is to be enchanted, or 
an unusual material required for a specific potion or scroll ink. 
For example, if a wizard is enchanting a long sword +1, the cost 
of the sword itself is not included in the lab's monthly operat- 
ing cost. Similarly, if he is mixing the ink for a scroll of protec- 
tion from petrification, any exotic ingredients such as a basilisk's 
eye or a cockatrice's feather must be obtained through a delib- 
erate action of the player character. 

If the laboratory is not in active use—the owner is off 
adventuring, or otherwise engaged—the maintenance cost 
drops to half the normal amount. For the 5,000 gp forge 
described above, this would be 250 gp per month. This 
^moth-balled" expense reflects the materials and specimens 
that are becoming unusable due to the passage of time. Of 
course, the wizard can choose not to pay this cost, allowing 
several months of maintenance to pile up before restocking 
the laboratory. In any event, the cost to resupply a labora- 
tory never exceeds more than half the lab's total value, since 


Equipment 


a lot of the equipment is fairly permanent. In the case of the 
5,000 gp forge, a character would have to pay 2,500 gp to 
restock his laboratory after 10 months of neglect, but 15 or 
20 months of not paying the maintenance cost wouldn’t be 
any more damaging. 

Alchemists and Artificers: These specialist wizards must 
pay 50 gp per character level per month in order to main- 
tain their laboratories. The wizard can defer or ignore these 
expenses, but this causes the loss of many of his specialist 
benefits—see Chapter 1. If the wizard misses some pay- 
ments, he must make up all the money he owes before 
restoring his lab to operation, up to half the value of the lab- 
oratory itself. In other words, an 8th-level artificer must pay 
400 gp per month to maintain his forge; if he skips one 
month of resupply, he loses many of his special abilities, 
and must pay 800 gp the following month or do without his 
powers for another month. 


Relocating Laboratories 


Laboratories of any type are not very portable. If a charac- 
ter needs to move a lab, he requires one medium-sized wagon 
for each 100 square feet of equipment and materials. Packing 
up a lab or setting it up again after transport should require at 
least two to three days per wagon-load, and the wizard will 
certainly have to spend a significant amount of money in 
replacing broken, lost, or ruined materials. Depending on the 
length of the journey and the care of the wizard’s prepara- 
tions, he will have to replace materials and equipment worth 
10% to 40% of the value of the entire laboratory. 


Shiria the Sorceress is a 7th-level invoker who has a great idea for 
a new spell, Shiria’s Bolt of Efficacious Destruction. First, she 
needs to find a site for her laboratory; after due consideration, Shiria 
elects to locate her lab in the town she and her comrades use as a base 
of operations. She decides to buy a “medium” stone building in a 
good part of town to house her laboratory and spends 3,000 gp to 
have a new building raised (she wants some specialized features to be 
included). The construction takes 10 weeks. 

While she’s waiting for her building to be completed, Shiria 
decides to get a head start on collecting the materials and equipment 
she requires for her lab. Since she plans to do spell research, she 
decides to acquire a research laboratory, and the DM sets the price at 
3,000 gp. It's reasonable to assume that collecting and setting up the 
equipment would take some time, as well, but the DM generously 
decides that Shiria can do a lot of this while the building's going up. 

The initial expense of the lab includes a small library suitable 
for researching 1st-level spells, but Shiria’s Bolt is proposed as a 
3rd-level spell, and Shiria will have to expand her library immedi- 
ately to perform the research. She requires a library valued at 
4,000 gp above and beyond her laboratory. The DM doesn't feel 
like identifying any particular books she needs to find; Shiria can 
build her library at the rate of 500 gp per week, finishing her col- 
lection just about the time her building's ready for occupation. 

Since the research laboratory is valued at 3,000 gp, Shiria will 
have to pay maintenance and upkeep totalling 300 gp per month 
while she is engaged in active research, or 150 gp a month to keep 
the lab moth-balled. By now, Shiria's purse is feeling a little light! 
She could have saved some money by renting a building instead of 
buying, or borrowing someone's library instead of outfitting her 
own. Of course, she can recoup some of her investment by selling 
access to her facilities to other wizards, or selling Shiria's Bolt of 
Efficacious Destruction once she develops it! 


67 


1 ? Wizards aren't the only characters capable 

D ricsts of creating magical items. Priests, fon, have 
Altars this capability. Priests can create scrolls at 
7th level, potions at 9th level, and other 

types of magic items at 11th level. Instead of cluttered labo- 
ratories filled with all varieties of reagents and bizarre 
devices, priests need only build a special consecrated altar 
to their deity in order to create magical items. 


The Location 


Altars don’t need the continuous maintenance or skilled 
pool of laborers and craftsmen that a wizard’s laboratory 
requires. Because of this, the altar can be located anywhere 
the priest wishes to put it, within reason. The general site 
should be someplace within the deity’s sphere of interest, so 
an altar dedicated to a sea-god should be near the sea, while 
one dedicated to a druidical power should be located in a 
pristine wilderness. Considerations such as the distance to 
the nearest large city or convenience for the character are sec- 
ondary, at best. 

There are two types of location that are ideal: a location 
that is easily accessible to a large body of the power's wor- 
shippers, or a location that has special significance to the 
power. A priest of Tempus (a god of storms and battle from 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS campaign setting) could meet the 
first condition by locating his altar in a fortress manned by a 
number of soldiers who follow Tempus, or a city that 
included a large congregation of Tempus' worshippers. Or, 
he might find an ancient battlefield or storm-lashed peak to 
be appropriate, since they meet the second condition. The 
DM is the final arbiter of what is or isn't an appropriate 
location for a particular deity’s altar. 

Like the wizard's laboratory, the priest's altar represents a 
significant investment of time, energy, and money. Thieves 
may attempt to loot the rich trappings of the altar, and ene- 
mies of the faith will not hesitate to desecrate an altar left 
unprotected. As a result, once a place suitable for his patron 
deity has been found, the priest should make the security and 
safety of the altar a primary goal. 


Dhysical Dequirements 


After finding a suitable location for the altar, the priest 
must consider what kind of facility he will need to house, 
shelter, or support the altar. In many cases, he can simply 
add the altar to an existing temple, monastery, or shrine 
dedicated to his deity. However, this may require the priest 
to expand or renovate the existing structure to make it suit- 
able for the altar. Refer to Table 11: Building Construction 
Time and Cost for building costs; if the altar is to be housed 
in a free-standing structure, it must be at least a medium- 
sized building, but an expansion to an old temple might be 
the equivalent of a small building. 

If the altar is located on a sacred site (a forest glade for a 
druid power, or a mountain peak for a god of the sky), the 
priest may not have to raise any kind of building to shelter 
it, especially if a man-made shelter would somehow be 
inappropriate at that site. However, preparing and clearing 
a site should still require an amount of work equivalent to 
raising a small building. 


Chapter 5 


Materials and Decoration 


The altar, its decorations or trappings, and the prepara- 
tions for the ceremony of consecration cost at least 2,000 gp, 
above and beyond the cost for any building or structures to 
house it. Generally, the altar must be built of whatever mate- 
rials seem appropriate; for a god of war, an altar made from 
the swords of brave men, or the shields of fallen warriors, 
could be appropriate. A deity of storms might require an altar 
built from a hundred-year-old oak split by lightning. In any 
event, the altar should be of the finest workmanship possible. 
Building an altar requires at least 2d4 weeks of the priest's 
time and attention, and the services of skilled masons, 
smiths, or woodworkers. 

In addition to the construction of the altar, the priest 
must also assemble and prepare special incenses, ceremo- 
nial vestments, and other unusual materials. This could cost 
anywhere from 1,000 to 10,000 gp more, depending on the 
deity involved, The priest may be able to borrow some of 
these materials from a large temple of his own faith, which 
would reduce the cost by 50%. 


Consecrating the Altar 


Once the altar has been completed, the priest must con- 
secrate it to his deity. The prayers, chants, and rituals 
require at least one full week. During this ceremony, the 
priest cannot be called away for other duties; if he leaves, he 
must begin again from the start and replace any materials 
expended in the abortive ceremony. 

At the end of each full week of prayer, the DM makes a 
special check to see if the priest gains the favor of his deity. 
The base chance for success is a percentage equal to 5 times 
the character’s level, so a 10th-level priest has a 50% chance 
of success after one week. For each additional week of 
prayer, the chance of success increases by 5%. Given time, 
the priest should eventually succeed, unless he’s angered 
his deity in some way. 

When the power responds to the priest’s prayers, the 
priest must offer up something of value or perform a special 
quest, whichever is demanded by the deity. The DM decides 
what is appropriate for the character and the deity he fol- 
lows. Surrendering magical items, treasure of great value, or 
an item hand-crafted by the priest are all reasonable. A 
quest that a priest of a god of healing might follow could be 
to go among the poor and heal one hundred of the sick, 
while a god of honor might ask the priest to go to the king’s 
court and expose his dishonorable dealings. By completing 
the quest or making the appropriate sacrifice, the priest 
demonstrates his devotion, and the deity consecrates the 
altar. 

A consecrated altar radiates a bless spell in a 10-foot 
radius. It remains consecrated until desecrated in some way 
by the deity’s enemies, or until the priest who consecrated it 
dies or falls from the faith. A consecrated altar can be used 
to produce potions, scrolls, and other magical items, as 
described in Chapter 7. 


68 


Even without a laboratory ora 
consecrated altar, priests and wiz- 
ards often find themselves in need 
of unusual or hard-to-find items 
for material components in their 
spells. While many DMs do not require players to keep track 
of their characters’ stocks of spell components, this can be a 
great test of a PC’s resourcefulness and the source of many 
adventures. After all, merely finding a diamond worth 1,000 
gp is quite an event for a low-level character, but then the 
player has to decide whether to grind it into worthless pow- 
der for use in a critical spell! 


Material Spell 
Components 


Spell Components: Yes or No? 


One of the optional rules presented in the Player’s Handbook 
is the use of spell components. You are free to decide to use or 
ignore components in your own campaign; as long as the 
NPCs abide by the same rules and restrictions the players do, 
the game works equally well in either case. The real crux of 
this issue are material components, and whether or not play- 
ers should have to keep track of their stocks of spell reagents. 

There are some very good reasons why you shouldn't 
use material components in play; it requires a great atten- 
tion to detail and some honesty on the part of the players, 
and may create obstacles or difficulties that take away from 
the DM's plot. After all, if the party's wizard has to drop out 
of the epic adventure in mid-stride to track down the ingre- 
dients for his next fireball spell, all concerned may feel a 
little frustrated or annoyed. 

On the other hand, using spell components and requir- 
ing an account of what the wizard has on his person and 
what he has stockpiled in his laboratory or home base can 
add another dimension of detail and pseudo-realism to the 
game. If spell components aren't used, who cares if a wizard 
is down to his last three coppers? More than any other class, 
a wizard can operate with no concern for material wealth— 
unless he has to worry about whether or not he can afford 
to buy the materials he'll need to be able to cast his spells. In 
addition, the use of spell components requires players to 
spend some time and effort thinking about situations their 
characters would certainly be dealing with and can enhance 
role-playing if it isn't taken to extremes. 

Generally, enforcing the requirements for material compo- 
nents works best for low- to mid-level characters. By the time 
a wizard is 8th or 9th level, he's usually wealthy enough to 
easily buy any materials he needs, and his daily selection of 
spells is so broad that keeping track of each type of compo- 
nent carried becomes a logistical nightmare. By that time, the 
DM can allow the player a little slack; the wizard's a mighty 
hero now, and both player and DM may have other arenas of 
role-playing (building laboratories or establishing strong- 
holds) that the character will be graduating to. However, at 
low levels, wizards and priests will find that some of their 
favorite spells have to be saved for when they're truly needed. 

For example, low-level wizards often rely on the armor 
spell as their sole means of defense against physical attack. 
Armor requires a piece of leather—no problem there—that 
has been blessed by a priest. Referring to Table 69: NPC Spell 
Costs in the DMG, bless is usually reserved for characters of 
the same faith as the casting priest, and even then a small 
sum might be required. So, the wizard who wants the piece 
of leather blessed for his spell might have to convert to the 


Equipment 


faith of nearest available priest, and tithe him 10 or 20 gp to 
boot! If you consider how often players simply say, “Oh 
yeah, I'll cast armor the day before we leave, so I'll have my 
1st-level spell open and armor in effect,” you can see just 
how much hassle (and role-playing opportunities!) are 
ignored by the player and DM. 


Acquiring Spell Components 

The materials used to power spells range from the mun- 
dane to the bizarre and the exotic. Dozens of spells require 
things like pebbles, stones, dirt, twigs, or leaves that can be 
found literally anywhere—including the middle of a battle, if 
a spellcaster is desperate. A number of spells require nothing 
more than a little bit of foresight and access to a simple trad- 
ing post or small market. Likewise, a few spells require 
painstaking and expensive preparations that may be impossi- 
ble to repeat in the field. 

Scavenging: The cheapest method of acquiring spell 
components is a field search. Many plant and animal speci- 
mens can be harvested with nothing more than time and a 
little luck, and a wizard who knows what he’s looking for 
can find a fair number of minerals as well. The wizard has 
to find an appropriate location, such as a nearby forest or 
field for animal and plant specimens. Materials that can be 
collected with a field search are rated as common, uncom- 
mon, or rare; depending on the amount of time the wizard 
takes, the suitability of his search, and the item's scarcity, he 

may or may not be successful. See Table 14: Field Searches. 


Table 14: 


Field Searches 


Item Base Search Base Time 
Scarcity Time Success Bonus 
Common 1d6 turns 75% +10%/turn 
Uncommon 3d6 turns 50% +5% /turn 
Rare 1d4+1 hours 25% +2%/turn 


Item scarcity is taken from Table 16: Spell Components. 
The DM may modify the category depending on where the 
wizard is searching; finding sand on a beach is pretty easy, 
for example. 

Base search time is the amount of time required to 
search for the item in question. A character can search for 
only one component at a time. 

Base success is the likelihood that the character will find 
the material in the base search time. 

Time bonus increases the success chance for each addi- 
tional turn the caster spends searching for the item. If he 
fails to find the material in the base search time, he can con- 
tinue to look, adding this percentage to his success chance 
as shown on the table. 

A field search for common materials doesn't take much 
time, so a traveling wizard could pause for brief searches 
during the march or while his companions are setting up or 
breaking camp. Depending on what it is the wizard is look- 
ing for, he can find anywhere from 1 to 20 or more doses or 
samples of the material. For example, if the wizard was 


69 


Chapter 5 


searching a damp forest for foxfire, he might find enough to 
be used in anywhere from 1 to 20 spells. Of course, storing 
and preserving multiple uses of a component may be harder 
than finding it to begin with. 

Purchasing; If the wizard doesn’t have time to search for 
materials himself, or can’t find a certain component, he can 
always purchase what he needs. Again, the item scarcity 
reflects the likelihood that someone in the vicinity happens 
to have the material or compound the wizard requires. If 
the wizard is out to purchase materials, the most important 
consideration is the number of vendors or the size and com- 
pleteness of the market he will be searching. This is gener- 
ally a function of the community size, but the DM can mod- 
ify item scarcity to reflect the character of the town. For 
example, many uncommon or rare chemicals may be com- 
mon in a city that supports an Alchemist Guild. 

Shopping for items in a town takes some amount of time, 
as well. A character may have to examine half a dozen 
smithies to find soot or charcoal of the exact color, weight, 
and composition he needs. Generally, common items can be 
located in a few minutes, while rare items may take several 
hours of the wizard's time. Anywhere from 1 to 20 or more 
usages can be found. 


Table 15: 
Durchasing Components 


Scarcity 
Uncommon 
5096 
6096 
7096 
8096 


City 


Rare 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 


Common 
80% 
90% 
100% 
100% 


Size 
Village 
Town 

City 

Major City 


Wizards with Laboratories: One nice benefit about an 
up-to-date, well-stocked laboratory is that it includes a 
number of interesting compounds, minerals, and speci- 
mens that may be useful as spell components. If a wizard 
owns a laboratory, there is a 50% chance that 1 to 20 usages 
of any given spell component from the mineral, animal 
specimen, and plant specimen list may be on hand, and a 
25% chance that a spell component from the finished item 
list may be present. The laboratory’s normal upkeep and 
maintenance expenses cover the cost of replacing these 
items once per month. 

Rule of Common Sense: The rules presented here for 
acquiring spell components are intended to be guidelines 
for the DM. If a player is particularly resourceful or intelli- 
gent in looking for components, ignore the dice and let his 
character find whatever it is that he’s looking for. Clever 
play should always be rewarded. On the other hand, 
sometimes items just aren't available in a given area, no 
matter how hard someone looks. Finding iron filings in a 
village of Stone Age technology is going to be extremely 
difficult, to say the least. Flowers, plants, and herbs com- 
mon in one part of the world may not exist elsewhere—no 
amount of money could create a pineapple in medieval 
Iceland, for example. 


7O 


Storage of Spell Components 


Spell components are quite small. Most spells require 
only the smallest pinches of powder or a few drops of liq- 
uid. In fact, the containers that are required to hold the 
materials and make them easy for a caster to find without 
looking are far more bulky and clumsy than the materials 
themselves. Small leather pouches, glass vials or tubes, or 
tiny clay finger-pots sealed with wax plugs are the most 
common storage devices. Most wizards choose to store the 
spell components for each of their memorized spells in sep- 
arate, pre-measured amounts to facilitate quick and accu- 
rate casting. With a system like this, there are ten to twenty 
spell components to a pound—even the most powerful wiz- 
ard carries only a couple of pounds of components. 

For some wizards, it’s a good idea to carry a bulk supply 
of some common reagents from which the individual spell 
preparations can be drawn. For example, a traveling wizard 
may find it to be a good idea to carry a whole spool of 
thread or string, since several spells call for this component. 
A bulk container usually contains twenty to fifty usages of 
the component in question and weighs about a pound. The 
character can carry a dozen or more of these in a leather 
saddlebag or a small trunk, ensuring that he won’t run out 
at a critical moment. Bulk containers cost five times the 
listed expense of a component, but contain dozens of doses. 

Some spell components may be perishable or short-lived. 
These items are noted on the component list. A perishable 
item can last for a week or so before it’s useless. Obviously, 
the character shouldn't purchase or store more than a few 
days' worth at a time. 


The Spell Component List 


There are a couple of classes of item deliberately not 
included on Table 16: items that already have a listed cost in 
the spell description (the special dust mixture of Leomund’s 
trap, or the 100 gp pearl required for identify, for instance) 
and items that are chosen or customized at the time of the 
spell. For example, the spell banishment requires the use of 
materials “harmful, hateful, or opposed to the nature of the 
subject of the spell." Since this could consist of a wide vari- 
ety of substances, banishment’s material components weren't 
included on the list. 

The spell components are divided into several categories, 
reflecting their general nature and origins. These include: 
Miniatures and Models; Finished or Refined Items; Miner- 
als; Common or Household Items; Animal Specimens; Plant 
Specimens; and Other, a catch-all for anything that doesn't 
clearly fit in another category. 

Each item has a note concerning its method of acquisi- 
tion. Items are listed as FS (Field Search), TM (Town or mar- 
ket), SO (Special Order), or Auto (items that can automati- 
cally be found by anyone willing to look for a few minutes.) 
A few items are both field search and town or market, 
meaning that a wizard can try to buy the material if he can't 
find it for himself. 

Scarcity is listed for items that wizards might search for 
or try to purchase, and a cost for items that the wizard 
might want to purchase. Also, items that are commonly 
available in the wizard's own laboratory are noted. Finally, 
items like the various dusts are priced with one spell use in 
mind. For example, if a wizard wishes to have enough pow- 


Equipment 


dered amber to cast two spells, he needs to come up with 80 
gold pieces (40 x 2). 

Note that the cost of an item can vary wildly with the cir- 
cumstances. Buying coffin wood in a kingdom where the 
interment of the dead is considered the sole and sacred 
province of a fanatical religious sect could be far more diffi- 
cult than a stroll down to the undertaker’s place of busi- 
ness! Similarly, tolls, finder's fees, and all kinds of sur- 
charges could come into play for strange or exotic items. 

In addition to the problems of cost, some special-order 
items may take quite some time to locate. For example, 
finding a 100-year-old map to tear to pieces could be 
quite difficult. Even the most dedicated book-buyer, 
herbalist, or apothecary may have to wait several weeks 
for something to turn up. Some special items may not be 
available for any price, and the wizard may have to 
locate these items personally if he wishes to cast the 
spells in question. 

Purchasing Agents: For the adventuring wizard, it’s a 
very good idea to spend money on hirelings who can handle 
the acquisition of components. For instance, the wizard 
might hire a couple of local children to collect various insects 
or herbs. Unless the assistants are well-trained, at least 75% of 
the material they bring back will be unusable due to small 
imperfections or taints, but for simple materials an assistant 
can save the wizard a lot of time. Apprentices are often 
assigned to these duties, both to learn what makes for a good 
spell component, and to save their masters the time of stalk- 
ing through a field, looking for a cricket or mouse that will let 
itself be captured. 


Most large towns in a typical 


Arcanists and AD&D campaign support one or 
two apothecaries, herbalists, 


Apothecaries alchemists, wise women, occultists, 


or hedge wizards. These shopkeepers make their living by 
providing minor enchantments, charms, or herbal mixtures to 
the townspeople. For the most part, the services and goods 
offered by these merchants are of little interest to the typical 
adventurer, but they can be excellent sources of spell compo- 
nents, and from time to time they may purchase magical 
items from player characters or have an odd item for sale. 

In addition to the sellers of mundane herbs, minerals, 
and charms, a few large cities may support an arcanist's 
shop. An arcanist is a merchant who trades in items of inter- 
est to wizards, including spell components, books and 
parchment suitable for spell books, and magical items. 
Arcanists are sometimes sponsored by a large wizard’s 
guild and are most frequently found in cities where wizards 
are well-regarded and fairly common. 


Alchemists 


The great majority of alchemists are 0-level characters, as 
opposed to mages or specialists in the school of alchemy. 
They are skilled in the nonweapon proficiency of alchemy, 
but cannot cast spells or manufacture potions or magical 
items. What common alchemists can do is create nonmagical 
chemical mixtures that may be useful to an adventuring 
party, or provide a character with the opportunity to pur- 
chase spell components from the mineral list at the listed 
cost. Of course, the laws of supply and demand apply; the 


val 


alchemist will charge what he can get for materials that his 
customers can’t get anywhere else. 
Some of the alchemists’ other wares include the following: 


Acid: Through careful distillation, alchemists can brew 
potent acid. (See the proficiency description, on page 51 of 
Chapter 4.) A flask-full of acid can command anywhere 
from 50 to 100 or (1d6+4) x 10 gold pieces, while a vial 
might sell for 10 to 40 gp. 

Incendiaries: These dangerous concoctions range from 
flammable oils and pitches to nasty stuff like naphtha or 
Greek fire. Again, refer to the description of the alchemist 
nonweapon proficiency in Chapter 4. A flask of an incendi- 
ary substance usually costs 10 to 30 gp. 

Pyrotechnics: Unlike the previous two substances, 
pyrotechnic mixtures are often powders. They can be used 
to create clouds of smoke of a variety of colors, or bright 
flashes of light when added to an existing fire. A vial of 
pyrotechnic mixture costs 5 to 20 (5d4) gp, while a flask 
costs anywhere from 10 to 30 gp. 


Apothecaries and Herbalists 


At first glance, these may seem to be two completely dif- 
ferent occupations, but they share similar roles in the com- 
munity. Both apothecaries and herbalists provide medicines 
for people suffering from a variety of ailments, and a great 
portion of these remedies are derived from various plants, 
herbs, and roots. Townspeople go to apothecaries or herbal- 
ists for pain relievers, poultices, purgatives and laxatives, 
and all other kinds of medicines. 

Adventurers find that apothecaries and herbalists are excel- 
lent sources of spell components, especially from the common, 
herb, and animal specimen lists. In addition, apothecaries 
sometimes serve as dealers in odds-and-ends in smaller towns, 
and a magical item such as a potion or ring may occasionally 
turn up in their possession. This is an unusual occurrence, so 
player characters might have the opportunity to examine or 
purchase an item only once or twice in a campaign year from 
any given apothecary. Refer to the list of the most common 
magical items, at the end of this chapter. 

In addition to their trade in spell components and the 
rare magical item, apothecaries and herbalists can create 
medicinal mixtures with the following properties: 


Healing salve: This ointment contains herbs that help to 
stop bleeding and close a wound, as well as infection-fight- 
ing properties. Applying the salve to a character with open 
cuts or bleeding wounds (not crushing or bludgeoning 
injuries) restores 1 hit point per separate wound or injury. 
For example, if a character was struck three times in the 
course of a melee, three applications of salve could restore 3 
lost hit points. Healing salve costs 5 to 20 gold pieces per 
application. 

Healing poultice: This compress helps to reduce 
swelling and bruising. It has the same effect as healing salve 
when applied to impact injuries and costs 10 to 30 gold 
pieces per poultice. 

Poison antidote: A herbalist or apothecary can prepare 
an antidote to one specific natural toxin, such as a rat- 
tlesnake bite or the sting of a giant wasp. The apothecary 
must have some idea of what will help the victim, so rare or 
unusual venoms (such as the giant wasp mentioned above) 


Chapter 5 


may be completely unknown. If the character knows an 
antidote, the herbalist or apothecary can prepare a dose that 
will remain good for 1 to 4 days at a cost of 20 to 80 gp. The 
poison antidote allows the victim to reroll his saving throw 
vs. poison with a +2 bonus, if it is administered within five 
rounds of the poisoning. Naturally, it is only effective 
against the specific toxin it was prepared for. 


Wise Women and Hedge Wizards 


Every village or hamlet has its own resident “witch” or 
“wizard,” or a person who claims command of magical 
powers and knowledge of herbs, spells, and charms. In a 
few cases, these characters are actually low-level magic- 
users, but more often they're fakes or charlatans. Most of 
these wise women or hedge wizards are 0-level characters 
with the herbalism and healing proficiencies. They can sell 
spell components from the herb, animal specimen, and com- 
mon lists, although they often have no idea what a particu- 
lar herb or item might be good for. 

Wise women and hedge wizards may be capable of creat- 
ing healing salves and poultices, as described above. In addi- 
tion, they can create minor charms or fetishes. These are tem- 
porary magical items about as powerful as a typical cantrip. 
Good examples would include a “love amulet,” that raised 
the wearer's Charisma (Cha/ Appearance) by 1 or 2 points, 
but only in the eyes of one particular subject whose hair was 
used in the making of the charm; a charm that discouraged 
mice or insects from entering a kitchen or pantry; or a small 
totem that brought the user good luck (a +1 bonus) on his next 
saving throw against a specific threat, such as fire, poison, or 
resisting mental spells. A charm costs anywhere from 5 to 50 
gold pieces, and retains its enchantment for 1 to 4 days. 


Arcanist 


Only the largest cities can support an arcanist, or a shop- 
keeper who deals solely in magical reagents, components, 
and the occasional enchanted item. An arcanist can provide 
spell components from any list, and also a number of other 
generally useful items for a wizard—paper, vellum, parch- 
ment, ink, quills, alchemical supplies and equipment, and 
other such things. 

Because arcanists have a clientele of wizards, they are will- 
ing to buy magical items and rare or unusual materials that 
could be useful as spell components. Player characters may sell 
components for 30% to 80% or (1d6+2) x 10% of their listed 
value. Magical items can be sold for whatever price the DM 
deems fair, although a PC selling a magical item should not be 
able to make more than twice the item’s experience point value 
from the sale. In fact, it’s perfectly reasonable for the DM to rule 
that the seller must sell by consignment—in other words, the 
arcanist agrees to display the item and handle any inquiries 
about it for a 10% share of the asking price, but he won't buy it 
outright. Until another customer comes along to show an inter- 
est in the item, the PC seller makes no money. Note that magi- 
cal items are rare, and from week to week the arcanist has no 
idea what may or may not show up in his shop. 


Buying, Selling, and Trading Magical Items 
In most AD&D campaigns, magical items are rare 
enough that it is nearly inconceivable that people would 


buy or sell them like any other commodity. For various 
reasons, magical items tend to be concentrated in the hands 
of player characters and their principal enemies. This means 
that the PCs never really experience the true scarcity of 
enchanted items and lose the sense of wonder that most 
people in their world would feel at even seeing a magical 
sword, a wand, or a nifty item like a carpet of flying. 

The effect of this scarcity is simple: Allowing the player 
characters to purchase or trade magical items is a privilege, 
and a rare one at that. It's an opportunity that comes along 
quite infrequently in a campaign, and in many cases it should 
be an opportunity that the players spent time and adventur- 
ing to create. In other words, if a player decides that his char- 
acter wants to find a ring of fire resistance and purchase it, 
there should be a lot more involved than a stroll down to the 
corner store. The character might have to hire a sage and 
spend weeks running down the chain of possession of the 
last known ring of fire resistance to appear in the area, and 
then he may have to locate its current owner and make an 
extremely generous offer—including trading magical items 
of his own, or undertaking some quest or service for the 
prospective seller—to have a chance of purchasing the ring. 

If the character is content to check in with the nearest 
arcanist once in a while, it could take months or years 
before the arcanist happened to stumble across the item the 
character was looking for—and even then, someone else 
might be interested in the same item. A bidding war, threats, 
or outright assassination attempts could result from two 
wealthy characters both trying to acquire the same item. 

Selling items isn't always easy, either. The PCs have to 
locate a buyer, and then agree on a fair price. Nobody in a 
small village will have the money required to buy a real 
magical item, and even a prosperous town may only have 
two or three individuals who could afford to buy what the 
PCs are offering for sale. Items such as potions or rings 
tend to be easier to sell, since anyone can use them, but 
books, wands, staves, or other items suited for priests or 
wizards only will be much more difficult to sell. In any 
event, the PCs are likely to see only 30% to 80% of their 
asking price for any given item, and they may have to 
demonstrate that the item works (or pay for an identify 
spell from a neutral party) in order to clinch the sale. 

The Cost of Magical Items: Enchanted items are rare 
and valuable. Without exception, they are the rarest and 
most expensive commodities to be found in a fantasy set- 
ting. They are valued accordingly. Even if a character hap- 
pens to locate a magical item for sale (an extremely rare 
event), the cost of the item is usually prohibitive, to say the 
least. As a basic rule of thumb, magical items should be 
worth anywhere from 5 to 20 times the listed experience 
point value, and a minimum of 200 gp for one-use items, or 
1,000 gp for persistent items. In many cases, the DM should 
set the cost for an item at a significant percentage of the 
character's total wealth—if someone has the only magical 
ring for sale in the entire kingdom, they're going to demand 
a huge sum for it, even if it’s only a ring of protection +1. 

In addition to the money involved, a character may have to 
offer a magical item of similar value in trade, or offer to per- 
form a service or undertake a quest to sweeten the deal for the 
seller. Regardless of the final deal struck, a player character 
should be careful of switches, swindles, or reneging; more than 
one adventurer has gone to his death believing that a brass 
ring with Nystul’s magical aura is a ring of wishes or spell turning. 


Equipment 


Spell Components 


Models and Miniatures 
Item 

tin 

3 Iden 

Bell, golden 
Bell, tiny 
Blade, knife 
Bust of caster, tiny 
Cage, silver wire 
Caltrop, golden 
Candelabra, silver 
Circle, brass 
Circle, gold 
Circle, platinum 
Circle, silver 
Cone, bull or ram horn 
Cone, crystal 
Cylinder, brass 
Cylinder, copper 
Cylinder, obsidian 
Dagger, tiny 


Die, bronze 

Die, silver 

Disk, bone, numbered | 
Doll, replica of self 
Drum, small 


Fan, silk 

Fan, tiny 

Glove, black silk 
Glove, leather 


Hand, cay 

Hand, stone 
Handkerchief, silk 
E UP rusty iron 
Horseshoe 

Hourglass 

Key, silver 

Links, gold 

Metal cube, perfect 
Mirror, silver, small 
Mirror, tiny 
Needle 


Needle, golden, tiny 
Needle, magnetized 
Paintbrush 
Pendant, metal 

Pin, silver 

Portal, ivory 

Pouch, leather 
Prayer beads 


proa obsidian 
Spinner, brass 

Spoon, silver 

Standard, miniature 
Statue, canine, oor 
Statue, canine, ivory 
Statuette, ivory, of caster 


Table 16: 


Acquisition 


SO, TM 


86 


SO, TM 


63686662 


BR GS 
999855253 


sees... 
2295 55 


§B5S2 5682285862292 i 985222542622 


Trumpet, hearing, brass, small 
Veil, silk 

War hammer 

Whistle, bone 

Whistle, silver, tiny 

Whistle, vulture-bone 


Scarcity Ziggurat, clay 


Common 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 


Refined/Finished Items 


Ball, lead 

+Bar, iron, magnetized 
+Bar, metal 

Bead, crystal 

+Bead, glass 

Blade, iron 

Box, small 

Crystal, leaded 

Cube, cast iron 
Diamond, hemispherical 
Disc, bronze 

+Gauze 


Uncommon 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Uncommon Glass, opaque 

Rare Glass sheet 


Rare +Glass tube 

Rave +Incense 
atte Iron, sheet 

Im Lens, small 

Rare +Magnet, small 

Rais 3s Marble, black 

Xm Marble, colored glass 
Dneodanon Mirror, fragment 

Hare Moonstone, polished 
+Paint, small pot 
Prism, crystal 
Ribbon 
Rod, amber 
Rod, crystal 
+Rod, glass 
Rod, iron 
Rod, silver 
Sheet, gold 


Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Common 
Uncommon 
Rare 


Common 
Rare 
Rare 


omen Sheet, platinum 


Common Sheet, silver 
Raa Silk 
Rare Silk, black 
Rare Silk, colored 
Rare Silk streamer 
Uncommon Sphere, clay 
Sphere, glass 
Stick or strip, ivory 
Tarts, tiny** 
+Wire, copper 
Wire, golden 
Wire, platinum 
Wire, silver 
Uncommon 
Rare Minerals 
Common s Item 
Common Agate 
Rare gP Amber 
Rare Amber, powdered 
Rare +Ash, volcanic 


Uncommon +Bitumen 
+Carbon 


Chrysolite, powdered 
+Clay 


Item Acquisition 


Uncommon 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Rare 
Rare 
Rare 
Rare 


Scarcity 


Uncommon 
Common 
Common 

Uncommon 

Uncommon 

Uncommon 

Rare 

Uncommon 

Uncommon 


Scarcity 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 

Rare 


+Coal 

Copper 

+Dust, coal 

Dust, diamond 
Dust, gold 

Dust, granite 

Dust, steel 

Emerald, powdered 
Feldspar, moonstone 
Feldspar, sunstone 
+Flint 

Granite, black 
Graphite, powdered 
+Iron filings 

+Iron, piece 

+Iron, powdered 
+Iron pyrite 

+Lead 

+Lime 

+Lodestone 
+Mercury (Quicksilver) 
Mica, chip 

Mica, ground 
Phosphorus 

+Pitch 

Quartz, clear 
Quartz, powdered 
Quartz, smoky 
Ruby, powdered 
+Salt 


+Saltpeter 
+Salts, alkaline 
Sand, colored 
Silver, powdered 
Stalactites, small 
Stone 

Stone, chip 
Stone, marble 
+Sulphur 

Talc 

Vermilion 

Zinc 


Common/Household Materials 


Item 

Acorn 

Bark chips 
Beeswax 

Blood** 

+Bone, powdered 
Bone, small 
Butter** 

Candle, black wax 
Candle, small 
Carrot, dried** 
Cloth, cotton 
Cloth, red 

Cloth, white 
Coffee bean 

Coin, copper piece 
Coin, silver 

Coin, gold 

+Cork 

Corn, kernel** 
Corn, powdered** 
Cotton 

Dirt 

Dust 

Egg, rotten 


Acquisition 
FS 
Auto 
FS, TM 
Auto 
TM 
Auto 
TM 
TM 
TM 
TM 
TM 
TM 
TM 
TM 
TM 
TM 
TM 
TM 
Auto 
TM 
TM 
Auto 
Auto 
FS, TM 


Chapter 5 


Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Rare 
Common 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Rare 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Rare 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 


Common 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Rare 


Scarcity 
Common 
Common 

Uncommon 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Common 


Egg, shell 
Egg, yolk** 
Eyelash 

Fat** 

Feather 
Fleece 

Flour 

Fruit, rotten** 
Fur 

Garlic, bud** 
Grain** 

Gum arabic 
Handkerchief 
Honey** 
Honeycomb** 


Leather loop 
Leather, shoe 
Meat, dried** 
Meat, raw** 
Milk fat** 
Molasses 
+Oil 

Oil, sweet 
+Paper 
+Parchment 
Peas, dried and split 
Pebble 
Pepper 

Pork rind** 


Sponge 

Straw 

String 

Sugar 
Tallow** 
Thread 

Twig 

Water 

Wax 

Wax, white 
Whitewash 
Wine 

Wood 

Wood, charred 
Wood, splinter 
Wool 


Animal Specimens 
Item 

Blood, doppleganger** 
Blood, umber hulk** 
Butterfly, live** 

Claw, cat 

Claw, umber hulk 
Cocoon, caterpillar 
Cricket, live** 

Dung, ape 

Dung, ox 

Eye, hawk** 

Eyelash, basilisk 
Eyelash, kirin 


FS, TM 
FS, TM 
Auto 
Auto 
Auto 
TM 
Auto 
Auto 
FS, TM 
FS, TM 
FS, TM 
TM, SO 
TM 
FS, TM 
FS, TM 
Auto 
TM 
Auto 
Auto 
TM 


TM 
Auto 
FS, TM 
TM 
TM 
FS, TM 
Auto 
Auto 
TM 
TM 
TM 
TM 


Acquisition 
SO 
sO 


Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
‘Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 


Uncommon 
Common 
Common 

Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 

Uncommon 

Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 


Scarcity 
Rare 


Rare 
Common 
Common 

Rare 

Uncommon 


Eyelash, ogre mage 
Fang, spider 
Feather, chicken 


Feather, hummingbird 
Feather, owl 
Feather, vulture 
Brad white 
eather wing 
Firefly, live** 
Fur, bat 
Fur, bloodhound 
Fur, cat 


Glowworm, live** 


l 
Ever i 
Hair, ape 
Hair, horse 
Hair, infant 


Hair, lycanthrope 
Hair, ox 
Hair, skunk 


Heart, hen** 
+Hoof, powdered 
Honey, royal jelly** 


Mouse, mummified 
Pineal gland** 
Scale, dragon 
Scale, herring 
Scale, snake 

Shell, turtle 

Sinew, ape** 

Sinew, horse or ox** 
Skin, chameleon 
Sian, anake 

Slug, live** 

Spider, live** 
Spider web a 
E EAI gri 


Toad, mummified 
Tongue, snake** 
Tooth, carnivore 
Whisker, mouse 


Wing, be 


Ga oO 
$4229 


` 


` 


adgcccH 
O RE 


49 
"B 


CLERC TUE E 
"ED CFER DUE 


Un Qn ^n 2 
sist is 


ggg 
222 


agus 
"g 


FIBER So d 
Z2266°° °° 226 


HHH 


Herbs and Plant Specimens 


Item 

Amaryllis, stalk** 
Apple blossom** 
Bark, oak 

Bark, willow 
Foxfire** 
Hickory nut oil 
Tolly berry** 
leaf** 


eek, crushed** 
Lotus blossom** 


Ho! 


Acquisition 


Equipment 


Rare 
Uncommon 


Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Uncommon 
Rare 
Common 
Common 
Rare 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Rare 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Rare 
Rare 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Rare 
Common 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Rare 
Rare 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Rare 


Uncommon 


Scarcity 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Rare 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Common 
Rare 


40 gp 
lsp 
5sp 


10gp 
3 sp 


Marigold, crushed** 
Moonseed seed 
Moss, phosphorescent** 
Nut, shell 

Pine cone 

Pine sprig** 

Poison ivy, leaf** 
Poison oak, leaf** 
Poison sumac, leaf** 
Raspberry leaves** 
Resin, camphor 
Rhubarb, leaf** 

Root, licorice 

Rose petal** 

Seed, legume 

Seed, sesame 
Shamrock leaf** 
Skunk cabbage, leaf** 
Spores, mushroom 
Stinging nettle, crushed** 
Thistledown 

Thorns, sharp 
Walnut oil 
Wychwood** 


Other Components 
Item 

+Acid 

+Acid, citric 

+Acid, nitric 

Balloon 

Bone, from undead 
Book, numerological 
Branch, from cemetery 
Cloth, from corpse 
Cloth, from ghoul 
Cloth, from priest's robe 
Cloth, linen & gold thread 


Dirt, from dragon’s footprint 


Dirt, from ghoul's lair 
Dirt/earth from grave 
Dust, from wizard’s tomb 
Dust, spectre 

Dust, vampire 

Eyelash, from corpse 
Hair, from evil female elf 
Hair, from ghoul 

Leather scrap, blessed 
Mesh of thread 

Page, from calendar 


Rainwater, from thunderstorm FS 
Scrap, from map 100 years old FS, SO 
Shroud, from 100-year old corpse FS 
Skin, from magic-resistant 


creature 
Tombstone, chip 
Vellum, blessed 
Wand, oak, 100 years old 
Weapon, broken 
Weapon, broken magical 
Wood, from coffin 
Wrapping, from mummy 


Common 
Uncommon 
Rare 
Common 


Common . 


Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Common 
Rare 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Uncommon 
Common 
Common 
Rare 
Rare 


Acquisition 
TM 
TM Rare 
TM Rare 

TM, SO Uncommon 
FS, SO Rare 
SO Rare 
FS Uncommon 
FS, SO Common 
FS, SO Rare 
FS, SO Uncommon 
sO Rare 
FS, SO Rare 
FS, SO Rare 
FS Common 
FS, SO Rare 
FS, SO Rare 
FS, SO Rare 
FS Common 
FS Rare 
FS, SO Rare 
SO Rare 
SO Uncommon 
FS Common 
Common 
Rare 
Rare 


Scarcity 
Rare 


FS Rare 

FS Common 

SO Rare 
FS, SO Rare 
FS, TM Common 
FS, SO Rare 
FS, TM Common 
FS, SO Rare 


* Items commonly available in wizard's laboratory. 


** Perishable items. 


FS Item acquired by field search. 
TM Item available in most towns or markets. 
SO Item must be special ordered from a craftsman of some kind. 


Chapter 6: 
Magic 


Magic in the AD&D game is mysterious and wonderful. It gives the player char- 
acters access to superhuman powers of perception, movement, and destruction. 
With the right spell or magical item, a character can literally do anything. Impass- 
able obstacles can be circumvented, secrets divined or unearthed, unbeatable 
monsters defeated; even a low-level wizard or priest can accomplish these amaz- 
ing feats with ease. And, naturally, magic also empowers the enemies of the 
player characters, giving villains dangerous and unpredictable abilities with 
which to oppose the heroes. 

While the magic system of the AD&D game generally works well, it only 
models one style or flavor of magical powers. The basic mechanic of learning 
spells throu gh long study and forgetting them as they are cast is a very distinc- 
tive feature of the game system, and players who are seeking a particular fantasy 
setting may find it to be too pervasive in the AD&D system. For example, the 
AD&D spell system doesn’t allow players to run characters who become 

fatigued or exhausted through use of spells but instead retain them in memory, a 
common element of fantasy literature. In other settings, magic comes with a 
moral or spiritual risk, and characters dare not call upon supernatural powers for © 
fear of their lives or sanity. 

In this chapter of PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells & Magic, we'll present an alternate 
system of acquiring and expending spells based on spell points. At its most basic 
level, this system simply permits wizards to customize their normal spell pro- 
gression, but we'll also present optional systems to represent different philoso- 
phies or mechanics of magic, including magic systems based on fatigue, sanity, 
life energy, and spiritual risk or morality. 

While the wizard class enjoys the spotlight in this chapter, we'll also take a 
look at priests and other spellcasters and present versions of the spell point sys- 
tem appropriate for those classes. Last, but not least, we'll discuss incorporating 
this material into existing campaigns. 


Magic 


Normally, wizards, priests, and 


The Sp ell other spellcasters are limited to a 
Doi fl L Sys tem strict spell progression table 


which lists how many spells of 
each level they may retain in memory at one time. For 
example, every 7th-level mage shares the same spell capac- 
ity of four 1st-, three 2nd-, two 3rd-, and one 4th level spell, 
although specialist wizards (or priests with exceptional Wis- 
dom scores) gain a slight advantage in this area because of 
their bonus spells. When a spell is cast, it vanishes from the 
caster’s memory, and he cannot make use of it again until 
he has a chance to rest and study his spell books once again. 

Spell points work a little differently. Characters no 
longer receive a standard spell progression table. Instead, 
they are assigned a number of spell points based on their 
character class and level. When the character studies his 
spell books or prays for spells, he uses these spell points to 
purchase the spells he wishes to memorize, with some rea- 
sonable restrictions. Naturally, higher-level spells are more 
expensive than lower-level spells, but high-level characters 
have more spell points available. Under the spell point 
system, a 7th-level mage may decide to memorize five 1st- 
level spells instead of the four he is normally allowed, at 
the cost of giving up his higher-level spells for that day. 
Or, he could choose to memorize four 4th-level spells, giv- 
ing up all his lower-level spells, or strike any balance 
between the two extremes that he likes. 

Specialist wizards receive the normal amount of spell 
points allowed to a mage of the same level, but also gain an 
amount of bonus points. These bonus points must be used to 
select spells from the specialist wizard's school of specializa- 
tion, but the specialist can spend them as he sees fit. For 
instance, a 7th-level invoker normally receives one 1st-, one 
2nd-, one 3rd-, and one 4th-level spell as a bonus for his spe- 
cialization, but with spell points he could choose as many as 
eight bonus 1st-level spells. 

There are three general guidelines the wizard must still 
obey when memorizing spells by using spell points: 


* The wizard must be well-rested and have access to his 
spell books in order to memorize spells. He still may 
memorize only those spells that he knows and has avail- 
able at that time. It takes about 10 minutes per spell level 
to commit a spell to memory. 

* The wizard is limited in the maximum spell level he may 
cast, based on his character level (and possibly his Intelli- 
gence score). For example, a 5th-level wizard is still lim- 
ited to spells of 3rd-level or lower. (See Table 17: Wizard 
Spell Point Progression.) 

* The wizard is limited in the maximum number of spells 
of each level that he can memorize, regardless of how 
many spell points he has available; for example, a 5th- 
level mage can't memorize more than four spells of any 
given spell level. Even 1st-level spells are difficult to 
memorize, and a wizard can't have more than nine spells 
of any one level in his memory, no matter how many 
spell points he has available. See Table 17. 


Some of these guidelines are relaxed or ignored for the 
optional systems of magic described later in this chapter. 
These systems dispense with the old assumption that spells 
vanish from memory when cast and use other restrictions to 
limit a wizard's power. 


Selecting Spells 

A wizard uses his spell points to choose his arsenal of 
spells when he takes the time to rest and study his spell 
books. Most wizards pre-select their spells; if a wizard can 
memorize two 2nd-level spells, he picks two specific 2nd- 
level spells from his spell book (say, invisibility and wizard 
lock) and stores them in his mind. This is referred to as a 
fixed magick; once chosen, these spells cannot be changed 
until the wizard casts them and then studies his spell 
books again. 

Some of the systems of magic described later in this 
chapter allow a wizard to designate free magicks. A free 
magick is one which the wizard does not place a specific 
spell into. By keeping the magick open, the wizard can use 
it to cast any spell of the appropriate level that he has in 
his spell books. For example, a 3rd-level specialist wizard 
might spend his spell points to acquire one fixed 2nd-level 
magick within his specialization (invisibility, for instance) 
and one free 2nd-level magick (see Table 18: Spell Cost by 
Level (Wizard) for spell costs). With the free magick, the 
wizard can cast any 2nd-level spell in his book when he 
needs it. If the wizard found himself in a situation where 
he needed to probe someone’s thoughts, he could use ESP; 
if he needed to aid a friend involved in a fight, he could 
use strength; or, if he needed to distract some pursuers, he 
could use improved phantasmal force. As long as the spell is 
known to the wizard and recorded in his spell books, it’s 
available through a free magick. 

Obviously, this is a huge advantage for a wizard. Instead 
of guessing about which of his spells may be useful in a par- 
ticular adventure, the wizard can have all of his spells of 
that level accessible. However, free magicks are less efficient 
than fixed magicks and cost more spell points to fill. Once 
the free magick has been used to cast a spell, it is wiped 
from the wizard’s memory, just like a fixed magick. 


Argyth, a 6th-level mage, has a total of 55 spell points with 
which to purchase his spell selection. He expects heavy combat 
against tough opponents in the coming adventure. For 10 
points apiece, he chooses three fixed 3rd-level spells—fireball, 
lightning bolt, and haste. Since he doesn't know which of his 
2nd-level spells may be most useful, he spends 12 more points 
to acquire a single free 2nd-level magick, which can be used to 
cast any of his 2nd-level spells. He has 13 points left over and 
decides to memorize two magic missiles, one protection from 
evil, and one free magick cantrip. Argyth has spent his 55 
points. He has one less 1st-level and 2nd-level spell than he 
would using Table 21 from the PHB, but he has an extra 3rd- 
level spell and the ability to call upon any 2nd-level spell and 
cantrip he knows once each. 


Tierwen is a 3rd-level invoker. She has 15 points available for 
general selections, plus 10 more points for spells of the school of 
invocation and evocation. She decides to select web and magic mis- 
sile for her bonus spells, using up all 10 spell points. For her normal 
allocation, she chooses jump, light, and stinking cloud, totalling 
14 spell points. She has 1 point left over and has purchased exactly 
what a 3rd-level invoker would normally receive—three 1st-level 
spells and two 2nd-level spells. 


Cha 


pter 6 


Table 17: 
Wizard Spell 


Doint Drogression 


Max. Spells 
Memorized at 
Each Level! 


Spell 
Points? 


Wizard Max. Spell 
Level Level 


4 (5) 
4 (6) 
4 (6) 


25 (+10) 
40 (+20) 
55 (+20) 


5 (6) 
5 (7) 
5 (7) 


150 (+60) 
200 (+60) 
250 (+90) 


6 (8) 
6 (8) 
6 (8) 


475 (+180) 
550 (+180) 
625 (+240) 


! Number in parentheses applies to specialist wizards. 
? Number in parentheses represents amount of bonus points 
specialist wizards can add to the base spell points. 


Table 18: 
&pell Cost by Level (Wizard) 


Spell 
Level 


Free 
Magick 


Fixed 
Magick 


Bb) — 


Cantrips 


The cantrip spell from the Player's Handbook is intended 
to describe a host of minor magical effects. In this system, 
a wizard may choose to memorize a cantrip as a 1st-level 
spell—just as it's described in the PHB—or he can memo- 
rize individual applications of cantrip for a cost of 1 spell 
point each. These one-shot cantrips have the exact same 
effect as the Ist-level spell, but each application consumes 
1 SP and has a duration of one full turn. 

All cantrips are free magicks by definition; the wizard can 
perform any minor magical feat appropriate for the spell, 
without selecting the precise incantation ahead of time. A 
wizard is limited in the number of cantrips he can memo- 
rize at one time; he can't allocate more than twice his num- 
ber of spells allowed for each level to cantrips. For example, 
a Ist-level mage is limited to no more than two spells of 
each level, so he can memorize a maximum of four cantrips. 
A 6th-level mage is limited to four spells of any given level, 
so he can memorize up to eight cantrips. 

All normal considerations for cantrips as described in the 
PHB still apply—they are minor magic, useful in role-playing 
or grandstanding but generally useless in combat. Of course, 
clever and resourceful players can create plenty of mayhem, 
even with magic as weak as this. 


Exceeding the Spell Level Limit 


If the DM agrees, a wizard character may learn and cast 
spells of a higher level than he would normally be allowed 
to know. This blurs the line of spell level distinctions, mak- 
ing the character’s exact level somewhat less important; 
there will be spells a character can learn and use easily, as 
well as spells that will be extremely costly and difficult for 
the character to use. 

Before a character can memorize a spell that’s over his 
head, he has to learn it first. This means that the character 
must find, purchase, or otherwise stumble across a spell of 
the level in question and attempt a learn spells check to 
see if he can master it. However, when a character is dab- 
bling in matters beyond his depth, his learn spells chance 
of success is halved for a spell one level higher than he 
should be able to use, and divided by 10 for a spell two 
levels higher than the maximum normally allowed. If a 
character does not succeed in learning the spell at this 
point, then he can try again at the level that he normally 
gains the spell. Under no circumstances can a character 
learn a spell three levels higher than his normal maxi- 
mum—it’s just too difficult, and he'll have to study his art 
for a while longer before he can make heads or tails of it. 
Also, because the spell is so difficult to learn, the wizard 
must memorize it as a fixed magick. 

If the character succeeds in learning the high-level spell, 
he can then select it normally by using his spell points to 
memorize it. However, since the spell is extraordinarily dif- 
ficult for the character, he must pay twice the listed normal 
fixed magick cost to memorize it. For many low-level char- 
acters, this will make the spell prohibitively expensive in 
any event; a 2nd-level specialist wizard only has a total of 
12 spell points available, so he could just barely memorize a 
single 2nd-level spell of his specialty school. Note that a 
2nd-level mage just doesn't have the points available to 
even try this feat. 


Wizards of medium to high level have a better chance to 
use a spell that would normally be out of reach for them. For 
example, a 6th-level wizard normally is limited to 3rd-level 
spells, but with effort he can learn a 4th-level spell and cast it 
for 30 spell points, which is twice the normal cost of 15 spell 
points. Since a 6th-level mage has 55 spell points available, he 
actually has a few points left over to select other spells— 
although it's a very costly privilege! 

Again, this is an optional rule, and the DM can decide to 
ignore it for his campaign. Note that all level-based charac- 
teristics of a spell depend on the caster's true level, so even 
if a 3rd-level wizard somehow acquired a fireball, it would 
only do 3d6 damage. (And he wouldn't have the points 
available to memorize it, anyway.) 


Casting Spells For Greater Effect 


Another variant rule available with the spell point system is 
casting spells for greater than normal effect. By “overcharging” 
a memorized spell (fixed magick only) with magical energy, a 
wizard can achieve results as if he were a wizard of much 
higher level. For example, a 2nd-level wizard is normally lim- 
ited to a single magic missile when he casts the spell, but with 
this optional rule he can fire the spell as a 3rd-level character in 
order to create two missiles with the spell. Naturally, the wiz- 
ard must devote additional spell points to the spell when he 
memorizes it. The price is 50% of the spell’s base cost for each 
additional casting level stored with the spell. 


Rarik is a 4th-level mage who wants to gain the extra damage 
potential of a third magic missile when he casts the spell. Nor- 
mally, a third missile is gained at 5th level, so Rarik wants to cast 
the spell as if he were one level higher. A 1st-level spell requires 4 
spell points to memorize, but by spending 6 points (50% more than 
4), Rarik gains the ability to cast this one spell as if he were actually 
5th level. All level-based variables are affected, including range, 
area of effect, duration, saving throw modifiers, and any other 
appropriate factors, so Rarik incidentally gains an additional 10 
yards of range with his investment. 

Later on in his career, Rarik decides that he'd like a fireball 
with some extra punch. He's a 5th-level mage now, and the spell 
costs him 10 spell points. Rarik spends two 50% increments (a 
grand total of 20 spell points) to cast this fireball as if he were a 
7th-level caster. The range increases from 60 to 80 yards, and the 
damage is 7d6 instead of 5d6. 


A character can’t invest more than four additional levels 
into a spell, which would triple its cost, increasing it by 200% 
above the normal price. Most wizards find that it’s more effi- 
cient to gain extra spells rather than overcharge a single one, 
but for spells with important breaks in power level based on 
the caster’s level—like magic missile—one or two steps of 
increased casting level may be a good idea. 


Reducing Spell Cost 


Just as wizards can allocate extra energy to hold magicks 
free, cast spells of higher level than normal, or gain additional 
levels of casting ability, they may also save spell points by 
memorizing fixed magicks with limitations or reduced power 
levels. A spell may be reduced in cost by 25% (round up) per 
limitation selected, toa maximum reduction of 50% for two 
limitations. Restrictions include the following: 


79 


Reduced Spell Power: By investing a spell with less 
energy than normal, a wizard can save a few spell points. 
This reduces the caster’s level by four, affecting range, dura- 
tion, damage, and all other level-based variables. In addi- 
tion, the spell can be more easily dispelled, since the effective 
casting level is used for this purpose. 

If the spell has no level-based variables (e.g., charm 
person) this limitation cannot be selected. A wizard must be 
at least 5th level in order to take this limitation. 

Prolonged Casting Time: The wizard can store less 
energy than normal in the spell, hoping to draw energy 
from his immediate environment when the time comes to 
cast it. This results in a lengthy period of gathering energy 
before actually releasing the spell. Spells with a casting time 
of less than one round require a preparation time of a num- 
ber of rounds equal to the spell's listed casting time, so a 
spell with a casting time of 3 would require three full 
rounds of uninterrupted concentration before the wizard 
could actually cast the spell. Spells with a casting time of 
one round require one full turn to cast, and spells with a 
casting time of more than one round can't be reduced in 
cost through this limitation. 

Special Casting Condition: By narrowing the focus 
and application of a spell, a wizard can reduce the 
amount of energy and effort required to commit it to 
memory. For example, the wizard can memorize a spell 
that can only be cast by the light of the moon or only 
affects certain types of objects (such as a shatter on crystal 
only). If the spell is particularly restrictive, the DM may 
allow a 50% reduction in cost. For example, a spell that 
can only be cast while the wizard is standing in one spe- 
cific place of power in the middle of nowhere might qual- 
ify. Naturally, the DM should keep a very close eye on 
spells with this limitation; if it's not really a limitation, the 
wizard shouldn't catch a break for it. 

Instead of requiring certain conditions to be right for 
casting, the wizard might have to take special steps to 
ensure that the target can be affected. For example, his 
charm person spell might require the caster to know the tar- 
get’s name or spend a turn conversing with the subject. Or, 
a magic missile might have no effect unless the wizard has 
touched the subject with his bare hand that day. It's even 
possible that a wizard may have a spell that automatically 
fails against a target wearing a certain color or carrying a 
lucky charm. 

A wizard shouldn't have more than one or two casting 
conditions that he normally observes. It's fine for a 
shadow mage to have a number of spells that can't be cast 
in daylight, but if he also has another spell that can't be 
used while it's raining, and a third that only affects orcs, 
the character concept is clearly being discarded in favor of 
game effect. 


Bonus Spell Points for 
High Intelligence 


Just as priests of extraordinary Wisdom receive greater 
than normal spell powers, extremely intelligent wizards 
can gain a few extra spell points to reflect their superior 
minds and memorization skills. Under this optional rule, 
wizard characters gain a number of bonus spell points 
equal to their maximum number of languages, based on 


Chapter 6 


Table 19: 
Bonus Spell Points for 
Intelligence 


Bonus 
Spell Points 


Intelligence 
Score 
9-11 
12-13 
14-15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20+ 


! Maximum bonus allowed. 


their Intelligence score. These spell points can be spent 
any way the character desires, as long as he doesn’t 
exceed his maximum number of spells per level (see Table 
17). The bonus points are shown on Table 19: Bonus Spell 
Points for Intelligence. 

As noted on the table, a wizard with an Intelligence of 14 
or better gains enough bonus points to memorize one addi- 
tional Ist-level spell, which is comparable with the tradi- 
tional priest bonus of an additional 1st-level spell for a Wis- 
dom of 13 or better. A wizard with an Intelligence of 17 has 
enough points to use this bonus to gain an extra 2nd-level 
spell, or one extra 1st-level spell with a couple of spell 
points to spare. 

DMs, take note: The cumulative effects of specialist wiz- 
ard bonuses, signature spells, and this optional rule could 
allow a 1st-level wizard to begin play with as many as four 
Ist-level spells memorized at once! Obviously, this is a very 
significant boost in power for a low-level character. Allow- 
ing a character to gain bonus spell points for his Intelligence 
score is a reasonable optional rule, but it also inflates the 
game by drastically increasing the power of Ist- to 3rd-level 
wizards. It's a good idea to strictly enforce the limits on the 
maximum number of spells of each level (see Table 17) per- 
mitted to a wizard character. 


Recovering Spell Points 


Since spell points in this basic system represent the total 
memorization ability of a wizard character, they are recovered 
or regained just like spell capability in the standard AD&D 
magic system. In other words, if a character spends 10 spell 
points to memorize a 3rd-level spell, those points are “tied 
up” by holding the spell ready in the character’s memory and 
can’t be used to memorize another spell until expended. Spell 
points used to memorize free magicks are also tied up in the 
same fashion. 

Once a character has cast a spell, the spell points used to 
hold that magick in memory are gone. The wizard must get a 
good night's sleep and re-study his spell book in order to 
regain spell points expended through casting spells. 


80 


The spell point rules described in the previ- 

Systems ous on basically duplicate the sopra 

477 Spell progression, casting, and recovery sys- 
of Magic tem of the AD&D game. Spell points oe 
vide more flexibility and some interesting options such as 
free magicks and the ability to cast spells of higher level, but 
the traditional trappings of magic remain the same—spells 
are learned through long, tedious study and forgotten once 
they are cast. 

In this section, we'll take a look at several variant magic 
systems that use the spell point mechanics to create entirely 
different methods of using arcane powers. For example, many 
books in fantasy literature assume that channelling magical 
power through a character's mind and body is a dangerous 
and exhausting exercise; a character can cast spells as long as 
his stamina holds out. With these optional systems, a magic 
System that mirrors this traditional approach can be integrated 
into an AD&D campaign. 


Channcllers meme 


Imagine wizards who do not forget spells as they are 
cast, but instead freely use any spell in their repertoire 
whenever they wish. Wizards in this system of magic are 
born with some special spark or gift that allows them to 
reach some hidden source or supply of magical energy 
and use this to power their enchantments and spells. A 
young apprentice knows only one or two ways to har- 
ness this energy into useful applications and has a very 
limited capacity for tapping and shaping magical 
energy, while a great archmage knows dozens upon 
dozens of spells and has a nearly unlimited capability 
for wielding magical energy. 

While this may seem like a world where the wizards 
reign unchecked, there's an important catch: Reaching 
for and directing magical energy is a dangerous and tax- 
ing exercise, at least as difficult as heavy labor or pro- 
longed exertion, and each spell a wizard casts leaves 
him weakened and vulnerable. In fact, wizards can 
exhaust their very lives by casting a spell that's too 
much for them to handle or by casting too many smaller 
spells in succession. 

Channelling or summoning magical energy is a very 
common system of magic in fantasy literature. Here's 
how it works in the PLAYER'S OPTION rules: Basically, the 
wizard gains spell points as described in the beginning of 
this chapter, allocates them to fixed magicks or free mag- 
icks just as he wishes, and selects the particular spells he 
wants to have locked into memory as fixed magicks. 
(Since the wizard takes the time to impress these spells in 
his mind, it's easier for him to energize them with chan- 
nelled magic, and thus the spell point cost is lower than 
free magicks.) The following optional systems from the 
previous section are used: 


* Free magicks may be used to provide the wizard with 
access to any spell in his repertoire, although they're 
still more expensive than fixed magicks. 

* The wizard may exceed his normal spell level limit 
using the optional rules described previously. 

* The wizard may decide to cast spells for greater effect 
by simply spending more spell points when he actually 
casts the spell. 


* The wizard can save spell points by choosing to cast 
spells with a prolonged casting time or at reduced 
power. 

* Lastly, the wizard modifies his spell point total based 
on his Wisdom and Constitution scores; he may not 
gain bonus spell points for his Intelligence. The charac- 
ter's hit point adjustment for Constitution and his mag- 
ical attack adjustment for Wisdom are added to or sub- 
tracted from his spell point total. If this lowers a 1st- 
level character to less than 4 spell points, he ignores the 
adjustments; all wizards have at least 4 spell points. 


While the character may have some spell points 
"allocated" or "tied up" in various fixed and free mag- 
icks, this actually makes no difference for a channeller. 
The initial selection of spells is simply used to create a 
slate of spell powers that the character can access and to 
define the cost in spell points for making use of these 
powers. The character may cast any spell that he has 
available through either a fixed or free magick, except 
that the magick does not vanish from his memory once 
he's cast the spell. Instead, the character deducts the 
number of spell points required to energize the spell 
from his spell point total. For example, if a mage with 40 
spell points has a magic missile memorized, he can cast 
that magic missile four times if he wants to! 
ls: Since spells never 
vanish from a channeller's memory, the character does 
not normally re-memorize spells during the course of an 
adventure. However, channellers have no particular 


Channellers and Studying Spel 


81 


obstacles to learning new spells or replacing the spells 
held as fixed or free magicks in their memory. The char- 
acter must be well-rested and have access to his spell 
books. It takes 10 minutes per spell level for the charac- 
ter to memorize a new spell. In effect, he “overwrites” 
whichever spells he wishes to in order to change the 
allocation of spell points into free and fixed magicks. 


Kerian, a 5th-level channelling invoker, wishes to change the 
spells he has memorized. Because of his Constitution bonus, he 
has 61 points to assign to various magicks. After resting, he 
decides to memorize one fixed (shield) and one free 1st-level 
magick (12 SPs), two fixed magicks (web and invisibility for 
12 SPs), and one prolonged casting time 3rd-level magick (fire- 
ball for 7 SPs), and one 4th-level magick that exceeds his level 
(ice storm at 30 SPs). After memorizing the spells, which takes 
1 hour and 10 minutes, Kerian is ready to adventure! 


If a character wishes to change just one spell in his current 
repertoire, he still has to rest and memorize it. For example, 
if a mage wished to change his magic missile spell to a shield 
spell, then he would have to sleep for eight hours and 
spend 10 minutes committing it to memory. 

Since spell points in this system represent magic 
potential or stamina (for lack of better words), expended 
spell points are naturally recovered as the character's 
fatigue fades and his strength returns. Just as a human 
who runs a wind sprint eventually recovers from his 
temporary exhaustion, a wizard who casts a spell will 
soon return to his full magical strength with a little rest. 


Chapter 6 
MÀ À Àá€—á 


50% or less of his maximum unwounded 
hit point total, the fatigue rating of the spell 
increases by one. If a character has been 
reduced to 25% or less of his normal hit 
point total, the fatigue rating increases by 
two categories. For example, a 5th-level 
wizard who normally has 16 hit points has 
been wounded and only has 8 hit points 
left. When he casts his fireball spell, he 
becomes severely fatigued instead of heavily 
fatigued. If he had tried the same spell with 
only 4 hit points, he would have been mor- 
tally fatigued, which is not good. 


Table 20: 
Spell Point Recovery 
lor Channellers 


Physical Activity Spell Recovered 

Hard exertion none 

Walking, riding 2 per hour, or 2% of normal maximum 
Sitting, resting 4 per hour, or 5% of normal maximum 
Sleeping 8 per hour, or 10% of normal maximum 


Spell points are recovered as shown on Table 20: Spell 
Point Recovery for Channellers. 

Characters recover a number of spell points equal to 
the percentage listed, or the whole number, whichever is 
better. For example, a 6th-level mage has 55 spell points. 
If he sleeps, 10% of 55 would be 6 (round up 5.5) spell 
points per hour, so he recovers 8 per hour instead. In 
fact, it’s more advantageous for any mage of 7th level or 
lower to take the listed number, and mages of 8th level 
or higher to work with percentages instead. For special- 
ists, 7th-level is the break point. 

In addition to the long-term prospects of exhausting his 
spell points, a channelling wizard finds that each spell he 
casts temporarily tires him. See Table 21: Spell Fatigue. 

Using the Fatigue Chart: When a wizard casts a 
spell, find the row that matches the caster’s level and 
then read across until you find the level of the spell. The 
column it appears in indicates the fatigue caused by the 
spell. For example, if an 8th-level wizard casts a fireball, 
begin on the row titled “Wizard Lvl. 7-8” and read 
across until you find the listing for 3rd-level spell. This 
spell causes moderate fatigue for the character. If the wiz- 
ard casts a 4th-level spell, he would suffer heavy fatigue. 

Loss of Hit Points: If a character has been reduced to 


Table 21: 
Spell Fati guc 


Fatigue Caused by Spell Level 
Moderate Heavy Severe 


Loss of Spell Points: In a similar man- 
ner, a character who has depleted his magi- 
cal energy is more susceptible to fatigue, 
too. The same rules apply for reduced spell point totals. 
Always count the character's spell points before the spell 
is cast, so a 1st-level wizard casting his first spell of the 
day is beginning with 4 spell points (or more) and not 
zero! Again, a loss of 50% increases fatigue by one cate- 
gory, and a loss of 75% increases it by two. Specialist wiz- 
ards add their two point totals together for comparing the 
points spent to the original total. 

Existing Fatigue: If a fatigued character casts another 
spell, increase the fatigue category of the new spell by one 
level if he is moderately fatigued, two levels if he is heav- 
ily fatigued, or three levels if he is severely fatigued. The 
character then acquires the new fatigue level of the spell 
he just cast, or stays where he was, whichever is worse. 
For example, if the 8th-level wizard mentioned above was 
already moderately fatigued and he cast a 2nd- or 3rd- 
level spell, the new spell would be considered heavily 
fatiguing because of his existing condition, and the wiz- 
ard would become heavily fatigued. However, if the wiz- 
ard had cast a 1st-level spell, he would have remained 
moderately fatigued. 

Note that fatigue can accumulate from other sources 
than casting spells. In the PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & Tactics 
book, there is a fatigue system based on rounds of combat. 
If this is in play, a wizard who fights for 
three or four rounds and then attempts 
to cast a spell may be in deep trouble. 
Characters who are fatigued under that 
system are considered moderately 
fatigued here, and exhausted characters 
are heavily fatigued. 


Mortal Effects of Fatigue: Naturally, 


fatigued characters face some 
significant disadvantages, as shown 
below: 


cantrip Ist 
1st 2nd 
1st, 2nd 3rd 
2nd, 3rd 4th 
3rd, 4th 5th 
4th, 5th 6th 
5th, 6th 7th 
6th, 7th 8th 
6th, 7th 8th 9th 
6th-8th 9th 
7th-8th 9th 
7th-9th — 


3rd or higher 
4th or higher 
5th or higher 
6th or higher 
7th or higher 
8th or higher 
9th or higher 


Lightly fatigued characters have 
no combat penalties, but they risk 
becoming more exhausted. Their 
movement rate is reduced to three- 
quarters normal, so most human and 
demihuman wizards will be reduced 
from a 12 to a 9. A lightly fatigued 
character might suffer from a slight 
headache or just feel tired. 


Magic 


Moderately fatigued characters suffer a -1 penalty to 
attack rolls and have their movement rates halved. 
Characters at this level of fatigue might have a persistent 
headache, slightly hazy vision, and pervasive muscle 
aches in random areas. 

Heavily fatigued characters suffer an attack penalty of 
-2, and an Armor Class penalty of +1. Their movement is 
reduced to one-quarter normal. Not only does the charac- 
ter feel exhausted, but he also suffers from a splitting 
headache, aches all over and could suffer from nose 
bleeds, etc. 

Severely fatigued characters suffer a —4 penalty to all 
attacks and a +3 penalty to their Armor Class. Their 
movement rate is reduced to 1. It is almost impossible for 
the character to stand up at this point (make a Dexter- 
ity / Balance check if the character moves). Of course, he 
can still concentrate enough to cast spells, but just barely. 
Other problems might be the inability to visually focus on 
anything for more than a second, extreme ringing in the 
ears, or whatever seems appropriate to the DM. 

Mortally fatigued characters are incapable of attack- 
ing or effectively defending themselves and collapse 
into a trembling heap immediately. The character must 
attempt a saving throw vs. paralyzation; if he fails, the 
strain proves too much and he perishes. If he passes, 
he remains unconscious for 1d6 hours before awaking 
severely fatigued. Obviously, a channeller should be 
extremely careful when he begins to feel tired—he can 
cause his own death if he overdoes it. 


Now that Kerian is armed with spells, he decides it's time to 
head on out. As he is traveling through a lightly forested area, 
he finds himself facing down several large spiders. Thinking 
quickly, he casts his invisibility spell. As a result, he loses 6 
spell points and becomes moderately fatigued. In an attempt to 
get into a better defensive position, Kerian also realizes that he 
is too weak to even think about trying to run away. He man- 
ages to stumble against a jutting boulder. In the meantime, the 
spiders are having trouble finding the invisible invoker. Kerian 
takes this opportunity to prepare his prolonged casting time 
version of fireball. After three rounds of gathering energy, 
Kerian blasts the wicked group of spiders. Not only does he 
spend 7 spell points, but now he is severely fatigued. Gasping 
for breath and sweating profusely, he watches the burnt 
remains of the spiders. Without warning, another large spider 
bites Kerian. Now he is faced with a quandary. If he casts even 
a 1st-level spell, he could perish. But then, if he doesn't, he will 
most certainly die. Kerian manages to cast a final magic mis- 
sile (the free 1st-level magick that had cost 8 SPs) at the 
remaining spider before lapsing into unconsciousness. 


Recovering from Fatigue: Of course, wizards don’t 
stay exhausted forever. Just as their spell points will 
eventually replenish themselves, their physical capaci- 
ties will also return. In order for a wizard to “lose” one 
step of fatigue, he must make a successful saving throw 
vs. paralyzation. 

Lightly or moderately fatigued characters can attempt a 
saving throw for each round of resting. 

Heavily fatigued spellcasters can attempt a saving 
throw for each turn of resting. 

Severely fatigued wizards can attempt a saving throw 
for each full hour of resting. 


Each extra round, turn, or hour (as appropriate) spent 
resting gives the character a cumulative +1 bonus on his 
saving throw, so a heavily fatigued wizard who rests 
three turns attempts three saving throws—the first with 
no modifier, the second with a +1 bonus, the third with a 
+2 bonus, and so on. 


After four hours, Kerian regains consciousness and sits up. 
He is severely fatigued but managed to accrue 8 spell points for 
each hour that he was unconscious, which brings him up to his 
full amount. Since there doesn't seem to be any immediate dan- 
ger, he decides to stay where he is for an hour. At the end of the 
hour, Kerian succeeds at a saving throw vs. paralyzation. 
Although he is now only heavily fatigued, he still doesn't feel like 
moving around (his aching body is making him feel slightly nau- 
seous). After two turns and three rounds, Kerian succeeds at two 
more saving throws. He stands up and resumes his path. 


Warlocks and Witches memm 


In a great amount of literature and folklore, magical 
abilities are considered supernatural; they're not normally 
attainable by most humans, but instead represent gifts or 
lore granted by dangerous powers. Wizards who subscribe 
to these beliefs do not learn spells from study and research; 
instead, they constantly seek to make contact with more 
knowledgeable (and therefore perilous) entities of extrapla- 
nar origin. The best of these creatures can be considered 
chaotic or neutral, while the worst are creatures of such 
malice and power that the wizard risks his body, mind, 
and spirit when merely contacting these entities. 

Wizards who rely on these patrons for magical power 
are known as warlocks or witches. Imps and familiars 
teach them their first spells as novices, and as they grow in 
power they seek more and more powerful tutors. Magic 
comes easily to these characters, a supernatural boon that 
allows them access to all the normal spell powers of a 
standard wizard. There is a grave risk involved with con- 
tacting these extraplanar powers: the risk of losing one's 
spirit to the powers that grant the wizard his spells. Magic 
itself is seen to be wrong for mankind, an abomination of 
nature, and people believe that wizards who dabble in 
such things will eventually be consumed by the hungry 
powers they bargain with for power. 

Warlocks use the spell point system as described ear- 
lier in this chapter, with the following notes: 


* Free magicks may be used to provide the wizard with 
access to any spell in his repertoire, although they're 
still more expensive than fixed magicks. 

* The wizard may exceed his normal spell level limit 
using the optional rules described previously. 

* The wizard may decide to cast spells for greater effect 
by simply spending more spell points when he actu- 
ally casts the spell. 

* The wizard can save spell points by choosing to cast 
spells with a prolonged casting time, reduced power, 
or spells with a special casting condition. 

* Warlocks and witches gain bonus spell points for 
high Intelligence scores. 


In this system of magic, a wizard uses his normal alloca- 
tion of spell points to select his arsenal of spells. Like the 


Chapter 6 


channeller, the character doesn’t actually spend his spell 
points until he actually casts a spell, and his battery of 
spells remains in his memory without vanishing. In other 
words, the warlock may make use of any of his memorized 
spells freely until he runs out of spell points. However, 
please note that the warlock may never cast more than nine 
spells of any one level in the course of a single day. 

However, all warlocks and witches have a serious 
limitation: Each time they spend spell points to cast a 
spell, they risk attracting the attention of a chaotic or evil 
power. The character has a percentage chance equal to 
the number of spell points expended, minus his charac- 
ter level, of being forced to take a step into the pact of 
service with the malevolent power. For example, a 7th- 
level wizard casting a 4th-level spell (15 SPs) has an 8% 
chance of drawing too much of his patron’s power and 
being required either to add to the debt of service that he 
owes his masters or start on the path of servitude to 
another dark master. There’s always at least a 1% chance 
of this happening, regardless of the character's level. 

The first few steps of service are easy for the charac- 
ter, and not too great a burden. In fact, when the charac- 
ter begins play as a Ist-level initiate, there are no partic- 
ular game or role-playing effects of his allegiance to 
these powers, although some societies may shun or per- 
secute anyone who publicly admits to trafficking with 
supernatural powers. Increasing levels of servitude to 
the warlock's patron may have the effects shown below; 
the DM is encouraged to be creative and malevolent. 
Note that these stages of commitment parallel the Dark 
Powers checks of the RAVENLOFT” campaign setting. 

Stage One, Enticement: The character's patron 
grants him a gift of some kind, but one that comes with 
a price. He gains a minor unnatural feature or trait that 
gives him both an advantage and a disadvantage. These 
could be red-glowing eyes that permit him to see 30 feet 
in the dark; small horns, fangs, or talons that can be 
used to inflict 1d4 points of damage in hand-to-hand 
combat; the ability to hide in shadows as a thief of equal 
level; acute hearing or sense of smell, giving the charac- 
ter a +1 bonus to surprise checks; or the ability to speak 
with dead, speak with animals, or use some other 1st- or 
2nd-level spell as a granted power once per day. In 
return, the character acquires a visible mark, feature, or 
characteristic that marks him as one who deals with for- 
bidden powers: his footprints are backwards, his voice is 
unnaturally raspy and sepulchral, his face shows some 
concealable mark of his allegiance, or whatever else the 
DM decides is appropriate. The general effect causes a 
-1 to 22 reduction to Charisma. 

Stage Two, Invitation: The warlock's patron powers 
grant the character enhanced abilities of some kind, but 
the strengthening of their bond also brings periods of 
weakness or vulnerability on the character. The enhanced 
abilities could be a +1 to +2 bonus to any ability score, a 
bonus of +5 to +10 hit points, or superhuman stamina 
that allows the character to ignore minor fatigue or the 
need to sleep for more than four hours. In return, the 
character must suffer through periods of weakness when 
his patron is distant or inaccessible. For example, the 
character may have the spell point costs of his spells 
doubled during daylight, moonlight, in temples or sacred 
ground, or on ships or boats. The more powerful the 


84 


advantage, the more universal the character's disadvan- 
tage. In addition to his lapse in magical power, the charac- 
ter may also suffer a halved Constitution, Strength, or 
Dexterity score for as long as the condition persists. 

Stage Three, Touch of Darkness: The warlock's hith- 
erto concealable features or subtle traits become so 
widespread or deformed that there is no chance of con- 
cealing what he is without magical aid. For example, he 
may sprout great bat-shaped wings that permit him to 
fly with a movement of 15 (C), his body may develop 
satyr-like hoofed goat legs that permit a movement of 
18, small horns may lengthen into dagger-sized weap- 
ons capable of inflicting 1d6 damage each, his skin may 
become scaly or leathery for a natural AC of 6, he may 
sprout a spiked tail that permits him to attack for 1d6 
damage, or his blazing eyes may cause fear in anyone 
who meets his gaze. Unfortunately, these sinister devel- 
opments usually prevent the warlock from associating in 
normal human society for the rest of his life, with a loss 
of 3 to 6 points of Charisma. In addition, the character 
acquires some ghastly habit or dependency that marks 
him as a creature of darkness. For example, the warlock 
may have to drink blood once per day, eat raw meat or 
dirt, or sleep only in graveyards. The character's align- 
ment changes one step towards evil or chaos to match 
that of his patron, incurring the normal penalties for a 
change of alignment. 

Stage Four, Embrace: The warlock gains some super- 
natural immunity or resistance, but also acquires a 
supernatural vulnerability. For example, he may gain 
the ability to only be struck by magical weapons, as well 
as immunity to sleep and charm spells, resistance to spells 
of a certain school, immunity to poison, the ability to 
assume gaseous form (much like a vampire) or some 
other powerful attribute. The price he pays is a vulnera- 
bility such as susceptibility to holy water and turning 
attempts by priests, the inability to stand contact with 
common materials such as cold iron or garlic, or the 
inability to set foot on sacred ground. (Take a look at the 
customized limitations in Chapter 1 for more ideas.) 
This weakness can be deadly if used against the charac- 
ter by enemies who discover its existence. 

The character's alignment changes one additional 
step towards that of his patron, possibly incurring 
penalties for the change. In addition, there is a 1% cumu- 
lative chance per day that the character's patron compels 
him to undertake some service or observe some rite. The 
character is controlled by the DM for 1d6 days before he 
regains full command of his faculties. 

Stage Five, Creature of Darkness: Eventually, the war- 
lock's pact with darkness overcomes whatever vestiges of 
humanity remain in his heart, and he becomes a slave to 
the powers that raised him. At this point, the warlock is 
no longer viable as a player character and passes perma- 
nently into the DM's hands as an NPC. Powerful new 
abilities manifest, such as magic resistance, additional 
increases of ability scores, and powers associated with 
undead monsters or fiends of various sorts. 

Resisting the Descent: Fortunately for player charac- 
ters, warlocks can attempt to resist the encroaching evil 
by fighting off the descent into darkness by sheer force 
of will. However, this is not easy. When the character's 
use of spell points creates the possibility for a descent to 


Magic 


a new level of servitude, the warlock can acquiesce and 
accept the new stage, or he can fight to retain his inde- 
pendence. This requires a saving throw vs. breath 
weapon, W ith a penalty equal to the level the character 

is threatened by—a warlock at Stage Three who is in 
peril of es to Stage Four makes his saving throw 
with a —4 penalty. The psychic turmoil of this conflict 
completely occupies the character's attention for 1d3 
days, during which he cannot cast spells and fights with 
a -3 penalty to his attack rolls. 

Warlocks and Recovering Spell Points: Witches and 
warlocks don't automatically recover spell points with 
the passage of time. For these spellcasters, spell points 
represent an ever-dwindling store of magical strength 
that can only be recharged with significant risk. Once the 
character's spell points have been expended, he must per- 
form a special ceremony or rite to summon his extrapla- 
nar sponsors and negotiate with them for additional spell 
power. This requires at least eight hours per character 
level, which means that a high-level wizard may require 
several days in order to renew his spell powers. 

This ceremony restores the wizard to his full allocation 
of spell points; at no time can the wizard have more spell 
points than the maximum permitted for his level, special- 
ization, and Intelligence bonus. When the character 
advances in level, he gains the full allotment of spell points 
for his new level without resorting to the ceremony. 

Studying Spells: Like channellers, warlocks can 
change their allotment of spells and free and fixed mag- 
icks by resting and sitting down with their spell books. 


The Warlock Campaign: If this variant magic system is 
used in play, wizards are generally detested by the rest of 
the world. Invariably, they turn towards evil as the beck- 
oning power of darkness lures them into its embrace. 
Playing a heroic wizard in such a setting will be extremely 
difficult; by the time most wizards reach 5th or 6th level, 
they'll be well on their way to becoming menaces to the 
lives and sanity of all around them. A good- aligned witch 
or warlock would be extremely scarce, since the basic 
premise of this entire system of magic is that the end justi- 
fies the means—a difficult concept to reconcile with the 
precepts of good. These rare wizards must carefully ration 
their spells, using their magical powers only in the direst 
situations, or they'll soon find that they've set foot to a 
road from which they cannot turn back. 


filers andl Di vs 


All forms of life contain a spark of magical energy, 
sharing a mystical life force that a wizard can use to 
power his spells. In order to cast a spell, the wizard 
slowly and carefully gathers this power of life until he 
has accumulated enough energy to create the enchant- 
ment he desires. Wizards who cast their spells in this 
manner are known as either defilers or preservers, 
depending on whether they destroy the vegetation from 
which they draw their magical power or work carefully 
so that the v egetation may iv e. Most wizards can only 
draw energy from plant life, but at the v ery highest lev- 
els, defilers and preservers can actually draw away the 


life force of animals as well. 

Wizards who rely on the energy of life in order to cast 
their spells are a fairly common archetype in fantasy lit- 
erature, but the model you may be most familiar with is 
the DARK SUN campaign setting. While defilers and pre- 
servers may seem to be inextricably tied to the world of 
Athas, there's no reason the DM couldn't introduce this 
system of magic into any campaign. Defilers and pre- 
servers use the spell point system as described at the 
beginning of this chapter with the following options: 


* The wizard can exceed his normal spell level limit by 
using the optional rules described previously. 

* The wizard may decide to cast spells for greater effect 
by accumulating extra spell points before actually 
casting the spell. 

* The wizard can save on spell points by choosing to 
cast spells with reduced power. 


The defiler or preserver uses his allocation of spell 
points to select his array of spells normally. However, 
none of these spells may be cast until the wizard gathers 
enough energy to do so. To gather energy, the wizard con- 
centrates on drawing the life force that surrounds him 
into his body, draining it away from the nearby vegeta- 
tion. If the wizard chooses to defile his surroundings, 
the vegetation is destroyed by this process, but a careful 
wizard can draw only enough energy to cast his spell, 
leaving the vegetation around him alive and intact. 

A preserver can accumulate spell energy at the rate of 
4 spell points plus 1 spell point per level each round; for 
example, a 4th-level preserver can accumulate 8 spell 
points in one round of absorbing energy. If the preserver 
can gather the required number of spell points in a sin- 
gle round, he may cast his spell in the same round, but 
otherwise he may be forced to extend his casting time by 
one or two full rounds in order to collect the required 
energy. A preserver can't "hold" the energy; he can only 
collect life energy as part of casting a spell. 

Since accumulating energy takes time, the character 
may suffer penalties to his initiative depending on how 
many spell points he draws in a single round, as shown 
on the Table 22: Initiative Modifiers for Preservers and 
Defilers. Accumulating energy requires the character's 


Table 22: 
Initiative Modiliers 
lor Preservers and Delilers 


Spell Points Initiative 
Accumulated Modifier 
3 or less -1 bonus 
4to6 none 

7to14 +1 penalty 
15 to 29 *3 penalty 
30 to 39 *5 penalty 
40 to 49 *7 penalty 
50 or more *9 penalty 


Chapter 6 


full attention, so he cannot engage in melee or move at 
more than a fast walk while doing so. However, draw- 
ing energy is not actually part of the spellcasting process 
and is not interrupted by suffering damage, failing sav- 
ing throws, or other such things as long as the character 
remains conscious and free of movement. 

The initiative modifier is based on the number of spell 
points accumulated in the round in which the spell is cast. In 
other words, a character may be wise to draw the mini- 
mum number of points necessary to avoid a hefty initia- 
tive penalty for “overcharging” himself for the spell. 


Dynos, a 5th-level preserver, is casting a haste spell. He 
can accumulate as many as 9 SPs per round (4+5), but his 
spell requires 10 SPs to cast, Dynos spends one entire round 
gathering energy and must gather at least 1 more spell point 
in the following round in order to cast his haste spell. If he 
draws his full allotment of 9 more SPs, he suffers a +1 penalty 
to his initiative. On the bright side, if he only draws the one 
point in the second round, his haste spell will gain an initia- 
tive bonus to its casting time. 


Rowan, an 11th-level preserver, normally gathers 4+11, or 
15 spell points per round. In order to cast her cone of cold (a 
5th-level spell), she must gather 15 spell points in one round, 
plus an additional 7 in the following round, which causes her 
to take a +1 penalty to her casting time in the second round. 
However, Rowan is capable of casting any spell of 4th level or 
less in a single round. 


Instead of drawing just enough energy to cast the spell 
desired, a preserver or defiler can choose to continue to 
accumulate energy in order to increase the effective cast- 
ing level of the spell, as described in the first part of this 
chapter. Each additional casting level requires an invest- 
ment of 50% more spell points, so Dynos could cast his 
haste as a 6th-level wizard by spending 15 SPs instead of 
10 SPs to cast it. Similarly, a character may draw less 
energy and cast a reduced-power version of the spell. In 
any event, the initiative modifier is always based on the 
number of points accumulated in the round in which the 
spell is finally cast. Rowan could decide to cast her cone of 
cold with one extra level of ability, but she now requires 33 
SPs to do so and must gather energy for two full rounds 
before unleashing the spell in the third. 

The great advantage of the defiler lies in the speed 
with which he can gather energy, since he doesn't care 
whether the life around him survives or not. Defilers 
accumulate 4 spell points plus 2 spell points per level in 
one round of gathering energy. For example, a 4th-level 
defiler can amass 12 spell points per round, instead of 
the maximum of 8 allowed a preserver of the same level. 
Unfortunately, the act of defiling destroys an area of 1 
foot in radius per spell point acquired in this fashion, so 
the defiler above would raze a circular area 12 feet in 
radius in one round of defiling. 

Once à preserver or defiler casts a spell, it is wiped 
from their memory just like a normal wizard's spell. Pre- 
servers and defilers can re-study their spells or change 
their spell selections as if they were standard mages. 

Ibe Von) 16s On the surface, it may seem that 
there's no reason to be a preserver when defiling offers 
such easy access to power. However, there's a price to be 


Magic 


paid. The wanton destruction of life for personal power is 
not a good act; defilers can't be good in alignment. In fact, 
most defilers tend to have evil tendencies, if not an evil 
alignment. Secondly, the land destroyed by a defiler 
remains useless for hundreds of years; the ground may as 
well have been salted or poisoned by the character. Of 
course, if the general populace of an area were to find out 
that a character is a defiler, that character would most 
likely be hunted down. Destroying the land is considered 
an evil act by most people—especially the people who 
have to work with it. 

In addition to destroying mundane vegetation, defil- 
ing inflicts 1d3 points of damage per spell level (a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell allows half damage) to any 
plant-based monsters or creatures caught in the radius of 
destruction. And while animals (including humans and 
demihumans) don't suffer damage from the energy drain 
of most defilers, it is a painful and unnerving experience 
that forces those characters caught in its grip to suffer a +1 
penalty to initiative per spell level; a 5th-level defiler cast- 
ing a fireball will cause those standing near him to take a 
+3 penalty on their next initiative roll. 

High-level defilers (21st level or higher) may also 
gain the ability to drain life energy from animals as well 
as plants, increasing their power draw to 4 SPs plus 3 
SPs per level. All living things caught in the defiler's 
radius of destruction (except the defiler himself) suffer 
1d6 points of damage per spell level. Obviously, this is 
an act of irredeemable evil, and it will make the defiler 
an enemy of all the forces that protect life and nature. 


Alicnists or Gummoncrs NENNEN 


Alienists deal with powers and entities from terrify- 
ingly remote reaches of space and time; for them, magi- 
cal power is nothing more than the triumph of the mind 
over the rude boundaries of dimension and distance. 
With knowledge and strength of will, the eons that lie 
between the stars themselves can be conquered, and 
unspeakable things from the endless black gulfs of space 
whisper terrifying secrets to the wizard who dares com- 
municate with them. Each spell, formula, or enchant- 
ment represents a hidden truth in the structure of uni- 
verse, a secret man was not meant to know, and the 
alienist plunges without fear into abysses of chaos and 
entropy that would blast a weaker man. 

While the warlock deals with supernatural powers, 
his patrons are creatures with near-human intelligence 
and motivations. They may embody vice, malice, or cor- 
ruption of the worst sort, but these are human faults. On 
the other hand, the alienist's allies are entities of cosmic 
evil older than time itself and thankfully ignorant (or 
uncaring) of the very existence of mankind. 

A campaign that features this philosophy of magic is a 
dark and dangerous one indeed. The cosmology of an 
alienist campaign necessarily reduces human deities and 
powers to mere phantasms or petty children, who are 
themselves blissfully ignorant of the outer gulfs that sur- 
round humanity. If the DM decides that contact with alien 
powers is the source of magical ability in his campaign, 
player character wizards should be extremely scarce. 

Alienists fall into three general categories: priests, 
intellectuals, and scholars. Since the alienist's patrons 


81 


are powers in their own right, many cults or forgotten 
religions venerate these entities, and some alienists are 
priests or students of these vile societies. Intellectuals 
are characters who simply desire more and more knowl- 
edge, the chance to plumb the reaches of space and time 
with the power of their minds; all too often, these 
alienists blunder into a dimension or a being that is so 
inimical to human thought or perception that they 
return as raving lunatics. The last type of alienist, the 
scholar, is a character who approaches his work with the 
greatest caution. Often, the scholar's goal is to learn just 
enough to interfere with another alienist, and nothing 
more; he understands that there are things human eyes 
should never see, and carefully avoids them. 

The alienist progresses as noted under the spell point 
system, with the following options in use: 


* The wizard may only choose fixed magicks. 

* The alienist may exceed his normal spell level limit, 
with the penalties described in the beginning of this 
chapter applied. 

* The alienist can choose to reduce the spell point cost 
of a spell by making use of a prolonged casting time 
or selecting a special casting condition. 

* The character gains bonus spell points for his Intelli- 
gence score, as described earlier in this chapter. 


Alienists memorize spells normally by using their 
spell point allocation to choose how many spells of 
which level will be available. When selecting spells, an 
alienist can reduce the spell's cost by choosing a longer 
casting time or special casting condition. The alienist's 
spells are cast normally and vanish from memory after 
use, and he recovers spell points normally, so on the 
surface the alienist seems to be fairly close to a stan- 
dard wizard—the flexibility of the spell point rules 
simply allows him to customize his arsenal of spells. 

Unfortunately for the alienist, learning a spell in the 


Table 23: 


Risk of Insanity by Spell Level 


Spell Chance of 
Level Insanity! 
1st 4% 
6% 
10% 
15% 
22% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60%? 


Modifier to Random 
Insanity Chart Roll 
none 
none 
+5% 
+10% 
+15% 
+20% 
+25% 
+30% 
+40% 


! Increase the chance of insanity by one level if the wizard suc- 
ceeds in his learn spells roll; for example, if a character learns a 
3rd-level spell, his insanity chance is actually 15%. The modifier 
to the insanity chart is still based on the spell’s actual level. 

? Maximum chance of insanity 


Chapter 6 


first place is the problem. At 1st level, the alienist begins 
with 1d4+1 1st-level spells. Each spell he attempts to 
learn after this initial selection places his sanity at risk. 
(The chance of insanity varies with spell level; see Table 
24: Risk of Insanity by Spell Level.) Although the secrets 
unveiled by the spell may drive the wizard mad, going 
insane doesn't prevent the wizard from learning the 
spell. In fact, the comprehension of a particular spell is 
far more unbalancing than attempting to learn a spell 
and failing, as reflected by the increased chance for 
insanity when a character succeeds in his roll. 

Conducting spell research, investigating the formulae 
for potions or scrolls, or researching the ingredients or 
process for creating a magical item all create a chance for 
insanity. The level of the spell in question (or the nearest 
equivalent spell in the case of a potion, scroll, or magical 
item) is used for the insanity check. 

If the wizard fails his insanity check, he must attempt 
a saving throw vs. death magic with a penalty of —2. If 
successful, the wizard is merely delirious or incoherent 
for 1d3 days as he tries to reconcile his notion of the cos- 
mos with the awful truth revealed to him. During this 
time, the character cannot cast spells, and fights with a 
penalty of —1 to his attack rolls. If the wizard fails both 
the insanity check and the following saving throw, he 
must roll on Table 24: Random Insanity Chart. 

Many of these conditions are not true forms of mad- 
ness, but instead represent plagues, curses, or afflictions 
that may trouble the character. High-level spells are 
much more dangerous than low-level spells for this pur- 
pose, since the most powerful spells grant the wizard 
insights into the blackest gulfs of cosmic horror. The fol- 
lowing list detail effects of the various conditions: 


Table 24: 
Random Insanity Chart 


d100 Roll! Result 
01-15 Delirium 
16-20 Disorientation 
21-24 Attraction 
25-37 Phobia 
38-40 Paranoia 
41-46 Alienation 
47—53 Amnesia 
54-61 Hallucinatory insanity 
62-64 » ... Melancholia 
|. 65-69 Dementia praecox 
- 70-74 Monomania 
75-79 Mania 
80-81 Manic-depressive 
82-89 Hebephrenia 
90-95 Catatonia 
96-103 Delusional insanity 
104-114 Schizophrenia 
115-119 Homicidal mania 
120-124 Psychic translocation 
125+ . Pursuit 


! The spell level modifies this roll; see Table 23. 


Delirium: The character lapses into a state of delir- 
ium lasting for 3d4 days during which he wanders aim- 
lessly and mumbles to himself or rants and raves. He 
does not recognize friends and is incapable of any ratio- 
nal action; he is easily frightened and flees most encoun- 
ters. The character cannot cast spells, and if he is 
restrained or threatened by combat, he becomes cata- 
tonic for 1 to 6 hours. After the delirium passes, the 
character returns to normal. 

Disorientation: The wizard's surroundings make no 
sense to him, and he is temporarily unable to recognize 
places, people, or even his own possessions. Unlike amne- 
sia, the character retains command of his normal skills and 
abilities, although he fights with a -2 penalty to his attack 
rolls and has a 20% chance of miscasting spells. However, 
he has a difficult time initiating or following through on 
actions; if told to stay put, he may wander off, or if his 
comrades flee from a monster, he might remain behind, 
unaware of his danger. The character has a 5% chance per 
day, cumulative, of recovering from his state. 

Attraction: The character develops an unhealthy 
obsession with a particular place, thing, or type of item. 
This manifests as an uncontrollable desire to be close to 
the subject of the attraction. Good examples might be a 
particular star in the sky, a mountain, a special site, the 
sea, an artifact or item, and so on. This desire drives the 
character to drop everything he's doing and travel to the 
site (or in its direction, in the case of a celestial object). If 
the wizard's friends stop him, he'll become disoriented 
for 1d6 hours, and then bend all his efforts towards 
resuming his trek by whatever means are necessary. 
There is a cumulative 5% chance of recovery per day. 

Phobia: Exposure to some terrifying stimulus leaves a 
lasting mark in the character's psyche and makes him mor- 
tally afraid of some condition or creature. A character con- 
fronted with the subject of his phobia automatically flees 
the scene with all possible speed for at least 1d3 full turns. 
If the character cannot escape the condition, he lapses into 
a catatonic state that lasts for 1d6 days. The DM can assign 
an appropriate phobia, or roll on Table 25: Phobias. 

A character does not normally recover from a phobia, 
but certain spells or psionic effects may desensitize him 
to his fear or repair his mind. 


Table 25: 
Dhobias 


Phobia 

Acrophobia (heights) 
Agoraphobia (open spaces) 
Astraphobia (storms) 
Claustrophobia (small spaces) 
Demophobia (crowds) 
Entomophobia (insects) 
Monophobia (being alone) 
Necrophobia (dead things) 
Pyrophobia (fire) 
Scotophobia (darkness) 


Paranoia: A wizard afflicted with this form of insan- 
ity becomes convinced that the agents of the Outer 
Powers are abroad in his world, his homeland, and even 
in his home town. They could be anywhere. At first, he 
is merely suspicious of strangers, but as the condition 
progresses, his suspicion spreads to those nearest him— 
his friends and family—and grows in strength, so that 
he begins taking precautions to guarantee his own 
safety. These precautions eventually include lethal 
attacks and plots against his former allies and friends. 

The paranoid’s condition only grows worse as time 
passes; without magical healing or psychic surgery, he 
will not recover. Generally, a paranoid PC becomes a 
NPC under the DM's control after 1d6 months have 
passed, or whenever the DM feels that the player isn’t 
role-playing his character effectively anymore. 

Alienation: The character experiences an acute sense 
of dislocation or wrongness in his surroundings. He is cer- 

tain that he belongs somewhere else, although he cannot 
say where that might be. While the paranoid experiences 
alienation towards people, an alienated character regards 
everything in his surroundings—people, places, and 
things— as unnatural and threatening. As the condition 
progresses, the character loses his ability to function in 
society and gradually sinks into dementia praecox or 
catatonia over the course of 1d6 months. 

Amnesia: Unable to absorb the secrets revealed to 
him, the wizard instead purges his mind of anything 
that reminds him of the horrors he has explored. Only 
his language skills remain; everything else—his class 
skills, his proficiencies, knowledge of people and 
places—vanishes. He retains his hit point total and origi- 
nal saving throw values, but for all other purposes he is 
now a Ist-level character with no proficiencies. The 
amnesiac has a noncumulative 10% chance of recovery 
each month. During his amnesia, the character may 
actually begin his adventuring career all over again, pos- 
sibly even changing class and alignment. 

Hallucinatory insanity: The character’s insights into 
the true nature of things leave him with the ability to 
perceive sights, sounds, or sensations from the awful, 
alien dimensions that parallel our own. To other charac- 
ters, the wizard appears to be hearing things, seeing 
things, or experiencing things that don’t exist. Unfortu- 
nately, these hallucinations have a very tangible reality 
for the character himself, and for any given action he 
undertakes—casting a spell, making an attack, even try- 
ing to walk across a room or study his spells—there is a 
33% chance (2 in 6) that one of his hallucinations dis- 
tracts him, preventing him from completing the action. 
Each month, there is a 10% chance that the character 
learns how to ignore these frightful apparitions and 
regains control of his perceptions. 

Melancholia: The insignificance of humanity in the 
face of the Outer Powers is a terrifying concept, and a 
wizard afflicted with melancholia suffers endless fits of 
brooding and depression as this knowledge sinks into 
his mind. Each day, there is a 5% cumulative chance that 
the character experiences an acute episode that com- 
pletely disables him for 1d3 days. The melancholic will 
have no volition to travel, fight, cast spells, or even look 
after his own survival, although his friends may be able 
to lead him along on a journey or keep him out of the 


Chapter 6 


9 Oo 


way on an adventure. Melancholia persists until magi- 
cally or psionically treated. 

Dementia praecox: This condition is similar to 
melancholia, but consists of a hopelessness or loss of 
volition. The character just can't bring himself to care 
about what is going on around him, even ignoring direct 
attacks or immediate threats to his life. Each time the 
character attempts an action, such as undertaking a jour- 
ney, participating in a fight, or casting a spell, there is a 
50% chance (3 in 6) that his dementia overwhelms him 
and he instead does nothing. If the character loses his 
will to fight, he will not even defend himself, losing any 
Dexterity adjustments to AC and suffering other penal- 
ties as the DM deems appropriate. Dementia praecox 
persists until magically or psionically treated. 

Monomania: The wizard becomes obsessed with a sin- 
gle goal and works ceaselessly until his goal is achieved. 
Depending on the alienist's origin, it might be the sum- 
moning of one of the Outer Powers, the secret of the next 
spell level, or the destruction of a particular cult or occult 
tome. As long as the wizard can pursue his goal, he can 
undertake any actions that further his purpose, but if he is 
somehow blocked or prevented from acting, he is likely to 
lapse into catatonia or become manic. Note that the wiz- 
ard's single-minded devotion to his cause is not healthy; 
he ignores sleep, goes without food, and otherwise 
neglects both himself and others. Monomania persists 
through 1d4 linked, long-term goals; when the wizard 
accomplishes them, he more or less returns to normal. 

Mania: Terror of unimaginable depth turns the 
alienist into a stark, raving madman. Every day, there is 
a 25% cumulative chance that he will suffer a manic 
episode lasting 1d6 hours, during which he attempts to 
attack or destroy anything around him. The maniac's 
Strength is incredible; a character's Strength increases by 
6 points (count each percentile category of 18 as one 
point), to a maximum of 19. While the maniac is raging, 
he can easily turn on and kill people close to him, but 
he's just as likely to run off or try to gnaw the bark off a 
tree, Even if the wizard is temporarily in control of his 
senses, he cannot cast spells or embark on long or com- 
plicated tasks; the struggle to retain control consumes 
too much of his attention. The alienist has a 5% chance 
per month of recovering his stability. 

Manic-depressive: This condition combines the 
worst features of mania and melancholia. Every 1d4 
days, the character's mood swings from the one condi- 
tion to the other. A manic-depressive's condition lasts 
until magically or psionically treated. 

Hebephrenia: Some horrors can forever destroy the 
mind unfortunate enough to perceive them; a character 
suffering from hebephrenia withdraws from reality into a 
childlike state, wandering aimlessly, ignoring most external 
stimuli and babbling or mumbling to himself constantly. 
This condition is completely debilitating. The character is 
effectively feebleminded, unable to participate in normal 
society or survive without constant care. The alienist may 
never recover from such a profound shock and has only a 
5% chance (noncumulative!) per month to regain his sanity. 

Catatonia: The catatonic completely withdraws from 
reality, ignoring all forms of external stimulus. He cannot 
move, speak, or act in any way, and may even ignore food 
placed in his mouth or painful injuries. There is only a 5% 


chance per month (noncumulativo) that the catatonic will 

recover from his state, although it is possible to provoke a 

catatonic into a temporary rage lasting 1d6 rounds by con- 
tinuously annoying or pestering the poor fellow. 

Delusional insanity: The alienist believes that he is 
something other than himself. In many cases, he believes 
that his mind or persona has been placed into the wrong 
body, believing that he is actually a creature or entity of 
some distant dimension trapped in human form. The steps 
he takes to rectify this could range from attempts at suicide 
to complex summonings designed to open the “right” 
dimension to him. The character may refuse to recognize 
his former friends and companions, or seek new allies 
more appropriate to his “true” self, but he generally retains 
all his skills and abilities. There is a 5% chance per month 
that the delusion may end of its own accord; otherwise, 
only magical or psionic treatment can help the character. 

Schizophrenia: An alienist’s encounter with schizo- 
phrenia is an extraordinarily dangerous event. An entity 
or power from the outer reaches of the cosmos invades 
the alienist's body, forming a second personality that has 
its own goals and skills distinct from the wizard's nor- 
mal personality. This second persona may wish to do 
nothing more than observe the host's world, or it may 
plot to open a dimensional gateway to the plane of its 
origin and bring others like itself to the mundane world. 

Each day, there is a 25% chance that the second per- 
sonality takes over, retaining control for 1d4 days while 
it pursues its own purposes, whatever they may be. 
During this time, the wizard is an NPC under the DM's 
control. This condition occasionally corrects itself after a 
time (if the invasive personality finishes whatever it was 
doing and leaves voluntarily), but most of the time the 
wizard will need magical or psionic help in order to 
exorcise the spirit. 

Homicidal mania: This resembles schizophrenia, as 
described above, but it’s much worse. The invasive per- 
sona is a creature that delights in mayhem and murder, 
and wants nothing more than to kill until it is sated. 
When the wizard loses control of his mind, the entity 
begins stalking and killing its chosen victims (often 
those closest to the host), often employing bizarre or dis- 
gusting methods to further its enjoyment. As described 
above, there is a slight chance (5% per month) that the 
entity leaves voluntarily. 

Psychic translocation: Perhaps the most jarring event 
that could occur to an alienist, psychic translocation 
exchanges the wizard's mind and persona with that of 
some inhuman entity from beyond the stars. The effects 
are somewhat similar to that of a magic jar spell in that 
the wizard finds himself trapped in another's body 
while some alien intelligence animates his own form. 
The invasive intelligence may simply be curious about 
the wizard's home, it might have forced the switch in 
order to escape from a precarious predicament in its 
own dimension, or it might have waited for cons for a 
chance to project its mind to the alienist's world, with 
some dire purpose or summoning in mind. There is a 
chance that the intelligence will leave of its own accord, 
or that the wizard may find a means to reverse the situa- 
tion and reclaim his own body. The DM is encouraged to 
be creative and malevolent. 

Pursuit: There are entities in the dimensions 


9| 


beyond our own that are so inimical and insatiable 
that even speaking their names or catching a glimpse 
of their existence courts disaster of the worst kind. An 
alienist who blunders across something of this nature 
accidentally attracts the notice of a monstrous alien 
intelligence, which then follows the wizard back to his 
home. The pursuing entity may be a powerful monster 
that desires to devour or possess the mortal that 
roused it, or it could be a forgotten abomination of 
formless intelligence that desires to devour or possess 
the alienist's entire world. Again, the DM is encour- 
aged to be creative and somewhat malevolent; mortals 
who tamper with powers of this magnitude risk cata- 
strophes of cosmic significance. 


Recurring Episodes ol Insanity 

While a wizard may emerge from a mind-blasting 
experience with his senses intact after a few weeks, he is 
never the same afterwards. Each time the wizard is forced 
to roll on Table 24, regardless of the actual result, his Wis- 
dom score drops by 1d2 points permanently. Wisdom rep- 
resents stability, strength of will, and mental fortitude; it 
is a good measure of how many shocks a single person 

can sustain in the course of his lifetime. Should a wizard's 
Wisdom score ever be reduced to less than 3, he becomes 
permanently insane, and he will never recover from what- 
ever condition(s) he currently suffers from. 

However, there are ways to bolster a character 's 
strength of mind after he suffers a Wisdom loss. A condi- 
tion that is treated by means of a restoration or wish spell, 
successful psychic surgery, or an elixir of health does not 
cause a Wisdom loss, since the mind is restored to its 
original state. Of course, when someone attempts to heal 
the condition by using a spell or psychic surgery, there is 
a 1% chance that the healer will contract the condition. 
As a result, it might be a little difficult finding someone 
willing to help heal a character's insanity. 


Dri zx sl S Just as wizards can create or customize 
c their own spell progression by using 


and Spell spell points, priests c an as well. Instead 


of memorizing the “standard” array of 
Doi nls spells of each level, a priest can concen- 
trate his magical power into a small 
number of spells at the highest level of power available to 
him, or he can instead memorize a greater than normal 
array of low-level spells. (Table 26: Priest Spell Point Pro- 

gression shows the number of spell points available to a 

priest as he progresses in level.) Other considerations 

include the following: 

* The priest must be well-rested and have access to a quiet 
place suitable for prayer. It takes about 10 minutes per 

spell level to commit a spell to memory. 

* The priest is limited in the maximum spell level he may 

cast, based on his character level. For example, a 5th-level 
priest is still limited to spells of 3rd-level or lower. 

* The priest is limited in the maximum number of spells of 
each level that he can memorize, regardless of how many 
spell points he has available; for example, a 5th-level 
character can't memorize more than six spells of any 
given spell level. 


Chapter 6 


Table 26: 
Priest Spell Point 
Drogression 


Max. Spells 
Memorized at 
Each Level 


Priest 
Level 


Max. Spell 
Level 
Ist 


Spell 
Points 


15 


40 
55 
70 
90 
125 
160 
200 


290 


SO 50805,0019 OS oO O0 U! Ul 4 U 


460 
530 
600 
675 
750 
+75 per level 


Bonus Spell for High Wisdom: In addition to the base num- 
ber of spell points available at each level, priests with high 
Wisdom scores gain a special bonus to reflect their piety and 
devotion. (This is a standard rule in this spell point system, 
unlike the optional bonus spell point rule for wizards with 
high Intelligence scores.) The number of bonus spell points 
depends on the character's Wisdom score and the maximum 
spell level available to him, as shown in Table 27: Bonus Spell 
Points for Priest Characters. 


Table 27: 
Bonus Spell Points 
for Priest Characters 


Character Level/Spell Level 
Wisdom 1-2 3-4 5-6 
Score 1st 2nd 
13 4 
14 8 
15 15 
16 
17 20 
18 
19 25 


9 2 


A 2nd-level priest with a Wisdom of 18 is still limited to spells 
of 1st-level or less, so his spell point bonus would be 8 points— 
enough to purchase the two 1st-level bonus spells he would receive 
under the PHB rules. A 4th-level priest with a Wisdom of 16 is 
limited to 2nd-level spells, so he would gain 20 bonus spell points, 
or enough to select the two 1st- and two 2nd-level spells he would 
normally be entitled to. 


Note that as a character rises in level, and his maximum 
spell level increases, the number of bonus points available 
to him may increase as well! 

Naturally, all of the normal considerations of choosing a 
spell apply; the priest does not need a spell book and can 
choose any spell that falls within his spheres of access. Spells 
may be chosen as pre-memorized fixed theurgies (the priestly 
equivalent of magicks), or the priest can leave a theurgy open 
to use any spell he wishes to by selecting a free theurgy (see 
the description for wizards.) 


Minor Spheres of Access 


Normally, a priest who wishes to select spells from one 
of his deity’s minor spheres of access may only choose 
spells of 3rd level or lower. However, with the spell point 
system, the power's secondary interest in a minor sphere 
can be represented by an increased cost to select these 
spells. Since the power is only tangentially concerned with 
these areas, the priest has to work harder and devote more 
time and concentration to memorizing these spells. Under 
this optional rule, spells selected from a minor sphere of access 
are treated as if they were one level higher for spell point costs. 
For example, a priest with minor access to the sphere of 
healing could select cure light wounds, but the spell would 
cost him 6 SPs instead of 4; see the Table 29: Spell Point 
Costs for Major and Minor Spheres. 

On the surface, this seems inefficient for the priest, and 
to some degree it is. But there is an advantage to this 
optional system: the priest is no longer limited to spells of 
3rd level or lower in his minor spheres. In the preceding 
example, the priest with minor access to healing now has 
the capability to utilize neutralize poison or cure serious 
wounds—although it is costly for him to do so. 


Table 28: 
Spell Cost by Level (Priest) 


Spell 

Level 

orison 
Ist 
2nd 
3rd 
4th 
5th 
6th 
7th 


Fixed 
Theurgy 


Free 
Theurgy 


Magic 


Table 29: 
Spell Point Costs for Major 
and Minor Spheres 


Universal 
Free! 


Minor 
Fixed 


Spell 
Level 


Major 
Fixed 


Major 
Free 


12 
20 


30 
40 


60 
80 


40 
50 


80 
100 


! Universal free allows priests to choose any spell of that level. 


Free Theurgies and Minor Access: Because spells of the 
same level may not have the same spell point cost under 
this optional system, free theurgies don’t work in the nor- 
mal fashion for spells in minor spheres. The priest has two 
choices: he can pay the spell points for a major free theurgy, 
which allows him to freely choose from any spell of that 
level to which he has major access, or he can pay for a uni- 
versal free theurgy, which allows him to choose from any 
spell of that level, regardless of whether he has major or 
minor access to the spell. See Table 29: Spell Point Costs for 
Major and Minor Spheres. 

Arkhosia, a 4th-level priest with a Wisdom of 17, has 25 plus 
20 or 45 spell points. She chooses to memorize one 2nd-level spell 
as a major free theurgy (12 points), one 1st-level spell as a univer- 
sal free theurgy (12 points), one major fixed 2nd-level theurgy (6 
points), one minor fixed 1st-level theurgy (6 points) and two 
major fixed 1st-level theurgies (4 points each). She ends up spend- 
ing 44 of her 45 spell points to memorize a total of two 2nd- and 
four 1st-level spells. Under the standard PHB rules, she would be 
entitled to five 1st- and four 2nd-level spells, so Arkhosia is choos- 
ing to memorize fewer spells, but giving herself the flexibility of 
two free slots, 


Orisons 


Appendix 1 of this book introduces the orison, or clerical 
cantrip. These minor blessings and invocations require only 1 
spell point apiece and are considered to be free theurgies; the 
priest may make use of any minor magical powers appropri- 
ate for the spell without selecting the enchantment ahead of 
time. The number of orisoris that may be memorized is equal 
to twice the priest’s maximum number of spells of one 
level—a 3rd-level priest could memorize as many as 10 
orisons, since he is limited to five spells of any one level. 


Recovering Spell Points 


Unless one of the optional systems of magic is in play for 
priestly magic, spell points are regained just like spell capa- 
bility in the standard AD&D game. In other words, if a char- 
acter spends 10 spell points to memorize a major fixed 3rd- 


93 


level spell, those points are “tied up” by holding the spell 
ready in the character’s memory and can’t be used to mem- 
orize another spell until expended. Spell points used to 
memorize free slots are also tied up in the same fashion. 

Once a character casts a spell, the spell points used to 
hold that spell (or slot) in memory are gone. The priest must 
rest for at least eight hours in order to regain spell points 
expended through casting spells and spend about 10 min- 
utes per spell level in devout prayer to use those points to 
memorize new spells. 


As you may have noticed, there are a 
few differences in the way priests 
and wizards acquire and memorize 
spells. The spell point systems 
described for each class already 
reflect these differences to a degree; 
for example, some of the wizard's 
optional rules aren't appropriate for priestly spellcasters, 
and vice-versa, while the amount of spell points available 
to each class of spellcaster varies in order to portray the 
"normal" spell progression. 

A very good way to highlight the differences between 
priests and wizards is to assign schools or systems of magic 
to each. For example, if you liked the wizard system of defil- 
ing and preserving, you may want to rule that priests cast 
spells by means of the channelling rules. In the campaign, 
wizards will have to be aware of the life energy around them 
as they cast their spells, while priests will instead be con- 
cerned with their own capacity to deal with the destructive 
power of divine energy. This provides each class with its own 
distinct flavor and feel—even though both priests and wiz- 
ards will be keeping track of spell points. 


Priests and 
Systems of 
Magic 


Chalk ——— zz 
S 


Every time a priest casts a spell, he touches a small 
portion of the infinite. The unimaginable power of a 
deity pours into his body and is directed into a spell 
effect. But the mortal frame was not meant to contain 
such energies, and the priest risks exhaustion or even 
death by calling on his god’s power too frequently. 

The same rules described for channelling wizards 
apply to a channelling priest. The priest gains spell 
points as described above, allocates them to fixed or free 
theurgies, and selects the spells he wants to have locked 
into memory as fixed theurgies. Free theurgies may be 
used to provide the priest with access to any spell in his 
repertoire, although they’re more expensive than fixed 
slots. The priest may exceed his normal spell level limit 
or cast spells for greater effect, although his deity may 
choose not to grant him these enhanced powers. The 
priest modifies his spell point total based on his Consti- 
tution score; the character's hit point adjustment for 
Constitution is added to or subtracted from his spell 
point total. If this lowers a Ist-level priest to less than 4 
spell points, he ignores the adjustments; all priests have 
at least 4 spell points. 

While the priest may have spell points “allocated” or 
“tied up” in fixed and free theurgies, this makes no dif- 
ference for a channeller. His selection of spells simply 
creates a slate of spell powers which the character can 
access and defines the cost in spell points for making use 


of these powers. The character may cast any spell that he 
has available through either a fixed or free slot normally, 
except that the spell slot does not vanish from his mem- 
ory once he’s cast the spell. Instead, the character 
deducts the number of spell points required to energize 
the spell from his spell point total. 

Spell points in this system represent magical stamina. 
They are recovered as the character’s fatigue fades and 
his strength returns. (Refer to Channellers, on page 80.) 
Spell points are recovered as shown on Table 20. 

In addition to the depletion of spell points, channelling 
also causes immediate fatigue effects. Refer to Table 21 
and the fatigue rules that follow. Note that the effective 
level of a spell may be higher than its true level, especially 
if the priest makes use of a spell from a minor sphere of 
access or casts a spell at a greater than normal effective- 
ness by paying extra spell points to do so. Consider quest 
spells to be two spell levels higher than the caster can cast 
for purposes of caster fatigue and exhaustion. 


A priest is an ordinary human, and his spell powers 
represent nothing more than the favor of his deity. With- 
out his patron power’s blessing and attention, the priest 
is completely incapable of wielding magic. Thus, in 


order to invoke a spell, a priest must engage in prelimi- 
nary prayers, invocations, and rites designed to attract 

his deity's notice. When the power responds, the priest 
is infused with the spell points necessary for his spell. 

In this system, the deity or power is concerned more 
with the priest's show of devotion and observance of the 
proper form, and considers the priest's actual situation 
to be irrelevant—after all, martyrs are made every day. 
The priest purchases his initial selection of spells by allo- 
cating spell points to free and fixed theurgies of the vari- 
ous spell levels. These represent very specific prayers 
that he will use to focus his deity's power, if the power 
chooses to respond. 

The normal options and rules governing priestly spell 
points are in use. In addition, the priest may make use of 
the reduced spell cost option, choosing the prolonged 
casting time in exchange for a 2576 reduction in the spell 
cost. This extends the casting time of a spell to the next 
highest time increment, so a spell with a casting time of 4 
would require four rounds to cast, and a spell with a cast- 
ing time of a full round would take a turn to cast. 

Before the priest can cast a spell, he must first invoke 
his deity's attention by speaking various preparatory 
prayers and performing other actions favorable to his 
power. In game terms, he must accumulate enough spell 
points to power the desired spell. Low-level spells are 


Magic 


Table 30: 
Initiative Modifiers for 


Ritual Prayer 


Spell Points Initiative 


Accumulated Modifier 
3 or less —1 bonus 
4to6 none 
7to14 +1 penalty 
15 to 29 +3 penalty 


very easy to cast, requiring nothing more than a 
moment's concentration and a brief invocation. How- 
ever, it can take a long time to build a higher-level spell. 
A ritual priest gathers 2 spell points per round through 
his invocations and prayers, but the cost to cast a spell is 
reduced by the priest's level. For example, a 1st-level 
priest casting a 1st-level spell must gather 3 spell points 
(4 for the spell, less 1 for his level), which would require 
one full round of prayer, plus part of a second round. 

If the priest's level reduces the spell's cost to 0, the 
priest need not spend any time gathering spell points 
and casts the spell with the normal casting time initia- 
tive modifiers. In the example above, a priest of 4th level 
or higher reduces a 1st-level spell to a cost of 0, which 
means he can cast the spell without spending time to 
gather his deity's favor beforehand. In effect, the spell is 
minor enough that the power trusts the priest not to 
misuse his or her divine energy. 

In many cases, the priest's gathering time will require 
more than one round. The 1st-level priest described 
above must gather 3 spell points to cast his spell, which 
means that he gathers 2 points in the first round of con- 
centration, and the remaining point in the round in 
which he casts the spell. There is a slight initiative modi- 
fier for this, as shown on Table 30: Initiative Modifiers 
for Ritual Prayer. 

The initiative modifier is based on the number of 
spell points accumulated in tlie round in which the spell is 
cast. For example, a 5th-level priest casting a 3rd-level 
spell must draw 5 spell points (10 for the spell, less 5 for 


Table 31: 


his level), which requires two full rounds of concentra- 
tion and part of a third—but since he only needs to 
gather 1 spell point in the last round, he gains a -1 
bonus to his initiative when he actually casts the spell. 

There are ways to accelerate this otherwise tedious 
process. Invoking the deity's power in a sanctified place, 
making a sacrifice pleasing to the deity, or staying true 
to the deity's precepts are all good ways to ensure that 
the deity in question will be willing to empower the 
priest with spell energy. See Table 31: Modifiers to Ritual 
Preparatory Times for examples. 


Place/Site of Interest: The priest is located in some 
place favored by the god. This could be a forge for a 
deity of smithery, a business for a god of commerce, or a 
battlefield for a power of war. 

Sanctified or Holy Place: The priest is located in a 
shrine, temple, or place of special and unique signifi- 
cance to the deity he serves. 

Offerings: The priest destroys or surrenders items or 
materials pleasing to his patron power. This could range 
from treasure, weapons, or gems to such things as exotic 
spices, candles, or specially-prepared libations. A deity 
of war or battle might consider a gem-decorated sword 
to be a minor offering, a sword of special significance or 
quality to be a moderate offering, and a magical weapon 
to be a major offering. As a rule of thumb, a small offer- 
ing must be worth at least 50 gp, a moderate worth 500 
gp, and a major offering 2,000 gp or more. 

Purity and Faithfulness: This is a subjective call on the 
part of the DM. Has the priest been careful to follow the 
precepts of both his temple and his alignment? Has the 
player gone out of his way to role-play his character's 
dedication, or has he been lazy in portraying the priest? If 
the character has been played well and is in favor with his 
superiors and his deity, this bonus applies. 

Previously Expended Spell: While the ritual priest gen- 
erally expends spells normally, it is possible for him to 
gather spell energy in order to re-use a spell that he already 
cast. However, this is quite difficult, and unless the priest 
has some other factor going for him—an offering or a good 
location from which to cast—he will be unable to attract 
the divine power necessary to re-use a spell. 

Regaining Spell Points: As noted above, ritual 
priests expend their spells normally, striking them from 


Modifiers to Ritual Preparatory Times 


Modifier Condition 
+1 SP/rd Casting from place of interest 


+2 SP/rd Casting from sanctified /holy place 


+1SP/rd Priest gives a small offering 
+2 SP/rd Priest gives a moderate offering 
+4 SP/rd Priest gives a major offering 
+1SP/rd Caster is pure or faithful to temple 

-1SP/rd Caster has committed mild infractions or failed to observe normal rites and prayers 
-3 SP/rd Priest is casting a previously expended spell 


memory as they cast the enchantments. In order to ready 
himself to use a spell again or change his spell alloca- 
tion, the priest must rest for at least eight hours and 
spend approximately 10 minutes per spell level praying 
for the spells he desires. Despite the fact that ritual 
priests gain spell energy directly from their deities, the 
complicated prayers and forms required to cast a spell 
must still be refreshed occasionally. 


Condilional Magic = 


In this system of priestly magic, deities grant the ability 
to cast spells based on the priest's need, not just on form 
or prayer. A faithful priest following his patron power's 
tenets will usually receive the spells he requests, but a 
priest who strays from the path will soon find that his 
patron no longer supports his actions. While the urgency 
of the priest's request is a consideration, the deity’s pri- 
mary concern is whether or not the use of that particular 
spell will benefit the deity's own purposes and causes at 
that moment. The priest's spell powers will vary with the 
interest and support of his deity. 

The following option is used for conditional magic: 


* Spells eget to a minor sphere of access are more 
costly than spells from a major sphere, as described 
earlier. Priests may request free or fixed theurgies by 
meeting the normal spell point costs. 


Many of the normal priest restrictions are still in place 
for priests using conditional magic. First of all, priests 
must still “memorize” any spell that he wishes to have 
access to. After all, if the priest is granted the ability to 

cast the spell, then he should be familiar with exactly how 
to go about doing so! Secondly, while the priest can cast 
spells at a higher character level than his own, he cannot 
use spells from spell lists above his own spell level. 

Before a priest actually begins play using this system 
of magic, the player and the DM should take some time 
to define positive and negative conditions for that priest's 
faith. These are situations or guidelines that define the 
deity's interests and ensure that the priest only invokes 
his god's power in pursuit of the deity's aims. Here are 
some examples of conditions: 


Positive Conditions 

* The priest is engaged in combat against a traditional 
enemy of the god or the faith, such as giants for a 
priest of Thor, or orcs for the priest of an elven god. 

* The priest is located in a place sacred or special to the 
deity, such as a mountaintop for a god of the air, or a 
deep forest for a druidical power. 

* The priest is engaged in a situation favorable to 
the deity; fighting for a god of war, trading for a 
merchant power, committing theft or burglary for 
a god of thieves, or in the open during a storm for 
a storm god. 


Magic 


Table 32: 
Effects of Conditions 


Caster may cast the spell as if he were 4 levels higher with no 
increase to spell point cost (see Casting Spells for Greater Effect), 
or he may choose to reduce the cost to 25% normal. 

Caster may cast the spell as if he were 2 levels higher (no increase 
in SP cost), or cast with 1 extra level and a 50% break in the spell 
point cost. 

Caster may cast the spell as if he were 1 level higher (no additional 
SP cost) or choose to reduce the spell point expenditure by 50%. 
No unusual effects. 

Caster must either select one negative effect of reduced spell cost 
and pay the normal spell point cost, or he can cast the spell at the 
usual level by paying 150% of the normal cost. 

Caster must select two negative effects of reduced spell cost and 
pay the normal spell point cost, or spend twice as many spell 
points as normal in order to cast the spell without reduced effect. 
The spell fails completely, expending the normal amount of spell 


Any time the priest casts a spell, the 
player should compare the number of 
positive conditions that apply to the 
number of negative conditions, and 
consult Table 32: Effects of Conditions. 


Maglas, the priest of Tempus previously 
described, is locked in battle with an ogre 
during a thunderstorm. Deciding that 
things aren't going his way, he decides to 
cast an obscurement spell to cover his 
escape. Since he is in battle, and the weather 
is appropriate, he has two positive condi- 
tions. On the other hand, he's getting ready 
to flee, which is a negative condition. There 
is a net +1 positive condition, which means 
that Maglas can cast the spell normally. 


In this system, if a priest casts a spell, 
it's still expended until he can re-memo- 
rize it... but saving spell points may 
allow the character to find room for an 


points required. 


* The priest's spell will directly benefit another wor- 
shipper of the same deity, such as healing a paladin 
of the same faith or using spells to protect townspeo- 
ple who follow the priest's religion. 

* The spell fulfills a traditional role or guideline of the 
power—starting a fire for a fire god, sowing deceit 
for a god of mischief, or offering advice or guidance 
in the case of a god of wisdom or knowledge. 


Negative Conditions 

* The spell aids or supports a traditional enemy. 

* The priest is located in a place inimical or opposed to 
his power (a wind priest adventuring underground, a 
fire priest venturing out on the ocean, etc.) 

* The priest is involved in a situation distasteful or 
opposed to his patron power (a priest of chaos using 
his spells to restore order, a priest of healing attempt- 
ing to injure someone with his spells, a priest of battle 
trying to avoid or escape from a fight). 

* The spell will directly or indirectly injure or discomfit 
a fellow worshipper or the temple's interests. 

* The priest has failed to observe one of his patron's 
holy days or rites, has violated his alignment, or has 
generally misrepresented his patron recently. 


As an example of how these conditions might work, 
consider the case of a priest of Tempus from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS campaign setting. (Tempus is a chaotic deity of 
battle and storms.) For his positive conditions, he selects 
casting spells in battle, casting spells during a storm, and 
casting spells that enhance or augment a warrior's ability 
to fight, such as bless, emotion, and other such enchant- 
ments. For his negative conditions, he selects casting spells 
outside of a fight, avoiding or fleeing a battle, and spells 
that aid lawful characters. Naturally, the DM can either set 
up these conditions himself or allow the player to set them 
up and then approve the conditions. 


extra free theurgy. For example, if Maglas 
manages to save 8 spell points by casting 
several spells in favorable conditions, he 
may now add a Ist-level free theurgy to 
his spell repertoire for the day. 

Recovering Spell Points: Priests who use conditional 
magic recover their spell points normally (see Recover- 
ing Spell Points) and may change their spell selection 
any time they rest eight hours and spend the time to 
pray for new spells. 


Druidical Magic mmmmm€— 
Priests of druidical or agricultural powers may be able 
to use preserving magic (see Defilers and Preservers). 
Preservers draw their magical energy from the lifeforce 
that surrounds them but are careful not to draw too 
much. If the preserving magic system is allowed for wiz- 
ards, this option should not be available for priests—it's 
a good idea to keep the flavor and methodology of wiz- 
ard magic and priest magic distinct and separate. 
Preservers strongly resemble ritual priests, since both 
must gather their energy before casting their spells, but 
preservers harness the lifeforce around them, while rit- 
ual priests rely on the power of their deity. 


Oth er Wizards and priests aren’t the 

only spellcasters in the AD&D 

ame; paladins, rangers, and 

Spellcasters Earn Jon have magical abili- 
ties. These are represented by spell point progression 
tables similar to those of the previous sections, although 
these characters don’t acquire their spell powers until a 
little bit later in their careers. 


Daladins 


While paladins must wait until 9th level to gain 
access to their spell powers, they rapidly increase in 
strength until they reach their maximum spell ability at 20th 


97 


Chapter 6 


Table 33: 
Daladin Spell Doint Progression 


Max. Spells 
Memorized at Spell 
Each Level 


Casting Max. Spell 
Level Level 


level. Paladins are similar to clerics or crusaders, but they 
are considered to have access to the spheres of combat, div- 
ination, healing, and protection. The paladin's spell point 
progression is shown on the Table 33: Paladin Spell Point 
Progression. 


Regardless of the character's actual level, his casting level is 
based on how long he has actually been able to use spells. A 
9th-level paladin is considered a 1st-level caster for all level- 
based variables that are part of a spell description. This 
level of ability increases as the paladin continues to 
advance, reaching a maximum of 9th level when the pal- 
adin reaches 17th level. 


Just like wizards and priests, paladins are limited in the 
maximum spell level available at any given character level. 
A 9th-level paladin may only use 1st-level priest spells, 
while a paladin of 15th level or higher can use spells of 4th 
level or lower. Paladins are also limited in the maximum 
number of spells of any one level they can memorize at a 
single time. Unlike wizards or priests, paladins do not gain 


Table 34: 


additional spell points after 
20th level. 

Major and Minor Spheres: 
Under the optional rules pre- 
sented in Chapter 3, a pal- 
adin may actually select 
minor access to alternate 
spheres. Because the paladin 
is limited to spells of 4th 
level or less, the usual dis- 
tinction between major and 
minor spheres is waived; the 
only difference is in the cost 
to use spells from alternate 
minor spheres, instead of his 
primary spheres. See Table 
34: Spell Point Costs by 
Spheres. 

Paladins recover spell 
points just like other priestly 
spellcasters. If one of the 
optional systems of 
magic is in play, paladins 
should use the mechanics 
that are used by priests in 
the campaign. 


Points 


aides 
Dangers 

Rangers gain their spell powers somewhat faster than 
paladins do, but in the long run they're less formidable as 
spellcasters; paladins are more powerful. Rangers have 
more in common with druids or shamans than other vari- 
eties of priests and may only learn spells of the plant or ani- 
mal spheres (unless the character has been customized 
using the rules presented in Chapter 3). The ranger's spell 
point progression appears in Table 35: Ranger Spell Point 
Progression. 

Just like paladins, rangers begin with the spellcasting 
ability of a 1st-level character and reach their maximum 
casting level of 9 when they reach 16th level. They are lim- 
ited to spells of 3rd level or less and are also limited in the 
maximum number of spells of each level they may memo- 
rize at one time. Rangers pay the same number of spell 
points to memorize spells as paladins do. 

Rangers normally use the same system of magic that 
druids or shamans use in the campaign. This could include 
preserving, channelling, or 
conditional magic, at the DM's 
discretion. Rangers reach their 
maximum spell ability at 16th 
level and do not gain more 


Spell Costs by Sphere (Paladin) 


Universal 


spell points at higher levels. 


Spell Major Major Minor 


Level Fixed Free Fixed Free 

orison — — 1 
Ist 8 6 12 
2nd 12 10 20 
3rd 20 15 30 
4th 30 22 44 


98 


Magic 


m O 


Table 35: 


Ranger Spell Point Progression 


Max. Spells 


Ranger 
Level 


Casting 
Level 


Max. Spell 


Level Each Level 


2nd 
3rd 
3rd 


Table 36: 


Bard Spell Doint Progression 


Max. Spells 
Memorized at 
Each Level 


Bard 
Level 


Max. Spell 
Level 


Spell 
Points 


! If the bard is allowed to specialize (see the class design rules 
in Chapter 3), he gains the bonus spell points shown in 
parenthesis in addition to the standard amount. 

? If the optional rules for exceeding spell level limit are in 
play, bards of 20th level or higher may attempt to employ 7th 
level spells. 


99 


Memorized at 


Bards 


With access to any spell and the 
ability to continuously improve their 
spell abilities, bards are not very far 
behind wizards in terms of sheer 
magical power. While they do not 
gain spell abilities until they reach 
2nd level, they always use their 
actual character level for calculating 
level-based effects in a spell; they 
have no separate “casting level,” 
like rangers and paladins. 

Bards often employ a different 
system of magic than wizards, since 
their spells can represent ancient 
songs or enchantments woven from 
the interplay of voice, instrument, 
and dance. Certainly, some systems 
of magic—alienists or warlocks, for 
instance—would be inappropriate 
for the bard's magical skills. The bard's spell point progres- 
sion is described in Table 36: Bard Spell Point Progression. 

Generally, bards follow the rules described for wizards in 
this chapter for memorizing and casting spells. Like wiz- 
ards, they may devote extra spell points to memorize free 
magicks, memorize spells for greater effect, use spells at 
reduced cost, and any other options the DM deems appro- 
priate. Bards are limited to seven spells of any one level, 
but continue to gain spell points after they reach 20th level. 


Spell 
Points 


"^ 


Optional Rules for Spellcasters 

At the DM's option, bards, rangers, and paladins 
may make use of some of the optional additions to the 
spell point rules. These include casting spells for greater 
effect, reducing the spell cost, and using the rules for 
cantrips or orisons as appropriate. However, bonus spell 
points for high Intelligence or Wisdom scores should not 
be used, since this is a special bonus for dedicated priests 
and wizards. 


Table 37: 
Spell Cost by Level (Bards) 


Spell Fixed Free 
Level Magick = 
Ist 4 8 
3rd 20 


10 


PY a our IST X E IE | 
5th 22 44 


Chapter 7: 


ell Desearch 
and Magical Item 
Creation 


Wizards and priests are constantly devising new and interesting applications for 
their magical powers. It seems to be a part of the job description; most player 
characters dive into research and item enchantment as soon as they reach the 
required level and set aside enough money for an appropriate laboratory or altar. 

At first glance, these activities may seem like they're not worth the time and the 
trouble. After all, researching a new spell or creating a new magical item can be a 
lengthy and expensive undertaking, uncertain of success. In fact, many DMs will 
require a PC wizard or priest to embark on several adventures—some quite haz- 
ardous—in order to obtain the knowledge or materials necessary. More than one 
character has allowed his ambition to lead him into expensive or fatal mistakes. 

While research and item creation are difficult and tedious endeavors, they can 
also be extremely rewarding. First of all, player characters confronted with a spe- 
cific problem may be able to devise a spell or item that can respond to that problem 
perfectly. Secondly, new items or spells have the advantage of surprise; everyone 
knows what a fireball is and how it works, but Felgar’s incandescent strike is another 
matter entirely! New spells or items can provide player characters with defenses or 
capabilities never before seen in a campaign. 

Spell research and magical item creation are discussed together in this chapter 
because they represent one of the most rewarding and interesting aspects of the 
AD&D game the ability of a character to create something that will outlast his or 
her own career (or even lifetime, in some cases!), becoming a permanent part of 
the DM's campaign world. After all, spells and items with names attached to 
them were first created by adventuring wizards and priests no different from any 
other player character. What wizard doesn't dream of being known as the next 
Rary, Bigby, or Otiluke? 


Spell Research & Magical Item Creation 


S ell At some point, almost any player 
P character spellcaster is going to want 
~ to try his hand at spell research. 

Research Devising a new spell is a great way 

for a character to make a lasting mark on a campaign, as 

noted above, but it’s also a fun exercise for the player and 

the DM; a new spell customizes and alters the campaign 

and the game itself. 

While both wizards and priests can research new spells, 
it’s much more common for wizards to do so. The philoso- 
phy of experimentation and investigation seems much 
more appropriate for wizards, since priests are inclined 
(quite naturally) to take things on faith and stick to the 
proven powers and abilities of their patron deity. How- 
ever, there’s no reason why a PC priest couldn’t participate 
in as much research as he or she wishes to; this is only a 
generalization, not a rule. 

There are two parts of spell research: designing the 
spell, and actually executing the spell research in game 
play. The player and DM will have to take time to work 
out the details of the spell before the character can embark 
on his research. 


‘ ugs ass 
Proposing a Spell 

Player characters can research four types of spells: exist- 
ing spells that they just haven’t had the opportunity to 
learn, “look-alike” spells that approximate an existing spell 
that they failed to learn; spells that would exceed the nor- 
mal maximum number of spells allowed by a character’s 
Intelligence score; and completely new spells never before 
seen in the campaign. Note that priests never have to worry 
about conducting the first three types of research, since they 
can use any spell belonging to a sphere to which they have 
access. Priests only conduct spell research to create entirely 
new spells. 

Existing Spells: From time to time, wizards will find that 
there is a particularly useful or valuable spell that eludes 
their grasp. There's no reason that a wizard can't decide to 
research a fireball or magic jar if he gets tired of waiting for 
an old spell book or scroll to fall into his lap. This is fairly 
straightforward, since the spell description already exists; 
the PC can go on to Conducting Research. 

Extra Spells: By the time most wizards reach moderate 
levels, the maximum number of spells they may know at 
any given level may become quite restrictive. For 
example, a wizard with an Intelligence of 14 may only 
know nine spells of one level. In order to continue to add 
to his spell book, the wizard must research any spells 
above and beyond this limit, instead of simply scribing 
newfound spells into his spell book. Obviously, this 
makes adding spells a tedious and time-consuming chore 
after a certain point, but if the PC is willing to spend the 
money and time, he may exercise this option. Again, since 
the spell description already exists, the PC can go on to 
Conducting Research. 

New Spells: The most interesting aspect of spell 
research, the creation of new spells requires a careful 
write-up and analysis in order to spot potential problems 
or abuses. Since the player must generate all the game- 
effect information for the spell, he must first write up a full 
description and then submit it to the DM for approval and 
modification. Note that modifying a new spell (i.e., delet- 


101 


ing components, improving casting time or range, or 
changing the way it works) constitutes a new spell. Creat- 
ing a “look-alike” spell to mimic a spell the PC is unable to 
learn is also considered to be new spell research. Go on to 
Describing a Spell and follow the process of approval and 
research step-by-step. 


Describing a Spell 


The first step in creating a new spell is describing its 
intent and effects. The interested player should take some 
time to write up a spell description similar to the spells in 
the Player’s Handbook. Generally, a new spell should be just 
that—new. Spells that do the same thing as existing spells or 
a combination of existing spells aren't really new, and need 
a better "hook" for purposes of spell research. Here are 
some guidelines, by category: 

Level: Naturally, the character should be able to cast the 
spell he's trying to develop, so the spell in question must be 
at or under his normal maximum spell level. For example, a 
6th-level wizard can use spells of 3rd-level or less, so he can 
research 1st-, 2nd-, or 3rd-level spells. 

Compare the proposed spell to a similar spell to get an 
idea of what a fair level assignment should be. Generally, 
spells should inflict about one die of damage per level, give 
or take a die; compare the spell's potential to magic missile, 
fireball, or flame arrow. Spells that do not allow saving 
throws, or spells that can affect an opponent regardless of 
his level or Hit Dice, are often of higher level than similar 
spells. Spells that are improvements of existing spells 
should be one to three levels higher than the spell they're 
modelled on, depending on the extent of the improvement. 

School/Sphere: Refer to Chapter 1 and Chapter 2; brief 
descriptions of each school of wizard magic and each 
sphere of priest magic appear in those chapters. Both wiz- 
ards and priests may only conduct research in schools or 
spheres they have access to, so a cleric may not research 
new animal or plant spells, and an invoker may not 
research illusion spells. 

Range: Damage-inflicting attack spells should have a 
good justification for ranges greater than 150 yards (or more 
than 10 yards per caster level), while nondamaging attack 
spells (sleep, hold, polymorph, and other such effects) rarely 
exceed more than 100 yards (or more than five yards per 
caster level) in range. Other spells can vary wildly in range, 
depending on their function; communication or transporta- 
tion spells may allow a range of hundreds of miles. 

Duration: While damage from attack spells or the effects 
of many noncombat spells are permanent, most spells that 
create a condition or change of status for their subjects have 
a well-defined duration. Durations can be defined by time 
(the preferred method) or until a certain predefined event 
occurs. For example, invisibility lasts until the caster makes 
an attack, while a charm can last for a few days or for several 
months, depending on the victim. Very few low-level spells 
should bring about a permanent change or weakness in a 
living target. 

Area of Effect: A spell that can affect several people at 
once, or several dozen people at once, is inherently more 
powerful than a spell that affects a single individual. Spells 
designed to affect several enemies can affect a random num- 
ber of subjects in a cube of about 20 to 30 feet (for example, 
hold person affects 1 to 4 targets in a 20-foot cube). Spells 


designed to affect more than 10 or 12 individuals shouldn't 
be larger than a fireball, which affects a sphere of 20 feet in 
radius. Exceeding these limits requires a more powerful 
(and therefore higher-level) spell than one that stays well 
within them. 


s: Most spells should have all three compo- 
nents —y verbal, pie and somatic—unless there's a good 
reason for omitting one. Spells with only one component are 
fairly rare. Note that spells without verbal components can 
be cast even if the character is silenced, and are therefore 
more dangerous than they may appear to be at first look. 

Material components that are hard to come by or very 
expensive can be used to control a spell's use in a campaign. 
Even though a 1st-level wizard can use identify, each time he 
does so, he must ruin a 100 gp pearl. If the DM enforces 
material component rules, the wizard might think twice 
before caning the spell any time he feels like it. 

Casting ie: The rule of thumb for wizard spells is a 

casting time of 1 per level, so a 4th-level spell (for instance) 
should have a casting time of 4. Priest spells default to a 
casting time of 3 plus 1 per level, so a 4th-level priest spell 
should be around a 7. If a spell is significantly under this 
mark, it should either be weaker than spells of a similar 
level, or higher in level than normal. Conversely, a pro- 
longed casting time may help to compensate for other 
advantages. 

Saving Throw: While the nature of the saving throw 

varies with es purpose of the spell, enchantments that inca- 
pacitate the victim without the benefit of a saving throw 
should be rare or limited to a type of victim affected. The 
sleep spell is a good example; it allows no saving throw, but 
can only affect low-Hit Dice creatures. Damage-causing 
spells that affect more than a single target without a saving 
throw are uncommon and tend to be high in level. 

Jescription and Effects: When creating the actual 
desc ription of the spell, mei ae to note who it affects, 
how it works, what it does, and how it can be stopped or 
undone. If the duration, range, or saving throw is described 
as ‘special,’ make sure you note how it is special and what 
its limits actually are. 

Most spells should perform one specific action, 
although spells may present several applications from 
which one can be selected when the spell is cast (see 
Otiluke's freezing sphere for an example of this). Spells that 
actually do two or three things at once, such as shadow 
door or guards and wards, are quite rare and are almost 
UC high-level enchantments. 

Last but not least, creating a new spell is an opportu- 
nity to be creative—feel free to add any color or special 
effects that are appropriate. A spell that makes a charac- 
ter impervious to cold is useful, but not very colorful; 
however, a spell that transforms a character's blood to 
magical ice water, thereby enabling him to resist cold 
damage, is a little more interesting. Also consider side 
effects or dangerous combinations of powers when writ- 
ing up the spell description. 


"E 
M 1 ^n 


)pDfroval ANG MOda tuot 


After the player writes up the spell and refines it, the DM 
should review and analyze the spell. Is it the right level, or 
is it more powerful than it should be? If the PC was the tar- 
get of his own spell, would it completely obliterate him? 


Spell Research & Magical Item Creation 


This might be a sign that the spell is too strong. Are the 
effects reasonable and appropriate for its power level? Does 
it permit the subject a chance to avoid its effects? Does the 
spell intrude on a role best left to another character—in 
other words, would it make the wizard a better thief than 
the party’s thief, a better fighter than the party’s fighter, and 
so on? A spell can take a few steps in this direction, but it 
should be examined carefully. And, most importantly: do 
you, the DM, think that this spell will make your game bet- 
ter or make it worse? 

If the spell is well-balanced and well-considered, then 
the PC can go on to Conducting Research. However, if it 
needs some work still, you can either return it to the player 
and inform him of any objections, or pencil in the modifica- 
tions you think are appropriate to make the spell work in 
your campaign. Remember, the player always has the 
option of deciding to not go through with the research if he 
doesn’t like the way the spell turned out after the DM 
looked at it! 


Conducting Research 


Now that the spell has been described and approved by 
the player and the DM, the character can begin his research 
effort. Spell research is time-consuming and expensive. First 
of all, a wizard must have access to a well-equipped research 
laboratory and library, as described in Chapter 5. In fact, if his 
library isn’t good enough for the research, he may need to 
spend time and money improving his scholarly resources 
before beginning the research at all! 

Priests can get by without purchasing these expensive 
facilities, but they must have access to the holy writings and 
texts available at a specific temple of their deity selected by 
the DM. In many cases, a priest will have to embark on a 
pilgrimage to a remote monastery or a theological univer- 
sity to find the research materials he will need. 

Secondly, the character must refrain from adventuring 
and concentrate solely on his research, to the exclusion of all 
other activities. Spell research consumes at least two weeks 
per spell level, so researching a 3rd-level spell would 
require at least six weeks of game time. The character may 
take breaks from his research to attend to other matters, but 
if the break is longer than a day, he suffers a setback of some 
kind and loses one week’s worth of research. For example, if 
a wizard finishes four weeks of research and then finds that 
he must travel out of town for three days, he must repeat 
one week of his studies. If the break turns out to be longer 
than the time he’s already invested, all the research is lost 
and he must start over. 


Basic Time of Research = 2 weeks per spell level 


Money is also an issue in spell research. Expending the 
supplies, reagents, tomes, and books required by the 
research consume 100 to 1,000 gp per spell level, above 
and beyond the normal maintenance cost of any labora- 
tory used by the character. Priests must invest in special 
incenses, candles, and other religious items of similar 
cost. The DM can set the price to a level he deems appro- 
priate, but it should always represent a bit of a stretch for 
the character. 


Basic Cost of Research = 100-1,000 gp per spell level 


103 


Success or Failure: If the character meets all the expenses 
and puts in his time with the books, he may attempt a suc- 
cess roll after the minimum research time (two weeks per 
spell level) has passed. The chance of success is 10% and is 
modified by the researcher's Intelligence score (for wizards) 
or Wisdom score (for priests) and experience level, less 
twice the level of the spell being researched. (See below.) 


Basic Success Chance = 10% + 1% per point of relevant abil- 
ity score + 1% per experience level — (2 x spell level). 


For example, a 7th-level wizard with an Intelligence of 17 
researching a 3rd-level spell has a success chance of 10% 
(base) + 17% (Intelligence) + 7% (experience level), minus 
6% (3rd-level spell), for a total of 28%. 

If the character does not succeed in his first attempt 
(unless he’s very high level, he probably won't), he may 
continue his research. At the end of each additional week, 
he may attempt a check with a +10% cumulative bonus. 
However, if the character ever rolls a result of 99 or 100 on 
his success check, the DM may rule that the spell proves 
unworkable and must be abandoned. 

Note that the success check replaces the normal learn 
spells mechanic—if the character can successfully research 
the spell, he can add it to his book automatically. 


New Spells in the Campaign 


A unique spell is a valuable commodity, one with signifi- 
cant trading value among other wizards or priests. An 
enterprising PC can choose to sell his hard-earned knowl- 
edge for whatever price he can get for it, or he can hoard his 
spell for his own use. In some cases, a wizard may want to 
be careful about flashing his newfound powers about in 
public; unscrupulous spellcasters have been known to steal 
the inventor's spell book in order to wrest the secrets of the 
new enchantment from its creator! Priests are less vulnera- 
ble to this kind of activity, but it's always possible that their 
patron power may take a liking to the spell and make it 
available to other priests of the same mythos. 


In many AD&D campaigns, charac- 


Magical Item ters are defined by their magical 
items. Rings, potions, boots, 


Crcation cloaks—all kinds of devices exist 


that are designed to let a character break the rules of the 
game in one way or another. Controlling the player charac- 
ter's acquisition of powerful magical items may be one of 
the most important jobs of the DM, since too little can lead 
to boredom or stagnation, while too much can create an 
ever-spiralling elevation of power gaming and wreck a 
good game even faster. 

Just because a character has the ability to make a magical 
item, the DM shouldn't wave his hand and let the item 
appear in the campaign. It's important to strictly enforce the 
details of magical item creation, since this is a character 
power that can unbalance a game very quickly. The point is 
for the player to appreciate all the trouble and effort his char- 
acter goes through in order to create even simple items. 
Forging a powerful item may take a character out of the 
campaign for months. 

Creating magical items has been described in great detail 


in the Book of Artifacts, and again in DM" OPrION: High Level 
Campaigns. The rules presented here mirror those systems 
and sum up the process for ease of reference. In addition, 
some more ideas for strange materials and components for 
magical items are included in order to widen the range of 
bizarre quests and riddles a DM can throw at a character 
while he's working on his next potion or devising a new 
ring or wand. 

Standard vs. Nonstandard Items: A character isn't lim- 
ited to duplicating magical items that appear in the DMG. 
He can choose to devise completely new magical items, tai- 
lored to his own needs and tastes. However, the character 
can attempt to create new items as he sees fit. Some may be 
simple variants of existing items—for example, there's no 
reason a ring of displacement wouldn't work as well as a cloak 
of displacement. Other items can incorporate powers never 
before seen in a magical item. Generally, variant items suffer 
a -5% penalty to the final success check, and nonstandard 
items suffer a -10% penalty. 

Specialist Wizards: Some magical items very clearly 
duplicate the effects of certain spells or specialist schools. 
For example, a wand of polymorphing is obviously an item 
with strong ties to the school of alteration, while a wand of 

force belongs in the school of force. If the DM agrees that the 
item in question does indeed fall into the character's spe- 
cialty, the wizard gains a +5% bonus on his success check 
when creating the item. 


Special Ingredients 


Creating an enchanted item is difficult. Even the simplest 
devices require extraordinary materials and processes. In 
many cases, characters find that an item just isn't worth the 
trouble of gathering the components, treating or refining 
them, and then weaving the spells that empower the final 
product. The DM's best means for controlling player charac- 
ter item creation is through the special ingredients required 
by a particular item. 

There are two types of special ingredients: materials 
and processes. Materials are just what one would think— 
components that are actually incorporated into the struc- 
ture of the item. Processes are steps that somehow refine, 
imbue, or alter the basic item. In either case, the ingredi- 
ent can range from common to exotic, embracing almost 
anything imaginable. 

Materials: As a general rule of thumb, more powerful 
items require more unusual materials. Materials may actu- 
ally represent physical components of the item in ques- 
tion—the metal used to forge a ring or a rod, the wool from 
which a cloak is woven—or materials might be additives or 
refinements, such as a handful of pixie dust for a potion of 
flying, or the scales of a giant snake that are incorporated in 
a phylactery of proof against poison. 

Materials can be completely nonmaterial, metaphorical 
ingredients as well as tangible substances. The courage of a 
knight, the spirit of a mountain, or the breath of a butterfly 
are all examples of this type of ingredient. A player charac- 
ter may have to exercise quite a bit of ingenuity and inven- 
tiveness to capture these rare qualities or essences! 

Materials are divided into three general categories: com- 
mon, rare, and exotic. 

Common materials can be acquired almost anywhere. 
Steel, leather, bone, cloth, oak staves, and other such 


Chapter 7 


104 


things are all common materials. Note that items suitable 
for enchantment must be made of the finest materials 
available, so a wizard might have to commission an ore- 
smelter to create the very purest steel available. Even the 
most common magical items require materials worth 100 
gp, at a bare minimum! Intangible common materials 
could include the tears of a maiden, the strength of a 
smith, or the essence of a rose. 

Rare materials are more difficult to find or more expen- 
sive. A particular type or grade of silk, diamonds, roc feath- 
ers, ebony, a wizard's bones, or iron smelted by a master 
dwarven smith would be rare. Intangible materials could 
include the tears of a heartbroken maiden, the strength of a 
king, or the essence of rose harvested on the first night of a 
new moon. Common materials produced or gathered under 
unusual circumstances—such as the rose essence just 
described—also count as rare. 

Exotic materials can only be acquired through an adven- 
ture on the part of the character. Silk woven from a phase 
spider, a faceted diamond never exposed to light, an arch- 
mage's bones, a lock of a goddess's hair, or steel smelted 
from a fallen star are all exotic materials; intangible materi- 
als might include the tears of a heartbroken princess, the 
strength of the greatest king in the world, or the essence of a 
rose harvested by the light of a comet that returns once 
every twenty years. 

Processes: Almost anything that alters, changes, deco- 
rates, or aids in the production of an item without becoming 
part of the final piece is a process. Naturally, the exact 
nature of the process varies with the physical form of the 
item; potions might be mixed or brewed in a special retort, 
boiled over a fire fueled by an unusual substance, stirred in 
a special fashion, distilled, evaporated, infused, fermented, 
separated, or purified. Other processes appropriate for vari- 
ous types of item include the following: 


Ink for scrolls can be brewed much like a potion; 

The alloy for metallic rings must be mined, smelted, and 
then cast in some kind of mold, extruded as wire, or 
cold-worked. Setting stones, polishing, tempering, 
inscribing, or etching could finish the ring. Rings can 
also be made from nonmetallic substances; carefully 
carved stone, wood, or bone would work. 

* Wands and rods can be made of wood, iron, bone, crys- 
tal, stone, or almost anything imaginable. These items 
might require lathing, steeping, tooling, sanding, carv- 
ing, polishing, enamelling, etching, or inlaying. 

* Staves are almost always made of wood, but a staff's 
heels—metal bands that cap the ends—could be made 
from any number of substances. Staves can be lathed, 
carved, steeped, tooled, sanded, inlaid, or set with crys- 
tals or stones. 

* Functional weapons and armor can be made from iron, 
bronze, steel, or any of a variety of fantastic alloys. 
Arms of +3 value are usually made from special mete- 
oric steel, +4 weapons or armor are made from mithral- 
alloyed steel, and +5 arms are of adamantite-alloyed 
steel. Processes used to make these items include min- 
ing, smelting, refining, forging, casting, tempering, 
cooling, etching, inlaying, sharpening, and enamelling 
or painting. 

* Other items could be beaten, boiled, embroidered, 
engraved, carved, painted, smoked, cured, glazed, deco- 


Spell Research & Magical Item Creation 


rated, upholstered, tempered, lacquered, cooled, or 
heated in some way. Take a look at the appropriate profi- 
ciency descriptions for an idea of some of the processes 
involved. 


Common processes could include chasing, engraving, 
marking, or finishing in any of the manners described 
above. Rare processes would add a hard-to-find material— 
embroidering with gold thread, boiling in the skull of a wiz- 
ard, or painting with pigment made from the blood of a 
cockatrice. Exotic processes could include such things as 
steeping the item or its components in the energies of the 
Positive Material Plane, smoking it over a fire fueled by 
branches of Yggdrasil, the World Oak, or forging the item 
with a hammer touched by the hand of a god. 


Dolions 


Among the easiest of items to make, potions range from 
simple healing brews to potent mixtures capable of taming 
dragons or restoring a character to complete health and san- 
ity. Some potions are clerical potions and can only be manu- 
factured by priests. These include: the elixir of health, potion 
of extra-healing, potion of fire resistance, potion of healing, potion 
of sweet water, and potion of vitality. 

Level Requirements: Both priests and wizards must be 
at least 9th level to create potions. Specialists in the school 
of alchemy may brew potions at 6th level, but must use spe- 
cial procedures to do so. They may use the standard proce- 
dure after reaching 9th level or continue to use their special 
process. 

Facilities: Wizards require an alchemical laboratory or a 
forge to brew potions; priests must have a consecrated altar. 
(See Chapter 5.) A wizard may need to expand his library in 
order to obtain the texts and tomes needed for researching 
the potion’s formula. 

Research: Before a character can brew a potion, he must 
discover what processes, materials, and special ingredients 
are required, and how these must be combined for success. 
This research requires 1d3+1 weeks at a cost of 100 gp per 
week, but if the character uses a commune or contact other 
plane spell to speed his research, he automatically succeeds 
in the minimum time. 

If the character has a full dose of the potion in question 
to use as a sample, the research takes only one week and 
costs nothing. However, he still must have access to a labo- 
ratory or an altar in order to conduct the research. 

Alchemists may use the research rules above once they 
reach 9th level, but before that they must follow a lengthier 
and more expensive process if they take advantage of their 
ability to create potions before other wizards can. An alche- 
mist of less than 9th level must spend two weeks and 500 
gp per potion level to research the formula and then pass a 
learn spells check. (A potion's equivalent spell level is its 
experience point value divided by 100, rounded up.) 

Once a character has researched a potion's formula, he 
need not research it again; he can create samples of the 
potion as often as he wishes, as long as he follows the cost 
and time requirements. 

Processes and Materials: Potions that contain only a 
single-use require one rare material and one common 
process; potions that provide several doses with one brew- 
ing require an exotic material and a rare process. (See 


105 


Special Ingredients at the end of this chapter.) Potions that 
normally produce more than one dose include potion of 
diminution, elixir of health, potion of extra-healing, potion of fire 
breath, potion of fire resistance, potion of growth, potion of invisi- 
bility, oil of impact, and potion of rainbow hues. 

One of the advantages of the alchemist is that he need 
not obtain special ingredients before creating a potion; his 
knowledge of chemicals and reagents enables him to simu- 
late these rare materials, whether he is using the alchemical 
process or the magical process. 

Cost and Time: Assuming that the character is able to 
obtain any special or unusual materials required for the 
potion, it will cost him a number of gold pieces equal to the 
potion's experience point value to brew the potion. This 
process takes one day per 100 gp required. 

The alchemical process usually requires one full week 
and 300 to 1,800 gp (346x100) to brew a potion. If the 
potion's experience point value is greater than 700, then 
the alchemist must spend an extra day per 100 experience 
points brewing the potion. However, at 9th level, the 
alchemist may choose to use the normal potion-brewing 
rules instead. 

Success or Failure: The base chance for a successful 
brewing is 70%, +2% per character level, -1% for every 100 
gp the potion costs. For example, a 13th-level wizard brew- 
ing a potion of fire breath would have a success chance of 96% 
(70% + 26% for character level), less 4% (400 gp), for a total 
of 92%. The DM should make this check in secret, since on a 
natural roll of 96 or higher the process fails, and the potion 
is cursed in some way (typically, it becomes a potion of poison 
or delusion instead of what it should be). 

Alchemists may instead use a learn spells check, with a 
+1% bonus per character level, to see if they are successful 
in brewing the potion. Or, if the alchemist is 9th level or 
higher, he may produce the potion by magical means, using 
the normal success check of 70% + 2% per level. If this is the 
case, the alchemist gains a +5% to his success chance due to 
his specialist knowledge of potions. 


Talghaz the Enchanter, a 9th-level wizard, decides that he 
needs to produce a philter of love in order to help a princess fall 
in love with one of his comrades. Talghaz already possesses a mini- 
mal library and arranges to borrow the laboratory of his alchemist 
friend. As a result, he can begin his research without any addi- 
tional expense. He uses no special techniques, so the research takes 
1d34-1 weeks and costs him 100 gp per week. 

After three weeks, Talghaz finishes his research, He discovers 
that the potion requires the tears of a dryad as a rare material 
and, with some grumbling, sets out to find a dryad and convince 
her to shed a few tears for him. One week (and an interesting 
adventure) later, Talghaz returns to the laboratory with a vial 
full of dryad tears and sets about brewing his potion. A philter 
of love is worth 200 XP, so it takes Talghaz two days and 200 
gp to brew the potion. 

When Talghaz finishes, the DM checks in secret to see if he 
was successful. The base chance is 70%, plus 18% for Talghaz's 
level, less 2% for the potion's experience point value. The DM 
also decides that a philter of love is right up an enchanter's 
alley and gives Talghaz the +5% bonus for specialization, His 
total chance of success is 91%; if the DM rolls a 96 or higher, the 
failure creates a cursed potion. (Wouldn't that be a surprise for 
Talghaz's friend?) 


WW 


N 


NS 


NY 


NN 


NN 


NS 


N 


N 
SN 


DANY 


Ir 


—— 


S 
4, 


Scrolls 


Like potions, scrolls are fairly easy to manufacture and 
are also accessible to characters of moderate level. Scrolls 
come in two varieties: spell scrolls and protection scrolls. 
Spell scrolls are exactly what the name implies—scrolls that 
store spells that can be cast simply by being read. Protection 
scrolls are special single-use magical items that provide 
defense against a number of threats. 

While any character may read a protection scroll without 
the benefit of a read magic spell, wizard spells cannot be cast 
from a scroll or transcribed into a spell book until a read 
magic spell or effect has been employed by the reader. This 
can be done at the time of the scroll’s use, or the reader can 
prepare ahead of time by using read magic in advance; once 
magically read, a scroll remains intelligible for the character 
who reads it. Note that only wizards, thieves, and bards 
may read wizard spells from spell scrolls; thieves and bards 
can bypass the normal requirement to read magic by using 
their special class abilities. 

Priest spells do not require a read magic spell in order to 
be used from a scroll. Priests, thieves, and bards may read 
priest spells from spell scrolls. 

Low-level wizards and priests may be able to read spells 
from scrolls that are normally beyond their abilities; even a 
1st-level wizard has a chance to pronounce the incantation 
for a fireball or lightning bolt correctly. Refer to Scrolls, in 
Appendix 3 of the DUNGEON MASTER® Guide. 

Level Requirements: Wizards may create scrolls when 
they reach 9th level. Priests may scribe scrolls when they 
reach 7th level. Any spell the character knows (or has access 
to, in the case of a priest) can be placed on a scroll, or the 
character may attempt to create a protection scroll. 

Geometers (specialists in the wizard school of geometry) 
have a special ability to create spell scrolls beginning at 4th 
level and protection scrolls at 7th level. When a geometer 
reaches 9th level, he may instead use the normal scroll cre- 
ation process if he so desires. 

Facilities: Wizards require access to any kind of labora- 
tory (alchemical, forge, or research) in order to blend the ink 
for the scroll, although this is a fairly simple task given the 
right ingredients. Priests can blend the ink in any reason- 
able work area, but then must have access to a consecrated 
altar in order to actually scribe the scroll. 

Research: There is no research required for spell scrolls 
or for protection scrolls that mirror spells available to the 
character. For example, if a wizard knows how to cast 
antimagic shell, he can write a scroll of protection from magic 
without performing any kind of research. If the scroll has 
no spell equivalent known to the character, he must 
research the scroll using the normal spell research rules. 
To figure out a scrolls's effective spell level, divide the 
experience point value by 500 and then add 2 (Level = 
XP/500+2). For example, scrolls worth 1,000 experience 
points are considered 4th-level spells; 

Protection scrolls that have spell equivalents include the 
following scrolls: 


Spell Research & Magical Item Creation 


Scroll Equivalent 
Protection from elementals dismissal 
Protection from magic antimagic shell 
Protection from petrification stone to flesh 
Protection from plants antiplant shell 
Protection from poison neutralize poison 
Protection from possession dispel evil 
Protection from undead control undead 
Protection from water airy water 


Processes and Materials: Scrolls require three compo- 
nents: some form of paper, a specially-blended ink, and a 
unique quill. Common paper, parchment, or papyrus may 
be used to create the scroll; paper provides a +5% bonus to 
the success roll, while papyrus inflicts a -5% penalty. All 
scrolls require a rare quill of some kind. 

Ink for spells of 1st to 3rd level requires a rare ingredient; 
ink for spells of 4th to 6th level requires an exotic ingredi- 
ent; and ink for spells of 7th to 9th level requires a rare and 
an exotic ingredient. (Use the spell level equivalents noted 
above for protection scrolls.) 

Geometers have the special advantage of requiring noth- 
ing except common paper or parchment and a rare quill 
(which can only be used once); the ink is not important for 
the geometer's scrolls. 

Cost and Time: Inscribing a spell onto a scroll takes one 
day per spell level, while creating a protection scroll takes 
one full week of uninterrupted work. The only cost incurred 
is that of obtaining the required materials. 

Geometers have the same time requirements, but must 
pay 100 gp per spell level for their materials for spell scrolls, 
or 300 to 1,800 gp (3d6x100) for protection scrolls. 

Success or Failure: The base chance to successfully cre- 
ate a scroll is 80%, +1% per character level, -1% per spell 
level (or equivalent spell level, in the case of protection 
scrolls). If the character fails the success check, the spell he 
is currently inscribing fails, and he may not add any more 
spells to that scroll, but any spells previously placed on the 
scroll remain intact and may still be used. 

The DM should make the check in secret, since a natural 
96 or higher on the success check creates a cursed scroll. The 
creator of the scroll has no idea that his work is flawed until 
he tries to use that particular spell. 

Geometers use a learn spells check instead of the normal 
success check if they produce the scroll without any magical 
ingredients or processes. If a geometer creates a scroll using 
the usual methods described above, he gains a +5% bonus 
to his success check due to his familiarity with scrolls. 


Milana, an 8th-level priestess, decides to create a scroll of 
protection from poison, since she and her fellow adventurers 
intend to go wyvern-hunting. Because Milana is capable of cast- 
ing the spell neutralize poison, s/te does not need to do any 
research. Because the spell equivalent is 4th level, the scroll 
requires an exotic material for the ink. The DM decides that the 
ink must include nightshade harvested during the dark of the 
moon, so Milana spends a week or more locating the deadly mush- 
rooms and waiting for the proper time to collect them. The quill 
must be a feather steeped in the venom of an adder, and Milana 
attends to that as well. Fortunately, her temple is near a good- 
sized town, and she can easily procure paper. 

After gathering the necessary materials, Milana blends the ink 


107 


(no cost or time) and begins scribing scroll of protection from 
poison. This requires one full week, at no particular cost— 
although the patriarch of her temple suggests that an offering for 
the use of the altar would be appreciated. Milana's chance of suc- 
cess is 80%, +8% for her level, -4% for the equivalent level of the 
scroll. The use of paper gives her a +5% bonus, for a total of 89%. 
Milana passes the check easily, and finishes her scroll. 


Other Items 


This broad category includes all other types of magical 
items, including rings, wands, staves, rods, miscellaneous 
magical items, and weapons and armor. Player characters 
can manufacture almost any kind of magical item appearing 
in the DMG, except for magical books, tomes, manuals, 
librams, grimoires, or artifacts of any kind. 

In addition, a player character may be restricted from 
creating a particular item by his class. Wizards can create 
any magical item that is not specifically reserved for the 
use of priest characters (i.e., an item such as a staff of 
curing) or limited to certain races (such as boots of 
elvenkind). Racial items are created by priests of that partic- 
ular race. If the item can be used by other characters as 
well as priests (for example, helm of teleportation), the wiz- 
ard can manufacture the item. On the other hand, priests 
and specialist wizards can only create items that they can 
use. When creating an item, a specialist wizard gains a 
+5% bonus to his chance of succeeding. 

The most important aspect of an item's enchantment has 
very little to do with its purpose or form. Magical items are 
divided into several loose classes that are based on the 
nature of the enchantment: single-use, limited-use, single- 
function, and multiple-function. 

Single-use items are depleted after a single usage. Most 
potions and scrolls fall into this category, but these have 
been discussed already. Other single-use magical items 
include such things as beads of force, incense of meditation, or 
any of Quaal's feather tokens. 

Limited-use items have a set or variable number of 
charges that may be used before it is expended. Some 
limited-use items can be recharged, but only if they are 
recharged before their last charge has been expended. 
Other limited-use items may have multiple-functions (see 
below). Most wands and staves are limited-use items. 
Other limited-use items include such devices as a ring of 
wishes, bag of beans, scarab of protection, or the special prop- 
erties of armor of fear. 

Single-function items have only one power, which func- 
tions continuously or on demand. Some single-function 
items have time limitations, after which they cannot be used 
until they replenish their magical energy. Some single- 
function items may feature a limited-use feature, in addition 
to the persistent powers. Items such as a ring of shocking 
grasp, amulet of life protection, boots of speed, and wings of fly- 
ing are good examples of single-function items. 

Multiple-function items have more than one power and 
may also feature additional limited-use powers. Good 
examples include the rod of alertness, ring of elemental com- 
mand, cloak of arachnida, or the helm of brilliance. 

Level Requirements: Both wizards and priests must be 
at least 11th level to create any kind of magical item other 
than a potion or a scroll. Wizards are also limited by the 
spells required to actually create the item—enchant an item, 


Chapter 7 


permanency, and any other appropriate spells. Priests, on the 
other hand, do not cast spells to create items, but instead 
use a consecrated altar (see Chapter 5). 

Facilities: Wizards require a well-equipped forge and 
may need to expand their personal libraries in order to con- 
duct the necessary research. (Again, refer to Chapter 5.) 
Priests must have access to a specially consecrated altar. In 
addition, both wizards and priests may find it very useful to 
have some skilled assistants nearby. 

Research: Before a character can begin work on a magi- 
cal item, he must first discover the steps necessary to create 
it! This requires research time and effort. Generally, a char- 
acter must spend 1d6+1 weeks and 200 gp per week in 
order to find out how to build the item, although the DM 
may rule that exceptionally powerful items (5,000 XP value 
or greater, or any item such as a girdle of giant strength that 
imparts drastic and persistent bonuses to a character) 
requires consultation with a sage or some special effort on 
the part of the character to research. 

Contact other plane and commune spells are particularly 
useful in this step of item creation, since the successful use 
of one of these divinations reduces the research time to the 
minimum required. 

Processes and Materials: The exact nature of the 
processes and materials required varies from item to item 
depending on its category and type. However, all items 
require an enchant an item spell (or the equivalent priestly 
ceremony), and many require a permanency spell to boot. 

Rings require one common process, usually some type of 
carving, engraving, pouring, shaping, or forging. In addi- 
tion to this process, magical rings have other requirements 
based on their type: 


Single-function rings require one exotic material; 

* Multiple-function rings require one exotic material and 
one exotic process per function; 

* Limited-use rings require one exotic material and one 
exotic process per use. 


Rings created by wizards must be prepared with an 
enchant an item spell and finished with a permanency spell, 
although charged rings such as the ring of the ram do not 
require the permanency spell, since it can be recharged. Nat- 
urally, the character must also cast any spells required for 
spell-like functions. 

Rods, staves, and wands are not completed with a per- 
manency spell and lose their magic if their charges are ever 
completely exhausted. Again, the type of item determines 
what processes and materials are required: 


* Single-function wands and staves require one rare mater- 
ial and one rare process; 

* Single-use or single-function rods require one exotic 
material and one rare process; 

* Multiple-function rods, staves, or wands require one 
exotic material, and one exotic process per function; 

* Limited-use rods, staves, or wands require one exotic 
material, and one exotic process per use. 


Materials for these devices could include the actual shaft 
or handle, a special headpiece or crystal, or special heels or 
caps for the ends. Processes might include carving, engrav- 
ing, painting, or tempering 


108 


Miscellaneous magical items require an enchant an item 
spell (or the appropriate priestly ceremony), but single-use 
and limited-use items do not require permanency spells. 


* Single-use and single-function items require one exotic 
material and one exotic process; 

* Limited-use items require one exotic material per func- 
tion and two exotic processes per use; 

* Multiple-function items require one exotic material per 
function, one exotic process, and one rare process per 
function. 


Naturally, the materials and processes used will vary 
widely with the nature of the item in question. Considering 
that miscellaneous magic includes everything from articles 
of clothing to boats and decks of cards, the actual construc- 
tion or creation of the item could include anything imagin- 
able! See Special Ingredients for ideas. 

Magical weapons and armor require an enchant an item 
and a permanency spell or the priestly equivalents (see pages 
121-122 in the DMG). In addition, devices with expendable 
charges (armor of fear, for example) must be imbued with the 
appropriate spells. Weapons and armor that have no special 
properties except for conferring combat bonuses are consid- 
ered single-function items; items with blending, command, 
disruption, throwing, hurling, accuracy, speed, distance, venom, 
homing, lightning, piercing, sharpness, wounding, or vorpal 
properties are considered multiple-function items. Armors 
that have special but expendable properties (fear and ethere- 
alness) are limited-use items; and expendable items such as 
magical arrows or javelins are single-use items. 


* Single-use weapons require one rare material and one 
common process; 

* Single-function weapons and armors require one exotic 
material, one common process, and one rare process; 

* Multiple-function weapons and armors require one 
exotic material and process, one rare process, and one 
common process per function; 

* Limited-use armors and weapons require one exotic 
material and process, one rare process, and one common 
process per use. 


Cost and Time: Again, the cost and time required to 
manufacture magical items varies depending on the cate- 
gory and the type of item. For example, if a mage wishes to 
create a single-function ring worth 1,000 XP, then he must 
not only spend 1,000 gp (see the "Cost in XP" column of 
Table 38: Magical Item Cost and Time SEUSS but he 
must also spend 10 weeks (one week for every 100 gp spent) 
constructing the item. 

The cost of any special processes or materials is not 
included in the base cost to create the item, so if a wizard dis- 
covers that he must crush one hundred pearls to create his 
dust of disappearance, it’s up to him to find the pearls. The time 
requirements do not include any special quests or processes 
the character must undertake in order to create the item. 

Success or Failure: All magical items that fall into this 
broad category share the same success roll. Assuming the 
character follows all the necessary steps, there is a base 60'% 
chance of success, +1% per caster level, —1% per spell or 
special process required to create the item. (The caster’s ini- 
tial enchant an item or finishing permanency spells do not 


Spell Research & Magical Item Creation 
_—————— 


Table 38: 
Magical Item Cost and Time Requirements 


Cost Time 
XP value 
2x XP 
1/5 XP 
1/5 XP 
1/5 XP 
1/5 XP 
1/5 XP 
1/5 XP 
1/5 XP 


Item 

Ring, single-function 1 wk per 100 gp 
1 wk per 100 gp 

1 wk per 1,000 gp 


1 wk per 100 gp 


Ring, all others 

Rod, single-use 

Rod, single-function 
Rod, multiple-function 


Rod, limited-use 


2 wks per 100 gp 
4 wks per 100 gp 
Staff/wand, single-function 1 wk per 100 gp 
Staff/ wand, multiple-function 2 wks per 100 gp 


Staff/wand, limited-use 4 wks per 100 gp 


Misc. magic, single-use 

Misc. magic, single-function 
Misc. magic, multiple-function 
Misc. magic, limited-use 
Weapon, single-use 
Weapon/armor, single-function 


Weapon/armor, multiple-function 


Weapon/armor, limited-use 


count against his success chance.) While specialist wizards 
receive a 5% bonus to their success chance when creating an 
item using abilities from their school of specialization, artifi- 
cers gain a special 10% bonus to their success chance due to 
their superior item-crafting skills. 

At the DM's option, characters who display exceptional 
ingenuity or go to extreme lengths to create an item from 
the very best, most appropriate materials and processes 
available may receive an additional bonus of +5% to +15% 
on their success chance. 

If the character rolls a 96 or higher on his success 
check, the item is cursed in some way. For example, a 
character attempting to produce a cloak of displacement 
might create a cloak of poisonousness instead. If for some 
reason the character was trying to create a cursed item, a 
roll of 96 or higher is a simple failure—he doesn't create a 
beneficial device instead! 


Thedaric is a 14th-level fire mage who decides to create a 
wand of fire for those times when he's low on memorized spells. 
He easily meets the level requirement and spends a little money 
refurbishing a laboratory (in this case, a forge) that he found in 
the ruins of an archmage's tower. The forge comes with a library 
sufficient for researching the wand of fire (it's the first item 
Thedaric has tried to make). Thedaric uses a contact other 
plane spell to minimize his research effort, so he only requires 
two weeks and 400 gp to learn how to create the wand. 

As described in the DMG, tlie wand of fire is a multiple- 
function item (it has four separate uses), and a limited-use item, 
since it uses charges. The DM decides that the wand requires one 


2xXP 
3x XP 
4x XP 
2xXP 
XP value 
2xXP 
2xXP 
2xXP 


109 


1 wk per 100 gp 

1 wk per 100 gp 

1 wk per 100 gp 

3 wks per 100 gp 

1 wk per 100 gp 

3 wks per 1,000 gp 
4 wks per 1,000 gp 
2 wks per 1,000 gp 


exotic material, and four exotic processes, in addition to the neces- 
sary spells, cost, and time. Thedaric discovers that the wand must 
be forged by a master smith of the azer (a race of fire-dwarves from 
the Elemental Plane of Fire), from brass smelted in the efreeti City 
of Brass, tempered by the fiery breath of an adult red dragon, 
graven while still soft with runes of power, using a fire sapphire (a 
mythical gemstone the DM just made up on the spot), and finally 
polished with a mixture containing the ash of a thousand year-old 
tree destroyed by fire. With a heavy sigh, Thedaric sets out on 
months of quests, challenges, and adventures, arranging all of the 
materials and processes. 

Several months later, everything's ready. Thedaric journeys to 
the elemental plane of fire, obtains the efreeti brass, gets the azer 
smith to work it into a wand, engraves it with the fire sapphire, 
tricks a dragon into tempering it, and finally polishes and finishes 
the item in his own workshop with his special mixture of ash. The 
construction of the item required an amount of gold equal to one- 
fifth the wand's XP value (900 gp in this case) and 4 weeks per 100 
gp, for a total of 36 weeks of forging, tempering, and polishing! 

Thedaric is well-satisfied with his work so far, but now he has 
to make the wand magical. First, he'll need to use enchant an 
item in order to prepare the wand to receive spells. After four 
days, the enchant an item is finished, and Thedaric attempts a 
saving throw vs. spell to see if it succeeded. His elementalist 
bonuses to saving throws vs. fire apply, and Thedaric passes with 
a surprisingly close shave. He then casts burning hands, 
pyrotechnics, fireball, and wall of fire into the wand. Each spell 
requires 2d4 hours per spell level, so this ends up taking several 
days in and of itself. Since he must check the success of each 
enchantment and doesn't know if any one spell will take, Thedaric 


casts another battery of the same spells into the wand, just to 
make sure that he gets all the functions desired—at worst, the 
wand will have a few extra charges on it, so this is a reasonable 
precaution against the possibility of failing in one of these steps. 
Since the wand of fire is a limited-use item, it does not require a 
permanency spell to complete it; after his second round of spells, 
Thedaric declares that he is finished. (He's not worried about 
stocking up on charges right now; he just wants to complete the 
initial enchantment, and recharge the wand to its maximum 
potential later.) 

The DM rolled saving throws vs. spells for each spell Thedaric 
placed into the wand, and as it turns out, the extra four spells were 
an unnecessary precaution; Thedaric succeeded the first time 
around. Now the DM checks to see if the overall process was a suc- 

cess or failure. The base chance of success for a wand is 60%, plus 
14% for Thedaric's level, -12% for spells and special processes. The 
DM decides that Thedaric was particularly resourceful, and gives 
him a +10% bonus, and since Thedaric is a fire specialist, he gains 
an additional +5% bonus, for a total success chance of 77%. 
Thedaric succeeds and now has a wand of fire; the DM decides 
that the spells he placed into the wand became its first 8 charges 
(each spell was cast into the wand twice.) 

Now, Thedaric will probably seek to recharge the wand. 
Recharging items requires another enchant an item spell, but 
this one ts automatically successful. He can then begin to place 
spells into the wand to increase the number of charges, up to its 
maximum of 50. So, after close to a year of adventuring and con- 
struction, Thedaric finishes his wand of fire! Considering the 
immense time and effort this took a 14th-level character, you can 
see why magical items should be rare and unusual things! 


Qualities 


When a wizard or priest creates a magical item, he 
spends a lot of time and effort seeking a way to impart to 
his creation the particular qualities and properties he 
desires. While an exhaustive listing of each standard 
item’s usual components would be beyond the scope of 
this book (and fairly boring, as well!), we'll take a quick 
look at some good ideas for components, spells, and 
processes designed to imbue an item with the powers the 
character desires. 

Qualities are divided into twelve loose categories: con- 
trol or domination, charm or influence, perception, bodily 
alteration, bodily augmentation, movement, resistance 
and defense, attack or offense, summoning, object alter- 
ation, healing and restoration, and magical manipulation. 
Most items fall into at least one, and sometimes two, of 
these categories. 

Control or Charm: Magical devices of this sort exert a 
compulsion of some kind, forcing compliance from the sub- 
ject. Unlike items that rely on influence or the power of 
emotion, control devices allow the caster to dictate com- 
mands to the subject, which will then be followed to the let- 
ter. Good examples of items that fall into this category 
include potions of giant, dragon, or undead control, or a ring of 
mammal control or elemental control. 

Materials for these items often include specimens or 
samples from the creature in question—blood, hair, 
sweat, or more intangible qualities. Rare or exotic 
requirements might force the PC to seek out a unique 
individual among the subject race, such as a frost giant 
jarl, or a vampire mage. 


Chapter 7 


Rings, rods, and staves of this class might require deco- 
rating or engraving with a rune signifying the true, secret 
name of the subjects to be affected. A substance that is 
linked to the subject in some way could be included; for 
example, a potion of plant control might require the sap of a 
treant since treants have the ability to animate other 
plants, or the potion might have to be prepared in a vessel 
carved from a treant’s heartwood. Similarly, a powdered 
gem taken from a king’s crown might be required for a 
potion of human control. 

In many cases, some form of charm, geas, or quest spell 
will be required to enchant the item. 

Influence or Emotion: Magical devices with these 
properties enable the wielder to exert unusual influence 
over the subject or impart an emotional state of some kind 
without gaining the ability to direct and control his move- 
ments. It is a subtler type of enchantment than outright 
control or domination, with more persistent effects that 
often highlight a player's role-playing ability. The wielder 
of the item is not able to actually order the subjects about 
but instead presents the subject with strong preferences or 
impulses that the subject is free to pursue as he sees fit. 
The least subtle of these items simply delivers an over- 
whelming emotion, such as fear or panic, to send the vic- 
tims into instant flight. A ring of human influence, wand of 
fear, or philter of love all fall into this category. 

Unlike the control and charm devices, many devices in 
this category enhance the caster’s Charisma or eloquence, 
without regard to the subject’s race. Materials associated 
with the emotion required are often incorporated into 
magical items of this type; for example, a wand of fear 
might require a bone from a lich or the terror of a coward. 
Items that confer persuasiveness to a character might 
require something from a creature with natural charm or 
beguiling powers, such as a snake's tongue or wood from 
the tree of a dryad. 

Processes could include such things as etching the item 
with the tears of a liar, engraving it with the secret name of 
a terrifying fiend, or tempering it on the altar of a deity of 
love or trickery. Rods, rings, and wands of this type are 
often chased with metals related to the emotions in ques- 
tion— silver or gold for noble emotions, lead or iron for 
base ones. 

Spells that may prove useful in enchanting these items 
include such things as animal friendship, emotion, enthrall, 
fear, suggestion, or mass suggestion. 

Perception: Magical items of this type extend the wearer 
or user’s perceptions in some way, enabling him to detect 
things he could not detect before, or extending the range of 
his senses beyond his immediate surroundings. Devices that 
expand the senses include such things as a ring of x-ray 
vision, a medallion of ESP, or a gem of seeing; items that extend 
the senses include potions of clairaudience or clairvoyance, 
crystal balls, and similar items. 

Materials often include samples or specimens from 
creatures who naturally possess the sense in question, 
such as the wit of a thief, the cunning of a fox, or the pick 
of a dwarf master miner. In addition, gems, glass, or stones 
of special clarity or color are often incorporated into 
devices of this nature. 

The processes required may involve more specimens of 
appropriate origin, such as polishing a magical lens with a 
paste made from the eye of a giant eagle or steeping a robe of 


eyes in the ichor of an argus. Other processes could include 
such things as grinding lenses or orbs, sanding items with 
special mixtures or compounds, magnetizing metal wands, 
or painting or inscribing an item in a certain design. 

All kinds of divination spells—clairaudience, clairvoyance, 
ESP, detect lie, or true seeing, for example—may be part of the 
item creation process. 

Movement: A great number of magical items impart 
some supernatural means of travel. Some merely augment 
the wearer’s natural abilities, while others open up entire 
new avenues of movement for the character. There are a 
number of movement-enhancing items, including potions 
of flying and levitation, boots of speed, boots of striding and 
springing, carpet of flying, cloak of the bat, wings of flying, 
and many others. 

Once again, specimens from creatures possessing the 
desired abilities are often important materials. Feathers 
from rare or unusual birds are frequently used for flying 
magic, while creatures such as grells or beholders provide 
levitation properties. Other materials could be more fantas- 
tic, such as the essence of the north wind. 

Depending on the nature of the item, the process usually 
serves to seal the magical power into the item. Boots might 
be stained with a special mixture or soled by a particular 
craftsman or a special tool. Cloaks might be cured or water- 
proofed in some unusual way. 

Useful spells for items conferring movement powers 
include enchantments such as jump, haste, fly, levitate, tele- 
port, polymorph self, wind walk, or plane shift. 

Bodily Alteration: This common category for magical 
items imparts some ability or power not normally pos- 
sessed by the wearer. These abilities are not necessarily 
offensive or defensive, but they can provide the character 
with unusual resistances or camouflage in certain situa- 
tions. Magical items that fall into this category include 
potions of diminution, growth, and gaseous form; items that 
confer invisibility, blending, or disguise abilities; and items 
that provide the wearer with water breathing, adaptation, or 
the ability to change his own shape. Naturally, this cate- 
gory often overlaps with several others since the alteration 
of one’s form can augment the wearer’s powers of move- 
ment, attack, or defense. 

In addition to materials harvested from creatures with 
the desired abilities, inert objects with the desired properties 
can be used as materials for these items. For example, a dia- 
mond or crystal of perfect clarity might be useful for invisi- 
bility, while the smallest grain of sand on a beach (now 
there’s a challenge!) might be required for diminution. 
Steam from a certain volcano, or wood from a vampire’s 
coffin, could impart gaseous form. 

Since many of the items in this category are potions, any 
process that is reasonable for creating a potion could be 
used. Other items might be steeped in special solutions 
designed to imbue them with the desired powers, or pol- 
ished or painted with the materials required. 

Obviously, most of these items have spells that are 
immediately applicable to the enchantment. Enlarge or its 
reverse are good for diminution and growth; invisibility, 
water breathing, polymorph self, and change self may all be use- 
ful for items of this type. 

Bodily Augmentation:Items of this type increase abili- 
ties or skills that the wielder already possesses by making 
him stronger and more dexterous, increasing his effective 


Chapter 7 


level, or augmenting his skills in a specific way. Examples 
include a potion of giant strength or heroism, a girdle of giant 
strength, bracers of archery, or gauntlets of dexterity. The 
chief difference between this category and the previous 
one is that augmentation changes existing abilities, while 
alteration provides abilities the character would not other- 
wise have. 

There are three major classes of item that can augment 
the user’s natural abilities: potions, girdles and gauntlets, 
and books. Potions often feature the hair, blood, or sweat of 
a creature possessing the desired qualities—a giant of the 
appropriate type for a potion of giant strength or a great hero 
for a potion of heroism. Materials for persistent items might 
include such things as an arrow carved by a master elf 
fletcher, leather from the belt of a giant chieftain, or steel 
worked by the strongest ogre in the land. 

The processes required for potions have been described 
at length already. Belts, gauntlets, and other such things 
require curing, cutting and shaping, etching or inscribing, 
piercing, applying metal studs or fasteners, and finishing 
with various rubs or mixtures. 

Spells that the character may find useful include 
enchantments such as strength, bless, prayer, or spider climb. 

Resistance or Defense: This large category includes 
all kinds of devices that provide the user with a resis- 
tance, defense, or immunity to some attack form. These 
can be divided into two subcategories: physical defenses, 
which protect the user from direct attack, and magical 
defenses, which negate specific forms of damage. A few 
items in this class provide some benefits against both 
physical and magical attack. Examples of items with 
resistance or defensive powers include all kinds of magi- 
cal armor, potions of fire resistance or invulnerability, the 
various sorts of protection scrolls, rings of mind shielding, 
sustenance, or protection, cloaks of protection or displacement, 
and many others. 

Naturally, favored materials include those that are 
resistant to the type of damage defended against by the 
item. These can be minerals or substances that possess the 
qualities desired—diamonds for hardness, special clay or 
crystal for acid resistance, various metals and alloys for 
strength and resilience—or samples from a creature 
known for a certain defense, such as the hide of a dis- 
placer beast or blink dog, the scale of a dragon, or the 
shell of a giant tortoise. Finally, substances inimical to the 
creature could be used to make a ward; garlic, holy sym- 
bols, or holy water could be incorporated into an amulet 
versus undead. 

Intangible materials such as a knight’s courage, a moon- 
beam, or the morning mists on a sylvan lake may be 
required instead of physical substances. A scarab versus 
golems might require the animating spark of a flesh golem, 
or the pity of an iron golem. 

Items of this class take many shapes and forms, but 
potions, armor, clothing, and jewelry are the most common 
varieties. The processes involved depend on the exact form 
of the item. However, processes designed to lend strength— 
tempering, shellacking or enamelling, or bonding—are fre- 
quently used to finish these items. Any number of spells 
provide defenses or resistances of some kind; these may be 
useful in the creation process. 

Healing and Restoration: Resistances generally prevent 
injury from taking place, but magic of this category concen- 


112 


trates on the swift repair of damage or adverse conditions. 
Some types of item instead offer enhanced health or 
longevity; in general, if an item affects the metabolism of 
the wearer for the purpose of preserving his health, it falls 
into this category instead of bodily augmentation. Items in 
this category include potions of healing and longevity, elixirs of 
health and vitality, ring of regeneration, staff of curing, and peri- 
apts of health or wound closure. 

Many of these devices or brews require herbs, which are 
special medicines and preparations famed for their healing 
potency. These herbs may require special harvesting or 
treatment before they can be incorporated into an item. In 
addition, animal samples from creatures who enjoy the 
properties in question can be useful; for example, a ring of 
regeneration may require the heart of a troll, while very long- 
lived creatures (elves, treants, or dragons) may be useful for 
magic that prolongs life. 

Adventurers are most familiar with potions of this type, 
and these require the same steps or processes that other 
potions do—distilling, brewing, aging, purification, and so 
on. Spells of healing and restoration are often required for 
creating items of this class, which means that most of these 
devices are created by priest characters. 

Attack or Offense: As the largest single category of mag- 
ical items, these devices with offensive powers range from 
simple enchanted weapons to mighty staves with a dazzling 
array of dreadful powers. Most rods, staves, and wands fall 
into this category along with almost all weapons and a fair 
number of rings, potions, and miscellaneous magical items. 
Just like defensive items, attack devices provide the wielder 
with either combat bonuses or magical effects, and a few 
(such as a staff of power) provide both. 

Weapons and other items designed to strike blows at an 
enemy usually rely on materials designed to grant extraor- 
dinary strength, sharpness, flexibility, or lightness and ease 
of use. Special minerals for the weapon's alloy are quite 
common. In addition, weapons with special qualities (quick- 
ness, wounding, hurling, and so on) may include samples 
from creatures that naturally possess these powers; a sword 
of life stealing might require the essence of a wraith, while a 
mace of disruption could incorporate the holy symbol of a 
patriarch dead 1,000 years. 

Devices that project magical attacks at the wielder's 
enemy often require materials that reflect their nature. A 
wand of frost could be made from an icicle, the bones of a 
frost giant shaman, or the fang of a white dragon. A staff of 
thunder and lightning might require wood taken from a light- 
ning-struck treant; a ring of shocking grasp that is etched with 
a solution made from the blood of electric eels is also appro- 
priate. Obviously, there is a wonderful variety of ideas to 
choose from! 

The process involved reflects the item in some way. 
Again, items meant to be employed as weapons will often 
feature some kind of tempering or strengthening, while 
other items could be finished in any number of ways. Items 
of this type that require charges may need certain spells to 
be cast into them over and over again during the creation 
process. 

Magical Manipulation: Magical items that affect other 
magical items, provide magical powers to their owners, or 
somehow augment or enhance the spell capability of their 
owners belong to this group. These items are among the 
most potent in the AD&D game system. This category 


Spell Research & Magical Item Creation 


includes rings of spell storing, spell turning, and wizardry; rods 
of absorption and cancellation; wand of negation; pearl of power; 
incense of meditation; book of infinite spells; and the beaker of 
plentiful potions. 

Generally, items of this sort require either highly magi- 
cal or highly antimagical materials since they are 
designed to manipulate the very stuff of magic itself. 
Magical materials include special alloys of meteoric or 
extraplanar minerals, as well as things such as a unicorn's 
horn, a kirin’s hooves, the bones of an archmage, or the 
holy symbol of a saint. Antimagical materials could con- 
sist of specimens from creatures with high magic resis- 
tance, iron taken from a nonmagical prime material 
world, or wood from a tree rooted in a magic-dead area in 
worlds where such places exist. 

Processes suitable for items of this type may involve pol- 
ishing or etching with a solution of magical or antimagical 
substances, tempering or engraving it in a place of great 
magical potential (the extraplanar domain of a god of 
magic, for example), or bathing it in the raw stuff of magic, 
such as a wild mage's wildfire spell. 

Spells suitable for empowering magic-manipulating 
items include dweomers such as antimagic shell, dispel magic, 
Mordenkainen's disjunction, or spell turning. Priests may rely 
on imbue with spell ability or holy word. 

Matter Manipulation: Items of this sort are designed to 
have their greatest effects on inanimate objects or sub- 
stances by transforming, destroying, or otherwise altering 
something without making a direct attack. Matter-manipu- 
lating devices include potion of sweetwater, oil of timelessness, 
wand of flame extinguishing, decanter of endless water, maul of 
the titans, or the horn of collapsing. While many of these 
devices have obvious applications as weapons in certain sit- 
uations, in most cases this is an incidental benefit or hazard 
of their normal function. 

Materials for these items often consist of substances that 
have the effect desired or animal samples from creatures 
that can perform the intended action. For example, a wand of 
flame extinguishing could incorporate ice or water from the 
heart of the Elemental Plane of Water, while a spade of colos- 
sal excavation might require the ground-up claws of a giant 
badger to be mixed into the alloy for the shovel’s blade. Ina 
couple of cases, the item contains some kind of link to one 
of the elemental planes and produces an endless supply of 
one substance or another. 

The process varies with the type of item; tools may 
require balancing, sharpening, or tempering of some kind. 
Spells that may be useful include dig, move 
earth, temporal stasis, purify food and drink, and 
other spells designed to affect objects. 

Summoning; Items that summon mon- 
sters, servants, or champions to aid the 
wielder fall into the class of summoning 
devices. In addition to the devices which 
obviously bring creatures from distant 
locales, figurines of wondrous power and other 
objects that transform into living servitors 
can be considered summoning devices since 
the overall effect (i.e., the user gains a useful 
ally of some kind) is much the same. Other 
summoning items include a ring of djinni 
summoning, staff of swarming insects, brazier 
commanding fire elementals, pipes of the sewers, 


113 


and the horn of Valhalla. 

Summoning devices almost always include materials that 
are pleasing to the creatures to be commanded, or at least sig- 
nify them in some way. For example, a horn of Valhalla might 
require the courage of a berserker, iron from the riven shield 
of a mighty hero, or gold won from a dragon's hoard. 
Devices built to summon extraplanar monsters often feature 
material collected on the subject creature's home plane. 

The finishing processes of a summoning device usually 
reinforce the bond with the particular creature by bathing or 
steeping the item in the creature's blood or by somehow 
imbuing it with a substance desired by the monster. Several 
spells may prove useful in creating these items, including 
gate, exaction, entrapment, conjure elemental, or binding. 


Items That No Player Character 
Should Create 


The rules for creating magical items allow the DM a 
great amount of latitude in determining just how difficult 
the creation of any particular item is going to be. After all, 
the search for a few exotic materials and processes can keep 
an ambitious PC busy for years! And the rules have been 
scaled to make the most powerful and deadly items prohibi- 
tively expensive and time-consuming. But, despite these 
safeguards, there are still a few items that are just too pow- 
erful for a player character to create. 

The first item is actually an entire category—magical 
books. Books, tomes, librams, manuals, and other such 
items provide the character with the ability to build himself 
an instant level gain or quickly enhance his ability scores. In 
most campaigns, it’s safe to assume that magical books are 
demi-artifacts endowed with a special purpose and a near- 
sentient talent for skipping out on their present owners. For 
whatever reasons, powers beyond mortal ken had a hand in 
the creation of these devices, and the only characters who 
can duplicate the feat are those who stand on the verge of 
divine ascension. 

The next two items are simply so inexplicably weird 
that the reasons why a PC would wish to create one or the 
other is almost impossible to fathom. These are the deck of 
many things and the spliere of annihilation. Both have poten- 
tially disastrous consequences for a campaign and should 
be extremely rare in any event. In particular, players seem 
to have a vindictive streak with regard to spheres of annihi- 
lation, using them to do things like drain seas and devour 


planets. The DM is well advised to prevent PCs from 
making a few dozen of these to liven up his world. The 
deck of many things, on the other hand, offers instant level 
gains and other such game-busting benefits. If a group of 
PCs finds one after an arduous adventure and chooses to 
experiment with it, they've earned the privilege. But 
preparing a new deck on demand is a privilege too dan- 
gerous for most players. 

The last category is the least spectacular: special racial 
magic, such as cloaks or boots of elvenkind. Unless the 
character is a member of the race in question, he should- 
n't be able to create these items. However, if the charac- 
ter is an elf (for example), and he's a priest that has risen 
high enough in level to contemplate the manufacture of 
these devices, there's no reason the DM couldn't allow 
him to do so as long as he follows the normal rules for 
item creation. 


CCUAS Pla StCal LLCS 

Items that possess charges, such as most wands or 
rods, can be recharged. Some item descriptions name the 
particular class and level of character that can recharge 
the item; for example, a rod of security can only be 
recharged by the combined efforts of a wizard and priest 
of 18th level or higher. If the item description does not 
specify the level required to recharge it, then it can be 
recharged by any character who can create an item (i.e., 
an 11th-level priest, or a wizard with the ability to cast 


| XX) 


enchant an item), as long as the character can also cast the 
highest-level spell simulated or cast by the item. For 
example, the highest-level spell incorporated in a wand of 


fire is wall of fire, a 4th-level wizard spell, which can be 


cast by a wizard of 7th level or higher; therefore, if the 
wizard knows wall of fire, it's the requirement to enchant an 
item that is the pressing issue in this case. 

If the character can use the appropriate spells, an item 
can be recharged by simply casting enchant an item and then 
making a saving throw vs. spell to see if the spell takes. 
(Priests spend a week praying at their consecrated altar to 
recharge their items.) If the enchant an item succeeds, the 
character may then cast the appropriate spells into the item, 
taking 1d4 hours per spell. If the preparatory spell fails, 
then the caster must make another saving throw vs. spell 
with a —1 penalty this time; failing this save results in the 
item's ruin. It will never be usable again. 

Assuming the character doesn't spoil the item by 
attempting to recharge it, he may then begin to place spells 
of the appropriate type into the item. As long as he begins 
the next spell within 24 hours of finishing the last one, he 
can pour charges into the item without stopping to use 
enchant an item again. Success is automatic, and the charac- 
ter can place as many (or as few) additional charges into 
the item as he likes. However, he may never overcharge 
the item by placing more charges into it than it could have 
at its maximum. For example, a ring of tlie ram can hold as 
many as 10 charges at one time, so it can't be recharged 
past that limit. 


Chapter 8: 


Spells in Combat 
© 


While many spells provide a character with information, influence, or unusual 
powers of movement, most wizards and priests seem to be interested in spells that 
bring doom and destruction upon their enemies. Naturally, there are a great num- 
ber of these enchantments, ranging from spells that annoy or hinder the subjects to 
awesome strikes that can slay dozens of monsters at once. 

In this chapter, we'll examine the use of spells on the battlefield. First of all, 
we'll take a look at characteristics or properties of combative spells—for 
example, how far away can a fireball be seen? Next, spells with special or unusual 
effects associated with them will be dealt with—just what does a fireball do to the 
air quality of a small room? For those of our readers who are familiar with the 
PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & Tactics book, we'll examine the issue of spells that 
cause knockdowns and the possibility of critical strikes or specific injuries 
caused by spell damage. 


S tl If you've played the AD&D 
pe game for any amount of time, 

apiat; ou are already quite familiar 
Characteristics with a number ol spell charac- 
teristics such as range, duration, area of effect, and other such 
attributes. Some characteristics are fixed values, while others 
may vary with the caster's level. PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells & 
Magic introduces the new characteristics of casting subtlety 
and sensory signature, which describe the obviousness of a 
spell’s casting or effects. 

In addition to perception characteristics, we'll also take a 
look at spells that may create knockdowns (a concept from 
the PLAYER’s OPTION: Combat & Tactics book), as well as spells 
that require attack rolls on the part of the caster. 


Casting Subtlety 

In many situations, a wizard or priest couldn’t care less 
who sees him casting a spell. When an archmage is getting 
ready to electrocute a band of ogres with his chain lightning 
spell, he usually doesn’t take any steps to conceal what he is 
doing and casts the spell in the most expedient fashion pos- 
sible. On the other hand, some situations require great deli- 
cacy on the part of the character. When a wizard wants to 
charm a guard-captain in front of the captain’s detachment 
of soldiers, he'll have to be very careful not to tip his hand. 

Naturally, some spells are more subtle than others. There 
are a number of factors to take into consideration—the 
number of components required, the size of the material 
components, the length of the casting time, and whether or 
not the spell requires some unusual behavior or speech on 
the part of the caster. 


Noticing Spells: Who notices when spells are being cast? 
Generally, anyone who is directly observing the caster 
notices the strange gestures or air of concentration that 
characterize a spell. Depending on the lighting conditions 
and the amount of distractions nearby, an observer might be 
able to notice the spellcaster's actions from as far as 30 to 50 
feet away. Casual observers—people who are on the scene, 
but don't have any particular reason to be watching the 
spellcaster—rarely notice the spell unless it's unusually 
obvious. If it's important to know whether or not a particu- 
lar NPC or monster notices the spellcaster's actions, the DM 
can make an Intelligence check for that character (Intelli- 
gence acts as a measure of a character's perceptiveness). 

Subtlety Rating: A spell's subtlety rating is the overall 
measure of how easily the caster's actions are detected by 
an observer. In some cases, the spell is automatically 
detected; any character within 10 feet who specifically 
watches the spellcaster (for example, someone engaged in 
melee with the caster, or a vigilant guard) will automatically 
notice that the character is attempting a spell. However, if 
an Intelligence check is used to determine whether or not a 
character notices a spell, the subtlety rating is used as a 
modifier to the character's roll. 

The spell's subtlety rating is figured as shown in Table 
39: Spell Subtlety Modifiers. 

Casting time is an important factor in the subtlety of a 
spell, since the longer the character is involved in the spell, 
the more likely it is that someone will notice him. The num- 
ber of components involved measures how complicated the 
spell is and how difficult it is to cast. Last but not least, 
some spells clearly require some unusual actions or behav- 
iors that may be hard to disguise. However, if the caster can 


Chapter 8 


Spell Subtlety Modifiers 


Modifier 
+1 
+2 
+3 
+5 
+1 
+1 
+1 
+1 


Condition 

Casting time of 4 or higher 

Casting time of 7 or higher 

Casting time of one round or more 
Casting time of one day or more 
Includes verbal component 

Includes somatic component 

Per three material components included 
Spell includes unusual action (singing, 
clapping, etc.) 

Spell requires dramatic action (shatter- 
ing gem or breaking item, capering and 
dancing, shouting, etc.) 

Spell requires very obvious action (a full 
religious ritual, drawing a circle on the 
ground with powder, etc.) 

Character going out of his way to be 
noticed 

Poor lighting 

Background noise can mask sounds 
Distracting activity nearby 


+2 


+4 


+6 


-2 
-1 
-2 


mask his actions by performing them in a place or manner 
that wouldn't be suspicious (for example, dancing or clap- 
ping in a street carnival, or shouting on a crowded battle- 
field) this last modifier can be negated. 

The spell's subtlety rating is the total of its modifiers. It is 
applied to an observer's Intelligence when rolling an Intelli- 
gence check to see if he or she notices the physical act of spell- 
casting. Remember, in many cases an Intelligence check is 
completely unnecessary—a wizard who casts a spell in a pitch- 
black room won't be seen by anyone, while a priest who uses 
magic in a crowded town market is probably going to be 
noticed by someone nearby. 


Vorgaad, a necromancer, is enjoying a stout ale in his favorite 
taproom «when a pushy paladin challenges him over some trifling 
issue of raising decently buried townsfolk and using them for his 
own evil ends. Vorgaad sighs and orders his minion Azoth to 
accept the paladin's challenge. Accompanied by a large number of 
tavern-goers, all concerned step outside into the torchlit yard of 
the inn. Vorgaad decides that the paladin will cut Azoth to pieces 
if he doesn't do something and decides to use stoneskin on Azoth 
to even the odds. Stoneskin has a casting time of 1 and requires 
verbal, somatic, and material components. As a result, its total 
subtlety rating is 4. In addition, the DM rules that the act of 
sprinkling granite and diamond dust over Azoth is strange 
enough for an additional 1 bonus, giving anyone nearby a 45 
bonus to their chance to detect Vorgaad's spell. However, the light 
in the courtyard, the din of the crowd, and the spectacle of Azoth 
taunting the paladin all help Vorgaad remain unnoticed; taken 
together, these reduce the bonus to 0. Any bystander who succeeds 
in an Intelligence check sees Vorgaad cast his spell. 


Note that characters can sometimes deceive intelligent 
enemies by pretending to cast spells. The would-be trickster 
should have some idea of what he’s doing; otherwise he’s 


118 


just flailing his arms around and shouting nonsense (which 
might be a distraction in and of itself!) It also helps a lot if 
the target of the charade has seen that particular character 
use magic before since the whole act is much more credible 
when it follows a real spell. Consider how fast a band of 
trolls might scatter if they’d just been fireballed and then 
observe the same wizard getting ready to cast another spell! 


Sensory Signature 


Another characteristic of spells is their sensory signature, 
or just how noticeable the effects of the spell are. A lightning 
bolt includes a blinding flash of light and a deafening clap of 
thunder; clearly, it is much more noticeable than a shocking 
grasp or an unseen servant. Many spell effects are completely 
undetectable; for example, a charm person, polymorph self, or 
feeblemind spell may wreak all kinds of havoc with the sub- 
ject, but outside observers can’t see, smell, or hear anything 
when the spell is cast that lets them know that magic was 
just employed. Sensory effects fall into (naturally) five 
major categories: sight, hearing, smell, touch, and taste. 

Sight: Spells that create matter, project energy, or create 
visible changes in the subject have a visual sensory signa- 
ture. Any creature close enough to see the effect will be 
aware of the fact that a spell has been cast. 

Hearing: Most spells with visible signatures also have an 
audible signature as well, even if it’s a weird hum, buzz, or 
ZOTTT! as the magic affects its target. A few spells have 
particularly noticeable audible signatures, such as lightning 
bolt, shout, and other such deadly enchantments. Very few 
spells have an audible signature without some form of 
visual signature as well. 

Smell: Enchantments such as stinking cloud and cloudkill 
are the obvious offenders in this category, but other spells 
may leave olfactory signatures behind, particularly spells that 
start fires. The pungent fumes of a pyrotechnics or incendiary 
cloud spell may easily be the first thing an observer notices, 
even before he sees the smoke. 

Touch and Taste: Usually, if a character’s close enough to 
notice a spell's effect by these methods, he's already quite 
aware of the fact that magic has been used against him. 
However, in some cases, this might be a character’s only 
way to detect a spell. For example, a character who has been 
magically blinded and deafened would still feel the warmth of 
a distant fireball on his face or feel the tremors caused by a 
priest's earthquake. 


Strength of Sensory Signatures 


All sorts of conditions may influence the obviousness of 
a spell; a lightning bolt may be reduced to a dim, distant 
flash in a deep fog, but the crack of the thunderbolt will still 
be quite audible! The number of creatures affected by a spell 
can be used as a rough measure of the strength of a sensory 
signature, as shown in Table 40: Sensory Signatures. 

For example, a fireball normally affects a 20-foot radius, 
so it would be considered a huge signature detectable at a 
range of 500 feet under good visibility conditions. On the 
other hand, polymorph other affects only one target, so it 
would be a medium signature spotted at a range of 50 feet. 
Obviously, the DM has a great deal of latitude here; spells 
break the rules of the game, and many defy classification. 

If the visibility is poor, the ranges listed above could be 


reduced by as much as 50 to 75 percent. However, simple 
darkness may not conceal spells with brilliant or fiery 
effects; if anything, a fireball or lightning bolt is even more 
visible at nighttime than it is in daylight! 

Spells can usually be heard or smelled at half the range 
they can be seen and felt at one-tenth the visibility range. 
The roar of a fireball normally carries for 250 feet or so, even 
if the blast itself is out of sight around a corner or behind a 
hill. A deafened character who isn’t looking at the blast can 
still feel the heat of the fireball from as far as 50 feet away. 
However, sound and smells may not propagate in a perfect 
circle from the spell's targeting point—if there's a strong 
wind blowing, the faint stench of a stinking cloud may be 
noticeable a mile or more downwind, while stone walls and 
large areas of still water may reflect or bounce sounds to 
several times their normal carrying distance. 


Table 40: 
Sensory Signatures 


# of Targets 
Affected 
Self 

1 Target 


2-9 Targets 
10+ Targets 


40+ Targets - 


Area 
Affected 


Visible at Range 
(Size Category) 
20' (S) 

50' (M) 

200 (L) 

00" (FD 
1,000’ (G) 


. or 2’ rad. 


5 - 
30 sq. or 15' rad. 
40' sq. or 20’ rad. 

. 100’ sq. or 40’ rad. - 


Sensory Signatures by School 


While each school of magic includes a variety of different 
spells, it’s possible to make some general observations 
about each school. Both priest and wizard spells of the 
listed type share some common sensory signatures. 

Abjurations: Spells of this type fall into three loose cate- 
gories—those that create barriers, those that enhance the 
recipient's resistance to attack, and those that directly attack 
the offending creature or object. Barriers include spells such 
as protection from evil, minor globe of invulnerability, antimagic 
shell, or prismatic sphere; generally, these spells have a nor- 
mal visible signature for their size, but don’t produce odd 
smells or sounds. Spells that enhance resistance include 
sanctuary, nondetection, or protection from normal missiles. 
These enchantments have small signatures or no discernible 
signatures at all. Abjurations that attack the offending crea- 
ture include fire trap, repulsion, or banishment; they may 
include sight and sound signatures as normal for their area 
of effect. The following are some specific examples: 

Protection from evil: moderate visual; 

* Minor globe of invulnerability: small visual; 

* Banishment: small visual, small audio. 


Alterations: This broad school includes spells designed to 
accomplish a multitude of effects. As a gross generalization, 
all alterations have the signatures derived from their areas of 
effect with a couple of notable exceptions. Alteration spells 
that affect other spells (the so-called "metamagic" spells, like 
far reaching or Rary's mnemonic enhancer) and spells that imbue 
the caster with a quality that doesn’t change his appearance 
(comprehend languages, fly, or water breathing, for example) usu- 


Spells in Combat 


119 


ally have no signature at all. Specific examples appear below: 
* Burning lands: moderate visual and audio; 
* Haste: no signature at all; 
* Animal growth: moderate visual and audio. 


Conjurations: Most conjurations involve visual sensory 
signatures since people on the scene notice whatever it is 
that just appeared, but audio signatures are unusual. 
Instead, olfactory signatures—strange smells and odors— 
often accompany spells of this school. Also, tactile sensa- 
tions such as chills, goosebumps, or nausea may come into 
play when doors to other dimensions are opened in the 
vicinity. The following are specific examples: 

* Unseen servant: small audio and tactile; 

* Monster summoning: moderate visual; 

* Power word: small audio and tactile. 


Divinations: A great number of divinations have no sen- 
sory signature at all since they impart information directly 
to the caster's awareness. However, some divination spells 
(such as detect magic) cause the items or objects in question 
to glow, so that anyone nearby can see them. 


Enchantments: Spells of this type that directly manipu- 
late the subject's mental or emotional state have no signa- 
ture to speak of, but a few spells of this type that relay com- 
pulsions or orders, or affect objects instead of people (com- 
mand, bind, ray of enfeeblement, snake charm, trip, or snare, to 
name a few examples) have normal sensory signatures as 
appropriate for their areas of effect. 

e Charm person: no sensory signature; 

* Hold person: moderate visual /tactile signature; 

* Ray of enfeeblement: small visual/audio signature. 


Illusions: In one sense, illusions are nothing more than sen- 
sory signatures with no reality attached to them. The central 
spells of this school—phantasmal force and its various improve- 
ments and refinements—are designed to create the largest "sig- 
nature" possible and may easily be observed from quite a dis- 
tance away. A few illusion spells work directly on the mind of 
the subject and have a much smaller sensory effect; these 
include misdirection, phantasmal killer, or eyebite. Illusions that 
mask or conceal something else have no true sensory signature 
in and of themselves; if an invisible wizard was surrounded by a 
glow or gained a pungent odor, the spell would be worthless! 

e Phantasmal force: visual signature by area affected; 

e Wraithform: small visual /tactile signature; 

* Eyebite: no sensory signature. 


Invocations: Without question, the school of invocation/ 
evocation includes the most spectacular spells available to a 
wizard or priest. Like it or not, a wizard who throws fireballs 
and lightning bolts is creating a fireworks show that people 
can see and hear for quite a distance away. Blinding flashes 
of light and deafening peals of thunder leave no doubt in 
the observer's mind that magic is at work here. Here are 
some classic examples: 

* Magic missile: moderate visual signature; 

* Fireball: huge visual, moderate audio/ tactile; 

* Cloudkill: large visual, large olfactory. 


Necromancies: While spells of this school can be extremely 
potent, the flash and bang of a powerful invocation isn't found 


in most necromancy spells. Most necromancy spells affect only 
a single subject at a time. Tactile sensations such as chills, nau- 
sea, or disorientation are somewhat more common in necro- 
mancy than thunderous detonations or weird haloes of light. 
The following are some good examples of necromancy spells: 

* Enervation: small visual /audio/ tactile; 

e Animate dead: moderate visual / tactile; 

* Cure serious wounds: small visual / tactile. 


Spells with Attack Rolls 


A small number of spells require the caster to make an 
attack roll in order to deliver damage or other effects to the 
victim. Some of these can be very potent, but their power 
is limited by the requirement to actually touch the subject 
with a successful attack roll. Generally, the caster can exe- 
cute a touch attack (or roll an attack roll) as soon as he fin- 
ishes casting the spell, or he can delay until the end of the 
current round and then make his attack. However, if the 
caster doesn’t attempt to discharge the spell in the round 
in which it is cast, it is wasted unless the spell has a dura- 
tion of more than one round. For example, cause light 
wounds must be used in the same round in which it is 
cast, but since chill touch lasts a minimum of four rounds, 
the caster doesn’t have to “use it or lose it” in the round 
he casts the spell. 

A number of spells don’t require the caster to actually 
injure the target or breach the victim's armor; even a 
glancing touch will be sufficient to discharge the spell's 
effects on the target. Spells of this type ignore tlie portion of 
the victim's Armor Class Hiat is derived from wearing armor. 
In other words, only Dexterity-based and magical adjust- 
ments help a character's Armor Class against some magi- 
cal attacks. 


Oromonos the wizard takes a dislike to an obnoxious guard 
and decides to teach him a lesson with a shocking grasp. Since 
the spell only requires the wizard to make contact with the target, 
the DM rules that the guard's plate mail +1 won't help him. 
Only the 1-point Armor Class bonus for the armor’s enchant- 
ment counts for the guard's AC, which makes him AC 9 to 
Oromonos's attack instead of his usual AC 2. 


Which spells qualify as spells that bypass armor? Basi- 
cally, this is a judgment call for the DM. In order to gain 
this advantage, the spell description should clearly imply 
that the spell would take effect even if it struck the victim 
on the breastplate instead of requiring the caster's hand to 
actually touch exposed skin. Another way of looking at it is 
this: Does the spell emulate the action of a normal weapon, 
such as a sword, arrow, or dagger? If it does, the spell defi- 
nitely requires a normal attack roll on the part of the caster, 
but if the spell affects the victim’s life force or achieves its 
effect from simple contact, the subject’s armor is ignored. 

Spells that directly affect the subject's life force include 
most of the necromantic touch spells (chill touch, vampiric 
touch, energy drain, etc.), the various cause wound spells and 
other reversals of healing spells such as poison, slay living, 
and destruction. The victim’s armor does not help to protect 
him from these attacks. Spells that somehow change or alter 
the victim's status, such as imprisonment, plane shift, or dispel 
evil also ignore armor. 

A second category of spells that can affect the victim 


Chapter 8 


through his armor includes spells that produce energy or 
forces against which armor is useless. For example, shocking 
grasp, chromatic orb, watery double, produce flame, fire seeds, or 
crystalbrittle can affect an armored or unarmored person 
equally well. 

Some spells that use attack rolls but ignore the victim's 
armor appear in Table 41: Armor-Breaching Spells. 

Spells that create physical attacks or emulate the effects of 
weapons include such enchantments as ice knife, hovering skull, 
Mordenkainen's sword, and spiritual hammer. Since these spells 
manifest as tangible weapons and are wielded in the same 
way, the subject is allowed the full benefit of his or her armor. 
See Table 42: Armor-Observing Spells. 


Table 41: 
Armor-Breaching Spells 


Wizard ws Priest ghi wo 


shocking grasp (1st) cause blindness or deafness (3rd) 
ghoul touch (2nd)' cause disease (3rd) 


watery double (3rd chaotic sleep (4th)? 
fire aura (4th)! poison (4th) 


Otto’s irresistible dance (8th) plane shift (5th) 
crystalbrittle (9th) slay living (5th) 


seclusion (6th)? 
Sol's searing orb (6th)? 
destruction (7th) 


' From The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
2 From Tome of Magic 


Table 42: 


Armor-Observing Spells 


Wizard Spells 


snapping teeth (3rd)! 

turn pebble to boulder (4th 
claws of the umber hulk (6th)? 
tentacles (6th)! 
Mordenkainen's sword (7th) 
shadow form (8th)! 


fist of stone (1st)? 

ice knife (2nd)! 

Melf's acid arrow (2nd) 
bone club (3rd)! 
hovering skull (3rd)! 


Melf's minute meteors (3rd) 


Priest Spells 


magical stone (1st) 
shillelagh (1st) 


flame blade (2nd) 
spiritual hammer (2nd) 


From The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
From Tome of Magic 


Spells in Combat 


PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & Tactics: In the revised initia- 
tive system introduced in the Combat & Tactics book, spells 
that require attack rolls are cast as normal (i.e., on the fast, 
average, or slow phase, as appropriate for the casting time). 
After the spell is invoked, the caster may then make his 
attack for the round in any subsequent phase. For example, 
a wizard who casts chill touch, a fast spell, may then make a 
touch attack in the average, slow, or very slow phases. Note 
that the character still receives only one attack per round. 

Even though the wizard will often be ‘unarmed’ when he 
uses a touch attack spell, he does not provoke an attack of 
opportunity since he’s not attempting to initiate unarmed 
combat. All he needs to do is touch the subject, not land a 
full-force punch or wrestle with the fellow. However, a vic- 
tim who is guarding will still be able to make his own attack 
before the wizard can deliver his touch-based attack. 


Knockdowns 


The concept of knockdowns was introduced in the PLAYFR’S 
Option: Combat & Tactics rulebook. Knockdowns are hits that 
send the victim flying or put him on the ground, knocking him 
prone. The ability to cause a knockdown varies from weapon 
to weapon, and the larger the target, the more resistant he is to 
knockdown results. Very few attacks have the power to put a 
frost giant flat on his back! 

While a club-wielding giant or a powerful barbarian obvi- 
ously has the potential to take an opponent off his feet, 
many spells also have the ability to drive a victim to the 
ground with tremendous force, shock, or concussion. In 
some cases, spell energy may cause knockdowns through 
spasms, intense pain, or physiological shock as well as sheer 
impact energy. 

Knockdown Die: The likelihood of a weapon (or a spell) 
to cause a knockdown is governed by the size of the knock- 
down die. Any time a character suffers damage from a spell, 
the caster may roll a knockdown die to see if there is a 
chance for a knockdown. If the number rolled on the knock- 
down die is higher than the victim’s knockdown number, he 
must roll a saving throw vs. death magic or fall down. 

Usually, being knocked down forces the character to 
spend his next action or attack standing again. Standing is 
treated as moving half the character’s normal movement 
rating, so a knocked-down fighter could choose to stand in 
the following round and still receive his normal allotment of 
melee attacks, while a knocked-down archer who stood up 
would have to fire at his normal rate of fire. (See What 
You Can Do in One Round, page 122 of the PHB.) 

While a character is on the ground, he is especially vulner- 
able to attack. Anyone attacking the knocked-down character 
gains a +4 bonus to hit, and the prone character may not 
apply his Dexterity adjustment (if any) to his Armor Class. 
Obviously, it's worth the time to stand up again! 

Knockdown Number: A character's resistance to knock- 
downs is measured by his knockdown number. Size is the 
most important characteristic here, although a character with 
a good saving throw will avoid many knockdowns regard- 
less of his size. See Table 43: Knockdown Numbers by Size. 


Oromonos isn't done with that guard yet. Since the shocking 
grasp didn't deter the fellow, Oromonos throws a lightning bolt af 
him at point-blank range. The lightning bolt has a knockdown die 
of d12 (we'll discuss knockdown die sizes for particular spells in a 


121 


moment), and Oromonos rolls an 8 with the d12 while he’s rolling 
his damage for the spell. Since the guard is a human (size M) and 
therefore knocked down on a 7 or better, he must now make a saving 
throw vs. death magic or hit the turf. Although the fellow does save 
against the lightning bolt itself, he blows his knockdown save and 
winds up on the ground, wondering what hit him. 


Spells and Knockdown Dice 


Clearly, not every spell has the potential for a knock- 
down. Enchantments such as charm person or slow may cre- 
ate serious difficulties for the victim, but they’re not going 
to throw him to the ground in the process. Other spells 
cause 'knockdowns' just by their nature; sleep, grease, and ice 
storm can put creatures on the ground by virtue of their nor- 
mal effects. Table 44: Spells with Knockdown Effects list 
spells that actually use the knockdown rules. 

For spells from other sources, use your best judgment 
in assigning a knockdown die. First of all, the spell must 
deliver energy to the target or cause a physiological reac- 
tion that might cause the subject to lose control of his 
limbs—for example, the agony associated with Abi- 
Dalzim's horrid wilting or throbbing bones has a chance to 
distract even the stoutest warrior, despite the fact that nei- 
ther spell actually strikes the victim with a tangible blow. 
You may observe that lightning bolts are particularly good 
for knockdowns, because they strike the target with an 
immense amount of energy and electrocute the victim at 
the same time! 

Spells that stun, daze, sleep, confuse, charm, hold, trip, 
fumble, or tangle the opponent don't need a knockdown 
die; if the spell succeeds, the victim is hindered by the 
action of the spell itself, and a knockdown would be 
redundant. Last but not least, spells that simulate weapons 
(Mordenkainen's sword, for example) can use a knockdown 
die based on the weapon itself; see PLAYER's OPTION: Com- 
bat & Tactics for a complete listing of weapons and knock- 
down ratings. 


Everyone knows that a fireball does 1d6 
damage per level of the caster, but have 
you ever stopped to consider what else a 
ball of flame 40 feet across might do? 
First of all, a fireball will start a lot of 
fires, especially in medieval settings 


Collateral 
Spell 
Effects 


with thatch-roofed 
houses, garments 
redolent with ani- 
mal oils and tan- 
ning chemicals, 

and lots of wooden 
construction. Sec- 
ondly, the residual 
fires left by a fireball 
will produce 
smoke—probably a 
lot of it, as many 
fires smoke very 
heavily just when 
they're getting 
started. Next, a fire- 
ball may foul the air 


Table 43: 
Knockdown 
Numbers by Size 


Knockdown 
Number 
3+ 
5+ 
7+ 
9+ 
11+ 
13+ 


Size 


Category 
T 


di "i 


ay 


st 


D "(Mit 


of a confined space by consuming a great amount of the 
available oxygen. But, for most players and DMs, the same 
fireball did 17 points of damage, and that was it! 

In this section, we'll take a quick look at unusual effects 
that may accompany the use of many powerful spells. In mil- 
itary terms, these incidental effects are referred to as collateral 
damage—a PC wizard probably isn't trying to start a three- 
alarm fire when he torches a city guard with his burning 
hands spell, but it might happen anyway. Depending on the 
DM's mischievousness, all kinds of mayhem may break loose 
when wizards start throwing heavy-damage spells around. 

The most important characteristic of a spell for purposes of 
collateral effects is its general type and purpose. There isn't a 
whole lot of fallout from a charm person or magic missile spell, 
but many other spells create environmental effects that may 
be long-lasting or even permanent. 


Fire 

A great number of spells employ fire as a weapon. Fires 
create smoke, foul contained atmospheres, and may spread 
to nearby flammables. 

Visibility: Flames don’t produce smoke—burning 
objects or creatures do. A fireball thrown in an unfurnished 
room of bare stone against a creature that won't burn well 
(say, an ice elemental) will leave very little in the way of 
heavy smoke. On the other hand, a fireball thrown in a sod 
house or a wooden building cluttered with greasy old furs 
and shoddy furniture will create a number of smoky resid- 
ual fires and quickly cloud up the surroundings. Gener- 
ally, a fire spell creates a cloud of smoke in its area of effect 
that persists for 2d4 rounds. This obscures vision, forcing 
all characters and monsters to suffer a -2 penalty on mis- 


122 


Chapter 8 


sile attacks through the smoke. The stink of burning 
objects may also hinder creatures that rely on scent to 
detect their enemies. 

Environmental Effects: Fire spells naturally cause fires. See 
Item Saving Throws on page 58 of the DMG. In addition to 
the affected characters, the DM can roll an item saving throw 
for the surrounding area; for example, if a stone room is fur- 
nished with tapestries and wooden benches, the DM can use 
the row for cloth and thin wood. 

If an item (or a victim's clothing, for example!) fails its 
saving throw, it may be on fire. People who catch fire suffer 
1d4 points of damage in the following round and an addi- 
tional die of damage in each subsequent round—for 
example 2d4 in the second round, 3d4 in the third round, 
and so on—until they extinguish the flames. The victim 
must pass a saving throw vs. death magic in order to extin- 
guish the flames and may gain a +2 to +8 bonus (DM's dis- 
cretion) if he uses a sensible method for doing so. 

Large fires in confined areas (for example, dungeon rooms) 
can be especially dangerous since they deplete the oxygen in 
the air, making it unfit for breathing. If a fire fills more than 
50% of an enclosed room or space, it fouls the air. Air-breath- 
ing creatures inside the room are affected as if the entire 
chamber had been targeted with a stinking cloud spell. After 
1d6 rounds of ventilation (or 1d6 hours in an unventilated 
area), the atmosphere returns to normal. 

One more thing about big fires: they make things hot. Imag- 
ine a character's surprise when he goes to open the castle gates 
just after the wizard's fireball goes off! In fact, the DM may rule 
that metal and stone objects retain enough heat to be affected 
as if they were struck with a heat metal spell, although under 
most circumstances they will only be heated to the minimal 
damage level of the spell. 


Spells in Combat 


Spell 


Abi-Dalzim's horrid wilting? 


Bigby's forceful hand 
Bigby's crushing hand 
Bigby's grasping hand 
Bigby's clenched fist 
blade barrier 

bone club 

call lightning 

cause serious wounds 
cause light wounds 
cause critical wounds 
chain lightning 
chromatic orb! 

claws of the umber hulk? 
cone of cold 

delayed blast fireball 
dust devil 

explosive runes 

fire seeds (missile) 
fire trap 

fire storm 

fireball 

fist of stone 

flame arrow 

flame strike 


Die 
d12 
d12 
d12 
d12 
d20 
d10 


Table 44: 


Spells with Knockdown Effects 


Knockdown 


Spell 
gust of wind 


ice storm (hailstorms) 

lightning bolt 

magic missile 

magical stone 

Melf's acid arrow 

meteor swarm 

Mordenkainen’s faithful 
hound 

Mordenkainen's sword 

Otiluke's freezing 
sphere (globe) 

prismatic spray 

repulsion 

shocking grasp 

shout 

spiritual hammer 

tentacles! 

throbbing bones! 

thunder staff 

turn pebble to boulder? 

vortex? 


Knockdown 


Die 
d6 
d12 
d12 
d6 
d10 
d12 
d6 
d6 
d6 
d20 


d10 
d8 


d10 
d12 
d10 
d8 
d8 
d10 
d8 
d8 
d10 
d12 
d10 


suffering a —4 penalty on any further 
item saving throws. 

As noted under fires, metal or stone 
objects subjected to supernaturally 
cold temperatures may be affected as 
if struck by a chill metal spell. 


Electricity and Lightning 


The distinction between lightning 
and electricity is principally one of 
hitting power. A lightning bolt’s 
immense voltage allows it to over- 
come the resistance of many things 
that normally don’t conduct electric- 
ity at all. In addition, the power of a 
lightning bolt is so great that the tar- 
get can blow itself to pieces as its flu- 
ids or water content is flashed to 
steam and then expands. This is why 
trees hit by lightning bolts split open; 
the water in the wood bursts the tree 
from inside as it turns to steam. 

In the AD&D magic system, light- 
ning bolt, call lightning, chain lightning 
and blue dragon breath are lightning 
attacks. Shocking grasp, glyphs of ward- 
ing, and the touch of a volt, shocker, 
or electric eel are electricity attacks. 

Visibility: The bright arc of electric- 
ity or the flash of lightning as it 
strikes can temporarily dazzle people 


! From The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
? From Tome of Magic 


Cold 


Cold-based attacks are rarer than fire-based attacks but 
are still fairly common among wizard spells. The most obvi- 
ous examples are ice storm, cone of cold, and Otiluke's freezing 
sphere. 

Visibility: The supernatural temperatures of a cold-based 
spell can cause some surprisingly thick fog by condensing 
water vapor in the air. The more humid the setting, the more 
likely it is for cold-based attacks to leave a residue of fog. Gen- 
erally, cold spells create a cloud of fog equal in size to the 
spell's area of effect. The fog persists for 1d6 rounds, and any 
attacks in or through the mist suffer a 2 attack penalty. 

Environmental Effects: Cold spells don't start fires, but 
they can leave a dangerous coating of ice on the ground; in 
fact, the ice storm spell specializes in this effect. Creatures 
moving in the area of effect have a 25% chance of risking a 
slip or fall, which a saving throw vs. death magic (or a Dex- 
terity check, DM's choice) can avert. Note that this is not as 
dangerous as the sleet application of ice storm since that ver- 
sion of the spell is designed to coat the ground with slip- 
pery ice. 

Objects subjected to intense cold may be weakened or 
become unusually brittle for a short time afterwards. Even if 
an item passes the saving throw, for the next 1d6 rounds it 
is especially vulnerable to normal blows or crushing blows, 


125 


looking right at the bolt or spark, 
especially when the viewers' eyes are 
adjusted to darkness or dim light. In 
this case, the DM may require onlook- 
ers to make a saving throw vs. death magic or suffer a -1 
attack penalty for 1d3 rounds as their vision clears. 

In addition, lightning and electricity may start fires if 
applied to flammable targets (wood or trees usually, but not 
people). The smoke from a lightning-struck fire can be just 
as disorienting as the smoke from a fireball. 

Environmental Effects: Lightning and electricity leave few 
lingering effects behind; a stink of ozone (ionized air) may 
persist for 1d6 rounds, possibly confusing creatures that rely 
on smell to detect their prey, and objects may be magnetized by 
their exposure to powerful electrical currents. This is not fan- 
tasy magnetism capable of picking up an armored warrior 
and hurling him through the air; this is low-level magnetism 
capable of skewing compass needles and lodestones. 

Flammable items that fail their saving throw vs. light- 
ning or electricity must make a second saving throw vs. 
normal fire or begin to burn. This may in turn cause smoke 
and other such effects. 

Lightning bolts cast underwater electrocute everything 
within a 20-foot radius of the bolt's origin. Since the wizard 
can start the bolt up to 40 feet away from his position, he 
would be wise to do so when using this spell in an aquatic 
setting. If a caster out of the water throws a lightning bolt 
into the water, the bolt has its normal effect on any creature 
in its path until it strikes the surface of the water; at that 
point, it expands in a 20-foot-radius globe in the water, and 
goes no further. 


Acid 

Another unusual attack form is acid. Very few spells 
make use of acid as a weapon, although a fair number of 
monsters have acid-based attacks, including the ankheg, the 
black dragon, and some slimes, puddings, and oozes. 

Visibility: Acid at work tends to give off noxious fumes, 
usually in an area about 5 to 15 feet in diameter; the more acid, 
the larger the area affected. The fumes may obscure missile 
and melee attacks at the DM's option, creating a—1 penalty for 
any creature trying to attack through the smoke and haze. 

Environmental Effects: Acid fumes are unpleasant to be 
around and may cause severe irritation of a victim's eyes, 
nose, and throat. If the DM desires, creatures within the 
cloud of fumes must roll saving throws vs. death magic or 
suffer a 2 penalty to attack rolls and Armor Class as long as 
they remain nearby. This means that a character struck by 
Melf's acid arrow may suffer combat penalties as well as 
damage from the spell. 


Wind 

Spells or effects that generate powerful gusts of wind can 
create a number of collateral effects. Enchantments such as 
dust devil, gust of wind, wind wall, and control wind are the 
most common in this group, and monsters such as djinni or 
aerial servants can create whirlwinds. 

Visibility: While a blast of wind doesn't necessarily 
obscure visibility, a gust on a very dusty or sandy surface is 
a different story altogether. On a dry, gritty surface, a wind- 
based spell or attack will create a rolling dust cloud that cre- 
ates a 2 penalty for people trying to fight or fire missiles 
into or through the area of effect. 

A blast of wind can also make it very difficult to hear 
anything above the roaring of the air and may carry a char- 
acter's scent downwind and away from a creature that 
relies on smell or hearing to locate its enemies. 

Environmental Effects: Strong winds can create all kinds 
of havoc in a dungeon by extinguishing torches and candles 
and plunging the party into darkness. Above the ground, it 
can carry the sparks from a campfire farther than normal or 
blow over a lamp, possibly starting an unexpected fire. 


Other Collateral Effects 


Magic is astonishing and almost always has effects or 
uses that are not immediately apparent. Feel free to impro- 
vise when a player in your campaign tries something that 
seems especially clever—or stupid. What happens when a 
purple worm is polymorphed into a puppy dog just after 
swallowing a still-living character? Or how do the various 
rays of the prismatic spray affect the area around them if they 
miss their target? What kind of wreckage does an acid storm 
spell leave behind when cast in a forest clearing? Be creative 
and take your best guess; the AD&D game is made of 
exceptions and special cases. 


A Sometimes, a spell or a special attack 
Cri tical strikes with sak evasit effect that 
Strike g even the toughest opponent can be crip- 
pled or killed by a single blow. Critical 
strikes reflect this capability; even a lowly magic missile 


Chapter 8 


124 


might strike the cyclops in his eye, while a lightning bolt that 
strikes a warrior dead-on can kill him in an instant. 

Critical strikes add flavor and pseudo-realism to the 
AD&D game by increasing the likelihood that the use of a 
spell will decide a fight one way or the other. An AD&D com- 
bat can be reduced to a simple process of attrition, but the use 
of magic should create the potential for a battle-ending injury. 
Even if the evil giant has 90 hit points, and the wizard’s fireball 
won't do more than 42 points of damage at its very best, a crit- 
ical strike may allow that spell to severely wound or incapaci- 
tate the giant. After all, it's not very heroic to throw six volleys 
of magic missiles into the same evil high priest; it denigrates 
the value of magic. 

Critical strikes can also represent special attack forms com- 
mon among monsters. Creatures that spit acid, breathe fire, or 
exhale poison gas are just as likely to kill a hero as a creature 
that rends him limb from limb with fang and claw. A hell 
hound may only inflict 4 to 7 points of damage with its fiery 
breath, but that doesn't mean that a 60-hit point fighter should 
not be threatened by the monster's attack! Critical strikes help 
to keep characters honest since any attack could result in 
severe injury or death. 


When Do Critical Strikes Occur? 


The critical strike system presented here is meant to be an 
expansion of the critical hit system from PLAYER’S OPTION: 
Combat & Tactics. However, some of the mechanics that work 
for attack rolls and Armor Class can't be applied directly to 
saving throws. For a spell or an attack to have the potential 
for a critical strike, it must do physical damage. While it's 
easy to imagine a character who is double-charmed or double- 
held, it's somewhat hard to extend the effects of such spells 
past the obvious results. After all, by failing the saving throw, 
the character already suffered whatever he was going to suf- 
fer for being subjected to the spell. 

Critical strikes occur when the target rolls a natural 3 or 
less on his saving throw and misses his saving throw by a 
margin of 5 points or more. If the spell in question does not 
allow a saving throw, the target still checks for a critical strike 
by rolling a saving throw versus the attack; this special sav- 
ing throw has no other purpose than determining whether or 
not the character suffers a critical strike. 

High-level casters or monsters are more likely to cause 
critical strikes, as shown on Table 45: Critical Strike Chance 
by Caster Level. 

Note that spells written on scrolls are assumed to be 
scribed at the 6th level of ability or one level higher than the 
minimum level required to cast them, whichever is higher; 
for example, a 5th-level wizard spell requires a 9th-level 
caster, so it is scribed at the 10th level of ability, but a 1st- 
level spell (requiring only a 1st-level caster) is written at the 
6th level of ability. 

Monsters with special attacks that may entail critical 
strikes use the table above, substituting their Hit Dice for 
caster level. As one might suspect, ancient red dragons of 
the 20 Hit Dice or higher variety can inflict devastating criti- 
cals with their fiery breath! 


Beshira the Sorceress, a 4th-level mage, hurls a magic missile 
at an unfortunate orog. Normally, a magic missile allows no sav- 
ing throw, but the orog will still roll a d20 for a saving throw vs. 
spell just to see if he fails critically or not. The orog is a 3 Hit Die 


Spells in Combat 


monster, which means that his saving throw vs. spell is a 16. The 
orog rolls an 8, which can't be a critical strike, since it’s not a nat- 
ural 3 or less— even though he missed his save by 8 points! 

A few levels later, Beshira encounters an angry cloud giant 
and decides that lightning bolt is the best way to deal with him. 
The cloud giant is a 16 Hit Die monster and only needs a 7 to 
make its saving throw. However, the giant rolls a 4, missing its 
save! Since Beshira is now an 8th-level sorceress, this natural 4 
may be a critical strike—except the giant still didn't miss by 5 
points. (He would have had to roll a 1 or 2 to miss his saving 
throw by a margin of 5 points.) 

Later in the same fight, Beshira exhausts her spells and hauls 
out a wand of fire to use against the giant. Against rods, staves, 
and wands, the giant's saving throw is a 6, so he will only suffer a 
critical strike on a roll of 1. 


Critical Strikes the Easy Way 


If the math of the preceding system seems to be a little 
too much for your campaign, try this method: the attacker 
rolls 1d20 when he throws the spell or uses his special abil- 
ity. If the die comes up an 18 or higher, the victim suffers a 
critical strike if he fails his saving throw. If the spell or effect 
doesn’t allow a saving throw, the victim may still attempt a 
saving throw vs. death magic to avoid the critical strike 
itself, although he still suffers the effects of the spell even if 
he avoids the critical hit. This system doesn’t account for the 
skill or power of the spellcaster or monster, but it may be a 
little faster than figuring out how much someone missed 
their save by. 


Types of Critical Strikes 


Obviously, the exact nature of the injuries a character 
suffers from a critical strike will vary with the form of 
energy or magic that hits him. Different spells or effects can 
burn, char, dissolve, electrocute, freeze, impale, maul, 
scorch, or wound the victim in different ways. Therefore, 
there are ten different critical strike charts, each represent- 
ing a different attack form. 

Readers familiar with the critical hit system from 
PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & Tactics may observe that the tar- 
get type (humanoid, monster, or animal) is not a considera- 
tion in the critical strike charts. Instead, only one body form 
or target type is included for each attack. Optional hit loca- 
tion tables for monsters and animals are provided in case 
you wish to incorporate them in your campaign, but you 
can use the critical strike tables for any kind of opponent as 
they are written. 

The critical strike tables include acid, cold, constriction, 
crushing, electricity, fire, impact, slashing, vibration, and 
wounding. 

Acid attacks include Melf's acid arrow, acid storm, the 
breath of a black dragon, the secretions of a black pudding, 
or the effects of holy water on certain undead. 

. Cold attacks include chill touch, cone of cold, Otiluke's 
freezing sphere, white dragon or silver dragon breath, and the 
deathly touch of a lich. 

Constriction attacks are the forte of giant snakes, monsters 
with tentacles, and spells such as Evard's black tentacles or 
Bigby's crushing hand. Anything that surrounds and squeezes 
the victim could fall into this category. 

Crushing attacks are mammoth assaults that can smash 


a person like a bug. Turn pebble to boulder, Bigby's clenched 
fist, or the blow from a ring of the ram are crushing attacks. 
Crushing can also represent the effects of a dangerous fall or 
the force of an explosion that hurls a character through the 
air. If the character’s whole body is affected by a physical 
force, it’s a crushing injury. 

Electricity includes various forms of magical lightning, 
shocking grasp, and the breath of a behir or blue or bronze 
dragon. There is no distinction between electricity and light- 
ning for critical strikes. i 

Fire is fairly obvious, but note that explosions (a gas 
spore explosion or the retributive strike of a broken staff) 
are more accurately described by crushing injuries. 

Impact injuries result from concentrated applications of 
force or small projectiles. Magic missile, spiritual hammer, or 
bullets cause impact injuries. In some cases, impact injuries 
actually penetrate the victim’s body. 

Slashing attacks include spells such as ice knife, Mor- 
denkainen's sword, and blade barrier. This category also 
includes the mauling action of some mechanical traps. 

Vibration attacks are rare, but dangerous, literally shak- 
ing the victim to pieces. A few monsters have special vibra- 
tion or sonic attacks. 

Wounding attacks result from cause light, serious or criti- 
cal wounds, and can also simulate withering, desiccation, or 
disease attacks. Wounds appear as gaping sores or 
destroyed tissue. 


Strike Location 


In the movies, the hero always manages to get shot in the 
shoulder, the leg, or just grazed in the side. Regrettably, 
adventurers aren’t always that lucky, and even a fairly minor 
critical strike—say, a magic missile—could be extremely dan- 
gerous if it strikes the character in the eye or the throat. The 
location of a critical strike is determined by rolling a d10 and 
comparing it to Table 46: Critical Strike Location. 

For your convenience, the hit locations are numbered on 
each subtable in the critical strike charts. 

Called Shots: If a spell or special attack uses a normal 
attack roll, the attacker may choose to use a called shot. A 
called shot forces the attacker to take a —4 penalty on his 
attack roll, but if it hits and inflicts a critical strike, the strike 


Table 45: 


Critical Strike Chance by 
Caster Level 


Critical Strike 
Occurs on... 
Natural 3 or less, save missed by 5 or more 


Natural 4 or less, save missed by 5 or more 

Natural 5 or less, save missed by 5 or more 

Natural 5 or less, save missed by 3 or more 
Natural 5 or less 


' Potions, wands and staves fall into this level range for 
determining critical strikes. 

? Rings, rods, and miscellaneous magical items fall into 
this range for critical strikes. 


Chapter 8 


automatically affects the location the attacker was aiming 
for. Spells that do not use attack rolls do not permit the 
caster to attempt a called shot. 

Whole-Body Injuries: Unlike most weapons, spells and 
special attacks create the possibility for whole-body injuries 
which damage a creature in several places at the same time. 
This is a function of the spell's size or area of effect. 


Huge creatures treat critical strikes as if they were one 
size smaller, so a frost giant struck by a fireball would suffer 
1d3 separate critical strikes, not 1d4. Gargantuan creatures 
reduce the strike by two size categories. Regardless of the 
size of the strike, the victim always suffers a critical strike in 
at least one hit location. 


Terthan, a human warrior, is struck by a lightning bolt and 
blows his save badly enough to qualify for a critical strike. The DM 
rules that the bolt is a large attack (two to nine targets reasonably 
approximates a lightning bolt's area of effect) so Terthan will suffer 
1d3 strikes. He rolls a 2, or two separate hits, and refers to Table 46. 
Naturally, Terthan is a humanoid; two 1d10 rolls result in a 5 
(abdomen) and an 8 (right arm). Now Terthan will go on to deter- 
mine the strike's severity and see what kind of injuries he suffers. 


Whole-body injuries can be ignored if the DM wishes; 
one roll on the hit location table should be enough for any- 
body. Whole-body injuries are a little more “realistic,” and 
they make critical strikes much more deadly, but the game 
works fine without them. 


Severity 


Naturally, critical strikes cover a great range of sever- 
ity. There’s a world of difference between a burning hands 
spell cast by a 2nd-level wizard and the awesome blast 
unleashed by an ancient, fire-breathing dragon. If the 
whole-body injury rules cover the size of the attack, sever- 
ity measures its intensity. 

The best approximation for the severity of a critical strike is 
how much damage the attack can inflict on its target. Figure 
the maximum damage potential of the spell or effect, compare 
it to the maximum, unwounded hit point total of the victim, 
and refer to Table 48: Critical Severity. 


Terthan, the warrior from the previous example, has a normal 
hit point maximum of 35 when unwounded. The lightning bolt 
was thrown by a 6th-level wizard with a potential of 6d6 points of 
damage (a maximum of 36 points). Since this is more than 
Terthan’s hit points, without being twice Terthran’s total, the 
severity roll will be 2d6. 


Refer to the appropriate critical strike chart and roll the 
severity dice indicated for the hit location. The result is the 
specific injury or effect suffered by the victim for the critical 
strike. Unlike the critical hits of the PLAYER's OPTION: Combat & 
Tactics book, critical strikes do not inflict doubled damage, and 
they do not allow the victim a special saving throw to avoid 
the specific effects. After all, the target already blew one sav- 
ing throw, or he wouldn't be rolling on the critical strike table. 


Lord Nonnach Redoff the Bold, a 20th-level warrior, rides forth 
to do battle with an adult red dragon. The dragon naturally opens 
the fray with its best fiery blast. Nonnach must make a saving 


126 


throw vs. breath weapon, needing only a 4 to succeed. Unfortu- 
nately, Nonnach rolls a 1 and misses. Since the dragon has 17 Hit 
Dice, its victims suffer critical strikes if they miss their save by at 
least 3 points and roll less than a 5—which Nonnach just did. 

Chortling with glee, the DM rules that the dragon's breath is a 
huge attack, inflicting critical strikes in 1d4 locations; Nonnach 
rolls a 3, so he'll get three separate rolls on Table 46 and winds up 
with critical strikes to the abdomen, right leg, and left arm. No, 
on to severity: the dragon's damage potential is 126 points, and 
Nonnach at his best only has 109 hit points, so each strike will be 
rolled with a severity of 2d6. In addition to the 79 points of dam- 
age Nonnach takes from the dragon's breath, he suffers minor 
injuries to his arm and abdomen, but his leg is burned off at the 
knee! (And the DM could require him to make a saving throw vs. 
death magic to check for death from massive damage, as described 
in the PHB.) All of a sudden, Nonnach finds himself wishing he 
were somewhere else entirely. 


Specific Injuries and Effects 

Usually, a critical strike results in a specific injury or 
penalty for the victim. As noted above, the victim does 
not gain a saving throw to avoid the special effects of a 
critical strike since he's already failed one pretty badly. 
However, many creatures can ignore the effects of certain 
strikes just by their nature. Most undead monsters are 
immune to cold-based attacks and therefore don't suffer 
any ill effects from cold critical strikes. Constructs such 
as golems don't have a real physiology and can ignore 
the incapacitating effects of internal injuries. Injuries are 
divided into six degrees of severity: grazed, struck, injured, 
broken, shattered and finally severed. 

Wounds or injuries are always accompanied by some 
loss of hit points, and some critical strike results may 
increase the damage caused by the spell or effect. Many 
also inflict temporary attack or movement penalties that 
persist until the character receives medical attention of 
some kind. The actual damage, or loss of hit points, may 
be recovered normally, but the injury's effects linger until 
it is specifically addressed. 


Table 46: 
Critical Strike Location 


d10' Humanoid di0' = = Monster/Animal 
1-2 ight leg z = 3 : Right foi eS Oe POS cd 


v"urpettleg HI fi rele / wing 
5 Abdomen Right hind leg 


6-7 Torso 7 Left hind leg 
8 enam Se ym MA 


9: rm 
10 Head 8-9 
10 


Torso /chest E 
Head 


' If the defender is two sizes taller or has a height advan- 
tage, roll 1d6 for location; if the attacker is two sizes taller or 
has a height advantage, roll 1d6+4 for location. 

? Rolls of 1-5 are tail hits for creatures with snake-like or 
fish-like bodies. 


Spells in Combat 


Table 47: 


Whole-Body Injuries 


# of Targets Area # of Locations 

Affected Affected Affected by Strike 
5’ sq. or 2’ rad. 1(M) 

30' sq. or 15' rad. 1d3 (L) 

40’ sq. or 20' rad. 1d4 (H) 

100’ sq. or 40’ rad. 1d6+1 (G) 


1 Target 

2-9 Targets 
10+ Targets 
40+ Targets 


After a few months of recovering from his battle with the 
dragon, Nonnach is riddled by a high-level wizard’s magic mis- 
sile spell and receives a critical strike. Magic missiles strike on 
the impact chart; the location roll is a 10 and the severity roll 
comes up as a 6, so Nonnach catches a missile in the eye. The 
spell inflicts 16 points of damage, but more importantly, Nonnach 
is temporarily blinded. He'll suffer a —4 penalty to all attack rolls 
until his injury is treated in some way, although he can recover 
the loss of hit points through magical or normal healing. 


Grazed, Singed, Chilled, Bruised: While the nature of the 
injury varies with the type of critical strike, all of these minor 
wounds fall under the category of 'grazes.' A graze is not 
very serious, although it may cause minor bleeding. A cure 
light wounds or any other healing magic capable of restoring 4 
hit points will heal a graze. Grazes also heal naturally as if 
they were a loss of 1d6 hit points; if a graze is the equivalent 
of a 2-hit point wound, a single day of rest will cure it and 


sc T mna. 
E. 


= <i 


eliminate any penalties. If a character receives healing magic, 
the graze is healed and he gets to recover hit points from the 
same spell or effect. 

Struck, Blistered: Slightly more serious than a graze, a 
‘struck’ result usually entails some kind of attack or 
movement penalties, such as a -2 penalty to attack rolls. 
Injuries of this type can be healed by a cure light wounds 
spell or other healing magic capable of restoring 5 lost hit 
points. Struck areas heal naturally as if they were a 
wound of 2d6 hit points. 

Injured, Burned, Frostbitten: Wounds of this level can 
trouble a character for many weeks; they heal naturally as if 
they were a loss of 10d6 hit points. A cure serious wounds 
spell, or any other healing magic capable of restoring 10 hit 
points or more, can repair the injury. 

Injuries almost always entail significant combat penalties 
for the character and may temporarily reduce a character's 


Table 48: 


Critical Severity 


Damage Potential vs. Severity 
Target Hit Point Total Roll 
Max. damage is less than % target hp 1d6 
Max. damage is less than target hp 2d4 
Max. damage is less than twice target hp 2d6 
Max. damage is twice or more target hp 2d8 


maximum number of hit points. Since he’s favoring a 
painful injury, he is more susceptible to attacks. Injured 
arms, legs, or tails reduce a character to 75% of his normal 
maximum hit points, while an injury to the torso, abdomen, 
or head reduces a character to 50% of his normal. (If the 
damage done by the spell or effect didn’t bring the character 
down to his new maximum, he is reduced to the lower 
number immediately, but if the damage was severe enough 
to drop the character beneath his new maximum, he doesn’t 
lose any additional hit points.) 

For example, let’s take a look at Lord Nonnach again. As 
noted in the example, Nonnach normally has a maximum of 
109 hit points. If he sustained an injury to his torso, he 
would temporarily be reduced to a maximum of 55 hit 
points. Even if the torso injury only did 10 or 15 points of 
damage, Nonnach is still going to lose half his hit points 
due to the effects of his injury! 

Broken: Most minor breaks are assumed to fall into the 
previous two categories; hairline fractures or chipped bones 
are painful, but generally minor, injuries. This category is 
reserved for severe fractures that render the limb in ques- 
tion useless. Broken bones can be mended by a cure serious 
wounds spell that is used only to knit the bone; unlike the 
grazed, struck, or injured categories, this healing spell restores 
no hit points to the character. Broken bones heal naturally as 
if they were a loss of 20d6 hit points, so a character with a 
badly broken leg won't be running sprints anytime in the 
next month or two. 

Broken arms reduce a character to 75% of his normal hit 
points, and broken ribs or legs reduce a character to 50% of 
his normal hit point maximum. Any other broken bones 
reduce a character to 25% of his normal hit point maximum. 
Continuing to adventure with a fractured skull or a few bro- 
ken vertebrae is never a good idea. 

Crushed, Shattered, Frozen, or Destroyed: A critical 
strike of this magnitude simply destroys the affected tissue 
or limb, rendering it forever useless. The victim of such a 
devastating injury never recovers his full health, without 
magical aid. A limb damaged in this way is completely use- 
less, while other areas so affected will leave the victim inca- 
pacitated. One to eight months of bed rest will be required 
before he regains even a semblance of mobility. 

An injury of this kind can only be repaired by a cure criti- 
cal wounds spell or any other magic capable of restoring at 
least 20 hit points to the victim. In addition, any bones in 
the affected area are assumed to be broken and may require 
additional magic to knit. 

Destroyed shoulders, hips, or limbs reduce a character to 
50% of his normal hit point maximum. Any other injuries of 
this severity reduce the character to 25% of his normal hit 
point maximum. At the DM's option, appropriate ability 
scores may be reduced by up to 50%; an acrobat with a 
ruined hip will never perform again. 

Severed, Dissolved, or Incinerated: Obviously, a creature 
that has a limb severed or completely removed from his body 
can no longer use that limb for movement or combat. A 
human with a severed leg can’t walk or run and is reduced to 
crawling until he finds a crutch; a character with a severed 
shield-arm can no longer employ his shield, and so on. The 
only way to undo damage of this scale is by use of the regen- 
eration spell or similar effects, or a properly worded wish. 

The shock of losing a limb will prevent a character from 
moving independently or attacking for 2d10 full weeks, 


128 


although a character who "only" loses a hand or a foot may 
be able to perform limited activities within 1d6 rounds of 
the injury, if he passes a system shock roll. Note that crea- 
tures with more than four limbs (especially insects or octo- 
pus-like creatures) are slightly more resistant to this sort of 
trauma and may be able to continue the fight after one or 
two rounds of being stunned. 

The loss of a limb will reduce a character's hit point max- 
imum by 25% for a partial loss, or 50% for a more cata- 
strophic injury. If the character is able to compensate with a 
prosthesis such as a wooden leg or a hook, the hit point loss 
may be reduced by one level. 


bleeding 

A common effect of many critical strikes is bleeding. 
Bleeding falls into three categories: minor, major, and 
severe. In many cases, bleeding may prove more dangerous 
than the original injury. 

Minor bleeding causes the victim to lose 1d2 hit points 
per full turn until the wound is magically healed or bound. 
There is a chance that minor bleeding will stop on its own; 
every time the character suffers damage from the bleeding, 
he may attempt a saving throw vs. death magic. If he suc- 
ceeds, the bleeding stops. 

Anybody (including the injured character!) can stop minor 
bleeding by applying a bandage. This requires one round. 

Major bleeding is much more dangerous, resulting in a 
loss of 1d2 hit points per round (not turn) until the injury is 
healed or bound. In effect, the standard negative 10 rule 
represents major bleeding; the character loses 1 hit point per 
round when reduced to negative hit points. 

Major bleeding can be stopped by a cure light wounds 
spell or the healing of 5 points of damage by any other 
means. In addition, the successful use of the healing profi- 
ciency halts major bleeding. If the wound is bound by an 
untrained character, make an Intelligence check for the 
would-be medic; if he fails, he is unable to help, but if he 
succeeds, the bleeding is reduced to minor. 

Severe bleeding causes the victim to lose 10% to 60% 
(1d6 x 1095) of his unwounded hit point total every round. 
For example, a fighter with 43 hit points would lose 4 (10%) 
to 24 (60%) of his hit points every round. A cure light wounds 
or 5 hit points of healing will reduce severe bleeding to 
major bleeding; a cure serious wounds or 10 hit points of heal- 
ing reduces it to minor bleeding; and a cure critical wounds 
or 20 hit points of healing stops it altogether. 

An untrained character has no chance to bind a torso, 
abdomen, or head wound with severe bleeding, but a trained 
healer can attempt a proficiency check with a —4 penalty to 
reduce severe bleeding to major bleeding in these areas. A 
trained healer can reduce severe bleeding from a limb to 
major bleeding with an unpenalized proficiency check, and an 
untrained character can do the same with a successful Intelli- 
gence check at a—4 penalty. Note that once severe bleeding 
has been reduced to major bleeding, the character may be able 
to then reduce the major bleeding to minor bleeding. 

Bleeding from several wounds is cumulative; a character 
with three cases of minor bleeding from three separate 
injuries suffers 3d2 damage every turn. After a character is 
reduced to 0 hit points by any level of bleeding, the bleed- 
ing stops, and he simply loses 1 hit point a round until he 
reaches -10 and dies. 


Spells in Combat 


UN 
"kh je 
Why, Wier o Welt di E 4 al If 
M edi “Sem uai eot i 
wt $i " 
i reri 


Winds? 


JH 


ART 
Me, “Mis 


by 


Combat Penalties 


Many critical strikes hamper the victim’s ability to fight 
or move by penalizing his attack rolls or reducing his move- 
ment rate. A character with reduced movement may not 
choose to charge, jog, run, sprint, or force-march in order to 
compensate. A character reduced to no movement may still 
drag himself along with an effective movement rating of 1 
or ride a mount with difficulty. 

A few critical strikes may prevent the victim from attack- 
ing at all; if this is the case, the character may not engage in 
spellcasting or performing any other actions except for 
using magical items or possibly using psionic powers that 
affect only his own body. 

Knockdowns: Some critical strikes may inflict a knock- 
down on the victim. This is not an automatic result; the vic- 
tim may still attempt a saving throw vs. death magic to 
remain on his feet. 


Armor, Shield, and Equipment Damage 


Acid, fire, lightning, and other lethal energies and sub- 
stances can quickly destroy a character’s armor. Unlike the 
critical hits introduced in PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & Tactics, 
every critical strike endangers the victim’s armor and 
equipment since the character already failed a saving throw. 
However, there’s no need to check everything the character 


129 


may have on his person—instead, only check items on or in 
the location struck. For example, if a character is struck in 
the face with a burning hands spell, his magical boots are in 
no real danger of being destroyed, but his helm or his read- 
ing spectacles might be ruined. 

To check for item damage, refer to Table 29: Item Saving 
Throws in the DMG. Vibration or sonic attacks can be 
treated as either a crushing blow or disintegration as the 
DM prefers, although if you decide to use the disintegration 
column, a +4 bonus is reasonable to reflect the less destruc- 
tive nature of vibration attacks. Wounding critical strikes do 
not damage equipment. 

Partially Destroyed Armor: If a character loses his armor 
in one particular location, the most accurate way to reflect 
his increased vulnerability is to consult the partial armor 
rules described on pages 128, 146 and 147 of the PLAYER'S 
OPrION: Combat & Tactics book. Basically, the character's 
overall AC will be worsened by the value of the missing 
piece, and the character will also have an AC 10 location 
that can be exploited by a called shot. 

If you don't have the Combat & Tactics book or don't 
want to use partial armor rules, simply assign the character 
a 1-point AC penalty for each piece of missing armor. For 
example, if a character in chain mail (base AC 5) loses the 
armor protecting his torso and right arm, his armor is now 
treated as a base AC of 7. This isn't as realistic, but may be a 
little easier to use in play. 


Acid 


Chapter 8 


Hit Location Chart 


d10 roll 
1-2 

344 

5 

6-7 

8 

9 

10 


Monster/Animal 
Right foreleg / wing 
Left foreleg / wing 
Right hind leg 

Left hind leg 

Tail 

Abdomen 
Torso/chest 

Head 


Humanoid 
Right leg 1 
Left leg 2 
Abdomen 3 
Torso 4 
Right arm 5 

Left arm 6-7 

Head 8-9 

10 


Location: Legs 


Severity 
1-3 


11 
12 
13 


Effect 

No unusual effect 

Acid splash grazes victim; pain distracts character for 1d4 
rounds causing a -2 penalty to attack rolls 

Leg struck, 4 move; pain distracts character for 1d6 rounds, 
as above, and causes knockdown 

Foot burned, 4 move, pain distracts character for 1d6 rounds 
Armor destroyed, acid splash as 4 above; if target has no leg 
armor, leg burned, 4 move, victim knocked down and 
stunned 1d6 rounds 

Hip/thigh burned, minor bleeding, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 
move 

Armor destroyed, leg struck as 5 above; if target has no leg armor, 
acid burns to bone causing major bleeding, no move or attack 
Foot dissolved; minor bleeding, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, 
then no movement and -2 penalty to attacks 

Leg dissolved at knee, major bleeding, no move or attack 

Leg dissolved at hip, no move or attack, major bleeding 

* As 12 above with an additional abdomen hit 


Location: Abdomen 


Severity 
1-3 


10 

11 

12 
13+ 


Effect 

No unusual effect 

Acid splash grazes victim, -2 to attack rolls for 1d6 rounds 
Abdomen struck, -2 to attack rolls, victim reduced to 4 move 
Armor destroyed, acid splash as 4 above; if target has no 
armor, abdomen burned, 4 move, minor bleeding, —2 to attack 
rolls 

Abdomen burned, minor bleeding, 4 move, -2 to attack rolls, 
victim stunned 1d6 rounds by pain 

Abdomen burned, minor bleeding, 4 move, 4 to attack rolls 
Armor damage, abdomen struck, minor bleeding, 4 move and 
—2 to attacks; if no armor, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, X move, 
-4 to attack rolls, major bleeding 

Abdomen burned, no move or attack, major bleeding 
Abdominal wall dissolved, no move or attack, severe bleeding 
Abdomen dissolved, victim reduced to 0 hp, severe bleeding 
As 12 above with additional torso or leg hit (50% chance of 


12 
13+ 


Torso dissolved, victim killed instantly 

As 12 above with additional abdomen, arm or head hit (40% 
abdomen, 20% left arm, 20% right arm, 20% head); it might 
make a difference when the survivors claim the treasure and 
possessions left behind by the victim. 


Location: Arms 
Severity Effect 


1-3 
4 
5 


6 


13+ 


No unusual effect 

Hand grazed by acid splash, weapon or shield dropped 

Arm struck, victim distracted by pain (-2 penalty to attack 
rolls) for 1d4 rounds, shield or weapon damaged by acid 
Hand burned, -2 to attacks with that hand (or no shield use if 
shield arm is burned), victim stunned 1d3 rounds by pain 
Armor destroyed, arm grazed by acid as in 4 above; if victim 
has no armor, arm burned by acid, -2 penalty to all attacks, 
victim stunned 1d4 rounds by the pain 

Arm burned, victim stunned 1d4 rounds, —4 to attacks with 
affected arm and -2 to all other attacks 

Deep acid burn renders arm useless, victim stunned 1d6 
rounds 

Hand dissolved, stunned 1d6 rounds, -2 to all attacks, minor 
bleeding 

Arm dissolved at elbow, stunned 1d6 rounds, no attack, major 
bleeding 

Arm dissolved at shoulder, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, no 
attacks, major bleeding 

As 12 above with an additional torso hit 


Location: Head 
Severity Effect 


1-3 
4 


5 


6 
7 


12 
134 


No unusual effect 

Acid splash distracts victim for 2d4 rounds, -2 penalty to 
all attacks 

Head struck, helm damaged, victim stunned 1d3 rounds; 
-2 to all attack rolls if victim had no helm 

Head struck, -2 to attacks, stunned 1d4 rounds by pain 
Helm destroyed, face burned, stunned 1d6 rounds, -2 to 
attacks; if victim wears no helm, +4 to all attacks and 4 move 
Face burned, victim blinded, stunned 2d8 rounds, Cha- 
risma reduced by 2d6 points, minor bleeding 

Scalp and one ear dissolved, victim stunned 2d8 rounds, 
major bleeding, 4 move and no attacks, Charisma reduced 
by 2d4 points 

Face dissolved, victim blinded, no move or attack, major 
bleeding, Charisma / Appearance reduced to 3 

Throat dissolved, no move or attack, severe bleeding; if 
bleeding doesn't kill the victim, he asphyxiates in 1d4+1 
rounds 

Skull dissolved, immediate death 

As 12 above with additional torso hit 


Location: Tail 
Severity Effect 
Location: Torso 1-5 No unusual effect 


either) 


Severity 
1-3 


Effect 

No unusual effect 

Acid splash grazes victim, -2 to attack rolls for 1d6 rounds 
Torso struck; 4 move, -2 to attack rolls, victim stunned 1 
round 

Shield destroyed, acid splash as 4 above; if target has no armor, 
torso burned, 4 move, minor bleeding, -2 to attack rolls 

Armor destroyed, torso struck, 4 move, -2 to attacks; if target 
has no armor, torso burned, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, % 
move, -2 to attacks 

Torso burned, minor bleeding, 4 move, -4 to attack rolls 
Torso burned, minor bleeding, no move or attack 

Torso burned deeply, major bleeding, no move or attack 
Torso partially dissolved, victim reduced to 0 hit points with 
severe bleeding 


6 
7-8 
9-10 


11 


12 


13+ 


130 


Tip of tail burned; if prehensile, any items carried are 
dropped, -2 penalty to all tail attacks due to pain 

Tail burned, lose any tail attacks; normal animals must roll 
saving throw vs. death magic or retreat in pain 

Tail burned, lose any tail attacks, 4 move if animal uses tail 
for movement 

Tail dissolved at mid-length, victim stunned 1d3 rounds, 
major bleeding, lose any tail attacks, no movement or 
attacks if creature uses tail for movement 

Tail dissolved, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, pain reduces 
creature to 4 move and -2 penalty on any attack rolls, major 
bleeding; no move or attack and severe bleeding if creature 
uses tail for movement 

As 12 above with abdomen or torso hit (assign 50% chance 
to both) 


pells in Combat 


Cold 10 Torso partially frozen, no move or attack, victim perishes in 
1d4 hours without magical help 
Hit Location Chart 11 Torso frozen, victim reduced to 0 hp, dies in 1d6 rounds 
d10 roll Humanoid Monster/Animal 12 Torso frozen, victim dies immediately 
1-2 Right leg Right foreleg / wing 13+ As 12 above with additional abdomen, arm or head hit 
344 Left leg Left foreleg /wing (40% abdomen, 20% left arm, 20% right arm, 20% head) 
5 Abdomen Right hind leg 
6-7 Torso Lefthindleg Location: Arms 
8 Right arm Tail Severity Effect 
9 Left arn Abdomen 1-3 No unusual effect 
10 Head Torso/chest 4 Hand chilled, weapon or shield dropped 
Head 5 Arm struck, shield or weapon dropped, -2 penalty to 
attacks with that hand until victim recovers 
6 Hand frostbitten, —4 to attacks with that hand (or no shield 
Location: Legs use if shield arm is struck) 
Severity Effect Armor shattered, arm chilled as in 4 above; if victim has no 
1-3 No unusual effect armor, arm frostbitten, —2 penalty to all attacks, victim 
4 Victim chilled; 4 move and -2 penalty to attacks for 1d6 slowed 1d4 rounds 
hours Arm frostbitten, victim slowed 1d4 rounds, -4 to attacks 
Leg struck, 4 move; victim knocked down and chilled as with affected arm and -2 to all other attacks 
above Deep frostbite renders arm useless, victim slowed 1d6 hours 
Foot frostbitten, 4 move Hand frozen and useless, stunned 1d6 rounds, -2 to all 
Armor shattered, victim chilled as 4 above; if target has no attacks 
leg armor, leg frostbitten, 4 move, victim knocked down Arm frozen from elbow down and useless, stunned 1d6 
Hip/thigh frostbitten, stunned 1d3 rounds, 4 move rounds, —4 to all attacks, slowed 1d6 hours 
Armor shattered, leg struck as 5 above; if target has no leg Arm frozen from shoulder down, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 
armor, bone broken by cold, no move, -2 to attack rolls move, no attacks, slowed 1d6 hours 
Foot frozen; victim knocked down, 4 movement, -2 penalty 13+ As 12 above with an additional torso hit 
to attacks 
1 Leg frozen from knee down, no move, -4 penalty to attacks Location: Head 
12 Leg frozen at hip, no movement or attacks possible Severity Effect 
134 As 12 above with an additional abdomen hit 1-3 No unusual effect 
4 Frost disorients victim for 2d4 rounds, -2 penalty to all 
Location: Abdomen attacks 
Severity Effect 5 Head struck, helm damaged, victim slowed 1d6 rounds; -2 
1-3 No unusual effect to all attack rolls if victim had no helm 
Victim chilled, -2 to attack rolls for 1d6 hours 6 Head struck, -2 to attacks, slowed 1d6 hours 
Abdomen struck, victim reduced to 4 move, chilled 1d6 7 Helm shattered, face frostbitten, slowed 1d6 hours, -2 to 
hours attacks; if victim wears no helm, 4 to all attacks and 4 move 
Armor shattered, victim chilled as 4 above; if target has no 8 Face frostbitten, victim blinded 1d6 hours and slowed 1d6 
armor, abdomen frostbitten, 4 move, -2 to attack rolls hours 
Abdomen frostbitten, 4 move, —2 to attack rolls; victim 9 Scalp and side of head frozen, victim slowed 1d6 hours, 4 
slowed for 2d6 rounds due to intense cold move and no attacks 
Abdomen frostbitten, 4 move, —4 to attack rolls; victim 10 Face frozen, victim blinded, no move or attack 
slowed for 1d6 hours by intense cold 1 Throat/nose frozen, no move or attack, asphyxiation in 
Armor shattered, abdomen struck, 4 move and -2 to 1d4+1 rounds 
attacks; if no armor, victim slowed 1d6 hours, 4 move, —4 to 12 Skull frozen through, immediate death 
attack rolls 134 As 12 above with additional torso hit 
Abdomen partially frozen, no move or attack; victim suc- 
cumbs in 1d4 days without magical healing Location: Tail 
Abdomen frozen, no move or attack, victim reduced to 0 Severity Effect 
hp; victim succumbs in 1d6 hours without magical healing 1-5 No unusual effect 
Abdomen frozen, victim reduced to 0 hp and succumbs in 6 Tip of tail frostbitten; if prehensile, any items carried are 
1d6 rounds without magical healing dropped, -2 penalty to all tail attacks 
13+ As 12 above with additional torso or leg hit (50% chance of 7-8 Tail frostbitten, lose any tail attacks; victim chilled 1d6 
each) hours, suffers a -2 penalty to attacks while chilled 
9-10 Tail badly frostbitten, lose any tail attacks, 4 move if animal 
Location: Torso uses tail for movement 
Severity Effect 11 Tail frozen at mid-length, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, lose 
1-3 No unusual effect any tail attacks, no movement or attacks if creature uses tail 
+ Victim chilled, -2 to attack rolls for 1d6 rounds for movement 
5 Torso struck; 4 move, -2 to attack rolls, victim chilled 1d6 12 Tail frozen, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, pain reduces crea- 
hours ture to 4 move and -2 penalty on any attack rolls; no move 
Shield shattered, victim chilled as 4 above; if target has no or attack if creature uses tail for movement 
shield, torso frostbitten, slowed 1d6 rounds, 4 move, -2 to 134 As 12 above with abdomen or torso hit (50% chance of 
attack rolls armor, torso frostbitten, victim slowed 1d6 either) 
hours, ⁄ move, -2 attacks 
Torso frostbitten, move, —4 to attack rolls, victim slowed Note: A frozen result kills the affected tissue; without access to power- 
1d6 hours by intense cold ful healing magic, the victim must have a frozen limb removed within 
Torso frostbitten, no movement or attacks possible 1d3 days to prevent lethal infection or gangrene. 


131 


Chapter 8 


. 8 Torso injured, minor internal bleeding, 4 move, —4 to 
Constriction attacks 
9 Ribs broken, minor internal bleeding, 4 move, -2 to attacks 
Hit Location Chart 10 Ribs broken, major internal bleeding, no move or attack 
d10 roll Humanoid Monster/Animal 1 Torso crushed, victim reduced to 0 hit points with severe 
12 Right leg Right foreleg / wing internal bleeding 
3-4 Left leg Left foreleg /wing 12 Torso crushed, victim killed 
5 Abdomen Right hind leg 134 As 12 above with additional hit in abdomen (40%), left 
6-7 Torso Left hind leg arm, right arm, or head (20% each) 
8 Right arm Tail 
9 Left arm Abdomen Location: Arms 
10 Head Torso/chest ^ Severity Effect 
Head 1-3 No unusual effect 
Hand twisted, weapon/shield dropped 
Location: Legs Arm twisted, weapon /shield dropped, -2 to attacks 
Severity Effect Hand broken, -2 to attacks/shield dropped 
1-3 No unusual effect Armor damaged, arm injured, -2 to attacks with that arm; 
Victim knocked down arm broken if victim has no plate armor, arm useless 
Knee twisted (struck), knockdown, 4 move Shield damaged, arm broken and useless, stunned 1 round 
Foot dislocated (broken), knockdown, 4 move Arm broken and useless, stunned 1d4 rounds 
Armor damaged, leg twisted, 4 move; leg injured if target Shoulder dislocated (broken), no attacks, minor bleeding 
has no plate armor to cover legs, 4move Arm crushed, 4 move, no attacks, minor bleeding 
Knee dislocated (broken), no move, -2 to all attacks Shoulder crushed, no move or attacks, major bleeding 
Armor damaged, leg injured, 4 move, -2 to all attacks; leg As 12 above with additional torso hit 
broken if target has no plate armor to cover legs, no move, 
— to attacks Location: Head 
Knee crushed, no move, —4 to attacks, minor bleeding Severity Effect 
Hip broken and dislocated, minor bleeding, no move or 1-3 No unusual effect 
attack 4 Victim stunned 1d6 rounds 
Leg crushed, no move or attack, major bleeding from com- 5 Head twisted (struck), helm removed, victim stunned 1 
pound fractures round; -2 to attack rolls due to pinched nerves in neck 
13+ As 12 above with additional abdomen hit Head struck, 4 move, -2 to attacks 
Helm damaged, face injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, 
Location: Abdomen -4 to attacks 
Severity Effect Skull broken, helm damaged, victim reduced to 0 hit 
1-3 No unusual effect points and conscious 1d4 hours; if victim has no helmet, 
4 Victim stunned 1d4 rounds unconscious for 4d6 days, lose 1d3 points of Intelligence 
5 Abdomen struck, victim stunned 1 round and reduced to 4 permanently 
move Jaw dislocated (broken), minor bleeding, no move or 
Armor damaged, victim stunned 1d6 rounds; if victim has attack 
no plate armor, abdomen injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 Neck broken, reduced to 0 hp, unconscious 1d6 days; vic- 
move, —2 penalty to all attacks tim must roll saving throw vs. death magic or suffer 
Abdomen injured, 4 move, -2 to all attacks 50-100% paralysis (1d6+4) x 10%. Paralysis caused by this 
Abdomen injured, minor internal bleeding, 4 move and -2 injury can only be cured by heal, regenerate, or healing 
to attacks magic of similar power 
Armor damaged, abdomen injured, minor bleeding, 4 11 Throat crushed, reduced to 0 hit points, major bleeding 
move and -2 to attacks; if victim does not have plate 12 Skull crushed, immediate death 
armor, 4 move, -4 to attacks 13+ As 12 above with additional torso hit 
Abdomen injured, no move or attack, minor internal 
bleeding Location: Tail 
Abdomen crushed, no move or attack, major internal Severity Effect 
bleeding 1-5 No unusual effect 
Abdomen crushed, victim reduced to 0 hit points with 6 Tip of tail struck; if prehensile, any items carried are 
severe internal bleeding dropped, -2 penalty to all tail attacks due to pain 
13+ As 12 above with additional torso or leg hit (50% chance of 7-8 Tail injured, lose any tail attacks; normal animals must roll 
each) saving throw vs. death magic or retreat in pain 
9-10 Tail broken, lose any tail attacks, 4 move if animal uses tail 
Location: Torso for movement 
Severity Effect 1 Tail crushed, victim stunned 1-3 rounds, lose any tail 
1-3 No unusual effect attacks, no movement or attacks if creature uses tail for 
El Knockdown, stunned 1d4 rounds movement 
5 Torso struck, victim stunned 1 round and reduced to 4 12 Tail crushed, pain reduces creature to 4 move and -2 pen- 
move alty on any attack rolls, minor bleeding; no move or attack 
6 Shield damaged, torso struck, 4 move if creature uses tail for movement 
7 Armor damaged, torso struck, 4 move, -2 to attacks; if no As 12 above with additional abdomen or torso hit (50% 
plate armor, torso injured, 4 move, —4 penalty to all attacks chance each) 


132 


Spells in Combat 


Crushin 8 Ribs crushed, major internal bleeding, no move or attack 
Torso crushed, victim reduced to 0 hit points with severe 
Hit Location Chart internal bleeding 
d10 roll Humanoid Monster/Animal Torso crushed, victim killed 
1-2 Right leg Right foreleg/wing 13+ As above with additional abdomen (40%), head (20%), or 
344 Left leg Left foreleg /wing arm (20% each) hit 
5 Abdomen k Right hind leg 
6-7 Torso Left hind leg Location: Arms 
8 Right arm Tail Severity Effect 
9 Left arm Abdomen 1-3 No unusual effect 
10 Head Torso/chest Hand struck, weapon/shield dropped 
Head Arm struck, -2 to attacks with that arm 
Hand broken, -2 to all attacks, weapon or shield dropped 
Location: Legs Armor destroyed, arm injured, -2 to attacks with that arm; 
Severity Effect if victim has no armor, arm broken, stunned 1 round 
1-3 No unusual effect Shield destroyed, arm broken, stunned 1d3 rounds 
Victim knocked down Hand crushed, stunned 1d4 rounds, minor bleeding 
Leg struck, knockdown, 4 move Shoulder dislocated (broken), no attacks, minor bleeding 
Foot broken, 4 move Arm crushed to elbow, 4 move, no attacks, major bleeding 
Armor damaged, leg struck, 4 move; if target has no Arm crushed to shoulder, no move or attacks, major 
armor to cover legs, leg injured, 4 move, -2 to all attacks bleeding 
Hip broken, minor bleeding, no move, -2 to all attacks 13+  Asabove with additional torso hit 
Armor destroyed, leg injured, 4 move; leg broken if target 
has no armor to cover legs, no move, ~+ to attacks Location: Head 
Knee crushed, no move, -4 to attacks, minor bleeding Severity Effect 
Hip shattered, minor bleeding, no move or attack 1-3 No unusual effect 
Leg crushed, no move or attack, major bleeding from 4 Victim stunned 1d6 rounds 
compound fractures 5 Head struck, helm removed, victim stunned 1d6 rounds; 
13+ As above with additional abdomen hit head injured, -2 to attack rolls if victim had no helm 
6 Head injured, stunned 2d6 rounds, 4 move, -2 to all 
Location: Abdomen attacks 
Severity Effect Helm destroyed, face injured, stunned 2d6 rounds, 4 
1-3 No unusual effect move, —4 to all attacks; victim must roll saving throw vs. 
4 Victim stunned 1d6 rounds death magic or be blinded as well 
5 Abdomen struck, victim stunned 1 round and reduced to Skull broken, helm destroyed, victim reduced to 0 hit 
^ move points and unconscious 2d6 hours 
Armor damaged, victim stunned 1d6 rounds; if target has Face crushed, minor bleeding, no move or attack, -2 
no armor, abdomen injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, Charisma permanently 
-2 penalty to attacks 10 Skull broken, unconscious 1d6 days, -2 to all attacks, 
Abdomen injured, stunned 2d6 rounds, 4 move, -2 to hit lose 1 point each of Intelligence /Wisdom /Charisma 
Abdomen injured, minor internal bleeding, 4 move and 4 permanently 
to attacks Skull crushed, reduced to 0 hit points, major bleeding; 
Armor damaged, abdomen injured, minor bleeding, 4 victim loses 1d6 points of Intelligence, Wisdom, and 
move and —2 to attacks; if victim has no armor, stunned Charisma (a heal or regenerate spell can restore lost ability 
2d6 rounds, major internal bleeding, 4 move, 4 to attacks points) 
Abdomen partially crushed, 4 move, —4 to attacks, major 12 Skull crushed, immediate death 
internal bleeding, stunned 2d6 rounds 134 As 12 above with additional torso hit 
Abdomen crushed, no move or attack, major internal 
bleeding Location: Tail 
Abdomen crushed, victim reduced to 0 hit points with Severity Effect 
severe internal bleeding 1-5 No unusual effect 
As above with additional leg or torso hit (50% each) 6 Tip of tail struck; if prehensile, any items carried are 
dropped, -2 penalty to all tail attacks due to pain 
Location: Torso 7-8 Tail injured, lose any tail attacks; normal animals must roll 
Severity Effect saving throw vs. death magic or retreat in pain 
1-3 No unusual effect 9-10 Tail broken, lose any tail attacks, 4 move if animal uses tail 
4 Knockdown, stunned 1d4 rounds for movement 
Torso struck, victim stunned 1 round and reduced to 4 11 Tail crushed, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, lose any tail 
move attacks, no movement or attacks if creature uses tail for 
Shield destroyed, torso struck, 4 move, stunned 1d6 movement 
rounds Tail crushed, pain reduces creature to 4 move and -2 
Armor destroyed, torso injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, % penalty on any attack rolls, minor bleeding; no move 
move, -2 to attacks or attack and major bleeding if creature uses tail for 
Ribs broken, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, —4 to all attacks movement 
Ribs broken, stunned 2d6 rounds, minor bleeding, 4 move, As 12 above with additional abdomen or torso hit 
-4 to attacks 


Chapter 8 


Electricity 


Hit Location Chart 

d10 roll Humanoid 
1-2 Right leg 
3-4 Left leg 
5 Abdomen 
6-7 Torso 


9 Left arm 
10 Head 


Location: Legs 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 
4 Victim shocked and knocked down; spasms distract char- 
acter for 1d4 rounds causing a -2 penalty to attack rolls 


5 Leg struck, 4 move; victim knocked down and shocked for 


1d6 rounds 

Foot burned, 4 move, victim knocked down, spasms last 
1d6 rounds 

Armor destroyed, leg burned, 4 move, victim knocked 
down and stunned 1d6 rounds 

Hip/thigh burned, knocked down, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 
move 


Armor destroyed, leg broken, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move 


and —4 penalty to all attacks 
Foot incinerated; minor bleeding, victim stunned 1d6 
rounds, then no movement and —4 penalty to all attacks 


11 Leg incinerated at knee, major bleeding, no move or attack 


12 Leg incinerated at hip, no move or attack, major bleeding 
13+ As 12 above with an additional abdomen hit 


Location: Abdomen 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 
4 Victim shocked and knocked down, -2 to attack rolls for 

1d6 rounds 
Abdomen struck, -2 to attack rolls, 4 move, victim 
knocked down 
Armor destroyed, abdomen burned, 4 move, -2 to attack 
rolls, victim stunned 1d6 rounds 
Abdomen burned, 4 move, -2 to attack rolls, victim 
stunned 2d8 rounds 
Abdomen burned, Y move, -4 to attack rolls, stunned 2d8 
rounds 
Armor destroyed, abdomen burned, victim stunned 2d8 
rounds, 4 move, —4 to attack rolls 
Severe internal burns, no move or attack 
Abdomen partially incinerated, no move or attack, death 


follows in 1d4 hours if victim is not treated with a cure crit- 


ical wounds or more powerful healing magic 
Abdomen incinerated, immediate death 


As 12 above with additional torso or leg hit (50% chance of 


each) 


Location: Torso 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 
4 Victim shocked and knocked down, -2 to attack rolls for 
1d6 rounds 
5 Torso struck; 4 move, -2 to attack rolls, victim knocked 
down 
6 Shield destroyed, torso burned, victim knocked down, % 
move, —2 to attack rolls 
7 Armor destroyed, torso burned, victim stunned 1d6 
rounds, 4 move, -2 to attacks 
Torso burned, victim stunned 2d8 rounds, 4 move, -4 to 
attack rolls 
Torso burned, no move or attack 


Monster/Animal 
Right foreleg /wing 
Left foreleg / wing 
Right hind leg 

Left hind leg 

8 Right arm Tail 
Abdomen 
Torso/chest 
Head 


10 Torso burned deeply, no move or attack, possible stopped 
heart; roll a saving throw vs. death magic or die in 1d3 rounds 

11 Torso partially incinerated, victim reduced to 0 hit points 
and dies in 1d3 turns unless treated by cure critical wounds 
or more powerful healing magic 

12 Torso incinerated, victim killed instantly 

13+ As 12 above with additional abdomen, arm or head hit 

(40% abdomen, 20% left arm, 20% right arm, 20% head) 


Location: Arms 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 

4 Hand shocked, weapon or shield dropped 

5 Arm struck, victim knocked down, -2 to attacks for 1d6 
rounds due to muscle spasms 

6 Hand burned, -2 to attacks with that hand (or no shield 
use if shield arm is burned) 
Armor destroyed, arm burned, -2 penalty to all attacks, 
victim stunned 1d6 rounds 
Arm burned, victim stunned 2d8 rounds, -4 to attacks 
with affected arm and -2 to all other attacks, current 
crosses body and may stop heart; roll saving throw vs. 
death magic or die in 1d3 rounds 
Arm broken and useless, victim stunned 2d8 rounds 
Hand incinerated, stunned 1d6 rounds, -2 to all attacks 
Arm incinerated at elbow, stunned 1d6 rounds, no attacks 
Arm incinerated at shoulder, stunned 2d8 rounds, 4 move, 
no attacks 
As 12 above with an additional torso hit 


Location: Head 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 

4 Victim shocked, knocked down, -2 penalty to attacks for 
1d6 rounds 

5 Head struck, helm destroyed, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, 
-2 to all attack rolls 

6 Head struck, -2 to attacks, stunned 2d8 rounds, victim 
deafened 

7 Helm destroyed, face burned, stunned 2d8 rounds, -4 to 
all attacks and 4 move 
Face burned, victim blinded, stunned 2d8 rounds 
Scalp burned, victim stunned 2d8 rounds, 4 move and -4 
penalty to attacks; roll saving throw vs. death magic or 
heart stops, killing character in 1d3 rounds 
Face burned, victim blinded, no move or attack, uncon- 
scious 4d6 days 
Head burned, victim blinded, deafened, and paralyzed, 
and remains so until he receives a regenerate spell or 
similar healing magic 

12 Skull incinerated, immediate death 

13+ As 12 above with additional torso hit 


Location: Tail 
Severity Effect 
1-5 No unusual effect 
6 Tip of tail shocked; if prehensile, any items carried are 
dropped, -2 penalty to all tail attacks 
7-8 Tail burned, lose any tail attacks; normal animals must roll 
saving throw vs. death magic or retreat 
9-10 Tail burned, lose any tail attacks, 4 move if animal uses tail 
for movement 
1 Tail incinerated at mid-length, victim stunned 1d3 rounds, 
minor bleeding, lose any tail attacks, no movement or 
attacks if creature uses tail for movement 
12 Tail incinerated, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, pain reduces 
creature to 4 move and —2 penalty on any attack rolls, 
minor bleeding; no move or attack and major bleeding if 
creature uses tail for movement 
13+ As 12 above with abdomen or torso hit (50% chance of 
either) 


134 


Spells in Combat 


Fire 


Hit Location Chart 

d10 roll Humanoid 
1-2 Right leg 
3-4 Left leg 
5 Abdomen 
6-7 Torso 
8 Right arm 
9 Left arm 
10 Head 


Monster/Animal 
Right foreleg /wing 
Left foreleg / wing 
Right hind leg 

Left hind leg 

Tail 

Abdomen 
Torso/chest 

Head 


Location: Legs 
Severity Effect 

1-3 No unusual effect 
Victim singed, -1 penalty to attack rolls 
Leg scorched, 4 move, -1 penalty to attack rolls 
Foot burned, 4 move, -1 penalty to attack rolls 
Leg burned, 4 move, 2 penalty to attack rolls; if victim is 
wearing metal armor, hot steel scorches him for an addi- 
tional 2d4 damage in the following round, and 1d4 dam- 
age in the round after that. 
Hip/thigh burned, 4 move, -2 to all attacks, victim must roll 
saving throw vs. death magic or be on fire (see page 122) 
Leg burned, 4 move and +4 penalty to all attacks; if victim 
wears metal armor, armor is destroyed and continues to 
inflict damage as 7 above 
Foot incinerated; minor bleeding, victim stunned 1d6 
rounds, then no movement and —4 penalty to all attacks 
Leg incinerated at knee, major bleeding, no move or attack 
Leg incinerated at hip, no move or attack, major bleeding 
As 12 above with an additional abdomen hit 


11 
12 
13+ 


Location: Abdomen 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 
4 Victim singed, -1 to attack rolls 
5 Abdomen scorched, -1 to attack rolls, 4 move 
6 Abdomen burned, X move, -2 to attack rolls; if victim 
wears metal armor, he is seared as described in 7 for the 
previous chart 


Torso burned, no move or attack 

Torso burned deeply, no move or attack, victim on fire (see 
page 122) 

Torso partially incinerated, victim reduced to 0 hit points, 
dies in 1d3 turns unless treated by cure critical wounds or 
more powerful magic 

Torso incinerated, victim killed instantly 

As 12 above with additional abdomen, arm or head hit 
(40% abdomen, 20% left arm, 20% right arm, 20% head) 


12 
13+ 


Location: Arms 


Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 

4 Hand singed, weapon or shield dropped 

5 Arm scorched, -2 to attacks 

6 Hand burned, -2 to attacks with that hand (or no shield 
use if shield arm is burned) 
Arm burned, -2 penalty to all attacks; if victim wears 
metal armor, seared for 2d4 damage in next round, 1d4 in 
round after that 
Arm burned, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, —4 to attacks 
with affected arm and -2 to all other attacks; roll saving 
throw vs. death magic or catch fire 
Arm burned and useless, victim stunned 1d6 rounds and 
on fire 
Hand incinerated, stunned 1d6 rounds, -2 to all attacks 
Arm incinerated at elbow, stunned 1d6 rounds, no attacks 
Arm incinerated at shoulder, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, 
no attacks 
As 12 above with an additional torso hit 


7 


Location: Head 


Abdomen burned, 4 move, -2 to attack rolls, victim must roll 


saving throw vs. death magic or catch fire (see page 122) 
Abdomen burned, 4 move, —4 to attack rolls, stunned 1d6 
rounds 
Abdomen burned, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, -4 to 
attacks; if victim wears metal armor, armor destroyed, vic- 
tim seared as in 6 above 
10 
11 


Abdomen burned severely, no move or attack 

Abdomen partially incinerated, no move or attack, death 
in 1d4 hours unless victim receives cure critical wounds or 
more powerful magic 

Abdomen incinerated, immediate death 

As 12 above with additional torso or leg hit (50% chance of 
each) 


12 
13+ 


Location: Torso 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 
4 Victim singed, —1 to attack rolls, stunned 1 round 
5 Torso scorched; 4 move, -2 to attack rolls 
Torso burned, 4 move, -2 to attack rolls; if victim carries 
shield, shield destroyed, causing searing damage as 
described above 
Torso burned, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, -2 to 
attacks; if victim wears metal armor, he is seared as 
described above 
Torso burned, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, -4 to 
attack rolls; victim must roll saving throw vs. death magi- 
cor catch fire (see page 122) 


Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 

4 Victim singed, -1 penalty to attacks 

5 Head scorched, -2 to all attack rolls, if victim wears metal 
helm, hot metal sears him for 2d4 damage next round, 1d4 
more the round after 
Head scorched, -2 to attacks, victim must roll saving 
throw vs. death magic or catch fire (see page 122) 
Face burned, stunned 1d6 rounds, -4 to all attacks and 4 
move; if victim wears metal helm, seared for additional 
damage as 5 above 
Face burned, victim blinded, stunned 1d6 rounds 
Scalp burned, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move and -4 
penalty to attacks, victim set on fire 
Face burned, victim blinded, no move or attack 
Head burned, victim blinded and deafened, and remains so 
until he receives a regenerate spell or similar healing magic 
Skull incinerated, immediate death 
As 12 above with additional torso hit 


8 
9 


10 
11 


12 
134 


Location: Tail 


135 


Severity Effect 

1-5 No unusual effect 

6 Tip of tail singed; if prehensile, any items carried are 

dropped, -2 penalty to all tail attacks 
Tail burned, lose any tail attacks; normal animals immedi- 
ately retreat 
Tail burned, lose any tail attacks, 4 move if animal uses tail 
for movement; roll saving throw vs. death magic or catch 
fire (see page 122) 
Tail incinerated at mid-length, victim stunned 1d3 rounds, 
minor bleeding, lose any tail attacks, no movement or 
attacks if creature uses tail for movement 
Tail incinerated, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, pain reduces 
creature to 4 move and -2 penalty on any attack rolls, 
minor bleeding; no move or attack and major bleeding if 
creature uses tail for movement 
As 12 above with abdomen or torso hit (50% chance of either) 


7-8 
9-10 


11 


12 


Chapter 8 


Impact 


Hit Location Chart 
d10 roll Humanoid Monster/Animal 
Right leg Right foreleg /wing 
Left leg Left foreleg / wing 
Abdomen Right hind leg 
Torso Left hind leg 
Right arm Tail 
Left arm Abdomen 
Head Torso/chest 
Head 


Location: Legs 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 
Victim knocked down 
Knee struck, victim knocked down, 4 move 
Foot broken, 4 move, minor bleeding 
Leg injured, 4 move; if target has no armor to cover legs, 4 
move, ~2 to all attacks, and minor bleeding 
Hip broken, stunned 1d6 rounds, minor bleeding, no 
move, —4 penalty to all attacks 
Leg injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, -2 to all attacks; 
if victim has no armor, leg broken, no move, —4 to all 
attacks, major bleeding 
Knee shattered, minor bleeding, stunned 1d6 rounds, no 
move, —4 penalty to all attacks 
Hip shattered, major bleeding, stunned 1d6 rounds, no 
move or attack 
Leg shattered, stunned 2d6 rounds, no move or attack, 
major bleeding from compound fractures 
134 As above with additional abdomen hit 


Location: Abdomen 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 
4 Victim stunned 1d6 rounds 
5 Abdomen struck, victim stunned 1 round, reduced to 4 

move 
Abdomen struck, 4 move, -2 to all attacks; if victim wears 
no armor, abdomen injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, 
-2 to all attacks, minor bleeding 
Abdomen injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, -2 to 
attacks, major bleeding 
Abdomen injured, major bleeding, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 
move, -4 to all attacks 
Abdomen injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, major bleeding, 4 
move, — to all attack rolls, armor destroyed; if victim 
wears no armor, no move or attack, major bleeding 
Abdomen injured, no move or attack, major bleeding 
Abdomen destroyed, no move or attack, major bleeding 
Abdomen destroyed, victim reduced to 0 hp, severe 
bleeding 

134 As above with additional torso (50%) or leg (50%) hit 


Location: Torso 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 
4 Knockdown, stunned 1d4 rounds 
5 Torso struck, victim stunned 1 round, 4 move 
6 Torso struck, 4 move, shield damaged; if victim has no 
shield, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, -2 to attacks, minor 
bleeding 
Armor damaged, torso injured, 4 move, -2 to attacks; if 
victim wears no armor, stunned 1d6 rounds, ribs broken, 
minor bleeding, 4 move, -2 penalty to attacks 
Torso injured, stunned 1d6 rds, major bleeding, 4 move, 4 
to attacks 
Ribs broken, major bleeding, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, 
—4 attacks 


10 Ribs broken, major bleeding, no move or attack 
11 Torso destroyed, victim reduced to 0 hp, severe bleeding 
12 Torso destroyed, victim killed 
13+ As above with additional abdomen (40%), arm (20% each) 
or head (20%) hit 


Location: Arms 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 

4 Hand struck, weapon/shield dropped 

5 Arm struck, -2 to attacks with that arm 

6 Hand broken, minor bleeding, -2 to all attacks 

7 Armor damaged, arm injured, -2 to all attacks; if victim 
has no armor, arm broken, —4 to attacks with that arm, 
minor bleeding 
Shield damaged, arm broken, stunned 1 round, minor 
bleeding 
Weapon dropped, arm broken, stunned 1d6 rounds, minor 
bleeding 
Shoulder injured, no attacks, stunned 1d6 rounds, minor 
bleeding 
Arm shattered, 4 move, no attacks, stunned 1d6 rounds, 
minor bleeding 
Shoulder shattered, stunned 2d6 rounds, no move or 
attacks, major bleeding 

13+ As 12 above with additional torso hit 


Location: Head 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 

4 Victim stunned 1d6 rounds 

5 Head struck, helm removed, victim stunned 1 round, -2 to 
attack rolls; if victim has no helm, stunned 1d6 rounds, -2 
to attacks 
Head injured, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, -2 to attacks, 
minor bleeding 
Helm damaged, face injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, 
—4 to attack rolls; if victim has no helm, unconscious 2d4 
hours, minor bleeding, 4 move, no attacks 
Skull broken, helm destroyed, victim reduced to 0 hit 
points, unconscious 1d4 hours, minor bleeding; no move- 
ment or attacks 
Jaw /face broken, major bleeding, no movement or attack; 
victim loses 1d3 points of Charisma / Appearance perma- 
nentl 
Head Hid, major bleeding, unconscious 1d6 days; vic- 
tim must roll saving throw vs. death magic or lose 1d3 
points of Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma permanently 

11 Throat destroyed, no move or attack, stunned 2d6 rounds, 
severe bleeding 

12 Skull destroyed, immediate death 

134 As above with additional torso hit 


Location: Tail 
Severity Effect 
1-5 No unusual effect 
6 Tip of tail struck; if prehensile, any items carried are 
dropped, -2 penalty to all tail attacks due to pain 
7-8 Tail injured, minor bleeding, lose any tail attacks; normal 
animals must roll saving throw vs. death magic or retreat 
in pain 
9-10 Tail broken, minor bleeding, lose any tail attacks, 4 move if 
animal uses tail for movement 
11 Tail injured, victim stunned 1d3 rounds, lose any tail 
attacks, no movement or attacks if creature uses tail for 
movement 
12 Tail destroyed, pain reduces creature to 4 move and -2 
penalty on any attack rolls, major bleeding; no move or 
attack if creature uses tail for movement 
134 As 12 above with additional torso or abdomen hit 


136 


Spells in Combat 


Slashing 


Hit Location Chart 

d10 roll Humanoid 
1-2 Right leg 
3-4 Left leg 
5 Abdomen 
6-7 Torso 
8 Right arm 
9 Left arm 
10 Head 


Location: Legs 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 
Leg struck, minor bleeding, victim knocked down 
Knee struck, knockdown, minor bleeding, 4 move 
Leg injured, 4 move, minor bleeding 


Monster/Animal 
Right foreleg/wing 
Left foreleg/wing 
Right hind leg 

Left hind leg 


Tail 


Abdomen 
Torso/chest 


Head 


Leg injured, knockdown, 4 move, minor bleeding; if victim 
has no armor, stunned 1d4 rounds, 4 move, major bleeding 
Knee injured, stunned 1d4 rounds, minor bleeding, % 
move, -2 attacks 

Leg injured, minor bleeding, 4 move, —2 to attacks; if vic- 
tim has no armor, leg broken, major bleeding, no move, -4 
to all attacks 

Hip broken, stunned 1d6 rounds, no move or attack, major 
bleeding 

Leg severed at knee, stunned 2d6 rounds, major bleeding, 
no move or attack 

Leg severed at thigh, stunned 2d6 rounds, no move or 
attack, severe bleeding 

As above with additional abdomen hit 


Location: Abdomen 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 
4 Abdomen grazed, minor bleeding 


Abdomen struck, victim stunned 1 round, 4 move, minor 
bleeding 

Abdomen struck, armor damaged, stunned 1d3 rounds, 4 
move, minor bleeding; if victim wears no armor, abdomen 
injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, -2 penalty to all 
attacks, minor bleeding 

Abdomen injured, 4 move, -2 to all attacks, major bleeding 
Abdomen injured, major bleeding, 4 move, —4 to all attacks 
Abdomen injured, armor destroyed, 4 move, -4 to all 
attacks; if victim has no armor, unconscious 1d6 hours, 
major bleeding 

Abdomen injured, no move or attack, major internal bleed- 


ing 
Abdominal wall destroyed, stunned 2d6 rounds, no move 
or attack, severe bleeding 


12 
13+ 


Abdomen destroyed, victim killed 


Location: Torso 
Severity Effect 
1-3 No unusual effect 
4 Torso grazed, minor bleeding 


As above with additional torso or leg hit (50% of either) 


Torso struck, stunned 1 round, 4 move, minor bleeding 
Shield damaged, torso struck, 4 move, minor bleeding 


10 
1 


12 
13+ 


Location: 
Severity 
1-3 
4 
5 


6 


13+ 


Location: 
Severity 
1-3 
4 
5 


10 


11 
12 
13+ 


Location: 
Severity 
1-5 
6 


Ribs broken, major bleeding, stunned 1d6 rounds, no 
move or attack 

Torso destroyed, severe bleeding, unconscious 2d6 days, 
no move or attack 

Torso destroyed, victim killed 

As above with additional abdomen (40%), arm (20% each), 
or head (20%) hit 


Arms 

Effect 

No unusual effect 

Hand struck, weapon or shield dropped 

Arm struck, minor bleeding, shield damage or weapon 
dropped 

Hand injured, minor bleeding, -2 to attacks or no shield 
use 

Armor damaged, arm injured, minor bleeding, -2 to all 
attacks; if victim has no armor, arm broken, stunned 1d6 
rounds, major bleeding, -2 to all attacks 

Hand severed, stunned 1d6 rounds, major bleeding 
Arm broken, and useless, stunned 1d6 rounds, major 
bleeding, 4 move, -2 to all other attacks 

Shoulder injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, no attacks, major 
bleeding 

Arm severed at elbow, stunned 2d6 rounds, no attacks, 
major bleeding 

Arm severed at shoulder, no move or attacks, severe 
bleeding 

As above with additional torso hit 


Head 

Effect 

No unusual effect 

Head grazed, minor bleeding, victim stunned 1d6 rounds 
Head struck, helm removed, victim stunned 1 round, 2 to 
attack rolls; if victim has no helm, head injured, stunned 
1d6 rounds, 4 move, —2 penalty to all attack rolls 

Eye destroyed, stunned 2d6 rounds, -2 to all attacks 

Helm damaged, face injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, 
-4 to all attacks, minor bleeding 

Skull broken, helm damaged, major bleeding, unconscious 
1d6 hours 

Face injured, victim blinded, major bleeding, no move or 
attack 

Skull broken, unconscious 1d6 days, major bleeding, 
move, 4 penalty to all attacks 

Throat destroyed, severe bleeding 

Skull destroyed, immediate death 

As above with additional torso hit 


Tail 

Effect 

No unusual effect 

Tip of tail struck; if prehensile, any items carried are 
dropped, -2 penalty to tail attacks, minor bleeding 

Tail injured, lose any tail attacks; minor bleeding, normal 
animals must roll saving throw vs. death magic or retreat 
in pain 

Tail broken, lose any tail attacks, 4 move if animal uses tail 
for movement, minor bleeding 

Tail destroyed, stunned 1d3 rounds, major bleeding, lose 
any tail attacks, no move or attack if creature uses tail for 
movement 


5 
6 
7 


Armor damaged, torso injured, 4 move, -2 to all attacks; if 


victim wears no armor, stunned 1d6 rounds, major bleed- 
ing, 4 move, -2 penalty to all attacks 

Torso injured, major bleeding, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 
move, 2 attacks 

Ribs broken, major bleeding, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, 
-4 attacks 


137 


Tail severed, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, -2 penalty on 
all attacks, major bleeding; no move or attack if creature 
uses tail for movement 

As 12 above with doubled damage dice 


Chapter 8 


Vibration 


Hit Location Chart 


d10 roll 


1-2 
3-4 
5 
6-7 
8 

9 
10 


Monster/Animal 
Right foreleg/wing 
Left foreleg / wing 
Right hind leg 

Left hind leg 

Tail 

Abdomen 
Torso/chest 

Head 


Humanoid 
Right leg 
Left leg 
Abdomen 
Torso 
Right arm 
Left arm 
Head 


Location: Legs 
Severity Effect 


1-3 


134 


No unusual effect 

Victim grazed and knocked down 

Leg struck, 4 move; victim knocked down, stunned 1d4 
rounds 

Foot injured, 4 move, victim knocked down, stunned 1d4 
rounds 

Armor destroyed, leg injured, 4 move, victim stunned 1d4 
rounds 

Hip/thigh injured, knocked down, stunned 2d4 rounds, % 
move 

Armor destroyed, leg broken, stunned 2d4 rounds, 4 move 
and —4 penalty to all attacks 

Foot disintegrated; minor bleeding, victim stunned 2d4 
rounds, then no movement and —4 penalty to all attacks 
Leg disintegrated at knee, major bleeding, no move or 
attack 

Leg disintegrated at hip, no move or attack, major bleed- 
in 

As 12 above with an additional abdomen hit 


Location: Abdomen 
Severity Effect 


1-3 


13+ 


No unusual effect 

Victim grazed and stunned 1 round 

Abdomen struck, -2 to attack rolls, 4 move, stunned 1d4 
rounds 

Armor destroyed, abdomen injured, 4 move, -2 to attack 
rolls, victim stunned 1d4 rounds 

Abdomen injured, 4 move, -2 to attack rolls, victim 
stunned 2d4 rounds 

Abdomen injured, 4 move, 4 to attack rolls, stunned 2d4 
rounds 

Armor destroyed, abdomen injured, victim stunned 2d4 
rounds, 4 move, -4 to attack rolls, minor bleeding 
Abdomen injured internally, no move or attack, major 
bleeding 

Abdomen partially disintegrated, no move or attack, death 
follows in 1d4 hours if victim is not treated with a cure crit- 
ical wounds or more powerful healing magic 

Abdomen disintegrated, immediate death 

As 12 above with additional torso or leg hit (50% chance of 
each) 


Location: Torso 
Severity Effect 


1-3 


No unusual effect 

Victim grazed, stunned 1 round 

Torso struck; 4 move, 2 to attack rolls, stunned 1d4 
rounds 

Shield destroyed, torso injured, stunned 1d4 rounds, % 
move, -2 to attack rolls 

Armor destroyed, torso injured, stunned 2d4 rounds, 4 
move, -2 penalty to attacks 

Torso injured, victim stunned 2d4 rounds, % move, -4 to 
attack rolls 


Location: 


Location: 


Location: 


158 


Severity 
1-3 
4 
5 


6 


13+ 


Severity 
1-3 
4 
5 


6 


10 


11 
12 
13+ 


Severity 
1-5 
6 


Torso injured, no move or attack, minor bleeding 

Ribs broken, no move or attack, major bleeding 

Torso partially disintegrated, victim reduced to 0 hit points 
and dies in 1d3 turns unless treated by cure critical wounds 
or more powerful healing magic 

Torso disintegrated, victim killed instantly 

As 12 above with additional abdomen, arm or head hit 
(40% abdomen, 20% left arm, 20% right arm, 20% head) 


Arms 

Effect 

No unusual effect 

Hand grazed, weapon or shield dropped 

Arm struck, stunned 1d4 rounds, -2 to attacks with that 
hand 

Hand injured, -2 to attacks with that hand (or no shield 
use if shield arm is burned), minor bleeding 

Armor destroyed, arm injured, -2 penalty to all attacks, 
victim stunned 1d4 rounds 

Arm injured, victim stunned 2d4 rounds, —4 to attacks with 
affected arm and —2 to all other attacks, minor bleeding 
Arm broken and useless, victim stunned 2d4 rounds 
Hand disintegrated, stunned 1d4 rounds, -2 to all attacks, 
minor bleeding 

Arm disintegrated at elbow, stunned 2d4 rounds, no 
attacks, major bleeding 

Arm disintegrated at shoulder, stunned 2d4 rounds, 4 
move, no attacks, major bleeding 

As 12 above with an additional torso hit 


Head 

Effect 

No unusual effect 

Victim stunned 1 round 

Head struck, helm destroyed, victim stunned 1d4 rounds, 
~2 to all attack rolls 

Head struck, -2 to attacks, stunned 2d4 rounds, victim 
deafened 

Helm destroyed, face injured, stunned 2d4 rounds, —4 
penalty to all attacks, 4 move, victim deafened 

Face injured, victim blinded and deafened, stunned 2d4 
rounds 

Skull broken, stunned 2d4 rounds, 4 move and -4 penalty 
to attacks; roll saving throw vs. death magic or lose 1d3 
points of Intelligence 

Jaw /face broken, no move or attack, unconscious 4d6 
days, major bleeding, victim deafened 

Throat destroyed, stunned 2d4 rounds, severe bleeding 
Skull disintegrated, immediate death 

As 12 above with additional torso hit 


Tail 

Effect 

No unusual effect 

Tip of tail grazed; if prehensile, any items carried are 
dropped, -2 penalty to all tail attacks 

Tail injured, lose any tail attacks; normal animals must roll 
saving throw vs. death magic or retreat 

Tail injured, lose any tail attacks, 4 move if animal uses tail 
for movement 

Tail disintegrated at mid-length, victim stunned 1d4 
rounds, minor bleeding, lose any tail attacks, no move- 
ment or attacks if creature uses tail for movement 

Tail disintegrated, victim stunned 2d4 rounds, 4 move and 
—2 penalty on any attack rolls, major bleeding; no move 

or attack and severe bleeding if creature uses tail for 
movement 

As 12 above with abdomen or torso hit (50% chance of 
either) 


Spells in Combat 


Woundin 8 11 Torso withered, victim reduced to 0 hit points, dies in 1d3 
turns unless treated by cure critical wounds or more power- 
Hit Location Chart ful magic 
d10 roll Humanoid Monster/Animal 12 Torso destroyed, victim killed instantly 
1-2 Right leg Right foreleg/wing 13+ As 12 above with additional abdomen, arm or head hit 
34 Left leg Left foreleg /wing (40% abdomen, 20% left arm, 20% right arm, 20% head) 
5 Abdomen Right hind leg 
6-7 Torso Lefthindleg ^ Location: Arms 
8 Right arm Tail Severity Effect 
9 Left arm Abdomen 1-3 No unusual effect 
10 Head Torso/chest 4 Hand grazed, weapon or shield dropped 
Head 5 Arm struck, -2 to attacks with that hand 
6 Hand injured, -2 to attacks with that hand (or no shield 
Location: Legs use if shield hand is injured) 
Severity Effect Arm injured, -2 penalty to all attacks, minor bleeding 
1-3 No unusual effect Arm injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, —4 to attacks with affected 
Victim grazed, -1 penalty to attack rolls arm, 2 penalty to all other attacks, minor bleeding 
Leg struck, 4 move, -1 penalty to attack rolls Arm injured and useless, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, 
Foot injured, 4 move, -1 penalty to attack rolls minor bleeding 
Leg injured, 4 move, -2 penalty to attack rolls, minor Hand withered, stunned 1d6 rounds, -2 to all attacks 
bleeding Arm withered at elbow, stunned 1d6 rounds, no attacks 
Hip/thigh injured, 4 move, -2 to all attacks, major Arm withered at shoulder, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, 
bleeding no attacks 
Leg injured, 4 move and —4 penalty to all attacks, major As 12 above with an additional torso hit 
bleeding 
Foot withered, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, then no move- Location: Head 
ment and —4 penalty to all attacks Severity Effect 
11 Leg withered at knee, minor bleeding, no move or attack 1-3 No unusual effect 
12 Leg withered at hip, no move or attack, minor bleeding 4 Victim grazed, —1 penalty to attacks 
13+ As 12 above with an additional abdomen hit 5 Head struck, -2 to all attack rolls 
6 Head injured, -2 to attacks, stunned 1d6 rounds 
Location:Abdomen 7 Face injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, -4 to all attacks and 4 
Severity Effect move 
1-3 No unusual effect 8 Face injured, victim blinded, stunned 1d6 rounds 
Victim grazed, —1 to attack rolls 9 Head partially withered, stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move and 
Abdomen struck, -1 to attack rolls, ^ move —4 penalty to attacks, minor bleeding 
Abdomen injured, 4 move, -2 to attack rolls, minor 10 Face destroyed, victim blinded, no move or attack, major 
bleeding bleeding 
Abdomen injured, 4 move, -2 to attack rolls, major 1i Throat destroyed, stunned 1d6 rounds, severe bleeding 
bleeding 12 Skull destroyed, immediate death 
Abdomen injured, 4 move, —4 to attack rolls, stunned 13+ As 12 above with additional torso hit 
1d6 rounds 
Abdomen injured, stunned 1d6 rounds, ⁄ move, -4 to Location: Tail 
attacks, major bleeding Severity Effect 
10 Abdomen withered, minor bleeding no move or attack 1-5 No unusual effect 
1 Abdomen withered, no move or attack, death in 1d4 hours 6 Tip of tail struck; if prehensile, any items carried are 
unless victim receives cure critical wounds or more power- dropped, -2 penalty to all tail attacks 
ful magic 7-8 Tail injured, lose any tail attacks; normal animals must roll 
12 Abdomen destroyed, immediate death saving throw vs. spell or immediately retreat 
13+ As 12 above with additional torso or leg hit (50% chance 9-10 Tail injured, lose any tail attacks, 4 move if animal uses tail 
of each) for movement, minor bleedin; 
11 Tail withered, stunned 1d3 rounds, minor bleeding, lose 
Location: Torso tail attacks; no movement or attacks if creature uses tail for 
Severity Effect movement 
1-3 No unusual effect 12 Tail destroyed, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move and 
Victim grazed, -1 to attack rolls, stunned 1 round -2 penalty on any attack rolls, major bleeding; no move 
Torso struck; 4 move, -2 to attack rolls or attack and severe bleeding if creature uses tail for 
Torso injured, 4 move, -2 to attack rolls movement 
Torso injured, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, -2 to As 12 above with abdomen or torso hit (50% chance of 
attacks, minor bleeding either) 
Torso injured, victim stunned 1d6 rounds, 4 move, -4 to 
attack rolls, minor bleeding 
Torso injured, no move or attack, major bleeding 
Torso withered, no move or attack, major bleeding 


139 


Appendix 1 


In addition to the usual spell characteristics (range, compo- 
nents, duration, casting time, area of effect, and saving 
throw), several additional characteristics are included in 
these new spells. These refer to material discussed in Chap- 
ter 8 and include the following items: 

Casting Subtlety: This describes how easily the spell 
may be cast without the caster’s action being spotted for 
what it is. The number given is the base modifier to an 
observer's Intelligence check based on the physical compo- 
nents and casting time of the spell. However, the DM may 
apply situational modifiers as he deems appropriate. 

Sensory Signature: Spells possess sensory signatures 
ranging from small to gargantuan describing how spectacu- 
lar and noticeable the spell’s effects are. 

Knockdown: If the spell causes a knockdown chance 
when it strikes a creature, the knockdown die is noted here. 

Critical Strikes: If the spell is capable of causing a criti- 
cal strike check, the spell’s size, number of locations hit, 
and the type of damage is noted here. For example, light- 
ning bolt would be noted as large (1d3 hits), electricity. 
Huge creatures treat spells as if they were one size smaller, 
and gargantuan creatures treat spells as if they were two 
sizes smaller. 

If you are not using any of these optional spell character- 
istics in your campaign, simply ignore the information; the 
basic spell description can be used for play in most cam- 
paigns. 


First-Level Spells 
Detect Phase 
(Divination, Dimension) 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Range: 0 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 10 x 60 ft. 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Creatures or objects that are phased—that is, in the Border 
Ehtereal Plane—can be detected by using this spell. The 
spell affects a path 60 feet long and 10 feet wide; any phased 
creatures or objects in this area are revealed as soft, blue- 
glowing outlines visible to anyone in the vicinity. Creatures 
or effects detected by this spell include: phase spiders, 
ghosts in their ethereal state, characters or creatures 
employing oil of etherealness, psionic etherealness or phasing, 
and all other similar effects. Doorways or portals to extradi- 
mensional spaces are also detected, although anything hid- 
den within remains unseen. 

Detect phase does not reveal the location of creatures or 
objects concealed by magical invisibility or illusions. Note 
that detecting a phased monster doesn’t necessarily give the 
caster the ability to attack it, but creatures such as phase 
spiders lose any special surprise bonuses they may receive 
if they are detected by using this spell. 


140 


Delect Secret Passages and Portals 
(Divination) 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Range: 0 

Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 10 x 10 ft. area /level 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: None 


This spell enables a wizard to detect secret doors, com- 
partments, caches, and similar devices. Only passages, 
doors, or openings that have been deliberately constructed 
so as to escape detection are detected by this spell—a trap 
door buried beneath crates in a cellar, an illusionary wall, or 
an amulet left in a cluttered room would not be detected. 
The wizard affects an area of 10 feet square per level, so a 
4th-level wizard could search four sections of wall, floor, or 
ceiling. Any doorways or openings detected by this spell 
glow softly for one full turn. It’s possible that a wizard 
might not find a secret compartment in the area of effect if 
the compartment is behind or under another object that cov- 
ers it completely. This spell only detects the doorway or 
opening; the wizard may have to search for a mechanism or 
catch that opens the door. 


Dictation 
(Invocation/Evocation, Geometry) 


Range: 10-ft. radius 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: Small audio 


Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell causes any words spoken by the wizard or 
anyone within 10 feet of him to appear on a piece of paper 
or the blank page of a book. It is useful for recording con- 
versations, verbal agreements, interrogations, or even notes 
or observations if the wizard doesn't want to take the time 
to write them down himself. Generally, a person reading 
aloud takes about one to five minutes to read a page, 
depending on how many words are on a page. 

Foreign languages are not translated, although foreign 
words are given the correct alphabetic spelling in the wiz- 
ard's native tongue; for example, the phrase c'est la vie 
would appear as it does here, with no English translation, 
but a phrase or name in Arabic or Chinese would not be 
transcribed in those alphabets. Magical spells and invoca- 
tions are not recorded, so this spell can't be used to create a 
backup copy of a scroll even as it's read by the wizard, but a 
clever wizard may be able to record a magical item's com- 
mand word if an enemy within range uses it while the spell 
is in effect. 

The material component for this spell is the blank page, 
scroll, or paper that the dictation will appear on. This must 
be prepared with a special wash of vinegar, which brings 
the cost to 10 gold pieces per page so readied. 


Expeditious Retreat 

(Alteration) 

Range: 0 Components: V, $ 
Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level Casting Time: 1 
Area of Effect: The caster Saving Throw: None 
Subtlety: +2 Knockdown: None 
Sensory: None Critical: None 


The wizard Kerith was noted for his astounding lack of 
courage in the face of even the most insignificant dangers. 
He developed this spell early in his career to assist him in 
his frequent and precipitous withdrawals from combat. 
When cast, expeditious retreat provides the wizard with an 
amazing fleetness of foot, enabling him to run in great leaps 
and bounds. The caster’s movement rate is tripled for the 
duration of the spell, so a wizard with a movement of 12 
would be able to run at a rate of 36 while the spell was in 
effect. In addition, the wizard can jump up to 5 feet in the 
air or make a 15-foot horizontal leap with ease. The wizard 
does not have to move while the spell is in effect, but if he 
moves at all, his unnatural speed and bounds prevent him 
from taking any other actions except for running—in other 
words, he can't take a half-move and throw a missile, or 
charge, cast a spell, or do anything else except move. 

The wizard cannot increase his movement further by any 
means, including additional movement-affecting magical 
spells or items. Kerith was also noted for his cynical obser- 
vation to a companion: "I don't have to outrun the troll. I 
just have to outrun you." 


(^ 


Drotection from Vermin 


(Abjuration) 

Range: Touch Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 2 rds./level Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: Creature touched Saving Throw: None 
Subtlety: +3 Knockdown: None 


Sensory: Small visual/olfactory ^ Critical: None 


This spell creates a magical barrier around the recipient, 
preventing the attacks of nonintelligent monsters of less 
than 1 Hit Die. Creatures in this category include normal 
centipedes, spiders, bats, and rats, but any monster with an 
Intelligence of low or better can ignore the spell's effects. 

The barrier extends about one foot from the protected 
character's body and moves with him; vermin cannot toler- 
ate the aura's touch and recoil from the character. Any 
attacks that require physical contact (bites, stings, claws, 
etc.) automatically fail, but a creature with a ranged attack 
can still attack the spell's recipient. 

The spell ends if the recipient attacks a creature he has 
been protected against, or tries to pin or trap the vermin by 
forcing the repelling barrier against them. The material 
component for this spell is a cone of pungent incense 
burned in a tiny bronze censer containing osquip ashes. 


Appendix 1 


Ray of Faligue 


(Necromancy) 


Range: 10 yds. + 5 yds./level 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: Small visual 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: Neg. 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This nefarious spell affects the victim's life energies, 
increasing any fatigue or exhaustion the victim currently 
possesses. Alert and well-rested characters suddenly 
become tired and sluggish, and characters who are already 
fatigued may be reduced to near-helplessness. In effect, the 
ray adds one level of fatigue or encumbrance to the victim. 
Moderately encumbered characters suffer a -1 penalty to 
attack rolls; heavily encumbered characters suffer a 2 pen- 
alty to attacks rolls and a +1 Armor Class penalty; and 
severely encumbered characters suffer a 4 penalty to attack 
rolls and a +3 Armor Class penalty. (Assume that monsters 
suffer a 1 penalty to their attack rolls and reduce their 
movement rates by 33%.) The victim is allowed a saving 
throw to negate the spell's effects. 

If you are using the fatigue rules from the PLAYER'S 
OpTION™: Combat & Tactics book, this spell operates in a 
slightly different manner—fresh characters become 
fatigued, gaining one level of encumbrance; fatigued char- 
acters become exhausted, gaining two levels of encum- 
brance; and exhausted characters collapse in a quivering 
heap, unable to move or attack. 


Second-Level Spells 
Cat’s Grace 
(Alteration) 


Range: Touch 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Small tactile 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Just as a strength spell can increase a subject's physical 
power for a time, cat s grace can enhance a subject's Dexter- 
ity. All abilities and skills that are Dexterity-based may be 
affected by an enhanced Dexterity score, including a sub- 
ject’s reaction adjustment, missile attack adjustment, defen- 
sive adjustment, Dexterity-based proficiency scores, and 
adjustments to thief abilities. The exact amount of Dexterity 
gained depends on the subject's class; multi-classed charac- 
ters use the most favorable die. 


Class Dexterity Gain 
Rogue 1d8 points 
Warrior 1d6 points 
Wizard 1d6 points 
Priest 1d4 points 


142 


The spell cannot confer a Dexterity score of 20 or more, 
and it is not cumulative with any other Dexterity-enhancing 
magical or psionic power. Subjects without Dexterity scores 
gain a -1 bonus to AC and a +1 to attack rolls with missiles 
for the duration of the spell. The material component for 
this spell is a few whiskers from an elven cat. 


Displace Self 


(Alteration, Dimension) 


Range: 0 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Emulating the natural ability of the displacer beast, this 
spell causes the caster to appear to be about two feet away 
from his true location. Any creature making a melee or 
missile attack against the caster automatically misses with 
his first attempt and suffers a -2 penalty on all subsequent 
attack rolls. In addition, the wizard also gains a +2 bonus 
on saving throws for any spell or special attack aimed 
directly at him, not at any other characters or the area 
around him. The only spell that will reveal the caster's 
true location is true seeing. 

The material component for this spell is a small strip of 
leather made from displacer beast hide that is twisted into a 
loop. 


Moon Rune 
(Alteration, Geometry, Artifice) 


Range: 0 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Up to 1 sq. ft. 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Small visual 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


By using this spell, the wizard can create an invisible 
mark or rune on any surface. This mark remains invisible 
until conditions specified at the time of the casting are met. 
For example, the wizard could specify that the runes are 
only visible by the light of the moon or by the light of a 
moon of a certain phase (half, full, etc.), when viewed by an 
elf, at sunset or sunrise, when viewed by a wizard, when 
the caster is present, and so on. The spell cannot be used to 
transcribe magical runes, signs, glyphs, or symbols, but as 
many as seven letters or marks can be drawn. Unlike a 
magic mouth spell, a moon rune is permanent and will appear 
any time its conditions are met. 

In addition to appearing when the proper conditions are 
met, a moon rune also becomes visible if a detect magic, detect 
invisibility, true seeing, or other such spell or effect is used on 
it. A read magic spell will reveal the maker's words, if any. 
Moon rune cannot be cast on a living creature. The mark can- 
not be dispelled, but it can be removed by the caster or by 
an erase spell. 

A moon rune requires a special mixture of pigment 
including mithral filings or powder worth at least 100 gp. 


New Wizard Spells, 3rd Level 


Protection from Poison 
(Abjuration) 


Range: Touch 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


With this abjuration spell, the wizard provides a protective 
barrier similar to that created by the spells protection from evil or 
protection from vermin, warding the recipient against creatures 
that possess venom or poison of some kind. Poisonous mon- 
sters or poison-using characters of 4 or less Hit Dice or levels 
are prevented from making physical contact with the spell 
recipient, while venomous creatures of 4+1 Hit Dice or poison- 
using characters of five levels or more suffer a -2 penalty on 
their attack rolls against the protected character. Only injected 
or contact poisons from natural or innate sources (such as com- 
pounds made from plants or the venom from a snake) in a 
position to possibly injure the character are protected against; a 
thief carrying a vial of ingestive poison in his pouch is not 
counted as a venomous character while a character that is 
brandishing a poisoned short sword is counted as venomous. 
The spell recipient can still be poisoned by a spitting attack or a 
thrown dagger smeared with poison. 

If the spell recipient attacks a creature he has been 
warded against or uses the resistance of the spell's aura to 
force his antagonist to give ground, the spell ends. Regret- 
tably, reaching out to drink from a poisoned cup dispels the 
effect, so this spell offers no protection against ingested poi- 
sons. The spell functions normally if cast upon a poison- 
using creature or character. 


Wall of Gloom 


(Conjuration/Summoning, Shadow) 


Range: 30 yards 

Duration: 2d4 rds. + 1 rd./level Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: Two 10-ft. cubes, Saving Throw: Special 
* one 10-ft. cube/level (max. is 8 cubes) 

Subtlety: +3 Knockdown: None 

Sensory: Huge visual, small tactile Critical: None 


Components: V, S, M 


This spell creates a wall or barrier of ominous shadow in 
any area within the spell range. The wall of gloom does not 
obscure sight completely, but objects or creatures within the 
wall, or on its other side, are dim shadows that can barely 
be seen. Creatures attempting missile fire through the wall 
suffer a 2 penalty to their attack rolls. In addition, the 
supernatural cold and darkness of the wall of gloom may 
cause creatures moving through the wall to recoil in fear. 
Creatures of 4 Hit Dice or less who enter the wall must 
make a saving throw vs. spell or retreat for 1d3 rounds; 
creatures of 4+1 to 7 Hit Dice must save or hesitate for 1 
round before entering the wall; and undead and creatures of 
741 Hit Dice or more ignore the wall's fear effects. 

The wall can take any shape the caster desires, as long as 
itis at least 10 feet high and 10 feet thick. The material com- 
ponent is a bit of fleece from a black sheep and the eyelash 
of a revenant. 


145 


Third-Level Spells 
Bands of Sirellyn 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Range: 40 yards 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Medium visual 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Saving Throw: Neg. 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Once employed by the mysterious ancient wizard known 
as the Arcanamach, the mage Sirellyn rediscovered this 
forgotten dweomer many centuries after its last use. The 
spell causes a number of shining metal bands to materialize 
out of the air, encircling and capturing a target of the 
caster's choice. The victim is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to elude capture, with a 1 penalty per three caster lev- 
els (for example, —1 for a 4th to 6th level caster, -2 for a 7th 
to 9th level caster, -3 for a 10th to 12th level caster, and so 
on), since higher-level casters tend to conjure more bands in 
a denser pattern. Any creature of less than size G (gargan- 
tuan) can be snared, but gargantuan monsters are simply 
too big to be restrained by the bands. 

If the victim fails his saving throw vs. spell, he is 
caught and held immobile by the bands. He may not 
move his arms and legs, but he is still capable of speech 
and can employ psionic powers or use worn magical 
items, such as rings. Subjects with a Strength rating may 
attempt to burst the bands and free themselves with a 
bend bars/lift gates roll. If the subject does not have a 
strength rating, it may make a saving throw vs. petrifica- 
tion with a —4 penalty. 

The spell requires three miniature bands of silver that are 
interlocked so that all three are connected. 


Lance of Disruption 


(Invocation/Evocation, Elemental Air, Force) 


Range: 0 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 5 ft. x 60 ft. 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: Huge audio vibration 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 

Saving Throw: 4 
Knockdown: d10 
Critical: Medium (1 hit) 


This spell creates a beam of concussive, disrupting force 
that lashes out from the wizard's hand in a path 5 feet wide 
and 60 feet long. Any creatures caught in the beam's path 
suffer 5d4 points of damage, plus 2 points of damage per 
caster level (maximum damage is 504430); for example, a 
6th-level wizard would inflict 5d4+12 damage with the lance 
of disruption. Victims are allowed a saving throw vs. spell for 
half damage. The lance’s energy delivers a powerful blow 
against inanimate objects and can easily blast light furni- 
ture, thin wooden walls, or fragile stonework to flinders. 
Barred wooden doors can be blasted of their hinges and 
even sturdy iron-bound doors or heavy stonework can be 
seriously damaged by the lance of disruption. 

Creatures with amorphous or nonsolid bodies, such as 
fire or air elementals and some oozes and slimes, are resis- 


Appendix 1 


tant to the lance’s effects and only sustain half damage, or 
one-quarter damage with a successful save. 


Lesser Sign of Scaling 
(Abjuration, Geometry) 


Range: 0 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: One portal 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: Medium visual 


Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Saving Throw: % 
Knockdown: d8 

Critical: Medium, type varies 


By using this spell, the caster creates a magical ward that 
has two major effects; first of all, it affects a doorway or item 
that opens (a chest, for instance) as if it were a hold portal 
spell, keeping it securely locked and closed. Secondly, if the 
protected doorway is forced open by any means, magical or 
physical, the sign is not only destroyed, but also strikes the 
offending creature for 1d8 points of damage +1 point of 
damage per level of the caster. The duration of this spell is 
either one day per level of the caster or until discharged, 
whichever happens first. The exact form of energy is chosen 
by the caster when he creates the lesser sign; acid, cold, fire, 
electricity, or sonic disruption are popular choices. 

The sign is not hidden or concealed in any way and is 
usually quite prominent on the item or portal it protects. The 
caster cannot specify particular creatures or conditions for the 
lesser sign's operation; it functions against any creature that 
attempts to pass it (except for extraplanar creatures of 6 HD 
or more and wizards of higher level than the caster—they can 
merely ignore it as if it were not there). The sign cannot be 
dispelled by spells of lower spell levels such as knock, but the 
caster can remove it any time he chooses, thus ending the 
spell, or it can be defeated by an erase spell cast by a wizard 
of equal or higher level than the original caster. 

The material component for a lesser sign can be a pinch of 
either powdered diamond (cold), ruby (fire), emerald (acid), 
pearl (sonic disruption, or sapphire (electricity), depending 
on the type of energy the wizard wishes the sign to employ. 
The value of the gemstone must be at least 100 gold pieces. 


Protection from Amorphs 
(Abjuration) 


Range: 0 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Medium tactile 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This abjuration resembles the spells protection from vermin 
or protection from evil, but in this case the caster is protected 
from the attacks of any of the various amorphous monsters, 
including slimes, jellies, oozes, puddings, cubes, and slither- 
ing trackers. In order to qualify as an amorphous creature, 
the monster must have an amorphous or fluid body, attack 
through acids or secretions of some kind, and be native to 
the Prime Material Plane (as opposed to extraplanar ele- 
mentals and such creatures). The monster cannot stand the 
touch of the barrier surrounding the protected character, 
and its natural attacks automatically fail. If the monster has 


144 


an innate ranged attack of any kind, these also fail. 

If the protected character makes an attack against the 
monster, or if he forces the barrier against the monster, the 
spell ends and he is no longer protected. The material com- 
ponent is a mixture of rare salts sprinkled in a small circle 
around the character to be protected. 


Solvent of Corrosion 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Alchemy) 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Saving Throw: % 
Knockdown: None 

Critical: Medium (1 hit) acid 


Range: 10 yards 

Duration: 3 rounds 

Area of Effect: 1 sq. ft./level 

Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: Medium visual 
large olfactory 


This spell conjures a corrosive, acidic slime of horrid 
strength on one surface or creature within the spell’s range. Up 
to one square foot of surface area per caster level can be 
affected, so a 5th-level caster can affect 5 square feet—enough 
to create a 2-foot by 3-foot hole in a door or wall, or thoroughly 
drench a man-sized creature. The acid eats through 6 inches of 
wood, leather, or bone, 4 inches of stone, or 1 inch of metal 
each round. Against monsters composed of stone, metal, or 
wood, the solvent inflicts 1d3 points of damage per caster level 
per square foot affected in the first round, 1d2 per caster level 
in the second round, and 1 per two caster levels in the third 
and final round. Therefore, a 10th-level wizard who strikes a 
treant with solvent of corrosion inflicts 10d3, then 10d2, and 
finally 5 points of damage. Each round, the victim is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell for half damage. 

Against flesh, the solvent is much less effective; it is 
caustic and burns painfully, inflicting 1 point of damage per 
caster level in the first round, but no further damage in the 
second or third round, However, the burning in the follow- 
ing rounds does inflict a -2 penalty to the victim's attacks 
while the solvent is active. The solvent is extremely likely to 
cause extensive damage to the victim's armor and equip- 
ment; item saving throws vs. acid may apply at the DM's 
discretion. If the armor or equipment is magical in nature, 
then the saving throw is made with the usual bonuses 
allowed to the magical item. 

The great alchemist Vandarien developed his solvent to 
dissolve iron grates, stone and woodwork traps, and other 
such hazards. The solvent's effectiveness against mineral or 
wood-based creatures was a mere side effect of his research. 
The material component of this spell is a mixture of vinegar, 
water, and a drop of black dragon acid. 


Wall of Water 


(Invocation/Evocation, Elemental Water) 


Range: 30 yards 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Large visual 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell calls into being a curtain or field of water that 
remains intact and upright in defiance of gravity. The wall 


New Wizard Spells, 4th Level 


lasts as long as the wizard chooses to concentrate on main- 
taining it or one round per level if the wizard chooses not to 
concentrate on holding it together. The caster may shape the 
wall of water in one of three ways: 


* A. Water Curtain. In this form, the wizard conjures one 
plane of water, 5 feet square and 1 foot thick, per experi- 
ence level; for example, a 5th-level caster can create five 
5-foot x 5-foot x 1-foot wall sections that would be 
enough to block an arched passageway 15 feet wide and 
10 feet high with a curtain of water 1 foot thick. The cur- 
tain's lower edge must rest upon the ground, but it need 
not be anchored on either side, and it remains cohesive 
and upright for the duration of the spell. Once raised, the 
wall cannot be moved. 

* B.Hemisphere. In this manifestation, the wall of water 
forms a dome 1 foot thick over the caster, with an inner 
radius equal to 3 feet plus 1 foot per caster level; a 7th- 
level caster could create a dome with a 10-foot radius. The 
wall must rest upon the ground. The dome is immobile. 

* C.Sphere. If cast underwater, the caster may shape the 
wall of water into a sphere 1 foot thick, with an inner 
radius equal to 3 feet plus 1 foot per caster level (no air is 
in the sphere). The sphere is centered on the caster and 
moves with him. 


In any form, the wall of water has two primary effects. First 
of all, missile fire through the wall is next to impossible, suf- 
fering a 4 attack penalty for each foot of thickness as well as 
a -1 damage penalty for every two feet of thickness. Crea- 
tures gain a +1 bonus to saving throws against attack spells 
that must pass through the wall. If the spell allows no saving 
throw, none is granted by the wall of water. Secondly, physical 
passage through the wall is hindered; any creature trying to 
pass through must take one full round to do so and becomes 
soaked to the skin in the process. 

The wall of water can be defeated or bypassed by a num- 
ber of spells or effects. At the end of the spell's duration, the 
water loses its cohesiveness and collapses, which may sur- 
prise those sheltering under the hemisphere or standing 
next to the curtain. Note that the water itself may be fresh 
water (25% chance), salt water (50% chance), or brackish 
(25% chance), although the sphere will always be composed 
of the water type that surrounds it. The material component 
is a vial full of blessed spring water. 


Fourth-Level Spells 


Conjure Elemental-Kin 
(Conjuration/Summoning, all Elemental, Geometry) 


Range: 60 yards 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Subtlety: +6 

Sensory: Medium tactile 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Like the conjure elemental spell, this summoning can be 
used to summon a creature from one of the four elemental 
planes—a sylph from the plane of Air, a pech or sandling 
from the plane of Earth, a fire snake from the plane of Fire, 


145 


or a nereid or water weird from the plane of Water. The wiz- 
ard must decide which elemental-kin he will conjure when 
he memorizes the spell since the components and proce- 
dures are different for each. An elemental specialist can con- 
jure only from his own element. 

Elemental-kin can only be conjured if there is a good 
amount of their native element at hand; a good-sized fire or a 
body of water is required for those elemental-kin. In addition 
to this and either an aquamarine, amber, ruby or emerald 
gem worth 1,500 gold pieces, the wizard must also provide 
the spell's material component, which varies by element: 


Air Elemental-kin: Burning incense 

Earth Elemental-kin: Soft clay 

Fire Elemental-kin: Sulphur and phosphorus 
Water Elemental-kin: Water and sand 


The elemental-kin is bound to obey the wizard's com- 
mands and will not turn against him, but it is generally 
annoyed by its summoning and cooperates only as 
instructed. Given the chance, the creature will disappear 
and return to its home in the elemental planes; in order to 
prevent this, the wizard must concentrate on keeping the 
creature from leaving. (If the wizard is wounded or grap- 
pled, or casts another spell, his concentration is broken.) 
The elemental-kin can be controlled or maintained at a dis- 
tance of 30 yards per caster level. 

The various elemental-kin creatures are described in 
detail in the MONSTROUS MANUAL tome, under the heading 
Elemental. At the DM's option, other elemental creatures of 
4 Hit Dice or less may be summoned with this spell. 


Improved Strength 


(Alteration) 


Range: Touch 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


By casting this spell, the wizard can empower a creature 
with superhuman strength. Unlike the 2nd-level strength spell, 
improved strength allows the recipient of the spell to ignore race 
or class restrictions on his maximum Strength score, possibly 
reaching scores as high as 25. The exact amount of strength 
gained varies by the recipient's class group: 


Class Strength Gain' 
Warrior 1d8+4 (max 25) 
Priest 1d6+4 (max 23) 
Rogue 1d6+4 (max 23) 
Wizard 1d4+4 (max 21) 


* Count each percentile bracket of exceptional strength as one point; 
the strength gain proceeds as 18, 18/01, 18/51, 18/76, 18/91, 18/00, 
19, and so on. 


Even if the recipient is not a warrior, he gains all the ben- 
efits of an exceptional Strength category; for example, if a 
thief with a Strength of 14 gained 7 points, he would pos- 
sess a Strength of 18/76 for the duration of the spell. In 


addition to the attack and damage bonus, increased chance 
to open doors or bend bars, and increased carrying capacity, 
the spell recipient may temporarily gain the ability to throw 
boulders as a giant of equivalent Strength, as shown below: 


Strength Equivalent Rock Hurling 


Score Giant Type Range Damage 
19 Hill giant 80 yards 1d6 
20 Stone giant 100 yards 1d8 
21 Frost giant 100 yards 1d8 
22 Fire giant 120 yards 1d8 
23 Cloud giant 140 yards 1d10 
24 Storm giant 160 yards 1d12 
25 Titan 200 yards 1d20 


When the spell ends, the recipient is struck by intense 
exhaustion; he can do nothing except rest for 1d3 full turns 
to recover his strength. The material component is a strand 
of hair from a giant. 


] sunt , 
LESSCLr (sCaS 


(Enchantment/Charm, Song) 


Range: 10 yards Components: V 
Duration: Special Casting Time: 2 
Area of Effect: 1 creature Saving Throw: Neg. 
Subtlety: +1 Knockdown: None 
Sensory: Medium audio Critical: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard places a magical 
command upon a creature of 7 Hit Dice or less to carry 
out some service, undertake a task, or refrain from some 
action or course of activity. The caster specifies the condi- 
tions of the lesser geas when he casts the spell; the victim 
must be intelligent, conscious, able to understand the 
caster, and not under the influence of any spells or effects 
that affect or control its mind. The lesser geas cannot com- 
pel a creature to kill itself or perform acts that will result 
in certain death, although the wizard can use the spell to 
coerce the subject into almost any other nondestructive 
course of action. The victim is entitled to a saving throw 
vs. spell to avoid the lesser geas, but suffers a -2 penalty on 
its save if the wizard is of higher level or Hit Dice, or a -4 
penalty if the wizard is more than twice the victim's level 
or Hit Dice. 

The wizard must be careful in the wording of his lesser 
geas since the casting and fulfillment are tricky. The subject 
should be given a tangible, achievable goal, with clear 
courses of action available to him. “Climb that mountain!” 
or "Tear that mountain down rock by rock!" are legitimate 
geases, but a geas such as "Become a mountain!" is just not 
specific enough to work. 

Similar to the 6th-level spell geas, the lesser geas compels 
the subject to obey the wizard's command. If the geased 
creature fails to follow the wizard's instructions, it will 
grow sick—each week that passes, the creature loses one 
point from each ability score, 1 hit point per Hit Die, and 
suffers a cumulative —1 penalty to attack rolls and saving 
throws. These penalties cannot reduce an ability score to 
less than 3, reduce a creature to less than 1 hit point per Hit 
Die, or reduce its attacks and saves by more than 4 points. 
The lesser geas can be countermanded by a remove curse spell, 


New Wizard Spells, 4th Level 


or a limited wish or wish. However, if the subject entertains 
thoughts of removing the /esser geas, it will protect itself by 
giving the subject a warning headache. If the subject per- 
sists, then the sickness will begin, 


Mordenkainen’s Force Missiles 


(Invocation/Evocation, Force) 


Range: 30 yds. + 10 yds./level 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1-7 targets 

Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Medium visual, 
large audio 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Saving Throw: Special 

Knockdown: d10 

Critical: Medium (1 hit) 
impact 


This spell creates a brilliant globe of magical energy 
that streaks forth from the caster's hand to unerringly 
strike its target, much like a magic missile spell. The subject 
must be seen or otherwise detected in order to be targeted 
by this spell. The wizard creates one missile at 7th level 
and an additional missile at every third level after 7th—in 
other words, two missiles at 10th level, three at 13th, four 
at 16th, and so on, to a maximum of seven missiles at 25th 
level. Each missile inflicts 2d4 points of damage to the tar- 
get and then bursts in a 3-foot radius concussive blast that 
inflicts 1 point of damage per level of the caster—for 
example, a 12th-level wizard could conjure two force mis- 
siles, each of which strikes for 2d4+12 points of damage. 
The victim may attempt a saving throw vs. spell to negate 
the concussion damage, but the impact of the missile itself 
allows no saving throw. 

Just like magic missile, the force spheres may be directed 
at as many or as few targets as the caster likes. The missiles 
can easily damage or destroy inanimate objects, especially 
fragile or delicate items. 


Dsychic Protection 


(Abjuration, Mentalism) 


Range: 0 

Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell provides the caster with a +6 bonus to saving 
throws (or allows a saving throw in the case that one is not 
normally allowed) against spells or effects that control or 
destroy his mind, including command, domination, feeble- 
mind, hold magic jar, insanity, possession, and the psionic 
powers of domination, mass domination, and switch per- 
sonality. Any attempt to subvert or destroy the wizard's 
mind automatically fails, but the wizard is still vulnerable 
to spells or effects that influence his actions without taking 
control of his psyche. In other words, attacks that simply 
encourage the victim to act in a certain way or influence 
his perceptions do not trigger the magical warding of the 
spell. A partial list of spells, powers, and effects that are 
not defended against includes charm, suggestion, emotion, 
confusion, hypnotism, fear, antipathy, beguiling, Otto's irre- 
sistible dance, a mind flayer’s mental blast, and most 


147 


psionic attacks. 
The material component for this spell is a tiny figurine of 
the wizard, cast in iron. 


Ultravision 
(Alteration) 


Range: Touch 

Duration: 2 hrs. + 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Subtlety: +6 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


An improved version of the infravision spell, ultravision 
allows the spell recipient to see perfectly in normal dark- 
ness, starlight, or moonlight to the full range of his unob- 
scured daylight vision. (See Chapter 13 of the Player's Hand- 
book; in most outdoor settings, this means that the character 
can spot movement at 1,500 yards.) In underground set- 
tings, the spell enables the recipient to see up to 90 feet in 
nonmagical darkness. Magical darkness, fog, or smoke is 
less effective than normal against a character using ultravi- 
sion; the spell permits the recipient to see at least 30 feet in 
magical darkness, and at least 10 feet in any kind of 
vaporous, foggy, or smoky atmosphere. Ultravision does not 
permit the recipient to spot invisible creatures, and it does 
not function in the presence of strong light sources 
(lanterns, torches, and so on). 

The material component for this spell is a black agate 
worth at least 50 gold pieces. 


Vilriolic Sphere 


(Conjuration/Summoning, Elemental Water, Alchemy) 


Range: 150 yards 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius 

Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: Medium visual, 
large olfactory 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Saving Throw: 4 

Knockdown: d8 

Critical: Large (1d3 hits) 
acid 


This spell conjures a one-foot sphere of glowing emer- 
ald acid that the caster can direct to strike any target 
within range. When it reaches its target, the sphere 
explodes and drenches the victim in potent acid. The vic- 
tim suffers 1d4 points of damage per caster level (to a 
maximum damage of 12d4) and may attempt a saving 
throw vs. spell for half damage. If the victim fails his sav- 
ing throw, he continues to suffer acid damage in the fol- 
lowing rounds, sustaining two less dice of damage each 
round. For example, an 8th-level wizard inflicts 8d4 dam- 
age with this spell on the first round, 6d4 on the second 
round, 4d4 on the third round, 2d4 on the fourth round, 
and the spell ends in the fifth round. Each round, the sub- 
ject is entitled to a saving throw—the spell ends when he 
succeeds, or when the acid damage runs its course. The 
acid can also be neutralized with soda, ash, lye, charcoal, 
or removed with a large quantity of water. 

The vitriolic sphere also splashes acid in a 5-foot radius 
around the primary target. Any creatures within the splash 
radius must save vs. paralyzation or suffer a splash hit that 


inflicts 1d4 points of damage per every five caster levels. 
Splash hits do not cause continuing damage. The material 
component for this spell is a drop of giant slug bile. 


Fifth-Level Spells 


Improved Blink 
(Alteration, Dimension) 


Range: 0 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: Medium visual 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Naturally, this spell is an improvement of the 3rd-level 
alteration spell blink, allowing the wizard to shift his body 
to any point within 15 feet of his current location. Unlike the 
lower-level spell, improved blink allows the wizard to choose 
the exact time of his jump, the exact destination, and the ori- 
entation or facing of his choosing. For example, a wizard 
confronted by an enemy fighter could blink just before the 
fighter attacked, reappearing directly behind his foe for a 
back attack. If the wizard blinks away from an attack, his 
enemy automatically misses—but creatures with multiple 
attacks may be able to reposition themselves for another 
swing if the wizard blinks to a location within reach. 

If the wizard intends to take any action such as attacking, 
casting a spell, or using a magical item, he must decide 
before the round begins if he will do so before or after he 
blinks. If he acts before he blinks, he may be endangered by 
an attack before he finishes; he can choose to proceed with 
his action, hoping that he won't be hit, or he can abort his 
action by taking his blink for the round. On the other hand, 
if the wizard begins his action affer his blink, the initiative 
modifier of his attack or spell is added to the time of his 
blink to determine when he attacks. 


A blinking wizard dueling a fighter decides to blink first, 
when the fighter attacks and then lightning bolt Hie offensive fel 
low. The fighter rolls a modified 6 for initiative, so tlie wizard 
waits until 6, then blinks, making the fighter miss. At that time, 
he starts his lightning bolt, which has a casting time of 3—the 
spell will go off on 9. 

In the PLAYER’S OPTION: Combat & Tactics initiative system, 
the wizard must count 1, 2, or 3 phases from the time of his blink 
for fast, average, or slow actions. If the fighter above attacked in 
the average phase, the wizard would blink during the fighter’s 
attack, and then his lightning bolt (a fast spell) would go off 1 
phase later, with any other slow actions. 


Because the wizard can pick the location he is blinking 
to, he may not choose to blink into a movable object in order 
to force it aside—he must blink to an area clear of obstruc- 
tions or obstacles. If he does attempt to blink into a movable 
object, he will find himself displaced to a random location 
(use the blink 1d8 rules in the PHB for determining where he 
ends up). 


Appendix 1 


148 


Lcomund's Hidden Lodge 


(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Range: 20 yards 

Duration: 1d4 hrs. + 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: 30 sq. ft./level 
Subtlety: +7 to +10 

Sensory: None 


Similar in most regards to the 4th-level spell Leomund’s 
secure shelter, this spell offers one significant improvement: 
The shelter is perfectly camouflaged to blend in with what- 
ever terrain or surroundings are appropriate. It may appear 
as a house-sized boulder in rocky or mountainous areas, a 
sand dune, a deadfall, a small grassy knoll, or even a 
mighty tree. The spell also conceals all telltale signs of habi- 
tation, including any smoke, light, or sound coming from 
within the lodge. Creatures or characters who are exception- 
ally well-tuned to their surroundings (elves, druids, 
rangers, and various sylvan monsters) may attempt a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell to spot the hidden lodge if they pass 
within 30 feet; all other creatures cannot find the wizard's 
refuge without the aid of true seeing or similar magic. 

In all other respects, the hidden lodge resembles Leomund's 
secure shelter. The interior is level, clean, and dry, and the 
whole thing is sturdily constructed from timber, stone, or 
sod. It is secure against winds of up to 100 miles per hour, 
impervious to normal missiles, and the doors, windows, 
and chimney have the option to be wizard locked and 
guarded by an alarm spell. Simple furnishings include up to 
ten bunks, à small writing desk, a trestle table and benches, 
and an optional unseen servant to wait on the wizard. (If any 
of the optional secondary spells are added on to this spell, 
then the casting time goes up to one hour and adds a +3 
modifier to the subtlety rating.) 

The material components are a square chip of stone, 
crushed lime, a few grains of sand, a sprinkle of water, and 
a splinter of wood, plus a crushed diamond worth at least 
100 gold pieces. If the secondary spells are to be included, 
their material components are required also. 


Drooling versus Combustion 
(Abjuration, Elemental Fire) 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Range: Touch 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Subtlety: +6 

Sensory: None 


The renowned fire wizard Daltim developed this spell 
some years ago to protect important items or structures 
against the various incendiary spells with which he was 
familiar. Proofing renders an inanimate object nearly imper- 
vious to fire, granting the affected item a +3 bonus to saving 
throws vs. magical fire (including a dragon's breath), and a 
*6 bonus to saving throws vs. normal fire. This is cumula- 
tive with the saving throw bonus of a magical item, so a 
cloak of protection +4 could have a bonus of +7 to +10 on any 
item saving throws versus combustion effects. Remember 
that an item fails its saving throw on a natural roll of 1, 


New Wizard Spells, 5th Level 


regardless of any bonuses. 

The item affected must be one discrete construction or 
object, although it can be articulated or composed of several 
parts (for example, a suit of armor, a catapult, a house, or a 
carriage). At 9th level, the wizard can proof an article of 
clothing or a small piece of furniture; at 12th level, a small 
vehicle or large piece of furniture; at 15th level, a small 
building or large vehicle; at 18th level, a medium building 
or a very large vehicle; and at 20th level or higher, a large 
building or small fortification. A character dressed in a com- 
pletely proofed article of clothing (a large cloak) gains a +2 
bonus to saving throws vs. fire. 

The material component for proofing versus combustion is 
a fire-brick made with the ashes left from a phoenix’s fire. 
Seafaring wizards often use this spell to protect their vessels 
from hostile fireballs and various fire-throwing devices. 


Rusting Grasp 
(Alteration, Elemental Water, Alchemy) 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 


Range: 0 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster Saving Throw: Special 
Subtlety: +4 Knockdown: None 
Sensory: Medium visual/olfactory Critical: None 


By casting this spell, the wizard gains the power to cor- 
rode ferrous metals and alloys at a touch. Iron and iron- 
based alloys such as steel, meteoric iron, mithral, and 
adamantite are affected, but noble metals such as gold, sil- 
ver, and copper are not subject to reduction through rusting. 
Any ferrous metal touched by the wizard must make an 
item saving throw vs. disintegration (usually a 17 or better 
on a d20) or be destroyed. Magical arms or armor may 
apply their bonus to this save, so a sword +3 would gain a 
+3 to its roll. Other magical metal items may receive a +1 to 
a +6 bonus based on the DM's estimate of their power. 

The wizard may employ rusting grasp in combat by sim- 
ply touching the equipment of metal-wearing characters or 
creatures. If he tries to touch the armor of a character, the 
wizard need only hit the opponents unarmored AC. If the 
armor fails its save, rusting grasp permanently destroys 2d4 
points of AC through corrosion. For example, plate mail 43 
(base AC 0) could be reduced to a base AC of 2 to 8 if it fails 
its item saving throw. 

Weapons are more difficult to grasp; the wizard must 
make an attack roll against AC 4 (modified by the oppo- 
nent's Dexterity) in order to touch the weapon. If the 
weapon fails its saving throw, it is destroyed. Important 
note: The wizard must touch the weapon and not the other 
way around! Unlike a rust monster, he doesn't corrode 
weapons simply by being hit. 

Against metallic creatures, rusting grasp functions like the 
priest spell cause serious wounds in that it inflicts 2d8+1 point 
of damage per successful attack. The spell lasts for one 
round per level, and the wizard can make one touch attack 
per round. The material component is an antenna from a 
rust monster. ' 


149 


Tensers Destructive Resonance 
(Invocation/Evocation, Force) 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Saving Throw: Special 
Knockdown: d12 
Critical: Huge (1-4 hits) 
crushing 


Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Subtlety: +4 
Sensory: Huge audio, 

large tactile 


When this spell is cast, a thin beam of destructive blue 
force springs forth from the caster's fingertip and strikes 
any one object within range. The beam imparts an immense 
amount of energy to the object struck, causing it to sponta- 
neously explode. Large, massive objects have more poten- 
tial destructive energy than small, lightweight objects, but 
the wizard must hold the beam on the larger object for a 
longer time in order to cause detonation. 

The beam has two principal effects: First of all, the object 
struck is disintegrated if it fails its item saving throw. Sec- 
ondly, any creature near the destroyed item suffers damage 
proportional to the weight of the item detonated, plus blast 
damage of 1d6 points per two caster levels. Creatures 
caught within the blast radius may attempt a saving throw 
vs. paralyzation for half damage (1 point per caster level), 
but the base damage of the explosion may not be saved 
against. 


Weight Resonance Base Explosive 
(Ib.) Time Damage Radius 
1-5 Instant 1d8 2 ft. 
6-25 Instant 1d12 3 ft. 
26-100 One rd. 1d20 5 ft. 
101-500 Two rds. 2d12 10 ft. 
501-2,000 Three rds. 3d12 15 ft. 


Objects more massive than 2,000 pounds are simply too 
big to detonate. Living flesh and enchanted objects or items 
are immune to the destructive resonance, but a wizard 
could choose to use Tenser’s destructive resonance on an object 
worn or carried by another creature. However, if he does so, 
the victim is entitled to a saving throw vs. spell to negate 
the beam entirely and prevent any damage at all, and then 
gains a save for half damage against the blast effect even if 
the beam succeeds in detonating his equipment. 

The material component for this spell is a tiny orb of 
finely-crafted gold with a small removable ring surround- 
ing it that must be taken off as the spell is cast. 


Drying Eyes 
(Divination) 
Components: V, S, M 


Casting Time: 1 turn 
Saving Throw: None 


Range: 1 mile 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1d4+1 
eyes/level 

Knockdown: None 

Critical: None 


Subtlety: +6 
Sensory: Tiny visual 


This spell conjures a small horde of semitangible magical 
orbs or eyes that can be used to reconnoiter an area at the 


F4 
EB mm E GE um Em BE UN 
Er n rem eum fr zum Be =v 


New Wizard Spells, 5th Level 


wizard's command. Each of the eyes is about the size of a 
small apple and can see 120 feet (normal vision only) in all 
directions. In order to report their findings, the eyes must 
return to the caster’s hand to replay in the caster’s mind 
everything they have seen during their existence. The eyes 
are subject to illusions, darkness, fog, and any other factors 
that would affect the wizard’s ability to receive visual infor- 
mation about his surroundings. The eyes only see as a nor- 
mal human would—abilities and spell effects including 
infravision do not alter the eyes’ vision. It only takes the eye 
one round to replay one hour of recorded images. 

The spell conjures 1d4 eyes, plus 1 eye per caster level. 
The eyes exist for up to 1 hour per caster level, or until they 
return to the wizard; after relaying its findings, an eye dis- 
appears. Each eye is AC 4, flies by levitation at a rate of 12, 
and has only 1 hit point—a single hit from any weapon or 
damaging spell destroys it. A successful dispel magic 
destroys all eyes caught in the area of effect. While the indi- 
vidual eyes are quite fragile, they’re small and difficult to 
spot, especially in conditions of poor visibility such as dark- 
ness, fog, or rain. Of course, if the eye is being sent into 
darkness, then it’s very possible that it could hit a wall or 
other similar obstacle and destroy itself. 

When the wizard creates the eyes, he can specify any set 
of instructions or orders that he wishes, up to 25 words. 
Any knowledge the wizard possesses is assumed to be 
known by the eyes as well, so if the wizard knows what a 
typical Jakallian merchant looks like, the eyes do as well. 
Sample commands might be, "Surround me at a range of 
400 yards and return if you spot any dangerous creatures," 
or "Spread out and search the town for Arweth; follow him 
for three turns, staying out of sight, and then return." Note 
that in the first command, the eye only returns if it spots a 
creature that the wizard would regard as dangerous; a 
seemingly innocuous peasant that is actually a shapechanged 
dragon wouldn't trigger the eye's return. In any event, if an 
eye is ever more than one mile distant from the wizard, it 
instantly ceases to exist. However, the wizard's link with 
the eye is such that he won't know if the eye was destroyed 
or if it just wandered out of range. 

Some command words can be used to abbreviate the 
directions. For example, "surround me" directs the eyes to 
form an equally-spaced ring at whatever range is indicated, 
and then move with the wizard. As eyes return or are 
destroyed, the rest automatically space themselves to com- 
pensate. "Spread out" directs the eyes to move away from 
the wizard in all directions. Other commands that might be 
useful include having them form a line in a certain manner, 
making them move at random within a certain range, or 
have them follow a certain type of creature. The DM is the 
final judge of the suitability of the wizard's directions. 

The material component is a handful of crystal marbles. 


Vile Venom 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Elemental Water, Alchemy) 


Range: 30 yards 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: Small visual 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Saving Throw: Special 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


By casting this inherently evil spell, the wizard conjures 
a small amount of deadly poison directly onto any weapon 
blades or other surface within the area of effect. The spell 
creates one dose per caster level; a single dose is sufficient 
to coat one size S weapon such as a dagger or an arrow- 
head, three doses can coat a size M weapon, and five doses 
can coat a size L weapon. The venom remains potent for up 
to one hour per caster level, although an envenomed blade 
remains so for only 1d3 successful attacks before the poison 
has been worn off. The potency of the venom varies by the 
caster level, as shown below. 


Level Onset Time Strength 
9th 2-12 rounds 20/1d3 
12th 2-5 rounds 25/2d4 
15th 1-2 rounds 30/2d6 

18th Immediate death /20 


If a weapon coated with Vandarien’s vile venom success- 
fully hits a creature, the victim must make a saving throw 
vs. poison or suffer the first damage figure—if the caster 
was a 12th-level wizard, this would be 25 points. (Naturally, 
this is damage above and beyond any caused by the 
weapon that injects the poison.) Even if he succeeds in the 
save, the victim still sustains a lesser amount of damage, as 
shown in the second figure. 

Instead of creating an insinuative poison (one that is 
introduced to the body through a cut), the wizard can 
instead conjure the venom as a contact poison. A surface of 
about one-half square foot per caster level can be affected. 
One square foot is enough to coat a doorknob, a sword-hilt, 
the handle or clasp of a chest, or an object of similar size. 
The contact poison has the same effects as the insinuative 
venom, but the victim gains a +2 bonus on his saving 
throws. The contact poison's toxicity fades at the end of the 
spell's duration. 

The material component is a small vial of venom from a 
giant snake. 


Sixth-Level Spells 


Arrow of Bone 
(Necromancy, Artifice) 


Range: 0 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 missile 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: Small visual/ tactile 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Saving Throw: Special 

Knockdown: Varies 

Critical: Medium (1 hit) 
impact 


By drawing runes of dire power upon a simple arrow, 
bolt, dart, or javelin, the caster changes the weapon into a 
sinister missile of cold, enchanted bone. The wizard may 
then throw or fire the weapon in the normal fashion, or he 
can choose to give it to a companion to use. If the wizard 
employs the arrow of bone himself, he strikes with the 
THACO of a warrior of half his own level and a +3 bonus to 
his attack roll; if he gives it to someone else, the bone arrow 
merely confers a +1 bonus to hit. A creature struck by the 
weapon must make a saving throw vs. death magic or die; 


Appendix 1 


even if successful, the victim sustains normal damage for 
the missile, plus an additional number of points equal to the 
weapon’s maximum damage (for example, 1d6+6 for an 
arrow or javelin, or 1d3+3 for a dart). Unlike the death spell 
or finger of death, the victim can be raised or resurrected in 
any expedient manner. 

The arrow of bone does not destroy undead or nonliving 
creatures outright. Instead, the arrow inflicts normal dam- 
age plus four times the missile’s normal maximum (1d6+24 
for an arrow, 1d3+12 for a dart, and so on), or half that if the 
subject creature succeeds in its saving throw. 

The material component is a powdered sliver of bone 
mixed with black dragon blood. The resulting mixture is 
used to paint runes on the weapon. If the splinter of bone 
can be taken from the remains of a close blood relative of 
the subject (a sibling, parent, or grandparent), the victim 
receives a —4 penalty on his or her saving throw if struck by 
the arrow of bone. 


Dimensional Blade 
(Invocation/Evocation, Dimension, Artifice) 


Range: 0 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: Small visual 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 

Critical: Moderate (1 hit) slashing 


This spell makes a single weapon incredibly sharp by 
reducing one of its physical dimensions to an infinitesimal 
measurement. The dimensional blade can slash through mat- 
ter with as much effort as it takes to wave a stick through 
the air. Even stone and iron can be carved to pieces with 
ease. The spell can be cast on almost any hand-held slashing 
(type S) weapon, as well as a few thrown weapons of this 
type, such as the chakram, shuriken, or a hand axe. 

Against creatures, the dimensional blade ignores any por- 
tion of Armor Class derived from armor itself; only magical 
and Dexterity adjustments affect the opponent's AC. For 
example, a warrior in chain mail +2 with a Dexterity of 17 is 
normally AC 0, but against the dimensional blade he only 
applies the 3-point adjustment for Dexterity and the 2-point 
magical adjustment, for a total AC of 5. Creatures wearing 
purely magical armor (such as bracers of defense) may keep 
the full magical adjustment. Monsters with thick or tough- 
ened hides, such as dragons, may lose part of the Armor 
Class at the DM's discretion. The weapon gains a +2 bonus 
to attack and damage rolls in any event, but the wielder 
ignores any Strength-based combat adjustments—muscle 
power doesn't help the blade at all. 

The dimensional blade is also quite effective against inani- 
mate objects. Any object with a diameter or thickness smaller 
than the blade's length must make a saving throw vs. disinte- 
gration when struck, or be cleanly severed in twain. Larger 
objects can be sawed through or sliced away at the rate of 
about 5 cubic feet per round. It's dangerous to attempt to dis- 
arm a dimensional blade; the weapon used must make an item 
saving throw vs. disintegration or be destroyed. 

Finally, the blade is also effective against phased or ethe- 
real creatures since part of its existence is forced into the 
Ethereal Plane. If the wielder has some way to detect crea- 
tures concealed in this way, the blade can strike and affect 


152 


them normally, but without the power to negate Armor 
Class or other combat bonuses. 

The wizard must touch the weapon to be affected by the 
spell, but afterward anyone may wield it. The material com- 
ponent for this spell is a razor-thin shard of glass. 


Etherealness 


(Dimension) 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: Neg. 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Range: Touch 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature(s) touched 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard and up to six other 
creatures joined by linked hands become ethereal (along 
with their equipment). While ethereal, the group need not 
stay together. The group’s presence can be detected only by 
detect phase, true seeing, or similar spells and effects. No 
physical, or magical attack can affect him, unless his 
assailant is ethereal as well (although some monsters, such 
as the basilisk, have gaze weapons whose power extends 
into the Ethereal Plane). The spell recipients are actually in 
the Border Ethereal and can still perceive their physical sur- 
roundings, but the world appears gray, misty, and indistinct 
to them. Note that as ethereal creatures can perceive the 
physical world here, a character could scout out his sur- 
roundings or make good an escape from the safety of the 
Border Ethereal. 

The wizard and his companions may remain in the Bor- 
der Ethereal for up to one hour per level; when the spell 
expires, they return to normal existence, although the wiz- 
ard can choose to end the spell before its full duration. The 
wizard also has the option of moving himself or the group 
from the Border Ethereal into the Deep Ethereal, in which 
case they remain ethereal when the spell ends. He will 
have to use this spell again or find another way back in 
order to return to his home plane. 

The wizard can attempt to use etherealness to banish an 
unwilling subject. He must make a successful attack roll in 
order to touch him, and the subject receives a saving throw 
vs. spell to negate the effect. An unwilling subject automati- 
cally remains in the Border Ethereal for an amount of time 
specified by the wizard at the time of the casting, but no 
more than one hour per caster level. When used like this, 
etherealness does not affect the caster, only the subject. 


Greater Sign of Sealing 


(Abjuration, Geometry) 


Range: 0 

Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Medium visual 


Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Saving Throw: Special 
Knockdown: Special 
Critical: Special 


A more potent form of the lesser sign of sealing, this spell 
allows the caster to guard an item or portal and prevent all 
other creatures from opening or passing through the sealed 
item or surface. The greater sign has several effects; first of 


New Wizard Spells, 6th Level 


all, it affects a doorway or item that opens (a chest, for 
instance) as a wizard lock spell. If placed in an open corridor 
or archway to prevent passage, the greater sign creates a 
magical barrier that repels all who try to pass. 

Second, the greater sign greatly strengthens the physical 
structure of any door or item it is placed upon, granting a 
+6 bonus on any item saving throws and allowing the item 
or door to ignore 1 point of damage per caster level from 
any attack. For example, a greater sign cast by a 12th-level 
wizard would reduce the damage of any blow or spell by 12 
points, so a fighter armed with a broad sword (maximum 
damage of 8 points) could never hack through a door pro- 
tected by the sign. 

Finally, if the protected doorway or item is forced open 
or destroyed by any means, the sign itself is not only 
destroyed, but also releases a spell upon the offending crea- 
ture. The spell held by the sign is cast into the ward when 
the greater sign is created, and any spell the caster has mem- 
orized may be used in this way, from a fireball or shocking 
grasp to a very nasty wish or polymorph. The range of the 
sign's retributive spell is 10 yards per caster level, so it is 
possible to destroy the warding from a safe distance. 

The sign is displayed in plain sight, and most wizards 
will recognize it for what it is. The caster cannot specify par- 
ticular creatures or conditions for the sign’s operation; it 
functions against any creature that attempts to pass it, 
although the wizard can freely pass through his own sign 
without activating it. The greater sign can be removed by the 
caster, thus ending the spell, or it can be defeated by a lim- 
ited wish or wish spell cast by a wizard of equal or higher 
level than the original caster; it cannot be dispelled. 

The material component for a greater sign is a powdered 
diamond worth at least 1,000 gold pieces. 


Superior Magnetism 
(Alteration) 


Range: 30 yds. + 5 yds./level 
Duration: 1 rd./5 levels 
Area of Effect: Special 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard designates one inani- 
mate object of stone, earth, or metal within the spell's range 
to function as a powerful magnet, attracting all metal. The 
object affected can be no larger than a 10-foot cube, 
although a section of wall, floor, or ceiling about 10 square 
feet will work. Once magnetized, the object exerts a power- 
ful attractive or repulsive force (caster's choice) against 
objects of ferrous metal. The effects vary by the proximity of 
the metal objects to the center of magnetism, as shown 
below: 


Distance to Movement Rate Effective Missile Attack 


Magnetism per Round Strength Penalty 
10 feet or less 40 feet 22 (Garg.) -40 
20 feet or less 20 feet 20 (Huge) -20 
30 feet or less 10 feet 18 (Large) -10 
40 feet or less 5 feet 14 (Medium) -5 

50 feet or less 2 feet 10 (Small) -2 
60 feet or less 1 foot 4 (Tiny) -1 


The movement rate represents how fast objects are 
drawn to or repelled from the center of magnetism. If the 
creature or object in question is heavier than the magnetized 
item, the magnetized item does the moving instead. The 
effective Strength is the “pull” of the magnetism at that 
range; the size equivalent refers to creature sizes, not 
weapon sizes. (All human-sized weapons are considered 
small or tiny for this chart). A character or creature carrying 
loose metal items or objects such as weapons, shields, 
helms, buttons, and so on must win an opposed Strength 
check (see PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & Tactics for information 
on opposed ability checks) in order to keep his possessions 
from being wrenched out of his grasp by the magnetism. 
Securing a weapon in its sheath, holding an item with both 
hands, and other precautions may give the character a +2 to 
+4 to his base ability score, at the DM's discretion. 

Characters wearing metal armor must attempt an 
opposed Strength check to ignore the effects of the mag- 
netism. If the character fails his Strength check outright, 
he loses his footing and flies towards or away from the 
object at the full rate indicated. He suffers full falling 
damage based on the speed with which he hits the item— 
1d6 for every 10 feet of the movement rate, or half that 
damage if he is repelled and simply thrown back onto the 
ground. If the character passes his Strength check but is 
beaten by the magnetism roll, he is moved one foot for 
each point he lost by. Again, some precautions or assis- 
tance may help iron-wearing characters in their Strength 
checks. For monsters, compare the creature’s size to the 
effective size of magnetism. 

An armored character who is stuck to a surface or object 
loses any Dexterity adjustments to AC and cannot make any 
physical attacks. He can try to wriggle out of his armor and 
free himself, employ a magical item, or use psionic powers 
if he has any at his disposal. 


Lodestone the fighter is charging a wizard when the dastardly 
felon magnetizes a sizable boulder about 30 feet from Lodestone's 
present position. Lodestone carries a long sword, a shield, and 
wears plate mail; he has a Strength of 17. First, he checks to see if 
he holds onto his sword and shield, making two opposed Strength 
rolls. He loses the shield, but keeps hold of his sword. Now the 
DM checks to see if Lodestone resists the drag on his armor. At 30 
feet, the magnetism has a Strength of 18. Lodestone rolls a 6, but 
the magnetism roll is a 12. Even though both Lodestone and the 
magnetism made their Strength rolls, the magnetism roll is higher 
than Lodestone’s roll and does not go over its target Strength 
score. As a result, Lodestone is dragged 6 feet closer to it. Next 
round, Lodestone tries again and blows his roll altogether, moving 
a full 10 feet closer. Now only 14 feet from the boulder, the mag- 
netism's Strength is effectively a 20, which means Lodestone is in 
big trouble. If he blows his roll again the next round, he'll go fly- 
ing into the boulder at a rate of 20 feet/round, which will inflict 
2d6 points of damage. 


If a creature wins its Strength check, it can ignore the 
spell’s effects and move out of the zone of influence normally. 
Sirellyn's superior magnetism also affects the passage of 
iron or steel missiles, such as steel-headed arrows or quar- 
rels. Any missile that passes through the zone of influence 

suffers an attack penalty equal to the movement at the 
range indicated. For example, if the path of an arrow 
brings it within 40 feet of a magnetized object, the attack 


Appendix 1 


suffers a —5 penalty. Finally, it is possible for the casting 
wizard to be affected by this spell as well. As a result, the 
wizard had better make sure that he's out of the effective 


area of effect when casting. 


The material component for this spell is a small bar mag- 
net, bent into a U-shape and coated with mithral. 


Trollish Fortitude 


(Necromancy) 


Range: 0 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +4 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 


Sensory: None Critical: None 

This powerful spell imbues the caster with the physical 
fortitude and resilience of a troll. While the spell is in 
effect, the caster regenerates 3 hit points per round until 
he reaches his normal maximum. He also gains a troll's 
ability to ignore dismemberment, decapitation, and other 
horrible injuries that would normally incapacitate or kill 
him outright (although losing a limb may prevent the 
caster from taking certain actions, such as running, climb- 
ing, and other activities). Bleeding, wounding, being 
reduced to negative hit points, and other effects that cause 
the victim to lose hit points from round to round are 
ignored—the caster instead regains 3 hit points per round, 
up to his normal maximum. If the caster is reduced to less 
than 0 hit points, he is incapacitated and must make a sys- 
tem shock roll or lose all of his highest level spells. The 
incapacitation lasts only until his regeneration restores 
him to 1 hit point or more; he can move, fight, and cast 
spells again as soon as his hit point total is positive. 

Trollish fortitude does not provide the caster with any 
defenses against lethal poison, disease, and other effects 
that don't cause a loss of hit points. Hit points lost through 
level draining, vampiric touch, or vampiric regeneration cannot 
be regenerated since this represents damage to the victim's 
life force, and not physical injury. In addition, fire damage 
and acid damage cannot be regenerated. While the spell is 
in effect, the caster can rejoin severed limbs simply by hold- 
ing them in place, but if the spell ends while a limb (which 
were already moving toward him) is still separate from his 
body, he immediately suffers the full effects of the injury. 

The material component for this spell is a shred of dried 
flesh from a troll's heart that must be pulverized into dust. 
The dust is then sprinkled on the caster. 


Seventh-Level Spells 


Descent into Madness 
(Enchantment/Charm, Mentalism) 


Range: 10 yds./level 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Saving Throw: Negates 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


154 


More insidious and powerful than the feeblemind spell, 
descent into madness afflicts one creature with a random 
form of insanity. The spell can affect any creature with 
an Intelligence of low (5) or higher; however, a character 
or creature protected by a mind blank is immune to this 
spell. Creatures are entitled to a normal saving throw vs. 
spell to withstand the spell. The form of insanity caused 
by the spell is determined by a roll on the chart: 


d% Insanity Type 
01-15 Delirium 

16-22 Disorientation 
23-34 Phobia 

35-40 Paranoia 

41-44 Alienation 

45-54 Amnesia 

55-64 Hallucinatory insanity 
65-69 Melancholia 
70-74 Dementia praecox 
75-83 Mania 

84-89 Hebephrenia 
90-95 Catatonia 

96-00 Homicidal mania 


The various types of insanity and their game effects are 
described under the Alienist in Chapter 6. The caster has no 
idea what kind of madness the spell inflicts on its victim, 
although he may be able to form an educated guess after 
observing the victim for a few rounds. Descent into madness 
accelerates the process of insanity radically, producing an 
advanced condition almost immediately; for example, a 
character rendered paranoid by this spell skips past suspi- 
cion and instantly regards his friends and allies as enemies 
of the worst sort. The victim has a small chance of recover- 
ing with the passage of time (as described under each type 
of insanity) but other than that the only ways to repair the 
effects of this spell are restoration, wish, or use of the psionic 
power psychic surgery. 

The material component is a special cube of gold wire 
worth at least 500 gold pieces shaped to represent a tesser- 
act, or four-dimensional figure. 


Neutralize Gas 
(Abjuration, Elemental Air, Alchemy) 


Range: 60 yards 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: One 10-ft. cube/lvl. 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Large visual/olfactory 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


By using this spell, the wizard renders inert and 
makes breathable any harmful vapors, gases, clouds, or 
fogs in the area of effect. This includes stinking cloud, 
cloudkill, solid fog, death fog, incendiary cloud, acid storm, 
gaseous breath weapons, spore or mold clouds, and simi- 
lar spells and effects. Harmful gas or vapor is trans- 
formed into a common, harmless fog cloud of the same 
dimensions as the original effect, and then dissipates 1d3 
rounds later. Creatures who were injured before neutralize 
gas is cast continue to suffer any effects from their previ- 
ous exposure—the spell does not heal or counter existing 


damage, so a creature that is choking and gagging from a 
stinking cloud would receive no relief from this dweomer. 
If cast in the same round of the effect's appearance, neu- 
tralize gas may be used to counter gaseous breath weapons, 
spores, and molds by granting any creatures affected a +4 
bonus to their saving throws and reducing any damage to 
one-half or one-quarter normal, depending on whether or 
not the victims make their saving throws. Air-based crea- 
tures are not affected by this spell; neutralize gas only 
“clears the air” of any harmful inhalants. The material com- 
ponents are a bit of charcoal and some bark from a treant. 


T^» . i 
4CTSISLCTICC 


(Invocation/Evocation) 


Range: 0 

Duration: 1 day /level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +6 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Related to both the contingency and permanency spells, 
persistence allows a wizard to cast a spell of 6th level or 
lower and then hold it until it is needed. There are two gen- 
eral uses for persistence: to use a personal spell effect as 
needed up to the maximum duration of the persistence itself, 
or to prepare an instantaneous spell and hold it ready until 
the caster wishes to use it. 


A. Personal effect. Any spell that augments the wizard's 
natural abilities—detect magic, protection from evil, jump, 
infravision, fly, wraithform, or other caster-affecting spells— 
can be made persistent by use of this spell. The wizard casts 
persistence and then immediately follows with the desired 
spell. Instead of taking effect immediately, the magic of the 
persistence holds it ready for use by a simple act of will. The 
wizard can then "turn on" or "turn off" the girded spell as 
often as he likes over the course of the duration of the persis- 
tence. The duration of the girded spell only runs while the 
spell is active, so a 15th-level wizard who makes a fly spell 
persistent will be able to use 1d6+15 turns of flight (the nor- 
mal duration of fly) over the next 15 days (the duration of 
the persistence) as he sees fit. 

This is especially useful because it allows the wizard to 
cast the girded spell and the persistence and have the girded 
spell's effects available while he then memorizes another 
spell in place of the spell made persistent. It is also useful 
because the girded spell can be activated instantly by an act 
of will. The main difference between this spell and contin- 
gency lies in the fact that a persistent spell may be invoked 
several times (up to the limit of its normal duration) while a 
contingency functions once only. 

B. Held spell. Spells that have an instantaneous effect, 
such as most attack spells and some movement spells like 
teleport or dimension door, can be rendered persistent as well. 
The held spell may be activated or discharged at any time 
during the duration of the persistence, but its magic is then 
exhausted as if it had been cast normally. This resembles the 


Appendix 1 


effect of a contingency spell, but the effect has no predefined 
conditions and simply occurs when the caster wills it to. 

Damaging or offensive spells that have a duration (for 
example, flaming sphere or wall of fire) cannot be rendered 
persistent. A wizard may have no more than one persistence 
spell active at any given time; if he girds a new spell while 
an old one is still persistent, the old spell is simply replaced 
by the new one. The material component is a crystal chalice 
of exquisite workmanship worth at least 2,000 gp. The 
material component of a held or girded spell is expended 
when the spell is made persistent. 


Seven-Lyes 


(Abjuration, Conjuration/Summoning) 


Range: 0 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Create 7 eyes 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Medium visual 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Saving Throw: Special 
Knockdown: Varies 
Critical: Varies 


This spell conjures into existence seven magical orbs that 
float above the caster's head in a ring about 5 feet in diame- 
ter. The eyes remain for 1 round per level, or until the caster 
chooses to either expend the orb by using it in attack or 
defense. In addition, as long as at least one eye is still in 
existence, the caster gains 360? vision and can detect invisibil- 
ify and detect phase at will, with a 60-foot range. The powers 
of each eye are described below. 


* Eyeofthe Mind. This orb protects the caster against 
mental attack, charm, or influence, including charm, 
beguiling, hold, and emotion effects. The first such attack is 
negated by the orb and destroys it in turn. If the wizard 
desires, the eye of the mind can instead be used to charm 
person like the Ist-level wizard spell, although this also 
expends the orb. 

* Eyeofthe Sword. This eye deflects the first physical 
attack that endangers the caster, including hand-held or 
missile attacks, and then disappears. The wizard can also 
employ the eye of the sword to create five magical blades 
that strike as magic missiles for 1d4+1 points of damage 
each. (Knockdown d6, medium (1 hit) impact) 

* Eye of the Mage. One manifestation of raw energy, such 
as lightning, fire, force, cold, or a similar effect, is 
absorbed by the eye of the mage. The eye can also project 
a 60-foot long by 5-foot wide lightning bolt that inflicts 
4d8 damage (saving throw vs. spell for half damage) to 
all in its path. Either use expends the eye’s power. 
(Knockdown d12, large (1-3 hits) electricity) 

* Eye of Venom. This eye can be used to halt any one 
attack or effect that could poison the caster. [n the case 
of an attacker armed with an envenomed weapon, the 
caster may decide to expend either the eye of venom or 
the eye of swords in order to block the attack. The eye 
can also be used to poison one creature within 30 feet; 
the victim must make a saving throw vs. poison or die 
in one round. 

* Eyeofthe Spirit. The first attack that affects the victim's 
life energy, including energy drain, strength drain, cause 
wounds, trap the soul, magic jar, or death is parried by the 
eye of the spirit. The wizard may instead choose to 


156 


expend the eye's power by casting enervation (see the 4th- 
level wizard spell) upon one target within 30 feet. 

* Eye of Artifice. This eye deflects and is destroyed by 
the first attack directed at the caster from a magical 
device. If the attack also takes a form that may be 
blocked by another eye (for example, the bolt from a 
wand of lightning) the caster may choose which eye is 
expended. If used to attack instead, the eye of artifice 
functions as a dispel magic cast at 8th level. 

* Eye of Stone. This eye offers protection against the first 
attack that could petrify the caster and then vanishes. It 
can also be expended to cast /iold person. 


Although any number of eyes can defend the wizard in 
the course of a single round, only one eye may be used to 
attack per round. When the caster uses an eye to attack, he 
may not cast a spell, attack physically, or employ another 
magical item in the same round; willing the eye to discharge 
its energies requires his complete concentration. Eye attacks 
are considered to have an initiative modifier of 1 or a speed 
of very fast in the PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & Tactics initia- 
tive system. 

The material component is seven blessed gemstones 
worth at least 50 gold pieces each. 


Eighth-Level Spells 
Analyze Dweomer 


(Divination, Artifice) 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 hours 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Range: 10 yards 

Duration: 1 rd./2 levels 

Area of Effect: 1 object or creature 

Subtlety: +7 

Sensory: Medium visual/small 
audio 


This spell reveals to the caster all spells, enchant- 
ments, dweomers, and magical properties present in one 
creature or object. One property, spell, or power is 
revealed each round in approximate order of when the 
spells were cast or the properties were acquired. (If the 
DM doesn’t know which spells were placed on the sub- 
ject first, a random roll for order of discovery is fine.) The 
caster has a base 50% chance to discern the existence and 
identity of a particular spell or property, +2% per level to 
a maximum of 99%. The only enchantments that remain 
inscrutable to analyze dweomer are those surrounding arti- 
facts or relics. 


A 16th-level wizard finds an unknown wand and decides to 
use analyze dweomer to study it. The DM knows that it’s a 
wand of fire, and he decides that the spells enchant an item, 
fireball, burning hands, and wall of fire were used to create the 
wand, in that order. In the first round, the wizard has an 82% 
chance to identify enchant an item; in the following round, an 
82% chance to discover fireball; in the next round, an 82% 
chance to perceive burning hands; and so on, for all remaining 
enchantments. Note that the DM could have decided that any rare 
or unusual materials or processes used to create the wand would 
also be revealed as if they were spells. 


New Wizard Spells, 8th Level 


After the wizard analyzes one object or creature, the spell 
ends, even if its duration has not expired yet. Casting this 
spell is physically taxing; the wizard must pass a system 
shock check or be exhausted and unable to do anything but 
rest for the next 1d8 hours. While this spell is most fre- 
quently used in the comfort and safety of the wizard’s labo- 
ratory, a mage could also cast analyze dweomer to study the 
magical seals and barriers on a portal, to determine just 
how a companion has been cursed, or to examine a poten- 
tial opponent for defensive spells. 

The material component for this spell is a tiny lens of 
ruby or sapphire set in a small golden loop. The gemstone 
must be worth at least 1,000 gp. 


Heart of Stone 
(Necromancy) 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 day 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Range: 0 

Duration: 1 year 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: 8 

Sensory: None 


This potent spell exchanges the necromancer's own 
living heart for a finely crafted heart of perfect, unblem- 
ished stone that alters the very nature of the wizard's 
body. As long as the heart of stone remains in effect, the 
caster need not fear attacks that pierce, slash, or cut him; 
he does not bleed and can ignore the most horrible 
injuries of this kind. The caster can also ignore most mag- 
ical effects such as spells, magical devices, and innate 
spell abilities of less than 8th level. 

In game terms, the character suffers only 1 point of 
damage from any type S or type P attack, plus any magi- 
cal adjustment for the weapon. For example, if struck by a 
long sword +1, he would suffer only 2 points of damage. 
Strength and specialization bonuses are ignored. If the 
wizard is dismembered, he suffers no additional damage 
other than the inconvenience of having his limbs 
removed, and he can reattach a severed limb by holding it 
in place for one full turn. The heart of stone is also partially 
effective against type B attacks since it prevents bruising, 
swelling, and crushed blood vessels. Against bludgeoning 
weapons, the wizard only suffers half the normal damage. 
Cause wound spells always inflict minimum damage 
against a wizard protected by this spell. While the caster 
may not feel a sword in his rib cage, any damage sus- 
tained interrupts spellcasting. 

In addition to resisting injury, the heart of stone also ren- 
ders the character immune to fatigue and exhaustion, 
whether normal or magical. He also gains a +4 bonus to 
saving throws vs. petrification attacks. 

While the heart of stone is quite powerful, it has limita- 
tions. First of all, determined physical attack can eventually 
destroy the wizard despite his unnatural resistance to 
injury—a mob of angry peasants with hatchets and spears 
can finish him off 1 point at a time if that’s what it takes. 
Second, the heart confers no protection against other attack 
forms, such as fire, electricity, cold, acid, and so on, 
although any bleeding caused by a burn is ignored. Disinte- 
gration effects also affect the caster. Most importantly, the 
caster loses the ability to naturally recover from injury and 


157 


no longer regains lost hit points with the passage of time. 
Healing spells, potions and items are reduced to their mini- 
mum effect, so a cure serious wounds (2d8+1 hit points 
restored) would only return 3 hit points to a wizard pro- 
tected by heart of stone. However, limited wish or wish can be 
used to restore 1 hit point per level of caster or all but 1d4 
hit points, respectively. 

In addition to these disadvantages, heart of stone also ren- 
ders the caster vulnerable in one other way: his own real 
heart can be destroyed, instantly slaying him. Naturally, the 
caster will want to take steps to hide and protect his true 
heart to prevent this from happening. The living heart con- 
tinues to beat for the duration of the spell but requires no 
special receptacle or facilities to protect it—the caster could 
leave it lying on the floor, if he wished. 

The heart of stone cannot be dispelled, although a more 
powerful negation magic such as Mordenkainen's disjunc- 
tion can bring the spell to an end. Stone to flesh also undoes 
the magic of the heart of stone. No matter how the spell is 
ended, the wizard's own living heart instantly returns to 
its proper place, and the stone heart appears wherever the 
living heart was kept. At this time, any injuries the wizard 
currently has are multiplied by 1d6 as the wounds begin 
to bleed again. For example, a necromancer who was 
injured for 6 points of damage instead suffers 6d6 when 
the spell ends. 

The material component for this spell is the stone 
heart itself. This must be a carved stone of quality (jade, 
obsidian, or gold-veined marble would be appropriate) 
worth not less than 5,000 gold pieces. It must be pre- 
pared by use of the enchant an item spell. The stone is not 
consumed at the spell's end and may be used again if it 
is undamaged. 


Iron body 


(Alteration, Elemental Earth) 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Range: 0 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Medium visual 


This spell transforms the caster’s body into living iron, 
which grants him several powerful resistances and abili- 
ties. While the spell is in effect, the caster can only be 
injured by blunt weapons of +3 or better value, or mon- 
sters of 8+3 Hit Dice or more. Slashing weapons, falling, 
crushing, and constriction attacks of all types are com- 
pletely unable to harm the caster, although an attack may 
knock him off-balance or pin him beneath tons of debris. 
Spells or attacks that affect the subject’s physiology or res- 
piration—for example, poison, cloudkill, enfeeblement, con- 
tagion, or pain touch—fail completely, since the caster has 
no physiology or respiration while the spell is in effect. 
Also, spells that have weight limits should be applied to 
the wizard as if he weighed over 3,000 pounds. The wiz- 
ard ignores electrical attacks and saves at +4 against fire 
attacks. If he saves, he takes quarter damage; if not, he 
takes half damage. If hit with a rod of smiting, he takes 
2d8+6 points of damage unless the attacker rolls a natural 
20. If this occurs, then the damage is doubled. 


In addition to the natural immunities of an iron body, the 
wizard enjoys powerful offensive abilities. His Strength 
score is raised to 20 (+3 to attack rolls, +8 damage) for the 
duration of the spell, and he can punch or bludgeon his ene- 
mies twice per round for 1d4 points of damage per blow, 
plus his Strength bonus. Unfortunately, his movement 
becomes slow and awkward, so he is reduced to a move of 3 
and suffers a 2 penalty to his initiative rolls (or a reduction 
of his base phase by one step, in PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & 
Tactics). Most importantly, the wizard's clumsiness and lack 
of breath prevent him from casting any spells while the iron 
body is in effect. 

Iron body may create additional hazards for the wizard as 
the DM deems appropriate. For example, rust monsters are 
extremely dangerous to a wizard using this spell. Heat metal 
spells inflict double damage to the caster. And, naturally, 
the wizard sinks like a stone in water—although he could 
survive the crushing pressure and lack of air at the bottom 
of the ocean—at least until the spell expired. Some magical 
items, such as potions or winded instruments, may be tem- 
porarily unusable as well. 

The material component for this spell is a small piece of 
iron that once belonged to an iron golem. 


Ninth-Level Spells 


Drogrammed Amnesia 


(Enchantment/Charm, Mentalism) 


Range: 20 yards 
Duration: Special 

Area of effect: 1 creature 
Subtlety: +8 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This particular spell was the last and most powerful spell 
developed by the archmentalist Rheizom. It allows the wiz- 
ard to selectively destroy, alter, or implant memories in the 
subject creature as he sees fit. He can completely reprogram 
a character, inventing a new persona, a new alignment, and 
assigning a new class as he sees fit. Only sentient beings can 
be affected; if the subject is not human, humanoid, or demi- 
human, he gains a +4 bonus on his saving throw. 

As described above, programmed amnesia can be used to 
achieve several different effects. The wizard may choose to 
make use of any or all of the effects listed below: 


* A. Memory erasure. Any or all memories possessed by 
the subject can be erased at the caster's will, including 
knowledge of specific events, people, or places. 

* B. Memory implant. The caster can create false memo- 
ries in the subject's mind as he sees fit. Imaginary 
friends, events that didn't really take place, betrayals 
by people the subject regards as his friends, or the 
friendship of an enemy could all be implanted in the 
subject's mind. 

* C.Skill erasure. The subject can be made to forget any 
or all class-based skills or proficiencies, including all or 
part of his THACO (it resets to 20), thief abilities, spell- 
casting, turning undead, or any other ability that stems 
from knowledge. About the only characteristics that can't 


Appendix 1 


be affected by this usage of Rheizom’s programmed amnesia 
are hit points, saving throws, and ability scores. A char- 
acter's native language cannot be erased, either. 

* D. Persona erasure. Combining the effects of a skill era- 
sure and a memory erasure, this leaves the subject as a 
clean slate. Only his ability scores, hit points, saving 
throws, and native language remain. The character may 
assume any class or alignment available, beginning as a 
Ist-level character just as if he had decided to dual-class. 
(Even demihumans can dual-class in this fashion, since 
they forget all skills of their previous class.) 

* E. Persona implant. By erasing the existing personality 
and implanting a false set of memories, the wizard can 
build a new persona for the mind-wiped character. In 
effect, he can decide what class, alignment, and personal- 
ity the subject will assume after his persona erasure. If 
the new persona is an adventurer, the character dual- 
classes, as described above. 

* F. Programmed erasure. The subject can be programmed 
to suffer a memory, skill, or persona erasure when a cer- 
tain event takes place. For example, the wizard could set 
the subject to be wiped clean as a slate when the subject 
receives a coded message or arrives at some destination. 
Optionally, the wizard can decide to have an erasure par- 
tially or totally lifted when the programmed condition 
comes to pass. 


The casting time of this spell varies according to what 
effects the wizard wishes to impose on the subject. To cast 
just one of the listed effects, the wizard must spend two 
days secluded away from any distractions—a personal 
laboratory is a good example of a secluded place. In 
between the intense eight-hour casting sessions, the wiz- 
ard can sleep and eat in the area he chose to seclude him- 
self in. If the wizard breaks his seclusion for any reason, 
the spell is lost. Also, for every effect over the first, 
another day (with its eight-hour intense casting period) 
must be spent in seclusion. 

The wizard must be able to see the spell's subject. At 
the end of each day of casting, the subject makes a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell to negate the effect. 

Programmed amnesia is normally permanent, unless the 
wizard cares to specify a set of conditions or parameters 
that will end the effect (see F, above). Its effects can only 
be undone by a restoration or wish spell, or by successful 
use of the psionic science psychic surgery. A character 
who picks up new skills or class abilities while amnesiac 
must make a saving throw vs. spell when his own real 
memories return; if he fails, the skills he learned as an 
amnesiac are gone forever, replaced by his former abili- 
ties, but if he succeeds he retains any new skills, and may 
even choose to continue in his new class as a dual-classed 
character. Dungeon Masters should keep in mind that an 
amnesiac character should still meet the new class's full 
prerequisites before he can become that class. 

Obviously, this is a very powerful spell, and the DM 
should very carefully examine a PC's use of this magic. 
Dungeon Masters, take note—there are dozens of excellent 
plot vehicles hiding here if an NPC wizard uses this on a 
player character! Also, be aware that destroying a creature's 
personality and replacing it with one more amenable to the 
wizard's designs is never a good act. 


(Conjuration/Summoning, Dimension) 


Range: 5 yds./level 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates a sphere 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Small visual 


Components: V, 5, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Saving Throw: Special 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This awful spell brings into existence a short-lived sphere 
of annihilation (as described in Appendix 3 of the DMG). The 
sphere is a black ball of nothingness about 2 feet in diameter 
that instantly and utterly destroys any matter that comes 
into contact with it. The spliere appears anywhere in the 
spell's range and moves up to 15 feet per round as the wiz- 
ard directs. If the wizard attempts to bring the sphere into 
contact with a living creature, the potential victim gains a 
saving throw vs. breath weapon to dodge aside, but a vic- 
tim who is unaware of the sphere's appearance or unable to 
move is destroyed without a saving throw. 

Once conjured, the spliere of ultimate destruction may not 
move exactly as the caster wishes. The wizard has a 75% 
chance to control it, plus 1% per point of Intelligence over 
12 and 3% for each point over 15. In other words, a wizard 
with an Intelligence of 18 would gain a +12% bonus to his 


E 3» 0748 
— remo nam e. 
Hun LA 
(anl ido: Mo a 121] \ 
7 1 IIR TRA ` 
PULY p 
| 


MIRI 


chance to control the sphere. If the wizard fails to control 
the spliere in any given round, it automatically moves 
directly towards him at its maximum speed of 15 feet per 
round. Unlike the magical item, another wizard may not 
contest the caster's control of a spliere of ultimate destruction 
unless the second wizard possesses a talisman of the sphere. 
(See the DMG.) 

Should a gate spell be cast upon the sphere, there is a 50% 
chance that the sphere is destroyed, a 35% chance that noth- 
ing happens, and a 15% chance that a gap is torn in the spa- 
tial fabric, catapulting everything in a 180-foot radius to 
another plane of existence. If the sphere is touched by a rod of 
cancellation, a tremendous explosion inflicts 3d4 x 10 points 
of damage to everything within 60 feet as the two forces 
negate each other. No other spell or magical item has any 
effect on a sphere of ultimate destruction. 

There is a 5% chance that any particular manifestation 
of this spell does not cause a victim's utter destruction 
but instead transports him to a random plane of exis- 
tence. The conjuring wizard has no way of knowing 
whether he has destroyed his enemy or merely blasted 
him into some remote dimension. The material compo- 
nent of this spell is a dark crystal ball that has been on 
the Ethereal Plane and that can be comfortably held in 
two hands. 


SS 
R 


Appendix 2 


As noted in the previous chapter, several new spell char- 
acteristics appear in the spell descriptions of this book. 
These include casting subtlety, sensory signature, critical 
strikes, and knockdown. Refer to page 136 for more infor- 
mation about these new characteristics. 


First-Level Spells 
Astral Celerity 
(Alteration) 


Sphere: Astral 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell enhances the caster's movement capabilities in 
extraplanar settings by attuning him to his new surroundings. 
While very few Ist-level priests find themselves in this situa- 
tion, higher level characters often make use of this spell. Astral 
celerity doubles the character's movement rate on the Astral 
Plane; normally, characters move at a rate of 30 times their 
Intelligence score in feet per round, but this spell increases this 
to 60 feet times their Intelligence score. As an incidental bene- 
fit, the caster also attunes himself to the plane much faster and 
suffers no penalties for missile fire while astral. 

While astral celerity is most often used in the astral plane, 
it also offers a small benefit to ethereal characters, too: their 
movement rates are increased by 50%, so a character with a 
movement rate of 12 would enjoy a movement rate of 18 
while this spell was in effect. Of course, time and distance 
have little meaning in the overall scheme of the Astral or 
Ethereal Planes, but relative speed could be very important 
in avoiding an unpleasant encounter or escaping from pur- 
suit of some kind. 


Battlefate 


(Alteration) 


Sphere: Chaos 

Range: 20 yds. 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell alters probability to favor one character or 
creature locked in battle. His opponent may stumble at an 
awkward time, a clumsy parry might catch the enemy's 
weapon at just the right angle, or he happens to notice the 
foe moving in for a flank attack. The more powerful the 
priest, the more potent the aid; combat modifiers provided 
by battlefate equal +1 per three levels, so a 1st-level caster 
provides a +1 bonus, a 4th-level caster a +2 bonus, a 7th- 
level caster a +3, and so on to a maximum of +5 for a 13th- 
level priest. The exact form of the aid or assistance varies 
from round to round—roll a d6 to see which aspect of the 
subject's combat abilities are affected in any given round. 


160 


Effect 

Nothing happens 

Defenses enhanced, apply bonus to subject AC 
Luck enhanced, apply bonus to saving throws 
Accuracy enhanced, apply bonus to attack rolls 
Damage enhanced, apply bonus to damage rolls 
Lucky opening! Subject gains one extra attack with 
either enhanced accuracy or damage (subject's 
choice) 


If the character does not make a roll of the specified type 
in the round, he gains no benefit for the spell; for example, 
if the character gains the saving throw bonus but doesn't 
have to make any saving throws during the round in ques- 
tion, battlefate doesn't help him. Of course, in the following 
round, the spell may provide him with a different benefit. 
Note that on a roll of 1, battlefate does not help the character 
ththe priest intends to aid—such is the nature of chaos. 

The material component for this spell is an electrum coin 
tossed by the priest as he casts the spell. 


Blessed Walchfulness 
(Alteration) 


Sphere: Guardian 

Range: Touch 

Duration: 4 hrs. + 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


By casting this spell, the priest confers exceptional 
powers of observation and alertness to one creature for the 
duration of the spell. While blessed watchfulness is in effect, 
the designated sentinel remains alert, awake and vigilant 
for the duration of the spell. In fact, it takes a roll of 1 to 
surprise someone under this effect. He resists sleep spells 
and similar magic as if he were 4 levels or Hit Dice higher 
than his actual level and gains a +2 bonus to saving throws 
against other spells or effects that could lower his guard or 
force him to abandon his watch, including charm, beguiling, 
fear, emotion, and similar mind-affecting spells. If the effect 
normally allows no saving throw, the watcher gains no 
special benefit. 


Calculate 
(Divination) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: 0 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: None 


Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


By means of this spell, the priest can accurately estimate 
the chance of success of one specific action, such as climbing 
a dangerous cliff, making a trick bowshot, crossing a burn- 
ing room unharmed, or even striking an enemy. The action 
in question must be one that would normally be resolved by 
a die roll, but the priest doesn’t have to be the person who 


New Priests Spells, 1st Level 


attempts the feat; he can use calculate to estimate the odds 
for anyone taking an action in his sight. The priest has a 
70% chance, +2% per level, of making an accurate estimate. 

If successful, the DM reveals to the player the action’s 
chance for success or any modifiers that may be in play. For 
example, he could reveal a particular opponent's Armor 
Class or THACO, the saving throw an opponent would 
require in order to save against a particular spell cast by the 
priest or the priest's wizard companion, or a character's 
chance to open doors, bend bars, or use a thief ability. The 
priest could even calculate his odds for actions that might be 
resolved by a die roll or DM caprice, such as his chance to 
avoid detection by hiding behind a rock. This spell takes 
into account factors that the priest himself may not be 
aware of, so from time to time a character may receive some 
very confusing results from this spell. For instance, if the 
priest doesn't know that an orc chieftain is actually a poly- 
morphed tanar'ri masquerading as an orc, he may be aston- 
ished to learn that the "orc" has a THACO of 7! 

If the priest fails his calculation check with a roll of 99 or 
00, his calculation is wildly skewed in a random fashion. 
The material component for this spell is a miniature abacus 
of ivory worth at least 100 gp. It is not consumed in the cast- 
ing of the spell. 


Calm Animals 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Animal 

Range: 60 yds. 

Duration: 1 turn 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Moderate audio 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: Special 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell soothes and quiets normal animals, which ren- 
ders them docile and harmless. Only creatures with Intelli- 
gence ratings of 1 to 4 (in other words, animal- or semi- 
intelligent creatures) can be affected by this spell. The caster 
can calm 2d4 Hit Dice of animals, plus 1 Hit Die per level, 
so a 4th-level priest could affect 2d4+4 Hit Dice of creatures. 
The caster can affect any animals he wishes to within the 
spell's range, but all the subjects must be of the same 
species. The subject creatures are not allowed a saving 
throw unless they have magical powers, abilities, or are 
clearly not entirely natural; a priest could calm a normal 
bear, war dog, or wolf with little trouble, but it's more diffi- 
cult to affect a winter wolf, hell hound, or owlbear. 

While under the influence of this spell, the affected crea- 
tures remain where they are and do not attack or flee, unless 
they are attacked or confronted by a significant hazard such 
as a fire or a hungry predator. Once roused, the spell's 
magic is broken and the animals are free to act in whatever 
fashion they normally would. Note that creatures affected 
by this spell are not helpless and defend themselves nor- 
mally if attacked. 


161 


Dispel Fatigue 


(Necromancy) 


Sphere: Necromantic 
Range: 30 yds. 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: None 


Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Subtlety: +4 
Sensory: None 


This spell removes physical fatigue or exhaustion from 
the subject by undoing the physiological effects of his exer- 
tions. The subject is instantly restored to his normal, fully 
rested level of endurance or vigor. This spell can be used to 
negate the penalties of forced marching, long swims, jog- 
ging, running, or sprinting, or even accumulated fatigue 
points from either the PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & Tactics 
rules or the magic fatigue rules in Chapter 6. Once this spell 
has been cast, the subject may start to accumulate fatigue or 
fatigue-based penalties again, depending on how he contin- 
ues to exert himself. The material component is a sprinkle of 
fresh, blessed springwater. 


Firelight 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Range: Touch 
Duration: 4 hrs. + 1 hr./2 levels 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Subtlety: +4 
Sensory: Large visual 


Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This variant of the spell log of everburning changes one 
small fire no larger than a campfire into firelight. The 
flame ceases to produce smoke and becomes much cooler; 
within 1 turn of the spell’s casting, the fire cools enough 
to be handled or touched barehanded without causing 
harm. The firelight is resistant to gusts of wind or poor 
burning conditions (pouring rain, lack of air, and so on), 
but complete immersion in water, vacuum, or magical 
darkness extinguishes the flame immediately. Firelight 
burns brighter and steadier than a normal flame, and a 
torch enchanted with this spell sheds light in a 30-foot 
radius instead of the normal 15-foot radius. The fuel 
source lasts throughout the duration of the spell. Unlike 
log of everburning, this spell is not at all useful for staying 
warm since firelight produces very little heat. 

Firelight inflicts 1d2 points of damage per caster level 
if cast on creatures of living or elemental fire, but has no 
other effect on these monsters. The material component 
is a mix of resins and incense, thrown into the flame to 
be affected. 


Appendix 2 


Orison 


(Various schools) 


Sphere: All 

Range: 10 yds. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Varies 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Small visual/audio 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


The most humble of priestly spells is the orison, a brief 
prayer or invocation of a minor nature. Typically, priests 
learn a number of orísoiis as acolytes or students in order to 
hone their spellcasting skills and emphasize concepts, 
ideals, or phrases of particular importance to the faith. 
Because an orisons is not even on par with other Ist-level 
magic, a priest memorizes a number of individual orisons 
equal to three +1 per level (up to a maximum of nine) when 
he devotes a Ist-level spell slot to orison. In other words, a 
Ist-level priest can memorize four orisons for one Ist-level 
spell slot, a 2nd-level priest can memorize five, and so on. 

Unlike cantrip, an orison must have a specific effect, 
although the priest need not decide which incantation he 
will use until he actually casts the spell. Regardless of the 
prayer chosen, the orison's duration is never more than one 
round per level. Known orisons include the following: 


* Alleviate: A single creature suffering from nausea or 
pain is relieved of its discomfort. Magically induced nau- 
sea or pain is only alleviated if the victim passes a saving 
throw vs. spell with a -2 penalty. 

* Calm: A single creature that has been startled or fright- 
ened is soothed. Victims suffering from magical fear may 
attempt a save vs. spell with a -2 penalty to calm them- 
selves. 

* Clarity: For the duration of the orison, the priest's speech 
is clear and free of impediment—useful for readings 
from sacred texts and other such rites. Magical condi- 
tions such as confuse languages cannot be overcome by 
this orison. 

* Courage: The priest gains a +1 bonus to his next attack roll, 
as long as the attack is made within the spell's duration. 

* Guidance: The priest gains a +1 bonus to a Wisdom or 
Intelligence check to determine the right course of action 
in a moral dilemma or puzzle. 

* Healing: By his touch, the priest may heal a creature of 1 
point of damage. 

* Magic sense: If there is a persistent spell effect or magi- 
cal item within 10 yards, the priest feels a recognizable 
tingle or sensation of some kind. He has no way to deter- 
mine what item or spell may have caused the reaction. 

* Memory: Any item the priest commits to memory dur- 
ing the spell duration is more completely and perma- 
nently learned; he gains a +2 bonus to any checks to 
recall the exact appearance, wording, or meaning of an 
item, text, or message. 

* Resistance to magic: The caster gains a +1 bonus to his 
next saving throw against magic of any type, as long as it 
occurs during the orison's duration. 

* Resistance to poison: The priest gains a +1 bonus to his 
next saving throw vs. poison, as long as it occurs during 
the orison's duration. 


162 


Other orisons of similar power or scope may be permit- 
ted by the DM. Generally, an orison should not affect more 
than one creature or die roll at a time, and an orison that can 
actually cause immediate harm to a creature should inflict 
no more than 1 or 2 points of damage. An offensive orison 
would be quite rare and most probably associated with an 
evil or chaotic priesthood. 


Protection [rom Chaos 
(Abjuration) 


Sphere: Law 

Range: Touch 

Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: Small visual 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Resembling the spell protection from evil, this abjuration 
wards the creature touched from the attacks of minions of 
chaos. Chaotic creatures suffer a —2 penalty to attack rolls 
against the spell recipient, and the subject gains a +2 bonus 
to saving throws against spells or other attacks employed 
by chaotic creatures. Attempts to possess, dominate, or exer- 
cise other forms of mental control against the recipient are 
automatically blocked by this spell. 

Protection from chaos also wards the recipient against con- 
tact with extraplanar creatures of chaotic origin, including 
tanar’ri, slaad, and eladrin. Unlike protection from evil, this 
spell does not necessarily guard against summoned or con- 
jured creatures unless the creatures in question are chaotic 
in alignment. However, protection from chaos does protect the 
recipient from creatures influenced by confusion and chaos 
spells and effects. The natural or bodily attacks of such crea- 
tures automatically fail, as long as the recipient does not use 
the spell’s power to trap, pin, or drive back the chaotic crea- 
tures in question. The spell ends if the recipient makes a 
melee attack against creatures that are prevented from 
attacking him by this spell. 

The material component is a small ring of gold or lead 
tempered by a chaotic smith. Note that this spell is not 
reversible. 


Strength of Stone 
= 


(Invocation/Evocation) 


Sphere: Elemental Earth 
Range: Touch 

Duration: 3 rds.+ 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell grants supernatural strength to the recipient 
by raising his Strength score by 1d4 points or to a minimum 
of 16, whichever is higher. Each 10% of exceptional Strength 
counts as 1 point, so a character with a Strength of 17 could 
be raised as high as an 18/30, but no higher. Both the priest 
and the recipient must be in contact with solid stone or 
earth when the spell is cast—standing on the ground will do 
nicely, but flying or swimming will not. The spell lasts for 3 


rounds plus 1 round per caster level or until the subject 
loses contact with the earth. Obviously, this can happen in a 
number of ways, including being picked up or grappled by 
a larger creature, being knocked through the air by an 
impact or explosion, or even being magically moved in 
some fashion. 

The material components are a chip of granite and a hair 


from a giant. 


(Invocation/Evocation) 


Sphere: Sun 

Range: 40 yds. 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Subtlety: +3 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: Neg. 
Knockdown: d6 


Critical: Medium (1 
hit) fire 


Sensory: Moderate visual, 
moderate tactile 


This spell creates a brilliant ray of scorching heat that 
slants down from the sky to strike one target of the caster's 
choice. The victim is entitled to a saving throw vs. spell to 
avoid the ray—a successful save indicates that it missed 
altogether. Any creature struck by the ray sustains 1d6 
points of damage, plus 1 point per caster level. Undead 
creatures and monsters vulnerable to bright light sustain 
1d6 points of damage, plus 2 points per caster level. In addi- 
tion to sustaining damage, living victims are also blinded 
for 1d4 rounds by the spell. 

The sun must be in the sky when sunscorch is cast, or the 
spell fails entirely. It cannot be cast underground, indoors, 
or in hours of darkness, although routine overcasts do not 
hinder the sunscorch, 


~limn 
nal | fl 
/ ICI NOOU MH 


(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 
Range: 0 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +1 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Components: S 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


A priest with access to this spell need not fear most 
routine falls, since the casting of the wind column creates a 
pillar of strong winds to slow his descent. The spell is 
most effective in areas or regions where a strong breeze is 
available, such as the heights of a mountain or the mast of 
a ship at sea. In areas of dead, calm air, it is much more 
difficult to muster the windpower necessary to arrest the 
caster’s fall. The caster’s rate of descent (and risk of dam- 
age) varies with the strength of the prevailing winds, as 
shown below. 

If the wind is very strong, the caster can even choose to 
gain altitude instead of falling, although he can rise no 
higher than 5 feet per level above his original height before 
the wind column loses cohesiveness and he starts to fall 
again. However, a priest could use this to leap out a castle 
window and allow the winds to bear him to the roof of the 
tower, if the conditions are right. 


Appendix 2 


Wind Falling Damage 
Strength Rate Sustained 
Very strong +2 ft./sec. (120 ft./rd.) None 
Strong 4 ft./sec. (240 ft./rd.) None 
Moderate 8 ft./sec. (480 ft./rd.) 1 per 10 ft." 
Light 16 ft./sec. (960 ft./rd.) 1d2 per 10 ft? 
None 32 ft./sec. (2000 ft./rd.) 1d3 per 10 ft.? 


! Maximum of 8 points 
2 Maximum of 10d2 
3 | Maximum of 12d3 


If you prefer to use the combat round scale from PLAYER'S 
OPTION: Combat & Tactics, rounds are approximately one- 
tenth as long, and movement per round is reduced accord- 
ingly. For example, in moderate winds, the caster will fall 
about 48 feet per round in the Combat & Tactics scale. 


Second-Level Spells 


Astral Awareness 
(Divination) 


Sphere: Astral 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This divination attunes the caster's perceptions to the sil- 
ver void of the Astral Plane or the misty grayness of the 
Ethereal Plane. While the spell is in effect, the caster auto- 
matically notes the approach of all kinds of astral or ethereal 
phenomena, including shifting conduits, the psychic wind, 
ether cyclones, demiplanes and debris, color pools, and cur- 
tains of vaporous color. The character has a 90% chance to 
detect a color pool from its invisible side and a 5% chance 
per level to determine which plane a curtain or pool leads to 
simply by studying its color. 

In addition to his awareness of physical phenomena, the 
caster gains a *2 bonus to surprise checks against astral or 
ethereal monsters. He also has a 5% chance per level to 
detect the threat of creatures whose gaze extends into the 
Ethereal (basilisks, for instance) before he enters the range 
of the monster's gaze weapon. 


Chaos Ward 


(Abjuration) 


Sphere: Chaos 

Range: Touch 

Duration: 2 rds. /level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: Small visual 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


By using this spell, the priest can create a shimmering 
aura of whirling light that surrounds the chosen creature. 
This protective aura makes the spell recipient more diffi- 


164 


cult to hit in hand-to-hand combat by providing a -1 
bonus to the subject's Armor Class. Against missile attacks 
or ranged spells aimed directly at the recipient, the chaos 
ward is even more effective since it provides a —2 bonus to 
Armor Class and a +2 bonus to any saving throws 
required. In addition, there is a chance that missile attacks 
or directed spells may be deflected or reflected by the 
chaotic energy of the shield, as shown below: 


d%! Effect 

01-85 No unusual effect, subject gains normal benefits 
of chaos ward 

86-95 Spell or attack automatically defeated 

96-99 Spell or attack ricochets, affecting a random 
creature within 30 feet—normal attack roll or 
saving throw needs to be rolled for the random 
creature to be affected 

100+ Spell or attack reflected back at originator, nor- 


mal attack roll or saving throw applies 
' Add the caster's level to the d% roll. 


In order to qualify as a spell aimed directly at the recipi- 
ent, a spell must affect only the subject in question; a spell 
such as hold person or sleep that happens to include the sub- 
ject in its area of effect does not count as a directed spell and 
does not trigger the chaos ward. The material component is a 
playing card used by a rogue of chaotic alignment. 


Cure Moderate Wounds 


(Necromancy) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Healing 

Range: Touch 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 

Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Moderate visual 
wounding when reversed 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 

Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: d8 
Critical: Medium (1 hit) 


Somewhat less common than the well-known cure light 
wounds and cure serious wounds, this healing spell was cre- 
ated by a priest who found that his heroic companions 
required his skill at doctoring more than his advice and wis- 
dom. By laying his hand on the subject's body, the priest can 
heal 1d10+1 points of damage. Noncorporeal, nonliving, or 
extraplanar creatures cannot be healed by this spell. The 
reverse of this spell, cause moderate wounds, requires the 
priest to successfully touch the victim and inflicts 1d10+1 
points of damage. (The knockdown and critical strike 
entries above are for spell's reverse.) 


Ethereal Barrier 
(Abjuration) 


Sphere: Astral, Wards 
Range: 120 yds. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Two 10-ft. 
squares/ level 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Saving Throw: None 


New Priests Spells, 2nd Level 


Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Subtlety: +6 
Sensory: None 


The ethereal barrier is a defense against the passage of 
extradimensional creatures, including characters or mon- 
sters that are phased, ethereal, or travelling via dimension door 
or shadow walk. The priest creates an imperceptible barrier of 
10 square feet per level that may be arranged in any fashion 
the priest desires. For example, a 3rd-level character can 
ward six 10-foot by 10-foot surfaces, which would be suffi- 
cient to guard a 10-foot by 10-foot by 10-foot room (four 
walls, a ceiling, and a floor need to be protected.) Note that 
some monsters may be capable of abandoning their ethereal 
approach in order to simply enter the barred area on their 
own feet—the ethereal barrier only bars their passage as long 
as they are traveling in the Border Ethereal. Also, while this 
spell can’t be worn down by any form of attack, it does not 
bar teleportation, gates, or the passage of astral creatures. 

Ethereal barrier may be cast as cooperative magic by sev- 
eral priests working together. As long as all involved char- 
acters can cast the spell, the areas of effect of each priest are 
added together. Total the levels of all priests involved and 
multiply by two to find the number of 10-foot by 10-foot 
squares that may be warded. For example, four 6th-level 
casters (24 total levels) can ward 48 10-foot by 10-foot 
squares. The duration is determined by the highest level 
priest involved, plus 1 turn for each additional priest. In the 
previous example, this would be 6 turns plus 3 turns for 
three additional priests for a total of 9 turns. 

This spell is also suitable for focus magic (see the spell 
focus in the Tome of Magic). The material component is a spe- 
cial compound of rare earths and lead worth at least 10 gp 
per application. One application is required for each 10-foot 
by 10-foot square to be warded. 


Iron Vigil 
(Alteration) 


Sphere: Guardian 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 week + 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: 45 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell allows the priest to ignore hunger, thirst, and 
extremes of climate for an extended period of time. While 
the spell is in effect, the priest requires no food or drink. He 
is effectively immune to exposure, dehydration, and heat or 
cold injury, since no naturally occurring climatic condition 
will cause him harm. (Lightning, floods, tornadoes, earth- 
quakes, and other such hazardous phenomena can still 
cause physical injury, of course.) 

During the iron vigil, the priest is able to ignore the need 
to sleep by choosing to meditate instead. While meditating, 
the priest can keep watch on his surroundings, but he suf- 
fers a +1 penalty to any surprise checks. If the character 
wishes to memorize spells, he must sleep normally. 

At the vigil's end, the priest must eat and drink; if no food 
or water is available, the character must make a Constitution 
check once every four hours at a cumulative —1 penalty or fall 
into a coma and perish within 1d3 days if he receives no aid. 


165 


He also requires at least four hours of rest for each day that 
he did not eat, drink, or sleep during his vigil. 


Resist Acid and Corrosion 
(Abjuration) 


Sphere: Protection 

Range: Touch 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell provides a subject with a better resistance to 
acid, corrosives, and caustic substances of all kinds. Mild 
corrosives cannot harm the subject at all, although they can 
still damage his gear. More intense acids and corrosives 
(black dragon breath, Melf's acid arrow, and the natural 
attacks of various puddings, oozes, slimes, and jellies) inflict 
only half the normal damage on the protected character. If 
the attack requires a saving throw, the subject gains a +3 
bonus, sustaining half damage with a failed save or one- 
quarter damage with a successful saving throw. 


Restore Strength 


(Necromancy) 


Sphere: Necromantic 

Range: Touch 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell removes unnatural weakness, debilitation, or 
exhaustion from the creature touched and restores him to 
his normal strength and stamina. It is useful in countering 
the effects of chill touch, ray of enfeeblement, ray of fatigue, the 
touch of a shadow or roper, and any similar spell or effect. 
Only temporary ability score losses may be alleviated by 
this spell; if a character suffers an incapacitating, physical 
injury, restore strength cannot help him. Also, loss of strength 
or stamina from purely natural causes such as exposure, 
disease, or exertion is not repaired by restore strength. The 
duration is permanent in that the subject remains at his 
maximum strength and endurance only until he is drained 
(or exerts himself) again. 


Soften Earth and Stone 


(Alteration) 


Sphere: Elemental Earth 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. square/level 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


When this spell is cast, all natural, undressed earth or 
stone in the area of effect is softened. Wet earth becomes 


Appendix 2 


thick mud; dry earth becomes loose sand or dirt; and stone 
becomes soft clay, easily molded or chopped. The priest 
affects a 10-foot square area to a depth of 1 to 4 feet, 
depending on the toughness or resilience of the ground at 
that spot (DM option). Magical or enchanted stone cannot 
be affected by this spell, nor can dressed or worked stone. 

Creatures attempting to move through an area softened 
into mud are reduced to a move of 10 feet per round. Any 
creatures caught within the mud when the spell takes effect 
must make a saving throw vs. paralyzation or lose the abil- 
ity to move, attack, or cast spells for 1d2 rounds as they 
flounder about in the muck. Loose dirt is not as trouble- 
some as mud, and creatures are only reduced to half their 
normal movement rate, with no chance of being caught for 
a round or two. However, it is impossible to run, sprint, or 
charge over either surface. 

Stone softened into clay does not hinder movement, but 
it does allow characters to cut, shape, or excavate areas they 
may not have been able to affect before. For example, a 
party of PCs trying to break out of a cavern might use this 
spell to soften a wall. 

While soften earth and stone does not affect dressed or 
worked stone, vertical surfaces such as cliff faces or cavern 
ceilings can be affected. Usually, this causes a moderate col- 
lapse or landslide as the loosened material peels away from 
the face or roof and falls. A moderate amount of structural 
damage can be inflicted to man-made structures by soften- 
ing the ground beneath a wall or tower, causing it to settle. 
However, most well-built structures will only be damaged 
by this spell, not destroyed. The material component is a bit 
of slip (wet clay) from the wheel of a master potter. 


Watery Fist 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Sphere: Elemental (Water) 
Range: 60 yds. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: d10 

Critical: Medium (1 hit) crushing 


This spell conjures a coherent pseudopod of water from 
any suitable body of water at least 5 feet across and 2 feet 
deep (for streams) or 10 feet in diameter and 2 feet deep (for 
ponds or pools). The pseudopod can stretch up to 10 feet plus 
1 foot per caster level from its source, so a 3rd-level priest 
could command watery fist to strike at a creature hovering 
thirteen feet above a lake or standing on the shore 13 feet from 
the water. The pseudopod obeys the priest's mental com- 
mands, although the priest must concentrate each round in 
order to maintain control of the watery member. 

The pseudopod is incapable of fine manipulation, but it 
can be used to make bludgeoning or constricting attacks. 
When used to strike at opponents, it attacks with the caster's 
THACO and inflicts damage as shown below. The priest may 
add his magical attack adjustment (from his Wisdom score) 
to his THACO, but Strength-based adjustments or special 
weapon skills don't help the priest to control watery fist. The 
pseudopod may be able to make rear or flank attacks if the 
priest can direct it into the proper position. 

If used to encircle and constrict, the pseudopod must 


166 


first make an attack roll as described above, inflicting dam- 
age based on the priest's level. However, in following 
rounds, the pseudopod automatically strikes its grappled 
target for constricting damage, +1 point per round of con- 
stricting. In other words, in the first round the victim sus- 
tains listed damage, in the second round he sustains listed 
damage +1, in the third he sustains listed damage +2, and 
so on. The pseudopod holds its target with an effective 
Strength equal to the priest's Wisdom score. 


Caster Striking Constricting 
Level Damage Damage 
14 1d6 1d3 
5-8 1d10 1d6 
9-12 1d12 1d8 
13+ 2d8 1d10 


Watery fist can be released by the priest any time he cares to 
stop concentrating on maintaining it. The pseudopod imme- 
diately resumes its normal state, possibly drenching a grap- 
pled creature or extinguishing a small fire if the caster wishes. 
The pseudopod is AC 6 and has 15 hp plus 1 hp per caster 
level, but it can only be damaged by magical weapons, fire, or 
cold; all other attacks simply pass through the water. Trans- 
mute water to dust, part water, lower water, and Otiluke's freezing 
sphere all destroy watery fist on contact. 

The material component is a vial full of blessed water or a 
sprig of mistletoe that is thrown onto the body of water 
from which the fist will be summoned. 


Third-Level Spells 


Control Animal 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Animal 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Duration: 1 round/level 

Area of Effect: 1 animal 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Small audio/ tactile 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Saving Throw: Neg. 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


When a priest casts this spell, he forces an animal to do his 
bidding. The creature is entitled to a saving throw vs. spell; if 
it fails, the caster may direct the creature with simple com- 
mands to act in any fashion desired. Sample commands 
include attack, run, fetch, etc. Suicidal or self-destructive com- 
mands grant the subject another saving throw to break free of 
the caster's control, with a +1 to +4 bonus depending on the 
extremity of the caster's orders. Ordering an animal to engage 
in combat is not necessarily self-destructive, as long as the 
prospective opponent is not more than three times the ani- 
mal's Hit Dice or more than two size categories larger than the 
subject. For example, a wolf (3 Hit Dice, size M) would attack 
a troll (6+6 Hit Dice, size L) without hesitation, but it might 
break free of the caster's control if ordered to attack a size H 
dragon or an 8+8 HD umber hulk. 

Control animal establishes a mental link between the 
caster and the subject, and the animal can be directed by 
silent mental command as long as it remains within range. 
Because the caster's intelligence directs the animal, the crea- 


New Priests Spells, 3rd Level 


ture may be able to take actions normally beyond its own 
comprehension, such as manipulating objects with its paws 
and mouth. The caster need not concentrate in order to 
maintain control of the creature unless he is trying to direct 
it to do something it normally couldn't. 

Control animal only works on normal or giant-sized ani- 
mals with Intelligence ratings between 1 and 4. Magical ani- 
mals, monsters, and creatures of low Intelligence or higher 
are immune to the effects of this spell. Druids always avoid 
using this spell. 


Detect Spirits 


(Divination) 


Sphere: Divination 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 10 x 60 ft. path 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This divination reveals the presence of disembodied or 
noncorporeal spirits of all types, including wraiths, ghosts, 
spectres, astrally-projecting creatures, characters or mon- 
sters employing magic jar or possession, and (of course) ani- 
mal spirits and spirits of nature. Characters or monsters 
who are simply invisible, phased, or ethereal do not count as 
spirits, since they are physically present in the flesh despite 
their unusual status. The caster detects spirits in a path 10 
feet wide and 60 feet long; any within the area of effect are 
revealed in their preferred form or appearance for all to see. 
Simply detecting a spirit doesn't give the caster any special 
ability to communicate with or attack the entity. 

The material component for this spell is a small pendant 
of copper wire worth at least 20 gp. 


Dictate 


(Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Charm, Law 

Range: 30 yds. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Up to 6 creatures 
in a 20-ft. cube 

Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: Small audio 


Components: V 
Casting Time: 6 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Originally developed by the Harmonium faction of the 
Outer Planes, this useful spell has come into more wide- 
spread use in recent years. While the spell is available as a 
2nd-level enchantment for members of the Harmonium, the 
general version is not quite as efficient and is considered a 
3rd-level spell. 

The dictate spell is an improved version of command, affect- 
ing up to 6 creatures in a 20-foot cube. The caster is not limited 
to a single word and can issue an order of no more than a 
dozen words in length. All the specified targets who fail their 
saving throws must attempt to obey the caster’s instructions. 
For example, a priest could issue a dictate such as “Stay here 
until I return,” “Throw down your weapons," or “Seize that 
elf!” The subjects will continue to obey nonimmediate orders 


167 


for up to one round per experience level of the caster. 

Subjects who cannot understand the caster are not 
affected, so characters who do not understand the caster’s 
language are immune to this spell. In addition, the order 
must create an immediate and obvious course of action 
for the subject; a dictate to “Die!” or “Feel sorry for him!” 
would simply cause the subject to stand still in confusion 
for one round. Poorly worded or confusing commands 
grant the subjects a +1 to +4 bonus on their saving throws 
at the DM's discretion. Similarly, if after the subject fails 
his saving throw he is given an obviously self-destructive 
dictate, the subject simply loses his next round as he fights 
off the compulsion. 


Etherealness 
(Alteration) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell resembles the 5th-level wizard spell ethereal- 
ness in many respects, but there are a few important differ- 
ences. First, the priest may not leave the Border Ethereal 
and venture into the Deep Ethereal; therefore, at the end of 
the spell's duration, he must return to the Prime Material 
Plane whether he wants to or not. Secondly, the priest may 
not use this spell on an unwilling target and can only make 
another creature ethereal if the subject is willing and in 
physical contact with the priest when the spell is cast. 
Besides himself, the caster can bring one creature per two 
experience levels (three at 5th, four at 7th, five at 9th, and so 
on) to the Ethereal Plane. Even if the priest abandons his 
charges in the Border Ethereal, the stranded characters will 
automatically materialize when the spell ends. 

While ethereal, the priest cannot be detected by any 
means short of a true seeing or detect phase spell. He per- 
ceives his surroundings as misty, gray, and otherworldly. 
No action he takes can affect the physical world, but he can 
pass through walls, doors, and other solid objects without 
hindrance. The priest can choose to end the spell voluntarily 
at any time, materializing in the physical world in one 
round. If the caster occupies a solid object when the spell 
ends, he is hurled into the Deep Ethereal and stranded in a 
catatonic stupor until he can be rescued. 


Fortify 


(Alteration) 


Sphere: War 

Range: 60 yds. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 10 ft. cube/2 levels 
Subtlety: +6 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Components: V, 5, M 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


By means of this spell, the priest prepares an area as a 
defensive position. Fortify may be used to prepare an open 


Appendix 2 


outdoors area such as a field, road, or grassland, or a rough 
or broken outdoors area such as a hillside, forest, or boul- 
der-fall. Large rooms or chambers such as a cavern or a 
great hall may be fortified as well. The exact effects of the 
spell depend on the nature of the site to be fortified. 

A. Open Outdoors Site: A rampart or dike of earth and 
loose stone rises from the ground along the perimeter of the 
site, leaving a shallow ditch on the outward face. Creatures 
defending the dike receive 50% cover against missile fire (+4 
bonus to AC), or 25% cover (+2 bonus) if they expose them- 
selves by engaging in melee combat or firing missiles out of 
the dike. Attackers cannot charge, run, or sprint over the 
ditch-and-dike. Large, open rooms or chambers with few 
features may fall into this category. 

B. Rough Outdoors Site: Loose stones and boulders, 
deadwood, and patches of dense briars are arranged to 
form a defensible wall or rampart along the perimeter of the 
area of effect. Characters hiding behind the wall receive 75% 
cover (+7 bonus to AC), or 50% cover if they expose them- 
selves by firing missiles or defending the wall. In hand-to- 
hand combat, the wall's defenders receive a +1 bonus to 
attack rolls; man-sized attackers must spend one full round 
in climbing over the wall in order to enter the fortified area. 
Natural caverns and large, cluttered chambers fall into this 
category, as well. 

C. Marshy or Low-lying Site: In areas such as swamp, 
marsh, bog, or tundra, fortify cannot raise a wall or dike to 
cover the defenders. Instead, the spell creates a water-filled 


ditch around the perimeter of the area of effect. This ditch is 
10 feet wide and 2 to 4 feet deep; most creatures require 1 
full round to negotiate the ditch, and defenders gain a +1 
bonus to attack rolls against enemies who are wading the 
ditch or climbing up the other side. 

The fortifications are permanent, although erosion, 
weathering, and excavations, clearing, or filling can quickly 
raze the site, returning it to its original state. The material 
component is the shell of a snail dusted with 100 gold 
pieces worth of diamond powder. In BATTLESYSTEM™ rules, 
fortify provides a defending unit with a +2 bonus to its AR 
against missile and melee attacks, but no bonus against mis- 
sile attacks in marshy or low-lying areas. 


Summon Animal Spiril 


(Necromancy) 


Sphere: Summoning 
Range: 10 yds./level 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Subtlety: +4 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Saving Throw: None 

Knockdown: d8 

Critical: Medium (1 hit) 
slashing 


This spell summons a minor spirit or entity to the 
caster's aid. Clerics usually summon minor elementals of 


New Priests Spells, 3rd Level 


some kind, while shamans typically conjure an animal 
spirit or spirit of nature. Regardless of the spirit’s origin, 
it appears as a ghostly beast of some kind—wolves, 
bears, tigers, or lions are most common. The animal spirit 
obeys the mental commands of the priest, attacking his 
enemies or performing any other task that it could rea- 
sonably accomplish. The creature is incorporeal and can- 
not handle or manipulate objects of any kind, but it can 
see and hear as a normal animal of its archetype and 
could be used to scout a dangerous area or act as a dis- 
traction of some kind. 

In combat, the animal spirit has the following statistics: 
MV 24; AC 4; THACO 15; Dmg 2d4. It can only be injured 
by magical weapons and can strike monsters hit only by 
+1 or better weapons. The spirit has a number of hit 
points equal to 10 plus the caster's level, so a 6th-level 
priest conjures a animal spirit with 16 hit points. The crea- 
ture is not affected by charm, sleep, hold, or other mind- 
affecting spells and suffers no damage from cold-based 
attacks. However, it is vulnerable to dispel magic or turn- 
ing as an undead monster of the caster's Hit Dice. If the 
animal spirit is turned, destroyed, or dispelled, the priest 
who summoned it must make a saving throw vs. spell or 
be stunned for 1d4 rounds. 

Because the spirit is intelligent and free-willed under 
the caster's direction, the priest need not concentrate in 
order to direct its attacks—an animal spirif could be 
ordered to attack a spellcaster in the back of an enemy 
party, while the cleric waded into hand-to-hand combat. 
The animal spirit makes use of flank or rear attacks when it 
can and gains any normal combat bonuses that a living 
creature in its position would be entitled to. The priest 
enjoys instantaneous, silent communication with the ani- 
mal spirit and can order it to stop attacking, to change its 
target, or to undertake almost any conceivable action 
desired. However, the spirit must remain within the spell's 
range; if it is ever more than 10 yards per caster level away 
from the priest, it dissipates harmlessly. 

The material component is a small whistle carved from a 
bone taken from the appropriate type of animal. 


Hold Poison 
(Necromancy) 


Sphere: Healing 

Range: Touch 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell is an improved version of slow poison, with a 
duration measured in days rather than hours. When cast 
upon a victim who has been poisoned by any means, hold poi- 
son arrests the venom and prevents it from doing any addi- 
tional damage to the victim. (In most cases, the spell must be 
cast during the poison's onset time in order to be effective.) 
Damage that has already been inflicted is not restored, but as 
long as the hold poison is in effect, the victim can be cured or 
healed of damage caused by poison by any normal means. 

This spell can be used to indefinitely postpone the onset 
of a poison if the caster chooses to continue to cast it on 


169 


the poisoned character before the previous /iold poison 
wears off. However, each time a new hold poison is used to 
stop the venom's advance for another few days, there is a 
2% cumulative chance that the spell fails and the poison 
runs its course. Evil priests have been known to deliber- 
ately poison a person and then use this spell to grant the 
victim a stay of death for a few days. This can be an 
extremely effective threat if the victim doesn't have access 
to a neutralize poison spell. 

The material component is the priest's holy symbol and a 
bud of garlic, crushed and smeared on the injury (or eaten if 
the poison was ingested). 


Repair Injury 


(Necromancy) 


Sphere: Healing 

Range: Touch 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Repair injury is intended for use in campaigns featuring 
the critical hit or critical strike rules. This spell addresses 
one specific injury or wound (see Chapter 8). It can be used 
to knit a broken bone, alleviate the swelling and pain of a 
sprain or a twist, or repair soft-tissue damage such as an 
injured eye, ear, or a severed tendon. If used as a simple 
curing spell, repair injury restores 1d10+1 hit points to the 
injured character, but if used to address the effects of a spe- 
cific injury, repair injury automatically removes one grazed, 
struck, injured, or broken condition, and alleviates any com- 
bat, movement, or maximum hit point penalties associated 
with the injury in question. The spell does not restore any 
lost hit points to the victim, other than the 1d10+1 that are 
incidental to the working of the spell. 


Beran, a fighter with 44 hit points, is struck by an ogre's club. 
The blow inflicts 12 points of damage, but Beran also suffers a 
broken hip. This injury will reduce him to a maximum of 25% of 
his normal total, so Beran's current hit points drop from 32 to 11 
after the battle ends. In addition, he is not capable of moving or 
attacking due to the effects of the injury. 

When the smoke clears, Talmos the priest comes to Beran's aid. 
Using repair injury, he knits Beran’s broken hip. The spell cures 
6 hit points in the process. Beran no longer suffers the movement 
or attack penalties for a broken hip and has 17 hit points to his 
credit. With time or additional healing, he can regain his normal 
total of 44. 


Repair injury is also helpful in dealing with wounds that 
fall in the crushed, shattered, or destroyed category. This 
spell reduces the severity of the injury to the broken level, 
which means it heals as if it were 20d6 lost hit points. Only 
one repair injury can be used on any given wound, so a char- 
acter with a shattered knee could still require a lot of time to 
recover after an application of this spell. 

Severed limbs, destroyed eyes or ears, and ability score 
losses caused by injuries cannot be healed by this spell. 
Repair injury is the equivalent of cure serious wounds for the 
purpose of slowing or stopping bleeding. 


Appendix 2 
, oo 


Unfailing Premonition 


(Divination) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 turn + 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


By anticipating possible futures and outcomes of the 
caster's actions, this spell provides the character with a tem- 
porary sixth sense or feel for danger. The spell operates on a 
subconscious level, and the caster receives strong intuitive 
impulses when he contemplates courses of action that may 
bring immediate physical injury or harm to him. For example, 
if the priest was about to open a trapped chest, the unfailing 
premonition would create a flash of insight or a gut feeling 
telling him that he shouldn't do so. Similarly, opening a door 
that leads into the lair of a ferocious troll may also trigger the 
spell's warning. Threatening a NPC who is likely to respond 
by drawing a weapon and attacking the PC would create a 
warning, but threatening a NPC who will get even with the 
priest in an hour or two will not trigger the premonition. 

The unfailing premonition is also quite useful in combat, 
as long as the priest obeys his instincts and ducks, dodges, 
or withdraws when his subconscious tells him to. While the 
spell is in effect, the priest gains a +2 bonus to his Armor 
Class and saving throws, but in any given round there is a 
25% chance that he will have to forego his intended action 
in order to obey the spell's warning impulses. 

The premonition only works on actions undertaken by the 
priest himself. If his companion is about to pull a mysteri- 
ous lever that will drop a 10-ton block of stone on the priest, 
he receives no warning. 


Weather Prediction 


(Divination) 


Sphere: Weather 

Range: 0 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


By casting this spell, the priest can predict the weather 
conditions at his location for a period of time equal to one 
day per level. The caster becomes aware of the prevailing 
conditions, trends, and weather systems that may affect his 
present location. Temperature, wind speed and direction, 
cloud cover, and precipitation can all be predicted with 95% 
accuracy for the next day, less 10% for each day after that. In 
other words, the priest's prediction is 95% accurate for the 
first day, 85% accurate for the second, 75% accurate for the 
third, and so on. In addition, magical or supernatural phe- 
nomena cannot be predicted. 

Priests of powers concerned with weather may use this 
spell to determine the best time for certain ceremonies or 
observances. Other priests find weather prediction useful for 
planning journeys or selecting campsites. 


170 


Wind Servant 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Sphere: Elemental (Air) 

Range: 20 yds./level 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Special 

Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Moderate audio/ tactile 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell allows the priest to exert fine control over air 
currents and winds, possibly extinguishing small fires or 
manipulating light objects as he sees fit within the spell's 
range. Generally, the priest is limited to one discrete action 
per round since he must focus his wind servant tightly on 
any given task. The wind servant can affect objects or crea- 
tures weighing up to 1 pound per caster level, twice as 
much if the object is reasonably light or airy (a cloak, scroll, 
or haystack, for instance), or 10 times as much if the object is 
designed to be carried by the wind, such as a ship's sail or a 
bird in flight. 

If an object is within the spell's weight limit, the caster 
may direct the wind servant to carry it along in gusts and air 
currents at a flying movement rate of 12 (E). If the object 
leaves the limits of the spell's range, the wind servant fails, 
and the object drops or falls normally from that point. Fly- 
ing creatures of size M or smaller can be forced to land or be 
driven away by use of the spell if they fall within the weight 
limit, or slowed by 50% if they exceed the weight limit. 
Employing the wind servant against an arrow or light missile 
adds a penalty of —4 to the attack roll. 

In dusty, snowy, or sandy regions, the caster can instead 
use wind servant to create a vicious zephyr of stinging dust 
around an enemy. This zephyr inflicts damage equal to the 
opponent's base AC less 2d6 points and creates a -2 penalty 
to the victim's attack rolls. For example, an enemy in leather 
armor +1 (AC 7) would suffer 7 - 2d6 damage if attacked by 
means of this spell. Note that any use of the wind servant 
requires the priest's undivided attention; he can take no 
other actions while directing the spell. 


Fourth-Level Spells 


Adamantite Mace 
(Alteration) 


Sphere: Elemental (Earth) 
Range: Touch 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Caster’s weapon 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Small visual 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: d12 
Critical: Medium (1 hit) 

impact 

By means of this spell, the priest transmutes his own 
cudgel, mace, or staff into an enchanted weapon of adaman- 
tite, the most magical mineral known. The adamantite mace 
gains a *2 bonus to attack and damage rolls, but it can 
strike creatures normally hit only by +4 or better weapons. 
As an incarnation of elemental earth, the mace inflicts up to 
twice the damage (roll twice the required damage dice) 


New Priests Spells, 4th Level 


against creatures of elemental air or magical avians such as 
griffons, perytons, pegasi, and winged baatezu or tanar’ri. 
The adamantite mace retains its special properties for one 
round per level of experience of the caster. 

The material component is a special powder made from 
a diamond worth 100 gp, sprinkled over the weapon. 


Dimensional Anchor 
(Alteration) 


Sphere: Guardian 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


When a priest casts this spell, a green ray springs from 
his outstretched hand and unerringly strikes a creature 
within line of sight and the range of the spell, covering the 
subject with a shimmering emerald field that completely 
blocks bodily extradimensional travel. Forms of movement 
barred by the dimensional anchor include blinking, dimension 
door, etherealness, gate, phasing, plane shift, maze, shadow walk, 
teleportation, and similar spell-like or psionic abilities. The 
field persists for one turn plus one round per caster level 
and has no effect other than blocking extradimensional 
travel. The dimensional anchor does not interfere with the 
movement of creatures in astral form, nor does it block 
extradimensional perception or attack forms such as a 
basilisk’s gaze. 


Entrench 


(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 


Sphere: War 

Range: 60 yds. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube/2 levels 
Subtlety: +3 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Components: V, $5, M 
Casting Time: 3 rds. 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


An improved version of the fortify spell, entrench has 
much the same effect, but prepares an even more formi- 
dable set of defenses. Like fortify, entrench may be used 
to prepare an open outdoors area such as a field or grass- 
land, or a rough outdoors area such as a hillside or for- 
est. Large rooms or chambers may be entrenched as well. 
In addition to the ditches and ramparts of the fortify 
spell, entrench makes use of local materials to create a 
small palisade and an array of stakes or sharp stones to 
discourage attackers. 

A. Open Outdoors Site: A rampart or dike of earth 
faced by a staked ditch rises from the ground along the 
perimeter of the site. Creatures defending the dike receive 
75% cover against missile fire (+7 bonus to AC), or 25% 
cover (+2 bonus) if they expose themselves by engaging in 
melee combat or firing missiles out of the dike. Attackers 
cannot charge, run, or sprint over the rampart, and must 
spend one full round negotiating the defenses in order to 
attack. The dike’s defenders receive a +1 bonus to attack 


171 


rolls against any creatures trying to move through the 
stakes or stones. 

B. Rough Outdoors Site: Loose stones, deadwood, and 
briars are arranged to form a defensible wall along the 
perimeter of the area of effect, faced by an array of sharp 
stakes or stones. Characters hiding behind the wall receive 
90% cover (+10 bonus to AC), or 50% cover (+4 bonus) if 
they expose themselves by firing missiles or defending the 
wall. Attacking creatures cannot run, charge, or sprint 
through the defenses, and must spend one full round to get 
through the stakes plus an additional round climbing over 
the wall in order to enter the fortified area. The wall’s 
defenders gain a +1 bonus to attacks against creatures nego- 
tiating the defenses. 

C. Marshy or Low-lying Site: In swamps or bogs, 
entrench creates a water-filled ditch around the perimeter of 
the area of effect. This ditch is 15 feet wide and 3 to 6 feet 
deep; most creatures require two full rounds to negotiate 
the ditch and climb up the far side, and defenders gain a +1 
bonus to attack rolls against enemies who are wading the 
ditch or climbing up the other side. 

The fortifications created by this spell are permanent, 
although erosion, weathering, and clearing or filling can 
return the site to its original state. The material component 
is the shell of a giant nautilus. In the BATTLESYSTEM rules, 
entrench provides the defending units with a +3 bonus to 
their AR versus missile and melee attacks, but only a +1 
bonus against missile attacks in marshy areas. 


Omniscient Eye 
(Divination) 


Sphere: Divination 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This divination enhances the caster’s vision by allowing 
him to see through any normal or magical darkness, fog, or 
mist to a range of 60 feet. In addition, the caster has a 
chance of piercing magical illusions, blending, and invisibil- 
ity equal to 70% plus 1% per level of experience, less 2% per 
spell level. For example, a 7th-level priest has a 70% + 7% - 
4%, or 73% chance, to spot a wizard concealing himself by 
using the 2nd-level spell invisibility. 

Unlike the 5th-level spell true seeing, the omniscient eye 
does not grant the caster the ability to perceive secret doors, 
traps, lost or misplaced objects, or creature alignments; it 
simply ensures that the caster can see the surroundings as 
they would appear without the interference of weather, 
lighting, or illusionary magic. Thus, the omniscient eye can 
be deceived by careful camouflage, concealment, or other 
purely physical precautions. Other phenomena that may 
bypass this spell’s power include psionic invisibility, true 
transparency, or extradimensional objects or creatures. 

The material component of this spell is a special oint- 
ment for the eyes that is composed of rare powders and 
herbs. The ointment costs at least 100 gold pieces for a sin- 
gle application. 


Appendix 2 


Decilalion 


(Abjuration, Invocation/Evocation) 


Sphere: Combat 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Moderate audio 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


By reciting a sacred passage or declaration, the priest 
invokes his deity's blessing upon himself and his allies, while 
causing confusion and weakness among his enemies. All 
creatures within the area of effect at the instant of the spell's 
completion are affected. Allies of the priest gain a +2 bonus to 
attack rolls and saving throws, or a +3 bonus if they are of the 
same faith (not just alignment) as the caster. Enemies suffer a 
-2 penalty to attack rolls and saving throws. After the recita- 
tion, the priest is free to take further actions during the spell's 
duration as he sees fit —he need not concentrate to maintain 
the spell. As a result, it is possible for the priest to cast a 
prayer spell, which increases the bonuses and penalties pro- 
vided to +3 and —3 respectively. If another priest is using 
chant at the same time, then the bonuses and penalties given 
by it are also allowed to add to the total. 

The material spell component is the priest's holy symbol 
and a copy of whatever text or scroll he holds sacred. Nei- 
ther are consumed by the spell. 


Suspended Animation 


(Necromancy) 


Sphere: Necromantic 

Range: Touch 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Subtlety: +8 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, 5, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


By using this spell, the caster can place one willing sub- 
ject in a state of suspended animation. The victim's breathing, 
heartbeat, and other vital processes slow to the point of 
nonexistence, although he or she seems to be deeply asleep, 
not dead. A caster of 7th to 10th level can maintain the sus- 
pended animation for up to one week plus one day per level; 
a caster of 11th to 15th level can maintain the state for up to 
one month plus one week per level; and a caster of 16th 
level or higher can place someone in suspended animation for 
one year plus one month per level. 

This spell has many useful applications. First, all bod- 
ily or mental afflictions become quiescent during the vic- 
tim's slumber. Poison, insanity, and many curses (lycan- 
thropy, geas, and mummy rot included) can be arrested, if 
not cured, and have no effect on the subject while he 
sleeps. Of course, if the spell is broken prematurely, all the 
conditions that were halted by the spell will start once 
again. Second, the subject requires no food or water, but 
he still needs air and dies if deprived of oxygen. Third, for 
every month that the subject is in suspended animation, he 
recovers one hit point. 

The caster can awaken the subject at any time within 


n2 


the spell's duration, although he must be in the subject's 
presence to do so. Optionally, the priest may pre-specify 
an amount of time within his normal duration or a special 
condition to awaken the sleeper. A condition must include 
a physical stimulus to the subject, such as a change in 
temperature, the touch of the sun, the kiss of a princess, or 
whatever the priest desires. If the priest maintaining the 
spell dies or is not able to awaken the sleeper, then the 
subject can be taken to another priest of the same deity to 
be awakened. 

If the subject is attacked, he is completely helpless and 
can be killed by a single blow. However, if the subject is 
attacked without being slain for some reason, he gains a 
saving throw vs. spell each round to emerge from his sus- 
pended animation. The subject will be extremely groggy and 
disoriented if his slumber is disturbed in this fashion, suf- 
fering a -2 penalty to all die rolls for 1d6 turns, but if he 
awakens in the normal or prescribed fashion, he is disori- 
ented for only one round. 

Some of the drawbacks to this spell affect the casting 
priest. First of all, it takes all of the priest's concentration 
to cast and maintain this spell. This means that the priest 
cannot cast any other spell while a subject is being held 
under the influence of the suspended animation. For each 
week that the subject is in suspended animation, the priest 
loses one point of Constitution. This happens each week 
until the priest transfers the spell to another priest of the 
same alignment. Transferring this spell requires a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell. If the saving throw is suc- 
cessful, then the priest who transfers the spell can start 
recovering Constitution at a rate of one point per hour of 
bedrest. If the saving throw doesn't succeed, then the 
priest loses another point of Constitution and cannot try 
to transfer the spell again for 8 hours. Either way, 
because of the temporary lapse of the spell, the subject 
will automatically lose 1 hit point each time a transfer is 
attempted. 

The material component for this spell is a rare herb that 
must be prepared with exacting care. The treatment costs at 
least 200 gold pieces and requires 1d3 days of the priest's 
time and attention. 


Unfailing Endurance 
(Necromancy) 


Sphere: Necromantic 

Range: Touch 

Duration: 1 day /level 

Arca of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell enhances the natural hardiness and stamina 
of the affected creatures by rendering them virtually 
immune to fatigue or exhaustion. During the casting of 
the spell, the caster must touch each creature to be 
affected. While under the spell's influence, the subjects 
may force march with no penalty, engage in up to 12 
hours of hard labor per day with no fatigue (or up to 16 
hours with moderate fatigue), and gain a *4 bonus to 
Strength /Stamina or Constitution /Fitness checks. In 
addition, the subjects gain a +4 bonus to saving throws 


sea RGR” 


against spells or magical effects that cause weakness, 
fatigue, or enfeeblement. Finally, an affected creature’s 
fatigue rating (from PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & Tactics) is 
doubled, and the subject gains a +4 bonus to his saving 
throws to recover from a fatigued or exhausted state. 


Windborne 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Sphere: Elemental (Air) 
Range: 0 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell provides a priest of elemental air with the ability 
to conjure a powerful column of wind that can bear his weight, 
permitting him to fly or glide for long distances. If used from a 
high place such as a mountainside or tower, the caster can 
glide a maximum horizontal distance of 20 feet per foot of ini- 
tial altitude—for example, if the priest used this spell and 
launched himself from a hilltop 800 feet high, he could glide a 
maximum distance of 16,000 feet, or about 3 miles. 

If windborne is cast by a priest on level ground, the ini- 
tial gust carries him aloft to a maximum altitude of 10 feet 
per caster level. From that point, he may then glide 10 feet 
per foot of initial altitude. For example, a 7th-level priest 


New Priests Spells, 5th 


173 


Tee 
U 


272) 
2^ E N 


would ascend to an altitude of 70 feet and thus be able to 
glide for a total horizontal distance of 700 feet. He can 
choose to glide for a much shorter distance, but never less 
than his initial altitude. 

While gliding, the priest moves at a rate of 15 (or about 
450 feet) with a maneuverability class of D. Each round, he 
drops between 20 and 40 feet. He can choose to descend at a 
much more rapid pace, dropping up to 200 feet per round 
without risk of a damaging impact upon landing. The caster 
doesn’t gain a mastery of aerial combat with this spell and 
suffers a -2 penalty to his attack rolls and Armor Class if he 
becomes involved in combat while gliding. 

The material component for this spell is the feather from 
a giant eagle . 


Fifth-Level Spells 


Animate Flame 
(Alteration) 


Sphere: Elemental (Fire) 

Range: 120 yds. Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 rd./level Casting Time: 8 

Area of Effect: 1-ft. diameter/level Saving Throw: None 

Subtlety: +4 Knockdown: None 

Sensory: Large visual, Critical: Varies 
moderate tactile/olfactory 


Appendix 2 


While using this spell, the priest can command a flame 
to leave its source of fuel and move at his direction. The 
flame is magically preserved at the intensity it possessed 
when animated and does not weaken or fail even if it has 
nothing to burn. The priest can affect any natural fire 
within range, but magical fires (including breath weap- 
ons) can only be animated and controlled on a roll of 11 or 
higher on a d20, -1 per level or Hit Dice difference 
between the caster and the creature or spellcaster who cre- 
ated the flame in question. For example, a 9th-level priest 
can animate a flaming sphere cast by a 4th level wizard on 
a roll of 6 or better on 1d20. In order to animate instanta- 
neous effects such as a red dragon's breath or a fireball, the 
priest must beat his opponent's initiative in the round he 
casts this spell and succeed in his attempt to take control 
of the flame. 

Under the priest's direction, an animated flame can 
move at a rate of 12, although it cannot cross water or 
wet or muddy ground. If the priest directs the flame to 
leave the spell's range, the spell ends and the flame stops 
and burns whatever it may be resting on. Animate flame 
can be a very effective weapon; the fire attacks with a 
THACO of 10 and may be able to strike several creatures 
in the same round, depending on its size. It inflicts dam- 
age as shown below: 


Number of 
Size Diameter Targets Damage 
Torch or lantern less than 1 ft. 1 1d3 
Small campfire 1-2 ft. 1 1d4 
Large campfire 3-5 ft. 2 1d6 
Bonfire 6-10 ft. 4 2d6 
Conflagration 11-20 ft. 8 3d6 
Inferno 21 ft. or more 20 5d6 


Creatures actually caught within the fire's diameter are 
automatically hit (without an attack roll) for the listed 
damage. Very hot or unusually cold fires may inflict dam- 
age (at the DM's discretion) as if they were one category 
larger or smaller. In addition to attacking the caster's ene- 
mies, the fire will naturally cause any combustibles it 
comes into contact with to burn, as well; an animated fire 
can easily torch a small town, given a few rounds to move 
from building to building. 

The animated flame can be dispelled normally. It can 
also be defeated by contact with a significant volume of 
water, ice, cold, or earth or dirt, just as a normal fire can be 
drowned or smothered. 

The priest can affect a single fire of up to 1 foot in diame- 
ter per level of experience; if a natural fire is too large for 
him to animate, he can animate a smaller portion of it and 
command the portion he controls. Magical fires cannot be 
divided in this way, so it requires a very high-level priest to 
deflect the breath weapon of a red dragon! 


Dimensional Translocation 
(Alteration) 


Sphere: Numbers, Summoning 
Range: 60 yds. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 


Components: S 
Casting Time: 3 
Saving Throw: Special 


174 


Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Subtlety: +1 
Sensory: Small visual 


By using this spell, the priest seals off the multidimen- 
sional existence of a magical, undead, or extraplanar crea- 
ture. The affected creature can be forced entirely into its 
extraplanar dimension, which removes it from the physical 
world, or its extraplanar existence can be severed, forcing it 
entirely into the Prime Material Plane. If the priest's level 
exceeds the subject’s level or Hit Dice, the subject is not 
allowed a saving throw, but creatures of higher level or Hit 
Dice than the caster are entitled to a saving throw vs. spell 
to negate the effect. Also note that magic resistance may 
apply, as well. 

If used to banish an extraplanar or multidimensional 
creature, dimensional translocation prevents the creature from 
returning to the Prime Material Plane for the duration of the 
spell. The creature may be able to take other actions, such as 
using magical items or spell-like abilities on itself while it 
waits to return. If the caster instead forces an extradimen- 
sional creature into the Prime Material Plane, one or more of 
the following effects may apply, at the DM’s option: 


* The creature’s Armor Class may be reduced by 1d6 
points for the duration of the spell. 

* The quality of a magical weapon needed to strike the crea- 
ture may be reduced by one "plus"; for example, a mon- 
ster normally hit by +2 or better weapons may become 
vulnerable to +1 weapons for the spell's duration. 

* Thecreature may suffer permanent death upon the loss 
of all its hit points. 

* Use of 1d6 spell-like powers (such as gating in allies) may 
be limited or negated. 

* Undead creatures lose the ability to drain life energy levels. 


This spell does not prevent extradimensional travel on 
the Prime Material Plane (i.e., dimension door, blinking, tele- 
port, or similar effects), but it does prevent the subject from 
plane shifting or becoming ethereal while in effect. 


Impregnable Mind 


(Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Protection, Thought 
Range: Touch 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Subtlety: +2 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell guards the spell recipient against magical or 
psionic attacks that affect the mind. This includes beguiling, 
charm, domination, feeblemind, hold, and similar effects, as well 
as most telepathic psionic powers and attacks. Against magi- 
cal influences, impregnable mind grants a +4 bonus to saving 
throws; if the attack normally allows no saving throw, the 
spell recipient may attempt one at no modifier. Against tele- 
pathic psionics, the spell inflicts a -6 penalty to the attacking 
psionicist’s power checks, making it more likely that a psionic 
attack or telepathic contact will fail. Impregnable mind offers no 
protection against nontelepathic psionics, such as a telekinetic 
thrashing or other psionics that affect the body. 


New Priests Spells, 5th Level 


Othertime 


(Alteration) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 0 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Small visual 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


When a priest enters othertime, he steps into a different 
reality in which the world around him is frozen at a 
moment in the future. Until time catches up to him, he may 
move about unhindered and observe his surroundings; no 
force known can detect his presence or harm him in the 
alternate reality, although he in turn cannot affect any crea- 
ture or object in the physical world. For instance, he could 
read a book at the page it was opened to, but he could not 
turn the page since that would require him to move an 
object that is temporarily immovable for him. To his com- 
panions or enemy in real time, the priest appears to simply 
vanish altogether, only to reappear at some later point. 

The duration of this spell is a little odd, to say the least. 
The priest may choose a duration of up to 1 round at 7th to 
9th level, 2 rounds at 10th to 12th level, 3 rounds at 13th to 
16th, 4 rounds at 17th to 19th, up to a maximum of 5 rounds 
at 20th level or higher. The duration chosen by the priest 
governs the length of the othertime; if the priest decides that 
the spell will last 2 rounds, then he is instantly transported 
to that point in time, surrounded by the frozen still-life of 
the world as it will appear 2 rounds after the priest cast oth- 
ertime. The caster then has 2 rounds to himself to take any 
actions he cares to, although he cannot affect the real world 
by any physical, magical, or mental means. 

While the caster is in the othertime, he is completely 
unaware of the intervening events. In the example above, if 
the caster’s friends were teleported away 1 round after the 
caster left and replaced by an identical group of dopple- 
gangers, the caster would have no chance to detect the 
switch; all he sees are the bodies of his “friends,” frozen in 
the positions they will occupy when he emerges from the 
othertime. This also means that nasty things like dragon 
breath, cloudkills, or mind blasts that pass through the spot 
where the caster happens to be have no effect on him—he 
simply does not exist in the real world while he waits for 
everyone else to catch up to him. 

As noted above, the caster gains an amount of subjective 
time equal to the duration of the spell. By leaping 3 rounds 
into the future, the caster gains 3 rounds of actions in the 
othertime. He could drink a potion, cast a spell, and then 
maneuver for an attack, for example, or he could gain a 3- 
round head start by running for his life while no one else 
can pursue him. If the priest uses this time to study a battle 
and position himself for an attack, he gains a -4 bonus to his 
initiative roll on the round he emerges from othertime, and a 
+4 attack bonus with his first strike. 

Leaping in and out of the time stream is a dangerous activ- 
ity; every time the priest employs this spell, there is a 1% non- 
cumulative chance that he becomes stuck in othertime, 
doomed to death by thirst or starvation when his own rations 
run out. Only the most extraordinary measures (a wish spell, 
divine intervention, etc.) can save a character in this predica- 


175 


ment. Once a priest is in othertime, he cannot pray for further 
spells. After all, if the priest is going to attract his deity’s atten- 
tion by praying for spells, the deity will most likely allow him 
out! The material component for this spell is an hourglass 
filled with rare salts, worth at least 100 gold pieces. 


Produce Ice 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Sphere: Elemental (Water) 

Range: 60 yds. 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Cube 1 ft./level 

Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Moderate visual, 
small tactile 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Saving Throw: Special 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell creates supernatural cold in the area of effect, 
condensing all atmospheric and standing water into a thick 
rime of ice. If there is no source of water or even enough 
humidity to support this spell, then the DM can rule that the 
spell has no effect. The caster affects a cubic area of 1 foot per 
level to a side, so a 12th-level caster affects a 12-foot by 12- 
foot by 12-foot cube (up to a maximum of 25 feet to a side). 
This can have several effects; first of all, any creature caught 
in the area of effect when the temperature is lowered suffers 
2d4 damage plus 1 point per level of the caster (or 2d4+12, 
for the 12th-level caster described above), or half that damage 
with a successful saving throw vs. spell. Any fires in the area 
are suppressed and may (5076 chance) be extinguished. 

Creatures entering the area of effect after the initial cre- 
ation of ice suffer no additional damage, although the air 
will be noticeably dry and cold. However, the ice formed 
by the spell coats all surfaces and may cause creatures to 
slip and fall. Any creature moving into or out of the 
affected area must make a saving throw vs. spell or fall, 
losing their action for the round. The ice lasts at least 2 
rounds per caster level, and then begins to melt at what- 
ever rate nature decrees. 

If cast on a body of water, this spell creates an iceberg of 
the stated dimensions. A swimmer or aquatic creature could 
be caught in the ice and trapped until the ice melts; most 
air-breathers will suffocate from this treatment, but a few 
aquatic creatures (fish, amphibians, etc.) may survive being 
frozen, at the DM's discretion. 

The material component is a scale from a white dragon. 


Righteous Wrath of the Faithful 


(Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: War 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


When a priest casts this spell, he fires his allies and com- 
panions with a divine madness or fury that greatly 
enhances their combat ability. Allies who are fighting on the 
side of the priest are affected as if they had received an aid 


Appendix 2 


spell, gaining a +1 bonus to attack rolls and saving throws, 
plus 1d8 additional hit points for the duration of the spell. 

Allies who share the same faith (not just alignment) of 
the caster are transported into the righteous wrath; they gain 
one additional melee attack each round and a +2 bonus to 
saving throws and attack and damage rolls. Creatures 
under the influence of the righteous wrath gain 1d8 addi- 
tional hit points, which are the first points lost if the subject 
sustains any injury (see aid, on page 257 of the PHB). Char- 
acters in a state of divine frenzy are difficult to charm or 
hold. Against spells or effects that target the subject’s mind 
or emotions, the saving throw bonus increases to +3. 

When the spell ends, all remaining additional hit points 
are lost. Characters who fought under the righteous wrath 
find themselves extremely fatigued and must rest for one 
full turn before exerting themselves again; if forced to fight 
in this state, they are treated as if they were exhausted under 
the Combat & Tactics fatigue rules. The material component 
of this spell is the priest’s holy symbol. 


Sixth-Level Spells 


Command Monster 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Charm 

Range: 60 yds, 

Duration: 1 rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Subtlety: +1 

Sensory: Small audio 


Components: V 
Casting Time: 1 
Saving Throw: Special 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This spell allows the priest to issue a command to any one 
creature within the spell's range. The magic of the spell 
translates the priest's order into a language or form the sub- 
ject creature can understand. The creature must have an 
Intelligence of at least 1 in order to be affected by this spell; 
nonintelligent creatures (those with a score of 0) cannot 
comprehend any order, no matter how the priest phrases it. 
Other creatures gain a saving throw vs. spell to resist com- 
mand monster, but only if they have an Intelligence of Excep- 
tional (15) or better, or the creature's levels or Hit Dice are 
equal to or greater than the caster's. 

Just like the 1st-level spell command, this spell coerces 
the subject into obeying the priest's one-word order to 
the best of its ability. The order must be absolutely clear 
and unequivocal; the subject will continue to obey for 
one round per two caster levels—six rounds at 12th level, 
seven at 14th, and so on. If this action places the subject 
in mortal peril, he may attempt a saving throw (whether 
he was originally entitled to one or not) in order to break 
free of the spell's power. Therefore, ordering a character 
standing at the edge of a cliff to "jump" will create an 
opportunity for the subject to break free. A command to 
"die" or "sleep" renders the creature unconscious for the 
spell's duration. 

Undead creatures are immune to this spell. 


176 


Entropy Shield 


(Abjuration) 


Sphere: Chaos 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Moderate visual /tactile 


Components: V, 5, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


This potent defense surrounds the caster in a chaotic 
maelstrom of energy and demimatter that blocks or deflects 
many attacks. The entropy shield extends about two feet in all 
directions from the caster's body. The warping effect of the 
field causes any melee or hand-to-hand attack to miss 5076 
of the time—even if the roll allows an attack to continue, the 
priest still gains a -2 bonus to his Armor Class. Normal mis- 
siles or hurled weapons miss automatically as the entropy 
shield deflects them from the caster. Even magical missile 
attacks (produce flame, magic missile, or Melf's acid arrow, for 
example), siege engines, and giant-thrown boulders may be 
deflected as if they were hand-to-hand attacks. 

Against spells or effects that produce energy, gas, or 
other physical attack forms (fireball, lightning bolt, cloud- 
kill, and other such spells) the entropy shield provides a 
50% chance that the attack simply does not affect the pro- 
tected priest. Even if the harmful energy or matter pene- 
trates the shield, the caster gains a +2 bonus on his saving 
throw. This does not cause a spell to fizzle or fail; a priest 
standing in the middle of a fireball is simply not touched 
by the spell, which will inflict its normal damage on any- 
one else in the area of effect. Any spell or effect that does 
not create matter or energy to harm or hinder the victim 
can pass through the entropy shield normally, so mind- 
based attacks and magical effects such as petrification, par- 
alyzation, enfeeblement, or polymorph (to name a few) can 
still affect the priest. 

In addition to its defensive benefits, the entropy shield has 
the ability to repel normal or giant-sized animals and crea- 
tures of lawful alignment, such as extraplanar monsters from 
the lawful planes. Any such creature attempting to attack the 
shielded priest in hand-to-hand combat must roll a saving 
throw vs. spell at the end of the round. If the creature fails, it 
recoils from the priest and cannot attack him physically for 
the remainder of the spell's duration (although it could 
decide to turn on one of the priest's companions). 

The material component for this spell is a gemstone 
worth at least 100 gold pieces that has been exposed to the 
chaotic energies of Limbo. 


Whirlwind 


(Invocation/Evocation) 


Sphere: Elemental (Air) 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Cone 10 ft. 
wide at base and 30 ft. tall 

Subtlety: +6 

Sensory: Huge visual/audio, 
large tactile 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Saving Throw: Special 


Knockdown: d20 
Critical: Large (1d3 
hits) crushing 


Appendix 2 


This spell creates a powerful cyclone of raging wind that 
moves as directed by the priest. The whirlwind can move by 
zigzagging along the ground or over water at a movement 
rate of 6. The whirlwind always moves after all other crea- 
tures have moved, and many creatures can avoid it simply 
by keeping their distance. If the cyclone exceeds the spell's 
range, it moves in a random, uncontrolled fashion for 1d3 
rounds—possibly endangering the caster or his allies—and 
then dissipates. 

Any creature of size L (large) or smaller that comes in 
contact with the whirlwind must make a saving throw vs. 
breath weapon or suffer 2d8 damage. Size M (man-sized) or 
smaller creatures who fail their first saving throw must 
attempt a second one, or be picked up bodily by the whirl- 
wind and held suspended in its powerful winds, suffering 
1d8 points of damage each round with no save allowed. The 
caster may direct the cyclone to eject any carried creatures 
whenever he wishes, depositing the hapless souls wherever 
the whirlwind happens to be when they are released. 

Maintaining the whirlwind requires the caster’s full atten- 
tion, and he cannot cast other spells or make any attacks 
while directing the spell’s course. If his concentration fails 
for some reason, he cannot simply cancel the spell. Instead, 
the spell becomes uncontrolled as described above and dis- 
sipates after 1d3 rounds. 

In truly desperate circumstances, priests of elemental air 
have been known to deliberately overrun their companions 
in order to carry them out of the path of some certain doom. 
Few care to repeat the experience. The material component 
for this spell is a handful of dust collected from a zephyr or 
snow from a williwaw. 


Seventh-Level Spells 
Antimineral Shell 
(Abjuration) 


Sphere: Protection, Elemental (Earth) 

Range: 0 Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius Saving Throw: None 
Subtlety: +6 Knockdown: None 
Sensory: None Critical: None 


When a priest casts this spell, he creates an invisible 
force field or barrier that blocks the entrance of animated or 
living mineral creatures. It is effective against elementals 
and creatures of elemental origin such as aerial servants, 
djinns, and mephits; golems and other constructs; creatures 
of living stone, such as galeb duhr or xorn; and objects, 
weapons, or armor animated by some outside force. It does 
not bar the passage of undead monsters, living creatures 
carrying inanimate material, or nonanimated minerals such 
as a giant-thrown boulder or a common rockslide. The 
antimineral shell moves with the caster, but if the caster tries 
to force it against a creature affected by this spell, the 
antimineral shell fails. The material component is a drop of 
some caustic solvent, such as acid from a black dragon. 


178 


Conjure Air or Water Elemental 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Elemental (Air/ Water) 
Range: 80 yds. 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: Special 
Subtlety: +5 

Sensory: Moderate visual 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 rds. 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


Priests of elemental air or elemental water can summon 
elementals from their respective spheres, just as druids can 
conjure fire or earth elementals. The summoned elemental is 
60% likely to have 12 Hit Dice, 35% likely to have 16 Hit Dice, 
and 5% likely to have 21 to 24 Hit Dice (20+1d4). Unlike the 
wizard version of this spell, the caster does not need to con- 
centrate to maintain control of the elemental since the creature 
regards the caster as a friend and obeys him implicitly. The 
elemental remains until destroyed, dispelled, sent away by a 
dismissal or a holy word spell, or the spell duration expires. 


Impervious Sanctity of Mind 
(Abjuration) 


Sphere: Protection, Thought 
Range: 0 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Subtlety: +6 

Sensory: None 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Saving Throw: None 
Knockdown: None 
Critical: None 


When using this spell, the priest renders his mind com- 
pletely immune to any mind-affecting spell, power, or 
psionic effect. This includes amnesia, awe, beguiling, charm, 
command, confusion, domination, emotion, empathy, ESP, fasci- 
nation, fear, feeblemind, hold, hypnotism, insanity, magic jar, 
mind blast, phantasmal killer, possession, rulership, sleep, soul 
trapping, suggestion, telepathy, and any psionic attack or 
power of the telepathic discipline. In short, if the spell or 
effect coerces the priest into taking an action or forming an 
impression that he doesn’t wish to, it fails while impervious 
sanctity of mind is in effect. The only mind-affecting spells or 
powers that can affect the protected priest are those of 
exceedingly powerful creatures or artifacts and relics. 

Unlike the wizard spell mind blank, the impervious sanctity 
of mind offers no protection against detection or scrying. 
However, it is effective against some attacks and powers that 
mind blank is powerless against. The spell requires a small 
ring of lead that was once breathed upon by a red dragon. 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Sphere: Elemental (Water) 

Range: 200 yds. + 50 yds. /level 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Wave 2 ft. high 
and 10 ft. long per level 

Subtlety: +6 

Sensory: Gargantuan visual, 
huge audio 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 rds. 
Saving Throw: None 


Knockdown: Special 
Critical: None 


This mighty spell summons a tsunami, or gigantic 
wave, from any major body of water. The body of water 
must be at least 1 mile in width, so in most circumstances 
the tsunami can only be summoned from the sea, large 
lakes, or extremely big rivers. The wave is 2 feet high and 
10 feet long for each level of experience of the caster, so a 
15th-level priest would summon a tsunami 30 feet high and 
150 feet wide. The wave can appear anywhere within the 
spell's range and immediately sweeps forward in the 
direction specified by the caster. This may take it out of the 
allowed range or even back at the casting priest. The 
tsunami moves at a rate of 24 (240 yards per round) and 
lasts one round at 14th level, two rounds at 18th level, or 
three rounds at 22nd or higher level. 

Ships caught by the tsunami must make a seaworthiness 
check (see Table 77: Ship Types in the DMG) with a penalty 


equal to the wave's height in feet. For example, a tsunami 
created by a 15th-level caster would inflict a -30% penalty 
to a vessel's seaworthiness check. If the check is failed, the 
vessel capsizes and sinks in 1d10 rounds, with the possible 
loss of those aboard. Human or humanoid swimmers 
caught in the wave must make a saving throw vs. death 
magic or be drowned in the wave; any creature in the water 
in the wave's path will be carried along as long as it lasts. 

If the priest sent the wave towards the shore, the 
tsunami loses 5 feet of height for every 20 yards it travels; a 
30-foot wave could wash 120 yards inland before there 
was nothing left of it. Creatures caught in the area sustain 
1d4 points of damage for every 5 feet of height the tsunami 
currently possesses and are carried along until it ends. Air- 
breathing creatures must make saving throws vs. death 
magic or be drowned outright by this treatment. Wooden 
buildings have a chance equal to three times the wave's 
current height of being destroyed by the tsunami (90% for a 
30-foot wave, for example) while stone buildings have a 
chance equal to the wave's height (or 30% for a 30-foot 
wave). Topography may influence or channel the wave's 
advance, so a good-sized hill could stop a tsunami cold, 
although its seaward face may be denuded of creatures 
and vegetation by the wave. 

Note that this spell in the hands of a high-level character 
can blanket an awesome amount of territory and literally 
destroy or drown anything in its path. The tsunami is so 
strenuous a spell that the priest is exhausted and helpless 
for 1d6 hours after summoning it. 


8 Italicized spells are reversible. Boldfaced Psychic Protection (4th) Displace Self (3rd) 


queis ee iens in ne Tome of A M voidance/Attraction (5th) Fog Cloud (2nd) 
TALIZEU Spes appearan.: Dismissal (5th) Fool's Gold (2nd) 
ue meal rat nM INVULNERABILITY TO NORMAL WEAPONS Irritation (2nd) 
this book. As mentioned in Chapter 2, (5th) Levitate (2nd) 
some spells have been reassigned to the Lower Resistance (5th) Magic Mouth (2nd) 
school of universal magic. MORDENKAINEN'S PRIVATE SANCTUM (5th) Maximilian's Earthen Grasp (2nd) 
. ] Proofing vs. Combustion (5th) Moon Rune (2nd) 
Universal Magic Safeguarding (5th) Pyrotechnics (2nd) 
Barred: None Von Gasik's Refusal (5th) Ride the Wind (2nd) 
l Antimagic Shell (6th) Rope Trick (2nd) 
Cantrip (1st) DRAGON SCALES (6th) Sense Shifting (2nd) 
Comprehend Languages/Confuse Languages Globe of Invulnerability (6th) Shatter (2nd) 
(1st) Greater Sign of Sealing (4th) Strength (2nd) 
Detect Magic (1st) INVULNERABILITY TO MAGICAL WEAPONS VOCALIZE (2nd) 
Hold Portal (1st) (6th) Whispering Wind (2nd) 
Identify (180 Repulsion (6th) Alacrity (3rd) 
Read Magic (1st) Banishment (7th) Blink (3rd) 
Wizard Mark (1st) Neutralize Gas (7th) Delude (3rd) 
Knock/Lock (2nd) Sequester (7th) Explosive Runes (3rd) 
Protection from Cantrips (2nd) Seven-eyes (7th) Far Reaching I (3rd) 
Wizard Lock (212) Spell Turning (7th) Fly (3rd) 
Dispel Magic (3rd) FEAR WARD (8th) Gust of Wind (3rd) 
Remove Curse/Bestow Curse (4th) Mind Blank (8th) Haste (3rd) 
Teleport (5th) Serten's Spell Immunity (8th) Infravision (3rd) 
Enchant an Item (6th) Elemental Aura (9th) Item (3rd) 
Teleport Without Error (7th) Imprisonment/Freedom (9th) Leomund's Tiny Hut (3rd) 
Permanency (8th) Prismatic Sphere (9th) Maximilian's Stony Grasp (3rd) 
Astral Spell (9th) Melf's Minute Meteors (3rd) 
"M Alteration Secret Page (3rd) 
bjuration . Barred: Abjurers, force mages Slow (3rd) 
Barred: Illusionists, transmuters, shadow SNAPPING TEETH (3rd) 
mages Affect Normal Fires (1st) Squaring the Circle (3rd) 
Burning Hands (1st) Tongues/Babble (3rd) 
Alarm (1st) —— l CHROMATIC ORB (1st) Water Breathing/Air Breathing (3rd) 
Protection from Evil/Protection from Good Color Spray (1st) Wind Wall (3rd) 
(Ist) Dancing Lights (1st) Wraithform (3rd) 
PROTECTION FROM HUNGER AND THIRST Enlarge/Reduce (1st) Dilation I (4th) 
wa : Erase (1st) Dimension Door (4th) 
Protection from Vermin (1st) Expeditious Retreat (1st) Extension I (4th) 
FILTER (2nd) Feather Fall (1st) Far Reaching II (4th) 
Protection from Cantrips (2nd) Fire Burst (1st) Fire Shield (4th) 
Protection from Paralysis (2nd) Fist of Stone (1st) Improved Strength (4th) 
Protection from Poison (2nd) Gaze Reflection (1st) Leomund’s Secure Shelter (4th) 
INVISIBLE Malt (3rd) Jump (1st) Massmorph (4th) 
IRON MIND (3rd) Lasting Breath (1st) Mordenkainen's Celerity (4th) 
Lesser Sign of Sealing (3rd) Light (1st) Otiluke's Resilient Sphere (4th) 
Nondetection (3rd) Mending (1st) Plant Growth (4th) 
Protecti ion from Amorphs (3rd) Message (1st) Polymorph Other (4th) 
Protection from Evil, 10' Radius/Protection Metamorphose Liquids (1st) Polymorph Self (4th) 
from Good, 10' Radius (3rd) . Murdock's Feathery Flyer (1st) Rainbow Pattern (4th) 
Protection from Normal Missiles (3rd) Shocking Grasp (1st) Rary's Mnemonic Enhancer (4th) 
FIRE AURA (4th) Spider Climb (1st) Solid Fog (4th) 
Fire Trap (4th) Alter Self (2nd) Stoneskin (4th) 
HALO OF Eves (4th) " Cat's Grace (2nd) Turn Pebble to Boulder/Turn Boulder to Peb- 
Minor Globe of Invulnerability (4th) Continual Light (2nd) ble (Ath) 
Minor Spell Turning (4th) Darkness, 15' radius (2nd) Ultravision (4th) 
OTILUKE’S DISPELLING SCREEN (4th) Deeppockets (2nd) Vacancy (4th) 


180 


Wizard Spells by School 
He 


Airy Water (5th) Estate Transference (9th) Prismatic Spray (7th) 
Animal Growth/Shrink Animal (5th) Glorious Transmutation (9th) Seven-eyes (7th) 
Avoidance/Attraction (5th) Mordenkainen's Disjunction (9th) Maze (8th) 


Distance Distortion (5th) 
Extension II (5th) 

Fabricate (5th) 

Far Reaching III (5th) 
Improved Blink (5th) 
Leomund's Hidden Lodge (5th) 
Leomund's Secret Chest (5th) 
Lower Resistance (5th) 


MORDENKAINEN'S PRIVATE SANCTUM (5th) 


Passwall (5th) 

RARY's TELEPATHIC BOND (5th) 
Rusting Grasp (5th) 

Stone Shape (5th) 

Telekinesis (5th) 


Transmute Rock to Mud/Transmute Mud to 


Rock (5th) 

Claws of the Umber Hulk (6th) 

Control Weather (6th) 

Death Fog (6th) 

Dilation II (6th) 

Disintegrate (6th) 

Extension III (6th) 

Glassee (6th) 

Guards and Wards (6th) 

Lower Water/Raise Water (6th) 

Mirage Arcana (6th) 

Mordenkainen's Lucubration (6th) 

Move Earth (6th) 

Otiluke's Freezing Sphere (6th) 

Part Water (6th) 

Project Image (6th) 

Stone to Flesh/Flesh to Stone (6th) 

Superior Magnetism (6th) 

Tenser's Transformation (6th) 

TENTACLES (6th) 

Transmute Water to Dust/Improved Create 
Water (6th) 

Duo-dimension (7th) 

Hatch the Stone from the Egg (7th) 

Mordenkainen's Magnificent Mansion 
(7th) 

Phase Door (7th) 

Reverse Gravity (7th) 

Statue (7th) 

Suffocate (7th) 

Vanish (7th) 

Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting (8th) 

Airboat (8th) 

Glassteel (8th) 

Incendiary Cloud (8th) 

Iron Body (8th) 

Otiluke's Telekinetic Sphere (8th) 

Polymorph Any Object (8th) 

Sink (8th) 


Shape Change (9th) 
Succor/Call (9th) 


Temporal Stasis/Temporal Reinstatement (9th) 


Time Stop (9th) 


Conjuration/Summoning 
Barred: Diviners, invokers 


Armor (1st) 

Conjure Spell Component (1st) 

Find Familiar (1st) 

Grease (1st) 

Mount (1st) 

Unseen Servant (1st) 

CHOKE (2nd) 

Glitterdust (2nd) 

Melf's Acid Arrow (2nd) 

Summon Swarm (2nd) 

Wall of Gloom (2nd) 

Bands of Sirellyn (3rd) 

Flame Arrow (3rd) 

Monster Summoning I (3rd) 

Phantom Steed (3rd) 

Sepia Snake Sigil (3rd) 

SNAPPING TEETH (3rd) 

Solvent of Corrosion (3rd) 

Watery Double (3rd) 

Conjure Elemental-Kin (4th) 

DUPLICATE (4th) 

Evard's Black Tentacles (4th) 

HALO oF Eyes (4th) 

Monster Summoning II (4th) 

Summon Lycanthrope (4th) 

Vitriolic Sphere (4th) 

Conjure Elemental (5th) 

Khazid's Procurement (5th) 

Leomund’s Secret Chest (5th) 

Monster Summoning III (5th) 

Mordenkainen's Faithful Hound (5th) 

Summon Shadow (5th) 

Vile Venom (5th) 

WALL OF Bones (5th) 

Conjure Animals (6th) 

Ensnarement (6th) 

Forest's Fiery Constrictor (6th) 

Invisible Stalker (6th) 

Monster Summoning IV (6th) 

TENTACLES (6th) 

Drawmij's Instant Summons (7th) 

Intensify Summoning (7th) 

Limited Wish (7th) 

Monster Summoning V (7th) 

Mordenkainen's Magnificent Mansion 
(7th) 


181 


Monster Summoning VI (8th) 
Power Word, Blind (8th) 
Prismatic Wall (8th) 

Symbol (8th) 

Trap the Soul (8th) 

Gate (9th) 

Monster Summoning VII (9th) 
Power Word, Kill (9th) 
Prismatic Sphere (9th) 

Sphere of Ultimate Destruction (9th) 
Wish (9th) 


Divination 
Barred: Conjurers, force mages, song 
wizards 


DETECT DISEASE (1st) 

Detect Phase (1st) 

Detect Secret Passages & Portals (1st) 

Detect Undead (1st) 

DIVINING Rob (1st) 

DEATH RECALL (2nd) 

Detect Evil/Detect Good (2nd) 

Detect Invisibility (2nd) 

DETECT Lire (2nd) 

ESP (2nd) 

Know Alignment/Undetectable Alignment 
(2nd) 

Locate Object/Obscure Object (2nd) 

Past Life (2nd) 

Alamir's Fundamental Breakdown (3rd) 

Clairaudience (3rd) 

Clairvoyance (3rd) 

Wizard Sight (3rd) 

Detect Scrying (4th) 

Locate Creature (4th) 

Magic Mirror (4th) 

Contact Other Plane (5th) 

False Vision (5th) 

Khazid's Procurement (5th) 

KNow VALUE (5th) 

Prying Eyes (5th) 

RaRY's TELEPATHIC BOND (5th) 

Legend Lore (6th) 

True Seeing (6th) 

Vision (7th) 

Analyze Dweomer (8th) 

Screen (8th) 

Foresight (9th) 


Enchantment/Charm 
Barred: Invokers, necromancers, dimen- 
sionalists, artificers, geometers 


& Charm Person (1st) Programmed Amnesia (9th) Mass Invisibility (7th) 


DIVINING Rob (1st) Succor/Call (9th) Sequester (7th) 
Friends (1st) Shadow Walk (7th) 
Hypnotism (1st) Illusion/Phantasm Shadowcat (7th) 

Sleep (1st) Barred: Abjurers, necromancers, Simulacrum (7th) 
Taunt (1st) alchemists, geometers Screen (8th) 

Bind (2nd) Weird (9th) 
Deeppockets (2nd) Audible Glamer (1st) 

Forget (2nd) Change Self (1st) Invocation/Evocation 


Insatiable Thirst (2nd) 

Ray of Enfeeblement (2nd) 

Scare (2nd) 

Tasha's Uncontrollable Hideous 
Laughter (2nd) 

BONE CLUB (3rd) 

DeLay DEATH (3rd) 

Hold Person (3rd) 

Minor Malison (3rd) 

Suggestion (3rd) 

Watery Double (3rd) 

Charm Monster (4th) 

Confusion (4th) 

Emotion (4th) 

Enchanted Weapon (4th) 

Fire Charm (4th) 

Fumble (4th) 

Greater Malison (4th) 

Leomund’s Secure Shelter (4th) 

Lesser Geas (4th) 

Magic Mirror (4th) 

Chaos (5th) 

Domination (5th) 

Fabricate (5th) 

Feeblemind (5th) 

Hold Monster (5th) 

Leomund’s Hidden Lodge (5th) 

Leomund's Lamentable Belaborment 
(5th) 

Magic Staff (5th) 

Mind Fog (5th) 

BLACKMANTLE (6th) 

Eyebite (6th) 

Geas (6th) 

Guards and Wards (6th) 

Mass Suggestion (6th) 

Charm Plants (7th) 

Descent into Madness (7th) 

Hatch the Stone from the Egg (7th) 

Shadow Walk (7th) 

Steal Enchantment (7th) 

Airboat (8th) 

Antipathy-sympathy (8th) 

Binding (8th) 

Demand (8th) 

Mass Charm (8th) 

Otto's Irresistible Dance (8th) 

Sink (Bth) 

Mordenkainen's Disjunction (9th) 


Conrsr VISAGE (1st) 

Nystul's Magic Aura (1st) 

Phantasmal Force (1st) 

Spook (1st) 

Ventriloquism (1st) 

Blindness (2nd) 

Blur (2nd) 

Deafness (2nd) 

Fool's Gold (2nd) 

Hypnotic Pattern (2nd) 

Improved Phantasmal Force (2nd) 

Invisibility (2nd) 

Leomund's Trap (2nd) 

Mirror Image (2nd) 

Misdirection (2nd) 

Whispering Wind (2nd) 

Illusionary Script (3rd) 

Invisibility, 10’ Radius (3rd) 

Lorloveim's Creeping Shadow (3rd) 

Phantom Steed (3rd) 

Spectral Force (3rd) 

Wraithform (3rd) 

Fear (4th) 

Hallucinatory Terrain (4th) 

Illusionary Wall (4th) 

Improved Invisibility (4th) 

Minor Creation (4th) 

Phantasmal Killer (4th) 

Rainbow Pattern (4th) 

Shadow Monsters (Ath) 

Vacancy (4th) 

Advanced Illusion (5th) 

Demishadow Monsters (5th) 

Dream/Nightmare (5th) 

Major Creation (5th) 

Seeming (5th) 

Shadow Door (5th) 

Shadow Magic (5th) 

Demishadow Magic (6th) 

Eyebite (6th) 

Lorloveim's Shadowy Transformation 
(6th) 

Mirage Arcana (6th) 

Mislead (6th) 

Permanent Illusion (6th) 

Programmed Illusion (6th) 

Project Image (6th) 

Shades (6th) 

Veil (6th) 


Barred: Conjurers, enchanters, illusion- 
ists, mentalists, shadow mages, song 
wizards 


Alarm (1st) 

Copy (1st) 

CHROMATIC ORB (1st) 

Dictation (1st) 

Fire Burst (1st) 

Magic Missile (1st) 

Shield (1st) 

Tenser's Floating Disc (1st) 

Wall of Fog (1st) 

Flaming Sphere (2nd) 

ICE KNIFE (2nd) 

Stinking Cloud (2nd) 

Web (2nd) 

Augmentation I (3rd) 

Fireball (3rd) 

INVISIBLE Malt (3rd) 

Lance of Disruption (3rd) 

Lightning Bolt (3rd) 

Melf’s Minute Meteors (3rd) 

Wall of Water (3rd) 

Dig (4th) 

Divination Enhancement (4th) 

Fire Shield (4th) 

Fire Trap (4th) 

Ice Storm (4th) 

Mordenkainen’s Celerity (4th) 

Mordenkainen's Force Missiles (4th) 

OTILUKE’S DISPELLING SCREEN (4th) 

Otiluke’s Resilient Sphere (4th) 

Shout (4th) 

Thunder Staff (4th) 

Wall of Fire (4th) 

Wall of Ice (4th) 

WIND BREATH (4th) 

Bigby’s Interposing Hand (5th) 

Cloudkill (5th) 

Cone of Cold (5th) 

Dream (5th) 

Leomund’s Lamentable Belaborment 
(5th) 

Sending (5th) 

Tenser’s Destructive Resonance (5th) 

Wall of Force (5th) 

Wall of Iron (5th) 

Wall of Stone (5th) 


Wizard & 


Bigby’s Forceful Hand (6th) 
Chain Lightning (6th) 
Contingency (6th) 

Death Fog (6th) 

Dimensional Blade (6th) 

Guards and Wards (6th) 
Otiluke's Freezing Sphere (6th) 
Tenser’s Transformation (6th) 
Acid Storm (7th) 

Bigby’s Grasping Hand (7th) 
Delayed Blast Fireball (7th) 
Forcecage (7th) 

Hatch the Stone from the Egg (7th) 
Limited Wish (7th) 

Malec-Keth’s Flame Fist (7th) 
Mordenkainen's Sword (7th) 
Persistence (7th) 

Bigby's Clenched Fist (8th) 
Binding (8th) 

Demand (8th) 

Gunther's Kaleidoscopic Strike (8th) 
Homunculus Shield (8th) 
Incendiary Cloud (8th 

Otiluke's Telekinetic Sphere (8th) 
Bigby's Crushing Hand (9th) 
Chain Contingency (9th) 
Elemental Aura (9th) 

Energy Drain (9th) 

Meteor Swarm (9th) 


Necromancy 
Barred: Enchanters, illusionists, 


transmuters, dimensionalists, mental- 
ists, alchemists, artificers, song wiz- 


ards 


Chill Touch (1st) 
CORPSE VISAGE (1st) 
Detect Undead (1st) 
Ray of Fatigue (1st) 
CHOKE (2nd) 

DEATH RECALL (2nd) 
GHOUL ToucH (2nd) 
Spectral Hand (2nd) 
BONE CLUB (3rd) 
DELAY DEATH (3rd) 
Feign Death (3rd) 
Hold Undead (3rd) 
HOVERING SKULL (3rd) 
PAIN TOUCH (3rd) 
Spirit Armor (3rd) 
Vampiric Touch (3rd) 
Contagion (4th) 
Enervation (4th) 
Mask of Death (4th) 
Animate Dead (5th) 
FORCE SHAPECHANGE (5th) 


Mummy Ror (5th) 

Summon Shadow (5th) 
THROBBING BONES (5th) 

WALL OF Bones (5th) 

Arrow of Bone (6th) 
BLACKMANTLE (6th) 

Bloodstone’s Spectral Steed (6th) 
DEAD MAN'S EYES (6th) 

Death Spell (6th) 

Reincarnation (6th) 

Trollish Fortitude (6th) 
Bloodstone's Frightful Joining (7th) 
Control Undead (7th) 

Finger of Death (7th) 

Intensify Summoning (7th) 
Suffocate (7th) 

ZOMBIE DOUBLE (7th) 
Abi-Dalzim’s Horrid Wilting (8th) 
Clone (8th) 

DEFOLIATE (8th) 

Heart of Stone (8th) 

Homunculus Shield (8th) 
SHADOW FORM (8th) 

Energy Drain (9th) 

Wail of the Banshee (9th) 


Elemental Air 
Barred: Earth elementalists 


Feather Fall (1st) 
Lasting Breath (1st) 
Wall of Fog (1st) 

Fog Cloud (2nd) 

Ride the Wind (2nd) 
Stinking Cloud (2nd) 
Whispering Wind (2nd) 


Alamir's Fundamental Breakdown (3rd) 


Gust of Wind (3rd) 

Lance of Disruption (3rd) 
Water Breathing/Air Breathing (3rd) 
Wind Wall (3rd) 

Conjure Elemental-Kin (4th) 
Solid Fog (4th) 

Airy Water (5th) 

Cloudkill (5th) 

Conjure Elemental (5th) 
Control Weather (6th) 
Death Fog (6th) 
Neutralize Gas (7th) 
Suffocate (7th) 

Airboat (8th) 

Incendiary Cloud (8th) 
Elemental Aura (9th) 


Elemental Earth 
Barred: Air elementalists 
Fist of Stone (1st) 


185 


Augmentation II (6th) Magic Jar (5th) Fool's Gold (2nd) $8 


Maximilian's Earthen Grasp (2nd) 

Alamir's Fundamental Breakdown (3rd) 

Maximilian's Stony Grasp (3rd) 

Conjure Elemental-Kin (4th) 

Dig (4th) 

Stoneskin (4th) 

Turn Pebble to Boulder/Turn Boulder to 
Pebble (4th) 

Conjure Elemental (5th) 

Distance Distortion (5th) 

Passwall (5th) 

Stone Shape (5th) 

Transmute Rock to Mud/Transmute Mud to 
Rock (5th) 

Wall of Iron (5th) 

Wall of Stone (5th) 

Glassee (6th) 

Move Earth (6th) 

Stone to Flesh/Flesh to Stone (6th) 

Transmute Water to Dust/Improved Create 
Water (6th) 

Hatch the Stone from the Egg (7th) 

Statue (7th) 

Glassteel (8th) 

Iron Body (8th) 

Sink (8th) 

Crystalbrittle (9th) 

Elemental Aura (9th) 


Elemental Fire 
Barred: Water elementalists 


Affect Normal Fires (1st) 
Burning Hands (1st) 
Dancing Lights (1st) 
Fire Burst (1st) 

Flaming Sphere (2nd) 
Pyrotechnics (2nd) 
Alamir’s Fundamental Breakdown (3rd) 
Fireball (3rd) 

Flame Arrow (3rd) 

Melf's Minute Meteors (3rd) 
Conjure Elemental-Kin (4th) 
Fire Charm (4th) 

Fire Shield (4th) 

Fire Trap (4th) 

Wall of Fire (4th) 

Conjure Elemental (5th) 
Proofing vs. Combustion (5th) 
Forest's Fiery Constrictor (6th) 
Delayed Blast Fireball (7th) 
Malec-Keth’s Flame Fist (7th) 
Incendiary Cloud (8th) 
Elemental Aura (9th) 

Meteor Swarm (9th) 


. Appendix 3 


Elemental Water 
Barred: Fire elementalists 


Metamorphose Liquids (1st) 

Insatiable Thirst (2nd) 

Alamir's Fundamental Breakdown (3rd) 

Wall of Water (3rd) 

Water Breathing/Air Breathing (3rd) 

Watery Double (3rd) 

Conjure Elemental-Kin (4th) 

Ice Storm (4th) 

Vitriolic Sphere (4th) 

Wall of Ice (4th) 

Airy Water (5th) 

Cone of Cold (5th) 

Conjure Elemental (5th) 

Rusting Grasp (5th) 

Transmute Rock to Mud/Transmute Mud to 
Rock (5th) 

Vile Venom (5th) 

Lower Water (6th) 

Otiluke’s Freezing Sphere (6th) 

Part Water (6th) 

Transmute Water to Dust/Improved Create 
Water (6th) 

Acid Storm (7th) 

Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting (8th) 

Elemental Aura (9th) 


Dimension 
Barred: by philosophy 


Detect Phase (1st) 

Enlarge/Reduce (1st) 

Gaze Reflection (1st) 

Deeppockets (2nd) 

Displace Self (2nd) 

Rope Trick (2nd) 

Blink (3rd) 

Dimension Door (4th) 

Distance Distortion (5th) 

Improved Blink (5th) 

Leomund's Secret Chest (5th) 

Dimensional Blade (6th) 

Etherealness (6th) 

Drawmij's Instant Summons (7th) 

Duo-dimension (7th) 

Mordenkainen's Magnificent Mansion 
(7th) 

Phase Door (7th) 

Shadow Walk (7th) 

Maze (8th) 

Gate (9th) 


Sphere of Ultimate Destruction (9th) 
Time Stop (9th) 


Force 


Barred: by philosophy 


Armor (1st) 

Magic Missile (1st) 

Shield (1st) 

Tenser's Floating Disc (1st) 
Levitate (2nd) 

INVISIBLE MAIL (3rd) 

Lance of Disruption (3rd) 
Mordenkainen's Force Missiles (4th) 
Otiluke’s Resilient Sphere (4th) 
Bigby’s Interposing Hand (5th) 
Telekinesis (5th) 

Tenser’s Destructive Resonance (5th) 
Wall of Force (5th) 

Bigby’s Forceful Hand (6th) 
Repulsion (6th) 

Bigby’s Grasping Hand (7th) 
Forcecage (7th) 

Mordenkainen’s Sword (7th) 
Bigby’s Clenched Fist (8th) 
Otiluke’s Telekinetic Sphere (8th) 
Bigby’s Crushing Hand (9th) 


Mentalism 
Barred: by philosophy 


Charm Person (1st) 

Hypnotism (1st) 

Spook (1st) 

ESP (2nd) 

Forget (2nd) 
Clairaudience (3rd) 
Clairvoyance (3rd) 

TRON MIND (3rd) 
Suggestion (3rd) 
Charm Monster (4th) 
Phantasmal Killer (4th) 

Psychic Protection (4th) 
Rary’s Mnemonic Enhancer (4th) 
Domination (5th) 
Feeblemind (5th) 

Magic Jar (5th) 

Sending (5th) 

Eyebite (6th) 

Geas (6th) 

Mass Suggestion (6th) 

Tower of Mental Resistance (6th) 
Descent into Madness (7th) 
Demand (8th) 

Mind Blank (8th) 


Programmed Amnesia (9th) 


Shadow 
Barred: by philosophy 


Chill Touch (1st) 
Sleep (1st) 
Spook (1st) 

Blur (2nd) 


184 


Continual Darkness (2nd) 

Darkness, 15’ Radius (2nd) 

Ray of Enfeeblement (2nd) 

Scare (2nd) 

Spectral Hand (2nd) 

Wall of Gloom (2nd) 

Lorloveim’s Creeping Shadow (3rd) 

Nondetection (3rd) 

Phantom Steed (3rd) 

SPIRIT ARMOR (3rd) 

Wraithform (3rd) 

Dimension Door (4th) 

Enervation (4th) 

Evard’s Black Tentacles (4th) 

Fear (4th) 

Minor Creation (4th) 

Shadow Monsters (4th) 

Demishadow Monsters (5th) 

Major Creation (5th) 

Mordenkainen’s Faithful Hound (5th) 

Passwall (5th) 

Shadow Door (5th) 

Shadow Magic (5th) 

BLACKMANTLE (6th) 

Bloodstone’s Spectral Steed (6th) 

Demishadow Magic (6th) 

Lorloveim’s Shadowy Transformation 
(6th) 

Shades (6th) 

Duo-dimension (7th) 

Phase Door (7th) 

Shadowcat (7th) 

Shadow Walk (7th) 

Maze (8th) 

SHADOWFORM (8th) 

Energy Drain (9th) 


Alchemy 
Barred: by philosophy 


Affect Normal Fires (1st) 

Fire Burst (1st) 

Grease (1st) 

Metamorphose Liquids (1st) 

Patternweave (1st) 

Protection from Evil/Protection from Good 
(1st) 

Fool's Gold (2nd) 

Glitterdust (2nd) 

Melf's Acid Arrow (2nd) 

Pyrotechnics (2nd) 

Sense Shifting (2nd) 

Stinking Cloud (2nd) 

Alamir's Fundamental Breakdown (3rd) 

Flame Arrow (3rd) 

Melf's Minute Meteors (3rd) 

Protection from Evil, 10° Radius/Protection 
from Good, 10° Radius (3rd) 


Wizard Spells by School 
an a o entof Corrosion Qn) ————— | Erase qis) ~= | Suggestion Grd) 


Enchanted Weapon (4th) Shield (1st) Charm Monster (4th) 
Fire Charm (4th) Hornung’s Baneful Deflector (1st) Confusion (4th) 
Fire Trap (4th) Hypnotic Pattern (2nd) Emotion (4th) 
Vitriolic Sphere (4th) Moon Rune (2nd) Lesser Geas (4th) 
Cloudkill (5th) BONE CLUB (3rd) Monster Summoning II (4th) 
Fabricate (5th) Explosive Runes (3rd) Shout (4th) 
Rusting Grasp (5th) Lesser Sign of Sealing (3rd) Summon Lycanthrope (4th) 
Transmute Rock to Mud/Transmute Mud to Secret Page (3rd) Chaos (5th) 

Rock (5th) Sepia Snake Sigil (3rd) Dismissal (5th) 
Vile Venom (5th) Conjure Elemental-Kin (4th) Hold Monster (5th) 
Death Fog (6th) Fire Trap (4th) Leomund’s Lamentable Belaborment 
Glassee (6th) Minor Globe of Invulnerability (4th) (5th) 
Stone to Flesh/Flesh to Stone (6th) Rainbow Pattern (4th) Monster Summoning III (5th) 
Transmute Water to Dust/Improved Create There/Not There (4th) Control Weather (6th) 

Water (6th) Thunder Staff (4th) Mass Suggestion (6th) 
Acid Storm (7th) Animate Dead (5th) Monster Summoning IV (6th) 
Hatch the Stone from the Egg (7th) Avoidance (5th) Banishment (7th) 
Neutralize Gas (7th) Conjure Elemental (5th) Charm Plants (7th) 
Statue (7th) INVULNERABILITY TO NORMAL WEAPONS Monster Summoning V (7th) 
Glassteel (8th) (5th) Power Word, Stun (7th) 
Incendiary Cloud (8th) Khazid's Procurement (5th) Spell Shape (7th) 
Crystalbrittle (9th) MORDENKAINEN'S PRIVATE SANCTUM (5th) Binding (8th) 
Glorious Transmutation (9th) Von Gasik's Refusal (5th) Mass Charm (8th) 


Artifice 
Barred: by philosophy 


CHROMATIC ORB (1st) 
DIVINING Rob (1st) 
Mending (1st) 

Bind (2nd) 

Ice KNIFE (2nd) 
Leomund's Trap (2nd) 
Moon Rune (2nd) 
BoNE CLUB (3rd) 
Explosive Runes (3rd) 
Flame Arrow (3rd) 
Item (3rd) 


Melf's Minute Meteors (3rd) 


SNAPPING TEETH (3rd) 
Enchanted Weapon (4th) 
Magic Mirror (4th) 
Thunder Staff (4th) 
Magic Staff (5th) 

Arrow of Bone (6th) 
Dimensional Blade (6th) 
Steal Enchantment (7th) 
Analyze Dweomer (8th) 
Antipathy-sympathy (8th) 
Shape Change (9th) 


Geometry 
Barred: by philosophy 


Alarm (1st) 
Copy (ist) 
Dictation (1st) 


Ensnarement (6th) 

Globe of Invulnerability (6th) 

Greater Sign of Sealing (6th) 

Guards and Wards (6th) 

INVULNERABILITY TO MAGICAL WEAPONS 
(6th) 

FEAR WARD (7th) 

Phase Door (7th) 

Sequester (7th) 

Vanish (7th) 

Binding (8th) 

Maze (8th) 

Symbol (8th) 

Trap the Soul (8th) 

Gate (9th) 

Shape Change (9th) 


Song 
Barred: by philosophy 


Audible Glamer (1st) 

Charm Person (1st) 

Find Familiar (1st) 

Friends (1st) 

Sleep (1st) 

Taunt (1st) 

Forget (2nd) 

Summon Swarm (2nd) 

Tasha's Uncontrollable Hideous 
Laughter (2nd) 

Whispering Wind (2nd) 

Fireflow (3rd) 

Hold Person (3rd) 

Monster Summoning I (3rd) 


185 


Monster Summoning VI (8th) 
Otto's Irresistible Dance (8th) 
Power Word, Blind (8th) 
Monster Summoning VII (8th) 
Power Word, Kill (9th) 

Wail of the Banshee (9th) 


Wild Magic 

Barred: All except wild mages 
Hornung's Guess (1st) 

Nahal's Reckless Dweomer (1st) 
Patternweave (1st) 

Chaos Shield (2nd) 

Hornung's Baneful Deflector (2nd) 
Nahal's Nonsensical Nullifier (2nd) 
Alternate Reality (3rd) 

Fireflow (3rd) 

Fool's Speech (3rd) 

There/Not There (4th) 

Unluck (4th) 

Vortex (5th) 

Waveform (5th) 

Wildshield (6th) 

Wildstrike (6th) 

Hornung's Surge Selector (7th) 
Spell Shape (7th) 

Hornung's Random Dispatcher (8th) 
Wildzone (8th) 

Stabilize (9th) 

Wildfire (9th) 

Wildwind (9th) 


Appendix 4 


In the PHB, clerics have major access 
to all, astral, charm, combat, creation, 


divination, guardian, healing, necroman- 


tic, protection, summoning, sun, and 
minor access to elemental. 

Revision: Clerics lose access to sun, 
elemental air, and elemental fire. They 
retain minor access to elemental water 
and elemental earth. 


Previously, druids had major access to 


all, animal, elemental, healing, plant, 
weather, and minor access to divination. 

Revision: Druids lose access to the 
sphere of divination. They gain major 
access to the sphere of sun. 


* Cooperative magic spells. Bold spells 
appear in the Tome of Magic. Italicized 


spells are reversible. Underlined spells 


are introduced in Appendix 2 of this 
book. As mentioned in Chapter 3, 
some spells have been added to the 
sphere of all. Also, other spheres have 
been reorganized. 


All 
(Major: any priest) 


Bless/Curse (1st) 

Combine (1st) 

Detect Magic (1st) 

Orison (1st) 

Purify Food & Drink/Putrefy Food & Drink 
(1st) 

Chant (2nd) 

Mystic Transfer* (2nd) 

Sanctify/Defile* (2nd) 

Dispel Magic (3rd) 

Remove Curse/Bestow Curse (3rd) 

Focus* (4th) 

Tongues (4th) 

Uplift* (4th) 

Atonement (5th) 

Commune (5th) 

Meld* (5th) 

Quest (5th) 

True Seeing/False Seeing (5th) 

Speak with Monsters (6th) 

Gate (7th) 

Animal 

(Major: shaman, druid) 


Animal Friendship (1st) 

Calm Animals (1st) 
Invisibility to Animals (1st) 
Locate Animals or Plants (1st) 
Charm Person or Mammal (2nd) 
Messenger (2nd) 

Snake Charm (2nd) 

Speak with Animals (2nd) 
Control Animal (3rd) 

Hold Animal (3rd) 

Summon Insects (3rd) 


Animal Summoning I (4th) 
Call Woodland Beings (4th) 
Giant Insect (4th) 

Repel Insects (4th) 

Animal Growth (5th) 

Animal Summoning II (5th) 
Commune with Nature (5th) 
Insect Plague (5th) 

Animal Summoning III (6th) 
Antianimal Shell (6th) 
Creeping Doom (7th) 
Reincarnate (7th) 


Astral 
(Major: cleric) 


Astral Celerity (1st) 

Speak with Astral Traveler (1st) 
Astral Awareness (2nd) 

Ethereal Barrier (2nd) 

Astral Window (3rd) 
Etherealness (3rd) 

Join with Astral Traveler (4th) 
Plane Shift (5th) 

Astral Spell (7th) 


Chaos 
(Major: chaotic crusaders) 


Battlefate (1st) 

Mistaken Missive (1st) 
Chaos Ward (2nd) 
Dissension's Feast (2nd) 
Miscast Magic (3rd) 
Random Causality (3rd) 
Chaotic Combat (4th) 
Chaotic Sleep (4th) 
Inverted Ethics (4th) 
Chaotic Commands (5th) 
Entropy Shield (6th) 
Uncontrolled Weather (7th) 


Charm 
(Major: clerics) 


Command (1st) 

Remove Fear/Cause Fear (1st) 
Sanctuary (1st) 

Enthrall (2nd) 

Hold Person (2nd) 

Music of the Spheres Qnd) 
Snake Charm (2nd) 

Dictate (3rd) 

Emotion Control (3rd) 

Cloak of Bravery/Cloak of Fear (4th) 
Free Action (4th) 

Imbue with Spell Ability (4th) 
Command Monster (6th) 
Confusion (7th) 

Exaction (7th) 


186 


Combat 
(Major: clerics, crusaders; Minor: 
monks) 


Command (1st) 

Magical Stone (1st) 

Aid (2nd) 

Spiritual Hammer (2nd) 
Prayer (3rd) 

Unearthly Choir* (3rd) 
Recitation (4th) 

Flame Strike (5th) 

Righteous Wrath of the Faithful (5th) 
Spiritual Wrath* (6th) 

Word of Recall (6th) 

Holy Word/Unholy Word (7th) 


Creation 
(Major: clerics) 


Light/Darkness (1st) 

Create Holy Symbol (2nd) 

Continual Light/Continual Darkness (3rd) 
Create Food & Water (3rd) 

Blessed Abundance (5th) 

Blade Barrier (6th) 

Heroes’ Feast (6th) 

The Great Circle/The Black Circle* (6th) 


Divination 
(Major: clerics, monks) 


Analyze Balance (1st) 

Detect Evil/Detect Good (1st) 

Detect Poison (1st) 

Augury (2nd) 

Detect Charm/Undetectable Charm (2nd) 
Find Traps (2nd) 

Detect Spirits (3rd) 
Extradimensional Detection (3rd) 
Locate Object/Obscure Object (3rd) 
Speak with Dead (3rd) 

Detect Lie/Undetectable Lie (Ath) 
Divination (4th) 

Omniscient Eye (4th) 
Consequence (5th) 

Magic Font (5th) 

Find the Path/Lose the Path (6th) 
Stone Tell (6th) 

Divine Inspiration (7th) 


Elemental, Air 
(Major: druids) 


Wind Column (1st) 

Dust Devil (2nd) 

Wind Servant (3rd) 

Zone of Sweet Air (3rd) 
Windborne (4th) 

Air Walk (5th) 

Cloud of Purification (5th) 
Control Winds (5th) 


Priest S 


Conjure Air Elemental (7th) 
Wind Walk (7th) 


Elemental, Earth 
(Major: druids; Minor: clerics) 


Strength of Stone (1st) 

Soften Earth and Stone (2nd) 

Meld into Stone (3rd) 

Stone Shape (3rd) 

Adamantite Mace (4th) 

Spike Stones (5th) 

Transmute Rock to Mud/Transmute Mud to 
Rock (5th) 

Stone Tell (6th) 

Animate Rock (7th) 

Antimineral Shell (7th) 

Conjure Earth Elemental (7th) 

Earthquake (7th) 

Transmute Metal to Wood (7th) 


Elemental, Fire 
(Major: druids) 


Firelight (1st) 

Log of Everburning (1st) 
Fire Trap (2nd) 

Flame Blade (2nd) 

Heat Metal/Chill Metal (2nd) 
Produce Flame (2nd) 

Flame Walk (3rd) 

Protection from Fire (3rd) 
Pyrotechnics (3rd) 

Produce Fire/Quench Fire (4th) 
Animate Flame (5th) 

Wall of Fire (5th) 

Conjure Fire Elemental (6th) 
Fire Seeds (6th) 

Chariot of Sustarre (7th) 
Fire Storm (7th) 


Elemental, Water 
(Major: druids; Minor: clerics) 


Create Water/Destroy Water (1st) 

Watery Fist (2nd) 

Water Breathing/Air Breathing (3rd) 

Water Walk (3rd) 

Lower Water/Raise Water (4th) 

Reflecting Pool (4th) 

Produce Ice (5th) 

Part Water (6th) 

Transmute Water to Dust/Improved Create 
Water (6th) 

Conjure Water Elemental (7th) 


Tsunami (7th) 


Guardian 
(Major: clerics, crusaders, monks) 


Blessed Watchfulness (1st) 


Sacred Guardian (1st) 

Iron Vigil (2nd) 

Silence, 15' Radius (2nd) 

Wyvern Watch (2nd) 

Continual Light/Continual Darkness (3rd) 

Glyph of Warding (3rd) 

Abjure (4th) 

Dimensional Anchor (4th) 

Dispel Evil/Dispel Good (5th) 

Unceasing Vigilance of the Holy Sen- 
tinel (5th) 

Blade Barrier (6th) 

Forbiddance (6th) 

Symbol (7th) 


Healing 
(Major: clerics, crusaders, druids; 
Minor: monks, shamans) 


Cure Light Wounds/Cause Light Wounds 
(1st) 

Cure Moderate Wounds/Cause. 
Moderate Wounds (2nd) 

Slow Poison (2nd) 

Cure Blindness or Deafness/Cause Blindness 
or Deafness (3rd) 

Cure Disease/Cause Disease (3rd) 

Hold Poison (3rd) 

Repair Injury (3rd) 

Cure Serious Wounds/Cause Serious 
Wounds (4th) 

Fortify* (4th) 

Neutralize Poison/Poison (4th) 

Cure Critical Wounds/Cause Critical 
Wounds (5th) 

Heal/Harm (6th) 

Regenerate (7th) 


Law 
(Major: lawful crusaders) 


Command (1st) 


Protection from Chaos (1st) 
Calm Chaos (2nd) 


Enthrall (2nd) 
Hold Person (2nd) 


Dictate (3rd) 
Rigid Thinking (3rd) 


Strength of One (3rd) 


Compulsive Order (4th) 


Defensive Harmony (4th) 


Champion's Strength (5th) 
Impeding Permission (5th) 


Legal Thoughts (6th) 


Necromantic 
(Major: clerics; Minor: crusaders, 
monks) 


Dispel Fatigue (1st) 
Invisibility to Undead (1st) 


187 


pells by Sphere 
a i) 


Restore Strength (2nd) 
Animate Dead (3rd) 


Feign Death (3rd) 

Negative Plane Protection (3rd) 
Remove Paralysis (3rd) 

Speak with Dead (3rd) 


Suspended Animation (4th) 


Unfailing Endurance (4th) 
Raise Dead (5th) 


Restoration (7th) 
Resurrection (7th) 


Numbers 
(Major: Monks) 


Analyze Balance (1st) 

Calculate (1st) 

Personal Reading (1st) 

Moment (2nd) 

Music of the Spheres (2nd) 
Etherealness (3rd) 
Extradimensional Detection (3rd) 
Moment Reading (3rd) 
Telethaumaturgy (3rd) 

Addition (4th) 

Dimensional Folding (4th) 
Probability Control (4th) 
Consequence (5th) 

Dimensional Translocation (5th) 
Extradimensional Manipulation (5th) 
Extradimensional Pocket (5th) 
Physical Mirror (6th) 

Seclusion (6th) 

Spacewarp (7th) 

Timelessness (7th) 


Plant 
(Major: druids; Minor: shamans) 


Entangle (1st) 

Locate Animals or Plants (1st) 
Pass without Trace (1st) 
Shillelagh (1st) 

Barkskin (2nd) 

Detect Snares & Pits (2nd) 
Goodberry/Badberry (2nd) 
Trip (2nd) 

Warp Wood (2nd) 

Plant Growth (3rd) 

Slow Rot (3rd) 

Snare (3rd) 

Spike Growth (3rd) 

Tree (3rd) 

Hallucinatory Forest (4th) 
Hold Plant (4th) 

Plant Door (4th) 

Speak with Plants (4th) 
Sticks to Snakes (4th) 
Antiplant Shell (5th) 
Commune with Nature (5th) 
Pass Plant (5th) 


A dix 4 
& Liveoak (6th) Sol's Searing Orb (6th) Monster Mount (6th) 


Transport Via Plants (6th) Sunray (7th) Hovering Road (7th) 
Turn Wood (6th) 
Wall of Thorns (6th) Thought War 
Changestaff (7th) (Major: Monks) (Major: crusaders) 
Protection Emotion Read (1st) Courage (1st) 
(Major: clerics, shamans; Minor: cru- Thought Capture (1st) Morale (1st) 

saders) Idea (2nd) Emotion Perception (2nd) 

Mind Read (2nd) Rally (2nd) 

Endure Cold/Endure Heat (1st) Emotion Control (3rd) Adaptation (3rd) 
Protection from Evil/Protection from Good Memory Read (3rd) Caltrops (3rd) 

(1st) Telepathy (3rd) Fortify (3rd) 
Ring of Hands/Ring of Woe* (1st) Genius (4th) Entrench (4th) 
Sanctuary (1st) Mental Domination (4th) Leadership/Doubt (4th) 
Resist Acid and Corrosion (2nd) Modify Memory (4th) Tanglefoot/Selective Passage (4th) 
Resist Fire/Resist Cold (2nd) Rapport (4th) Disguise (5th) 
Withdraw (2nd) Solipsism (4th) Illusory Artillery (5th) 
Line of Protection/Line of Destruction Thought Broadcast (4th) Gravity Variation (6th) 

(3rd) Impregnable Mind (5th) Illusory Fortification (7th) 
Magical Vestment (3rd) Memory Wrack (5th) Shadow Engine (7th) 
Negative Plane Protection (3rd) Mindshatter (5th) 

Protection from Evil, 10’ Radius/Prot. from Thoughtwave (5th) Wards 

Good, 10' Radius (3rd) Disbelief (6th) (Major: Crusaders, shamans) 

Remove Paralysis (3rd) Group Mind (6th) 
Spell Immunity (4th) Impervious Sanctity of Mind (7th) Antivermin Barrier (1st) 
Antiplant Shell (5th) Mind Tracker (7th) Weighty Chest (1st) 
Impregnable Mind (5th) Ethereal Barrier (2nd) 
Antianimal Shell (6th) Time Frisky Chest (2nd) 
Antimineral Shell (7th) (Minor: Monks) Zone of Truth (2nd) 
Impervious Sanctity of Mind (7th) Efficacious Monster Ward (3rd) 
Know Age (1st) Invisibility Purge (3rd) 
Summoning Know Time (1st) Squeaking Floor (3rd) 
(Major: clerics, shamans) Hesitation (2nd) Thief's Lament (3rd) 
Nap Qnd) Zone of Sweet Air (3rd) 
Call Upon Faith (1st) Accelerate Healing (3rd) Fire Purge (4th) 
Draw Upon Holy Might (2nd) Choose Future (3rd) Weather Stasis (4th) 
Dust Devil (2nd) Unfailing Premonition (3rd) Barrier of Retention (5th) 
Messenger (2nd) Age Plant (4th) Elemental Forbiddance (5th) 
Summon Animal Spirit (3rd) Body Clock (4th) Grounding (5th) 
Abjure (4th) Age Object (5th) Shrieking Walls (5th) 
Dimensional Translocation (5th) Othertime (5th) Undead Ward (5th) 
Dispel Evil/Dispel Good (5th) Repeat Action (5th) Crushing Walls (6th) 
Aerial Servant (6th) Time Pool (5th) Dragonbane (6th) 
Animate Object (6th) Age Creature (6th) Land of Stability (6th) 
Conjure Animals (6th) Reverse Time (6th) Tentacle Walls (7th) 
Word of Recall (6th) Skip Day (6th) 
Exaction (7th) Age Dragon (7th) Weather 
Mind Tracker (7th) (Major: Druids) 
Spirit of Power (7th) Travelers 
Succor (7th) (Major: Shamans) Faerie Fire (1st) 
Obscurement (1st) 
Sun Know Direction (1st) Call Lightning (3rd) 
(Major: druids) Aura of Comfort (2nd) Weather Prediction (3rd) 
Lighten Load (2nd) Control Temperature, 10’ Radius (4th) 
Light/Darkness (1st) Create Campsite (3rd) Protection from Lightning (4th) 
Sunscorch (1st) Helping Hand (3rd) Weather Stasis (4th) 
Continual Light/Continual Darkness (3rd) Know Customs (3rd) Control Winds (5th) 
Starshine (3rd) Circle of Privacy (4th) Rainbow (5th) 
Blessed Warmth (4th) Tree Steed (4th) Weather Summoning (6th) 
Moonbeam (5th) Clear Path (5th) Control Weather (7th) 
Rainbow (5th) Easy March (5th) 


188 


A 


Ability score requirements 
[1l M ——— 32 
crusader. 555.5592 ciue Ke eS RS esa eae 32 
DH ———MÁ— € 33 
effect specialist .......... ono 18 
MARC ic —YY———Ó— 15 
POT se siete rae óc dco mostre serie 33 
philosophy specialist ............... 17 
Dri d———— 34 
specialist wizard. .......... liess 15 
thaumaturgical specialist ........... 21 
Abjuration 
SchO0L..; uaa irae x Tia Lu 13 
sensory signature... eses eere 119 
AHMAR Lippe ke eA REE 16 
Accelerated spell progression ability. . . . . 43 
Access 
t0 SCIDOIBu: oras yere coo tots 13 
to schools ability........... sese 24 
to.Sphiefes..... oss eec esee obere 29 
to spheres ability... enne? 38 
JACI; quise cdpepie ec ees vi korea 51,71 
CHB A E warecence 130 
critical strike: eere y ERES 125 
environmental effects. ............. 124 
spelleffects «5.9 vv Lene 124 
VISIDIBUy i.e orc esce racc ar 124 
Acquiring proficiencies ........... suse. 51 
Administration proficiency ............. 59 
Ar ECHO oe a aue ctim prenom 14 
Alchemical laboratories 
equipment costs ....... eo er ens 64 
MIZE «oiov SUNG SRS S SU VER RAS 64, 65 
Alchemist... crociera 20, 71, 105 
Hibtatiyiies. oop A 65 
Alchemy 
POREN 010: 0. eee im einn 51 
sage knowledge ................... 54 
SCHOO ses oues etae aes 14 
Allenstion assasin raua ys RE EREN 90 
Alienists and summoners ........... s. 87 
JBSETUEVC uoces dione Rt a 88, 90 
optional systems................64. 87 
recovering spell points ............. 87 
studying spells- sscan 87 
ANAHE ennea 29 
Alms proficiency ns senno aA 59 
Altar 
consecrating «eee renet niinen 68 
JOA 67 
PRATER AIS irao ARN 68 
physical requirements . ............. 67 
Alteration 
school ;suaso ses Co XSEPE UU EPTNS 13 
sensory signature ..............++- 119 
Alternate sphere access ability .......... 45 
I — 90 
Anatomy proficiency ............+.+0++ 52 
Animal empathy ability................ 38 
Attimal SpHere:. — 29 
Apothecary «iioscove se ERE EUCHTRS 71 
Approving new spells .............++- 102 
AASE ee esc; eee a S 72 
Arcanology proficiency ......-......0++ 52 
Architecture 
sage knowledge ................... 54 
Area of effect, new spells.............. 101 
Armor 
ability for wizards ................. 24 
cleric restrictions. ......... sisse 32 
CABE a Jeucceseees viti a c 33 
AENEUS AREE menu racc es 129 
druid restrictions ...............+++ 33 
magical. oer sassmeeirention Ded ANANA 108 
monk restrictions ...............064- 34 


restrictions limitation. .............. 40 
BhATÜBTL. uoce vtero ee an tere 35 
spell ase ability... eneeennsins ses 43 
wizard restrictions .............++4+ 15 
Armor Class 
improvement ability ............... 38 
Armor-breaching spells ............... 120 
Armor-observing spells... ......... ss. 120 
Art, sage knowledge. .................. 54 
PCE BONO a a ore ira igi 14 
AtficeE iceciioce uus vae ev eiu us 21 
llo, ———— 65 
ANAC i vr ordavovu sve eveueeoE A Ea 113 
ASA ssl ———ÁÀ 29 
Astrology, sage knowledge............. 55 
Astronomy, sage knowledge............ 55 
Attack rolls, spells... .............suu. 120 
Attack/offense qualities............... 112 
con ———— 88 
Automatic spell acquisition ability ....... 24 
Awkward casting method 
Hm AHOR v vivis ee ERE EE 26, 40, 44 
BARC MR 43,99 
Scroll. co cepi ww EA 43 
Special abilities... eerte 43 
special limitations. ........... suus 44 
SPELL BOOK: «rsen cose enisi icem 43 
spell point progression ............. 99 
spell point system. ................. 99 
Behavior/taboo limitation. .......... 26, 40 
Bleeding ecce v eESCPEVE VUES 128 
Blistered, injuries ........0+s0s0eeeees 127 
Bodily alteration qualities ............. 11 
Bodily augmentation qualities ......... 111 
Bonus spells ability................ sss. 24 
Bonus spell points 
high Intelligence. .............++ 79, 80 
high Wisdom. cicvecvasx erue 92 
SDECIAUSE MMMME— 77,78 
Bookbinding proficiency ............ 52, 60 
Botany, sage knowledge. ............... 55 
Broken, Injariess aio eese a Seeds ERA 128 
Bruised injuries «conrra 127 
Building time, laboratory .............. 63 
Bureaucracy proficiency ............... 60 
Burned, injuries..........6.ceeeceeees 127 
Buying magical items................+. 72 
Calle TE ins soient Mesrine en 125 
Calling Spir «cesse ve zi eevits 35,37 
[euo MN—— 78 
Cartography, sage knowledge .......... 55 
Casting spells for greater effect ......... 79 
Casting subllety. 5. er eaa 117 
Casting time 
new spells... e ecennenrt ter 102 
reduction ability ................ 24, 38 
CAPAEONIA — — 90 
Ceremony proficiency ............ seus 60 
Ceremony /observance limitation ....... 40 
Channellers vr 80, 93 
FRUE aonr etenen 82 
optional systems. ......... Ls sese 80 
recovering spell points ............. 82 
studying Spells... ennemis 81 
Chaoesphere: «sca nanna 29 
Charm 
SCHOOL ss is oV Scelus 13 
Tj n —Á—— 29 
Chemistry, sage knowledge ............ 55 
Chilled injuxies. ««2vvoencnicesk even 127 
[a A — 31,32 


Sphere BESS icit A meses 31 
Cold 


CHE! oerte as SuSE RASE 131 
Critical strike. orco ere eve xa 125 
environmental effects.............. 123 
Spell effects ;::2 evi ev TE NET 123 
VISIBLE ea societe aide 123 
Cold resistance ability ................. 38 
Collateral spell effects ................ 121 
Bless se term dip P ee ee Sa 124 
COld cuoco pena Ee VVerUENRUS 123 
electricity /lightning............... 123 
NRG: sai sia e sci ya y Eee VERE TS 122 
pp ———— 124 
wind iier ser ER EXEC FPES. 124 
Combat 
critical OEE aaa es rns 129 
spell initiative ............06eeeeen 121 
spells... esee 116 
Sphetecis coo ve dva wis evi VETE REPRE 29 
touctispells...«.orsceorrrerc vamus 120 
Combat bonus ability............... 24,38 
Common materials. ............6..44. 104 
Components. « «ressentir mares 68 
new spells cvs sees 102 
Concentration proficiency...........+.. 53 
Conditional magic ............ssesee 96 
negative conditions ..............-. 97 
optional systems. ......... sese 96 
positive conditions. .......... sues 96 
recovering spells points. ............ 97 
Conjuration 
BORON o i ANER 13 
sensory signature ...............+. 119 
CONNER oria icai rac e UNA manas 16 
Consecrating, altar ............. sese 68 
Constitution adjustment ability ......... 24 
Constriction 
CHALE iocos cttresacewae sa cerea rat 132 
entecal SIME! overs civ pine niniamcavoionies 125 
Control/charm qualities .............. 110 
Converting characters ..............0005 8 
Cost 
WADOTAIGEY a cwcansnensasinmcoienremcaies 63 
Hbraryisisacs cies serene ER VES 65 
magical HEMS ..2eececs eek 72 
eU T EE E IN TT 108 
POHONB opes escono head 105 
researching spells ............. s.s. 103 
Scrollg zoe e EENE QOO DES WOES 107 
spell component. ............seeeese 70 
Creating 
new SPOS score aw ncacacawwracsecaains 100 
STE AEE cito t cio 106 
Creation sphéte. «5 «eee voo ceres noue ws 29 
Crifical strikes. — M 124 
combat penalties. ...............+. 129 
isis iis MM 129 
Beyerliy. «v. soo vue Ra e Er ERR WES 126 
Ciüsader. ».. eurocevrcee es eoe acta 31 
Crushed, injuries. ......... lesse 128 
Crushing 
RATE R E atout crane 133 
critical strike «cio cei ve qoas 125 
Cryptography, sage knowledge ......... 55 
Damage, equipment. .......... esses 129 
Defilers and preservers ..............+. 85 
accumulating spells points.......... 86 
GERE, cessit Stage 86 
optional systems. ........... usse 86 
studying spells .............sseesee 86 
Delirfunt. ise eeenntvo EA PRARYUVA 88 
Delusional insanity............. sse 91 
Dementia praecox. ......... eene 90 


Describing new spells ................ 101 
Destroyed, injuries vaser cinneas 128 
Detect evil ability ........ eese 39 
Detect magic ability ................055 24 
Detect undead ability.................. 39 
Difficult memorization limitation ....... 26 
Difficult spell acquisition............... 40 
Dimensional magic school. ............. 14 
Dimensionalist.....—.« eee eremiee emere 19 
Diplomacy proficiency... ..... sees 60 
DisorientantioI..««cucaacoaecsiira ice i coca 88 
Liüspel DIE «aal ange EHE A SORERA 25 
Dissolved; injuries «52e cox eva 128 
Divination 

School«ucsosec oe asse pudiese 13 

Sensory signale... «eoe rien 119 

SPHERE s Lo gx accus apo ace oR Tere 29 
BI M 17 
Dowsing proficiency ..............0+5: 53 
Druid sawciccanvaresvawwnenecwwarers 31, 33 

SOHOLG QOCOBU: o 4c A pe Pierius 31 
Drilidical magie. «creo moie 97 
Duration, new spells ................. 101 
BartliSCcBOGL. oeer 14 
Bifects new:spells, 4... n hàn 102 
Hifects Of fati gue ca conen Es 82 
Electricity 

chürbccs sese veves eges piviretos ien 134 

critical SEARS a cesare 125 
Electricity and lightning 

environmental effects. ..........--- 123 

spell-Sffects:.ia jin ab timi mes tg 123 

VISIDIlly... cirea teer 123 
Elemental sphere. eeren mnn 29 
Elerentalist..22: c wissen oes 18 
HHCBABIBE. Ls d racer tocco tri n as 17 
Enchantment 

sensory signature ........ eee 119 

SCHOOL: «sauce EAE oti eM EEEE EA 13 
Engineering, sage knowledge. .......... 55 
Enhanced casting level ability .......... 25 
Environmental condition limitation. ...... 26 
Equipment 

damage: ios cite eA ERR 129 

libOratoby &veceve ratito 64, 66 
Equipment costs 

alchemical laboratories .........-..- 64 

Eaa a EAE ERE OANE O 64 

research laboratories ...........+++- 65 
Evacation sehool. «aeneo merecen 13 
Exceeding spell level limit, 

spell point system. ........ eese 78 
Existing fatigue... ocn ieoa SA 82 
Exotic materialá. ....« «aces noce 104 
Expert healer ability. ...............+55 39 
Extended spell duration ability ...... 25, 39 


Facilities 
other items... rr eere een 108 
(rotor SRM ETE 105 
SCHOUB «c oci aceti rA BORD RI ez Ms 106 
Fanaticism limitation ..........sssesese 40 
FADE S oii vuv rci Rn I wevweviti us 82 
Field searches, spell components ........ 69 
Finding books. e: EE EVE 66 
Fire 
A EAER kx AVES steaks SUE 135 
eriücal striKe. i.e onere 125 
environmental effects. ............. 122 
SCHOO Seinen morer tes 14 
Shell effeetS cocus daos pietro pts 122 
a raices sensui s 122 


Fire/electrical resistance ability ......... 39 
Fixed APEK renren 77 
Fixed theurpy c esce c sv R 92 
Folklore, sage knowledge .............. 55 
Followers ability... 25,39 
Force 

MARE —— M— 19 

BéhOoQbzszs AE AN S E ACE EEA E 14 
Forges 

equipment costs ni ai wie Rs 64 

v M INERTECA SS 64 
POTAE ai A EE 77 
Free EU saosan aaa aaa 92 
Frostbitten, injuries. escuna 127 
Frozen, injuries ..errr oe mee 128 
Game-breaking characters........... 27,41 
Genealogy, sage knowledge ............ 55 
Geography, sage knowledge............ 55 
Geology, sage knowledge .............. 55 
ONCE ra 5: scr.» er aon cab ET 22, 101 
Geometry schaol. :( conoces 14 
Glassblowing proficiency .............. 53 
Crazed Injuties:. «vascos ee eee nes 127 
Guardian sphere .«.eovisauasscev ys aves 29 
Hallucinatory insanity ................. 90 
Hazardous spells limitation ......... 26,41 
Healing 

POUNCE seas exciso roreciesgosvs 71 

BAD. oa b^ tbe EEG oe eae 71 

Sphere. coss aav specs etta Sors #0 29 
Healing /restoration qualities .......... 112 
Hearing, sensory signature ............ 118 
FIGHV VASE UE ssec cuce oie intesa e 83 
Hebephrenia 255v: ox. xa S 90 
Hedge Wizards ....cceceeer rms 72 
Heraldy, sage knowledge .............. 55 
PCED ALIS tins. 2e tocar rtr a 71 
History, sage knowledge ...............55 
Hit point bonus ability................. 39 
Homicidal maria.. -cainesanayeniaceeae 91 
Hypnotism proficiency ..............+5 53 
Identification of substances.............51 
Identify plants and animals ability ...... 39 
Illusion 

Schoobzs cce ereosipi mus mo POOR UO t 13 

Sensory SIGNAIUIE a cocco coe esvus 119 
Ilüslonist..-.»-osdee Nnotnotan be em Iz 
Immunity 

BOO ous P EN E A E ANAE 25 

to charm ability. 554 comes 89 

to magic ability saes aenea 39 

to natural disease ability ............ 39 
Impact 

Cart ccs oe pee LV AI Ce 136 

CA SEDE ss esa necessari 125 
Improved Hit Die ability ............... 25 
Incendiaries......2vensz ixi te 51,71 
Incinerated, injuries ...........0+ 6000s 128 
Increased spell power limitation ........ 45 
Increased spell progression 

limitations 9122 se amare EUER 45 
Influence/emotion qualities ........... 110 
Injured, injuries; (a5: «sucer tI ent 127 
Injuries 

BHGCHE oir eR boo va Aat 126 

Specifie usen cremate wae 126 

whole:sbady, ee eerte 126 
Insanity 


alienists and summoners. ........ 88, 90 


recurring episodes ......... sisse 91 
Inspire/enrage allies ability ............ 39 
Intelligence, bonus spell points ......... 79 
Investigation proficiency .......... sess. 60 
Invocation 

Coe. —Y—— 13 

sensory Signature o. ua cainii a 119 
INVOKE e oian E 17 
KriückdOWn cis viis cera terc 121 

arida SEIKO aranean bh 129 

DIOE, cic. essen sens 121 
Know alignment ability................ 39 
Labotatoryuusseusasusre aes eo amare ue 63 

CONO i 2) (111) | earns e te oie eerie 64, 66 

lOCRE OTI o eaae a RUE SIESEERASOV S 63 

fRalrtenance oss ary emere eere 66 

physical requirements .............- 63 

PAIAO T onera n RE età 67 

PON ARTNA AUAA 63 

Wilderness: cocos sam eere a 63 
Languages, sage knowledge ............ 55 
Law 

PORNE -enina 61 

sage knowledge ................ss. 55 

SPACE: v ascccesreanacs oo raté dox sra 29 
Lay on hands ability..........-......55 39 
Learning bonus ability................. 25 
Learning penalty limitation............. 26 
Level requirements 

RIEDEL Heec cette nens 107 

potions.. venintan serere dans 105 

BETS iuste CER C9 p ARR eR 106 
Library «i were NS RR USE 65 

care and protection. sass sissies 66 

OUSE cuc oe tipsx qd doigts AA 65 

finding bOOKS 5 oa s 66 

DI M— ——— ones 66 
Light faligue si: oscovesvzvecobups eva 82 
Limited magical item use limitation . . 26, 41 
Limited spell selection limitation........ 41 
Limited-use items. ovecsissceaisieiesiecaianous 107 
Location 

Alta e —Á— ÁÁ 67 

BERORI i cars sepcemacacectonvnysrisninaraningisinints 63 
Loss of hit points, fatigue .............. 82 
Loss of spell points, fatigue............. 82 
MBs EEATT 15 
MST CAE T EREE A RENS pU aki 6 

C ———Ó——Í( 10 

MART al HEMS aicn e nies 100 

M EET 108 

Cui]  — 13 

scrolls eorr RECS Vase NS 106 
Magical atmo «cesser ec iege 108 
Magical items ............... 100, 103, 107 

BEURICOT A EEA retorica 21 

CBE, S obs queste IBS lH T 72 

GreatioTi.: eiat vates 100, 103 

identifying, artificer.............046. 22 

ingredients: cese se ya ey VS 104 

DDPA s nona toca es antea 65, 66 

Quhlities:: cusees as REVUES n Mapes 110 

PEDAG zeosoestacnaa east eacus 115 

SEIS ac ostii ice a avg I 72 

SpeciilislB: assvosvose E 104 

A Loses rmt pactionem ens eed aie 72 
Magical items no PCs should create. . ... . 113 


Magical manipulation qualities ........ 112 
Magical weapons ........ssseeeeeee 108 
Magicks 2:6 erae ver ep UI 77 
Maintenance, laboratory ——————(' 66 
Major bleeding ........... eee 128 
Mania ocomexpsceenestacen cantet ace mU 90 
Manic-depressive .............0e0eeeee 90 
Material spell components ............. 68 
Mathematics, sage knowledge .......... 55 
Matter manipulation qualities ......... 113 
Medicine, sage knowledge ............. 55 
Melancholia: asiasviacss epe VERSES 90 
Mental resistance proficiency ........... 53 
Vf HANS RA —À 19 
Meteorology, sage knowledge .......... 55 
Mirior BeetDnp.. uis nene teens 128 
Miscellaneous magical items .......... 108 
Moderate fatigue. ........ eee 83 
Monka yanii rasaan E VeRO. 31, 33 
MONGA A sagsscanacronarsramsaienameness 90 
Monstrous spellcasters.........--+.+++- 47 
Mortal fagueren 83 
Movement qualities ............+..655 111 
Multi-classed characters ............... 46 
Multiple-function items.............+. 107 
Music, sage knowledge ................ 55 
Myconology, sage knowledge. .......... 55 
INGCrOmatbeE «uento ias rea Taiwan 17 
Necromancy 
sensory signature ..............4 119 
72, P ——— 13 
Necromantic sphere ............4...0+5 29 
No components ability............ isse 25 
Notcongspelle. enisi da teatros 117 
Numbers Spliere c eecescis ea ets 29 
Observation proficiency. ........-...+++ 61 
Oceanography, sage knowledge......... 56 
Omen reading proficiency........... 53, 61 
Opposition school limitation............ 44 
Oratory proficiency .......... eese 61 
Orpo d iwoosveca c evicea e Pim p o 93 
BATIBO ID. aor: opina e niat 3 oc dd 45, 97 
special aDeSe norinni s 45 
special limitations................-. 45 
spell point progression ............. 98 
spell point system. ........... eee 98 
Papermaking proficiency. ........... 54,61 
PRERDIORL. censui a koteeem en cae s 90 
Pass without trace ability ........... sse 39 
Perception qualities .................. 110 
Persistent spell effect ability ............ 25 
Persuasion proficiency. ......... sees 61 
Philosophy, sage knowledge. ........... 56 
PRODIA socius ea va d E PR aua 88 
Physical requirements 
altar. asain es Seseav kac EAE XEM 67 
J8DORaEOE cacsascmeseeirae e acre 63 
Physics, sage knowledge............... 56 
Planes 
Inner, sage knowledge.............. 56 
Outer, sage knowledge ............. 56 
Plant SplibEe, vnesene 29 
Poison antidote «S crux RN EE 71 
o S — Á—Ó—— M 105 
aiclientsE ever comm Iv AESNSR 20, 105 
COAL BG a ora EE rins Fesser ee 105 
Viro RE MEET II 65 
Prestidigitation proficiency. ............ 54 


PESE aono cie teca istes ew AINT SPA sw 27 
BREL oce e riii trt tae ceterae 67 
channeller 262p vetri atte 93 
(ic, D—————M—— 31 
crusaders sess REN ERUNT S RATER 32 
conditional magic...............605 96 
RII. ores ncs auo RN 33 
druidical Mages oue sess verdes 97 
IUUD seios IEn aA 33 
Huttes Ens a 46 
multi-classed specialty ............. 46 
prolicienctes ires cy Rex 59 
FHWA Prayer A —I 94 
SHAMAN. cesse cum uPENI IONS! 34 
special abilities... 22er 38 
special limitations.................. 40 
spell point progression ............. 92 
spell point recovery ............ ss. 93 
Spell points 2x66: ern nex 91 

Priestly wizard ability ..............085 25 

Processes, magical items .............. 104 

Processes and materials 
magical weapons .......... sees 108 
Other Memo sovcoe vero eec intes 108 
PONG uec tice rita ooo set PAS AO 105 
SCroll$ acc eite esas PERIERE 107 

Proficiencies 
ability modifiers.. ss siro oen cens 51 
character points... vacent eei BI 
check modifers: asrine nene 51 
group crossover ability .......... 25, 39 
DEW eee ctia cocus Se aki a Ns 50 
DrieSto cis seecwcae dor Te crea Veces 59 
D M — —— 51 
ward eva NACE RAN CPU 51 

Prolonged casting time, spell points ..... 79 

Proposing new spells ................. 101 

Protection scrolls. ...........0.0008 22, 106 

Protectionsphexe: euenien 31 

Psychic translocation ..............654. 91 

Purchasing agents, spell components ....71 

Purchasing spell components. .......... 70 

Purify water ability. ............. issu. 39 

Purstit insanily 2.5 raro irse nr ERAT 91 

BytOtechtucs; s ecesureuse vetas 51,71 

Qualities, magical items....-.-.....-.. 110 

Range increase ability ................. 25 

Range, riew spells. va ree ved eia 101 

Ranger: E —— — 45, 98 
Special abilities; 2 2er eva eria 45 
special limitations. . ........... sess. 45 
spell point progression ............. 98 
spell point system. .............6.55 98 

Rare materials |... iles 104 

Read magic ability (.5:5 meus 25 

Recharging magical items ............. 115 

Recovering from fatigue ............... 83 

Recovering spell points 
alienists and summoners. ........... 87 
chiannellers. «cues swasa 82 
conditional magic......... sese 97 
Fitual prayer «2er seris 96 
warlock and witch ................. 85 

Reduced hit points, limitation ....... 26,41 

Reduced spell knowledge limitation... . . 26 

Reduced spell power 
HAND CER 44 
spell points <s sps eles eerte eth 79 

Reducing spell cost, spell points ........ 79 

Relocating laboratory.......... sse 67 

Research bonus ability ............. suu 25 


191 


Research laboratories 


equipment cobta e scere mesa 65 
SIZE iuis ovt igi e ELO Rep GU ad 65 
Research 
other items: 535 exe ee 108 
joco M OMÀ 105 
proficiency. aa siene ann a 54 
SOE eS 106 
SEES a N 100 
Researching spells 
BBE Laici anaE A o AARAA 103 
success or failmean aaa 103 
Do ————— 103 
Resist energy drain ability.............. 39 
Resistance/defense qualities. .......... 112 
KRIEDY. a dao seii RARUS TA t ipod ns 108 
Ritual prayet..- ecciesie ope 94 
accumulating spell points........... 95 
optional systems. ....... isses 94 
recovering spell points ............. 96 
ROG. corset ORAR 108 
Rule of common sense .............sse 70 
Sage knowledge proficiency ......... 54,61 
Saving throw, new spells.............. 102 
Scarcity, spell components. ............. 70 
Schizophrenia 5:457 6] 1 soi o 91 
School knowledge ability .............. 25 
School of magic, sage knowledge. ....... 56 
School specialization ability ............ 43 
Schools and spheres, new spells. ....... 101 
Schools of effect, ee nne nmt 14 
ability requirements................ 18 
Creating NEW iusuooisieieeenaei te 14 
BRCCIANSIS:. ..terarnae 400 sihi dde 18 
Schools of magie... irr ees aevi 13 
Schools of philosophy ................. 13 
ability requirements. ........... s.s. 17 
CREAR EW cueieeescseneee mo encenen 13 
Specialist zc coeur Va ZRVTU 16 
universal magic. .......... cess 13, 14 
Schools of thaumaturgy......... sese 14 
ability requirements. ........ sues 21 
REARS iain HUP CUS SA ico oda 20 
Scribe proficiency ............6.0005 57,61 
Scroll dee aDIBty usos ome 43 
Scrolls; ossa a Eri T Ea a RR E 106 
Dat ussca acopacco aaea 43 
CLEANSE Dew vasis Eaa 106 
FEIM a ips cascos mrs 22,107 
Secret language ability................. 39 
Selling magical items...............0+5 72 
Sensory SIBDatute races ninen 118 
Schools «o9 ee ya Ia rs 119 
[uli M so sana ar S 118 
Severe bleeding :.....2 eris 128 
SOVET LANGUES iuncerustexcesaceerscestseaegues 83 
Severed. TIN CUES a. usc so Seek tinae 128 
Severity, critical strikes. ......... sss. 126 
Shadow 
IT E 19 
BETIGOD, «ue totus ricus ien ra AR nhan 14 
Shaman: ss vous NEUSS KEEN 31,34 
SPINA ara a m emicevad vuacescessone 35 
Shapechange ability .......... isses 39 
Shattered, injuries... ores 128 
Stueld; damage... unnm 129 
Sight, sensory signature............... 118 
Signature spells, i ences ne 57 
Singed, injuries isis o Ee Er rx xxn 127 
Single-function items ........6.+.05005 107 
Single-use items... eere mnn 107 
Size 
alchemical laboratories ............. 64 
FORES swansea osm ncae sitae ur Ros 64 


loci. — —— 66 
research laboratories ............... 65 
Slashing 
Ghatb. os ere sd vk Nae Si eb EIS UNE 137 
critical strike «v.c rre een nie 125 
Slower casting time limitation ....... 26,41 
Smell, sensory signature .............. 118 
Sociology, sage knowledge ............. 56 
Song 
| €——Á— 23 
SCHOOL . s.s cusa AEL TAE TACT 14 
Special abilities 
BR. cpi ion ESI TO SESS 43 
delayed acquisition ........... sue. 24 
PURA. conna 45 
priesta raa pa a aa 38 
PAREL a D TEn 45 
wizard orsin E aS 24 
Special casting conditions, spell points. . . 79 
Special limitations 
Lo ————— P ÓÓ 44 
páládin.. meranen 45 
priest. ocscoscevuvsoge sa ox3 NT 40 
TRIB ices: csspoebrarearenvtora emma 45 
Wizard «i6:vsopes d se EXE ERN 26 
Specialist 
BDIUIGE sei QQUIEb nS ER RUNE ES en 
ACNE «oce cesesua vacan rea 
ADEN a SA 
CONTEE ss paraa uus va eg ga 
dimensionalist. ............. eese 
GIVINED «ocsieo vi Spe cR RAPERE 
elementalisl.....«o«- ome »remesinreemis 
an a ASTIAT EEEIEE EEES ET 
IONE NARS ani aE atat erae 
T MAE 
illusionist. .......... 
INVOKED aerea, 
mentaliit o una ye ER Rr Usa dus 
THOTISITOLB oy args cootra inch ceri 
multi-classed wizard 
TACROMANCEE 2sesesosen esiti vetivxuae 
schools of effect... eerte ens 
schools of philosphy 
schools of thaumaturgy............. 20 
shadow mage cicis onini eaaa 19 
SONG mage eeann nne 23 
transmuter. i.e re rE 28 
WHC MASE oec uci poscieeske caue 23 
YHZAIC Lee npa an PR o 16 
Spell book 
Dati. TIT T sis ened 43 
WIZE Css RA dubeWa a SENA ERI 15 
Spell components ...............eesuse 68 
acquisition. 26e | I OE 69 
C —— 70 
List <sssca tases eA p X aut 73 
purchasing .«zcueevievscovevisvvawe e 70 
purchasing agent ..........sssssse 71 
ScaICity os see's o cessa ra rd nasa 70 
SCAVENGING: «cere rne necnon 69 
Slotlng :xiiesveveecsviee sev ET ese. 70 
Spell cost in spell points. . . . 77, 78, 92, 98, 99 
spheres of access. ..........s sss 92, 98 
Spell point progression 
MICI. cs cya is tain ain aor RARUS Cui 99 
paládinz. c cescyaeu devenez 98 
poll j— ——— s 92 
TAN SERS owas wv ae XXE EDT 99 
bor o PP 78 
Spell point system. ........ less 8,76 
alienists and summoners. ........... 87 
bad. en ru dioit Rn 99 
CANDIDS: vaarinsa ceci eto wey ves 78 
casting spells for greater effect....... 79 
Channellere i2) «aa peat is 80, 93 
conditional MaE srainnsear 96 


defilers and preservers ............. 85 


druide exse pae 97 
exceeding the spell level limit ....... 78 
guidelines ....... ves 77, 91, 98, 99 
minor spheres of access. ...... 92, 93, 98 
jl pii C esa asistos 98 
priest... cocer ee eroeen eere tems 91 
prolonged casting time ............. 79 
IAnger..o ciere eee ERE E Ra 99 
reduced spell power. ..........sssese. 79 
reducing spell cost ............ esse. 79 
ritual prayer «severe eene 94 
special casting conditions ........... 79 
SpeCIBlIBIS. «0o cci e ER RR 77 
spellcost ec eren 77, 78, 92, 98, 99 
warlocks and witches .............. 83 
WAZA reu eo cese entren 77 
Spell research library ............ sss 65 
Spellcasters, monstrous .......... sess 47 
Spells 
approving and modifying new ..... 102 
armor-breaching............ sese 120 
armor-observing........... sees 120 
Loro so] mna seanna 120 
knockdown dice.................. 121 
proposing new neve eeevacnvee ses 101 
subtlety modifiers...............+- 118 
Spheres Of access... ecce ere 29 
Spirit powers ability... .......... ee 40 
Spirits, shaman... «veceeces ex eges 35 
Stages of descent, warlocks and witches. . . 84 
SHAVES civic Usa sae 93A VER ea 108 
Storing spell components .............. 70 
Stake location «c5. 35 9v S erERR YS 125 
Struck, Injuries... ioci anasa 127 
Studying spells 
alienists and summoners. ........... 87 
Chanrillegs, «uenerit nnmero 81 
defilers and preservers ............. 86 
warlocks and witches .............. 85 
Subtlety rating. «ees yr pA soso se 117 
Success or failure 
other item creation. ......... issue 108 
potion creation .......... cesses 105 
scroll creation ......... eese 107 
spell research; 2. verre rie 103 
Summoning 
qualities; aseena a 113 
SCHOOL ins 0a ESAE ENEE 13 
BONO A EPE T A I IAEE 31 
Sun sphere...... Ee ee EREE 31 
Supernatural constraint limitation. ...... 26 
Supplies, laboratory ..................5 66 
Tactics of magic proficiency ............ 57 
Talisman limitation. ..............0 27,41 
Taste, sensory signature............... 118 
Thaumaturgy proficiency .............. 57 
Theology, sage knowledge ............. 56 
Theurgies -veccyseetyA ed eR EVER PN a 92 
Thief abilities (ability) .............. 25, 40 
Thoughtsphere. <2... (ient e ern 31 
Time 
other item creation. eesse rasane. 108 
potion creation .......... eese 105 
SCRI OREO eae racemis aree 107 
Spell research. ::4 oper 103 
Touch, sensory signature.............. 118 
Toxicology, sage knowledge ............ 56 
Trading magical items ...............++ 72 
ASIEN ene iita es DOS buts S diem es 18 
Travelers sphere ......-.-..000eeee eee 31 
Turn undead ability .................-- 40 


U 


Unarmed combat, monk .....--.......: 34 
Unarmed combat skills ability .......... 40 
Undead lore proficiency ............... 61 
Universal magic school .......... 13,14, 15 


Unreliable casting method limitation ....44 


Vibration 
SUDDEN INTE 138 
critical strike: «avc oes 125 
Wand: oceEUStREKUHEREAE ARS ales 108 
War Sphere. «ossccssaaeie ace tnra sita a 31 
Wards sphere. «<<... e rnt sanennne as 31 
Warlock and witch ...............suuu. 83 
optional systems. ......... sse 83 
recovering spell points ............. 85 
stages of descent......-..+-s0eeeees 84 
studying spells. sisisi ninina eies 85 
Warrior ability bonuses ability .......... 40 
MAIOR SCHOOL, sneno iba ion 14 
Weapon restriction limitation ........ 27,41 
Weapon selection ability ............ 25, 40 
Weapon specialization ability ........ 25, 40 
Weather sphere . ....-«eaenrmrhem enne 31 
Whole-body injuries. ............. sse 126 
Wild MAGE ——— 23 
Wild magic school. rins racian 14 
Wind 
environmental effects.............. 124 
spell effects 5:522 crar rarus 124 
VISIDIY.. reri antem otio 124 
Wisdom, bonus spell points ............ 92 
WISE WOMENS «vro nis nione die a tna rcs 72 
Witurd c3 crrX.A EXEC FRERA En 12, 15 
alienists and summoners. ........... 87 
bonus spell points .......-........- 92 
channellers. /2122 e aco 80 
defilers and preservers ............. 85 
laboratory noaa sur vas 63 
MAZE —————— 15 
multi-classed «75 cioe EXEUNT 46 
multi-classed specialist ............. 46 
proficiencies ...........6+e.eee rece 51 
special abilities ................000. 24 
special limitations. ................. 26 
specialist 5.2 oc oua Ru va zeae 15 
Spell BOOKS «ceo esiceemesrsiee errare 15 
spell point progression ............. 78 
Spell POI. sercis (spar eate 77 
warlock and witch ............. usu. 83 
Wizard magical item use ability ......... 44 
Wizardly priest ability ................. 40 
Wounding 
ll ——————t 139 
eriticalstrike.... 2 yer s 125 
Zoology, sage knowledge .............. 57 


PLAYER’S OPTION”: Spells & Magic 


D Advanced 


unceonsés&Drasons 


oes your wizard wish to create a 
powerful magical item or a potent 
new spell? What other effects does 
your priest's favorite offensive spell 
accomplish? Spells & Magic provides 
players and Dungeon Masters with 
expanded rules that are compatible 

with the Player's Handbook, 

the DuNcEON MASTER” Guide, and the rest 

of the PLAYER’s Option™ line of rulebooks. 
Within these pages you will find new 
spells and proficiencies for wizards and 
priests, plus further rules on spell research 
and magical item creation, new options for 
designing spellcasters, an alternate system 
of gaining and using spells, and much 
more. Use this book to bring out the 

full power and potential of any 
spellcasting character! 


TSR Ltd. 

120 Church End 
Cherry Hinton 
Cambridge CB1 3LB 
United Kingdom ISBN 0-7869-0394-5 


TSR, Inc. 

201 Sheridan Springs Rd. 
Lake Geneva 

WI 53147 

U.S.A. 


©1996 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. Made in the U.S.A. 
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and DUNGEON MASTER 

are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
PLAYER’S OPTION and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. $22.00 US — $28.00 CAN — £12.99 UK 


Sug. Retail 


