Dinséons& Dragons’ 


— Three _ 


Compendium 


Priest’s Spell Compendium 


Accessory 


Credits 
Design: It is impossible to list all the creators of the spells cataloged in these volumes, 
but credit goes to everyone who created a spell in a module, boxed set, accessory, 
hardbound book or magazine article published in the last 20 years. 
Compilation: Mark Middleton 
Development and Editing: Jon Pickens 
Additional Proofing: Kim Mohan 
Creative Direction: Ed Stark 
Interior Black and White Art: David Martin and David Roach 
Art Director: Dawn K. Murin 
Graphic Design: Tanya Matson 
Production Manager: Chas DeLong 
Typesetting: Nancy Walker 
Acknowledgments: L. Richard Baker III, Brad Bolas, Ed Greenwood, Miranda Horner, 
Julia Martin, Mark Middleton, Roger E. Moore, John Rateliff, Cindi Rice, 
Thomas M. Reid, Steven E. Schend, and Skip Williams. 


Based on the original DUNGEONS & DRAGONS rules created by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson. 


Volume Three 
Spike Growth to Zone of Truth 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ан. Жее ИШЕК О ОТ Cate reas Net C Os WON BIRTH ore 578 
Howto Use Tis Book. aves ancl ies о ЛОО o eter I ais > 578 
M ligu SET ENERO CUN DO TODO tct НЕТ 582 
A Gode to Spell CODE... n are orare mE Sar Eee Де EY ORT ER 584 
So mE К ч. И СИ т aee rovieedehted CRAS AR HV ABRE AN 585 
p TP. AM AU лс. сылы сыал, 635 
Riordino STE aie Se То 667 
NL, eR 4» aioe rea ce eoi eet eis ie S ЖИЛ» НД ЛЛК dE RT И у Ue dE 677 
Wu Р Е Sue ЖК a Tete AT rsen Lots vods 682 
DEY ES Bik Sess Leu Ra ccc Rls ae UNS DA Аз UNIT SE de. 725 
Appendices Tables at Сома И . e r о S Sie А, дю. 721 


US., CANADA EUROPEAN HEADQUARTERS 
ASIA, PACIFIC, & LATIN AMERICA Wizards of the Coast, Belgium 
Wizards of the Coast, Inc. PB. 2031 
P.O. Box 707 2600 Berchem 
Renton, WA 98057-0707 Belgium 
+1-800-324-6496 +32-70-23-32-77 


Visit our website at www.wizards.com 


AD&D, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AL-QADIM, BATTLESYSTEM, BIRTHRIGHT, DARK SUN, DRAGON, DRAGONLANCE, DUNGEON, 
DUNGEON MASTER, FIEND FOLIO, FORGOTTEN REALMS, GREYHAWK, MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, MYSTARA, PLANESCAPE, 
PLAYER'S OPTION, POLYHEDRON, RAVENLOFT, RED STEEL, RPGA, the RPGA logo, SPELLJAMMER, and the Wizards of the Coast logo 

are registered trademarks owned by Wizards of the Coast, Inc. с 
MONSTROUS MANUAL is а trademark owned by Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 


All Wizards characters, character names, spell names, magical item names, monster names, unique place locations, 
and the distinct likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 


Distributed to the hobby, toy, and comic trade in the United States and Canada by regional distributors. 
Distributed in the United States to the book trade by St. Martin's Press. Distributed in Canada to the book trade by Fenn Ltd. 
Distributed worldwide by Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and regional distributors. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America, 
Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 


©2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc. All rights reserved. Made in the U.S.A. 


620-T11611 0-7869-1611-7 


м иннаа иан аиа и ОНЫН н 


Introduction 


The Priests Spell Compendium continues the 
work of the Wizard s Spell Compendium series. This 
final volume completes the alphabetical reference 
to priest spells of the AD&D” game system, cover- 
ing the letters Sp through Z, and contains various 
appendices as well, The full series covers priest 
spells created for the game from 1975 to 1995. 

For the uninitiated, this is not a book of “real” 
magical spells. In a fantasy game world, characters 
like Merlin the Magician create marvelous magical 
effects with a wave of the hand. This is a book of 
marvelous effects that can be used by the good guys 
(and the bad guys) in the course of a game session. 
The key to the game is, as always, the decisions 
made by the players (heroic or otherwise), and the 
impact those decisions have on the ongoing plot of 
the game. New spells are fun, but it’s even more fun 
figuring out unusual ways to use them. 

Up to this time, lists of spell effects have been 
keyed to spell level; that is, relative spell power. In 
other words, if all a player or Dungeon Master 
knew was a spell name, each level's list of spells 
had to be checked. While this last volume includes 
level lists (as well as lists by race and specialty), the 
most important principle of organization used in 
the series as a whole is alphabetical. 

The material in these books is presented in the 
most current game format: that of the 2nd Edition 
rules. Some descriptions have been updated or 
combined with similar spell effects to eliminate 
duplication; some have been modified for better 
play, and a very few have been dropped entirely. 

Generally, “granted powers” of specialty 
priests are beyond the scope of this series, 
. although a few have been configured as spells. 
Variant magica! systems, such as the kingdom- 
level magic of the BIRTHRIGHT setting are also 
beyond the scope of this book. However, the 
optional Sphere of War, introduced in the TOME OF 
Maaic book (essentially a BATTLESYSTEM® rules 
variant) and the psionics-based spells of the DARK 
Sun® setting are close enough to standard spells to 
be included in a special section in the final 
volume. Clerical cantrips, or orisons, are included 
in this volume as well. 


About This Book 


The spells listed in this book are given alpha- 
betically. Spell names that include a proper name 
are given a primary listing under that name. For 
example, for Abbathor 5 greed, the primary entry is 
under “A.” Another reference to the main entry will 


578 


be found at the second word of the spell name; in 
this case, the short entry would read: "Greed, 
Abbathor’s.” 

Be aware that many spell names are irregular 
compound words, and that standard alphabetical 
order follows complete words. Thus, dark road will 
appear before darkbolt. If you can't find a spell, 
try looking for it as a compound form. 

Some spells may have the same name; or the name 
of a spell might have been changed. Where two spells 
have the same name but come from different cultures, 
the spell from the culture most similar to Medieval 
Europe is given first. Renamed spells have a short ref- 
erence under the original name. 

Spells associated with specific campaign worlds 
(other than the FORGOTTEN REALMS and GREYHAWK 
settings) are marked with a special symbol so they 
can be easily recognized. See page 584 for a sum- 
mary of these symbols. Spells associated with a spe- 
cific monster or nonhuman race (dragons, elves, and 
so on) are noted; the race name is separated from 
the spell name by a dash. Specialized optional priest 
classes with unique spell lists, such as the NPC 
savant-cleric, are also specially noted. 

Generally, spell names and secondary game 
effects are italicized. For example, the symbol spell 
has a secondary effect called discord. 


How to Use This Book 


Each spell in this book is organized along the 
same general lines. Each is listed by its name, 
school, sphere, and a number of statistics that 
govern its use such as Level (of power), Range, 
Casting Time, and so on. The game powers of each 
spell are described, along with any special rules that 
govern its use, how the spell target can avoid or 
counter its effects, any limitation of how the spell 
can be used, and any special preparations or mate- 
rials that are needed for a successful casting. Next, 
the details of any reversed form the spell might 
have are given. Finally, a section called Notes has 
been appended to each spell; this deals with patron 
power, the spell’s rarity, and any special restrictions 
on who (or what) can use it. 

Having covered the field briefly, a more detailed 
look is in order: 


Name: This is the name by which the spell is gen- 
erally known. Although we have tried to ensure 
unique names, this has not always been possible. 
For example, dark fire, a minor spell that gives heat 
without light, is very different from darkfire, an evil 
and powerful black flame commanded by the drow 
elves, Where two spells have the same name, the 


:"———Á—XÀ— иии тине á!'n— Ыар аНЫН ш 


most general version is given first, while variants 
cast by other races or found in specialized cam- 
paign settings are given later. A name marked with 
an asterisk (*) is a cooperative magic spell in which 
a circle of priests combines their efforts (coopera- 
tive magic is discussed in this book). 


School: Each school governs a type of magic, 
according to the type of energy its spells employ 
and the special practices and methods used in cast- 
ing them. The basic schools are: 


SCHOOLS OF MAGIC (PHILOSOPHY) 

Abjuration: Protective, warding, or banishing 
magics. ` 

Alteration: Magic that changes physical prop- 
erties of an object, creature, or condition. 

Conjuration/Summoning: Magic that calls or 
brings objects or creatures from elsewhere. 

Divination: Magic that uncovers what is lost or 
hidden in the past, present, or future. 

Enchantment/Charm: Magic that bestows mag- 
ical properties on objects or influences creatures 
magically. 

Illusion/Phantasm: Illusions create and alter 
appearances; phantasms affect the mind. 

Invocation/Evocation: Magic that channels and 
shapes magical energy to create an effect or object. 

Necromancy: Magic that works on life energy, 
including the negative energy of the undead. 


Sphere: Priest spells are grouped into a number of 
spheres of influence, or spheres. These spheres are 
the building blocks of a divine power’s portfolio, 
and determine which spells are made available to 
priests of that faith. For the most part, the sphere 
assignments from the Players Handbook are given, 
however, the revised assignments of the PLAYER’S 
OPTION: Spells & Magic book are assumed to be 
official updates. For the purpose of this series, 
spheres are grouped into three categories: Clerical 
Spheres, Druidical Spheres, and Specialty Spheres. 
In addition, there is an A// sphere, to which all 
priests have access. 

Clerical Spheres are those governed by the 
powers of the Outer Planes. These are spheres to 
which the cleric class has access. In the DARK SUN 
setting, these are collectively grouped as the Sphere 
of Cosmos. 

Druidical spheres are primarily those concerned 
with the Prime Material Plane and Elemental 
Planes. They are drawn upon by religions of the 
natural world: animism, shamanism, and druidism. 

Specialty spheres include spheres created for 
specialty priesthoods, concerned with specialized 
knowledge, and are generally closed to the clerical 


class. Most are introduced in the TOME ОЕ MAGIC 
book. 

Priests have either major or minor sphere 
access. 

Major access to a sphere allows the priest to 
cast all spells in the sphere. 

Minor access to a sphere allows the priest to 
cast spells of Ist to 3rd level in the sphere. 

Complete lists of spells by sphere appear in this 
volume of this set. 


CLERICAL SPHERES 

Astral spells are those that allow access to the 
Astral Plane, for purposes of movement and com- 
munication. 

Charm spells affect attitudes and actions of 
people. Powers of love, trickery, or art, often grant 
access to this sphere. Expansive faiths deal with 
this sphere as well. 

Combat spells are often granted by powers of 
war or strife. Many faiths that defend themselves by 
force have access to this sphere. 

Creation spells can produce something from 
nothing, often to benefit the followers. Prime cre- 
ator powers often grant access to this sphere. 

Divination spells recover long-lost information 
or provide guidance. Most specialty priests should 
have at least minor access to this sphere. 

Guardian spells summon an actual guardian of 
some sort. 

Healing spells remove afflictions or heal 
wounds. They cannot restore life or lost limbs. 
Reversal of these spells is restricted to evil priests. 

Necromantic spells restore destroyed life force 
such as life, limbs, and experience levels. Reversal 
of these spells is restricted to evil priests. 

Protection spells that provide personal protec- 
tion to the caster or creatures aided. 

Summoning spells call creatures from other 
places or dimensions to serve the caster. This is 
usually risky, as the service is often against the will 
of such creatures. 

Clerics have major access all Clerical Spheres, 
and minor access to the Elemental Spheres of Earth 
and Water. 

Paladins have access to the spheres of Combat 
Divination, Healing, and Protection. 


DRUIDIC SPHERES 

Animal spells affect or alter creatures. This 
sphere does not include spells that affect people. 
Powers of nature or husbandry often grant access to 
this sphere. 

Elemental spells affect the four basic elements 
of air, earth, fire, and water. Powers of nature or 
powers with elemental interests typically grant 


E. 579 М. 


b—————————— id 


access to at least part of this sphere. Few priests 
have access to all four elements. 

Plant spells affect plants, ranging from simple 
agriculture (improving crop yields) to communi- 
cating with plantlike creatures. Powers of nature or 
agriculture often grant access to this sphere. 

Sun spells deal in the basic powers of the solar 
universe—the purity of light and its counterpart 
darkness. 

Weather spells enable the priest to manipulate 
forces of weather. Powers of nature and tempests 
often grant access to this sphere. 


Druids have access to the Druidic Spheres and to 
the Sphere of Healing. 


SPECIALTY SPHERES 

In general, specialty spheres include those 
spheres introduced either in the Tome of Magic or 
in other sources. 

Chaos spells add randomness and confusion to 
the world around the caster. The results are unpre- 
dictable and uncertain. Powers of mischief and ill 
luck often grant access to this sphere. 

Law spells increase order in the world around 
the caster. This may enhance cooperation or limit 
individual thought or action. Powers of community 
and rulership often grant access to this sphere. 

Numbers spells are based on the theory that 
numbers and mathematical relationships provide 
insight into the nature of the universe. Powers of 
arcane lore sometimes grant access to this sphere. 

Thought spells concern such abstract topics as 
thought, time, and boundaries. Powers concerned 
with the mind or knowledge often grant access to 
this sphere. 

Time spells manipulate the effects of time on 
objects and creatures, as well as the passage of time 
itself. 

Travelers spells aid and comfort the traveler, 
making such endeavors safer, easier, and more 
enjoyable. Powers that protect wayfarers often grant 
access to this sphere. 

War spells are battlefield spells granted when 
large-scale battles are imminent. 

Wards spells seal and area against intrusion, 
either by creating a barrier or forbidden zone, or 
by inflicting a magical effect. 


Specialty priests might have access to one or 
more specialty spheres, in addition to certain Cler- 
ical or Druidical spheres. The DM decides the exact 
number and type of spheres available to a power or 
deity. 


s might receive m Ог А, f 
and either Law or Chaos, depending on their 
alignment (a neutral cleric receives one or the 
other, but not both). Druids might receive major 
access to Time and Wards, and minor access to 


Travelers. Paladins might might receive access to Law 
and War. Rangers might receive access to Trav- 
elers and Weather. row 


THE “ALL” SPHERE 

This special list of spells is common to all 
priests. This group includes spells a priest needs to 
perform basic functions. 


Reversed Form: An entry of “Reversible” means 
the spell can be cast with the opposite effect. For 
example, the cure light wounds spell which restores 
lost hit points, can be reversed as cause light wounds, 
which inflicts damage. Often, a reversed form of a 
clerical spell will be favored by evil clerics. Usually, 
a priest must memorize the exact form of the 
reversible spell he wants available. 


Level: This is the relative power level of the spell, 
ranging from Ist level (weakest) to 9th level (most 
powerful). A high priest in a major city generally 
has access to a 6th-level spell, a few 5th-level 
spells, and an increasing number of 4th- through 
Ist-level spells each day. 


Range: The distance from the caster at which the 
magical effect occurs. A range of “0” means the 
effect is centered on the caster's person or location; 
in the latter case the effect is usually immobile. 
“Touch” means the effect can be used on another 
creature or object, and generally on the caster as 
well. Unless otherwise specified, ranged spells are 
centered on a point visible to the caster and within 
the spell's range; this can be a specific creature or 
object if desired. Most ranges are measured in 
yards; some are measured in feet. 


Components: These are the types of components 
that the spell requires; if the components are not 
present, the casting fails. *V" is verbal; that is, a 
spoken incantation the priest is assumed to deliver 
while casting. “S” is somatic; that is, measured and 
precise gestures with the hands, which the priest is 
assumed to make while casting. “М” is for material; 
that is, physical substances or objects that are anni- 
hilated by the spell energies in the casting process. 
This abbreviation sometimes signifies a focus, or 
device that is reusable; sometimes this is a tempo- 


4 580 М. 


eee 


rary focus whose premature destruction ends the 
spell. 

Often the components are merely suggestive or 
colorful; at other times they will be a significant 
restriction on how often a spell can be cast. Unless 
a cost for a component is given in the description 
(which means the component is intended as a 
limit), the cost is negligible and can be assumed as 
part of the priest’s daily or monthly general 
expenses. 


Casting Time: This is relative time required to cast 
a spell. Unless rounds, turns, or a longer casting 
time is specified, the casting will be completed in 
the same round it is started. A casting time less than 
one round is a modifier to the initiative roll, and is 
essentially the same as a weapon speed factor. A 
spell that takes a full round to cast comes into effect 
at the end of that round. 


Duration: This is how long the magical energy of 
the spell lasts. An instantaneous duration means the 
spell energy comes and goes the instant the spell is 
cast, though the spell effect might be long lasting. 
A duration of permanent means the spell energy 
remains as long as the effect does; this means that 
the spell is vulnerable to a dispel magic spell. This 
is an altered usage. Many spells listed in earlier 
sources as having a “permanent” duration (such as 
cure light wounds) are altered in this series and in 
future to “instantaneous.” 

Spells with a set duration (such as 1 round per 
level) must be kept track of by the player; those with 
a variable duration are secretly rolled by the DM. 

Some spells can be ended by the caster at will; 
the caster must be in range of the center of the 
spell's effect and must usually (though not always) 
speak words of dismissal. 


Area of Effect: This entry lists the creatures, 
dimensions, volume, weight, and so on, that the 
spell can affect. Some spells have areas that can 
be shaped by the caster; of these, no dimension can 
be less than 10 feet unless the spell specifically 
allows it. Many areas are given as cubes to make 
it easy to figure out areas of effect when using 
maps gridded into 10-foot or 5-foot squares. 
Three-dimensional volumes are most often needed 
to resolve aerial or underwater effects. 

Unless specifically stated otherwise in the 
description, areas of effect conform to their physi- 
cal surroundings; for example, a /ight spell with a 
60-foot radius centered in a closed room that is a 
20-foot cube will light the room. It will not pene- 
trate a solid wall to light a room beyond. 

Many areas are given as geometric shapes. 


581 


Radius: This might yield a circle, hemisphere, 
or sphere, depending on the situation. 

Cloud: Usually given as a block of cubes for 
convenience, although it's actually amorphous and 
billowy. 

Cone: This projects outward from the caster, 
with the smallest end toward the caster and the 
largest diameter farthest from the caster. 

Path: This is usually a 10-foot wide line starting 
at the caster projecting away in a straight line to a 
specified length. 

Spells that affect the caster's friends or enemies 
are based on the current perceptions of the caster. 


Saving Throw: This entry lists whether a spell 
allows a saving throw and, often, the effect of a 
successful saving throw: “Мер.” means the spell is 
negated and has no effect; “4” means that the spell 
inflicts damage and that a successful saving throw 
halves the damage taken; *None" means no saving 
throw is allowed to an unwilling subject. The 
result of a saving throw for a reversed spell is 
given in the paragraph that details the reversed 
form. 

The saving throw itself is a roll on a 20-sided 
die; high numbers are generally good. 

Wisdom allows adjustments to saving throws 
against Enchantment/Charm spells. Dexterity may 
provide adjustments against spells that affect a 
large area. 

Solid physical barriers may give saving throw 
modifiers and reduce damage. Cover and con- 
cealment may also affect saving throws. The 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide (DMG) has more 
information. 

А creature that successfully saves against a spell 
without obvious physical effects often feels a hos- 
tile force or tingle, but the exact nature of the attack 
cannot be deduced. 

Unless the spell specifies otherwise, if a char- 
acter makes a saving throw, all items carried and 
worn are assumed to survive the attack. If the char- 
acter fails the saving throw, exposed items must 
make saving throws against the attack form. An 
item exposed by the destruction of a covering (a 
parchment scroll protected by a bone scroll case, 
for example) must also save against the attack. 

Unless specifically forbidden, a character can 
voluntarily forego a saving throw and willingly 
accept the spell result. Even a character with a spe- 
cial resistance to magic (for example, an elf’s 
resistance to a charm spell) can voluntarily sup- 
press this if he wants. 


Spell Description: This contains the details of what 
the spell does and how it works. Spells with multiple 


р ————————————— 4 


functions usually allow the caster to pick the desired 
function at the time of casting (for example, the emo- 
tion spell can create fear, courage, hope, despair; joy, 
and several other effects). 

Spells that give bonuses or penalties to attack 
rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, and so on, are 
usually not cumulative; only the strongest magic is 
effective. However, duration may be a factor, and 
spell effects might overlap in different ways at dif- 
ferent times. 


Notes: This new section deals with the spell's 
recommended rarity on the following scale: 
common, uncommon, rare, very rare, and unique. 
These are discussed in detail in the Definitions of 
Spell Frequency section. Spells of any rarity also 
may be restricted to certain races or specialty cast- 
ers. Any notes on a spell's source or origin, such as 
a game world or a magazine, are given here. 


Monster Details: Some of the spells summon 
or create monsters. The standard abbreviations used 
for monster details given later. Not all monsters 
will use all abbreviations. 


AC: Armor Class 

MV: Movement—fly, swim 
(MC) = Maneuverability Class (A to E) 

HD: Hit Dice 

SAT. | Number of Attacks 

THACO: To Hit Armor Class 0 

Dmg: Damage 

SA: Special Attacks 

SD: Special Defenses 

SW: Special Weaknesses 

MR: Magic Resistance 


SZ: Size 
Int: Intelligence 
ML: Morale 


AL: Alignment 


Spell Frequency 


FORGOTTEN REALMS* players and DMs 
different from those used in FORGOTTEN 
REALMS products. These guidelines are 
intended for general world settings. The DM, 
as always, is free to alter them as needed for 
local campaign conditions. 


Common Spell: The details and effects of a 
common spell are generally known, even by priests 
who may not have access to the spell. All spells in 


the Players Handbook are common spells. Spells 
listed for the basic priest class in world-specific 
material (such as the DARK SUN* campaign set) аге 
common for priests of that world, but might be rarer 
or even unknown elsewhere. 

Player character priest of 1st level can choose 
Ist-level spells given in the Player s Handbook 
from allowed spheres. Any limitation on spell 
selection—such as those for specialty priesthood or 
kit—apply even to common spells. Note also that 
DMs may have their own campaign guidelines. For 
example, the DM might have special spell lists for 
each divine patron, restricting any spells not 
included in the specific list. A DM might rule that 
named spells (such as Henley 5 disrupting digit) are 
uncommon or restricted spells, as well. 

Players and DMs should be aware that while the 
standard rule is that priests have free access to all 
spells on their respective lists, a more useful ruling 
is to use all common spells in allowed spheres. This 
gives the maximum ability to the DM to reward 
players occasionally with new spells and to encour- 
age magical research as a campaign activity. We 
highly recommend that additions to priest spell lists 
be allowed only through research or through the 
recovery of certain lost tomes. 


The DM always decides whether a priesthood is 

allowed a spell if there is any question. 
Uncommon Spell: Priest spells found in the Tome 
of Magic and PO: Spells & Magic fall into this cat- 
egory. These spells are less well known, but not 
restricted to a race or special group like, for exam- 
ple, druids, dragons, or the Emerald Enclave. A kit, 
school, or other specialty might allow some uncom- 
mon spells to be treated as common spells. Clerics 
can research uncommon spells using the normal 
research rules. 

Generally, a player character will not start with 
an uncommon spell or learn it in the course of 
normal level advancement (unless a divine patron 
allows it). Such spells enter play when found on a 
magical scroll or in a special book, or when 
developed as a result of spell research. In the aver- 
age AD&D campaign, finding a new common or 
uncommon spell is a little more common that a 
fighter class character finding a sword+/. Some 
uncommon spells may be restricted (see 
Restricted Spells). 


Rare Spell: Rare spells are specialized or hidden 
magic, such as those introduced in modules or 
accessories. Besides spells that are just less well 
known, two special types of rare spells exist: 1) 


» 582 М. 


"enn 


Spells known by a specific nonhuman race (such as 
elven spells from the Complete Book of Elves); and 
2) Spells of a specialty or campaign-specific group 
that is not given in the Player s Handbook (such as 
the spells of the Thornwater Circle, the spells from 
the Complete Necromancer s Handbook, or spells 
of a defiler priest who specializes in Elemental Fire 
magic). Rare spells are likely to be restricted (see 
Restricted Spells). 

A specialty priest treats the spells allowed by the 
specialty as common. 

Player characters have access to rare magics 
only as a result of campaign-specific conditions. 
Priest research of rare magics has a base —15% 
penalty to the research success rolls, unless the 
character has access to some sort of knowledge or 
resource that would offset this. Of course, a spell 
not pleasing to the divine patron will not be granted 
at all. 

Certain campaign-specific or storyline condi- 
tions might allow rare spell research at common 
spell chances. For example, if a human priest's 
reward for an adventure on behalf of the elves is 
elven lore (a race-specific spell), the DM may 
choose to waive some or all of the research cost, 
and/or the research success roll (time requirements 
should not be waived under any circumstances). 


Very Rare Spell: Spells that appear only in maga- 
zine articles, or are otherwise variant, should be 
classified as very rare. Spells newly introduced in 
Prayers From the Faithful fall into this category as 
well (this makes those special tomes a treat to find). 
The DM should closely control very rare spells. For 
example, they might be available only in a single 
special book or tome in which they were recorded. 
Many very rare spells are also restricted (see 
Restricted Spells). 

A DM who allows the spell to be researched at 
all rolls for the success of the research secretly and 
announces the result to the player. At the DM's 
option, the standard research success chances may 
be halved, or even quartered. 

Classifying a spell as very rare is one way for a 
DM to handle an experimental spell that is too pow- 
erful or one that encroaches too much on the class 
abilities of nonpriests. It is also possible, over time, 
for a spell devised by a player character to become 
rare, uncommon, or even common, either within a 
specific sect, or generally. 


583 


Unique Spell: This spell is known only to its original 
creator and is intrinsic to the creator's campaign func- 
tion. Some spells of this type might be available only 
to a character holding a certain position or office. 
Most unique spells are of the 6th spell level or higher; 
the creator is nearly always of 12th level or higher. 
Such spells are marked with a double dagger tt. 

There are fewer priest than wizard spells of this 
type, since a patron deity is more likely to grant or 
withhold spells of this type directly. 

The acquisition of a unique spell, or the creation 
of one by a player character, is a major campaign 
event, similar in campaign impact to the comple- 
tion of an epic high-level quest, the opening of a 
fixed interplanar gate, the founding of a barony, the 
destruction of an artifact, and so on. 


Other Definitions 


Lost Spell: Rarely, a spell is mentioned for which 
no 2nd Edition detail exists (including a few spells 
deliberately withdrawn from the system). No 
details are given for these other than the spell name. 
They are “lost knowledge,” included only to con- 
firm their one-time existence for the curious. 


Restricted Spell: A restricted spell is barred to 
generalists (that is, the cleric class), and to all other 
priests except those specifically allowed in the spell 
description or by the DM. Optionally, an independ- 
ently researched spell that matches the effects of a 
restricted spell might be possible, but at no less 
than two levels above the listed level. 


Optional Priest Magic: In addition to normal 
priest spells, three other types of priest magic are 
optional. 

Quest spells are special campaign-affecting 
spells occasionally made available to priests of at 
least 10th level and possessing a Wisdom ability 
score of at least 17. Quest spells are located in a 
special appendix in the final book. 

Faith Magic involves the harnessing of the 
devotional power of priests and worshipers to 
amplify the effect of certain spells. A discussion of 
faith magic is found in the final book. 

Cooperative Magic involves the linking of two 
or more priests who are of the same ethos (the Law- 
Neutral-Chaos axis) in order to increase the effec- 
tiveness of a joint spellcasting. A more complete 
discussion appears in the appendix of this book. 


A Guide to Spell Icons 


wie С co EE RA 


AL-QADIM* BIRTHRIGHT” DARK SUN 
Arabian Setting Setting of Kings Psionic World Setting 


ә A 


DRAGONLANCE* Kara-Tur/The Horde Maztica PLANESCAPE" 
Epic Romance Oriental Setting Aztec/New Other Planes’ 
Setting World Setting Setting 


- Ф Lo а 


RAVENLOFT* RED STEEL* Savage Lands’ Setting ^ SPELLIAMMER* 
Gothic Fantasy Setting Swashbuckling Fantasy Space Setting 
Fantasy Setting 


! Although there is no specific setting for savage spellcasters, many worlds have areas from which these might 
come. This icon marks spells particularly suited to an outland "savage" wizard or witch-doctor. 


Magic in the Worlds 

Elemental magic in the traditional FORGOTTEN REALMS, GREYHAWK, DRAGONLANCE, and MYSTARA set- 
tings is based on air, earth, fire, and water. This varies in other settings: In the oriental setting, air, earth, 
fire, and water are joined by a fifth element, wood, and priests are called shukenja. In the AL-QADIM set- 
ting, the four basic elements are traditional, but are called the Provinces of Flame, Sand, Sea, and Wind. 
In the Maztica setting, priest specialties are not detailed. In the sword-and-sandal DARK SUN setting, priests 
are preservers or defilers, depending on whether or not their magic drains the living energy of that world. 
Here, psionics are as important as magic. In the BIRTHRIGHT setting, bloodline abilities augment normal 
magics; scions of evil bloodlines are called awnsheglien, and those of heroic bloodlines are called 
ensheglien. In the SPELLIAMMING setting, flying ships are propelled by spellcasters using magical power 
sources called major helms and minor helms. In the swashbuckling RED STEEL setting, latent magical abil- 
ities called legacies result in baneful mutations (the Red Curse) unless controlled by exposure to the rare 
ore cinnabryl. The depletion of this ore is cause for concern. In the RAVENLOFT setting, the Demiplane of 
Dread, gothic horror in form of Dark Lords, each a godlike power trapped in a private domain, keeps 
adventurers on the run, looking for a way out and making special fear, horror, and Ravenloft powers 
checks. The PLANESCAPE campaign presents new settings from the inner (Elemental) Planes to the Outer 
Planes, where the gods live. Casting magic here requires special spell keys, and the denizens are divided 
into factions along alignment lines. 
Abbreviations referring to Source Material 
PHB = ADVANCED DUNGEONS & Dracons Player s Handbook 


DMG = ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
PO:SM = Player 5 Option: Spells & Magic 


584 


Spike Growth 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 3d4 turns + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Wherever any type of plant growth of moderate 
size or density is found, this spell can be used, The 
ground-covering vegetation or roots and rootlets in 
the area become very hard and sharply pointed. In 
effect the ground cover, while appearing to be 
unchanged, acts as if the area were strewn with cal- 
trops. In areas of bare ground or earthen pits, roots 
and rootlets act in the same way. For each 10 feet of 
movement through the area, a creature suffers 244 
points of damage, and must also roll a saving throw 
vs. spell. If this saving throw is failed, the creature’s 
movement rate is reduced by of its current total 
(but a creature’s movement rate cannot be less than 
1). This penalty lasts for 24 hours, after which the 
creature’s normal movement rate is regained. 


Ne 


Spike Stones 


Without the use of a spell such as 
true seeing, similar magical aids, or 
some other special means of detection 
(such as detect traps or detect snares and 
pits), an area affected by spike growth is unde- 
tectable as such until a creature enters the area and 
suffers damage. Even then, the creature cannot 
determine the extent of the perilous area unless 
some means of magical detection is used. 

The components for this spell are the priest's 
holy symbol and either seven sharp thorns or seven 
small twigs, each sharpened to a point. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


3 


Spike Stones 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 3d4 turns + 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. square/level, 1 spike/sq. ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


The spike stones spell causes rock to shape itself 
into long, sharp points that tend to blend into the 
background. It is effective on both natural rock and 
worked stone. The spike stones serve to impede 
progress through an area and to inflict damage. If 
an area is carefully observed, each observer is 25% 
likely to notice the sharp points of rock. Otherwise, 
those entering the spell's area of effect suffer 1d4 
points of damage per round. The success of each 
attack is determined as if the caster of the spell 
were actually engaging in combat. Those entering 
the area are subject to attack immediately upon set- 
ting foot in the area and for each round spent in the 
area thereafter. The initial step enables the individ- 
ual to become aware of some problem only if the 
initial attack succeeds; otherwise movement con- 
tinues and the spike stones remain unnoticed until 
damage occurs. Charging or running creatures 
suffer two attacks per round. 

Those falling into pits affected by spike stones 
suffer six such attacks for every 10 feet fallen, each 
attack having a +2 bonus to the attack roll. In addi- 
tion, the damage inflicted by each attack increases 
by +2 for every 10 feet fallen. Finally, the creatures 
also suffer any normal falling damage. 

The material component is a group of four tiny 
stalactites. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Spiral of Degeneration 


Spiral of Degeneration 
Quest spell, see appendix. 


Spirit Animal Form 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 hr. 

Duration: 1d10 days 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is most commonly used on warriors 
in the pursuit of some heroic deed. Spirit animal 
form can be cast upon the self or another willing 
person. After entering a trance that lasts at least one 
hour, the subject changes into a typical member of 
his or her spirit animal’s species. For all intents and 
purposes, the subject becomes that animal, receiv- 
ing all of its normal attributes and abilities, save 
that intellect is retained. The transformed person 
uses the spirit animal’s combat tables, but the 
saving throw tables appropriate to his human form. 
Everything worn or carried becomes part of the 
animal form, and is still with the subject upon 
returns to normal form. The spell lasts 1d10 days, 
and neither the caster nor the subject has any con- 
trol over when it will expire. 

This spell cannot be used to assume the form 
of supernatural or supernaturally large animals, 
such as thunder birds. If such an attempt is made, 
the receiver assumes the form of a similar type of 
creature—in the case of thunder birds, for example, 
an eagle. 

Notes: Common for Amerind cultures (origi- 
nally from Legends & Lore). 


Spirit Annihilation 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 barely living or recently deceased 
sentient being 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


By use of this spell, the caster completely anni- 
hilates a creature’s spirit, utterly wiping it from 
existence. The spirit never reaches the Outer 


2 586 М. 


Planes, but is caught up by the force of the spell and 
utterly shattered, or its energy is diverted to some 
foul use (such as to power a particularly monstrous 
spell of gigantic complexity). 

This spell is usable only on those who are about 
to die or who have died (below 0 hit points, or 
below —10 hit points if that optional rule is in use) 
within one round per level of the caster. The sub- 
ject receives a saving throw vs. spell, which 
negates the effect if the saving throw is success- 
ful. Those who fail their saving throws cannot be 
spoken with by means of speak with dead, raised, 
reincarnated, or resurrected, though the body of 
the victim can be animated as a mindless undead 
creature. 

Spirit annihilation was used by the priests of 
Bane centuries ago to negate the operation of spells 
used to retrieve information from the Banites’ vic- 
tims, such as speak with dead. The only place to 
currently find this spell is on ancient scrolls hidden 
deep within old Banite haunts. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Bane of the For- 
GOTTEN REALMS setting. Knowledge of this spell is 
all but lost. 


Spirit Bind 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 corpse 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When cast near the corpse of a newly dead indi- 
vidual, this spell binds an individual's life force to 
its physical remains, preventing a spirit's departure 
to the afterlife. The (presumably unwilling) spirit of 
the deceased is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to 
resist the effect (made as if still alive). The casting 
priest imposes a —1 penalty to the save for every 3 
levels of experience he or she has attained (—2 
penalty at 7th level, —3 at 10th level, to a maximum 
of —6 at 19th level). 

Spirit bind must be cast on the body of the 
recently deceased within one round per level of the 
caster. Thus a 10th-level priest can bind the spirit of 
an individual who was dead for up to a turn. If suc- 
cessful, the spirit-bound corpse takes on a pale sil- 
very or mauve radiance. Normal animals and even 
monsters of Low Intelligence involuntarily shun 
this necromantic aura. 


Spirit of Flame 


a a 


While under the effect of this spell, a cadaver 
becomes immune to the normal effects of rot and 
decay. Spirit bind can thus be employed to preserve 
a body for a subsequent raising or resurrection, for 
which the spirit-bound individual is considered to 
have been dead for less than a day. Because of the 
strong, necromantic link already forged between 
the spirit and the body, the subject receives a —1096 
penalty to his or her Resurrection Survival roll. 

However, this spell is more often put to much 
darker ends by death priests. Note that, for the 
deceased, being spirit-bound is not a pleasant expe- 
rience. The spirit may not be aware of its current 
location or the passage of time (or so good-aligned 
priests who employ this spell may like to think), but 
it is most certainly aware of being trapped or con- 
strained. Once bound to its body, a spirit is much 
easier to coerce with threats of permanent impris- 
onment and to interrogate with speak with dead 
spells. Some sages speculate spirit bind may also 
be involved in the loathsome creation of a flesh 
golem. 

While immune to normal decay and dissolution 
(and the ravaging of animals and dumb monsters), 
the spirit-bound corpse is in no way protected from 
destruction. Should its body be destroyed, the spirit 
is bound to the area instead. Such a restless, quasi- 
liberated spirit might become a noncorporeal 
undead (such as an apparition, banshee, haunt, pol- 
tergeist, wraith, ghost, or spectre). A spirit impris- 
oned in this manner can be released by casting the 
reverse of this spell or dispel evil (dispel magic and 
remove curse are ineffective). Because of the con- 
siderable dangers for the subject and moral quan- 
daries involved, good-aligned priests are naturally 
reluctant to employ spirit bind except in the most 
dire emergencies. 

The reverse of this spell, spirit release, severs a 
spirit's ties with the material world. Unwilling non- 
corporeal undead are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell effect, subject to the same penalties as spirit 
bind. 1f failed, the undead spirit departs for the 
Outer Planes and is effectively dispersed. Note that 
neither version of this spell affects corporeal 
undead (such as ghouls, liches, and vampires), nor 
do they affect extraplanar creatures. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancer-priests. 


587 


Spirit Mask 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: 1 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is available only to shamans of Ubtao, 
known as spiritlords. By means of this incantation, 
a spiritlord can wrap his or her own essence in that 
of a minor or major spirit. While under the effects 
of a spirit mask spell, many Divination spells are 
diverted to affect the enveloping spirit, not the spir- 
itlord. For example, spells cast on a priest protected 
by a spirit mask spell such as know alignment and 
ESP are redirected to detect information about the 
spirit in which the spellcaster is enshrouded, not the 
caster. This misdirection is not readily apparent to 
the caster of the divination magic. Spells such as 
detect magic, detect invisibility, and similar magics 
are unaffected by a spirit mask spell. 

The material component is the spiritlord's spirit 
mask (his or her holy symbol). 

Notes: Granted by the Chultan jungle god 
Ubtao of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Spirit of Flame 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 6 

Range: 2 mi./level 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 6 rds. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a priest can walk into a fire and 
teleport to any other fire up to the limit of his range. 
The priest can go blindly, and will appear in a 
random campfire in a place determined by the DM. 
If the caster isn’t near a settlement, then 30% of 
the time no suitable fire is within range and the 
spell is wasted. The destructive fire elementals 
demand a high price for this spell, and the priest 
sacrifices 1d6 hit points (as damage) each time it 
is cast. The damage can be healed by any method 
that restores lost hit points. 

Notes: Uncommon for Elemental Fire priests 
from the DARK SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Spirit of Power 


588 


Spirit of Power* 
(Invocation, Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: 1 hr. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This cooperative spell is rarely used or spoken 
of, since its requirements are strict and the outcome 
is uncertain. The spell must be cast by six priests 
of the same faith. All six must touch hands at the 
time of casting. At the completion of the spell, the 
priests fall into a trance. The life essences of the 
priests leave their bodies and merge at a point 
within 10 feet of the casters. The spirits of the 
priests meld together to form the avatar of the 
priests' deity. 

In this manner, the six become a single being 
with all the powers and abilities allowed to that 
avatar. The only stipulation is that the priests' deity 
cannot have created all avatars allowed to it at that 
moment. If this has happened, the spell fails and the 
priests are drained as described below. 

If the spell succeeds, the priests have com- 
pletely given their wills over to their deity, essen- 
tially forming the vessel into which it funnels 
power. In becoming the avatar, the priests retain 
the ability to make most of their own decisions. 
(The six must work in harmony or allow one of 
their number to decide all actions.) However, the 
deity can assume direct control of the avatar at any 
time it desires—the avatar is, after all, an earthly 
manifestation of the deity. 

Although the spell has a duration of one hour, 
the deity is not obliged to release the priests at that 
time. If the priests are not released at the end of the 
spell's duration, they instantly die. A deity can 
choose to sacrifice its priests in order to maintain 
its avatar on the Prime Material Plane. For good 
deities or those that have any respect for life, free 
will, or mercy to abuse this spell is virtually 
unknown. For dark and sinister gods, the question 
is much more uncertain. If a deity chooses to main- 
tain the avatar longer than one hour, control of the 
avatar instantly and permanently passes to the DM. 
(Clearly, a DM should seldom if ever exercise this 
power.) 

While the priests are formed into the avatar, 
their bodies remain in a death-like trance. The 
priests have no idea what might be happening to 
their real bodies (unless the avatar can observe 


them). Any damage to a priest’s body requires ап 
instant System Shock roll. If successful, the 
damage is recorded normally, but the damage does 
not take effect until the spell ends (at which point 
the priest will almost certainly die). If the System 
Shock roll is failed, the priest dies instantly and the 
spell ends. Those who die in this manner cannot be 
raised, resurrected, or reincarnated. They have 
been taken to the ultimate reward (or punishment) 
for the service they have rendered. If the bodies are 
moved from their positions, the spell ends. 

Even if the deity releases the priests, they are 
left severely drained. All spells memorized are lost 
until the priests can rest and perform their prayers 
once again. The physical drain leaves each priest 
with only 1 hit point upon awakening, regardless 
of the number of hit points the priest had when the 
spell was cast. Since damage suffered during the 
spell takes effect instantly, any priest who is hurt 
may die immediately (although quick action by 
others might save him). 

Each priest who survives the spell will be bound 
by a quest (a duty that must be completed in 
exchange for calling upon their god). 

The material component is an offering appro- 
priate to the deity. The DM determines the exact 
nature of the offering required. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with major 
access to the sphere of Summoning (ToM). 


Spirit Quest 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: 6 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 24 hrs. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell combines the strictures of a quest 
spell (as the 5th-level priest spell) with a series of 
visions that appear to the spell recipient in his or 
her dreams or feverish hallucinations. Unlike a 
quest spell, a spirit quest can be cast only on a will- 
ing recipient. The spellcasting shaman cannot spec- 
ify the nature of the quest or the requirements of the 
task in any fashion. Instead, the totem spirit of the 
beast cult communicates the spirit quest to the spell 
recipient through an ongoing series of cryptic 
dreams and mystifying visions. The spell recipient 
must interpret the visions and attempt to complete 
the quest. If the visions indicate that certain com- 
panions are allowed to join the quester on his or 


Spirit Trap (of the Darkbringer) 


her spirit quest, then they (and only they) can par- 
ticipate without afflicting the spell recipient with 
the penalties of a standard quest spell. 

If the spell recipient admits failure and gives up 
the spirit quest at any time, the effects of the spell 
end immediately and the carried token (described 
below) crumbles into dust. The quester suffers no 
further effects, except a loss of status in the tribe. 
However, if a quester succeeds, he or she becomes 
a legend among the children of Uthgar and receives 
a permanent, unique power granted by his or her 
tribe's totem spirit. (This unique ability must be 
designed by the DM and should be commensurate 
for the difficulty and importance of the spirit quest 
performed. In addition, the successful completion 
of a spirit quest should be marked by the granting 
of a large experience point reward.) 

No being can attempt a spirit quest more than 
once per lifetime, regardless of the success or fail- 
ure of a previous attempt. 

The spell requires that the quester carry a small 
token of his or her beast totem, such as a bear claw 
or raven feather. If the token is lost for any reason 
before the spirit quest is completed, the visions 
cease immediately, although the requirements of 
the quest aspect of the spell remain in force. The 
visions resume if and when the token is recovered. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol (the shaman's sacred bundle) and a bundle 
of potent herbs and incense that is burned while 
the spell is cast. 

Notes: Granted by the barbarian demipower 
Uthgar of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Spirit Release 


Reversed form, spirit bind. 


Spirit Trap (of the Darkbringer) 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Plant, Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | hr. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 living creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates an innocuous-appearing false 
walnut. Once the spell is cast to create it, it can be 
activated at will by any possessed Minion of Moan- 
der by clenching it in a special way. When activated, 
the round nut radiates a sphere of darkness that 
expands to the size of a pumpkin to encompass the 
bearer's hand and forearm in an inky black ball in 


A 589 М. 


Spiritual Corruption 


b———————————————————? 1 


a single round. In the following round, the sphere 
shimmers like hot tar and emits a vinelike tendril of 
glassy black up to 20 feet in length that touches the 
target being. A subject who fails a saving throw vs. 
spell with а —4 penalty is enveloped in darkness and 
transformed into a silhouette. The silhouette then 
constricts and squeezes into a tiny, black, marble- 
size sphere that is pulled by the tendril into the 
Minion’s hand. The darkness then dissipates, leav- 
ing a clear, crystal walnut in the Minion’s hand sur- 
rounding the marble-size black sphere that is the 
imprisoned being. A being who makes a success- 
ful saving throw vs. spell is unaffected by the vine- 
like tendril, and the spell dissipates immediately. 

The clear spirit prison lasts for 1 day per level of 
the spellcaster. When the crystal nut is shattered or 
when the spell duration expires, the marble-size 
sphere of darkness reforms into the shape of the 
imprisoned creature and then the darkness dissi- 
pates, leaving the creature unharmed. 

The material component is a black sapphire 
with greenish-yellow highlights of at least 5,000 gp 
value, which is transformed into the false walnut. 

Notes: Granted by Moander the Darkbringer of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Spiritual Corruption 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Living creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is an insidious enchantment that 
tempts the heart and soul of any victim subject to 
its degenerative effects. The effects of a spiritual 
corruption spell can be ended only by a limited 
wish or wish spells or the actions of a deity, artifact, 
or relic. Dispel magic and similar spells have no 
effect. The casting of this spell is an evil act. 

The target creature is allowed an initial saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid the effects of spiritual cor- 
ruption entirely. Good-aligned beings receive a +4 
bonus to their initial saving throw, neutral-aligned 
beings (with respect to good and evil) receive no 
bonus or penalty, and evil-aligned creatures are 
unaffected by this spell. 

Once under the effects of a spiritual corruption 
spell, a being’s moral fiber is severely tested. 
Within one day of the casting of this spell, the being 
is tested by a minor moral dilemma selected by the 


DM. A being who fails a saving throw vs. spell 
(secretly rolled by the DM, and the above-men- 
tioned modifiers do not apply) chooses the morally 
suspect option. A being that succeeds at the saving 
throw is no longer under the effect of the spiritual 
corruption spell. Saving throws can, of course, be 
voluntarily forgone. 

If the saving throw is failed on the first day, the 
being is tested again by a more significant moral 
dilemma on the second day. Again a saving throw is 
required, this time with a —1 penalty. Success 
means the creature is tested again the following day 
by a less significant moral dilemma, but with no 
penalty to his or her saving throw. If the saving 
throw fails, the temptations increase, and a third 
test occurs on the third day, with a —2 penalty. 

This series of temptations fluctuates in degree 
and penalty indefinitely until the being either 
makes his or her saving throw on a day with no 
penalty or fails a saving throw vs. spell with a —7 
penalty. In the former case, being is no longer 
under the effect of the spiritual corruption spell, 
but still has to deal with the consequences of any 
moral failures and may need an atonement spell. 
In the latter case, the spell also ends, but the being’s 
alignment irrevocably shifts to evil (alignment with 
respect to law and chaos remains unchanged), and 
he or she feels strongly drawn to the worship of 
Gargauth. 

The material component is a piece of fruit that 
looks delicious on the outside, but which is com- 
pletely rotten within. 

Notes: Granted by the evil demigod Gargauth 
the Outcast of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Spiritual Hammer 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By calling upon his deity, the caster of a spiri- 
tual hammer spell brings into existence a field of 
force shaped vaguely like a hammer. As long as the 
caster concentrates upon the hammer, it strikes at 
any opponent within its range, as desired. Each 
round the caster can choose to attack the same crea- 
ture as the previous round or switch to a new crea- 
ture that he can see anywhere within his maximum 
range. The hammer's chance to successfully hit is 


2 590 М. 


Spittle 


ee a 


equal to that of the caster, without any Strength 
bonuses. In addition, it strikes as a magical weapon 
with a bonus of +1 for every six experience levels 
(or fraction) of the spellcaster, up to a total of + 3 to 
the attack roll and + 3 to the damage roll for а 13th- 
level caster. The base damage inflicted when it 
scores a hit is the same as a normal war hammer 
(1d4+1 vs. opponents of man-size or smaller, 144 
upon larger opponents), plus the magical bonus. 
The hammer strikes in the same direction as the 
caster is facing, so if he is behind the creature, all 
bonuses for rear attack are gained along with the 
loss of any modifications to the creature’s AC for 
shield and Dexterity. 

As soon as the caster ceases concentration, the 
spiritual hammer spell ends. A dispel magic spell 
that includes either the caster or the force in its 
area of effect has a chance to dispel the spiritual 
hammer. If an attacked creature has magic resist- 
ance, the resistance is checked the first time the 
spiritual hammer strikes. If the hammer is suc- 
cessfully resisted, the spell is lost. If not, the 
hammer has its normal full effect for the duration 
of the spell. 

The material component is a normal war 
hammer that the priest must hur] toward opponents 
while uttering a plea to his deity. The hammer dis- 
appears when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Spiritual Wrath* 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 6 

Range: 300 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 60 ft. to 120 ft. radius 
Saving Throw: / 


This powerful cooperative spell is rarely 
invoked since it requires the concerted effort of six 
or more high-level priests. The casting effort 
severely weakens the priests, discouraging casual 
use of this spell. 

To cast the spell, six or more priests must be 
within a 15-foot radius. Each priest must cast spir- 
itual wrath at the same time. Before beginning the 
spell, the priests must decide upon the area of 
effect. The spell causes 10d6 points of damage, 
plus an additional 1d6 points per priest casting the 
spell. (The minimum damage, therefore, is 16d6.) 
Creatures within the area of effect are allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell to reduce the damage to half. 


The spell strikes as a great wave of force that 
descends from the sky. Small objects exposed to it 
must save vs. crushing blow. Structures suffer 
damage as if hit by a heavy catapult. The force of 
this spell raises a great cloud of dirt and dust, 
obscuring the area for 1d4+1 rounds. 

The spell's area of effect is determined by the 
number of casters. Each priest contributes 10 feet 
to the radius of the spell. Six casters would create 
a spell with a radius of 60 feet. No more than 
twelve casters can cooperate to cast this spell 
(maximum of 22d6 damage and a 120-foot radius 
area of effect). 

The spell is difficult to cast, physically taxing 
the priests so much that each suffers 3d10 points 
of damage from the effort (no saving throw). 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with major 
access to the sphere of Combat (70M). 


Spittle 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: S 

Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 attack 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the priest to generate a dis- 
gusting spittle that can paralyze any creature it 
touches. The priest must make successful attack, 
and the creature is considered to be is at short 
range. Any creature struck must make a success- 
ful saving throw vs. spell or lose the use ofthe area 
struck (see the table below). The attack can be used 
but once, and the spells ends if not used within 5 
rounds of the casting. All effects last 1d4+1 
rounds. The DM might alter the hit location chart 
to account for creature facing or non-humanoid 
body type. 

Notes: Granted by Iuz the Evil of the Grey- 
HAWK Setting. 


Spittle Hit Location Table 
1d8 Roll Area Struck Effect 
1 Head Unconscious 
2-4 Воду Paralyzed 
5 Weapon Arm No attacks 
6 Non-weapon Arm Мо shield bonus 
7-8 Leg Movement 
reduced 5095; 
lose defensive 
Dexterity bonuses 


4 591 M 


Spliff's Wonder Bubbles 


ee A 


Spliff’s Wonder Bubbles 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 144 rds. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. stream, 3 ft./level long 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this enchantment, a priest calls 
forth 1d4 bubbles, plus one bubble for every level 
he or she has attained. The bubbles shoot forth 
from the priest's fingertips in a 10-foot-wide 
stream that is 3 feet long per level of the caster. For 
example, a 6th-level priest releases 144 + 6 
bubbles in a stream 10 feet wide and 18 feet long. 
The priest makes an attack roll against the Armor 
Class of each creature caught in the stream. A 
bubble that strikes releases a variable spell effect 
(see table). Bubbles that do not strike a creature 
pop for no effect. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from PoLyHE- 
DRON Newzine). 


Wonder Bubble Effects 
Effect 
Cures 1d3 points of damage 
Cures 1d4 points of damage 
Cures 146 points of damage 
Releases a s/ow poison spell 
Releases an aid spell 
Releases a bless spell 


1d6 Roll 


ON tn шоо м — 


Splinter Wood 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 wooden item 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes one wooden object to 
explode violently into thousands of splinters. The 
druid can affect up to one spear shaft in volume 
per level (one axe handle, seven arrow shafts, or 
7 pounds of wood). An item with a volume greater 
than the caster can affect suffers no harm. Other- 
wise, the item is allowed an item saving throw vs. 
crushing blow with a —1 penalty for every four 
levels of the druid (magical items have bonuses 
as noted in the DMG). 

Any creature within a certain distance takes 
damage from the flying splinters. The affected 
area depends on the size of the splintered object: 
2 feet, plus 1 additional foot per 20 pounds mass. 
The splinters cause damage equal to 1 hit point 
per 7 pounds of wood. Thus, a spear shaft inflicts 
1 point of damage to any creature holding it or 
within 2 feet. 

Damage caused by the splinters is reduced by a 
value equal to the Armor Class of the creature sub- 
tracted from 10. Thus, a creature with AC —1 is pro- 
tected from 11 points of damage. 

A creature's Dexterity is reduced by 1 point for 
every 5 points of damage inflicted by this spell until 
such time as all splinters are removed. This takes 
one round per point of damage received. (Splinters 
inflicting less than 5 points of damage need not be 
removed.) 

Additionally, creatures without great helms or 
eye protection have a 5% chance of being blinded 
for 2d4 rounds. 

Notes: Very rare spell for druids. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


5 


9 


2 


Spring Mastery 


Eee 4 


Spoil 


Reversed form, ferment. 


Spring 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 2 

Range: 3 yds./level 
Components: V, S, М 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 24 hrs. maximum 
Area of Effect: Creates 1 spring 
Saving Throw: None 


The druid can use this spell to create a tempo- 
rary spring of water with a flow rate of 2 to 12 gal- 
lons a minute, depending on the relative dryness 
of the region. If the DM determines that under- 
ground water exists within range, it is detected and 
drawn to the surface at the spot chosen unless its 
path is blocked by solid rock. The appearance of the 
water is delayed one round for every 10 feet it must 
travel. In arid country, the spring may last for as 
little as 1 hour and flow at a lower rate. 

The material component is a small forked stick, 
which is thrust into the ground. 

Notes: Very rare for druids. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Spring Mastery 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation, Elemental Water 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be employed in three ways: If cast 
on a spot where there is no running watercourse, it 
causes water to spring up from the earth. If cast on 
an existing spring, it purifies the water and makes 
it totally transparent and nondistorting to the 
caster's eyes. If the caster is in contact with a 
spring, the magic can be used to perform a limited 
sort of teleport. 

The first function of the spell causes water to 
flow up from a spot on the ground forever if enough 
subterranean groundwater is present to feed a 
spring. If there is no water around, it causes a 
steady flow of water of Eldath for one turn per level 
of the caster. One creature per round can drink of 


the flow, but if it is used to fill leather canteen 
flasks, potion bottles, or other containers permitting 
transportation away for later imbibing, the spell is 
exhausted after 1 container per level of the caster 
is filled. Any container larger in volume than the 
caster's two hands placed together counts as two or 
more containers, depending on its size. 

The second function of the spell allows the 
caster to clearly see through the spring's water to 
find creatures therein and examine submerged 
objects or the streambed itself. Normally invisible 
creatures such as water weirds or water elementals 
in the spring affected by spring mastery are made 
evident to the caster even if they are merged. Spring 
mastery used in this fashion permanently banishes 
all taints, poisons, waterborne diseases, and corro- 
sive substances, including monster secretions. An 
aquatic monster employing such fluid-based attacks 
discovers that they simply do not function within a 
70-foot spherical radius of where the spell was cast 
for one full year after the round of casting. 

The third function of spring mastery permits 
instantaneous travel for the caster and all nonliv- 
ing worn, carried, or held items only (to whatever 
limits the caster can normally carry) from the place 
of casting to either a known, previously visited spot 
in or on the bank of any other spring in Faerün 
(including subterranean watercourses) or to the 
nearest junction with another watercourse either 
upstream or downstream (which need not be a 
locale known to the caster), as the caster chooses. 

The material components are three drops of 
water blessed by Eldath, blessed by one of her per- 
sonal servants (her servitor creatures) in her name, 
or consecrated to her by an Exalted of Eldath. 
These must be poured upon the spot where the 
priest desires a spring to issue from in the first spell 
use, introduced into the existing spring in the 
second, or poured in the hand of the casting priest 
in the third. 

Notes: Granted by Eldath, the Green Goddess 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


4 593 NV 


Sprite Venom — Elf 


A 


Sprite Venom — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 arrow/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster can create an 
ointment similar to that employed by sprites to coat 
the tips of their arrows. For every level of the caster, 
the caster can create enough sprite venom to coat 
the tip of a single arrow, dart, needle, or quarrel. 
(Sling bullets and other missile weapons that inflict 
bludgeoning damage do not benefit from the appli- 
cation of sprite venom.) 

Any creature struck by an arrow treated with 
sprite venom must make a saving throw vs. 
poison or fall into a deep sleep lasting 1d6 turns. 
Unlike the ointment created by sprites, magic 
resistance protects against the ointment created 
by this spell. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a pinch of sand from a sandman, a type 
of elemental from the Elemental Plane of Earth. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Erevan Пеѕеге. 


Squeaking Floor 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, М 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft./level square 
Saving Throw: None 


The squeaking floor spell squeaks loudly when 
any creature larger than a normal rat (larger than 
one-half cubic foot or weighing more than three 
pounds) steps on or touches the warded area. The 
spell affects a square whose sides equal the caster's 
level times 10 feet (a 9th-level priest could affect a 
square whose sides are 90 feet long). 

The squeaks can be heard in a 100-foot radius, 
regardless of interposing barriers such as walls and 
doors. The squeaks occur regardless of the surface, 
whether wood, stone, dirt, or any other solid mate- 
rial. Listeners automatically know the direction of 
the sounds. 


Those who successfully Move Silently reduce 
the radius of the noise to 50 feet. Those able to fly 
or otherwise avoid direct contact with the affected 
surface do not activate the squeaking floor. A mag- 
ical silence effect suppresses the squeaking origi- 
nating within its area. 

The material component is a rusty iron hinge 
that squeaks when moved. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with access to the 
sphere of Wards (ToM). 


Stalk 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal, Traveler 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell makes the affected creature nearly 
invisible in rural surroundings (99% undetectable 
visually, as if hiding in shadows). The creature 
also becomes almost totally silent (as if moving 
silently with a 99% skill), and both its natural 
scent and its heat signature are masked by the 
spell (making infravisual or scent detection of the 
creature also 99% unlikely). A stationary creature 
under the effect of stalk is impossible to detect 
by nonmagical means at a range of greater than 
10 yards. 

Movement does not negate the spell, but it ren- 
ders nonmagical detection possible by keen obser- 
vation. In this case, the affected creature still can 
Move Silently with a base 50% chance for success 
and remain undetected with a base 65% chance for 
success with respect to vision and infravision. If 
the creature’s normal Hide in Shadows or Move 
Silently skills are higher than these percentages, 
then they are used instead, although the infravi- 
sion-masking chance while moving remains 65%. 
Scent masking is always at 99% for the duration 
of the spell. 

The spell effect ends when the duration expires 
or when the creature attacks. 

The material components are a piece of dried 
chameleon or lizard skin and the holy symbol of 
Mielikki. 

Notes: Granted by the nature gods Mielikki and 
Gwaeron Windstrom of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. Granted by Ehlonna in the GREYHAWK 
setting. 


2 594 ыч 


Stalker 
Quest spell, see appendix. 


Starflight* 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Travelers 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 to 3 worshipers of Mystra 
Saving Throw: None 


This cooperative spell requires at least two Mys- 
tran priests casting the spell simultaneously. For every 
two additional Mystran clergy members (of any 
class) who participate in the ceremony, another Mys- 
tran worshiper can be affected, to a maximum of three 
worshipers. Other participating clergy must either 
cast starflight or donate three spell levels of magical 
energy to the spell. Clergy who donate energy lose 
three spell levels of spells from memory as if they had 
been cast. Portions of a spell donated result in the loss 
of the whole spell as if it were cast. This spell bestows 
on its recipient the capability of magical flight. If 
empowers a worshiper of Mystra to move vertically 
and horizontally at MV 24 (A), and at MV 12 (A) if 
ascending and MV 36 (B) if diving sharply. The spell 
recipient can swoop and rise with a mere thought and 
can carry up to his or her own body weight along in 
flight. It lasts as long as stars are visible in the sky, 
normally ending with sunrise, but possibly terminat- 
ing earlier because of a storm or heavy fog. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Mystra of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Starharp 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing, Protection 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 2-ft./level diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


Starharp creates a blue-white, glowing image of 
a harp floating in the air above the caster's head. 
The harp plays by itself, echoing and elaborating on 
whatever tune the caster sang or hummed during 
the casting, and emits little stars of twinkling radi- 
ance as it does so. 


Starshine 


N 


All creatures within a sphere 2 feet in diameter 
per level of the caster centered on the harp (an area 
of effect that moves with the caster) are instantly 
freed from any existing natural or magical pain, 
nausea, charm spells or effects, hold spells or 
effects, fear, stunning, and repulsion spell effects. 
These effects do not return after the starharp fades 
away. In addition, the caster can concentrate on any 
one being within a 2-foot-diameter sphere per level 
of himself or herself during spellcasting. That being 
is magically cured of 2d4 points of damage as soon 
as the starharp appears. If no being is chosen, this 
healing power is lost; it cannot be saved for later. 

This spell cannot be disrupted by attacks against 
the caster or the harp image. Magical darkness of 
any sort cannot form or persist within the 
starharp 5 area of effect. 

Once the spell is cast, the creator of a starharp is 
free to fight, sleep, cast spells, and engage in other 
activities without affecting the starharp. If the caster 
is slain, the starharp continues to function but turns 
blood-red in color, its tune becoming sad. 

This spell has been customarily known only by 
Harpers, but it is now known also by the clergy of 
Finder Wyvernspur. 

The spell's material components are a tear from 
the caster and a tiny carved harp of wood, bone, or 
ivory. 

Notes: Granted by Finder Wyvernspur of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Uncommon for Harper 
priests. 


Starshine 
(Evocation, Illusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Sun 
Level: 3 


Range: 10 yd/level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


А starshine spell enables the caster to softly illu- 
minate an area as if it was exposed to a clear night 
sky filled with stars. Regardless of the height of the 
open area in which the spell is cast, the area imme- 
diately beneath it is lit by starshine. Vision ranges 
are the same as those for a bright moonlit night— 
movement noted out to 100 yards; stationary crea- 
tures seen up to 50 yards; general identifications 
made at 30 yards; recognition at 10 yards. The spell 
creates shadows and has no effect on infravision. 
The area of effect actually appears to be a night sky, 
but disbelief of the illusion merely enables the 


| р, 595 e 


| 
| 


Steal Breath 


_ ——————————— di 


disbeliever to note that the stars are actually evoked 
lights. This spell does not function under water. 
The material components are several stalks 
from an amaryllis plant (especially Hypoxis) and 
several holly berries. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


hie 


Steal Breath 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 2 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell forces the air out of an opponent s lungs. 
Nonbreathing creatures are unaffected by this spell, but 
any other creature that fails a saving throw vs. spell 
loses one round of actions and suffers a —3 initiative 
modifier for the next three rounds. Steal breath can 
disrupt spellcasting. The stea! breath spell counters 
and can be countered by ће Ist-level spell deep breath. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Steal Psionic Strength — Duergar 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell steals 1d8 PSPs per level of the 
caster (to a maximum of 10d8 PSPs) from a being 
with psionic abilities and transfers them to the 
priest casting the spell. The target creature 
receives a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
effect. If the creature has fewer PSPs than are 
stolen, then the priest receives all the creature's 
remaining PSPs. The bonus PSPs are used first 
when the priest engages in psionic activity, 
whether it be a psionic attack, defense, or power. 
Stolen PSPs that are not used before the spell ends 
dissipate without effect. 

The spell dissipates without effect if the target 
creature and/or the caster has no psionic ability or 
if the creature has 0 (zero) PSPs. Psionic defense 


modes cannot block the theft of PSPs by this spell, 
but magical defenses such as a ring of mind 
shielding or certain spells granting impervious 
mind shielding block the effect, 

The material component is the priestess's holy 
symbol, which is touched to her brow during the 
casting of the spell. 

Notes: Granted by the duergar goddess Deep 
Duerra. 


Stealth of Brandobaris — Halfling 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the priest temporarily 
gains the ability to Move Silently and Hide in Shad- 
ows as a thief of equal level (see the Average Thief 
Ability Table in the DMG). Dexterity and racíal 
adjustments apply, as do armor penalties. If the 
caster is a multiclassed priest/thief or a specialty 
priest of Brandobaris, the chance of success when 
using either skill is instead increased by 2096. 
Stealth of Brandobaris is canceled if exposed to a 
successful dispel magic or similar power. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling god, Brandobaris. 


Steelskin — Gnome 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster transforms the 
hide of a creature into an alloy of flesh and steel. 
The added protection gives a +1 bonus to Armor 
Class for every three levels of the priest (round up), 
to a maximum bonus of +5. However, the steelskin 
reduces the recipient's Dexterity to two-thirds of 
normal (rounded down) with a corresponding 
adjustment to Dexterity-related abilities. 


Ж 596 М. 


The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a forged steel rod. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Flandal 
Steelskin. 


Steep Soma-Juice — Vedic 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 hrs. 
Duration: 1 wk. 

Area of Effect: 2 ounces/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is required for the preparation of soma 
juice, a special drink sacred to the moon-god Soma. 
It is primarily for those of Indian societies, though 
the DM may allow it to be granted by other deities 
if desired. When the priest brews and blesses the 
soma plant’s leaves, he or she creates a powerful 
magical juice. Those drinking at least one ounce a 
week receive two benefits: an increase of one point 
of Constitution and an immunity to nonmagical dis- 
ease. These effects dissipate at the end of a week 


=> 


dr | | 
= i | 
1/2 iM 


Sticks to Snakes 


(7 days) without soma-juice. The priests generally 
restrict the juice to the use of nobles and priests. 

Notes: Common for priests of Soma; otherwise 
very rare. A description of Soma can be found in 
the Legends & Lore book, page 132. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Sterility 


Reversed form, see fertility. 


Sterilize 
Reversed form, see fertilize. 


Sticks to Snakes 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Creation, Plant 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 144 sticks + I stick/level in a 
10-ft. cube 

Saving Throw: None 


г 


Still Waves 


р ell | 


By means of this spell, the caster can change 1d4 
sticks, plus one stick per experience level, into snakes; 
thus, a 9th-level priest can change 10—13 sticks into an 
equal number of snakes. These snakes attack as com- 
manded by the priest. There must, of course, be sticks 
or similar pieces of wood (such as torches, spears, 
сіс.) to turn into snakes. Such а stick cannot be larger 
than a staff. Sticks held by creatures are allowed a 
saving throw equal to that of the possessor (for exam- 
ple, a spear held by an orc must fail the orc’s saving 
throw vs. polymorph). Magical items, such as staves 
and enchanted spears, are not affected by the spell. 
Only sticks within the area of effect are changed. 

The type of snake created varies, but a typical 
specimen has 2 Hit Dice, Armor Class 6, a move- 
ment rate of 9, and either constricts for 1d4+1 
points of damage per round or bites for 1 point plus 
poison (if any). The chance of a snake thus changed 
being venomous is 5% per caster level, if the spell- 
caster desires. Thus, an | th-level priest has a max- 
imum 55% chance that any snake created by the 
spell is poisonous. The spell lasts for two rounds for 
each experience level of the spellcaster. 

The material components of the spell are a 
small piece of bark and several snake scales. 

The reverse, snakes to sticks, changes normal- 
sized snakes to sticks for the same duration, or it 
negates the sticks to snakes spell according to the 
level of the priest countering the spell (for example, 
a 10th-level priest casting the reverse spell can turn 
11—14 snakes back into sticks). 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Still Waves 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 turn+3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. х 20-ft. area 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell immobilizes normal wave motion in a 
20-foot by 20-foot area. It stills the waters, permit- 
ting drowning sailors, lost cargo, or other items to 
be fished out of heavy seas. When cast during a 
heavy chop, the ocean within the area of effect 
becomes as still as pond water; if seas are heavier 
than this (as during a violent storm), the wave 
action is reduced to a heavy chop. If the sea is agi- 
tated by an elemental or hostile magic, still waves 
fails unless the spellcaster makes a saving throw vs. 
spell. If the seas are already affected by still waves, 


2 598 Se 


a hostile spellcaster or elemental must make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell to disrupt the magi- 
cally calmed waves. 

Notes: Granted by Valkur, Captain of the 
Waves, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Stone Curse 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. yd./level 
Saving Throw: '/ or None 


The stone curse spell allows the priest to 
weaken stonework progressively over time by 
changing it into a spongy, soft material. When the 
spell is cast, an initial volume of stone is rendered 
soft, spongy and porous, being altered to a sub- 
stance so brittle that it can easily be broken off and 
crushed in the hand. This fact is not obvious in the 
appearance of the stone, however. Only a creature 
with some expert ability in evaluating stonework 
can detect a stone curse. For instance, a dwarf or 
an individual possessing the Stonemasonry non- 
weapon proficiency can recognize a stone curse on 
a d20 roll of 19+ upon casual inspection. A detect 
magic spell reveals Alteration magic at work in the 
area of effect, as does direct tactile exploration 
(simply touching the stone is not sufficient). 

The danger of a stone curse is that it can spread 
undetected. Each day following its casting, a fur- 
ther adjacent volume of stone equal to the original 
volume is also transformed by the spell. Eventually, 
this may have some important structural effect, like 
the crumbling of a supporting wall or the collapse 
of a mineshaft or tunnel, as the DM deems fit. A 
stone curse can be negated by a remove curse, a 
successful dispel magic, or by a spell that changes 
the nature of the stone more dramatically, such as 
transmute rock to mud. 

A stone curse can inflict damage upon creatures 
from the Elemental Plane of Earth, such as xorn, 
galeb duhr, and the like. The caster must make a 
successful attack roll. The spell otherwise inflicts 
1d4 points per level of the caster. A succussful 
saving throw indicates the damage is halved. Like- 
wise, a wizard employing a statue spell or a priest 
employing a meld into stone spell suffers damage 
from a successful stone curse attack.. 

The material component is a small chunk of 
very soft sandstone 


| 
| 


Notes: Granted by Iuz the Evil of the GREY- 
HAWK setting. 


Stone Form — Gnome 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the recipient is trans- 
formed into living stone, not unlike a stone golem or 
stone guardian. This spell has no effect if cast upon 
an unwilling creature. As a creature of magical 
stone, the subject has an effective Armor Class of 
5, or а +1 bonus to current Armor Class, whichever 
is better, and immunity to nonmagical attacks (such 
as acid, normal fire, normal weapons, and so оп). 
However, a being in stone form is affected by all 
spells that affect stone, including stone shape, trans- 
mute rock to mud, etc. Any spell effect or physical 
blow that transforms or shatters the stone form in 
any way immediately ends the spell effect and 
inflicts 4d6 points of damage to the subject. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a shard of rock from a once-animate 
stone (perhaps part of a destroyed stone golem or a 
rock previously subjected to an animate rock spell). 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Callarduran 
Smoothhands. 


Stone of Sharpening 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth RU UA 
Level: 4 
Range: 0 


Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 5 rds. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 weapon (per level) 
Saving Throw: None 


Any sword or edged weapon struck against this 
temporarily enchanted rock has its edge perfectly 
sharpened and oiled, giving it a +3 damage bonus 
against the next target struck, +2 against the 
second, and +1 against the third. After the third 
blow has been struck, there are no other special 
effects. The stone can sharpen metal, obsidian, and 
bone weapons, as many as the caster has levels. To 


Stone Seeing — Dwarf 


)————————————————' di 


prepare the spell, the caster wraps a cloth around 
the stone, which can be no more than 2 feet in 
diameter, and soaks it with oil. The cloth is set on 
fire and allowed to burn until it disintegrates. The 
stone can then be used to sharpen as many weapons 
as the caster has levels of experience. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Stone Quench 
Reversed form, stone storm. 


Stone Seeing — Dwarf 
(Divination, Elemental Earth) 
Sphere: Divination, Elemental Earth 


Level: 5 

Range: Unlimited 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Similar to the wizard spells c/airvoyance and 
wizard eye, the stone seeing spell enables the caster 
to scry whatever is within sight range of the locale 
chosen. Distance from the priest is not a factor, but, 
unlike the aforementioned wizards spells, the 
selected locale must be entirely contained within 
solid rock. 

Stone seeing enables the caster to see through 
the enveloping rock to a range of 100 yards per 
level of the caster or as far as the rock itself 
extends, whichever is less. The caster can see in 
only one direction at a time, but by turning his or 
her head, the caster can adjust the direction of the 
stone seeing in any direction desired. The spell 
enables the caster to “see” various veins and inclu- 
sions in solid rock, including creatures that can 
move through rock, such as xorn. The spell enables 
sight beyond the rock surface only as dwarves do; 
in other words, as if the caster was peering out from 
a cavern floor wall or ceiling. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a small stone chip of the type of rock 
on which the spell is centered. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Dumathoin. 


4 599 = 


| 
| 


Stone Shape 


Ni 


Stone Shape 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 
Level: 3 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 3-ft. cube plus 1 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster can form an 
existing piece of stone into any shape that suits his 
purposes. For example, a stone weapon can be 
made, a special trapdoor fashioned, or a crude idol 
sculpted. By the same token, it enables the spell- 
caster to reshape a stone door, perhaps so as to 
escape imprisonment, providing the volume of 
stone involved is within the limits of the area of 
effect. While stone coffers can be thus formed, 
stone doors made, ete., the fineness of detail is not 
great. If the shaping has moving parts, there is a 
30% chance they do not work. 

The material component is soft clay that must 
be worked into roughly the desired shape of the 
stone object, and then touched to the stone when 
the spell is uttered. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Stone Storm — Dwarf 
(Evocation) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 7 

Range: 160 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: /2 


When a stone storm spell is cast, the area of 
effect is enmeshed in a vortex of swirling, batter- 
ing rock and stone. Creatures within the area of 
hurtling stone receive 2d8 points of damage, plus 
one additional point of damage per caster level 
(thus a 14th-level priest inflicts 2d8+14 points of 
damage). A creatures that makes a successful 
saving throw vs. spell suffers only half damage. The 
area of effect is selected by the caster at the instant 
of casting from two options. The first is a circle of 
60-foot radius, with a 10-foot diameter “eye” in the 
center that is not affected. The second is a cloud 
whose dimensions do not exceed 120 feet (for 


example, the cloud might be 40 feet wide, 20 feet 
tall, and 60 feet long). 

The reverse of this spell, stone quench, clears 
twice the area of effect of a stone storm of dust, 
dirt, and other particles suspended in the air. Thus, 
a dusty haze that obscures vision and impedes 
breathing (such as that generated in battle or by an 
avalanche) is cleared instantly. Magic of 6th level 
or less that creates such effects is instantly ended 
(dust devil, wall of sand, sandstorm, and so on). 
Creatures from the Elemental Plane of Earth of less 
than demigod status can be returned to that plane 
by a stone quench cast for this purpose. The base 
chance is a roll of 6 or better on 1d20. The caster’s 
level is added to the roll, and the creature’s Hit Dice 
are subtracted from the roll. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a handful of pebbles, sand, or dirt (the 
latter is thrown into the air). 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Moradin. 


Stone Tell 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination, Elemental Earth 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. yd. 
Saving Throw: None 


When the priest casts a stone tell spell upon an 
area, the very stones speak and relate to the caster 
who or what has touched them, as well as telling 
what is covered, concealed, or simply behind them. 
The stones relate complete descriptions, if asked. 
Note that a stone's perspective, perception, and 
knowledge may hinder this divination. Such details, 
if any, are decided by the DM. 

The material components for this spell are a 
drop of mercury and a bit of clay. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


2 600 S 


Stone Trap — Dwarf 


ee P di 


Stone to Flesh 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 

The stone to flesh spell turns any sort of stone 
into flesh. If the stone object was formerly living, 
this spell restores life (and goods), although the sur- 
vival of the creature is subject to the usual System 
Shock survival roll. Any formerly living creature, 
regardless of size, can be thus returned to flesh. 
Ordinary stone can be turned to flesh in a volume 
of 9 cubic feet per level of experience of the spell- 
caster. Such flesh is inert, lacking a vital life force, 
unless a life force or magical energy is available 
(for example, this spell would turn a stone golem 
into a flesh golem, but an ordinary statue would 
become a body). If cast upon stone, the wizard can 
create a cylinder of fleshy material from 1 to 3 feet 
in diameter and up to 10 feet long, allowing a pas- 
sage to be made. 

The material components are a pinch of earth 
and a drop of blood. 

The reverse, flesh to stone, turns flesh of any 
sort to stone. All possessions on the person of the 
creature likewise turn to stone. The intended sub- 
ject of the spell receives a saving throw vs. spell to 
avoid the effect. If a statue created by this spell is 
subjected to breakage or weathering, the being (if 
ever returned to his original, fleshy state) will have 
similar damage, deformities, etc. The DM may 
allow such damage to be repaired by various high- 
level priest spells, such as regenerate. 

The material components of the spell are lime, 
water, and earth. 

Notes: Very rare spell, possibly available to 
clerics and priests with major access to the sphere 
of Creation. 


Stone Trap — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardían 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Permanent until discharged 
Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft./level 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell renders stone invisible and moves it to 
a mid-air location (within range) chosen by the 
caster. It levitates in place, sometimes for years, 
until the spell is released, either by will of the 
caster, or by the caster's death. This spell is often 
used to devise a trap, holding boulders as deadfalls 
above archways (including castle or delve 
entrances), vault doors, thrones, bathtubs, beds, or 
other strategic areas. 

Release can be accomplished by the utterance 
of a word or phrase, (often a phrase spoken in the 
original spellcasting). The spell also might be keyed 
to specific conditions, like the 2nd-level wizard 
spell magic mouth (in other words, “when the lock 
on the door is broken or picked" and so on). 

When the spell is triggered, the stone turns vis- 
ible as it falls, inflicting 2d4 points of damage per 
level of the caster. Each creature in the area must 
make a saving throw vs. spell. Success allows a 
Dexterity check. A successful Dexterity check indi- 
cates the creature escapes damage completely, 
while a failed check means the creature takes half 
damage. 

Skilled dwarves often fashion false stone ceil- 
ings of smooth-finished stones and raise them over- 
head to serve as stone traps. A true seeing effect 
reveals the levitating stone clearly, but if the caster 
has prepared it with enough skill (using shaped 
stone blocks, or carved ornaments such as gar- 
goyle-heads or vault arches), the viewer may not 
recognize the viewed stone as any sort of trap. The 
levitating stone does radiate magic, faintly—but 
then, many dwarven delves radiate magic from 
most of their stone surfaces, if spells have been 
used in their shaping or subsequent use. A suspi- 
cious thief can find the trap at half his or her 
normal Find Traps skill, and a successful Remove 
Traps check (also at half the usual chance) can 
bring down the stone without harm to the thief. 

The material components are a speck of grit, a 
drop of water, an eyelash from any creature, and a 
pebble. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Vergadain 
the Trickster. 


2 601 М. 


Stone Walk 


)EE—————— ——————— „ | 


Stone Walk 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is used to link far-flung temples or 
sacred areas for important and emergency journeys. 
A stone walk is a special form of teleportation that 
circumvents all known magical barriers and safe- 
guards against teleportation, including gorgon's 
blood, proof against teleportation spells, and so on. 

A stone walk involves two stony areas large 
enough to stand on. Both must be prepared with a 
secret ritual involving crushed gems before the 
spell itself is cast. Once the stone walk is cast, a 
being can pass instantly and unerringly from one 
stone to the other by standing on one and speaking 
a secret password set during the casting. The two 
ends of the teleportation must be on the same plane 
of existence but can be any distance apart. The trip 
itself is always instantaneous and safe, though the 
destination itself may be guarded, trapped, flooded, 
or the like. The traveler always arrives at the other 
end; blocking the stone transport site with solid 
matter merely causes the traveler to arrive at a 
nearby open, floored space. 

One one-way trip per level of the caster can be 
made for one being (usually the caster, but not nec- 
essarily) and all carried or worn items, accouter- 
ments, and nonliving items, up to 100 pounds 
additional weight. Living creatures who touch the 
caster can also be transported along with 100 
pounds of gear each, but each creature plus 100 
pounds of gear uses up one trip. Nonliving mate- 
rial of more than 100 pounds in weight is simply 
left behind and cannot stone walk without the touch 
(and accompaniment) of a living creature. Usually, 
only a single priest makes a trip, and the extra 
capacity of the spell is left for subsequent trips. 
Note that the password cannot be changed until the 
spell is exhausted and a new one cast to replace it. 

If too many creatures try to come on a stone 
walk, the spell is exhausted. The caster or whoever 
speaks the password is first taken and then 
whichever other creatures the magic can accom- 
modate. Extra creatures and all nonliving material 
in excess of the spell's capacity are left behind. 

The material component of the preparatory 
ritual for the end sites of the spell is a paste with 


602 


which each end of the stone walk is outlined. For 
each end, this paste requires four crushed rubies of 
at least 5,000 gp value each. The ends must be per- 
sonally prepared by the caster of the stone walk 
within 444 days of the casting of the spell. The 
ritual of preparation involves the spellcaster 
bathing, thoroughly washing the stony areas 
selected, and outlining these areas with the paste 
while whispering the future password. 

The caster can travel between the two end sites 
by any form of motivation desired (walking, flying, 
burrowing, riding a horse, etc.) and can cast the 
stone walk immediately after the second end is pre- 
pared. The spell lasts until the caster uses up all of 
the trips provided, or until a successful dispel magic 
is usesd at either of the two ends of the stone walk. 

The spell itself requires a piece of spider silk at 
least a foot in length, two intact diamonds of 5,000 
gp value or greater, a handful of earth, and a wing 
feather of any flying bird. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Bane of the For- 
GOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Stone Walk — Drow 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: S, 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


А development of the meld into stone spell, this 
magic allows a caster to merge into solid stone and 
travel short distances through it. Travel is possible 
through loose, or broken stone, but not mud, sand, 
or fine gravel. Movement is always at a rate of 10 
feet per round. 

If spell duration permits, a caster can enter 
stone, leave it, and re-enter it or another mass of 
stone, without casting a second stone walk. While 
in stone, the caster can sense any ending or edges of 
stone within 120 feet, as well as the presence, loca- 
tion, and size of any cavities, seep-water, fissures, 
air pockets, and beings (such as digging or impris- 
oned creatures, and those able to pass through 
stone, such as xorn). The stone blocks all hearing, 
but some vibrations can be felt. The caster can walk 
up or down as well as horizontally, and can tell 
direction relative to the natural grain of the rock. 

The caster is trapped alive, entombed in solid 
stone (the same as a victim of the 9th-level wizard 
spell imprisonment) if not out of stone when the 


spell expires. A priest within 12 feet of a break in 
the stone when the spell ends can struggle onwards 
to break out at a cost of 1d6 lost hit points (2d6 if 
a System Shock roll fails). In the round of emer- 
gence from stone, the caster is unable to use spells 
or attack, has an effective Armor Class of 10, and 
moves at half rate (rounding down). 
Notes: Rare spell known by the drow. 


Stonebirds 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal, Elemental Earth 


Level: 3 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 2d10 birds 
Saving Throw: none 


When cast, this spell summons 2d10 birds, 
which are transformed into living stone. The birds 
are under the control of the caster and retain all of 
their avian abilities. Each stone bird is treated as a 
1 Hit Die creature with a THACO of 19. A stone 
bird has 4 hit points and inflicts 1d4 points of 
damage with each pecking attack. 

Stone birds can be directed to fly into a creature. 
If the bird successfully strikes a creature, it inflicts 
2d8 points of damage and dies. 

Birds remain in their stone form for 10 minutes 
per level of the caster, or until they are killed. At the 
end of the spell’s duration, the birds are no longer 
under the caster’s control. 

Notes: Granted by Ilmater, the One Who 
Endures, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Stoneblend — Dwarf 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the recipient to blend against 
stone walls so as to be effectively invisible for as 
long as he or she holds still. The creature must press 
its body against the stone wall when the spell is cast. 

Careful observation of the exact area in which 
the concealed creature stands allows a 5% chance 


Stonefall — Dwarf 


for visual detection. Tactile or other physical inspec- 
tion of the specific region immediately reveals the 
presence of the creature and ends the spell. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a pinch of dust. The spell also requires 
that the recipient be dressed in dull or drab colors 
(browns, blacks, and/or grays) that do not clash 
with the surrounding environment. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven craft god 
Laduguer. 


Stonefall — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 4 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 3 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes rocky materials present in an 
area to fall suddenly in one of four fashions. If this 
spell is cast within three rounds after a stonefire spell 
is cast by a priest of Moradin, the fiery damage of 
that spell is added to the striking damage of this one. 


* If cast underground, it causes stalactites to fall or 
starts a cave-in. A fall of stalactites forces the 
intended target creature to make 1d6 Dexterity 
checks (these represent the number of falling sta- 
lactites; if fewer stalactites are available, reduce the 
number of checks). Each failed check results in a 
hit for 246 points of damage. Exposed fragile items 
must make saving throws vs. crushing blow if in 
the affected area. This sort of attack is relatively 
unlikely (rofl 1 on 146) to cause a more general 
cave-in. If it does, the next effect occurs as well. 


* А deliberate cave-in causes 4d8 damage to all 
below it (save vs. petrification for half damage). If 
the situation makes it possible for a cave-in to miss 
intended target creatures, the priest must make a 
successful attack roll (at +5 bonus to the attack), 
as if attacking directly. A miss means the creature 
scrambled adroitly enough to avoid all damage. 


* If cast indoors, it causes a ceiling collapse. An 
indoor ceiling collapse causes only 3d8 points of 
damage (save vs. petrification for half), but 
damage to breakable items in room and the space 
above the ceiling must be considered. Beings that 
fall down with the ceiling suffer 3d6 points of 
damage (minimum; more falling damage might 


|J 603 К. 


Stonefire — Dwarf 


be taken at the rate of 1d6 per 10 feet fallen). A 
successful saving throw vs. spell lowers this 
damage by half. 


* If cast in open air, it causes one fist-sized stone 
to fall rapidly out of the sky and strike the 
intended creature, causing 3d4 points of damage 
(the creature is allowed a saving throw vs. spell 
to avoid the missile and all damage). 


The material component is a handful (at least 
three) of fingerjoint-sized or larger stones or pebbles. 
Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Dumathoin. 


Stonefire — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth, Elemental Fire 


3 | M ie 


Y 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to ignite stone into 
roaring flames. The stone blackens, stretches to 
reveal holes, burns away from the edges of these 
holes in ever-widening cavities until large amounts 
of stone have actually been burnt away, and then 
smolders into quiescence again, creaking as it cools. 

The stonefire gives off an acrid, billowing white 
smoke, an earthy, metallic stink, and flames that 
cause 2d6 points of fire and heat damage (per 
round) to creatures within 10 feet. Actual contact 
with stonefire causes 4d4 points of damage and 
forces a System Shock roll to avoid collapsing 
unconscious from the pain. 

Creatures especially susceptible to fire damage 
suffer double these effects. Creatures made of stone 
take 4d4 points of damage in the first round and a like 
amount each round until a successful saving throw vs. 
spell is made, checking each round. Creatures resist- 
ant to fire suffer 142 points of damage from contact 
with stonefire. (They suffer some damage due to the 
corrosive effects of the burning). Stone burned away 
by this spell is consumed, forever gone. 

If key areas of stonework (such as pillars) or 
natural stone walls, ceilings, or supporting floors 
are burned away, collapses and cave-ins may occur. 
The effects of such cave-ins are detailed in the spell 
description for stonefail. Collapses entail the same 
damage, plus falling damage (and item saving 
throws) for beings and things that fall as a result of 
the spell. This spell cannot be precisely controlled, 


Stoneskin — Dwarf 


oe Ш 


even with long practice; it is unsuitable for stone- 
carving or decorating uses. The caster can affect 1 
cubic foot of stone per level; a man-sized statue is 
roughly 12 cubic feet. 
The material components are a few grains of salt- 
peter and a piece of stone, which are rubbed together. 
Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Moradin. 


К Я 
Р 
А. 


Stoneiron 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, М 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Weapon(s) touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes stone weapons (flint, obsidian, 
and so on) to have the attack and damage scores of 
ordinary steel weapons, eliminating all penalties 
and higher chances of breaking. One large or two 
small weapons can be affected by each casting of 
this spell. Enchanted missiles lose their dweomer 
after striking their target; otherwise, the spell lasts 
5 rounds per level of the caster. Repeated castings 
do not improve the weapon's abilities further. 

The material component is a small chunk of stone 
of the same type as the weapon to be enchanted. 

Notes: Very rare for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. Optionally known by shamans and other 
priests from savage settings. 

(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


605 


Stoneskin — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special (24 hrs. maximum) 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 

Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the affected creature gains 
a virtual immunity to any attack by cut, blow, projec- 
tile, or the like. Even a sword of sharpness cannot 
affect a creature protected by stoneskin, nor can a rock 
hurled by a giant, a snake' strike, etc. However, mag- 
ical attacks from such spells as fireball, magic missile, 
lightning bolt, and so forth have their normal effects. 
The spell blocks 1d4 attacks, plus one attack per two 
levels of experience the caster has achieved. This limit 
applies regardless of attack rolls and regardless of 
whether the attack was physical or magical. For exam- 
ple, a stoneskin spell cast by a 9th-level caster would 
protect against from five to eight attacks. An attacking 
griffon would reduce the protection by three each 
round; four magic missiles would count as four attacks 
in addition to inflicting their normal damage. 

The material components are granite and dia- 
mond dust sprinkled on the recipient's skin. 

Notes: Very rare spell granted by some dwarven 
deities, identical to the 4th-level wizard spell of the 
same name. (Updated from DR4GON Magazine.) 


Special Note: This spell is subject to consid- 
erable abuse by player characters. Multiple stone- 
skins placed on a single creature are not cumu- 
lative. If two or more stoneskin spells are cast on 
the same creature, roll normally for the number of 
attacks each spell protects against. If a new spell 
protects against more spells than does the present 
one, the recipient gets the benefit of the increased 
protection; otherwise, there is no effect. The cast- 
er does not necessarily know how many attacks 
the spell can shield him from. 

Stoneskin protects only against blows, cuts, 
pokes, and slashes directed at the recipient. It 
does not protect against falls, magical attacks, 
touch-delivered special attacks (such as touch- 
delivered spells, energy draining, green slime, 
etc.), or nonmagical attacks that do not involve 
blows (such as flaming oil, ingested or inhaled 
poisons, acid, constriction, and suffocation). 
Stoneskin lasts for 24 hours or until the spell has 
absorbed its allotment of attacks. 


Stonewood 


“мчч 


Stonewood 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell bestows the strength of stone on a 
given volume of wood without otherwise altering 
its appearance or weight. A wooden door or wall, 
for example, would have the sturdiness (and saving 
throws) of stone. The stonewood spell affects a 
maximum of 100 square feet of wood per level of 
the caster, to a thickness of | foot (or any equiva- 
lent numerical combination). Only one wooden 
object can be strengthened per casting. 

The material components are a gemstone of at 
least 500 gp value and a small piece of hardwood. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell, (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Storm Cone 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Weather 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./3 levels above 9th 
Area of Effect: Cone, 20-ft.-wide x 60 ft. long 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a whirling vortex of wind in 
a 60-foot-long cone shape that flares from its apex 
at the caster to a mouth 20 feet in diameter. The 
caster can move the storm cone up, down, or side- 
ways 10 feet in each round of its existence. The 
storm cone lasts for 4 rounds plus 1 round for every 
three whole levels of experience the caster has 
above 9th level (5 rounds at 12th level, 6 at 15th 
level, etc.). 

A storm cone whirls about all beings it touches, 
buffets them with invisible “stones” of solid air 
contained within the storm cone, and stabs them 
with tiny lightning bolts that arc about continuously 
within the vortex. The whirling and buffeting effect 
inflicts 5d4 points of damage to all beings in the 
area of effect. They must also make saving throws 
vs fall and crushing blow for all worn or carried 
items. The lightning bolts strike creatures touched 


by the storm cone for an additional 2d4 points of 
damage and force affected beings to make saving 
throws vs. lightning for all worn or carried items 
unless they are protected against electrical damage. 
Both buffeting damage and lightning damage are 
suffered in each round of contact with the storm 
cone. 

А successful saving throw vs. spell halves the 
physical damage (round down); there is no save 
against the lightning. Beings caught within a storm 
cone cannot cast spells or launch attacks and can 
fight free of the storm cone only by making suc- 
cessful Strength and Dexterity ability checks on the 
same round. 

Notes: Granted by Talos the Destroyer, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Storm Legion 
Athasian Dragon King magic, 9th level; psionic 
component renders the spell uncastable by priests. 


Storm of Vengeance 
Quest spell, see appendix. 


Storm Shield 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection, Weather 
Level: 3 


Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 6 rds.+1d4 rds. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a floating, weightless, mobile 
barrier of solid air that blocks all damage from 
winds, lightning, normal missiles, and heat or cold. 
A storm shield attracts all electrical discharges 
within 30 feet and absorbs them so that no harm is 
done to nearby beings. It automatically neutralizes 
any extreme of heat (including fire), or cold 
(including ice), that it comes into contact with, but 
does so only once for each extreme. A storm shield 
neutralizes a second encounter or round of contact 
with either extreme heat or cold, but as it does so, 
the storm shield itself dissipates, ending the spell. 

A storm shield is always about 6 inches thick 
and occupies a square, flat area of 10 square feet 
per level, stopping where it encounters solid obsta- 
cles. It can be fitted into a narrow passage or open- 
ing, so as to seal it entirely or be made to fold in 
on itself if the caster so wills to make a smaller bar- 
rier that can be moved about in narrow confines 


A 606 N 


Stormrage 


рь ———————————— d 


without becoming stuck. The caster can move the 
shield by force of will at MV 12 (B) and turn or 
tilt it as desired, until he or she engages in other 
spellcasting, whereupon control over the shield is 
lost, and it remains stationary until the spell 
expires. 

A storm shield is effective from all sides, but it 
only deflects normal missiles; a sword or other 
weapon can be thrust through it with no effect on 
either the shield or the attack. 

Notes: Granted by Talos the Destroyer, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Stormcloak 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Protection, Elemental Water 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 year 

Area of Effect: 1 living being 
Saving Throw: None 


Stormcloak sets up a condition that, when the 
spell is activated at any time for up to a year after 
being cast by speaking a secret word aloud, the 
spell recipient cannot die as a result of a storm at 
sea that he or she is currently experiencing. Once 
activated, the spell guarantees that by some assort- 
ment of coincidental conditions (as far-fetched or 
commonplace as need be), the spell recipient will 
not drown, be struck down by flying debris, die of 
being hurled ashore against rocks, etc. from that 
particular storm. 

Umberlant priests cannot cast this spell on 
themselves. 

The material component is the holy symbol of 
the Umberlant casting it (which is not consumed 
in the casting). 

Notes: Granted by the evil sea goddess Umber- 
lee of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


607 


Stormrage 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 6 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 1 rd./4 levels (round down) 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 
This spell empowers the caster or another 
touched being (who must be willing or the spell 
fails) to fly and hurl lightning. The flight is at MV 
fly 18 (B), and responds perfectly to the will of the 
flyer, who can hover, stop, go backwards, and even 
hang in one place with enough stability to cast 
spells. Such spellcasting does not end the storm- 
rage, but does prevent the hurling of any lightning 
during the round or rounds in which it takes place. 
A stormrage spell enables its recipient to emit 
from his or her eyes two straight-line lightning 
bolts per round, each of which do 6d6 points of 
damage. A successful attack roll, at the recipient's 
normal THACO, is necessary to strike a desired 
target. Items are allowed saving throws vs. light- 
ning if targeted and struck; if they fail, they are 


ИИ Ji i | 


И] 
" "nit 


Stormvoice —Old Empire 


destroyed. Creatures receive a saving throw vs. rod, 
staff, or wand if struck; those that succeed take only 
half damage. Both bolts can be directed at the same 
target if desired (determine the results of each sep- 
arately), but lightning bolts not hurled during a 
round cannot be used to augment the number or 
damage of bolts unleashed in later rounds. 

A stormrage ends when the caster wills it to, at 
the expiration of its normal duration, or when 
dispel magic is successfully cast on its recipient, 
whichever happens first. Until then, it drains 4 hit 
points from the recipient per round. (A recipient 
who discovers this effect and is no longer willing to 
be under the effects of this spell can end it after 
one round.) 

While under the effects of stormrage, the recip- 
ient is immune to all lightning and wind damage 
and can “stand fast” against natural and magical 
winds. 

The material components are a feather from any 
sort of bird that can fly, a pinch of ash from any 
burnt organic material that was struck by lightning, 
and a piece of flint. 

Notes: Granted by Talos the Destroyer, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Stormyoice —Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Weather 


Level: 2 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 

This spell enables the caster to speak with the 
voice of a storm. The caster can be heard clearly at 
10 times normal distance. АП creatures within a 20- 
foot radius of the caster must roll successful saving 
throws vs. spell or be deafened for 1d4 rounds and 
be knocked from their feet. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Horus- 
Re of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Straighten Wood 
Reversed form, warp wood. 


Strength — Shukenja 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Use of this spell increases the Strength of the 
individual touched by a number of points that 
depend on the character's class, 


Class Strength Gain 
Samurai, sohei, kensai, 

bushi, & barbarians 1d8 points 
Shukenja and yakuza 1d6 points 
Wu jen and monks 144 points 


Ninja gain Strength as their other class. 

Samurai, kensai, bushi, and barbarians gain 
strength in 10% increments upon reaching 18 
Strength. 

The material component is a piece of fur of a 
strong animal such as a bull or ape. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Strength — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Application of this spell increases the Strength 
of the individual by a number of points—or tenths 
of points after 18 Strength is attained (only if a war- 
rior). Benefits of the strength spell last for the dura- 
tion of the magic. The amount of added Strength 
depends upon the spell recipient's group and is sub- 
ject to all restrictions on Strength due to race and 
class. Multiclass characters use the best die. 


2 608 М. 


Strength of Stone 


мА 


Class Strength Gain 
Warrior 148 points 
Priest 1d6 points 
Rogue 1d6 points 
Wizard 1d4 points 


If a warrior has an 18 Strength already, from 
10% to 80% is added to his extraordinary Strength 
roll. The spell cannot confer a Strength of 19 or 
more, nor is it cumulative with other magic that 
adds to Strength. Beings without Strength scores 
(kobolds, lizard men, etc.) receive a +1 to attack 
and damage rolls. 

The material component is a few hairs, or a 
pinch of dung, from a particularly strong animal 
such as an ape, a bear, or an ox. 

Notes: Very rare spell granted by some dwarven 
deities, identical to the 2nd-level wizard spell of the 
same name. (Updated from Dr4Gon Magazine.) 


Strength of One 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Law 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 2d6 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature + 1 creature/2 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell on a group of lawful crea- 
tures, the priest imbues each creature with a 
Strength bonus equal to that of the strongest crea- 
ture in the group. To be affected by the spell, all 
creatures must touch the hand of the priest at the 
time of casting. Only human, demihuman, and 
humanoid creatures of man-size or smaller can be 
affected. The recipients can be a mixed group of 
lawful neutral, lawful good, or lawful evil align- 
ments. The spell will not take effect if any creature 
of neutral or chaotic alignment is included in the 
group. 

Prior to casting, one creature is designated the 
keystone. А group cannot have more than one key- 
stone, even if another creature has equal strength. 

Upon completion of the spell, all affected indi- 
viduals gain a bonus to damage equal to the key- 
stone's bonus to damage from Strength. Any 
magical bonuses belonging to the keystone are not 
added; only the keystone's natural strength is con- 
ferred on the group. 

This bonus supersedes any bonus an affected 
creature might normally receive. Thus, a warrior 
with 16 Strength (a +1 bonus to damage) who 


benefits from this spell with a keystone who has 
Strength 18/07 (a damage bonus of +3) gains a total 
bonus of +3 to damage (not +4 to damage). The 
keystone receives no bonus. 

Affected creatures gain no improvements to 
THACO, Bend Bars/Lift Gates, or other functions 
of Strength. 

The spell ends if the keystone is killed before 
the duration expires. The bonus and duration are 
not affected if a member of the group is killed 
within the duration of the spell. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Law (ToM). 


Strength of Stone 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell grants supernatural strength to the 
recipient by raising his or her Strength score by 1d4 
points, or to a minimum of 16, whichever is higher. 
Each 10% of exceptional Strength counts as 1 
point, so an individual with a Strength of 17 could 
be raised as high as an 18/30, but no higher. Both 
the caster and the recipient must be in contact with 
solid stone or earth when the spell is cast. The spell 
lasts for 3 rounds plus 1 additional round per caster 
level or until the subject loses contact with the 
earth. Obviously, this can happen in a number of 
ways, including being picked up or grappled by a 
larger creature, being knocked through the air by an 
impact or explosion, or even being magically 
moved in some fashion. 

The material components are a chip of granite 
and a hair from a giant. 

Notes: Uncommon spell for druids (PO:SM) 
Granted by the dwarven god Moradin and the 
gnome god Callarduran Smoothhands. 


609 М. 


Strengthen Stone 


b кити наа аара аттык стти ee 


Strengthen Stone 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | hr. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 building or wall 
Saving Throw: None 


Strengthen stone can reinforce any stone con- 
struction (house, tower, wall segment, aqueduct, 
etc.), against physical damage. The DM adds +4 to 
the structure's saving throw against any type of 
damage, from siege engines to natural earthquakes. 
The stone object gains a saving throw against the 
earthquake spell (see the PHB). The spell can be 
cast only once on any stone object. 

If the priest casts this spell on a stone golem 
or other animated stone being (like one created 
by animate rock), the creature receives a —1 bonus 
to its Armor Class and adds a +1 bonus to its 
saving throws for the duration of the spell. 
Strengthen stone has no effect on earth elemen- 
tals or galeb duhr. 

The material component, a diamond chip worth 
at least 500 gp, must be crushed and sprinkled on 
the construction. 

Notes: Uncommon spell for druids. 


Striking Shadows 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: A 20-sq.-ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


The striking shadows spell creates two tenta- 
cled, smokelike guardian monsters identical to 
“worker grell” (see the MONSTROUS MANUAL tome) 
in form, attacks (11 attacks at THACO 15, 10 ten- 
tacles and one bite), damage (144 X 10/1d6), Armor 
Class (AC 5), and movement (MV fly 12 (D)). 
However, these shadow creatures' tentacles cannot 
paralyze, and they are unable to wield or carry 
items, speak, or reason. Striking shadows attack all 
beings within the spell's designated area of effect 
that are not bearing holy symbols of Mask. They 
dissipate when the spell expires or when dealt as 


many points of damage (each) as the caster 
possesses. 

Notes: Granted by the Mask, god of thieves of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Striking Wave 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes water to rise up into a single 
directed strike of massive force. A large body of 
water must be present (in other words, a pond, lake, 
or the sea) or the spell is wasted. It cannot create 
water out of nothing, nor can it cause the contents 
of a tub or small, ornamental pool to do more than 
rise up in an impressive manner and crash back 
down again, splashing things nearby. 

A striking wave varies from 10 feet to 100 feet 
wide as the caster directs, moves in the direction 
its caster directs and can change direction in 
response to the caster's silent concentration, but it 
must travel at least 60 feet in a straight line before 
it can do harm; otherwise, items in its path simply 
ride up along its swell and are unharmed. The priest 
must be in contact with the water to cast the spell, 
although this contact can be as little as a hand or toe 
dipped into the wetness. The range of the spell 
applies to how distant the wave can form from the 
caster, not how far it can travel. If unhindered by 
impact or obstacle, the striking wave travels several 
miles before subsiding. If cast in a confined area, 
such as a harbor, so that it strikes a sea wall or other 
immobile obstacle within 100 feet of its forming, 
it rebounds back to where it was formed, doing 
double damage to creatures and items between. 

A striking wave smashes into immobile objects 
for 10d12 points of damage. Floating objects are 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell; if alive and swim- 
ming or free to move in the water, floating creatures 
are also allowed a second saving throw vs. spell. 
Each saving throw that succeeds removes three dice 
of damage, so swimmers who make both saving 
throws suffer only 4d12 points of damage. A 
rebounding wave must be saved for separately both 
times; one set of saving throws does not govern 
both strikes. 

Striking waves can attack targets on the shore; 
however, they lose force as they do so, For every 


F. 610 \ 


Succor 


— ew d 


10 feet up the shore the wave travels, 1412 of 
damage is lost from the wave. 

Ships suffer structural damage from a striking 
wave as follows: A ship automatically loses 10% 
of its seaworthiness if at anchor or tied up dockside, 
but only 5% if floating freely; small open boats 
suffer double this damage. Open boats and barges 
may well be capsized by a striking wave. The DM 
must adjudicate such situations. The DM must also 
determine damage done to wharves and other struc- 
tures; however, such damage is rarely extensive 
unless the buildings’ construction was not intended 
for marine or shore use. 

The material component is a drop of water 
blessed by Umberlee or by a senior Umberlant in 
the name of the goddess. 

Notes: Granted by the evil sea goddess Umber- 
lee of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Stumble — Old Empire 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, М 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes one creature within its area of 
effect to stumble. While victims are affected by a 
stumble spell, they suffer а —4 penalty to their 
attack rolls, their movement rate is halved, and they 
loses all bonuses due to Dexterity. [fa creature rolls 
a successful saving throw vs. spell, he or she is 
completely unaffected. 

The material component is a drop of oil. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Anhur 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Styx, Touch of the 
See touch of the Styx. 


Substitution 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


After this spell is cast, the shukenja is able to 
transfer a limited amount of damage from himself 
to a specially prepared figure of his deity. Before 
casting the spell, the shukenja must first person- 
ally prepare a statue of his deity from materials 
worth at least five ch'ien (25 gp). In addition, every 
time the spell is cast, the shukenja must present an 
offering suitable to his deity. When the spell is cast, 
the statue is imbued with the power to absorb 1d4 
points of damage the shukenja suffers, no matter 
where the caster may be. This substitution is auto- 
matic, the first points of damage suffered are auto- 
matically absorbed by the statue. Repeated spells 
can be cast on the same statue up to a limit of 20 
points of damage transferred. The shukenja cannot 
have more than one such substitution in effect at 
any given time. When the shukenja is harmed, he 
bears no sign of the damage. Instead it appears on 
the statue he has prepared. The statue cannot be 
healed and once all points are lost a new statue 
must be prepared. This spell is empowered by the 
great faith and service of the shukenja to his deity. 
Those in questionable standing with their deity 
cannot use this spell, as it is an act of compassion 
from their deity. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Succor 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 day 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 item 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the priest creates a power- 
ful magic aura in some specially prepared object— 
a string of prayer beads, a small clay tablet, an ivory 
baton, and so on. This object radiates magic, for it 
contains the power to instantaneously transport its 
possessor to the sanctuary of the priest who cre- 
ated its magic. Once the item is enchanted, the 
priest must give it willingly to an individual, at the 
same time informing him of a command word to 
be spoken when the item is to be used. To make use 
of the item, the recipient must speak the command 
word at the same time that he rends or breaks the 
item. When this is done, the individual and all items 
worn and carried (up to his or her maximum 
encumbrance limit) are instantly transported to the 


6 


1 


1 


Succor of Berronar — Dwarf 


NÝ 


sanctuary of the priest, just as if the individual were 
capable of speaking a word of recall spell. No other 
creatures are affected. 

The reversed application of the spell, summon 
priest, causes the priest to be transported to the 
immediate vicinity of the possessor of the item 
when it is broken and the command word said. The 
priest has a general idea of the location and situa- 
tion of the item’s possessor, and can choose not to 
be affected by this summons. This decision is made 
at the instant the transportation is to take place. 
However, if he chooses not to go, then the oppor- 
tunity is gone forever and the spell is wasted. 

The cost of preparing the special item (for either 
version of the spell) varies from 2,000 to 5,000 gp. 
The more costly items can transport the subject 
from one plane of existence to another, if the DM 
allows. The same factors that can prevent the 
operation of the plane shift and teleport spells can 
also prevent the use of this spell. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Succor of Berronar — Dwarf 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell gives aid in whatever fashion the 
recipient requires, whether it be due to injury, 
poison, disease, or the like. While casting succor 
of Berronar, the caster duplicates the following 
spell effects: cure disease, cure serious wounds, 
cure blindness, cure deafness, neutralize poison, 
and repair injury (this last if the critical hit optional 
rules are being used). 

In addition, for the next 24-hour period, curses 
(including lycanthropy) and addictions are held in 
abeyance, sanity is restored, and the recipient’s 
spirit receives a great boost. 

This spell is ineffective if used more than once 
a year on any given recipient. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a drop of holy water. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Berronar 
Truesilver. 


612 


Summon Ancestor 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 rds. 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 spirit 
Saving Throw: None 


When a shaman casts this spell upon his tribe’s 
ancestral mound (the only place the spell can be 
cast), it causes an ancestor to come forth, drawn 
back as a spirit of chaotic neutral alignment. The 
spirit takes form as a transparent being, a combi- 
nation of totem beast and primitive human. To 
select the type of spirit summoned, the DM rolls 
1d20 and matches the result against the table below. 
The shaman can also try and summon a normal 
spirit (a minor spirit of the dead), such as a father or 
child of a tribal member. (These normal spirits 
cannot leave the vicinity—more than 50 feet—of 
the ancestral mound where they were buried.) 

When the spirit appears, the summoner makes 
a Wisdom ability check (using the table’s modi- 
fiers) to control it; otherwise, the spirit becomes 
an uncontrolled ghost (use the ghost statistics in the 
MONSTROUS MANUAL tome) and immediately attacks 
all living beings around it. However, even an 
uncontrolled spirit cannot travel more than 50 feet 
from the ancestral mound. 

A controlled spirit can perform the following 
functions for a shaman: attack a foe (as a ghost—or 
another type of undead creature at the ОМ% discre- 
tion), guard the ancestor mound for a year (until freed 
again at the next Runemeet), tell the shaman ancient 
secrets, initiate a new shaman (only ancestral shaman 
spirits can do this), or raise dead (refer to the table). 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol (the shaman’s sacred bundle), a relic of the 
desired ancestor (though another may appear), and 
a small bonfire. 

Notes: Granted by the barbarian demipower 
Uthgar of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Summon Animal Spirit 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons a minor spirit or entity to 
the caster's aid. Priests usually summon minor ele- 
mentals of some kind, while shamans typically con- 
jure an animal spirit or spirit of nature. Regardless 
of the spirit's origin, it appears as a ghostly beast 
of some kind—a wolf, bear, tiger, or lion is most 
common. The animal spirit obeys the mental com- 
mands of the priest, attacking his enemies or per- 
forming any other task that it could reasonably 
accomplish. The creature is incorporeal and cannot 
handle or manipulate objects of any kind, but it can 
see and hear as a normal animal of its archetype 
and could be used to scout a dangerous area or act 
as a distraction of some kind. 

In combat, the animal spirit has the following 
statistics: MV 24; AC 4; THACO 15; Dmg 2d4. It 
can be injured only by magical weapons and can 
strike monsters hit only by +1 or better weapons. 
The spirit has a number of hit points equal to 10 plus 
the caster's level, so a 6th-level priest conjures a 
animal spirit with 16 hit points. The creature is not 
affected by charm, sleep, hold, or other mind-affect- 
ing spells and suffers no damage from cold-based 
attacks. However, it is vulnerable to dispel magic or 
turning as an undead monster of the caster's Hit 
Dice. If the animal spirit is turned, destroyed, or dis- 
pelled, the priest who summoned it must make a 
saving throw vs. spell or be stunned for 1d4 rounds. 

Because the spirit is intelligent and free-willed 
under the caster's direction, the priest need not con- 
centrate in order to direct its attacks—an animal 
spirit could be ordered to attack a spellcaster in the 
back of an enemy party, while the priest waded into 
hand-to-hand combat. The animal spirit makes use 
of flank or rear attacks when it can and gains any 
normal combat bonuses that a living creature in its 
position would be allowed. The priest enjoys instan- 
taneous, silent communication with the animal 
spirit and can order it to stop attacking, to change 
its target, or to undertake almost any conceivable 
action desired. However, the spirit must remain 
within the spell's range; if it is ever more than 10 
yards per caster level away from the priest, it dissi- 
pates harmlessly. 


Summon Divine Minion — Old Empire 


The material component is a small whistle 
carved from a bone taken from the appropriate type 
of animal. 

Notes: Common for shamans, uncommon for 
clerics (PO:SM). 


Summon Cetacean — Sea Elf 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning, Elemental Water 


Level: 3 

Range: 1-mi. radius 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a specialized variation of the 4th- 
level priest spell animal summoning I. By means 
of this spell, the caster calls a number of cetaceans 
(such as dolphins, porpoises, and whales), whose 
combined Hit Dice total 32 or less. Dolphins are 
always summoned first if available. Otherwise, if 
more than one species is available, the type with 
greater Hit Dice is summoned. Only cetaceans 
within a mile of the caster at the tíme of the cast- 
ing will respond. 

Unlike the animal summoning I spell, the caster 
can make only one call, and cannot choose what 
form of cetacean shows up, if any. The cetaceans 
summoned aid the caster by whatever means they 
possess, staying until the fight is over, a specific 
mission is finished, the caster is safe, they are sent 
away, and so on. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Deep Sashelas. 


Summon Divine Minion — 
Old Empire 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell, previously known simply as summon 
minion, is available only to priests of the Mulhorandi 
pantheon. It enables the caster to summon one divine 
minion. The minion appears where designated by the 
caster within the spell’s range. The divine minion 
serves the priest faithfully, performing any command 


a 613 М. 


Minion Table 


b——————————————————— d 


Animal 
Baboon 


Brown Bear 


Cave Bear 


Cat, wild 


Cobra, giant 


Cow, horned 


Crocodile 


Crocodile, giant 


Hawk 


Scorpion 


Snake, giant 


Minion Table 
Deity (AL) Move SAT Dmg 
Thoth (LN) 12, 12 in trees 1 144 
Osiris (LG) 12 3 1d6/1d6/1d8 
Set (LE) 
Geb (N) 12 3 1d8/1d8/1d12 
Bast (CG) 18,Cl9,9intres 3 142142142 
Nephthys (CG) 15 1 1d3 
Hathor (NG) 15 1 144 
Nephthys (CG) 6, swim 12 2 2441412 
Sebek (NE) 
Set (LE) 
Sebek (NE) 6, swim 12 2 346/210 
Horus-ReLG 1, fly 33 (B) 3  1d2/d2/ 
Isis (NG) 
Nephthys (CG) 
Osiris (LG) 


Thoth (LN) swim 6, fly 12 (C) 


Set (LE) 12 
Anhur (CG) 12 
Bast (CG) 
Horus-Re (LG) 
Bast (CG) 12, climb 9 
6 in trees, swim 6 
Set (LE) 12 
Set (LE) 15 


614 


1d4/1d4/1d10 


1d3/1d3/1d6 


1d8/1d8/1d3 


1d3 


SA 
Nil 


Paw hit on 18* gives hug for 246 


Paw hit on 18* gives hug for 2d6 


Surprised only on 1—2; opponent 
surprise penalty —3; if both paws 
hit, rear claw rake for 2 х 142 


Poison bite: Save at —2 Die/10 
onset 2d4 rounds 


Trample for 144 if in group 
stampede 


Opponent surprise penalty —2 


Opponent surprise penalty —2 


Swoop at +2 for double damage 
Beak hit 25% eye, blind 1d10 
rounds (permanent eye loss: 10%) 


Nil 

Nil 

Surprised only on 1, leap 30’, if 
both paws hit, rear claws rake for 
2 1d6+1 

Surprised only on 1, opponent 
surprise penalty —3, leap 20’ up 
or 25' forward, if both paws hit 
rear claws rake for 2 х 144 


Claw hit grips for 148 continuous 


Sting poison onset 1 rd., save for 
death/0. 


Bite poison onset | rd, save for 
death/0 


that does not violate the dictates of its deity. This 
includes giving up its life in combat. Only one 


minion can serve a priest at a time. 


The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a large gem of at least 1,000 gp value, 
which must be sacrificed to the deity in the casting 


(and is destroyed in the process). 


Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deities of the 


FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Divine Minion: AC -2; МУ 12; HD 6; THACO 
11; #AT 3/2; Dmg 1412 or by weapon; SA Attack 
as 10th-level fighter, animal form; SD Save as 
10th level fighter, immune to magic causing 
fear or doubt; MR 10%; SZ M 6'/;'; ML fearless 
(20); Int high (13); %; AL as deity; XP 2,000. 

These are messengers and servitors of the 
Mulhorandi deities. They appear as large, well- 
muscled warriors in bronze armor decorated 
with the symbol of the deity. They favor large 
khopeshes, scimitars, and two-handed swords. 
A minion is 25% likely to have a magical 
weapon of up to +2 enchantment. Minions need 
not eat or drink, and they and their equipment 
disappear if they are slain (they are reformed by 
their deities in the Outer Planes). They radiate а 
faint aura of their alignment and the deities port- 
folio; for example minions of Hathor inspire 
inherent trust, while those of Set produce 
instinctive dislike in animals, which flee. 

The minions of Set are most active, carry 
khopeshes or broad swords, and wear black scaly 
plate mail armor. They often serve as military 
advisors to mortal worshipers.. 

Divine minions can also change shape at will 
to animal form, usually only when absolutely 
necessary. This takes less than a single round, in 
which the minion's initiative modifier is 5. The 
minion retains its AC, Hit Dice, and hit points, 
while gaining the animal form's movement rate, 
attacks, and any special attack forms. The form 
dictates how minions coordinate with each other. 
Bears, hawks, scorpions, and snakes fight alone; 
crocodiles and ibises attack in swarms; lions and 
jackals coordinate in complex strategies, includ- 
ing ambushes and other ploys. Animal types are 
summarized on the Minion Table. 


Summon Earth Grue — Gnome 


Summon Earth Grue — Gnome 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth, Summoning 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell opens a gate to the Elemental Plane 
of Earth, summoning an earth grue, also known as 
a chaggrin or soil beast, to the caster. The caster 
need not fear that the summoned grue will turn on 
him or her. Neither concentration on the activities 
of the grue nor protection from it is necessary. The 
summoned earth grue helps the caster in whatever 
manner possible: attacking the caster's foes, tun- 
neling in the general direction desired, and so on. 
It remains for a maximum of three rounds per level 
of the caster. It returns to its home plane if slain or 
sent back by a dispel magic spell or similar magic. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a unworked raw metals worth at least 50 
gp. The latter is offered as a bribe to the creature 
during the casting, and must be handed over to the 
creature before it will enter the Prime Material Plane. 

Notes: Granted by the evil gnome god Urdlen. 


Grue, Earth: AC 4; MV 12, burrow 3; HD 
5+5; THACO 15; #АТ 2; Dmg 1d4+2/1d4+2; SA 
quills, claws, hide in stone; SD +1 or better mag- 
ical weapon to hit, spell immunity; SZ М 
(3(FM] long); ML average (8-10); Int low to 
average (5-10); AL NE; XP 1,400. 

Notes: Àn earth grue can assume the shape 
of a large mole, a yellowish hedgehog with a 
skull-like head, or a humanoid of lumpy, wet clay 
with an asymmetrical and vicious face and 
small, feral eyes. 

Special Abilties: SA—an earth grue in 
humanoid form can merge into a surface of nat- 
ural soil or stone, only faintly perceptible to care- 
ful observation as a damp, dark outline. It can 
emerge suddenly to surprise opponents (—5 to 
surprise rolls). In hedgehog form, unprotected 
flesh in contact with an earth grue’s quills suf- 
fers 1d4 points of damage. In any form, after a 
successful hit, an earth grue can dig in its razor- 
sharp foreclaws, inflicting 1d6+6 points of 
damage per round until dislodged; this requires 
a successful Strength check. SD—an earth grue 
is immune to earth-based and earth-affecting 


615 


Summon Insects 


b————————————— di 


spells such as earthquake, passwall, transmute 
rock to mud, stone to flesh, and the like. Its mere 
presence dispels such magic within a 40-foot 


Summon Insects 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The summon insects spell attracts a cloud or 
swarm of normal insects to attack the foes of the 
caster. Flying insects appear 70% of the time, while 
crawling insects appear 30% of the time. The exact 
insects called are bees, biting flies, hornets, or 
wasps, if flying insects are indicated; biting ants or 
pinching beetles, if crawling insects are indicated. A 
cloud of the flying type, or a swarm of the crawling 
sort, appears after the spell is cast. This gathers at a 


point chosen by the caster, within the spell's range, 
and attacks any single creature the caster points to. 

The attacked creature sustains 2 points of 
damage if it does nothing but attempt to flee or fend 
off the insects during the time it is attacked; it 
suffers 4 points of damage per round otherwise. If 
the insects are ignored, the creature fights with a —2 
penalty to its attack roll and a +2 penalty to its 
Armor Class. If the creature attempts to cast a spell, 
an initiative roll should be made for the insects to 
see if their damage occurs before the spell is cast. If 
it does, the creature's concentration is ruined and 
the spell is lost. 

The insects disperse and the spell ends if the 
creature enters thick smoke or hot flames. Besides 
being driven off by smoke or hot flames, the swarm 
might possibly be outrun, or evaded by plunging 
into a sufficient body of water. If evaded, the sum- 
moned insects can be sent against another oppo- 
nent, but there will be at least a 1-round delay while 
they leave the former opponent and attack the new 
victim. Crawling insects can travel only about 10 
feet per round (maximum speed over smooth 
ground) and flying insects travel 60 feet per round. 
The caster must concentrate to maintain the swarm; 
it dissipates if the caster moves or is disturbed. 

It is possible, in underground situations, that the 


Summon Shadow Spirit 


b —————————————————— a! 


caster might summon 1d4 giant ants by means of 
the spell, but the possibility is only 30% unless 
giant ants are nearby. This spell does not function 
under water. 

The materials needed for this spell are the 
caster's holy symbol, a flower petal, and a bit of 
mud or wet clay. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Summon Lock Lurker 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 8 hrs. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Within one round of casting this spell, the priest 
magically conjures 143 lock lurkers, The lock lurk- 
ers appear in an area within spell range, as desired 
by the caster. They follow simple instructions of the 
caster, who is conveyed the ability to communicate 
basic concepts verbally to them for the duration of 
the spell (though the caster cannot understand the 
lurkers in turn). They are typically set to guard 
treasure, smal] areas such as the interiors of chests, 
bags, or pouches, or the person of the caster. 

These creatures do not check morale. They 
vanish when slain or when the spell duration expires. 

The material component is a gold coin. 

Notes: Granted by the lesser power Waukeen 
Merchant's Friend of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Lock Lurker: AC 3; MV 9; HD 1+3; THACO 
19; #AT 1; Dmg 1 (bite), 1d4+5 (sting); SA paral- 
ysis; SD partial etherealness; SZ T (1" body, 1’ 
tail; ML elite (13-14); Int low (6); AL N; XP 175. 

The lock lurker's body looks like a coin, but 
it has a powerful tail that exists on the Ethereal 
Plane until the creature strikes. Usually found 
as a guardian creature or as a lurking predator 
that feeds on small vermin, the lock lurker bite 
cannot pierce metal. The sting can pierce any 
armor, its whip-like attack stuns smaller than 
man-sized creatures for 1d2 rounds. The poison 
slows the creature on the round following the 
strike, at which time a saving throw vs. poison 
is made. Success slows the victim a second 
round, followed by full recovery. Failure rigidly 
paralyzes for 1d6 hours, followed by 1d2 rounds 
slowed, followed by full recovery. 


Summon Minion 
Aka summon divine minion. 


Summon Priest 
Reversed form, succor. 


Summon Shadow Spirit 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere; Summoning 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, М 
Casting Time: 24 hrs. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This unique spell has shaped the culture of the 
Eshowe for generations and continues to enmesh 
the tribe in its malevolent effects. Over half of the 
Eshowe, including all the chiefs, shamans, specialty 
priests, crusaders, mages, and prominent warriors, 
undergo this ritual of binding as part of a tribal cer- 
emony. Only a few of the most remote and insignif- 
icant Eshowe clans are completely untouched by 
this incantation’s taint. 

By means of this spell, the recipient’s shadow is 
permanently bound into his or her body and spirit. 
Thereafter, the recipient of a summon shadow spirit 
spell never again naturally creates a shadow, regard- 
less of the immediate light conditions. The subject 
of a summon shadow spirit spell receives a saving 
throw vs. spell at a +1 bonus, modified by his mag- 
ical defense adjustment due to Wisdom, to avoid 
this spell's effects unless the saving throw is volun- 
tarily forgone. 

Although the Eshowe believe that a being's 
spirit is restored to its body by means of this spell, 
in truth this incantation binds a shadow (as 
described in the MONSTROUS MANUAL tome) that 
dwells on the Negative Material Plane to the recip- 
ient. This link transfers many of the shadow 's nat- 
ural defenses to the recipient. A recipient is 
immune to sleep, charm, and hold spells and cold- 
based attacks. Opponents require a +1 or better 
magical weapon to wound a recipient of this spell. 

However, this spell also has numerous insidi- 
ous effects on the subject. The binding of the 
shadow causes a slow, but inexorable, shift in 
alignment in the subject to chaotic evil. In addi- 
tion, there is a 1% cumulative chance per year that 
a recipient of this spell is permanently trans- 
formed into a shadow. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and an area of shadow. 


2 617 М. 


Summon Spectator 


“маш A 


Notes: Granted by the Chultan god Eshowdow 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Summon Spectator 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning, Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: 70 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The annals of the church of Helm relate that in 
ancient times Helm, He of the Unsleeping Eyes, 
created the ultimate guardian to assist his neces- 
sarily fallible human followers. This creature, 
known as a spectator, appeared as a large orb dom- 
inated by an unblinking central eye with four stalks 
sprouting from the top of the orb to watch in each 
of the cardinal directions. In a dark time in the 
church’s distant history, the forces of evil gained the 
upper hand for a while. During this bleak period, 
various gods of evil corrupted Helm’s creations into 
the horrors known as beholders and their kin. 
Priests of Bane claim this is so much hogwash; they 
believe that the Black Lord created the eye tyrants 
as the ultimate rulers, and spectators are Helm's 
poor attempt at copying Bane's magnificent cre- 
ation. The truth is unknown, although priests of 
Helm are known to destroy beholders and their kin 
wherever possible, and the remaining priests of 
Bane (and Xvim) return the favor to spectators 
whenever possible. 

This spell enables priests of Helm to summon 
nearly infallible guardians to assist in their ordained 
tasks. Summon spectator summons one of Helm's 
spectator servitors from Mechanus to the Prime 
Material Plane to serve for up to 101 years in a 
specified task. The task must involve the guarding 
of some location or inanimate physical object, such 
as a portal, shrine, or a holy relic. (The scope of 
things a spectator summoned by summon specta- 
tor will guard is broader than what one summoned 
by the particular variant of the 7th-level wizard 
spell monster summoning V that normally summons 
spectators will guard.) It allows no one except the 
one who summoned it or another priest of Helm to 
enter the location it is guarding or to use, borrow, or 
examine an item or treasure it watches over. It is not 
gullible and can fairly easily detect false claims to 
membership in Helm's priesthood by questioning 
such claimants telepathically about details of the 
church' rituals and beliefs. 


A summoned spectator does not abandon its 
post unless slain or blinded in all five eyes, in 
which case it automatically returns to Helm's tower 
in Mechanus. Its eyes regenerate in 24 hours, after 
which time it returns to its post. If the object is gone 
or the location breached when it returns (it can 
automatically tell), it again leaves for Mechanus, 
never to return. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a steel gauntlet blessed in the name of 
Helm; the latter is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Granted by Helm the Vigilant of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Spectator: AC 4/7/7; МУ fly 9 (B); HD 4+4; 
THACO 15; #АТ 1; Dmg 144+1; SA Eyes; SD 
*2 surprise bonus, +1 initiative bonus, central 
eye; MR 5%; Int high (11-14); SZ M (4' dia.); 
ML elite (14); AL LN; XP .4,000. 

The spectator is a relative of the beholder, 
with a spherical floating body a large central eye 
and four eyestalks. The AC ratings are for the 
body (70%; AC 4, 4+4 HD), eyestalks (20%, 
АСТ, 1 hp), and central eye (10% ACT, 1 hp). 

Eye Powers—central eye: reflect one spell 
per round if the spectator makes a successful 
saving throw vs. spell. Eyestalk abilities are: 

Create food & water: for 6 

Cause serious wounds: range 60 feet, 1 
target, damage 2d8+3, save vs. spell for half. 

Paralyzation Ray: range 90 feet, 1 target, 
save vs. paralyzation or affected for 8d4 rounds. 

Telepathy: range 120 feet, 1 target, save vs. 
spell or suggestion. 


Summon Spectral Death 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 day/level maximum 
Area of Effect: Tracks 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This evil spell summons a spectral death, a bil- 
lowing cloud creature of negative energy, to find 
and slay a creature described to it by the caster. (It 
cannot otherwise be commanded to fight for the 
caster.) When it is summoned, the priest must have 
cast a protection from evil spell, be within a pro- 


2 618 М. 


Summon Undead 


eee A 


tective circle, or have a special item used to con- 
trol the spectral death. Otherwise, it attempts to slay 
its summoner and return from whence it came. 

The spectral death returns to its own plane 
whenever the spell lapses, its mission is fulfilled, 
it is banished (by means of abjure, dispel evil, holy 
word, or some similar method), or the priest is 
slain. If the spectral death cannot complete its mis- 
sion within | day per caster level, and none of the 
foregoing have occurred, it relentlessly tracks its 
summoner. If it confronts its summoner, it attacks 
in a rage, striking as a 20 Hit Die creature and 
inflicting 3d6 points of damage with each success- 
ful hit. 

When raging, the spectral death is 50% resistant 
to any attempt by the summoner to banish it back to 
its home plane (the quasielemental Plane of Vac- 
cuum). This is adjusted by 5% per level (or Hit Die) 
difference. The spectral death has 20 Hit Dice for 
this purpose, thus its resistance to a 15th-level 
caster is 75%. 

Notes: Used almost exclusively by evil priests 
of the MYSTARA setting. (The details of the spec- 
tral death can be found in the Mysr4n4 Monstrous 
Compendium.) 


Spectral Death: AC 0; MV fly 18 (A); HD 
10; THACO 11; #AT 2; Dmg 1410/1410; SA 
Wisdom drain (save vs. death each hit or lose 1 
point); SD hit only by magical weapons, turned 
as "special" undead, creature has no flank or 
rear; SZ M (5' dia.); ML fearless (20); Int aver- 
age (8-10); AL NE; XP 5,000. 

Those slain by the spectral death are forever 
dead, no means short of a full wish can restore 
them. Raise dead, reincarnation, resurrection, 
regeneration and similar means of revivification 


all fail. An individual who lost Wisdom but sur- 
vived the attack regains lost Wisdom at a rate of 
1 point per day. The creature looks like a cloud 
of boiling black vapor surrounded by a faint 
green-black nimbus. 


Summon Spider 
See spider summoning; a drow spell. 


Summon Undead 
(Necromancy, Summoning) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Summoning 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons one or more undead into 
the general vicinity of the priest. The creatures 
answer the summons within 1d6+6 rounds. Upon 
their arrival, lesser undead will usually seek to 
eliminate the priest at once unless he (or she) is 
suitably fortified behind protection from evil. More 
powerful, intelligent undead may attempt to parley 
with the priest, but they will invariably end the con- 
versation and attack once their initial curiosity has 
been satisfied. A priest must be prepared to com- 
mand, cajole, entice, or destroy whatever creature 
has been called into his service. 

Whenever possible, the DM should choose 
what kind of undead answers the priest’s summon- 
ing, based on the caste’s current surroundings, level 
of ability, and alignment. Alternatively, the DM can 
roll 1d20 and consult the table. 


Summon Varrangoin 


a м 


1d20 Roll Undead (Number Appearing) 


1-8 Ghouls (444) 

9-12 Ghasts (2d4) 

13-14 Shadows or Wights (1d4+1) 
I5 Wraiths or Mummy (143) 
16 Spectre, Ghost, or Banshee (1) 
17 Special (1) 

18-20 No undead in range (0) 


Special undead might include sons of Kyuss, 
apparitions, crypt things, eyes of fear and flame, and 
any other unusual undead creature the DM may wish 
to introduce. In truly rare circumstances (for 
instance, if the spell is cast near a creature’s lair), this 
spell might attract the attention of a more powerful 
undead, such as a death knight, vampire, or even a 
lich. These beings will seldom arrive in a predictable 
fashion and are most likely to demand some form 
of nasty retribution or lavish sacrifice to appease. 

The summoned undead remain in the vicinity of 
the priest for at least one turn per level and can be 
commanded to assist the priest in his or her 
endeavors (including, possibly, attacking the 
caster’s opponents). Unless fortified with resist 
turning, the undead summoned by this spell can be 
turned (or commanded) by priests other than the 
caster. Because it enlists the service of powerful 
and malicious undead, summon undead is granted 
only to priests serving evil deities. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancer-priests. 


Summon Varrangoin 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a priest to summon one abyss 
bat (varrangoin) as a servant. The priest can spec- 
ify which type (I-VI) of varrangoin he wishes to 
summon. The casting time is 1 round per “type 
level” (a Type II varrangoin can be summoned in 
2 rounds, a Type V takes 5 rounds, etc.). However, 
because of the chaotic nature of the Abyssal 
planes, there is always some chance that the sum- 
moning will bring forth a randomly selected var- 
rangoin type. This chance is 50%, less 2% per 
level of experience of the priest. If a randomly 
selected type appears, use the table to determine 
the type appearing: 


620 


0100 ^ Varrangoin Appearing 

01-30  TypeI 

31-50 Туре ll 

51-66 Type III 

67-80  TypeIV 

81-88 Type V 

89-92 Type VI 

93-00 Spell failure: no varrangoin appear 


Lesser varrangoin summoned will do the 
priest's bidding to the best of their abilities, save 
that they will not behave in any obviously self- 
destructive manner. Greater varrangoin, however, 
have to be negotiated with and offered some reward 
or sacrifice for their services before they will serve 
the priest. 

This specialized and limited form of gating 
draws forth an abyssal bat for a limited time only. 
At each dawn following its summons, the varran- 
goin is permitted a saving throw vs. spell and, if 
this is failed, it returns to its home plane. Saving 
throws must be made in the same manner each 
dawn following the summons in order for the var- 
rangoin to remain on the Prime Material. Varran- 
goin do not have true names or individual 
identities, so it is not necessary for the casting 
priest to be familiar with the details of the crea- 
ture being summoned. 

The material component is a small quartz prism 
crafted with asymmetric facets, contained within a 
brass sphere. It is consumed during the summons. 

Notes: Granted by Iuz the Evil of the GREY- 
HAWK setting. 


Sun Scepter 
(Enchantment/Charm, Conjuration/ 
Summoning) 

Sphere: Sun, Law 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


The casting of this spell borrows an hour of day- 
time from the day it is cast (or the next day if cast at 
night) to render its effects. Sun scepter temporarily 
enchants a solid gold scepter or mace that the caster 
touches into a magical item of some potency. When 
sun scepter is cast, the golden scepter glows with 
the same brightness and illumination as a contin- 
ual light spell. The individual holding the scepter 
when the spell is cast can immediately command 


Varrangoin 


Аааа A 


Lesser Varrangoin (Abyssal Bat): AC 0; MV fly 18 (С); НО 5+5; THACO 15; #AT 
3 (claw/claw/bite); Dmg 1d4/1d4/1d6; SA by type; SD by type; MR 25%; SZ М (4—5' 
tall); ML fanatic (17—18); Int very (11-12); AL CE; XP 2,000. 


These skeletal bats have rotting wings, a skull-like head, glowing red eyes, and a 
forked tail. They have special abilities depending on their type. АП varrangoin types 
look alike. 


General Powers—Harmed only by silver or magic. Light and continual light inflict 
2 points damage/caster level; if in radius, all attacks and saves at —2. Sunray or sunburst 
inflict 6d6, no saving throw if magic resistance fails. Save against any breath weapon 
for half damage. 


I—Breathes cone of cold at 11th level for 548, 3/day. Immune to cold, half from 
electricity. 


II—Breathes fireball 15' radius, 30-yard range, 5d8, 3/day. Immune to fire, half 
from acid. 


III—Spit lightning bolt 5 х 60', 5d6, 3/day. Immune to electricity. 


IV—Spits acid 5' radius, 30-yard range, 548, 3/day. Immune to acid, half from 
fire. 


Greater Varrangoin (Abyssal Bat): AC —3; MV fly 18 (C); HD 8-16; THACO 11; 
#AT 4 (claw/claw/bite/tail); Dmg 1d6/1d6/1d10/1d8; SA by type; SD by type; MR 
35%; SZ M (4—5' tall); ML fanatic (17-18); Int high (13—14); AL CE; XP 6,000. 


General Powers—Harmed only by silver or magic. Light and continual light inflict 
2 points damage/caster level; if in radius, all attacks and saves at —2. Sunray or sunburst 
inflict 6d6, no saving throw if magic resistance fails. Save against any breath weapon 
for half damage. 


V—Berserk (1 turn/day, +2 attack/-2 AC, immune to fear/illusions). Dispel magic 
at 14th level, 2/day, symbol of pain 1/ау. Immune to charm. Permanent free action. 
Half damage from fire, cold, electricity. Immune to spells that affect their strength 
and physical capabilities (e.g.: fumble, ray of enfeeblement, prayer effects on attack and 
damage). 


VI—Spells as 9th-level wizard. Save vs. spells and rod/wand/stave at 18th level. 
Innate magic (all 1/day): mirror image, dispel magic, polymorph other, polymorph self, 
wizard eye, flesh to stone, project image. Immune to 1st-3rd level spells. Can use any 
wizard item they can physically wield. 


P. 621 ~ 


Sunblade 


ne „ 


the obedience and fealty of creatures within 120 
feet of his or her location when the spell is com- 
pleted. From 200 to 500 Hit Dice (or levels of expe- 
rience) can be ruled, but a creature with 15 or 
higher Intelligence and 12 or more Hit Dice or 
levels is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to negate 
this power upon itself. 

Ruled creatures obey the wielder of the sun 
scepter as if he or she were their absolute sover- 
eign. Still, if the wielder gives a command that is 
absolutely contrary to the nature of the creatures 
commanded, the rulership power is broken. 

While the rulership power is only effective upon 
the creatures within 120 feet of the sun scepter 
wielder when the spell is cast, the sun scepter can 
also be wielded as a magical weapon that inflicts 
1d8+3 points of damage until the spell expires. 
Against golems, the sun scepter causes 2d8+6 
points of damage. If a natural 20 is rolled on the 
attack roll, the sun scepter completely destroys the 
golem but is itself destroyed in the process. Against 
creatures of the Outer Planes, the sun scepter 
inflicts 1d8+3 points of damage. If the attack roll 
is a natural 20, the scepter causes triple damage, 
but the spell is also immediately ended (though the 
golden scepter is not destroyed). 

The material component is a solid gold scepter 
or mace worth at least 2,500 gp. It is not consumed 
in the casting of the spell except under the condi- 
tions described above. 

Notes: Granted by the sun god Amaunator of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Sunblade 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Sun whe 
Level: 3 
Range: 0 


Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 4 rds. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A brilliant sword of fiery sunlight appears in the 
caster's hands when this spell is cast. It acts as a 
magical long sword and grants a +2 to attacks and 
damage. Blinding rays emanate from the flaming 
blade, subtracting 1 from enemy's attacks as Jong as 
the opponent remains in melee. The sword inflicts 
double damage on any creatures with a weaknesses 
for sunlight or bright illumination. 

Notes: Common for priests of the Sun sphere of 
the DARK SUN setting. 


Sunburst 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. radius globe 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a brilliant flash of golden 
light. Undead within the area of effect take 6d6 
points of damage (no save). АП other creatures 
within or facing the burst must save vs. spell or be 
blinded for 1 round. Creatures without eyes, and 
those not sensitive to visible light, are not effected. 
A sunburst negates darkness spells within its area, 
provided the darkness was cast by someone of 
equal or lower level than the priest. 

The material component is Pholtus's silvery sun 
holy symbol and a bead of any clear crystalline sub- 
stance. 

Notes: Granted by the Pholtus of the Blinding 
Light of the GREYHAWK setting. 


Sunray 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun 
Level: 7 


Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd. + 144 rds. 

Area of Effect: 5-ft.-radius (special) 
Saving Throw: Special 


With this spell, the caster can evoke a dazzling 
beam of light each round in which no action other 
than movement is performed. The sunray is like a 
ray of natural sunlight. All creatures in the 10-foot 
diameter area of effect must roll successful saving 
throws vs. spell or be blinded for 1d3 rounds, 
those using infravision at the time for 2d4 rounds. 
Creatures to whom sunlight is harmful or unnatu- 
ral suffer permanent blindness if the saving throw 
is failed, and are blinded for 2d6 rounds if the 
saving throw is successful. Those within its area 
of effect, as well as creatures within 20 feet of its 
perimeter, lose any infravision capabilities for 
144+1 rounds. 


4 622 М 


Sunscorch 


Undead caught within the sunray’s area of effect 
receive 8d6 points of damage, one-half if a saving 
throw vs. spell is successful. Those undead 20 feet 
to either side of the sunray’s area of effect receive 
3d6 points of damage, no damage if a save is suc- 
cessful. In addition, the ray can result in the total 
destruction of those undead specifically destroyed 
by sunlight, if their saving throws are failed. The 
ultraviolet light generated by the spell inflicts 
damage on fungoid creatures and subterranean 
fungi just as if they were undead, but no saving 
throw is allowed. 

The material components are an aster seed and 
a piece of aventurine feldspar (sunstone). 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Sunrise 
(Evocation, Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun 
Level: 3 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1+1d4 rds. or special 

Area of Effect: 5-ft.-sphere around creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


With this spell, the caster evokes a dazzling 
sphere of light equal to natural sunlight around 
himself or a touched being or item. All beings in 
contact with the sphere lose the use of infravision 
for 2d4 rounds, which is halved if a saving throw 
vs. spell is successful. 

Vampires and other undead, fungoid creatures, 
and subterranean fungi in contact with the sphere 
suffer 4d6 points of damage, which is halved if a 
saving throw vs. spell is successful. Upon their first 
contact (only) with the dazzling radiance, such 
creatures are affected as if by a confusion spell on 
the round following contact. On first contact with 
the radiance, these creatures may continue an attack 
or fighting actions that bring them into the light, 
but on the next round they hesitate and are unable 
to attack or take any deliberate action. 

Creatures harmed by sunlight are affected by 
the radiance as if they were caught in actual sun- 
light. Undead vulnerable to sunlight receive a 
saving throw vs. spell to avoid destruction. 

The caster can choose to have it delay and not 
take effect until a word of activation that was whis- 
pered during casting is spoken again. The spell 
effect occurs at any later time when the word is 
spoken unless the touched being dies first or is 
affected by a dispel magic. In addition, if the 
delayed form of the spell is cast on the caster, it 
can even be activated by silent force of will alone; 
no word need be spoken. The spell is not affected 
by other spellcasting or magical activity on the part 
of the caster, but its delayed effect cannot be 
unleashed in the same round as the caster activates 
a magical item or casts another spell. 

The material components are an aster seed and 
a piece of sunstone (aventurine). 

Notes: Granted by the god of dawn Lathander 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Sunscorch 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun 
Level: 1 


Range: 40 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates a brilliant ray of scorching 
heat that slants down out of the sky to strike one 
creature of the caster’s choice. The creature is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the ray— 
a successful save indicates that it missed altogether. 


A 623 ~ 


Sunstroke 


a d 


Any creature struck by the ray sustains 1d6 points 
of damage, plus 1 point per caster level. Undead 
creatures and monsters vulnerable to bright light 
sustain 1d6 points of damage, plus 2 points per 
caster level. In addition to sustaining damage, 
living victims who fail their save are also blinded 
for 1d4 rounds by the spell. 

The sun must be in the sky when sunscorch is 
cast, or the spell fails entirely. [t cannot be cast 
underground, indoors, or in hours of darkness, 
although routine overcasts do not hinder the 
sunscorch. 

Notes: Common for priests of the Sun sphere of 
the DARK SUN setting. 


Sunstroke 
(Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire, Elemental Sun 
Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 6 rds. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


The caster points his finger at a creature and 
a brilliant beam of sunlight shoots outward to 
cause a severe case of heat exhaustion. The crea- 
ture must make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell or instantly collapse into a convulsive mass 
until treated or dead. The creature's skin becomes 
cold and clammy, it does not sweat regardless of 
the heat, and its muscles convulse dangerously. 
This causes the creature to lose 1d4 hit points per 
round. The condition can be stopped by a heal or 
cure critical wounds spell, or by pouring at least 
one gallon of cool water over the creature's head. 

A creature that has suffered a severe heat stroke 
once is forever susceptible. Those affected require 
twice their normal amounts of water if exposed to 
the sun for more than four hours, and may go into 
convulsions if not adequately hydrated. 

If the saving throw is successful, the creature is 
affected as if by the 3rd-level heat exhaustion spell. 
All attack rolls and saving throws are made at a -2 
penalty unti] the effect is countered by cooling (a 
canteen of water poured on the head is sufficient), 
by magical healing (such as cure light wounds), or 
by a dispel magic spell. 

Notes: Common for priests of the spheres of 
Sun and Elemental Fire of the DARK SUN setting. 


Sunstroke —Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire, Sun 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Sunstroke afflicts the target creature with the 
effects of heat stroke for the duration of the spell. 
While suffering from the effects of insolation, the 
creature’s interna) body temperature rises by 1° 
Fahrenheit per round, to a maximum of 8° higher 
than normal. 

Undead and creatures immune to heat or fire are 
totally unaffected by this spell. Cold-blooded ani- 
mals simply move slower and slower. For every 
degree of increased temperature, cold-blooded 
creatures have a —1 penalty to initiative. 

Warm-blooded creatures display increasingly 
feverish side effects while under the effects of this 
spell. For every degree of increased temperature, 
warm-blooded creatures suffer 1 point of damage 
and suffer a —1 penalty to their attack, damage, 
saving throw, and initiative rolls, to à maximum 
penalty of —5. If the creature's body temperature 
rises 6? or more above normal, the creature is 
wracked by convulsions and cannot attack, defend, 
or cast spells. If the creature's body temperature 
rises 8[DM above normal, it immediately lapses 
into a coma and cannot be revived until the spell 
effect expires. 

A successful saving throw vs. spell negates this 
spell immediately. Target creatures are allowed a 
saving throw when the spell is cast and once every 
other round thereafter. An endure heat spell in 
effect on the creature when sunstroke is cast grants 
the creature a +1 bonus to its saving throw; a resíst 
fire grants the creature a +3 bonus; and a protection 
from fire grants immunity to the spell's effects. 

Sunstroke s effects can be halted immediately by 
means of a dispel magic, remove curse, cure dis- 
ease, or heal spell. Other healing spells have no 
effect. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a small piece of flammable material 
(paper, cloth, dry wood). 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Horus- 
Re of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


4 624 М 


Surelock 


Superheroism 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects 0-level individuals and war- 
riors only. It confers a temporary increase in life 
energy levels upon any such individual with fewer 
than 13 experience levels. The exact number of 
levels (and associated Hit Dice gained) is given on 
the table. 

The recipient fights as though at the experience 
level bestowed by the magic. Any damage sustained 
is taken first from the magically gained hit points 
and Hit Dice. The magic lasts for one round per 
caster level, after which any remaining bonus 
energy levels or hit points are lost. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from POLYHE- 
DRON Newszine.) 


Superheroism Spell Effect 
Number 10-sided dice 
Level of Energy for Accumulated 
of Levels Damage 
Recipient Bestowed Bestowed 
0 6 5 
Ist-3rd 5 4+1 
4th-6th 4 3+2 
7th-9th 3 2+3 
10th—12th 2 1+4 


Surelock 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Surelock was specifically designed to protect 
against unwanted plane-spanning portals. As long 
as it's in effect, the spell seals all gates and portals 
that reach into other planes. The spell does not 
affect movement abilities within a single plane, 
so a teleport spell is unaffected. However, per- 
manent, temporary, and shifting portals cannot 
open within the area affected by the spell. Like- 
wise, plane shift and astral spell don't function 
within the area of effect. A gate spell cannot pull 
a creature into or out of the affected area. Any 
attempt to use any of these powers results in auto- 
matic failure—a spell to that effect would be 
wasted and a charge from a magical item would 
be lost. 

When cast, surelock spreads out in a radius from 
the caster to the full extent of its area of effect. It is 
not possible to exclude portals within this area; 
everything is affected equally. Nor can the effect 
be lowered, even by the caster, without the use of 
dispel magic. Once cast, the area does not move— 
although originally centered on the priest, it does 
not follow him around thereafter. 

Despite the various gate ward and gate seal 
spells used by wizards, this is still—by far—the 
most potent ward against interplanar travel. Its radius 
of effect, duration, and ability to block spells as well 
as actual gates and portals makes it clearly superior. 
Despite this, note that in Sigil, the Lady of Pain has 
absolute control over the city's portals and may 
choose to overturn the spell's effects at her whim. 

The material component is a crystal key that 
must be shattered when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Rare for planar priests. Unlikely to be 
learned except through visiting the Outer Planes. 


2 625 = 


Surf 


) ee ali 


Surf Surface Sojourn — Sea Elf 
(Alteration) (Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water Sphere: Animal, Elemental Water 
Level: 3 Level: 1 
Range: 30 yds. Range: Touch 
Components: V, S Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn + 1 turn/level Duration: 3 hrs./level 
Area of Effect: 10 yds. beachfront/level Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None Saving Throw: None 


This spell aggravates the natural wave action 
on a beach so that higher and higher waves rush 
ashore until a violent crashing surf rolls in. It can 
catch people unaware or hinder boats moving to 
and from the beach. At its most violent, surf can 
damage or destroy beachfront structures and docks. 
Once the wave action begins, the spell-caster him- 
self must move away from the surf, for the longer 
the spell lasts, the more violent the resulting wave 
action will be. For its first turn of duration, the surf 
rushes up to its normal high-water mark. For every 
turn past that, the surf advances a further 10 yards 
inland. Surf raised by a 6th-level sea priest, for 
instance, will wet the shore a distance of 60 yards, 
from the normal high-water mark. 

Notes: Uncommon for Sea priests; otherwise, 
very rare. (Updated from Da4GON Magazine.) 


Surface sojourn affects only water-dwelling 
beings that are capable of existing on land for short 
periods of time, but who favor aquatic environments. 
Examples of eligible races include aquatic elves, 
aquatic half-elves, malenti, merfolk, and sahuagin. 

For the duration of this spell, the recipient can 
exist on land without the attendant discomfort, 
penalties, restrictions, or the like that doing so nor- 
mally entails. During such sojourns, the affected 
creature is enveloped in a thin mantle of water that 
keeps its skin moist. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a snail shell. 

Notes: Granted by the sea elf god, Deep 
Sashelas. 


626 


Sustarre, Chariot of 


b———————————9 d 


Suspended Animation 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By using this spell, the caster can place one will- 
ing subject in a state of suspended animation. The 
victim's breathing, heartbeat, and other vital processes 
slow to the point of nonexistence, although he or she 
seems to be deeply asleep, not dead. A caster of 7th 
to 10th level can maintain the suspended animation 
for up to one week plus one day per level; a caster of 
11th to 15th level can maintain the state for up to one 
month plus one week per level; and a caster of 16th 
level or higher can place someone in suspended ani- 
mation for one year plus one month per level. 

This spell has many useful applications. First, 
all bodily or mental afflictions become quiescent 
during the victim’s slumber. Poison, insanity, and 
many curses (including lycanthropy, geas, and 
mummy rot) can be arrested, if not cured, and have 
no effect on the subject while he sleeps. Of course, 
if the spell is broken prematurely, all the conditions 
that were halted by the spell will start once again. 
Second, the subject requires no food or water, but 
he still needs air and dies if deprived of oxygen. 
Third, for every month spent in suspended anima- 
tion, the subject recovers one hit point. 

The caster can awaken the subject at any time 
within the spell’s duration, although he must be in 
the subject’s presence to do so. Optionally, the 
priest can pre-specify an amount of time within the 
spell duration or a special condition to awaken the 
sleeper. A condition must include a physical stim- 
ulus to the subject, such as a change in temperature, 
the touch of the sun, the kiss of a princess, or what- 
ever the priest desires. If the priest maintaining the 
spell dies or is not able to awaken the sleeper, then 
the subject can be taken to another priest of the 
same deity to be awakened. 

The subject is completely helpless and can be 
killed by a single blow. However, if attacked with- 
out being slain, the subject receives a saving throw 
vs. spell each round to emerge from his suspended 
animation. The creature is extremely groggy and 
disoriented if disturbed in this fashion, suffering a 
—2 penalty to all die rolls for 146 turns; a creature 
that awakens in the normal or prescribed fashion is 
disoriented for only one round. 


Some of the drawbacks to this spell affect the 
casting priest. First of all, it takes all of the priest's 
concentration to cast and maintain this spell. This 
means that the priest cannot cast any other spell 
while a subject is being held under the influence 
of the suspended animation. For each week that the 
subject is in suspended animation, the priest loses 
one point of Constitution. This happens each week 
until the priest transfers the spell to another priest 
of the same alignment. Transferring this spell 
requires a successful saving throw vs. spell. If the 
saving throw is successful, then the priest who 
transfers the spell can start recovering Constitution 
at a rate of one point per hour of bedrest. If the 
saving throw doesn’t succeed, then the priest loses 
another point of Constitution and cannot try to 
transfer the spell again for 8 hours. Either way, 
because of the temporary lapse of the spell, the sub- 
ject will automatically lose 1 hit point each time a 
transfer is attempted. 

The material component is a rare herb that must 
be prepared with exacting care. The treatment costs 
at least 200 gold pieces and requires 1d3 days of the 
priest’s time and attention. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (PO:SM). 


Sustain 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 6 hrs./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/2 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the shukenja or any creature it 
is cast upon to do without food or water for the dura- 
tion of the spell. The creature does not suffer the 
effects of starvation or thirst, although it can eat and 
drink normally. When the spell ends, the creature 
must resume normal eating and drinking habits, but 
does not feel any adverse effects from the time spent 
without food. Likewise, if the spell is cast upon a 
creature suffering from starvation and thirst, it coun- 
ters the effects as if the creature had eaten one fill- 
ing meal for every six hours of the spell's duration. 

The material components are a flask of warm 
sake and a rice cake. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Sustarre, Chariot of 
See chariot of Sustarre. 


4 627 s 


Sustarre’s Transformation 


Sustarre’s Transformation 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 7 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1d4 creatures in a 60-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


This potent transformation will polymorph one 
or more living creatures (as per the polymorph 
other spell), causing them to take root and turn into 
trees unless a successful saving throw vs. poly- 
morph is made. Up to twice the caster's level in Hit 
Dice can be affected, and the caster must select 
which creatures will be affected. Creatures that 
successfully save are slowed for 1d4 rounds. A 
single creature saves at —4, two save at —2, and 
three or four save at –1. The effect cannot be dis- 
pelled, but a remove curse from a caster of higher 
level than the druid will release a trapped creature. 
The caster can release any such trapped creature 
at will. 

The material component is mistletoe. 


c 
Ж. 


TIL 
ЖД, 


628 


Notes: Very rare for druids. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Swim 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature/2 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell gives an untrained swimmer the abil- 
ity to swim as if proficient, with all chances for 
success detailed in the PHB under the description 
of the swimming nonweapon proficiency. If cast on 
a proficient swimmer, the recipient swims with a 
+2 bonus to his or her Constitution for purposes of 
determining success. One creature for every two 
experience levels of the spell's caster (round up) 
can be affected. 

The material component is a small pumice stone 
for each recipient. 

Notes: Granted by Valkur, Captain of the 
Waves, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Swirling Scythes — Old Empire 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Plant, Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 3-ft. radius/level 
Saving Throw: '⁄2 


This spell creates a whirling horizontal circle of 
invisible scythes, each created from a field of 
force, centered on the spellcaster. One scythe is 
created for each level of the caster. Casters of 
swirling scythes mentally specify the height at 
which all of the scythes spin, and they can change 
that level each round as long as it is not lower than 
their feet or higher than their heads. Swirling 
scythes pass through rock and metal as if those 
materials did not exist. Only living organic mate- 
rial is affected by this spell. This spell ends imme- 
diately when the duration expires or the caster 
ceases to devote full concentration to the spell. 
Casters can move at half their normal movement 
rate and maintain concentration (though they 


Sylvan Creature Form 


и аиша аи аак À u€— = ини ЕЕЕ ЕГЕР A 


cannot take other actions); the swirling scythes 
move with the caster. 

Although this spell was created to reap the 
fields of Mulhorand, it is an extremely deadly 
combat spell as well. Any creature caught within 
the area of effect suffers 2 points of damage per 
round per swirling scythe. A successful saving 
throw vs. spell halves this damage. 

The material component is a miniature silver or 
gold scythe and the priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deity Osiris 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Sword and Hammer 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, $ 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a shadowy sword and war 
hammer of twice normal size. These are animated 
magical constructs rather than tangible items. They 
fly about within the spell range, which is centered 
on the caster, at MV fly 30 (A), striking once per 
round at THACO 4 at a being or object mentally 
chosen by the caster. The two weapons can attack 
the same creature or each can strike at a separate 
creature. They can change targets as often as the 
caster desires. The sword inflicts 4d4 points 
damage, and the hammer deals 2d4 points. If they 
both attack the same creature, there is no saving 
throw to avoid the damage they inflict, but a crea- 
ture facing only one of the spell weapons is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to suffer only half 
damage. 

The weapons are considered sufficiently 
enchanted to hit any sort of foe (such as those hit only 
by weapons of +3 enchantment). They automatically 
continue to attack the same creature they did on the 
previous round if the caster is slain, departs, or turns 
his or her attention to other spellcasting. (When such 
a spell is finished being cast, the caster may return his 
or her attention to the sword and hammer and reas- 
sign them to other creatures if desired.) 

The magical constructs created by sword and 
hammer strike silently, are nonmetallic, cannot be 
fooled by illusions, and cannot be magically 
controlled by anyone other than the caster. They 


vanish in a twinkling of lights when the spell 
expires or earlier if the caster wills the spell to end. 

Notes: Granted by the Tyr the Just God of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Swordward 
(Alteration, Evocation, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Protection, Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 5 to 60 sq. ft. 
Saving Throw: None 

This spell creates a guardian effect in a clearly 
defined area of shimmering silver-gray air. Within 
its confines, all points of damage done to foes by 
the attacks of lawful good-aligned beings are 
gained as extra (or replace lost) hit points by the 
attacking lawful good beings. Moreover, all edged 
weapons wielded against lawful good individuals 
strike at a —3 penalty on attack rolls and a —3 
penalty to every die rolled for damage rolls (for 
example, 2d6+3 becomes 2d6—3). The caster can 
choose to make the swordward fill any area 
between 5 and 60 square feet, but its potency is 
unaffected by the size of its coverage. 

А swordward cannot coexist with a blade bar- 
rier. If either spell is cast so as to come into con- 
tact with any part of the area of effect of the other, 
both spell effects vanish instantly in a thunderous 
explosion, and all beings in the former areas of 
effect of both spells take 6d12 points of blast 
damage; this damage is halved for those that they 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell. All items 
in the same area in such an event must make suc- 
cessful item saving throws vs. magical fire or be 
destroyed. Any beings located in the overlap area 
where the two spells met are allowed no saving 
throw, and items in that area must make successful 
saving throws vs. disintegration, not magical fire. 

The material components are an edged weapon 
(or a fragment of such a blade) that has drawn blood 
in battle, a piece of lodestone, and an amethyst of at 
least 5 gp value. 

Notes: Granted by the war god Torm of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Sylvan Creature Form 
See sylvan form. 


J 629 V 


Sylvan Form — Elf 


) ———————————————' Ad 


Sylvan Form — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 

When this spell is cast, the priest is able to 
assume the form of any non-evil humaniform 
sylvan creature, as adjudicated by the DM, from as 
small as a gorse (3 inches tall) to as large as a voad- 
kyn (9'/ feet tall). Other commonly assumed forms 
include that of an atomie, brownie, dobie, dryad, 
grig, hamadryad, kilmoulis, korred, leprechaun, 
nixie, nymph, pixie, satyr, sea sprite, seelie faerie, 
sprite, or sylph. It is not possible to assume nonhu- 
maniform guises, such as that of a centaur or uni- 
corn, nor that of an evil sylvan creature, such as a 
bramble faerie or quickling. Furthermore, the priest 
gains the assumed form's physical mode of loco- 
motion and breathing. No System Shock roll is 
required. The spell does not give the new form's 
other abilities (attack, magic, special movement, 


etc.), nor does it run the risk of the priest changing 
personality and mentality. 

When the new form is assumed, the caster's 
equipment, if any, melds into the new form (in par- 
ticularly challenging campaigns, the DM may allow 
protective devices, such as a ring of protection, to 
continue operating effectively). The caster retains 
all mental abilities, including spell use, assuming 
the new form allows completion of the proper 
verbal and somatic components and the material 
components are available. A caster not used to a 
new form might be penalized at the DM's option 
(for example, а —2 penalty to attack rolls) until he 
or she practices sufficiently to master it. 

Thus, a priest changed into a sylph could fly, but 
his magic resistance would be unaffected and he 
could not summon an air elemental or turn invisible 
at will; a change to a korred would provide an 
18/76 Strength and the ability to hurl boulders but 
not the ability to Jaugh or to participate without risk 
in a korred dance. 

Naturally, the strength of the new form is suffi- 
cient to enable movement. The priest retains his or 
her own hit points, attack rolls, and saving throws. 
Only one form can be assumed by means of this 
spell, although the priest can revert to his or her 
normal form at any time, immediately ending the 


Symbol 


— a ш 


spell. A priest voluntarily returning to original form 
and ending the spell regains 1d12 hit points. The 
priest also returns to the original form when slain or 
when the effect is dispelled, but no hit points are 
restored in these cases. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Corellon 
Larethian, 


Symbol 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Sphere: Guardian, Wards) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 3 or ] turn 
Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None or пер. 


This spell allows the caster to scribe any of on 
the potent runes described below. A symbol can be 
quickly scribed in the air or on some surface, or 
carefully inscribed on a surface. 

A quickly scribed symbol has a casting time of 
3. The resulting rune becomes active immediately. 
It lasts one turn per caster level and glows faintly 
while it lasts. Symbols of fear, hopelessness, pain, 
or persuasion can be used in this manner. Symbols 
of death, discord, insanity, pain, sleep, stunning, 
and spell loss cannot. 

The only material components required are a 
small amount of mercury and phosphorus. 

A carefully inscribed symbol has a casting time 
of one turn. The symbol is inactive when finished 
and remains so indefinitely until triggered. Once 
triggered, it becomes active and glowing, usually 
lasting one turn per caster level. Some symbols can 
burn out more quickly. For example, a symbol of 
death ends when it has slain 80 hit points worth of 
creatures, or after one turn per level of the caster, 
whichever comes first. 

The material components for a carefully 
engraved symbol are mercury and phosphorus, 
plus powdered diamond and opal worth at least 
5,000 gp each. 

To be effective, a symbol must always be placed 
in plain sight and in a prominent location; cover- 
ing or hiding the rune renders the symbol ineffec- 
tive. As a default, a symbol is triggered whenever a 
creature does one or more of the following, as 
selected by the spell caster: reads, touches, or 
passes over the rune; looks at the rune; or passes 
through a portal bearing the rune. In this case, 


631 


"reading" the rune means any attempt to study, 
identify, or fathom its meaning. Throwing a cover 
over a symbol to render it inoperative triggers it if 
it reacts to touch. To trigger a symbol, a creature 
must be within 60 feet of the rune. 

The caster can set special triggering conditions 
of his own. These can be as simple or elaborate as 
the caster desires. Special conditions for triggering 
a symbol can be based on a creature's name, iden- 
tity, or alignment, but otherwise must be based on 
observable actions or qualities. Intangibles such as 
level, class, Hit Dice, or hit points don't qualify. For 
example, a symbol can be set to activate when a 
lawful good creature approaches, but not when a 
paladin approaches. 

А symbol's triggering conditions are defensive. 
A touch-triggered symbol remains untriggered if an 
item bearing the symbol is used to touch a crea- 
ture. Likewise, a symbol cannot be placed on a 
weapon and set to activate when the weapon strikes 
а foe. Once cast, a symbols triggering conditions 
cannot be changed. 

The caster ignores the effects of his own sym- 
bols, and cannot inadvertently trigger them. When 
scribing a symbol quickly, the caster can instantly 
attune any number creatures to the symbol, rend- 
ing them immune to its effects, provided the crea- 
tures are within 60 feet of the rune when it is 
created and that the caster is aware of their pres- 
ence. 

When creating a carefully inscribed rune, the 
caster can specify a password of phrase that pre- 
vents a creature using it from triggering the symbol. 
The caster also can attune any number or creatures 
to the symbol, but this can extend the casting time. 
Attuning one or two creatures takes negligible time; 
attuning small group (up to 10 creatures) takes an 
hour. Attuning an entire household (up to 25 crea- 
tures) takes a day. Attuning larger groups takes pro- 
portionately longer, as the DM sees fit. 

When triggered, a symbol affects all creatures 
within a 60-foot radius, except for the caster and 
any individuals attuned it. If a symbol has a pass- 
phrase, anyone using it remains immune to that par- 
ticular rune's effects so long as the individual 
remains within 60 feet of the rune. An individual 
who leaves the radius and returns must use the pass 
phrase again. 

Once triggered, a symbol remains active until its 
duration expires; creatures that subsequently meet 
an active symbol 5 triggering conditions suffer its 
effects. The symbols described below are the most 
commonly known. 


Symbol 


Lesser Symbols: 

Fear: This symbol can be scribed quickly or 
carefully engraved on a surface. Creatures within 
the radius are afflicted by a powerful version of the 
4th-level wizard spell, fear. If scribed in the air, this 
symbol imposes a —4 penalty to saving throws 
against the fear effect. If the rune is carefully 
engraved on a surface, the saving throw penalty 
increases to —8. 


Hopelessness: All creatures within the radius 
must attempt saving throws vs. spell, at a 4 
penalty if the rune is carefully engraved on a sur- 
face. If the saving throw fails, the creature suffers 
from hopelessness for 3d4 turns. It submits to 
simple demands from foes, such as to surrender or 
get out; the effect is similar to the 3rd-level wizard 
spell, suggestion. If no foes are present to make 
demands, there is a 25% chance that the creature 
takes no other action than to hold its ground. If the 
creature remains free to act there is a 25% chance it 
will retreat from the rune at its normal movement 
speed. In either case, the creature can defend nor- 
mally if attacked. 


Pain: Creatures within the radius suffer wrack- 
ing pains that reduce Dexterity scores by two points 
and impose a —4 attack penalty. Both effects last 
2d10 turns. This symbol can be scribed quickly or 
carefully engraved on a surface. 


Persuasion: This symbol can be quickly scribed 
or carefully engraved on a surface. Each creature 
within the radius must attempt a saving throw vs. 
spell, at a —4 penalty if the rune is carefully 
inscribed on a surface. If the saving throw fails, the 
creature becomes the same alignment as the caster 
for 1d20 turns. During this time, an affected crea- 
ture becomes friendly to the caster as though sub- 
jected to the 1st-level wizard spell, charm person. 


Greater Symbols: 

Death: One or more creatures within the radius, 
whose total hit points do not exceed 80, are irrevo- 
cably slain as though struck by the 6th-level wizard 
spell, death spell. This symbol must be carefully 
engraved on a surface. 


Discord: All creatures within 60 feet immedi- 
ately fall into loud bickering and arguing. Mean- 
ingful communication is impossible. If the affected 
creatures have different alignments, they are 50% 
likely to attack each other. Bickering lasts 5d4 
rounds, fighting lasts 2d4 rounds. This symbol 
must be carefully engraved on a surface. 


Death 


C) 
cm 


Hopelessness e 


Persuasion 


Sleep 


» Wy 
Р 
4 


e 
Spell Loss ‘a 


Stunning E . 


"iot >< X 
: 


6 


3 


2 


Symbol 


——— E те к т ш шыт кы ЕЫ ЫЕ а 


Insanity: Опе or more creatures within the 
radius, whose hit points do not exceed 120, become 
insane and act as though affected by the 4th-level 
wizard spell, confusion. Insanity lasts until a heal, 
restoration, or wish spell is used to remove the 
affliction. This symbol must be carefully engraved 
on a surface. 


Sleep: Creatures within the radius fall into a 
catatonic slumber if they have 8+1 Hit Dice or less 
(characters are affected if 8th level or less). Sleep- 
ing creatures cannot be awakened for 1d12+4 turns. 
This symbol must be carefully engraved on a sur- 
face. 


Spell Loss: Any creature within the radius 
immediately loses 1d4 spells from memory. The 
DM should determine which spells are lost ran- 
domly. Creatures with no memorized spells are 
unaffected. Creatures that have some memorized 
spells, but not enough to satisfy the loss, suffer no 
effect beyond the loss of all memorized spells. This 
symbol must be carefully inscribed. 


Stunning: One ore more creatures within the 
radius, whose total hit points do not exceed 160, are 
stunned for 3d4 rounds, Stunned creatures drop 
what they are holding and cannot take any mean- 
ingful actions. They cannot communicate, employ 
spells, use magical items, initiate psionic abilities, 
use spell-like powers, fight, or move freely, Move- 
ment is limited to one-third the creature’s current 
movement rate, or a rate of 3, whichever is less. 
Attacks against stunned creatures gain a +4 bonus. 
This symbol must be carefully engraved on a 
surface. 


A successful dispel magic removes the effects 
of a symbol from a creature, unless the symbol’s 
effect is instantaneous (death, spell loss) or the 
description specifies another remedy (insanity). 


Permanent Symbols: A symbol can be ren- 
dered permanent with the 8th-level wizard spell 
permanency, provided the rune is carefully 
engraved upon a permanent, non-portable surface 
such a wall or door. A permanency spell indefi- 
nitely extends a symbol’s basic duration of one 
turn per caster level. When triggered, a permanent 
symbol usually glows for about a turn each time it 
is activated, but there is no limit to the number of 
times it can be triggered. If the symbol can affect 
only a limited number of hit points of creatures, 
the limit applies each round. For example a per- 
manent symbol of death can slay 80 hit points of 
creatures every round. 


For the curious, here is the original text of the 
priest symbol spell. 
Symbol 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Guardian, Wards 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components; V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: Neg. 

The priest casting this spell inscribes a glowing 
symbol in the air or upon any surface, according to 
his desire. Any creature looking at the completed 
symbol within 60 feet must roll a successful saving 
throw уз. spell or suffer the effect. The symbol 
glows for one turn for each experience level of the 
caster. The particular symbol used is selected by 
the caster at the time of casting. The caster will not 
be affected by his own symbol. One of the follow- 
ing effects is chosen by the caster: 


Hopelessness: Creatures seeing it must turn back 
in dejection or surrender to capture or attack 
unless they roll successful saving throws vs. 
spell. Its effects last for 3d4 turns. 


Pain: Creatures affected suffer —4 penalties to 
their attack rolls and —2 penalties to their 
Dexterity ability scores due to wracking pains. 
The effects last for 2d10 turns. 


Persuasion: Creatures seeing the symbol become 
of the same alignment as and friendly to the priest 
who scribed the symbol for 1d20 turns unless a 
saving throw vs. spell is successful. 

The material components are mercury and 
phosphorus (see also the 8th-level wizard spell, 
symbol). 


The rune itself can be removed with a successful 
erase spell or a successful dispel magic targeted 
solely on the rune. The destruction of a surface 
upon which a symbol is inscribed destroys the rune, 
but also triggers its effects. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). This spell has 
been substantially reworked from the 2nd Edition 
version. The symbol of spell loss originated in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


A 633 ~ 


Sympathetic Magic I 


N 


Sympathetic Magic I 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to make a divina- 
tion about a specific person or thing, if some 
portion of the subject is available to the caster. 

The caster can roughly perceive the current 
location and condition of the subject (dead or alive, 
healthy or wounded, еїс.). If a creature is strongly 
aligned with good or evil, this is also learned. If 
the subject is on another plane, out-of-phase, in 
another dimension, traveling in time, or similarly 
absent only this fact is perceived. This divination 
is blocked by any magic of equal level or greater 
that wards against divinations. 

The spell requires some material focus associ- 
ated with the creature or object. This can be, for 
example, a lock of hair, fingernail parings, a sliver 
of wood or metal, and the like. The material is 
destroyed in the casting. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Sympathetic Magic II 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell, like sympathetic magic 1, allows the 
caster to make a divination about a specific person 
or thing, if the caster has a fragment of material 
associated with the subject. 

The caster can roughly perceive the current 
location and condition of the subject (dead or alive, 
healthy or wounded, еїс.). If a creature is strongly 
aligned with good or evil, this is also learned. If 
the subject is on another plane, out of-phase, in 
another dimension, traveling in time, or similarly 
absent sympathetic magic П allows more precise 
divination about location and state. 

The caster can, in addition, exercise control over 
a creature that is the subject of the spell in a way 
similar to the 3rd-level wizard spell suggestion, 
though this influence is lost if the caster tries to 
force the creature to endanger itself. This power can 
be used only in the present, and cannot change the 
past or shape the future. 

The material component is part of the subject 
the priest holds. This can be, for example, a lock 
of hair, fingernail parings, a sliver of wood or 
metal, and the like. The material is destroyed in the 
casting. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Talona’s Blessing 
(Abjuration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Protection, Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


Talona 5 blessing must be delivered by flesh-to- 
flesh touch. This spell renders the touched spell 
recipient—who may be the caster—temporarily 
immune to all poisons (including blood poisoning, 
venoms, and poisonous gases) and diseases 
(including lycanthropy and mummy rot). Za/ona s 
blessing also prevents the onset or spread of para- 
sitic infestations, gangrene, and existing diseases 
(such as leprosy and transformations due to plant 
symbiosis). It expels rot grubs from the body of 
the spell recipient without further harm to the spell 
recipient, and permanently kills musks, molds, 
spores, seeds, and mosses infesting or in contact 
with the body of the protected being. 

Notes: Granted by Talona, Mistress of Disease, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Talontar, Touch of the 


See touch of the talontar. 


Tame Animal — Shaman 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal " 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 animal 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the shaman to take an animal 
as a tame and loyal pet. In order to do this, the 
shaman must perform some act that earns the crea- 
ture's gratitude, casting the spell immediately fol- 
lowing. The beast must be of animal-level 
intelligence, and cannot be magical or fantastic. 

Examples of such services include: freeing the 
animal from a snare or trap, or defending the 
animal or its young from a fearsome predator. The 
fable of Androcles pulling a thorn from the lion's 
paw provides a more poetic example of how to gain 
an animal's gratitude. 


ASTE: AG) 


Telepathic Broadcast 


The uses of the tamed pet depend 
upon the intelligence of the animal. Rel- 
atively bright creatures might master half 
a dozen simple commands (coming when 
whistled for, running to fetch help on another com- 
mand, attacking with its hooves, etc.), while notori- 
ously stupid beasts—like sheep—can master only a 
single command. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Y 
Ne 


Tattoos of Protection 
Quest spell, see appendix. 


Telatha, Glyph of Warding 
See glyph of warding, telatha. 


Telepathic Broadcast 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Thought 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster's allies 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell puts the priest in one-way telepathic 
communication with ali allies within range. No 
opponent hostile to the spellcaster can "hear" the 
telepathic broadcast. While this spell is in effect, 
the priest can telepathically broadcast instruc- 
tions, orders, information, or anything else 
desired at will, so long as the information can be 
transmitted verbally. The priest cannot select 
which allies hear the message; anything chosen 
for broadcast is heard by all allied forces. This 
spell also does not allow the priest's allies to 
respond. 

The caster must choose the language the broad- 
cast will be sent in. Allies who cannot understand 
the language in which the caster is communicating 
hear the words but do not understand their mean- 
ing without additional magical aid. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a pinch of dust from the desiccated 
brain of a mind flayer or other creature with tele- 
pathic abilities or a drop of a potion of clair- 
audience or potion of ESP. 

Notes: Granted to priests of The Red Knight, a 
war god of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


7 635 М. 


Telepathy 


_ Ee d 


Telepathy 
(Divination, Alteration) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn + 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell establishes direct, two-way mental 
contact between the priest and a single subject. The 
subject must have Intelligence of at least 5 for the 
spell to take effect. While the spell is in effect, the 
two participants can communicate silently and rap- 
idly, regardless of whether they share a common 
language. 

Telepathy does not give either participant access 
to the other's thoughts, memories, or emotions. Par- 
ticipants hear only thoughts that the other partici- 
pant actively sends. 

Mind-to-mind communication is approximately 
four times faster than verbal communication. The 
level of complexity that can be communicated is 
only that which can be expressed through language. 
Gestures, expressions, and body language cannot 
be conveyed. 

А priest can establish separate telepathic chan- 
nels to multiple individuals. Each linkage is estab- 
lished through a separate casting of the spell. There 
is no network between the channels. For example, 
Balfas the priest establishes telepathy with Alra the 
warrior and Zymor the thief by casting this spell 
twice. Balfas can communicate a single thought to 
both Alra and Zymor, but Alra and Zymor cannot 
communicate with each other. Balfas, however, can 
send a thought so that only one of the two partici- 
pants receives it. 

If the priest casts this spell on an unwilling sub- 
ject (for example, if the priest wants to silently 
threaten or taunt the subject), the subject receives 
a saving throw vs. spell to resist the effect. Willing 
subjects need not make a saving throw. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Thought (ToM). 


Telethaumaturgy 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell requires the priest to perform a 
numerological analysis of a subject's correct name. 
The result is that the priest can cast another spell 
that affects the subject individual at a range much 
greater than normal. In other words, by gaining 
deep knowledge of the individual, the priest cre- 
ates a channel to that individual that makes a sub- 
sequent spell easier to cast on that subject. 

Only certain spells can benefit from teleth- 
aumaturgy: 


bless* 

command 

charm person or mammal 
detect charm 

hold person 

know alignment 

remove curse* 
probability control 

quest 

confusion (one creature only) 
exaction 


For spells marked with an asterisk (*), telethau- 
maturgy also increases the range of the reversed 
spell. Unless indicated, telethaumaturgy does not 
increase the range of the reversed spells. 

The increase in range depends on the level of 
the caster (see table). 


Level Multiplier 
1-6 x2 

7-11 x3 

12-16 x4 
17* x5 


Thus, a 12th-level priest who has cast telethau- 
maturgy on an individual could subsequently cast 
charm person on that individual at a range of 320 
yards, rather than the normal range of 80 yards. 

A spell to be enhanced by telethaumaturgy must 
be cast on the round immediately following the 
completion of telethaumaturgy. Spells that nor- 
mally affect more than one individual (such as 


2 636 М. 


confusion) affect only the selected subject when 
cast following telethaumaturgy. 

When cast by a priest of 11th level or higher, 
telethaumaturgy has an additional effect. If the sub- 
ject is within the normal range of the subsequent 
spell (for example, 80 yards for charm person), the 
subject's saving throw suffers a —2 penalty. 

Like the personal reading spell, telethau- 
maturgy functions only if the priest knows the 
correct name of the subject. A priest who casts 
the spell using an alias will not know that 
telethaumaturgy has not taken effect until the 
subsequent spell fails. The priest does not auto- 
matically know why the subsequent spell failed 
(the subject might simply have made a success- 
ful saving throw). 

The material component is a small book of 
numerological formulae and notes. This book is 
different from the book used in personal reading. 
The book is not consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Numbers (70M). 


637 


Temporal Anomaly — Elf 


Temporal Anomaly — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: І rd. 
Duration: 2d4 rds. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest can create a 
ripple in the time stream so that a physical effect 
occurs without the physical cause occurring. For 
example, the priest can cause a dart to appear in an 
opponent's neck without actually appearing to 
throw anything. 

During the casting of this spell, the priest enters 
an alternate time stream for up to one round per 
level of the caster. During that time interval, the 
priest can attempt to carry out any action normally 
open to him or her, and other creatures can react 
accordingly. When the casting is complete, the 
priest returns from the alternate time stream, 
although to observers it appears as if the priest 
spent only a single round casting a spell, and the 
effects of any action caused in the alternate time 
stream suddenly become apparent, without obvious 
cause or without any memory of such events by 
other participants. Any spells cast, charges 
employed, or other magical effects employed in the 
alternate reality are not used up when the priest 
returns to the original time stream. 

For example, a 14th level priest casts temporal 
anomaly. For the next fourteen rounds, she interacts 
with the current situation normally. She could try to 
hit an opponent with a dart, but to do so would 
require a successful attack roll, and the opponent 
could react accordingly. She could also bind the 
wounds of an ally and cast cure light wounds upon 
him. When the priest returns to her normal time 
stream, observers will believe that the caster spent 
a single round casting a spell. Upon completion of 
the spell, however, the foe would suddenly sport a 
dart in the neck and the ally would suddenly be 
bandaged and cured. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a powdered ruby worth at least 1,000 
gp. 
Notes: Granted by the elven deity Labelas 
Enoreth. 


Tenfold Ironguard 


_ di 


Tenfold Ironguard 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 to 10 creatures 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell makes up to 10 beings (the caster may 
be one of them) touched by the caster immune to 
the damage of all metal items. Metal blades and 
bars pass through protected beings as if their bodies 
did not exist. Willing creatures are automatically 
affected by a tenfold ironguard spell; hostile crea- 
tures are unaffected if they successfully save vs. 
spell (and the caster must typically make a suc- 
cessful attack roll to touch them, too). The strength 
of this magic is not altered by how many or few 
beings are protected by it. 

A being under the influence of a tenfold 
ironguard can pass through metal bars, gates, and 
the like as if a phantasm—but is brought up short 
by the presence of nonmetallic items (such as a 
wooden handle on a metal tool) or by enchanted 
metal. Heat, cold, and poisons still affect the 
guarded being, even if delivered by “harmless” 
metal weapons. Magical metal weapons deal 
damage equal to their bonuses. (those with no 
bonus inflict 1 point of damage per strike.) Spells 
whose effects involve metal (such as b/ade barrier) 
deal their normal effects to ironguarded beings. An 
ironguarded being pierced by or moving through 
metal when this spell expires is instantly slain. 

A tenfold ironguard has one important differ- 
ence from the Sth-level wizard ironguard spell: 
Each protected being can designate one metal item 
(one that they are holding and that the caster can 
touch during casting) to be unaffected by the spell. 
Thus a protected being can retain a single weapon, 
tool, key, or other item. The item can contain other 
items (a metal chest full of coins, for instance) and 
still be considered “опе item" (though if the coins 
spill, the guarded being will not be able to pick them 
up), but cannot extend its exemption from the spell 
to attached items. (For example, a breastplate made 
exempt would not extend its status to an adjacent 
gorget or any other part of the same suit of armor.) 
Metal pieces “fall through" the body of an individ- 
ual, but leather straps typically work by hanging 
tightly from the body, and buckles still hold them 
together even though the metal in the buckles them- 
selves can now pass through the wearer. 


The caster cannot end the ironguard early by 
any known means—dispel magic and similar spells 
cannot remove its protection—but the death of the 
caster ends the magic instantly. 

The material components are a handful of iron 
filings and a drop of aqua regia. 

Notes: Granted by Helm the Vigilant of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Tentacle of Withering 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms one of the caster's arms 
into a wriggling, eel-like gray tentacle, which is 
rubbery, flexible, can readily adhere to surfaces or 
grasp things (and release them whenever desired) 
and is retractable and extensible from the length of 
the original arm to 36 feet long. The tentacle can 
grasp or manipulate objects (at a —2 penalty from 
the caster's normal Dexterity), wield weapons (at a 
—2 penalty to attack rolls), constrict for 1d8 points 
of damage plus 1 point per level of the caster, or 
enact its withering power (if the caster wills it to); 
sucking life energy from a living body it is touch- 
ing. To wither, the tentacle must make a successful 
attack roll at the caster's THACO with a +4 bonus. 
А successful withering attack causes 1d8 points of 
damage plus 1 point per level of the caster and the 
loss of sensory or motive use of the struck body 
part for one round with no saving throw. (Deter- 
mine which body part is struck through random 
dice roll between possible targets.) If the head is 
struck, a round of blindness and deafness 
inescapably results. If a leg is struck, that leg 
cannot move for one round. A struck arm cannot 
move or hold things and drops anything already in 
its grasp. The tentacle can repeatedly affect a crea- 
ture, inflicting another 1d8 points of life-draining 
damage plus 1 point per level of the caster each 
round and disabling a new limb or the same limb— 
if it can maintain contact with the being. 

The caster can end this spell early at any time by 
silent act of will, causing the tentacle to melt slowly 
away. While the tentacle is disappearing, the caster 
does not have any use of the tentacle/limb for one 
round. While the tentacle is in existence, the caster 


2 638 М. 


Test of Maat — Old Empire 


) ee 8 


cannot engage in other spellcasting and may have 
limited mobility or be hampered in some activities. 
The material components are a fragment of 
bone or small complete bone and a piece of rubber 
or eel flesh. 
Notes: Granted by Moander the Darkbringer of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Tentacle Walls 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, 5, М 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 50-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


Tentacle walls enables the caster to enchant a 
single room whose volume is less than or equal to 
the area of effect. The spell activates 1d4 rounds 
after any creature other than the caster enters the 
room. The intruder must be larger than a normal 
rat; that is, it must be larger than one-half cubic foot 
or weigh more than three pounds. 

When the spell is activated, six black, leathery 
tentacles sprout inside the room; the tentacles are 
evenly divided among the room's surfaces (for 
instance, if the room is a cube, one tentacle sprouts 
from the floor, one sprouts from the ceiling, and 
one sprouts from each of the four walls). 

The whip-like tentacles grow to the length of 
the room and swing wildly. Each round, a tentacle 
has a 30% chance of striking a random creature in 
the room, inflicting 1d6 points of damage (save vs. 
spell for half damage). Each tentacle has AC 0 and 
25 hit points. When a tentacle is reduced to 0 hit 
points, it disappears in a puff of black smoke. 

If all creatures are killed or withdraw from the 
room, the surviving tentacles withdraw, disappear- 
ing into the walls. If the spell is activated again, 
six tentacles reappear; new tentacles are created to 
replace any destroyed previously. As long as one 
tentacle survives an encounter, the tentacles will 
continue to be replaced. Only when all six tentacles 
are destroyed is the spell permanently negated. 

The material component is the dried tentacle of 
an octopus. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Wards (ToM). This spell should not 
be confused with the drow spell wall of tentacles. 


639 


Test of Maat — Old Empire 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination, Law 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell has two distinct uses, one of which 
must be chosen during spellcasting. 

In its primary form, a test of maat discovers 
emanations of injustice, dishonor, disorder, and sin 
from any creature within its area of effect, a corri- 
dor 10 feet wide and 120 yards long. The duration 
of this spell effect is 1 turn+5 rounds per level. 
Character alignment (or, more precisely, deviation 
from the ethos of law and good) is revealed only 
indirectly, if at all. The primary effect is to reveal 
whether a creature is accordance with the concept 
of maat—that is if they are at peace with the gods 
and living a happy life. A test of maat registers 
(indirectly) whether the person has performed 
activities offensive to Horus-Re such as providing 


Тага Harr, Claws of 


eee анла I i 


offerings to Set or Sebek, acting disrespectfully to 
priests, treating slaves poorly, etc. If multiple indi- 
viduals are within the area of effect, a priest must 
be of Sth level or greater to differentiate the status 
of each individual; otherwise the group is perceived 
as an average of sorts. The degree of discord in an 
individual and its general nature can be sensed by 
a priest of 9th level or higher. The priest must con- 
centrate—stop, have quiet, and intently seek to 
detect the aura of maat—for at least one round to 
receive a reading. This aspect of the spell only func- 
tions within the geographic sphere of influence of 
the Mulhorandi pantheon. 

In its alternative form, a test of maat spell 
allows the priest to determine whether or not a 
morally ambiguous contemplated action falls 
within the strictures of maat. In this form, when a 
test of maat is cast, the priest imagines a possible 
course of action for himself or herself (and possibly 
some companions). The spellcaster immediately 
receives a positive or negative feeling as to whether 
or not the contemplated action would violate the 
limits of maat, and the spell effect ends immedi- 
ately thereafter. There is a base 10096 chance of 
receiving an answer to this form of test of maat. 
However, Horus-Re encourages his followers' abil- 
ity to think for themselves and is less responsive to 
requests to provide advice that occur less than a 
tenday apart. For every day less than 10 that has 
yet to pass between castings of this spell, the base 
chance of not receiving a response increases by 
1095. For example, if this form of a test of maat was 
last used three days ago prior to the current spell- 
casting, there is a 70% chance of not receiving a 
response. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol held over his left eye with his right hand. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Horus- 
Re of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Thard Harr, Claws of 
See claws of Thard Harr. 


That Art Thou — Vedic 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


By uttering the phrase “tat tvam asi” (“that art 
thou"), the caster’s senses become one with all 
beings and objects within a 30’ radius sphere cen- 
tered on the caster. The caster sees and feels every- 
thing sensed by every person, caterpillar, tree, and 
rock in the area of effect. (A first-time caster will 
be surprised how much a rock feels.) The onrush 
of sensory information allows the caster to know 
of all beings and objects in the area, including 
hidden and invisible creatures, traps, and magic 
items. The caster does not sense thoughts or detect 
powers of creatures and objects contacted. Because 
the spell accesses thoughts, any being whose 
thoughts are masked cannot be spotted solely with 
this spell. While the spell is in effect, the caster can 
take no other action, including movement and 
speech. The caster can discontinue the effect at any 
time during the spell’s duration. 

Notes: Common for priests from a vedic 
(Indian) culture; otherwise very rare. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


The Doom of Bane 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, 8, М 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 suit of armor and 1 corpse 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the corpse or partial 
remains of a single upright bipedal creature of any 
race into the animate force of a helmed horror. The 
horror rises from the remains three rounds after 
spellcasting is complete, entering its armor. If 
armor is not present, the horror dissipates, and the 
spell is wasted. 

The caster or another being must wear the armor 
as the horror enters it, a process described as 
“unbearably chilling.” This often causes the armor 
wearer to faint. The horror gains its knowledge of 
how to fill the armor and something of its inde- 
pendent reasoning from the armor wearer, who 
need not be of the proper class to use the armor. 
Once the horror has entered the armor, the armor 
should be removed, since within one turn it ani- 
mates as a fully functional helmed horror. 

The remains need not be whole and are destroyed 
in the casting, they must be the remains of a crea- 
ture of evil alignment for at least part of its life or the 
spell has no effect. The doom of Bane destroys the 
remains forever, preventing resurrection, animation 


T 640 \ 


Thorn Spray 


b ———————————— P" d 


as an undead creature, speak with dead, and similar 
activities from affecting them. A helmed horror is 
not an undead creature. It cannot be turned, affected, 
or dispelled by holy beings or things. 

The material components of this spell are a 
pinch of bone powder or a bone shard, a pinch of 
dust, and a fairly complete, nonmagical, non- 
aligned suit of metal armor, which serves as the 
body of the helmed horror. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Bane of the For- 
GOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Helmed Horror: AC 2; МУ 12, fly 12 (E) HD 
4+I/level; THACO 12; &AT 1; Dmg by weapon 
or 144 (fist); SD innate feather fall, immune to 
illusions, Enchantments/Charm spells, and mind 
affecting magic, healed by magic missile (excess 
reflects back at caster); immune to three specific 
spells chosen by creator; SZ M (6' tall); ML fear- 
less (20); Int high (14); AL LN; XP 2,000, 


Thief’s Lament 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A thief entering an area enchanted with thief s 
lament suffers a great reduction in his thieving 
skills. The thief is allowed a saving throw to resist 
the effects of the spell; failure indicates that he or 
she suffers the full effects of the /ament. All 
attempts to Pick Pockets, Open Locks, 
Find/Remove Traps, Move Silently, Detect Noise, 
Climb Walls, and Hide in Shadows are reduced by 
25% (although a skill cannot be reduced below 5%, 
presuming the thief has at least a score of 5% in 
the skill). 

The spell affects a cube whose sides equal the 
caster’s level times 5 feet (a 10th-level caster could 
affect a cube whose sides equal 50 feet). 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a silver key. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with access to the 
sphere of Wards (ToM). 


Thorn Spray 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 4 thornlike objects/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a priest can cause barbs, 
spikes, thorns, spines, or nonmetallic darts, either 
naturally growing or magically created (in other 
words, by use of a spike growth, wall of thorns, or 
briartangle spell), to spring with enough force to 
serve as missiles from his or her hand or from 
bushes or resting places within 10 yards of himself 
or herself. The thorns fly up to 120 yards within 
the round of casting and strike as many creatures 
as the priest wishes within the limits of the number 
of thorns able to be animated. The priest can direct 
the thorns in any combination at any living or non- 
living (а scroll, lantern, or wineskin) creatures that 
he or she can see. The priest can animate a maxi- 
mum of four thorns per experience level. 

The thorns strike only if a successful attack roll 
is made for each creature. The attack roll is made as 
though the thorns were directly wielded by the 
priest and at a +4 attack bonus in addition to any 
other applicable bonuses the priest might have; no 
range penalties apply. The thorns inflict 1 point of 
damage each. Sleep-venomed wooden darts are 
sometimes carried by priest (especially druids) who 
use this spell often. 

The missiles of a thorn spray twist and turn in 
flight to follow moving creatures and avoid 
obstructions, and are fast enough to catch most 
birds on the wing. The thorn spray spell works 
underwater, but the priest has only normal attack 
rolls, and the range is reduced to 90 yards. 

The material components are magical or natu- 
ral barbs, spikes, thorns, spines, or nonmetallic 
darts that the priest animates. 

Notes: Granted by the god Silvanus, the Forest 
Father, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


2 641 V 


Thorns of Binding 


Thorns of Binding 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth, Elemental Water 
Level: 4 RU UA 
Range: 10 yds. 
Components: S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By casting this spell, the priest causes a magical 
thorny vine to appear and wrap itself around a 
chosen creature. A successful saving throw means 
the attack is foiled, and the vine dissipates harm- 
lessly. Failure results in 1d4 points of damage, plus 
a number of additional points of damage equal to 
the Armor Class of the creature. Thus, a human in 
plate mail (AC 3) takes 1d4+3 points of damage. 
In addition, the creature is bound and cannot take 
any other actions until it escapes. 

To escape the bonds, a creature must make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell at —4. The creature 
takes another 144 + AC points of damage for every 
escape attempt, regardless of success. Exception- 
ally large and powerful creatures can snap the vine 
easily. Otherwise, the caster can, by concentrating 
for a full round and squeezing, cause the vine to 
constrict and inflict damage (as above), or can dis- 
miss the thorns of binding with a gesture. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Thornwrack 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 thorn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Thornwrack causes long, painful thorns to grow 
out of the spell recipient's flesh, piercing the skin 
from the inside. One thorn appears each round, 
inflicting 1d3 points of damage, until all the thorns 
have appeared. When the number of thorns exceeds 
the subject's experience level or Hit Dice, a creature 
still conscious becomes immobilized by the pain, 
unable to take any action. 

One round after the last thorn erupts from the 
subject's flesh, the first one disappears. The thorns 


continue receding at a rate of one per turn. Immo- 
bilized subjects can move again once the number of 
thorns falls below their Hit Dice or experience 
level. For instance, say the body of a 4th-level 
wizard has seven thorns. After four turns had 
passed, only three thorns would remain, so the 
wizard would no longer be immobile. 

Cure spells can restore hit points but do not 
eliminate the thorns. Dispel magic will end the 
spell but prevents existing thorns from receding. A 
heal spell cancels the thornwrack, eliminates all 
existing thorns, and cures all damage. Without the 
benefit of magical remedies, the spell ends when 
the last thorn has receded. 

Notes: Uncommon spell for druids. 


Thought Broadcast 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | turn + 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell turns the subject into a thought broad- 
caster. For the duration of the spell, everyone within 
30 yards of the subject senses the subject's 
thoughts, making it impossible for that being to lie, 
keep secrets, conceal motives, etc. The subject is 
not automatically aware that its thoughts are being 
sensed. Everyone who senses these thoughts, on the 
other hand, knows their source. 

This spell causes the broadcast of only surface 
thoughts and motivations, not memories. There is 
no need for a common language between broad- 
caster and receivers; for this purpose, thoughts are 
considered to be symbolic, not dependent on lan- 
guage. The detail level of the thoughts is insuffi- 
cient for others to learn specific skills from the 
subject. Thus, if the subject casts a spell, everyone 
within range knows what spell is being cast before 
it takes effect, but no one gains any knowledge 
about how the spell is cast. 

If the broadcaster is invisible or hiding in shad- 
ows, the broadcast functions normally, and all 
receivers are aware that someone is in the vicinity 
whom they cannot see. While receivers cannot pin- 
point the broadcaster's location, the broadcaster's 
thoughts will inevitably reveal his general position 
(“Oh no, he's looking right at me,” and so on). A 
being Hiding in Shadows will be automatically 
detected, while attacks against an invisible broad- 


t. 642 М. 


caster suffer а —2 penalty, rather than the погтпа1—4. 
This spell totally negates the chance of surprise by 
the broadcaster. 

The subject must have an Intelligence score of 1 
or more to become a broadcaster, and must have a 
normal mind as understood by PCs. Thoughts that 
are broadcast can be received only by individuals 
with Intelligence scores of 3 or better. An unwilling 
subject receives a normal saving throw vs. spell to 
avoid the effects. A willing subject can waive this 
saving throw. 

The material component is a smal) balloon that 
the priest inflates upon casting. This balloon is con- 
sumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Thought (ToM). 


Thought Capture 


Thought Capture 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components; V, $ 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 10 yds. 
Saving Throw: None 


One of the more bizarre contentions held by 
priests of the School of Thought is generally 
scoffed at by outsiders. The theory states that once 
a thought has occurred in someone’s brain, it exists 
as a freestanding mental object. This thought object 
usually remains inside the brain of the creature that 
created it, but sometimes it escapes (this suppos- 
edly explains why people forget things). When this 
happens, the thought object stays in the geographi- 
cal area where it was lost. Any receptive brain (usu- 
ally the brain of the creature that initially created 
the thought) can pick it up again simply by bump- 
ing into the invisible, free-floating thought. Accord- 
ing to the theory, this is the reason that people can 
regain a lost thought by going back to the location 
where the thought was lost. This supposedly works 
because the free-floating thought is recaptured, not 
because the locale reminds them of the thought. 
Unfortunately for philosophers who disagree with 
this, thought capture seems to be extremely strong 
evidence for this theory. 

This spell makes the priest’s brain something 
of a magnet that attracts thought objects in close 
proximity. The priest can sense strong thoughts and 
emotions and can sometimes even see momentary 
visions of creatures who died or suffered some 
powerful emotion in the immediate vicinity. 
Thought objects are always attracted to the priest 
in the order of the strongest (those attached to pow- 
erful emotions or significant events) to the weakest. 
Thus, if several thought objects share the same 
vicinity, the priest will perceive information about 
the most interesting or significant event. The priest 
might pick up images of a battle from the point of 
view of a warrior who died there, or he might gain 
information about the victor of the battle. 

The DM dictates the information provided to 
the priest, and thus can use this spell to provide 
players with important background information or 
can add texture to a campaign world. The informa- 
tion provided might be highly cryptic or symbolic, 
perhaps in the form of a rhyme or riddle. 

The priest gains one thought object per casting 
of the spell. The spell can be cast a number of times 


ne л ыс д QOO SU мр. 


Thoughtwave 


b—————————————————— 2 


in the same locale, with the priest gaining a differ- 
ent thought object with each casting. A locale con- 
tains a finite number of thoughts, however, and 
once the priest has gained all of them (per the DM), 
the spell will fail in that locale. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Thought (ToM). 


Thoughtwave* 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This cooperative spell can be cast by either a 
single priest or a group of priests. Thoughtwave 
allows the priest to send a short but powerful mes- 
sage to one or more specific individuals, inform- 
ing them of his or her situation and general 
location. The spell instantly generates a powerful 
mental impulse indicative of the caster's general 
mental state—anger, fear, pain, despair, etc. 

The caster can designate as many as ten persons 
to receive this message, provided they can all be 
specifically named or grouped in a general cate- 
gory. Thus, the caster could designate a group of 
characters by name or could target fellow priests, 
superiors, adventuring companions, knights of 
Lord Harcourt, or villagers of Dopp. If more than 
ten individuals are in the group, those closest to 
the source receive the impulse. 

There is no range limitation to the spell, 
although it cannot be projected outside the plane 
occupied by the caster. 

Creatures receiving the impulse automatically 
know who sent it (even if they have never met the 
priest before) and gain a clear indication of the 
mood and situation of the caster. Recipients also 
intuitively know the general source of the spell, 
although they are unable to pinpoint rooms, 
dungeon levels, or landmarks. For example, a 
fighter could suddenly be struck by an image of 
Father Rastibon, who is injured and in great pain 
somewhere along the forest road. A priest might 
suddenly sense that his patriarch is being tortured 
in the dungeons of Castle Varrack. 

The spell can also be cast by more than one 
priest, allowing them to either contact greater 
numbers of individuals or increase the intensity of 
the message. If greater numbers are desired, ten 


individuals are contacted per priest involved in the 
casting. 

Increasing the intensity of the message makes 
it more compelling. Doubling the intensity (requir- 
ing at least three priests) causes the message to act 
as the 3rd-level wizard spell suggestion. In this 
case, the effect is limited to a single creature. 
Tripling the intensity (requiring at least five priests) 
gives the spell the force of a quest. This effect is 
also limited to a single creature. In both cases, the 
creature is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid 
the effect of the suggestion or quest. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Thought (ToM). 


Threefold Boon 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell grants a single recipient (who may 
be the caster) three attempts at all saving throws, 
attack rolls, and ability checks for the duration of 
the threefold boon. The magic does not modify 
those rolls in any way, and only the best result of 
the three rolls is used. 

Notes: Granted by Tymora, goddess of luck of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Threnody — Drow 
(Necromancy, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Charm 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


Also known as Kiaransalee s song of lament, 
this spell enables the priestess to evoke images of 
lost friends and family in the minds of those who 
are facing the undead, hindering their ability to 
attack those who bear the guise of their loved ones. 

After 1 round of singing the threnody (the cast- 
ing time), anyone within or who enters the spell's 


ЖУ ГТ I T Rr c (x mcs e Eo REC 


area of effect while the singing continues must 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell or fall 
under the sway of the threnody for as long as he or 
she remains in the area of effect. Anyone unaffected 
who remains in the area of effect in subsequent 
rounds must continue to make saving throws vs. 
spell with a +2 bonus or fall under the sway of the 
threnody. The only way to escape the lament's 
effects is to stay more than 30-feet from the singer. 
While a subject is under the sway of the threnody, 
undead within the area of effect appear to bear the 
likeness of deceased persons for whom the subject 
cared deeply. Affected subjects attack undead oppo- 
nents with a —2 penalty to attack and damage rolls. 
A fortunate few persons—typically the very 
young or the very sheltered—have never lost a 
loved one or family member or witnessed a death. 
Such individuals (as adjudicated by the DM) are 
immune to the siren song of a threnody. At the 
other extreme, an affected being encountering the 
animated remains of a love one or comrade is inca- 
pable of attacking that foe and suffers a —4 AC 
penalty to avoid the undead creature s attacks. 
This spell requires no material components, but 
the caster must be a proficient singer. 
Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Kiaransalee. 


Thunderbolts, Marthammor's 
See Marthammor's thunderbolts. 


Thunderclap 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


To cast this spell, the druid takes an oak leaf in 
hand and slaps that hand against any hard object 
(including the other hand). The result is a sound 
very much like a thunderclap that can be heard for 
miles. Any creature within 30 feet of the druid is 
stunned and deafened unless a successful saving 
throw vs. spell is made; in which case the creature 
is only temporarily deafened for 1d10 rounds. A 
stunned creature cannot initiate or continue any 
action for the remainder of the current round or the 
next round. Attacks made while deafened are at a 
penalty of —2. Deafened creatures have a —3 penalty 
when rolling for surprise. The caster is immune to 
the spell's effects. 


Tiamat, Spawn of 


The material component is an oak leaf. 
Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Thundercone 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Weather 
Level: 3 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Cone 40 ft. long X 20 ft. wide 
Saving Throw: Special 


When the caster completes the incantation and 
claps his hands, a cone of deafening noise is cre- 
ated, Creatures within the area of effect are deaf- 
ened. Further, they must save vs. spell or be 
stunned (reeling and unable to attack) for 1-2 
rounds as well. Deafened creatures receive an addi- 
tional saving throw vs. spell each round, with suc- 
cess indicating that their hearing has returned. The 
spel] causes no damage. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from PoLyHE- 
DRON Newszine.) 


Thunderstroke — Old Empire 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Weather 


Level: 4 

Range: 40 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: 2 


This spell enables the priest to call upon the 
wrath of Anhur and summon a bolt of lightning to 
strike a single creature. This bolt causes 144 points 
of damage plus 2 points of damage per level of the 
priest, to a maximum of 44 points. If the creature 
rolls a successful saving throw vs. spell, the 
damage is halved. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Anhur 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Tiamat, Spawn of 
See spawn of Tiamat. 


Ae eT хыдай: ee 


Time Pool 


b ——————————— NNNM ( 


Time Pool 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to cause a mirror, à 
pool of water, or any other reflective surface to 
reveal a specific event from the past. The image 
provides a perfectly clear picture with normal 
sounds, as if the caster were present at the scene. 
The image continues for the duration of the spell. 

Time pool will not reveal images from other 
planes of existence. 

The spell's success is not automatic. The caster 
must know the general nature of the event he or she 
wishes to view (“Show me the murder of King 
Thanak," and so on). The caster's base chance of 
viewing the desired scene is 50%, modified as fol- 
lows, to a maximum of 90%: 


* Add 5% for each point of the caster's Wisdom 
above 15. 

* Add 20% if the caster has successfully used time 
pool to observe the same event before. 


Only one of the following can apply: 

* Add 20% if the event is one in which the caster 
participated, 

* Add 10% if the caster is well informed about the 
event. 

* Add 5% if the caster is slightly informed about 
the event. 


The caster cannot communicate or otherwise 
interact with the image. Spells cannot be cast into 
the time pool. 

The material components is a pinch of pow- 
dered quartz. A suitable reflective surface is also 
required. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Time (ToM). 


Timelessness 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Numbers 
Level: 7 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell totally stops the flow of time for a 
single individual. АП signs of life stop and the sub- 
ject is incapable of any movement or thought. 
While the spell is in effect, the subject is totally 
immovable and cannot be affected by any physical 
or magical forces. Weapons simply bounce off the 
subject as they would bounce off the hardest stone. 
Spells, including dispel magic, are totally incapable 
of affecting the subject in any way. The subject does 
not age. 

Aside from the fact that the subject remains vis- 
ible, frozen in place like a statue, he or she is effec- 
tively no longer part of the universe. (DMs may 
rule that the most powerful of magics, such as 
wishes, and creatures of demigod or higher status 
can affect the subject.) 

When the priest casts the spell, he or she states 
the duration for which the spell will remain in 
effect (the maximum is one full day per level of the 
caster). Once the spell is cast, this duration cannot 
be changed; the priest cannot end the spell before 
the stated time has elapsed. 

If the subject is unwilling to be affected by the 
spell, the priest must touch the creature for the spell 
to take effect; a normal saving throw vs. spell is 
allowed to resist the effects. A willing subject need 
not make a saving throw. 

The priest can cast this spell on himself if 
desired. This spell can provide a powerful defense; 
while it is in effect, the subject is totally invulnera- 
ble. Timelessness is also an effective form of long- 
term imprisonment, as long as the priest is around 
to cast the spell again at the appropriate time. 

This is an exceptionally powerful spell. Casting 
it puts a significant strain on the priest. Each time 
the priest casts timelessness, he or she must make 
a System Shock roll. Failure means the priest per- 
manently loses 1 point of Constitution. 

The material components are a gem worth at 
least 1,000 gp and a small cylinder of obsidian. 
Both are crushed during the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Numbers (ToM). 


2 646 М. 


Tomb Ward 


рь a di 


Timewarp — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, $ 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the priest to send a being 
back in time. The timewarp has a maximum range 
of two minutes, which enables the being (who can 
be the caster) to go back to an action he or she 
made in the previous round and negate it. (The 
being appears exactly where he or she was two min- 
utes ago with the knowledge of what will occur if 
he or she continues the present course of action.) It 
also grants new saving throws, attack rolls, and 
damage rolls, and forces opponents to make similar 
rolls. Note that this change in the timestream 
affects only those directly involved with the sub- 
ject; it does not give everyone in melee new rolls, 
just the subject and those attacking him or her. This 
spell ages the caster one year. 

The material component is a pinch of sand. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deity Thoth 
of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Tomb Ward* 


е 


(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 day 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 tomb, a cube 30 ft./side 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the priest to cast a conditional 
curse upon a tomb. Anyone violating the tomb 
becomes subject to the curse. At one point during the 
casting of this spell, the priest must cast a either a 
divine curse or ancient curse spell to define the effects. 

It takes a full day to cast this spell, and the priest 
cannot be interrupted at any time during the casting. 
The caster must walk through all the passages and 
rooms of the tomb, marking the walls, floors, ceil- 
ings, and doors with signs of the curse. During this 
time, the priest also sets down the exact conditions 
that will trigger the curse. They can be as simple as 
*any creature entering this tomb" or as complicated 


as "any mortal disturbing the remains of the king, 
removing his burial treasure, breaking or destroy- 
ing his possessions, or defacing the tomb." 

The DM determines the exact effects. In gen- 
eral, the wording of the curse should be interpreted 
literally, though vague or unclear passages should 
be given unfavorable interpretations. 

The sized of the warded tomb is limited; it can 
comprise an area no larger than a cube 30 feet on a 
side. If other priests assist the caster, however, each 
additional priest adds 10 feet to each side of the 
cube. Therefore, seven priests (including the caster) 
can ward a cube-shaped area up to 90 feet on a side. 

The material components are the holy symbols 
of each priest involved. The symbols must be left in 
the tomb, frequently buried in the walls or floor. 
Optionally, a creature of the same race as the priest 
can be entombed alive instead of the holy symbol. 
A combination of creatures and holy symbols is 
acceptable, so long as each priest leaves one com- 
ponent. Entombing living creatures as a part of the 
spell mandates a Ravenloft powers check. 

Notes: Common on the Demiplane of Dread; 
otherwise rare. 


WT 
И in 


JU a en a a ЕНДЫ "Т "ШИ 


Tongues 


N 


Tongues 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to speak and under- 
stand additional languages, whether they are racial 
tongues or regional dialects, but not communica- 
tions of animals or mindless creatures. When the 
spell is cast, the spellcaster selects the language or 
languages to be understood. The spell then empow- 
ers the caster with the ability to speak and under- 
stand the language desired with perfect fluency and 
accent. The spell enables the priest to be understood 
by all speakers of that language within hearing dis- 
tance, usually 60 feet. This spell does not predis- 
pose the subject toward the caster in any way. The 
priest can speak one additional tongue for every 
three levels of experience. 

The reverse of the spell, babble, cancels the 
effect of the tongues spell or confuses verbal 
communication of any sort within the area of effect. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Torm, Hand of 
See hand of Torm. 


Torm, Wrath of 
See wrath of Torm. 


Totem Beast 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: | mi. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Like the I st-level wizard spell find familiar, this 
spell allows a priest to summon an animal that rep- 
resents some aspect of his or her faith. If the spell 
succeeds, the animal appears 1d6 turns after the 
casting and remains with the priest one day for each 
level of the caster. 


The totem beast does not add hit points to the 
caster, nor is it linked in such a way that the two 
cannot be separated. The animal summoned to the 
caster is exceptionally intelligent for its species and 
understands all verbal commands issued by the 
caster. No mental telepathy exists between the pair. 
The animal does not understand speech or com- 
mands issued by anyone other than the caster, even 
if they speak the same language as the priest. 

Different gods grant different totem beasts to 
their followers. The priest has no control over the 
type of animal gained. The following list provides 
examples of animals that may appear to priests of 
different deities. 


Deity Beast(s) 

Erik bear, falcon, fox 

Nesirie seal, swan, otter 

Eloéle cat, raven, rat 

Kriesha wolf, owl, badger 
Belinik ^ varsk, vulture, wolverine 


This list is not exhaustive; a different type of 
animal may appear to a priest depending on the 
god's wishes and the priest's location. A priest of 
Belinik in Khinasi lands may summon a hyena, for 
example. Lower level priests tend to gain smaller 
creatures, while higher level priests are sometimes 
granted larger beasts. 

The totem beast may have up to 1 Hit Die for 
every three levels of the caster, up to the maximum 
Hit Dice normal for such a creature. If a 5th-level 
priest of Erik cast the spell and was visited by a 
black bear, the bear could have up to 2 Hit Dice. 
The DM can grant maximum Hit Dice or roll for 
the possible range (in this case, 1d2). 

No priest can ever have more than one totem 
beast at one time. The animal always departs peace- 
fully at the end of the spell (unless it was mis- 
treated, in which case it might leave earlier or turn 
on its master). The priest is free to dismiss the 
animal sooner if desired. A priest can summon only 
one totem beast in a 30-day period. 

Success of subsequent castings depends on the 
priest's treatment of previous animals. If an animal 
were endangered or mistreated, further attempts 
may fail until an amount of time has passed or the 
priest atones for his actions in kind (such as caring 
for sick or injured animals). 

The material components are 10 gp worth of 
high quality food appropriate for local animals 
(both carnivores and herbivores) and a miniature 
leash made of fine gold wire. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


F 648 ~ 


Totemic Image 
(Alteration) è 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Totemic magic is invoked by the practitioner 
painting ог inscribing an image that conveys magi- 
cal powers upon anyone bearing that image. Most 
totemic images take several hours to properly 
create, making such magic impractical for the aver- 
age adventuring spellcaster. On the other hand, 
totemic inscriptions are powerful and can be pre- 
pared in advance based upon anticipated situations. 
Totemic image bonuses of the same type are gen- 
erally not cumulative, nor can the same totemic 
image usually be applied multiple times to increase 
the effect. At 1st level (or whenever the spell is 
learned), the shaman learns one image that corre- 
sponds to his or her personal totemic animal; one 
additional totemic image can be learned at each 
additional experience level. A shaman can learn the 
totem magic only of those creatures with which he 
or she is familiar. 

Each image must be inscribed or drawn upon 
an appropriate surface. This can be done with a 
knife, paint, or other pigments. Once the image has 
been inscribed, the object functions as described 
below. Some images have a time limit after which 
the image is still visible, but has lost all its power. 
Such images can be renewed, a process that does 
not actually involve redrawing the image, but 
requires the same amount of time, during which the 
shaman chants over the image. 

Totemic images can be inscribed into items that 
will function for other individuals, but these require 
that some token from the individual be worked into 
its creation—a few hairs, a drop of blood, some 
object the individual has personally gathered on a 
special quest. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans and savage 
clerics. 


Б жана — TOP 


Totemic Image 


Totemic Images 


The following list describes several different 


totemic images, their powers, casting times, and 
limitations. The format employed is as follows: 
Name (Duration/Casting Time): Effect. 


Bear/Elephant (1 day/1 hour): This image 
can be inscribed upon an amulet, pendant, 
weapon, clothing, armor, or virtually any 
object that can be kept on an individual's 
person. While wearing the object, the bearer 
receives a +1 bonus to his or her Constitution. 
Boar/Warthog (1 day/1 hour): This image can 
be inscribed upon an amulet pendant, 
weapon, clothing, armor, or virtually any 
object that can be kept on an individual's 
person. While wearing the object, the bearer 
can remain active at —5 hit points or above. 


* Covote/Jackal (1 day/2 hours): The image of 


the crafty Coyote, inscribed upon a weapon, 
amulet, or piece of clothing brings bad luck 
to enemies. At the wearer's option, one oppo- 
nent per encounter may suffer —1 penalty to 
hit, +1 penalty to AC, or —1 penalty to all 
saving throws. The wearer must decide upon 
the effect for each opponent. The decision 
cannot be changed or revoked. 

Dolphin (3 months/3 days): This image is 
often carved or painted along the gunwales of 
canoes and small boats. It provides a +15% 
bonus to all Seaworthiness checks. Many 
Dolphins may be inscribed, often in associa- 
tion with the Gull image, but multiple images 
do not increase the symbol's effectiveness. 


* Eagle (1 week/1 hour): The sign of the Eagle 


increases the accuracy of a missile weapon. 
When inscribed on an arrow, quarrel, sling 
stone, or spear, an Eagle symbol improves the 
missile's chances to hit (not damage) by +1. 
Thís symbol can be inscribed only on a missile. 
More than one Eagle image can be inscribed 
upon a missile. Two images have no further 
effect, but three images increases the bonus to 
+2. This is the maximum number of images 
allowed. The Eagle image can be used with the 
Shrike and Hawk images. Once the missile is 
used, the power of the image is expended. 
Firefly/Scarab Beetle (1 day/\ hour): This 
image can be carved upon a staff, wand, or 
amulet. It provides the equivalent of the Ist- 
level priest spell light on command. The light 
can be extinguished and renewed as the bearer 
wills for the duration of images' power. 


Totemic Image 


* Fox/Monkey (1 day/1 hour): When inscribed 
upon an amulet, a cloak, or a pair of gloves, the 
Fox symbol adds +10% to all thief skill rolls for 
the image's duration. 


Guil (3 months/3 days); The totemic image 
of a gull can be carved or painted on the mast 
or tiller of a ship. It adds 6 to the ship's 
movement rate. While numerous Gulls are 
often inscribed on a ship, sometimes inter- 
twined with Dolphins and other sea images, 
multiple images do not increase the symbol's 
effectiveness. 


Hawk (1 week/1 hour): When inscribed on an 
arrow, spear, or other missile weapon, this 
symbol increases short, medium, and long 
ranges by 20 yards (60 yards total). Thus a short 
bow's range (50/100/150), becomes equal to a 
long bow's range (70/140/210). The Hawk 
image (as the Eagle) can be inscribed only on 
the missile itself. Only one Hawk image can be 
inscribed on a missile at any one time. This 
symbol can be used with Eagle and Shrike 
images, within the limitations listed under those 
symbols. Once the missile is used, the power 
of the image is expended. 


Horse/Zebra (1 day/1 hour): This image can be 
inscribed upon a pair of shoes, boots, or san- 
dals. While bearing the rune, the user has a 
basic movement rate of 18 if man-sized, 12 if 
small. 


Mountain Lion/Tiger (1 day/1 hour): This 
image can be inscribed upon an amulet, pen- 
dant, or any piece of jewelry or adornment. 
While wearing the object, the bearer is sur- 
prised only on a roll of 1. 


Otter/Crocodile (1 day/1 hour): The totemic 
image of an otter is often inscribed upon a small 
pendant or earring. It gives the bearer the abil- 
ity to swim like an otter (swim 18) and remain 
submerged without the need to breath for as 
long as 5 minutes at a time. 


Owl (1 day/1 hour): The bearer of this symbol, 
which can be inscribed upon a pendant, amulet, 
brooch, torc, or circlet, can see in total darkness 
without penalty for the above duration. 


Raven/Ibis (1 day/1 hour): The bearer of this 
symbol, which can be inscribed upon a pendant, 
amulet, brooch, torc, or circlet, receives a +1 
saving throw bonus against spells and mental 
attacks. 


Salmon/Python (\month/3 days): This symbol 
can be carved on the gunwales of a small boat. 
Like all boats, the vessel can then move down- 


» 650 М. 


stream freely, but it can also move upstream at 
half the rate of the current, without the occu- 
pants having to row or expend any similar 
effort. 


Shrike (1 week/1 hour): A single Shrike symbol 
increases a missile’s damage by +1. Like the 
Eagle and Hawk images, it can be inscribed 
only on a missile. Three Shrike symbols 
increase damage by +2, the maximum bonus. 
The Shrike image can be used with the Hawk 
and Eagle symbols. Once used, the power of the 
image is expended. 

Snake (1 day/1 hour): The Snake symbol can 
be inscribed upon an amulet, pendant, cloth- 
ing, armor, or virtually any object that can be 
kept on an individual’s person. While wearing 
the object, the bearer reduces the saving throw 
of any creature the bearer casts a charm or hold 
spell on by 1. 

Stag/Cheetah (1 day/1 hour): The Stag symbol 
can be inscribed upon an amulet, pendant, 
clothing, armor, or virtually any object that can 
be kept on an individual's person. While wear- 
ing the object, the bearer receives a +6 bonus 
to his or her movement rate, and the ability to 
make running leaps of 20 feet, usable in one 
encounter, 

Thunderbird/Lion (1 day/| hour): This image 
can be inscribed upon an amulet, pendant, 
clothing, armor, or virtually any object that can 
be kept on an individual's person. While wear- 
ing the object, the bearer receives a +1 bonus 
to attack rolls and +1 to any saving throw 
against fear. 

Tortoise/Rhinoceros (1 week/1 day): The Tor- 
toise symbol can be inscribed on a piece of 
armor, an amulet, or a pendant. Once inscribed, 
the symbol improves the wear's Armor Class by 
1. Only one such symbol can be worn by an 
individual at any time. 

Whale (3 months/3 days): Ships with this image 
carved into the strakes, gunwales, or ram need 
not make a Seaworthiness check if they ram 
another vessel. If ramming a living creature, the 
vessel inflicts 2d6 points of damage per 20 
cargo tons (to a maximum of 9d6) against 
living creatures. 

Wolf/Hyena (1 day/1 hour): This image can be 
inscribed upon an amulet, pendant, clothing, 
armor, or virtually any object that can be kept 
on an individual's person. While wearing the 
object, the bearer receives a +1 bonus to any 
tracking roll. 


Touch of Loviatar 
See Loviatar’s caress. 


Touch of the Styx 
(Enchantment/Charm, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is a more potent version of the 2nd- 
level wizard spell forget. Touch of the Styx causes 
the subject to lose all memory of the last 24 hours 
unless a saving throw is made. There is no way to 
restore this memory except by relearning what 
occurred from the accounts of others. 

In addition to normal verbal and somatic com- 
ponents, this spell requires that the caster have 
touched the true waters of the Styx sometime in his 
life. While this spell resembles blessed forgetful- 
ness, it was actually developed independently and 
(unlike that spell) is usually not used by priests 
aligned with the archons of Mount Celestia. 

Notes: Rare for planar priests. Unlikely to be 
learned except through visiting the Outer Planes. 


Special Note: Canny spellcasters know that 
just touching the Styx on Pandemonium has no 
effect on memories—a convenient loophole for 
would-be casters of this spell. 


Touch of the Talontar 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: ] turn 

Area of Effect: Touched beings 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a flickering brown radiance 
around the caster's hand or another chosen limb 
that lasts for 1 turn. While this radiance glows, the 
priest can attempt to touch and affect as many crea- 
tures as he or she has normal attacks within that 
period of time. АП creatures the priest manages to 
touch during that time become the victims of touch 


651 


Touch of the Talontar 


of the Talontar save for those beings the caster 
wills, during contact, the magic not to harm. A suc- 
cessful attack roll is required to touch a creature. If 
such a touch is made to any part of the creature 
(armor or clothing can be touched, as bare flesh 
contact is not required), the brown light flashes, and 
the creature must make a saving throw vs. spell. 

If the saving throw succeeds, the creature takes 
1 point of damage; the corrosive magic eats a hole 
in any armor or garment worn and causes a disfig- 
uring eruption of the skin beneath the touched area 
into raw welts; and the spell's effects end for that 
creature, This wound inflicts a temporary loss of 2 
points of Charisma upon the creature, but the 
wound vanishes and the ability score points are 
regained through normal healing rest or the use of 
curative magic (such as a cure light wounds). 

If the saving throw fails, the creature suffers 6 
points of damage and is slowed (as the spell) 
instantly until the end of the following round. On 
this second round, the creature must make another 
saving throw. If it succeeds, the creature suffers 1 
point of damage, is corroded as discussed above, 
and the spell's effects end for that creature. If this 
second saving throw fails, the creature suffers 346 
points of additional damage and must make a 


ШП 


Touchsickle 


N 


Constitution ability check and a Strength ability 
check. If both succeed, the spell’s effects end for 
that creature. If one fails, the creature falls uncon- 
scious and takes an additional 148 points of 
damage but can be roused on the following round 
or later if still alive. If both checks fail, the crea- 
ture takes an additional 1d10 points of damage, 
falls into a coma instantly, and cannot be roused 
by any known means for 1d12+2 rounds. 

Once the touch of the Talontar is cast, the cast- 
ing priest is free to take any other desired actions, 
including touching other creatures (within the spell 
duration), casting other spells, or attacking with a 
weapon. Note that the effects of touch of the Talon- 
tar cannot be transmitted through a weapon, but 
only through the hand of the casting priest. 

Notes: Granted by Talona, Mistress of Disease, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Touchsickle 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, one of the caster’s hands 
temporarily becomes a wooden magical weapon. 
The extremity is able to strike creatures who can 
be hit only by magical weapons of +2 enchantment 
or less. The extremity gains no attack bonus, but 
its slightest touch does the same slashing (Type S) 
damage as a sickle: 1d4+1 points of damage vs. 
smaller than man-sized or man-sized creatures, 1d4 
points of damage vs. larger than man-sized crea- 
tures. 

A druid can use the enchanted extremity to har- 
vest mistletoe as though it were a gold or silver 
sickle. 

Notes: Granted by Eldath, the Green Goddess 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Tracking 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: 2 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell detects psychic impressions left by 
creatures moving through an area. The druid first 
takes an object closely related to the creature being 
tracked, such as a favorite article of clothing, a lock 
of hair, or a blood spoor, and attunes to the quarry's 
psychic pattern by casting the spell on the object. 
After this, any psychic trace of the same pattern 
glows in the vision of the caster. The fresher the 
psychic “tracks,” the brighter they glow. 

These impressions are visible up to two days old 
per level of the druid. This spell can detect the pas- 
sage of creatures under the influence of a pass with- 
out trace spell; it can also detect the passage of 
another druid. 

Notes: Uncommon spell for druids. 


Trance 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 120-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell the shukenja enters a deep trance, 
during which he cannot move, speak or take any 
action. While in the trance, the shukenja is highly 
attuned to the powers and forces in the surrounding 
area. Аз such, the trance allows the shukenja to dis- 
cover whether any supernatural or magical effects 
are at work in the area. For each round the shukenja 
remains in the trance, he or she feels the presence 
of any one lesser spirit, greater spirit, curse, perma- 
nent magical effect, or haunting, provided this is in 
the area of effect. The shukenja is able to determine 
the general type of thing contacted (natural spirit, 
evil haunting, etc.), but cannot communicate with 
it in any way or gain any other information about it. 
For example, the party stops at a deserted temple for 
the night. The shukenja enters into a trance, hoping 


A 652 М. 


Translate 


| ee d 


to learn if supernatural forces are at work here. 
From the trance she learns that an evil spirit is 
haunting the temple. So prepared, the party can 
ready appropriate defenses or leave. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Transfer Curse — Shaman 


(Necromantic) > 
Sphere: Protection p 


Level: 4 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Very similar to the transfer offense spell, this 
spell transfers a curse or malign spell from its 
victim to an animal scapegoat. The method of cast- 
ing the spell is identical—the creature is dressed 
with objects representing the victim of the curse, 
or the curse itself, and driven from the village. 

Any normal spell can be transferred in this way, 
regardless of the relative levels of the shaman and 
the original caster. Wizards’ and priests’ magics, 
spirits’ curses and the spells of extraplanar crea- 
tures can all be transferred. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Transfer Offense — Shaman 
(Necromantic) А 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell takes the wrong-doings of a com- 
munity and ritually “transfers” them to an animal 
(a "scapegoat"). Any spirits that are displeased 
with a community will recognize the efforts by the 
shaman, and will accept that the burden of guilt 
has been shifted to the scapegoat, and thus the 
community’s standing is restored in their eyes. 
This is handy if someone has misbehaved so badly 
that mere sacrifice is insufficient to appease the 
spirits, if the crimes cannot be precisely deter- 
mined, or if the perpetrator is unable or unwilling 
to beg forgiveness. 


An animal such as a goat or an ox is selected, and 
symbolically dressed in the village’s wrongs: repre- 
sentative ribbons, thongs, or ropes are tied to its horns, 
or the clothing of wrongdoers (if they are identified) 
are strapped to its back. A short speech or ceremony is 
then given, and the beast is driven or led away from 
the village, to be destroyed by wild animals. 

It is considered unlucky if the beast returns to 
the village, if a hunter should slay it and—particu- 
larly—if any human, demihuman, or humanoid 
should eat its meat (see sidebar). 

The animal and the items attached to it are the 
focus for the spell. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Eating a Scapegoat Animal 
Eating the meat of a scapegoat violates tribal 
taboos and visits trouble on the perpetrators, in addi- 
tion to the effects on the tribe. These ills are perma- 
nent until countered either by the tribal shaman or 
by a priest of at least 12th level. Typical ills include: 
*They become sickly (-3 Constitution, and 
always suffering from some petty ailment). 
* Poor hunting luck (-2 to all rolls involving 
hunting, fishing, archery, and the like.) 
• Ancestors curse (as 4th-level bestow curse spell) 
* A spirit animal of roughly the perpetrator’s power 
attacks. If slain it reappears the next month. 
* Any game they kill or meat they butcher will 
be rancid. 
* Any plants they tend will die within the month. 


Transformation 
Quest spell, see appendix. 


Translate 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 3 turns/level 

Area of Effect: 1 text or scroll 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to read texts (scrolls, 
maps) written in a foreign language (including 
Thieves' Cant). It does not allow the reading of 
wizard-magic texts or the deciphering of coded 
messages. The spell can be used in conjunction 
with a scribe spell if the translation is to be written 
down. Any scroll containing a spell or recipe for a 
potion or powder cannot be translated. 


/ 653 ms 


Tranquility, Eldath’s 


b—————————————————— 


Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON Transmute Rock to Magma 


Magazine.) (Alteration) 
Reversible 
Tranquility, Eldath's Sphere: Elemental Magma 
See Eldath's tranquility. 
Transformation, Sustarre's Range: 10 yds./level 


See Sustarre's transformation. 


Transmute Dust to Water 
Reversed form, transmute water to dust. 


Transmute Magma to Rock 
Reversed form, transmute rock to magma. 


Transmute Metal to Wood 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 7 

Range: 80 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 metal object 
Saving Throw: Special 


The transmute metal to wood spell enables the 
caster to change an object from metal to wood. The 
volume of metal cannot exceed a maximum weight 
of 10 pounds per experience level of the priest. 
Magical objects made of metal are 90% resistant 
to the spell, and those on the person of a creature 
receive the creature's saving throw as well. Artifacts 
and relics cannot be transmuted. Note that only a 
wish spell or similar magic can restore a transmuted 
object to its metallic state. Otherwise, for exam- 
ple, a metal door changed to wood would be 
forevermore a wooden door. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Transmute Mud to Rock 
Reversed form, transmute rock to mud. 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 5 cube/level 
Saving Throw: Vs. paralyzation 


This spell turns a patch of rock or solid earth 
into fiery magma by superheating it in a matter of 
seconds. Anything caught within the area should 
make a saving throw vs. paralyzation or take 6d8 
points of damage. The magma will remain for 
about 2 days, and then cool to a black circle of ash. 

The reverse transmute magma to rock is only of 
temporary duration. It transforms magma to stone 
cool enough to walk on for one hour. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Transmute Rock to Mud 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Earth, Elemental Water 


Level: 5 

Range: 160 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell turns natural rock of any sort into an 
equal volume of mud. If it is cast upon a rock, for 
example, the rock affected collapses into mud. 
Magical or enchanted stone is not affected by the 
spell. The depth of the mud created cannot exceed 
10 feet. 

Creatures unable to levitate, fly, or otherwise 
free themselves from the mud sink at the rate of 
Ys of their height per round and eventually suffo- 
cate, save for lightweight creatures that could nor- 
mally pass across such ground. Brush thrown atop 
the mud can support creatures able to climb on top 
of it, with the amount required decided by the 
DM. Creatures large enough to walk on the 
bottom can move through the area at a rate of 10 
feet per round. 

The mud remains until a successful dispel 
magic or transmute mud to rock spell restores its 


A 654 ^ 


Transmute Water to Dust 


substance—but not necessarily its form. Evapora- 
tion turns the mud to normal dirt at a rate of 146 
days per 10 cubic feet. The exact time depends on 
exposure to the sun, wind, and normal drainage. 

The reverse, transmute mud to rock, hardens 
normal mud or quicksand into soft stone (sandstone 
or similar mineral) permanently unless magically 
changed. Creatures in the mud are allowed a saving 
throw to escape before the area is hardened to 
stone. Dry sand is unaffected. 

The material components are clay and water (or 
sand, lime, and water for the reverse). 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Transmute Water to Dust 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. yd./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


655 


When this spell is cast, the subject area instantly 
undergoes a change from liquid to powdery dust. 
Note that if the water is already muddy, the area of 
effect is doubled, while if wet mud is present, the 
area of effect is quadrupled. If water remains in 
contact with the transmuted dust, the former 
quickly permeates the latter, turning the dust into 
silty mud, if a sufficient quantity of water exists to 
do so, otherwise soaking or dampening the dust 
accordingly. 

Only the liquid actually in the area of effect at 
the moment of casting is affected. Potions that con- 
tain water as a component part are rendered useless. 
Living creatures are unaffected, except for those 
native to the elemental plane of Water. Such crea- 
tures must roll a successful saving throws vs. death 
or be slain; however, only one such creature can be 
affected by any single casting of this spell, regard- 
less of the creature's size or the size of the spell's 
area of effect. 

The reverse is simply a very high-powered 
create water spell that requires a pinch of normal 
dust as an additional material component. 

For either usage of the spell, other components 
required are diamond dust of at least 500 gp value, 
a bit of seashell, and the caster's holy symbol. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Transport Via Plants 


b——————— ———————— d 


Transport Via Plants 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster is able to enter 
any large plant (human-sized or larger) and pass any 
distance to a plant of the same species in a single 
round, regardless of the distance, separating the two. 
The entry plant must be alive. The destination plant 
need not be familiar to the caster, but it also must 
be alive. A caster uncertain of the destination plant, 
need merely determine direction and distance, and 
the transport via plants spell moves him as close as 
possible to the desired location. There is a basic 
20% chance, reduced by 1% per level of experience 
of the caster, that the transport delivers the caster to 
a similar species of plant from 1 to 100 miles away 
from the desired destination plant. If a particular 
destination plant is desired, but the plant is not 
living, the spell fails and the caster must come forth 
from the entrance plant within 24 hours. Note that 
this spell does not function with plantlike crea- 
tures—for example, shambling mounds, treants, and 
so on. The destruction of an occupied plant slays the 
caster (see the plant door spell). 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Treasure Scent 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This simple spell enables a priest to detect pre- 
cious metals and gems within a 20-foot radius. The 
priest can determine the type of metal or gem as well 
as the total number of individual pieces, whether 
they be gems, nuggets, or coins, but not the actual 
value of the treasure by means of this spell. The 
effect is centered on and mobile with the caster. 

Although spellcasters cannot immediately 
divine the location of any treasure detected, they 


can tell if they are getting closer (^warmer") or far- 
ther (“colder”) from the largest group of unknown 
items. For example, if a priest were aware of the 
treasure carried by his companions and himself, he 
could ignore their carried coins while honing in on 
a buried chest of gems. Likewise, if a chest of 1,000 
copper coins and a chest of 100 gold coins were 
buried in separate locations in the same room, by 
means of this spell the priest could find first the 
copper pieces and then begin to home in on the 
location of the gold. 

When casting this spell, the priest must make 
repeated sniffing sounds as the verbal component. 
Tiamat requires that any priest employing this spell 
sacrifice 20% of any newly located treasure to her 
within 10 days of its discovery or face her wrath. 

Notes: Granted by the evil dragon god, Tiamat, 
to human worshipers. 


Tree 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster is able to 
assume the form of a small living tree or shrub or 
that of a large dead tree trunk with but a few limbs. 
Although the closest inspection cannot reveal that 
this plant is actually a person, and for all normal 
tests he is, in fact, a tree or shrub, the caster is able 
to observe all that goes on around him just as if he 
was in normal form. The Armor Class and hit 
points of the plant are those of the caster. The caster 
can remove the spell at any time, instantly changing 
from plant to his normal form and having full capa- 
bility for any action normally possible (including 
spellcasting). Note that all clothing and gear worn 
or carried change with the caster. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a twig from a tree. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


P. 656 N 


Tree Healing 


———— ————— E d 


Tree Growth 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Earth 
Level: 6 RV 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 rd. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Through this spell, a priest can cause a normal 
tree to grow from a seed to full size in only one 
round. The tree itself is not magical; only its accel- 
erated growth is a magical effect. The priest must 
place the seed where he wishes the tree to grow; if 
this is not already on a soil or earth surface, the 
tree will seek out soil no more than 1 foot below, 
even through rock or metal. A priest who wishes to 
simply drop the seed can do so; if the priest wishes 
to toss the seed to some specific location within 
12 feet, a successful Dexterity check is required— 
failure means a missed, but by no more than 3 feet. 
During its rapid growth, the tree tries to attain its 
full size and height, smashing through barriers with 
a Strength score of 25. Wooden structures splinter; 
rock walls, ceilings, and foundations split and 
crumble; even metal barriers bend or split against 
the massive growth of the tree. Should a structure 
collapse because of the tree's growth, creatures may 
have to make a saving throw vs. spell or take 
damage, at the DM's option. Though rapid, the 
growth of the tree can easily be avoided by most 
characters and creatures. 

The material component is the seed itself, which 
must be undamaged but need not be magically 
enchanted before this spell is cast. 

Notes: Common for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Tree Healing 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing, Necromantic, Plant 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster and one tree 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a wounded priest to pass into 
the interior of a tree and remain hidden within it for 
as long as desired, being healed by the natural nutri- 
ents of the tree. During this time, the caster can see 
and hear the surroundings of the tree perfectly but 
is concealed from all forms of detection by the 
magic of the spell and protected by the tree from 
any extremes of heat, cold, rain, sunlight, snow, and 
other conditions. The tree itself gives off no magi- 
cal aura and is not marked by the caster’s entry in 
any way. All the caster’s bodily processes are sus- 
pended, so the caster has no need to sleep, breathe, 
or eat. The caster regains | hit point every 6 turns 
of continuous existence inside the tree. There is a 
40% chance that the tree will neutralize any disease 
the caster may be carrying, regardless of whether or 
not the caster is aware of the condition, If more than 
one disease is present, determine the result sepa- 
rately for each. Tree healing can do nothing against 
any poisons except tree poisons, which it always 
neutralizes. 

If a tree containing a priest is damaged, the 
priest takes half of the damage but is free to leave 
the tree at any time. The caster can use his or her 
spells or magical items carried to heal the tree from 
within. Offensive magic must be cast from outside 
the tree, or the tree is destroyed. 

Once the caster of a tree healing spell leaves 
the tree, the magic ends. Reentry is impossible 
without another casting of the spell. The caster 
priest can, however, reach out of the tree to speak, 
gesture, or discard items, and then duck back in, 
so long as some part of his or her body remains 
within the tree. The spell brings all items worn or 
carried by the caster into the tree, but other items 
cannot be brought in later. If the priest reaches out 
of the tree and picks anything up, it cannot pass into 
the tree. 

A tree healing can never be used to enter tre- 
ants or other sentient forest plants. Any physical 
damage deliberately done by the priest to the tree 
while within it results in his or her unceremonious 
expulsion from the tree, whether the tree is sentient 
or not. 


/ 657 V 


Tree Nap — Gnome 


EE eee 


Notes: Granted by the nature deities Mielikki 
and Gwaeron Windstrom of the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting, and the elven deity Rillifane 
Rallathil. 


Tree Nap — Gnome 
(Illusion/Phantasm, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster is able to draw 
on the healing power of a living tree while cloaked 
in an illusionary guise resembling part of the tree. 
This spell can be cast only when the caster has 
taken a position in contact with the chosen tree that 
can be maintained for an extended period. 

As long as the caster does not move (aside from 
small shifts in position) or break contact with the 
tree, he or she is cloaked by a simple illusion, 
appearing as a natural part of the tree. For example, 
if the priest who sits on the ground and leans against 
the base of the tree might appear to be an above- 
ground root. A caster who stretches out horizon- 
tally along a tree limb might appear to be part of a 
thick branch. A priest who curls up in a ball and sits 
at the base of a branch where it joins the trunk might 
appear to be a large burl. However, any method that 
can discern illusions or reveal hidden creatures 
reveals the caster's position immediately, although 
that will not automatically end the spell effect. 

A caster who gets a full night's sleep (8 hours) 
while the spell is in effect can tap into the life force 
of the tree. A night's sleep under the effect of a tree 
nap is equal to complete bed-rest, and naturally 
heals 3 points of damage for the day. If the tree is 
an oak, the healing is doubled to 6 hit points. If the 
oak is the home of a dryad or hamadryad, the heal- 
ing is doubled again, to 12 hit points for a single 
night's sleep. 

The material components are the caster's holy 
symbol and a drop of tree sap. 

Notes: Granted by the forest gnome god, Baer- 
van Wildwanderer. 


Ww 


658 


Tree Steed 


p en d 


Tree Spirit 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 tree 
Saving Throw: None 


Tree spirit permanently links the soul of the 
caster with a tree, usually chosen carefully for its 
health, vigor, and remote environment. Casting this 
spell joins the life force of the druid with that of the 
tree; as long as the tree lives, the caster ages at one- 
tenth the normal rate. (Because the spell causes the 
tree to devote all its energy to maintaining health 
rather than growth, it always remains exactly the 
size it was at the time of casting.) Moreover, the 
caster’s spirit merges with the tree at the charac- 
ter’s death. No form of reincarnation or resurrection 
(except a wish) on the character’s body will work 
unless it lies within 10 feet of the tree. 

One year after the caster dies, the druid’s spirit 
animates the tree as a treant. (DMs should roll up 
treant statistics for the tree at the time the spell is 
cast, to determine the tree’s Armor Class, Hit Dice, 
etc.) The chosen tree must be of treant height; the 
exact size determines the size of the new treant, 
which possesses the caster's memories and person- 
ality but has no granted powers or spellcasting abil- 
ity. It must communicate as a treant. 

The DM decides whether to consider this treant 
an NPC or allow the player to control it. (DMs 
should use the guidelines that apply to PCs who 
become lycanthropes or undead.) 

However, a druid who uses tree spirit to link with 
a tree suffers any physical damage inflicted on the 
tree. For instance, if someone hacks at the tree with 
an axe and causes 4 points of damage, the druid also 
loses 4 hit points; the druid knows the tree has been 
harmed, but does not know the nature of the injury. 

If the tree dies but does not sustain enough 
damage to kill the caster, the druid is stunned for 
1d6 rounds and must make a successful System 
Shock roll to avoid death. Spells that heal the druid 
do not affect the tree. 

Damage to the druid does not affect the tree, as 
the extra energy the tree expends on strength and 
health makes any damage the druid sustains negligi- 
ble to the tree. However, it's usually in the druid's best 
interest to have an animal friend or two guard the tree. 

In addition, the druid should choose the tree 
carefully. If the surrounding land is cleared for 


659 


construction work or lumber before the druid's pro- 
longed life span finally ends, the druid is in trouble. 

Casting tree spirit first requires a full month's 
preparation. The druid lives near the tree during this 
time of prayer and mediation. Then a private bond- 
ing ceremony is conducted at the height of a sol- 
stice. This spell often is cast by ancient druids, who 
wish to preserve their wisdom or make sure their 
groves remain defended even after their death. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids; otherwise virtu- 
ally unknown. 


Tree Steed 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 1 log or plank 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enchants a log, plank, or similar piece 
of wood to become a temporary steed. The log or 
plank must be at least 1 foot wide, 3 inches thick, 
and 3 to 10 feet long. Any type of wood is suitable. 

When the spell is cast, the log sprouts four 
wooden, horselike legs. The tree steed can be ridden 
like a normal horse and can be used to carry equip- 
ment. The tree steed can carry up to 600 pounds of 
riders and gear before breaking. If the tree steed 
breaks under the weight of the riders or gear, the 
enchantment instantly ends and the sree steed again 
becomes a normal (although broken) log or plank. 

The tree steed obeys all of the caster’s verbal 
commands to move, slow, speed up, stop, and turn. 
It has a movement rate of 12 on land. It can move in 
the water (swim 6), floating on the surface and pad- 
dling with its legs. The tree steed must remain 
within 10 yards of the caster in order to move; if the 
distance between the tree steed and the caster 
exceeds 10 yards, the tree steed stops until the 
caster is again within range. 

The tree steed will not fight for the caster and is 
incapable of any action other than movement. The 
tree steed does not become fatigued and does not eat. 
It has all the vulnerabilities of normal wood, includ- 
ing fire, and can be damaged by both magical and 
physical attacks. It has AC 8 and 20 hit points. 

The material components are a log or plank of 
suitable size and a horseshoe. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Travelers (ToM). 


Тпр 


Тгїр 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 object up to 10 ft. long 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This magic must be cast upon a normal object— 
a length of vine, a stick, a pole, a rope, or a similar 
object. The spell causes the object to rise slightly 
off the ground or floor it is resting on to trip most 
creatures crossing it, if they fail their saving throws 
vs. spell. Note that only as many creatures can be 
tripped as are actually stepping across the 
enchanted object. Thus a 3-foot-long piece of rope 
could trip only one man-sized creature. Creatures 
moving at a very rapid pace (running) when tripped 
suffer 1 point of damage and are stunned for 144+1 
rounds if the surface they fall upon is very hard (if 
it is turf or other soft material, they are merely 
stunned for the rest of that round). Very large crea- 
tures, such as elephants, are not at all affected by a 


mu -$ "mL 
ww Te } 
| М a` 


trip spell. The object continues to trip all creatures 
passing over it, including the spellcaster, for as long 
as the spell duration lasts. A creature aware of the 
object and its potential adds a +4 bonus to its saving 
throw roll when crossing the object. The enchanted 
object is 80% undetectable unless a means that 
detects magical traps is employed or the operation 
of the spell is observed. This spell does not function 
under water. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Triple Mask 
(Illusion/Phantasm, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell transports the caster's real body and 
gear to an extradimensional space and creates three 
identical, solid images of the caster on the spot 
where the caster stood. These solid illusions have 
no intellect and cannot wield or cast magic, but 
otherwise look and act just like the caster, who 
controls them all. The images can carry things, 
speak, and even launch (nonspell) attacks at the 
caster's normal THACO, employing their nonmag- 
ical duplicates of whatever gear and weaponry the 
caster had on his or her person at the time the spell 
was cast. The images act independently and can 
travel any distance apart from each other without 
affecting the operation of the triple mask. This 
spell is often used by casters who want to be 
present at a dangerous meeting or journey but 
somehow remain safe. 

The caster must be in contact with/linked to 
one of the images at the beginning of a round and 
stay “in” that image until the end of the round; in 
the meantime, the other two images carry out any 
instructions they were given at the end of the pre- 
ceding round. When the round ends, the caster can 
instantly, silently, and untraceably switch to 
another image. At the same time, the caster can 
alter the orders for the other two images. No switch 
need be made if the caster does not desire to, and 
the caster can see and hear (but not smell, feel, or 
taste) through the eyes and ears of all three images 
at all times. 

Images that are destroyed when the caster is not 
in them do the caster no harm. One image's 


destruction does not end the spell or visibly affect 
the other two images—but if the image the caster 
is linked to is destroyed, the spell ends, all three 
images vanish instantly, the caster appears in the 
location of the destroyed image, and the caster suf- 
fers 1 point of damage for each experience level 
he or she currently possesses. 

When this spell is cast, the caster must make a 
System Shock survival roll. If it fails, the caster 
falls unconscious but takes no other harm, and the 
spell is wasted without taking effect. When the 
spell ends normally, the caster returns to the last 
position of any of the remaining images when the 
spell expired. 

The material components are three peas. 

Notes: Granted by Leira, Lady of Mists, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


True Name — Savant 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the savant to discover the true 
name of a creature if it fails a saving throw vs. spell. 
Also, the spell can be used to discover the com- 
mand word of a device (no saving throw allowed). 

The material component is a potion of ESP, 
which is consumed by the caster. 

Notes: Restricted to cleric-savants. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


True Seeing 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: All 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When the priest employs this spell, he confers 
upon the recipient the ability to see all things as 
they actually are. The spell penetrates normal and 


True Seeing — Shukenja 


magical darkness. Secret doors become plain. The 
exact location of displaced things is obvious. Invis- 
ible things become quite visible. Illusions and 
apparitions are seen through. Polymorphed, 
changed, or enchanted things are apparent. Even 
the aura projected by creatures becomes visible, so 
that alignment can be discerned. Furthermore, the 
recipient can focus his vision to see into the Ethe- 
real Plane or the bordering areas of adjacent planes. 
The range of vision conferred is 120 feet. True 
seeing, however, does not penetrate solid objects; 
it in no way confers x-ray vision or its equivalent. 
Furthermore, the spell effects cannot be further 
enhanced with known magic. 

The spell requires an ointment for the eyes that 
is made from very rare mushroom powder, saffron, 
and fat and costs no less than 300 gp per use. 

The reverse, false seeing, causes the person to 
see things as they are not: rich is poor, rough is 
smooth, beautiful is ugly. The ointment for the 
reverse spell is concocted of oil, poppy dust, and 
pink orchid essence. 

For both spells, the ointment must be aged for 
1d6 months. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


True Seeing — Shukenja 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: АП 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 120-ft. sight range 
Saving Throw: None 


The shukenja using this spell sees all things as 
they truly are, including secret doors, displaced 
beings, and invisible, ethereal, and astral persons 
and things. Illusions are pierced, and polymorphed, 
altered, and magicked things appear as they should 
be. Alignments can be determined. The spell's 
reverse, false seeing, causes the person affected to 
see the reverse of the truth. 

Both spells require an ointment that must be 
aged for 1d6 months, the ointment for true seeing is 
made of rare powdered mushrooms, saffron, and 
fat, while the reverse contains oil, poppy dust, and 
mare's sweat. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


A 661 Se 


Truemetal 


Truemetal 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: S, 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: A 30-ft.-radius, 90-degree arc in the 
direction the caster is facing 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to detect the true 
consistency and components of any metal that is 
within range and in the general direction (90° arc) 
the priest is facing when the spell is completed or 
that enters this area during that round. The spell 
also tells whether such metal radiates a dweomer or 
not. Though this spell can be used to find concealed 
money or weapons or reveal magical weapons, it is 
usually employed to ferret out false coins, coinage 
containing lead or made of a thin coating of one 
metal over another, and magical or enspelled coins, 
since a common method of harming or spying on a 
rival merchant is with magic carried by a coin that 
passes into the rival’s possession. 


Notes; Granted by the lesser power Waukeen 
Merchant’s Friend of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Tsunami 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 7 

Range: 200 yds. + 50 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Wave 2 ft. high and 10 ft. 
long/level 

Saving Throw: None 


This mighty spell summons a tsunami, or gigan- 
tic wave, from any major body of water. The body 
of water must be at least | mile in width, so in most 
circumstances the tsunami can be summoned only 
from the sea, large lakes, or extremely big rivers. 
The wave is 2 feet high and 10 feet long for each 
level of experience of the caster, so a 15th-level 
priest would summon a /sunami 30 feet high and 
150 feet wide. The wave can appear anywhere 
within the spell's range and immediately sweeps 


forward in the direction specified by the caster. 
This may take it out of the allowed range or even 
back at the casting priest. The tsunami moves at a 
rate of 24 (240 yards per round) and lasts one round 
at 14th level, two rounds at 18th level, or three 
rounds at 22nd or higher level. 

Ships caught by the tsunami must make a sea- 
worthiness check (see Table 77: Ship Types in the 
DMG) with a penalty equal to the wave’s height in 
feet. For example, a tsunami created by a 1 5th-level 
caster would inflict a -30% penalty to a vessel's 
seaworthiness check. If the check is failed, the 
vessel capsizes and sinks in 1d10 rounds, with the 
possible loss of those aboard. Human or humanoid 
swimmers caught in the wave must make a saving 
throw vs. death magic or be drowned in the wave; 
any creature in the water in the wave's path will be 
carried along as long as it lasts. 

If the priest sent the wave towards the shore, the 
tsunami loses 5 feet of height for every 20 yards it 
travels; a 30-foot wave could wash 120 yards inland 
before there was nothing left of it. Creatures caught 
in the area sustain 1d4 points of damage for every 
5 feet of height the tsunami currently possesses and 
are carried along until it ends. Air-breathing crea- 
tures must make saving throws vs. death magic or 
be drowned outright by this treatment. Wooden 
buildings have a chance equal to three times the 
wave's current height of being destroyed by the 
tsunami (90% for a 30-foot wave, for example) 
while stone buildings have a chance equal to the 
wave's height (or 3096 for a 30-foot wave). Topog- 
raphy may influence or channel the wave's advance, 
so a good-sized hill could stop a tsunami cold, 
although its seaward face may be denuded of crea- 
tures and vegetation by the wave. 

This spell, in the hands of a high-level priest, 
can blanket an awesome amount of territory and lit- 
erally destroy or drown anything in its path. The 
tsunami is so strenuous a spell that the priest is 
exhausted and helpless for 1d6 hours after sum- 
moning it. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids (PO:SM). 


Tsunami, Istishia's 


Tsunami — Shukenja 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 7 

Range: 240 yds. 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1d4 rds. 
Area of Effect: Variable 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a huge, racing wall of water 
that destroys structures of less than the sturdiest 
stone construction. The size and destructive power 
of the wave depends on the amount of water pres- 
ent, and can be up to 10 feet high per level of the 
shukenja. An average river can wash away a farm- 
stead; an ocean can inundate an entire town. The 
tsunami washes away and scatters unprotected crea- 
tures with up to 3 Hit Dice (save vs. death or 
drown). Unprotected creatures with 4 or more Hit 
Dice take 3d6 points of damage per round of expo- 
sure, The tsunami has the same effect as an earth- 
quake spell on all structures except those made of 
solidly constructed stone. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental set- 
ting; otherwise, very rare. 


Tsunami, Istishia’s 
See Istishia’s tsunami. 


66 


3 


Tumblethorns 


SS ла лааны аы ы" 


Tumblethorns 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: / 

This spell transforms a single thorn (a sharp 
protuberance that has grown on any sort of plant at 
any time in the past, held by the priest during cast- 
ing) into a whirling, flying tangle of impossibly 
long, flailing thorns. The ball of thorns is about 2 
feet across and flies from the caster's hands straight 
at a single chosen creature. If the creature moves, 
the thorns can change direction once to follow, and 
strike with the caster's THACO +1. 

The tumblethorns strike once only and are con- 
sidered a nonmagical, physical attack when consid- 
ering the effects of magical barriers and other 
spells. The spell inflicts slashing and stabbing 
damage equal to 1d4 points plus 1 point per level of 
the caster to a maximum of 1d4+10 points (half that 
if a successful save is made, to a minimum of 2) 
and then fade away. A tumblethorns does its usual 
damage to the wrong creature if it strikes another 
living creature of its own volume or larger on the 
way to its intended creature, but fades away harm- 
lessly if it does not strike any living creature before 
reaching the limits of the spell range or after a 
round has passed. A tumblethorns is considered AC 
3, but anyone unwise enough to strike it destroys 
it—and instantly receives its full damage (no saving 
throw). 

Notes: Granted by Talos the Destroyer, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS Setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Turn Wood 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 120-ft.-wide path, 20 ft. long/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, waves of force roll forth 
from the caster, moving in the direction he faces, 
and causing all wooden objects in the path of the 
spell to be pushed away from the caster to the limit 
of the area of effect. Wooden objects above 3 inch- 
es in diameter that are fixed firmly are not affected, 
but loose objects (movable mantles, siege towers, 
etc.) move back. Objects under 3 inches in diame- 
ter that are fixed splinter and break, and the pieces 
move with the wave of force. Thus, objects such as 
wooden shields, spears, wooden weapon shafts and 
hafts, and arrows and bolts are pushed back, drag- 
ging those carrying them with them. If a spear is 
planted in order to prevent this forced movement, it 
splinters. Even magical items with wooden sections 
are turned, although an antimagic shell blocks the 
effects. A successful dispel magic spell ends the 
effect. Otherwise, the turn wood spell lasts for one 
round for each experience level of the caster. 

The waves of force continue to sweep down the 
set path for the spell’s duration, pushing back 
wooden objects in the area of effect at a rate of 40 
feet per melee round. The length of the path is 20 
feet per level of the caster, thus a 14th-level caster 
casts a turn wood spell with an area of effect 120 
feet wide by 280 feet long, and the spell lasts for 
14 rounds. Note that after casting the spell, the 
path is set and the caster can then do other things 
or go elsewhere without affecting the spell’s power. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


2 664 = 


Тугаппу 


eee А 


Turnbane 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection, Necromancy 
Level: 3 
Range: 0 
Components: 


Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects undead creatures in the serv- 
ice of, or being commanded by, the priest from 
turning attempts. The spell has two forms. 

A) The shorter duration, more protective version 
lasts 1 round per caster level. It confers total immu- 
nity to turning attempts upon chosen undead crea- 
tures within the area of effect. Only undead crea- 
tures with Hit Dice equal to half the caster’s level or 
less can be so protected. Such undead moving far- 
ther than 30 feet from the caster lose this protec- 
tion; they can be turned normally if another attempt 
is made. Note that the turnbane does not negate a 
successful turning in the event that turned undead 
creatures move back to within 30 feet of the caster. 

B) The longer duration version lasts 3 rounds 
per level and allows the caster to protect undead 
with Hit Dice equal to or less than the his or her 
experience level. An opposing priest, cleric or pal- 
adin attempting to turn such creatures must first 
roll a number on 1d20 less than the caster's basic, 
unadjusted saving throw vs. spell. Failure to do so 
means the undead cannot be turned while they 
remain within 30 feet of the caster. This failure 
does not prevent others from trying to turn the 
same undead creatures; each separate turning 
attempt by another different priest requires a sepa- 
rate 1d20 roll. A successful roll on the 1d20 means 
the turning attempt is resolved normally. 

A successful dispel magic will remove the 
effects of a turnbane, as will a dispel evil cast into 
the area of effect of the turnbane. A holy word dis- 
pels a turnbane also. 

Notes: Granted by luz the Evil of the 
GREYHAWK setting. 


Tymora, Favor of 
See favor of Tymora. 


Tyranny 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 120-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


Similar in effect to a rod of rulership, this spell 
enables the priest to command obedience and feal- 
ty within the area of effect when cast. From 200 to 
500 Hit Dice (or levels of experience) can be ruled, 
but creatures with 15 or greater Intelligence and 12 
or more Hit Dice or levels are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell. Ruled creatures obey the priest as 
if he or she were their absolute sovereign. Still, if 
the priest gives a command that is absolutely con- 
trary to the nature of the creatures commanded, the 
magic is broken. 

Priests who employ this spell contrary to the 
wishes of Gilgeam find their god's displeasure 
forcefully expressed in the immediate future, as 
adjudicated by the DM. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a small golden circlet worth at least 
250 gp. The latter is placed on the priest's head 
prior to the casting of the spell and vanishes at the 
spell's conclusion. 

Notes: Granted to priests of Gilgeam in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Р 665 М. 


Unbend 


Unbend 


Reversed form, oath. 


Unceasing Vigilance 
of the Holy Sentinel 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft.-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enhances a priest's ability to guard a 
person, place, or object. The spell's effect must be 
centered on a specific area, for it creates an invisi- 
ble spherical boundary up to 10 feet in diameter. 
The effect is not mobile; it cannot move with a 
living creature. 

While within the area of effect of this spell, the 
priest (and only the priest) gains several special 
abilities. 

* His or her sense of sight is magically enhanced. 
The caster can see through normal darkness and 
can see invisible creatures and objects. Solid 
objects cannot be seen through, however, and the 
range of the magical sight is limited to 60 feet. 

* The priest has no need for food, water, or rest. He 
or she does not feel fatigue and regenerates 1 hit 
point per hour spent within the circle. However, 
the priest does not actually rest and therefore 
cannot regain spells until he or she sleeps. 

* The priest is totally immune to the effects of 
magical and natural fear, as well as sleep and 
charm spells. 


If the priest leaves the circle, the spell is broken. 
When the spell ends, the priest must rest for 1 turn 
per hour (or portion thereof) spent in the circle. 
This rest is compelled unless the priest is forced 
into action (by being attacked, for example). If 
taking such action, the priest can move at only half 
his or her normal movement rate, has an Armor 
Class penalty of —2, an attack penalty of 2, and 
loses all Dexterity combat bonuses. 

To cast this spell, the priest must trace a circle of 
sigils and runes 10 feet in diameter using a special 
ink containing the powder of a crushed sapphire 
(at least 1,000 gp value) and a drop of holy water. 
This procedure takes 1 turn to complete. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with major 
access to the Guardian sphere (ToM). 


Generally a priest fatigued by this spell cannot 
respond to threats that he or she cannot perceive 
(a priest suffering damage always perceives a 
threat.) A nap spell grants 48 turns of rest. 


Uncertainty, Amaunator's 


See Amaunator's uncertainty. 


Uncontrolled Weather 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 4d4 sq. mi. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to summon weather 
that is inappropriate to either the climate or season 
of the region. The summoned effects are always 
dramatic—cool breezes or light fog do not appear. 
Instead, torrential floods assault a desert, a heat 
wave rages in polar wastelands, and tornadoes and 
hurricanes rip across gentle landscapes. A blizzard 
might spring up in summer or a tornado might 
materialize in the winter. 

The caster has no influence over the weather 
pattern that emerges. The area of effect and the 
duration of the weather cannot be controlled. 

Four turns after the spell is cast, the trend of the 
weather becomes apparent—a sudden chill gust of 
wind, overcast sky, and so on. The uncontrolled 
weather arrives on the fifth turn. Once the weather 
has arrived, it cannot be dispelled. If the spell is 
canceled by the caster before the beginning of the 
fifth turn, the weather slowly reverts to its origi- 
nal condition. 

The effects of the spell are the decision of the 
DM. The effects should be grand and impressive. 
Following are suggested effects of the weather. 

Torrential Rain/Blizzard: Visibility is reduced to 
100 yards or less; travel is nearly impossible due 
to water or heavy snow on the ground. 

Storm/Hurricane: All flying creatures are 
driven from the skies; trees are uprooted; roofs are 
torn off; ships are endangered. 


# 666 M 


Undead Alacrity 


Heat Wave: Intense heat immediately causes ice 
bridges to melt; avalanches of snow and ice roll 
down mountains. 

The DM determines the area of effect randomly. 
The maximum duration of the spell is one turn per 
level of the caster; however, the DM may cancel the 
effect after a shorter time. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Chaos (ToM). 


Undead Alacrity 
A necromancer-cleric specialty spell nearly identi- 
cal to the drow spell, undead battlemight except for 
a duration of 1 turn + 2 rounds/level and a +1 
bonus to the undead creatures ' AC. 


Undead Battlemight — Drow 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 undead/level 
Saving Throw: None 

This spell affects undead zombies and skele- 
tons touched by the caster, giving them the speed 
and agility of the caster (in peak, healthy state, 
base movement 12). The undead gain the initia- 
tive rolls of the caster, and the caster's saving 
throws, if better than their own. The spell affects 
up to one undead creature per level of the caster, 
lasting 1 round, plus one additional round per 
level of the caster. 

The material components are three drops of 
water, sinew or cartilage from any mammal, and a 
drop of quicksilver. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Lolth. 


Undead Focus — Drow 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 undead creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The undead focus spell allows the caster to cast 
spells through an undead being. The spells cast 
through the creature originates with it for all purposes, 
but the priest performs all casting activity, uses com- 
ponents, and so on. Thus, a hidden priest can avoid 
direct combat, casting spells through a selected 
undead creature. The distance between the priest and 
the undead being does not matter, but they must be 
on the same plane. Unless the caster has some way to 
see the undead or its surroundings, the spells cast 
through the creature are hurled from it blindly. 

Spells to be cast through the undead creature 
can be chosen by the priest as needed. Up to one 
spell per round can be cast through the undead 
creature, until it is destroyed or until a maximum 


Undead Ward 


р ———————————————c ee e 


of one spell per level of the priest has been chan- 
neled through the focus. The spell ends after a max- 
imum of 10 turns per caster level, even if the focus 
has not been exhausted. 

While undead focus does not grant control of 
the undead creature by itself, other magics or 
powers that allow control or augmentation of the 
undead creature can be used without hampering 
this spell. If cast on undead creatures affected by 
revenance and/or undead battlemight, a dispel 
magic spell ends at most only one of these spells 
(choose which randomly). 

The material component is a drop of the caster's 
blood. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Lolth. 


Undead Form 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a living spellcaster to assume 
the form of an undead creature, with all of the 
attendant abilities, for the duration of the spell. By 
means of the undead form spell, the caster can 
assume the form of any type of undead of 8 Hit 
Dice or less that the caster is familiar with, pro- 
vided the priest could possibly turn that undead 
type if six levels below his or her current level. 
Hence a 7th-level priest could assume the form of 
a skeleton, zombie, ghoul, shadow, or wight, and an 
8th-level priest could assume any of those forms 
as well as that of a ghast. The only difference in 
abilities between a priest using undead form and 
true undead creatures is that those slain by the 
caster in undead form do not arise as undead 
creatures. Hence if the priest assumes the form of 
a wight and then drains all of the life energy levels 
of a foe, the foe does not later arise as a half- 
strength wight under his or her control. 

While in undead form, the caster cannot use 
spells or employ any other granted powers, spell- 
like abilities, or other special abilities. Hit points, 
Intelligence, and Wisdom are unchanged, but oth- 
erwise the priest acquires the strengths and weak- 
nesses of the assumed form including immunities 
to certain spells, if any. Any hit points lost while in 
undead form are not regained upon reversion to the 
original form. 


This spell does not work for undead spellcasters. 

The material component is a small piece of 
bone or flesh from the body of being who is now 
undead. 

Notes: Granted by the god Velsharoon the Lich 
Lord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Undead Plague 
Quest spell, see appendix. 


Undead Regeneration 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 undead 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest can “heal” an 
undead, restoring to its unlife a number of hit points 
equal to 1d6 plus the caster’s level. Gaseous and 
intangible undead can be “touched” by a caster 
reaching into the space they occupy. The spell pre- 
vents normal undead attacks or effects of contact 
with undead from affecting the caster. 

The reverse of this spell, drain undead, inflicts a 
like amount of damage. Undead “drain” damage is 
not gained as healing or extra hit points by the caster. 
The same protections against undead powers are 
given to the caster as undead regeneration confers. 

Only undead can be affected by either version of 
this spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancer-priests. 
Also known to the drow. 


Undead Spell Focus 
A necromancer-cleric spell, identical to the drow 
spell undead focus. 


Undead Ward 
Reversed form, living ward, not the same as the 5th 
level spell of the same name. 


2 669 М. 


Undead Ward 


OO ee id 


Undead Ward 
(Abjuration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, М 

Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell prevents most types of undead crea- 
tures from entering the area of effect (a cube whose 
sides equal the caster's level times 5 feet—a 15th- 
level caster could affect a cube 75 feet long). 

When an undead creature attempts to enter the 
protected area, the creature is affected by the 
ward as if it was being turned by a priest two 
levels lower than the caster. The casting priest 
need not have the ability to turn undead. Thus, 
an undead ward created by a 10th-level priest 
would turn creatures as an 8th-level priest. 

The results of the turning attempt are calcu- 
lated normally. If a large number of undead 
assault the warded area, not all of them are turned 
by the spell, since the normal limitations apply. 
Undead that are unaffected by the turning attempt 
ignore the undead ward for its duration. Undead 
within the area of effect when the spell is cast are 
not affected. However, when such undead leave 
the area of effect, they are subject to the effects 
of the spell if they attempt to reenter. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol, which must be carried around the 
perimeter of the area to be warded. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with major 
access to the sphere of Wards (ToM). 


Undeath After Death 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, М 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | Banite 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a closely guarded secret within the 
upper ranks of the church of Bane, and its use disap- 
peared with the death of Bane. Undeath after death 
is cast on worshipers of Bane upon the moments of 
their deaths, transforming them into different forms of 
undead. Which form of undead a Banite becomes 
depends on his or her level of experience in life, The 
more powerful the Banite was in life, the stronger the 
type of undead. Vampires created by this spell retain 
character abilities. (If the DM chooses to use the 
optional rules presented for mummies in Van 
Richten's Guide to the Ancient Dead, mummies cre- 
ated by this spell retain character abilities, also.) The 
level of the caster must be higher than the level of the 
spell's recipient, or the caster must make a saving 
throw vs. death magic or perish in the casting. In such 
a case, however, the spell still acts normally on the 
recipient. 

This spell is used only on Banite victims who are 
about to die (0 hit points) or who have died (below 
0 hit points, or below —10 hit points if that optional 
rule is in use). If the spell is cast upon a Banite after 
his or her death, it must be cast within one round per 
level of the caster after death occurs; otherwise, the 
spirit of the Banite is too far from the body to return 
and take control. If the caster waits too long, the 
spell works as an animate dead spell, creating a 
mundane, mindless zombie. 


Level Type of Undead 
Ist-3rd Ghoul 
4th-6th Ghast 
7th-9th Ju-ju zombie 
10-13% Wight 
14th-17th Mummy 
181+ Vampire 


The material component is a black obsidian 
heart into which is carved the recipient’s name and 
the symbol of Bane. This heart is shattered during 
the ceremony. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Bane of the For- 
GOTTEN REALMS setting. 


6 


7 


0 


Undeath to Death 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: A 40-ft. diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


АП undead creatures (of less than a semidivine 
nature) in the area of effect of this powerful spell 
who fail a saving throw vs. spell are instantly 
destroyed. This causes all noncorporeal undead 
(including vampires caught in such a state) to dis- 
appear forever. The caster of undeath to death 
cannot choose to focus the spell on one undead 
individual and avoid affecting others, but the effects 
of the magic are not altered by the presence of vary- 
ing numbers of undead. All potential victims make 
saving throws separately. 

The sphere of effect is immobile once its focus 
is chosen by the caster; however, the focal point 
must be known or visible to the caster during cast- 
ing. The sphere becomes active the instant its cast- 
ing is complete and remains so until the end of the 
following round. The spell affects all undead that 
come into contact with any part of the sphere 
during that time. Living and dead creatures in the 
area of effect are affected by this spell in only one 
way (no saving throw to avoid): If they later die and 
attempts are made within 48 hours after the sphere 
of effect expires (or they leave or are removed from 
it) to animate them into undeath, all such attempts 
will automatically fail. 

The saving throw against an undeath to death 
spell is modified as follows: Skeletons, zombies, 
ghouls, and all other undead of 2 Hit Die or less 
save at a —4 penalty; shadows, wights, ghasts, and 
other undead of 3 through 5 Hit Die save at —2; 
wraiths and other 6 Hit Die undead save at par 
(unmodified); mummies and other 7 Hit Die 
undead save at +2; vampires and other 9 Hit Die 
undead save at +4; ghosts and other 10 Hit Die 
undead at +6; liches and other 11 Hit Die undead 
save at +8, and "special" undead automatically save 
against this spell. 

Surviving physical remnants of undead turned 
to dead by means of this spell can be later ani- 
mated to undeath again by other magic or used 
in such Kelemvorite spells as dead march. Para- 
sites such as rot grubs, diseases (including 
mummy rot), and other conditions carried by 
undead affected by this spell are forever eradi- 


Understand Curse —Shaman 


cated—the remains do not carry and cannot pass 
on such harmful phenomena. 

The material components are a bone or bone 
fragment once part of an undead creature, a pinch 
of ashes from a fire over which carrion has been 
burned, and a pinch of graveyard dust. 

If the caster of an undeath to death spell sacri- 
fices a consecrated holy symbol of his deity in the 
casting of the spell (it must be shattered), undead 
who successfully save against losing their undeath 
still take physical damage of 3d4 points. 

Notes: Granted by the god Kelemvor, Judge of 
the Damned, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 
This spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare 
tomes. 


Understand Curse —Shaman 


(Divination) 

Sphere: Divination p 
Level: 2 "T 
Range: 10 ft. 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 3 month 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast upon any creature or object 
that is suffering from any harmful magical affect or 
the unwelcome attentions of a supernatural power. 
The spell reveals to the shaman the manner in which 
the creature or object is cursed, the reason for the 
curse, and who is responsible for this. 

Thus, the shaman can discover the name of the 
person or creature who cursed the creature or object 
and what manner of being it is (a spirit, a mortal 
wizard, a demigod, and so on); whether the curse 
or spell is a punishment, revenge, or unprovoked 
assault; and the manner of the curse or spell 
(whether it's a curse or cause blindness spell, a 
spirit's attempts to drive a creature mad, and so on). 

Note that the spell does not reveal the nature of 
a spirit (though a local shaman may recognize the 
name, particularly if it is an ancestor or other spirit 
venerated by the people), nor the race of any mortal 
agent. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


2 671 = 


Understand Device 


b ——————————————— g 


Understand Device 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to learn, in detail 
and with complete understanding, the purpose and 
operation of any device (even those that are frag- 
mented, disguised, or magical). The spell reveals 
their words of activation (if any), perils, traps and 
triggers, how the device was made and how it 
should be maintained, whether or not it has been 
moved or modified since its construction, and if it is 
complete. The names and natures of any substances, 
fuels, or spells necessary to operate the device are 
also revealed. The caster is instantly aware of 
exactly how to operate the device (though precision 
in its use, like riding a horse, requires practice). 

To successfully cast this spell, a priest must touch 
some part of the device to be examined, though it 
may be far from the main workings of the assembly. 
(For example, touching a trip-wire would enable the 
priest to learn all about the trap it is meant to trigger.) 
The magic confers no special protection against the 
accidental activation of devices caused by the 
caster's touch. Understand device enables Gonds- 
men to penetrate many guarded places across 
Faerün, both avoiding and improving traps, loading, 
and transport devices, by borrowing the wisdom of 
others, even those long dead, of lands now fallen. 

The material component is a glass rod melted 
and blown or twisted into a holy symbol of Gond. 
The rod is consumed by the spell. (The caster's per- 
sonal holy symbol may suffice in a pinch, and it can 
be of any material so long as it has previously been 
used in the casting of a spell; the spell consumes it.) 

Notes: Granted by the god Gond, Lord of АП 
Smiths, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell 
is found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Undetectable Alignment 
Undetectable Ambush 
Undetectable Charm 
Undetectable Lie 


Reversed forms of detection spells. 


Unearthly Choir* 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This cooperative spell requires at least three 
priests casting the spell simultaneously. At the time 
of casting, the priests must be within 10 feet of each 
other. Upon completion of the spell, the priests sing 
a single, dissonant chord. The result of the spell 
depends on the number of voices in the choir. 

Trio. In this form, the spell projects a cone of 
sonic force 120 feet long and 40 feet wide at the 
base. АП creatures within the area of effect must 
save vs. spell or suffer 2d4 points of damage. Those 
who successfully save vs. spell suffer only half 
damage. Undead suffer a —2 penalty to their saving 
throws. 

Quartet. With four voices, the spell has the 
same area of effect as described above. However, 
all those who fail their saving throw suffer 2d4 
points of damage and are deafened for one round. 
Those who successfully save suffer half damage 
and are not deafened. Undead creatures are not 
allowed a saving throw. 

Quintet. Five singers produce a chord of major 
power. All within the area of effect suffer 344 
points of damage (saving throw for half damage). 
Undead are not allowed a saving throw, All crea- 
tures are deafened for one round. Furthermore, pot- 
tery, glassware, crystal, and similar breakable 
goods must make a successful item saving throw 
vs. fall or be shattered. 

Ensemble. An ensemble of singers consists of 
six to ten priests. In this case, the area of effect 
increases to a cone 180 feet long and 60 feet wide 
at the base. All creatures within this area suffer 1d4 
points of damage per priest and are deafened for 
144 rounds. A successful saving throw vs. spell 
reduces the damage and duration of deafness by 
half. Undead creatures of 3 Hit Dice or less are 
immediately destroyed. All other undead suffer 
normal damage, but are not allowed a saving throw. 
Glass, pottery, crystal, bone, and all wooden items 
that are the strength of a door or less (chests, tables, 
chairs, etc.) must make successful item saving 
throws vs. crushing blow or be shattered. 

Choir. The most powerful group, a choir, 
requires eleven or more priests. In this case, the 


s; 672 V 


Unfailing Premonition 


Sa 


area of effect expands to a cone 300 feet long and 
100 feet wide at the base. All within the area of 
effect suffer 146 points of damage per priest to a 
maximum of 20d6. A successful saving throw vs. 
spell reduces the damage by half. Those who fail 
to save are deafened for 1d10 rounds; those who 
succeed are deafened only 1d6 rounds. Undead 
creatures of 5 Hit Dice or less are immediately 
destroyed. Undead with more Hit Dice are not 
allowed a saving throw. Structures within the area 
of effect are damaged as if they suffered a direct 
hit from a light catapult (one hit per four priests in 
the choir). Doors, chests, and other breakable items 
are instantly shattered. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with major 
access to the sphere of Combat (ToM). 


673 


Unfailing Endurance 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enhances the natural hardiness and 
stamina of the affected creatures by rendering them 
virtually immune to fatigue or exhaustion. During 
the casting of the spell, the caster must touch each 
creature to be affected. While under the spell’s 
influence, the subjects can force march with no 
penalty, engage in up to 12 hours of hard labor per 
day with no fatigue (or up to 16 hours with moder- 
ate fatigue), and gain a +4 bonus to Strength/Sta- 
mina or Constitution/Fitness checks. In addition, 
the subjects gain a +4 bonus to saving throws 
against spells or magical effects that cause weak- 
ness, fatigue, or enfeeblement. Finally, an affected 
creature’s fatigue rating (from PLAYER'S 
OPTION: Combat & Tactics) is doubled, and the 
subject gains a +4 bonus to his saving throws to 
recover from a fatigued or exhausted state. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics with major 
access to the Necromantic sphere (PO:SM). 


Unfailing Premonition 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 turn + 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By anticipating possible futures and outcomes 
of the caster's actions, this spell provides the caster 
with a temporary sixth sense or feel for danger. The 
spell operates on a subconscious level, and the 
caster receives strong intuitive impulses when he 
contemplates courses of action that may bring 
immediate physical injury or harm to him. For 
example, if the priest was about to open a trapped 
chest, the unfailing premonition would create a 
flash of insight or a gut feeling telling him that he 
shouldn't do so. Similarly, opening a door that leads 
into the lair of a ferocious troll may also trigger the 


Unholy Word 


spell’s warning. Threatening a NPC who is likely 
to respond by drawing a weapon and attacking the 
PC would create a warning, but threatening a NPC 
who will get even with the priest in an hour or two 
will not trigger the premonition. 

The unfailing premonition is also quite useful in 
combat, as long as the priest obeys his instincts and 
ducks, dodges, or withdraws when his subcon- 
scious tells him to. While the spell is in effect, the 
priest gains a +2 bonus to his Armor Class and 
saving throws, but in any given round there is a 
25% chance that he will have to forego his intended 
action in order to obey the spell’s warning 
impulses. 

The premonition works only for actions under- 
taken by the caster. If the priest’s companion is 
about to pull a mysterious lever that will drop a 10- 
ton block of stone on the priest, no warning is 
received. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Time (PO-SM). 


Unholy Word 
Reversed form, holy word. This form is cast by evil 
priests. 


Unicorn Steed 
(Conjuration/Summoning, 
Enchantment/Charm) 

Sphere: Animal, Summoning 


Level: 3 

Range: 3 mi. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 24 hrs. 

Area of Effect: 1 unicorn 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons a unicorn (or compels one 
already present) to serve the caster as a steed for 
one day. It works only once in the life of an indi- 
vidual unicorn. (Thereafter the unicorn can feel the 
“pull” of such spells and may choose to obey of its 
own volition. In this case, the caster is unaware that 
it is free to abandon such service at any time). A 
unicorn steed will fight for and with the caster, 
carry him (and an amount of gear equal to him 
weight, but no other living creature), and even tele- 
port with him. The spell creates a special sort of 
limited telepathy between unicorn and rider, so that 
each is aware of the other's intent and mental state. 

A unicorn steed cannot attack, play pranks on, 
“throw, “ or willfully harm its rider, but the spell is 
intended as a gentle compulsion. Those who misuse 
their steeds or send them into danger (as opposed to 


riding them through danger) may find Mielikki or 
one of her servants breaking the spell before its 
normal expiration. Mielikki would never allow a 
creature who is not one of her faithful worshipers to 
successfully gain the use of this spell (even by read- 
ing it from a scroll). 

The material component is three hairs from the 
mane or tai] of a unicorn. 

Notes: Granted by the nature gods Mielikki and 
Gwaeron Windstrom of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. This spell is found only in a few exception- 
ally rare tomes. 


Unliving Identity 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Cosmos wie 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A priest employs this spell to give temporary per- 
sonality and identity back to mindless undead, 
namely skeletons and zombies. The undead creature's 
previous consciousness and identity are restored, 
including memories, preferences, personality, and 
alignment. The creature is still undead, but now has 
the ambitions and thoughts it had as a living being. 
There is a 1?6 chance per year that the creature has 
been dead (not necessarily undead) that it goes imme- 
diately mad, unable to accept its undeath and the 
changes to its world over that time a mad undead 
immediately flees, its identity forever lost. 

In instances where the history of a particular 
undead is known, the DM can apply what he knows 
to the new free-willed skeleton or zombie. How- 
ever, in cases where the undead's history is 
unknown, select its former class, alignment, and 
level according to what best suits the adventure, or 
decide randomly. 

Important: The undead does not retain any of its 
class or level bonuses; it is still simply a skeleton or 
zombie. None of this information will be readily 
apparent for a skeleton, though others guess at class 
from tattered clothing still worn by a zombie. 

The reverse of this spell, unliving mindlessness, 
permanently returns any free-willed skeleton or 
zombie to its former mindless state, or temporarily 
makes other undead mindless, The undead creature 
retains its combat and life-draining abilities, but 
has no sense of who it is, was, or what its previous 


2 674 V. 


Unwilling Wood 


a 


plans were. For the duration of the spell the undead 
wanders aimlessly, slaying and draining life until 
destroyed. This spell does not work on liches, and it 
affects a vampire only until the vampire feeds 
again. 

The material component is any article signifi- 
cant to the undead creature’s former life, such as a 
piece of clothing or equipment, a favorite weapon, 
a personally written letter, etc. 

Notes: Common for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Unliving Mindlessness 


Reversed form, unliving identity. 


Unquestioning Obedience 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Law 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


An improved version of the 1st-level priest spell 
command, this incantation enables the priest to 
command another creature with a single phrase or 
sentence and expect unquestioning obedience. The 
command must be uttered in a language understood 
by the creature. The subject obeys to the best of its 
ability only as long as the command is absolutely 
clear and unequivocal. Thus, a command like *Go 
away!" is ignored. Unlike the command spell, com- 
mands to "Die!" or similar self-destructive orders 
cause the spell to end immediately. 

All spells must be reasonable commands a just 
sovereign could expect of an intensely loyal liege. 
Hence the commands “Lie still in a prone posi- 
tion!” or “Defend my honor and person!” would be 
obeyed, but absurd commands like “Bite the green 
elephant!” or unreasonable commands like “Jump 
off that cliff!” would be ignored. The DM must 
adjudicate any command given by the priest as to 
whether or not the priest elicits unquestioning 
obedience. 

This spell allows only one command to be 
given, but it is followed until the spell expires or 
the action demanded is completed. Creatures with 
an Intelligence of 15 or more, or those with 9 or 
more Hit Dice (or experience levels) are allowed 
a single saving throw vs. spell, adjusted for 
Wisdom, to avoid the effects of unquestioning 
obedience. 


Notes: Granted by Siamorphe the Noble of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Unwilling Wood 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 7 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


A caster can transform one or more living crea- 
tures within a 30-foot radius into unwilling wood, 
causing them to sprout roots, branches, and leaves. 
The creatures become trees of a type native to the 
region and of the characters’ age before the trans- 
formation. The spell works only if cast on beings 
occupying ground that could support a tree; recipi- 
ents flying or suspended in water at the time of 
casting remain unaffected. 

This spell can mutate a number of creatures 
equal in total Hit Dice (or levels) to the caster’s 
level. If the area of effect holds a group of creatures 
with Hit Dice (or levels) totaling a number greater 
than the caster’s experience level, the caster decides 
the order in which the creatures are affected. . 
Unused Hit Dice or levels are lost. 

For example, a 14th-level druid casts unwilling 
wood into a target area containing a giant with 12 
Hit Dice and two 3rd-level warriors. The druid can 
transform either the giant or two warriors, but not 
all three 

Each creature affected is allowed a saving throw 
vs. polymorph. The spell mutates all those failing 
their saving throw, along with any items they carry. 
A new tree has a height of 5 feet per level (or Hit 
Die) of the creature. The effect is permanent; a 
creature transformed into a tree ages as a tree and 
dies as a tree. However, affected beings retain 
awareness, memories, personality, and intelligence. 
Only damage severe enough to kill the tree can kill 
an unwilling wood creature. 

Tree-characters can return to normal if a spell- 
caster of greater level than the original caster uses 
remove curse. The original caster can release a 
transformed entity at will. 

The material components are a bit of tree root 
and the caster’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Uncommon spell for druids 


= 675 М. 


Uplift 


a ш 


Uplift* 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 12 hrs. 
Duration: ] turn 

Area of Effect: 1 priest 
Saving Throw: None 


Uplift bestows increased spellcasting ability on 
one priest, including additional spells per level and 
use of spells beyond the caster's normal level. This 
cooperative spell requires two priests who must 
spend the day casting this spell. During the casting, 
the priests must decide which additional spells (of 
all levels) are desired. Upon completion of the 
casting, the priests touch palms, and the priest of 
higher level receives a charge of magical energy. 
This charge temporarily boosts the level of the 
priest for spellcasting purposes. The amount of 
increase is one level per five levels of the lower 
level caster (fractions rounded up). If both priests 
are of equal level, the casters must decide who 
benefits from the spell. 

The spell grants the priest the spellcasting abil- 
ity of the new level. It does not improve hit points, 
attack rolls, or other abilities. If the increase allows 
more spells per level, the additional spells are 


instantly placed in the subject's memory. A priest 
is also enabled to cast spells normally beyond his 
or her level. Range, duration, area of effect, and 
other variables are all based on the priest's tempo- 
rary level. 

The increased effect lasts only 1 turn. At the end 
of the turn all additional spells are lost and the 
priest reverts to his or her normal level. 

As an example, consider a party with a fallen 
comrade. The two priests in the party are 7th and 
8th level, both unable to cast raise dead. After a 
night's rest, each priest adds uplift to his memorized 
spells. After casting the spell, the 8th-level priest 
suddenly gains the casting abilities of a 10th-level 
priest, including the ability to cast raise dead. At 
the end of one turn, the priest's abilities revert to 
8th-level. 

Casting this spell is an arduous task, causing a 
severe drain on the priests. When the spell expires, 
the uplifted priest suffers 2d6 points of damage 
from mental exhaustion. This damage cannot be 
healed by any means until the priest has had at least 
8 hours of rest. 

The material components are the priests’ holy 
symbols and an offering worth at least 500 gp from 
each priest. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Uthgar, Fortitude of 
See fortitude of Uthgar. 


A 676 К. 


Valkur, Favor of 
See favor of Valkur. 


Vampiric Mist 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation, Necro- 


mancy) 


Sphere: Necromancy 


Level: 6 

Range: 200 yds. 
Components: V, S, М 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: | turn + 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


By casting this spell, the priest brings into exis- 
tence a malign, freezing mist in a hemispheric area 
with a radius up to 20 yards plus 2 yards per level of 
the priest. Within the mist, visibility is reduced to 
10 yards and movement is reduced by 25%. Each 
round a creature spends within the mist, it loses 104 
hit points from chill damage (no save, but magic 
such as resist cold halves damage) and must make a 
Constitution check or lose 1 point of Strength. 

The fog travels at MV 9 over any and all ter- 
rain. It can follow simple instructions such as 
“pursue the dwarves on the hill, * but it does so 
with no real intelligence (if the pursued party splits 
up, the member(s) followed is randomly deter- 
mined) and it has no special detection abilities (it 
cannot follow invisible creatures, for example). 

For every 10 points of damage inflicted by the 
mist, the priest regains 1 hit point (normal maxi- 
mum cannot be exceeded). For every 5 points of 
Strength drained, the priest regains 1 hit point in the 
same way. 

For every creature slain by the mist, whether by 
cumulative hit point loss or Strength reduced to 
zero, the priest gains a surge of energy; this can be 
used to cast cure light wounds on any creature 
touched, but this healing must be used within 3 
rounds or the effect is lost. Any creature slain by the 
vampiric mist becomes a juju zombie under the 
control of the priest unless a save vs. death magic is 
successful. 

The vampiric mist may be destroyed by a spell 
such as gust of wind, but it is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell at the level of the priest casting the 
spell to avoid such destruction. It can be dispelled 
in the normal manner. 

The mist cannot be struck with weapons or 
physically damaged with spells such as lightning 
bolt, although a suitable fire-based spell (fireball, 
etc.) may dissipate and destroy the mist unless it 
makes a successful saving throw vs. spell at the 


Velsharoon's Death Pact 


level ofthe priest who created it. Normal 
fires do not affect the mist, nor do they 
prevent the chilling and damaging effect 
of the spell on creatures within the area 
of effect. 

Finally, Strength points lost from exposure to a 
vampiric mist are regained at a rate of one per hour 
after escaping the mist. 

Notes: Granted by luz the Evil of the GREY- 
HAWK setting. 


Veil of Djalice 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


Named for the famous long-ago priestess who 
devised it, this spell is sometimes called the *glam- 
our glamer" because it temporarily augments the 
beauty of the caster or a touched being to unearthly 
levels. The spell also affects the recipient's voice 
and grace, boosting effective Charisma to 20 in all 
situations involving personal allure. Beings of the 
same race and opposite gender of the spell recipient 
who are not deaf and blind are helplessly smitten by 
the affected being and eagerly leap to serve his or 
her smallest whim. 

Notes: Granted by Sune, Lady of Love, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Velsharoon, Claws of 
See claws of Velsharoon. 


Velsharoon's Death Pact 
(Necromancy, Alteration) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Summoning 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 individual (usually the caster) 
Saving Throw: None 


This manifestly evil spell is a variant of the death 
pact spell from the Complete Book of Necromancers. 
This powerful pact has enabled many “slain” priests 
to return from the dead and eliminate their enemies. 


4 677 Nise 


Venom Bite 


р ——————— — —————— d 


By completing this ritual, a Velsharan priest forges 
a powerful pact with Velsharoon the Vaunted. The 
covenant ensures that a chosen individual will sur- 
vive an untimely death. A Ve/sharoon 5 death pact is 
triggered whenever the protected individual is 
reduced to fewer than 0 hit points (mortally 
wounded) due to combat, spell, or accident. In the 
same round, the subject receives the following 
benefits. 

The individual (or his or her remains) and all 
possessions are transported immediately back to a 
religious sanctuary as if by a word of recall. The 
location of the sanctuary must be specified at the 
time of forging the Velsharoon's death pact. 

Upon arrival, the individual receives a raise 
dead spell (if necessary) and automatically suc- 
ceeds at any required System Shock survival roll. 
Any severed or amputated limbs are instanta- 
neously regenerated. 

The body is cleared of lingering enchantments 
with a dispel magic (bestowed at caster's level), 
whether beneficial or baneful, and cleansed of all 
poisons, diseases, blindness, curses, and insanity. 

Velsharoon 5 death pact remains in effect indef- 
initely until the conditions established at the time of 
its forging have been fulfilled. The pact may be 
established to benefit an individual other than the 
caster. The chosen one must be in good standing 
with the Velsharan faith and is most commonly a 
member of the clergy who has reached 9th level 
and is undergoing the Pact of the Everlasting cere- 
mony. Velsharoon 5 death pact must be cast іп an 
unholy sanctuary consecrated to Velsharoon to be 
effective. A dispel magic cannot end a Velsharoon 5 
death pact prematurely. 

This powerful spell is not without its costs, how- 
ever. Forging a death pact is an exhaustively stress- 
ful process, drawing the casting priest (and the spell 
recipient, if other than the caster) into draining 
audiences with extraplanar powers. As a result, 
establishing a Velsharoon s death pact ages the 
caster five years and requires at least one week for 
complete recuperation for the spell's caster and 
recipient, during which time the priest cannot cast 
any spells or engage in any physically demanding 
activity. Furthermore, when the pact is invoked, the 
mystical transport and instantaneous healing exacts 
another toll, this time aging the recipient for five 
years (if the individual was raised, he or she also 
loses 1 point of Constitution permanently). This 
cost can be mitigated through the sacrifice of good- 
aligned sentient creatures in Velsharoon's name at 
the end of the spellcasting. For each such creature 
sacrificed, one year of aging caused by the spell is 
negated first from the caster of the spell and then 
from the aging penalty to be applied to its recipient 


when the spell's activation conditions are met. 
Finally, for each such creature further sacrificed, 
the week of recuperation is eliminated for first the 
spell's caster and then the spell's recipient. 

The spell's material components are seven drops 
each of the caster's blood, the recipient's blood, 
unholy water, and dew. 

Notes: Granted by the god Velsharoon the Lich 
Lord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Venom Bite 
Aka spider bite. 


Venom Immunity — Drow 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects one creature (which may be 
the caster). It renders the recipient immune to the 
effects of all toxins for the duration of the spell. A 
poison foiled by this spell is permanently neutral- 
ized; it does not take effect when the spell ends. 
Later attacks with the same poison, however, has 
normal effects. Unlike the more powerful neutral- 
ize poison, this spell has no effect on poisons 
already present in a creature. It will foil a poison 
that first takes effect in the same round that the 
creature receives a venom immunity spell. 

Notes: Known to some drow priests. 


Venom of Varae 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 30 ft. 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell empowers the spellcaster to expectorate 
a glob of snake venom. For purposes of determin- 
ing the success of this attack, the priest’s THACO 
is equivalent to a warrior of the same level. The 
venom can be held in the priest's mouth indefi- 
nitely, but the spell is wasted and the venom lost 


» 678 `~ 


Venomous Blade — Drow 


Ee а 


(without any harmful effect on the spellcaster) if 
the priest swallows, attempts to talk, or otherwise 
opens his or her mouth. Note that contact with the 
venom does not harm the caster if the venom is 
used as part of this spell. 

Any creature struck by this powerful contact 
poison (Type M) must immediately make a saving 
throw vs. poison with a —4 penalty. If successful, 
the creature suffers 5 points of damage. If the 
saving throw is failed, the creature suffers 20 points 
of damage. The onset time is | round. 

The material components are a small vial of any 
sort of snake venom, which is poured into the spell- 
caster’s mouth during the incantation, and the 
priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the yuan-ti god Sseth. 


Venomed Claws 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 5 
Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature per 3 levels 
Saving Throw: None 

By casting this spell, the priest gives himself 
and up to one additional creature per three levels 
of experience of the priest (round fractions up) the 
ability to strike in hand-to-hand combat with ven- 
omous claw attacks. Any hand-like appendage can 
be used by the affected creature, which has only 
one poisonous claw attack per round. Damage 
inflicted by a successful attack with venomed claws 
is 104 points per two levels of experience of the 
priest (round fractions down), to a maximum of 
6d4. In addition, the attack sequence does any 
damage it would normally cause. A successful 
saving throw vs. poison halves this damage, or 
negates it entirely if the basic nonpoisonous 
damage of the attack is 2d4 hit points or less. 

The material component is a snake fang or the 
poison sac of a venomous spider. 

Notes: Granted by luz the Evil of the GREY- 
HAWK setting. 


Venomous Blade — Drow 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 bladed weapon 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a priest can enspell a 
single bladed weapon so as to envenom the wounds 
inflicted by the three first successful attacks with 
the blade. Any creature so wounded automatically 
suffers 1 additional point of damage per round in 
subsequent rounds until the wound is bandaged or 
10 rounds (1 turn) expire. Successive wounds 
damage in the same manner as the first. The spell 
fades after three attacks or 24 hours expire, 
whichever comes first. 

Like wounds inflicted by a sword of wounding, 
injuries caused by a venomous blade cannot be 
healed by regeneration nor by potion or spell short of 
a wish. Damage usually can be healed only by natu- 
ral means—rest and time, However the underlying 


Vhaeraun, Blessing of 


ŅŘŘŘŘŮŮŮĖŮ À 


magic that prevents the wounds from healing can be 
removed by an entire elixir of life or a cure disease 
from a 9th-level caster. After either measure is 
employed, the impediment to magical healing is 
removed. 

The material component is a poisonous sludge 
of venoms and other noxious ingredients that are 
smeared on the blade during the casting. 

Notes: Granted by the drow god Selvetarm. 


Vhaeraun, Blessing of 
See blessing of Vhaeraun. 


Vicissitude 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Chaos 
Level: 2 
Range: Special 


Components: S, М 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to bend fate, but not 
without risk. When faced with any situation involv- 
ing chance the priest need only make the mystic 
passes of this spell to receive a +10% bonus to the 
die roll, (cf., stone of good luck). However, each 
time this spell is used there is a noncumulative 5% 
chance that it will backfire and produce the worst 
possible result for the caster. 

When applied to saving throws, this spell grants 
the caster a +2 bonus to the die roll (a roll of “1” 
always fails), but if a natural “20” is rolled, disas- 
ter strikes and the priest suffers maximum damage 
from the attack. 

The priest must be alive to use this spell and 
must have Ralishaz’s three bone holy symbol 
openly displayed. 

Notes: Granted by Ralishaz of the GREYHAWK 
Setting. 


View Animal Mind — Shaman 


(Divination) " 
Sphere: Animal p 
Level: 7 Å ; 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 1 Animal 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a shaman to probe the 
memory of a single animal, which the caster is in 
physical contact with. For the duration of the spell 
both the shaman and the animal are in a trance, nei- 
ther aware of their surroundings nor able to react 
to events in their vicinity. The spell only works on 
normal animals with Intelligence no greater than 
animal level. 

While looking into the creature's mind, the 
shaman can search for specific information known 
to the animal or view events seen by it from its own 
perspective. When watching an event which the 
animal has seen, all details are perfectly clear, 
allowing the caster to see (and memorize) facial 
features, conversations, and so on, even though the 
animal could not itself understand such details. 

The caster cannot look at the animal's entire 
memory in one casting of the spell, but can seek 
only one type of information concerning one time 
period or individual. 

The following are examples of how this spell 
can be used: 

The shaman can review the animal's memories cov- 
ering a period up to one full day (periods longer 
than one day cannot be viewed with a single cast- 
ing); or 

The animal's memory can be searched for any 
encounters with an individual or object known to 
the caster; or 

The shaman can discover the largest predator in the 
area; or, 

The shaman can skim through the creature's mind, 
getting a general impression of the events it has 
experienced—usually unimportant details of habi- 
tat, feeding patterns, and so on, but sometimes 
revealing important facts like a period of captivity, 
a traumatic encounter with a large monster, or other 
event that the shaman might investigate with sub- 
sequent castings of the spell. 

The spell is focused through the preserved eye 
of an owl, which is not destroyed when the spell is 
cast. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Viper’s Bite 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: | rd./3 levels 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


6 


8 


0 


Vulnerability 


This spell allows the caster to attack a nearby 
creature with a vicious bite of magic fangs. The bite 
inflicts 1d4 points of damage on a successful attack 
roll. The bite is magical and can hit creatures 
immune to normal weapons. While biting, the druid 
can make other attacks normally. The bite itself is 
poisonous, causing the subject to save vs. poison 
or die. 

The material component is a pair of viper’s 
fangs. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Optionally available to 
shamans and other savage priests (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Voodoo 
(Evocation) А 
Sphere: Charm ? 


Level: 1 

Range: Infinite 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 day 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Although this is a Ist-level spell, a barbarian 
cleric must be at least 3rd level to cast it. It is used 
to enspell a creature from afar and, although usually 
baneful, can be used to help the recipient. A saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid the voodoo effects is 
allowed to an unwilling recipient. If the secondary 
spell used with voodoo can normally be saved 
against, another save can be attempted. To cast the 
spell, an effigy worth at least 500 gp must be con- 
structed of the subject. 

Since the effigy must be realistic, the sculptor 
must be quite familiar with the subject. The effigy 
must then be pierced with ornate pins in a lengthy 
ritual. Copper pins (3 gp each) can cause harm and 
silver pins (1 pp each) are used to help the recipi- 


ent. An oil worth 10 gp per level of the caster must 
then be applied to the doll and the cleric. The avail- 
able effects of the spell vary with the level of the 
caster (these are identical to the spell resembled, 
unless otherwise specified, see table). 

The caster is aware of the results. If “coma” is 
indicated, the subject must make a successful 
saving throw vs. death magic or fall into a coma, 
taking one 1 point of damage per day thereafter. 
Unless dispel magic, exorcise, remove curse, dispel 
evil, limited wish, or wish is used successfully, the 
subject will eventually die without regaining con- 
sciousness, 

Notes: Restricted to barbarian clerics, very rare. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Voodoo Effects 


Caster Pins 
Level Needed Effect 
3+ 3  Curse/bless, scare 
4+ 6 Cause/cure light wounds, por- 
tent* 
7+ 9 Cause/cure disease, 
Cause/cure paralysis, 
Cause/cure blindness, 
bestow/remove curse, charm 
person 
9+ 12 Cause/cure serious wounds 
11+ 13 Quest, cause/cure critical 
wounds 
13+ 20 Coma 
Vortex, Akadi’s 


See Akadi's vortex. 


Vulnerability 


Reversed form, immunity to weapons. 


Vulnerability 


Reversed form, protection. 


Wailing Whips 


Wailing Whips 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 30-ft.-diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: '2 


This spell fills a spherical area of air with 
ghostly whips of force that fly about, circling and 
writhing so violently that they cause a moaning and 
wailing sound. The spell cannot form in the midst 
of a solid object, but will form the remaining por- 
tion of its sphere if solid objects intervene. So long 
as there is even a tiny air-passage link between 
areas on either side of a wall or other nonmagical 
barrier, parts of the sphere form on both sides of the 
barrier. This property makes the spell popular for 
attacking guards inside an adjacent guardroom, 
eavesdroppers using a peephole in a “next-door” 
passage, and so on. 

Creatures in contact with the sphere are slashed 
for 4d6 points of damage per round, but are allowed 
a saving throw vs. spell each round for half 
damage. Once formed, the area of effect is station- 
ary, and the spell cannot be ended prematurely by 
the will of the caster or by the caster’s death or 
departure (dispel magic or a similar spell is neces- 
sary). The caster of the wailing whips can be 
harmed by it. 

Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Loviatar of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Wailing Wind 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Weather 


Level: 1 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Cube, 10 ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a priest creates a magical 
warning system. When any creature larger than a 
common honeybee enters a guarded area (a passage, 
chamber, cavern, doorway, or cave mouth of up to the 
area of effect), a wailing, whistling blast of wind 
blows from the guarded area toward the casting 


X wc 


£s 
WwW 


AY/ 


priest. The priest designates the area to be 
protected verbally, and must be standing 
within 5 yards per level of the area to be 
protected when the spell is cast. 

The wailing wind travels toward the caster as 
long as he or she is on the same plane as the 
guarded area, but fades out beyond 100 yards per 
level of the caster. The wailing wind has a distinc- 
tive tone that can be heard by all creatures capable 
of hearing. It transmits and magnifies any sounds 
(speech, movement, etc.) made by the triggering 
being at the time it is activated, and thus it may give 
any listener a clue as to what sort of intruder 
approaches. 

The spell cannot be modified to be activated 
only by specific beings or types of creatures. Once 
the guarded area is entered and the wailing wind 
rises, the spell is exhausted unless the caster was 
of sufficient level to allow another activation of the 
spell for another intruder. The wind itself lasts for 
1 round per level of the casting priest once trig- 
gered, although the caster can end it sooner. 

A wailing wind can be activated more than once, 
depending on the level of its caster. As the level of 
the caster increases, the number of blasts of wail- 
ing wind occurring for different intruders at differ- 
ent times is also increased. A 1st- or 2nd-level caster 
creates only a single-blast wailing wind; a 3rd- or 
4th-level caster creates a wind of two blasts; a 5th- 
or 6th-level caster creates a wind of three blasts, and 
so on with no known maximum. 

Notes: Granted by Eldath, the Green Goddess 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Walk Among Beasts — Shaman 


(Enchantment/Charm) " 
Sphere: Animal fp 
Level: 3 А | 
Капре: 0 


Components: V, S, М 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes the shaman to be ignored by 
nearly all animals encountered. The only beasts not 
affected by this spell are those that are magical or 
intelligent, or the shaman's own pets. 

The material component is the pelt of any 
indigenous animal, which must be openly worn by 
the caster, whether as a cloak, girdle, shawl, hood, 
or other item of clothing (not destroyed by the cast- 
ing). 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


жй 682 М. 


Wall of Fire 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 5 

Range: 80 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The wall of fire spell brings forth an immobile, 
blazing curtain of magical fire of shimmering 
color—yellow-green or amber (different from the 
4th-level wizard version). The spell creates an 
opaque sheet of flame up to one 20-foot square per 
level of the spellcaster, or a ring with a radius of 
up to 10 feet, plus an additional 5 feet for every two 
levels of experience of the wizard, and 20 feet high. 

The wall of fire must be cast so that it is verti- 
cal with respect to the caster. One side of the wall, 
selected by the caster, sends forth waves of heat, 
inflicting 2d4 points of damage upon creatures 
within 10 feet and 1d4 points of damage upon those 
within 20 feet. In addition, the wall inflicts 4d4 
points of damage, plus 1 point of damage per level 
of the spellcaster, to any creature passing through 
it. Creatures especially subject to fire may take 
additional damage, and undead always take twice 
normal damage. Note that attempting to directly 
catch moving creatures with a newly created wall of 
fire is difficult; a successful saving throw enables 
the creature to avoid the wall, while its rate and 
direction of movement determine which side of the 
created wall it is on. The wall of fire lasts as long 
as the priest concentrates on maintaining it, or one 
round per level of experience of the priest in the 
event he does not wish to concentrate upon it. 

The material component is a pinch of phospho- 
rus. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Wall of Iron — Dwarf 
Reputed to be granted by some dwarven deities as 
a 7th-level spell; otherwise identical to the 5th- 
level wizard spell. 


Wall of Moonlight 


Wall of Moonlight 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Protection, Sun 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Vertical plane, 6-in.-thick vertical 
plane with a surface area of 5 sq. ft 

Saving Throw: None 


This magic creates a shimmering tapestry of 
swirling, pearl-white force. A wall of moonlight is 
intangible, need not be anchored to anything, and 
can readily be passed through. It can be made 
smaller than the caster's limits if surroundings con- 
fine it or the caster wishes to leave an opening 
beside it, but it cannot be dismissed prematurely. 
The false moonlight of the wall is bright enough to 
read by and to clearly illuminate its surroundings 
within 20 feet in all directions. Beings employing 
infravision cannot see clearly through it, though 
they may, if the situation allows, be able to shield 
their eyes and see past it. 

А wall of moonlight has the following effects on 
creatures and items coming into contact with it or 
passing through it: Undead creatures take 4d12 
points of damage. Creatures of evil alignment plus 
any beings who are carrying a holy symbol conse- 
crated to the goddesses Shar or Umberlee suffer 
2410 points of damage. Magical items glow with a 
sudden red faerie fire for 1d4--1 rounds; this cannot 
be banished before its duration ends, even if the 
wielder can normally control the radiance of the 
item. Magical potions must make a successful item 
saving throw vs. magical fire or explode, inflicting 
3d4 points of damage upon beings within 10 feet or 
1d4+8 points of damage on any being carrying 
them if they are carried in a glass, crystal, or 
ceramic flask. (If they are carried in some other 
manner and fail their saving throw, the DM must 
adjudicate the appropriate proportionate effects.) 
Finally, magical darkness of any sort is banished 
and cannot be evoked or continue to exist within 40 
feet of any part of a wall of moonlight. 

If a creature passes through the wall more than 
once, or pauses in its midst for more than one 
round, the being suffers this damage for each con- 
tact with the wall or round of continuous contact 
with it. 

Notes: Granted by the goddess Seliine of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


a 683 М 


Wall of Shadow 


SS of 


Wall of Shadow 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 5 

Range: 80 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A wall of shadow spell creates an immobile cur- 
tain of twilight up to one 20-foot square per level of 
the spellcaster, or a ring with a radius of up to 10 
feet, plus 5 additional feet for every two levels of 
experience of the priest, and 20 feet high. 

А wall of shadow must be cast so that it is ver- 
tical with respect to the spellcaster. A wall of 
shadow is as solid as a wall of force to anyone or 
anything that is connected to or has ever existed 
for any length of time on the Demiplane of Shadow 
or the Negative Energy Plane. (This includes recip- 
ients of a summon shadow spirit spell.) Anyone else 
who passes through a wall of shadow must make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell or suffer the 
effects of an enervation spell with a duration of 2d4 
hours. This spell is often used to create shadowy 
edifices that seem insubstantial to outsiders but 
which are as solid as granite to Eshowdow's clergy 
and followers. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and an area of shadow. 

Notes: Granted by the Chultan god Eshowdow 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Wall of Stone 
Reputed to be granted by some dwarven deities as 
a 6th-level spell; otherwise identical to the 5th-level 
wizard spell. 


Wall of Tentacles 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: Wall-shaped area (freestanding, if 
desired), 6 in. thick, and with a surface area on 
one side up to 10 sq. feet/level 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the caster to create a special 
sort of quasiliving elemental barrier. On the safe 
side (the inner side), it appears as a shadowed sec- 
tion of wall. On the outside, it initially appears as 
rough, purple-brown stone. The caster and priests 
of the same faith can freely move through the wall 
as though it did not exist. If any other creature 
(except when in physical contact with a living, 
mobile priest of Ghaunadaur) touches this plain 
wall, four tentacles emerge to grasp the being and 
begin a loud hissing and champing noise to alert the 
clergy to the presence of an intruder. 

The wall can extrude twenty 16-foot-long ten- 
tacles, and two beaks. These shift about its surface 
but can make only four attacks per round against 
any single opponent. Only the tentacles attack ini- 
tially; the beaks are saved for a second stage of con- 
tinued attack or resistance (see below); only the 
tentacles attack initially. Each tentacle strike inflicts 
physical damage, and the creature struck must 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell or be held 
(as if by a hold person spell). Affected beings get a 
saving throw to break free of the hold effect (only 
one save, regardless of how many tentacle strikes 
are suffered). While held, subjects are attacked by 
other tentacles at a +2 bonus to hit, and dragged 4 
feet closer to the wall per round. Severing a tenta- 
cle automatically breaks its hold and causes it to 
vanish. A tentacle is severed if it takes more than 12 
points of damage in a single round. 

Once at the wall, the beaks can attack. The 
poison of the beaks is debilitative; it takes effect in 
2d4 rounds and reduces all ability scores by half for 
its duration. All appropriate adjustments to attack 
rolls, damage, Armor Class and so on resulting 
from the poison apply. Further, the individual's 
movement is reduced by half and cannot heal by 
normal or magical means until the poison is neu- 
tralized or 3d4 days have passed. 

The material components are any sort of snake, 
living or dead, and the beak from an octopus or an 
avian. 

Notes: Granted by the drow deity Ghaunadaur. 
This spell should not be confused with the ward- 
ing spell tentacle wall. 


CO 11; #AT 22 (4 tentacles per target); Dmg 


Mo of Tentacles: AC —2; HD 10; hp 200; 
1d20 ( X 20 tentacles) and 1410 (х 2 beaks); SA 


ic (strips it of 50 hit points), disintegrate 
s 100 hit points), or symbol of persua- 
(allows all beings of the same alignment as 


Wall of Thorns 


N 


The wall of thorns spell creates a barrier of very 
tough, pliable, tangled brush bearing needle-sharp 
thorns as long as a person’s finger. Any creature 
breaking through (or crashing into) the wall of 
thorns suffers 8 points of damage, plus an additional 
amount of damage equal to the creature’s AC. Neg- 
ative ACs subtract from the base 8 points of 
damage, but no adjustment is made for Dexterity. 
Any creature within the area of effect of the spell 
when it is cast crashes into the wall of thorns, and 
must break through to move. The damage is based 
on each 10-foot thickness of the barrier. 

If the wall of thorns is chopped at, it takes at 


the caster—and others whom they escort, while 
touching—to pass through the wall unharmed); 
SZ H-G (140 sq. ft. minimum); ML Fearless 
(20); Int non- (0); AL N. 

Beak Poison: Onset time 2d4 rounds; half 
ability scores and movement, no normal or mag- 
ical healing; effects last 3d4 days. 

If the wall is attacked by any spell or spell- 
like effect or is reduced to 99 or fewer hit points, 
it creates darkness, 15’ radius from its outside 
surface, and bites any creatures it can reach. 


Wall of Thorns least 4 turns to cut a path through a 10-foot thick- 
(Conjuration/Summoning) ness. Normal fire cannot harm the barrier, but mag- 
Sphere: Plant ical fires burn away the barrier in 2 turns, creating 

a wall of fire effect while doing so (see the wall of 
Level: 6 fire spell). In this case, the cool side of the wall is 
Range: 80 yds. that closest to the caster of the thorn wall. 
Components: V, S The nearest edge of the wall of thorns appears 
Casting Time: 9 up to 80 yards distant from the caster, as desired. 
Duration: 1 turn/level The spell lasts for one turn for each level of expe- 
Area of Effect: One 10-ft. cube/level rience of the caster, covers one 10-foot cube per 
Saving Throw: None level of the caster in whatever shape the caster 


desires. Thus a 14th-level caster could create a wall 
of thorns up to 70 feet long by 20 feet high (or 
deep) by 10 feet deep (or high), a 10-foot high by 


Wandering Glyphs 


)-——————————— M" ai 


10-foot-wide by 140-foot-long wall to block a dun- 
geon passage, or any other sort of shape that suited 
his needs. The caster can also create a wall of 5-foot 
thickness, which inflicts half damage but can be 
doubled in one of the other dimensions. Those with 
the ability to pass through overgrown areas are not 
hindered by this barrier. The caster can dismiss the 
barrier on command. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Wandering Glyphs 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Ward 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 hrs. maximum 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is cast to include two to six different 
surfaces located within a 1-mile-radius sphere, all 
of which must be touched and outlined with burn- 
ing incense by the caster during the casting of the 
spell as in the 3rd-level priest glyph of warding 
spell. Wandering glyphs creates two glyphs of the 
same type as those created by a glyph of warding 
spell; the glyphs have all of the properties of normal 
glyphs of warding save that the caster cannot trig- 
ger and is immune to all effects of his or her own 
glyphs of warding. In addition, wandering glyphs 
are not stationary. They can move by themselves to 
one of the up to six different surfaces touched 
during casting, though they can never both be in the 
same place. (If less than six spots are touched, less 
than six are utilized.) 

The time required to cast the spell is equal to the 
time required to trace the areas desired to be pro- 
tected by the glyphs. This time is equal to 1 round 
for every 5 square feet of area to be protected. A 
caster can protect at each of up to six locations an 
area equal to a square the sides of which are equal 
to his or her level in feet. The casting cannot exceed 
8 hours. 

Wandering glyphs stay at specified surfaces 
until triggered to go to others or move about from 
designated surface to surface at random. Nonran- 
dom appearance sequences and conditions are set at 
the time of the spell's casting and cannot later be 
changed. Triggered glyphs deal their usual damage 
to intruders activating them and are spent in so 
doing. A wandering glyph spell is not ended by the 
discharge of only one of its glyphs, and the glyphs 
can be commanded to keep apart during casting, 


686 


so that only one ever appears in a given location. 
The expenditure of all glyphs in a wandering glyph 
spell ends the spell. 

The six surfaces (often doors) set during spell- 
casting become “sensors” for the spell. The glyphs 
of warding can be called to a locale when one of 
the surfaces designated by the spell detects either 
the approach of a creature of a certain alignment; 
the discharge of magic in an adjacent area that is not 
from the caster; or the approach of any creature that 
does not bear a certain token, wear a certain uniform 
or badge, or speak a certain password. 

The material components are enough incense 
to trace the areas to be protected, a drop of holy (or 
unholy) water for each location, and a black opal 
worth at least 250 gp. If any location to be protected 
exceeds 50 square feet, the locations must also be 
sprinkled with at least 2,000 (total) gp worth of 
powdered diamond. 

Notes; Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting, recorded by Volo. 


Warband Quest 
Quest spell, see appendix. 


Ward, Major 
Ward, Minor 


See major ward and minor ward. 


Ward Matrix 
Quest spell, see appendix. 


Ward of Light 
(Abjuration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: Sphere 10 to 90 ft. in diameter 
Saving Throw: Из 


This spell creates a protective sphere (or on 
solid ground, a hemisphere) of shielding force 
centered on the caster. It is stationary after it is 
cast and will survive the death or departure of its 
caster. 

А ward of light can be any size from 10 feet 
across to 90 feet in diameter, as the caster decrees 
during casting. 

The material components are six ivory tokens 
inscribed with the disc of Lathander and set down 
at the center of the area defended by the caster. 


These emit опе ray each per round, “firing” unerr- 
ingly at any creatures entering the guarded area 
who do not wear or carry a holy symbol of Lath- 
ander. Those already within the shielded area when 
it forms are not targeted by the spell unless they 
leave the area and try to return. 

If more than six target creatures enter or are in 
the sheltered area during a single round, the first 
six creatures to enter (or the six that have been 
within the hemisphere the longest) are struck by the 
rays of the ward. If fewer than six valid target crea- 
tures are in violation of the ward during a round, 
they suffer attacks from multiple rays (divide evenly, 
and then allot extra rays randomly). 

Ward of light rays each cause 4d8 points of 
damage per round, double that to undead (although 
the undead are allowed a saving throw just as other 
creatures are). The ivory tokens vanish in smoke 
when the spell expires, whether they have fired any 
rays or not. 

Notes: Granted by the god of dawn Lathander 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Warning 


д ——————————— IY il 


palat 2 [зщ 
N | =. | 


NN. d ma ) We | 


Warmth 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V. M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 4 hrs. + 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell maintains a creature's body heat 
against cold for 4 hours, plus 1 additional hour per 
level of the caster. Also, any cold-based damage is 
restored at the rate of one hit point per turn. When 
exposed to magical cold or special cold-based attack, 
the protected creature receives a +2 bonus to saving 
throws, and cold-based damage is reduced by 1 point 
per die. This spell is not cumulative with any other 
magical protections against cold. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Warning 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: 2 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius around creature 
touched 

Saving Throw: None 

This spell heightens the sense of the recipient 
and his or her awareness of danger. The subject 
receives a favorable adjustment of 1 on surprise 
checks (3-іп-10 becomes 2-in-10, and so on) from 
events originating within the area of effect. (For 
example, the subject can be surprised by a missile 
fired from outside the area of effect.) 

Likewise, the individual cannot be easily struck 
from behind, since the subject becomes aware of any 
creature moving behind him or her within 10 feet. 
Further, the subject has a 30% chance to notice any 
trap or hidden danger (including invisible oppo- 
nents) within the area of effect. Also, the chance of 
a foe successfully Hiding in Shadows or Moving 
Silently in the area of effect is halved. 

The various warnings given by this spell are 
only noticeable to the recipient ofthe spell. It is that 
individual's decision to notify other members of an 
allied group should a warning be received. 


4 687 М. 


Warning Shout — Halfling 


The material component is a small metal figure 
sprinkled with the dust of a crushed pearl. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental set- 
ting; otherwise, very rare. 


Warning Shout — Halfling 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1/2[FRA]-mi. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


A priest who casts a warning shout can project 
a single word loud enough to be heard outdoors 
approximately a half-mile away. The sound is mag- 
ically amplified so that it is the same volume close 
to the spellcaster as it is at the edge of the spell’s 
radius. Only one word can be projected using this 
spell (such as “Intruders!” or *Help!"). 

As a side effect, the spell wakens sleeping crea- 
tures in the area that can be naturally awakened by 
noise and are not extremely deep sleepers. These 
sleeping creatures may not know what woke them, 
at the discretion of the DM. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling god Arvoreen 
the Defender. 


Warp and Weave 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables its caster to precisely iden- 
tify the magic employed to create an effect 
observed by the caster during the previous round, 
during the round of casting, or during the round fol- 
lowing casting. The caster of warp and weave 
learns the spell name, type (wizard or priest), 
school or sphere, and necessary material compo- 
nents of any such magic. 

Only one magical effect can be examined, but a 
warp and weave spell fails to impart any knowledge 
if the effect is nonmagical or if the caster mistak- 
enly believes that remnants are from a very recent 


magic when they are, in fact, from one cast earlier. 

The warp and weave also suggests (by visions 
of mental images) one method by which the 
observed spell effects can be countered or undone 
(if possible). Such visions may be cryptic, but never 
deliberately mislead. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Mystra of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Warp Sense 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 60 ft. path 
Saving Throw: Special 


The warp sense, a spell finds and analyzes the 
gates and portals of the planes. It allows the being 
touched to sense any gate or portal, active or not, 
along a 60-foot path, dead ahead. Scanning in a 
single direction (out of four in a complete circle) 
takes one full round, so the recipient can shift direc- 
tions while scanning. However, the empowered crea- 
ture cannot move in any other way without 
disrupting the spell; full concentration is required. 

Once a portal is detected, the creature can try 
to deduce where the other end discharges and the 
key required to use the portal, if any. Each piece of 
information requires a separate saving throw and if 
either is failed, a; nothing further can be learned 
about that portal. The player can state which ques- 
tion will be asked first. If the creature has actually 
seen the portal in operation, a +2 bonus is applied 
to the check. 

Notes: Rare for planar priests. Unlikely to be 
learned except through visiting the Outer Planes. 


Warp Stone or Metal 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 4 

Range: 1 level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A 688 ~ 


Watchfire 


VO a 


Stone or metal objects up to 5 pounds weight 
per level of the druid can be warped and made use- 
less by this spell. Any number of objects can be 
warped as long as their total weight does not exceed 
5 pounds per level of the druid; these items must 
also fail a saving throw (use the “crushing blow” 
column with a +2 bonus for the item). Magical 
items have an additional +2 bonus (weapons and 
similar items add their combat bonus as well). Arti- 
facts are not affected Creatures in warping metal- 
lic armor take damage equal to the Armor Class 
value subtracted from 10; thus, AC 2 inflicts 8 
points of damage if warped. Warped armor is use- 
less. Locks can be warped open or permanently 
closed with this spell; this is also true of doors with 
metal hinges or bands. 

The material component is a small piece of iron 
ore that can be crumbled by hand. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Warp Wood 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 

When this spell is cast, the priest causes à 
volume of wood to bend and warp, permanently 
destroying its straightness, form, and strength. The 
range of a warp wood spell is 10 yards for each 
level of experience of the caster. It affects approxi- 
mately a 15-inch shaft of wood of up to one-inch 
diameter per level of the caster. Thus, at 1st level, 
a caster might be able to warp an hand axe handle 
or four crossbow bolts; at 5th level, the caster could 
warp the shaft of a typical spear. Note that boards 
or planks can also be affected, causing a door to be 
sprung or a boat or ship to leak. Warped missile 
weapons are useless; warped melee weapons suffer 
a —4 penalty to their attack rolls. 

Enchanted wood is affected only if the spell- 
caster is of higher level than the caster of the prior 
enchantment. The spellcaster has a 20% cumula- 
tive chance of success per level of difference 
(20% if one level higher, 40% if two levels 
higher, etc.). Thus, a door magically held or 
wizard locked by a 5th level wizard is 4096 likely 
to be affected by a warp wood spell cast by a 
7th-level priest. Wooden magical items are 


considered enchanted at 12th level (or better). 
Extremely powerful items, such as artifacts, are 
unaffected by this spell. 

The reversed spell, straighten wood, straightens 
bent or crooked wood, or reverses the effects of a 
warp wood spell, subject to the same restrictions. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Watchfire 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Fire | 
Level: 6 
Range: 2 mi./level 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 3 rds. 
Duration: 1 hr. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell allows a caster to know how 
many fires burn within the area of effect and the 
approximate location of each. He can choose any 
one of these fires and peer out of it as if he were 
actually within the flames. Anyone watching the 
fire sees a dark face peering out at them, but can 


Watchful Eyes 


b———————————————— d 


dispel the visage only by extinguishing the flame or 
casting other protections from scrying. 

The caster can communicate through the 
flames, but cannot cast spells or use special abilities 
without other magic that enables this. 

The reverse of this spell, seal fire, protects all 
fires in range from being used in this way. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
Range: Special 


setting. 
Components: V, S, M 


Casting Time: 1 rd./object (minimum 1 hr.) 
Duration: 12 hrs./level 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


Watchful Eyes 
(Enchantment, Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 6 


The spellcaster must choose easily portable 
objects to enchant, and must make them identical 
(within reasonable limits). The objects together 
undergo an elaborate “curing” process that some- 
what resembles the metapsionic method of empow- 
ering an item. This takes the spellcaster at least one 
hour per day for one month. If the spellcaster skips 
a day the process must start again from scratch. 

Each spell enchants up to 100 identical items. 
The spellcaster must touch each item during cast- 
ing. A spellcaster who has more than 100 items can 
cast watchful eyes consecutively, so long as the 
curing process continues daily. 

Any number of spellcasters can attend. When 
the caster finishes with the final item, the spell acti- 
vates for all items at once. The items appear 
unchanged but now detect as magical for the dura- 
tion of the spell. 

Thereafter, those who attended all the castings 
can select and tune in on any enchanted item up to 
100 miles away, as described above. This takes 1d6 
rounds. (Note: the clairsentient effect works nor- 
mally, independent of circumstances: for instance, 
it works even if the item is concealed. The DM may 
assign negative modifiers for extreme range, pres- 
ence of interfering magic, etc.) 

The watchful eye carriers become aware of this 
magical sensing only if they would ordinarily detect 
magic used in their presence. Detect scrying iden- 
tifies the item, but nothing can trace the clairsen- 
tience back to its source. 

This spell requires one other material component: 
a conventional magical scrying device, such as a 
crystal ball, which is not expended in the process. 


Alliance leaders find the watchful eyes enchant- 
ment expensive and time-consuming, but effective. 
They guard its secret closely, and most other spell- 
casters have never heard of it. Some monarchs 
know of the spell, but not the procedure. They 
would pay a fortune for it. 

Notes: Known to priests of the Alliance of the 
DARK SUN setting. 


Watching Shadow 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a mobile shadow that sends its 
caster visual information (similar to, but by no 
means exactly like, a wizard eye spell). The locale 
being watched need not be known to the caster of 
the spell. The shadow need not be man-shaped, but 
it is always of approximately the same cubic 
volume as the caster. It can squeeze through any 
hole that one of the caster's hands, up to the wrist, 
could pass through, and the caster can change its 
shape at will. (Quite specific forms can be taken, so 
that the shadow can point like a hand, etc.) The 
shadow glides along the ground or floor at MV 15, 
falling gently to earth if it moves over a sudden 
drop off. It cannot fly or rise except by moving up 
a stair, or climbing a wall, rock face, or incline that 
the caster could traverse. 

The caster can move the shadow wherever 
desired, seeing in any direction from it by silent 
effort of will. The shadow is visible, and will no 
doubt attract attention if it moves, stops, moves 
again, and appears to follow beings—especially 
when no shadow should be present—but there is no 
visible eye or other indication that the caster is 
watching through the shadow. The caster's mind 
cannot be contacted by beings employing magic or 
psionics on the shadow. The caster can see out of 
the shadow as far and as well as if his or her own 
eyes were present where the shadow is and the 
gloom of the shadow was not. 

The presence of lead or gorgon's blood in walls 
(or their mortar) serves as a barrier against the 
viewing linkage of shadow to caster, but the caster 
retains control of the spell effect. If the shadow can 
be moved “blind” to a spot where there is no effec- 
tive intervening barrier, the visual link is restored. 


2 690 М. 


Water of Eldath 


N 


Watching shadow functions only on its caster’s cur- 
rent plane of existence. 

Unlike a listening shadow, a watching shadow 
spell ends instantly if its caster undertakes any 
other spellcasting. 

Notes: Granted by the Mask, god of thieves of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Water Breathing 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of a water breathing spell is able 
to breathe under water freely for the duration of the 
spell—that is, one hour for each experience level of 
the caster. The priest can divide the base duration 
between multiple creatures. Thus an 8th-level priest 
can confer this ability on two creatures for 4 hours, 
four for 2 hours, eight for 1 hour, and so on, to a 
minimum of /2 hour per creature. 

The reverse, air breathing, enables waterbreath- 
ing creatures to survive comfortably in the atmos- 
phere for an equal duration. Note that neither 
version prevents the recipient creature from breath- 
ing in its natural element. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Water Form 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 
Level: 7 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell transforms the recipient into a crea- 
ture made of elemental water, enabling him to flow 
as a liquid. The recipient no longer needs to eat or 
breathe. The water form is cohesive, and the recip- 
ient can shape himself as desired—even retaining his 
original shape. When submerged in a lake or other 
watery environment, the watery form becomes 
invisible. 


The recipient suffers only half damage from all 
piercing and slashing attacks. Furthermore, the 
creature is immune to poison and gas attacks while 
in this form. Full sunlight, however, inflicts 1 point 
of damage each round from evaporation. 

Most magic affects the recipient, although some 
spells have greater effects than others. АП fire-based 
spells inflict —1 point per die of damage (minimum 1 
point per die) while electrical attacks inflict +1 point 
per die of damage. If targeted by a spell that affects 
water, the recipient must attempt a saving throw vs. 
spell. Spells that transmute water into another sub- 
stance end the effect prematurely; the recipient 
reverts back to his own form, subject to the restric- 
tions below. The caster can end the effects of the 
spell whenever he desires. It otherwise lasts for 1 
turn, plus 1 additional round per level of the caster. 

Notes: Uncommon for Sea priests and those 
with major access to the sphere of Water. 


Water of Eldath 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water, Healing 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Three potion flasks 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell fills three potion flasks with water of 
Eldath. An entire flask of water of Eldath poured 
onto and object or creature kills mold and musk 
creeper spores (including monstrous sorts) and rot 
grubs; purifies water of dangerous pollutants, dis- 
eases, and oils, including all things that give the 
water an unpleasant taste and odor; and acts as a 
neutralize poison (as the 4th-level priest spell). If 
an entire flask is imbibed, it instantly confers the 
following effects on the drinker as needed: It cures 
disease (as the 3rd-level priest spell); cures mummy 
rot; cures lycanthropy; removes curses (as the 3rd- 
level priest spell); and closes all wounds, including 
wounds made by enchanted weapons such as a 
sword of wounding that cannot normally be made to 
close, effectively binding the wounds and prevent- 
ing further damage due to blood loss. The water of 
Eldath is treated as any other potion with respect 
to spells such as dispel magic. 

The material component is three drops of water 
blessed by Eldath, blessed by one of her personal 
servants (her servitor creatures) in her name, or 
consecrated to her by an Exalted of Eldath. One 
drop is placed into each flask. 


A 691 ~ 


Water Serpent 


Ü)c——————————————————— di 


Notes: Granted by Eldath, the Green Goddess 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Water Serpent 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: A body of water at least three times 
the caster's body volume 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a pre-existing body of water 
of at least thrice the caster's body volume and 
within spell range to animate in accordance with 
the caster's wishes. A serpentine mass of water 
that obeys the caster's wishes, biting at foes as 
directed. Although the “serpent” is not a sentient 
force, the magic compels it to follow moving tar- 
gets and continue to obey a set task until its caster 
changes the commands governing it, so that it 
appears to fight or act independently of the 
caster's supervision. 

А water serpent can rise up (to a maximum of 
18 feet above the water surface) and strike at targets 
of the caster's choosing with a “bite” of crushing 
water that deals 3d8 points of damage, and strikes 
twice per round. The serpent is AC 1, MV swim 18, 
has 55 hit points (dealing it more damage than that 
total causes it to collapse, ending the spell), and a 
THACO of 11. It cannot coil around, constrict, or 
tail-slap foes, being an actual *growth" of the water 
rather than a whole-bodied creature, but it can 
batter at wharves, boats, walls, and other solid 
objects within its reach, forcing "crushing blow" 
saving throws against all such items if the items 
are free to move (for example, if they are floating), 
at a —1 penalty if they are solid and immobile, and 
at a 2 penalty if they are composed of separate ele- 
ments, such as the bricks or stones of a mortared 
wall or the tree-trunks of a wharf piling. It can 
deliver two such blows per round, or a blow and an 
attack (at a target creature). Attacks on creatures 
do not force crushing blow saving throws on worn 
or carried items. 

Unlike the similar Umberlant spell water 
wyvern, a water serpent cannot be used as a steed. 
Nevertheless, it can be used (but only by its caster) 
in a single thrust that picks up the caster and pro- 
pels him or her forward to a maximum of 60 feet 
and upward to a maximum of 20 feet. This drive 
can be precisely aimed, but is not stable enough to 


692 


Water Walk 


Ņ—Ů ш 


permit spellcasting en route and provides no pro- 
tection for the caster at the end of the movement. 
(When the serpent recoils and collapses, it ends tbe 
spell and leaves the caster moving forward with the 
same momentum as the thrust, and, perhaps, noth- 
ing beneath him or her.) 

Such a thrust is made at MV 18, and can proj- 
ect beyond the body of water out of which the ser- 
pent was created. It is typically used to deposit the 
caster on a balcony, atop a wall, or on some other 
height clear of the water. 

If the creator of a water serpent wills the spell to 
end, or the serpent passes beyond spell range, it 
instantly melts away, slumping back into the sur- 
rounding waters as the magic dissipates. The caster 
can freely cast other spells after creating a water 
serpent, but cannot change its directives in any 
round in which he or she is spellcasting. A water 
serpent must always be directed to attack a specific 
target, not multiple ones. If one is told to strike at 
“anything that enters through that doorway,” it 
attacks the first creature to do so and ignore all 
others, even after its quarry is dead. If told to attack 
“all creatures entering through that doorway,” it 
attacks only the first one to do so. 

The material components are two fangs from 
any sort of aquatic creature equipped with sharp 
teeth (not cartilage or bony ridges, but true teeth). 

Notes: Granted by the evil sea goddess Umber- 
lee of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Water Sprint — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, $ 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This simple spell triples the spellcaster’s normal 
swimming movement rate for one round. After 
casting this spell, the priest must utilize this boost 
of speed within one hour per level of the spell- 
caster. When the spell duration expires or after the 
burst of speed is utilized, the spell effect ends 
immediately. 

Priests of Sebek commonly employ this spell 
when preparing for a hunt. They then lurk in croc- 
odile form beneath the water waiting for likely prey 
and, when a likely victim is found, burst out with 
surprising speed and attack. 


Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Sebek, 
Lord of Crocodiles, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 


setting. 
Water Trap 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water wie 
Level: 4 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft diameter 
Saving Throw: Special 


With a water trap spell, the caster turns a 
normal body of water, no more than 20 feet in 
diameter, into a deathtrap The spell magnifies the 
natural surface tension of the water, giving it the 
strength to pull size M and smaller creatures to a 
murky death. Whenever a creature of affected size 
attempts to drink from a pool, oasis, or watering 
hole altered by this spell, it must make an immedi- 
ate saving throw vs. death magic. Failure indicates 
that the creature is instantly pulled under the sur- 
face and trapped. 

Creatures pulled under by this spell will find 
that the surface of the water now has a tough, rub- 
bery consistency (at least from below) that makes 
escape very difficult. A trapped creature can 
escape by attempting a second save at a —6 
penalty. 

Friendly creatures outside the pool add +1 to the 
creature’s save every round, and are in no danger of 
being sucked under themselves once the trap has 
been sprung. Beings of size L and larger can free one 
trapped creature per round. This spell is most often 
used to trap desert oases and private wells. 

The material component is a small wooden or 
stone figure of a man trapped in a hardened bit of 
amber or other translucent stone. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Water Walk 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 
Level: 3 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


2 693 ~ 


Water Window 


p жиыннан шаитан НЕ — ——— E 


By means of this spell, the caster is able to 
empower one or more creatures to tread upon any 
liquid as if it were firm ground; this includes mud, 
quicksand, oil, running water, and snow. The recipi- 
ent’s feet do not touch the surface of the liquid, but 
oval depressions of the appropriate foot size and two 
inches deep are left in the mud or snow. The recipi- 
ent’s rate of movement remains normal. If cast 
underwater, the recipient is borne toward the surface. 

For every experience level above the minimum 
required to cast the spell (5th level), the caster can 
affect another creature. 

The material components for this spell are a 
piece of cork and the priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Water Window 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination, Elemental Water 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 ft. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | hr. 

Area of Effect: 5 X 5 ft. sq. 
Saving Throw: None 

This spell allows the caster to gain information 
from a quantity of water. Once the spell is cast, the 
water begins to show the images of objects and 
creatures that have been reflected in its surface 
over the past 24 hours. The caster can make spe- 
cific requests such as "show me the last man who 
passed by here, “ and the water will show the 
appropriate reflection. Should the request be 
impossible to fulfill, the water becomes opaque 
gray until another request is made or the spell 
expires. 

Should the caster use the spell on flowing 
water, such as a river, the caster must keep up with 
the water in order to view the reflection. Other- 
wise, the flowing water shows images of what 
happened upstream (where the actual water was 
when the objects were reflected in it). If there was 
no light to produce a reflection, the water shows 
only darkness under the effect of this spell. 

The spell requires a suitable body of water. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from POLYHE- 
DRON Newszine.) 


Water Witch 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Elemental Water wie 
Level: 2 
Range: Special 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: Until water is found 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The priest must first find two wooden or metal 
rods no more than 2 feet long and / inch thick. One 
is held in each hand, level with the body, as the 
priest begins to walk. When water is detected, the 
rods are attracted to each other; they form an “X” 
over the spot. The sticks are only magical for the 
duration of the spell, and the caster is guaranteed 
to find any quantity of water of at least 2d6 gal- 
lons no more than | foot below ground level. The 
water will be muddy, so each thirsty creature has 
to drink twice the amount normally needed. Dis- 
turbing the caster breaks the spell; the caster can 
abandon it at any time, as well. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Waters of Life 


Na 


Water Wyvern 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 3 

Range: 40 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: A body of water at least twice the 
caster’s body volume 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a pre-existing body of water 
of at least twice the caster’s body volume to ani- 
mate in accordance with the caster’s wishes. A 
wyvernlike mass of water is created, though it 
must be emphasized the term is based on shape 
resemblance. The spell only shapes unintelligent 
water and sets it to a task—it does not create a sen- 
tient or aware monster. 

A water wyvern can rise up (to a maximum of 
12 feet above the water surface) and strike at tar- 
gets of the caster’s choosing with a “bite” of 
crushing water that inflicts 2d8 points of 
damage, and strikes once per round. It is AC 3, 
MV swim 12, has 33 hit points (dealing it more 
damage than that total causes it to collapse, 
ending the spell), and has a ТНАСО of 13. The 
size of the “wyvern” created may vary, but its 
useful properties do not. 

The caster of a water wyvern can choose to ride 
upon it or direct it to carry others. As a steed, the 
water wyvern achieves a wet solidity, surging along 
under the creatures it bears like a galloping horse. 
It forms a stable platform for the casting of swift, 
simple spells (those requiring no material compo- 
nents other than a holy symbol or surrounding 
water and with a casting time of 5 or less). If the 
“wyvern” carries only one rider (a single creature, 
plus worn or carried gear, of less than 300 pounds 
total weight), it can use its bite attack as directed by 
the caster. If it carries two or more creatures or 
more than 300 pounds weight, it can be only a 
mobile platform and has no attacks. A water 
wyvern can carry a maximum of two creatures, or 
three if one is its caster. 

No one but its caster can stop or steer a 
“wyvern.” It will only bite as directed by the 
caster—but as long as the caster is within range, the 
caster need not be riding it or in direct contact with 
it to command it. 

If the creator of a water wyvern undertakes any 
other spellcasting or wills the “wyvern” to cease 
to exist, it instantly melts away, slumping back into 
the surrounding waters as the magic dissipates. 


The material components are a tooth from any 
sort of animal, and three scales from any aquatic 
creature. 

Notes: Granted by the evil sea goddess 
Umberlee of the ForGoTTEN REALMS setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare 
tomes. 


Waterfloat 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 
Level: 1 


Range: 10 yds/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell prevents objects or creatures in the 
area of effect from sinking into water or other liq- 
uids. 

The caster can affect a weight of 200 pounds, 
plus 100 additional pounds per level, divided 
between as many creatures or objects as he or she 
chooses to include in the spell. Affected objects and 
creatures bob to the surface and remain afloat for 
the duration of the spell, regardless of subsequent 
drifting. 

Anything affected by this spell resists being 
pulled under with a buoyant force equal to its 
normal weight. If the spell is cast on an unwilling 
creature—for example, a merman trying to escape 
by diving—then a successful saving throw vs. spell 
negates the effect, though the creature counts 


toward the spell limit. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for Sea Priests; otherwise, 
rare. 

Waters of Life 

(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water Кед 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, М 
Casting Time: 9 rds. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell is representative of the life- 
giving nature of water, and the sacrifices that the 


2 695 ~ 


Waterspout 


р ————————— di 


priests of that sphere are willing to make for those 
they believe worthy. 

The priest spends makes an elixir from local 
herbs. Once made, the priest gives half the potion 
to the patient, and takes the rest himself. 

The former patient is now healed of all damage, 
poisons, or diseases, but the effects, wounds, and 
other symptoms are transferred to the priest. 

Soon the healer falls into a near comatose state 
for a period of two hours while his body fights off 
infections and repairs the damage. 

At the end of this period, the priest should make 
a System Shock roll. If he passes the test, he awak- 
ens from the coma and all is well. If he fails, he suf- 
fers the effects of whatever was wrong with the 
former patient. This cannot result in the priest's 
death. Conditions that would cause his death are 
halted, and the priest goes into a trance for another 
24 hours. When he awakes, he will have only 1 hit 
point, but no other ill effects, scars, or contagion. 

If friendly spellcasting heals the damage, the 
priest quickly recovers from his coma, losing 1d4 
hit points representing fatigue. 

Magical afflictions, diseases, or curses cannot 
be cured by the waters of life. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Waterspout 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes water to rise up into a 
whirling, cylindrical column. A large body of water 
must be present (in other words, a pond, lake, or the 
sea) or the spell is wasted; the magic cannot create 
water. А waterspout created by means of this spell 
is 10 feet across, rises 80 feet above the water, and 
requires a depth of water of at least 20 feet beneath 
it. If sufficient space is not available for the spout to 
form, the spell is wasted. If it later encounters 
insufficient depth after it has formed, it collapses, 
inflicting 4d6 points of falling damage on all beings 
within it as the only damage it deals in that round 
and ending the spell. 

А waterspout is a destructive vortex of water that 
flails and sucks in creatures and objects it contacts and 
waterborne items within 10 feet of itself (below and 


on all sides), whirling them up to its top before fling- 
ing them free. The caster can direct the waterspout to 
travel horizontally 10 feet per round. It will claw along 
the sides of large immobile objects such as castle 
walls or islands that it is sent against and smash 
through flimsy barriers. When the spell expires, it 
sinks slowly down, doing no harm to creatures and 
items it is carrying that round. 

Items struck by a waterspout must make item 
saving throws vs. crushing blow once per round or 
be shattered and destroyed. Structures and larger 
items may well suffer structural damage as deter- 
mined by the DM. 

Creatures struck by a waterspout are sucked into 
it the first round. They are then helplessly whirled 
about for 6d8 points of damage per round for two 
rounds; they must also make a successful saving 
throw vs. death magic each round or drown unless 
able to breathe in water by natural or magical means 
or hold their breath (a successful Strength and Con- 
stitution ability check each round or a successful 
Swimming proficiency check each round. Finally, 
they are flung free at the end of the next round, 
taking only 3d8 points of damage during this round. 
(They need not make saving throws vs. death magic 
this round.) Being flung free typically hurls a crea- 
ture 100 feet or more horizontally (in the midst of a 
mist of water) and inflicts 6d4 points of falling 
damage on creatures if they land in water or a 
swamp or as much as 12d4 points of damage if they 
are hurled into trees, buildings, rocks, or other solid 
objects. Items still miraculously attached to a flung 
creature's body must make a successful saving 
throw vs. crushing blow when their wearer lands or 
be destroyed; magical items receive a +2 bonus to 
this saving throw. Only on the round of being flung 
free is a creature able to use magical means, such 
as an item or quick spell, to escape the effects of 
the waterspout. 

The material component is a drop of water 
blessed by Umberlee or by a senior Umberlant in 
the name of the goddess. 

Notes: Granted by the evil sea goddess Umber- 
lee of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Waterwall 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 
Level: 4 
Range: 30 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


2 696 = 


Watery Fist 


ee ees uM d 


This spell causes a wall of blue-green water 10 
square feet in size for every level of the spellcaster 
to bubble forth from the targeted area, rising 
through cracks in the floor, falling from the sky, or 
simply springing forth from the empty air. The 
waterwall is 20 feet high. 

Creatures smaller than the height of the wall 
find themselves paralyzed if they attempt to move 
through the wall. They are unable continue through 
the wall or retreat back out of the wall. Creatures 
larger than the height of the wall have their move- 
ment rates reduced to one-quarter of normal. Crea- 
tures who attempt to move through the wall receive 
no saving throws against the waterwall s paralyzing 
or slowing effects. 

If waterwall is cast to initially incorporate a spe- 
cific creature, the creature is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell with a +4 bonus. Success means the 
creature leaped from the area of effect before the 
wall fully came into being. 

Physical missiles cannot pass through the wall, 
though they can hit trapped creatures. The same is 
true for spells that have to travel through the 
waterwall to reach specific targets (including fire- 
ball, burning hands, meteor swarm, magic missile, 
Melf's acid arrow, and other spells that rely on 


line-of-sight), though area-of-effect spells that do 
not rely on traveling through intervening space to 
their target function normally through the water- 
wall. Cone of cold, Otiluke's freezing sphere, or 
similar spells instantly turn a waterwall into a wall 
of ice and inflict maximum normal damage for the 
initial spell (the cone of cold, etc.) on the creatures 
trapped within the waterwall/wall of ice. These 
creatures also lose any saving throw the damaging 
spell would normally allow. (For instance, cone of 
cold usually allows a saving throw for half damage. 
A creature trapped in the waterwall would receive 
no saving throw against the damage of the cone of 
cold). Trapped creatures are helpless against melee 
attacks as well. A ring of free action negates the 
affects of a waterwall for its wearer. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a vial of water. 

Notes: Granted by Istishia the Water Lord of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Watery Fist 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell conjures a coherent pseudopod of 
water from any suitable body of water at least 5 feet 
across and 2 feet deep (for streams) or 10 feet in 
diameter and 2 feet deep (for ponds or pools). The 
pseudopod can stretch up to 10 feet plus 1 foot per 
caster level from its source, so a 3rd-level priest 
could command watery fist to strike at a creature 
hovering 13 feet above a lake or standing on the 
shore 13 feet from the water. The pseudopod obeys 
the priest’s mental commands, although the priest 
must concentrate each round in order to maintain 
control of the watery member. 

The pseudopod is incapable of fine manipula- 
tion, but it can be used to make bludgeoning or con- 
stricting attacks. When used to strike at opponents, 
it attacks with the caster's THACO and inflicts 
damage as shown below. The priest can add his 
magical attack adjustment (from his Wisdom score) 
to his THACO, but Strength-based adjustments or 
special weapon skills don't help the priest to control 
watery fist The pseudopod may be able to make 
rear or flank attacks if the priest can direct it into 
the proper position. 


6 


9 


7 


Watery Travel 


b———————————"————m" i 


If used to encircle and constrict, the pseudopod 
must first make an attack roll as described above, 
inflicting damage based on the priest's level. How- 
ever, in following rounds, the pseudopod automat- 
ically inflicts constricting damage on the grappled 
creature, increasing damage by +1 point per round. 
In other words, in the first round the creature sus- 
tains listed damage, in the second round it sustains 
listed damage +1, in the third it sustains listed 
damage +2, and so on. The pseudopod holds the 
creature with an effective Strength equal to the 
priest’s Wisdom score. 


Caster Striking Constricting 
Level Damage Damage 
1-4 1d6 1d3 
5-8 1410 146 
9-12 1412 148 
13+ 248 1410 


Watery fist can be released by the priest апу 
time he cares to stop concentrating on maintaining 
it. The pseudopod immediately resumes its normal 
state, possibly drenching a grappled creature or 
extinguishing a small fire if the caster wishes. The 
pseudopod is AC 6 and has 15 hit points, plus 1 
additional hit point per caster level. It can be dam- 
aged only by magical weapons, fire, or cold; all 
other attacks simply pass through the water. Trans- 
mute water to dust, part water, lower water, and 
Otiluke 5 freezing sphere all destroy watery fist on 
contact. 

The material component is a vial full of 
blessed water or a sprig of mistletoe that is thrown 
onto the body of water from which the fist will 
be summoned. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics and druids 
(PO:SM). 


Watery Travel 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn +1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is similar to the Sth-level priest spell 
pass plant. The creature must immerse itself in a 
body of water (a lake, river, stream, or a full bath- 
tub); the priest then casts the spell. The subject and up 
to 100 pounds of his or her clothing and equipment 


are then transformed into water. The subject remains 
aware of his surroundings and is able to move under 
his own power (though he must remain in water) for 
the duration of the spell. An unwilling creature is 
allowed a saving throw to resist the effect. 

The watery individual moves at a rate of one 
mile per round regardless of the movement, speed, 
or conditions of the body of water; the creature 
would move across a still pond or upstream during 
a thunderstorm at the same rate. 

The subject can use ground water to pass 
through seemingly dry areas. A creature that seeps 
into the ground or passes from a river or pond into 
the ground water moves one-half mile per round. 

Regardless of the depth of the ground water, the 
watery creature retains a general sense of direc- 
tion. He or she is unable to see anything, but can 
hear reasonably well while in water form. 

When the spell expires, the creature immediately 
transforms into its normal form. If within a few feet 
of dry land, the magic thrusts it safely onto land, 
clothing and gear dry. A creature farther offshore 
must swim or be rescued by friends. A creature trav- 
eling in groundwater dies instantly. Practitioners of 
watery travel have been known to disappear forever. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Wave 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 
Level: 2 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 

When a priest casts this spell, a wave originates 
from him and moves in the direction he faces, in a 
60? arc. The wave is 1 foot high per level of the 
caster, and it travels for 60 feet plus 30 feet per level 
of the caster on the open sea, reaching inland for 10 
feet per level of the caster. Ships caught in the wave 
spell's area of effect must make a seaworthiness 
check to avoid capsizing, though at a +30% bonus 
at Ist level; this bonus decreases by 5% per level 
thereafter, so that normal seaworthiness checks are 
made for a wave cast by a 7th-level sea-priest. The 
—5% penalty is applied for every level after 7th level 
as well, so a seaworthiness check is made at a 2096 
penalty against an llth-level sea-priest's wave, 
which is 11 feet high and travel for 390 feet on the 
sea. The wave causes | point of damage per level of 
the caster to any land-based being struck by it if the 


2 698 М. 


Wealthword 


Ņem 


wave rolls overland, but it causes no damage to 
swimmers on the open sea. 

Wave spells are unaffected by sea or weather con- 
ditions. Thus, a wave can be made to run at a right 
angle to or completely counter to the direction of any 
other waves. Wave spells affect the surface of the 
water only and have no more affect on underwater 
creatures than naturally occurring waves. 

Notes: Uncommon for Sea priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Wave of Telekinesis — Gnome 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. wide path, 10 ft./level long 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the priest can hurl one 
or more objects directly away at high speed, to a dis- 
tance of up to 10 feet per level of experience. Any 
creature or object of 10 pounds per caster level or 
less in the area of effect is affected. Creatures within 
the weight capacity of the spell are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid being hurled. Damage 
caused by hurled objects is decided by the DM, but 
cannot exceed 1 point of damage per caster level. 
Those able to employ as simple a counter-measure 
as an enlarge spell, for example (thus making the 
body weight go over the maximum spell limit), can 
easily counter the spell. The various Bigby 5 hand 
spells also counter this spell. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Gaerdal 
Ironhand. 


Wealthtwist 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing, Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms gems, trade bars, and/or 
coinage of a value of 250 gp per spell level into 
one of the following spells, chosen by the caster 
and enacted instantly on him or through his touch 


on another being: cure light wounds, cure blindness 
or deafness, cure disease, cure serious wounds, 
neutralize poison, cure critical wounds, heal, 
regenerate, and dimension door. If insufficient 
funds exist for a chosen spell, the caster is instantly 
made aware of this, and if enough additional funds 
cannot be touched within the two rounds of the 
spell’s casting, the caster will have to settle for a 
lesser spell effect or waste the magic altogether. 

This spell is often used by Waukeenar as a spe- 
cial boon to Waukeen-worshiping merchants who 
are willing to make substantial donations to the 
church in return for some extra protection. 

The material component is the wealth needed 
to cast the level of spell desired. 

Notes: Granted by the lesser power Waukeen 
Merchant’s Friend of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Wealthword 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing, Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This variant of the wealthtwist spell transforms 
gems, trade bars, and/or coinage of a value of 500 
gp per spell level into one of the following spells: 
cure light wounds, cure blindness or deafness, cure 
disease, cure serious wounds, neutralize poison, 
cure critical wounds, heal, regenerate, and dimen- 
sion door. If insufficient funds exist for a chosen 
spell, the caster is instantly made aware of this, and 
if enough additional funds cannot be touched 
within the two rounds of the spell’s casting, the 
caster will have to settle for a lesser spell effect or 
waste the magic altogether. 

The priest casts wealthword into the mouth of 
another being by touch, whispering a word of acti- 
vation as he or she does so. If the tongue touched 
ever speaks that word, the spell effect instantly 
occurs, even if this befalls years later. For exam- 
ple, a nonspellcasting merchant protected by a 
wealthword—with the necessary loss of cash— 
loses an arm in a brigand attack years later, gasps 
out the secret word—and regains his arm. 

The spell recipient need not have any famil- 
iarity with magic, but must be able to utter the 
word of activation to enact the waiting spell effect. 
There is no known way to remove this waiting 


2 699 М 


Weapon Bless 


protection from a being; dispel magic has no 
effect on it at all. 

This spell is sometimes used by Waukeenar as 
a special boon to Waukeen-worshiping merchants 
who are willing to make substantial donations to 
the church in return for some extra protection. 

The material component is the wealth needed 
to cast the level of spell desired. 

Notes: Granted by the lesser power Waukeen 
Merchant’s Friend of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Weapon Bless 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 weapon 
Saving Throw: None 


With the weapon bless spell, the shukenja is 
able to prepare one weapon for combat against a 
particular foe. Upon casting the spell, he carefully 
writes on the weapon the identity of the foe and 
several sutras to give the weapon power. Although 
the exact name of the creature need not be known, 
the identity must be specific, identifying only a 
single individual or creature. Stating the weapon is 
to be used against “a kappa” is not sufficient. How- 
ever, stating the weapon is to be used against “the 
kappa who lives in Ch’i Sheng’s millpond” is a pre- 
cise enough identification. Thereafter, that weapon 
is +5 on the first attack and damage roll against that 
particular foe. The weapon is considered a magical 
one for the purposes of striking creatures that can 
be hit only by magical weapons. The effects of the 
weapon bless are not additive with those of already 
magical weapons, i.e. if cast upon a +2 weapon, 
the effect is still +5, not +7. Furthermore, if the 
weapon is used to strike another creature while the 
spell is in effect, the blade is wiped clean and the 
spell is lost. 

The material component is a writing brush and 
ink made from dragon’s blood. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Weapon Immunity — Old Empire 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the priestess to become 
immune to one particular type of weapon. This may 
include weapons such as long swords, bastard 
swords, maces, or heavy crossbow bolts; it must be 
a specific type of weapon. 

A priestess struck by that weapon sustains no 
damage. This protects the priestess even from mag- 
ical weapons. Monster attacks, such as claws and 
fangs, cannot be included in the effect of this spell, 
nor can magical attacks, such as fireball spells. 
Only one weapon immunity spell can be active at a 
time on the caster. 

The material component is a piece of amethyst, 
jade, or lapis lazuli. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi goddess Isis 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Weapon of the Earth — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Available to all dwarven priesthoods, this spell 
allows the caster to transform a normal chunk of 
stone into a weapon. The weapon is always the same 
as the weapon associated with priest's deity (for 
example, hammers with Moradin, battle axes with 
Clanggedin, and so on). However the affected stone 
must be of a volume relative to the weapon type it 
will assume; the spell fails if the amount of available 
stone is less than the volume of the desired weapon. 

Despite being made of stone, the weapon 
inflicts normal damage for its type. Its stone com- 
position makes it immune to metal-affecting magic 
and conditions like rust or corrosion, heat metal 
and crystalbrittle spells, and so on. On the other 
hand, the weapon is susceptible to stone-affecting 


2 700 М 


Weather Dome 


spells such as stone to flesh, transmute rock to mud 
and the like. In any case, the weapon is considered 
magical for purposes of determining what creatures 
it can hit, but it provides no additional attack or 
damage bonuses. 

When the spell expires the weapon returns to 
its normal form. Dispel magic and similar effects 
can make the weapon revert to a normal stone early 
if cast successfully. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a small chunk of iron ore. 

Notes: Granted by various dwarven deities. 


Weapon Shift — Halfling 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 weapon 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to transform a par- 
ticular weapon into an entirely different weapon. 
However, the spell has several important limita- 


tions, as follows: 

First, the final product must be a weapon that 
the caster can use without penalty, with regard to 
both class restrictions and proficiency status. 

Second, the weapon to be changed must be of 
similar size, and composed of the same material, as 
the weapon it will become. For example, a wooden 
club cannot be turned into a steel short sword, though 
a steel short sword could be transformed into a steel 
club. Likewise a quarterstaff could be transformed 
into a short bow, as they are of similar size. 

Third, weapons that carry a magical dweomer, 
even if it is only temporary (for example, Nystul 5 
magic aura, light, etc.) cannot be affected by this 
spell. Casting it on a magical weapon simply wastes 
the spell. 

Fourth, the transformed weapon receives no 
bonuses to attack or damage rolls, nor is it able to 
strike creatures that can be hit only by magical 
weapons. The altered weapon radiates magic if 
detected, however. 

Finally, the caster must keep the weapon in hand 
for the duration of the spell or else it immediately 
reverts to its true form. Thus, the caster cannot pass 
the weapon to another being, nor cast spells that 
require somatic components or perform actions that 
require two hands. 

Weapon shift can be negated if subjected to a 
successful dispel magic or more powerful effect. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling god Arvoreen 
the Defender. 


Weather Dome 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: 7 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 1 turn/level. 

Area of Effect: 30-ft.-radius dome 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell brings into being an invisible barrier 
against the elements over one person or object 
upon which it is cast. The dome moves with that 
person or object. Inside the dome, the temperature 
is comfortable and the ground is dry. The dome 
repels most effects of nature, such as rain, snow, 
hail, sleet, frost) high winds, desert heat, and 
extreme cold. These effects must be natural and 
not magical (for example, a cone of cold still 
affects those inside). This spell does not keep out 


m. 701 ~ 


Weather Prediction 


“АҢ 


natural catastrophes such as rock slides or sea 
waves, but does protect against tornadoes, hurri- 
canes, and typhoons. 

The material components are a tent-shaped leaf 
and a 1,000-gp or greater. value diamond, which are 
destroyed in the casting of the spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Weather Prediction 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Weather 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the priest can predict the 
weather conditions at his location for a period of time 
equal to one day per level. The caster becomes aware 
of the prevailing conditions, trends, and weather sys- 
tems that may affect his present location. Tempera- 
ture, wind speed and direction, cloud cover, and 
precipitation can all be predicted with 95% accuracy 
for the next day, less 10% for each day after that. In 
other words, the priest's prediction is 95% accurate 
for the first day, 85% accurate for the second, 75% 
accurate for the third, and so on. In addition, magical 
or supernatural phenomena cannot be predicted. 

Priests of powers concerned with weather can 
use this spell to determine the best time for certain 
ceremonies or observances. Other priests find 
weather prediction useful for planning journeys or 
selecting campsites. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids (PO:SM). This 
spell should not be confused with the predict weather 
spell, which is of shorter duration and less power. 


Weather Stasis 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards, Weather 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Cube, 10-ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


Weather stasis maintains the weather conditions 
prevalent in the area of effect when the spell is cast. 


The spell affects a cube whose sides equal the 
caster's level times 10 feet (a 10th-level caster 
could affect a 100-foot X 100-foot X 100-foot 
cube). 

Ап area protected by weather stasis is unaf- 
fected by temperature variations in the surround- 
ing environment. The spell also acts as a shield 
against rain, snow, and hail, which cannot enter the 
protected area. If conditions of precipitation existed 
in the area of effect when the spell was cast, the 
identical weather will continue for the duration of 
the spell. 

For example, weather stasis is cast in an area 
where the temperature is 75°F. and no precipita- 
tion is falling. Half an hour later, the temperature 
drops to 60 degrees and rain begins to fall. The pro- 
tected area remains dry and the temperature stays at 
75 degrees. If the spell had been cast while rain was 
falling in the area of effect, rain would continue to 
fall for the duration of the spell, even after it 
stopped raining in the surrounding area. 

All physical objects other than rain, snow, and 
hail can pass into the protected area. All creatures 
and characters can move freely into and out of the 
area. The spell does not prevent water-based spells 
or water-based creatures (such as water elementals) 
from operating in the area. 

The spell protects against both natural and mag- 
ically generated weather. Night and day pass nor- 
mally in the protected area, although temperature 
variations associated with night and day do not 
occur. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a drop of rain. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with major 
access to the sphere of Wards or Weather (ToM). 


Weather Summoning 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Weather 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By this spell, the caster calls forth weather 
appropriate to the climate and season of the area 
he is in. Thus, in spring a tornado, thunderstorm, 
cold, sleet storm, or hot weather can be summoned. 
In summer a torrential rain, heat wave, hail storm, 
etc., can be called for. In autumn, hot or cold 
weather, fog, sleet, etc., can be summoned. Winter 


A 702 = 


enables great cold, blizzard, or thaw conditions to 
be summoned. Hurricane-force winds can be sum- 
moned near coastal regions in the late winter or 
early spring. The summoned weather is not under 
the control of the caster. It might last but a single 
turn, in the case of a tornado, or for hours or even 
days in other cases. The area of effect likewise 
varies from about one square mile to 100 square 
miles, Note that several casters can act in concert to 
greatly affect weather, controlling winds, and work- 
ing jointly to summon very extreme weather 
conditions. 

Within four turns after the spell is cast, the trend 
of the weather to come is apparent—for example, 
clearing skies, gusts of warm or hot air, a chill 
breeze, overcast skies, etc. Summoned weather 
arrives 1d12+5 turns after the spell is cast. Note 
that the new weather condition cannot be changed 
by the caster once it has been summoned. Once the 
weather is fully summoned, it cannot be dispelled. 
If the summoning is successfully dispelled before it 
has been completed, the weather slowly reverts to 
its original condition. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Weathertell 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Weather, Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 rds. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster, who must be able 
to see the sky and listen to the winds, to predict the 
general weather conditions for the upcoming 1 hour 
per level of the caster. These are the natural weather 
conditions at the caster's current location (and 
probably the nearby area) assuming that no magical 
manipulation occurs. Thus, this spell could predict 
a natural rain shower that is coming in three hours, 
but could not predict a magically created storm 
tomorrow morning. The caster discovers the gen- 
eral wind speed and prevailing direction of the 
wind that will be extant for the indicated time 
period. Specific timing of gusts and wind shifts is 
not available, however. Similarly, the caster discov- 
ers whether it will be precipitating, what type of 
precipitation it will be, and approximately how hard 
any precipitation will fall. Exceptional weather pat- 
terns (such as tornadoes) are revealed to the caster, 
but he or she cannot predict their path with any 


703 


Weavesong 


b) ————————————————— Mud 


accuracy. Finally, the spell also reveals if magic is 
currently acting on the weather at the instant the 
spell is cast, but not in what way it is being affected. 
The material component is a miniature weather- 
vane carved of wood or made from metal. 
Notes: Granted by Valkur, Captain of the 
Waves, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Weavesong* 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The potent spell allows the priest to call directly 
on the Weave to fashion nonliving matter out of 
magic or to reshape existing matter. Given enough 
time and energy, nearly any object can be created or 
shaped. Once the shaping is completed, the magical 
energy fades in a short time, leaving the finished 
matter permanently in the desired form; at this 
point it is unaffected by dispel magic, Mor- 
denkainen 5 disjunction and similar effects. 

While there is no hard and fast limit on the 
amount of matter that can be created or shaped by a 
weavesong, several practical limits exist. First, the 
casting time of weavesong is one turn per pound of 
organic material, one hour per pound of earth or 
stone, and one day per pound of metal or gemstone 
created or shaped by means of this spell. Second, for 
every day (round up) spent creating or shaping matter 
by means of this spell, the priest's Constitution tem- 
porarily drops by one point. If the Constitution of the 
priest ever drops to zero, the strain of the weavesong 
crafting is too much and the priest's spirit passes on. 
Constitution points return at a rate of one point per 
two days once the weavesong is ended. Finally, upon 
completion of the weavesong, the cast must make 
three successful ability checks. First, the caster must 
make a successful Constitution check (against initial 
score at the time of casting) reflecting the tremendous 
strain required to hold the weavesong together until 
the item coalesces. Second, the caster must make a 
successful Wisdom check, reflecting the tremendous 
willpower necessary to harness the energies of the 
Weave. Third, the priest must make a successful 
Artistic Ability nonweapon proficiency check in the 
medium worked. A priest who lacks this nonweapon 
proficiency altogether must check against one-third 
of his or her Wisdom score (round down). A priest 


Weavesong 


EEE 1 


who has the Artistic Ability proficiency, but has not 
specialized in working in a medium employing the 
created or shaped material must check against two- 
thirds of the Wisdom score (round down). If subabil- 
ities from PLAYER’S OPTION: Skills & Powers are 
used, the required checks are made against Fitness, 
Willpower, and Intuition, respectively. 

If the weavesong succeeds, any matter so cre- 
ated or shaped is permanent, indistinguishable from 
other matter. If the weavesong fails for any reason 
(whether it be because the caster was forced to end 
the spell prematurely, because the Constitution of 
the priest dropped to zero, or because one or more 
ability checks were failed), the created matter 
appears briefly, but does not coalesce. It immedi- 
ately dissipates into magical energy once again; 
likewise, shaped matter briefly assumes the new 
shape before reverting to its prior form. A failed 
casting has a 10% chance of a magical backlash. 
The backlash erupts as a spherical burst of pure 
magical energy centered on the priest with a radius 
of 10 feet for each 100 pounds of material (round 
up) that the priest attempted to create or shape. Any 
creature caught in the area of effect suffers 10d10 
points of damage. There is no saving throw against 
such a backlash, and the only protections against 
this damage are magic resistance or being in a dead 


magic zone or an antimagic field. Only the first 
protects the caster; obviously a weavesong cannot 
be cast in a dead magic zone or an antimagic field. 

Weavesong can be cast as a cooperative magic 
spell, greatly increasing the amount of matter that 
can be created or shaped and the likelihood of suc- 
cess. If cast by two or more priests, the amount of 
matter that can be created or shaped in any period 
of time is multiplied by the number of participants. 
The Constitution score regulating the maximum 
length of the casting time is the sum of the Consti- 
tution ability scores of the participants. Temporar- 
ily lost points of Constitution are apportioned 
equally among the participants according to the 
percentage of Constitution points they contributed 
to the total pool. Ability checks are made against 
the best score of any of the participants. Finally, 
the chance of a magical backlash is reduced by 1% 
(to a minimum of 5%) for each additional partici- 
pant beyond the first. 

The material components are the caster’s holy 
symbol and a small amount of the material to be 
created. 

The latter “seeds” the Weave so that the ambient 
magical energies coalesce into the desired material. 
Shaped matter naturally serves as its own material 
component. If matter from a single Elemental, 


Wheel of Bones 


eS ee eee ee 


Para-Elemental or Quasi-Elemental plane is used as 
the material component, it is possible to create or 
shape matter with the purity of that found on the 
various Inner Planes. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. 


Weighty Chest 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: 5-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to enchant a chest, 
book, package, or any other nonliving object no 
larger than a 5-foot X 5-foot X 5-foot cube. When 
the enchanted object is touched by anyone other 
than the caster, the apparent weight of the object 
increases, becoming 2—5 (144+1) times the weight 
of the person or persons touching it. This condi- 
tion makes the object extremely difficult to move 
for anyone but the caster. The caster can move the 
object normally throughout the duration of the 
spell. 

The weight increase is activated only when 
some other creature tries to lift or move the chest. 
For example, the caster cannot hurl the chest at an 
opponent, hoping the foe will be bowled over or 
unbalanced by the weight. However, a foe might 
be tricked into trying to lift or move the chest. 

The material component is a small lead ball. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with access to the 
sphere of Wards (ToM). 


Wheat into Blade 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 plant 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the stalk of any living, cul- 
tivated plant, taller than the caster's knee into a 
weightless, nonmetallic, nonreflective 7-foot-long 
magical spear +2 usable by the caster without any 


nonproficiency penalty. (If wielded by others, they 
must be proficient in the use of a spear to avoid 
penalties.) If thrown, this weapon strikes once and 
vanishes, dealing 8 points of damage to any crea- 
ture it strikes. If set to receive a charge, it inflicts 
triple maximum damage (24 points) at one suc- 
cessful attack and then vanishes. The caster can 
never be harmed by his own plant-spear, even if 
repeatedly attacked by someone else wielding it. 

This magic does not work on plants that are 
magically controlled by another entity. In such 
cases, it identifies the condition and acts as an 
unbreakable hold plant spell of 1 turn duration. 

Multiple wheat into blade spells can create a 
long, durable, unbreakable plant-pole. If a stalk is 
touched to one end of a plant-spear while a second 
wheat into blade spell is cast, it will fuse onto the 
first. 

Notes: Granted by Chauntea, the Great Mother, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Wheel of Bones 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms bone fragments into a fast- 
spinning pinwheel of many bones that whirl about a 
limb of the caster chosen during casting. The caster 
cannot grasp anything with that limb or cast any other 
spell without ending the wheel of bones, which fades 
instantly into nothingness when it expires. The caster 
can will the spell to end at any time. 

A wheel of bones inflicts 1d6+4 points of damage 
when a priest hits a foe with it by making a success- 
ful attack roll with the limb it surrounds. The wheel 
of bones can also fire bone shards once per round in 
addition to any melee attack the caster can make. 
The melee attack is made with the priest’s normal 
THACO. Hurled shards always strike at THACO 7, 
regardless of the priest’s own attack prowess. They 
cause 1d4 points of damage each, and 1d3 of them 
fly at the desired target. While caster designates the 
target of a shard attack, he or she has no control over 
how many shards are hurled at it. The missile range 
of these shards is 5 (short)/10 (medium)/15 (long) 
yards, and they can be fired at point blank range at 
neither a penalty or a bonus. 


2? 705 М. 


Whip of Flame 


Мылы ллы баалы анан ————5;] 


The damage and duration of a wheel of bones 
is unaffected by the number of shards it fires, and 
the caster of the wheel is never harmed by the 
spell’s bone shards, regardless of where they fly, 
ricochet, or strike. 

The material components are at least two bones 
or bone fragments from any source. 

Notes: Granted by Eldath, the Green Goddess 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Whip of Flame 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 
Level: 2 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 7 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a blazing whip or flexible line 
of flames extending for 12 feet from one of the 
caster's hands (or, if lacking a hand, from the end 
of whatever is left of the caster's arm). The whip 
of flame is wielded using the caster's THACO, and 
it strikes once per round. Although this weightless 
lash behaves like a whip, and burns brightly 
enough to see by, the flames are actually an illu- 
sion, and cannot ignite anything. The weapon is 
an intangible line of force, not an actual cord that 
can wrap around things, be grasped, or be cut. 

A whip of flame causes damage by transmitting 
heat, searing whatever it touches for 1d8+3 points 
of damage per strike. Metal weapons and armor 
transmit full damage to their wearers, but leather 
armor or the padding typically worn under metal 
armor reduces damage by half, rounding fractions 
down, for the first strike of the whip of flame; there- 
after, such garments are hot enough to transmit full 
damage to their wearers. 

Note that creatures can pass through the lash- 
ing whip without being slowed or hampered in any 
way, but in turn they have no effect on it. Beings 
who rush through the stretched-out whip or other- 
wise deliberately come into contact with it take its 
full damage even if it has already struck another 
creature on the same round. 

The whip of flame fades away when the spell 
expires, the caster wills it to, or the caster com- 
mences any other spellcasting. 

The material components are one of the caster's 
hairs and a flaming branch, spark, or lump of charcoal. 

Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Loviatar of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


706 


Whip of Pain 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a whiplike, flexible line of 
force emanating from the fingertips of the caster's 
hand (or, if lacking a hand, from the end of what- 
ever is left of the caster's arm). This crackling, coil- 
ing line of purple sparks is wielded as a whip and 
uses its caster's THACO to attack. It strikes oppo- 
nents up to 10 feet distant. 

The whip of pain functions as a +2 magical 
weapon for purposes of which creatures it is able to 
affect. When the wielder successfully strikes a crea- 
ture, the whip makes a loud snapping sound, and the 
creature must make a saving throw vs. spell and a 
Constitution ability check. If the saving throw fails, 
the creature suffers 4d4 points of damage; if it suc- 
ceeds, the creature suffers only half damage. If the 
ability check succeeds, the creature feels only enough 
pain to suffer a —1 penalty to its next attack roll. If it 
fails, the creature is wracked by pain on the remain- 
der of the current and all of the next round. This wors- 
ens its Armor Class by 1, gives a —2 penalty to attack 
rolls, and makes it impossible for the creature to con- 
centrate enough to cast any spells. 

The whip of pain fades away when the spell 
expires, is dispelled, the caster wills it to, the caster 
falls unconscious, or the caster commences any 
other spellcasting. The wielder can trigger magical 
items like wands with his or her other hand with- 
out ending this spell. 

The material components are a drop of unholy 
water and one of the caster's hairs. 

Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Loviatar of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Whip of Woe 


4 


Whip of Shar 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft.-long, flexible beam of force 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a flickering black beam of force 
1 inch in thickness surrounded by a purple halo. It is 
wielded by the caster, whom it cannot harm. If the 
caster successfully strikes with the whip in combat, the 
struck creature suffers 2d4 points of damage. Undead 
are affected as if by a turning attempt by a priest of 
three levels higher than the whip-caster. 

Living creatures struck by a whip of Shar must 
also make a successful saving throw vs. spell or be 
unable to attack on the following round because 
they are writhing in pain and unable to control their 
actions. Writhing creatures incur no Armor Class 
penalties, but must make successful Dexterity abil- 
ity checks to avoid dropping all held and wielded 
items (one check per item). Those struck in 


successive rounds are less prone to fall victim to 
this facet of the whip 5 attacks due to a numbness 
produced from repeated exposure. Hits in succes- 
sive rounds cause the second saving throw to be at 
a +1 bonus, the third saving throw to be at a +2 
bonus, and so on. A whip of Shar has no effect on 
even the most fragile of nonliving objects and 
cannot be used to bind, constrict, or entangle. It is 
considered a magical weapon for purposes of 
which creatures it can strike. 

The materia] components are three sharp-edged 
pieces of black obsidian or glass and a long, black 
hair from any evil creature. 

Notes: Granted by the Shar, Mistress of the 
Night, evil goddess of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Whip of Woe 
(Invocation/E vocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a weightless, spectral glisten- 
ing black whip of magical force extending from one 
of the caster's hands. It does not actually have to 
be grasped and leaves the hand free to conduct 
other spellcasting or activities. To call on its lashing 
powers, however, the caster cannot wield other 
weapons or work other spells in the same round. 

A whip of woe can strike creatures up to 10 feet 
distant (successful attack roll required) and can lash 
out once per round at a single target being. If used 
to slash at creatures within 3 feet of the caster, it 
can hit up to three beings (both attacks cannot be 
performed in the same round). 

The lash of a whip of woe inflicts 2d4 points of 
damage on one creature. A struck creature must 
also make a successful saving throw vs. spell at 2 
or automatically fail all saving throws and ability 
checks required in the next round. 

The slash attack of a whip of woe always strikes 
first in a round, can attack up to three extremely 
close target creatures, and deals 144 points of 
damage. Struck creatures must save vs. spell and 
make a Strength check. If the saving throw fails, a 
target being drops any carried weapons and cannot 
launch an attack with them until the next round 
regardless of how quickly they are recovered. If the 
Strength check fails, the creature reels back from 


Whirichain 


a 2 


the whip, limbs trembling, and staggers at least 10 
feet away from the caster (unless the situation makes 
this movement impossible), but is free to act nor- 
mally during the next round. 

The materia] component is a human hair that 
has been anointed with a drop of holy water on a 
consecrated altar of Beshaba. 

Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Beshaba, 
Maid of Misfortune, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting. This spell is found only in a few exception- 
ally rare tomes. 


Whirlchain 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 90 yds. 
Components: 

Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: 2 


This spell causes a helixlike length of chain to 
materialize around a chosen target creature, whip 
around that being for 4d4+4 points of battering 
damage, and then vanish. It can affect creatures 
despite intervening magical barriers, but cannot 
penetrate magical shields or defenses that block 
4th-level spells. 

The material component is a length of any sort 
of metal chain longer than the length of the caster’s 
hand. 

Notes: Granted by Ilmater, the One Who 
Endures, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Whirlpool 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 turn/level. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By use of this spell, a priest causes a large 
whirlpool to come into being. The spell is effective 
against both surface and underwater creatures and 
objects. The spell requires the use of a specially con- 
structed ball of shark's teeth that is | foot in diameter. 
The ball is taken to the appropriate depth (10 feet 


for every level of the spellcaster) or is placed on the 
sea floor or ocean bottom if the depth is insufficient. 
The whirlpool spell is then cast, and the ball of teeth 
begins to rotate, slowly picking up speed with every 
rotation. Once the spell is cast, the ball stays in place 
and cannot be moved. The ball rotates for two turns 
before the whirlpool forms (the two turns count 
against the spell's duration). The caster has these two 
turns to get out of the area of effect, or may be caught 
in the whirlpool. 

The whirlpool has a radius of 100 feet, plus 
another 10 feet per level of the spellcaster. The 
center of the whirlpool, called the vortex, is 1 foot 
wide per level of the spellcaster at the surface, nar- 
towing to | foot wide just above the ball; the vortex 
is 10 feet deep per level of the spell-caster. If the 
ball has not been placed deep enough in the water, 
or if the water is of insufficient depth and the ball is 
placed on the ocean floor, the depth of the vortex 
is shortened accordingly. If the ball is placed too 
deep, the vortex fills with water immediately after 
forming and the whirlpool collapses on itself and 
is destroyed. When the spell’s duration expires, the 
ball of shark’s teeth disintegrates and the whirlpool 
collapses in on itself and disappears in one round. 

Anything entering the area of effect is inex- 
orably drawn into the vortex of the whirlpool in one 
turn. Movement is in a spiraling fashion at a rate 
of 12. Once in the vortex, ships and underwater 
vessels must make seaworthiness checks to avoid 
capsizing; apply a 5% penalty to such checks for 
every level of the spellcaster above 11th level. 
Those caught in the vortex suffer 1d6 points of 
damage per round from battering. 

Swimmers and ships can fight the pull of the 
whirlpool's current, but their movement rate must 
exceed 12 to escape. To determine how long a 
swimmer or ship can fight the whirlpool's current, 
deduct the swimmer's or ship's movement rate from 
the whirlpool's movement rate (12), then divide the 
whirlpool's movement rate by this number for the 
time in rounds. For example, a human with a swim- 
ming rate of 6 is caught in a whirlpool. The swim- 
mer will be drawn into the vortex in two rounds 
(12— 6 = 6, 12 + 6 = 2). A swimmer whose move- 
ment rate exceeds 12 can avoid being pulled into 
the whirlpool. 

Swimmers and ships with a maximum move- 
ment rate of 12 make no progress and only keep 
themselves the same distance from the vortex. 
Swimmers can swim at full speed against the 
whirlpool's current for four rounds, after which 
they must make a Constitution check every round. 
A swimmer who fails a Constitution check is con- 
sidered exhausted and can do nothing but keep his 
head above water until the whirlpool takes him 


A 708 a 


Whirlwave 


р, ———————————— a 


under. Ships with a maximum movement rate of 12 
hold their own against the whirlpool for five turns. 
After that time, a seaworthiness check must be 
made at —10% per turn in the whirlpool. This check 
reflects the growing exhaustion of the sailors and 
rowers as they fight the whirlpool's current. If a 
seaworthiness check is failed, it means the sailors 
and rowers have collapsed with exhaustion and can 
do nothing more. 

Notes: Uncommon for Sea priests otherwise, 
very rare. (Updated from DR4GON Magazine.) 


References: For swimmers, see the swim- 
ming rules (pages 120-121 of the PHB); for 
ships, see the information on ocean voyaging 
(page 126 of the DMG). 


Whirlpool of Doom 


(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth or Silt 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 rds. 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5 ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: Vs. spell 


709 


This terrible spell turns earth or silt into a 
swirling sea of rock and earth. Anyone standing in 
the area must make a save vs. spell. Failure indi- 
cates that they have been sucked into the center of 
the whirlpool and must begin to make Swimming 
proficiency checks at a +3 penalty. Creatures that 
make three successful checks in a row are able to 
make their way to the edge of the pool and pull 
themselves free. Failing a proficiency check means 
the individual begins to drown. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Whirlwave 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: A cylinder of up to 300 yds. in 
length with an inside diameter of 15 ft. 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell shapes existing water (no matter how 


agitated) into a tunnel like that formed by large 
"breakers" rolling into a shore. This cylinder of 


7 
YYW 
Г 
Wf 


UZ, 


E^ 777 ) i 


WHE, 


T SWF 


#2. 


SIS 


POSS Sree 


Whirlwind 


eee ee A 


water is up to 300 yards long, contains breathable 
air, and has “solid” walls that will not collapse or 
spray water on creatures inside, although they can 
freely reach through the curving water, pierce it with 
weapons, and even grasp things and pull them 
through the walls and into the tunnel. A whirlwave 
tunnel can be traversed as if one is walking on solid 
ground, and even if cast in a storm, both the water 
and the air within it are calm and immobile. 

The tunnel forms in the direction its caster is 
facing, beginning around him or at any distance 
within spell range, and either runs straight away from 
the caster or, if the caster desires, curves toward a 
desired destination he visualizes. (That is, the caster 
must have seen it previously, even if darkness or 
weather prevents seeing it at the time of casting. The 
caster cannot merely aim for a harbor or an island he 
suspects is present.) The caster can choose to 
“anchor” the tunnel, which makes it immobile despite 
external forces such as tidal waves, gales, and the 
like. He could otherwise elect to make it mobile so 
that it is swept along by the surrounding waters. The 
latter use of the tunnel usually serves to bring sailors 
ashore, or most of the way toward shore, from a ship- 
wreck or a naval battle. 

A whirlwave tunnel continues only so long as 
there is water around it. It cannot be longer than 
the body of water, though it can otherwise be as 
long as the caster desires, to its length limit of 
300 yards. The magic prevents water from flood- 
ing the tunnel through its open ends, but fails, 
causing a tunnel collapse, if struck by part water 
or similar magic of equal or greater level that 
serves to shape water. Persistent attacks on a 
tunnel by a water weird, water elemental, or other 
creature partially composed of liquid water (as 
opposed to creatures that merely live in the water, 
such as sharks or octopuses) can also cause its 
collapse if they inflict a cumulative total of 66 
points of damage in a single 10-foot spot or area. 
The use of any fire-related magic within the 
tunnel (even spells cast into the open ends, such 
as fireballs) also causes its instant collapse, 
although the two spells will cancel each other 
rather than visiting fiery damage on creatures in 
the tunnel (they still suffer damage from the col- 
lapse itself). 

A whirlwave tunnel can be created that bends 
or slopes up or down from the horizontal, and its 
“floor” is not slippery. Thus, a caster can use this 
spell to create a climbing chute (but not a slide) 
within a waterfall and curve safely through a 
plunge pool at the bottom of the fall or to thrust 
safely through a whirlpool or maelstrom. 

A whirlwave tunnel protects creatures inside it 
as follows: No normal missile can penetrate its 


walls. Weapons wielded directly from the outside 
(for instance, by aquatic creatures), spells cast from 
the outside, and objects penetrating from outside 
(such as ships or rocks that come into contact with 
a mobile whirlwave tunnel) can all pass freely 
through the walls of the tunnel, with one exception: 
The swirling waters of the walls prevent clear sight 
of creatures inside the tunnel by observers more 
than 10 feet distant, so spells requiring clear vision 
of the target are affected. 

Any number of creatures can pass along a whirl- 
wave tunnel before it expires, at their normal move- 
ment rates. Those still in the tunnel when it 
collapses, or passing bodily through the tunnel 
walls, suffer 5d4 points of battering damage (per 
passage). 

The material component is a piece of wire or 
glue-stiffened thread formed into a hollow spiral 
(like a metal spring). Also, some of the water is 
consumed by the spell. (If this spell is cast in a 
shallow wading pool, the magic works, but it 
nearly empties the pool in the process.) That this 
magic does not protect beings in the tunnel from 
acids, poisons, or other harmful effects in the 
water itself. 

Notes: Granted by the evil sea goddess Umber- 
lee of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Whirlwind 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Cone 10 ft. wide at base and 
30 ft. tall 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a powerful cyclone of raging 
wind that moves as directed by the priest. The whirl- 
wind can move by zigzagging along the ground or 
over water at a movement rate of 6. The whirlwind 
always moves after all other creatures have moved, 
and many creatures can avoid it simply by keeping 
their distance. If the cyclone exceeds the spell's range, 
it moves in a random, uncontrolled fashion for 143 
rounds— possibly endangering the caster or his 
allies—and then dissipates. 

Any creature of size L (large) or smaller that 
comes in contact with the whirlwind must make a 
successful saving throw vs. breath weapon or suffer 
2d8 points of damage. Size M (man-sized) or 


P 710 М. 


Whirlwind of Steel 


p a A 


smaller creatures that fail their first saving throw 
must attempt a second one, or be picked up bodily 
by the whirlwind and held suspended in its power- 
ful winds, suffering 1d8 points of damage each 
round with no save allowed. The caster may direct 
the cyclone to eject any carried creatures whenever 
he wishes, depositing the hapless souls wherever 
the whirlwind happens to be when they are 
released. 

Maintaining the whirlwind requires the caster’s 
full attention, and he cannot cast other spells or 
make any attacks while directing the spell’s course. 
If his concentration fails for some reason, he cannot 
simply cancel the spell. Instead, the spell becomes 
uncontrolled as described above and dissipates after 
1d3 rounds. 

In truly desperate circumstances, priests of Ele- 
mental Air have been known to deliberately overrun 
their companions in order to carry them out of the 
path of some certain doom. Few care to repeat the 
experience. 

The material component is a handful of dust 
collected from a zephyr or snow from a williwaw. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids (РО:5М). 


Whirlwind (of Akadi) 
(Invocation/Evocatíon) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 7 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 3 + 144 rds. 

Area of Effect: A 270-ft.-high cone with an apex 
30 ft. in diameter and a 10-ft.-diameter base 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates damaging, gale-force winds 
capable of destroying structures of less than the 
sturdiest stone construction. On land, the whirlwind 
appears as a tornado; at sea, it appears as a hurri- 
cane. The whirlwind can be created only where 
there is room for it to fully form, and its formation 
require a full turn. It automatically scatters unpro- 
tected creatures with up to 3 Hit Dice, who must 
make a successful saving throw vs. death magic or 
be killed. It grounds all flying creatures, who must 
make a successful saving throw vs. death magic or 
crash, taking falling damage. Unprotected creatures 
with 4 or more Hit Dice take 3d6 points of damage 
per round of exposure from buffeting, flying debris, 
etc. and cannot move into the wind (in other words, 
toward the caster). The whirlwind has the same 
effect as an earthquake (see the 7th-level priest 
spell of that name) on all structures except those 


made of solidly constructed stone. 

The whirlwind moves at a rate of 30 to 60 yards 
per round according to the desire of the caster, and 
the caster can vary its direction by up to 60 degrees 
per round. The caster must concentrate on the 
whirlwind for a full round to change its speed or 
direction. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a piece of straw. 

Notes: Granted by the Air god Akadi of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting and the elven air god- 
dess Aerdrie Faenya. 


Whirlwind of Steel 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Уз 


This spell creates five phantom arms wielding 
scimitars. Both limbs and weapons are magical 


Whisperleaf — Gnome 


)wEDEMMMN———————————————— il 


constructs and not actual, tangible things. The float- 
ing, flying limbs hack silently at target creatures 
until they are dispelled, warded away by magical 
barriers, or willed out of existence by the caster. 
They strike twice per round at THACO 8. Each 
scimitar inflicts 1d8 points of slashing and piercing 
damage, but is considered a +2 enchanted weapon 
for purposes of determining what it can hit. 

When whirlwind of steel is cast, the caster irrevo- 
cably chooses one of two missions for the scimitars: 
They either remain within a stationary 10-foot cube 
whose center is seen and chosen by the caster at the 
time of casting and attack all creatures entering that 
area, or they attack a single target creature, moving to 
accompany that creature at MV fly 18 (B) and revert 
to the first type of mission only if the creature is slain 
or teleports away. (The stationary 10-foot cube in this 
case is either centered 5 feet above where the creature 
falls dead or 5 feet above the floor at the spot from 
which the creature teleported.) 

All creatures are allowed saving throws for half 
damage against every scimitar strike from a whirl- 
wind of steel. The caster always successfully makes 
such saving throws if he or she is hit by a scimitar. 
(The caster is not immune to the scimitars’ attacks.) 

The material component is a fragment of a 
metallic bladed weapon. 

Notes: Granted by the evil demigod Gargauth 
the Outcast of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Whisperleaf — Gnome 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 4 rds. + 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 oak branch 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the still-living branch of 
an oak tree into a stout wooden spear that the priest 
can easily remove from the tree and use in combat. 
The spear created by this spell is a +1 magical 
weapon. The caster must wield the spear, it does not 
fight on its own. When the spell ends, the spear 
reverts to its original form, but cannot be rejoined 
to the original tree. The bonus increases by +1 
when the caster reaches 5th level and again at 10th, 
to a maximum of +3 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the forest gnome god, Baer- 
van Wildwanderer. 


712 


Whispers 
(Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Air Кед 
Level; 2 
Range: Sight 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Concentration 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The whispers spell allows a priest to overhear 
anything said by any individual he or she can see. 
The caster must focus on one creature at a time, 
but can shift the focus instantly—to keep up with a 
conversation, for example. Because the sounds are 
actually carried on the wind between the priest and 
the subject, scrying or similar spells cannot be used 
for the purpose of “seeing.” 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Whisperward 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardian, Weather 
Level: 1 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Until triggered 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This ward can be applied to a single item or clo- 
sure (such as a book, door, or lid), or it can ward 
an area up to 60 feet in diameter. The caster can key 
it to an individual, alignment, or condition in much 
the same way as a magic mouth spell. If the ward 
is triggered, a faint whispering breeze alerts the 
caster, who must be within 1 mile per level of the 
caster to be alerted. 

The material component is mistletoe. 

Notes: Uncommon spell for druids. 


Wild Weather 


SEE Р 


Wieldskill 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Thought 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily gives any one creature 
(seen and mentally chosen by the caster at the time 
of casting) proficiency in the use of a specific 
weapon or tool. The spell recipient may be the 
caster or another being touched by the caster during 
casting. The magic bestows temporary but com- 
plete familiarity with the use, care, and handling 
of the weapon and all accouterments. For instance, 
a wizard temporarily given proficiency in the use of 
a crossbow knows how to wind or cock it, which 
nearby implement is the necessary windlass (if it 
is that type of crossbow), and the different uses and 
proper loading of a variety of quarrels (if an array 
is present). Similarly, a scholar suddenly made 
familiar with a pickaxe would know how to use it to 
cleave rock along a plane, how to avoid striking 
sparks, how to strike so as to blunt the tool very 
quickly or as slowly as possible, what care to give 
it, and so on. 

This magic does not confer any added Strength, 
reach, body weight, or other physical adjustments 
so as to allow the spell recipient to wield the 
weapon or tool most effectively; it just instills the 
precise and complete knowledge of how to do so. 
When the spell ends, this knowledge is forgotten, 
although memories of particular things done with 
the weapon or tool remain. 

Notes: Granted by the god Gond, Lord of AII 
Smiths, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Wild Deer Speed 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


A druid casting this dweomer gains the ability 
to run at great speed for the duration of the spell. 


713 


The druid can move at a rate of 15 without tiring. 
The druid can jump over ground obstacles up to 
twice his height tall and twice his height broad 
during normal movement without breaking stride. 
A normal jump is increased by a distance up to 
twice the caster's height as well. 

The material component is scrapings from the 
hooves of a fleet herbivore (deer, antelope, etc.). 

Notes: Very rare druid spell (Updated from 


DRAGON Magazine.) 


Wild Lands 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 hrs. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: /; mi./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms an area into a wild place 
that attracts monsters and savage peoples. Druids 
frequently use it to protect guarded lands, and 
priests use it to shield rare power conjunctions and 
shrines. Templars can not use the wild lands spell. 

The priest focuses the spell on an inanimate 
object, a rock or a statue, and it becomes the focal 
point of the spell. Violent creatures will slowly 
gravitate to the spot—usually a new creature 
appears every two weeks. Roll on the random 
encounter table for the appropriate terrain type. If 
a passive creature is generated, roll again. Neutral 
creatures are possible, but they should be wild and 
dangerous. Intelligent creatures such as humans, 
gith, or thri-kreen will be savage and warlike. They 
are not necessarily evil, just fiercely protective, 
proud, and belligerent. 

The only way to dispel the wild lands is to 
destroy the item that serves as its focus. This item 
is not protected by the spell, but casters often pro- 
tect the object with other spells. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Wild Weather 
Athasian Dragon King magic, 8th level; psionic 
component renders the spell uncastable by priests. 


Wind and Rain Protection 


Wind and Rain Protection 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By use of this spell, a druid can make one crea- 
ture immune to wind or any form of precipitation. 
In essence, a shell is created around the creature 
that no form of precipitation (including rain, sleet, 
snow, fog, hail, meteorites, or any other natural 
objects falling from the sky) can pass through. The 
shell also reduces the speed of any wind touching 
the protected creature by 10 MPH per level of the 
druid. Any form of magical wind or precipitation 
is unaffected by this spell, but spells that summon 
up a natural wind or storm are affected. Any air ele- 
mentals attacking a protected creature receive a —7 
on all attack rolls, and the protected creature gets 
+5 on all saving throws against magical precipita- 
tion that inflicts damage, as well as against air 
elementals. 

This spell in no way protects against lightning 
or temperature extremes. 

The material component is a fan-shaped leaf, 
which is crushed in the casting, and a diamond of 
500 gp or greater value, which is destroyed in the 
casting. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Wind Blast — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, it causes a powerful cone- 
shaped wind gust, originating at the priest’s hand and 
extending outward in a cone 5 feet long and 1 foot in 
diameter per level of the caster (to a maximum of 50 
feet long and 10 feet in diameter). The force of the 
wind blast inflicts 4d4 points of damage on man- 
sized and larger creatures. Small and tiny creatures 


714 


suffer the damage noted above and must also suc- 
cessfully save vs. spell or be thrown as far as 25 feet 
backwards. If they smash into any hard object, such 
as a wall or a large tree, they make a successful saving 
throw vs. petrification or be stunned for 1d4 rounds 
and suffer 1d6 points of additional damage from the 
force of the impact. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a small paper fan. 

Notes: Granted by the elven air goddess Aerdrie 
Faenya. 


Wind Column 


(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


A priest with access to this spell need not fear 
most routine falls, since the casting of the wind 
column creates a pillar of strong winds to slow his 
descent. The spell is most effective in areas or 
regions where a strong breeze is available, such as 
the heights of a mountain or the mast of a ship at 
sea. In areas of dead, calm air, it is much more dif- 
ficult to muster the windpower necessary to arrest 
the caster's fall. The caster’s rate of descent (and 
risk of damage) varies with the strength of the pre- 
vailing winds, as shown below. 

If the wind is very strong, the caster can even 
choose to gain altitude instead of falling, although 
he can rise no higher than 5 feet per level above his 
original height before the wind column loses cohe- 
siveness and he starts to fall again. However, a 
priest could use this to leap out a castle window and 
allow the winds to bear him to the roof of the tower, 
if the conditions are right. 


Wind Falling Rate Damage 
Strength ft./sec. (ft./rd.) Sustained 
Very strong 2 (120) None 

Strong 4 (240) None 
Moderate 8 (480) 1 per 10 ft 
Light 16 (960) 142 per 10 ft 
None 32 (2000) 143 per 10 ft 


! Maximum of 8 points 
? Maximum of 1042 points 
è Maximum of 1243 points 


Wind Walk 


)|————————————— EE а 


If you prefer to use the combat round scale from 
PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & Tactics, rounds are 
approximately one-tenth as long, and movement 
per round is reduced accordingly. For example, in 
moderate winds, the caster falls about 48 feet per 
round in the Combat & Tactics scale. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids (РО:5М). 


Wind Lash 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Weather 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell creates an invisible, weightless whip 
of hard-edged air extending from a limb of the 
caster. With this construct, the caster can strike 
with his or her normal THACO at one chosen oppo- 
nent, causing 2 points of damage per level per suc- 
cessful attack. In any round in which the wind lash 
successfully strikes, any target spellcasting with a 
casting time of more than 1 is ruined, and the target 
creature must make a successful saving throw vs. 
paralyzation or be hurled to the ground, taking an 
additional 1 point of damage and forcing all frag- 
ile carried items to make a saving throw vs. fall. 

The caster can switch targets at will, but switch- 
ing targets takes a round, during which time no one 
can be attacked by the wind lash. The nature of the 
wind lash is such that only the chosen creature is 
struck. Other beings are aware of the spell because 
it emits terrifying snarling wind noises and may 
even blow away small, light objects such as cap- 
feathers and parchments that are not securely 
gripped (but they suffer no damage). If the spell- 
caster casts another spell while this spell is still in 
effect, the wind lash dissipates immediately. A 
wind lash-wielder can employ magical items simul- 
taneously with a lash if they can be wielded with 
one hand. 

Notes: Granted by Talos the Destroyer, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Wind Walk 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 
Level: 7 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the priest, and possibly one or 
two other persons, to alter the substance of his body 
to a cloudlike vapor. A magical wind then wafts the 
priest along at a movement rate of 60, or as slow as 
6, as the spellcaster wills. The wind walk spell lasts as 
long as the priest desires, up to a maximum duration 
of six turns (one hour) per experience level of the 
caster. For every 8 levels of experience the priest has 
attained, up to 24, he or she is able to touch another 
person and carry that person, or those persons, along 
on the wind walk. Those wind walking are not invis- 
ible, but rather appear misty and translucent. If fully 
clothed in white, they are 80% likely to be mistaken 
for clouds, fog, vapors, etc. The priest can regain his 
physical form as desired, each change to and from 


715 


Wind Walk — Shukenja 


vaporous form requiring five rounds. While in 
vaporous form, the priest and companions can be hit 
only by magic or magical weaponry, though they may 
be subject to high winds at ће DM's discretion. No 
spellcasting is possible in vaporous form. 

The material components are fire and pure 
water. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Wind Walk — Shukenja 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the shukenja to transform his 
body to a cloudlike mist, moving at a rate of 6 to 
60 per round as desired, for as long as the shukenja 
desires, up to the duration of the spell. The 
shukenja can in addition take two persons with him 
on the wind walk and, while visible, the individu- 
als are 80% likely to be mistaken for clouds or fog 
if they are dressed in white. 

The material components are fire and a few 
drops of holy water. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Windbearer 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 turn*1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a pillar of air 5 feet in diame- 
ter and up to 3 feet tall per level of the caster. The 
vertical dimension is decided at the time of casting. 
The pillar of air exerts an upward force of 40 
pounds per level of the caster. If this is sufficient 
to counter the weight of an object or creature enter- 
ing the area, such an object or creature rises verti- 
cally to the top of the column in a single round. 
Unwilling creatures are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid the effect. The caster can vary the 


height of the pillar from the possible maximum to a 
minimum of 5 feet by concentrating for one round. 
The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 
Notes: Granted by the air god Akadi of the For- 
GOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Windborne 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell provides a priest of Elemental Air 
with the ability to conjure a powerful column of 
wind that can bear his weight, permitting him to 
fly or glide for long distances. If used from a high 
place such as a mountainside or tower, the caster 
can glide a maximum horizontal distance of 20 feet 
per foot of initial altitude—for example, if the 
priest used this spell and launched himself from a 
hilltop 800 feet high, he could glide a maximum 
distance of 16,000 feet, or about 3 miles. 

If windborne is cast by a priest on level ground, 
the initial gust carries him aloft to a maximum alti- 
tude of 10 feet per caster level, From that point, he 
can then glide 10 feet per foot of initial altitude. For 
example, a 7th-level priest would ascend to an alti- 
tude of 70 feet and thus be able to glide for a total 
horizontal distance of 700 feet. He can choose to 
glide for a much shorter distance, but never less 
than his initial altitude. 

While gliding, the priest moves at a rate of 15 
(or about 450 feet) with a maneuverability class of 
D. Each round, he drops between 20 and 40 feet. He 
can choose to descend at a much more rapid pace, 
dropping up to 200 feet per round, without risk of 
a damaging impact upon landing. The caster does- 
n't gain a mastery of Aerial Combat with this spell 
and suffers a —2 penalty to his attack rolls and 
Armor Class if he becomes involved in combat 
while gliding. 

The material component is a feather from a 
giant eagle . 

Notes: Uncommon for druids (PO: SM). 


» 716 М. 


Winds of Change 


маа (а 


Windlance 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 
Level: 5 
Range: 0 


Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is primarily used by druids and other 
shapeshifters as a method of escape. When wind- 
lance is cast, a powerful burst of air launches the 
spellcaster and any other creature or creatures 
unfortunate enough to be in the same 10-foot cube 
into the sky for 120 to 600 feet, as chosen by the 
casting priest. No damage is sustained in the initial 
blast, but creatures unable to change shape, fly, or 
use magic for a soft landing suffer normal falling 
damage when they strike the ground. 

Windlance activates any natural shape change 
ability its caster has, allowing the casting creature 
to cast windlance and change form in the same 
round. Creatures other than the caster in the spell's 
area of effect at the time the spell is cast are not so 
empowered. 

Notes: Granted by the nature gods Eldath, 
Mielikki, Gwaeron Windstrom, and Silvanus of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known by the Emerald 
Enclave. This spell is found only in a few excep- 
tionally rare tomes. 


Winds of Akadi 


(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 4 

Range: 100 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: И; 


When this spell is cast, a 30-foot-diameter sphere 
of whirling air comes into existence at a point indi- 
cated by the caster. Creatures in the area of effect 
when the spell is cast (or those entering the area of 
effect while the spell is in effect) must make a saving 
throw vs. spell or suffer 1d4 points of damage. 

On the second round of the spell, the priest can 
cause a lightning bolt to issue forth from the storm 
at any creature within range, inflicting 1d6 points 
of damage per level of the caster to a maximum of 


10d6 points. Bolts fired from the cloud behave in 
the same way as those created by the lightning bolt 
3rd-level wizard spell, and all affected creatures are 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell for half damage. 
Creatures within the cloud in a round when a /igAt- 
ning bolt is projected make their saving throws with 
а —4 penalty. 

Every other round, the cloud releases one /ight- 
ning bolt in a manner and at creatures selected by 
the caster. The cloud produces a total of five light- 
ning bolts before the spell expires. In the interme- 
diary rounds between lightning bolts, the casting 
priest is free to perform other actions, including 
melee attacks and spellcasting. At the start of each 
even-numbered round, however, the priest directs 
the lightning bolt to its target and thus loses his or 
her normal action for that round. 

Notes: Granted by the air god Akadi of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Winds of Change 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Elemental Air Ке 
Level: 2 
Range: 30 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 30 yds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell alters the judgment of one creature 
at random intervals, depending on the direction of 
the winds. The spell can divert a creature from its 
goal for an extended time without physically harm- 
ing it. If the wind changes between east and west, 
the creature's distinction between good and evil 
alters. Wind that varies between north and south 
alters its attitude towards law and chaos. In 
absolutely calm conditions, the creature becomes 
true neutral. The creature behaves normally from 
moment to moment and suffers no obvious harm 
such as starvation or confusion, but cannot pursue 
a given goal for long without changing its mind. 
The general direction of the wind usually changes 
every two hours, and often more frequently. The 
DM chooses the wind direction either randomly or 
based on whatever behavior change seems most 
dramatic or entertaining. Magically altered wind 
direction can also change the creature's attitudes. 
The speed of the wind has no effect on this spell. 

The spell requires a set of wooden dicing sticks, 
which are reusable. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


P. 717 SS 


Winged Memory 


Winged Memory 


Reversed form, blessed forgetfulness. 


Wisdom of the Sorcerer-Kings 


(Summoning) ' | 


Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This frequently used summons allows a templar 
to pick any needed spell from the templar spell list. 
Upon casting the wisdom, the templar picks another 
spell of Ist to 5th level to be cast in the following 
round. The chosen spell must be cast—the priest 
cannot cancel its activation, although the subject 
spell's duration can be shortened if the nature of the 
spell allows. The templar cannot use the wisdom of the 
sorcerer-kings to cast more than one spell in a round. 

This useful spell is representative of the sor- 
cerer-king's raw power, and the fact that he can 
channel spell energies directly to his followers. 

Notes: Restricted to templars in the DARK SUN 
setting. 


718 


Withdraw 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of a withdraw spell, the priest in 
effect alters the flow of time with regard to himself. 
While but one round of time passes for those not 
affected by the spell, the priest is able to spend two 
rounds, plus one round per level, in contemplation. 
Thus, a 5th-level priest can withdraw for seven 
rounds to cogitate on some matter while one round 
passes for all others. (The DM should allow the 
player one minute of real time per round withdrawn 
to ponder some problem or question. No discussion 
with other players is permitted.) Note that while 
affected by the withdraw spell, the caster can use 
only the following spells: any divination spell or 
any curing or healing spell, the latter on himself 
only. The casting of any of these spells in a differ- 
ent fashion (for example, a cure light wounds spell 
bestowed upon a companion) negates the withdraw 
spell. Similarly, the withdrawn caster cannot walk 
or run, become invisible, or engage in actions other 
than thinking, reading, and the like. He can be 
affected by the actions of others, losing any Dex- 
terity or shield bonus. Any successful attack upon 
the caster breaks the spell. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Wither 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables a priest of Myrkul to dupli- 
cate the powers of a staff of withering. Once cast, 
the spell lasts for up to six rounds or until a suc- 
cessful attack to touch a creature is made. The 
priest of Myrkul can take other actions once the 
spell is cast and need not concentrate to maintain it, 
though the effect of the spell can be transmitted 


only through the priest’s hand or another limb, not 
a weapon. 

A successful hit inflicts 1d4+1 points of 
damage, ages the creature by 10 years, and, if the 
creature fails a saving throw vs. spell, causes one of 
the creature's limbs to shrivel and become useless. 
Check by random number generation for which 
limb is struck. (For example, on humanoid crea- 
tures roll 144: 1=right arm, 2=left arm, 3=right leg, 
4=left leg.) The aging effect causes the creature’s 
abilities and lifespan to be adjusted for the resulting 
age increase and can cause ability scores to drop 
or an elderly creature to die of old age. 

All effects are permanent unless cured. Regen- 
erate restores a withered limb to normal, and rest or 
curative magic cure the damage done, but only a 
limited wish, wish, or other magic specifically able 
to cure or abate aging can restore the creature’s 
youth. 

This spell has no effect on beings bearing holy 
symbols of Myrkul. Ageless creatures and noncor- 
poreal beings (undead, elementals, tanar’ri, 
baatezu, and other powerful extraplanar beings) 
cannot be aged or withered. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Myrkul in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Wither 


Reversed form, quickgrowth. 


Wither 


Reversed form, regenerate. 


Wolf Spirits 
Quest spell, see appendix. 


Wolfjaws 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster's right hand 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell turns the priest's right hand into a 
pair of powerful wolflike jaws in memory of the 
way that Tyr lost his right hand to the monstrous 
wolf-like being Kezef the Chaos Hound. These 
jaws deal 2d4 points of damage to all opponents 
the priest successfully attacks with them. The 
spell allows the caster to strike with the jaws 


719 


Wolfjaws 


twice per round and to gain a +1 bonus on all 
attack rolls with the jaws or another weapon 
while the spell is in effect. A wolfjaws spell van- 
ishes if its caster attempts any other spellcasting, 
but a priest can wield a weapon or trigger a mag- 
ical item in his or her left hand and use a wolf- 
jaws, thus gaining multiple attacks normally 
denied to him or her without affecting the spell 
in any way. 

The caster can end a wolfjaws instantly at will. 
When the spell ends early in this manner, the caster 
can also spell remove the damage dealt by the last 
bite of the wolfjaws, an ability that the priest can 
use to bargain with a wounded foe or to correct 
cases where an ally has mistakenly been attacked 
by the priest. While wo/fjaws is in effect, it pro- 
vides its caster with complete immunity to all hos- 
tile magical or psionic shape change and hold 
effects. 

The material component is a bit of wolf fur or a 
tooth from any type of mammal. 

Notes: Granted by the Tyr the Just God of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Wonder Bubbles, Spliff's 


Wonder Bubbles, Spliff's 
See Spliff's wonder bubbles. 


Wondrous Recall 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Creation 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to bring back into 
memory two duplicates of the last spell cast before 
the wondrous recall in order to enable that spell to 
be cast again twice. A cast wondrous recall appears 
as two phantom spells that can be carried in addi- 
tion to the spells memorized by the caster. Each of 
these "extra" spells can be unleashed by silent act 
of will with a casting time of 1 and no need for 
material components. However, these spells cannot 
exceed the normal limitation of one spell castable 
per round. If the caster so desires, one of the 
recalled spells can precisely duplicate in efficacy 
(damage, area of effect, etc.) the original spell from 
which the recall copied its phantom spells or—if 
this exact duplicate is the second recalled spell to 
be unleashed—its recalled twin. 

A priest can carry in mind only one cast won- 
drous recall (that is, two phantom spells) and one 
uncast wondrous recall at a time. Prayers for more 
than one wondrous recall are never granted and 
attempts to cast a wondrous recall while one is 
still in effect result in the caster being feeble- 
minded (as the Sth-level wizard spell of the same 
name). Wondrous recall cannot recall 7th-level or 
greater spells. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Mystra of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Wood Rot 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Level: 3 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 10 yds. 


Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 sq. ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell accelerates the decay of a ship's hull or 
deck structure. The wood thus affected crumbles 
away at a rate of 1 square ft. of surface area each 
round to a depth of 2 inches, effectively destroying 
hull integrity, a mast, or up to 10 square feet of 1- 
inch thick deck each round. All affected wood must 
be a continuous area; casting this spell more than 
once in one area cannot speed up the rot. 

The material component is the caster's holy 
symbol. 

The reverse of this spell, prevent wood rot, 
immediately negates a rot wood spell, or slows the 
effects of natural decay for one month. It does not 
reverse rotting effects that have already occurred 
(see cure rot). If a ship has been protected by pre- 
vent wood rot, then a wood rot spell negates this 
protection without other effect. 

Notes: Uncommon for Sea Priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


DM Notes: If in common use, this spell can 
cause severe problems for ships in play. The more 
commonly it is used, the faster countermeasures 
to defeat the effect will develop. Ship enchant- 
ments that proof a ship against this spell will 
become fairly common as the use of the spell 
spreads. In short, the introduction of this spell 
should be treated as a dynamic, evolving event, 
rather than a static one. 

If a ship is holed at the waterline or below by 
wood rot, the crew can often make sufficient 
temporary repairs to prevent the ship from sink- 

ing outright. Assume that a ship's seaworthiness 
раар Оте] Күл dl on rem 
with seaworthiness checks being made every 5th 
round the rot continues. Allow a work crew of 5 
sailors to restore 5% of lost seaworthiness with 
5 rounds of work, up to half the inflicted damage. 


Wood Sword 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration:  rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms its material component 
into a temporary weapon: a sword that can be 
wielded by the caster or be directed to attack a 


2 720 М 


Word of Binding 


b—————————— ш 


particular creature by the caster from afar. In either 
case, it strikes with the caster's normal THACO, 
deals 1 hit point of damage per level of the caster 
at every successful strike, and vanishes instantly 
when the spell expircs or it comes into contact with 
any flame. If released to fight on its own, a wood 
sword is AC —1, has 22 hit points, and moves at MV 
fly 16 (A). It strikes once per round at a single crea- 
ture or object. 

The target of a wood sword can be indicated 
during casting or determined later and can be 
changed at any time. The caster can choose any vis- 
ible creature or item within range and silently will 
the sword to attack it. If its designated target dies or 
vanishes, the sword vanishes if not given a new 
target. The caster can bid the weapon go and attack 
a certain target or return to be directly wielded as 
often as desired for the duration of the spell. 

The sword is supple, but can be broken by suc- 
cessful edged weapon chopping attacks that inflict 
more damage than it has hit points or by being 
caught in a closing stone or metal door; such 
destruction ends the spell instantly. The caster can 
fight with another weapon and leave the wood 
sword to fight on its own, but if its creator casts any 
other spell, the sword vanishes the instant that new 
magic takes effect. Use of magical items by the 
casting priest does not destroy a wood sword. 

The sword can do no harm to nonliving wood 
or to stone or metal, but can readily be employed 
to smash glass flasks, topple items, and even to stir 
mixtures in distant bowls. (A clever caster could 
direct it to knock over the rearmost bottle in a clus- 
ter of glass objects, thereby making it smash or 
knock over the other glass objects in its way.) If the 
caster has the leisure to enact precise control, the 
sword can perform quite delicate tasks. It need not 
merely attack things. If used to carry things (such 
as satchels or ropes across chasms, or rings of keys 
to prisoners), it breaks if burdened with a greater 
weight than the caster can lift (the caster's maxi- 
mum press amount, dictated by his or her Strength 
ability score). 

The material component is a twig, branch, or any 
fragment of wood that still retains some bark and has 
not been cut, stained, varnished, or otherwise altered 
by tools. (This means the wood must be picked up as 
fallen wood or snapped off rather than cut.) 

Notes: Granted by the nature gods Mielikki and 
Gwaeron Windstrom of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Woodiron 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Plant, Combat RA 
Level: 4 " 
Range: Touch pP 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 it ' 
Duration: 5 rds./level 


Area of Effect: Weapon(s) touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a specialized version of enchanted 
weapon that works only on wooden weapons. When 
the spell is cast on a wooden weapon, that weapon 
becomes as hard as its iron counterparts on other 
fantasy worlds, with no penalties to attack or 
damage, Weapons normally made of wood, such as 
the club and quarterstaff, are granted a bonus of +1 
to both attack and damage rolls. Only one spell can 
be cast on a weapon at a time; the effects are not 
cumulative, even with normal wooden weapons like 
those mentioned above. Wooden shields are also 
affected by this spell, becoming +1 for defensive 
purposes. Both weapons and shields are fireproof 
for the spell’s duration. 

Missiles of wood enchanted in this manner lose 
their dweomer as soon as they hit a target; other- 
wise, the spell lasts for its full duration. It is also 
used in the manufacture of regular magical 
weapons and shields. 

The material component is a chip of the bronze- 
hard agafari wood of Nibenay. 

Notes: Very rare for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. (Updated from DRAGON magazine.) Option- 
ally known by priests from savage settings. 


Word of Binding 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Up to 30 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is cast by uttering a magical word as the 
door, lock, flap, shutter, or cupboard (the spell will 
extend to several small doors attached in the same 
enclosure, or offering access to the same space) to 
be “bound” is touched. Thereafter the caster can 
freely open and close the bound access point without 
disturbing the spell, but any other creature must 


Р. 721 ~ 


Word of Recall 
S E 


physically break the bound door or access point to 
pass it, successfully cast three dispel magic spells 
upon it (any amount of time can pass between these 
castings), or cast knock twice. The death of the caster 
of the word of binding also ends the magic. 

This spell can be so cast (by using a slightly dif- 
ferent word) to allow all clergy of Oghma to freely 
pass the binding, or (by use of yet another word) to 
allow a single other being besides the caster to pass 
the binding freely. This other creature must be 
touched by the caster during the spell's casting. 

Notes: Granted by Oghma, Lord of Knowledge, 
in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Word of Recall 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Summoning 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 


Components: V 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The word of recall spell takes the priest instantly 
back to his or her sanctuary when the word is 
uttered. The sanctuary must be specifically desig- 
nated in advance by the priest and must be a well- 
known place. The actual point of arrival is a 
designated area no larger than 10 feet X 10 feet. The 
priest can be transported any distance, from above 
or below ground. Transportation by the word of 
recall spell is safe within a plane, but for each plane 
the priest is removed, there is a 10% cumulative 
chance that the priest is irrevocably lost. The priest 
is able to transport, in addition to himself, 25 
pounds of weight per experience level. Thus, a 15th 
level priest could transport an additional 375 
pounds weight. This extra matter can be equipment, 
treasure, or even living material, such as another 
person. Exceeding this limit causes the spell to fail. 
Note that unusually strong physical fields, such as 
magnetic or gravitational forces, or even magical 
applications can, at the DM’s option, make the use 
of this spell hazardous or impossible. 
Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Г 


WN 


SS 


SESS 


NW 


N 


Word of Vengeance 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 
Components: V 

Casting Time: | 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When the priest utters this word, any psionic 
creature psionically attacking or in mental contact 
with the priest suffers the effects shown on the table 
if a saving throw vs. spell is failed. 


Hit Dice Effect 
less than 4 Kills 
4 to 7+ Paralyzes 2d4 turns 
8 to 11+ Stuns 5d4 rounds 
12 or more Deafens 2d4 rounds 


In addition, any psionic creature surviving a 
failed saving throw is rendered incapable of using 
any psionic powers save defense modes. This effect 
lasts for a number of days equal to the number of 
levels or Hit Dice by which the caster exceeds the 
creature; the creature is affected for a minimum of 
one day. During this time, the affected creature’s 
PSP total is halved. 

The nature of this spell allows it to be cast in 
response to a psionic attack. If psionically attacked, 
the caster can instantly change any previously 
declared action and attempt this spell instead. If 
the caster wins initiative, the spell succeeds. If the 
caster loses initiative, the incoming psionic attack 
disrupts the spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from POLYHE- 
DRON Newszine.) 


723 


Wrath of Torm 


)—————————————— iil 


Wound 
(Necromantic) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A ranged version of the spell cause serious 
wounds, this spell inflicts 2d8+1 points of damage 
on the target creature. A successful saving throw vs. 
spell negates all damage. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Bhaal of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Wrath of Torm 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes the caster to be outlined in an 
aura of glowing white light (which is bright and 
clear, but not blinding in its intensity). The caster 
gains height up to 12 feet (with a corresponding 
increase in reach and no loss of Dexterity) and his 
Charisma rises to 18 (if at that score already, the 
spell does not augment it further). 

While the spell is in effect, the caster strikes at 
+5 bonus to attack and damage rolls and gains a 
+3 bonus to all saving throws. Against undead crea- 
tures, the caster deals double normal damage rather 
than gaining the +5 damage bonus. 

Notes: Granted by the war god Torm of the For- 
GOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found only in 
a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Wyvern Watch 


b——————————————"àÀ 


Wyvern Watch 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 8 hrs. or until strike 
Area of Effect: 5-ft.-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is known as wyvern watch because 
of the insubstantial haze brought forth by its cast- 
ing, which vaguely resembles a wyvern. It is typi- 
cally used to guard some area against intrusion. 
Any creature approaching within 10 feet of the 
guarded area may be affected by the “wyvern.” Any 
creature entering the guarded area must roll a suc- 


cessful saving throw vs. spell or stand paralyzed for 
one round per level of the caster, until freed by the 
spellcaster, by a dispel magic spell, or by a remove 
paralysis spell. A successful saving throw indicates 
that the subject creature was missed by the attack of 
the wyvern form, and the spell remains in place. 
As soon as a subject creature is successfully struck 
by the wyvern form, the paralysis takes effect and 
the force of the spell dissipates. The spell force 
likewise dissipates if no intruder is struck by the 
wyvern form for 8 hours after the spell is cast. Any 
creature approaching the space being guarded by 
the wyvern form may be able to detect its presence 
before coming close enough to be attacked; this 
chance of detection is 90% in bright light, 30% in 
twilight conditions, and 0% in darkness. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for cleric (PHB). 


2 724 E 


NS» ДУХ 


$ 


. N O 
v 


uu 


22 


Хуіт, Масе оѓ 
See mace of Xvim. 


Yathaghera, Favor of 
See favor of Yathaghera. 


Yondalla, Curse of 


See curse of Yondalla. 


Youthful Object 


Reversed form, age object. 


Zin-Carla 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 rds. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is “the highest gift of Lolth,” granted 
rarely even to favored drow. It is a special form of 
animate dead, that enables the caster to create a 
special sort of zombie, known as a spirit-wraith. 
Imbued with the skills (hit points, Armor Class, and 
ТНАСО) it had in life, this creation is telepathi- 
cally linked to—and controlled by—the caster of 
this spell, usually a drow matron mother. 

This spell may not be instantaneously granted, 
or may be denied entirely, at Lolth's will. It is 
granted only for the completion of specific tasks, 
and these may never be purely to work revenge or 
bring harm on other drow. Failure in the task brings 
on the disfavor of Lolth. 

Zin-carla involves the forcible return of a 
departed soul or spirit to its body. Only through the 
willpower and exacting, sleepless control of the 
caster are the undead being's desired skills kept 
separate from unwanted memories and emotions. 
The duration of the spell is limited by the needs of 
the task, the patience of Lolth, and the mental limits 
of the caster—for a total loss of control usually 
means failure. 


БАУ, 
OIRO) 


í SGA 

So long as that control is maintained, the spirit- 
wraith cannot tire or be distracted from its task. It 
does not feel pain or disability, and will continue 
to function as long as it remains mobile. 

A spirit-wraith cannot be made to cast spells 
without losing control over its mind entirely. It can 
fully use combat and craft skills possessed in life. If 
control is lost, the spirit-wraith becomes a 
revenant, driven by hatred and the memory of its 
violation at the hands of the spellcaster. Uncon- 
trolled spirit-wraiths do not stop until the zin-carla 
caster is destroyed. 

A spirit-wraith driven to do something against its 
old nature has a chance of breaking free of its control 
(treat as а charm spell, with the same saving throw as 
in life). For example, one cannot successfully use 
this undead to destroy a being that it loved in life. 

Spell-like natural powers (such as the /evitation 
ability of drow) are retained, and can be used by, the 
undead. The spirit-wraith can use its former expe- 
rience and memories, as much as allowed by the 
linked caster. Both the zombie and the caster are 
immune to the effects of spells that attack the mind, 
and similar spell-like powers (such as the mental 
blast of a mind flayer). It knows wariness, anger, 
glee, hatred, frustration, and triumph, but not fear. 
It cannot be controlled by the spells and priestly 
powers normally used to command encountered 
undead—and control of it cannot thereby be 
wrested away from the caster of the zin-carla. 

Spirit-wraiths do not breathe, but can speak (if 
allowed to do so by their controller). They can utter 
command and activation words, and the control- 
ling caster can speak through them directly, but 
spell incantations will have no effect if uttered by 
the undead. 

To stop a spirit-wraith, it must be physically 
destroyed—if it is still able to even crawl, it will do 
so, tirelessly, searching for a way to complete its task. 

The material component is a treasured object 
that belonged to the body to be controlled. If the 
corpse is badly decomposed or not whole, other 
spells (such as Nulathoe s ninemen) and magical 
unguents will also be required, to restore it to 
whole, supple condition. 

Wizards and other powerful creatures (such as 
mind flayers, aboleth, or cloakers) who raid or 
despoil drow cities can expect to face either a full- 
scale attack—or a spirit-wraith or two. 

Notes: Rarely granted by the drow goddess 
Lolth. 


2 725 м 


Zone of Deception 


М МИНЕ Eee eee ш 


Zone of Deception 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Reversible T" di 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft./level cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This is the reverse of the zone of truth spell. 
Everyone in the area of effect knows immediately 
that they can speak only lies. They can decide 
exactly what they say and how they say it, but every 
statement must be a lie. Because questions, suppo- 
sitions, and exclamations are not statements, they 
are not affected. The DM should carefully exam- 
ine every statement and classify it as true, false, or 
an exception to the spell. For example, the state- 
ment “I can only lie" is a true statement under the 
influence of this spell and, therefore, cannot be 
spoken. 

Notes: Common on the Demiplane of Dread; 
used mostly by evil priests. 


Zone of Sweet Air 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Wards 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft./level cube 
Saving Throw: None 


Zone of sweet air creates an invisible barrier 
around the area of effect that repels all noxious 
elements from poisonous vapors, including those 
created magically (such as a stinking cloud). The 
spell offers no protection against poisonous vapors 
created by a dragon's breath weapon (such as the 
chlorine gas of a green dragon). Noxious gases 
already within the area of effect when the spell is 


cast are not affected. Fresh air passes into the area 
normally. 

If a poisonous vapor is expelled within the area 
of effect (for example, a stinking cloud is cast), the 
spell takes effect normally but dissipates in half the 
time normally required. 

The spell affects a cube whose sides equal the 
caster's level times 10 feet (for example, a 10th- 
level caster could affect a cube whose sides are 100 
feet long). 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol, a silk handkerchief, and a strand of spider 
web. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with access to the 
sphere of Elemental Air or Wards (ToM). 


Zone of Truth 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft./level cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell prevents creatures in the area of effect 
(including those who enter it later) from speaking 
any deliberate and knowing lie. Such creatures are 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect; 
those who fail the are affected. Those affected are 
aware of this enchantment; therefore, they may 
avoid answering questions to which they might nor- 
mally respond with a lie or they may be evasive as 
long as they remain within the boundaries of the 
truth. Someone who leaves the affect area is free 
to speak as he or she chooses. 

The spell affects a cube whose sides are 5 feet 
long per level of the caster. Thus, a 4th-level priest 
can affect a 20 foot cube. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a phony emerald, ruby, or diamond. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (see zone of 
deception for a reverse form common on the 
Demimplane of Dread). 


2 726 м. 


Appendices: Table of Contents 


Appendices: Table of Contents 


SPELL APPENDICES 
Quest Spells 


Psionic Enchantments... 
Sphere of War 


Text Appendices 
Quest Spells 

Faith Magic 
Cooperative Magic .... 
Divine Intervention 
Divine Ascension 


Priest Spells by Sphere 


Spell Lists by World 
AL-QADIM Setting 
BIRTHRIGHT Setting 
DRAGONLANCE Setting ... 
DARK SUN Setting 
Forgotten Realms Setting 
GREYHAWK Setting 
MYSTARA Setting 
Oriental Priest Spells 
PLANESCAPE Setting 
RAVENLOFT Setting 
RED STEEL Setting 
Savage Settings 
SPELLJAMMER Setting 
Vedic Spells 


Nonhuman Priest Spells 


Special Priest Lists 
Tribal Spellcasters 
Cloistered Priests .................. : 
Necromancer-Priests 
Savants and Oracles 


721 


Quest Spells 


See Л 
Quest Spells 


The quest spells that follow are used only in 
extraordinary circumstances, as determined by the 
DM. The DM should read the explanatory notes 
about quest spells before allowing these spells into 
play (see page 776). 


Combined List 


Laerme’s Emissary 


Reversion 

Robe of Healing 
Sera’s Blessed Luck 
Ship of Tears 


Wolf Spirits 


Animal Horde 


Abundance 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Creation, Plant 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting an abundance spell, the priest quick- 
ens the ripening of a harvest or the growth of wood- 
land. The priest stands anywhere within the area to 
be affected, and designates the exact size and shape 
of the area in the casting. 

Fields of crops in the affected area grow, ripen, 
and be ready for harvest in a single day. Seed must 
be sown any time before the casting of the spell. 
The spell affects 10 square miles of cultivated 
fields. 

A woodland achieves 25 years of growth in one 
day, plus 5 years per day for another three days. Soil 
capable of supporting the woodland is required for 
the growth to remain healthy thereafter. The spell 
affects 25 square miles of woodlands. 

The spell does not create effects such as entan- 
glement or enlargement of the flora within its area 
of effect. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Animal Compulsion, Erik's 
See Erik's animal compulsion. 


Animal Horde 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 day 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 10-mi. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This potent spell summons a number of animals 
to the priest. For each level of the priest, a number 
of animals totaling 10 Hit Dice appear. Thus, an 
18th-level priest summons 180 Hit Dice of animals. 

The Power who grants the spell enables the 
priest to know exactly what types and numbers of 
animals are within the area of effect. The priest can 
specify the number of animals desired; for instance, 
a 16th-level priest could summon 60 Hit Dice of 
wolves, 40 Hit Dice of bears, and 60 Hit Dice of 
wolverines. The animals begin arriving in one 


NN 


БҮ 


IN 


ct 
VAN. 
2 


round and all assemble at the priest’s location at 
the end of three turns. 

The animals won't fight among each other even 
if they are natural enemies. Monsters (dragons, gor- 
gons, hell hounds, and so оп) cannot be summoned 
with this spell. 

The summoned animals aid the priest by any 
means of which they are capable. They enter battle, 
protect the priest and any companions, and perform 
specified missions until the priest dismisses them 
or the spell expires. During this time, the priest can 
communicate with the summoned animals. 

At the end of the spell, the animals instinctively 
return to their lairs. For the first three turns after the 
spell expires, the animals won't attack the caster, 
his or her companions, or other summoned ani- 
mals. After this time, the animals behave normally. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


A 729 %- 


Avani's Resuscitation 


EEE A 


Avani’s Resuscitation 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: | turn 

Area of Effect: 100-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Under certain circumstances, priests of Avani 
can use the healing power of the sun to revive 
injured or fallen friends. 

This spell can be cast only during daylight and 
lasts until the sun sets. In the Khinasi climate, this 
spell can last 12 to 16 hours. In other parts of Cer- 
ilia, the duration may be significantly shorter 
(during a Vosgaard winter, daylight may last only 
eight hours). 

When cast, the sunlight of Avani shines brightly, 
even through cloud cover (even magically sum- 
moned or created clouds), and confers healing on 
the bodies of anyone within 100 yards of the caster. 
For the magic to work, two conditions must be met: 
Those to be healed must be exposed to the sunlight 
(the priest or his allies may have to drag fallen com- 
rades into the sunlight), and those to be healed must 
be worshipers of Avani or otherwise designated by 
the priest. This prevents the priest’s enemies from 
being healed unless the priest so desires. 

Avani 5 resuscitation is an extremely powerful 
healing spell. While it lasts, all affected beings heal 
at a rate of one hit point per turn. The healing sun- 
light also acts as cure blindness, cure disease, and 
performs similar physical healing. The spell cannot 
cure certain magical afflictions; it cannot restore 
lost levels or remove curses. 

Avani’s spell can even raise dead and regen- 
erate. As long as the sun has not set on a dead or 
maimed character, the spell restores lives or limbs 
at the last light of the day. Restored individuals 
need not make System Shock rolls because of 
Avani’s direct influence. An individual raised 
from the dead by this spell has 1 hit point at 
sunset. 

This spell does not affect elves, though half- 
elves who believe in the human pantheon may be 
healed. Dwarves and halflings may be healed if 
they are allied to Avani or the casting priest. Orogs, 
humanoids, and other nonhumans seldom benefit 
from Avani's power—only those who have allied 
themselves with Avani's servants stand a chance of 
receiving the healing gift. Other creatures may be 
healed at the DM’s discretion. 


730 


Notes: Granted by Avani of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Avatar Form 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: АП 


Level: Quest 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: | hr./level of caster 
Casting Time: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell must be cast upon a willing worshiper 
of the same faith as the priest commanding the 
spell. Attempting to cast it on a nonbeliever would 
be considered sacrilege, and could cause the priest 
to be stripped of his god’s favor (spells, special abil- 
ities, etc.) until he performs a suitable act of atone- 
ment. 

By means of this spell, the priest grants the 
form of the god's avatar to himself or a fellow wor- 
shiper. (The avatar forms of each Cerilian deity are 
described in the first section of this book under the 
individual god descriptions.) 

The recipient gains no additional powers, but is 
in all ways transformed into the avatar. The indi- 
vidual's appearance, voice, scent, and mannerisms 
fit the avatar in all ways. The character cannot be 
detected as anything other than the avatar by any 
means (true seeing, for example, would not reveal 
the transformation). 

Notes: Granted by all deities of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Blessed Luck, Sera's 
See Sera's blessed luck. 


Circle of Sunmotes 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation, Necro- 
mancy) 

Sphere: Sun 


Level: Quest 

Range: 200 yds. 

Duration: 3 turns 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting circle of sunmotes, the priest creates 
a hemispherical shell filled with sparkling, glowing 
motes of bright sunlight. A 1-foot-radius globe of 
sunlight appears at the height of the caster's head 


Conformance 


> EEE На иШ Ó 


in the exact center of the circle. Friends are posi- 
tively affected and enemies are negatively affected 
by the spell. 

Creatures within the area of effect that are 
friendly to the priest experience the glowing motes 
as warm, invigorating, inspiring, and healing. They 
regain 1d6 points of damage, gain the benefit of 
an aid spell for | turn after the circle of sunmotes 
is created, gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage 
rolls, and gain a +2 bonus to morale. Further, com- 
panions of the priest who step within 10 feet of the 
glowing miniature sun at the center of the effect are 
healed of 1d8+2 points of damage. This affects 
each creature only once during the spell's duration. 

To companions of the priest outside the area of 
effect, enemies within the circle look like they are 
affected by golden faerie fire. Creatures affected by 
the faerie fire suffer a —2 penalty to their Armor 
Class from attacks by creatures outside the circle. 

Enemies of the priest experience the same sun- 
motes as blinding, burning, and damaging. They 
must make a successful saving throw vs. spell or be 
blinded for 1 turn after the sunmotes are created. 
Each enemy is struck by a small fiery mote that 
causes a —2 penalty to morale and 1d4-1 points of 
damage. No saving throw is allowed, but creatures 
with magical fire resistance suffer only half damage. 


731 


Enemies of the priest who come within 10 feet 
of the minisun are burned for 1d8+2 points of fire 
damage. No saving throw is allowed, but creatures 
possessing magical resistance against fire suffer 
only half damage. 

Enemies of the priest outside the circle view the 
priest's allies as if obscured by a blinding light and 
suffer a ~2 penalty to missile attacks against them. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Conformance 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Invocation) 
Sphere: Law 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 hr. 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The conformance spell has a simple principle 
with a profound effect: probable events always 
manifest. That is, an event with a probability of 
5196 or better will occur. Thus, if a saving throw 
of 10 is required to avoid an effect, no roll is nec- 
essary; the save is automatically successful. If a 


D 


YU 
240 


Cuiraécen, Warlords of 


N Í 


warrior must roll 10 or better to hit an enemy, he 
automatically hits. 

Conversely, improbable actions (those with less 
than a 50% chance) always fail. A warrior who 
must roll 12 or better to hit an enemy automatically 
fails. A thief with a 49% chance to Hide in Shad- 
ows automatically fails. 

Two special conditions attend this spell. First, a 
prayer spell effect is continuously operative in the 
area of effect, shifting the balance of combat prob- 
abilities to favor the priest who cast the spell and 
any companions. Second, a chance of exactly 50% 
shifts in favor of the caster’s faction. For example, 
if a roll of 11 or better is needed to save against a 
spell effect, this is a 50% chance for success. In 
such cases, the priest and companions would make 
the save and enemies would fail. 

This spell is particularly potent if bless and 
chant spells are cast in the area of effect. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Cuiraécen, Warlords of 
See warlords of Cuiraécen. 


Cursed Quest, Kriesha’s 
See Kriesha’s cursed quest. 


Daythief 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: Quest 

Range: | mi. 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 wk. +1 day/level 
Casting Time: | turn 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons a bird—a daythief (a bird 
holy to most of Eloéle's worshipers)—that serves 
the priest for the spell's duration. The bird is highly 
intelligent with regard to obeying orders, and uses 
cleverness and innovation to achieve its master's 
goals. 

The daythief s primary purposes are to spy and 
steal for its master. As a spy, it can fly anywhere a 
bird can normally go and can relay information to 
its master upon its return by speaking in a voice 
understandable only to the priest. It can answer 
questions about its spy mission, but it cannot make 
judgments or perform extrapolations from existing 
information. 

The bird also has the ability to locate and steal 
small objects. The daythief can carry an object in its 


732 


claws or beak up to three times its own weight and 
still fly to its master. The bird can be sent to steal 
specific objects, or might steal things on its own 
that its master might find useful. It cannot use its 
uncanny intelligence or magical speech to explain 
why it steals a particular object. 

The daythief cannot be captured or harmed. It 
is said that Eloéle protects her holy bird or replaces 
destroyed daythieves with new birds to serve her 
faithful priests. Only intelligent and subtle priests 
of Eloéle are granted the use of this quest spell. 

Notes: Granted by Eloéle of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Elemental Swarm 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental, Summoning 


Level: Quest 

Range: 240 yds. 
Duration: 1 hr. 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to open a portal to 
one elemental plane (as appropriate for the patron 
Power). The caster can then summon a swarm of 
elementals from that plane. 

After the first turn of casting, 3d3 elementals 
of 12 Hit Dice each appear; after the second turn, 
243 elementals of 16 Hit Dice each appear; after 
the third turn, 1d3 elementals of 20 Hit Dice each 
appear. Each elemental has at least 5 hit points per 
hit die. The elementals remain for an hour from the 
time they first appear. 

These elementals obey the priest explicitly and 
cannot be turned against the caster. The priest does 
not need to concentrate to maintain control over the 
elementals. They cannot be dismissed by spells 
such as dismissal, dispel magic, or banishment. The 
elemental remain for the duration of the spell. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Emissary, Laerme's 
See Laerme's emissary. 


Fear Contagion 


J 


Erik’s Animal Compulsion 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: Quest 

Range: | mi. 

Components: V, S, М 
Duration: | day/level 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 

Area of Effect: 1 individual 
Saving Throw: None 


Erik sometimes grants this spell to his druids 
when they must venture into dangerous territory 
alone, or when they must send others on difficult 
missions. 

The subject of Eriks animal compulsion 
receives the aid and assistance of all natural beasts 
within range of the spell. For the most part, these 
creatures are not able to communicate with the sub- 
ject, but an animal might be able to coerce the indi- 
vidual to follow it to fresh water or to safety. The 
animals are unable to understand commands or the 
individual's needs and desires. 

If the subject was dying of thirst in the desert, 
for example, local animals would try to lead him 
or her to water. If the subject was starving, they 
might bring food. If the subject was under attack, 
all natural beasts in the area would do their best to 
defend him or her. 

In addition, natural animals cannot be com- 
pelled to act against the affected individual. Dogs 
will not track the druid if their masters wish him 
or her ill (Erik knows), while war horses shy from 
charging. 

Erik’s animal compulsion overrides any other 
charms or natural compulsions that might cause 
animals to attack or hinder the individual. Only 
another quest spell has a chance of counteracting 
it while the spell is in effect. 

Notes: Granted by Erik of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Etherwalk 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Astral, Travelers 
Level: Quest 
Range: Special 


Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By casting this spell, the priest transports him- 
self and as many as 50 followers (who must join 


hands at the time of casting) to the Border Ethereal. 
Unwilling creatures are allowed a saving throw at 
a —4 penalty to avoid transportation. 

The spell then allows the priest and party to 
make as many as three round-trip journeys to and 
from the Inner Planes. It then allows them to return 
to the Prime Material Plane. 

Travel rates in the Ethereal Plane are at four 
times normal speed. Travel times for locating or 
searching along planar curtains are all at the mini- 
mum time possible. Encounters with monsters 
occur at one-fifth the normal frequency. The priest 
and party are not affected by the ether cyclone. 

The spell expires when the priest and party 
return to the Border Ethereal from an Inner Plane 
for the third time. They are then instantly trans- 
ported to the Prime Material Plane. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Fear Contagion 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Charm, War 


Level: Quest 

Range: 240 yds. 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


A priest casting fear contagion selects a single 
creature to be the focus of the spell. The creature 
is affected by magical fear and receives no saving 
throw to avoid the effect. All within 10 yards of the 
target creature must make a successful saving throw 
vs. spell with a —4 penalty; failure means they are 
also affected by fear. 

Affected creatures flee away from the spell- 
caster for as long as they are able to run (refer to 
Chapter 14 of the Player s Handbook for rules). 
Such creatures, after resting, spend one full turn 
cowering. During this time, affected creatures 
suffer a —4 penalty to attack rolls, and all Dexterity 
bonuses are negated. 

As creatures run in fear, their fear is contagious. 
Any creature that comes within 10 yards of a crea- 
ture affected by this spell must also make a suc- 
cessful saving throw (no penalties) or likewise flee 
from the spellcaster. 

Creatures affected by fear no longer cause fear 
in others after they have passed one mile from the 
original center of the spell effect. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


A 733 М. 


Haelyn's Wisdom 


b —————————————— dl 


BATTLESYSTEM effects: If BATTLESYSTEM rules 
are used, the spell forces the unit to make a 
Morale Check at a —6 penalty. If this roll fails, 
the unit routs. Fear-struck creatures are permit- 
ted rally tests with a —3 penalty and rout until 
they rally. A rally test is not permitted until two 
turns of rout movement have been completed. 
Creatures passed within 10 yards make a stan- 
dard Morale Check with a —3 penalty to avoid 
routing, as well. 


Haelyn's Wisdom 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: АП 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: | turn 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Haelyn $ wisdom has the power to grant divine 
advice to the casting priest. The spell temporarily 
summons the spirit of a dead champion of Haelyn. 


h 


OAN 


h 


UN 
/ 


„0, a D 
VA % OUS 


Z 


The champion, invisible and noncorporeal, will stay 
with the priest for the duration of the spell, answer- 
ing questions and giving advice when needed. 

This “invisible adviser" draws on the wisdom it 
gained during its life and its afterlife. It should be 
considered a specialist—a sage in regard to one 
sphere of knowledge specified during the casting of 
the spell. The adviser might be an expert on 
combat, war, law, Anuirean history, or any field 
related to the worship of Haelyn. 

The adviser probably won't be knowledgeable 
concerning things out of its area of expertise. For 
example, a priest of Haelyn might summon an 
invisible adviser to help her plan a large battle. That 
adviser can provide splendid advice regarding the 
deployment of troops, the logistics of supply, and 
activity on the battlefield. The adviser will be less 
helpful regarding personal combat, and of nearly no 
use regarding decisions of law or economics. 

The duration of the spell depends on Haelyn's 
wishes. Usually, the adviser remains throughout the 
current crisis. If the adviser was summoned to help 
with the planning and execution of a particular 
battle, the spirit stays until the battle ends. As a gen- 
eral rule, the spell seldom lasts more than a month. 

Haelyn may call back the spirit if he thinks the 
adviser has been misused or the priest is letting the 
spirit make decisions. The adviser is meant only to 
supplement the wisdom and knowledge of the cast- 
ing priest, as if it were a powerful augury or speak 
with dead spell. If the casting priest abuses or mis- 
uses the advice given by the spirit, Haelyn will first 
warn the priest, then recall the adviser. 

Notes: Granted by Haelyn of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Health Blessing 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing, Necromantic 


Level: Quest 

Range: 100 yds. 

Duration: 1 day/level 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 50 creatures 
Saving Throw: None 


Health blessing provides a number of human, 
demihuman, or humanoid creatures with protection 
against il] health; it also enables those affected to 
heal others. 

Recipients of a health blessing are immune to 
nonmagical disease, gain a +4 bonus to saving 
throws vs. poison and death magic, and can cast 
cure light wounds on themselves once per day for 
the duration of the spell. In addition, a recipient of 


health blessing can heal one other creature per day 
as a paladin does by laying hands. The healing con- 
ferred is 1 hit point per level or hit die of the crea- 
ture doing the healing. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Highway 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 day 

Casting Time: | turn 

Area of Effect: 1,000 square yards 
Saving Throw: None 


The Aighway spell creates a shimmering plane 
of force that acts as a magical conveyor for the 
priest. By standing at the forward edge of the 
10 X 100 yard plane, the priest and as many fol- 
lowers as can fit onto the square can travel as out- 
lined below. 

The highway travels 30 miles per hour (MV 88) 
over all terrains. The priest sets the height of the 
highway in a range from 1 foot to 100 yards above 
ground level. The highway moves as the priest 
wills; if the priest fixes a destination in his or her 
mind, the highway takes the shortest route to that 
destination until the priest changes the course in his 
or her mind. 

The highway cannot be used offensively. It trav- 
els over or around obstacles such as buildings and 
large creatures, It protects creatures traveling on it 
from adverse effects of the elements (ice, rain, 
gales, etc.). The highway can hover in place, but 
hovering can be achieved only at a height of 12 
inches above ground level. 

When the spell expires or the destination is 
reached, the highway gently lowers the priest and 
party to the ground. The priest can order the high- 
way to drop off creatures and collect others at inter- 
mediate destinations, although the caster must 
remain on the highway or it wil] disappear. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Imago Interrogation 
(Divination, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Astral, Divination, Time 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Duration: Special 
Casting Time: | turn 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Implosion/Inversion 


The imago is a mental image—a form of mental 
magical body. After casting this spell (requiring 1 
turn), the caster falls asleep. After 146 turns of 
sleep, the imago of the priest begins to travel. The 
imago is not subject to any form of attack and has 
no effective attacks. 

The imago can travel to as many as four differ- 
ent locations separated by any distance, even across 
the planes and/or backward in time. At these loca- 
tions, the imago can interrogate the imagoes of as 
many as 10 other sentient creatures (other than 
Powers), compelling them to reply truthfully to its 
questions. A maximum of 40 questions can be 
asked during the spell duration. 

Asking one question and listening to the reply 
takes 4 rounds of time in the caster's world. Each 
planar or temporal jump lasts 3 turns in that world. 

Imago communications are telepathic. The 
questions must be answerable in a sentence of rea- 
sonable length, or the interrogated creature 
becomes confused and cannot answer. 

The imagoes of interrogated creatures have no 
recollection of their interrogations. As a result, his- 
tory cannot be changed through backward time 
travel using this spell. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


DM Note: The DM may rule that certain 
magical wards and other protections may pre- 


Implosion/Inversion 


(Invocation) 
Sphere: Numbers, Combat 


Level: Quest 

Range: 120 yds. 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 or more creatures 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By use of this spectacular spell, the priest 
rearranges the extradimensional and spatial geome- 
tries of the molecules of one or more creatures, The 
result is that the rearrangement of the target crea- 
ture causes it to implode (collapse inward upon 
itself) or invert (its inside become its outside and 
vice versa). 

The result is usually inversion, unless the target 
creature would not be adversely affected by this 
process. For example a slime, ooze, golem, ele- 
mental, and so on would implode. In either case, 
the effect kills or destroys the target creature 


P. 735 ~ 


Interdiction 


eee ДШ 


instantaneously unless it makes a successful saving 
throw vs. death magic at a —4 penalty. 

The priest can affect one creature per round 
with this spell. After each round, the priest must 
make a Constitution check. If this fails, the priest 
is overwhelmed with the effort of sustaining the 
spell, at which time the spell ends, leaving the 
priest fatigued (reeling and unable to act) for 1d4 
rounds. The maximum possible duration of the 
spell is 3 turns. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Interdiction 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Chaos, Law, Wards 


Level: Quest 

Range: 240 yds. 

Duration: 1 day 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: 200-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This powerful spell affects all enemies of the 
spellcaster who enter the area of effect. The spell 
inflicts a —1 penalty to Armor Class, a —1 penalty to 
attack and damage rolls, and a —2 penalty to saving 
throws. Creatures friendly to the priest receive cor- 
responding bonuses: +1 bonus to Armor Class, +1 
to attack and damage rolls, and a +2 bonus to saving 
throws. Additional effects are possible, depending on 
the Power granting the spell. Effects correspond (or 
at least not conflict) with the spheres the priest nor- 
mally uses. Multiple effects are possible. 

Wards: The variation for the sphere of Wards 
requires that each hostile creature entering the area 
of effect make a saving throw vs. spell at a —4 
penalty or suffer 4d6 points of damage. Any 
affected creature must also flee the area and is 
unable to return. The creature must make a second 
saving throw vs. spell at a ^4 penalty as it leaves the 
area or be blinded until magically cured. 

Law: The variation for the sphere of Law 
requires that a hostile creature make a saving throw 
vs. spell each time it wishes to change an action. 
Thus, if a creature wishes to stop running and draw 
a weapon, a successful saving throw is needed or the 
creature continues to run. Actions that cannot be 
continued (for example, firing an arrow if the archer 
has no more arrows) are repeated as empty automa- 
tisms. In addition, creatures hostile to the priest 
automatically fail saving throws against Enchant- 
ment/Charm spells cast by the priest. 

Chaos: The variation for the sphere of Chaos 
requires that a hostile creature make saving throw 
vs. spell at —4 penalty or be affected by confusion 


736 


| (Abjuration) 


(as the spell). Affected creatures also have a 5% 
chance per round of suddenly being attacked by a 
phantasmal killer. 

All creatures that enter the area of effect are 
subject to the effects of the spell. All effects except 
blindness cease 3 rounds after an affected creature 
leaves the area. Creatures reentering the area of 
effect must make new saving throws. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Kriesha’s Cursed Quest 


Sphere: Protection 


Level: Quest 

Range: 1 mi. 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: | hr. 

Area of Effect: 1 individual 
Saving Throw: None 


Legends tell that only the most powerful High 
Priestess of Kriesha will ever be granted the use of 
this quest spell. However, the legends also say that 
she may be granted this spell several times during 
her career. 

When this spell is cast, the priestess specifies a 
single individual who she has personally seen at 
least once. This individual is often a hero of an 
enemy faith. The casting priest then specifies a par- 
ticular quest in which that hero is currently 
engaged. The spell then takes its hideous affect. 

As long as the hero remains on the specified 
quest, he or she is subject to all the effects of a 
curse spell (reversed remove curse), as well as other 
misfortunes (bad weather, attacks of wild animals, 
and so on) the DM wishes to enforce. The spell 
works in devious ways, making the victim’s life 
extremely difficult and dangerous while pursuing 
the specified quest. If the hero turns aside from the 
quest, the curse temporarily lifts, making life seem 
fair and pleasant again. 

This spell is most often invoked when a cham- 
pion of another faith attempts to hinder or destroy 
those faithful to Kriesha. The spell's stated intent 
must be very specific. The cursed quest cannot 
encompass "any time the character acts against a 
worshiper of Kriesha,” but it might work “when the 
character acts to destroy Kriesha's temples in the 
province of Lutkhovsky." 

The DM must always specify at least one way 
that the curse can be lifted. The victim of the spell 
won't know this solution, nor will the casting priest. 
However, the power of the other gods may try to 
provide hints to the victim as a means of balancing 


Mebhaighl Touch 


b —————————— dd 


the power of the spell. Suggested ways of remov- 

ing Kriesha’s cursed quest include: 

* Slaying the caster of the spell; 

* Finding a holy relic of one of Cerilia's other 
deities to use as protection; 

* Destroying a holy relic of Kriesha; and 

* Performing an important and dangerous task to 
win another god's favor (and protection). 
Notes: Granted by Kriesha of Cerilia, the 

BIRTHRIGHT Setting. 


Laerme's Emissary 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Priests of Laerme value beauty and romance 
above all other worldly things. Pacifistic by nature, 
they often find themselves in the roles of ambassa- 
dors between enemy lands. On very special occa- 


sions, their goddess may grant the use of this quest 
spell to aid their peacemaking endeavors. 

The priest casts this spell to seem reasonable 
and inoffensive to all Cerilian creatures of Intelli- 
gence 8 or better. As long as the affected priest puts 
forth a "friendly" appearance (using Table 59: 
Encounter Reactions in the DMG), no creature of 
sufficient intelligence will react to in a manner 
worse than "indifferent." 

The power of this spell allows priests of Laerme 
to attempt impossible missions in the field of diplo- 
macy. A priest influenced by this spell could safely 
travel through an elven or awnshegh realm, knowing 
that no intelligent creature—even the awnshegh— 
will attack him as long as the priest maintains a 
friendly, helpful attitude. In addition, a normally 
unreasonable or evil character will at least consider 
what the priest has to say, rather than dismissing 
pleas or arguments out of hand. 

This spell does not charm creatures into helping 
or obeying the priest. It will not magically stop an 
attack in progress or provide the priest with cover 
so he or she can enter an enemy's realm and assas- 
sinate the ruler. Should the priest do anything, or 
allow his or her allies to do anything, that would 
compromise the integrity of the magic, Laerme 
withdraws her protection immediately. 

The spell's magic usually lasts for the duration 
of a particular mission. This might mean several 
days of travel through different realms, or it could 
mean one audience with a powerful individual. The 
spell usually expires after a month, unless the priest 
has not yet accomplished the mission. 

Notes: Granted by Laerme of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Mebhaighl Touch 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: АП 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Components: У, S M 
Duration: 3 mo. 

Casting Time: 1 day 

Area of Effect: 1 province 
Saving Throw: None 


Ruornil's priests are few and scattered. Their 
leaders generally control small holdings in the 
forests of Cerilia, hidden from prying eyes. They 
concern themselves with Ruornil's war against the 
Shadow and strive to make themselves powerful 
enough to resist it. 

When a priest regent of Ruornil finds himself 
unable to tap his holdings for the energy to cast a 


Mindnet 


b——————————————————— à 


realm spell (if he is out of range of his ley lines, 
for example), he can cast mebhaighl touch. The 
spell directly affects the casting priest, allowing 
him to tap the magical energy of a single province. 
He must remain within the same province for the 
duration of the spell (as soon as he leaves its bound- 
aries, the spell ends). He is able to cast realm spells 
as if the unclaimed source holdings in the area were 
temple holdings under his control. The priest can 
then cast any realm spell he knows, using the meb- 
haighl as a source holding. 

Example: Ruorlen, a 15th-level priest, has fled 
his enemies to Cariele— specifically, the province 
of Mountainsedge (3/4). Currently, the only source 
holding in the province is a source (0) held by the 
Eyeless One. Ruorlen, who has been granted meb- 
haighl touch, can cast it to tap mebhaighl as the 
equivalent of a temple (4) holding. Over the next 
three months, Ruorlen can cast as many as three 
realm spells in Mountainsedge that require a hold- 
ing level of 4 or less. 

Notes: Granted by Ruornil of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Optional: Realm spells are beyond the scope 
of this book, which limits the usefulness of this 
spell. As an option, the DM might treat this spell 
as a one-time /imited wish in areas that are not 
magic dead, and as a full wish in areas of wild 
magic, mythal, or other exceptionally strong magic. 


Mindnet 
(Divination, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Duration: 2 hrs. 
Casting Time: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


The priest casting a mindnet spell establishes a 
telepathic link with as many as 10 other creatures 
that can be separated from each other by as much as 
10 miles. Thus, a chain of creatures 100 miles long 
could be established. 

The Power granting this spell has the final word 
on the individuals that can be included. Most com- 
monly, it can be cast to include individuals famil- 
iar to the caster. However, depending on the 
purpose of the spell, the Power may allow a 
stranger known to the caster only by name to be 
included in the mindnet Unwilling creatures must 


make a successful saving throw vs. spell at a -4 

penalty to avoid being included. 

Casting the spell requires one round per two 
creatures in the mindnet. The spell's duration 
begins after all affected creatures have been linked. 
Individuals of any class can take part in the link, 
benefiting from several effects. 

First, each member of the mindnet benefits 
from Intelligence, Wisdom, and Dexterity bonuses. 
The bonuses are equal to the bonuses held by the 
member of the mindnet with the highest ability 
score. For example, if five creatures in a mindnet 
have Wisdom scores of 15, 15, 16, 17, and 18, each 
would make saving throws, ability checks, and the 
like at a Wisdom score of 18. Bonus spells are not 
gained due to enhanced Wisdom, however. 

Second, spells can be pooled among the spell- 
casters within the mindnet. Any caster can use a 
spell memorized by another caster with several 
restrictions: 

* The caster who has memorized the spell must 
allow its use. 

* The borrower can use only spells of a level he or 
she could normally cast. 

* The borrower must abide by normal class 
restrictions. Priests and wizards in the same 
mindnet cannot use each other's spells, nor can 
a specialist wizard borrow a spell from an oppo- 
sition school. 

* A borrowed spell is lost from the mind of the 
caster who memorized it. 

* Any required component must either be pro- 
vided by the borrower, or used appropriately by 
the caster who memorized the spell at the 
instant the spell is cast. 


Third, each member of the mindnet is in con- 
stant mental communication. Each member knows 
what is happening at the locations of all other 
members. 

Finally, twice per turn, the caster of the mind- 
net spell can instantly teleport any individual 
linked by the mindnet to any other individual who 
is also a part of, the spell. This massive effort 
results in a +4 penalty to any Constitution checks 
made by the priest. 

The priest casting the spell cannot perform any 
other actions while the mindnet exists; if so, the 
spell is canceled. The priest must make a Constitu- 
tion check at the end of each turn in order to sustain 
the spell. A failed check cancels the mindnet. The 
spell can last a maximum of 12 turns (2 hours). 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


р, 738 м 


Revelation 


)———————————————" А 


Planar Quest 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Astral 


Level: Quest 

Range: Touch 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By joining hands with as many as 12 compan- 
ions and casting this spell, the priest transports the 
party to any other plane of existence, The priest and 
party may arrive at a specific location in a plane 
(if one is known) or at an unknown destination. 
Travel time to the destination, whether known or 
unknown, is the minimum possible. In an Inner 
Plane, a friendly guide is always available to the 
priest. Hostile encounters occur at one-fifth normal 
frequency. 

Unwilling creatures are allowed a saving throw 
уз. spell at a —4 penalty to avoid being transported. 
In the Inner Planes, the party is magically protected 
as necessary for survival in the environment. The 
party does not need to eat, drink, or rest if condi- 
tions make these activities impossible. Party mem- 
bers are immune to fire in the Elemental Plane of 
Fire, and similar immunities are granted by the 
Power in other planes as necessary. The party can 
move through any terrain (including the Elemental 
Plane of Earth) at its normal movement rate. 

In the Outer Planes, similar immunities apply. 
The priest is also granted a power compass 
(described in Manual of the Planes). Hostile 
encounters in an Outer Plane occur only half as 
often as normal. 

The duration of this spell is decided by the 
Power who grants it. Normally, it is sufficient to 
allow the priest and party to undertake the quest 
that the Power has set forth. When the quest has 
been completed successfully or has failed beyond 
recovery, the priest and party are returned to the 
Prime Material Plane. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Preservation 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: Quest 

Range: 480 yds. 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: | turn 
Area of Effect: 1 structure 
Saving Throw: None 


739 


This spell creates a powerful set of protective 
wards that operate on a single fortified building, 
temple complex, tower, or similar structure. These 
wards protect the physical integrity of the structure 
and prevent magical access. 

A building protected by preservation suffers 
only 25% of normal structural damage from 
sources such as siege engines, earthquakes (both 
natural and magical), and powerful weather-affect- 
ing spells. Spells that directly affect the physical 
integrity of the structure (such as passwall, stone 
shape, transmute rock to mud) simply fail when 
cast on the protected building. 

Preservation creates a permanent protection 
from evil spell on the affected building. Every sur- 
face of the building benefits from the effects of 
the spell. 

Magical spells allowing access to the build- 
ing fail. Thus, creatures attempting to teleport or 
fly into the building are stopped. Birds and crea- 
tures with natural flight can enter the building 
normally. 

If the building is a temple (or other consecrated 
building) dedicated to the Power that granted the 
spell, all priests inside it gain the benefit of a sanc- 
tuary spell for the duration of the preservation. 

The preservation spell expires if the building is 
destroyed or after 60 days have passed. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Resuscitation, Avani's 
See Avani's resuscitation. 


Revelation 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: Quest 
Range: Special 
Duration: 1 day 


Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The revelation spell grants the priest extraordi- 
nary divination powers. These are effective to a 
жор of 240 yards. 

The priest gains true seeing as the Sth-level 
priest spell. 

The priest can see and identify all priest spell 
effects in the area (assume a line of sight in a 
60-degree arc). 

The priest is instantly aware of any creature’s 
attempt to lie to him. 

The priest can communicate with animals, crea- 
tures, and monsters of all types. While the 


Reversion 


N Ý 


number of creatures is unlimited, the priest can 

converse with only one at a time. 

The priest can communicate telepathically with 

humanoids. 

* The priest can use a suitable item as a crystal ball 
once per hour, as per the magical item described 
in the DMG (including range). The priest has a 
+20% bonus to all rolls used to determine 
success. 
Notes: Common quest spell. 


Reversion 
(Alteration, Invocation) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the priest reverses certain 
recent events in the area of effect. The spell affects 
only creatures friendly to the priest. The magic 
takes effect immediately after the spell is com- 
pleted rather than at the end of the round. The 


740 


reversion spell affects only creatures and charac- 
ters. Equipment and magical items are not affected. 
All damage suffered by the priest’s allies during 
the previous turn is undone. This includes energy 
drains, poison, and all special attack forms unless 
these resulted in instantaneous death. Death from 
cumulative physical damage is undone, however. Any 
creature brought back to life by the reversion spell is 
not required to make a Resurrection Survival roll. 
Any spells cast by the priest’s allies during the 
previous turn are restored and can be used again. 
This does not apply to magical or spell-like effects 
from magical items or scrolls. Material components 
consumed in spellcasting during this time are also 
restored. 
Casting this spell ages the priest one year. 
Notes: Common quest spell. 


Robe of Healing 
(Enchantment, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: Quest 

Range: Touch 
Duration: | hr. 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Area of Effect: 1 robe 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enchants the priest's robe or cloak, 
enabling him to walk among wounded creatures and 
heal them. By touching the robe, a wounded crea- 
ture is cured of 1d4+4 points of damage. As many 
creatures as can physically touch the robe within the 
spell duration can be healed. A reasonable maxi- 
mum is 20 creatures per round, allowing a total of 
1,200 creatures to be healed. A creature can be 
affected only once per week by the robe of healing. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Sera's Blessed Luck 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Level: Quest 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 wk. + 1 day/level 
Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The priest can imbue any willing worshiper of 
Sera with Sera s blessed luck. This powerful spell 
almost always benefits the recipient, but true to 
Sera’s nature, the spell sometimes confers ill luck. 


Siege Wall 


ae ee a 


While the creature is affected by this spell, all 
its die rolls are rolled twice—attack and damage 
rolls, proficiency checks, saving throws, and so on. 
The creature is almost always allowed to take the 
better of the two rolls. If either of the two rolls 
comes up with the worst possible result (a 1 on an 
attack roll, or a 00 on a thief ability check, for 
example), the creature must take that result instead 
of the better roll. 

If both rolls on any given check come up as the 
worst possible checks, then Sera has frowned upon the 
creature. For the remainder of the duration, the crea- 
ture is forced to take the worse of the two results. 

If both rolls on any given check come up as the 
best possible results, the creature can apply a +3 
bonus to any two die rolls during the next 24-hour 
period. 

Notes: Granted by Sera of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Ship of Tears 
(Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: Quest 

Range: 100 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When Nesirie’s priests need to undertake long voy- 
ages, they may be allowed to use Nesirie’s ship of 
tears. Formed out of the longing and sorrow of the 
world, this spell creates a ship made entirely of water, 
though it feels as solid as any wood. It can carry up 
to two people per level of the casting priest. Nonwor- 
shipers of Nesirie may be disconcerted when boarding 
this flowing, blue-green ship of water. 

When Nesirie’s priest casts this quest spell, she 
stands on a shore and begs her goddess for trans- 
portation to some far place she could not otherwise 
reach safely. The ship of tears rises from the water, 
and she and her companions can board. 

The ship sails at incredible speed, being one 
with the water. No one has ever tracked its speed 
accurately, but legend tells that the ship of tears can 
circumnavigate Cerilia in less than a month. 

The ship travels anywhere the priest directs. The 
vessel has no sails and no crew—it moves only by 
Nesirie’s will. Passengers had best not offend 
Nesirie while aboard the ship, or they may find 
themselves swimming home. 

No water creature, natural or otherwise, will 
attack the ship of tears. Mortal craft, no matter how 


motivated, could never sail quickly enough to 
attack the ship. Weather has no effect on the ship 
or passengers. Some say the ship can even go under 
water, protecting its passengers in a bubble of air, to 
avoid unusual trouble. When the ship arrives at its 
destination, it waits for its passengers to disembark, 
then dissolves into the surf. 

This is one of the few quest spells that may be 
granted more than once to the same priest. Nesirie 
sometimes allows a priest a return trip, depending 
on the nature of the quest. 

Notes: Granted by Nesirie of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Shooting Stars 
(Conjuration, Invocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Sun, Weather 


Level: Quest 

Range: 120 yards 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 40-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: '/2 


A priest casting shooting stars creates a violent 
turbulence in the air above the area of effect, from 
which a number of fiery-orange, electrically- 
charged miniature fireballs erupt and shower onto 
the ground. Within the area of effect, all creatures 
suffer 6d10 points of combined fire and electrical 
damage. A successful saving throw at a —4 penalty 
indicates half damage. 

In addition, four large shooting stars materialize 
within the area of effect. The priest can individually 
target these at specific creatures. If creatures are 
not specified, the targets are randomly selected. 
Each shooting star causes 48 points of damage on 
impact (no saving throw is allowed). Any creature 
within 10 feet of impact suffers 24 points of fire 
damage (save vs. spell at —4 for half damage). 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Siege Wall 
(Alteration, Invocation) 
Sphere: Creation, Guardian 


Level: Quest 

Range: 480 yds. 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: | turn 
Area of Effect: 1 building 
Saving Throw: None 


A siege wall uses magical energy to fortify all 
external areas of a fortified building, such as walls, 


2 741 ~ 


Sphere of Security 


battlements, drawbridges, and gates. External sur- 
faces to be protected must be contiguous. 

Creatures assaulting the protected building have 
their movement rates reduced by half: when trying 
to scale the exterior surfaces (scaling ladders, and 
so on). Damage caused by war machines is reduced 
by 2 die levels. (Thus, if normal damage is 1d12, 
1d8 is rolled instead; if damage is 1d10, 1d6 is 
rolled.) Damage caused by crushing engines is 
rolled at —2 to the damage roll. 

The siege wall expires if the building is 
destroyed; it lasts a maximum of 24 hours. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


BATTLESYSTEM effects: The protective effects 
of the siege wall are compatible with BATTLESYS- 
TEM rules (see Chapter 7). Attackers suffer a —2 
penalty to damage rolls for missile fire. Damage 
or AD caused by war machines is reduced by 2 
die levels (if normal damage is 1d12, 1d8 is 
rolled instead; if damage is 1d10, 1d6 is rolled; 
ballista has AD8). Damage caused by crushing 
engines is rolled at 2 to the damage roll or ADs. 
Hits or hit points of crushing engines are 
reduced by half. АП enemies attacking a building 
protected by siege wall who enter an enclosed 


wall space are out of command unless they arein 


the line of sight of their commander, regardless 
of his control diameter. 

All exterior areas of the fortification have 
their hit points or Hits doubled (see Hits of 
Building Features in BATTLESYSTEM rules). 


Sphere of Security 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 hr. 

Casting Time: Special 

Area of Effect: 10-foot radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Sphere of security protects the priest who casts 
the spell and his companions within the area 
of effect. Enemy creatures within the area are 
unaffected. 

The sphere grants affected creatures a +2 bonus 
to Armor Class, 50% magic resistance, and a +2 
bonus to saving throws against magic. Casting this 
portion of the spell requires 1 round. 

In addition, the priest can specify additional 
specific protection effects from the List of Protec- 
tion Scrolls in Appendix 3 of the DMG. Each 


A 742 М. 


additional protection lengthens casting time by 1 
round. The priest can create one additional effect 
per five experience levels, to a maximum of four 
effects. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Spiral of Degeneration 
(Enchantment/Charm, Invocation) 
Sphere: Chaos, Thought 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Duration. 1 hr. 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 50-ft. diameter 
Saving Throw: Special 


This potent spell affects all creatures hostile to 
the priest within the area of effect. The Power grant- 
ing the spell causes the spell’s effects to manifest 
in one of two ways: the Chaos variation or the 
Thought variation. 

Chaos: In the Chaos variation, the fabric of 
reality is altered to change events. Magical items 
become dysfunctional because the fabric of magi- 
cal reality is changed. 

Thought: In the Thought variation, the thoughts 
of those affected by the spell are distorted and 
altered so that they are unable to function coher- 
ently and effectively. Magical items become dys- 
functional because the thoughts of their users are 
warped to either convince them that the items 
cannot function or block thought so that proper 
commands cannot be given. 

The effects are the same for both variations. 
Each round, there is a 50% chance that a degenera- 
tion effect will occur in the area of effect. When 
this occurs, two events take place. First, spellcast- 
ers lose one spell from each level of spells currently 
memorized (for example, a spellcaster who has 
memorized three spells each from 1st through 3rd 
Jevel loses one spell from each level for a total of 
three lost spells). Lost spells can be regained nor- 
mally through rest and memorization. 

Second, magical items are affected in the fol- 
lowing ways: 

* Weapons and armor lose one level of enchant- 
ment (a sword +3 becomes a sword +2, and so 
on). 

* Magical items with charges (wands, rods, 
staves, etc.) are drained of 1410 charges. 

* Magical items without pluses or charges must 
make a saving throw vs. spell (using the saving 
throw of their owner) or become nonmagical. 

* Potions lose all magic and each scrolls loses one 
randomly determined spell. 


| 
| 


Sunmotes, Circle of 


L—— nities 


* Permanent magical items (swords, boots, armor, 
and so on) temporarily lose all special effects 
until the spell expires or until the items leave the 
area of effect and for 1d10 rounds thereafter. 

* Single-use and charged items are permanently 
affected by this spell. For example, a potion 
destroyed by this spell remains useless even 
after the spell ends. 

Within the area of effect, magical communica- 
tion is impossible due to thought blocks and chaotic 
effects. A reverse of the tongues spell operates con- 
tinuously in the area of effect. Telepathic commu- 
nication (for example, with a familiar) is also 
impossible. No communication magic functions 
(ESP. sending, and so on); any spellcaster trying to 
cast such a spell is stunned for 1 round per level of 
the spell attempted. 

In the Chaos variation of the spell, the center of 
the area of effect moves 10 feet per round. The direc- 
tion is randomly determined using 148 roll and com- 
pass points (1 = N, 2 = NE, 3 =E, 4 = $Е, 5 = $, 6 = 
SW, 7 = W, 8 NW). The radius of the spell effect 
always includes the caster; reroll any contrary result. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Stalker 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Creation, Guardian, Plant 


Level: Quest 
Range: 30 yds. 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 

A priest casting this spell conjures 1d4+2 plant- 
based creatures that are identical to shambling 
mounds of 11 Hit Dice. These creatures aid the caster 
in combat or battle, perform a specific mission, or 
serve as bodyguards. The creatures remain with the 
priest for seven days unless dismissed. If the stalkers 
are summoned for guard duty only, however, the dura- 
tion of the spell is seven months. In this case, the stalk- 
ers can only be ordered to guard a specific site or 
location. The stalkers have the shambling mound 
resistance to fire only if the terrain is suitable (marshy, 
close to a body of water, etc.). 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Storm of Vengeance 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental, War, Weather 


Level: Quest 

Range: 400 yds. 

Duration: 1 turn 

Casting Time: | turn 

Area of Effect: 120-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell requires the priest to concentrate and 
cast the spell for the full duration of the spell. The 
casting time and duration are simultaneous; both 
activities occur in the same turn. 

In the first round of casting, the priest summons 
an enormous black storm cloud over the area of 
effect. Lightning and crashing claps of thunder 
appear within the storm; creatures in the area of 
effect must make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell or be deafened for 1d4 turns. 

On the second round, acid rains down in the 
area, inflicting 1d4+1 points of damage. No saving 
throw is allowed. 

On the third round, the caster calls six lightning 
bolts down from the cloud. Each is directed at one 
target by the priest (all can be directed at a single or 
they can be directed at six separate targets). Each 
lightning bolt strike causes 8d8 points of damage 
(save vs. spell for half damage). 

On the fourth round, hailstones rain down in the 
area, causing 3d10 points of damage (no saving 
throw). 

On the fifth through tenth (and final) rounds, vio- 
lent rain and wind gusts reduce visibility to 5 feet. 
Movement is reduced 75%. Missile fire and spell- 
casting into or from the area of effect are impossible. 

The sequence of effects ceases immediately if 
the priest is disrupted from spellcasting during the 
1-turn duration of the spell. The priest can cancel 
the effects at any time. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Sunmotes, Circle of 
See circle of sunmotes. 


4 743 М. 


Tattoos of Protection 


ч“ A ———5—————M———U 


Tattoos of Protection 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: Quest 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: | mo. 

Casting Time: 1 hr./tattoo 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When the Prince of Terror's legions enter battle, 
he sometimes grants his war priests the ability to 
protect noble followers. By use of this spell, a priest 
of Belinik can inscribe protective tattoos onto one 
creature (which may be the caster). 

A tattoo of protection can contain the magic of 
any priest spell from the sphere of protection that 
the priest could normally cast. The priest can 
inscribe as one level of magic into such tattoos for 
each level of experience. A 12th-level priest of 
Belinik, for example, could inscribe up to 12 levels 
of protective magic into one set of tattoos; this 
might be two 6th-level spells, or one 6th-level and 
two 3rd-level spells, and so on. The priest can 
inscribe the same spell several times if desired. 

The protected creature can activate any of these 
protective spells by touching the appropriate tattoo 
with a free hand and crying the name of Belinik 
aloud. When an individual tattoo is activated, it 
glows slightly and the spell inscribed within works 
for its normal duration. When the spell duration 
elapses, that individual tattoo fades slightly and 
cannot be used for a number of hours equal to its 
spell level. After one month, all of the tattoos fade 
and cannot be used. 

Notes: Granted by Belinik of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Transformation 
(Alteration, Enchantment, Illusion) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: Quest 

Range: 0 

Duration: 3 turns 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 100-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The transformation spell allows the priest to 
alter extradimensional and relative geometries 
within the area of effect. This enables the priest and 
his companions to use extradimensional links to 
facilitate rapid movement as follows: 


All allies of the priest are able to blink (as per 

the 3rd-level wizard spell) once per round, with the 
ability to select the direction of movement. 
As many as 10 creatures (designated by the priest at 
the time of spelicasting) can use the teleport with- 
out error spell. They can teleport anywhere within 
the area of effect of the transformation spell once 
during the spell. 

As many as 10 creatures (specified by the priest 
at the time of spellcasting) act as if wearing boots 
of striding and springing. This effect lasts for the 
spell duration. 

At any time during the spell, the priest and as 
many as 10 other creatures can be affected as per a 
shadow walk spell. Those to be affected must stand 
in a circle and touch hands. If the priest who cast 
the transformation spell leaves by the shadow walk, 
all other effects of the transformation are canceled 
immediately; otherwise, they persist for three turns. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Undead Plague 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: Quest 

Range: | mi. 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 2 rounds 

Area of Effect: 100 yd. square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this potent spell, the priest sum- 
mons many ranks of skeletons to do his bidding. 
The skeletons are formed from any and all 
humanoid bones within the area of effect. The 
number of skeletons depends on the terrain in the 
area of effect; a battle site or graveyard will yield 
10 skeletons per 100 square yards; a long-inhabited 
area will yield three skeletons per 100 square yards; 
and wilderness will yield one skeleton per 100 
square yards. 

The spell’s maximum area of effect is 10,000 
square yards. Thus, no more than 1,000 skeletons 
can be summoned by this spell. 

The skeletons created by this spell are turned 
as zombies and remain in existence until de- 
stroyed or willed out of existence by the priest 
who created them. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


2 744 Me 


Ward Matrix 


b ee ad 


Warband Quest 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, War 


Level: Quest 

Range: 240 yards 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: | round 

Area of Effect: 200 creatures 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A priest can cast warband quest on any group of 
200 creatures capable of understanding his or her 
commands. The creatures are then affected in a 
manner similar to the 5th-level priest spell, quest. 
Unwilling creatures are allowed a saving throw 
with a —4 penalty to avoid the effects. 

The specified quest must be related to the 
reason that the Power granted this spell (perhaps a 
quest to slay or overcome a specified enemy). 

Warband quest gives subjects of the spell a 
bonus of 2 hit points per level of the caster (maxi- 
mum bonus 20 hit points). Subjects also gain the 
effects of a prayer spell and have Morale of 18 
while on the quest. These benefits last for the dura- 
tion of the spell; the spell ends when the specified 
task is completed. A creature that abandons the 
quest is subject to the wrath of the deity. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Ward Matrix 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: Quest 

Range: Special 
Duration: 60 days 
Casting Time: 6 turns 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The ward matrix spell links as many as six loca- 
tions within the Prime Material Plane. Only loca- 
tions that have a functioning Wards spell can be 
linked. Ward matrix conjoins the different Wards 
spells so that each linked site gains the protection 
of all other wards in the network. 

From the place where the ward matrix is cast, 
magical connections spread to the other designated 
sites. These can be seen with a true seeing or simi- 
lar spell as tendrils of magical energy running 
through the air just above ground level. The con- 
nections target their destinations and move toward 
them at a rate of 40 miles per turn. They can evade 
barriers such as antimagic shell by moving above or 
around them. When the connections reach their 
destinations, they muitiply and spread to connect 
all other locations in the network; this secondary 
linkage is established at a rate of 20 miles per turn. 


Warlords of Сшгаёсеп 


a ЫИ 


The conjoining of wards lasts for 60 days unless 
a linked area is destroyed or a Wards spell is dis- 
pelled. Any location that is destroyed or has its 
Wards spell dispelled is removed from the matrix; 
other connections remain intact for the duration. 
Notes: Common quest spell. 


Warlords of Cuiraécen 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: War 


Level: Quest 

Range: 100 yards 
Components: V, 8, M 
Duration: | month 
Casting Time: | turn 
Area of Effect: lunit 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects one unit (about 200 men), 
transforming them into a powerful military force 
for the god of battle. The spell lasts a full month or 
until the unit is destroyed or disbanded. 

When this spell is cast, it changes the target unit 
in a way specified by the caster. For every three 
levels of the caster, the spell adds a +1 bonus to 
any combination of the unit’s ratings: Move, Melee, 
Defense, Charge, or Missile. A 9th-level caster 
might improve a single ability by +3, or she might 
improve three abilities by +1. The spell cannot 
create a new mode of attack (units without the abil- 
ity to charge, for example, cannot gain that abil- 
ity), and it cannot increase a unit’s move beyond 
twice its original value. 

In addition to these bonuses, the unit is 
improved to three Morale icons (Swords, Pennant, 
and Shield). The affected unit is not immune to 
routs, but it becomes much more brave in the face 
of the enemy. The spell also grants the unit a —4 
bonus to all unit saving throws. 

The warlords of Cuiraécen are an imposing 
sight. Thunder and lightning strike behind and 
above them, and sparks fly when they wield their 
weapons. The voice of Cuiraécen moves them to 
great deeds of glory, and his power flows through 
their limbs. The very sight of them is sometimes 
enough to make weak units flee the battlefield 
in terror. 

Notes: Granted by Cuiraécen of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Special Note: For further details on the sphere 
of War, see page 768. To convert this spell to the 
BATTLESYSTEM rules, use the following: 

Move +1 = Mv +3 

Melee/Missile +1 = +1 AD 

Charge +1 = +2 AD 

Defense = +1 AR 
Morale becomes 15 (Champion) for all checks 
and is not further modified. 


Wisdom, Haelyn’s 
See Haelyn’s wisdom. 


Wolf Spirits 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Invocation) 
Sphere: Animal, Guardian, Summoning 


Level: Quest 

Range: 30 yards 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The priest casting this spell calls upon the 
“spirits” of wolves (or another animal, if appro- 
priate). The notion of wolf spirits is akin to the 
Wild Hunt of Celtic mythology: a pack of enor- 
mous magical wolves led by a human master who 
range Celtic lands seeking to destroy evil. The wolf 
spirits spell summons 204+2 such entities to serve 
the priest as master. 

Wolf spirits can be instructed to perform a serv- 
ice in the manner of the animal summoning spells. 
In this variation in the Animal and Summoning 
spheres, the spell does not expire until the spirits 
have performed their commanded service, to a 
maximum duration of 14 days. In the Guardian 
variation of this spell, the spirits can be com- 
manded only to keep watch over an area or creature. 
The spell lasts 100 days for this type of service. 

Notes: Common quest spell. 


Wolf spirits: AC —4; MV 36 fly 36 (В); HD 5 
+ 5; &AT 1; THACO 14; Dmg 346; SZ M; ML 
fearless (20); Int animal (1); AL N. Wolf spirits 
are immune to all forms of mind control, illu- 
sions, gases, paralyzation, and spells that affect 
only corporeal creatures. They can be harmed 
only by weapons of +2 or greater enchantment. 


2 746 Є, 


Orisons 


и ee аттан Щ 


Orisons 


In the Ist Edition, priest cantrips, or orisons, 
existed only in the pages of DRAGON magazine. 
In the 2nd Edition, they received an updated 
treatment only with the advent of the PLAYER'S 
OPTION: Spells & Magic book. In the meantime, 
the whole cantrip rule system had been replaced 
by a single 1st-level spell that allowed the caster 
as many different minor effects as desired within 
a long period of time (8 hours). The 2nd Edition 
orison spell, as well as a new related spell, pro- 
tection from orisons, is given in the main text. 
The Ist Edition orisons are presented here as 
examples of what a priest might do with the 2nd 
Edition orison spell. In the Ist Ed. rules, a seg- 
ment was i of a round. 

Orisons are minor spells learned by apprentice 
priests during their long, rigorous, and tedious 
training for their calling. An aspiring priest can use 
one orison per day as а 0-level postulant (-2,000 
XP to —1,001 XP), two orisons per day as a 0-level 
petitioner (—1,000 to —501), and three orisons per 
day as a 0-level aspirant (—500 to —1). Orisons аге 
memorized just as are higher-level spells 

Most orisons are simple little spells of no great 
effect. When the individual becomes a Ist-level 
priest, these smal] magics are usually ignored in 
favor of the more powerful spells then available. 
However, a priest may choose to retain up to two 
orisons in place of one 1st-level spell. 

All orisons are 0 level, have a 10-yard range, 
and have a generally small area of effect. They 
require only soft, simple verbal and somatic com- 
ponents, and are cast in a very short time (% to 2 
segments). They manifest as a brief burst of magic 
that quickly fades, leaving at most a minor physi- 
cal change that persists until altered by time or 
labor. Only orisons that involve living creatures 
allow any saving throw. Also, orisons do not gen- 
erally break states of extreme concentration (such 
as when casting a spell). The effects of orisons, and 
the people and items affected by them, radiate a 
very faint magical aura that lasts for no more than 
a turn once the magic fades. 


747 


The orisons іп this section are grouped accord- 
ing to whether they are cast by clerics (including 
specialty priests) or by druids (including barbarian 
or savage priests) or by both. Over time, the druids 
have gotten far more attention than clerics with 
respect to orisons. That imbalance has been par- 
tially addressed here by making more of these 
available to the cleric and bolstering that list by the 
addition of a few suitable spells from the wizard 
cantrip list. Two new ideas from Ed Greenwood 
round out the list. Also, spheres for all orisons are 
given in parentheses after their names for those 
DMs who want to make up orison lists of their own. 


Casting Orisons in 1st Edition Campaigns 

Orisons are cast the same way that spells are 
cast. Up to two orisons can be cast during any 
round by a single priest. Furthermore, the 
moment of casting in the round of casting is 
dependent on the usual factors: surprise, initia- 
tive, and so on. After the first of the two orisons 
is cast, the priest player rolls a four-sided die to 
determine how many segments later he or she 
can cast the second orison (if so desired). It is 
not possible to cast both a spell and an orison 
during the same round, no matter how short the 
casting times аге, 


Researching or Finding Orisons 

Beginning with 2nd Edition, orison effects are 
usually specified on the spot by the priest; thus, no 
research is necessary. However, some orison effects 
might become available through the discovery of 
ancient tomes. A priest who finds an orison in such 
a tome must study the pages describing it for at least 
a week before being able to cast the found orison 
successfully. If the priest comes from a nonliterate 
culture, then a similar period of withdrawal for 
intense meditation and suitable sacrifice to the divine 
patron for direct illumination may be sufficient. If 
the 1st Ed. rules are used, or if the DM allows char- 
acters to develop special variant orisons that only 
they can cast, then an orison is assumed to be one- 
half level for the purpose of magical research. 


LIST OF ORISONS 


ee c "di 
LIST OF ORISONS 


(Orisons in italics are new.) 


АП Cleric Orisons 
Aspiration Candle 
Benediction Canticle 
Bless Meal Chill 
Ceremony: Oath Clean 
Consecrate Disinfect 
Cure Minor Wounds Dry 
Dowse Handfire 
Freshen Incense 
Haze Meditation 
Judgment Mouse 
Malediction Polish 
Parch Remove Pain 
Petition Restful Sleep 
Preserve Shine 
Quench Stone 
Temperature Tweak 
Watch Warding 
Warm 


All 


Aspiration (All) 
(Invocation) 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


An aspiration is a quick prayer on the order of: 
“Give me strength!” or “Don’t let me goof up!” The 
player rolls a d20 out of the player’s own sight for 
the DM, who records it. At any time during the next 
game hour, the player can ask to have a bad die roll 
replaced by the hidden roll. The d20 can replace 
an attack roll, a saving throw, or a percentile dice 
roll (multiplying the secret roll by 5). Upon the 
player’s request, the secret roll is revealed, and 
becomes the official dice roll. There is no guaran- 
tee that the secret roll will be better, but it is a 
second chance. 


Benediction (All) 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Area of Effect: 15-ft. cube 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


A benediction is a minor form of bless, centered 
on the caster, raising morale of friendly creatures by 
+1 and their attack rolis by +1 for three rounds. It 
does not affect creatures already engaged in combat. 


Druid Orisons Humidity 
Animal Liven 
Animal Command Mark Path 
Bird Call Pet 

Cause Rash Prod 
Disguise Scent Repel Insects 
Drywood Ripen 
Edible Plant Smokeball 
Elemental Shield Test Soil 
Find a Stray 

Flamefinger 

Heal Rash 

Holly Dart 

Bless Meal (АП) 

(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 10-ft. sq. area 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


This orison blesses a meal, including drink, 
giving those who eat it a +1 saving throw vs. any 
poison or disease it may contain. If no saving throw 
is allowed, the orison allows a saving throw of 20. 


Ceremony: Oath (All) 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Area of Effect: 1 individual 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


Ап individual of the priest's religion takes an 
oath in the presence of a priest, pledging his or her 
honor to do some minor task. АП parties touch the 
priest's symbol, as the priest ratifies the oath with 
a ritual sign and some formula such as “зо be it!" 
The oath stands until the pledge is fulfilled or 
broken. If broken, the oathbreaker suffers a -5% 
penalty to the base loyalty of followers and allies 
until satisfactory reparations are made. A third 
party of the caster’s religion can pledge for the oath 
of a nonbeliever. The priest might pledge for a non- 
believer, but this is extremely rare. 


A 748 Ni 


Petition 


h ————— —" di 


Consecrate (АП) 
(Invocation) 


Area of Effect: 10-ft. sq. area 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


This orison consecrates a material component 
used in spell casting, allowing the spell to operate at 
a +1 (or +5%) bonus. The DM decides exactly how 
the bonus is applied. The component must be used 
the round after consecration, or the benefit is lost. 


Cure Minor Wounds (Healing) 
(Necromantic) 


Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


A minor cure, similar to cure light wounds. This 
orison restores 1 point of damage. This orison is not 
reversible. 


Dowse (Divination) 
(Divination) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


Sometimes referred to as find water, this orison 
allows the caster to locate the nearest amount of 
water at least 10 gallons in volume, within 100 
yards. There is no guarantee the water is fresh, 
drinkable, or accessible. 


Freshen (All) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


By means of this orison, the caster brings new 
life or freshness to the object desired. The magic 
applies to food and drink items such as milk, beer, 
meat, and raw vegetables. It also works with cut 
vegetables, flowers, herbs, and so on. Although it 
removes a slight taint of spoilage, restores drooping 
flowers, and so on, it is not as effective as a purify 
food & drink spell, and lasts for but an hour. The 
object must be of relatively small size: a small cask 
of liquid, a sheep, a bushel of vegetables, etc. If 
used on a creature that is harmed by magics such as 
purify food and drink, the orison inflicts 1d2 points 
of damage. 


Haze (Protection, Weather) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


The caster causes a haze to envelop his or her 
person. This haze gives the caster a +1 bonus to 
Armor Class and saving throws. The haze lasts for 
only two rounds, then fades away. 


Judgment (Divination) 
(Divination) 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


A priest can cast this orison to gain a +1 bonus 
to one Wisdom ability check. This orison can be 
applied only once to any given check. The DM 
might disallow use of this orison for various rea- 
sons; for example, if insufficient time is available. 


Malediction (Charm) 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Area of Effect: 15-ft. cube 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


The reverse of benediction, a malediction gives 
the morale of opponents a —1 penalty and worsens 
their attack roll by 1 for three rounds. The male- 
diction can be hurled at opponents up to 30 feet 
away. It does not affect creatures already engaged 
in combat. Using this orison is not a good act. 


Parch (Elemental Water) 
(Enchantment) 


Area of Effect: ] creature 
Casting lime: 1 segment 


The reverse of the quench spell, this orison 
causes a subject of up to large size to experience an 
intense thirst—no matter how recently it has drunk. 
Lips crack and the mouth and throat become dry 
until a quantity of liquid is again consumed. 


Petition (All) 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Casting Time: 2 segments 

A petition is a direct appeal to the patron deity 
for a specific favorable event to occur sometime 
during the current day. Examples include finding a 
misplaced item, meeting an old friend, remember- 
ing forgotten information, making a favorable 
impression, and so on. A petition that would affect 


J 749 ч 


an attack roll, damage roll, saving throw or profi- 
ciency check grants a +1 bonus to one die roll. If no 
opportunity occurs for the granting of the petition 
or if it is not granted that day, then it is wasted. 

The DM secretly rolls 1d20 for each petition. 
On a roll of 1, the priest suffers a minor penalty or 
unlucky event (the patron is annoyed). The DM 
may increase this chance if the priest casts it too 
often, asks for favors of excessive value, or makes 
the same request continuously. 


Preserve (Protection) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 6-in. cube 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


This orison is used to preserve material of an 
animal or vegetable nature for future use, such as 
herbs or spell components. If used on fresh materi- 
als, these will not decay for a year. 


Quench (Elemental Water) 
(Enchantment) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


This orison soothes a creature of up to large size 
that suffers from water deprivation. While no water 
is actually created, cracked lips are softened and a 
dry mouth and throat are moistened, giving the illu- 
sion of having partaken of liquid refreshment. 


Temperature (Protection, Weather) 
(Alteration) 


Casting Time: 2 segments 
Area of Effect: 1 


This orison protects an individual from extreme 
temperatures for 4 hours. Exposure to temperatures 
between —100*F and 200*F inflicts no damage. 


Watch (Guardian, Animal) 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Area of Effect: 1 animal 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


The caster charges an animal to watch over her 
while she sleeps (the animal may, however, make its 
saving throw vs. spell and ignore the charge). If the 
animal accepts, it remains alert and awake to the 
best of its ability. If anyone approaches within 20 
feet of the caster, the creature will attempt to 


awaken the caster. The animal will not fight for the 
caster unless it is also attacked. 


Cleric Orisons 


Candle (Creation) 
(Conjuration) 


Area of Effect: 1 candle 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


This orison causes a candle held in the caster's 
hand to light. For the next turn, the candle cannot 
be extinguished as long as the caster continues to 
hold it. The candle is consumed normally, but 
drafts, gusts of wind, and so on cannot put out the 
flame. Drowning or smothering the flame extin- 
guishes it, however. 


Canticle (Protection) 
(Abjuration) 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Casting Time: Special 


A canticle is a minor form of sanctuary, in 
which the caster chants recitations of the priest’s 
sacred literature. As long as the chanting continues, 
opponents must make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell at a +2 bonus in order to strike or otherwise 
attack the caster. The caster cannot engage in any 
other activity than movement at half speed during 
this time. 


Chill (Creation) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1-ft. cube 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


The caster, using this orison, can reduce the 
temperature of nonliving liquid or solid material by 
about 40°F, subject to a minimum temperature of 
freezing (32°F). The chill lasts for but an instant, 
after which the object warms slowly back to 
normal temperature. 


Clean (Protection, Travelers) 
(Abjuration) 


Area of Effect: 4 sq. yds. 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


LA 750 Na. 


Remove Pain 


) ee a 


This orison enables the caster to remove heavy 
soil, dirt, and like foreign objects from floors, 
walls, dishes, windows, etc. These surfaces are then 
spotless. Usually only one type of material is 
treated in a single application, as care must be taken 
in removal of pigments and the like. 


Disinfect (Healing) 
(Necromancy) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


When cast on a minor wound, this orison does 
nothing to heal the injury; it prevents the wound from 
becoming infected. The wound heals as if well tended 
even if not bandaged or kept clean. This orison does 
not negate the need for rest while healing. 


Dry (Elemental Water) 
(Abjuration) 


Area of Effect: 1 cu. yd. 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


This orison removes dampness and excess 
moisture from materials in the area of effect. It is 
useful for drying cloth or herbs and for cleaning 
chores. 


Handfire (Combat) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: The caster's hand 
Casting Time: /; segment 


This orison fills the palm of the priest's hand 
with a momentary bright flash of flame. The flame 
can ignite ready flammables, such as powders, 
incenses, and volatile oils. The flash can scorch or 
blister exposed flesh and might inflict as much as 
1 point of damage to a creature that fails a saving 
throw vs. spell. 


Incense (Charm) 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


When this orison is invoked, the caster creates a 
sudden burst of some scent, which quickly rolls out 
to a distance of 20 feet. The scent can be anything the 
priest desires, from rose petals to brimstone, from a 
metallic tang to an exotic spice, so long as the caster 
has some small item that the smell has clung to, how- 


751 


ever faintly: perfume vial, charcoal fragment, and 
so on). This item acts a focus and is not expended in 
the casting. The scent fades within a turn, though a 
creature with exceptionally keen senses might be 
able to detect it for an hour or more. 


Meditation (Charm) 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


А minor (and nonreversible) form of remove 
fear, a meditation gives the caster (and only the 
caster) a +] bonus to any saving throw against mag- 
ical fear attacks for | turn. 


Mouse (Summoning, Animal) 
(Summoning) 


Area of Effect: 1 mouse 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


The mouse orison enables the caster to bring 
forth a mouse up to 10 feet away. The animal is a 
typical field mouse (or as similar a species as pos- 
sible), When it arrives, the caster has no control 
over the mouse. The animal behaves as would any 
mouse in the given situation. 


Polish (Protection) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


When this orison is used, the caster magically 
smoothes and brings luster to materials such as 
wood, metal, stone, leather, or ceramic. Naturally, 
the desired object must be relatively clean for this 
orison to be effective. The object must be of rea- 
sonable size—a floor of up to 1,000 square feet, for 
example. It works best on smaller objects such as 
boots, mirrors, crystal containers, and so on. 


Remove Pain (Healing) 
(Necromantic) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


This orison negates the effects of pain, allow- 
ing the recipient to gain 1 hit point, but only if cur- 
rently wounded. This orison cannot help a healthy 
character, nor can a creature that has received this 
benefit receive it again for 24 hours. 


Restful Sleep 


)—————————————————— di 


Restful Sleep (Necromantic, Travelers) 
(Necromantic) 


Casting Time: 2 segments 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 


This orison allows a willing recipient to gain 
full benefit from half the rest; thus, the creature 
touched gains the benefits of eight hours of rest 
from only four hours of actual sleep. The creature 
can be awakened at any time, and may wake of its 
own volition in an emergency. The orison ends 
when the creature wakes. 


Shine (Protection) 
(Abjuration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


Similar to the polish orison, this magic allows 
the caster to remove tarnish, rust, corrosion, and 
similar substances from the desired object. This 
orison brings about a mirror-bright shine to objects 
capable of such, causing their surfaces to be 
smooth and unmarred. A piece of jewelry, for 
instance, could be made more attractive. А single 
object up to a cubic yard in volume can be treated 
by this orison. 


Stone (Combat) 
(Enchantment) 


Area of Effect: 1 small stone 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


By means of this orison, the caster can enchant 
a single stone the size of a sling stone. This mis- 
sile receives a +1 bonus to hit and damage. The 
caster (only) can hurl it by hand, sling, etc. The 
casting and attack occur in the same round, for if 
the stone is not used immediately, the dweomer 
fades and is wasted. 


Tweak (Summoning) 
(Conjuration) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


By means of this orison, the caster causes an 
unseen thumb and forefinger to harmlessly, but 
annoyingly, tweak some portion of a chosen subject 
within a 10-foot radius of the caster. These portions 
are: cheek, nose, ear, beard, moustache, whiskers, or 
tail. The orison's effects do not disturb spell casting, 


752 


although the tweaking might distract any creature by 
causing it to turn to discover the source of the annoy- 
ance. A failure to make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell (for creatures with an Intelligence under 7), or 
failure to roll a score greater than Intelligence on 
3d6 (for to creatures with intelligence of 7 or 
greater), means a 1-segment distraction. 


Warding (Protection) 
(Abjuration) 


Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


This orison is a minor form of the protection 
from evil spell For two rounds, it prevents 
enchanted, conjured, or summoned creatures of 3 
Hit Dice or less from making bodily contact with 
the recipient, unless these are attacked by the pro- 
tected creature. Against more powerful creatures, or 
after the primary protection is broken, the orison 
improves Armor Class against evil creatures by 1. 
The orison adds no bonus to saving throws. To 
complete the spell, the caster sprinkles holy water 
on the recipient. 


Warm (Creation) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1-ft. cube 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


The caster, using this orison, can increase the 
temperature of nonliving liquid or solid material by 
at most about 40°F. The orison cannot raise the tem- 
peratures of a living creature above its normal body 
temperature, nor the temperature of an object above 
140°F, The orison lasts but an instant, after which 
the object slowly cools to normal temperatures. 


Druid Orisons 


Animal (Animal) 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Area of Effect: 1 animal up to 3 HD 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


This orison summons one ordinary mammal, 
bird, or reptile of up to 3 Hit Dice, to the druid. 
The animal, which may come from up to a half 
mile away, is not under the druid's control, but can 
be subjected to further spells after it arrives. A 


Elemental Shield 


b ————— —€— a a d 


summoned animal remains generally available for 
one turn before wandering off. 

To activate this orison, the caster vocalizes a 
soft clucking or clicking sound. 


Animal Command (Animal) 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Area of Effect: 1 animal up to 3 HD 
Casting Time: '/s segment 


Thís orison enables the druid to command an 
ordinary mammal, bird, or reptile with up to 3 Hit 
Dice with a single word. The animal obeys to the 
best of its ability, if the command is absolutely clear 
and unequivocal. Typical commands are stop, sit, 
go, sleep, etc. The commands attack and kill, 
require the caster to point at the desired target. The 
effect lasts for but a single round; thereafter, the 
creature acts according to its nature. 


Bird Call (Animal) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: 1/2 segment 


The orison allows the druid to imitate the call of 
a number of common, feathered avians. The druid 
must have heard the call to be imitated at some pre- 
vious time. Only one call can be mimicked, but the 
caster can do so for an entire turn after the casting. 
The call can carry as far as a natural birdcall. 

The somatic gesture consists of clasping both 
hands around the mouth while the lips are puckered 
to create a whistling noise when breath is exhaled. 


Cause Rash (Plant) 
(Necromancy) 


Area of Effect: 1 man-sized creature 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


This orison causes a red, itchy rash to appear 
on an arm or leg of the subject. The rash is, for all 
practical purposes, the same as that caused by 
exposure to a rash-causing plant (poison ivy, poison 
oak) and must be treated in the same manner. 

The druid makes a scratching motion while 
whispering the arm or leg to be affected. 


Disguise Scent (Animal) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


This orison neutralizes the particular body odor 
of the recipient for one turn. Animals that normally 
rely on smell to detect strangers won't be aware of 
the subject. Any creature or object the subject 
encounters can't learn its scent. 

The caster goes through the motions of pouring 
an imaginary liquid into his cupped hand and 
splashing it on the subject's body, while humming a 
short ditty. 


Drywood (Plant) 
(Abjuration) 


Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft. of wood 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


This orison enables the caster to dry pieces of 
wood that may be too green or too damp to be 
ignited. Once treated (which takes a full turn), the 
wood burns as if dried for several months. 

The somatic gesture is a sawing motion with a 
smal] flame over the wood to be affected. 


Edible Plant (Plant) 
(Divination) 


Area of Effect: 1 plant 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


When cast on a plant, this orison allows the 
druid to determine whether or not consuming that 
type of vegetation would endanger his or her health. 
If only certain parts of the plant (such as the berries 
or leaves) are edible, the entire plant registers as 
inedible unless the caster checks those specific 
parts. Such matter as grass or maple leaves, while 
normally not eaten, are revealed as edible, since 
their consumption causes no actual harm. 

The caster points to the plant to be identified 
while making a chewing motion. 


Elemental Shield (Elemental) 
(Abjuration) 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


This orison protects the caster from an attack 
based upon one element (air, earth, fire, water). 
The first 4 points of damage taken from an attack 
based on the named element are negated; this 
occurs after the effects of magic resistance and 
saving throws are resolved. The protection lasts a 
maximum of | turn. 

The caster places both hands palm up and out- 
ward before him, circling them once in opposite 


| , 753 С 


Find a Stray 


и ———————————————— à 


directions, while whispering the name of the 
element protected against. 


Find a Stray (Animal) 
(Divination) 


Area of Effect: 1 domestic animal 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


This orison enables the caster to locate any 
missing domestic animal within two miles. The 
animal could be a cow, sheep, dog, horse, cat, pig, 
or similar animal. The caster stands in a place well- 
known to the animal (a barnyard, pasture, etc.), 
spits on the ground, makes a sign, and calls the 
animal by name (Rover, Buttercup, Porky, Old Tom, 
and so on). If the animal is within two miles of the 
caster, the caster's tongue will tingle slightly, 
revealing direction and approximate distance. The 
effects last until the animal is found, the caster 
gives up, or the animal moves beyond a two-mile 
distance from the caster. 


Flamefinger (Elemental Fire) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Casting Time: | segment 


This orison creates a small flame on the end of 
the caster's forefinger. The caster can maintain it by 
concentration for up to | turn. The flame can be 
used to ignite combustible materials. The flame can 
scorch or blister exposed flesh and might inflict as 
much as 1 point of damage to a creature that fails 
a saving throw vs. spell. 

The caster snaps his fingers while blowing on 
them gently. 


Heal Rash (Plant) 
(Necromancy) 


Area of Effect: 1 sq. ft. 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


This is the reverse of the cause rash orison. In 
addition to countering the cause rash orison, it 
heals any rash caused by exposure to an irritating 
plant (such as poison ivy, poison oak, or poison 
sumac). An exceptionally large rash may require 
several castings, and magical effects are beyond its 
power. 

The caster makes a gentle stroking motion 
above the affected skin. 


Holly Dart (Plant) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: [ holly leaf 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


The druid can enchant a leaf of holly to become 
a magical dart +1 for one round. if not used by the 
round after the casting, the leaf reverts to its normal 
state. 

The caster presses his lips to the leaf. 


Humidity (Weather) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


The orison causes all objects in the area of 
effect to become damp and slippery. The moisture 
remains until the area dries naturally. The orison 
can be reversed to dry objects in a damp area. 

The caster's hands, palms down before him, are 
flicked rapidly outward. For the reverse, the spread 
fingers are drawn quickly inward. 


Liven (Plant) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 plant 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


This orison restores vigor to one small plant or 
tree branch. A plant that can bring forth fruit will 
on command. After one turn, the plant returns to 
its original state and any fruit not consumed turns 
to dust. 

The caster gently strokes the branch or plant 
from root to leaf. 


Mark Path (Plant, Travelers) 
(Enchantment) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


This orison places a small mark on an object, such 
as a rock or tree, to mark a path. The mark is com- 
pletely harmless and remains invisible until the caster 
or another druid passes within 10 feet of the spot. At 
this time, the mark appears briefly as glowing arrow, 
pointing in the direction the caster has chosen. Once 
the mark has revealed itself, the orison fades. 

The caster lightly draws a small arrow with a 
fingertip on the object to be marked, while 
whistling a jaunty traveling song. 


a 754 Ne 


Test Soil 


b —————————————————" ai 


Pet (Animal) 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


This orison allows the druid to calm one animal 
of up to 3 HD, domesticating the animal for one turn 
if a saving throw vs. spell is failed. The animal must 
have a low Intelligence or less. Any attack on the 
animal breaks the orison. 

The caster makes a soft cooing noise while pat- 
ting the animal. 


Prod (Weather) 
(Evocation) 


Casting Time: 1 segment 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 


This orison produces an electrical spark spring- 
ing forth from the caster's hand to strike any one 
creature within 10 feet. This spark inflicts 4 points 
of subdual damage (1 point of actual damage). 

The caster rubs his foot upon the ground while 
making a soft buzzing sound. 


Repel Insects (Animal) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


This orison makes the caster's body repel 
normal insects (including normal insects magically 
summoned or controlled). It has no effect on giant 
insects. The effect lasts for one hour. While the 
insects may still swarm around the caster, they will 
not bite or even light on his or her person. 

The caster twirls his index finger around his 
head in a circle. 


Ripen (Plant) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 Ib. of fruit 
Casting Time: 2 segments 


By casting this orison, the user causes unripe 
fruit to ripen within one round. The ripened fruit is 
otherwise normal in every way, and is subject to 
normal spoilage and decay. 

The caster makes a clockwise circular motion 
with his palm over the fruit to be affected. 


Smokeball (Elemental Fire) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1-ft.-radius sphere 
Casting Time 2 segments 


This orison brings into being a sphere of dense 
smoke anywhere within the range that the caster 
desires. Any living creature within the smoke 
cannot see or breathe, and must leave the smoke 
immediately. The smoke dissipates in 1 turn, sooner 
if subjected to any breeze or wind. 

The caster makes a soft popping sound with his 
tongue while pointing his index finger at the point 
the puff is to appear. 


Test Soil (Plant) 
(Divination) 


Area of Effect: 1 sq. yd. of soil 
Casting Time: 1 segment 


This orison tells the druid if a section of ground 
contains the right minerals and nutrients to support 
healthy plant growth. The balance of acid to alka- 
line can be divined, as well as the amount of fertil- 
izer the soil contains 

A small pinch of the dirt to be tested is placed 
between the lip and gums, as the jaw is worked up 
and down. 


2 755 М. 


Psionic Enchantments 


Psionic Enchantments 


In the DARK SuN setting, the Dragon Kings rule 
stark monolithic cities that dot a barren landscape. 
Their magical arts have embraced and incorporated 
psionics in a way unduplicated elsewhere. Priests of 
Athas have two paths: that of the cleric-psionicist 
and that of the elemental. Those choosing the 
second path eventually gain psionic enchantments 
of their own. The priest taking this path will ulti- 
mately abandon human form and transform into an 
elemental being. A prerequisite to begin the 
advancement to elemental form is achievement of 
20th-level. While priests may also take the path of 
the cleric-psionicist, only elementals can cast 
psionic enchantments. 

A cleric who would become an elemental con- 
tinues to age normally until achieving 30th level. 
At this point, permanent elemental form is 
achieved and the further passage of time has no 
effect on the caster. Those on the elemental path 
from 21st to 29th level can assume elemental form 
for a limited time, depending on their experience 
level. 

Psionic enchantments are magic, with psionics 
acting as a catalyst in the process. In the DARK 
SuN setting, the elemental spells can be of 8th, 
9th, or 10th-level. This appendix is included for 
DMs who wish to introduce similar Elemental 
encounters into other settings. Some of the mate- 
rial has been updated since its original appear- 
ance. 

Unlike other spells, the psionic enchantments of 
Athas require special preparations before the actual 
casting. Also, in the following spell descriptions, 
“ср” stands for ceramic pieces, the equivalent of a 


LIST OF PSIONIC ENCHANTMENTS 


8th Level 

Alter Climate (A,W) 
Create Oasis (A, E, W) 
Forever Minions 
Hasten Crops 

Reverse Winds (A) 
Wild Weather (A) 


9th Level 

Air of Permanence (A) 
Disruption (A) 
Mountainous Barrier (E) 
Pocket Dimension 
Prolific Vegetation 
Storm Legion (A, W) 


10th Level 
Cleanse 

Insect Host (A) 
Planar Vassal 
Prolific Forestation 
Rift 

Silt Bridge (E) 


A=Air, E-Earth, W=Water 


gold piece on metal-poor Athas. 
Priest Spell Progression 

Level 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
20 9 9 9 8 7 5 2 1 - - 
21 9 9 9 9 8 6 2 1 - - 
22 9 9 9 9 9 6 3 2 - - 
23 9 9 9 9 9 7 3 2 1 - 
24 9 9 9 9 9 8 3 2 2 - 
25 9 9 9 9 9 8 4 3 2 - 
26 9 9 9 9 9 9 4 3 2 1 
27 9 9 9 9 9 9 5 4 2 1 
28 9 9 9 9 9 9 6 4 3 1 
29 9 9 9 9 9 9 7 4 3 2 
30 9 9 9 9 9 9 8 4 3 3 


756 


Blight 


b ———————————————————— ii 


Air of Permanence 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Air 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 30 cu. ft. of air 
Saving Throw: None 


Through this spell, a priest can slow the effects 
of aging on any nonliving item. The item must be 
sealed in an airtight container. It is the air that is 
enchanted, not the item within. A skilled artisan 
must construct a container with a volume up to 15 
cubic feet; it costs at least 1,000 cp. During the 
preparation time, the priest must spend six hours per 
day enchanting the container and drawing sigils and 
runes on its inner surfaces. The enchantment makes 
the container airtight against natural decay, though 
tampering ends the spell. Once items are placed 
inside the container and the spell is cast, time effec- 
tively stops inside. The items do not age or decay in 
any way. If the container is broken, the items are 
unharmed and resume aging at the normal rate. 

When casting, the priest can also place a cause 
blindness, cause deafness, cause disease, or 
bestow curse spell on the container. Tampering 
with the container unleashes the spell on the tam- 
pering individual(s). Once the container is broken 
and the air of permanence lost, this additional spell 
is lost, as well. 

The material component for this spell is a bottle 
of air taken from the remains of the lungs of a crea- 
ture that has been dead at least 100 years. 

Notes: Granted to air elementals. 


Alter Climate 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water 
Level: 8 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 30 days minimum 
Duration: 5 days/day of preparation 
Casting Time: | turn 

Area of Effect: 40 sq. mi. 

Saving Throw: None 


The alter climate spell allows a to priest subtly 
affect the pattern of weather over a large area for 
a long period of time. During the preparation time, 
the priest must ravel in the 40 square mile to be 


757 


affected, spending at least four hours each day for 
a minimum of 30 days studying the local weather 
and experiencing the land’s bounty and hardships. 
Once cast, the spell’s duration is equal to five 
times the number of days the priest spent study- 
ing the area. 

If the spell is cast to improve the weather, nor- 
mally scant rainfall is supplemented mildly, and the 
severity of winds and storms are reduced for the 
duration of the spell. Existing croplands in the area 
of effect provide an abundant harvest, and most 
likely a surplus the locals can sell. Other existing 
plants are also fruitful, but alter climate does not by 
itself create new plant life. If cast in conjunction 
with a prolific vegetation spell, any barren land 
(stony barrens, sandy wastes, and so on) grows 
grass and scrubs (much like scrub plain terrain) 
after 10 days and for the duration of the spell. The 
accelerated rainfall levels are very gradual and are 
spread over the duration of the spell—there is no 
flash flooding or excessive erosion. 

If the caster worsens the weather, rainfall is cut 
to drought levels and the severity of sand and wind 
storms increases. Crops in the affected area fail, 
leaving the fields dried and nearly ruined. Other 
vegetation may also be destroyed, depending on the 
terrain. Areas of scrub plain become sandy wastes 
after 30 days, and the land does not naturally 
recover its scrub covering if the spell lasts more 
than 300 days. Areas of forest become sandy wastes 
after 600 days, and the land does not naturally 
recover its trees or other plant life if the spell lasts 
more than 1,500 days. Magical vegetation is 
unaffected. 

In either case, the spell’s effect on the weather is 
not immediately apparent. A casual observer may 
never realize what is happening until half a year or 
more has passed. 

The material components area specimens of 
every type of weather common to the area—a cup of 
rainwater, a handful of windblown sand, and a piece 
of tree or rock split by lightning. The priest must 
collect these during the time of preparatory study. 

Notes: Granted to air and water elementals, 
common, 


Blight 


Reversed form, hasten crops. 


Cleanse 


Cleanse 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 10 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 45 days minimum 
Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 1 day 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell lets the priest “reset” another indi- 
vidual’s alignment after it has somehow changed. 
The priest invokes the favor of powerful beings 
within the desired alignment to accept a being that 
has strayed back into the ranks of the faithful. Usu- 
ally, a priest is sought out by an individual (or the 
individual's friends) whose alignment has somehow 
changed. The priest must be of the individual’s 
original alignment. 

During the preparation time, the repentant indi- 
vidual must try to avoid his or her current align- 
ment and aspire to the original alignment—most 
often through inaction, but good role-playing 
should be a bonus for a player character. Mean- 
while, the priest contacts a powerful being of the 
appropriate alignment. Powerful beings aligned to 
good/evil or law/chaos exist in the outer planes. 
Powerful beings of a neutral alignment reside 
mainly in the inner, elemental planes. Particularly 
powerful creatures, such as advanced beings, spir- 
its of the land, or other Athasian beings may also 
be suitable at the ОМ discretion. 

The priest contacts the being either magically, 
psionically, or physically three times during the 
preparation period, once every 15 days after the 
preparation has begun. The contact is brief but prob- 
ing—the priest must plead the case with the power- 
ful being. Since priest and being are of the same 
alignment, the contact is never hostile, though it 
may not be successful. Based on the sincerity of the 
individual desiring the change, the priest's belief in 
the individual, and the player's role-playing, the DM 
decides if the meeting is successful. If not, the priest 
must make contact again after 15 days. After three 
successful meetings, the spell can be cast. 

The casting places both the individual and the 
priest great risk. If the priest has acted in any way 
contrary to his or her alignment, or if the repentant 
individual has not done all he or she can do to 
change his or her ways during the preparation time, 
the spell goes drastically wrong. The priest imme- 
diately changes alignment to match that of the 
repentant individual, and the individual loses half 


of accumulated experience to date. Once this has 
occurred, both are barred from using the cleanse 
spell in the future. If the DM is convinced that both 
priest and repentant character have acted properly, 
the spell works and the character regains his or her 
original alignment. 

This spell relies on the role-playing of the char- 
acter and the ОМ interpretation of events and 
motivations. The DM plays the part of the power- 
ful being, watching out for the best interest of its 
alignment. Flagrant disregard for alignment while 
under this intense scrutiny should cause the spell 
to fail. Use the three meetings of the preparation 
period to update the characters on their progress— 
a series of failed meeting should dissuade them. 

The material component is a magical item 
usable only by one of the priest's alignment. It is 
destroyed when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Granted to all elementals, common. 


Create Oasis 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Earth, and Water 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: Special 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a lush oasis within the con- 
fines of a ring of standing stones of the priest's cre- 
ation. The maximum radius of the oasis is 30 yards 
per caster level beyond 20th; the priest can create a 
smaller oasis if desired. 

The preparation time is the time required to 
erect the circle of stones. Each stone must be at 
least 12 feet tall and no more than 4 feet wide or 
thick; rough-hewn and oblong; and set into the 
ground to stand on end. One stone must be placed 
every 10 yards around the circumference of the 
proposed oasis (the table shows how many stones 
must be erected for oases of various sizes.) 


2 758 М 


Disruption 


ee di 


Radius Circumf. Creatures 

Level (yds.) (убу) Stones Supported 
21 30 189 19 8 
22 60 376 38 31 
23 90 566 57 71 
24 120 754 76 126 
25 150 943 95 197 
26 180 1130 113 283 
27 210 1320 132 385 
28 240 1508 151 503 
29 270 1697 170 636 
30 300 1885 189 785 


Cutting and placing a single stone requires 49 
worker-hours, provided stones are readily available 
in the area and the workers have appropriate tools 
(chisels, spikes, hammers, rollers). If tools or ready 
stones aren't available, this time may increase or, 
at the DM's discretion, the preparation may be 
impossible, Also, particularly skilled or capable 
workers (such as dwarves, half-giants, or slaves 
trained in quarries) may cut the time by as much 
as half. The priest can erect the stones personally by 
physical or magical labor, or enlist the help of other 
creatures that share his or her alignment (if any 
laborers are not of the priest's alignment, the spell 
will fail when cast). After the last stone is place, the 
priest casts create oasis from the exact center of the 
ring. Provided all the stones are in place at the time 
of casting, interruptions that may have occurred 
during their placement won't negate the spell. 

When the spell is completed, the circle inside 
the stones is instantly transformed into a plat-filled, 
water-rich oasis. The trees and bushes are laden 
with nourishing, delicious fruits, and small game 
birds and animals appear, supported by springs and 
pools of fresh, cool water. The oasis can also sus- 
tain one human-sized creature for every 36 square 
yards, as shown on the table. Each night, game 
creatures, fruits, and water are replenished. Defil- 
ing magic stil] causes permanent damage—subtract 
the damaged area when considering the oasis's abil- 
ity to support living creatures. 

The oasis remains intact until the priest either 
voluntarily ends the spell or physically moves 
beyond the ring of standing stones. Once the spell 
ends, the oasis and the standing stones vanish, leav- 
ing the exact terrain that existed before. The spell 
also ends if the priest is slain. 

The material components are the standing 
stones themselves, which vanish when the spell is 
broken. 

Notes: Granted to air, earth, and water elemen- 
tals, common. 


Disruption 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 
Level: 9 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 30 days 
Duration: 7 days 

Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell lets the priest disrupt the magical link 
between templars and their sorcerer-kings, cutting 
off their source of spells. That link is a complicated 
affair, based on magic, psionics, and physical [aw; 
it is possible to block it by setting up interference or 
“static,” effectively creating an umbrella under 
which the link cannot exist. 

The priest must choose one sorcerer-king and 
study his activities during the preparation time— 
only templars who worship that sorcerer-king are 
affected. The priest must learn of the sorcerer- 
king's activities, his organization of templars, and 
something about his long-term goals. Therefore, 
the priest must spend the preparation time near the 
sorcerer-king, either in his city-state or in nearby 
fields. 

The spell creates a series of connected circles, 
each 5 miles in diameter, one per level of the caster 
above 20th (each corresponds roughly to a single 
hex on the Tyr region map in the DARK SUN boxed 
set). The arrangement of the circles is completely 
up to the caster, but the first must be centered over 
his or her location at the time of casting. For exam- 
ple, with the first centered over the caster, the rest 
could stretch in a straight line in any direction or 
be clustered to blanket an area. 

Any templar under a circle cannot receive addi- 
tional spells. Those currently memorized can be 
cast normally. Since the disruption spell has no 
other tangible effect, an affected templar may not 
be aware of it until he receives no spells, and even 
then may not know why that is. The spell blocks the 
ability to receive spells, but doesn't block a sor- 
cerer-king from sending: if a sorcerer-king is in the 
area of effect, his templars outside the area still 
receive their spells. 

Interference with a sorcerer-king and his tem- 
plars certainly draws their wrath. If the spell is 
caste within a city, chaos reigns for the duration of 
the spell as many vital services grind to a halt. 
Such powerful magic can be traced (psionically 
and magically), so the caster should have an 
escape plan). 


2 759 М. 


Forever Minions 


р, ————————————————————————— 1 


The material component is опе of ће sorcerer- 
king’s obsidian balls. The priest can obtain it 
personally or hire others to get it. 

Notes: Granted to air elementals, common. 


Forever Minions 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 8 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 21 days 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: Creatures, 3 HD/level maximum 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a priest can guarantee that a 
number of followers will animate as zombies when 
they are killed. The enchantment stays with the fol- 
lowers unti] they are slain; it cannot be removed by 
normal means. 

During the preparation, both the priest and the 
followers to be enchanted must spend at least 8 
hours per day in seclusion, in the dark, readying the 
spell. If a follower misses a day of preparation, the 
spell cannot work for him. Such a follower present 
during the casting of the spell is immediately slain 
and does not rise as an undead. 

The number of followers enchanted per casting 
is measured in Hit Dice; the caster can affect up to 
3 Hit Dice of creatures per level of experience. One 
round after those followers have fallen, they reani- 
mate as zombies, just as in the spell animate dead. 
Whether or not they are in the priest's presence, the 
zombies immediately seek out him or her, and obey 
the priest's instructions. During the casting, the 
priest can specify an increased time (up to a maxi- 
mum of one day) between death and reanimation. 

Followers who are not slain in the service of the 
priest do not reanimate. For example, a follower 
who secretly works against the priest, or who dies 
on personal business does not reanimate. 

Recipients of the spell might already be zom- 
bies or skeletons (the latter reanimate as skeletons). 
Forever minions cannot be cast more than once on 
a single creature. 

The material component is a wax imprint of 
every follower's right hand (claw, tentacle, or what- 
ever). 

Notes: Granted to elementals, common. 


Hasten Crops 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 15 days minimum 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 6 hrs. 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


By using a hasten crops spell, a priest can lessen 
the time necessary to grow grain crops from seed to 
harvest. The area of effect is one square mile per 
caster level beyond 21st, but the spell affects only 
one grain crop planted in that area; the type of grain 
must be specified before the spell is cast. 

During the preparation time, the priest must 
spend 3 hours per day praying over the seeds to be 
used for the crop and at least 3 hours per day trav- 
eling and blessing the fields to be planted. This 
process must continue for at least 15 days. The 
local farmers must still plant the seeds before the 
spell can be cast. 


7 


6 


0 


Insect Host 


p ee 1 


On Athas, typical grain crops require a full 120 
days to reach harvest, though some crops may take 
as few as 90 or as many as 150 days. The hasten 
crops spell reduces the normal time it takes to grow 
the grain crop from seed to harvest by the days 
spent in preparation. Minimum growing time is 
seven days. The spell grants no magical properties 
or protections to the crop as it is growing—natural 
or manmade disasters can still wipe it out. 

Athas has no major changes in seasonal tem- 
perature and rainfall that govern growing seasons. 
However, when a particular crop must be grown 
at a specific time of the year, this spell must be 
cast toward the beginning of that time. During the 
6-hour casting time, the priest must have the 
cooperation of at least 100 local farmers and 
other folk to engage in a planting festival. Por- 
tions of the seed crop are burned, a bountiful feast 
is prepared and eaten, and the locals dance in 
honor of all the elemental planes that make their 
agriculture possible. 

The material components are grain seeds taken 
from some other bumper crop carried in baskets 
made by the local children. The baskets and grain 
are burnt in the festival’s central bonfire. 

The reverse of this spell, blight, causes existing 
grain crops to wither and die. The area of effect is 
the same, and the priest must still indicate which 
particular grain crop is to be affected. Other crops 
and plants are unaffected. Blight and hasten crops 
cancel each other in the same area of effect. 

The material components for the reverse are a 
pinch of salt and a bit of moldy bread. 

Notes: Granted to elementals, common. 


Insect Host 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 10 

Range: 300 yds. 
Components: V, $, М 
Preparation Time: 7 days 
Duration: | day 

Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, cloud upon cloud of 
flying, biting insects swarm to the priest to serve 
him or her. Unlike the insect plague spell, these 
insects are magically created; the spell can be cast 
where no natural insects exist. Each insect is 
small, barely the size of a pea, but by the thou- 
sands or even millions they cause horrendous 
destruction. 


761 


During preparation, the priest clearly pictures 
the insects to be conjured and the type of destruc- 
tion they will inflict. This requires secluded con- 
centration for the entire period. 

When cast, the spell calls one cloud of insects 
per caster level above 15th. Each cloud is roughly 
a sphere of 15-foot radius that contains many thou- 
sands of individual insects. Each cloud has a move- 
ment rate of 24 and is completely under the priest’s 
control. Each can perform a different task, provided 
it remains within range of the caster. 

Creatures caught in a cloud can see no more 
than 5 feet away. Spellcasting is impossible. Each 
creature suffers 5 points of damage each round in 
the cloud, regardless of Armor Class (invisibility is 
no protection). All creatures with 4 Hit Dice or less, 
flee and scatter, those with less than 8 Hit Dice 
must make a successful morale check or flee as 
well. The priest cannot choose to affect only 
selected individuals within a cloud. 

A cloud descending on crops devours its 
volume per turn, wiping out whole fields in a few 
hours. In a city or village, the townspeople panic 
while the insects destroy all unprotected foodstuffs 
and all wooden and tarp construction. Several 
clouds can easily surround a group or block a road. 


Mountainous Barrier 


ŅŮĖŮĖŮŮŮŮŮĖŮŮŮŮ 


The insect host can be dissipated by a success- 
ful dispel magic. It can also be blown back by a 
powerful, magical wind, dispersed for a time by an 
air elemental, or temporarily held off with smoke, 
thought the last will only work for a few rounds. 
Area-effect magic such as fireball can destroy large 
numbers of the magical insects, but individual 
attacks have very little effect. 

The material component is a blown glass model 
of a locust or some other insect, filled with gem 
dust (100 gp minimum). 

Notes: Granted to air elementals, common. 


Mountainous Barrier 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 1 day 
Duration: 1 day 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the priest calls up a ring of enor- 
mous mountains. The priest must spend the entire 
day of preparation time in careful meditation in the 
vicinity of existing mountains, within the distance 
shown on the table. 


Priest Level Distance Radius 

23 5 miles 100 yards 
24 7 miles 300 yards 
25 10 miles 500 yards 
26 15 miles 800 yards 
27 20 miles 1 mile 

28 25 miles 1.5 miles 
29 30 miles 2 miles 
30 35 miles 2.5 miles 


On casting, a ring of mountains, one mile 
wide and one mile high appears around the 
caster, thrusting up from the ground. The radius 
shown is the inner radius, that from the caster to 
where the mountains being. The radius is a max- 
imum; the priest can call for a smaller radius if 
desired. 

Anything on the ground where the mountains 
erupt must make a successful saving throw vs. 
crushing blow (vs. paralyzation for creatures). 
Items that fail are destroyed; creatures takes 10d6 
points of damage. Creatures that can fly receive a 
*5 bonus to their saving throws. The mountains 
will not rise to destroy a community of more than 


20 individuals—the ring of mountains forms a gap 
instead. 

While the spell is in effect, the priest can lower 
any or all of the mountains and raise them again; 
the caster controls them perfectly in all ways. 

After the spell ends, the mountains return into 
the earth as suddenly as they came. The ground 
appears undisturbed, although man-made structures 
destroyed by them remain in ruins. 

The material component is rock from a recent 
landslide. 

Notes: Granted to earth elementals, common. 


Planar Vassal 
(Summoning) 
Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 10 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Preparation Time: Special 
Duration: 7 days 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: Creature summoned 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell lets the priest capture an outer planar 
creature of opposite alignment and force it into 
temporary servitude. The priest selects the type of 
creature desired before the preparation time begins. 
The creature's alignment must be directly opposed 
to the caster's, as follows: lawful is opposed to 
chaotic, good is opposed to evil, and neutral has 
no opposite. For example, a lawful good priest must 
select a chaotic evil creature. True neutral priests 
cannot cast this spell. 

During preparation, the priest must cast a gate 
spell to call the creature to the Prime Material 
Plane. Because the creature called for may or may 
not step through the gate—and even if it does, it 
may immediately attack the priest—the prepara- 
tion is hazardous. When the creature of opposite 
alignment arrives, the priest must personally 
subdue it, without help from others. Once the 
priest inflicts damage equal to half the creature's 
hit point total by any means, the p/anar vassal 
spell can be cast. 

Upon completion of the casting, the planar crea- 
ture immediately becomes a discontented vassal of 
the priest. It grumbles and complains about duties, 
but performs them, albeit slowly at times. The vassal 
obeys the letter of all commands, but tries to violate 
their spirit when feasible. The planar vassal has no 
obligation to protect the priest unless so ordered. 
Planar creatures with the power to call others of their 
kind can be ordered to do so, but those new creatures 


2 762 ч 


Pocket Dimension 


b ———————————" ш 


are in no way controlled by the priest. Once the seven 
days have passed, the planar creature most likely 
(75% chance) attacks the priest; otherwise it simply 
returns to its home plane. 

Other planar creatures may notice their associ- 
ate's absence and come to investigate. Also, once a 
creature is free, it may plot revenge— subtle priests 
often see to it that their planar vassals are slain car- 
rying out their duties. Those surviving this treat- 
ment never forget an enemy. 

Notes: Granted to elementals, common. 


Pocket Dimension 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 
Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 30 days 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: | turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The caster can fill a pocket dimension with 
materials or creatures and carry it around. Once 
opened, the portal disgorges its contents into the 


763 


Prime Material Plane. 

During the entire preparation period, the priest 
must travel extensively (at least two hours per day) 
in either the Astral or the Ethereal Plane, as he or 
she chooses, because the pocket dimension tem- 
porarily exists there. Upon casting, a “portal” opens 
to the pocket dimension from the Prime Material 
Plane. The portal is an invisible square, 40 feet on 
a side, standing just at ground level. Anything that 
passes through the square enters the pocket dimen- 
sion—it cannot return until the portal is accessed 
(see below). Anything living can walk through the 
portal. Inanimate objects must be carried or pushed 
through. The portal has only one direction—an 
individual who gets one arm halfway through 
cannot pull it out. 

The portal remains open for up to an entire day, 
accommodating everything that enters during that 
time. Then it closes to become a clear glass disk, 
roughly the size of a coin. The glass disk weighs 
virtually nothing. While the priest has it, everything 
that passed into the pocket dimension stays there. 
Time does not pass in the pocket dimension. The 
disk is specially protected, and does not radiate 
magic under the scrutiny of detect magic. Nothing 
can interfere with the contents of the pocket dimen- 
sion; planar creatures cannot enter, and astral and 
ethereal creatures cannot gain access. 


jj 


т 
fit M 


N 
MN 
| 


i sol 
г 


| т 


Prolific Forestation 


When the glass disk is snapped in two, the 
portal reopens, and everything that went into it re- 
emerges in the same order and at the same speed as 
it entered. The first thing that entered the pocket 
dimension is the first to exit. The glass disk has no 
particular resistance to damage, and may break 
accidentally. 

The material component is the hide of any 
planar creature. 

Notes: Granted to elementals, common. 


Prolific Forestation 
(Alteration, Conjuration) 
Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 10 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 30 days 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a priest causes a grove of trees 
to magically appear. The area must contain no other 
trees, or the spell fails. 

During the preparation time, the priest must 
devote eight hours per day for 30 days to fashion a 
staff from a tree of life. The priest must carve the 
staff perfectly smooth with a diamond dagger. No 
other task can be undertaken during the eight-hour 
periods. 

The area of effect is a circle with a maximum 
radius that varies according to the caster’s level (the 
caster can make the radius smaller if desired, see 
table). 

To cast the spell, the priest thrusts the diamond 
dagger into the ground in the center of the area, 
then moves with the staff to the circle’s edge. The 
priest then walks around the area of effect, drag- 
ging the staff. The staff magically ensures that the 
priest walks a perfectly circular path, eventually 
returning to the starting point. The priest must walk 
(not run, fly, or levitate) but may use magical means 
to speed the walk. Interruptions lasting more than 
a single round negate the walking and it must be 
started again. If the dagger at the center of the circle 
is disturbed, the spell fails, so the priest often places 
a guard over it. When the circle is completed, the 
spell is cast. 


Max Rough Time 
Caster Radius Circumf. to Walk Trees in 
Level (yds.) (yds.) (rds.) Сгоуе* 
27 30 188 2 140 
28 60 377 4 560 
29 120 754 7 2,250 
30 240 1,507 13 9,000 


* Approximate; can vary as much as 20% 


The forest consists of mature trees, one to four 
feet in diameter, spaced three to six yards apart. 
The thick forest canopy towers 90 to 120 feet. This 
spell creates no brush or undergrowth; the forest 
floor is the same terrain type as before the spell was 
cast. The spacing of the trees hinders the movement 
of huge or gargantuan creatures; smaller creatures 
can move through the forest unhindered. 

Unlike the prolific vegetation spell, the trees 
created have magical protection against natural 
destruction for one year per caster level. Natural 
fires, lightning, lack of water, and harsh weather do 
not kil] them. Defiler magic still destroys them 
normally, as can any attack that would affect 
normal trees. 

The material components are the staff and the 
diamond dagger, both of which disappear when the 
spell is cast. 

Notes: Granted to elementals, common. 
Restricted to elementals common. 


Prolific Vegetation 
(Alteration, Conjuration) 
Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 30 days 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes shrubs and grasses to grow 
over a wide area of previously barren terrain. If the 
terrain is not virtually barren of plant life, then the 
spell fails. 

During preparation, the priest must devote eight 
hours per day for 30 days to fashion a staff from a 
tree of life. The priest must carve the staff perfectly 
smooth with an obsidian dagger. No other task can 
be undertaken during the eight-hour periods. 

The area of effect is a circle with a maximum 
radius that varies with to the caster's level (the caster 
can make the radius smaller if desired, see table). 

To cast the spell, the priest thrusts the obsid- 


2 764 ч 


Reverse Winds 


Na 


ian dagger into the ground in the center of the 
area, then moves with the staff to the circle’s edge. 
The priest then walks the circumference of the 
area of effect, dragging the staff. The staff magi- 
cally ensures that the priest walks a perfectly cir- 
cular path, eventually returning to the starting 
point. The priest must walk (not run, fly, or levi- 
tate) but can use magical means to speed the walk. 
If the time taken to complete the circle requires 
the priest to stop to sleep, there is no penalty, pro- 
vided the caster immediately resumes walking. 
Other interruptions lasting more than a single 
round negate the walking and it must be started 
again. If the dagger at the center of the circle is 
disturbed, the spell fails, so the priest often places 
a guard over it. When the circle is completed, the 
spell is cast. 


Caster Max Rough Time 
Level Radius Circumf. to Walk 
24 90 yds. 566 yds. 5 rds. 
25 180 yds. — 1,311 yds. 1 turn 
26 540 yds. 2 mi. 3 turns 

27 1.25 mi. 8 mi. 2 brs. 
28 6 mi. 38 mi. 9 hrs. 
29 12 mi. 75 mi. 18 hrs.** 
30 25 mi. 157 mi. 36 hrs.** 


"Time is for a human in clear terrain and clear 
weather 
“Requires multiple marching days 

Upon casting, the area inside the circle instantly 
grows thick with grass and small shrubs, much like 
scrub plains. The vegetation does not emerge from 
solid stone, but arises from any soil, no matter how 
rocky, sandy, or dry. The vegetation is normal in 
every respect, and has no magical properties. It 
remains until and unless it dies from lack of mois- 
ture, brushfire, erosion, and so on. If this spell is 
cast in conjunction with the priestly psionic 
enchantment, alter climate, the vegetation can grow 
and last longer. Defiler magic still destroys the veg- 
etation normally. Unlike the wizard version of this 
spell, the priest version has no reversed form. 

The material components are the staff and the 
obsidian dagger, both of which disappear when the 
spell is cast. 1 

Notes: Granted to elementals, common. 
Restricted to priests, common. 


Reverse Winds 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 8 

Range: 600 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: None 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: Hemisphere 600 yds. in diameter 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the priest can change wind 
direction. Because it does not alter the velocity of 
the winds, this spell is most effective during wind- 
or sandstorms. The spell has two forms—immedi- 
ate and erratic. The caster chooses which occurs 
at the instant of casting. 

A) Immediate: The priest simply chooses the 
new direction the wind should take. Once cast, the 
wind ceases completely for one round, then resumes 
with equal force in the new direction. This can move 
smoke, clouds, fog, and spells with similar effects. 
(For wind effects, see the DMG, page 127.) 

B) Erratic: The wind's direction varies wildly, 
changing drastically several times per round for the 
duration of the spell. All nonmagical missile fire 
in the area of effect suffers a —5 attack penalty (for 
BATTLESYSTEM games, this is a —2 penalty to every 
missile AD rolled). Flying creature maneuverabil- 
ity ratings are reduced three grades (A becomes D, 
B becomes E). Flying creatures reduced below E 
crash, suffering falling damage (1d6 per 10 feet 
fallen, maximum 20d6). The erratic changes can 
disperse smoke, clouds, fog, and spells with these 
effects. 

In either case, the spell's area of effect is a hemi- 
sphere centered on a point selected by the caster, 
extending 600 yards in every direction along the 
ground and 600 yards above it. 

The material component is the breath of a flying 
creature. 

Notes: Granted to elementals, common. 


2 765 М. 


Rift 


b a 


Rift 
(Alteration, Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 10 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 60 days 
Duration: 3 days 

Casting Time: 10 turns 

Area of Effect: Sphere 360 yds. 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the priest brings the Negative 
Material Plane closer to the Prime Material Plane, 
creating a rift between the two, centered upon him- 
self. The priest first spends the lengthy prepara- 
tion time studying undisturbed for at least four 
hours per day, reading scrolls and books about the 
planes. Upon casting, all undead in the area of 
effect gain nine times their original hit points as 
temporary additional hit points for the duration of 
the spell. For example, a zombie with 5 hit points 
gains an additional 45 hit points for three days. In 
combat, the temporary hit points are lost first, and 
then the actual hit points, until the undead creature 
is slain. When the spell ends any remaining bonus 
hit points disappear, but the undead are otherwise 
unaffected. 

The area of the rift moves with the caster, pos- 
sibly placing some undead out of the sphere or 
encompassing others. Bonus points are gained 
immediately upon entering the sphere, but only 
once per creature per casting. An undead creature 
leaving the area does not lose the bonus. The caster 
has no control over which undead creatures receive 
the benefit of the bonus hit points; all are so 
affected. 

The material component is an obsidian goblet 
containing the ground bones of a dead necromancer. 

Notes: Granted to elementals, common. 


Silt Bridge 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 
Level: 10 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 45 days 
Duration: 7 days/level 
Casting Time: 5 turns 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


With this powerful spell, the priest can tem- 
porarily turn a vast area of the Sea of Silt into solid 
ground. This spell cannot be cast elsewhere. 

During the preparation time, the priest must spend 
at least six hours per day flying over the silt to be 
altered, sprinkling it with bone dust, Unlike most 
psionic enchantments, interruptions during a day's 
activities can be tolerated, provided the priest does 
spend six hours during each day in preparation. 

Once the spell is cast, the mixture of bone and 
silt hardens to form a solid surface. The area solid- 
ified is a rectangle 100 yards across, and its length 
is one mile per caster level above 20th. Multiple 
castings can create longer bridges. 

The hardened area can support any amount of 
weight, since it is solid from the surface down to 
the bottom of the Sea of Silt. If it is gouged or 
attacked, it reacts exactly like bone. When the spell 
duration ends, the bone softens over a period of 
three rounds back into its original silt-those stand- 
ing on it likely disappear beneath the surface. 

The material component is a large amount of 
bone dust. The caster must assemble at least 50 
pounds of bone dust per day of preparation, or 
2,250 pounds altogether. Generally, a humanoid 
creature has 25 pounds of bones. Larger creatures 
have 25 pounds per Hit Die. The caster need not 
personally gather or grind these bones, nor does 
the preparation time include this. 

Notes: Granted to elementals, common. 


Wild Weather 


)———————————ÀY d 


Storm Legion 
(Alteration, Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 30 days 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 5 turns 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 

With this spell, the priest can magically trans- 
port a large army via a natural storm system. The 
storm itself must be of natural, nonmagical 
origin—a sand-, wind-, or lightning storm. 

During the preparation time, the priest must care- 
fully measure the winds and the storms of the region, 
spending at least four hours per day observing these 
conditions. The spell cannot be cast until a natural 
storm gathers over the army to be transported. The 
total number of Hit Dice of creatures the storm legion 
spell can affect is given on the table. 


Priest Level Hit Dice 
23 90 
24 180 
25 300 
26 500 
27 900 
28 1,500 
29 2,400 
30 3.600 


АП creatures, living or undead, can be trans- 
ported by this spell. They must gather around the 
priest when the spell is cast, in military formations. 

Upon casting, the storm's winds and blowing 
sands dissolve the soldiers in the area of effect. In 
a matter of a few rounds, their forms are com- 
pletely gone, their essence removed to the clouds 
above. All material possessions, magical and oth- 
erwise, are dissolved with the soldiers. 

The caster is similarly dissolved, but he or she 
alone retains consciousness. During the journey, the 
caster has control over the storm's direction. A storm 
can usually travel between 10 and 40 miles per hour. 
Once over the desired target, the spell ends and the 
caster and army literally rain out of the skies. 

Descending as drops of blood, bone, and tissue, 
the fragments reassemble themselves in 10 rounds 
into the individuals they once were. During this 
time, they are helpless and vulnerable to attack. 
Any physical attack made on the incomplete form 
of a soldier destroys it—it will never reform. The 
caster reassembles normally, and is just as vulner- 


767 


able to attack. Once the 10 rounds pass, the sub- 
jects are in exactly the relative positions they had 
when taken up into the storm, with the same equip- 
ment as before. 

If the spell is dispelled while the storm is still in 
motion, all those carried within are slain. Once 
cast, the storm cannot be affected by other weather- 
affecting magic. 

The material component is the standard or 
insignia of an army that was defeated during a storm. 

Notes: Granted to elementals, common. 


Wild Weather 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water 
Level: 8 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 1 hr./level 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Casting Time: 8 

Area of Effect: 1 sq. mi./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell resembles weather summoning except 
that the priest can create bad weather that need not 
be appropriate to the local area. Terrible wind or 
lightning storms, torrential downpours, incredible 
heat or cold, hailstones, or even snowfalls are pos- 
sible. The weather condition created slows and 
damages all creatures within the area of effect, 
including the caster. Creatures caught in wild 
weather move at one-third their normal movement 
rate. Creatures caught in the open take 1 point of 
damage per turn until they find cover—even going 
to ground and covering oneself is sufficient, but in 
that case movement is halted. 

If the weather created might be considered 
harmful to the land or its plants and animals, then 
a spirit of the land might intervene, at the DM's 
option. The spirit must believe that damage would 
be unnaturally severe (weather is, after all, a natu- 
ral phenomenon); spells aimed against other tres- 
passers on its lands rarely interest it. The spirit can 
make a special saving throw to negate the spell 
effects, saving on a 1d20 roll of 5 or higher. 

The material component is a large glass bottle 
with air collected at a location where the weather 
created is common. The priest must wander 
through the area to be affected for the entire prepa- 
ration time for the spell, occasionally uncorking the 
bottle to release some of the air. 

Notes: Granted to elementals, common. 


Sphere of War 


b——————————————————— d 
Sphere of War 


Because the spells in this sphere were designed 
for use with the BATTLESYSTEM"" miniatures rules 
(currently out of print), they have been taken from 
the general spell list and presented here in their 
own section. Several of these spells are overpow- 
ered for their listed levels; their use is up to the 
DM. Several spells in the Quest Spells section are 
also of the sphere of War—these are fear conta- 
gion, storm of vengeance, warband quest, and 
warlords of Cuiraécen. 


Adaptation 

Caltrops 

Courage 

Disguise 

Emotion Perception 
Entrench 

Fortify 

Gravity Variation 

Illusory Artillery 

Illusory Fortification 
Leadership/Doubt 

Morale 

Rally 

Righteous Wrath of the Faithful 
Shadow Engine 
Tanglefoot/Selective Passage 


Adaptation 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: War 
Level: 3 
Range: Special 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: One unit of up to 200 individuals 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast in two different ways. The 
first, appropriate for battlefield use, has a range of 
180 yards, a casting time of one turn, and duration 
of 1d4+2 turns. During: this period, the affected unit 
can fight in one specific type of terrain (specified by 
the caster) as if it was the favored terrain (per ВАТ- 
TLESYSTEM rules) for that unit. While the spell lasts, 
the unit gains no benefit when fighting in its actual 
favored terrain; the magically conferred favored ter- 
rain takes precedence. The priest can cancel the spell 
before the duration expires if desired. 


768 


The material component is a pinch of clay dust. 

Only priests of 12th level and higher can cast 
the second effect, which also requires preparation 
in advance. The priest and unit must be within 100 
yards of a place of worship dedicated to the cast- 
ing priest's deity. The casting time is 5 turns. 

At the conclusion of the casting, the unit gains 
the benefit described above, with two main differ- 
ences. First, the unit does not lose the benefit of 
fighting in its own actual favored terrain (the unit 
effectively has two favored terrains). Second, the 
spell endures until the next sunset. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of War. 


Caltrops 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: War 


Level: 3 

Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell plants a section of ground with mag- 
ically created spikes that damage units moving 
though the affected area. 

The spell can create two kinds of caltrops: 
infantry and cavalry. The first are of small size and 
are designed to harm foot soldiers. The latter are 
larger and cause serious damage to cavalry or units 
composed of size L or larger creatures. Cavalry cal- 
trops are so large that size M or smaller creatures 
can easily step around them. This prevents damage 
to infantry units. 

Each time a unit moves into a planted area, the 
unit suffers an attack of AD=4 (for infantry caltrops) 
or AD=6 (for cavalry caltrops). Units charging 
through a planted area suffer double damage. A unit 
ending its move in a caltrop-sown region suffers 
another attack when it moves out of the area. 

This spell creates a rectangular field of infantry 
caltrops up to 1600 square yards in area (for exam- 
ple, 40 yards X 40 yards, 20 yards X 80 yards, and 
so on), or a field of cavalry caltrops up to 900 
square yards (for example, 30 yards X 30 yards, 20 
yards X 45 yards, and so on). 


Disguise 


)|——————————— di 


Caltrops make no distinction between friend 
and foe; all creatures entering a caltrop-sown area 
suffer the same consequences. However, the casting 
priest can end the spell at any time, causing the cal- 
trops to vanish and leaving the terrain clear. 

Unlike normal caltrops, a region sown with 
magical caltrops cannot be swept clear; the magical 
caltrops remain in place until the spell ends. 

The material component is a golden caltrop. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of War. 


Courage 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: War 
Level: 1 
Range: 240 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 unit up to 200 individuals 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell imbues the target unit with a tempo- 
rary burst of courage. To cast this spell, the priest 
must have an uninterrupted line of sight to the unit. 

The courage spell enables a unit to pass its first 
morale check following the casting of this spell. 
When circumstances require a morale check, no 
die roll is made; the unit is assumed to have passed 
the check. After this occurs, the spell ends and the 
unit must make al] future morale checks normally. 
If the affected unit need not make any morale 
checks, the spell expires at the first sunset. 

When several different events simultaneously 
trigger morale checks, the BATTLESYSTEM rules 
apply penalties to a single morale check. If this 
happens to a unit under the influence of a courage 
spell, the player commanding the unit selects one 
such event and its modifier is ignored. 

No more than one courage spell can affect a unit 
at one time. Once the spell has expired, a priest can 
cast the spell again on the same unit. 

The material component is a cube of cast iron. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of War. 


Disguise 
(Шиѕіоп/ Phantasm) 
Sphere: War 
Level: 5 
Range: 200 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Duration: 1 turn/3 levels 

Area of Effect: 1 unit up to 300 individuals 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell changes the appearance of a single 
unit so it resembles another unit. The disguise can 
cause the affected creatures to appear to be of 
another class, nationality, rank, race, alignment, or 
military affiliation (that is, a unit from one army 
can appear wearing the armor and carrying the 
colors of another army). The spell cannot change 
the size category of the unit's members. Thus, a unit 
of humans can appear to be a unit of elves, but 
cannot appear to be a unit of giants or halflings. The 
spell does not affect the relative size of the unit; a 
unit of 50 creatures still appears to be a unit of 50 
creatures. 

The disguised unit may appear to be carrying 
any melee or personal missile weapons (for exam- 
ple, axes, long swords, crossbows, and so on), and 
may appear to be wearing any type of armor. In 
combat, however, the unit attacks and defends with 
its real weapons and armor regardless of the gear its 
members may appear to be carrying. 

The disguise spell is most effective at long 
range. Any unit moving to within 20 yards of a dis- 
guised unit sees through the illusion. 

The caster automatically sees through the illu- 
sion. Members of the disguised unit see no change 
in their appearance. True seeing or similar magic 
is required for other individuals to see through the 
disguise, unless they move to within 20 yards of the 
unit. 

The material components are a fine silk veil and 
a length of woven platinum wire. The wire is con- 
sumed during the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of War. 


2 769 М. 


Emotion Perception 


Emotion Perception 
(Divination) 
Sphere: War 


Level: 2 

Range: 300 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 unit/S levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to sense the emo- 
tional state and the level of determination of one 
or more military units. The priest must have an 
uninterrupted line of sight to the entire target unit. 
When this spell is cast, the priest instantly learns 
the current morale rating and morale status of the 
unit. The DM describes morale using the appropri- 
ate term; for example, steady, elite, and so on. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of War. 


Entrench 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: War 
Level: 4 
Range: 60 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube/2 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


An improved version of the fortify spell, 
entrench has much the same effect, but prepares an 
even more formidable set of defenses. Like the for- 
tify spell, the entrench spell can be used to prepare 
an open outdoors area such as a field or grassland, 
or a rough outdoors area such as a hillside or forest. 
Large rooms or chambers can be entrenched as well. 
In addition to the ditches and ramparts of the fortify 
spell, entrench makes use of local materials to 
create a small palisade and an array of stakes or 
sharp stones to discourage attackers. 


У 
"4 
i 


WE р, 


A. Open Outdoors Site: A rampart or dike of 
earth faced by a staked ditch rises from the ground 
along the perimeter of the site. Creatures defending 
the dike receive 75% cover against missile fire (+7 
bonus to AC), or 25% cover (+2 bonus) if they 
expose themselves by engaging in melee combat 
or firing missiles out of the dike. Attackers cannot 
charge, run, or sprint over the rampart, and must 
spend one full round negotiating the defenses in 
order to attack. The dike's defenders receive a +1 
bonus to attack rolls against any creatures trying to 
move through the stakes or stones. 

B. Rough Outdoors Site: Loose stones, dead 
wood, and briars are arranged to form a defensible 
wall along the perimeter of the area of effect, faced 
by an array of sharp stakes or stones. Creatures 
hiding behind the wall receive 90% cover (+10 
bonus to AC), or 50% cover (+4 bonus) if they 
expose themselves by firing missiles or defending 
the wall. Attacking creatures cannot run, charge, or 
sprint through the defenses, and must spend one full 
round to get through the stakes plus an additional 
round climbing over the wall in order to enter the for- 
tified area. The wall’s defenders gain a +1 bonus to 
attacks against creatures negotiating the defenses. 

C. Marshy or Low-lying Site: In swamps or 
bogs, the spell creates a water-filled ditch around 
the perimeter of the area of effect. This ditch is 15 
feet wide and 3 to 6 feet deep; most creatures 
require two full rounds to negotiate the ditch and 
climb up the far side. Defenders have a +1 bonus 
to attack rolls against enemies who are wading the 
ditch or climbing up the other side. 


The fortification created by this spell is perma- 
nent, although erosion, weathering, and clearing or 
filling can return the site to its original state. In the 
BATTLESYSTEM rules, the entrench spell provides 
defending units with a +3 bonus to their AR against 
missile and melee attacks, but only a +1 bonus 
against missile attacks in marshy areas. 

The material component is the shell of a giant 
nautilus. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of War. 


Gravity Variation 


наан Аж щщ“ Ғ 


Fortify 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: War 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube/2 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest prepares an 
area as a defensive position. The fortify spell can be 
used to prepare an open outdoors area such as a 
field, road, or grassland, or a rough or broken out- 
doors area such as a hillside, forest, or boulder-fall. 
Large rooms or chambers such as a cavern or a 
great hall can be fortified as well. The exact effects 
of the spell depend on the nature of the site. 

A. Open Outdoor Site: A rampart or dike of 
earth and loose stone rises from the ground along the 
perimeter of the site, leaving a shallow ditch on the 
outward face. Creatures defending the dike receive 
50% cover against missile fire (+4 bonus to AC) or 
25% cover (+2 bonus) if they expose themselves by 
engaging in melee combat or firing missiles out of 
the dike. Attackers cannot charge, run, or sprint over 
the ditch-and-dike. Large, open rooms or chambers 
with few features may fall into this category. 

B. Rough Outdoor Site: Loose stones and 
boulders, dead wood, and patches of dense briars 
are arranged to form a defensible wall or rampart 
along the perimeter of the area of effect. Those 
hiding behind the wall receive 75% cover (a +7 
bonus to AC), or 50% cover if they expose them- 
selves by firing missiles or defending the wall. In 
hand-to-hand combat, the wall’s defenders receive 
a +1 bonus to attack rolls; man-sized creatures must 
spend | full round climbing over the wall to enter 
the fortified area. Natural caverns and large, clut- 
tered chambers fall into this category as well. 

С. Marshy or Low-lying Site: In such areas as 
mash, swamp, bog, or tundra, the fortify spell cannot 
raise a wall or dike to cover the defenders. Instead, the 
spell creates a water-filled ditch around the perimeter 
of the area of effect. This ditch is 10 feet wide and 2 
to 4 feet deep; most creatures require 1 full round to 
negotiate the ditch, and defenders have a +1 bonus 
to attack rolis against enemies wading the ditch or 
climbing up the other side. 


The fortification created by this spell is perma- 
nent, although erosion, weathering, and excavation, 
clearing, or filling can quickly raze the site, return- 
ing it to its original state. 


In the BATTLESYSTEM rules, fortify provides the 
defending unit with a +2 bonus to its AR against 
missile and melee attacks, but no bonus against 
missile attacks in marshy or low-lying areas. 

The material component is the shell of a snail, 
dusted with powdered diamond worth at least 100 gp. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of War. 


Gravity Variation 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: War 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Duration: | turn/3 levels 

Area of Effect: 120-yd. X 120-yd. square 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell changes the characteristics of a 
square region of terrain. The area can be no more 
than 120 yards on a side. The priest can effectively 
turn a flat plain into a slope of any direction, or can 
flatten an existing slope. The spell does not allow 
the priest to alter the pull of gravity, however. 

This spell lets the priest create or negate a height 
differential of as much as 20 feet (a 2-inch slope in 
BATTLESYSTEM rules measurements) within the area 
of effect. This can have various consequences, the 
best way to discuss the effects is by example. 

Example 1: Two units face each other on a flat 
plain. The priest can alter the slope of the terrain so 
that one unit is 2 inches of elevation higher than the 
other. The unit that is upslope gains the combat ben- 
efits for higher ground, and the unit that is downs- 
lope must pay the movement cost for moving uphill 
if it wishes to approach the other unit. 

Example 2: One unit is on flat terrain; another 
unit, 6 inches away, is on a hill of 2-inch elevation. 
Using this spell, the priest can effectively eliminate 
this difference in elevation (raising the low ground or 
lowering the high ground). All combat and move- 
ment involving these two units is then conducted as 
if there were no elevation difference (that is, no 
movement penalty, no combat benefit for higher 
ground, and so on). Alternatively, the priest could 
increase the height differential by 2 inches. Combat 
and movement would now be conducted as if the 
total difference in elevation were 4 inches. 

Example 3: A unit faces a hill of 3-inch eleva- 
tion. The priest casts gravity variation, decreasing 
the effective elevation of the hill to 1 inch. The unit 
pays a lower movement point cost to climb the hill. 
Alternatively, if the unit facing the hill were an 


» 771 М. 


Illusory Artillery 


N 


enemy unit, the priest could increase the effective 
elevation to 5 inches. 

The priest must specify the degree and direction 
of change at the moment of casting. These param- 
eters cannot be changed while the spell remains in 
effect. 

The gravity variation spell can have dramatic 
effects on siege engines and towers. Most siege 
engines can be moved only on the most gentle of 
slopes. By raising or lowering the effective elevation 
of siege engines (by 2 inches), the priest might totally 
immobilize them by positioning them on a slope too 
steep for them to negotiate. Siege towers are 50% 
likely to topple, which would totally destroy them. 

The material component is a tiny plumb bob; 
the plumb line must be made of platinum wire 
while the bob itself must be a gem of at least 1,000 
gp value. The device is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of War. 


Illusory Artillery 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: War 


Level: 5 

Range: 300 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 30 yd. x 30 yd. square 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a vivid illusion of incoming 
artillery fire (ballista bolts, catapult stones, and so 
on) against a target chosen by the caster. The illu- 
sion is complete, comprising both auditory and 
visual elements. It is impossible for target creatures 
to determine where the missiles were fired from; the 
missiles are noticed only as they are about to strike. 

The missiles never actually strike—they vanish 
inches above the heads of those in the target unit 
and cause no damage. The illusion is so terrifying, 
however, that those attacked must make an imme- 
diate morale check. The first time a group or unit 
is subjected to this spell, the morale check is made 
with no modifier. The second and subsequent times 
the same unit is attacked with this spell, the unit 
receives a +1 bonus to its morale score (against this 
effect only). However, if the unit has been the target 
of real artillery fire in the interim, the bonus does 
not apply. 

The material component is a small, empty cylin- 
der made of brass. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of War. 


Illusory Fortification 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: War 


Level: 7 

Range: 240 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 10 turns 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The ritual required to cast this spell is time- 
consuming and extremely complex. As its name 
implies, illusory fortification creates an illusion 
ofa wall of heavy stonework up to 30 feet tall and 
160 yards long, topped with crenellations. The 
illusory wall can be of any color and apparent 
age, potentially allowing the caster to match the 
false wall with the real walls of an existing castle. 
The illusory wall must be continuous (it cannot 
form two or more shorter walls), but it can follow 
any corners or bends that the caster desires. 

In addition to the wall, the spell creates the 
illusion of constant movement among the crenel- 
lations, as if defending troops were moving atop 
the wall. The formation of the crenellations 
makes it impossible for a distant observer to 
determine exactly how many and what types of 
defenders are present on the illusory fortification. 

The illusion remains in existence for 2d12 
hours unless the spell is terminated earlier. 

The spell has one very significant limitation: 
it is strictly two-dimensional and is visible from 
only one side (the side that the caster deems to 
be the outside). When viewed from the outside, 
the wall appears real; when viewed from the end, 
from above, or from the inside, the wall is totally 
invisible except for a faint outline of the shape of 
the wall. This means that friendly troops, con- 
cealed from enemy view by the illusory wall, can 
see their opponents clearly. The wall is most 
effective if friendly troops are informed of the 
wall's presence and are careful not to walk 
through the illusion. Such an occurrence does not 
end the spell, but it will probably alert the enemy 
to the nature of the wall. 

Spells cast at the wall and physical missiles 
fired at it by siege engines appear to strike the 
wall and inflict normal damage. In reality, the 
spells or missiles pass through the illusion, pos- 
sibly striking troops or real fortifications beyond. 
Such hits do not disturb the illusion. 

As soon as an enemy unit moves within 10 
yards of the illusory fortification, the spell ends 
and the wall vanishes. 


2 772 3 


Morale 


a Ó 


The spell can be ended in two ways in before 
its duration expires. First, the priest can end the 
spell at any time. Second, if a friendly unit makes 
an attack, whether melee or missile combat, 
through the illusory wall from the inside to the 
outside, the spell ends instantly. 

Once the illusory fortification has been cre- 
ated, the priest does not need to concentrate on 
the wall. The spell remains in effect even if the 
casting priest is wounded or killed. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol, a handful of stones, powdered mortar, and 
a gem worth at least 3,000 gp. All components 
except the holy symbol are consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of War. 


Leadership 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 
Reversible 
Sphere: War 
Level: 4 


Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be used in two distinct ways. 
The first, appropriate for battlefield use, 
increases the subject creature’s command radius 
by 50% (round fractions up). This spell has a 
range of 240 yards, duration of 1d4+6 turns, and 
a casting time of 1 turn. The priest can cast the 
spell on any individual (a commander or hero) 
within his line of sight. The material component 
is a pinch of steel dust. 

The second variation must be cast in or within 
100 feet of a place of worship officially dedicated 
to the caster’s deity. Both the priest and the sub- 
ject creature must be present. The casting time is 
5 turns, involving an intricate ritual and many 
prayers. The subject’s command radius is doubled 
for 2d12 hours. The material component is the 
priest’s holy symbol. 

The priest can cast either aspect (but not both 
at once) on himself. No individual can be the sub- 
ject of more than one casting of this spell at one 
time, whether different aspects or cast by differ- 
ent priests. If more than one spell is attempted 
on the individual, only the most recent casting 
takes effect. 

The reversed form, doubt, requires the crea- 
ture to make a saving throw vs. spell. If failed, the 


creature’s command radius is halved (round frac- 
tions down) for 1d3+4 turns. 

The material component is a pinch of steel 
dust. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of War. 


Morale 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: War 
Level: 1 


Range: Special 

Components: V, S, М 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 unit up to 200 individuals 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be used in two distinct ways. The 
first is appropriate for battlefield use. It modifies 
the target unit's morale by 1, either positively or 
negatively, as the caster desires. This modification 
remains in effect for 144+2 turns. The priest can 
cast this spell on any unit within 240 yards in an 
uninterrupted line of sight. The casting time for this 
use is one turn. 


Rally 


"gE 


The second use of the spell requires lengthy 
preparations. Casting must take place inside or 
within 100 yards of a place of worship dedicated 
to the casting priest’s deity. Both the priest and the 
unit to be affected must be present. The casting 
time for this use is 5 turns. The material component 
is the priest’s holy symbol. 

At the conclusion of this use of the spell, the 
unit’s morale is raised by 3 (maximum of 19). This 
morale increase lasts until the next sunset. Only 
priests of 10th level or higher can cast this version 
of the spell. 

The material component is a gem of at least 
100 gp value, which is destroyed during the 
casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of War. 


Rally 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: War 
Level: 2 
Range: 240 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 unit of up to 300 individuals 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the subject unit to make an 
immediate rally check. It allows the check during 
the Magic Phase, rather than forcing the unit to wait 
for the Rally Phase in the BATTLESYSTEM rules. If 
the priest casting the spell is of 12th level or higher, 
the subject unit receives a +1 bonus to its rally 
check die roll. The priest must have an uninter- 
rupted line of sight to the unit. 

The material component is a miniature dupli- 
cate of a pennant or standard that represents the 
cause for which the unit is fighting (such as a 
national flag or the blazon of the unit’s liege lord). 
The pennant is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of War. 


Righteous Wrath of the Faithful 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: War 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The caster fires any allies and companions with a 
divine madness or fury that greatly enhances their 
combat ability. Those fighting on the side of the 
priest are affected as if they had received an aid spell, 
gaining a +1 bonus to attack rolls and saving throws, 
plus 148 additional hit points for the duration of the 
spell. Also, allies who share the same faith (not just 
alignment) of the caster become filled with right- 
eous wrath: they gain one additional melee attack 
each round and have a total +2 bonus to attack rolls, 
damage rolls, and saving throws. The additional hit 
points conferred by righteous wrath are the first 
points lost if the subject sustains any injury. Char- 
acters in a state of divine frenzy are difficult to 
charm or hold. Against spells or effects that target 
the subject's mind or emotions, the saving throw 
bonus increases to +3. 

When the spell ends, any remaining temporary 
hit points that it granted are lost. Those fighting 
under righteous wrath are extremely fatigued and 
must rest for one full turn before exerting them- 
selves again. If forced to fight in this state, they 
are treated as if exhausted under the Combat 
& Tactics fatigue rules. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of War. 


Fatigue: Exhausted characters operate as if 
their encumbrance were two classes worse. 


Selective Passage 
Reversed form, tanglefoot. 


2 774 M 


Tanglefoot 


b ————————————————— i 


Shadow Engines 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: War 


Level: 7 

Range: 240 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 turns 

Duration: 8 turns 

Area of Effect: 180-yard X 180-yard square 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates the illusion of as many as four 
siege engines. The casting priest can choose from 
ballistae, siege towers, catapults, rams, or any com- 
bination thereof. Like the creatures created by the 
spell shadow monsters, these illusory engines have 
at least a tenuous reality and can inflict damage on 
enemies. 

Illusory crews of the appropriate number and 
race accompany the shadow engines. The engines 
can move at a rate of 20 yards per turn and are unaf- 
fected by terrain considerations. (The caster can 
choose to slow them when passing through rough 
terrain to aid the illusion of reality.) 

Shadow engines cannot carry real troops. They 
fire at the same rate as real engines of the appro- 
priate type, but a hit causes only one-half the 
damage normal for that type of engine (round frac- 
tions down). 

A shadow engine remains in existence until the 
spell duration expires, until an enemy unit 
approaches within 10 yards, or until it suffers 
damage from an enemy missile attack. When any of 
these conditions occur, the engine vanishes. If a 
single spell has created multiple engines, only the 
engine struck vanishes; the others remain. 

The crew associated with a shadow engine 
remains with that engine and cannot move more 
than 5 yards away from the engine itself. 

Shadow engines can move independently of 
other engines created by the spell as long as they 
remain within the area of effect and remain within 
240 yards of the caster. The caster must maintain 
concentration to control the shadow engines. No 
other spells can be cast, nor can the caster move at 
a movement rate greater than 6. If the caster is 
struck for damage, the shadow engines vanish. 

The material component is a finely detailed 
miniature model of a siege engine (of any type), 
which is consumed during the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of War. 


Tanglefoot 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: War 


Level: 4 

Range: 240 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Duration: 2 turns/level 

Area of Effect: 100 sq. yards/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily doubles the movement 
cost of one region of ground. Units allied to the 
priest are unaffected and movement is made at 
normal cost; only enemy units suffer the penalty. 

The spell creates a variety of effects depending 
on the terrain: grass twists around troops' ankles, 
swamp becomes more viscous, rocks and gravel 
shift underfoot, and so on. 

The spell affects only units—that is, groups of 
soldiers moving in regular or irregular formation. 
The spell does not affect individuals or monsters 
moving and operating alone. (When using the Bar- 
TLESYSTEM rules, figures that represent individual 
heroes are not affected by this spell.) 

When casting this spell, the priest must have an 
uninterrupted line of sight to the terrain to be 
affected. The priest can choose the shape of the 
area, up to the maximum area of effect. This spell 
can create only one contínuous area of tanglefoot. 
There is no way of detecting that a particular area is 
under the influence of this spell simply by looking 
at the area. Detect magic reveals that the area is 
magically affected. 

The material component is a drop of molasses. 

The reverse of this spell, selective passage, cuts 
the movement cost of an area in half (round frac- 
tions up) for friendly units. Again, individual 
heroes and creatures are not affected by this spell 
(which means that advancing troops must be care- 
ful not to leave their leader behind!). 

The material component is a pinch of powdered 
graphite. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of War. 


E 775 = 


Quest Spells 


a eam Ғ 
Quest Spells 


Priests and clerics are the servants of Powers— 
immortal entities with abilities far beyond those of 
mere mortals. Yet these servants do not wield mag- 
ical forces equal to those of wizards; priests have 
nothing to compare with the wish spell, for example. 
Circumstances will arise when a priest should be 
able to call upon the magical energies controlled by 
the patron Power to achieve something extraordi- 
nary in serving a sacred duty. Quest spells are 
designed to satisfy these extremes and allow the 
priest to wield high-powered magic without drasti- 
cally altering the scope of his or her magic. 

Quest spells are a category of powerful spells 
without an assigned level. They should not be con- 
fused with the 5th-level spell guest, which is a spe- 
cific single spell. 

While quest spells are powerful, they are not as 
powerful as the energies used by Powers. A god who 
chose to flatten a mountain or raise an island could 
probably do so. Priests cannot achieve such huge 
effects; they are still mortal beings. But quest spells 
do provide a priest with magic more powerful than 
any other priestly magic; a quest spell could easily 
mean the difference between success or failure in a 
mission. Quest spells are capable of affecting large 
areas or numbers of creatures and allow the shap- 
ing of great energies; they are often difficult or 
impossible to resist or dispel. 

Quest spells are not part of a priest’s normal 
repertoire. These spells are granted powers, 
bestowed directly by one’s deity to achieve special 
goals. 


Why Quest Spells 

Two circumstances are most likely to warrant the 
granting of a quest spell. First, a Power may con- 
tact the priest in a dream or omen, or by sending a 
servant or avatar. In this case, the Power requests 
that the priest perform a vital service on behalf of 
the Power (the nature of such a request is discussed 
later). The priest is effectively commanded to go on 
a quest—hence the generic title of quest spell. 

A second case for the granting of a quest spell 
may occur if a priest were to discover something of 
fundamental importance to the faith that the Power 
must be appraised of (not all powers are omnis- 
cient). A priest contacting the Power (with a com- 
mune spell or by prayer) might beseech the Power to 
grant some exceptional magic to address the situa- 
tion. The request for a quest spell must not be moti- 
vated by such selfish considerations on the priest’s 
part (such hubris is greatly offensive to any Power), 
and circumstances must be truly exceptional. The 


776 


Power then considers the priest’s request and 
responds accordingly. 

In game terms, the first condition translates to 
the DM using a quest spell as a plot device to spice 
up a quest for the priest and his or her party. The 
second condition translates to a player requesting 
exceptional aid for his or her priest character fol- 
lowed by the DM’s decision whether to allow this. 


Conditions for Quest Spells 

The circumstances that prompt a power or priest 
to seek the use of a quest spell are usually related 
to a major sphere of concern of the Power. A god 
of druids is not likely to grant a quest spell to 
address a matter of warfare, commerce, politics, 
knightly virtue, or other irrelevance (as this Power 
would view them). However, destruction of a huge 
swathe of forest by fire is entirely different. To pro- 
tect or regenerate a great natural resource, a druidic 
Power would surely consider dispatching a most 
powerful servant with awesome magic. A major 
challenge demands a major response. 

A Power may choose to equip followers with a 
quest spell in preparation for a major conflict with 
servants of a hostile Power. This may be true for both 
sides in the conflict; the NPCs as well as the PCs 
might be equipped with quest spells. In this manner, 
tow Powers avoid fighting each other directly; their 
servants carry out the warfare instead. This will be a 
major event in any campaign setting! Milder varia- 
tions on this theme include the razing of a major 
temple of the enemy Power or the destruction of a 
major resource belonging to the Power's servants. 

This is a situation in which a DM must exercise 
caution. This type of conflict can easily swerve out 
of control and threaten the destruction of the game 
world; no Power wants this. Only if a Power has 
stepped out of line is the retribution by a rival Power 
tolerable among the community of Powers. If an evil 
temple has stood in the capital of an evil land for 
centuries, it is unacceptable for a good deity to 
strike at it. If an evil temple in hidden in nonevil 
lands, it is reasonable for a good Power to strike it 
down. It is important that game balance and the 
status quo are maintained. 

A Power is likely to grant a quest spell when 
there is a major threat to its followers, church, con- 
secrated grounds, or territories. These situations 
may become considerably extended; a Power of 
healing may extend the use of quest magic to help 
his priests cure a virulent plague affecting ordinary 
folk. For such a Power, the welfare of the common 
man is important. In such cases, game balance must 


Quest Spells 


ee 


be maintained by granting quest spells only in true 
catastrophes. 

Exceptional and unique circumstances will arise 
that will draw quest magic into the game. This may 
include racial interests (for elves, dwarves, and so 
on) such as defense of the homelands or protection 
of great fortresses, or it may include communities of 
exceptional artisans wishing to draw quest magic 
from Powers. The discovery of an intensely magi- 
cal artifact or place important to the power may 
necessitate quest magic to secure it. Establishing 
and developing a major sacred location may justify 
the use of quest magic (especially with spheres such 
as Creation, Guardian, Protection, and Wards). Such 
cases are individually determined by the DM as 
major elements of a campaign story line. 


Situations Unworthy of Quest Spells 

What types of requests do not warrant a Power 
granting a quest spell? Generally, a quest spell is not 
needed for events that affect only a minor sphere of 
interest for the deity and events that are part of normal 
Prime Material conflict; a senior priest being killed by 
an agent of an evil Power isn’t enough to justify the 
use of a quest spell. Any problem that has limited 
scale or should resolve itself in time through the 
normal efforts of priests does not need quest magic. 

The DM must considers whether a problem is 
out of the ordinary. Only under extraordinary cir- 
cumstances should a quest spell be granted. If the 
DM is in doubt, a simple question may provide the 
answer: Could the problem have a fair chance of res- 
olution through the use of upper-level priest spells if 
wisely used? Only if the answer is “no” should quest 
magic be considered. 


Which Priests Receive Quest Spells 

Only true and faithful servants of a Power who 
have successfully used powerful magic are eligible 
for quest spells. This limits quest spells to priests; 
although a paladin may be true and faithful, his or 
her experience is not sufficient to command the 
magical energies of potent quest magic. 

Level limitations are important. It is very rare for 
a priest of less than 12th level to be granted quest 
magic. Priests of 9th level and lower cannot use 
quest magic; the strain of holding and shaping such 
magic is too great. 

A priest must possess Wisdom of 17 or better to 
cast quest spells. It is quite possible for a priest to be 
granted a quest spell but not possess the wisdom to 
cast 7th-level clerical spells; Powers sometimes 
work in mysterious ways. 

Under normal conditions, quest spells are 
granted to high-level priests rather than to their 
junior counterparts (when such an option exists, 


such as in a large temple). If the hierarchy of a 
temple has been destroyed, then the best of the 
junior echelons may be granted quest spells. 

Some cases may not offer as many options as to 
the recipient of a quest spell. If the nearest priest to 
the site of a mission is of a lower level that priests 
at a faraway temple, the chances are good that this 
priest will be granted a quest spell rather than await- 
ing the arrival of a faraway superior, Similarly, if the 
senior priests of a temple are too old to travel or are 
needed to maintain order at the temple, a priest of a 
lower level may be granted the quest spell. 

In some situations, a Power will recognize an 
extremely devoted follower by granting a quest 
spell, passing up older, more experienced col- 
leagues. Age and experience do not indicate devo- 
tion or worthiness. Prodigies exist in all walks of 
life; clerics are no exception. 

Faithfulness and piety of the priest are impor- 
tant but difficult to judge. The priest must be 
unswerving in his or her alignment and have an 
exemplary record of service to the Power. It is rea- 
sonable to ignore an offense committed due to mag- 
ical influence even if atonement was required (or 
voluntarily undergone) as a result. 

Obviously, these criteria depend on DM judg- 
ment. The DM must remember that priests are mor- 
tals—and mortals have weaknesses. While a priest 
who has not been zealous in defense of the faith is 
a noncandidate for quest spells, a priest who is pure 
of heart but who has made a few errors might still be 
considered for quest magic. However, such a priest 
may be asked to undertake a preliminary quest to 
prove his or her worthiness. This is especially likely 
if there is no time pressure for the greater quest or 
if the priest has asked the Power for quest magic 
rather than the Power commanding the priest. 

A preliminary quest is not a trivial affair; it 
should present a stiff challenge. In a campaign, it is 
especially appropriate if such a quest doubles as an 
opportunity to acquire a new resource (magical 
items, henchmen, followers, NPC co-operation, and 
so on) which might assist the greater quest to come. 


How Is the Quest Spell Granted 

A priest must undergo specific preparations to 
receive a quest spell. Isolated prayer and medita- 
tion for 24 hours are required (double this if the 
priest has Wisdom of only 17 or is below 12th 
level). If this period is interrupted, the priest must 
begin anew. Following this period, the priest needs 
one hour to establish an maintain a direct mental 
link with the patron Power and receive the spell into 
his or her mind. During this communion, the priest 
is in a state of exultation and is oblivious to the out- 
side world. He or she cannot be roused from this 


A 777 ~ 


5 ee 


reverie. The DM may rule that specific ceremonies 
be carried out by the priest during the time of med- 
itation and the time of the granting of the spell. 
These ceremonies should be determined in accor- 
dance with the nature of the religion. The priest may 
be required to be in a major church or temple for the 
ceremony. The presence of junior priests and 
acolytes, perhaps united in mass prayer, may also be 
needed. However, these are only suggestions and 
should not be rigidly enforced—a god of travelers 
would not require a quest spell to be granted in a 
temple, for example. 


Introducing the Quest Spell 

Bringing a quest spell into a campaign should be 
a major event. It should create a powerful atmosphere 
that includes elements of pageantry, solemnity, and 
ceremony to make the event come alive in the game. 
Such considerations of staging and flavor are left to 
DM discretion and the demands of the campaign. 


The Cost of Quest Spells 

Quest spells are not granted without a price. A 
priest receiving a quest spell is unable to memo- 
rize spells of the highest level he or she is allowed. 
Memorized spells of that level are lost (for exam- 
ple, a 13th-level cleric is unable to use 6th level 
spells). 

A cleric who has been granted a quest spell does 
not gain the ability to automatically cast it again. 
Each time a priest wishes to use a quest spell, the 
described procedures must be repeated. 


Adjudicating Quest Spells 

The rules that follow apply to all quest spells. 
The DM should avoid altering these rules, in order 
to use quest spells consistently and fairly. 

Components: Material components are not 
needed for quest spells. All quest spells use verbal 
and somatic components. Since this is invariant, com- 
ponents are not included in the spell descriptions. 

Duration: In the spell descriptions, the term 
“day” is often used. “Day” means “until the next 
dawn” if the priest casts the spell during daylight 
hours and “until the next dusk” if the spell is cast 
during nighttime hours. 

Countering Quest Spells: Most quest spells 
cannot be dispelled. Because of their semidivine 
origin, mortal dispel magic spells simply do not 
affect them. In most cases, only other quest magic 
will directly counter quest magic. 

This also applies to attempts to counter specific 
elements of quest spells, For example, certain quest 
spells include the effect of a prayer spell in the area 
of effect of the quest spell. Such a prayer effect 
cannot be countered by the use of a mortal prayer 


spell. The quest prayer overrides the ordinary 
prayer spell. 

Saving Throws: Target creatures at whom quest 
spells are cast are usually allowed no saving throws. 
Magical items that would normally protect against 
the type of effect (for example, a ring of free action 
against a hold/paralysis effect) allow a weakened 
saving throw of 18. Magic resistance functions, but 
at one-half normal. If a quest spell has multiple 
magical effects, magic resistance checks must be 
made against each affect. 


Faith Magic 


A unique feature of clerical magic is faith magic. 
Using this special category of priest spells, clerics 
can create semipermanent wards, sanctify ground, 
ensure good harvests, or even improve the health of 
followers. In short, this amplified magic allows cer- 
tain clerical spells to be increased and intensified 
through the combined efforts of priests and wor- 
shipers. Range, area of effect, duration, and even 
damage can be altered through devotion and com- 
bined spellcasting. 

To gain this ability, priests and their worshipers 
form groups to create faith magic. Priests of nearly 
all religions seek out worshipers, establish temples, 
retire to monasteries, and establish seminaries. 
While there are many practical reasons to form such 
groups, priests’ attitudes are also shaped by this 
important difference between clerical and wizardly 
magic—the ability to combine magical power. 
Wizard spells lack the property to benefit from devo- 
tional power—wizards gain no magical benefits 
from founding monasteries or attracting followers. 


Devotional Power 

The core of faith magic is devotional power. This 
power comes from the dedication of ardent follow- 
ers and priests. It is not something that can be 
manipulated directly (like a spell), although it is a 
source of power for spells. Unlike magical energy, 
devotional energy is not tied to a particular charac- 
ter class. Ordinary people are as much a source of 
this power as are adventurers. Only priests are sig- 
nificantly different; their lifelong dedication to their 
god being the wellspring for even greater power. 

Not everyone is a source of devotional energy. 
Almost every character generates a small amount 
of power, but only those persons dedicated in their 
beliefs provide the amounts needed for faith magic. 
Even at this level, the total energy provided by each 
person is very small. Thus, faith magic can be used 
only when large numbers of sincere worshipers 


2 778 М. 


и ——————————" ш 


gather, such as particularly devout congregations, 
monasteries, seminaries, and universities operated 
by a religious order. Sincere belief is the most 
important factor. While persons attending a service 
may be numerous, casual followers do not con- 
tribute to the effect. 

Before its power can be harnessed, the devo- 
tional energy of a groups must be gathered and con- 
centrated toward a single effect. This is known as 
focusing the effect. Once focused, the devotional 
energy provides power needed to maintain a spell 
effect, increase its area of effect, or create a number 
of other different results. A focus is created by 
means of the 4th-level spell focus. 

Once the devotional energy has been focused, the 
priest or priests can cast the spell to be amplified. 
Using the devotional energy gathered by the focus, 
the spell’s area of effect, duration, or both can be 
increased. The exact increase depends on the level of 
the priest casting the focus spell. Such amplified 
spells typically affect a building (such as a church 
or hospital), group of buildings, or even an estate. 

The spell remains in effect as long as the focus 
exists. This requires a minimum number of wor- 
shipers and periodic renewals of the spell. Since the 
duration of a focus is long, these renewals often 
coincide with important festivals of the religion, 
when numerous worshipers are present to provide 
devotional energy. 


Cooperative Magic 


Cooperative spells are unique to priests. These 
spells allow several priests to combine their abilities 
to create a greater effect. Combine (1st level) is one 
type of cooperative spell. 

Cooperative spells do not require a focus or 
devotional energy; all that is required are two or 
more priests of sufficient level to cast any coopera- 
tive spell. Casting times for cooperative spells are 
much shorter than those required for quest spells or 
faith magic, making cooperative magic useful to 
adventuring priests. 

АП priests who attempt cooperative magic must 
know the spell to be cast and be of the same ethos. 
Generally, only priests of the same religion can use 
cooperative magic. However, priests of deities 
known to work in close harmony are sometimes 
able to use cooperative magic with each other. The 
decision lies with the DM, since the relations 
between different deities vary greatly from cam- 
paign to campaign. 

Note: In this series, cooperative spells are 
marked with an asterisk (*). Those spells that can be 


cast cooperatively (but not necessarily must be), are 
marked as well. 


Divine Intervention 


The gods are not unwilling to aid their wor- 
shipers. The fact is, gods have so many worshipers 
that they prefer to give aid of a less specific and 
more general nature— subtle aid that will help their 
worshipers as a whole. This type of aid often goes 
unnoticed in the short run (except by high level 
priests, who know what to expect). Specific aid to 
individuals is extremely rare, despite the fact that 
this is the type of aid deities are most frequently 
requested to supply. 

If the supernatural powers of the various Outer 
Planes could and would continually and constantly 
involved themselves in the affairs of the millions 
upon the Prime Material Plane, they would not only 
be so busy as to get neither rest nor relaxation, but 
these deities would be virtually handling their own 
affairs and confronting each other regularly and 
often. If an entreaty for aid is heard one time in 100, 
surely each and every deity in the multiverse would 
be as busy as a switchboard operator during some 
sort of natural disaster. Even giving each deity a 
nominal number of servants able to supply aid to 
desperate adventurers, the situation would be fren- 
zied at best. Add to the effects of various spells— 
commune, contact other plane, gate. It is obvious 
that intervention by a deity is no trifling matter, and 
it is not to be allowed on a whim, even if the char- 
acters are in extremis! 

This is not to dictate that deities wil] never come 
to characters. The mighty evil gods and fiends are 
prone to appear when their name is spoken—pro- 
vided they stand the possibility of gaining converts 
to their cause. The forces of good might send some 
powerful creature of like alignment to aid characters 
on a mission in their behalf. Certainly in the case 
of some contest between opposing deities, all sorts 
of intervention will take place—but always so as not 
to cause the deities themselves to be forced into 
direct confrontation! The accumulation of hit points 
and the ever-greater abilities and better saving 
throws of characters generally represents the aid 
supplied by supernatural forces. In most cases, the 
DM determines the involvement of deities as the 
campaign develops. 


Note: Deities will not intervene on the planes that 
are the habitation of other deities: the Outer Planes. 
Neither will they venture to involve themselves in 
the Positive and Negative Material Planes. Interven- 
tion in the EJemental Planes is subject to DM option 


A 779 М. 


ee EEE Д 


based on the population there (if there are elemental 
gods, the deities from the Outer Planes will not go 
there). Intervention occurs only on the Prime Mate- 
rial, Astral, or Ethereal Planes in most cases. 


General Intervention 

The following guidelines can be used if a char- 

If the character beseeching help has been 
exemplary in faithfulness, allow a straight 1096 
chance that some creature will be sent to his or 
her aid, if this is the first time the character has 
asked for help. 

If 00 is rolled, the deity itself may come (1% 
chance per level of the character), and this 


chance is modified as noted. 
Each previous intervention on 

behalf of the character —5% 
Alignment behavior only medial -5% 
Alignment behavior borderline -10% 
Direct confrontation with another 

deity required by the situation -10% 
Character opposing forces of 

diametrically opposed alignment +H% 
Character serving deity proximately 

(through direct instructions or by 

means of an intermediary) +25% 

It is incumbent upon the DM to prevent players 
from becoming too dependent on this type of aid. 


A good default approach is to make sure that spu- 
rious calls for divine intervention ultimately cost 
more than the beseeching character benefits. 


Divine Ascension 


It is remotely possible for mortals to ascend into 
the ranks of the divine. However, there are certain 
requirements that must be fulfilled before such a 
thing can happen. 

First, the character in question must have 
advanced to an experience level that is significantly 
above and beyond the average level of adventurer- 
type characters in the general campaign. This 
includes all such nonplayer character types as mili- 


780 


tary leaders, royal wizards, and so on. For example, 
if the average level of characters in the campaign, 
both player and nonplayer, is around 5th level, then 
a candidate for ascension should be something like 
9th or 10th level. If the average level is something 
like 15th, then a character would have to be in the 
realm of 25th—30th level! 

Second, the character's ability scores must have 
been raised through some mighty world-shaking 
magic to be on par with the lesser demigods. Should 
such an act be lightly considered, remember that a 
wish spell is the most powerful magic that mankind 
can control, and such an average increase in abilities 
would literally take the power of dozens of wishes. 

Third, each personage must have a body of sin- 
cere worshipers, people convinced of his or her 
divinity due to their witnessing of and/or belief in 
the mighty deeds and miracles the character has per- 
formed (and continues to perform). These must be 
genuine worshipers, honest in their adoration or pro- 
pitiation of the person. 

Fourth, the person in question must be and have 
been a faithful and true follower of his or her align- 
ment and patron deity. It is certain that any deviation 
will have been noted by the divine powers. 

If all of the above conditions have been met, and 
the character has fulfilled a sufficient number of 
divine quests, then the character's deity may choose 
to invest the candidate with a certain amount of 
divine power, and bring the character into the ranks 
of the god's celestial servants. This process of 
ascension usually involves a great glowing beam of 
light and celestial fanfare, or (in the case of those 
transmigrating to the lower planes), a blotting of 
the sun, thunder and lightning, and the disappear- 
ance of the character in a great smoky explosion. 
Characters thus taken into the realms of the gods 
serve their patron as minor functionaries and mes- 
sengers. After several centuries of superior service 
and gradual advancement, exceptional servants may 
be awarded the status of demigod, which includes 
having an earthly priesthood and the ability to grant 
spells to the demigod's priests. 

Naturally, ascension to divinity effectively 
removes the character from the general campaign, 
as he or she becomes a nonplayer member of the 
ОМ» pantheon. The section on divine intervention 
applies in general to these characters as well, as the 
patron deity has more important jobs for his or her 
servants than to continually send them when called 
to interfere in worldly matters. 


_ —————————————————— „ 
Priest Spells by Sphere 


These lists include many of the more general priest spells, sorted by relative rarity. The entries in CAPs 
are common spells from the Player s Handbook. The spells in normal type are uncommon spells, those from 
the Ist Ed. Player s Handbook, the Tome of Magic, and the PLAYER 'S OPTION: Spells & Magic books. Spells 
in italic type are rarer spells from modules and other supplements. Screened spells are very rare spells from 
magazines and other sources. Specifically excluded from these lists are world-, deity-, and race-specific 
spells, as well as spells identified as from extremely rare sources, such as the sources described in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS accessory Prayers from the Faithful. 


All 

BLEss (1) 

СОМВІМЕ* (1) 

Detect Maoic (1) 

Punirv Foop & DRINK (1) 
Ceremony (1) 

Orison (1) 

CHANT (2) 

Mystic Transfer (2) 
Protection from Orisons (2) 
Sanctify* (2) 

DisPEL Maaic (3) 
REMOVE CURSE (3) 


Focus (4) 

Uplift (4) 
ATONEMENT (5) 
COMMUNE (5) 
Quest (5) 

TRUE SEEING (5) 
Meld (5) 


SPEAK WITH MONSTERS (6) 


Animal 

ANIMAL FRIENDSHIP (1) 
ОЕТЕСТ SNARES & Pits (1) 
INVISIBILITY TO ANIMALS (1) 
LOCATE ANIMALS OR PLANTS (1) 
Calm Animals (1) 

Beastmask (1) 


Gift of Speech (2) 


Converse with Sea Creature (3) 


ANIMAL SUMMONING I (4) 
CALL WooDLAND BEINGS (4) 


Detect Animal Attacker (4) 
Enhance Water Creature (4) 
Hunger (4) 


ANIMAL GROWTH (5) 
ANIMAL SUMMONING II (5) 
COMMUNE WITH NATURE (5) 


P. 781 M 


ПЕН 
[ 
P 


Emotion Control (3) 

CLOAK OF BRAVERY (4) 

FREE ACTION (4) 

IMBUE WITH SPELL ABILITY (4) 


© 
| 


Command Monster (6) 


2° 9 
1 | 
S 35 


MAGICAL STONE (1) 


ИН HH IH B 
S = +T m 
$ cm 9 5 


Ee Ы 


CONTINUAL LIGHT (3) 


CREATE Foop & WATER (3) 


Sticks To SNAKES (4) 
Blessed Abundance (5) 
ANIMATE OBJECT (6) 
BLADE BARRIER (6) 
HEROES’ FEAST (6) 
Great Circle* (The) (6) 


Divination 

Detect Evi (1) 
DETECT Poison (1) 
Analyze Balance (1) 
Portent (1) 

Detect Disease (1) 
Empathy (1) 


Find Water (1) 
Read Language (1) 


AuGury (2) 

ОЕТЕСТ CHARM (2) 

FIND TRAPS (2) 

KNOW ALIGNMENT (2) 
SPEAK WITH ANIMALS (2) 
Detect Life (2) 


Bat Sense (2) 
Know Language (2) 


Locate OBJECT (3) 
SPEAK WITH DEAD (3) 
Detect Illusion (3) 
Detect Spirits (3) 


Extradimensional Detection (3) 
Converse with Sea Creature (3) 


Find Portal (3) 
Water Window (3) 


Detect LIE (4) 
DIVINATION (4) 
TONGUES (4) 

Lair Divination (4) 
Omniscient Eye (4) 
Maaic Font (5) 
Consequence (5) 
FIND THE PATH (6) 
STONE TELL (6) 


Alter Luck (6) 
Divine Event (6) 
Seal of Destiny (6) 
Seek (6) 


Divine Inspiration (7) 


2 783 М 


Elemental Air 

Wind Column (1) 
Dust Реут (2) 

Wind Servant (3) 
Zone of Sweet Air (3) 


Thunderclap (3) 


Windborne (4) 

Protection from Elementals, 10' 
Radius (4) 

AIR WALK (5) 

Cloud of Purification (5) 

CONTROL WINDS (5) 

Whirlwind (6) 

Conjure Air (or Water) Elemental (7) 


Conjure Greater Elemental (7) 
WIND WALK (7) 


Elemental Earth 
Strength of Stone (1) 


Sense Direction (1) 


Soften Earth and Stone (2) 
MELD INTO STONE (3) 
STONE SHAPE (3) 
Adamantite Mace (4) 
Earthmaw (4 ) 


Magnetism (4) 


Protection from Elementals, 10' 
Radius (4) 


Warp Stone Or Metal (4) 
Nature s Charm (5) 


Shatter Stone and Metal (5) 
Sink into Earth (5) 


SPIKE STONES (5) 

Strengthen Stone (5) 

TRANSMUTE Rock To Мор (5) 
ANTI-ANIMAL SHELL (6) 

STONE TELL (6) 

ANIMATE ROCK (7) 

CONJURE EARTH ELEMENTAL (7) 
EARTHQUAKE (7) 

TRANSMUTE METAL To Woop (7) 
Anti-Mineral Shell (7) 


Elemental Fire 

Firelight (1) 

Log of Everburning (1) 
Fire TRAP (2) 

FLAME BLADE (2) 

HEAT METAL (2) 

PRODUCE FLAME (2) 
FLAME WALK (3) 
PROTECTION FROM FIRE (3) 


== 
шү ee же 8 i ae 


PYROTECHNICS (3) 

PRODUCE FIRE (4) 

Protection from Elementals, 10' 
Radius (4) 

Animate Flame (5) 

WALL OF FIRE (5) 


CONJURE FIRE ELEMENTAL (6) 
Fire SEEDS (6) 
CHARIOT OF SUSTARRE (7) 


FIRE STORM (7) 


Elemental Water 
CREATE WATER (1) 
Precipitation (1) 
Watery Fist (2) 

Purify Water (1) 
Pressure Resistance (2) 


Enhance Water Creature (4) 

LOWER WATER (4) 

REFLECTING POOL (4) 

Protection from Elementals, 10' 
Radius (4) 


b ———————————————————" d 


Fortifving Stew (druid) (2) Unfailing Endurance (4) 
CURE BLINDNESS OR DEAFNESS (3) RaIsE DEAD (5) 

Cure DISEASE (3) Cure Insanity (5) 

Hold Poison (3) X5 


Repair Injury (3) c 
CURE SERIOUS WOUNDS (4) ЖА нк ле. 
NEUTRALIZE POISON (4) Mindkiller (7) 
Fortify Healing* (4) RESTORATION (7) 
ыо узу кту dumm PRU RESURRECTION (7) 
———— Numbers 
CURE CRITICAL WOUNDS (5) Analyze Balance (1) 
Des s AD Calculate (1) 
Regenerate C ] Personal Reading (1) 
ЧАА яца eee g A! M t (2) 
HEAL (6) Music of the Spheres (2) 
REGENERATE (7) Etherealness (3) 
Breath of Life (7) Extradimensional Detection (3) 
а eir "^O ds Moment Reading (3) 
Telethaumaturgy (3) 
Addition (4) 
Dimensional Folding (4) 
Law Probability Control (4) 
COMMAND (1) Consequence (5) 
Protection from Chaos (1) Dimensional Translocation (5) 
Calm Chaos (2) Extradimensional Manipulation (5) 
ENTHRALL (2) Extradimensional Pocket (5) 
HOLD PERSON (2) Protection from Fiends, 10' 
Dictate (3) Radius (5) 
Rigid Thinking (3) i i 
Strength of One (3) 
Compulsive Order (4) 
Defensive Harmony (4) 
Champion’s Strength (5) 
Impeding Permission (5) 
Legal Thoughts (6) 
Necromantic 
Dispel Fatigue (1) 
INVISIBILITY TO UNDEAD (1) 
AID (2) 
Restore Strength (2) 
ANIMATE DEAD (3) 
З GooDBERRY (2) 
FEIGN DEATH (3) Trip (2) 
NEGATIVE PLANE PROTECTION (3) Warp Woon (2) 
REMOVE PARALYSIS (3) 
SPEAK WITH DEAD (3) 
Exorcise (4) 
NEUTRALIZE POISON (4) 
Suspended Animation (4) 


785 


b ————————————— 1 


PLANT GROWTH (3) 
SNARE (3) 

SPIKE GROWTH (3) 
TREE (3) 

Slow Rot (3) 
Shape Wood (3) 


Druid’s Decay (3) 

Heal Trees (3) 

Pass without Trace, 10’ Radius (3) 
Splinter Wood (3) 


HALLUCINATORY FOREST (4) 
HOLD PLANT (4) 

PLANT Door (4) 

SPEAK WITH PLANTs (4) 
Sticks To SNAKES (4) 
Hunger (4) 

Knurl (4) 

Needlestorm (4) 


Decompose (4) 


ANTI-PLANT SHELL (5) 
COMMUNE WITH NATURE (5) 
PASS PLANT (5) 
Thornwrack (5) 


Animate Tree (5) 
Stonewood (5) 


LIVEOAK (6) 

TRANSPORT VIA PLANTS (6) 
TURN Woop (6) 

WALL OF THORNS (6) 

Ivy Siege (6) 


Blossom (6) 
Earthwrack (6) 


CHANGESTAFF (7) 
Tree Spirit (7) 
Unwilling Wood (7) 


Holly Dart (7) 
Sustarre's Transformation (7) 


Protection 

ENDURE HEAT/ENDURE COLD (1) 
PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1) 
SANCTUARY (1) 

Ring of Hands* (1) 


Rainshield (1) 


2 786 М. 


RzsisT FiRE/REsIST COLD (2) 
WITHDRAW (2) 

Resist Acid and Corrosion (2) 
Pressure Resistance (2) 


Death Prayer (2) 
Protection from Charm (2) 


MAGICAL VESTMENT (3) 
NEGATIVE PLANE PROTECTION (3) 
REMOVE PARALYSIS (3) 

Line of Protection* (3) 


Mind Cloak (3) 
Protection from Amorphs (3) 
Wind and Rain Protection (3) 


PROTECTION FROM EviL, 10’ 
RADIUS (4) 

SPELL IMMUNITY (4) 

Protection from Gas, 5’ Radius (4) 

Protection from Lycanthropes, 10' 

Radius (4) 

Protection from Traps (4) 

Protection from Undead, 5' 
Radius (4) 


Hand of Fate (4) 
Protection from Electricity (4) 
Protection from Electricity, 10" Radius (4) 


ANTI-PLANT SHELL (5) 

Impregnable Mind (5) 

Protection from Fiends, 10' 
Radius (5) 


Adaptation (5) 
Protection from Petrification, 10” Radius (5) 


Anti-Animal Shell (6) 
Anti-Mineral Shell (7) 
Impervious Sanctity of Mind (7) 


Sphere of Adaptation (7) 


Е 


Summoning 

Call Upon Faith (1) 

Dust DEVIL (2) 

MESSENGER (2) 

Draw Upon Holy Might (2) 
Summon Animal Spirit (3) 
ABJURE (4) 

Elemental Control (4) 
Dimensional Translocation (5) 
Dispet Еу. (5) 


a и 


AERIAL SERVANT (6) 
ANIMATE OBJECT (6) 
CONJURE ANIMALS (6) 
Worb ОЕ RECALL (6) 


Call Avatar (7) 


EXACTION (7) 
Succor (7) 
Spirit of Power* (7) 


Sun 

LiGHr (1) 

Sunscorch (1) 
CONTINUAL LIGHT (3) 
STARSHINE (3) 


Warmth (3) 


Blessed Warmth (4) 
MOONBEAM (5) 
RaAiNBOW (5) 

Sol's Searing Orb (6) 
SuNRAY (7) 


Thought 
Emotion Read (1) 
Thought Capture (1) 


Detect Psionic Use (1) 
Dictation (1) 


Idea (2) 

Mind Read (2) 
Emotion Control (3) 
Memory Read (3) 
Telepathy (3) 

Genius (4) 

Mental Domination (4) 
Modify Memory (4) 
Rapport (4) 

Solipsism (4) 
Thought Broadcast (4) 
Impregnable Mind (5) 
Memory Wrack (5) 
Mindshatter (5) 
Thoughtwave* (5) 
Disbelief (6) 

Group Mind (6) 


Impervious Sanctity of Mind (7) 


Mind Tracker (7) 
Divine Inspiration (7) 


Time 
Know Age (1) 
Know Time (1) 


2 787 М. 


Hesitation (2) 

Nap (2) 

Accelerate Healing (3) 
Choose Future (3) 
Unfailing Premonition (3) 
Age Plant (4) 

Body Clock (4) 

Age Object (5) 
Othertime (5) 

Repeat Action (5) 
Time Pool (5) 

Age Creature (6) 
Reverse Time (6) 

Skip Day (6) 

Age Dragon (7) 


Travelers 
Know Direction (1) 


Easy Road (1) 
Journey’s Orison/Malison (1) 


Aura of Comfort (2) 
Lighten Load (2) 


Dark Fire (2) 
Pass without Notice (2) 


Create Campsite (3) 
Helping Hand (3) 
Know Customs (3) 
Circle of Privacy (4) 
Tree Steed (4) 
Clear Path (5) 

Easy March (5) 
Monster Mount (6) 
Hovering Road (7) 


Wards 

Anti-Vermin Barrier (1) 
Weighty Chest (1) 
Ethereal Barrier (2) 
Frisky Chest (2) 

Zone of Truth (2) 
Efficacious Monster Ward (3) 
Invisibility Purge (3) 
Squeaking Floor (3) 
Thief’s Lament (3) 
Zone of Sweet Air (3) 
Fire Purge* (4) 
Weather Stasis (4) 


Surelock (4) 


Barrier of Retention (5) 
Elemental Forbiddance (5) 


p инан нн ааа аад ааны a 


Grounding (5) 
Shrieking Walls (5) 
Undead Ward (5) 
Forbiddance (6) 
Crushing Walls (6) 
Dragonbane (6) 
Land of Stability (6) 
Tentacle Walls (7) 


Inner Sanctum (7) 


War 

Courage (1) 

Morale (1) 

Emotion Perception (2) 

Rally (2) 

Adaptation (3) 

Caltrops (3) 

Fortify (3) 

Entrench (4) 

Leadership/Doubt (4) 
Tanglefoot/Selective Passage (4) 
Disguise (5) 

Illusory Artillery (5) 

Righteous Wrath of the Faithful (5) 
Gravity Variation (6) 


788 


Illusory Fortification (7) 
Shadow Engine (7) 


Weather 

FAERIE FIRE (1) 
OBSCUREMENT (2) 
Precipitation (1 
Whisperward (1) 


Weathertell (1) 


CALL LIGHTNING (3) 
Cloudburst (3) 
Weather Prediction (3) 


Thunderclap (3) 


CONTROL TEMPERATURE, 10’ 
RADIUS (4) 

PROTECTION FROM LIGHTNING (4) 

Weather Stasis (4) 


Cloudscape (5) 


CoNTROL WINDS (5) 
RAINBOW (5) 

WEATHER SUMMONING (6) 
CONTROL WEATHER (7) 


h ———————————————————— " A 
AL-QADIM Setting 


Few spells were added for this setting, most for savage jungle priests. Priests of civilized lands use the stan- 
dard lists. 


Death Talisman (2) Jungle Avatar (6) 
Conjure Jungle Minions (4) Body Link (7) 
Rending (4) Create Crypt Servant (7) 


Create Jungle Minions (5) 


BIRTHRIGHT Setting 


Relatively few new spells were added for this setting, these are for the most part found in The Book of 
Priestcraft (#3126). 


General Spells Quest Spells 

Blood Bond (1) Avani’s Resuscitation (О) 
Discern Elven Influence (1) Avatar Form (Q) 

Know Bloodline (1) Daythief (Q) 

Moonbeam (1) Erik’s Animal Compulsion (Q) 
Enhance Blood Ability (2) Haelyn’s Wisdom (Q) 
Circle of Secrets (3) Kriesha’s Cursed Quest (Q) 
Imbue with Blood Ability (3) Laerme’s Emissary (Q) 
Totem Beast (3) Mebhaighl Touch (О) 
Blood Bank (4) Sera’s Blessed Luck (Q) 
Inheritance Assurance (4) Ship of Tears (Q) 

Watery Travel (5) Tattoos of Protection (Q) 
Restore Bloodline (6) Warlords of Cuiraécen (Q) 


DRAGONLANCE Setting 


The only priest spell currently unique to the DRAGONLANCE setting is the mindspin (7) spell. Other than this, 
this setting generally follows sphere assignments and common lists. 


2 789 nN 


_ ————————————— ш 


DARK SUN Setting 


This list is the complete DARK SUN spell index originally presented in Earth, Air, Fire, and Water (#2422), 
updated to include spells from the PLAYERS OPTION: Spells & Magic book. The “Cosmos” list is given first, fol- 
lowed by the elemental spheres of Air, Earth, Fire, Water and the quasi-elemental spheres of Magma, Rain, 
Silt, and Sun. In general, DARK SUN spells from magazine sources have been included in the sphere of Cosmos. 


Sphere of the Cosmos 


Level 1 

Analyze Balance (1) 
Animal Friendship (1) 
Anti-Vermin Barrier (1) 
Astral Celerity (1) 
Battlefate (1) 

Bless (1) 

Blessed Watchfulness (1) 
Call Upon Faith (1) 

Calm Animals (1) 
Combine* (1) 

Command (1) 

Courage (1) 

Cure Light Wounds (1) 
Detect Evil (1) 

Detect Magic (1) 

Detect Poison (1) 

Detect Snares & Pits (1) 
Dispel Fatigue (1) 
Emotion Read (1) 
Entangle (1) 

Hand of the Sorcerer Kings (1) 
Invisibility to Animals (1) 
Invisibility to Undead (1) 
Know Age (1) 

Know Direction (1) 
Know Time (1) 

Light (1) 

Locate Animals or Plants (1) 
Merciful Shadows (1) 
Mistaken Missive (1) 
Morale (1) 

Orison (1) 

Pass without Trace (1) 
Personal Reading (1) 
Proof Against Undeath (1) 
Protection from Evil (1) 
Remove Fear (1) 

Ring of Hands* (1) 
Sacred Guardian (1) 
Sanctuary (1) 

Shillelagh (1) 

Speak with Astral Traveler (1) 
Weighty Chest (1) 


Level 2 

Aid (2) 

Altruism (2) 

Astral Awareness (2) 
Augury (2) 

Aura of Comfort (2) 
Barkskin (2) 

Black Cairn (2) 

Calm Chaos (2) 

Chant (2) 

Charm Person or Mammal (2) 
Cure Moderate Wounds (2) 
Detect Charm (2) 
Dissension’s Feast (2) 
Draw Upon Holy Might (2) 
Emotion Perception (2) 
Enthrall (2) 

Ethereal Barrier (2) 

Find Traps (2) 

Frisky Chest (2) 
Goodberry (2) 

Hesitation (2) 

Hold Person (2) 

Holy Symbol (2) 

Idea (2) 

Iron Vigil (2) 

Know Alignment (2) 
Lighten Load (2) 
Messenger (2) 

Might of the Sorcerer-Kings (2) 
Mind Read (2) 

Moment (2) 

Music of the Spheres (2) 
Nap (2) 

Obscurement (2) 
Protection from Orisons (2) 
Resist Acid and Corrosion (2) 
Restore Strength (2) 
Silence, 15’ Radius (2) 
Slow Poison (2) 

Snake Charm (2) 

Speak with Animals (2) 
Spiritual Hammer (2) 

Trip (2) 

Warp Wood (2) 

Withdraw (2) 

Wyvern Watch (2) 

Zone of Truth (2) 


Level 3 

Accelerate Healing (3) 
Adaptation (3) 
Animate Dead (3) 
Astral Window (3) 
Caltrops (3) 

Choose Future (3) 
Continual Light (3) 
Control Animal (3) 
Cure Blindness or Deafness (3) 
Cure Disease (3) 
Dictate (3) 

Dispel Magic (3) 
Efficacious Monster Ward (3) 
Emotion Control (3) 
Extradimensional Detection (3) 
Feign Death (3) 

Glyph of Warding (3) 
Helping Hand (3) 
Hold Animal (3) 

Hold Poison (3) 
Invisibility Purge (3) 
Know Customs (3) 
Locate Object (3) 
Magical Vestment (3) 
Memory Read (3) 
Miscast Magic (3) 
Moment Reading (3) 
Negative Plane Protection (3) 
Plant Growth (3) 
Prayer (3) 

Random Causality (3) 
Ranike Cloud (3) 
Remove Curse (3) 
Remove Paralysis (3) 
Repair Injury (3) 
Rigid Thinking (3) 
Slow Rot (3) 

Snare (3) 

Speak with Dead (3) 
Spike Growth (3) 
Squeaking Floors (3) 
Starshine (3) 

Strength of One (3) 
Summon Insects (3) 
Telepathy (3) 

Thief’s Lament (3) 
Tree (3) 


2 790 ~ 


^—-————————üllpaÍÍÓÀ's Áo ÀÁ—mÍ— »on—Á- 


Unearthly Choir (3) 
Unfailing Premonition (3) 
Weather Prediction (3) 
Zone of Sweet Air (3) 


Level 4 

Abjure (4) 

Addition (4) 

Age Plant (4) 

Animal Summoning I (4) 

Body Clock (4) 

Call Woodland Beings (4) 

Chaotic Combat (4) 

Chaotic Sleep (4) 

Circle of Privacy (4) 

Cloak of Bravery (4) 

Compulsive Order (4) 

Cure Serious Wounds (4) 

Defensive Harmony (4) 

Detect Lie (4) 

Dimensional Anchor (4) 

Dimensional Folding (4) 

Divination (4) 

Exorcise (4) 

Fire Purge* (4) 

Focus (4) 

Fortify Healing* (4) 

Free Action (4) 

Genius (4) 

Giant Insect (4) 

Hallucinatory Forest (4) 

Hold Plant (4) 

Image of the Sorcerer-Kings (4) 

Imbue with Spell Ability (4) 

Inverted Ethics (4) 

Join with Astral Traveler (4) 

Mental Domination (4) 

Modify Memory (4) 

Neutralize Poison (4) 

Omniscient Eye (4) 

Plant Door (4) 

Probability Control (4) 

Protection from Evil, 10’ 
Radius (4) 


Rapport (4) 

Repel Insects (4) 
Recitation (4) 

Solipsism (4) 

Speak with Plants (4) 
Spell Immunity (4) 
Sticks To Snakes (4) 
Suspended Animation (4) 
Thought Broadcast (4) 
Tongues (4) 

Tree Steed (4) 
Unfailing Endurance (4) 
Uplift (4) 

Weather Stasis (4) 


Level 5 

Animal Growth (5) 
Animal Summoning II (5) 
Anti-Plant Shell (5) 
Atonement (5) 

Barrier of Retention (5) 
Blessed Abundance (5) 
Champion's Strength (5) 
Chaotic Commands (5) 
Commune (5) 

Commune with Nature (5) 
Consequence (5) 

Cure Critical Wounds (5) 


Dimensional Translocation (5) 


Dispel Evil (5) 

Easy March (5) 

Extradimensional 
Manipulation (5) 

Extradimensional Pocket (5) 

Grounding (5) 

Illusory Artillery (5) 

Meld (5) 

Memory Wrack (5) 

Mindshatter (5) 

Moonbeam (5) 

Othertime (5) 

Pass Plant (5) 

Quest (5) 

Rainbow (5) 

Raise Dead (5) 

Repeat Action (5) 

Righteous Wrath of the 
Faithful (5) 

Shrieking Walls (5) 

Thoughtwave* (5) 

Time Pool (5) 

True Seeing (5) 

Unceasing Vigilance of the 
Holy Sentinel (5) 

Undead Ward (5) 


791 


Level 6 

Animal Summoning III (6) 

Animate Object (6) 

Anti-Animal Shell (6) 

Blade Barrier (6) 

Command Monster (6) 

Conjure Animals (6) 

Create Tree of Life (6) 

Crushing Walls (6) 

Disbelief (6) 

Entropy Shield (6) 

Find the Path (6) 

Gravity Variation (6) 

Group Mind (6) 

Heal (6) 

Heroes’ Feast (6) 

Legal Thoughts (6) 

Monster Mount (6) 

Physical Mirror (6) 

Reverse Time (6) 

Seclusion (6) 

Skip Day (6) 

Speak with Monsters (6) 

Spiritual Wrath* (6) 

Transport Via Plants (6) 

Turn Wood (6) 

Unliving Identity (6) 

Wall of Thorns (6) 

Wisdom of the Sorcerer- 
Kings (6) 

Word of Recall (6) 


Level 7 

Bane of the Defilers (7) 
Changestaff (7) 
Confusion (7) 
Creeping Doom (7) 
Divine Inspiration (7) 
Exaction (7) 

Gate (7) 

Holy Word (7) 
Hovering Road (7) 
Illusory Fortification (7) 
Mindkiller (7) 
Regenerate (7) 
Reincarnate (7) 
Restoration (7) 
Resurrection (7) 
Shadow Engine (7) 
Spacewarp (7) 

Spirit of Power* (7) 
Succor (7) 

Sunray (7) 

Symbol (7) 

Tentacle Walls (7) 
Timelessness (7) 


йлы ыл и а ыы 


Uncontrolled Weather (7) 
Wild Lands (7) 

Forever Minions (8) 
Hasten Crops (8) 

Pocket Dimension (9) 
Prolific Vegetation (9) 
Cleanse (10) 

Planar Vassal (10) 
Prolific Forestation (10) 
Rift (10) 


Air 
Curse of Tongues (1) 
Deep Breath (1) 
Elemental Bonding (1) 
Wind Column (1) 
Channel Stench (2) 
Coat of Mist (2) 
Dust Devil (2) 
Slave Scent (2) 
Whispers (2) 
Winds of Change (2) 
Air Lens (3) 
Call Lightning (3) 
Conjure Lesser (Air) 
Elemental (3) 
Create Smoke (3) 
Chimes of Finding (4) 
Control Temperature, 10’ 
radius (4) 
Defiler Scent (4) 
Protection from Lightning (4) 
Protection from Weather (4) 
Wind Servant (4) 
Air Walk (5) 
Cloud of Purification (5) 
Conjure (Air) Elemental (5) 
Control Winds (5) 
Elemental Forbiddence (5) 
Good Weather (5) 
Insect Plague (5) 
Plane Shift (5) 
Sands of Time (5) 
Sandstorm (5) 
Tree Growth (5) 
Windborne (5) 
Aerial Servant (6) 
Mark of the Hunted (6) 
Silt Tides (6) 
Weather Summoning (6) 
Whirlwind (6) 
Astral Spell (7) 
Conjure Greater (Air) 
Elemental (7) 
Create Shrine (7) 


Initiation (7) 

Silt Cyclone (7) 
Sirocco (7) 

Wind Walk (7) 
Alter Climate (8) 
Create Oasis (8) 
Reverse Winds (8) 
Wild Weather (8) 
Air of Permanence (9) 
Disruption (9) 
Storm Legion (9) 
Insect Host (10) 


Earth 
Elemental Bonding (1) 
Magical Stone (1) 
Strength of Stone (1) 
Dust Devil (2) 
Soften Earth and Stone (2) 
Bramblestaff (3) 
Conjure Lesser (Ear) 
Elemental (3) 
Curse of Black Sand (3) 
Meld into Stone (3) 
Oil Spray (3) 
Sand Spray (3) 
Stone Shape (3rd 
Stoneiron (3) 
Infestation (4) 
Rejuvenate (4) 
Return To Earth (4) 
Sand Warriors (4) 
Stone of Sharpening (4) 
Thorns of Binding (4) 
Conjure (Ear) Elemental (5) 
Crumble (5) 
Elemental Forbiddance (5) 
Ironskin (5) 
Spike Stones (5) 
Transmute Rock to Mud (5) 
Tree Growth (5) 
Heartseeker (6) 
Sand Blade (6) 
Silt Tides (6) 
Stone Tell (6) 
Transmute Water to Dust (6) 
Animate Rock (7) 
Conjure Greater (Ear) 
Elemental (7) 
Create Shrine (7) 
Glass Storm (7) 
Earthquake (7) 
Mountain Barrier (7) 
Initiation (7) 
Silt Cyclone (7) 


Transmute Metal to Wood (7) 
Create Oasis (8) 
Silt Bridge (10) 


Fire 
Elemental Bonding (1) 
Endure Heat/Cold (1) 
Faerie Fire (1) 
Firelight (1) 
Log of Everburning (1) 
Sunscorch (1) 
Clues of Ash (2) 
Firetrap (2) 
Flame Blade (2) 
Heat Metal (2) 
Produce Flame (2) 
Resist Fire/Resist Cold (2) 
Conjure Lesser (Fire) 
Elemental (3) 
Create Smoke (3) 
Flame Walk (3) 
Heat Exhaustion (3) 
Protection from Fire (3) 
Pyrotechnics (3) 
Produce Fire (4) 
Channel Flame (4) 
Animate Flame (5) 
Conjure (Fire) Elemental (5) 
Elemental Forbiddance (5) 
Flame Harvest (5) 
Flame Strike (5) 
Wall of Fire (5) 
Fire Seeds (6) 
Spirit of Flame (6) 
Sunstroke (6) 
Watchfire (6) 
Chariot of Sustarre (7) 
Conjure Greater (Fire) 
Elemental (7) 
Create Shrine (7) 
Initiation (7) 


oo аали oro 


Water 
Create Water (1) 
Elemental Bonding (1) 
Purify Food & Drink (1) 
Clear Water (2) 
Coat of Mist (2) 
Crystallize (2) 
Speak with Water (2) 
Water Witch (2) 
Watery Fist (2) 
Bramblestaff (3) 
Circle of Life (3) 
Conjure Lesser (Water) 
Elemental (3) 
Create Food and Water (3) 
Water Breathing (3) 
Water Walk (3) 
Curse of the Choking Sands (4) 
Lower Water (4) 
Lungs of Water (4) 
Protection from Weather (4) 
Reflecting Pool (4) 
Rejuvenate (4) 
Soothe (4) 
Thorns of Binding (4) 
Water Trap (4) 
Conjure (Water) Elemental (5) 
Crumble (5) 
Elemental Forbiddance (5) 
Good Weather (5) 
Magic Font (5) 
Sands of Time (5) 
Heartseeker (6) 
Part Water (6) 
Transmute Water to Dust (6) 
Waters of Life (6) 
Conjure Greater (Water) 
Elemental (7) 
Create Shrine (7) 
Dehydrate (7) 
Initiation (7) 
Alter Climate (8) 
Create Oasis (8) 
Wild Weather (8) 
Storm Legion (9) 


Magma 
Elemental Bonding (1) 
Conjure Lesser (Magma) 
Elemental (3) 
Magma Jet (3) 
Magma Blade (4) 
Magma Shield (4) 
Conjure (Magma) Elemental (5) 
Elemental Forbiddance (5) 
Transmute Rock to Magma (6) 
Conjure Greater (Magma) 
Elemental (7) 
Create Shrine (7) 
Eruption (7) 
Initiation (7) 
Magma Tunnel (7) 


Rain 

Elemental Bonding (1) 

Coat of Mist (2) 

Conjure Lesser (Rain) 
Elemental (3) 

Acid Rain (4) 

Protection from Weather (4) 

Soothe (4) 

Water Trap (4) 

Conjure (Rain) Elemental (5) 

Elemental Forbiddance (5) 

Conjure Greater (Rain) 
Elemental (7) 

Create Shrine (7) 

Initiation (7) 

Wild Weather (8) 

Storm Legion (9) 


Silt 

Elemental Bonding (1) 
Conjure Lesser (Silt) 

Elemental (3) 
Curse of the Black Silt (3) 
Sand Spray (3) 
Sand Warriors (3) 
Whirlpool of Doom (4) 
Conjure (Silt) Elemental (5) 
Elemental Forbiddance (5) 


Sand Blade (6) 

Silt Tides (6) 

Conjure Greater (Silt) 
Elemental (7) 

Create Shrine (7) 

Glass Storm (7) 

Initiation (7) 

Silt Cyclone (7) 

Sirocco (7) 

Silt Bridge (10) 


Sun 
Elemental Bonding (1) 
Spark of Blinding (1) 
Sunscorch (1) 
Create Mirage (2) 
Conjure Lesser (Sun) 
Elemental (3) 
Heat Exhaustion (3) 
Sunblade (3) 
Blessed Warmth (4) 
Healing Rays (4) 
Mirage of Despair (4) 
Conjure (Sun) Elemental (5) 
Elemental Forbiddance (5) 
Plane Shift (5) 
The Great Circle/The Black 
Circle (6) 
Sol's Searing Orb (6) 
Sunstroke (6) 
Conjure Greater (Sun) 
Elemental (7) 
Create Shrine (7) 
Dehydrate (7) 
Initiation (7) 


Special Notes 
Isolate Templar (6)—Known by 
the Veiled Alliance 
Spawn Song (4)—Known by the 
giants of the Silt Sea 


24 793 М. 


> EEE 2 


FORGOTTEN REALMS Setting 


While many of the more general spells from the setting are on the general lists, this section contains the spe- 
cialty spells associated with the specific gods of the setting. The deity-specific lists exclude the very rare spells 
detailed in Prayers of the Faithful. Spells in the General list in italics are generally used by evil priests. 


General (Uncommon) Spells 
Purify Self (1) 

Omen (2) 

Continual Faerie Fire (3) 
Glyph of Warding: Telatha (3) 
Hold Metal (4) 

Censure (4) 

Control Giant Insect (4) 

Float (5) 

Hard Water (5) 

Break Limb (6) 

Create Undead Minion (7) 


Akadi 

Windbearer (3) 

Calm Winds (4) 

Clear Air (4) 

Winds of Akadi (4) 
Akadi’s Vortex (7) 
Conjure Air Elemental (7) 
Whirlwind (7) 


Amaunator 

Amaunator's Uncertainty (2) 
Advanced Sunshine (4) 
Illumination (5) 

Sun Scepter (6) 


Ао 
None known 


Auril 

Frost Fingers (1) 
Frost Whip (2) 
Ice Blade (4) 
Heart of Ice (7) 


Azuth 

Azuth’s Fedefensor (4) 
Azuth’s Exalted Triad (5) 
Azuth’s Spell Shield (7) 
Destroy Magedoom (7) 


Bane 

The Doom of Bane (4) 
Dark Promise (5) 
Mystic Lash (5) 


Create Baneguard (6) 
Spirit Annihilation (6) 
Undeath after Death (6) 
Death Symbol of Bane (7) 
Moonveil (7) 

Stonewalk (7) 


Beshaba 

Bane of Beshaba (2) 
Misfire (4) 
Misfortune (5) 


Bhaal 
Attraction (2) 
Decay (3) 
Wound (5) 


Chauntea 

Favor of the Goddess (2) 
Phantom Plow (3) 

Plant Lance (4) 

Conjure Nature Elemental (7) 
Sanctify Sacred Site (7) 


Cyric 

Black Talon (2) 
Dark Aura (4) 

Skull of Secrets (4) 
Create Direguard (7) 


Deneir 

Glyph of Revealing (2) 
Amanuensis (3) 

Shift Glyph (3) 


Eldath 

Wailing Wind (1) 
Touchsickle (2) 
Flameshield (3) 
Greenwood (3) 
Moldtouch (3) 

Wheel of Bones (3) 
Control Vapor (5) 
Greater Touchsickle (5) 
Water of Eldath (5) 
Spring Mastery (6) 
Mist of the Goddess (7) 


794 


Emerald Enclave 
(Patrons: Eldath, Mielikki, 
Silvanus) 
Faith Magic Zone (4) 
Retarget (5) 
Windlance (5) 
Finder Wyvernspur 
Dispel Silence (3) 
Ghost Pipes (2) 
Melisander's Harp (5) 
Starharp (6) 


Garagos 

Blood Mantle (4) 
Blood Rage (4) 
Whirlwind of Steel (5) 


Gargauth 

Astaroth's Augmentation (3) 
Mask of Gargauth (3) 
Spiritual Corruption (6) 
Call Upon Gargauth (7) 


Gond 

Wieldskill (2) 
Probing Arm (4) 
Fantastic Machine (6) 


Grumbar 
Earthenair (3) 
Earthenport (5) 


Gwaeron Windstorm 
Banish Blight (2) 
Natural Attunement (2) 
Stalk (2) 

Wood Sword (2) 

Tree Healing (5) 


Helm 

Sentry of Helm (1) 
Exaltation (3) 
Forceward (3) 

Mace of Odo (3) 
Seeking Sword (4) 
Summon Spectator (5) 


b ——————————— „ 


Hoar 

Scent of Vengeance (2) 
Hand of Hoar (4) 
Hoar's Revenance (6) 


Ibrandul 

Dark Path (1) 
Blacklight (3) 
Skulk (4) 

Create Ibrandlin (6) 


Iimater 

Favor of Ilmater (3) 
Endurance of Ilmater (4) 
Blast of Pain (5) 

Istishia 

Precipitation (1) 
Cloudburst (3) 

Rites of Istishia (3) 
Waterwall (4) 

Conjure Water Elemental (6) 
Istishia's Port (7) 
Istishia's Tsunami (7) 


Iyachtu Xvim 
Mace of Xvim 
Reaving Blades 
Battletide 
Optional: Any spell of Bane 


Jergal 

Detect Living (1) 
Determine Final Rest (3) 
Seek Eternal Rest (4) 
Jergal's Mind Probe (5) 
Gate of Doom (7) 


Karsus 
Karsus's Avatar (lost?) 


Kelemvor 
Chilling Scythe (2) 
Dead March (4) 
Deny Death (5) 


Kossuth 
Banish Flame (1) 


Lathander 

Rosemantle (1) 

Rosetouch (2) 

Sunrise (3) 

Boon of Lathander (4) 

Shield of Lathander (5) 

False Dawn (6) 

Greater Shield of Lathander (7) 


2 795 М. 


Leira 

Impenetrable Falsehood (2) 
Monstrous Illusion (4) 
Triple Mask (5) 


Lliira 

Bliss (2) 

Deadly Dance (4) 
Candle of Calm (5) 


Loviatar 

Loviatar's Caress (2) 
Whip of Flame (2) 
Dance of Pain (3) 
Whip of Pain (3) 
Kiss of Torment (4) 


Lurue 
Alicorn Lance (2) 
Favor of Yathaghera (3) 
Dance of the Unicorns (5) 
Silver Tongue and 

Starry Eyes (6) 


Malar 

Beast Claw (2) 
Animal Sight (4) 
Find Companion (4) 
Rage (5) 

Animal Transfer (6) 
Faithful Mount (7) 


Mask 

Listening Shadow (3) 
Shadowcloak (3) 
Watching Shadow (4) 
Striking Shadows (6) 


Mielikki 

Banish Blight (2) 
Stalk (2) 

Wood Sword (2) 

Tree Healing (5) 

Create Treant (7) 


Milil 

Battle Song (2) 

Dispel Silence (3) 

Song of Compulsion (3) 
Singing Stone (4) 
Forgotten Melody (5) 
Harp of War (7) 


Moander 
Handfang (2) 
Speedrot (3) 


Rising Rot (5) 

Seed of Moander (5) 

Spirit Trap of the 
Darkbringer (5) 

Roots of the Assassin (6) 

Tentacle of Withering (6) 


Myrkul 

Bonebite (2) 
Corrupt (4) 

Wither (5) 

Dolorous Decay (6) 
Quench the Spirit (6) 


Mystra 

Starflight (3) 
Anyspell (4) 
Magefire (4) 
Wondrous Recall (6) 
Spell Ward (7) 


Nobanion 

Lionheart (2) 

Pride of Nobanion (4) 
Roar of the King (4) 
Feline Form (7) 


Oghma 

Impart Knowledge (2) 
Duplicate (4) 
Spellbind (7) 


Red Knight 

Analyze Opponent (1) 
Knight’s Move (3) 
Telepathic Broadcast (5) 


Savras 

Foresight (1) 

Haunted Visions (3) 
All-Seeing Crystal Ball (6) 


Seliine 

Moonblade (3) 

Wall of Moonlight (4) 
Moon Path (5) 
Moonweb (5) 


Shar 

Armor of Darkness (3) 
Whip of Shar (3) 
Creature of Darkness (4) 
Darkbolt (4) 


Sharess 
Excessive Indulgence (1) 


b ———————————————— 


Intensify Sensation (3) 
Kiss of Sharess (5) 


Shaundakul 

Favor of Shaundakul (2) 
Shadow Sword (4) 
Gauntlet of Winds (5) 


Shiallia 

Ease Labor (3) 
Fertility (4) 
Endless Dance (6) 


Siamorphe 

Divine Bloodline (1) 
Unquestioning Obedience (2) 
Loyal Vassal (3) 

Divine Investiture (5) 


Silvanus 
Briartangle (4) 
Oakheart (4) 
Smoke Ghost (4) 
Thorn Spray (4) 
Fireward (5) 
Mulch (5) 

Death Chariot (7) 


Sune 

Love Bite (2) 

Rapture (3) 

Veil of Djalice (4) 
Merge with Nature (6) 


Talona 

Poison Touch (2) 

Cloud of Pestilence (4) 
Touch of the Talontar (4) 
Talona's Blessing (5) 


Talos 

Wind Lash (2) 
Storm Shield (3) 
Storm Cone (5) 


Tempus 

Holy Flail (3) 

Reveal (4) 

Dance of the Fallen (6) 
Bladebless (7) 

Sacred Link (7) 


Torm 

Compel (3) 

Hand of Torm (4) 
Bolt of Glory (6) 
Swordward (6) 


Tymora 

Favor of Tymora (2) 
Feat (4) 

Luckbolt (6) 


Tyr 

Wolfjaws (2) 

Hammer of Justice (5) 

Sword and Hammer (6) 

Resplendence of 
Renewed Youth (7) 


Ulutiu 

Magical Tether (1) 

Ice Walk (1) 

Protection from Cold (3) 


Umberlee 

Speak with Drowned Dead (3) 
Striking Wave (4) 

Oars to Snakes (4) 
Stormcloak (4) 

Waterspout (6) 

Maelstrom (7) 


Uthgar 

Fortitude of Uthgar (1) 
Summon Ancestor (3) 
Spirit Quest (6) 


Valkur 

Sea Legs (1) 
Weathertell (1) 
Cure Scurvy (2) 
Swim (2) 

Home Port (3) 
Still Waves (4) 
Favor of Valkur (5) 


Velsharoon 

Claws of Velsharoon (1) 
Undead Form (4) 

Gaseous Form (5) 
Velsharoon's Death Pact (7) 


Waukeen 

Truemetal (1) 

Summon Lock Lurker (3) 
Doublecoin (4) 

Minor Wealthtwist (5) 
Wealthtwist (7) 
Wealthword (7) 


Chultan Pantheon 


Eshowdow 

Continual Shadow (3) 
Summon Shadow Spirit (4) 
Wall of Shadow (5) 


Sseth 

Snake Charm (of Sseth) (1) 
Venom of Varae (3) 

Snake Skin (4) 


Ubtao 

Spirit Mask (1) 
Free Will (2) 

Call Dinosaurs (5) 


» 796 `~ 


b —————————————— mH 1 


Old Empire Spells 


The deities of the Old Empire region of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting (Mulhorund and Uthgar) are inspired 
by traditional Egyptian and Babylonian mythology. In addition to the listed spells, their priests all have access 
to omen (2) and summon divine minion (7). A rare spell attributed to no specific deity is cleanse (1). 


General 

Cleanse (1) 

Omen (2) 

Summon Divine Minion (3) 


Anhur 

Stumble (1) 

Bird of Prey (3) 
Detect Ambush (3) 
Thunderstroke (4) 


Bast 

Excessive Indulgence (1) 
Intensify Sensation (3) 
Kiss of Sharess (Bast) (5) 


Geb 

Detect Metal and Mineral (1) 
Arm Hammers (2) 

Dust Shield (3) 

Earthshake* (5 ) 


Gilgeam 

Hurl Thunderbolt (4) 
Right of Might (5) 
Tyranny (7) 


Hathor 

Horns of Hathor (2) 
Nurture (2) 

Dance of Life (6) 


Horus-Re 

Test of Maat (1) 
Stormvoice (2) 
Eye of Fire (3) 
Sunstroke (3) 
Mirage (4) 
Dying Curse (6) 
Bane (7) 


Isis 

Charm of Isis (3) 
Weapon Immunity (4) 
Seedstorm (5) 

Nephthys 

Assess Value (1) 
Contract of Nephthys (4) 
Major Curse (5) 
Enduring Ward (6) 
Sanctify Crypt (7) 


Osiris 

Beckon (1) 

Chill (3) 

Animal Vision (4) 
Swirling Scythes (4) 
Sanctify Spirit Host (6) 


Sebek 
Water Sprint (1) 
Crocodile Tears (2) 


Set 

Dispel Ward (2) 
Sarcophagus of Death (3) 
Incarnation of Evil (5) 
Create Ancient Dead (6) 


Thoth 

Speak with Birds (1) 
Inscribe Speech (2) 
Detect Curse (3) 
Flock of Birds (4) 
Shatter Circle (5) 
Resist Magic (6) 
Time Warp (7) 


Tiamat 

Treasure Scent (2) 
Dragon Scales (4) 
Sleep of Dragons (6) 
Spawn of Tiamat (6) 


A 797 V 


)p————————————————' si 


GREYHAWK Setting 


While many of the more general spells from the setting are on the general lists, this section contains the spe- 
cialty spells associated with the specific gods of the setting. The priest lock spell originally appeared in an 
adventure module and is not associated with a specific deity. 


Boccob 
Disc of Concordant 


Opposition (6) 


Celestian 
Meteors of Celestian (4) 


St. Cuthbert 
Beguiling (2) 


Ehlonna 
Stalk (2) 


Fharlanghn 
Footsore (4) 


Heironeous 
Bolt of Glory (6) 


Iggwilv* 
Henley's Digit of Disruption (7) 


Incabulos 
Plague (4) 


Istus 
Enmeshment (6) 


Iuz 

Spittle (1) 

Blackhand (3) 
Turnbane (3) 
Bonechain (4) 
Clawcloud (4) 
Bloodgloat (5) 
Lifebane (5) 
Screaming Skull (5) 
Stone Curse (5) 
Venomed Claws (5) 
Chain Madness (6) 
Create Thassaloss (6) 
Death Touch (6) 
Summon Varrangoin (6) 
Vampiric Mist (6) 


Nerull 
Ebony Tendrils (5) 


Pholtus 

Dispel Darkness (1) 
Glow (3) 

Sunburst (4) 
Reflect (5) 


Ralishaz 
Vicissitude (2) 
Protection from Misfortune (4) 


Ulaa 
Command Earth (6) 


Wee Jas 
Ability Alteration (3) 


MYSTARA Setting 


Alphabetical List 

Ability Alteration (3) Wee Jas 

Beguiling (2) St. Cuthbert 

Blackhand (3) Juz 

Bloodgloat (5) Zuz 

Bolt of Glory (6) Heironeous 

Bonechain (4) Juz 

Chain Madness (6) Juz 

Clawcloud (4) Juz 

Command Earth (6) Ulaa 

Create Thassaloss (6) Juz 

Death Touch (6) /uz 

Disc of Concordant 
Opposition (6) Boccob 

Dispel Darkness (1) Pholtus 

Ebony Tendrils (5) Nerull 


Lifebane (5) Juz 
Meteors of Celestian (4) 
Celestian 


Plague (4) Incabulos 

Priest Lock (2) 

Protection from Misfortune 
(4) Ralishaz 

Reflect (5) Pholtus 

Screaming Skull (5) Zuz 

Spittle (1) Juz 

Stalk (2) Ehlonna 

Stone Curse (5) Juz 

Summon Varrangoin (6) Juz 

Sunburst (4) Pholtus 

Turnbane (3) Juz 

Vampiric Mist (6) Zuz 

Venomed Claws (5) Juz 

Vicissitude (2) Ralishaz 


The only priest spell currently unique to the MYSTARA setting is the summon spectral death (6) spell, 
which appeared in the Monstrous Compendium appendix for that world. The spell can be considered a 
very rare spell in other settings if the creature used. 


798 


) Eee ii 


Oriental Priest Spells 


The shukenja of this setting use this list instead of the standard priest spell list from the PHB. The oriental 
spells are listed as being “very rare” in other settings, but appear in only in this list (accounting for shuken- 
ja operating in a western campaign). The spells smoke bridge (5) and karma curse (7), appeared in the Horde 
supplement, and have a Tibetan flavor. The spell, ancestral blessing (2), appeared in Legends & Lore in the 
Chinese section. The spell kami absorption (5) appeared in Legends & Lore in the Japanese section. 


Ist Level 

Animal Companion 
Augury 
Beneficence 

Bless 

Calm 

Cure Light Wounds 
Deflection 

Detect Disease 
Detect Evil 

Detect Harmony 
Detect Magic 
Detect Poison 
Divining Rod 
Know History 
Omen 

Purify Food & Drink 
Resist 

Snake Charm 
Trance 

Weapon Bless 


2nd Level 

Aid Chant 

Commune with Lesser Spirit 
Create Spring 

Detect Charm 

Detect Life 

Dream Sight 

Enthrall 

Hold Person 

Holy Symbol 

Know Motivation 
Messenger 
Obscurement 
Protection from Spirits 
Request 

Slow Poison 

Snake Summoning 
Speak with Animals 
Warning 

Withdraw 


3rd Level 
Castigate 

Cure Blindness 
Cure Disease 
Death’s Door 
Detect Curse 
Dispel Magic 
Divination 
Dream Vision 
Flame Walk 
Invisibility to Spirits 
Know Alignment 
Levitate 

Magical Vestment 
Oath 

Possess Animal 
Prayer 

Remove Curse 
Remove Paralysis 
Speak with Dead 
Substitution 


4th Level 

Abjure 

Cure Serious Wounds 
Detect Lie 

Detect Shapechange 
Endurance 

Exorcise 

Fate 

Neutralize Poison 
Pacify 

Penetrate Disguise 
Polymorph Self 
Protection from Evil 10' Radius 
Reanimation 
Remorse 

Reward 

Snake Barrier 
Speak with Plants 
Spell Immunity 
Sustain 

Tongues 


799 


5th Level 

Advice 

Air Walk 

Atonement 
Commune with Greater Spirit 
Cure Critical Wounds 
Dispel Evil 

Mental Strength 
Possess 

Raise Dead 
Remember 

Strength 

True Seeing 


6th Level 

Find the Path 

Force Shapechange 
Heal 

Immunity to Weapons 
Inanimate Servant 
Instruct 

Invisibility to Enemies 
Longevity 

Plane Shift 
Quickgrowth 

Smite 

Speak with Monsters 


7th Level 
Ancient Curse 
Astral Spell 
Compel 
Divine Wind 
Exaction 
Gate 

Holy Word 
Quest 
Reincarnate 
Restore Spirit 
Resurrection 
Wind Walk 


)————————————— id 
PLANESCAPE Setting 


Most of these spells are general, but the dictate spell is known to priests of the Harmonium faction. Also, 
crown of radiance was omitted from Volume 1, and can be found in the errata of this volume. 


General Spells Protection from Earth (3) Elemental Protection (5) 
Know Faction (1) Protection from Winds (3) Sever the Silver Cord (5) 
Protection from Prime (1) Blessed Forgetfulness (4) Celestial Protection (6) 
Protection from Silver (1) Breath of the Elements (4) Crown of Brilliance (6) 
Dictate (2) Foesight (4) Crown of Glory (7) 
Renewed Ability (2) Protection from Prime, 10’ Elemental Breach (7) 
Warp Sense (2) Radius (4) Shield of the Archons (7) 
Crown of Radiance (3) Touch of the Styx (4) Sphere of Survival (7) 
Fostered Protection (3) Crown of Flame (5) 


RAVENLOFT Setting 


These spells are specific to the Demiplane of Dread, and are from the core book Domains of Dread 
(82174). That book also has a section describing how some standard spells are altered in the setting (the 
most important being that normal magic will not allow escape from the setting). 


Zone of Deception (2) Cloud of Putrefaction (5) Divine Curse (6) 
Corpse Whisper (3) Living Ward (5) Ancient Curse (7) 
Eyes of the Undead (3) Break Limb (6) Tomb Ward (7) 
Feign Undead (4) Break Limb (6) 


RED STEEL Setting 


This setting uses the standard spell list, except for a measure cinnabryl (1) and mantain (3), which deal 
with the Red Curse and the metal cinnabryl, and the spell interruptable light (4). The last might be con- 
sidered a very rare spell in other settings. 


аайын аар ER Айк кайат. 


A 
Savage Setting 


This list is based on the Shaman (#9507), with a few from other sources. Deity-specific spells are not 
included; for example, those of Ubtao and Nobanion from the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Level 1 Level 3 Perfect Perception (4) 
Hunt Nemesis (1) Bind Fetish (3) Rending (4) 
Totemic Image (1) Call Pack (3) Transfer Curse (4) 
Voodoo (1) Chattel Spirit (3) 
Cleanse Hearth (3 ) Level 5 

Level 2 Control Animal (3) Animal’s View (5) 
Amulet (2) Create Mask (3) Bind Guardian (5) 
Animal Spy (2) Haunting Notes (3) Call Ghost Pack (5) 
Boneiron (2) Lion's Claws (3) Charm Spirit (5) 
Bonewood (2) Resist Injury (3) Cleanse Community (5) 
Call Animal (2) Revive Spirit (3) Converse (5) 
Casting Out (2) Spirit Animal Form (3) Create Jungle Minions (5) 
Circle of Protection Summon Animal Spirit (3) 

from Spirits (2) Transfer Offense (3) Level 6 
Command Another's Pet (2) Walk Among Beasts (3) Beckon Spirit (6) 
Contain Spirit (2) Jungle Avatar (6) 
Create Spiritknife (2) Level 4 Mortal Snare (6) 
Death Candle (2) Bad Medicine (4) Reinvigorate Nature (6) 
Death Curse (2) Conjure Jungle Minions (4) Tame Animal (6) 
Heal Spirit (2) Create Sanctuary (4) 
Protection from Serpents (2) Extract Spirit (4) Level 7 
Sense Spirit (2) Lizard Limbs (4) Calling Melody (7) 
Understand Curse (2) Locate Spirit Animal (4) Council of Spirits (7) 

Log To Lizard (4) View Animal Mind (7) 


SPELLJAMMER Setting 


Only a very few priest spells were created for this setting. Although these have small use in a game that does 
not use this material, the list is provided as a summary of the spells that do exist currently. 


Create Air (1) Softwood (4) Flyfield (5) 
Contact Home Power (2) Create Minor Helm (5) Create Atmosphere (7) 
Detect Powers (2) Debris Barrier (5) 

Vedic Spells 


These are based on traditional Hindu mythology. These spells originally appeared in a DraGoN Magazine 
article, but the notes for reincarnation sight are from the section on Indian mythology from the Legends & 
Lore book. 


Om (ist) That Art Thou (3rd) Call Avatar (7th) 

Sanctify Ghi (1st) See АП Faces (4th) Penetrate Cosmic Ignorance 
Karma Sight (2nd) Conceal Lifeforce (5th) (7th) 

Steep Soma-Juice (2nd) Pool of Deeds (Sth) 

Flame Walk (3rd) Reincarnation Sight (6th) 


2 801 M 


“Ағ 


Demihuman Deities Spell Lists 


This section includes general and specific spells for priests of Dwarf, Elf, Drow, Gnome, and Halfling 
deities. In addition to the spells of specific deities, more general spells are listed here as well. 


Abbathor 
Maskstone (2) 
Abbathor's Greed (3) 
Conceal Riches (4) 


Berronar Truesilver 
Guardian Hammer (4) 
Berronar's Favor (5) 
Succor of Berronar(5) 


Clangeddin Silverbeard 
Silverbeard (1) 

Rockburst (2) 

Axe Storm of Clangeddin (4) 


Deep Duerra (duergar) 
Steal Psionic Strength (1) 
Augment Psionics (2) 
Deflect Psionics (4) 


Dugmaren Brightmantle 
Mending (1) 
Brightmantle (2) 
Guardian Mantle (7) 


Dumathoin 
Dumathoin's Rest (2) 
Crypt Ward (4) 
Stonefall (4) 

Stone Seeing (5) 
Earthwalk (6) 


Gorm Gulthyn 

Blessed Watchfulness (1) 
Detect Drow (1) 

Sentry of Gorm (1) 

Alert Allies (2) 

Iron Vigil (2) 

Fire Eyes of Gorm (4) 


Dwarf Pantheon 


Haela Brightaxe 

Detect Weapons (1) 
Haela's Battle Blessing (2) 
Hurl Rock (2) 


Laduguer 

Stoneblend (1) 

Strength of Stone (1) 
Blessed Craftsmanship (3) 
Enchanted Hammer (4) 


Marthammor Duin 
Marthammor’s Intuition (2) 
Marthammor's Thunderbolts (3) 
Glowglory (3) 


Moradin 

Strength of Stone (1) 
Stonefire (4) 

Soul Forge (5) 

Stone Storm (7) 


Sharindlar 

Detect Dwarves (1) 
Ease Labor (3) 
Merciful Touch (3) 
Fertility (4) 
Flowstone (5) 


Thard Harr 

Claws of Thard Harr (1) 
Disentangle (2) 

Lesser Guardian Hammer (3) 


Vergedain 

Detect Enemies (2) 
Merchant's Glamer (2) 
Stone Trap (4) 


Rare (and Very Rare) 
Dwarven Spells — 
Weapon of the Earth (1) 


Detect Harmful Gas (1) 


Circle of Stone* (5) 
Commune with Earth (5) 


2 802 V. 


тынан аннан A 


Uncommon (or Rare) Spells 


Camouflage (2) 

Seeking (2) 

Faith Arrow (2) 

Faerie Flames (5) 
Garments of Elvenkind (6) 


Aerdrie Faenya 
Speak with Avians (1) 
Wind Blast (3) 

Call Aerial Beings (4) 
Calm Winds (4) 
Flight of Remnis (4) 


Angharradh 

Divine Romantic Interest (1) 
Motes of Moonlight (1) 
Speak with Avians (1) 
Detect Spirits (3) 

Wind Blast (3) 
Moonbow (4) 
Moonbridge (4) 

Flight of Remnis (4) 
Hamatree (5) 

Nymph's Beauty (7) 


Corellon Larethian 
Augment Artistry (1) 
Sixth Sense (1) 


Eilistraee 

Eilistraee's Moonfire (2) 
Moondance* (2) 

Stalk (2) 

Bladedance (3) 

Lesser Spellsong (3) 
Spellsong (6) 


4 803 М. 


Elf Pantheon 


Probe Enemies (3) 
Sylvan Form (4) 
Crystallomancy (5) 


Deep Sashelas (sea elf) 
Surface Sojourn (1) 
Shark Charm (2) 
Summon Cetacean (3) 
Cetacean Form (7) 


Erevan Пеѕеге 
Sprite Venom (3) 
Pixie Dust (5) 
Faerie Form (7) 


Fenmarel Mestarine 
Beast Tattoo (1) 

Find Sustenance (3) 
Solitude (4) 


Hanali Celanil 

Divine Romantic Interest (1) 
Hamatree (5) 

Nymph’s Beauty (7) 


Labelas Enoreth 

Protection from Aging (2) 
Renewed Youth (3) 

Speak with Ancient Dead (5) 
Temporal Anomaly (7) 


(Elf) Drow Pantheon 


Ghaunadaur 

Mists of Ghaunadaur (3) 
Amorphous Form (5) 
Elder Eye (5) 

Wall of Tentacles (7) 


Kiaransalee 

Threnody (2) 

Haunted Reverie (5) 

Curse of the Revenancer (6) 


Lolth 

Cloak of Dark Power (1) 
Spider Climb (1) 
Spidereyes (1) 

Undead Battlemight (1) 
Darkfire (2) 

Mindtouch (2) 

Conceal Item (3) 
Undead Focus (5) 


Rillifane Rallathil 
Animal Animosity (1) 
Sap (1) 

Acorn Barrage (2) 
Banish Blight (2) 
Amber Prison (4) 
Oakheart (4) 

Tree Healing (5) 
Create Treant (7) 


Sehanine Moonbow 
Motes of Moonlight (1) 
Cure Madness (2) 
Detect Spirits (3) 
Moon Shield (2) 

Moon Blade (3) 
Moonbow (4) 
Moonbridge (4) 
Moonfire (5) 


Shevarash 

Infrainvisible (2) 
Shevarash's Infravision (3) 
Depress Resistance (3) 


Solonor Therandira 
Keen Eye (2) 
Archer's Redoubt (3) 
Everfull Quiver (3) 


Spiderform (5) 

Spider Summoning (5) 
Meld of Lolth (6) 
Spiderbite (6) 

Cloak of Gaer (7) 
Repulsion (7) 
Zin-Carla (7) 


Selvetarm 
Fortitude (2) 
Venomous Blade (4) 


Vhaeraun 

Blessing of Vhaeraun (2) 
Conceal Item (3) 

Dark Embrace (4) 

Air Tread (6) 

Deceive Prying (6) 
Soultheft (7) 


a А 


Baervan Wildwanderer 
Arboreal Scamper (2) 
Whisperleaf (2) 

Tree Nap (4) 


Baravar Cloakshadow 
Mistake (1) 

Gull (2) 

Mantle of Baravar (5) 


Callarduran Smoothhands 
Animate Stalactite (1) 

Detect Metal and Minerals (1) 
Detect Drow (1) 

Strength of Stone (1) 

Depress Resistance (3) 

Ruby Axe (3) 

Stone Form (4) 


Arvoreen 

Blessed Watchfulness (1) 
Warning Shout (1) 
Weaponshift (2) 
Humansize (3) 

Sparkling Sword (3) 
Blazing Sword (4) 
Giantsize (5) 


Brandobaris 
Daydream (1) 
Charm of Brandobaris (2) 
Stealth of Brandobaris (3) 


2 804 М. 


Gnome Pantheon 


Flandal Steelskin 

Detect Metal and Minerals (1) 
Steelskin (1) 

Metalshape (3) 

Shades of Rhondang (4) 


Gaerdahl Ironhand 
Blessed Watchfulness (1) 
Deafening Clang (1) 
Alert Allies (2) 

Iron Vigil (2) 

Nature’s Eyes (3) 

Wave of Telekinesis (4) 


Garl Glittergold 
Gembomb (3) 

Conjure Aurumvorax (5) 
Edge of Arumdina (5) 


Halfling Pantheon 


Cyrrollalee 

Comforts of Home (1) 
Seal of Cyrrollalee (2) 
Improved Sanctuary (4) 


Sheela Peryroyl 
Reed Staff (1) 
Sheela's Entangle (2) 
Royalberry (5) 


Urogalan 

Earth Anchor (2) 

Soften Earth and Stone (2) 
Doomhound (3) 

Call Hounds (4) 


Nebelun 
Analyze Contraption (3) 


Segojan Earthcaller 
Segojan's Armor (1) 
Burrow (2) 

Call Stone Guardian (7) 


Urdlen 

Burrow (2) 

Soften Earth and Stone (2) 

Summon Earth Grue (4) 

Curse of the Everbleeding 
Wounds (6) 


Yondalla 

Reed Staff (1) 
Badger Form (4) 
Horn of Plenty (4) 

A Day in the Life (5) 
Curse of Yondalla (7) 


)|——————————————— adi 


Nonhuman Priest Spells 


Generally few unusual priest spells have been recorded for nonhuman races. These are listed below for all 
races except drow elves, whose spells appear in the demihuman section. In addition, the original 1st Edi- 
tion list for nonhuman tribal casters is reproduced here as well. Note that the dragon spells include only 
spells granted to dragon spellcasters, as opposed to humans and nondragons who are members of a dragon- 
worshipping cult. 


Beholder Elemental, Earth Sahuagin 

Control Death Tyrant (4) Earthenair (3) Gloom (2) 

Create Death Tyrant (7) Earthenport (5) Crush of the Depths (4) 
Murk (4) 

Dragon Elf, Drow 

Eternal Sleep (1) See Demihuman section Yuan-Ti 

Ecdysis (2) Histchii Brew (4) 

Dire Chant (3) Elf, Sea Elf Venom of Varae (3) 

Surface Sojourn (1) 

Dwarf, Duergar Shark Charm (2) Treant 

Steal Psionic Strength (1) Cetacean Form (7) Command Forest (5) 

Augment Psionics (2) 

Deflect Psionics (4) 


805 


Ņ——ŮŮŮŮ 


Tribal Spellcasters 


Shamans are tribal spellcasters of 7th level or less. They have the following spells (and the reverses, if appli- 
cable). Wisdom does not affect the number of spells available to shamans. Witchdoctors are tribal 
priest/wizards. In addition to the priest abilities of shamans, they can use a limited number of wizard 
spells (and their reverses, if applicable). Tribal shamans and witchdoctors have limited scope for advance- 
ment by race, as noted. For example, a troglodyte shaman can achieve 3rd level (and cast 2nd-level spells), 
while a lizard man witch-doctor could achieve 7th level priest/2nd-level wizard, casting spells of 4th level 
and 1st level. (From the tst Ed. DMG.) 


Shaman Spells 
Ist Level 
Cure Light Wounds 
Detect Evil 
Detect Magic 
Light 
Protection from Evil 
Resist Fear 


2nd Level 

Augury 

Chant 

Detect Charm 
Resist Fire 

Snake Charm 
Speak with Animals 


3rd Level 

Cure Blindness and Deafness 
Cure Disease 

Dispel Magic 

Locate Object 

Prayer 

Remove Curse 


4th Level 
Divination 
Exorcise 
Neutralize Poison 
Tongues 


3rd Level Class Maximum 
Ettin 

Ogre 

Troglodyte 

Troll 


5th Level Class Maximum 
Bugbear 

Gnoll 

Kobold 

Ore 


7th Level Class Maximum 
Giant (Hill, Stone, Fire, Frost) 
Goblin 

Hobgoblin 

Lizard Man 


*A tribe has either shamans or 

witchdoctors, except caveman 
tribes, which have both. 
Shamans and witch doctors 
should be placed, and not 
encountered in groups deter- 
mined randomly. 


Witch-Doctor Spells 
1st Level 
Affect Normal Fires 
Dancing Lights 
Identify 
Push 
Shield 
Ventriloquism 


2nd Level 
Audible Glamer 
Detect Invisibility 
Invisibility 
Levitate 

Magic Mouth 


806 ES 


b ————————————" М 


Cloistered Priests 


This variant priest frm DRAGON Magazine was a nonadventuring priest with minor sage-like abilities. 
In addition to the class details, a few new spells were incorporated (italics). If allowed to player characters 
at all, they should be extremely rare, perhaps requiring independent study to acquire, or they might be incor- 
porated as the specialty spells of a god of Wisdom or Knowledge. 


Level 1 

Bless 

Ceremony 

Create Water 
Combine 

Cure Light Wounds 
Detect Evil 

Detect Magic 

Hand Fire 

Magical Vestments 
Protection from Evil 
Purify Food & Drink 
Sanctuary 

Scribe 


Level 2 

Augury 

Chant 

Death Prayer 
Detect Charm 
Detect Life 

Holy Symbol 
Know Alignment 
Light 

Slow Poison 
Speak with Animals 
Translate 


Level 3 

Create Food & Water 

Cure Blindness or Deafness 
Detect Cursed Items 

Dispel Magic 

Enthrall 

Glyph of Warding (Paralysis) 
Hold Person 

Locate Object 

Prayer 

Remove Curse 

Remove Paralysis 

Speak with Dead 

Dismiss Undead 


Level 4 

Continual Light 

Detect Lie 

Exorcise 

Minor Ward 

Neutralize Poison 

Protection from Evil, 10' Radius 
Speak with Plants 

Scroll 

Tongues 


Level 5 

Atonement 
Commune 

Cure Critical Wounds 
Dispel Evil 

Major Ward 

Quest 

Raise Dead 

True Seeing 


Level 6 
Communicate 
Heal 

Stone Tell 
Word of Recall 


New Spells 
Hand Fire (1) 

Scribe (1) 

Death Prayer (2) 
Translate (2) 

Detect Cursed Items (3) 
Dismiss Undead (3) 
Minor Ward (4) 

Scroll (4) 

Major Ward (5) 
Communicate (6) 


2 807 К. 


———— н ———-—- 


1st Level 

Detect Life 

Ebony Hand 
Invisibility to Undead 
Skeletal Servant 
Spectral Senses 
Undead Alacrity 


2nd Level 

Aid 

Hear Heartbeat 
Resist Turning 
Slow Poison 


3rd Level 

Animate Dead 

Cause/Cure Blindness 
or Deafness 

Cause/Cure Disease 


2 808 М. 


LÀ 
Necromancer-Priests 
Death's Door Undead Regeneration/Drain 
Feign Death Undead 
Life Drain Undead Spell Focus 
Negative Plane Protection Undead Ward 
Remove Paralysis 
Speak with Dead 6th Level 
Spirit Bind/Release Asphyxiate 
Summon Undead 
4th Level 
Cause/Cure Insanity 7th Level 
Fortify Death Pact 
Heart Blight Destruction/Resurrection 
Poison/Neutralize Poison Energy Drain/Restoration 
Plague Curse Mindkiller 
Wither/Regenerate 
5th Level 
Dispel Good/Evil Quest 
Slay Living/Raise Dead Health Blessing 
Scourge Undead Plague 


N, 


Savants and Oracles 


This list is based on several NPC specialty priests that appeared in DRAGON Magazine. While these were 
essentially NPC classes, here they are represented a single, combined spell list here. Usages have been 
updated to 2nd Edition (in particular, the 1st Edition practice of distinguishing between variant classes by 
assigning spells to different levels was generally abandoned in 2nd Edition—this list follows 2nd Edition 
practice in level this type of spell level variation; such as remain are underlined. As a side note, the detect 
metal and minerals spell in Volume 1 is itself a specialty application. A general usage spell, if allowed, 
should be around 3rd level). 

Some spells on this list are wizard spells (given in italics). Details can be found in the Wizard Spell 
Compendiums. The savant/oracle versions operate exactly the same as the wizard versions, except that cast- 
ing times of less than 1 round are slower by 3 than the wizard version. The following sphere recommenda- 
tions are extrapolations of 2nd Edition material. 


MAJOR SPHERES: All, Astral, Divination, Guardian, Law, Protection, Summoning, Thought, Time, Wards 
MINOR SPHERES: Creation, Healing, Travelers 


Level 1 Hold Undead Seek 
Detect Evil Locate Object Stone Tell 
Detect Illusion Negative Plane Protection True Name 
Detect Untruth Feign Death 
Detect Snares & Pits Speak with Dead Level 7 
Identify Sympathetic Magic I Divine Inspiration 
Locate Animals or Plants Reincarnate 
Portent Level 4 Spell Drain 
Read Language Detect Lie Vision 
Weathertell Divination Vision Crystal 

Find Person 
Level 2 Greater Vision 
Augury Lair Divination New Spells 
Detect Charm Omen II Detect Untruth (1) 
Detect Invisibility Psychic Impressions Read Language (1) 
Detect Life Speak with Plants Know Intent (2) 
Find Trap Wizard Eye Know Language (2) 
Omen I Omen I (2) 
Know Alignment Level 5 Call Spirit (3) 
Know Intent Bestow Hit Points Detect Spirits (3) 
Know Language Commune Divine Truth (3) 
Omen I Commune with Nature Sympathetic Magic I (3) 
Speak with Animals Cure Critical Wounds Omen П (4) 
Slow Poison Hide Psychic Impressions (4) 
Tongues Life Steal Greater Vision (5) 

Raise Dead Hide (5) 
Level 3 Sympathetic Magic II Life Steal (5) 
Animate Dead Sympathetic Magic II (5) 
Call Spirit Level 6 Divine Event (6) 
Clairaudience Contact Other Plane Memory (6) 
Clairvoyance Divine Event Omen III (6) 
Detect Metals and Minerals Heal Recall Spell (6) 
Detect Spirits Legend Lore Seek (6) 
Divine Truth Memory True Name (6) 
Exorcism Omen III Divine Inspiration (7) 
Find Portal Recall Spell Spell Drain (7) 


Мыннан рыннан ннн аараан анын рана" 


Shamans 


Shaman spells are incorporated into the Savage setting lists. 


Sea Priests 


These spells might be known by priests of sea priests or those of gods of the sea. At ће DM's option, spe- 
cialty spells from deities of seas or sailing might be added, such as those of Umberlee and Valkur of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. In addition, many spells can be adapted to sea priest use. For example, 
any spell whose name contains the word "animal" can be altered to "fish", and the aquatic monster sum- 
moning tables can be used as well. 


Waterfloat (1) Surf (3) Inkjet (5) 

Detect Predator (2) Enhance Water Creature (4) Wave (5) 

Speak with Sea Creatures (2) Sea Form (4) Rapture of the Deep (6) 
Pressure Resistance (2) Hold Wave (4) Whirlpool (6) 

Wave (2) Shellskin (4) Sea Mount (6) 
Protection from Fire (3) Siren Song (5) Water Form (7) 
Water/Air Breathing (3) Echolocation (5) Tsunami (7) 


2 810 М 


_ EEE a 


Priest Spell Index 


This index contains the priest spells in the Priest’s Spell Compendium books, arranged alphabetically, 
including all spells in the appendices. The number in parentheses after the spell name is the spell level. 
The following notations are also used: Spells with text are given in normal type. Secondary citations are 
given in italics. O-Orison; Q=Quest Spell; *=Cooperative Magic; 8th, 9th, and 10th indicate psionic 
enchantments of those levels from the Dark Sun setting; "rev"= reversed form; "see"-a primary listing is 
given elsewhere, aka-"also known as" indicates an alternative, less common name. 


A 

A Day in the Life — Halfling (Sth).............. 10 
Abbathor's Greed — Dwarf (3гй)............... 10 
Absyance® (50) „анон 10 
Ability Aeration (310)... оосо: 11 
До, ДИРИ d 11 
Abjure — Shukenja (4th) ..................... 11 
Abundanes (Q).. «оолак а ГА СРИ 729 
Accelerate Erosion (rev Sands of Тіте).......... 524 
Accelerate Healing (3гй).........›.. ж. oleae’ H 
Acid Rain ОИН) +. жез. verd Ete UT 12 
Acorn Barrage — ЕІҒ (2п0).................::. 12 
Accounts, [E ']la 5 (see [Е ']la s Accounts). ....... 235 
Adamantite Mace (4th) .............. eere 12 
Adaptation (3rd, Sphere of War) ............... 768 
Adsptation (О) „ааг ‚з эзы cts 4 13 
Ааа)... EXE e xv MUR 13 
Advanced Sunshine (4). ..................... 14 
Aico (ЭШ)... ‹ х=» ree О УБ 14 
Aeris Servant (6%)... 2. раје 15 
Age Crentute (60)... ove nse eine Ps WU 15 
ASS Drsgon (СШ)... же» ++» >к ж ame nee 16 
Age Object (Sth) ооло 16 
Age Plam (A) 1. =. 3S. рәш Шу» em TS 17 
АМ GRE. 5, «isin, x зе EPA. Sa a E 17 
Air Breathing (rev Water Breathing) ............. 17 
Ait Leog Qul)... ensem a ео О Oe 17 
Air of Permanence (Oth)... ~; -sss oc TM en 751 
Alit Тела). ec eue ае И 18 
Ait ЭМЕГЕ)... „ооа nndis dfe ERE 19 
Akadi, Winds of (see Winds of Akadi)............. 19 
Akad Vortex (7%); is о erus co ЪЫ&5 stor 19 
Alert Allies — Dwarf, Gnome (2nd). ............ 20 
Alert Vigil (1f) ...—: 2.2.2: арр OU 20 
Alicorm Lance QW)... ahes oo dm аг 20 
All-Seeing Crystal Ball (бїҺ)................... 21 
Allergy Field (110) . ..... cite occu осо 21 
Alter Climate (8th) ........ ede acc es e y SETS 757 
Alter ЖК (GU). › +». а.» secu УРОД s Sis 21 
Alteration Mantle, Azuth s 

(see Azuth s АПекайопМаптїйе)................ 48 
Arig Qno)... oor ras sare С MEOS 22 
Amanuensis (31d) «5220 ecco r re eee 22 
Amaunator's Uncertainty (2пй)................. 22 
Amber Prison — Elf (4th). ..................:. 23 
Amorphous Form — Drow (5th). ..............- 23 


811 


Айай! (nd), о erbe. us cias ede owns 24 
Analyze Balance (8t) . 2.251220 125r eee ees 25 
Analyze Contraption — Gnome (3rd). ........... 25 
Analyze Onpotietit (15t).......—. 4. 2 v e vta ree 25 
Ancestral Blessing — Oriental (2nd)............. 26 
Жасик Carte (ОШ) а. e ss 0c: cote PED Us Са 26 
Ancient Curse (RAVENLOFT) (71) ............... 27 
PBMC САРАИ гь 752 
Animal Animosity (18)................:...... 27 
Animal Call (see Call Animal or Bird) ........... 90 
Animal Command (О)... 205.82 oa 3402 0 628 753 
Animal Companion (18%)...................... 27 
Animal Eves (2000) у stu 28 
Animal Friendship (18)....................... 28 
Animal Gtowth (565)... с.а 29 
Animal Но ЮАШ)... rete cO oes 729 
Animal Sanctuary (1st) .............:......... 29 
Animal Sight (АФ). с талаага 29 
Anual Speech 2n... «€. 2A TRE 16 29 
Animal Sov (DII); эз еже» о ААА: 30 
Animal Spy — Shaman (2пй).................. 30 
Animal Summoning I (4һ).................... 31 
Animal Summoning II (5th) ................... 31 
Animal Summoning III (6ћ)................... 31 
Animal Fransfer (6)... эли Л. сеооа; 32 
Animal Trick — Ranger (3гй).................. 32 
Animal Vision — Old Empire (4th) ............. 33 
Animal/Bird Call (see Call Animal or Bird). ....... 90 
Animal's View — Shaman (5) ................ 33 
Atunmte Dead (90. .......——— doe + a sisal Tan 33 
Animate Dead Monsters (5һ).................. 34 
Aüimde Flame (ООС. еа. ое neben 34 
Animate Object (O): sss as opns 35 
Апе Rock (M. зен дааны... 36 
Animate Stalactite — Gnome (158ї).............. 36 
Animide Satos (ИШ)... 96 etched sce sys 36 
Aste Tree (500). 3 cn. Ae vae es vs 37 
Animate Weapon — Dwarf (181)................ 37 
Anti-Animal Shell (6th). олы, курд. ЙБ ыш 324 37 
Anti-Mineral Shell (7th) ...................... 38 
Aon PE Sen). ccce c MINER es 38 
Anti-Vermin Barrier (Ist) ..................... 38 
АИ Ну ан ео metes e 39 
Aranen's Divinational Armor (1st). .............. 39 
Atboreal Scamper (180 = osole sss aso na os 39 
Archer’s Redoubt — ЕЇЇ(3га).................. 40 


b ————————————————— "i! 


Arm Hammers — Old Empire (2nd)............. 40 
Armor of Darkness (10)... 20 0S. 40 
Armor, Ѕеројап 5 (see Segojan 5 Armor) ......... 535 
Arumdina, Edge of (see Edge of Arumdina) ...... 234 
Аарне (GU): | . 2210 oueonie ES ese wes ate 41 
Aspistion (Oy. ло 2906 3. 93e AERA 748 
Assess Value — Old Empire (1st) ............... 4l 
Assume Amorphous Form (see Amorphous Form) . . . 23 
Assume Gaseous Form (see Gaseous Form) ...... 297 
Assume Sylvan Form (see Sylvan Form) ......... 629 
Assume Undead Form (see Undead Form) ....... 669 
Astaroth's Augmentation (3rd) ................. 42 
Astral Awareness (200) ....................... 42 
Astral Celerity (sf)... 09240 808.99 43 
Astral Spell (АШ). ы дерд, sa EE EN 43 
Astral Window (31d)... 2 eee E 
Atonement GU). REER eee a en eta e n 44 
APOC 20). «ois isos sin cia siais азе». ка ДЬ ws ++ 
Attraction (rev Рејесііоп).................... 193 
Attunement — Drow (4th) .................... 45 
Augment Artistry — Elf (18ї).................. 45 
Augment Psionics — Duergar (2nd)............. 46 
Augmentation, Astaroth 5 

(see Astaroth s Аиететайоп)................ 42 
дарау Gub. 2... ае ee Au eee ААО Te 46 
Augury — Shukenja (15ї)..................... 46 
Avra of Comfort Ond). ......-- ce Reet ee 47 
Aura of Discomfort (rev Aura of Comfort)... ...... 47 
Avani's Resuscitation (Q) .................... 730 
Avatar Fori (0)... os oue ++» жазу еН 730 
Awaken Magical Item (7).................... 47 
Awakening (440.........—. л. 48 
Awakening (see Awaken Magical Item) ........... 47 
Axe Storm of Clangeddin — Dwarf (4th)......... 48 
Azuth's Alteration Mantle (6ћ)................. 48 
Azuth's Exalted Triad (5th) .................... 49 
Azuth's Fedefensor (4th) ...................... 50 
Azuth* Firing Frenzy (605) . .............. c 022 50 
Azuth's Immobility (5)....................:. 50 
Azuth’s Spell Shield (7th) ................. ess. 51 

B 

Bad Medicine (4b)... Ка; 52 
Bad Weather (rev Good Weather).............4. 307 
Badberry (rev Соойһетту).................... 308 
Badger Form — Halfling (4) ................. 52 
Bane — Old Empire (7)..,.................. 53 
Bane, Death Symbol of 

(see Death Symbol of Bane) ................ 188 
Bane, Doom of (see The Doom of Bane) ......... 640 
Bane of Beshaba (2nd) ............... ls 53 
Bane of theDefiles (7th) . 2 ores 53 
Bane Yondalla — Halfling (Sth) ................ 54 
Banish Blight Qnd). ае о 54 
Buh Plan’ СО)... ie R E See 54 
Banish Mirage (rev Create Міғаре)............. 158 


Baravar, Mantle of (see Mantle of Baravar) ...... 393 
Bate AIR eee РЕ REV 55 
Barret of Riention (оу. агаа emerit ru 55 
Bat Senes (Andy ice 205 ааль 55 
Battle Blessing, Haela 5 

(see Haela’s Battle ВЇеззїпө)................ 316 
Баш Song Qd 09. 103 cick PAT eed os sa 56 
Battle Trident (4th) .:........................ 56 
Dati Nip ТУА 34. СЕ cem aueh 56 
ВИНО (Зу 9 ais re rere ees 57 
BOsr RE ЕОР АРАТА 57 
Beast Claw (2nd). 50001 EUER 58 
Beast Tattoo — ЕІҒ (151) ...................... 58 
Bottes (ТИЗ. os seis cs E 7 nte 59 
ВОЛИ (20) элск rete testes ate 59 
Beckon — Old Empire (15) ................... 59 
ЗЕХН): сг ее Gee К. „2 60 
Beguilme (Ur) Teaca cech oi rete aac teta 60 
Beuiedieasn (О): Lo ieu sot sh. a ees 748 
Benificence (18). «see AR at NS 60 
Berronar, Succor of (see Succor of Berronar) . ... . 612 
Berronar's Favor — Dwarf (5th) ................ 61 
Ве (SU) теа нани SII e eie w АЛИЯ 61 
Beshaba, Bane of (see Bane of Beshaba).......... 53 
Beshaba, Darkfire of (see Darkfire of Beshaba) ... 182 
Bestow Curse (rev Remove Сиғѕе).............. 492 
Bestow Hit Points — Savant (5{һ)............... 62 
Bestow Major Curse (6һћ)..................... 62 
Bestow Minor Curse (3ї0)...............5 ao 64 
Bind Fetish — Shaman (3гй)................... 67 
Bind Gua (OO) eros vor vows ster sedo ies 68 
Bii Gall (0) ica caps uec Rer one 753 
Bird Call (see Call Animal or Bird). ............. 90 
Bird of Prey — Old Empire (3rd) ............... 68 
Biting Shadow (70). ce eser eso er o/c etiam 69 
ЭКСи 020d) РОР ГАНИ TRA. ч 69 
FICA BEND а ак на DON CC CET OS 69 
Blackhend (370): 2. cere вс ect fI Бн 70 
СЕНЕ. Т НИ ИК ES OR 70 
Blade Barrier (О) 5. secre met cerea 70 
Bladebend — Drow (Sth) ..................... 71 
Bladebises (700... sacle coe v Elbe pe mH Us ts 71 
Bladedance — Drow (3rd) .................... 71 
Biscntiiers Bowls (ЭШ)... eng БЕ 72 
Blast o£ Pan (ИШ) ао ИЙ ОЛ 73 
Blazing Sword — Halfling (3rd). ............... 73 
BIET И ЧИЛДИ ox ERIS CE 748 
HIS (380. 02 2 eruit у е Led и 74 
Blessed Abundance (5th). . ........... esee 74 
Blessed Craftsmanship — Dwarf (3rd)........... 74 
Blessed Forgetfulness — Archon (4th) ........... 75 
Bhessd Werth О) еса г, 6: 75 
Blessed Watchfulness (1st) .................... 75 
Blessing of Vhaeraun — Drow (2nd) ............ 76 
Blessing, [E']la’s (see [E'Jla’s Blessing)......... 236 
Blessing, Talona (see Talona’s Blessing) ........ 635 


2 812 M 


)|-————————————————d à 


Blight (rev Blossom) : secite лнн а а Ш.М 
BiB AA) .......4 ае N 
Blistering Rays (rev Merciful Shadows). ........ 
Blood Bank (б)... с... жэ cs cd MRC Айз 
Biccd Bond( Ig... -eecoeet xe tor tein 
Blood Litk (Л): nece dores Не 
Bhóod Lust Qn)........e oce 
Blóód Muille (40b)... eee 
Blood Rape (45). әләге 
Bloodglost (УЫ). 0r rene es 
Blossom (Ol. НИНУ 
Body Blades Qui)... stash 
Body.Clack (ai)... oo eere А: 
Body Litik (Т). 00 96 os cle So S 
Bolt of Glory (GB)... aS 
Bone Bite ud)... ore eencertor ren ertt 
Воена): „ЕС dU 2S 
Воо C200) Mis 22... cui aera T Ue Ое 
БОО (ДАШ)! ано ло aR 
Boon of Fottime (350) 22а и %@ К 
Boon of Lathander (4th) .................... 
Bim f the: God Mdb... ное 
Borogar, Hand of (see Hand of Borogar)........ 
Bowls, Blaenther s (see Blaenther’s Bowls) . . .... 
Bramblesuif (Эха), ....22 ое pe RE 
Brandobaris Stealth (see Stealth of Brandobaris) . 
Break Camp (rev Create Сатрзйе)............ 
Break Lins (00): Louer COS PELA 
Breath of Death (rev Breath of Life) ........... 
БАЙ ОКЕ (Сину. 2 c2 oe a 
Breath of the Elements (4һҺ)................. 
ВИЛЛЕ (И) анъа ел 
Brightmantle — Dwarf (2nd) ................ 
Burning Rays (rev Healing Rays) ............. 
Burrow — Gnome (2пй).................... 


CORD AG Les seres enne te ea eon eae ОЕ 
Сав (1390... 012 e SAC ca ite n PR 
Call Aerial Beings (4)..................... 
Call Animal — Shaman (2nd). ............... 
Call Animal or Bird (151).................... 
Call Avatar (FR) «2400605 EI ee abe 
Call Council of Spirits (see Council of Spirits) . . . . 
Call Ditossunt (56)... ra riisi ea 
Call Follower — Ranger (3гй)................ 
Call Ghost Pack (58)... 5.22492 0E 
Call Hounds — Halfling (4th). ............... 
САЕН UN... oun edere ra ты. 
Call Lightning (31d). „от Sieve 
Call Pack (300) еъ од aces er 
СН бөйү. (6)... ое ооо ЩЕ 
Call Spirit — Savant (3гй)................... 
Call Stone Guardian — Gnome (Sth) .......... 
Call the Council of Spirits (see Council of Spirits). . 
Call Upon: Faith (1st). „: гаса: 


$91 


Call Upon Gargauth (7Һ)..................... 95 
Call Woodland Beings (4th) ................... 95 
Calling Melody — Shaman (7th) ............... 96 
СӘН (Чар); у.е». nete ee Rer oe esee 97 
Calm (rev Effervescence)....... «eee 235 
Сй Animals (lat) есь аи dos ton 97 
Calin: Chaos (208) еа a 97 
TE OTS “SE RR POON ee NES 98 
Cil WINGS (409/5009 CTE ARR ey 98 
СОРГО: з-дын», e EV BARAT wee es 768 
Camouflage — Elf (2п0)...................... 99 
Сее). a кә, AU epee ЬУ 750 
Cattle of Calm (905)... 7... oe e 99 
RRO (ED) ан о s ed dez NEQU Pe 750 
Caress, Loviatar s (see Loviatar s Caress)........ 383 
Оа (ЗАЛ). 075221. meet ene 100 
Сир Ost Qd)... ша. aeu „дй MEVS e 100 
Cause Blindness or Deafness 

(rev Cure Blindness or Deafness) ............ 169 
Cause Critical Wounds (rev Cure Critical Wounds) . . 169 
Cause Disease (rev Cure Юїзеазе).............. 169 
Cause Fear (rev Remove Fear) ................ 493 
Cause Insanity (rev Cure Insanity) ............. 170 
Cause Intermediate Wounds 

(rev Cure ModerateWounds) ................ 171 
Cause Light Wounds (rev Cure Light Wounds)... . . 171 
Cause Moderate Wounds 

(rev Cure Moderate Wounds) ................ 171 
Cause Paralysis (rev Remove Paralysis) ......... 493 
Cause Scurvy (rev Cure Scurvy) ............... 172 

(aka Inflict Scurvy) 
Cause Serious Wounds 

(rev Cure Serious Wounds) ................... 172 
Catto Rath: (0) аери: 753 
Celestial Protection (60): 7...2... eee 101 
Celestian, Meteors of (see Meteors of Celestian) . . 406 
СВОГО (О) е ое ее аен оо. 101 
Ceremony — Cleric (1st) .................... 101 
OTHER CLERICAL CEREMONIES ,................ 104 
Ceremony — Druid (156)..................... 104 
OTHER DRUIDIC СЕВЕМОМІЕЅ .................. 106 
Ceremony: Oath (O) „22а: 748 
Cetacean Form — Sea Elf (7th). ............... 107 
Сїй Creation (50)... ceverree vore ipee io NIIS 108 
Chain Madness (60b) .....—.. 5.2 even 108 
Champion's Strength (5).................... 109 
Сора (Ш) оао ее nes EAA 109 
Chinnel Flame (40b) oos o еее Лл 110 
GhntebStendt (and) ОТУ. te 110 
Clint (200) неее +. aan cele 110 
Chant of Fangs (810) 4. оо ce HE 111 
Chaos Watd Gnd)... MESS 111 
Chaotic Combat (ИЗ) 02. e ees 112 
Chaotic Commands (5їһ)..................... 112 
Glinotic Бер (ИШ) ое оион PEU STEMS 112 
СїшгөоЁВшйштө (О) 4.75. 2 ees 113 


» 813 Ss 


Charm of Brandobaris — Halfling (2nd)......... 113 
Charm of Isis — Old Empire (3rd) ............. 114 
Charm Person or Mammal (2nd). .............. 114 
Charm Shark (aka Shark Charm) .............. 539 
Сш: Spit (60)... ье ин л кл; 115 
Chatel Spint (31d). -. сао ears 115 
Chatterbark — Ranger (3гй).................. 115 
GNI OD Lise eor Y ТЫ ү: үз. ү Б 750 
Chill — Old Empire (3гй).................... 116 
Chill Metal (rev Heat Мейй).................. 328 
Chilling Scythe (2nd) .....-.. 209510 Es 116 
Chimes of Finding (4th) ..................... 117 
Glicose Pure (id)... ue. PRO: 117 
а РТА 117 
Следе of Privacy (4h) do wc Ss 118 
Circle of Protection from Spirits (2nd) .......... 118 
Citole of Secrets* (31d) . с. лсо ос eR 118 
Circle of Stone* — Dwarf (Sth) ............... 119 
Circle of Sunmotes (О) 1.525 ace ae 730 
Clangeddin, Axe Storm of 

(see Axe Storm of Clangeddin) ................ 48 
Clewcloud (Н)... eto c eels oa ale 5 119 
Claws of Thard Harr — Dwarf (151) ............ 120 
Claws of Velsharoon (Ist) .................... 120 
Са (О)... si MES TUBIS ERU ciate 750 
Chame (100)... wc а M es 758 
Cleanse — Old Empire (151).................. 120 
Cleanse Community (51ћ) .................... 121 
Cleanse Hearth (nd)... о. оные 121 
Clar АИ): аид ЕТЫ 121 
Clear Pali (ОЮ), еса БОЕ Ио et 122 
Char WARE OI n aio inae ИГ ee 122 
Cloak ot Bravery. (40)... 522015 2006s 123 
Cloak of Dark Power — Drow (Ist) ............ 123 
Cloak of Fear (rev Cloak of Bravery) ........... 123 
Cloak of Gaer — Drow (71ћ). ................. 124 
Cloud of Pestilence (4th). .................... 124 
Cloud of Purification (Sth) ................... 125 
Cloud of Putrefaction (5Һ)................... 125 
Сїй йй)... >». жЕ o RAE 125 
Chdecape (50)... „с.р АСО: 126 
Ches of Ash Cl) since ccs eso T MEL mes 126 
Clutter Path (rev Clear Рай).................. 122 
Goalstone (lost)... 1... sates cee PR 126 
Costot Mist (200)... s ДИА ha 127 
Code of Secrecy (50)... 2...2 22 Клайн. 127 
Gold Hand (ЭЙ) 2.5. о сае ное 127 
СОБЕ (130... dee бал E 128 
Comforts of Home — Halfling (Ist)............ 128 
Command (b). os ais еар ANA TS 128 
Command Another's Pet — Shaman (2nd) ....... 129 
Coinmand БЕШ (605)... sive es cabin ЛАЗ 129 
Command Forest — Treant (5{һ)............... 129 
Command Monster (6ћ)..................... 130 
Commune (90)... ccce С АСС 130 
Commune with Earth — Dwarf (Sth) ........... 131 


814 


Commune with Greater Spirit (5th). ............ 131 
Commune with Lesser Spirit (2nd) ............. 131 
Commune with Nature (5) .................. 132 
Сосо ИШ)... зде» etie vm 132 
Conpel О]: узу ааз» denos c Pase dtd 133 
Compel —Shukenja (7) .................... 133 
Compulsive Order (4th). .......... iadmn ea oa 134 
Conceal (rev Reveal)... ......... ees 9205 Mes 503 
Conceal Fire (rev Watchfire) .................. 689 
Conceal Item — Drow (3гй).................. 134 
Conceal Lifeforce — Vedic (51ћ)............... 134 
Conceal Motivation (rev Reveal Motivation). . . . . . 368 

(баг TALEO EMD) = а seid erus 241 
Conceal Riches — Dwarf (4th) ................ 135 
СОПОКО (ОО)... ее mn mira she epe 731 
Confüsia (7100... onis Dos nop со E TET 135 
Conjure Air Elemental (7th) .................. 136 


Conjure Air or Water Elemental (see Conjure Air 
Elemental; see Conjure Water Elemental) . . 136, 140 


Conjure Animas (ОН)... 136 
Conjure Aurumvorax — Gnome (5th). .......... 136 
Conjure Earth Elemental (7th). ................ 137 
Conjure Elemental — DARK SuN (Sth) .......... 137 
Conjure Fire Elemental (6їһ).................. 137 
Conjure Greater Elemental (71)............... 138 
Conjure Greater Elemental — DARK SUN (7th). ... 139 
Conjure Jungle Minions (41) ................. 139 
Conjure Lesser Elemental — DARK SUN (3rd). .... 139 
Conjure Nature Elemental (7th). ............... 140 
Conjure Water Elemental (6th) ................ 140 
Conaedrmte (ОО) ес ооа И лаб 749 
Consequeüce (50)... ооо ео; 141 
Contact Home Power (2nd) ................... 141 
Contain Spirit — Shaman (2nd) ............... 142 
Contaminate Water (rev Purify Water)........... 475 
Continual Faerie Fire (3rd) ................... 142 
СООО Е Жуда» TD 143 
Continual Shadow (870). 5... uer tI 143 
Contract of Nephthys — Old Empire (4th) ....... 144 
Control Animal (31d). ............ eee 144 
Control Aratha (aka Control Giant Insect) ....... 145 
Control Death Tyrant — Beholder (4th) ......... 145 
Control Giant Insect (4) .................... 145 
Control Lycanthropes (бїһ)................... 146 
Control Temperature, 10' Radius (4th) .......... 146 
Control Vapor (30D)... о ya ob Шс a edes 146 
Control Weather (7th) ........... г. 147 
Control Winds (Ау bie! 291094 tes ee 148 
Converse — Shaman (51һ).................... 148 
Converse with Sea Creatures (3rd) ............. 149 
Corpse Whisper (31d). .....—.«. eese eee аг 149 
Сото (АО): а reise rhone окат 150 
Council of Spirits — Shaman (7th). ............ 150 
Courage (130... 506 алаан uray 769 
Crawling Darkness (6th) ..................... 151 
ROME ATE EID) созсо! нз... „А; OU 151 


Create Ancient Dead — Old Empire (6th)........ 152 
Create Atmosphere (7th) ... 0... лез „Жемин 152 
Create Baneguard (601) ........ 1.5 ааг 153 
Greate Cumpiité (31d)... do euet NIS 153 
Create Crypt Servant (7th). . л... „гале к. 154 
Create Crypt Thing (7th). .............:. sss 154 
Create Death Tyrant — Beholder (7th) .......... 155 
Create: Dineguard (705). ... АЫ ОБ 155 
Create Food & Water (3rd) ................... 155 
Create Holy Symbol (see Holy Symbol). ......... 337 
Create аа (ӨШ)... >». aaa 155 
Create Jungle Minions (Sth) .................. 156 
Create Machine* — Dwarf (6th)............+.- 157 
Create Mask — Shaman (3га)................. 158 
Create Minor Helm (Sth). sere ое 158 
Create Мише Qund) ...... еен 158 
Creste Oasis (Bb) ......... 52d 0 Жанай 758 
Create Sanctuary (Фф)... г... офа елан 159 
Сие Shrine (ТЕ... Ges ele voe en saan 160 
Create Smokie (31d) : . ......- ma оа 160 
Create Spiritknife — Shaman (2nd) ............ 160 
Create Spring 2nd) 2: 2...2. Јаше LH 161 
Create Thassaloss (6th) .................:.... 161 
Creste Treat (70)... С NER ERU 162 
Create Tree of Life (6th) ..................... 163 
Create Undead Minion (71) .................. 163 
Creato Water (180. ......- one ro N 163 
Creature of Darkness (4th) ................... 164 
Creeping Doom (700)... sio JUL GERI 164 
Crocodile Tears — Old Empire (2nd) ........... 165 
Crown of Brilliance — Archon (6th). ........... 165 
Crown of Flame — Archon (5th).............-. 165 
Crown of Glory — Archon (7th)............... 166 
Crown of Radiance — Archon (3rd) ............ 862 
Crumble (Sth) 12, aL же, ОТИВА 166 
Crush of the Depths — Sahuagin (4th).......... 166 
Crashing Walls (О) : ....... X cou ES AN 167 
Crypt Ward — Dwarf (4) ................... 167 
Crystallize (2nd) ........... PLOTS DU. 168 
Crystallomancy — Elf (5th) .................. 168 
Cure Blindess (see Cure Blindness or Deafness). . . 169 
Cure Blindness or Deafness (3rd) .............. 169 
Cure Critical Wounds (Sth) ................... 169 
Cure Discase Qu)... ка TES 169 
Care Insanity (MB) «orco ed teo NR 170 
Cure Intermediate Wounds (replaced) ........... 171 
Cure Light Wounds (Ist) .......25.. ода 171 
Cure Madness — Elf (2nd) ................... 171 
Cure Minor Wounds (О). „али 749 
Cure Moderate Wounds (2па)................. 171 
бше RoCCWUBY.. Lu ino Fisica eee 172 
Care Scurvy (2nd). Lc 172 
Cure Serious Wounds (4th) ................... 172 
Curse. (reo BIBE) „гос vo aw SEW AO KEW 74 
Curse (see Remove Curse). sD 25.59 aie eme Eos 492 
Curse of the Black Sand/Silt (3rd). ............. 173 


Curse of the Choking Sands (4th) .............. 173 
Curse of the Everbleeding Wounds — Gnome (6th) . . 173 
Curse of the Revenancer — Drow (6th) ......... 174 
Curse of Tongues (19D... ..::. dais ивана 174 
Curse of Yondalla (715) „агам: 174 
Cyrrollalee, Seal of (see Seal of Cyrrollalee) ..... 529 
D 

Dance of Life* — Old Empire (6th)............ 176 
Duce OP Pat (3m... mee repe dene ew 176 
Dance of the Fallen (6h). ........... ele 177 
Dance of the Unicorns (Sth) .................. 177 
Duk Aun (АШ)... odio жаы, зиз 177 
Dark Embrace — Drow (4th) ................. 178 
Det Ene Cand ris mudo sensfeeteepietbe ex 178 
Desk Pali ЧИС оао eere e a 179 
Dark Promise (5th). .........206 coe ни 179 
D a eese НС ОНУ КЕ З 180 
ИШЕ Way (61b) 2. агаа Y evi exe 180 
оўо ВУИ teo 181 
Darkfire — Drow (2nd). ..................... 181 
Darkfire (aka Darkfire of ВезһаЬа)............. 182 
Darkfire of Beshaba (210). ................... 182 
Darkness (rev ШЕШ) з ous cocer» 374 
Day in the Life, A (see A Day in the Life). ......... 10 
Daydream — Halfling (1st). .................. 182 
РИШЕ (О) 5503 оаа eset ele ees 732 
Dead Magic Shield (5)..................... 183 
Desd March (ИШ) us zone Res mss 183 
Deaden Sensation (rev Intensify Sensation). ...... 355 
ПБУ Danes (б); eor dee 183 
Deafening Clang — Gnome (151) .............. 184 
Death Candle — Shaman (2nd). ............... 184 
Death Chiriot (70D . 113 беши... „с altis os 185 
Dedi Cue (200): os йына ovy HIER 186 
Death Dingon (О). ое voc orenle wis e 186 
PGES Л ss эче eee eR RIEN IS 186 
Death Pact, Velsharoons 

(see Velsharoon s Death Расї)................. 677 
MR POM ON Ое» не vun А М» 187 
Death Symbol of Bane (7һ).................. 188 
Deut Tiliman (ЖИП): неее Te oxi 188 
БН ТОО (6095.0 oid cis 9 ФЬ Cit 189 
Deut Door (ЭМ)... 3x enc niodo mde 189 
ТИШӘ Barrier (ЭШ)... „дее ДЬ 189 
ЮУ ГЕЙ: oe AT Ge A ok 190 
Decay (see Druid s Decay) ................... 223 
Decay (aka Greater Decay, see Dolorous Decay) . . 219 
Decay, Dolorous (see Dolorous Decay).......... 219 
Deceive Prying — Drow (бїһ)................. 191 
Beoompóde (АЮ) аА << вана sn 191 
Deen Ва) 1s onc entries 191 
Defensive Harmony (4th) .................... 192 
рее (rav. Sanct). i.s e uz ve e suono 520 
Defiler Scent (40b). |... eee ere lee 192 
Deflect Psionics — Duergar (4th) .............. 192 


4 815 М. 


EEE айан" 


Detloction СЙ)... 5. ‚ a teen a ee ere eels 193 
Degenerate Critical Wounds 

(rev Regenerate Critical Wounds) ............ 486 
Degenerate Light Wounds 

(rev Regenerate Light Wounds) .............. 486 
Degenerate Serious Wounds 

(rev Regenerate Serious Wounds) ............ 487 
Degenerative Harm (rev Regenerative Heal)... ... 487 
РЕТ) оО crete eae 193 
Demagnetize (rev Мағпеїѕт). ................ 391 
Deny Deuth (5)... ооо аА 193 
Depress Resistance — Elf, Gnome (3rd). ........ 194 
Desecrate Ghi (rev Sanctify СМ)............... 521 
Destroy Atmosphere (rev Create Atmosphere). . . . . 152 
Destroy Bloodline (rev Restore Bloodline). . . . . . .. 500 
Destroy Crypt Thing (rev Create Crypt Thing). . . . . 154 
Destroy Water (rev Create ИШїе?)............... 163 
Destroy Magedoom (7th). .................... 194 
Destruction (rev Resurrection) ................ 502 
Detect Ambush (319)... 5:40 onere ode dS 195 
Detect Animal Attacker (4Һ).................. 195 
Detect Balance (ist) 20s t Ис 195 
Detect Charm Qn). «<< «4.5/5 eae Sa Poe de ee 196 
Detect Curse (aka Detect Cursed Item).......... 196 
Detect Curse — Old Empire (3rd). ............. 196 
Detect Curse — Shukenja (3rd). ............... 196 
Detect Cursed Kem (38d) os 945a ca eee ee ce 196 
Detect Disease (180)... «o.oo 299 00e I 197 
Detect Drow — Dwarf, Gnome (15ї)............ 197 
Detect Dwarves — Dwarf (1st). ............... 198 
Detect Enemies — Dwarf (181)................ 198 
Detect Evil (ist) ..2.:2:: 2:50 ЛОР EPA 198 
Detect Good (rev Detect Буй)................. 198 
Detect Harmful Gas — Dwarf (1st). ............ 199 
Detect Harmony (190) ооо оооло 6 199 
Detect Winsion a a oro OE EIE 199 
р а (AR)... РРС s PIE 200 
Detect Life (200). а.о. NR ees 200 
Defect Living Се): e oe 5 sales sow st roates 200 
Detéct Magic (180). «505. И: 201 
Detect Metal and Mineral — Old Empire, 

Dremel: Gnogie (sl)... o жй. ЕКСЕ 201 
Detect Poisoli (19)... оса Абе 201 
Detect Powers (2nd) 5.2.20 ees rer ves 201 
Detect Predator (2nd) ....................... 203 
Détect Psionic Use (18) ssi ss оа: аел 203 
Detect Shapechanger (4). ................... 203 
Detect Snares & Pits (1st) .:..: 2...0, 203 
Detect Spirits 300) rae or туза Шо» 204 
Detect Untruth — Savant (Ist) ................ 204 
Detect Weapons — Dwarf (1st). ............... 204 
Determine Final Rest (3rd) ................... 205 
Déctete (9D ocio eerte MER setae els Hae 205 
Dictate — Harmonium (2пд).................. 205 
ПИРОН). еее revise rero RM T 206 


Digit of Disruption, Henley s 


816 


(see Henley 5 Digitof Disruption) ............ 329 
Dimensional Anchor (4).................... 206 
Dimensional Folding (4һ).................... 206 
Dimensional Translocation (5th) ............... 207 
Dire Chant — Dragon (3rd) .................. 208 
а О ЕУРО НАИС Re 208 
Disc of Concordant Opposition (6th). ........... 209 
Discern Elven Influence (Ist) ................. 209 
Disdain (rev Attraction). . ........... eee 44 
Disentangle — Dwarf (2nd) .................. 210 
Diéguise Scent(O) о... eI mens 753 
Düguise (50). оис И A oie 769 
Disinfeet (O) РОТЕ re ee esu Inns 751 
Dismiss Air Elemental 

(rev Conjure Air Elemental) ............... 136 
Dismiss Earth Elemental 

(rev Conjure Earth Elemental) .............. 137 
Dismiss Fire Elemental 

(rev Conjure Fire ЁЇетета1)................ 137 
Dismiss Greater Elemental 

(rev Conjure Greater Elemental). . ....... 138, 139 
Dismiss Lesser Elemental 

(rev Conjure Lesser Elemental). ............. 139 
Dismiss Nature Elemental 

(rev Conjure Nature Elemental) ............. 140 
Dismiss Water Elemental 

(rev Conjure Water Elemental) .............. 140 
Dismiss Undead — Cloistered Priest (3rd) ....... 210 
Dispel Darkness (1st) ........ 6050s erret 210 
Dispel BUEF(SQD) а Н ОИ 211 
Dispel Fatigue (1@) е: 211 
Dispel Good (rev Dispel ЕУЙ)................. 211 
Dispel Magic (d) 00s Д.Д. eer vt 211 
Биресе EDan Л Икен Peces УЕ 212 
Dispel Ward — Old Empire (2nd).............. 212 
РИО (900. О С. voe Uwe ВАЗ 759 
Dissension’s Feast (2nd) ..................... 213 
Dissipate Smoke (rev Create Ѕтоҝе)............ 160 
PMID ORI. E e тыта STRE VENE 213 
Divination — Shukenja (3rd) ................. 214 
Divination (aka Lair Divination). .............. 370 
Divine Bloodline (18)....................... 214 
Dire СӨР (GAD) oe иг, C0 Mb аР, 4 214 
TIT EVEN (ЧИ S лән. Е 215 
Divine Future (see Divine Event) .............. 215 
Divine Inspiration (7)...................... 216 
Divine Investiture (5) ...................... 216 
Divine Past (see Divine Event) ................ 215 
Divine Present (see Divine Еуелі).............. 215 
Divine Purpose td). -s.s Fiat ггг 217 
Divine Romantic Interest — Elf (1st) ........... 218 
Eine TEOMA ORG) ее a ><», „УЙКУ 218 
Divine Wind OE a nie Т К 218 
Divinial Armor, Aranen s 

(see Ағапеп = Divinial Атто?)................ 39 
Diviging Rod (lst) su. vests 10S dev Vs EIS 219 


oo 1 


Djalice, Veil of (see Veil of Djalice)............. 677 
Dolorous Decay (ӨШ). ........0 21 9253 219 
Doom Curse — Dwarf (5) .................. 219 
Doomhound — Halfling (3гӣ)................. 220 
Dóóomüde (ИЦ)... rS 220 
ПОЛСОН MI... orae oe а des 221 
Doubt (ev Leadership) 2-2-3... 773 
Dówse (О) о. 015s еги» жузе э» е EM S 749 
DRO Scala (Ub). «66 cins.2 +55» T С 221 
Dragonbane (6th). fais vice syste 790299 9$ 204 221 
Drain Undead (rev Undead Regeneration) ....... 669 
Draw Upon Holy Might (2п4)................. 222 
Dream Sight Qui)... cto dbs weed Pec Bee 222 
Dream Visions Gri)... sw oad ce eee 223 
Беная Decay: (Эш). узж»: sedeo uL 223 
РОБОВИ)... 55: ov NE 224 
OSTIO NU EO I TI M Qui 751 
Dry Spring (rev Create Spring) ........ sisse 161 
Deywood(O)....—.1 ае ra ае» бәй «эеле RET 753 
Dotistboist Rest (Znd). ..- ore ао RE 224 
риро (A0) ovis o veto vere eei E 224 
Dust Devil Gnd) «ove ОЛИ: 225 
Dust Shield — Old Empire (3гй)............... 225 
Dweomer Divination (7). ................... 225 
Dweomettlow (АШ). ..... в «ESTEE LAN 226 
Dying Curse — Old Empire (6th).............. 227 
E 

Batiy Anchor (2nd) |... da dew I Med M 228 
Earth Sense — Dwarf (3гй)................... 228 
Earth Walk — Dwarf (6th) ................... 228 
Earthénair td)... 2. еер 229 
Bátitenporf G6)... гале 229 
Бабине (4 0... оне 229 
Rattiquake (70) л. огеле A 230 
Earthshake* — Old Empire (5th) .............. 231 
Баас (60) —. 1... eee reete eee OR 231 
Hase Labor (308) „инанан о РИХ 232 
Bav Mab (Э)... ТЕТЕ ЧО 232 
УГ Ls vu Lex scena er 233 
Bbony Hand (1x6... ... ое EM RE 233 
Ebony Tesideils (50). .......... гез Seles 233 
Ecdysis — Dragon (2п4)..................... 234 
Rotódocstion ИР RESTE 234 

Edge of Arumdina — Gnome (2nd) ............ 234 
Бае РИШ О): uo enin иаа и саа су 753 
Bifervescemne 00d)... 2 mo uo Ae ЖАЛ. 235 
Efficacious Monster Ward (3rd) ............... 235 
Eilistraee's Moonfire (200) ................... 236 
105 Accounts Qni. ose eom EN 235 
(E'it Blessing Qnd). ........ 10-0 925. oe 236 
Eldath, Water of (see Water of Eldath)........... 691 
Eldath’s Tranquility (2nd) .................... 237 
Elder Bye — Drow (58)... 5... 2 1 222223 237 
Elemental Bonding: (18st) .........04. 1 5.2 237 
Elemental Breach (70) .. 1100201 a 238 


Elemental Control (4%)...................... 238 
Elemental Forbiddance (5#ћ).................. 238 
Elemental Protection (5th). ................... 239 
Elementa Shield (О): Loser rers e cts 753 
Elemental Swarm (О) о.е 1 ee wes 732 
КОЗЛА о, ПРОДРЕ 239 
ВЕЕ) ас. е ааа (ФИР 240 
ЕОС Con (OR... .2. mE 240 
Emotion Perception (2пй).................... 770 
TUNE ORE CDI) ea oos oer eso ae 241 
HDD (D. E roten л СГ DITE 241 
Enchant Phylactery (5)..................... 241 
Enchant Runestones — Dwarf (2nd)............ 242 
Fbhunt Stoncé (Н). Lee ea оион 242 
Eudless Dance (605) .........4 гыр 243 
е: ООРУ tr 244 
Endurance of Птаќет (4th) ................... 244 
Endure Heat/Endure Cold (181)................ 244 
Enduring Ward — Old Empire (6th)............ 245 
Energy Drain (rev Кеѕіоғаійоп)................ 500 
Enfeeble Water Creature 

(rev Enhance Water Сғеаіиғе)............... 246 
Enhance Blood Ability (2п4).................. 245 
Enhance Turning (2nd) ...............:....... 245 
Enhance Water Creature (4) ................. 246 
Enmeshment (6). .:....................... 246 
О РЕВИЗИИ dE E^ 247 
Entangle, Improved (see Sheela s entangle)...... . 540 
Entangle, Sheela 5 (see Sheela 5 entangle). . ...... 540 
Hatbiall And). соуле ev sale dius roD E, 247 
Enthrall — Shukenja (200) ................... 247 
БООН Ц) 4 nee eene etta 770 
Batropy Shield (ОВУ: ьон Ле 247 
Erik's Animal Compulsion (Q) ................ 733 
КОРНО (70)... сәк. rant og He A 248 
Puis Pene (ЭШ)... EN eee h s 248 
Eternal Sleep — Dragon (151)................. 249 
Ethereal Barrer (28d) >». 5... SER 249 
Тва nes nl). louis creer ems ed hasta 250 
Bihérwalk (OQ). cecva té ae a oss aie a ere 733 
Evade Truth (rev Detect Untruth) .............. 204 
Everbleeding Wounds 

(see Curse of the Everbleeding Wounds)... ... . 173 
Everchanging Self (6th). ............. eee 250 
Everfull Quiver — Elf (3rd) .................. 251 
ВОО УИ; енени 251 
E NE A О БИ 252 
Exalted Triad, Azuth s (see Azuth s Exalted Triad) . . . 49 
Excessive Indulgence (1st) ................... 252 
ЖГНЕ ОЕ. че» жасу EEE E o Da 253 
Exorcism — Savant (2пй).................... 253 
Extract Spirit — Shaman (4) ................ 253 
Extradimensional Detection (3гй).............. 253 
Extradimensional Manipulation (Sth) ........... 254 
Extradimensional Pocket (5th)................- 254 
Eye of Fire — Old Empire (3rd) ............... 255 


4 817 М. 


ee 


Eyes of the Undead (3гӣ)..................... 255 
F 
Pierio Fio (151) oen ene НАТЕ ts 257 
Faerie Flames — ЕҤ(5%)...........:......%. 257 
РИЙ Armor (ЭШ); ©...» classe 257 
Faith Arrow — Elf 2nd). .. .................. 258 
Faith Magic Zone (4) ...................... 258 
РИИ Mount (70). ....4541 юеш 258 
ЖАНЕ Wall (60))............<..... С 259 
False ЮКЕ (Б) ...-..22 44:226 e EYE EOS 259 
Fangs of Retribution (2пд).................... 260 
Fantastic Machine (605).  : 5! зу denen hex 260 
hi lel о сои 261 
Fatigue (rev Endurance) ..................... 244 
Roc GI)... 4 nde sen Mex vx mes Р Т 262 
Favor, Berronar 5 (see Berronar s Favor) ......... 61 
Favor. of Iimoter (3rd): 2754.48 ГУ 263 
Favor of Shaundakul (2nd) ................... 263 
Favor of the Goddess (2nd) ................... 264 
Favor of Pymora (2nd). ......... bide e aN 264 
Favor of Valkur (Sth) 34:65 csi ose 2 2299935 264 
Favor of Yathaghera (3rd) .,.................. 265 
Rene Contagion (Оу: si s e vM RARI 733 
Бо (К) ee ceo reat es ee 265 
Fedefensor, Azuth s (see Azuth 5 Fedefensor)....... 50 
Feetitiniud (605) с. 7 sessio es e melo eta 266 
Fols ПЕ). eoe o or тыы 266 
Feign Undead (408)... o ege. oie cer tt Ик 266 
Félibe Fori (70). . aise te oan va E er rE 267 
р ПОЙ ДЕРРИ swiss Si + ел Ae 267 
Fertilité MIB). E A ШӘ И 267 
Fertilize (aka Fertility). ........... ew eda ее» 267 
Rd Stee (О). .....„. 1% еа нй Mode a 754 
Bind Companion (ИШ). ~ isss Ие 268 
Find Drinkable Water (1st) ................... 268 
Ri Portal (Зд... «02 он... об 269 
Find Sustenance — Elf (150) .................. 269 
Rind ho Paar (60). ....... e Sort Merete 269 
Find the Path — Shukenja (6th) ............... 270 
Find Traps Quà)... eee ees 270 
Find Underground Water (see Find Water) ....... 270 
Fihd Water (Hl). eene ce Же ж 270 
Finger of Desth (7th). ........ аа: 271 
Fire Eyes of Gorm — Dwarf (4th). ............. 271 
Fit&df Pestice УЗОРУ А 271 
Foa Paget (44)... eese coca ret ье 271 
Fire Purge — Myrikan (1о31).................. 272 
Fire Quench (rev Fire 5їокт).................. 272 
Rus Seeds (6th)... cocos aeneo xor он 272 
НОЗИК). 2... еа от 272 
Рр. (280) 5... drca ИЛК de 2 ee es 273 
ВОК) 522. е еен Нак Ал 273 
е (in). ....,. (X oot S) OR ERO ae 274 
Firewied (58) 5... a сане гом 274 


Firing Frenzy, Azuth 5 (see Azuth s Firing Frenzy) . . . 50 


Fist, Ilmater s (see Ilmater 5 Fist) .............. 345 
НИКЕНИН (20) o. cuire nol EF е olg aie 274 
Fist of Gond (6t)... а ооган 275 
Rietoé Blade (2440)... . оао eese 215 
КИП Harvest ГИН), е 275 
Blame Shield (31d). .......5. агас 276 
Dima Spi ЎТ ТРЛР eo ре 276 
Pisis Walk (SH) чу з Eus ye RIS ео Б 28 276 
Непа (Оу: ЧЫЛ. 754 
Flesh to Stone (rev Stone to Flesh) ............. 601 
КО (Эй). „асе s Lama АЫ ded, Өй даб» 89 277 
Float (see Wateyfloal).. ... 122.592: C aide 695 
Flock of Birds — Old Empire (4th)............. 277 
Flowstone — Dwarf (5) .................... 271 
ElBeld (3th)... саз scr eo patur En 278 
Pos RUMOR) o. 5.5... „+ nro eR EE 279 
Ie CL SERT EPEE IT E YT TTE 279 
Foesigbt (009... 5. coe Pup v e € s Beer ote 280 
Footsore (ЕШ). деа ere (Sox NNI a 281 
Forbiddance (О) .......5 gas vanes vee 281 
Force Shapechange (6һ)..................... 282 
Force Werechange (1о51)...................... 282 
Fotceward Qd)... ecce о xu A wo dele 282 
КЕ ДАРОРИИ ИНЕ on 282 
Forever Minions (Sth) . „о. б а a 760 
Forge Fire (200)... т Б eet: A 283 
Forgotten Melody (5th) ..:..::......::......: 283 
FOREN OW. sco cance hes rnit ors 771 
Fortify (aka Fortify Неайпр).................. 284 
Fortify Healing* (4th) < 055. оен далее. 284 
Fortifying Stew (2nd) ....... ала. oan es 284 
Fortitude — Drow (2пй)..................... 285 
Fortitude, Natural (see Fortitude of Uthgar )...... 285 
Fortitude of Uthgar (Ist) ..................... 285 
КОЕ Bite (08) а see ow Ada oN 285 
Fostered Protection (3г0)..................... 286 
Pec Antion (ИШ). seo er etc BER hn 286 
FOGG WU ШАЙ), erue y ox spas à зА 286 
Frenzy of the Сен Qul)... 10 o 287 
ОСОН А МО E er ПЕЕ 749 
Ру Chest nd). <i. caus. isisccccszine e e 287 
Frost Breath (200) аен i vet ту. 287 
Host Fingers КИЙ) осо лэ ИЧ» ena 288 
Prost Whip (200) a oen e i DR Rw 288 
G 
Gaer, Cloak of (see Cloak of Саеғ)............. 124 
Gargauth, Call Upon (see Call Upon Gargauth) . . . . 95 
Gargauth, Mask of (see Mask of Gargauth) ...... 396 
Garments of Elvenkind — Elf (6th) ............ 297 
Е ро, ОИНИ. 297 
Gate (70). oie s 1% dS о Еа 297 
Gate of Doom)... =», иба бой 298 
Gaunadar, Mists of (see Mists of Gaunadar)..... . 416 
Gauntlet of Winds (4)...................... 298 
Gembomb — Gnome (3гй)................... 298 


2 818 M 


———————Á —— тишинин — ———— ш 


Genius у.с ооо doe ee S ISTE ZI 299 
УРИНА eM one 299 
Сї КИКИ). „аена олок 299 
Ghost Pipes Qni)... esos о ЛЕ UV v 300 
Giant Insect GRE). . ы-у асу оН 301 
Giant Spider — Drow (3rd). .................. 301 
Giantsize — Halfling (5һ)................... 302 
Giftof Speech ind) у... 2%... о os жеб бу 302 
Glass Sum (7B) е ене, 302 
Gloom —Sahuagin (2nd) .................... 303 
СТЮ ОИ)... oars 303 
Glow (nd). e ia arcane аини TA 303 
Glowglory — Dwarf (31d). . .................. 304 
Glyph of Revealing (200) .................... 304 
Glyph of Warding (310)... -c.a ә: гагы 305 
Glyph of Warding: Telatha (3гй)............... 305 
Goad of Misfortune (6th) .................... 306 
Golem (509)... асо кйш, АЙК КИЛ 306 
Gond, Fist of (see Fist of Gond) ............... 275 
Good Medicine (rev Bad Мейісіпе). ............. 52 
Good Weather (5tb). ........ eee anise DUE 6 307 
Góodbtery. Ond, 2.2 ese rore 308 
Gorm, Fire Eyes of (see Fire Eyes of Gorm) ...... 271 
Gorm, Sentry of (see Sentry of богт)........... 536 
Grace, Kelemvor s (see Kelemvor s Grace) ....... 364 
Grasedart Qn)... oor eMe e IR 308 
Gravity Variation (6). s< oie ri en ela 771 
Great Circle* (The) (6th). i. -> 5s ss oa ж ЧА. 308 
Greater Creature of Darkness (6th)............. 309 
Greater Guardian Seal (б@\)................... 310 
Greater Mantle of Mystra (бїһ)................ 310 
Greater Shield of Lathander (7th) .............. 311 
Greater Touchsickle (Sth) .................... 311 
Greater Vision — Savant (4th) ................ Зи 
Greed, Abbathor s (see Abbathor s Greed). . ....... 10 
Grobawood Dn. es ons enum e ert оа ИКИ 312 
Ground Tisce (40) o civ occ one te ov 312 
Охооо (Э), vie мәз» +» жал eov 313 
Group Mind (605)... с Slice e yer 313 
Guardian Hammer — Dwarf (4th). ............. 313 
Guardian Mantle — Dwarf (7). .............. 314 
Guidance (lost)... 1.224. qe оа 314 
Gall — Gnome (2nd) o's х0. зал. 315 
H 
Haela's Battle Blessing — Dwarf (2nd).......... 316 
Haelyn's Wisdom (О) ....................... 734 
Haeilstone (И. oco ceret за ete 316 
Hallucinatory Forest (4һ).................... 316 
Hamatree — БЇГ(5һ)....................... 317 
Hammer of Justice (5th) ..................... 318 
Hand Fire (see һапайїге)..................... 321 
Hand of Borogar — Dwarf (6th) . .............. 318 
Hand Of Fate (Ф)... os cerrar 319 
Hind. of Hoar (44h)... occ. 5:001 дай 05 319 
Hand of the Sorcerer-King (Ist) ............... 319 


819 


Наа Of Той (40): аа oe ew te sa 320 
Handearidie (390). 1.2.5 eden enmt des 320 
ое 5d ste scie Rein +» С. qe GER MS 321 
ИНЕ (Юел ue 751 
ос МЕН MERT inks АЗААР Ы а 321 
Nest Water G0). 3, <<. Рато 322 
Hann (ey Heal) «tai. ms Biases MANORS as s 324 
Harm Plants (rev Heal Plants) ................ 324 
Harm Trees (rev Heal Түееѕ) .................. 325 
ИИ or WAC TAD): 2 аас eux eir eT eres 322 
Hen CIS (I) ааа, оона ИЕ TN 760 
Hathor, Horns of (see Horns of Hathor) ......... 340 
Haunted Visions (310) .....—.. 1) ае 323 
Haunting Notes — Shaman (3rd) .............. 323 
FROM PV EET VO Reis Doin SHAE slain Єл 749 
HM BI гд ба Ere eS rtp SEEDS 324 
НӘШ Plauta (Ig) аеоси dos 324 
Heu Rast (О). суза edicts ажа бв ай; 754 
Heal Spirit — Shaman (200).................. 324 
Heal Trees Id)... cosas дезо» aves oct ARD 325 
Heading Hand (40) os ies oio M RSS 325 
Hedhng Rays (АШ)... aero docct Runs 325 
Health Blessing (О)... 734 
Hear Heartbeat Qnd. enr rein 325 
Heart Biot (ABl Леле Dy ye лае 326 
МАШ САЙ (90b) ега асноде 327 
Hedttof Toe (ГИН... chide spe айкел дай» 327 
Heditseecket (60)... алоб 327 
Ней Exhanstion id) «аади 327 
На Меш 200) 12: 3. 2208 ои, Pax e а 328 
Helm, Sentry of (see Sentry of Не!т)............ 536 
Helping Hand (35D ........£5 + itis. chat Dem 328 
Henley’s Digit of Disruption (7th).............. 329 
Hammes” Poast (Ө). с.е таи uec 329 
МИА). ке tn Ute n ЫГ s PE 331 
НӨ). ебри бн 331 
Hibernie SOE A ARETES A E A 331 
Hidden Hatred (rev Foesight) ................. 280 
Hide — Oracle (SO) ia .........5 pilates ras 332 
High Silt Tides (rev Silt Тїйез)................. 544 
Higher Consecration (6ћ).................... 332 
Highway (Q) cane. tees, оао saat 735 
Histchii Brew — Yuan-Ti (4) ................ 333 
Hoar, Hand of (see Hand of Hoar) ............. 319 
Hoars Revenance (66h) |... eee tes 333 
Mal AnmLOND. erue ox asin din tn er 333 
Hobt Mud (4890 15.5: supp hp lev NR +з 334 
Hold Person (uil) |. ones tae ens etwas T 334 
HOM Plant М)... э.» ж. э» рле, yrs eS 335 
Hold Poison (S00) soa oes eode P sua 335 
Hold Undead — Savant (3гй)................. 335 
Hold Wave (4B). «occ ә. BOs сайы жй v 336 
Holly Dat (0)... еза иди, tree RENS 754 
HUN Dt (Ithy.. е жж, ‚ээй 336 
Haly. FisbOnj). oe cia sig eas, sae РРА Т 336 
Hoy Might (Gb) 5.0.0 cuties. eosin ovis 337 


a анны" 


Hüly ЧИШ (Өй)... мәз a REIR eS 337 
Hob. Symbol: (280)... аго orco ISI 337 
Ноу Vesting (00h)... 0o eR ERU 338 
Hoy Wed (ОШ)... comer repete 339 
Home Dott (910). . .. oer ++ әс. rre sen 339 
Horn of Plenty — Halfling (4th). .............. 339 
Horns of Hathor — Old Empire (2nd). .......... 340 
Hovering Road (7) ... .. 0. 125 229.9999 340 
Humansize — Halfling (151).................. 340 
НИШУ (Q)... 1. eem truco vais ve RE 754 
Hopger (АШ)... ...... oso ruere ОАТ 341 
Hunt Nemesis — Barbarian (Ist) .............. 341 
Hurl Rock — Dwarf (200). ................... 341 
Hurl Thunderbolt (4th) .................... 342 
I 

е ООРУТАР ODO PTS 343 
Jos Spies (Эй)... 4; „жа iss done cuncdenes 343 
Io WORE (1й)....... roo О ОИ 343 
Ea (DI) УОЛТ А tan У 344 
ommation (ЭШ)... cuyos eo АИЫ ENSIS eX 344 
Ilosoty Artillery: (565). ........ о ЯБ 772 
Illusory Fortification (7th). ........... esee 772 
Ilmater, Endurance of (see Endurance of Ilmater) . . 244 
Ilmater, Favor of (see Favor of Ilmater) ......... 263 
Tnsters Fist (И) саги eT ene 345 
Image of the Sorcerer-Kings (4th). ............. 345 
Imago Interrogation (Q) ..................... 735 
Imbue Purpose (66h) . .........21: eroe 345 
Imbue Undead with Spell Ability (Sth).......... 346 
Imbue with Blood Ability (3гй)................ 346 
Imbue with Spell Ability (4Һ)................. 346 
Immobility, Azuth s (see Azuth s Immobility) ....... 50 
Immunity to Weapons (бїһ)................... 347 
Impart Knowledge (201)..................... 347 
Impeding Permission (Sth) ................... 348 
Impenetrable Falsehood (200)................. 348 
Impervious Sanctity of Mind (7th) ............. 349 
Inplore (rev Ablure)...- 5e esee a лиз 11 
Implosion/Inversion (Q) ..................... 135 
Impregnable Mind (Sth)........... 1s. 2 shies de 349 
Improved Entangle (aka Sheela’s Entangle) ...... 540 
Inanimate Servant (6th). . .................... 349 
Incarnation of Evil — Old Empire (Sth)......... 350 
Incas (Оу, оо: гә +». ке Sate ata UE РЕМ 751 
Infesintion (M). <...>» әз нә» зай, СЕЙТЕ 350 
Inflict Labor (rev Ease 1аЬо?)................. 232 
Inflict Scurvy (rev Cure $ситуу)................ 172 
ОНО (ЭМ)... +). >... eine rer meee 351 
Infravision, Shevarash 5 

(see Shevarash 5 Іпўтауіѕіоп). ............... 540 
Inheritance Assurance (4һ)................... 352 
АРРОС соо 352 
КОЮ... ае жезде, оное US 353 
Tuner Santon (70) аео Sonde PEN 353 
Inscribe (aka Inscribe Speech) ................ 353 


820 


Inscribe Speech — Old Empire (2nd) ........... 353 
Tüsect Host (LOH) sic ee eee eer rtt sme 761 
Tusect Plague СШ): irr аа ЕЕЕ 5 354 
ENEA OIG) e. orent 354 
Met n ALS RERO CO ECT кк DRE Eie Rus 354 


Intensification of Weather (aka Intensify Weather). . . 473 
Intensify Sensation (3rd) 
Intensify Weather (rev Protection from Weather) . . . 473 


Inteediotión (Оу: ео E eae 736 
Interruptable Light (4th) ..................... 356 
Intuition, Marthammor 5 

(see Marthammor 5 їтїийїоп)............... 395 
Inversion (see Implosion/Inversion, О) .......... 735 
Inverted Ethics (4th) ........................ 356 
Invisibility Purge* (3rd) ..................... 356 
Invisibility to Animals (181)................... 357 
Invisibility to Animals, 10' Radius (3rd). ........ 357 
Invisibility to Enemies (6th) .................. 357 
Invisibility to Spirits (3гй).................... 358 
Invisibility to Undead (151) ................... 358 
Hon Vigil (200) cise «ev eere tro teer T 358 
БОЕ (500175 онова гог 359 
Isis, Charm of (see Charm о{15їз).............. 114 
Isolate Teplár (60). 5. coner 359 
Istishia, Rites of (see Rites of Istishia). .. ........ 509 
ТЕШЕР Port (RUD, sooo atit ЧЕ. 7 360 
Techn Теа (70) ..5. 1... Vea sv 360 
Iyy Siege (00i). аа ees aleve olan с. деды: 360 

J 
Jaws of the Wolf (200)....................... 361 
Jergal's Mind Probe (5th) .................... 361 
Join with Astral Traveler (4)................. 361 
Journey 5 Malison (rev Journey's Orison) ........ 362 
Journey's Orison/Malison (18{)................ 362 
ТООС (О ео ооа eer eae 749 
Jungle Avatar (00). 2 ansa na о о sh ean 362 
K 

Kami Absorbtion (51ћ). ...................... 363 
Кате Curse (70). о an ev EUN 363 
Karma Sight — Vedic (2nd) .................. 364 
Karma Mask (rev Karma Sight). ............... 364 
Kapa B i ua ПО): 7. о ае ое nin она 364 
Keen Eye — Elf 2nd). ......... eee 364 
Kelemvort Grace (90:5... оло, 364 
Kiransalee s Song of Lament (aka Threnody) ..... 644 
Wins OF Shine ЭШ) ere ntn Rest 365 
Kiss of Torment (40)... 077 Ere ev 365 
Knight's Move (3rd) ........................ 366 
ЖИ Age Circes ога ЬО us Ж 366 
Know Alignment (2nd) ...................... 366 
Know Bloodime (130 45.5... 110293027 lek 366 
Ku CONG Sei eee nee Ree eMe 367 
Know Direction (Та) eo г оло др; 367 
Kw Paetion (180... 7.5.9: T TOV Oe soe 367 


b—————————————m di 


Know Ниту (180) 1.4... 2€ 49 20297 Senet 368 Lowaters Carcas Qnd) ......... eed. ан 383 
Know Intent — Savant (2пй).................. 368 Loving РИП (ОШ) s a d ecu LAN 383 
Know Language (2п0)...............:....::. 368 Lower Watee (4th) |... codec cr v VIE ee 383 
Know Motivation —Shukenja (2nd)............ 368 Heal Waste Ol)... voco. oS RES EA 384 
(see also, Empathy) DOING) ois. ye aa dc ксл A TASET 384 
Küow Time (ЫШ... 04а eae een 369 Lamas of Water (Ш) 835 254 асо ie 385 
xn LS E EE E УКУГУ: дул. 369 TAO LORY ERR CRT TT бе ©з» QUIT DES LA ODE 385 
Kriesha's Cursed Quest (Qon ss -oa a n S 736 
M 
L Mare oE Oko O Ios оок о 386 
Laerme's Emissary (О).................... 737 Mate of Xvit Qui)... 1 rr pond 386 
Lair Diviustiot (5) е 370 МО (UD. users icm rere rite eI DIES 386 
Land Legs (rev Sea Legs) .................. 529 МИЕ” (SUD... ху. ood PB SORS 387 
Land of Stability (Өш)... „ооох 370 Miüsic Cremer (180. г.г Rules 387 
Lathander, Boon of (see Boon of Lathander). . ... . . 84 МЕСТО): =з 0 de don e EE 388 
Lathander, Greater Shield of Magical Stade (1): uei eoe traten 389 
(see Greater Shield of Lathander).......... 311 Magical Tether (1st): 5...5... 6 eRe Re cele Bene 389 
Lathander, Shield of (see Shield of Lathander) . . . . 542 Magical Vestment (Згб)...................... 389 
Laughing Water (30d)... ау оа Honan дага 370 Magical Vestment — Shukenja (3rd)............ 389 
Leadership/Doubt (4Ф).................... 773 Magia Blade (4h) .........-.-. ecce .лезаз 389 
Leaf Ioto Dagger. (lat)... fee bis os ce Seka Bs 371 Mag ION) с. кзн жж» sms DNUS 390 
Legal Thoughts (6th)... reais Ee 372 Miügma Shield (Ф)... 391 
Lesser Guardian Hammer — Dwarf (3rd). ..... 372 Mim ТШЕ (7H) oreet tus 391 
Lesser Guardian Seal (4th) ................. 372 Mismelen (И) cod ors epis ЫИ v x ee e 391 
Lesser Spellsong — Drow (4th) ............. 373 Maintain (310), атое qose ores: 392 
Levitate — Shukenja (3rd) ................. 373 Major Curse (aka Bestow Major Curse) .......... 62 
Ute Drei Sedi. o5 сьс у 373 Major Curse — Old Empire (5th) .............. 392 
Life Steal — Savant (Sth) .................. 374 Major Weed (505). „а ax rese TIR Dew з» әз 392 
Те (90). лао о был. YARIS 374 МАЖЕНОВ, 5, сы E D E СР" 393 
Lift Doom (rev Doom Сиғзе)................ 219 Malediction (0): гур». еее уре et 749 
Dight Ia ooo ks cited swe sins ace te ae 374 Mantle of Baravar — Gnome (5th) ............. 393 
Lighten oad Qud) << sen han Л: 375 Mantle of Mystra (4th)... ...............4%.%+{ 393 
Lightning bsuce (40); г.а crea. Veni ie 375 Маву (ОМ)... шырак ыз t re ee 394 
Lightning Wate? (ЗҮЙ)... 376 Mark of Brotherhood — Dwarf (2nd)........... 394 
Line of Destruction (rev Line of Protection) ...... 376 Mark of the Hunted (6ћ)..................... 395 
Line of Protection* (Згӣ)................... 376 МАРИН (О)... ат а Иа А» 754 
Lions Claws (Qu). ....... 00 Me ЛЕНТ: 377 Marthammor's Intuition — Dwarf (2nd) . ........ 395 
Liontieart Qiu .. гое 371 Marthammor's Thunderbolts — Dwarf (3rd)... . . . 395 
Listening Shadow (3г0).................... 377 Mask Emotion (rev Empathy) ................. 241 
Live FREES EE, Meme ЕТ. 754 Milk of Gagsuth Qu... 2 cee 396 
ИБО uuo E rud Ut ERE 378 Maskstone — Dwarf (200) ................... 397 
Living Wand (50): сасе гае 379 о, odes RUS 397 
Lid Lite od)... koe ccs ове TEE 379 Measure Cinnabryl (1st)..........-. eere ж. 398 
Lizard to Log (rev Log to Lizard)... <... ss 381 Mebhaighl Touch (0) ....................... 737 
Locate Animal (see Locate Animals or Plants) ....380 Medion (О)... „ео cei xxi Е STARR 751 
Locate Animal Follower — Ranger (2nd) ...... 379 MEG (руа моо аад n a ANB 22. 3398 
Locate Animals or Plants (15ї)............... 380 Meld into Stone (3rd). ......« аео 399 
Loone Object Qul). ... Sacked on 380 Meld of Lolth — Drow (6ћ).................. 399 
Locate Plant (see Locate Animals or Plants)... . . . 380 Melisander's Harp (5%). ..................... 399 
Locate Spirit Animal (4). ................. 380 Mémóocy (ЫБ)... es ега vc a NN 400 
Log of Everburning (151)................... 381 Memory Read — Savant (3rd) ................ 401 
Log To Lizard Ау: сосен Re 381 Métnory Wink (ЭӉ): 004 dc eats 401 
Lolth, Meld of (see Meld of Lolth)............ 399 Mend Limb (rev Break ИтЬ)................... 85 
Longesii OID еол CHEN 382 Mending — Dwarf (1st) ..................... 402 
Lose the Path (rev Find the Path) ............ 269 Mental Domination (4һ)..................... 402 
ПОБ ВИБО)... ааа он 382 Маша Browess Grd)- i Й ал б 403 


- 821 Ns 


Анна ран раар ee 


Mental Strength (5ш)... ....... 29.5 2v 403 
Mental Weakness (rev Mental Strength). ......... 403 
Merchant's Glamer — Dwarf (2nd)............. 403 
Merciful Shadows (1st) ............2......:.. 403 
Merciful Touch — Elf (3rd). .................. 404 
Merge with Nature (6th) ..................... 404 
Message Mole (Л) ... 5 ec eres vie x ve RE 404 
МООН Ond). Luce cedet ee o nece recu 405 
Metal and Mineral Detection 

(see Detect Metal and Minerals)............. 201 
Metal Shape — Dwarf (3rd) .................. 405 
Metal Skin (65b)... corres E 406 
Meteors of Celestian (4һ).................... 406 
Might OF Mystra(50) oos c ҮК ы 406 
Might of the Sorcerer-Kings (2nd) ............. 406 
Ма Cloak (31d). 2... i aoaaa А 407 
Mind Probe, Jergal s 

(see Jergal s Mind РгоЬе).................. 361 
Miüd Read (20d). аал 407 
Mindkiller (7)... еее аа Ет 407 
МИК (QY occa eR асо РИД 738 
МИНЕ (500)... еен Б 408 
МЕКНИ)... СЕЧЕ. M 409 
Mindtouch — Drow (2nd). ................... 411 
Minor Curse (aka Bestow Minor Curse) .......... 64 
Minor Ward (48): 13 эсин. тай» eov 411 
Minor Wealthtwist (5th) .................:... 411 
Mirage — Old Empire (4th) .................. 412 
Mirage of Despair (4Һ)...................... 412 
Mirror Vestments (3rd) ...................... 413 
Miscest Magic (3rd). 42.9000 eT. cem 413 
Mite ӨШ)... 5...5. ec e oT QE DIM 413 
Myifortune (505)... ао 414 
Migenig Word (уол. оого, 414 
Mist of the Goddess (70) .................... 414 
Mistake — Gnome (151) ..................... 415 
Mistaken Missive (18) 41... 20500 гиц 415 
Mists of Ghaunadaur — Drow (3rd)............ 416 
Moander, Seed of (see Seed of Moander)......... 513 
Modify Memory (4th) ....................... 416 
Mold Touch (ad) ........ 12092 2220915, 5. 8 417 
Mount АД)... Ja cas dr ee 417 
Moment Reading (3rd) ...................... 418 
Monster Mount (0)... .....„ 2 UIN Л Дл 418 
Monstrous Illusion (4th) ..................... 419 
Moon Blade Gul)... sa cease ъезд» айыы 419 
Moon Patt (ЭШ)... snc о МЫ estan 420 
Moon Rising (АШ)... ..... жил ЧЛ. aes 420 
Moin Shield (2nd): «. «0:56 ees Io Е-Е 420 
Motubtsn GEO... vro „Йә ame 421 
Moonbeam — Cerilia (15ї)................... 422 
Moonbow — Elf (4th). ....................:. 422 
Moonbridge — Elf (4th) ..................... 422 
Moondance* — Drow (2пй).................. 423 
Moonfire (50): 2... ИИ Не ЧН ШЕ 423 


Moonfire, Elistraee s (see Elistraee s Moonfire) ... 236 


822 


Moonshaft (aka Moonbow) ................... 422 
Моб (ОН): ee eee Фм. anette 423 
Mó6nweb (ЭШ) 2... oec ald LU ed eunte 424 
Morale (1st)... 5,0 о: P s e Ma 773 
Morningglow (aka Glyph of Warding: Telatha) . . . . 305 
Mortal Snare — Shaman (6th) ................ 425 
MON Skull (Ores ses bic Bole MIS n e REN 425 
Motes of Moonlight — Elf (181) ............... 426 
Mother Lode — Dwarf (5{һ).................. 426 
Mountainous Barrier (9һ).................... 762 
Molle О): 2 E E A TEA E S Й 751 
Muddy Water (rev Clear Ишет)................ 122 
Müll (5th). ин ео oo IRIS 427 
Multiple Message Mote (4th) ................. 427 
Murk — Sahuagin (4th) ..................... 428 
Music of the Spheres (200) ................... 428 
Wipes Lani (З) іно ео eme 429 
Mystic Transfer Qui) e лое воло, оа 429 
Mystra, Greater Mantle of 

(see Greater Mantle of Муѕіға). ............. 310 
Mystra, Mantle of (see Mantle of Муѕіға)........ 393 
Mystra, Might of (see Might of Mystra).......... 406 

N 

МИК nd). end vec CES ern 431 
Natural Attunement (200) .................... 431 
МИША Forütude. 1. oorr ores Sau Vae 863 
Мешеу Cham (50)... os... ips еее steeds 431 
Nature's Eyes — Gnome (2п4)................ 431 
Nectar (Iufji. des ыле A Уби 432 
NésdieMor ес vais som odio ев АУЫ 432 
Negative Plane Protection (3rd)................ 432 


Nephthys, Contract of (see Contract of Nephthys). . . 144 


Netitralize Poison (4th) ......... eode у 2. 433 
Nightmare (rev Dream Ёїзїоп)................. 223 
Nobanion, Pride of (see Pride of Nobanion) . . . . . . 457 
Nurture — Old Empire (200) ................. 433 
ИЮНУ Beauty: (70). 2.2.22. еа ои 434 
о 

ОББ (ИУ... осон Meer 435 
Oars to Snakes (4th) ......................., 435 
OUh ЭШ). 2224 sre ЕРНИН т РАШ. 436 
Oathbinding (aka Seal of Cyrrollalle)........... 529 
Obscure Alignment — Shukenja 

(rev Know Alignment) ......00 00006 c eee 366 
Obscure Animal Follower 

(rev Locate Animal Follower) ............... 379 
Obscure Object (rev Locate Object) ............ 380 
OGiscurement nd)... cereos 436 
Odo, Mace of (see Mace of Ойо)............... 386 
Oil Bray Gn) с esse эз сз NT ES: 436 
Qui — Vedió(120 о н. 437 
ОАЕ eeu У.т» E 437 
Omen — Old Empire (2п0)................... 438 
ӨӨК... дф...» 438 


Omen П (4th) ........ Piae V a d eS tae EQ 438 
TEED cs coca acts erecto qe t P 439 
Oniniscient Eye (4th). .......- eee en ren 439 
Oris (IU oculo raeTre erre Y VERA 439 
Ottima (0)... ere И 440 
Otberworld (66b) о... НР roS 441 
Ох бИ (Э) оосо e i аИЯ 441 
Р 
Peo dE |) pee К КГК СКОТ СК 442 
Page Guardian (50b). ... „о.е ИД 442 
PRESB (О) uror irse Warhead Т. 749 
Part Watch (ФИ)... экы. осоро cane А RS 442 
РОЛ Pant(900)..... әле ез5 EE ЛОН 443 
Pass without Notice (2пй).................... 443 
Pass without Trace (190), .....;: 9.445. holes 08 444 
Pass without Trace, 10' Radius (3rd)............ 444 
Passoge (йй) ...... eco ое 444 
Passwob АШ) э... „.— вне PETERET 444 
Penetrate Cosmic Ignorance — Vedic (7th)....... 445 
Penetrate Disguise (1051)..................... 445 
Penetrate Disguise (4һ)...................... 445 
Perfect Perception — Shaman (4th). ............ 445 
Permanency Prayer (7). .................0.. 446 
Permanent Lure (6th). coors essor i aan 446 
Personal Reading (1st). ....;.› .... a REE 447 
PI(O): rior neck rro pott MIO TONS 755 
Petiion Оу ооа оо ЕТО 749 
Petrification (aka Petrify Wood). ...........:... 447 
Ру Wood (190) 70:00. ets e 447 
Phantom Plow (310): ....... иу Seas oes S 447 
Physical Mirror (6Ш). .... 5.» eee etd 448 
Pillar of Borogar — Dwarf (4th) ............... 448 
Pixie Dust — Elf (Sth) .............. nnl 449 
Plague (4th). ............ фей dt 449 
Pingus Curse (4di). ... iis. vee Hi ILI 449 
Planar Опе (О)... 50:2 05 SUR 739 
Planar Vassal (LOM). оо tare IS 762 
Plane Shift (SI) ordo er ere ЛӘ 450 
Plane Shift — Shukenja (5) ................. 451 
Plant Doar (44). с Ве pale eee 451 
Plant Growth (310). 2: „әри: 451 
Past Laon)... os os оороо ко РОСИИ 452 
Plant Renewal (200) ...2.... 4 ТОЕТ 452 
Phinge (rev Flont) oov dt 277 
Pocket Dimension (9097 . до; зз. n 763 
Poison (rev Neutralize Роїзоп)................. 433 
Poison Touch (2nd) ...... Site era ene ГАЛ. д 452 
Polish (Q4 2:35.22 pas line comets 751 
Polymorph Plant (370).....................:; 453 
Polymorph Self (4th). ..............:. eee 453 
Pool of Deeds — Vedic (5th). ................. 454 
Port, [stishia 5 (see Istishias Port). ............. 360 
hor 1202-7 Ж ны ЖИНИНЕ. г. 454 
Póssess (О). БИИ 455 
Possess Animal (300): <<. 3 200 290 s 455 


РЕ (20D) es cos srs Seed aloe TSR ДН 455 
Piecipitition (1st). Adie «veo (es 9.5 456 
Predict Weather (Ist).........000eeceeeeeeeus 456 
Prepare Enchantment (5th) ................... 456 
Preservebos (Qu) ified nisi ES vain T 739 
Preserve (Ө) ice Ies ier THES 750 
Pressure Resistance (2п@) .................... 457 

Prevent Wood Rot (rev Wood Rot) 
Pride of Nobanion (4th). ..................... 457 
Pricst Lack (ау уе ce SUN Pueden 457 
Probability Control (4һ)..................... 458 
Probe Enemies — ЕЇЄ(3гй)................... 458 
Probing Arm (58)... . vik е eres 458 
РИШ (O) ЗРИВУ еа рса т oes 755 
BPiodace Pie (И) гое е 459 
Produce Flame (204). 55. 0n 4 Tie 459 
Profince lo (50) 552. Eoo HIPS 460 
Prolific Forestation (10#).................... 764 
Prolific Vegetation (9th) .............:....... 764 
Proof Against Undeath (Ist) .................. 460 
Protection from Acid 

(aka Resist Acid and Corrosion) ...........-+ 498 


Protection from Air Elementals 

(see Protection from Elementals, 10’ Radius) . . . 465 
Protection from Aging — Elf (2nd). ............ 461 
Protection from All Elementals 

(see Protection from Elementals, 10’ Radius) . . . 465 
Protection from All Lycanthropes (see Protection 


from Lycanthropes, 10° Radius) ............. 468 
Protection from All Traps 

(see Protection from Traps, 5' Radius) ........ 472 
Protection from All Undead 

(see Protection from Undead, 5' Radius) ...... 472 
Protection from Amorphs (3г0)................ 461 
Protection from Animals (2nd) ................ 462 
Protection from Breath Меаропѕ............... 462 
Protection from Chaos (18ї)......:............ 462 
Protection from Charm (2nd) ................. 462 
Protection from Cold (see Resist Fire/Cold) . . .... 498 
Protection from Cold (3г0й).................... 463 
Protection from Corrosives 

(see Resist Acid and Corrosion) ............. 498 
Protection from Death (71ћ)................... 463 
Protection from Demons 

(see Protection from Fiends, 10’ Radius) ...... 466 
Protection from Devils 

(see Protection from Fiends, 10' Radius) ...... 466 
Protection from Dragon Вгеаїһ................ 464 
Protection from Earth (379)................... 464 
Protection from Earth Elementals 

(see Protection from Elementals, 10’ Radius) . . . 465 
Protection from Electricity (4th) ............... 464 
Protection from Electricity 

(see also, Protection from Lightning) ......... 468 
Protection from Electricity, 10' Radius (4th). . .. . . 464 
Protection from Elementals, 10' Radius (4th) , . . . . 464 


A 823 4 


eee ЫШ 


Protection from Energy Drain 

(see Negative Plane Protection) ............. 432 
Protection from Evil (1st) ........ cone res 465 
Protection from Evil, 10' Radius (4th) .......... 466 
Protection from Fiends (see Protection from Evil). . . 465 
Protection from Fiends, 10’ Radius (Sth)......... 466 
Protection from Fire (see Resist Fire/Cold)....... 498 
Protection from Fire (3гй).................... 467 


Protection from Fire Elementals 

(see Protection from Elementals, 10' Radius). . . 465 
Protection from Gas, 5' Radius (4th)............ 467 
Protection from Good (rev Protection from Evil). . . 465 
Protection from Good, 10’ Radius 


(rev Protection from Evil, 10' Radius)......... 466 
Protection from Insects (3гй).................. 468 
Protection from Lightning (4Һ)................ 468 
Protection from Lycanthropes, 10' Radius (4th) . . . 468 
Protection from Magic, 5' Каййиз.............. 468 

(not a spell) 

Protection from Misfortune (4һ)............... 469 
Protection from Orisons (2пй)................. 469 
Protection from Petrification, 10' Radius (Sth)... . 469 
Protection from Plants (see Anti-Plant Shell) ...... 38 
Protection from Poison 


(see Slow Poison and Neutralize Poison). . . 550, 433 
Protection from Possession 


(see Protection from Еуй).................. 465 
Protection from Prime (180)................... 470 
Protection from Prime, 10' Radius (4th)......... 470 
Protection from Scorpions (2nd)............... 471 
Protection from Serpents — Shaman (2nd). . ..... 471 
Protection from Shapechangers, 10' Radius (see 

Protection from Lycanthropes, 10' Radius). . . . 468 
Protection from Silver (1st)... ................ 471 


Protection from Specific Elementals, 108 Radius 

(see Protection from Elementals 108 Radius) . . . 465 
Protection from Specific Lycanthropes, 10” Radius 

(see Protection from Lycanthropes 10" Radius). . 468 
Protection from Specific Undead, 5' Radius 


(see Protection from Undead 5' Radius) . . . .... 472 
Protection from Spirits (2пй).................. 472 
Protection from Traps, 5' Radius (4th) .......... 472 
Protection from Undead, 5' Radius (4th). ........ 472 


Protection from Water Elementals 
(see Protection from Elementals, 10' Radius). . . 465 


Protection from Weather (4Һ)................. 473 
Protection from Winds (Згӣ).................. 473 
Psionic Barrier (4th) ........ ecco 473 
Psychic Immolation (3rd) .................... 474 
Psychic Impressions — Savant (4th). ........... 474 
Pufiball (ist); 40:5. . гган mener he 474 
Purify Food & Drink (151).................... 475 
Parity: Sof (18)... ээл» atom eri 475 
Purify Water — Druid (15ї)................... 475 
Putrefy Food & Drink 

(rev Purify Food & ОтїпК)................... 475 


2 824 M 


Poroteclinioe (ЗЕЦ) аа 6e tien ESPERE 475 
Q 
(res (OD) ЗЕТИ АТТОО АТАКИ АР S 750 
Quench Fire (rev Produce Гіғе)................ 459 
Quench the Spirit (60) .......... salads cleo 477 
Que SED 53: у ие, эз ce os seen pete he 477 
Quekprowth (00). voe oie езж» eels 478 
R 
ПО) ааа Үү" ЕР 479 
GMI (908). ane rE йкы аео ое 479 
Rainbow (1081)... ener ears 479 
Ried ос РОНСАР ees 480 
Rabe Dead CSB) |... reete гг гъ 480 
Raise Water (rev Lower Ийїе?)................. 383 
ЕОР EIS LE EE 774 
Random Causality (3rd) ..................... 480 
ОСОТ ае веко tria Sate 481 
Ropportédib) o doloe жааны Pere дб 481 
Rate (3d)... cvusneesessostem I S 481 
Rapture of the Deep (6th) ......... го. 482 
Read Baned Letters (lost) .................... 482 
Read Language (10)... Le die ns em nr $us 482 
ААО РР. ТУРАТ 483 
Reaving Blades (40)... 0 3 ea ias 483 
Recall Spell — Savant (6th) .................. 483 
О с азем бкл» ыд e ТУ 484 
Recover Trail — Ranger (15ї)................. 484 
Reduce Animal (rev Animal Growth) ............. 29 
Reed Staff — Halfling (151)................... 484 
ЖАШ) „аанак sene е elt 8 485 
Reflecting Pool (40)... аа на nes 485 
Regenerate: (Vi) ааг Е ро 485 
Regenerate Critical Wounds (Sth) .............. 486 
Regenerate Light Wounds (181)................ 486 
Regenerate Serious Wounds (4th) .............. 487 
Regenerative Heal (7th). ........... ас. 487 
ОСНО (IW)... suse еа sre là dia 488 
Reincarnate — Shukenja (7th) ................ 488 
Reincarnation Sight — Vedic (6th) ............. 489 
Reinvigorate Nature — Shaman (6th)........... 489 
Réjuvenáte. (40) 1с. аан BRUT ale 491 
Паи (ЭШ)... «зы» 0 a» ага 491 
Remote МЫШ) foi hiss eux auri ara p Ио ler HS 492 
Remove Crypt Ward (rev Crypt Ward) ........... 167 
Remove Curse ГЭ)... . shee шаи со 492 
Remove Fear (180) .......co eee edes clim ar 493 


Remove Major Curse (rev Bestow Major Curse). . . . 62 
Remove Minor Curse (rev Bestow Minor Curse). . . . 64 


REVO Pet (Oy. у сазе ей 751 
Reshove Paralysis (ul) .. 2... eec 493 
Remove Paralysis — Shukenja (3rd)............ 493 
Retding GU... voee ss vcore anak eens 493 
Renew Deposit — Dwarf (7th) ................ 494 
Renewed Ability (2nd). ....... 2 deo dea Bie 494 


Renewed Youth — ЕІ (Зта). .................. 495 
Renewed Youth, Resplendence of 

(see Resplendence of Renewed Youth)......... 499 
Repair (see Repair Нет)..................... 496 
Repeit Injury D) esien aaaea 495 
Ripalta iaa ana e a 496 
Repeat Action (5#)......................::. 496 
Repel Insects (О). 22... onenarena eremo nte 755 
Repel Insects (АФ)... .....-5-»5 5 йене 497 
Repulsion — Drow (7һ)..................... 497 
Request Qnd). .....-. onte Reale Sweet 497 
BRITE EETRI ы LES YI ILLOD 498 
Resist Acid and Corrosion (2п0)............... 498 
Resist Fire/Resist Cold (2пй).................. 498 
Resist Injury (310... 2. Ее ЫЗ 499 
Resist Magic — Old Empire (бїһ).............. 499 
Resist Tomine: (2090)... ус 499 
Resplendence of Renewed Youth (7th). .......... 499 
Rest, Dumathoin 5 (see Dumathoin Rest) ....... 224 
Restful Sleep (0). ........ 1 2001, ауе 752 
Restoration (ИШ)... ааа КЕ 500 
Restore Bloodline (6їһ)...................... 500 
Restore Rarth (4th) «is psi. ә cates 501 
Restore Rune (б) о sls аео е 501 
Кайе ИНС): „а 502 
Restore Strength (2nd). ....................-. 502 
Restore Youth (rev Age Суейїште)................ 15 
Resarrection (Ву: о.е ое 502 
Resurrection —Shukenja (7th) ................ 503 
Resuscitation, Avani 5 (see Avani s Resuscitation). . . . 730 
КИЗ (Б). >... visas 9 O O 503 
Return to Earth (4th) «os ....5. а. 503 
RANGED | «55-3 55s E ES A RETE 503 
Reveal Forest (rev Hallucinatory Forest). ........ 316 
Reveal Stone (rev Maskstone) ................. 397 
Révelation (Ў... ес КЕ 504 
КЕКИ): аьр К ТАЛКУ OMS 739 
Revealing Dust (rev Pixie Dust) ............... 449 
Revenance — Drow (2М0)..................›. 504 
Revenance, Hoar s (see Hoar 5 Revenance). ...... 333 
Reverse Bane (rev Вапе)...................... 53 
Reverse Fossilization (3rd) ................:.:. 505 
Reverse Time (б)... „озан 505 
Reverse Winds (800)... E er RP E, 765 
Reversion (О)... 022 c ak шо ORO ES 740 
Revitalize Animal — Ranger (15!).............. 505 
Revive Spirit — Shaman (3rd) ................ 506 
Rewind (M) 2.5... exonerat NIS Mitis 506 


Rhondang, Shades of (see Shades of Rhondang) . . . 


ЫИ (ӨШ)... sans ёк» E ИС o 766 
Right of Might — Old Empire (5th) ............ 507 
Righteous Wrath (of the Faithful) (Sth).......... 774 
Rigid Thinking (3150) ..... .... 09/7 09295 0 2212 507 
Ring of Hands* (151)........................ 508 
Ring of Woe (rev Ring of Напаӣз)............... 508 
Ripen (Ө)... „фе шы ааа eee NETUS 755 


825 


С) 2а о а УК ТТ 508 
КО РЈ): еол еен абе ER 508 
от АЗЕ ЯАНА ЗЕ 5993 509 
Rites of tinis COND) aio oor edu bo «ә 509 
Ritual of Transference* (7Ь).................. 510 
Roar of thie King (Д)... v RR WIE qus 511 
Rolle of Healing (О), „о аль roit аны» 740 
Rock Shield (rev Hurl Rock) .................. 341 
Rockboret (200): Lc ores eese e aus IBS ra 511 
Roots of the Assassin (6th) ................... 512 
ОИС Y d 512 
Rieter Canad) зз» curo uo РАЗА 513 
Rossius QD. o eee seen reitera eee 513 
НЕТУ (ЭШ)... coe sudo mus ШИЛЕП INE 513 
Ruby Axe — Gnome (3rd) ................... 514 
Rune Chant — Dwarf (7{һ)................... 514 
Rune of Impregnable Defense* (7)............ 514 
Rune of Power — Dwarf (5(һ)................. 515 
S 
Sabrent Guanes G aara a AUR a 518 
SRE EXE CTs: И: ис ЗЕКЕ 518 
Sacred Strike (4th) член cvs iere eva uli 518 
Saorosanct (709): sses e tms Дое оаа 519 
Sanctified Marker (4th). ..................... 519 
Зин” (2nd). 2. 5:0 Sosa ee Deseos ERIS 520 
Sanctify Crypt — Old Empire (7th) ............ 521 
Sanctify Ghi — Vedic (181) ................... 521 
Sanctify Sacred Site (70) т.л 521 
Sanctify Spirit Host — Old Empire (6th) ........ 522 
ау (196), Чем» co e eta deem 522 
Sud Blade (Оу are e$, Noe eo йылын Rea 523 
Sand Spray (300)... аи 523 
Sand Warriors (40h) 5.03360 as. cae aes 523 
Sani. of Tone с. 524 
Sundetoris (50/5 АШУ» UA ee eif OR ек 524 
ОГАЕ У ERIS 525 
Sarcophagus of Death — Old Empire (3rd). ...... 526 
Scent of Vengeance (2пй).................... 526 
Seirocco (aka Sirocco)... ae ce se rS eg 547 
Scorching Rays (rev Healing Rays) .........++++ 325 
Scope СИН). ааа санай 526 
Scovring Wind (5th) ........... creber 527 
Screaming Skull (5th) ....................... 528 
SOMO Cel) РЗА АНИР 528 
Sorel (АШ)... узбек enr Doi reo дә 528 
Sec Fori (400. с cline e meses АЕА 528 
Ben Toga (180). онаа оо ls P ARTS lal 529 
SHMEMOURE (GR. suos esr racc MET 529 
Seal of Cyrrollalee — Halfling (2nd) ........... 529 
Seal of Destiny (6th)... serrer eter 530 
Searing Orb, 5015 (see Sol s Searing Orb) ....... 558 
Seating Song (46b)... ceno rud 530 
ОЛИ IR) eese crm einige РОТЕ А 530 
See All Faces — Vedic (4) .................. 531 
Seed of Moander (50). .............:....0... 531 


N 


Seedstorm — Old Empire (5һ)................ 532 
SOCK (ӨШ)... +; узел» „сс АЙТ SOROR Y 533 
Seek: Bternal Rest (45)... ....... 200024 208 533 
Seeking — Elf Qnd) ........... оа 534 
Seeking Mote (14)... гога: 534 
Seeking (96)... 2... 20 9 000: 534 
Segojan's Armor — Gnome (1st). .............. 535 
Selective Passage (rev Tanglefoot).............. 775 
Sese Directions: (199 оон О 535 
Sense Nature of Spirit — Shaman 

(ros Sense SOP). НН ИР с 536 
Sense Spirit — Shaman (200)................. 536 
Sentryiof Helm (ist) 5.5.5... аео rU 536 
Séntiy of Gor (180... ezaeere rn a 536 
Sera Blessed Luck (Q) v; Аг. гуле: 740 
Sever the Silver Cord (Sth) ................... 536 
Shades of Rhondang — Gnome (4th) ........... 537 
Shadow Engines (70i) . e re ia 0.2: ЛАЙЫ 775 
Shadow Sword Gra) 2 ior daz deest 537 
БББС (Sm е anise ce cova 537 
Shape Wood (31d) «o's 66s ooo ueni NU 538 
Shar, Whip of (see Whip of Ѕһағ)............... 707 
Sharess, Kiss of (see Kiss of Sharess) ........... 365 
Shark Charm — Sea Elf (2nd). ................ 539 
Sbuplesf (Ой)... va voco 539 
Shatter Circle — Old Empire (5th) ............. 539 
Shatter Stone and Metal (5th) ................. 540 
Shaundakul, Favor of 

(see Favor of Shaundakul) ................. 263 
Sheela's Entangle — Halfling (2nd) ............ 540 
ШЕШЕ (07. neice Teen ers er QS 540 
Shevarash's Infravision — Elf (3rd). ............ 540 
Shield of Lathander (5). .. ............. 2s. 542 
Shield of the Archons (7) ................... 541 
Shield of the God (5th) ...........1 ЛЫ 541 
Shield of the Tanar vi (rev Shield of the Archons). . . . 541 
SUR Glyph Gn... <x diver ул. ccd eames 542 
Shillelagh (1s... 27.20.5512 Quee 2 542 
SMEG (ЧО)... они ОЛАИ: 752 
Ship of Teats (Q). 2а: О 741 
Ship Shield (Sth)... i ee cre LUE SUE 543 
SHobtisig: Stars (Оу, irin 741 
Slirieking Walls (5th): ......›. ...... ООЛ 543 
Shrink Insect (rev Giant тзесї)................ 301 
Siege WH (О) 5.5. „>ы, cee a woo maidens 741 
Silence, 15” Radius 2nd). .......... е3 543 
Sut Budge (ПОШ). „+. ее E E ETUR 766 
Sil Cyclone (709). оа eres ook een 544 
SIUBdes (00). еван se ДО 544 
Silver Tongue and Starry Eyes (6th) ............ 544 
Silverbeard — Dwarf (Ist) ................... 545 
Singing Stons (ФИ); ие 545 
Siti into Esth (50)... ro DEDERE 546 
Site Song (0) 5 viens cdc anos a E 546 
Siocop (ТӨ)... >...» eo Mae В 547 
Sixth Sense — BE (IW): ELIT VK 547 


826 


Skeletal Servant (1g). ......... Т 547 
Skip. Day (00). ais о de oS ned oan 548 
SE Ord) o5. or Oe SSS 548 
Skull of Secrets (40)... 100 oso 549 
Stave Sont Qud). a. ee oco LN у 549 
Slay Living (rev Raise Реай).................. 480 
Sleep of Dragons (65h) 2......... o ies 550 
Sieg: Shadow (Sth) з aoo cate eae 550 
SUN Bonn CORON 2. arro errore creen ТЕ 550 
Slow Poison (200) i.e i SE ou aid 550 
Slow Poison — Shukenja (2nd). ............... 551 
SION MR ARI) «oo alot he vido d's Ge wares УГ... 551 
Sinite (б)... croceo ce iP ӘЛ 551 
БОН (АШ). уз rums SENSUS 552 
See Bridge (О oo ss vx з) ode ees UMS $52 
Smoke Ghost (4th) 15:559: Лоса 552 
ИШЛЕ (OY. 2. ‚+55, xh fa 0a See E E: 755 
Shske Barrier (44) 257.7 оооу Ae 553 
Shale Charm Qn - 609v vov PIETRA. 553 
Snake Charm (of Sseth) (Ist) ................. 554 
Не Sin (АШ. а ао о Е 554 
Snake Summoning (2п)..................... 555 
Snakes to Oars (rev Oars to $паКез)............ 435 
Snakes to Sticks (rev Sticks to $паКез)........... 597 
рО): „онан Охе 555 
Ке Bo аео ое асаа, 555 
Snow: Boots (190 5. ла Сло ЖЕ Lee 556 
SHOW HONS (S0 V. э. euni sis «э» ЛЕНИ 556 
Soften Earth and Stone — Gnome, 

Halfling (200) л iai 2237 vo oret 557 
SORDE (AUD s osteo os: 2.5 ase reco ME же 557 
Sol's Searing Orb (6th) . ........: 0 ulin en 558 
Sous СИУ oa cies Дә. ео САБЫМ 558 
Solitude — Elf ИШ олега Ли оле. 1... 559 
Song of Compulsion (3гй).................... 559 
Song OE Heabng (5). е еее e ОЛЫ 560 
Soothe (40h): а ааа IER RA 560 
Soul Forge — Dwarf (5їһ).................... 560 
Soultheft — Drow (6@).....................: 561 
Spacewarp (С?Ш), alten s RANK рыи 562 
Spark of Blinding (1st) .............. celos. 562 
Sparkling Sword — Halfling (2nd) . ............ 563 
Spawn of Tiamat (6ћ)....................... 563 
Spawn Song — Giant (4) ................... 563 
Speak with Ancient Dead — Elf (5#ћ)........... 564 
Speak with Animals (2п0).................... 564 
Speak with Astral Traveler (Ist) ............... 565 
Speak with Avians — Elf (1st) ..........:..... 565 
Speak with Birds — Old Empire (Ist)........... 565 
Spesk with Dead (3t1d).............. НК 565 
Speak with Dead — Shukenja (3rd) ............ 556 
Speak with Dragonkind (6th) ................. 556 
Speak with Monsters (61ћ). ................... 567 
Speak with Plants (4) ...................... 567 
Speak with Sea Creatures (2nd). ............... 568 
Speak with the Drowned Dead (3rd)............ 568 


)——————————— ———" шщ 


Speak with Water (200)...................... 568 
Spectral Manticore (4) ..................:.. 569 
Spectral Senses (15) ............ ore 569 
Spectral Зор (40)... 1... 569 
Speed Rot (309)... 50:05:00 a a a 570 
Speeding Trident (2nd) .............- eee 570 
Spell Drain — Savant (7һ)................... 570 
Spell Immunity (4th). ....................... 570 
Spell Immunity — Shukenja (4һ).............. 571 
Spell Shield (of Mystra) (3гй)................. 571 
Spell Shield, Azuth s (see Azuth s Spell Shield) ..... 51 
Spell Ward (7th): г. оеро RESI 571 
А Р „>. „2...1 РЕ а 571 
Spellsong* — Drow (6th) ...........:........ 572 
Spelltouch (Ath). ао: 572 
Spellweb — Drow (3rd) .................:.23 573 
Sphere of Adaptation (7th) ................... 574 
Sphere of Security (Q). s.i. steele 742 
Sphere of Survival (7th) ............ 5. eee 574 
Spider Bite — Drow (6ћ).................... 574 
Spider Climb — Drow (1st) .................. 575 
Spider Summoning — Drow (5{һ).............. 575 
Spidereyes — Drow (Ist) .................... 575 
Spiderform — Drow (5й\).................... 576 
Spike Growth (210)... teer neem 585 
Spike Stones (Sth) ti. 0. erdeve Seo OUR REN 585 
Spiral of Degeneration (0) ................... 742 
Spirit Animal Form (3гӣ)..................... 586 
Spirit Annihilation (6th) .................:::. 586 
Spirit Bind (Gnd) ..... ооо ио 586 
Spirit Mask (190). „25... АЕ 587 
Spirit of Flame (Н)... аа 587 
Spirit of Power* (7th) ....................... 588 
Spirit Quest (60b), 5. oo e Seats TIEN 589 
Spirit Release (rev. Spirit Вїпй)................ 586 
Spirit Trap (of the Darkbringer) (Sth) ........... 589 
Spiritual Corruption (6һ).................... 590 
Spiritual Hammer (200). ...............:..... 590 
Spiritual Wrath* (6) ....................... 591 
Spittle (1st) 5.2. oer Age seen ee 591 
Spliff's Wonder Bubbles (3гй)................. 592 
Splinter Wood (310). ....... .. ae n 19 aes 592 
Spoil (rev. Ferment) -ccs o trita ооа: 267 
Spine (dnd) ъа И 593 
Spring Mastery (eisein elas 593 
Sprite Мепот-—ЕІҒ (Згд) ..................... 594 
Squeaking Floor (3td) ....................... 594 
Су PET I ais ede ere ИЕ 594 
ЗОЛ (0): ...... ея». +5 ILI Sabine т дан 743 
SREP (3e)... erre er sina ИЗ 595 
Өдөр (609... аак, ee eee 595 
Sunhine соо ИРОНИИ КИРИР яа... 595 
Steal Beoath (250). o o гу ес Ирига 596 
Steal Psionic Strength — Duergar (151).......... 596 
Stealth of Brandobaris — Halfling (3rd). ........ 596 
Steelskin — Dwarf (3гй)................. .... 596 


Steep Soma-Juice — Vedic (2nd) .............. 597 
Sterility (rev Fertility) <<.. oaa noiaeo 267 
Sterilize (rev Fertilize)........ eee 267 
Sticks to Snakes (40h) oc... cet исра. 598 
SHIEWRVES (IB). oor enero MP ER 598 
SIRO ТАРУ seii eam eed o ERR OD 752 
Stone Cree (ЭШ) оза» ‚айу, 598 
Stone Form—Gnome (4th) .................., 599 
Stone of Sharpening (4Һ).................... 599 
Stone Quench (rev Stone Storm) ............... 600 
Stone Seeing — Dwarf (5һ).................. 599 
Stine Shape Gnd). «e eka О wane 600 
Stone Storm —Dwarf (7)................... 600 
РОИ Sy Кенә» 3 ETT 600 
о (M. ais oe cae res soe caper ee 601 
Stone Trap — Dwarf (4їһ).................... 602 
Sine Welk (70)... ЧАГЫ ЛА IRA 602 
Stone Walk — Drow (4Һ).................... 603 
Ststebinis (З) 0 0 es ce op MR a 81У 603 
Stoneblend — Dwarf (18ї).................... 603 
Stonefall — Dwarf (4th) ............. eese. 604 
Stonefire — Dwarf (4). .................... 604 
Siren (OB... oec aeo de 605 
Stoneskin — Dwarf (4th) .................... 605 
Зоо (5th) uv oodd. epe hos. nal ele ts 606 
SOO COE CU o serene verra cea ue d 606 
Sim Legion (900). cits ons Winsor Aa 761 
Storm of Vengeance (0) ..................... 743 
Ston Shield (n... u.c atest cone 606 
Stonoleak: GB). cos cese nni з rmt «+ Л 607 
Store (00) 719 IUe d erre amine e EIE VA 607 
Stormvoice — Old Empire (2nd) .............. 608 
Straighten Wood (rev Warp Wood) .............- 689 
Strength — Dwarf (5һ)...................... 608 
Strength — Shukenja (51) ................... 608 
Strength of One (td) .........2 eene 609 
Strength of Stone (180)... ... (12.0: 609 
Strengthen Stone (5). ...................... 609 
Striking Shadows (310)... ; 2.0. rese 610 
Stiking Wave (A аьаан о acto 610 
ЭКМЕ Cb. eco $e cocos MEO TURRIS 611 
Styx, Touch of the (see Touch of the Styx). .. . ..... 651 
Substitution (3d). оо ene es 611 
Sio UU Las . aie ice rhe REISEN Era 611 
Succor of Betronar (5th) ..... уз.» se Sw 612 
Summon Ancestor (3г0) ..................... 612 
Summon Animal Spirit (3гй).................. 612 
Summon Cotacean (Gn). 2.2. асан лә 613 
Summon Divine Minion (3гй)................. 613 
Summon Earth Grue (44һ).................... 615 
Summon Insects (ard) .................:..:... 616 
Summon Lock Lurker (3rd). .................. 616 
Summon Minion (aka Summo614n Divine Minion) . 617 
Summon Priest (rev Succor) .................. 617 
Summon Shadow Spirit (4th) ................. 617 
Summon Spectator (5th) ..................:.. 618 


4 827 M. 


)|—————————————————— a 


Summon Spectral Death (бїһ)................. 619 
Summon Spider (aka Spider Summoning) ........ 575 
Sumimon Undead (66) ........... 1 dan 619 
Summon Varrangoin (6їһ).................... 620 
Sum Soepéer (бї)... ueris ce rer OS 620 
БЕ) 52а icto oos mein sa NE 622 
ОН)... ИЧИРЕ ГАКА Ку о к 622 
Вову (ЭШ). «uos nk ox aa ЛЫШ зә У 622 
SUING (30D ОИС: 623 
ССО (180) гло V eR aco 623 
Sünstrale (ӨШ): о Se Reeds Salter 624 
Sunstroke — Old Empire (3rd)................ 624 
Supecherdiam (Ө) «54. 2.0 рез 625 
Garlock (A) 2..2 are erre tere ERN 625 
SOBER ihe .. к.» =+%»+я»4 5 evince EIS 626 
Sutface Sojourn (190), 106 ce ace os 626 
Suspended Animation (4һ)................... 627 
Sustain (VI)... ОТ САГЫ АЛАЛ. 627 
Sustarre, Chariot of (see Chariot of Sustarre).... . 113 
Sustarre's Transformation (7th)................ 628 
Sun А. „деле; so P M edi MINE EV aise 628 
Swirling Scythes (4th)... .......... 1. ceo. 628 
Sword and Hammer (50)... е 629 
Swordwibd (О) : 25r VELIT RES 629 
Sylvan Creature Form (see Sylvan Form) ........ 629 
Sylv Perm (ИШ)... ж... Meere e 630 
Symbol (УШ) ее crake NT EU ed 631 
Sympathetic Magic I (3rd). ................... 634 
Sympathetic Magic П (5) ................... 634 
Ж 

Taloni s Blessing (5th) 1-90 as aoe 635 
Talontar, Touch of the (see Touch of the Talontar) . . 651 
Tame Animal — Shaman (6th) ................ 635 
Tglefoot (45)... АОС О. 775 
Tattoos of Protection (0)..................... 744 
Telatha, Glyph of Warding 

(see Glyph of Warding: Telatha) ............. 305 
Telepathic Broadcast (5th). ................... 635 
ПАШАШУ Gu) Oo ее о АН Ар 636 
Telethaumaturgy (3rd). ............. eee 636 
Teniperature (О). Мз. Re ae mor. 750 
Temporal Anomaly (71) ............:........ 637 
Tenfold Ironguard (i a ia оог ИЕ 638 
Tentacle of Withering (6ћ) ................... 638 
Телос Walls (785. «occa sere >. а, ora 639 
Test of Maat — Old Empire (1st) .............. 639 
ТӨРӨӨН (Ө)... н» ОКУНУ 755 
Thard Harr, Claws of 

(see Claws of Thard Нат).................. 120 
That Art Thou (32d) «6.5.5. 1.2.4 әл: 640 
The Doom of Bane (4) ..................... 640 
Thiet E Eament 3rd). 5.20092. се cocos SO 641 
Tom Spray (0) cc's ccs ed N 641 
Thorns of Binding (4%ћ)...................... 642 
Thorawrsck (501). „г... eo aes wae Mets wer 642 


828 


Thought Broadcast (4th) ..................... 642 
Thought Capture (18)... ена HR 643 
"Iipogtbwive ОШ)... nior Ынде ets 644 
"Inteefokt BOOM (50): ане с 644 
Threnody — Drow (1st) -soosse ceso essien 644 
Thunderbolts, Marthammor 5 

(see Marthammor 5 Thunderbolts) ........... 395 
Thondeclsp (td)... c cbe 645 
Thbundexcone (9003. £N. o «eruere sess 645 
Thunderstroke — Old Empire (4th)............. 645 
Tiamat, Spawn of (see Spawn of Tiamat). ........ 563 
"Hane РОО as Кез ees tes о < nate pees ae 646 
"ünsleseneas (7) 5 os ois Sse eror ere Ie oc 646 
Timewarp — Old Empire (7һ)................ 647 
TORO NRI (ore ЧО ЕС auras 647 
Tonpars (40b). РЕНА С зей 648 
Torm, Hand of (see Hand of Torm) ............. 320 
Torm, Wrath of (see Wrath of Torm). ............ 723 
Totem БОШ GHD) о ЕЛЫ» s da 648 
Yi tr (Па... УД... эй, 649 
Touch of Loviatar (see Loviatar’s Caress) . ....... 383 
Touch of the Styx (4th)... cei cece eet 651 
Touch of the Talontar (4th) .... 5:2 2...0. 651 
Pouchsickle Quo... oor n aan 652 
ЖАЛАА (Ong) cee cuore элна сб d 652 
"iance CIS) е лена qs rue Ce т 652 
Tranquility, Eldath s (see Eldath 5 Tranquility) .... 237 
Transfer Curse —Shaman (4һ)................ 653 
Transfer Offense —Shaman (3гӣ).............. 653 
Trsneformiation (D) ooo rius meu rto 744 
Transformation, Sustarre s 

(see Sustarre s Transformation). ............. 627 
E UU B Mee Re PITE LOCI Be LOC EI ER 653 
Transmute Dust to Water 

(rev Transmute Water to Риѕі)............... 655 
Transmute Magma to Rock 

(rev Transmute Rock to Марта) ............. 654 
Transmute Metal to Wood (7th). ............... 654 
Transmute Mud to Rock 

(rev Transmute Rock to Mud) ............... 654 
Transmute Rock to Magma (6їһ)............... 654 
Transmute Rock to Mud (5#ћ)................. 654 
Transmute Water to Dust (6th) ................ 655 
Transport Via Plants (6th) .................... 656 
Treasure Scent (18D. э» .+ ә жәл» wala hos du 656 
Tree (ard). ueste crm red e tates er 656 
TOS GRWIBTSBIO S erre ERSTE ees m 657 
Tree Healing (ЭШ) c. rore eros ee rao nde wry 657 
Tree Nap — Gnome (4th) .................... 658 
ЖОЛОН CHI. „э ns ace е, жеска nt SONS c TOR 659 
Tres Steed (418) агъа ае орай 659 
DIG) oe oc бейеу iene ens Ot ee 660 
Тийе Made е ЕРРЕТИ nema 660 
True Name — Savant (бїһ)................... 661 
Tiie Seeing (ОШ)! ee reu. n EE oe 661 
True Seeing — Shukenja (Sth) ................ 661 


ы. 


Troemetil (ШШ)... ЕО АЕ 662 Venomous Blade — Drow (4th) ............... 679 
TONE QU). eL reser roy RIDE 662 Vhaeraun, Blessing of (see Blessing of Vhaeraun). . . 76 
Tsunami — Shukenja (7)................... 663 NEARS NZD) аа аге Peel 680 
Tsunami, Istishia’s (see Ishtishias Tsunami) . . .... 360 View Animal Mind — Shaman (7th)............ 680 
Tuinblethors (2nd). -..... LE SERE Sez 663 ЖАРКЕН Bie (SUD ЕАСИ ОРНУ З РУНИ у 680 
тоса у... оке А 664 Wapabo (Inf)... Pots 6, rel eee et dus 681 
Тираж ethos сори. 664 Vortex, Akadi 5 (see Акайі 5 Vortex) .............. 19 
Tweak4O).. ue ree Coe Dale ee ee did 752 Vulnerability (rev Immunity to Weapons) ....... . . 347 
Tymora, Favor of (see Favor of Tymora) ......... 264 
TYRONE acest душан кы S O 665 Ww 
Willing Wikis (ОЦ)... о. eS MES eRe oe 682 
U ИАЛ Wind (166) «cvs elc riis 682 
Unbend бею Өй... ore 436 Walk Among Beasts — Shaman (3rd). .......... 682 
Unceasing Vigilance of the Holy Sentinel (Sth). . . . 667 МЕЕ (SI)... ees е REC 683 
Uncertainty, Amaunator s Wall of Iron — Dwarf (тершеа)................ 683 
(see Amaunator 5 Uncertainty) ............... 22 Wall of Moonlight (4). ..................... 683 
Uncontrolled Weather (7)................... 667 Wall of Shadow (5%). .................:..... 684 
Undead Alacrity (Ist) ......,................ 668 Wall of Stone — Dwarf (reputed). . .......... 684 
Undead Battlemight — Drow (Ist)............. 668 Wall of Tentacles (ТШ))..,.......... oce dod 684 
Undead Focus —Drow (5) .................. 668 Wálkof Thome (Ө); 2...2. RUE Ie 685 
Undead Form (И) ас ноа. 669 Wandering Glyphs (5th) ..................... 686 
Undead Plagiie (Q) ......1. 240 oo 744 Wettend ОЗГО)...» ж... MN Ov ee 745 
Undead Regeneration (5) ................... 669 Ward, Major (see Major Ward) ................ 392 
Undead Spell Focus (aka Undead Focus) ........ 668 Ward, Minor (see Minor Ward) ................ 411 
Undead Ward (rev Living Ward). ............... 379 Wand MEBSE TD c cane ie eese А. 745 
Undead Want th) i... i. 0 oc doula Sevetlase 670 о. УС. лл rc se oO 687 
Undeath After Death (7(ћ).................... 670 Watding (05. zr vs „э-ге S AD Jed 752 
Undeath To Death (7th). ............ eoe 671 Warlords of Cuiraecen (О) ................... 746 
Understand Curse — Shaman (2nd) ............ 671 ото >». aaraa Ur UEBER o ERI 752 
Understand Device (7th) ..................... 672 о РОЧКИ A r 687 
Undetectable Alignment (rev Know Alignment) . . . . 366 WHINE Ond). oi. 5 ceo со Два. 687 
Undetectable Ambush (rev Detect Ambush)... .. . . 195 Warning Shout — Halfling (151)............... 688 
Undetectable Charm (rev Detect Charm) ........ 196 Warp and Weave (4)....................... 688 
Undetectable Lie (rev Detect Lie) .............. 200 Warpisense (ФА)... оге л, 688 
Unearthly Choir* (3rd) ..:......... 222 dete 672 Warp Stone or Metal (4һҺ).................... 688 
Unfailing Endurance (4%).................... 673 Warp Wood Qaa ea Лр Йй ма: 689 
Unfailing Premonition (3rd) .................. 673 МО) >; жәй» ОЬ ate aI 750 
Unholy Word (rev Holy Word) ................. 339 WONG (О. едь CORDE S 689 
Unicar eee ONDE e s uses ees orsa сос 674 Watckful'Eyes (700 ree EET 690 
Unliving Identity (6). ...................... 674 Watching Shadow (4һ)...................... 690 
Unliving Mindlessness (rev Unliving Identity). . . . . 675 Wette ЭШКЕ) С... эу» E 691 
Unquestioning Obedience (2nd) ............... 675 Mates Pon TN MEE кауыз. err A 691 
Unwilling Wood (718) ; 2... 0c ts eee лу. 675 Water OF Fidei (588)... «oar reet oer 691 
ПРАК Geo рз» ava scaler 675 ЭШЕ ЗЕНОН ОТО лыд ЫДА 692 
Uthgar, Fortitude of (see Fortitude of Uthgar). . . . . 285 Water Sprint — Old Empire (1st) .............. 693 
Wetis Tap (MB) ЧЕ ex aite E 693 
У ЕТА (ЭХ)... ove qu Ex з AT 693 
Valkur, Favor of (see Favor of Valkur)........... 264 Water Window (Їй)... соолот о dann 694 
МЕСЕ). о оаа eens 677 узсе АЕ E o oo eve КҮП 694 
Veit OF Dilios (OD... shrew sy chs rA THIS ES 677 Water Wyvern (ОЮ s Love resetE accuses 695 
Velsharoon, Claws of (see Claws of Velsharoon) . . . 120 ЕО еа acsi 695 
Velsharoon's Death Pact (7th) ................. 677 Walesg OR ARS И)... ес аа зт 695 
Venom Bite (aka Spider Вйе).................. 574 еро) AE T Ee ait e ovis ee 696 
Venom Immunity — Drow (3rd). .............. 678 МГА Н. oes sigh cete sieces eid ps 697 
Venom of Varae (38d)... оао ees 679 Watery Bist (200). УУ е ыл» Col e Earl о 697 
Venamed Cipit (9). io etes зэ COSE 679 Watery Travel th)... s duuocecevev rocca 698 


829 


b ———————————'il 


Weye O6)... E oo deco ote 698 
Wave of Telekinesis — Gnome (4th). ........... 699 
Weslthtunt (7th) +, . 25, o orn RT Е 5 699 
Wislfwond (ОШ); о. азони: 699 
Weapons Bless (140)... ... +44 eere 700 
Weapon Immunity — Old Empire (4th) ......... 700 
Weapon of the Earth — Dwarf (1st) ............ 701 
Weapon Shift — Halfling (2п0)................ 701 
‘Weather Dome (Nl) .-. осоне ено неъ 701 
Weather Prediction (310). ......... E E 702 
Weather Stasis (44)... LA 702 
Weather Summoning (6th). ................... 702 
Waaka s AS 703 
МЭЛИТӨОШОД? (ТОЭ: 2... оозана Е ЕЭ 703 
Weighty СеО)... Е 705 
Wheat into Blade (3rd) ..........;:2..0::.... 705 
Wisel of Bones (Sid)... 6.16500 S teas 705 
Whin of Flame: С) оа, 22/595 дА 706 
Whipo£f Pam Ord). «iis... 100) 9 mas 706 
ЭЛИ) OF Sint (310) „есь AER 8. 707 
Эмре Woe (Sh). е ee pees TIEN 707 
ПСВ (ИО): аео 708 
Whirlpool (00)... еа ее са ена До 708 
Whirlpool of Doom (4th). ........,........... 709 
WERT WW (db). 5: «05-010. еее оа ое ИКЦ 709 
ЗО (ОКВ)... +55 ое 710 
Whirlwind (of Akadi) (7th) ................... 711 
Whirlwind of Steel (5th) ........... 0000000005 711 
Whisperleaf — Gnome (2nd) ................. 712 
Whiüpetz uj) 22 ics sos asic yian РС 712 
Wiser WERE (10... ег rem Арк КЫЫ 712 
Wisekdilill (ad): . ..- 5. 2099459, › Em Bae 713 
Wild Deer Speed Qnd) .........5 ce cine 713 
МБАЛ)... cientos c E 713 
Wild Weather: (Bl)... 5.2: JU 0E АЫ ER 767 
Wind and Rain Protection (3rd). ............... 714 
Wind Blast — Elf (3rd)... .............. ise 714 
Wind Golumn (Ust) оона ma. 714 
Wad Lub QW)... cues carie oct ate meets 715 
УВУ аА ене 715 


Wind Walk — Shukenja (7th) ................. 716 
WRC UCR (30). aes an sav bios ie SA 716 
Windborue (ЯШ)... ане ovate oe sina io 716 
Witkdlanice (589.96. с эдш oe dress 717 
Winds of Akadi (А)... ПЫ 717 
Winds of Change (21)... 2с... 40 717 
Winged Memory (rev Blessed Forgetfulness)... . ... 75 
Wisdom of the Sorcerer-Kings (6th) ............ 718 
Withdraw Qnid) ire. cnet Bes aeree а 718 
SAU! (SU stab spies pans oa sade ARE EE г 718 
Wither (rev Quickgrowth) .................... 478 
Wither (rev Керепегаіе)...................... 485 
Wolf Spirits (OD) ылуу»; O МИЛЕ Rd 746 
Тениз (Ani «oot ar a ooo Saves 719 
Wonder Bubbles, 5р1] s 

(see Spliffs Wonder Bubbles) ............... 592 
Wondrous Recall (6)....................... 720 
WER: Loc nn Des epee he ФЕР 720 
Wood Sword:(2nd): гал Mees Ole 720 
Weodlton (diy. слу ois oc Tuo Бш. 721 
Word of Binding (5#)....................... 721 
Word of Recall (6th) soss 06.600 on лш 722 
Word of Vengeance (6ћ)..................... 723 
Wound (ЭШ). ги е OUS cd utei v 723 
Wiáth of Torm ДӨН)... ез, 003-2 Sues avs 723 
Wyvern Watch Qnd) oo. ccm Ие oes 724 

Х-Ү 
Xvim, Масе of (see Mace of Xvim) ............. 386 
Yathaghera, Favor of (see Favor of Yathaghera) . . . 265 
Yondalla, Curse of (see Curse of ҮопааПа) ....... 174 
Youthful Object (rev Age ОБјесі)................ 16 
Z 

SAMI ТААТАН eet 725 
Zone of Deception (204). ............2......5 726 
Fone o£ Sweet Aw (ЭЙ)... 25:2: 2 pestes e o0 726 
Come of Tralh Qnd):...... Ans SIN аел Лы] 726 


2 830 М 


H 


ISBN 0-7869-1611-7 


| | | 


0786"916115 
U.S. $24.95 САМ $32.95 


