Volume Three 


a es ; 


Compendium 


Wizard’s Spell Compendium 


Volume Three 


Credits 


Design: It is impossible to list all the creators of the spells cataloged in these volumes, but credit 
goes to everyone who created a spell in a module, boxed set, accessory, hardbound book or 
magazine article published in the last 20 years. 

Compilation: Mark Middleton 
Development and Editing: Jon Pickens 
Additional Development: L. Richard Baker IHI 
Project Coordination: Thomas Reid and Steve Winter 
Interior Black and White Art: Glen Michael Angus and Arnie Sweckle 
Art Direction: Dawn Murin 
Graphic Design: Tanya Matson and Dawn Murin 
Typesetting: Angelika Lokotz and Eric Haddock 


Acknowledgments: L. Richard Baker IH, Brad Bolas, Ed Greenwood, Bruce Heard, Miranda 
Horner, Julia Martin, Mark Middleton, Roger E. Moore, John Rateliff, Terry O’Neal, Steven E. 
Schend, slade, Keith Strohm, Skip Williams. And of course, James M. Ward. 


Based on the original DUNGEONS & DRAGONS rules created by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson. 


Monster Summoning I to Sprites 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Introdüctioi srera eee ea eh co od Gin en Bae ee Te OE OR ae Re eats ba Rate 2 
How to Use This Book -3y3\.58 totus Sack Bids sae Sb ne ae Bence als Sas ened ea gee e es 2 
Spell. Frequency. ccs tte ou SS ova wate sine ole Mone A EA EE dion ora E tae denen Glad quate e 4 
TOONS sereia a ct Sapa al eRe dh ded wl eee tg Se eR anne Gods betta hc weer a ee ate alts ges See OR 7 
MOa Bash hes tae ates tins Sacha hot tae sion Ns ce Dette cars cect Wa a ib e A, ental NN ae ast Matt raa os 8 
TNE pcg inc A halon way abn a dae abe a ot ints ee Os Re ee ee ore deca ao 32 
© Mae ROR neem ere eee E A ges en A ee er ee EE eee er ee ee 53 
Pea Ss dese da lected Ste ancl Boh SN s Sate one eT 1h Ree tev ee eae hbo tentacle OET E uses ana ear eats Bahasa 74 
scene hii ied ake eee se Bhs Ge ele tet may os oH eee ae OH EAR ie 143 
IR: ona E E E EE E AE E LG ESS E SE as antes oe Min ken ene eh eet A 145 
SO SPs hates eterno ho ae eee aa ok Paes aoa aicaaeeN epee eee ators 183 
Most Common Spell List ..iciecnge ti cues vere he tows ide des Cee IE e eee rnae 287 


U.S., CANADA, ASIA, EUROPEAN HEADQUARTERS 
PACIFIC, & LATIN AMERICA Wizards of the Coast, Belgium 
Wizards of the Coast, Inc. PB. 34 
P.O. Box 707 2300 Turnhout 
Renton, WA 98057-0707 Belgium 
+1-206-624-0933 +32-14-44-30-44 


Visit our website at www.tsr.com 


AD&D, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AL-QADIM, BATTLESYSTEM, BIRTHRIGHT, DARK SUN, DRAGON, DRAGONLANCE, 
DUNGEON MASTER, FIEND FOLIO, FORGOTTEN REALMS, GREYHAWK, MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, MYSTARA, PLANESCAPE, 
POLYHEDRON, RAVENLOFT, RED STEEL, RPGA, the RPGA logo, SPELLJIAMMER, and WORLD OF GREYHAWK, and the TSR logo are registered 
trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 

DEITIES & DEMIGODS, MONSTROUS MANUAL, and ROLE PLAYING GAME ASSOCIATION are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 

All TSR characters, character names, spell names, magical item names, monster names, unique place locations, and the distinct likenesses thereof are trademarks 
owned by TSR, Inc. LANKHMAR is a trademark owned by and under license from Fritz Leiber. 

Distributed to the book trade in the United States by Random House, Inc. and in Canada by Random House of Canada Ltd. 

Distributed to the hobby, toy, and comic trade in the United States and Canada by regional distributors. Distributed worldwide by Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and 
regional distributors. 

This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained 
herein is prohibited without the express written permission of TSR, Inc. 


®1998 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Made in the U.S.A. 
TSR, Inc. is a subsidiary of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 
First Printing, February 1998 
ISBN: 0-7869-079 1-06 2175 


sh 
K 


aN 
` - 


. 
I~ " 


NÍ 


Introduction 


The third volume of the Wizard Spell 
Compendium continues the work of the first 
two. This volume provides an alphabetical ref- 
erence to wizard spells of the AD&D® game 
system, covering the letters Mo through Sp. The 
entire series of Wizard Compendium books 
covers wizard spells created for the game from 
1975 to 1995. 

For the uninitiated, this is not a book of “real” 
magical spells. In a fantasy game world there are 
characters like Merlin the Magician, who create 
marvelous magical effects with a wave of the 
hand. This is a book of marvelous effects that 
can be used by the good guys (and the bad guys) 
in the course of a game session. The key to the 
game is, as always, the decisions made by the 
players (heroic or otherwise), and the impact 
those decisions have on the ongoing plot of the 
game. New spells are fun, but it’s even more fun 
figuring out unusual ways to use them. 

Up to this time, lists of spell effects have 
been keyed to spell level; that is, relative spell 
power. In other words, if all a gamer or 
Dungeon Master knew was a spell name, each 
level’s list of spells had to be checked. Although 
the final volume of this series will include level 
lists (as well as lists by race and magical spe- 
cialty) the most important principle of organiza- 
tion used in the series as a whole is alphabetical. 

The material in these books is presented in 
the most current game format, that of the 2nd 
Edition rules. Some spell descriptions have 
been updated or combined with similar spell ef- 
fects to eliminate duplication; some have been 
modified for better play, and a very few have 
been dropped entirely. 

Variant magical systems, such as the rune 
magic system detailed in our Viking setting ref- 
erence book; the kingdom-level magic of the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting; the psionic Dragon-King 
magics of the DARK SUN setting; and the very 
rare, pure-energy “spellfire” of the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting are beyond the scope of this 
book. The emphasis here is on those magical ef- 
fects that any character with the ability to cast 
wizard spells might find useful in the course of 
an adventure. 


About This Book 


The spells listed in this book are given alpha- 
betically. Spell names that include a wizard’s 


579 


name are given a primary listing under that 
name; for example, for Tenser 5 floating disk, 
the primary entry is under “T.” Another refer- 
ence to the main entry will be found at the 
second word of the spell name; in this case the 
entry would read: “Floating Disk, Tenser’s.” 

Be aware that many spell names are irregular 
compound words, and that standard alphabetical 
order follows complete words. Thus, fire shield 
will appear before fireball. If you can’t find a 
spell, try looking for it as a compound form. 

Some spells will have multiple names; or the 
name of a spell might have been changed, either 
to avoid confusion with a better known spell 
with a similar name or to better match the spell 
effect. For example, intensify, which makes nat- 
ural phenomena such as storms and earthquakes 
more severe, was renamed intensify nature to 
distinguish it from effects that might be intensi- 
fied by other spells, such as intensify summon- 
ing. Renamed spells have a short reference 
under the original name. 

Spells associated with specific campaign 
worlds are marked with a special symbol so 
they can be easily recognized. See page 7 for a 
summary of these symbols. Also, spells that are 
associated with a specific monster or nonhuman 
race (such as dragons, elves, and so on) will be 
noted; the race name is separated from the spell 
name by a dash. 

Generally, spell names and secondary game 
effects are italicized. For example, the emotion 
spell has a secondary effect called hope. 


How To Use This Book 


Each spell in this book is organized along the 
same general lines. Each is listed by its name, 
school, and a number of statistics that govern its 
use such as Level (of power), Range, Casting 
Time, and so on. The game powers of each spell 
are described, along with any special rules that 
govern its use, how the spell target can avoid or 
counter its effects, any limitations on how the 
spell can be used, and any special preparations 
or materials that needed for a successful cast- 
ing. Next, the details of any reversed form the 
spell might have are given. Finally, a section 
called Notes has been appended to each spell; 
this deals with the spell’s recommended rarity in 
the campaign, and any special restrictions on 
who (or what) can use it. 

Having covered the field briefly, a more de- 
tailed look is in order: 


Se ee Se ee 


Name: This is the name by which the spell is 
generally known. Although we have tried to 
ensure unique names, this has not always been 
possible. For example, create shade, a useful 
shelter from the sun in the arabian deserts of the 
AL-QaADIM setting, is very different from create 
shade, the evil spell that turns someone into a 
dangerous shadow monster from the Plane of 
Shadows, a monster known as a shade. Where 
two spells have the same name, the most general 
version is given first, while variants cast by other 
races or found in specialized campaign settings 
are given later. 


School: Each school governs a type of magic, 
according to the type of energy its spells 
employ and the special practices and methods 
used by its wizards. The basic schools are: 


SCHOOLS OF PHILOSOPHY 

Abjuration: Protective, warding, or banishing 
magics. 

Alteration: Magic that changes physical 
properties of an object, creature, or condition. 

Conjuration/Summoning: Calls or brings ob- 
jects or creatures from elsewhere. 

Divination: Uncovers what is lost or hidden 
in the past, present, or future. 

Enchantment/Charm: Bestows magical prop- 
erties on objects or influences creatures magi- 
cally. 

Illusion/Phantasm: Illusions create and alter 
appearances; phantasms affect the mind. 

Invocation/Evocation: Channels and shapes 
magical energy to create an effect or object. 

Necromancy: Magics working upon life 
energy, including the negative energy of the 
undead. 


Optional Schools: These include two groups 
of schools beyond the original eight. 


THE SCHOOLS OF EFFECT 

Dimension: Magics that affect dimensions, or 
access extradimensional areas. 

Elemental Magic: Subdivided into Air, Earth, 
Fire, and Water specialists. Arabian and oriental 
cultures have similar divisions. 

Force: Magics dealing with fields of pure co- 
hesive magical energies. 

Shadow: Magics that deal with shadow and 
darkness, including the shadowstuff of the 
Demiplane of Shadow. 


SCHOOLS OF THAUMATURGY 

Alchemy: Uses powders and strange reagents 
to achieve effects. 

Artifice: Uses items and devices to focus 
spell energies. 

Geometry: Uses diagrams, symbols and com- 
plex patterns to channel magical energy. 

Wild Magic: Shapes dangerously uncon- 

trolled raw energies; subject to unpredictable 
surges. 


UNIVERSAL SCHOOL OF MAGIC 
A special list of spells to which any wizard 
has access. 


Reversed Form: An entry of “Reversible” 
means the spell can be cast with the opposite 
effect. For example, the flesh to stone spell, a 
petrifying attack, can be reversed as stone to 
flesh, providing a way to recover a character 
otherwise lost to a petrification attack. Usually, 
a wizard must memorize the exact form of the 
reversible spell he wants available. 


Level: This is the relative power level of the 
spell, ranging from Ist level (weakest) to 9th 
level (most powerful). A king’s wizard who can 
create potions, magical scrolls, and magical 
items with expendable charges will generally 
have access to a 6th-level spell, a few Sth-level 
spells, and an increasing number of 4th- 
through Ist-level spells each day. 


Range: The distance from the caster at which 
the magical effect occurs. A range of “0” means 
the effect is centered on the caster’s person or 
his location; in the latter case the effect is usu- 
ally immobile. “Touch” means the effect can be 
used on another creature or object. Unless oth- 
erwise specified, spells are centered on a point 
visible to the caster and within the spell’s range; 
this can be a specific creature or object if de- 
sired. Most ranges are measured in yards; some 
are measured in feet. 


Components: These are the types of compo- 
nents that the spell requires; if the components 
are not present, the casting fails. “V” is verbal; 
that is, a spoken incantation the wizard is as- 
sumed to deliver while casting. “S” 1s somatic; 
that is, measured and precise gestures with the 
hands, which the wizard is assumed to make 
while casting. “M” is for material; that is, phys- 
ical substances or objects that are annihilated by 
the spell energies in the casting process. This 


580 


p SSS = a 


abbreviation sometimes signifies a focus, or 
device that is reusable; sometimes this is a tem- 
porary focus whose premature destruction will 
end the spell. 

Often the components are merely suggestive 
or colorful, at other times they will be a signifi- 
cant restriction on how often a spell can be cast. 
Unless a cost for a component is given in the 
description (which means the component is in- 
tended as a limit), the cost is negligible and can 
be assumed as part of the wizard’s daily or 
monthly general expenses. 


Casting Time: This is relative time required to 
cast a spell. Unless rounds, turns, or a longer 
casting time is specified, the casting will be 
completed in the same round it is started. A 
casting time less than one round is a modifier to 
the initiative roll, and is essentially the same as 
a weapon speed factor. A spell that takes a full 
round to cast comes into effect at the end of that 
round. 


Duration: This is how long the magical energy 
of the spell lasts. An instantaneous duration 
means the spell energy comes and goes the in- 
stant the spell is cast, though the spell effect 
might be long-lasting. A duration of permanent 
means the spell energy remains as long as the 
effect does; this means that the spell is vulner- 
able to a dispel magic spell. This is an altered 
usage. Many spells listed in earlier sources as 
having a “permanent” duration (such as cure 
light wounds), will be altered in this series and 
in future publications to “instantaneous.” 

Spells with a set duration (such as 1 round 
per level) must be kept track of by the player; 
those with a variable duration are secretly rolled 
by the DM. 

Some spells can be ended by the caster at 
will; the caster must be in range of the center of 
the spell’s effect and must usually (though not 
always) speak words of dismissal. 


Area of Effect: This entry lists the creatures, 
dimensions, volume, weight, and so on, that 
the spell can affect. Some spells have areas that 
can be shaped by the caster; of these, no di- 
mension can be less than 10 feet unless the 
spell specifically allows it. Many areas are 
given as cubes to make it easy to figure out 
areas of effect when using maps gridded into 
10-foot or 5-foot squares. Three-dimensional 
volumes are most often needed to resolve 
aerial or underwater effects. 


581 


Unless specifically otherwise in the descrip- 
tion, areas of effect conform to their physical 
surroundings; for example, a light spell with a 
60-foot radius centered in a closed room that is 
a 20-foot cube will light the room. It will not 
penetrate a solid wall to light a room beyond. 

Many areas are given as geometric shapes. 

Radius: This might yield a circle, hemi- 
sphere, or sphere, depending on the situation. 

Cloud: Usually given as a block of cubes for 
convenience, although it’s actually amorphous 
and billowy. 

Cone: This projects outward from the caster, 
with the smallest end toward the caster and the 
largest diameter farthest from the caster. 

Path: This is usually a 10-foot wide line start- 
ing at the caster projecting away in a straight 
line to a specified length. 

Spells that affect the caster’s friends or ene- 
mies are based on the current perceptions of the 
caster. 


Saving Throw: This entry lists whether a spell 
allows a saving throw, and often the effect of a 
successful saving throw: “Neg.” means the spell 
is negated and has no effect; % means that the 
spell inflicts damage and that a successful 
saving throw halves the damage taken; “None” 
means no saving throw is allowed to an unwill- 
ing subject. The result of a saving throw for a 
reversed spell is given in the paragraph that de- 
tails the reversed form. 

The saving throw itself is a roll on a 20-sided 
die; high numbers are generally good. 

Wisdom allows adjustments to saving throws 
against enchantment/charm spells. Dexterity 
may provide adjustments against spells that 
affect a large area. 

Solid physical barriers may give saving throw 
modifiers and reduce damage. Cover and con- 
cealment may also affect saving throws. The 
DUNGEON MASTERS Guide has more infor- 
mation. 

A creature that successfully saves against a 
spell without obvious physical effects often 
feels a hostile force or tingle, but the exact 
nature of the attack cannot be deduced. 

Unless the spell specifies otherwise, if a 
character makes a saving throw, all items car- 
ried and worn are assumed to survive the attack. 
If the character fails the saving throw, exposed 
items must make saving throws against the 
attack form. An item exposed by the destruction 
of a covering (a parchment scroll protected by a 
bone scroll case, for example) must also save 


h E 


against the attack. 

Unless specifically forbidden, a character can 
voluntarily forego a saving throw and willingly 
accept the spell result. Even a character with a 
special resistance to magic (for example, an 
elf’s resistance to a charm spell) can voluntarily 
suppress this if he wants. 


Spell Description: This contains the details of 
what the spell does and how it works. Spells 
with multiple functions usually allow the caster 
to pick the desired function at the time of cast- 
ing (for example, the emotion spell can create 
fear, courage, hope, despair, joy, and several 
other effects). 

Spells that give bonuses or penalties to attack 
rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, and so on, 
are usually not cumulative; only the strongest 
magic is effective. However, duration may be a 
factor, and spell effects might overlap in differ- 
ent ways at different times. 


Notes: This new section deals with the spell ’s 
recommended rarity on the following scale: 
common, uncommon, rare, very rare, and 
unique. These are discussed in detail in the Def- 
initions of Spell Frequency section. Spells of 
any rarity also may be restricted to certain races 
or specialty casters. Any notes on a spell’s 
source or origin, such as a game world or a 
magazine, are given here. 


Monster Details: Some of the spells 
summon or create monsters. The standard ab- 
breviations used for monster details given later. 
Not all monsters will use all abbreviations. 


AC: Armor Class 

MV: Movement— FI: fly 
(MC) = Maneuverability Class (A to E) 

HD: Hit Dice 

#AT: Number of Attacks 

THACO: To Hit Armor Class 0 

Dmg: Damage 

SA: Special Attacks 

SD: Special Defenses 

SW: Special Weaknesses 

MR: Magic Resistance 

SZ: Size 

ML: Morale 

AL: Alignment 


582 


Spell Frequency 


FORGOTTEN REALMS” players and DMs 
should note that the definitions used here are 
different from those used in FORGOTTEN 
REALMS products. These guidelines are intended 
for general world settings. The DM, as always, 
is free to alter them as needed for local cam- 
paign conditions. 


Common Spell: The details and effects of a 
common spell are generally known, even by 
wizards who may not have the spell in their 
books. All spells in the Players Handbook are 
common spells. Spells listed for the basic 
wizard class in world-specific material (such as 
the DARK SuN”? campaign set) are common for 
wizards of that world, but might be rarer or even 
unknown elsewhere. 

Player characters can take common first level 
spells as starting spells (see Starting Spellbooks 
in the Wizard Spell Compendium Vol. 1). Any 
limitation on spell selection—such as those for 
school, class, or kit—apply to all spells, even 
common ones. Note also that DMs may have 
their own campaign guidelines. For example, 
the DM might require every PC mage to have a 
mentor wizard, restricting any “free” spells 
(those not found or directly researched) to spells 
in the books of the mentor. A DM might rule 
that named spells (such as Tenser s floating 
disk) are uncommon spells, as well. 


The DM always decides the rarity of a spell 
if there is any question. 


Uncommon Spell: Wizard spells found in the 
Tome of Magic fall into this category. These 
spells are less well known, but not restricted to a 
race or special group like, for example, witches, 
dragons, or the Red Wizards of Thay. A kit, 
school, or other specialty might allow some un- 
common spells to be treated as common spells. 
Generalist mages can research uncommon 
spells using the normal research rules. 

A player character cannot start with an un- 
common spell or learn it in the course of normal 
level advancement (unless, perhaps, a wizardly 
mentor knows it). Such spells enter play when 
found on a magical scroll or in a spellbook, or 
when developed as a result of research. In the 
average AD&D campaign, finding a new 
common or uncommon spell is a little more 


_ 


ee 


common that a fighter class character finding a 
+1 magical sword. Some uncommon spells may 
be restricted (see Restricted Spells). 


Rare Spell: Rare spells are specialized or 
hidden magic, such as those introduced in mod- 
ules or accessories. Besides spells that are just 
less well known, two special types of rare spells 
exist: 1) Spells known by a specific nonhuman 
race (like elven spells from the Complete Book 
of Elves); and 2) Spells of a specialty or cam- 
paign-specific group that is not given in the 
Player's Handbook (like the spells of the Red 
Wizards of Thay, the spells from the Complete 
Necromancer s Handbook, or spells of a wizard 
who specializes in Elemental Fire magic). Rare 
spells are likely to be restricted (see Restricted 
Spells). 

As noted in the Player s Handbook, a special- 
ist has bonuses to the “Chance to Learn” and 
spell research rolls within that specialty. The 
specialist treats the spells of the specialty as 
common, unless other factors apply (an en- 
chantment/charm spell known only to dragons 
is still considered rare for a wizard specializing 
in enchantment/charm magic.) 

Player characters have access to rare magics 


A Guide to Spell Icons 


` BIRTHRIGHT? 


Setting of Kings 


AL-QADIM® 
Arabian Setting 


Q 


DRAGONLANCE® 
Epic Romance 
Setting 


Oriental Setting 


we 


RED STEEL® 
Swashbuckling 
Fantasy Setting 


RAVENLOFT® 
Gothic Fantasy Setting 


Kara-Tur/The Horde 


only as a result of campaign-specific condi- 
tions. Generalist mage research of rare magics 
has a base —15% penalty to the “Chance to 
Learn” and research success rolls, unless the 
character has access to some sort of knowledge 
or resource that would offset this. 

Certain campaign-specific or storyline con- 
ditions might allow rare spell research at 
common spell chances. For example, if a human 
wizard’s reward for an adventure on behalf of 
the elves is an elven spell, the DM may choose 
to waive some or all of the “Chance to Learn” 
roll, the research cost, and/or the research suc- 
cess roll (time requirements should not be 
waived under any circumstances). 


Very Rare Spell: Spells that appear only in 
magazine articles, or are otherwise variant 
should be classified as very rare. The DM 
should closely control very rare spells. For ex- 
ample, they might be available only in a single 
special book or tome in which they were 
recorded. Many very rare spells are also re- 
stricted (see Restricted Spells). 

A DM who allows the spell to be researched 
at all rolls for the success of the research se- 
cretly and announces the result to the player. At 


wie 


DARK SUN? 
Psionic World Setting 


A X 


Maztica PLANESCAPE® 
Aztec/New Other Planes’ 
World Setting Setting 


i 


SPELLJAMMER® 


P 
D” 


Savage Lands' Setting Fantasy Space Setting 


' Although there is no specific setting for savage spellcasters, many worlds have areas from which these might come. This icon marks spells particularly 


suited to an outland “savage” wizard or witch-doctor. 


583 


(ne 


the DM’s option, the standard “Chance to 
Learn” might be reduced by up to 50% and the 
research success chances halved, or even quar- 
tered. 

Classifying a spell as very rare is one way for 
a DM to handle an experimental spell that is too 
powerful or one that encroaches too much on 
the class abilities of nonwizards. It is also pos- 
sible, over time, for a spell devised by a player 
character to become rare, uncommon, or even 
common. 


Unique Spell: This spell is known only to its 
original creator and is intrinsic to the creator’s 
campaign function. Some spells of this type 
might be available only to a character holding a 
certain position or office. Most unique spells 
are of the 6th spell level or higher; the creator is 
nearly always of 12th level or higher. Such 
spells are marked with a double dagger (tf). 

If a unique spell can be learned at all, it can 
be learned only from its creator (or in very rare 
circumstances, from the creator’s writings). 
Merely having a spellbook or scroll is not suffi- 
cient, though these might count as part of the 
creator’s “writings.” The Simbul’s spell trigger 
is a unique spell. 

The acquisition of a unique spell or the cre- 
ation of one by a player character is a major 
campaign event, similar in campaign impact to 
the completion of an epic high-level quest, the 
opening of a fixed interplanar gate, the found- 
ing of a barony, the destruction of an artifact, 
and so on. 


Abbreviations referring to Source Material 

PHB = ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
Player 5 Handbook 

DMG = ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

PO:SM = Player s Option: Spells & Magic 

WoG = WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting 


Other Definitions 


Lost Spell: Rarely, a spell is mentioned for 
which no 2nd Edition detail exists (including a 
few spells deliberately withdrawn from the 
system). No details are given for these other 
than the spell name. They are “lost knowledge,” 
included only to confirm their one-time exis- 
tence for the curious. 


Restricted Spell: A restricted spell is barred to 
generalists (that is, the mage class), and to all 
other wizards except those specifically allowed 
in the spell description or by the DM. Option- 
ally, an independently researched spell that 
matches the effects of a restricted spell might be 
possible, but at no less than two levels above the 
listed level. 


Magic in the Worlds 


Elemental magic in the traditional 
FORGOTTEN REALMS, WORLD OF GREYHAWK, 
DRAGONLANCE, and MYSTARA settings is based 
on air, earth, fire, and water. This varies in other 
settings: In the oriental setting, air, earth, fire, 
and water are joined by a fifth element, wood, 
and wizards are called wu jen. In the AL-QADIM 
setting, the four basic elements are traditional, 
but are called the Provinces of Flame, Sand, 
Sea, and Wind. Also, a special type of wizard 
here, the shai’ir, receives spells on demand 
from small elemental genies known as gen. In 
the Maztica setting, special craft magics exist, 
called pluma (feather) and hishna (animal) 
magic. In the sword-and-sandal DARK SUN set- 
ting, spellcasters are preservers or defilers, de- 
pending on whether or not their magic drains 
the living energy of that world. Here, psionics 
are aS important as magic. In the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting, bloodline abilities augment normal 
magics; scions of evil bloodlines are called 
awnsheglien, and those of heroic bloodlines are 
called ensheglien. In the SPELLJAMMING setting, 
flying ships are propelled by spellcasters using 
magical power sources called major helms and 
minor helms. In the swashbuckling RED STEEL 
setting, latent magical abilities called legacies 
result in baneful mutations (the Red Curse) 
unless controlled by exposure to the rare ore 
cinnabryl. The depletion of this ore is cause for 
concern. In the RAVENLOFT setting, the Demi- 
plane of Dread, gothic horror in form of Dark 
Lords, each a godlike power trapped in a private 
domain, keeps adventurers on the run, looking 
for a way out and making special fear, horror, 
and Ravenloft powers checks. The PLANESCAPE 
setting presents new settings from the inner (El- 
emental) Planes to the Outer Planes, where the 
gods live. Casting magic here requires special 
spell keys, and the denizens are divided into fac- 
tions along alignment lines. 


Monster Summoning 

For ease of reference, generic monster 
summoning tables based on the 
Monstrous MANUAL" Tome have been included 
with each monster summoning spell description. 
The DM is free to use, modify, replace, or ignore 
these tables as desired; they are not intended for 
player use. 


Monster Summoning I 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


(Song) 


Level: 3 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 30-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Within one round of casting this spell, the 
wizard magically conjures 2d4 lst-level mon- 
sters (selected by the DM from the Ist-level en- 
counter tables). The monsters appear anywhere 
within the spell’s area of effect, as desired by the 
wizard. They attack the spell user’s opponents to 
the best of their ability until either he commands 
that the attacks cease, the spell duration expires, 
or the monsters are slain. These creatures do not 
check morale, but they vanish when slain. Note 
that if no opponent exists to fight, summoned 
monsters can, if the wizard can communicate 
with them and if they are physically able, per- 
form other services for the summoning wizard. 

In rare cases, adventurers have been known to 
disappear, summoned by powerful spellcasters 


Monster Summoning II 


4 using this spell. Those summoned recall 
Sj all the details of their trip. 

The material components of this spell 
are a tiny bag and a small (not necessarily lit) 
candle. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). The monster 
lists provided for the monster summoning spells 
are default listings; the DM is free to make up 
similar lists or choose the results directly to fit an 
encounter. 


Monster Summoning IIT 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


(Song) 


Level: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Range: Special 

Area of Effect: 40-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is much like the 3rd-level spell mon- 
ster summoning I, except that this spell summons 
1d6 2nd-level monsters. These appear anywhere 
within the spell’s area of effect and attack the 
caster’s opponents, until he commands them to 
cease, the spell duration expires, or the monsters 
are slain. These creatures do not check morale; 
they vanish when slain. If no opponent exists to 
fight and the wizard can communicate with 
them, the summoned monsters can perform other 
services for the summoning wizard. 

The material components of this spell are a 
tiny bag and a small (not necessarily lit) candle. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Monster Summoning I . 
Land Aquatic, Salt 

l Ant, giant 1 Barracuda (1 HD) 
2 Bat, huge 2 Lamprey, common 
3 Beetle, fire 3 Merman 
4 Bullywug 4 Otter, sea 
5 Goblin 5 Piranha (3d4) 
6 Hobgoblin 6 Urchin, black 
7 Jermlaine (3d4) 
8 Kobold (3d4) Aquatic, Fresh 
9 Leech, giant (1 HD) 1 Frog, giant (1 HD) 
10 Muckdweller 2 Koalinth (hobgoblin) 
11 Orc 3 Lamprey, common 
12 Rat, giant (3d4) 4 Nixie (3d4) 

5 Otter, common 

6 Piranha (3d4) 


nS 


585 


~ Monster Summoning IT] 


Monster Summoning II 
Land Aquatic, Salt 

1 Beetle, bombardier 1 Barracuda (2 HD) 

2 Centipede, giant 2 Dolphin 

3 Frog, giant or killer 3 Locathah 

4 Gnoll or flind 4 Ray, ixitxachitl 

5 Lamprey, land 5 Ray, sting 

6 Lizard man 6 Sea horse 

7 Mongrelmen (2 HD) 7 Seawolf, lesser 

8 Mudmen 8 Urchin, green 

9 Spider, large 

10 Stirge Aquatic, Fresh 

ll Toad, giant 1 Eel, electric 

12 Troglodyte (1d6) 2 Frog, giant (2 HD) 
3 Kuo-toa 
4 Leech, giant (2 HD) 
5 Lizard man 
6 Piranha, giant 


Monster Summoning III 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


(Song) 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 50-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is much like the 3rd-level spell mon- 
ster summoning I, except that this spell summons 


1d4 3rd-level monsters. These appear within the 
spell’s area of effect and attack the caster’s oppo- 
nents, until either he commands them to cease, 
the spell duration expires, or the monsters are 
slain. These creatures do not check morale and 
vanish when slain. If no opponent exists to fight, 
and the wizard can communicate with them, the 
summoned monsters can perform other services 
for the wizard. 

The material components of this spell are a 
tiny bag and a small candle. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Monster Summoning II 


Land 

1 Ankheg (3—4 HD) 
2 Bat, giant 

3 Beetle, boring 

4 Bugbear 

5 Centipede, megalo- 
6 Crab, giant 

7 Crocodile, wild (2 HD) 
8 Dog, death 

9 Gelatinous cube 
10 Ghoul 

11 Lizard, giant 

12 Lyc., wererat 

13 Orc, orog 

14 Osquip 

15 Sandling 

16 Scorpion, large 
17 Snake, constrictor 
18 Spider, huge 

19 Weasel, giant 
20 Urchin, land 


586 


Aquatic, Salt 
Barracuda (3 HD) 
Crab, giant 
Lacedon (ghoul) 
Sahuagin 

Selkie 

Urchin, red 


AA whe 


Aquatic, Fresh 
Crab, giant 
Crocodile, giant 
Frog, giant (3 HD) 
Lacedon (ghoul) 


& WN 


_ 


‘ Monster Summoning V g 


Monster Summoning IV 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


(Song) 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 5 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 60-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is much like the 3rd-level spell mon- 
ster summoning I, except that this spell summons 
1d3 4th-level monsters. These appear within the 
spell’s area of effect and attack the caster’s oppo- 
nents, until he commands them to cease, the spell 
duration expires, or the monsters are slain. These 
creatures do not check morale; they vanish when 
slain. If no opponent exists to fight, summoned 
monsters can, if the wizard can communicate 
with them, and if they are physically capable, per- 
form other services for the summoning wizard. 

The material components of this spell are a 
tiny bag and a small (not necessarily lit) candle. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Monster Summoning V 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


(Song) 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 6 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 70-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is much like the 3rd-level monster 
summoning I spell, except that this spell sum- 
mons 1d3 Sth-level monsters. These appear 
within the spell’s area of effect and attack the 
caster’s opponents until either he commands 
them to cease, the spell duration expires, or the 
monsters are slain. These creatures do not check 
morale, and they vanish when slain. If no oppo- 
nent exists to fight, summoned monsters can, if 
the wizard can communicate with them and if 
they are physically capable, perform other ser- 
vices for the summoning wizard. 

The material components of this spell are a 
tiny bag and a small (not necessarily lit) candle. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Monster Summoning IV 


Land 

1 Ankheg (5—6 HD) 
2 Ape, carnivorous 
3 Banderlog 

4 Ettercap 

5 Gargoyle 

6 Ghast 

7 Hellhound 

8 Huecuva 

9 Hydra, 5 heads 
10 Lyc., werewolf 
1] Ogre 

12 Ooze, gray 

13 Owlbear 

14 Scorpion, huge 
15 Snake, giant const. 
16 Toad, poisonous 
17 Toad, fire 

18 Wasp, giant 

19 Wolf, worg 
20 Yeti 


587 


Aquatic, Salt 
Hippocampus 
Kapoacinth (gargoyle 
Lobster, giant (crayfish) 
Merrow (ogre) 

Otter, giant 

Shark (3—4 HD) 

Triton 

Urchin, yellow 


coon NO Bh WN = 


Aquatic, Fresh 
Beetle, giant water 
Crayfish, giant 
Kapoacinth (gargoyle) 
Kelpie 

Merrow (ogre) 

Otter, giant 

Pike, giant 

Spider, giant water 


on NA MR Whe 


| 


~~ Monster Summoning VI ; 


Monster Summoning V 


Land Aquatic, Salt 
1 Ankheg (7-8 HD) 1 Crocodile, giant 
2 Cockatrice 2 Lamprey, sea 
3 Displacer beast 3 Scrag (troll) 
4 Doppleganger 4 Sea lion 
5 Hornet, giant 5 Selkie 
6 Hydra, 7 heads 6 Shark (5—6 HD) 
7 Hydra, 5 heads, cryo- or pyro- 7 Spider, giant marine 
8 Leucrotta 8 Water weird 
9 Lizard, subterranean 9 Urchin, Silver 
10 Lyc., wereboar 0 Roll again with 1d8 


11 Margoyle 

12 Minotaur 

13 Ochre jelly 

14 Rust monster 

15 Slithering tracker 

16 Snake, giant, pois. or spitting 
17 Spider, giant 

18 Giantkin, verbeeg 

19 Wolf, winter 

20 Zombie, Ju-ju 


Monster Summoning VI 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


(Song) 


Level: 8 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 7 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 80-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is much like the 3rd-level spell mon- 
ster summoning I, except that it summons 1d3 
6th-level monsters. These monsters appear in 
1d3 rounds within the spell’s area of effect and 
attack the caster’s opponents, until either he com- 
mands them to cease, the spell duration expires, 
or the monsters are slain. These creatures do not 
check morale, and they vanish when slain. If no 
opponent exists to fight, summoned monsters 
can, if the wizard can communicate with them, 
and if they are physically capable, perform other 
services for the summoning wizard. 

The material components of this spell are a 
tiny bag and a small (not necessarily lit) candle. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Monster Summoning VII 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


(Song) 


Level: 9 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 8 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 90-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is much like the 3rd-level spell mon- 
ster summoning I, except that this spell summons 
one or two 7th-level monsters that appear one 
round after the spell is cast, or one 8th-level 
monster that appears two rounds after the spell is 
cast. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Note: The 8th-level monsters that can be 
summoned by the monster summoning VII 
spell are listed on page 590. 


h Monster Summoning VII r 


Monster Summoning VI 


Oeo~ TAO & WN 


OO AN MN BW bd 


Land 

Basilisk 

Beetle, stag 
Carrion crawler 
Dracolisk 
Drider 

Griffon 

Hydra, 8 heads 
Lizard, minotaur 
Lyc, weretiger 
Manticore 
Ogre mane 
Otyugh 
Pyrolisk 
Salamander 
Spider, phase 
Troll 

Wolfwere 
Wraith 

Wyvern 
Yuan-ti, halfbreed 


Monster Summoning VII 


Land 

Basilisk, greater 
Behir or tunnel worm 
Bulette 

Chimera 

Ettin or hill giant 
Golem, flesh 
Gorgon 

Hydra, 10 heads 
Hydra, 8 heads, cryo- or pyro- 
Lizard, fire 
Mummy 
Neo-otyugh 
Pudding, black 
Roper 

Shambling mound 
Slug, giant 
Sphinx, hieraco- 
Troll, 2-headed 
Umber hulk 

Xorn 


589 


AU AUN m 


Dak WN 


de Go N 


& YW bo m 


Aquatic, Salt 

Eel, marine 

Narwhal 

Octopus 

Seawolf, greater 

Shark (7—8 HD) 

Snake, giant sea (8 HD) 


Aquatic, Fresh 

Eel, marine 

Gar, giant 

Octopus 

Seawolf, greater 

Snake, giant sea (8 HD) 
Vodyanoi (8 HD) 


Aquatic, Salt 

Ray, manta 

Slug, giant sea 

Snake, giant sea (10 HD) 
Squid, giant 


Aquatic, Fresh 

Catfish, giant 

Greenhag 

Naga, water 

Snake, giant sea (10 HD) 


~ Moon Rune r 


Monster Summoning VIH 


Land 
1 Beetle, rhinoceros 
2 Giant, fire or frost 
3 Giant, formorian 
4 Golem, stone 
5 Gorgimera 
6 Hydra, 12 heads 
7 Hydra, lernaean, 8 heads 
8 Pudding, brown 
9 Remorhaz 
10 Rust monster 
l1 Will o`wisp 
12 Worm, purple 


Aquatic, Salt 

Eye of the deep 

Dragon turtle (12 HD) 

Kraken" 

Shark, giant 

Vodyanoi (16 HD)" 

Whale, killer 

Whale, small herbivore (12 HD) 
Worm, mottled (purple) 


O uU AUN me 


Aquatic, Fresh 

Slug, giant sea 

Dragon turtle (12 HD) 
Kuo-toan monitor 
Worm, mottled (purple) 


DUN m 


* This creature is10% likely to become free-willed if ordered to act against its nature or inclinations. 


Moon Rune 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice, Geometry) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Up to 1 sq. ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


By using this spell, the wizard can create an 
invisible mark or rune on any surface. This mark 
remains invisible until conditions specified at the 
time of the casting are met. For example, the 
wizard could specify that the runes are only visi- 
ble by the light of the moon or by the light of a 
moon of a certain phase (half, full, etc.), when 
viewed by an elf, at sunset or sunrise, when 
viewed by a wizard, when the caster is present, 
and so on. 

The spell cannot transcribe magical runes, 
signs, glyphs, or symbols. As many as seven let- 
ters or marks can be drawn. Unlike a magic 
mouth spell, a moon rune is permanent and will 
appear any time its conditions are met. 

Besides appearing when the proper conditions 
are met, a moon rune also becomes visible if a 
detect magic, detect invisibility, true seeing, Or 
other such spell or effect is used on it. A read 
magic spell will reveal the maker’s words, if in 
magical script. A moon rune cannot be cast on a 
living creature. 

The rune cannot be dispelled, but it can be re- 


590 


moved by the caster or by an erase spell. 

A moon rune requires a special mixture of pig- 
ment including mithral filings or powder worth 
at least 100 gp. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Moonbow, Presper’s 
See Presper’s moonbow. 


Mooncloak 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is usable only at night under a 
moonlit sky. The incantation weaves an aura of 
moonlight around the caster or a chosen visible 
being within spell range. The area of effect 
moves with the focal being. 

This magical field glows with a pearl-white 
radiance bright enough to read by. Within its 
confines, creatures receive special benefits 
against all cold-based, paralyzing, and level- 
draining attacks. The warded creatures receive an 
extra saving throw or damage lessened by 1 point 
per die—whichever best applies in the DM’s 
judgment. 

Once per round, while a mooncloak lasts, the 
spell’s caster can choose to sacrifice one memo- 


_ 


‘ Moonglow r 


rized spell. The spell is expended without being 
cast, and the caster or another creature touched 
by the caster within the moonlit field gains a 
number of hit points equal to twice the level of 
the expended spell. 

The caster must touch the chosen individual to 
so gift (and usually heal) him or her, and cannot 
cast another spell in the same round. If hit points 
gained in this way raise a being to more than its 
usual total, the extra hit points are lost. 

A mooncloak can outlast the death, uncon- 
sciousness, or flight of its caster, but vanishes in- 
stantly if the caster desires it ended. 

The material component is a moonstone, 
pearl, or other pale-hued gemstone of not less 
than 50 gp in value, which is destroyed in the 
casting. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers; rare. 


Moonglow 
Third level spell, aka moonglow symbol. 
Moonglow 
(Alteration) 
(Shadow) 
Level: 1 


Range: 10 ft./level 


TAW | 
sà YORIM A ‘ 
mY SU 


y 
Às 


he ‘dS 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius centered on 1 object 
Saving Throw: Neg. (see below) 


This spell enables the caster to conjure a faint, 
blue-white radiance resembling moonlight, cen- 
tered on a chosen item within range. The item 
chosen to be highlighted must be man-sized or 
smaller. Larger items are only partially illumi- 
nated (for instance, a particular spot on a wall 
could be lit). The clothing or gear of a foe attack- 
ing in darkness might be chosen, but the item 
must be visible to normal vision; the caster 
cannot choose to illuminate some part of an in- 
visible foe. Chosen items, even those on the 
person of a hostile creature, are allowed the 
bearer’s saving throw vs. spell against being illu- 
minated only if they have a dweomer. 

Moonglow is completely suppressed by any 
type of magical darkness. It is not bright enough 
to read spells or normal writing, but large in- 
scriptions and clear, simple, or familiar markings 
can be discerned. 

Notes: Uncommon spell, originally from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


~ Moonglow Symbol r 


Moonglow Symbol 
(Alteration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to draw a glowing 
symbol in the air or on a solid surface. The 
symbol is drawn with pure water, which vapor- 
izes from the drawing finger during the spell. 
The symbol glows with a faint, silver-blue light, 
like moonlight. Until dispelled, the glow can be 
seen only in darkness, and is otherwise invisible. 
The symbol consists of radiant air, and cannot be 
moved or modified except by casting another 
moonglow symbol spell on it. The glowing figure 
cannot bear any magical powers, such as those of 
a glyph or symbol spell, nor can it be linked to 
any other magic via a spell trigger or other 
magic. 

A moonglow symbol spell can be used to write 
messages and even to set down sigils and runes, 
but these are without magical power. In some 
cases, wizards have deliberately used this limita- 
tion to draw harmful runes or glyphs for recogni- 
tion purposes or as warnings to keep away. 
Symbols created with this spell cannot turn, ani- 
mate, or react, but can be fashioned into pointing 
hands, masks that resemble human faces, and 
other shapes that might convey meaning. 

A moonglow symbol remains stationary unless 
cast on an object, whereupon it moves with that 
object. If the object is destroyed, the symbol is 
also. In the dark, moonglow symbols give off 
enough light to read by. 

Notes: Uncommon for geometers; otherwise 
rare. Originally from the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Mordenkainen’s Celerity 
(Alteration, Invocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Mordenkainen 5 celerity affects spells of 1st to 
3rd level that alter the movement of the wizard, 
such as feather fall, jump, spider climb, levitate, 
fly, and haste. Spells to be affected must be cast 
within one turn of the casting of Mordenkainens 
celerity, and do not expire when the celerity ex- 
pires. 

Spells cast following the celerity receive a 
25% bonus to duration. This effect is not cumula- 
tive with other means of magically extending a 
spell’s duration. In addition, the caster’s move- 
ment rate is increased by 25% (the feather fall 
rate of descent can be reduced by 25% at the 
caster’s option). 

The area of effect is the caster, except in the 
case of the Aaste spell, for which the effects of 
the celerity operate on 1d4 creatures in addition 
to the wizard. The celerity has no other effect on 
these creatures in any way. 

The spell gives the wizard a +2 bonus to his 
saving throws against spells of Ist to 3rd level 
that directly affect his movement, such as web, 
hold person, and slow. The wizard also gains a 
+2 bonus to saving throws against magical paral- 
ysis. 

The material component is a small pouch or 
vessel containing centipede or millipede legs. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (ToM). 


Mordenkainen’s Defense Against 
Lycanthropes 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell will aid a creature in surviving at- 
tacks made by lycanthropes. Any attack made 
upon the creature by a lycanthrope has a -2 
penalty to hit. No matter how much damage a ly- 
canthrope inflicts, the wounded creature will not 
contract lycanthropy as long as the spell is in 
effect. The spell will not protect the creature 
from contracting lycanthropy if injuries occur 
before the spell is cast or after it expires. 

The material component is crushed moon- 
stone worth at least 30 gp. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


592 


_— 


` Mordenkainen’s Encompassing Vision r 


Mordenkainen’s Defense Against 
Nonmagical Reptiles and Amphibians 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


A creature protected by this spell gains an ad- 
vantage in combat with nonmagical reptiles or 
amphibians, including snakes, dinosaurs, frogs, 
and giant-sized species of such animals. Dragons 
are excluded from the spell’s effect, as are other 
creatures with unnatural abilities. All affected 
animals have a —2 penalty to hit the protected 
creature, and the creature gains a +4 bonus to 
saving throws against reptile or amphibian 
venom. 

The material components are a bit of snake 
skin and a dried frog’s leg placed in a pouch of 
hardened leather. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Mordenkainen’s Disjunction 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is cast, all magic and magical 
items within the radius of the spell, except those 
on the person of or being touched by the spell- 
caster, are disjoined. That is, spells being cast are 
separated into their individual components (usu- 
ally spoiling the effect as a dispel magic spell 
does), and permanent and enchanted magical 
items must successfully save (vs. spell if actually 
cast on a creature, or vs. a dispel magic spell oth- 
erwise) or be turned into normal items. Even ar- 
tifacts and relics are subject to Mordenkainens 
disjunction, though there is only a 1% chance per 
caster experience level of affecting such power- 
ful items. Thus, all potions, scrolls, rings, rods, 
miscellaneous magical items, artifacts and relics, 
arms and armor, swords, and miscellaneous 
weapons within 30 feet of the spellcaster can 


possibly lose all their magical properties when 
the Mordenkainen 5 disjunction spell is cast. The 
caster also has a 1% chance per level of destroy- 
ing an antimagic shell. If the shell survives the 
disjunction, no items within it are disjoined. 

Note: Destroying artifacts is a dangerous busi- 
ness, and 95% likely to attract the attention of 
some powerful being who has an interest or con- 
nection with the device. Additionally, if an arti- 
fact is destroyed, the casting wizard must roll a 
successful saving throw vs. spell with a —4 
penalty or permanently lose all spellcasting abil- 
ities. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Mordenkainen’s Electric Arc 
(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell causes one or more small flashes of 
lightning to erupt from the caster’s fingertips and 
strike one or more opponents. One arc of light- 
ning will be evoked for every three full levels of 
the caster. Each electric arc inflicts 1d6 points of 
damage, plus one point per level of the caster to a 
maximum bonus of +10 per arc. A saving throw 
vs. spell reduces damage by one half. The spell is 
most effective when each electric arc is directed 
at a separate opponent. Only one arc can strike a 
target per combat round; others striking the same 
target have no further effect. 

The material components for the spell are a bit 
of fur and a glass rod. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Mordenkainen’s Encompassing Vision 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell grants a creature a full 360 degrees of 
vision, so the creature can see to the sides and rear 


593 


~ Mordenkainen’s Faithful Hound om 


as well as it sees to the front. The creature cannot 
be surprised from the rear by any attacker that the 
creature can see normally. The spell works in 
combination with any sort of enhanced or magical 
vision, including infravision, ultravision, or x-ray 
vision. A creature with both detect invisibility and 
encompassing vision can see invisible, ethereal, or 
astral beings to its flanks or rear as well. The 
person affected by this spell also has a —2 penalty 
on all saving throws vs. gaze attacks. 

The material component is a crystal disc with 
eight eyes inscribed upon it, spaced at 45-degree 
intervals around the edge of the disc. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Mordenkainen’s Faithful Hound 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard summons 
up a phantom watchdog that only he can see. He 
can then command it to perform as guardian of a 
passage, room, door, or similar space or portal. 
The phantom watchdog immediately commences 
a loud barking if any creature larger than a cat 
approaches the place it guards. As the faithful 
hound can detect invisible creatures and ward 
against the approach of ethereal creatures, it is an 
excellent guardian. It does not react to illusions 
that are not at least quasi-real. 

If the intruding creature exposes its back to the 
watchdog, the dog delivers a vicious attack as if 
it was a 10-Hit Dice monster, striking for 3d6 
points of damage. It can hit opponents of all 
types, even those normally subject only to magi- 
cal weapons of +3 or greater enchantment. Crea- 
tures without backs (for example, ochre jellies) 
are not attacked. The faithful hound cannot be at- 
tacked, but it can be dispelled. The spell lasts for 
a maximum of one hour plus half an hour per 
caster level, but once it is activated by an in- 
truder, it lasts only one round per caster level. If 
the spellcaster is ever more than 30 yards from 
the area that the watchdog guards, the spell ends. 

The material components of this spell are a 
tiny silver whistle, a piece of bone, and a thread. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


J A 


594 


Mordenkainen’s Faithful 
Phantom Defenders 
(Summoning) 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons a set of phantom beings 
seen as shimmering outlines of violet light. 
These defenders do their best to keep between 
the wizard and his foes, providing the caster with 
enough time and space to defend himself with 
spells. To most creatures, the phantom defenders 
are solid, seemingly real entities. To the wizard, 
the defenders are completely transparent and 
noncorporeal. Any attack spell cast by the wizard 
has no effect on them, so the wizard’s spells can 
be cast through them to strike enemy creatures. 
The defenders suffer no harm if caught within 
the area of effect of the wizard’s spells. 

One of four different sets of phantom defend- 
ers can be summoned by the wizard, but the 
caster must decide which set will be called forth 
when the spell is memorized. Each set is best 
suited for a particular environment. These are the 
four sets of defenders: 


* Three faithful phantom soldiers: AC 4 (phan- 
tom chain mail and shield); MV 9; HD 4; hp 
24 each; #AT 1; Dmg 1d8 (phantom long 
sword); THACO 17; AL N; SA can strike 
creatures hit only by +1 magical weapons. 


Two faithful phantom centaurs: AC 5; MV 
18; HD 4; hp 28 each; #AT 1; Dmg 1d6 
(phantom light lance); THACO 15; AL N; SA 
can strike creatures hit only by +2 magical 
weapons. 


Eight faithful phantom giant bats: AC 8; MV 
3, fl 18; HD 2+2; hp 12 each; #AT 1; Dmg 
1d4; THACO 19; AL N; SA can strike crea- 
tures hit only by +3 magical weapons. 


Five faithful phantom sharks: AC 6; MV sw 
24; HD 3; hp 15 each; #AT 1; Dmg 1d4+1; 
THACO 15; AL N; SA can strike creatures hit 
only by +1 magical weapons. 


a 


-_ 


x Mordenkainen’s Force Missiles r 


The material component is a 1,000 gp emer- 
ald which vanishes when the spell is cast. The 
spell also requires is a small lead crystal figure 
depicting the type of defender to be summoned, 
which is reusable. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Mordenkainen’s Faithful 
Phantom Guardian 
(Summoning) 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons a faithful phantom being 
to watch over and protect the wizard for one day. 
The guardian will remain an undetectable ob- 
server, watching the caster from the Ethereal 
Plane. The guardian can see what is happening 
within 60 feet of the caster, and can spot invis- 
ible, out-of-phase, duo-dimensional, ethereal, or 
astral creatures within the area around the 
wizard. If the guardian spies any creature about 
to launch a surprise attack on the caster, it will 
instantly materialize to defend the wizard. The 
guardian fights for up to one round per level of 
the caster or until it is destroyed. 

The wizard also has the option of summoning 
the guardian to his side at any time. The guardian 
will appear in one round and fight under the 
same time limit. Once the guardian has spent its 
time on the Prime Material Plane, it has com- 
pleted its mission and will no longer watch over 
the caster. The guardian appears as a shimmering 
outline of violet light. The phantom guardian 
cannot speak, so it cannot shout a warning if the 
wizard is attacked. 

The material component is a 1,000 gp dia- 
mond, which is sent to the guardian when the 
spell is cast as a payment for its service. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Faithful Phantom Guardian: AC 2; 
MV 15; HD 6; hp 36; #AT 1; Dmg 1d10 
(two-handed sword); THACO 13; AL N; SA 
can strike creatures hit only by +2 magical 
weapons. 


Mordenkainen’s Faithful 
Phantom Shield-Maidens 


(Summoning) 


Level: 4 

Range: 50 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons a pair of shimmering 
violet phantom beings that will stay on either 
side of the wizard and protect him from all at- 
tackers. 

The shield-maidens stay close enough to the 
caster for their shields to help cover the wizard. 
The shield of one maiden will provide the caster 
with a +1 Armor Class bonus. If both shield- 
maidens protect the same side of the caster with 
their shields, the Armor Class bonus is +2. While 
the shield-maidens can protect the caster from at- 
tacks from different directions, they will move 
no farther than 50 feet away from the caster, even 
if the wizard orders them to move away. They 
follow magically wherever the caster goes. 

The material components are a pair of small 
crystal shields tied with string to a miniature 
wooden figure of the caster. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Phantom Shield-Maiden: AC 4 (phantom 
chain mail and large shield); MV 12; HD 3; 
hp 20 each; Dmg 1d6 (phantom spear); 
THACO 17; ALN. 


Mordenkainen’s Force Missiles 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. + 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 or more creatures or objects 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a brilliant globe of magical 
energy, which streaks forth from the caster’s 
hand to unerringly strike its target, much like a 


~ Mordenkainen’s Involuntary Wizardry 


magic missile spell. The target must be seen or 
otherwise detected. 

The wizard creates one missile at 7th level, 
and an additional missile at every third level after 
7th—in other words, two missiles at 10th level, 
three at 13th, four at 16th, and so on, to a maxi- 
mum of seven missiles at 25th level. 

Each missile inflicts 2d4 points of impact 
damage upon the target creature, and then bursts 
in a concussive blast that inflicts | point of 
damage per level of the caster to all within in a 3- 
foot radius. For example, a 12th-level wizard 
could conjure two force missiles, each of which 
strikes for 2d4+12 damage. A target creature that 
makes a successful saving throw vs. spell negates 
the concussion damage, but the impact of the 
missile itself allows no saving throw. 

As with the magic missile spell, the force mis- 
siles can be directed at as many or as few targets 
as the caster likes. The missiles can damage or 
destroy inanimate objects, especially fragile or 
delicate items. Such items must make a success- 
ful saving throw vs. crushing blow or be shat- 
tered. Sturdy objects, such as thick stonework, 
are unlikely to be affected. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (PO:SM). 


Mordenkainen’s Involuntary Wizardry 
(Enchantment/Charm, Necromancy) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 spellcaster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell forces a single, randomly-chosen 
wizard spell from the mind of another spellcaster. 
If the subject can’t cast wizard spells, then the in- 
voluntary wizardry is wasted. Otherwise, the sub- 
ject receives a saving throw vs. spell with a —3 
penalty; if this succeeds, the involuntary wizardry 
spell is wasted without effect. The involuntarily 
cast spell is centered on and takes full normal 
effect on the subject; if the spell would do no harm 
to the subject, then the subject suffers one point of 
damage per spell level (for instance, detect invisi- 
bility, a 2nd-level spell, inflicts two points of 
damage). The involuntarily cast spell is expended. 
The subject receives any saving throw normally al- 
lowed against that spell’s effect. 

While Mordenkainen’s involuntary wizardry 


spell itself has no material component, any com- 
ponent for the involuntarily cast spell is ex- 
pended from the person of the subject. Likewise, 
any casting penalty (such as the temporary Con- 
stitution loss for an identify spell) is visited upon 
the subject. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Mordenkainen’s Lucubration 
(Alteration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By use of this spell, the wizard is able to in- 
stantly recall any lst- through Sth-level spell he 
has used during the past 24 hours. The spell must 
have been memorized and actually used during 
that time period. Mordenkainen’s lucubration 
allows the recovery of only one spell. If the re- 
called spell requires material components, these 
must be provided by the caster; the recovered 
spell is not usable until the material components 
are available. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Mordenkainen’s Magnificent Mansion 
(Alteration, Conjuration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 rds. 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 300 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard conjures up an 
extradimensional dwelling, entrance to which can 
be gained only at a single point of space on the plane 
from which the spell was cast. From the entry point, 
those creatures observing the area see only a faint 
shimmering in the air, in an area 4 feet wide and 8 
feet high. The caster of the spell controls entry to the 
mansion, and the portal is shut and made invisible 
behind him when he enters. He can open it again 
from his own side at will. Once observers have 


o aaa, < 


596 


A 


p— 


x Mordenkainen’s Penultimate Cogitation va 


passed beyond the entrance, they behold a magnifi- 
cent foyer and numerous chambers beyond. The 
place is furnished and contains sufficient foodstuffs 
to serve a nine-course banquet to as many dozens of 
people as the spellcaster has levels of experience. 
There is a staff of near-transparent servants, liveried 
and obedient, to wait upon all who enter. The atmos- 
phere is clean, fresh, and warm. 

Since the place can be entered only through its 
special portal, outside conditions do not affect the 
mansion, nor do conditions inside it pass to the 
plane beyond. Rest and relaxation within the place 
is normal, but the food is not. It seems excellent and 
quite filling as long as one is within the place. Once 
outside, however, its effects disappear immediately, 
and if those resting have not eaten real food within a 
reasonable time span, ravenous hunger strikes. Fail- 
ure to eat normal food immediately results in the 
onset of fatigue or starvation penalties as decided by 
the DM. 

The material components of this spell are a 
miniature portal carved from ivory, a small piece of 
polished marble, and a tiny silver spoon. These are 
utterly destroyed when the spell is cast. 

(It is worth mentioning that this spell has been 
used in conjunction with a normal portal, as well as 
with illusion magic. There is evidence that the 
design and interior of the space created can be al- 
tered to suit the caster’s wishes.) 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Mordenkainen’s 
Penultimate Cogitation 
(Alteration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 7 

Range: | mi. 

Casting Time: 1 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This permits the wizard to call to mind one 
spell of Ist to 6th level from one of the caster’s 
personal spellbooks, provided the appropriate 
spellbook is within one mile of the wizard. The 
spell must be one that the caster knows, as ex- 
plained in the Player's Handbook. The spell 
cannot be called from a scroll or another wizard’s 
spellbook. Only one spell can be called per cast- 
ing of the penultimate cogitation. The called 
spell can be cast on any succeeding round. A 
10% chance exists that the called spell will be 
magically erased from the wizard’s spellbook. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


~ Mordenkainen’s Private Sanctum s 


Mordenkainen’s Private Sanctum 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: 1 room 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell insures privacy in a room of up to 
1,600 square feet in area, or 40 feet by 40 feet in 
dimension. All windows in the room become 
dark and misty as seen from the outside, prevent- 
ing creatures with normal vision, infravision, or 
other special vision from looking into the room. 
Those inside can look out normally. X-ray vision 
cannot penetrate into the room, as if the room 
were completely enclosed in a lead shield. No 
sounds, no matter how loud, can escape the 
room, so a thief cannot eavesdrop from outside. 
Scrying attempts, such as ESP clairaudience, 
clairvoyance, or crystal balls, cannot penetrate 
the protected room, and a wizard eye cannot get 
inside. The casting wizard can freely leave the 
room without the protection being dispelled. 

The material components are a thin sheet of 
lead, a piece of opaque glass, a wad of cotton or 
cloth, and powdered chrysolite. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Mordenkainen’s 
Protection From Avians 
(Abjuration) 
(Air) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


A creature protected by this spell receives a 
special benefit when in combat with avians to- 
talling no more than 15 Hit Dice; if more Hit 
Dice attack, the spell is negated. Affected avians 
have a —2 penalty on rolls to hit the protected 
creature for the duration of the spell. 

The material component for the spell is a 
feather from any bird wrapped with a strip of 
tough leather. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Mordenkainen’s Protection From 
Insects and Arachnids 
(Abjuration) 
(Earth) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell provides a measure of protection 
from insects, spiders, and scorpions, including 
giant-sized and unnatural species of such ani- 
mals. All such animals attack the protected crea- 
ture with a —2 penalty to hit and all of the 
protected creature’s saving throws against insect 
or arachnid venom have a +4 bonus. The spell 
works on no more than 20 Hit Dice of bugs of all 
types. If more than 20 Hit Dice of these attack, 
the spell dissipates. 

The material component is an insect trapped in 
amber. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Mordenkainen’s 
Protection From Slime 
(Abjuration) 
(Mater) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell helps protect a creature against at- 
tacks by all molds, slimes, puddings, oozes, and 
other formless, primordial beings. All attacks 
against the protected creature are made with a —2 
penalty and the protected creature’s saving throw 
has a +2 bonus. 

The slime monster can attack the protection 
itself. The spell negates up to 10d4 points of such 
damage from slime before it collapses. 

The material components are a bit of food 
mold pressed between two flat stones, and a 
pinch of diamond dust. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


p 


x Morphail’s Unholy Blessing r 


Mordenkainen’s Sword 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 7 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell, the wizard brings into 
being a shimmering, swordlike plane of force. 
The spellcaster can mentally wield this weapon 
(to the exclusion of all activities other than 
movement), causing it to move and strike as if it 
were being used by a fighter. The basic chance 
for Mordenkainen’s sword to hit is the same as 
the chance for a sword wielded by a fighter of 
half the level of the spellcaster. For example, if 
cast by a 14th-level wizard, the weapon has the 
same hit probability as a sword wielded by a 7th- 
level fighter. 

The sword has no magical attack bonuses, but 
itcan hit nearly any type of opponent, even those 
normally struck only by +3 weapons or those 
who are astral, ethereal, or out of phase. It hits 
any Armor Class on a roll of 19 or 20. It inflicts 
5d4 points of damage to opponents of man size 
or smaller, and 5d6 points of damage to oppo- 
nents larger than man size. It lasts until the spell 
duration expires, a dispel magic is used success- 
fully upon it, or its caster no longer desires it. 

The material component is a miniature plat- 
inum sword with a grip and pommel of copper 
and zinc (500 gp). The miniature disappears 
upon the completion of the casting. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Morgannaver’s Sting 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Until discharged (3 rds. maximum) 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the caster to drain 3d4 hit 
points from any single creature and absorb them 
as healing energy. The caster has three rounds 
after casting to touch another creature (a success- 


ful attack roll is required), or the spell is lost. If 
the caster begins casting another spell before 
touching another creature, the spell is also lost. 

The first creature touched is affected, regard- 
less of the caster’s intentions. The affected crea- 
ture must make a saving throw vs. spell. If 
successful, the creature loses 1d6+1 hit points, 
and the caster gains no hit points. If the saving 
throw is failed, the caster gains 3d4 hit points 
drained from the creature as healing energy. 
Morgannaver'’s sting does not confer hit points 
above the caster’s normal total; excess hit points 
drained by the spell are simply lost. 

The drained creature, if not killed, is wracked 
by intense pain for 1d3 rounds, suffering an 
Armor Class penalty of —2 and a -2 penalty to 
attack rolls during this time. Further, the creature 
is unable to cast spells or perform other activities 
requiring concentration. Hit points lost to this 
spell can be regained by the usual means (magi- 
cal healing, rest, and so on). 

This spell cannot drain undead creatures, nor 
creatures whose energies are based on the Nega- 
tive Material Plane. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in the 
tome Galadaster’s Orizon. 


Morphail’s Unholy Blessing 


(Abjuration, Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 HD/level in a 50-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell gives undead creatures a saving 
throw against the undead turning powers of 
priests and paladins. For each experience level of 
the caster, | Hit Die of undead creatures is pro- 
tected. When a cleric or paladin attempts to turn 
a protected undead, the undead creature receives 
the caster’s saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
effect. Undead that fail this saving throw are 
turned normally. 

The evil Prince Morphail—a powerful vam- 
pire—created an unholy blessing to protect him- 
self and his undead servants from priestly powers. 

Notes: Found in the MYSTARA setting, where it 
is common or uncommon; virtually unknown 
elsewhere. 


, T to 


599 


~ Most Excellent Force Scuplture, Bigby’s r 


Most Excellent Force Sculpture, 
Bigby’s 


See Bigby’s most excellent force sculpture. 


Motion 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell confers a magical motive force on 
an object touched by the wizard. The object must 
be designed to move in some way—for example, 
a wagon would roll on its wheels without the 
benefit of a horse to pull it; a boat or raft would 
move over water; a winch, capstan, water wheel, 
or millstone could be made to turn by itself; or a 
door or gate could open or shut by itself. 

The motion can be started and stopped by 
command words specified by the wizard during 
the casting. The potential for motion on com- 
mand exists for the duration of the spell. 

The rate of motion is about the same as the 
object’s normal operating speed (for example, up 
to 12 for a wagon, 18 for a chariot, etc.), and the 
wizard can vary speed or direction of motion 
within this normal range at will. The force of the 
motion is proportional to the size of the object 
affected, so a wizard might win a tug of war with 
a team of large draft horses if he has a large, 
sturdy cart to work with. This spell is useful for 
creating unusual machines and devices for a 
wizard’s laboratory. 

If the object’s motion is interfered with by a 
greater force than it can counter (a giant grabs a 
magically powered water wheel and tries to stop 
it), the object resumes its ordered motion when 
the obstruction is cleared. 

Notes: Rare spell. Known to be in Prismal’s 
Pocket Library, Vol. IV. 


600 


Mount 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 2 hrs. + 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: 1 mount 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster conjures a 
normal animal to serve him as a mount. The 
animal serves willingly and well, but at the expi- 
ration of the spell duration it disappears, return- 
ing to its own place. The type of mount gained by 
this spell depends on the level of the caster; of 
course, a caster can choose a lesser mount if de- 
sired. Available mounts include those listed. 


Caster Level Mount 


1-3 Mule or light horse 
4-7 Draft horse or war horse 
8-12 Camel 
13-14 Elephant (and howdah at 18th 
level) 
15+ Griffon (and saddle at 18th 
level) 


The mount does not come with any riding 
gear, unless it is of a class lower than the caster 
would normally be entitled to; thus, a 4th-level 
wizard can gain a war horse without saddle and 
harness, or a light horse with saddle and harness. 
The statistics of the animal gained are typical of 
all creatures of the same class. The mount disap- 
pears when slain. 

The material component of the spell is a bit of 
hair from the type of animal to be conjured. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Mountain Fortress 
Athasian Dragon-King magic; psionic 


component renders the 


spell uncastable by 
wizards. 


p" 


~ Move Earth r 


Mouse 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting this spell on an object (weighing up to 
5 oz., plus 1 oz. per level) causes that object to 
scurry off to a safe place and stay there. This 
generally be some narrowly confined space that 
is difficult to access, but allows some avenue for 
escape. If searched for, the object eludes the 
search by scurrying from hiding place to hiding 
place at a movement rate of 6. 

The object stops moving when the spell ex- 
pires or the caster voluntarily ends the spell. The 
spell is automatically dispelled if any searcher 
touches the object—this requires a successful 
attack against AC 0, as the object is quite nimble. 

The object returns to the caster if he so com- 
mands it. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Move Dune 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Sand) Q i 
Level: 5 
Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 10 ft. x 10 ft. x 10 ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell a caster can lift a heap of 
sand—or dust or gravel—and move it to a nearby 
location. To an observer, it looks as if the wizard 
levitates the load and sends it drifting through the 
air. The spell can move only small, dry, inorganic, 
and nonliving particles. It leaves wet soil (mud) 
and rocks behind, along with buried objects such 
as bones, treasure, and burrowing animals, re- 
vealing them for all to see. Also exposed are sen- 
tient creatures, including all types of elementals 
and earth-based creatures such as sandlings. 

The wizard can hoist a load occupying a 10- 
foot cube per experience level, usually part of a 
dune. He must be able to see the dune to lift it. 


He can move it up to 20 feet each round in any 
direction. The spell’s duration 1s one round per 
level. Once the sand is launched, he doesn’t need 
to concentrate to keep it moving, or even see it. 
The load moves in one mass. If the wizard delib- 
erately drops it, the debris forms a cloud identi- 
cal in effects to a sand shield, lasting 1d3 rounds. 
Creatures below a load that is dumped (as op- 
posed to those who move into the resulting sand 
shield) are allowed a Dexterity check to avoid 
being buried. 

The material component of this spell is a pinch 
of sand, blown upon by the caster. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise very rare. 


Move Earth 
(Alteration) 
(Earth) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, the move earth spell moves dirt 
(clay, loam, sand) and its other components. 
Thus, embankments can be collapsed, hillocks 
moved, dunes shifted, etc. However, in no event 
can rock prominences be collapsed or moved. 
The area to be affected dictates the casting time; 
for every 40 yard x 40 yard surface area and 10 
feet of depth, one turn of casting time is re- 
quired. The maximum area that can be affected is 
240 yards x 240 yards, which takes four hours. 

If terrain features are to be moved—as com- 
pared with simply caving in banks or walls of 
earth—it is necessary that an earth elemental be 
subsequently summoned to assist. All spellcast- 
ing or summoning must be completed before any 
effects occur. As any summoned earth elemental 
will perform most of its work underground, it is 
unlikely that it will be intercepted or interrupted. 
Should this occur, however, the movement of the 
earth requiring its services is stopped until the el- 
emental is once again available. Should the ele- 
mental be slain or dismissed, the move earth spell 
is limited to collapsing banks or walls of earth. 

The spell cannot be used for tunneling and is 
generally too slow to trap or bury creatures; its 
primary use is for digging or filling moats or for 
adjusting terrain contours before a battle. 


601 


~ Move Object — Old Empire = 


The material components for this spell are a 
mixture of soils (clay, loam, sand) in a small bag 
and an iron blade. 

Note: This spell does not violently break the 
surface of the ground. Instead, it creates wavelike 
crests and troughs, with the earth reacting with 
glacierlike fluidity until the desired result is 
achieved. Trees, structures, rock formations, etc. 
are relatively unaffected, save for changes in ele- 
vation and relative topography. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Move Object — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to point to a 
single small object and move it. The wizard can 
move an object weighing up to two pounds per 
level to a maximum of 20 pounds. Complex 
movements are not possible: While a dagger can 


“he Lt P 
rT WW 
, bisca AAR. 2 W 3 a 


Ha A Wagal AQ’ 
H N i a A . Ae E 


NA 


Meee 
NC Rr 


saison ane a JS 
X Sut i A NAAN LAA 

WAA PRAMAS A an X WW 
RU SEAL 


SA 
SAY NON 


be pulled from its sheath if not secured, the 
caster cannot unbuckle a belt. A wizard can use 
this spell to push or pull levers from a safe dis- 
tance. This spell cannot be used to animate and 
attack with weapons from a distance. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 
Optionally, the spell can be made available to 
mentalist specialists. 


Move Sand 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Sand) a 
Level: 1 
Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 2 rds. or less 
Area of Effect: 3-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This magic allows the caster to direct the 
movement of sand in a localized area—even 
against the forces of wind, gravity, and spells that 
are 2nd level or lower. Control is by sheer will 
and expressive gesture; the caster does not have 
to touch the sand directly, but must be able to see 


Ui ti ayy! 


“iy 


SSS (an 


ORE ni 


p 


D Multi-Lock r 


it during the spellcasting. In all cases, movement 
of the sand is slow and obvious. 

This spell only functions in areas with a large 
amount of loose sand or dry earth, such as a 
desert, beach, or windswept barren. All or part of 
the loose sand in the area can be moved (within 
limits of the spell). Move sand does nothing in 
areas of solid rock, abundant plant life, or great 
moisture; these cause the spell to fail. 

Move sand can prevent sand from blowing or 
drifting into a designated area, or help the caster 
dig out an area that has been covered. It serves 
equally well in the careful removal of sand from 
buried objects (even the living). The spell also 
can serve to create a drift that temporarily blocks 
an enemy’s view. 

In certain situations, move sand can be used to 
trigger a slide of sand from atop a dune, or to 
protect individuals caught in such a sandslide. To 
determine success, roll 1d20 and note the result. 
Then roll 1d8 and add the caster’s level to deter- 
mine a second result. If the second result is 
higher, the caster succeeds in triggering the sand- 
slide. Otherwise the sand moves (or fails to 
move) normally. 

If this spell is used to deliberately lift sand or 
dust that is stable or at rest in calm conditions, it 
can create a cloud that obscures an enemy’s 
vision. The cloud remains airborne for one 
round, and measures up to 20 feet by 10 feet 
across, by 5 feet deep. All missile attacks 
through such a cloud suffer a —1 attack penalty. A 
saving throw bonus of +1 is allowed against at- 
tacks that can be dodged (cf., Dexterity bonus); 
an example is lightning bolt. 

The material component is a handful of sand. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise very rare. 


Mug, Bugman’s 


See Bugman’s mug. 


Muirara’s Map 
(Divination) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Developed by one of Sylune’s favorite appren- 


tices, the long-dead half-elf sorceress for whom 
it is named, this spell allows the caster to per- 
ceive a mental picture of four lights in darkness: 
one light is the caster, two others are known 
places the caster has visited at some previous 
time (specified during casting), and the third is a 
chosen being. 

Viewing this mental map gives the caster a 
rough idea of the location of a being she seeks, 
and his or her direction and distance from the 
caster. If the being happens to be at one of the 
chosen locations, the spell confirms this and 
gives a greater indication of the subject’s where- 
abouts: A hazy mental picture shows if the being 
is indoors or outdoors, above or below ground 
level, and moving or stationary. 

The spell can find any creature on the same 
plane as the caster, except a being using nonde- 
tection and like magics (Rary’s protection from 
scrying, Mordenkainen’s private sanctum, etc.) 
or psionic means of concealment. 

Notes: Rare or very rare in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Multi-Lock 
(Alteration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell seals an enclosed area: all closing 
and shuttering devices such as doors, windows, 
gates, sliding panels, and similar barriers to entry 
or egress instantly slam shut and wizard lock. 
The area must be closable along its perimeter: a 
room, a shuttered pavilion, a hallway of doors, 
and so on. The spell has sufficient force to dis- 
lodge iron spikes and stone or timber props, and 
can send creatures of up to Huge size sprawling. 

The maximum volume that can be covered by 
a multi-lock is a cube 40 feet per side. The cube 
increases by 10 feet per caster level above 12th, 
so a 13th-level wizard affects a 50-foot cube, a 
14th-level wizard affects a 60-foot cube, and so 
on. No closures beyond the immediate area to be 
sealed will shut, regardless of the maximum area 
of effect. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


E T e o a a i T 


603 


~~ Multiple Mouths, Elminster’s r 


Multiple Mouths, Elminster’s 


See Elminster’s multiple mouths. 


Mummy Creation — Old Empire 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 50 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 mummy/4 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the wizard can animate up to 
one corpse per four levels of experience (all frac- 
tions are rounded down). The corpses must be 
properly prepared: Each requires an embalming 
fluid that costs 1,400 gp and each body must be 
properly wrapped and prepared, which requires 
six full hours each. 

When activated by this spell, these corpses 
have all of the abilities, including hit points, of 
mummies (see the MonsTROUS MANUAL). When 
the spell has run its course, or when the mum- 
mies are destroyed, the corpses crumble to dust. 
Usually only the bodies of slave-servitors are 
treated in this fashion. 

The material component is mummy dust. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


Mummy Production 

A variation of the 5th-level mummy creation 
known to a specialized type of necromancer 
known as a Deathmaster. It is the same except that 
only one mummy is created, it must be activated 
with a word within 24 hours of the casting, and the 
mummy can be deactivated only by its destruction. 
The mummy is under the control of the caster, but 
has a chance to become free-willed (treat as a 
controlled undead, see control undead). 


Mummy Rot 
Aka mummy touch. The various treatments of 
this effect have been combined into a single “of- 
ficial” version of the spell. 


Mummy Touch 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 


604 


Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Upon casting this spell the wizard is empow- 
ered to inflict the mummy rotting disease on 
others by touch for the duration of the spell. 
Against an actively resisting creature, this re- 
quires a successful attack roll. 

Mummy rot causes the flesh of the victim to 
putrefy and decay. This causes a loss of 2 points 
of Charisma per month and is fatal in 1—6 
months if untreated. Mummy rot can be cured by 
cure disease and more powerful magics that du- 
plicate its effect. While under the effects of 
mummy rot, the victim cannot benefit from cure 
wound spells of any type. Natural healing takes 
place at 10% of the normal rate. 

The spell does not change the caster’s appear- 
ance or affect other abilities. The mummy touch 
affects everyone the caster touches, save himself, 
for the duration of the spell. The caster can, if de- 
sired, end the spell prematurely. 

Undead are immune to the effects of mummy 
touch, as are other creatures that would not nor- 
mally be affected by the attack of a mummy 
(such as iron golems). Mummy touch cannot be 
granted to another individual. The disease func- 
tions only by direct touch—it cannot be used to 
poison food or drink. 

The material components of this spell are a 
pinch of mummy dust and a drop of blood. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers; other- 
wise very rare. In the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting, it is known to be in the tome, Tidings of 
Conflict and Woe. 


Murderous Mist, Merald’s 


See Merald’s murderous mist. 


Murdock’s Feathery Flyer 
(Alteration) 
(Air) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell, a feathery membrane 
grows under the wizard’s arms, extending along 
his sides to his feet. The membrane appears to 
merge with the caster’s skin and clothing. 


_— 


~ Murmuring Masses r 


If the caster spreads his arms and jumps from 
a height, he can glide through the air. For each 
foot of elevation, the wizard can glide five feet 
horizontally. Thus, a wizard jumping from a 
10-foot wall could glide up to 50 feet. Gliding 
characters have a movement rate of 12 and Ma- 
neuverability Class E. 

A wizard attempting to carry more than his 
normal weight allowance plummets to the earth 
upon takeoff. 

When the spell expires, the feathers instantly 
disappear. If the wizard is airborne, he immedi- 
ately plummets toward the ground. 

The material component is an eagle’s feather. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (ToM). 


Murlynd’s Ogre 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 ogre 
Saving Throw: Special 


When the spellcaster brings this dweomer into 
play, a hissing veil of odd colored vapors shoots 
upward. From behind this screen of clashing, 
misty smoke steps an ogre-like creature of ob- 
scene bulk and hideous visage. All creatures of 4 
or fewer Hit Dice or levels of experience will flee 
for 1d4 rounds and spend a like period recover- 
ing from trembling. They must successfully save 
vs. spell before having sufficient courage to 
return. Creatures of 4+ Hit Dice (5th level or 
greater) receive an immediate saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid the fear reaction noted above; 
those of 8+ Hit Dice or 8th level save at a +4 
bonus. 

While it appears fearsome, the ogre is but a 
wraith-like creature with no form or substance. It 
inflicts but 1d4 points of damage when it attacks 
(as an ogre). Although it can be struck only by 
magical weapons, it is destroyed by a mere six 
points of damage. 

The material components for this spell are any 
bit of ogre (hair, nail pairing, etc.) and a piece of 
horsehide. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell (WoG). 


Murlynd’s Void 
(Alteration, Conjuration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 ft./level diameter 
Saving Throw: Special 


Murlynd’s void creates a gaping black hole in 
some surface within spell range—floor, ceiling, 
wall, ground, etc. The opening lasts for as many 
rounds as the caster has levels of experience. The 
void is a vacuum, like the gate to another place 
(extra-dimensional non-space). Small light items 
(such as paper, leaves, and other items of less 
than ¥4-pound weight) within a 100-foot radius 
of the void will whirl up into the air in a vortex, 
disappearing into the pitch black opening. Small 
fires within 10 feet of the void edge are extin- 
guished as the air is drawn into the vacuum. In 
tightly closed areas of under about 20,000 cubic 
feet (under 30 x 30 x 25 feet), the atmosphere is 
thinned such that breathing is impossible for the 
void’s duration and for one turn after it disap- 
pears, unless ventilation is somehow established. 
Creatures immediately above the opening cre- 
ated by the casting of the spell must save vs. spell 
or be lost in the non-space until they are some- 
how rescued, find a way out, or die. Those within 
3 feet of its edge, or its surface (if on a wall, ceil- 
ing or otherwise not underfoot) must make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. paralyzation, or likewise 
be drawn in and be lost. Successful magic resis- 
tance withstands the spell effect. 

The spell components are a hollow sphere of 
black glass and a strip of paper given a half-twist 
and glued together at the ends. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell (WoG). 


Murmuring Masses 
(Iilusion/Phantasm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd./level + 1d6 rds. 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


605 


~ Music Box, Darsson’s r 


When this spell is cast, the wizard creates an 
illusionary crowd of mentally murmuring voices. 
Any psionic creature in, or attempting to access, 
the area of effect (with contact, attack, clairaudi- 
ence, etc.) suffers a —4 to all psionic power scores 
due to the “crowd noise.” 

The casting requires a fragile, fine stemmed 
glass (25 gp) containing a small fruit or veg- 
etable. The glass must be raised as if in a toast. 
The glass is not consumed in the casting, but the 
caster must eat the garnish to complete the spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Music Box, Darsson’s 
See Darsson’s music box. 


Mycontil’s Last Resort 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 (see below) 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


When cast, this spell converts all remaining 
spells in the caster’s memory to magical energy, 
much like the final strike of a staff of the magi. 
The wizard can direct this energy to any point 
within 5 yards per level, a base range of 90 yards. 
All creatures in a 30-foot radius take 1d4 points 
of damage per spell level memorized; those far- 
ther away than 10 feet are allowed a saving throw 
vs. death magic for half damage. 

This spell even works against magic resistant 
creatures. A creature that is 65% magic resistant 
can resist only 65% of the damage, taking the rest 
normally. If farther away than 10 feet, the crea- 
ture is allowed a saving throw for half damage. 

The caster must make an immediate, success- 
ful system shock roll or die. Success costs the 
caster one point of Constitution, and puts him in 
a coma for 1d4 weeks. The coma can be ended in 
1d4 days by a heal spell cast for this purpose 
alone. 

The material component is the finger bone of 
an archmage, which must be prepared in a ritual 
that takes from | to 4 days. The preparation is 
costly, involving diamond dust worth at least 
5,000 gp and a pure platinum ring worn on the 
finger. When the preparation is complete, the 
caster intones all but the final word of the spell. 


After all is prepared, the caster activates the spell 
merely by speaking the final word and breaking 
the finger bone. After the initial casting, the 
caster need not keep this spell in memory; pos- 
session of the ring and bone is sufficient to call 
upon this spell. 

This is the spell that most wizards claim My- 
contil used in his climatic battle against the 
Dambraii. The spell was claimed by Ramael, and 
is one of the chief arguments his foes used to dis- 
credit him. 

For obvious reasons, this spell is not used fre- 
quently. In the history of Halruaa, only Mycontil 
is thought to have cast this spell. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting, best known in Halruaa, the Shining 
South; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


ISR KIRAENI 
PRR Ree 
EROS 
ROR AKVA RS x 
K ; 


ae 
N 
\ 


iy 
AG 


POC es Be 
ee OE 


Mylsibis’s Arcane Contention 
(Enchantment, Evocation, Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 9 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 battlefield 
Saving Throw: Special 


AE E E EEN, a 


606 


p 


~ Mylsibis’s Arcane Contention y 


A wizard who unleashes Mylsibis s arcane 
contention enters a magical duel of extreme effi- 
cacy and catastrophic effect with another wizard. 
The arcane contention creates twin phantasmal 
creatures of awesome size (which seem real to all 
others), controlled by the participating wizards. 

The challenge is issued when one wizard casts 
this spell, initiating a complex series of formal 
responses. The challenge can be issued to any 
wizard within range, regardless of intervening 
barriers of any type. The spell fails if a specialist 
mage is challenged. 

If the challenge is accepted, the challenged 
wizard is immediately compelled to cast at least 
10 spell levels of spells or his own arcane con- 
tention spell. These spells are absorbed to power 
the contention; none of their normal effects man- 
ifest in any way. When the challenged wizard’s 
casting is complete, the arcane contention proper 
is joined. 

A challenged wizard who does not wish to 
meet the challenger must make a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid being drawn into the contention. 
wizards of less than 12th level automatically 
make their saving throws against the spell if they 
so choose. Failure to save draws in the challenged 
wizard and the required spells must be cast. 

Once the arcane contention proper begins, 
both wizards become immobile and absolutely 
vulnerable. Typically, each wizard will be in 
friendly territory or have magical defenses pre- 
pared. Each wizard chooses a monster type to 
represent him in the battle. Any monster can be 
chosen, as long as it is one the wizard has studied 
in detail. The monster need not be of the wizard’s 
alignment, but it cannot be a unique being or a 
specific individual. 

Once both wizards have selected a “champion 
monster,” the apparently real champions form at 
10 times the creatures’ normal size (this affects 
size, Hit Dice, and other applicable factors by a 
factor of 10; however, damage per attack is but 
three times normal). Hit points are rolled for the 
monsters, and 2 hit points are added to each 
monster’s total for each level of the controlling 
wizard (an 18th-level wizard adds 36 points to 
the champion monster). 

Each champion monster is identical to the 
stock from which it is envisioned, including spe- 
cial abilities, special defenses, magic resistance, 
Intelligence, immunities, and so on. In addition, 
the champion can cast spells as its controller, 
using the wizard’s actual memorized spells, 
except Mylsibis s arcane contention. The magi- 
cal champions damage only each other, regard- 


less of attack form, and take damage only from 
the opposing champion. 

The champion monsters do battle under the di- 
rection of the controlling wizards. All movement, 
attack rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, etc., are 
made exactly as they would be in a normal battle. 
Players should keep track of how many points of 
damage their monsters take in combat. 

During the battle, each wizard must maintain 
concentration, or lose control of his champion 
during the interruption. An “uncontrolled” cham- 
pion can attack only physically (no spell use). Nei- 
ther champion can use spells or physical 
movement to leave the battlefield; neither can 
willingly move out of sight of the opposing cham- 
pion or either of the controlling wizards. The 
battle ends when one champion is slain by the 
other. 

The wizards can affect their champions during 
the contention in the following ways: 


e Expend Hit Points: The wizard can transfer 
his own hit points directly into his champion 
on a one-for-one basis; this includes hit 
points received from magical healing. (Note: 
The heal spell and other methods of restoring 
all hit points at once will not restore any hit 
points during the arcane contention.) 
Expend Ability Score Points: The wizard can 
increase the damage done by any attack of 
his champion at a rate of | point per point of 
any ability score expended (Strength, Intelli- 
gence, etc.). No score can be reduced below 
zero; if any score is at zero at the end of the 
battle, the wizard dies. Expended ability 
score points return at the rate of 1 point per 
ability below normal for every two rounds. 
Expend Magical Item Charges: The wizard 
can expending charges from his magical 
items. Each charge can either add 1 to the 
champion’s hit point total, or increase the 
damage done in one attack by 1 hit point. 
Magical Healing: Any healing that the 
wizard receives during the contention may 
optionally be applied to his champion, with 
the exception of a heal spell. 

Healing Limits: No more hit points can be 
added to a champion once it has received twice 
its original number of hit points. 


Example: A wizard with 56 hit points in- 
creases the hit point total of his champion (cur- 
rently at 200 hit points) by 40 hit points. The 
wizard’s new total will be 16 hit points, and the 
champion’s new total will be 240.The wizard 
also has a Strength of 16 and a Constitution of 


yO eee N 


607 


~~ Mystic Rope — Witch r 


17. If the champion monster is directed to cast a 

fireball spell that would normally do 67 points 
damage, the wizard may opt to reduce both his 
Strength and Constitution scores by 10 (to 6 and 
7, respectively) and have the champion inflict 87 
points of damage (save for half). Much later, the 
champion is severely wounded and has but 42 hit 
points remaining. The wizard drinks a potion of 
extra-healing and opts to use half of the 20 hit 
points he gains to heal himself, bringing his total 
up to 26 hit points, and the champion’s hit point 
total up to 52. 


When the battle is concluded, both phantasms 
vanish, and the losing wizard takes 10% of the 
damage his champion suffered (no saving 
throw), and loses from memory all the spells his 
champion cast during the battle. 

The victor loses 5% of the damage his cham- 
pion suffered, but does not lose any spells from 
his memory (besides an expended Mylsibis 
arcane contention, of course). The victor also 
gains an experience points bonus equal to half 
the experience point value of the vanquished 
wizard. 

Any enemies of the victor under 2 Hit Dice 
who viewed the battle must make morale checks 
or suffer the effect ofa fear spell, and those of 2+ 
to 4 Hit Dice must make saving throws vs. spell 
or suffer from the effects of a scare spell. Those 
friendly to the victor gain a bonus of +1 to their 
morale for the battle. 

Notes: Very rare spell; barred to specialists. 
Known to be in Mylsibis 5 Codex of Contention. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Mystic Rope — Witch 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 3 

Range: 100 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 turns + 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Creates 1 rope 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a magical rope that obeys 
the caster’s verbal orders. The rope is 10 feet per 
caster level in length, up to a maximum of 100 
feet, and appears in the caster’s hand. The rope 
has two principal uses: climbing and entangle- 
ment. While the caster can switch freely between 
these, the rope can perform only one function at 
a time. The rope has a movement rate of 9 and an 


608 


effective Strength of 19. The rope can snake 
upward, but cannot leap more than 10 feet, al- 
though it can be thrown farther. 

A. Climbing. The rope can move up walls or 
cliffs and secure and knot itself. If the height 
scaled is less than half the rope’s length, it can 
form a loop and hoist or lower weights up to 500 
pounds each as ordered by the caster. Otherwise, 
those using the rope must ascend or descend under 
their own power. The caster can order the rope to 
return after the obstacle has been bypassed. 

B) Entanglement. The rope can ensnare and 
bind a foe. The caster can throw it up to 30 feet to 
entangle a nearby enemy, or it can move and 
attack as directed. The rope can entangle only 
one creature each round (a successful saving 
throw vs. spell avoids the attack). The rope con- 
tinues to attack each round until the caster orders 
otherwise. See the table for the total number of 
creatures that can be entangled at one time. 

Snared creatures can try to escape at the be- 
ginning of each round. A successful bend bars 
roll is required—use the table if Strength is un- 
known. Escape is automatic if the rope is de- 
stroyed. The rope cannot move a creature 
weighing 500 pounds or more, but can ensnare 
creatures that venture within reach of its remain- 
ing length. 

The mystic rope is destroyed by a successful 
dispel magic spell, by the escape of a creature of 
Large size or greater, or by failing a saving throw 
against disintegration, magical fire, lightning, or 
acid (saving throw: 12). Also, the rope can be de- 
stroyed by 10 + 2d4 points of damage from slash- 
ing weapons. 

The material component is a miniature rope of 
braided hairs from the mane of a nightmare. 

Notes: Restricted to witches and those trained 
by them; rare. Optionally available to artificers; 
very rare. 


Creature Rope Escape Chance if 
Size Required no Strength Score 
Tiny I ft. 1% 
Small 3 ft. 2% 
Man-sized 6 ft. 4% 
Large 20 ft. 16% 
Huge 30 ft. 50% 
Gargantuan 50 ft. 70% 


Mystic Shield — Phaerimm 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 8 
Range: 0 


‘Components: V, S, M 


Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 being 


-Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an invisible aura around the 
casting phaerimm or a touched spell recipient. It 
moves with the protected being, and prevents all 
wizard spells of 7th level or less, and all priest 
spells of 6th level or less, from having any effect 
on the being. 

The protected being can, however, cast spells 
and wield magical items normally (even on him- 
self, within the aura). This usage has no effect on 
the mystic shield, nor does it prevent the pro- 


‘tected being from successfully summoning a 


Leomund’s secret chest, or using Drawmijs in- 
stant summons or any other spell that brings 
things to the caster. Magical armor and protec- 
tions worn or used by the protected being func- 
tion normally within the aura. 

To physical attacks and senses, the mystic 
shield does not exist. A magical blade striking 
the protected being inflicts only physical 
damage: any magical damage bonuses, attack 
bonuses, or magical special effects are negated. 

The material components of this spell are a 
stone, a drop of blood, a tear from the caster’s 
eye, and a clear gemstone of not less than 400 gp 
value. 

Notes: Restricted to phaerimm; common. 


Mystic Sphere — Phaerimm 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an invisible spherical field 
around the casting phaerimm or a touched spell 
recipient. All wizard spells of 8th level or less, 
and all priest spells of 6th level or less, have no 
effect within this sphere. 

The area of effect can be moved around at the 
caster’s will (at a rate of up to 60 feet per round 
in any direction—including through solid objects 
or underground). It need not remain around the 
caster, and can protect all beings within it (or 
those parts of beings within its confines). 


609 


A Mystical Spy, Rastor’s r 


Beings within a mystic sphere can cast spells 
and wield magical items normally, without af- 
fecting the sphere. A mystic sphere does not pre- 
vent beings within it from successfully 
summoning objects from outside the sphere, 
with magic. Magical armor and protections func- 
tion normally within the sphere. 

To physical attacks and senses, a mystic sphere 
does not exist. Within its confines, a magical 
weapon inflicts only physical damage: any magi- 
cal damage bonuses, attack bonuses, or magical 
special effects are negated. 

The material components of this spell are a 
stone, a tear from the caster’s eye, and a clear 
gem of at least 600 gp value. 

Notes: Restricted to phaerimm; common. 


Mystic Writing 
(Alteration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Until triggered 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the wizard inscribes a 
message of up to 25 words upon a solid surface, 
using a special pigment. Any interruption of the 
inscription process prevents completion of the 
message, but does not affect words already in- 
scribed. The words glow for one round after they 
are written, and then fade out. They reappear 
when a detect magic spell is cast upon them, or 
when a specified event takes place within 10 
yards of the location. When the mystic writing is 
triggered, it remains for one round and then van- 
ishes. 

Triggering events might include the arrival of 
a certain creature or type of creature known to 
the caster, a certain date, or events such as “when 
moonlight strikes this stone,” or “when a bard 
stands here and plays an elven ballad.” Spells 
cannot be incorporated into mystic writing. The 
spell lends itself to permanency. 

The material component is the special pig- 
ment, which costs 200 gp per application. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Mystical Spy, Rastor’s 
See Rastor’s mystical spy. 


Nahal’s Nonsensical Nullifier 


n 
- 


Nahal’s 
Nonsensical Nullifier* 
(Abjuration) = 
(Wild) 
Level: 2 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1d6 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell scrambles the aura of the affected 
creature, giving random results to know align- 
ment, detect evil, and detect lie spells cast on 
that creature. 

When a protected creature is the focus of one 
of these divinations, the information gained is 
randomly determined. Thus, if know alignment 
is used against a chaotic evil creature protected 
by the nonsensical nullifier, the response could 
be any alignment combination. If two characters 
both use the same divination on the same target, 
two random results are generated. 

A new random result is generated each 
round; thus, continued observation of a pro- 
tected creature usually results in different read- 
ings. The table below is used to determine the 
random alignment. 


1d10 

Roll Alignment 
l Lawful Good 
2 Lawful Neutral 
3 Lawful Evil 
4 Neutral Good 
5 Neutral 
6 Neutral Evil 
7 Chaotic Good 
8 Chaotic Evil 
9 Chaotic Neutral 
10 No Alignment 


The material component is a small amount of 
egg yolk smeared into the scalp of the recipient. 
Notes: Restricted to wild mages; common. 


a Vip 


IF? 


. 
e 


> 


i 


610 


“a 


f 


A 


Nahal’s Reckless Dweomer* 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Wild) 


Level: 1 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is the wild mage’s ultimate last- 
resort spell. When cast, the mage releases a 
sudden flood of wild magical energy in the hope 
of seizing and shaping that energy into a desired 
spell effect. The attempt usually fails, but some- 
thing almost always occurs in the process. 

Before casting the spell, the mage announces 
the spell effect he is trying to create. The mage 
must be able to cast the spell (that is, has it in 
his spellbooks), but need not have it memo- 
rized. After announcing the spell (along with 
the target and any other conditions required by 
the spell), the wild mage casts Nahal 5 reckless 
dweomer. A burst of magical energy is released, 
which the wild mage tries to manipulate into the 
desired form. The actual effect of the spell is 
rolled randomly on Table 2: Wild Surge Results. 

Because the release of energy is planned by 
the mage, his level is added to the dice roll. If 
the result indicates success, the mage has 
shaped the magical energy into the desired 
effect. More often than not, the effect is com- 
pletely unexpected. The result may be benefi- 
cial to the mage or it may be completely 
disastrous; this is the risk the mage takes in 
casting Nahal s reckless dweomer. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages; common. 


Nature Call — Witch 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 


(Song) È 
Level: 2 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 120-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


A witch can summon either 1d10 small birds 
or mammals (up to the size of a squirrel or 
hawk), or a single larger bird or mammal (up to 


p 


~ Nautical Ironwood r 


the size of an eagle or a wolf). If any such crea- 
tures can be found within the area of effect, they 
immediately come forward to serve the caster. 
The summoned creatures can be directed to 
fight on the caster’s behalf for up to 3 rounds 
plus 1 round per caster level, or to perform one 
distinct mission or task of a noncombative 
nature, such as carrying a message or small 
object. In this case, the summoned creatures 
obey the wizard’s initial order to the best of 
their ability for up to three days. 

While the wizard’s allies are willing to enter 
combat on his behalf, their morale is not en- 
hanced in any way, and they refuse to attack 
creatures that they recognize as their natural 
predators or groups of larger creatures. Even if 
they choose to engage an enemy, the creatures 
rarely fight to the death. At the DM’s discretion, 
an animal or bird may be willing to feign an 
attack, causing confusion in creatures of animal 
intelligence or lower, and causing a —2 attack 
penalty to more intelligent monsters for as long 
as the animals keep up their harassment. Refer 
to the Monstrous ManuaL Tome for details of 
specific creatures (see Bird; Mammal, Small; or 
Wolf). 

Notes: Restricted to witches (common) and 
song mages (uncommon). The DM may also 
allow characters of gypsy blood, Nature mages, 
or Savage mages access, as well. 


Nautical Ball Lightning 


(Conjuration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 ball/5 levels 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell creates one ball of lightning for 
every 5 levels of the caster. Each ball can be 
sent to a different target, and balls of lightning 
are usually targeted at the members of a ship’s 
crew. A ball of lightning is 2 feet in diameter 
and flies through the air to strike its target at a 
movement rate of 24. Once it impacts its target, 
whatever the target, it moves rapidly along 
nearby surfaces in random directions: up masts, 
along decks, down ladders, and so forth, at a 
movement rate of 12. If it moves within 15 feet 
of another living being, it “chases” that being 
until it strikes this new target, and then begins 


611 


random movement until it acquires a new target, 
continuing this cycle until it becomes stuck at a 
certain location, such as the top of a mast or at 
the end of a yardarm (10% chance rolled each 
round after the first if the ball’s current location 
indicates the possibility), or the spell’s duration 
ends. 

A ball of lightning inflicts 1 point of damage 
per level of the spellcaster each time it touches a 
living creature. It automatically strikes a living 
creature who is its initial target, provided the 
target cannot outrun it; if it acquires new targets 
after the first, it automatically strikes them if its 
movement and theirs could intersect in a given 
round. If a ball stops a certain spot (for exam- 
ple, reaching a dead end at the end of a mast or 
spar), the lightning starts a small fire on a roll 
of 5 or 6 on 1d6. Creatures at that same location 
take 1 point of damage per level of the spell- 
caster each round they are in contact with the 
ball. 

Notes: Common for Sea mages, especially in 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting Sea of Fallen 
Stars region; otherwise very rare. 


Special DM Note: When handling the 
nautical ball lightning effect, concentrate 
on its flash and shimmer; don’t try to map 
its course in excruciating detail. Run it as a 
special effect with quicksilver speed and 
have it add to the usual chaos of a sea-fight. 


Nautical Ironwood 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 8 cu. ft. of wood/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Nautical ironwood temporarily lends the 
strength of iron to the common wood used in a 
ship. This spell is most often used to reinforce 
the planking of a hull, and sometimes to brace 
spars and masts. Although the wood gains in 
strength, it becomes no more heavy. The 8- 
cubic-foot area of effect can protect an area of 
the hull nearly 2 feet wide by 4 feet long. A 6th- 
level wizard, for instance, could make a 6-foot 


N 


chaser’s Glowing Globe 


by 8-foot area iron-strong, or a 4-foot by 12- 
foot one. Vulnerable areas near the waterline 
can be protected, or the prow reinforced if ram- 
ming is expected. Nautical ironwood doubles 
the normal damage capacity against impact, 
stress, and fire. Wood bespelled in this manner 
gains a saving throw of 6 against the effects of 
the warp wood spell. The spell lends itself to 
permanency. 

The material components are a spike of iron 
and the dust of one small diamond of 500 gp 
value, which are consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Uncommon for Sea mages; otherwise, 
very rare. (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Nchaser’s Glowing Globe 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 glass globe 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell places a continual light within a 
globe of brown glass, and allows the wizard to 
control the brightness of the globe mentally. 

The light within the globe functions as a con- 
tinual light spell, illuminating an area of up to 60 
feet in radius. By mental control, the caster can 
reduce this illumination to a dull, luminous glow 
similar to faerie fire. The caster need not concen- 
trate on the spell to maintain it, only to change 
the level of illumination. The wizard can control 
the illumination at a distance of 10 yards per 
level of the caster. 

The caster can maintain any number of globes 
simultaneously and change their illuminations 
independently or simultaneously. The globes can 
be moved or carried, but if destroyed, their magic 
is lost (they save as glass objects). If the caster 
dies, the globes continue to function, but control 
of their illumination level can be switched to a 
new owner able to cast 4th-level wizard spells 
who touches the globes to establish control. 

The spell requires a globe of blown glass of 
the finest quality and a small spark as its material 
components. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
Nchaser 5 Eiyromancia. The suggested cost for 
unenchanted glass globes is 30 gp, these are 
rare and most often specially ordered. 


612 


p 


~ Negative Plane Protection ra 


Negate Magical Weapon — 
Red Wizards 
(Abjuration) 
Level: 4 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1d4 + 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of this spell is not affected by 
the magical abilities of enchanted weapons. A 
broad sword +1, for example, simply becomes 
an ordinary broad sword. This spell affects most 
magical powers of an enchanted weapon. Such 
items as the nine lives stealer, defender, holy 
avenger, and so on still inflict the base damage 
common to normal weapons of their type. 

This spell does not negate powers that affect 
a weapon’s wielder. An intelligent sword that 
allows its bearer to fly, detect magic, or provides 
spell-like abilities such as strength, levitation, 
or telekinesis continues to do so. An ability that 
affects the recipient of this spell—charm 
person, ESP. and so on-is negated. 

Negate magical weapon does not affect a spe- 
cial purpose power. If a wizard who casts the 
spell on himself is attacked by a weapon whose 
special purpose is to defeat wizards, the 
weapon’s special purpose powers (blindness, 
confusion, disintegration, and so on) still func- 
tion. Only the weapon’s normal magical 
bonuses and lesser powers are negated. 

The material component is a dagger of at 
least +1 enchantment, or a gem-encrusted plat- 
inum dagger of finest workmanship worth at 
least 800 gp. 

Notes: Restricted to the Red Wizards of Thay 
and those trained by them; uncommon. 


Negate Shadowy Form 
Reversed form, see Lorlovheim’s shadowy 
transformation. 


Negate Turning 
Lost spell. Reputed to be a 4th-level spell able 
to negate the priestly ability to turn or com- 
mand undead by multiple priests at once. 


613 


Negative Plane Protection 
(Abjuration, Necromancy) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special (1 turn/level max.) 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects against energy drain spells 
and similar undead powers. The creature 
touched is partially protected against one suc- 
cessful attack of this type per five experience 
levels (round down; two at 14th, three at 15th, 
four at 20th, etc.). Note that this differs from the 
3rd-level priest spell of the same name. 

Undead existing partially on the Negative 
Material Plane (such as shadows, wights, 
wraiths, spectres, and vampires) inflict physical 
damage normally, but if the protected creature 
successfully saves vs. death magic, no drain of 
Strength or level results. Instead, the energies 
cancel with a flash of brilliant light and a thun- 
derclap; an attacking undead creature suffers 
2d6 points of damage. Attackers using spells or 
magic to drain energy are not so harmed. Note 
that unlike the priest spell, failure to save vs. 
death magic does not cause the protected being 
double physical damage. 

The spell lasts for one turn per level of the 
caster unless discharged first. This spell cannot 
be cast on the Negative Material Plane. 

The spell also provides protection from ener- 
vation and similar spells that reduce the pro- 
tected creature’s level or Strength by means of a 
Negative Energy Plane connection. 

The material component is three drops of the 
caster’s blood. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Book of Shan- 
galar the Black. 


~ Nemicron’s Transference í 


y 


k A 
Cour 


ass 


Nemicron’s Transference 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Two objects 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast upon any two nonmag- 
ical objects of less than one cubic foot mass. 
One physical property is switched between the 
two at the caster’s discretion, such as strength, 
weight, melting and boiling points, edibility, 
and so on. The caster must touch both objects to 
effect the spell. 

For example, a wizard could cast this en- 
chantment upon a glass beaker and an iron bar, 
causing them to exchange their strengths. This 
would give the beaker the saving throw of hard 
metal against blows and falls, while reducing 
the saving throw of the iron bar to glass. Each 
object retains its weight, shape, and appearance. 
This spell does not work on magical objects. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine. ) 


Nerve Dance 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 7 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Concentration (3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
maximum) 

Area of Effect: 1 to 3 creatures 

Saving Throw: Special 


Casting this spell causes one to three glow- 
ing, red streamers to shoot from the caster’s 
hand. Each of these streamers, under the caster’s 
direction, pursues an intended target until it 
strikes and wraps around the target. A targeted 
creature is allowed a saving throw vs. spell; fail- 
ure means the streamer engulfs the creature. 
The saving throw must be made each round 
until the spell expires. 

Those failing the saving throw take 2d6 
points of damage and fall to the ground in ex- 
cruciating pain for as long as the spell lasts. 
Those who make their saves must continue to 
dodge and weave and are incapable of spellcast- 
ing or similar actions. Sending multiple stream- 
ers against the same target has no additional 
effect, not even additional saving throws. 

The caster must concentrate on the streamers 
to direct them. If his concentration is broken the 
spell ends immediately. Otherwise, the maxi- 
mum duration of the spell is 3 rounds, plus 1 
round per caster level. Streamers passing 
beyond the spell range dissipate harmlessly. 

The streamers can be destroyed before they 
wrap a target creature. Each is AC 0, and any hit 
from a magical weapon destroys it. The stream- 
ers take no damage from normal weapons. 

The material components are a 6-inch strand 
of red spider silk, and a glass rod with continual 
light cast upon it. The rod is used to direct the 
streamers. The spider silk is consumed in the 
casting, as is the continual light spell. 

Notes: Common in the Shining South of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; otherwise very 
rare. Known to be in the books of Random the 
Mad. 


Net — Hishna 


Net 
(Evocation) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Casting Time: 2 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell, conjures a heavy, sticky weblike 
net in a 10-foot cube around its target area. The 
net doesn’t anchor itself to surfaces, but entan- 
gles any moving objects or persons within its 
area. 

Those in the area of effect must make saving 
throws vs. spell. If successful, they manage to 
dodge the net or break the few strands that hold 
them. Those who fail are entangled and immo- 
bilized for at least one round. They can cut their 
way free in following rounds or break free if 
their Strength is greater than 15. The net is not 
flammable. 

The net spell is a variation of the web spell, 
but its limitations make it far more useful for use 
within the city of Waterdeep. The net needs no 
anchors and can be conjured in mid-air, either to 
drop on miscreants below or to entangle flying 
creatures. Its size limitations and shorter dura- 
tion create fewer problems with traffic and by- 
standers, since it doesn’t obstruct entire streets 
like a normal web spell. Due to their flame retar- 
dance, multiple nets can be used to help smother 
small fires as part of a fire-guard. 

The material component is a bit of spider web 
or rope. 

Notes: Known to the Watch-Wizards and 
Wizard Guild of Waterdeep; common among 


them. 


Net — Hishna 
(Invocation/Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. or 2 


A net spell creates a many-layered mass of 
strong, sticky strands similar to spider webs but 


far larger and tougher. These masses must be 
anchored to two or more solid and diametrically 
opposed points, floor and ceiling, opposite 
walls, etc., or the net collapses upon itself and 
disappears. 

The net spell covers a maximum area of eight 
10 x 10 x 10-foot cubes and the net must be at 
least 10 feet thick, so a mass 40 feet high, 20 
feet wide, and 10 feet deep can be cast. Crea- 
tures caught within the strands, or simply touch- 
ing them, become stuck among the gluey fibers. 

Anyone in the area when the spell is cast 
must roll a saving throw vs. spell with a —2 
penalty. If the saving throw is successful, two 
things may have occurred. If the creature has 
room to escape the area, then it is assumed to 
have jumped free. If there is no room to escape, 
then the net is only half strength. Creatures with 
less than 13 Strength (7 if the webs are half 
strength) are stuck until freed by another or 
until the spell wears off. Missile fire is gener- 
ally ineffective against creatures trapped in the 
net. 

Creatures with Strengths between 13 and 17 
can break through one foot of net strands per 
round. Creatures with 18 or greater Strength 
can break through two feet of strands per round. 
If the net is at half strength, these rates are dou- 
bled. (Great mass equates to great strength in 


, aT LLN 


615 


~ Net of Stars 7 


this case, and creatures of large mass hardly 
notice strands.) Strong and huge creatures can 
break through 10 feet of netting per round. 

Furthermore, the strands of a net spell are 
flammable. A magical flaming sword can slash 
them away as easily as a hand brushes away 
cobwebs. Any fire—torch, flaming oil, flaming 
sword, etc.—can set them alight and burn them 
away in a single round. All creatures within a 
flaming net suffer 2d4 points of damage from 
the flames, but those free of the strands are not 
harmed. 

The material component of this spell is a bit 
of spider web. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Net of Stars 
(Evocation) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a whirling cluster of stars 
(twinkling motes of raw spell energy) that can 
be wielded mentally by the caster to lash one 
target repeatedly or directed to spin and dance 
rapidly about in an area, filling it with a net that 
harms all creatures in its confines. 

The lash of motes, which affects only one 
creature, is fan-shaped: 20 feet long, 40 feet 
across at its farthest edge, 2 feet wide at its 
base, and about 6 feet thick. The caster cannot 
work any other magic while wielding a net of 
stars as a lash. The lash causes 2d12 points of 
damage each round; the target creature is hit au- 
tomatically and receives no saving throw. If a 
second being moves to forcefully aid or shield 
the first being, damage is divided equally be- 
tween the two creatures (1d12 each). If three or 
more beings group tightly together, all of them 
suffer 1d8 points of damage per round. Damage 
caused by the whirling stars is not considered 
fire damage. 

Once the net option is chosen, the spell be- 
comes fixed in that area and cannot be wielded 
as a lash again. A stationary net continues to 
function without the caster’s attention. The 
caster is never harmed by her own net of stars. 

The net fills a 40-foot x 40-foot volume. 


Creatures within the net can move normally, 
though they cannot cast spells—the spell energy 
disrupts any forming dweomer. Beings inside 
the area of effect suffer 3d4 points of damage 
per round. Creatures who move into an existing 
net suffer an additional 2d6 points of damage on 
first contact. Exiting a net does not evoke this 
flare up, but a being who probes into the net, is 
harmed, withdraws, and then enters again suf- 
fers the 2d6 points of damage twice. 

The material components for a net of stars 
are an eyelash from any mage who has success- 
fully cast a wild magic spell and a small pow- 
dered diamond, moonstone, or piece of rock 
crystal. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers; uncommon or 
rare. 


Neutralize Components 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell originally was developed as a joke 
by twin wizards wanting to confound one an- 
other in their spellcasting contests. It does what 
the name implies—rendering all material com- 
ponents carried by the subject useless for the 
duration—unless the subject makes a successful 
saving throw vs. spell at -4. 

The spell affects only components the subject 
is holding or carrying, not all potential compo- 
nents within his reach. For example, a wizard 
who memorized a web spell could reach into a 
corner for some cobwebs with which to cast his 
spell. All components rendered inoperative 
glow faintly while the spell is in effect, so spell- 
casters can tell their components have been al- 
tered if they care to check. 

The spell has no effect on the operation of 
scrolls, potions, or magical items, nor does it 
affect components carried within extra-dimen- 
sional containers, such as a bag of holding. 

The material components of this spell are a 
bit of spoiled meat and a shattered glass bead. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


, a E TTEN 


r 


~ Night’s Jambiya r 


Neutralize Gas 
(Abjuration) 
(Air, Alchemy) 


Level: 7 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: One 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By using this spell, the wizard renders inert 
and makes breathable any harmful vapors, 
gases, clouds, or fogs in the area of effect. This 
includes stinking cloud, cloudkill, solid fog, 
death fog, incendiary cloud, acid storm, 
gaseous breath weapons, spore or mold clouds, 
and similar spells and effects. 

Harmful gas or vapor is transformed into a 
common, harmless fog cloud of the same di- 
mensions as the original effect, and then dissi- 
pates 1d3 rounds later. Creatures injured before 
the neutralize gas spell is cast continue to suffer 
any effects from their previous exposure—the 
spell does not heal or counter existing damage, 
so a creature currently choking and gagging 
from a stinking cloud receives no relief from 
this dweomer. 

If cast in the same round of the effect’s ap- 
pearance, neutralize gas can counter gaseous 
breath weapons, spores, and molds by allowing 
any creatures affected a +4 bonus to their saving 
throws and reducing any damage to one-half 
normal (save for one-quarter). Air-based or 
gaseous creatures are not affected by this spell; 
neutralize gas only clears the air of any harmful 
inhalants. 

The material component is a bit of charcoal 
and some bark from a treant. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Neverending Nightmares 


(Enchantment) P 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables the caster to subject the 
victim to nightmarish dreams. It can be cast 


617 


upon the person at any time, but it remains dor- 
mant until the person sleeps. The saving throw 
is rolled secretly when the spell is cast. When he 
sleeps, the victim has a horrible nightmare. The 
exact nature of the nightmare differs from 
person to person, depending on the unique fears 
of the individual. 

The victim of the nightmare awakens in a cold 
sweat, gasping for air and clawing at his face. 
After a few rounds he recovers his composure. 
He does not remember the nightmare in any 
detail, only vague, unspeakable horrors. The 
nightmares continue every night until the spell is 
broken. A simple remove curse will do the trick. 
Under the scrutiny of a detect magic spell, the 
target radiates an aura of enchantment. 

After the first nightmare, the character auto- 
matically fails any future fear or horror checks. 
In each case, the memory of the nightmare 
comes flooding back to him. He is convinced 
that the nightmare predicted this scene and will 
result in a horrible doom. 

The material component of this spell is a lock 
of hair from a black horse. Casting this spell is 
cause for a RAVENLOFT powers check. 

Notes: Common in the RAVENLOFT setting; 
very rare elsewhere. This spell can be re- 
searched only on the Demiplane of Dread. 


Nezram’s Ruby Ray 
Aka ruby ray of reversal. 
Night’s Jambiya 
(Iilusion) 
Level: 3 


Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 jambiya 
Saving Throw: None 


The night's jambiya spell cloaks a single jam- 
biya in impenetrable shadow. The weapon is 
concealed from view, though the darkened area 
is easily visible. When thrown, the dagger is 
nearly impossible to dodge, providing a +3 
attack roll bonus. Once the spell is cast, the 
jambiya can be handed to another character to 
throw, but that character must throw it immedi- 
ately in the next round or the magic is lost. The 
nights jambiya gives no benefit in melee. 

The spell requires a jambiya, which is not 
consumed in the casting. 


~ Nightmare r 


Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise very rare. 


Nightmare 


Reversed form, see dream. 


Nightscar 


(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the caster to place a magical 
mark upon another object or individual. The 
mark can be seen only by the caster and up to 
seven other chosen individuals. It remains for 
the duration of the spell despite the marked in- 
dividual or object changing its shape, using illu- 
sion to mask its presence, or becoming 
invisible. The caster sees the new form (or does 
not see the invisible individual, in this case), but 
still sees the mark. 

The mark can be placed from a distance on 
any visible surface of the flesh or the object. It 
emits a glow visible to the caster and the chosen 
individuals in the dark. The recipient can be un- 
aware that the caster has placed the mark but is 
allowed a saving throw. A successful saving 
throw vs. spell indicates that the individual is 
not marked by the nightscar. 

Besides the caster, up to seven others can see 
the nightscar on its target. These individuals are 
usually in contact with the caster at the time of 
the casting. Alternately, the caster can hold up 
to seven gems, stones, or seeds in his hand. 
Each of these seeds, given to an individual, 
allows that individual to see the nightscar on 
the target. 

Once placed, the scar cannot be detected by 
magic but it can be seen by a detect invisibility 
or true seeing spell. The mark fades when the 
spell duration ends, and a dispel magic or 
remove curse destroys the nightscar as well. 

This spell is often used in cities to keep track 
of thieves and other individuals for later contact 
and/or arrest. It is particularly useful in trailing 
individuals who can change their shape or ap- 
pearance. Nightscar is believed to have been 
originally developed to track lycanthropes in 
their human form. 


618 


Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. Known to 
be in the Shadowtome. 


Nimodes’ Major Delousing 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 hrs./level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


All normal insects within the area of effect 
flee instantly, and no such creature will enter the 
area voluntarily until the duration has ended. 
The area cannot be moved, and only normal in- 
sects are affected by the spell. Summoned or 
controlled insects can penetrate the barrier, 
however. 

Notes: Common for hedge wizards; other- 
wise, rare or very rare. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Nimodes’ Unseen Butler 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 2 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 60 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates something akin to a super- 
charged unseen servant who races along like a 
whirlwind along the area of effect. The servitor 
buffs and polishes, cleans and waxes, straight- 
ens and sweeps. The spell lasts until the area of 
effect is clean, usually three to four rounds. 

Nimodes has sold this spell to several enter- 
prising hedge wizards, so it can be found from 
Kara-Tur to Cormyr. This spell is used to clean 
the wizard’s own area as well as inns and tav- 
erns after a busy night. All trash and broken 
items are collected in a single heap at the far 
edge of the area of effect. 

The material component is a piece of string 
and drop of oil. 

Notes: Common for hedge wizards; other- 
wise, uncommon or rare. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


ESS °> = 


= i 
5 * 2 $ is 
WA, : PRN 
~\ se A H 


ANU 
NARRATOR PRCT RTT Me 0: E.. 
WARN l uO 


\ 


A 
+ AACN, y Of ie ge 


HR. CS 


ie 


` 
2 


eicoe ee $ 


S 


4, 
4% 


A a SSS ie 


Ss : 
SOLGEMIPIFIES 1! 


tye Fede i E 


vaa DAY 
LOO MSMOOTTET Ma 
5 `, 
4, a k 
X DSS 


i 


DOENE N 


Fags, 
x be 
il 

A 


EE 
Z a 
VY oe - 
LBL NM, e 
2 + : ~~ 
A d aol 1 eg 
wt SY 
i ' 5 preset 
Ni xe « —— pa 
Ay ass 
O7 A rue = 
O i N 
teen mp eS = 
i : á e, r \ r 
* : S 
\ ak 
S x 


a 
Nt 


mi7 A 


alias 
4 
i 

N 


WRS 
Na 


4 wi. yok 
ra 


ave 


~ Ninemen, Nulathoe’s r 


Ninemen, Nulathoe’s 
See Nulathoe’s ninemen. 


Nondetection 
(Abjuration) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or item 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the wizard makes the 
creature or object touched undetectable by div- 
ination spells such as clairaudience, clairvoy- 
ance, locate object, ESP and detect spells. It 
also prevents location by such magical items as 
crystal bails and ESP medallions. It does not 
affect the know alignment spell or the ability of 
intelligent or high-level beings to detect invis- 
ible creatures. If a divination is attempted, the 
nondetection caster must roll a saving throw vs. 
spell. If this is successful, the divination fails. 

The material component of the spell is a 
pinch of diamond dust worth 300 gp. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Nonsensical Nullifier, Nahal’s 
See Nahal’s nonsensical nullifier. 


Ip - 
AA 


A 


Normal Aura 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: 1 item, 1⁄2 lb./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, the magical aura of an 
item can be concealed. The item can weigh up to 
one-half pound per level of the caster; more 
massive items are unaffected. Intelligent items, 
or those with alignments, cannot be masked. To 
detect magic and similar spells and abilities, the 
item will appear to be nonmagical, with no 
saving throw. However, if the item is actually 
held by the detecting creature, then a successful 
saving throw vs. spell allows the item's true aura 
to be perceived. Further, an illusionist using 
detect magic or detect illusion while holding the 
item receives a saving throw bonus of +1 (which 
the specialty wizard bonus increases to +2). 

The normal aura spell does not block true 
seeing, nor does it conceal a magical aura froma 
spellcaster four or more levels higher than the 
one casting the spell. It will negate Nystul’s 
magic aura (and vice versa) if cast for this pur- 
pose. 

Notes: Rare spell. Known to be in the Blue 
Book of Du'Morde, Vol. I. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


helen 


4 by. x 7?) 


i 


i 


620 


-_ 


Numbness r 


Normal Flow 
Reversed form, see reverse flow. 


Nulathoe’s Ninemen 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 corpse of size L or smaller 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects a dead body against 
normal decay, magically strengthening the 
joints and repelling disease and rot. The spell 
does not heal wounds or reverse damage in- 
flicted on the body in its living or dead state. 

If the body is later brought back from the 
dead (with raise dead, resurrection, or a similar 
spell), only the time elapsed between the death 
and casting of the ninemen (pronounced nin- 
EM-en) counts for determining success. Once 
the body is revived, the effect of the ninemen 
ends. 

This spell can be cast only on bodies that 
were once alive and now are dead. It has no 
effect on undead. Also, while under the effects 
ofthe ninemen, the body cannot become undead 
or be animated using animate dead or similar 
spells. 

The material components of this spell are a 
small amount of blood and a moonstone worth 
at least 50 gp. The moonstone is crushed and 
sprinkled over the body. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
Nchaser s Eiyromancia. 


Numbness 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 limb 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes a limb of the subject’s body 
to go numb. Only arms, legs, tails, tentacles, 
and wings can be so affected (including an ele- 
phant’s trunk or other prehensile limbs are af- 


621 


fected); a head, for example, would not be af- 
fected. The caster must make a successful attack 
roll to affect the desired limb (see table). Crea- 
tures of gargantuan size (size G) are immune to 
the spell. 


Limb 

Striking tentacle, clawed arm 
Lowered wing, weapon-holding arm 
Leg or foreleg 

Raised wing, active tail 


Attack Penalty 

0 
-] 
-2 
-3 


Tentacles, arms, and active tails are assumed 
to be in use for attacking the spellcaster or his 
allies. The DM may further modify these 
chances as common sense dictates. A dragon 
raising its wings high over the caster’s head may 
have placed them out of reach, while a gnome 
illusionist fighting a giant would not have to 
stoop or lunge below his normal height to touch 
the giant’s leg. In general, the term “striking 
tentacle” refers to any limb within easy reach; 
“weapon-holding arm” means any limb close 
but active; “leg” means any limb for which the 
caster has to lunge or spring; “raised wing, 
active tail” means any limb that moves very fast 
or is awkward to reach. Helpless, sleeping, or 
bound opponents can be touched automatically. 

The limb loses all feeling for the duration of 
the numbness, with consequent loss of feeling 
and efficiency. The following specific penalties 
accrue to a numbed limb: 

Ability Score Loss: The numbed limb loses 2 
points of Dexterity and Strength, with attendant 
penalties for attack, defense, thieving abilities, 
and so on. Objects grasped by a numbed limb 
are 30% likely be dropped each round. 

Attack Penalties: A numbed limb has a -1 
penalty when attacking, in addition to any 
Strength loss. Missile-firing penalties may be 
assessed in addition to Dexterity loss (for exam- 
ple, a victim might not be able to draw a spe- 
cially strengthened bow). 

Armor Class Adjustment: This depends on 
the limb affected. A numbed shield arm negates 
shield use. A numbed weapon arm parries at —4. 
A numbed leg gives a l-point AC penalty in ad- 
dition to any Dexterity effect; and so on. 

Movement Loss: Walking on a numbed limb 
reduces movement rate by one-third and gives a 
20% chance to fall prone each round. A numbed 
wing reduces flying movement rate by one- 
third, worsens maneuverability class by one 
step, and the flyer requires two rounds to 
become airborne. 


B 


~ Nybor’s Gentle Reminder —- Red Wizard r 


Weakened Grapple: Damage inflicted by a 
numbed limb’s clutch (for example, a bear’s 
hug) is at —1 per die (minimum | point of 
damage per die). Creatures attempting to break 
free from the grasp of a numbed limb have a 
+30% bonus (or +6) to their attempts to do so. 


Penalties for multiple hits on a single limb 
are cumulative. The caster can negate the spell 
at will. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Cyclopedia Phantastica Vol. II. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Nybor’s Gentle Reminder — 
Red Wizard 


(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is quite popular with slave over- 
seers and those wishing to make their servants 
work a little faster. Victims receive a sharp, ago- 
nizing pain, which immobilizes and prevents 
them from taking any action for one full round. 
All saving throws made by the victim during 
this round are at a —2 penalty. The spell inflicts 
no actual physical damage. 

Notes: Restricted to the Red Wizards of Thay 
and those trained by them; common or uncom- 
mon. 


Nybor’s Joyful Voyage — Red Wizard 
(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: | ft./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By use of this spell, a wizard teleports an- 
other individual 1d100 miles in a random direc- 
tion, as determined by the following chart. 


Die Roll Direction 
l North 
2 South 
3 East 
4 West 
5 Up 
6 Down 


Transportation is instantaneous, and the indi- 
vidual is often faced with hostile conditions at 
his or her arrival point—water, solid rock, and 
so on. Those unfortunate enough to be trans- 
ported upward fall to their deaths unless some 
magical intervention such as feather fall is used, 
while those transported downward can only 
hope to materialize in a cavern or air pocket, 
rather than being encased in solid rock. 

This spell was invented by the Zulkir Nybor 
to deal with troublesome peddlers. The “joyful” 
nature of Nybor 5 voyage refers to the joy of the 
spell’s caster rather than that of its target. 

Notes: Restricted to the Red Wizards of Thay 
and those trained by them; common or uncom- 
mon. 


Nybor’s Mild Admonishment — 
Red Wizard 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. + 1 yd./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This improvement on Nybor's gentle re- 
minder causes intense pain in its victims and in- 
capacitates them for 2d4 rounds. Those affected 
can take no action during this time other than 
lying on the ground and writhing in pain. All 
their saving throws made during this time are at 
a —3 penalty. 

Notes: Restricted to the Red Wizards of Thay 
and those trained by them; common or uncom- 
mon. 


Nybor’s Stern Reproof — Red Wizard 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds. + 1 yd./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 


SO E a a a AEN 


Nybor’s Wrathful Castigation — Red Wizard 


Duration: 2d6 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell inflicts stabbing pains even greater 
than Nybor’s gentle reminder and Nybor’s mild 
admonishment. When the spell is first cast, the 
target creature must make a saving throw vs. 
death magic. If this roll fails, the creature dies 
instantly. A surviving creature receives a saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid further effects. 

Those failing the saving throw vs. spell are 
incapacitated and can take no actions for 2d6 
rounds. In addition, at the time of casting, the 
caster can elect to continue inflicting pain for a 
number of rounds less than or equal to his level. 
All saving throws made by the affected creature 
during this time are at a —6 penalty. 

Notes: Restricted to the Red Wizards of Thay 
and those trained by them; common or uncom- 
mon. 


Nybor’s Wrathful Castigation — 
Red Wizard 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 yds. + 1 yd./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 3d6 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Nybor’s wrathful castigation is the most 
feared spell created by this Red Wizard. Like 
his other spells, it causes wracking pain and vi- 
olent convulsions. The target creature must 
make a saving throw vs. death magic each round 
that the spell is in effect. If any is a failure, the 
creature dies from the agonizing pain inflicted 
by the spell. A creature surviving the casting of 
this spell receives a saving throw vs. spell to 
avoid suffering further effects. 

This spell incapacitates an affected creature 
for 3d6 rounds. In addition, at the time of cast- 
ing, the caster can elect to continue inflicting 
pain for a number of rounds less than or equal to 
his level. All saving throws made by the victim 
during this time are at —6, except those made 
against the death magic effect of this spell. 

Notes: Restricted to the Red Wizards of 
Thay and those trained by them; common or 
uncommon. 


4 AN o b | 3 á i 
WN Yr o 4y, 
4 tg d W) A K 


À. 


~ Nymph’s Aura — Elf r 


Nymph’s Aura — Elf 
(Elven High Magic) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell grants the caster the beauty of a 
nymph and its attendant dangers to all ob- 
servers. Observers gazing upon the caster are 
blinded unless they successfully save vs. spell. 
If the caster disrobes, observers must success- 
fully save vs. spell or die. 

The caster need not be female to use this 
spell. The aura is effective for male casters, as 
well: These gain dazzling good looks that affect 
both males and females. 

The material component of this spell is a vial 
of nymph’s tears. 

Notes: Restricted to elves; very rare. 


Nystul’s Blacklight Burst 


(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


This risky spell brings forth a blast of energy 
from the Negative Material Plane for an instant. 
Those within the area of effect suffer 1d4 points 
of damage per level of the caster, half damage if 
a save vs. death magic is successful. The maxi- 
mum potential damage is 10d4. Those who fail 
their saves are also slowed (as the spell) for 1d4 
rounds. Undead are not affected by the spell. 

Creatures from the Positive Material Plane or 
upper Outer Planes take an additional point of 
damage per level of the caster, and their saving 
throws are made at a —2 penalty. Such creatures 
failing their saves are stunned for 1d4 rounds, 
rather than slowed. 

The wizard is 10% likely to lose control of 
the spell and be affected by its attack, as a ray 
from the area of effect bounces back to strike 
the caster. 

The material component is a bit of earth 


taken from the grave of a ghoul or ghast. 
Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Nystul’s Blackmote 
(Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. + 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons a microscopic mote of 
energy from the Negative Material Plane to the 
caster’s hand. The caster must immediately roll 
a saving throw vs. death magic at a +2 bonus to 
control the mote. If successful, the mote lies 
dormant in the wizard’s hand for one round, 
building up power. The caster can do nothing 
else during this period, full concentration on the 
mote is required. If the caster’s concentration is 
broken during this time, the blackmote is dis- 
pelled. At the end of the round, the spell is at 
full power and the mote can be hurled at a crea- 
ture within the range of the spell. 

The blackmote automatically strikes, explod- 
ing in a burst of darkness and cold, inflicting 
2d6 damage plus one point of damage per level 
of the caster (to a maximum of 2d6+10). 
Undead and creatures from the Negative Mater- 
ial Plane or lower Outer Planes are unaffected. 

A caster who fails the initial saving throw 
loses control of the mote. It immediately ex- 
plodes in the caster’s hand, inflicting one point 
of damage and paralyzing the wizard for 1d4 
rounds. 

The material component is a sliver of bone 
taken from an undead skeleton. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Nystul’s Blazing Beam 
(Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Ray, 30 ft. + 10 ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell draws a parcel of energy from the 
Positive Material Plane to the caster’s hand, to 


SE T 


624 


_ 


~ Nystul’s Enveloping Darkness r 


be fired in a ray one foot wide to a distance of 
30 feet plus 10 feet per level of the caster. It af- 
fects only a single creature. Except for undead, 
a creature struck by the beam receives a saving 
throw vs. spell. Success means the creature 
struck a glancing shot and is dazed for 1d4 
rounds, suffering a —2 penalty on hit rolls and a 
+2 penalty to Armor Class. Failure means the 
creature is struck full in the face and blinded for 
2d4 rounds, suffering a —4 penalty to attack 
rolls and AC. 

An undead creature is automatically struck 
by the beam, suffers 4d6 points of damage, but 
is not dazed or blinded. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Nystul’s Crystal Dagger 
(Conjuration, Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level (maximum) 
Area of Effect: Summons 1 dagger 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons into the caster’s hand a 
dagger composed of material from the Quasi- 
Elemental Plane of Mineral, strongly infused 
with energy drawn from the Positive Material 
Plane. The crystal dagger has no attack bonus 
and inflicts 1d4+2 points of damage in melee. 

Against undead and creatures from the lower 
Outer Planes, the dagger inflicts 1d4+3 points 
of damage. If the crystal dagger scores maxi- 
mum damage, the monster is paralyzed until the 
end of the round following the hit and the 
dagger vanishes. 

The material component is a tiny dagger 
made from fine lead crystal, worth 250 gp. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Nystul’s Crystal Dirk 


(Conjuration, Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Summons | dirk 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a weapon similar to that de- 


scribed in the 2nd-level crystal dagger spell. 
Nystul s crystal dirk is faintly magical, granting 
a +1 bonus to attack rolls. The dirk inflicts 
1d4+2 points of damage when it hits. Against 
undead and monsters from the lower Outer 
Planes, the dirk inflicts 1d4+3 points of 
damage. If the crystal dirk scores maximum 
damage, the monster is paralyzed until the end 
of the round following the hit. The dagger van- 
ishes at the end of the spell’s duration. 

The material component is a tiny dagger 
made from lead crystal worth 350 gp. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Nystul’s Dancing Werelight 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 60 yds. + 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 2 hrs. + 1⁄2 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a mote of light completely 
under the caster’s control. The light shed by the 
mote can be increased or decreased at the 
caster’s will, ranging from the brightness of a 
light spell to the dim glow of a candle. The 
werelight can flit about from place to place as 
the caster directs, as long as it stays within the 
range of the spell. The werelight can be called 
upon to hang over the caster’s head as a conve- 
nient reading light. The werelight spell cannot 
be attached to an object or creature. It can exist 
only as a mote hanging in the air. 

The material component is a live firefly. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Nystul’s Enveloping Darkness 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 5 rds. + 2 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a zone of impenetrable 
darkness around the wizard 20 feet in radius. 
Although the caster can see in and through the 
zone of darkness without trouble, all others 


~~», Nystul’s Expeditious Fire Extinguisher r 


cannot see through the envelope, not even with 
infravision or ultravision. In addition, a distor- 
tion field affects the caster, who is attacked at 
-2 in addition to the darkness penalty. Nystul s 
lightburst entirely negates this spell, as does a 
sunburst from a wand of illumination and simi- 
lar effects (spells of at least 3rd level). 

The material components are a drop of pitch, 
a whisker from a black cat, and a bit of fur from 
the coat of a displacer beast. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Nystul’s Expeditious Fire Extinguisher 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This more powerful version of the 1st-level 
wizard spell affect normal fires spell enables the 
caster to quickly extinguish a large fire. When 
the spell is cast, anti-energy from the Quasi- 
Plane of Ash is momentarily drawn down upon 
the fire. An area of nonmagical fire up to 10 feet 
by 10 feet per level of the caster can be put out 
immediately (50 x 50 feet at 5th, 60 x 60 feet at 
6th) to a maximum of 100 x 100 feet. The spell 
is useful for combatting forest and brush fires. 

The spell is less effective against magical fire. 
The chance of extinguishing a magical fire is 
only 60%, and a maximum area of 30 feet by 30 
feet can be snuffed out. 

The spell has no effect on a fire-based crea- 
ture or on flames emanating from a creature’s 
body, such as a fire elemental, a fire grue, or a 
balor. 

The material components for the spell are a 
pinch of cold ash mixed with salt. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Nystul’s Flash 


(Evocation) 


Level: | 

Range: 30 yds. + 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius globe 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a sudden flash of bright 
light in a 10-foot radius globe. All creatures 
within the area of effect that fail a saving throw 
vs. spell are blinded for 1d4 rounds. Those that 
make their saving throws are merely dazed for 
1d4 rounds, suffering a —2 penalty on all attack 
rolls. They are also off-balance in melee: Any 
attack made against a dazed creature has a +2 
hit modifier. Creatures outside the globe facing 
the flash do not suffer any ill effects. Creatures 
without eyes are not affected by the spell. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Nystul’s Golden Revelation 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Cone, 60 ft. long x 30 ft. wide 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the wizard can reveal hidden, 
concealed, or invisible creatures within the con- 
ical area. The concealed creature is surrounded 
with an aura of golden light, shining out in a 1l- 
foot diameter about the creature, making it 
easily seen. The wizard can make a full 360- 
degree sweep-search of the area in one round. 
The spell might reveal a thief hiding in shad- 
ows, a barbarian concealed in natural terrain, or 
a creature hiding behind an obstacle. The spell 
creates a glow around an invisible, out-of- 
phase, ethereal, duo-dimensional, or astral 
being in the area of effect, as well as a creature 
using a cloak of elvenkind, robe of blending, 
ring of chameleon power and so on. 

No saving throw is allowed against the golden 
revelation, although successful magic resis- 
tance protects a creature from being outlined by 
the spell. 

The material component is a box wrapped 
with waxed parchment, containing a glowworm. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


FEN 


626 


~ Nystul’s Lightburst r 


Nystul’s Grue Conjuration 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 4 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell, which is actually a group of four 
risky spells, will summon one grue—harginn, 
ildriss, chaggrin, or varrdig—from one of the 
four Elemental Planes. The type of grue to be 
summoned must be decided before the caster 
memorizes the spell. 

Grue are notoriously untrustworthy and dif- 
ficult to control, so the caster must rely on 
more than just concentration to keep the grue 
under his command. As soon as the grue is 
summoned, it will demand a payment from the 
caster for its service. The payment offered must 
be at least 500 gp worth of goods of interest to 
the grue, or the grue will be angered and imme- 
diately attack the caster. If the grue is satisfied 
with the offer, it will grudgingly perform one 
service for the caster for the duration of the 
spell. The grue will try to subvert or openly dis- 
obey the caster’s orders if it finds them un- 
pleasant. 


W 


lenti 


SETET 


hai 


fi 


Girne 


HIRERE 


r 
“l 


MAUNA tT 


Special material components are used to 
summon the grue desired. These include in- 
cense (air grue), soft clay (earth grue), sulphur 
(fire grue), sea water (water grue). 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Nystul’s Instant Daylight 
Aka Nystul’s lightburst. 


Nystul’s Lightburst 


(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell summons a burst of energy from 
the Positive Material Plane. While creatures 
without eyes cannot be blinded, all other crea- 
tures within or facing the sudden blaze of 
energy are blinded for one round, with no 
saving throw. 

In addition, undead, creatures from the Nega- 
tive Material Plane, and beings from the Lower 
Outer Planes that are caught within the area of 
effect suffer 1d6 points of damage per level of 


WOY 
“AGEN 
wr, 


vah 


VILUNKI 


ft 


PTI 


-. 


bs 
an 
cS 
N 


ortere, . o 
LOO 


p> 


——— 


N 


~ Nystul’s Magic Aura r 


the caster to a maximum of 10d6 (save vs. spell 
for half damage, undead have a penalty of —2). 
The material component is a small, solid gold 
orb worth 500 gp. It is destroyed after the spell 
dissipates. 
Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Nystul’s Magic Aura 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, any one item of no 
more than five pounds weight per level of the 
spellcaster can be given an aura that is noticed 
by someone using magic detection. Further- 
more, the caster can specify the type of magical 
aura that is detected (alteration, conjuration, 
etc.) and this effectively masks the item’s actual 
aura, if any, unless the item’s own aura is excep- 
tionally powerful—an artifact, for instance. If 
the object bearing Nystul’s magic aura has an 
identify spell cast on it or is similarly examined, 
the examiner has a 50% chance of recognizing 
that the aura has been placed to mislead the 
unwary. Otherwise, the aura is believed and no 
amount of testing reveals what the true magic is. 

The component for this spell is a small 
square of silk, which must be passed over the 
object that receives the aura. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Nystul’s Radiant Arch 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Concentration 

Area of Effect: 1 creature, 10-ft./level distant 
Saving Throw: 12 


This spell creates a glimmering rainbow of 
light that arches between the caster’s open 
hands. Once the rainbow takes form, the caster 
can choose to fire a ray 1 foot wide from the 
rainbow, aimed at one creature up to 10 feet 
away per level of the wizard. The ray can take 


628 


the form of one of the seven colors of energy 
drawn from the Quasi-Plane of Radiance. 
* Red: cold energy (+1 damage to fire-based 
creatures, no damage if cold-based); 
e Orange: heat energy (+1 damage to cold- 
based creatures, no damage if fire-based); 
* Yellow: acid damage (save vs. spell to take 
no damage); 
e Green: neutralize poison (as 4th-level priest 
spell) 
e Blue: electrical energy (+10 points of 
damage to a metal armored enemy) 
e Indigo: undead specific (only undead are 
harmed) 
e Violet: vegetation specific (only plant-based 
life, including fungi and molds, are harmed) 


The ray inflicts 1d6 points of damage per 
level of the caster, to a maximum of 15d6. The 
type of damage corresponds to the color of the 
ray, and the creature is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell for half damage. 

The wizard must concentrate to keep the ra- 
diant arch active, so any attack that breaks the 
caster’s concentration will dispel the rainbow 
and prevent the caster from launching a ray. One 
ray can be fired each round. 

The material components are a crystal prism 
that shatters at the conclusion of the spell anda 
small black board with a pinhole through the 
center. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Nystul’s Radiant Baton 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates one baton 
Saving Throw: None 


When the wizard casts this spell, it summons 
into the caster’s hand a slender baton formed 
from energy drawn from the Quasi-Elemental 
Plane of Radiance. The baton can be one of the 
seven colors of the rainbow as the caster 
chooses. The attack form of the baton corre- 
sponds to the color chosen, being similar to the 
attack of a radiance Quasi-Elemental creature, 
as follows: 

* Red Baton: cold energy (+1 damage to fire- 

based creatures, no damage if cold-based); 


~ Nystul’s Radiant Baton va 


* Orange Baton: heat energy (+1 damage to 
cold-based creatures, no damage if fire- 
based); 

* Yellow Baton: acid damage (save vs. spell to 
take no damage; 

e Green Baton: neutralize poison (as 4th-level 
priest spell); 

* Blue Baton: electrical energy (+10 damage 
to metal armored enemy); 

* Indigo Baton: undead specific (only undead 
are harmed); 

: Violet Baton: vegetation specific (only 
plant-based life, including fungi and molds 
are harmed). 


The color of the baton is chosen during cast- 
ing, and cannot be changed thereafter. Creatures 
are allowed no saving throw vs. the effects of 
the radiant baton. The baton automatically hits 
any creature that successfully strikes the caster 
in that melee round; otherwise, the caster’s 
THACO determines a successful strike on an 
enemy. When a hit is scored, the baton inflicts a 
base damage of 2d4 points, plus one point of 
damage per level of the caster (to a maximum of 
2d4+10). The type of damage corresponds to 
the color of the baton. 

The material component is a crystal prism, 
which shatters at the conclusion of the spell. 
The spell also requires a set of seven small, 
silver rods, which can be reused. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


629 


Oathbinding 


Oathbinding 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell binds the subject to certain vows 
and conditions, and stipulates a penalty for fail- 
ing to meet them. Although similar to a genie 
contract, the oathbinding spell binds only one 
party, not two. This is often offered by a stronger 
party in return for a favor or as an alternative to 
some more severe punishment. Such a binding 
must have a definite end or condition under 
which it is broken. A dispel magic or remove 
curse will not counter it. An oathbinding cannot 
compel extreme changes in behavior or bind the 
subject to lengthy servitude. Since the spell is 
voluntary, magic resistance is not a factor. 

For example, in arabian lands, if a wizard ac- 
cepts such a binding (for example, to slay no 
djinn for a year and a day), a genie may under- 
take voluntary service for the wizard for a lim- 
ited time or a limited number of occasions. 

The spell requires the caster to sacrifice at 
least 1,000 gp to a sealing power. 

Notes: Uncommon spell, originally from an 
arabian setting. 


Obedience 


(Enchantment, Evocation) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the wu jen to force any crea- 
ture, other than spirits or undead, to totally obey 
the caster’s will. Although the spell can be cast 
on unintelligent creatures, it does not have a 
useful effect unless the creature can understand 
the speech of the wu jen. A circlet of gold 
placed on the head of the creature once the spell 
is cast. The wu jen must touch the creature to 
cast the spell and the creature is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. If the 


saving throw is failed, the creature is af- 
fected. 

The circlet cannot be removed except 
by the caster until a successful saving throw is 
made, nor does it fall off of its own accord. 
Once the circlet is in place, there is no limit to - 
the range of the spell. The caster can be hun- 
dreds of miles away and still maintain his hold 
over the creature. 

The spell creates no change in the creature’s 
will or its personality. It can refuse to obey 
orders or attempt to harm the wu jen. However, 
the wu jen, by uttering a few mystical words, 
can cause wracking pains in the affected crea- 
ture. These pains are so intense that the creature 
cannot do anything, barely able to breathe or 
talk. 

By chanting these words over and over, the 
wu jen can sustain the pain until the creature re- 
lents and obeys. For every round the pain is 
maintained, the creature suffers 1d10 points of 
damage (the caster can always stop the spell 
short of death). 

Each day the creature is under the spell it is 
allowed a new saving throw vs. spell to escape 
the effect, but such saving throws are made with 
a —4 penalty. The caster can easily remove the 
circlet, breaking the spell. A dispel magic, lim- 
ited wish, or wish spell also can be used to 
remove the circlet. 

Finally, there is the smallest chance that a 
merciful deity will, upon seeing the sufferings 
of the creature, lift the spell. The DM must 
decide if this occurs (generally no more 
common than a 1% chance). The deities often 
view this spell as a means of punishing and cor- 
recting evil creatures. 

The spell requires a golden circlet worth at 
least 1,000 gp, which can be reused. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise very rare. 


Obold’s Brightness 


(Evocation) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. diameter 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


Obold s brightness is a thick, smoky cloud 60 
feet in diameter that glows bright white, shot 


630 


>. Odeen’s Impenetrable Lock r 


through with sparks. These sparks are actually 
tiny bolts of lightning that leap here and there 
inside the cloud, dealing all beings within 6d8 
points of damage. A successful saving throw vs. 
spell means that creatures contacting the bright- 
ness take only half damage. 

The cloud forms in one spot within the spell’s 
range (over level ground, it forms as a hemi- 
sphere, rather than as a full sphere). It moves 
briskly in a single direction set by the caster 
when it is cast, moving at a rate of 15 for the 
rest of its existence. It can reach areas the caster 
cannot see, and it is thus handy for attacking 
fortifications, defended caverns, and the like. 
This spell is named for its creator, the gruff old 
mage Obold (now dead), who used it to deal 
with frequent orc attacks on his isolated moun- 
tain-crag tower. 

The material components of this spell are a 
scrap of fur and a tangle of wire. 

Notes: Rare or very rare in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Obscure Object 


Reversed form, see locate object. 


Odeen’s Impenetrable Lock 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 lock 
Saving Throw: None 


When Odeen 5 impenetrable lock is cast upon 
any locking device or mechanism, that device 
cannot be opened except by a special key, en- 
chanted at the same time as the lock. 

The lock cannot be opened by nonmagical 
means, nor can it be broken by force, for the 
lock is magically strengthened to withstand 
even storm giant strength. The locking mecha- 
nism continually changes shape, foiling any 
normal attempt to unlock or pick it. 

The lock is unaffected by the knock spell. 
Magical lockpicks allow one attempt at their 
base percentage chance; failure means the lock- 
picks must save vs. crushing blow or be de- 
stroyed. Magical keys stick fast, and can be 
released only with a dispel magic spell. Other 
unlocking devices, such as the chime of open- 


Tis TT 
ip 
AA JA ite G Le 
Y 


1 


y 


~ Odeen’s Magic Cloud r 


ing, have only one chance to open the impene- 
trable lock, which receives its caster’s saving 
throw vs. spell. The lock cannot be shattered or 
bypassed by magic resistance, like that pos- 
sessed by some extraplanar beings. 

While thieves cannot pick a lock enchanted 
with this dweomer, they can detect the spell is 
present as if it were a trap—careful examination 
reveals the lock’s magical shifting. 

If the spell is cast on a lock set in a door or 
portal, creatures with a Strength of 18/91 or 
better have half their normal chance to open 
magically held doors to force the door open, re- 
flecting the chance that the door might give way 
at the hinges or that the casing might crumble. 

The caster can end the dweomer with a dispel 
magic spell. A caster of five or more levels 
higher than the caster (or 30th level in any case) 
can also dispel the impenetrable lock. A limited 
wish or wish can open the lock. A timestop spell 
will stop the lock’s magical shifting long 
enough to allow a normal lock picking attempt. 

Material components for this spell are three 
drams of mimic ichor and two drams of dopple- 
ganger blood. These are rubbed on a small gold 
key, which becomes the only way to open the 
lock without first dispelling the magic. If the 
gold key is used in a later casting of another im- 
penetrable lock spell, it no longer opens a previ- 
ously cast impenetrable lock. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in The 
Spells of Odeen. (Updated from DRAGON Maga- 
zine.) 


Odeen’s Magic Cloud 
(Evocation) 
(Air) 
Level]: 2 


Range: 20 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5 x 5 x 5 ft. cloud 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes a small cloud to appear 
within range of the spellcaster. The wizard de- 
cides at the time of casting what type of cloud 
appears. The caster can freely move the cloud at 
a rate of 15 by concentrating on it. Otherwise, 
the cloud remains in place so long as the wizard 
pays it nominal attention. If the caster’s full at- 
tention is diverted, the cloud drifts with the 
breeze until the caster brings it back under con- 


632 


trol. The wizard can dismiss the cloud at will. 
The types of clouds include: 

A) Misty Cloud. This thick, vaporous cloud 
can be centered on the face of a creature, so as 
to move with it. The cloud prevents both normal 
vision and infravision. The cloud can protect the 
subject from a gaze attack or hinder an oppo- 
nent’s vision (it has no effect on a beholder’s 
eye-beams). 

B) Storm Cloud. Thick, dark, and billowy, this 
cloud can produce rain and lightning at the 
wizard’s option. One small lightning bolt can be 
generated each round if the wizard concentrates. 
It can strike one creature below or inside the 
cloud for 1d6 points of damage. A successful 
saving throw vs. spell negates the damage com- 
pletely. 

C) Rainbow Cloud. This thin, magical cloud 
displays a rainbow when light shines through it. 
Its chief purpose is to impress viewers; using 
this form doubles the spell duration. 

Other types of clouds are rumored to have 
been developed by other wizards. 

The material components vary with cloud 
type. All require a ball of cotton. The misty 
cloud requires a ball of wool. The storm cloud 
requires a black, sulphurous powder. The rain- 
bow cloud requires three hairs from a horse’s 
tail, one dyed in each of the primary colors. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in The 
Spells of Odeen. (Updated from DRAGON Maga- 
zine.) 


Odeen’s Magic Tailor 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | garment 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell alters the size and shape ofa 
normal garment or piece of leather or cloth 
armor to fit its wearer. Size can be altered up or 
down by 10%. The garment or armor must be 
worn at the time of the spell casting by the one 
who will use it. The spell affects only one outfit 
or suit of armor. Metallic armor and magical 
armor cannot be altered with this spell. Magical 
garments, such as a robe of blending, can be al- 
tered only if the wearer makes a successful 


> 


o Odeen’s Sounding Stick r 


saving throw vs. spell. If the saving throw is 
failed, the garment cannot be sized. The caster 
cannot try to size that garment again until he 
gains a new level. 

Sizing takes one hour at first level, less five 
minutes for every additional level to a minimum 
of 10 minutes at 10th level. If the process is in- 
terrupted, the spell is broken and the garment is 
fully restored to its original condition, but the 
caster can cast the spell again at any time. Once 
the spell is completed, the dweomer fades; a 
dispel magic spell, for example, will not restore 
the garment once the alteration process is com- 
plete. 

The material components for Odeen 5 magic 
tailor are a small bone needle, a length of silken 
thread, and a bit of wool. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in The 
Spells of Odeen. (Updated from Dracon Maga- 
zine.) 


Odeen’s Secret Word 
(Alteration, IHusion/Phantasm) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 spell inscription or equivalent 
Saving Throw: None 


Odeen 5 secret word is used to render writing 
illegible until a secret word chosen by the caster 
is spoken. When the spell is cast upon writing, 
that writing cannot be read by any means until 
the secret word is spoken. If the writing is of a 
magical nature, a read magic spell must be em- 
ployed to read it, and if written in a language 
unknown to the reader, a comprehend lan- 
guages spell is required. Any form of magical 
transcription can be used to copy the inscription 
if the secret word has been spoken. 

If Odeen’s secret word is dispelled, the writ- 
ing is destroyed. Odeen'’s secret word has no 
effect on magical glyphs, symbols, or explosive 
runes. It cannot be cast on writing that has been 
magically altered; for example, with unread- 
able magic (the reverse of read magic) or con- 
fuse languages (reverse of comprehend 
languages). 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in The 
Spells of Odeen. (Updated from DraGoN Maga- 
zine). 


Odeen’s Sounding Stick 
(Alteration, Divination) 
(Artifice, Mentalism) 


Level: 2 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 stick 
Saving Throw: None 


Odeen’s sounding stick, which can be cast on 
any rod or stick of wood up to 2% feet long, en- 
ables the holder to detect hollow areas, faults, 
and weaknesses, including concealed and secret 
doors and certain traps, in wood, earth, and 
stone. Such faults are detected by tapping with 
the stick. 

The range of the sounding stick varies with 
its size, as does the fault size that can be de- 
tected. The range of the stick is four times its 
length, to a maximum of 10 feet. The diameter 
of the smallest fault that can be detected is half 
the length of the stick, to a minimum of 3 
inches. Only the holder of the stick can note 
such faults, for they are revealed by vibrations 
in the stick. The base chance for detecting a 
fault or hollow space is 50% for wizards who 
know Odeen’s sounding stick, and 40% for any 
other characters. Other modifiers apply (see 
table). 


Type of stick Modifier 
Oak or yew +10% 
Witch hazel +5% 
Birch or alder +0% 
Cottonwood or dogwood -5% 
Pine or fir -10% 
Other factors 

Holder is an elf +10% 
Holder is a half-elf or gnome +5% 
Holder is a dwarf or humanoid -5% 
Holder wears gloves -5% 
Holder wears gauntlets -15% 
User level +1%/level 


The DM can add other modifiers as desired. 
Only one stick is affected in a single casting of 
the spell. A light or a continual light spell can 
be cast on the stick without affecting the sound- 
ing stick spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in The 
Spells of Odeen. (Updated from Dr4Gon Magazine.) 


DON 


633 


Ogre, Myrlynd’s 


= 


S 


N AW Y 


0 
è 


Ogre, Murlynd’s 
See Murlynd’s ogre. 


Oilskin 
(Abjuration) 
(Alchemy, Force) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 turns/level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or small object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell prevents fog, rain, waves, hail, and 
other forms of precipitated water from touching 
the person or small object upon which the spell 
is cast. Precipitation comes within an inch of 
the body or object, but strikes an invisible bar- 
rier and does not penetrate to the clothes or 
skin. The spell is also effective against intermit- 
tent wetting by waves. The barrier does not 
affect any type of missile or other object. 

An individual under this spell can see more 
clearly than most in driving rain because none 
gets into his eyes. An individual or object struck 
by a wave remains dry, but if immersed in the 
ocean, the mass of water is sufficient to over- 


come the barrier and the individual or object be- 
comes wet, ending the spell immediately. 

The material component of this spell is a small 
square of cloth that has been treated with oil so 
as to become water-repellent. 

Notes: Uncommon for Sea mages; otherwise, 
very rare. (Updated from Dracon Magazine.) 


Older 


Reversed form, see younger. 


Omen 
(Divination) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the wu jen to forecast the 
general fortunes of some major undertaking 
and determine auspicious and inauspicious 
events. When the spell is cast, the wu jen calls 
upon spirits to grant him some sign regarding 
the proposed action. 

The wu jen must burn paper strips written 
with mystical characters to the four directions 
as material components for the spell. 

This spell is commonly used before starting a 
journey, engaging in a major battle, or attempt- 
ing some notable feat. The outcome of the spell 
is determined by two factors. First, the DM 
should consider the proposed action against in- 
formation that only he knows. For example, the 
characters are about to leave a village to punish 
a group of bandits. The omen spell is cast to de- 
termine if this is an auspicious time to go. The 
DM knows that the village will be attacked by 
bandits that night, so the result would be an ill 
omen (since the characters would not encounter 
the bandits in the surrounding mountains). In 
situations where the DM has no information on 
which to base his judgment, roll 1d10 and con- 
sult the Wu Jen Omen Results table. 

Omens are infrequent and interpreting them 
is difficult. The strain this spell places on the 
caster prevents it from being used more than 
once per week. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise very rare. This spell should not be con- 
fused with the priest spell of the same name. 


634 


- 


~ Ongeldyn’s Fist r 


Wu Jen Omen Results 


1d10 
Roll Result 
1-2 Jil Omen: The characters should not 


undertake the task this day. If this 
advice is ignored, all the characters 
suffer a -l penalty to attack and 
saving throw rolls for the rest of the 
day. Their chance for encounters is 
doubled and a —10% reaction modifier 
is applied to all encounters. 

Great Danger Exists: The chance for 
encounters is doubled for the day and 
a -10% reaction modifier applies to 
all encounters. Adversaries have a +1 
bonus to their attack rolls. 

Neutral Omen: No special modifiers 
apply. 

Favorable Omen: The characters are 
able to travel half again their normal 
traveling rate that day. Opponents have 
a —1 penalty to their attack rolls 
against the characters that day. 
Auspicious Omen: All the effects of a 
favorable omen apply. In addition, the 
characters gain a +1 bonus to all 
saving throws made that day. 


3-4 


Ondovir, Ray of 


See ray of Ondovir. 


One-Way Lock 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 portal 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell magically locks any one door, 
chest, or portal upon which it is cast as a wizard 
lock. However, the closure is locked from one 
side only (caster’s choice) and can be opened 
freely from the other direction. The door or 
portal can be opened from the locked side only 
by breaking it down, using a knock or dispel 
magic, or by a wizard four or more levels higher 
than the caster. If the one-way lock is bypassed 
by a knock or a higher level wizard, it is negated 
only temporarily and remains in force. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Magazine.) 


Ongeldyn’s Fist 


(Evocation) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell calls into being a shadowy human- 
like fist about as large as a man’s torso. It strikes 
at a single target creature selected by the caster. 
The creature must be visible to the caster and 
within range at the time of casting. 

The fist always strikes last in any round, al- 
lowing a nimble opponent to cast spells, fight 
others, or carry on other activities. It strikes at 
the target creature with a THAC0 of 7, inflicting 
4d4 points of damage per hit. 

Ongeldyn'’s fist cannot be parried, and only a 
dispel magic can affect it. A successful dispel 
destroys it. The fist cannot change targets once 
cast, and fades away if its target dies or leaves 
the plane on which it is cast. The fist follows a 
fleeing target creature anywhere on the same 
plane, and is specifically designed to follow 
blink, dimension door, teleport, and other trans- 


Ñ 
es 


» oe 
RQ G 
AY QE 


ÑS 


\ 


Open Path 


portation magics. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small fist carved of onyx. 

Notes: Rare or very rare in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Open Path 


Reversed form, see seal path. 


Open the Living 


(Divination, Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is useful to a wizard who uses the 
distort life spells in magical breeding experi- 
ments. It allows more precise knowledge to be 
gained by keeping a vivisected creature alive for 
the spell duration so that internal structures and 
functions can be directly observed and under- 
stood. Not only does this spell give the wizard a 
95% chance to correctly read the aura of a de- 
sired physical trait (all failures being wrong 
readings) but also allows the wizard to add a 5% 
bonus to future distort life spells aimed at that 
trait of the species. This aid in focusing future 
distortions is useful, but the examined creature 
does not survive the process. 

The creature must survive a system shock 
check when the spell is cast or expire immedi- 
ately. The check is repeated once per week with 
a cumulative -1% per check until the creature 
dies. 

The material component is a small, sterile 
scalpel made of silver and platinum, worth 500 
gp- 
Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from ZMAG- 
INE Magazine.) 


Oracle, Wizard’s 
See wizard’s oracle. 


Orb of Containment, Otiluke’s 
See Otiluke’s orb of containment. 


Organic Disruption — Reggelid 


(Alteration, Necromancy) | 


Level: 3 

Range: 50 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the caster to strike at life- 
shaped creations and those who use them. 
When the spell is cast, a 10-foot radius sphere 
of dark energy appears around the desired loca- 
tion and quickly fades. All life-shaped creations 
within the sphere must make a saving throw vs. 
death magic or be slain instantly. Nonliving or- 
ganic material such as wood and leather must 
make an item saving throw vs. acid or crumble 
to dust. All other organic beings receive 2d6 
points of damage (save vs. spell for half). 

The material component of this spell is a 
drop of mild acid, such as vinegar. 

Notes: Known by the reggelid, magic-seek- 
ing elf-like humanoids of the DARK SUN setting. 
The spell is useful against the life-shaped cre- 
ations of the windrider halflings of the Jagged 
Cliffs region. 


Othnal’s Spectral Dagger 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 4 

Range: 70 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell consumes an edged metal weapon 
of any size, sort, or condition, creating a 
translucent dagger-shaped blade of force; this 
can glow (as the faerie fire spell) or not as the 
caster wills. Initially, the blade is nearly invis- 
ible (30% likely to be noticed). 

The spectral dagger appears wherever the 
caster desires within spell range, and moves as 
the caster wills, at a rate of 12, striking twice 
per round with the caster’s THACO, but with a 
+3 bonus. It can strike creatures vulnerable to 
weapons of +3 enchantment, and deals 1d4+3 
points of damage per strike. Although concen- 


eee E EEEN 


> 


~ Otiluke’s Death Screen r 


tration is not required to maintain the spell, it is 
required to make the dagger attack (see shadow- 
hand). 

Notes: Rare or very rare in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Otiluke’s Acid Cloud 
(Evocation) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius globe 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a small crystalline sphere 
filled with a yellowish-brown mist. The crystal 
sphere must be used within three rounds or its 
contents become useless. The sphere can be 
thrown up to 20 yards as a grenade-like missile. 
When the sphere shatters, the mist is released, 
filling the air in a 30-foot radius with yellowish 
acid fumes. 

Everything within the area of effect is af- 
fected as if placed in an acid bath. All creatures 
within the fumes take 4d4 points of acid 
damage immediately, with no saving throw, and 
suffer 1d4 points of damage for every additional 
round of exposure to the fumes. All objects 
touched by the acid fumes must make a saving 
throw vs. acid or be eaten away. For every addi- 
tional round of exposure to the fumes, an item 
must save again. The acid bath remains in exis- 
tence for one round per two levels of the caster, 
but any wind, rain, or turbulent atmospheric 
condition negates the spell in a round. 

The material component is a small vial of di- 
luted aqua regia (royal water). 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otiluke’s Boiling Oil Bath 
(Conjuration, Evocation) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates a cauldron-shaped con- 
tainer of force filled with boiling oil, which ap- 
pears over the target creature’s head. The 
cauldron dumps its contents onto the creature 
unless a successful saving throw vs. spell is 
made. Success means the creature notes the 
cauldron’s sudden appearance and leaps clear 
before the oil is poured. A creature who fails 
takes the full dose of boiling oil, suffering 3d4 
heat damage. 

The material components are a few drops of 
oil and a pinch of sulphur. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otiluke’s Bubbling Buoyancy 
(Alteration) 
(Air, Alchemy) 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 100 Ibs./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows normally non-buoyant ob- 
jects to float upon a layer of small crystal bub- 
bles filled with air. Up to 100 pounds of matter 
per level of the caster can be made to float, in- 
cluding gold, lead, stone, or a living creature. 
An object that has sunk can be raised to the sur- 
face if the object is within the spell’s range. 

The material components are a small cork 
and a pinch of bromine salt. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otiluke’s Death Screen 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 7 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. square 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell calls into existence an immobile 
gray, misty screen, shaped as the caster wills 
(20 x 20 feet is common). Any creature passing 
through the screen suddenly finds itself trapped 
in a mysterious zone of nil-space where it is 
subjected to anti-energy drawn from one of the 


Do EN 


637 


>. 


~ Otiluke’s Diamond Screen r 


four Negative Quasi-Planes. 

Every round, the trapped creature loses 25% 
of its current hit point total, dropping to 0 hit 
points at the end of the 4th round if it fails to 
escape. The creature dies at —10 hit points at the 
end of the 5th round. For every round a creature 
is trapped, it receives a saving throw vs. death 
magic. Success means the creature escapes back 
to the Prime Material Plane, emerging from the 
side of the screen opposite the side entered. The 
saving throw to escape is made at —1 in the Ist 
round, —2 in the 2nd, —3 in the 3rd, and —4 in the 
4th round. 

If the spell ends before a creature escapes or 
dies, the creature is released onto the Prime Ma- 
terial Plane as the screen disappears, as if the 
creature had escaped on its own. A creature re- 
emerging injured but alive is stunned for 1d4 
rounds as it recovers from the effect of the life- 
draining zone. Those imprisoned in the zone 
can heal themselves and use any other magics, 
but can’t escape unless they make saving throws 
for the zone. 

The material components are a sheet of lead 
crystal, earth from a vampire’s coffin, and a 
hollow sphere (for vacuum). 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otiluke’s Diamond Screen 
(Evocation) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 6 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. square 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an immobile glittering 
screen of energy of any color chosen by the 
caster. All creatures passing through the screen 
are attacked by a multitude of razor-sharp blades 
made of substance drawn from the Quasi-Plane 
of Mineral. Each creature suffers 3d20 points of 
damage no matter what its Armor Class. The 
spell can be shaped as the caster wishes (typi- 
cally a screen of 20 x 20 feet). 

The material component is a collection of 
sharp diamond chips worth at least 5,000 gp, 
and these vanish after the spell is cast. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


638 


Otiluke’s Dispelling Screen 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. square 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an immobile shimmering 
screen of violet energy in any shape the caster 
desires. Any creature passing through the 
screen is affected by dispel magic with the 
same level of effectiveness as that cast by the 
wizard. As the screen does not create a focused 
effect, it has no effect on magical items other 
than potions, nor can it affect a permanency 
spell. A spell made permanent is subject to the 
dispelling only temporarily; for example, a 
wizard with a permanent invisibility spell 
would become briefly visible while walking 
through the screen if the dispel magic effect is 
successful against the invisibility. 

The material components for this spell are a 
sheet of fine lead crystal and a chysolite gem- 
stone worth 1,000 gp (both vanish when the 
spell is cast). 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). This 
spell was originally published in the GREYHAWK 
Adventures hardbound as a 5th-level spell. 


Otiluke’s Electrical Screen 
(Evocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. square/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates an immobile shimmering 
screen of electrical energy that can be shaped 
into a wall, hemisphere, or sphere, with a 20- 
foot diameter, as the caster wishes. It is always 
immobile. Any creature passing through the 
screen suffers a strong shock. Creatures passing 
through the screen must make a saving throw 
vs. spell; those wearing metal armor have a -4 
penalty. A creature failing the saving throw suf- 
fers 1d4 points of damage and both loses Dex- 
terity bonuses and suffers a —2 attack roll 


- 


N Otiluke’s Fire and Ice r 


penalty for 1d4+1 rounds, due to numbness. A 
creature making the saving throw takes no 
damage and suffers no Dexterity penalty, but is 
mildly numbed and attacks at a —1 penalty for 
1d4+1 rounds. 

The material components are a bit of fur, a 
glass rod, and a thin sheet of fine crystal, all of 
which vanish after the spell is cast. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otiluke’s Excruciating Screen 
(Evocation) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 6 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. square/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates an immobile misty gray 
screen that can be shaped into a wall, hemi- 
sphere, or sphere, within the designated dimen- 
sion, as the caster directs. Any creature passing 
through the screen is affected as if momentarily 
transported to one of the four Negative Quasi- 
Elemental Planes. The plane affecting the crea- 
tures touching the screen must be chosen when 
the spell is memorized. Any creature passing 
through the excruciating screen must make a 
saving throw vs. death magic. Those who fail 
are shocked and stunned for 1d4 rounds and 
suffer 4d4 points of damage. Those who make 
the saving throw suffer a —1 penalty to all saving 
throws for 1d4 rounds. The four particular ef- 
fects are described below. 

« Vacuum: The shock caused is due to asphyx- 
iation. Creatures that do not need to breathe 
are unaffected by the screen. 

« Salt: The shock is the result of body mois- 
ture drawn from the creature. Creatures 
without body fluids are not affected, such as 
golems, undead, or beings from the Elemen- 
tal Planes of Earth, Fire, or Air. 

* Ash: The shock is caused by a loss of the 
creature’s body heat. Undead and cold- 
based creatures are unharmed by the screen. 

* Dust: The shock is produced by having part 
of a creature’s solid body mass dispersed. 
Creatures of a gaseous or liquid form are not 
harmed by this screen. 


The material components are a crystal sheet 
and either a hollow sphere, lump of salt, pinch 
of ash, or bit of dust, depending on the type of 
screen. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otiluke’s Fire and Ice 
(Evocation) 


Level: 7 

Range: 50 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius globe 
Saving Throw: Special 


When the spell is cast, a red crystal sphere 
immediately appears before the caster, then flies 
away at great speed toward a targeted area. A 
split second later, a blue crystal sphere appears 
and quickly follows behind the red sphere. 
When the red sphere reaches the area chosen by 
the caster, it explodes in a fireball 30 feet in 
radius, inflicting 4d4 points of fire damage 
upon all within the area of effect. A successful 
saving throw vs. spell reduces the damage by 
half. A split-second later, the blue sphere ex- 
plodes in the same area of effect, inflicting 4d4 
points of cold damage upon all within a 30-foot 
radius. Those who made the saving throw 
against the fire take only half damage from the 
cold blast, but those who failed the saving throw 
against the fire take full damage from the cold. 
Note that, as with fireball, premature impact ex- 
plodes the spheres immediately. 

The greatest effect of the one-two attack 
combination is the tremendous shock inflicted 
upon inanimate objects by the radical change in 
temperature. All exposed items in the area of 
effect save as nonmagical items vs. crushing 
blow. Failing this saving throw causes most ma- 
terials to crack or shatter. 

The material components are a pinch of 
phosphorus and a small quartz crystal. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


DO EEN 


639 


> 


~ Otiluke’s Force Umbrella > 


Otiluke’s Force Umbrella 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 3 

Range: 50 ft. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. diameter dome 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a broad, bowl-shaped dome 
of force over the caster’s head, 20 feet in diame- 
ter, shimmering violet in appearance. The dome 
follows the caster wherever he travels. The 
dome not only shields the caster from rain, 
sleet, or snow, but also against physical or mag- 
ical attacks from above, such as siege missiles, 
giant-hurled boulders, or a breath weapon from 
a flying dragon. 

The force umbrella provides a +4 saving 
throw bonus against magical attacks from 
above, and a —6 Armor Class bonus against 
physical attacks from above. The umbrella also 
deflects 75% of arrow or bolt attacks from 
above, including high angle indirect fire (such 
as a volley of arrows shot in this fashion). The 
dome conforms to restricted spaces and passes 
through narrow openings easily. 

The material components are a miniature um- 
brella made of wood and leather and a pinch of 
diamond dust. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otiluke’s Freezing Sphere 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Water) 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


Otiluke’s freezing sphere is a multipurpose 
spell of considerable power. If the caster opts, 
he can create any of the following: 

A) Frigid Globe. A small globe of matter at 
absolute zero temperature that spreads upon 
contact with water—or a liquid that is princi- 
pally water—freezing it to a depth of 6 inches 
over an area equal to 100 square feet per level of 


640 


the spellcaster. This ice lasts for one round per 
level of the caster. 

The material component is a thin sheet of 
crystal about an inch square. 

B) Cold Ray. The spell can be used as a thin 
ray of cold that springs from the caster’s hand to 
a distance of 10 yards per level of the wizard; 
this ray inflicts 1d4+2 points of damage per 
level of the caster upon the first creature struck. 
A saving throw vs. spell is applicable; all 
damage is negated if it is successful (as the ray 
is so narrow a save indicates it a If the 
first creature is missed, the páth of the ray is 
plotted to its full distance, and anything else in 
its path must save (if applicable) or suffer ap- 
propriate damage. 

The material component is a white sapphire 
of not less than 1,000 gp value. 

C) Globe of Cold. This creates a small globe 
about the size of a sling stone, cool to the touch, 
but not harmful. This globe can be hurled, either 
by hand to a distance of 40 yards (considered 
short range), or as a sling bullet. The globe shat- 
ters upon impact, inflicting 6d6 points of cold 
damage upon all creatures within a 10-foot 
radius (half damage if a saving throw vs. spell is 
successful). Use the Grenadelike Missile Table 
in the DUNGEON MASTER Guide to find where 
misses strike. Note that if the globe is not 


_— 


~ Otiluke’s Polar Screen r 


thrown or slung within one round per level of 
the spelicaster, it shatters and causes cold 
damage as stated above. This timed effect can 
be employed against pursuers, although it can 
prove hazardous to the spellcaster and his asso- 
ciates as well. 

The material component is a 1,000 gp dia- 
mond. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Otiluke’s Orb of Containment 
(Evocation) 
(Alchemy, Artifice, Force) 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 6 in. sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is used to create a useful container 
for dangerous substances. When the caster has 
an object or substance to be contained, the spell 
can be cast to create a crystal sphere 6 inches in 
diameter, up to 30 yards away from the caster. 
The crystal orb surrounds the object (or part of 
a semi-liquid substance) and holds it securely; it 


« 
~~ + 


ji) T, 

en ue 
Hige- Ae w 
À x Ua ‘ J 


641 


will not form around an object that it cannot 
wholly contain. The interior surface of the orb is 
as hard as adamantite, so that even the most 
volatile or corrosive substance can be safely 
held. Time within the orb is frozen, so the sub- 
stance held will not age. 

The orb cannot be shattered by physical force 
or most magical attacks, although a dispel 
magic or disintegrate spell can destroy the orb 
and free its contents. 

The orb of containment exists for one day. 
After this, it fades out, freeing the contents. If 
the spell is cast again before the orb fades, the 
spell is renewed and continues for another day 
without disturbing the contents. 

The material components are a diamond 
worth 1,000 gp encased in glass, both of which 
shatter when the spell is cast. Only a shard of 
glass is required to renew the spell. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otiluke’s Polar Screen 
(Evocation) 
(Water) 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. square 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates an immobile misty, bluish- 
white screen of energy that can be shaped to 
form a wall, hemisphere, or sphere. Any crea- 
ture passing through the polar screen is affected 
as if the creature suddenly passed through a 
freezing blizzard. Any creature failing a saving 
throw vs. spell is coated with ice crystals for 
1d4+1 rounds (until the crystals melt away), 
during which time the creature suffers one point 
of cold damage per level of the caster. 

The creature is also severely chilled, suffer- 
ing a —4 attack penalty until the ice melts. A 
creature making the saving throw is affected by 
the ice crystals for only one round. A melt spell 
rids a creature of the ice crystals immediately, 
while a fireball, but no other flame, can destroy 
the polar screen itself. 

The material components are a thin sheet of 
fine lead crystal and a few bluish-white quartz 
crystals, all of which vanish after the spell is 
cast. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


~ Otiluke’s Radiant Screen 


Otiluke’s Radiant Screen 
(Evocation) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. square 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an immobile screen of 
energy drawn from the Quasi-Elemental Plane 
of Radiance. The screen can be up to 20 feet 
square, and can be shaped into a wall, hemi- 
sphere, or sphere as the caster orders. The radi- 
ant screen can be one of the seven colors of the 
rainbow, each color exhibiting a different form 
of energy identical to the colors of Nystul s radi- 
ant baton. 


Color Effect 

Red Cold energy (+1 damage to fire-based, 
none if cold) 

Orange Heat energy (+1 damage to cold 
based, none if fire) 

Yellow Acid damage (save vs. spell or take +2 
splash damage) 

Green Neutralize poison 

Blue Electrical energy (+10 damage to 
metal armored) 

Indigo Undead specific (only undead are 
harmed) 

Violet Vegetation specific (only plant-based 


lifeforms, including fungi and molds, 
are harmed) 


The screen affects anything passing through 
it as determined by the screen’s color. The caster 
can change the color of the screen from round to 
round at will, but only one color per round can 
exist. The radiant screen inflicts 2 points of 
damage per level of the caster. Thus, cold-based 
creatures take 3 points of damage per level of 
the caster when passing through the orange 
screen, while fire-based creatures suffer 3 
points of damage per level from the red screen. 

The material components are a crystal prism, 
a beryl gemstone worth at least 500 gp, and a 
thin sheet of fine crystal colored the seven 
colors of the rainbow, all of which vanish after 
the spell is cast. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otiluke’s Resilient Sphere 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1-ft. diameter/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the result is a globe of 
shimmering force that encloses the subject crea- 
ture—if it is small enough to fit within the di- 
ameter of the sphere and it fails to successfully 
save vs. spell. The resilient sphere contains its 
subject for the spell’s duration, and it is not sub- 
ject to damage of any sort except from a rod of 
cancellation, a wand of negation, or a disinte- 
grate or dispel magic spell. These cause it to be 
destroyed without harm to the subject. Nothing 
can pass through the sphere, inside or out, 
though the subject can breathe normally. The 
subject may struggle, but all that occurs is a 
movement of the sphere. The globe can be 
moved physically either by people outside the 
globe or by the struggles of those within. 

The material components of the spell are a 
hemispherical piece of diamond (or similar 
hard, clear gem material) and a matching hemi- 
spherical piece of gum arabic. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Otiluke’s Siege Sphere 
(Evocation) 
(Alchemy, Artifice) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a large, boulder-sized 
sphere of force that can be fired by a catapult. 
The siege sphere lasts for one complete turn 
before it fades out of existence, so it must be 
fired within one turn of the spell’s casting. The 
siege sphere can take several different forms, 
and the type of sphere to be created must be de- 
cided when the spell is memorized. The siege 
sphere is as hard as adamantite before it is 


A a E a 


642 


p 


~ Otiluke’s Steaming Sphere r 


launched, and can be destroyed only by a dispel 
magic, disintegrate, or wish. After the sphere is 
fired, it takes on a different form, depending on 
the type of the sphere created. Despite the form 
that the attack takes, Otiluke 5 siege sphere van- 
ishes after its attack. Several different types of 
spheres are possible. 

* Crystal Shards: This sphere splinters apart 
30 feet above the ground, raining down crys- 
tal shards in a 20-foot radius circle. Each 
creature in the area takes 5d6 points of 
damage regardless of Armor Class. 

The material component is a pinch of 

sharp diamond flakes. 
Liquid Fire: When the sphere strikes, it in- 
stantly shatters, spraying a mass of liquid 
fire over an area 30 feet in radius. All com- 
bustibles in the area of effect are ignited. 
Any creature struck by the liquid fire takes 
2d4 points of damage per round for 2d6 
rounds unless the fire is doused or the burn- 
ing fluid is washed off. 

The material components for this form 

are a drop of pitch, a bit of phosphorus, and 
a pinch of diamond dust. 
Wrecking Ball: Upon nearing its target, the 
sphere’s density dramatically increases so it 
strikes with three times the impact (and 
damage) of a heavy catapult. 

The material components are a lodestone 
and a pinch of diamond dust. 


Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otiluke’s Smoky Sphere 
(Evocation) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: | 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell summons into the caster’s hand a 
small crystalline sphere filled with a gray, hazy 
mass. The caster can throw the smoke sphere as 
far as 60 yards as a grenade-like missile. The 
sphere shatters when it hits, filling a 10-foot 
radius area with harsh, irritating smoke. 

Any creature in the area failing a saving 
throw vs. poison suffers a fit of coughing, gasp- 
ing, and choking for 1d4+1 rounds. The affected 


643 


creatures attack and make saving throws with a 
-2 penalty until the fit passes, and any spell 
with a verbal component has a 30% chance of 
failure when cast by a coughing spellcaster. 

The smoke cloud disperses and becomes 
harmless after one round. The sphere must be 
used within three rounds of casting or the sub- 
stance becomes inert and useless, and the crys- 
tal sphere disintegrates. If the smoke sphere is 
shattered before it is thrown, the smoke cloud 
affects the caster. 

The material component is a charred stick or 
piece of charcoal and a small, hollow glass ball. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otiluke’s Steaming Sphere 
(Evocation) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a small crystalline sphere 
filled with hot steam in the caster’s hand. The 
mist within the sphere remains active for three 
rounds. The sphere can be hurled up to 60 yards 
from the caster. When the sphere hits a solid 
surface, it instantly shatters, filling a 30-foot 
radius area with thick steam that inflicts 4d4 
points of heat damage per round of exposure, 
with no saving throw. 

The steam totally obscures vision, reducing 
visibility to only 3 feet. Creatures within the af- 
fected area are disoriented, making it difficult 
for them to find their way out of the steam 
cloud. To escape the steam cloud, a creature 
must make a successful saving throw vs. spell, 
with one attempt allowed per round. A creature 
that successfully saves emerges from the steam 
bath in a random direction; Imagine a clock 
face and roll 1d12 to find the direction in which 
the creature escapes. If the saving throw is 
failed, the creature stumbles around in the steam 
bath for that round. Once activated, the steam 
lasts for one round for every two levels of the 
caster. It can be dispersed at once by a gust of 
wind spell. 

The material components are a few drops of 
pure water, a pinch of dust, and a bit of sulphur. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


~ Otiluke’s Telekinetic Sphere = 


Otiluke’s Telekinetic Sphere 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 8 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 ft./level diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is exactly the same as the 4th-level 
wizard spell Otiluke 5 resilient sphere, with the 
addition that the creatures or objects inside the 
globe are nearly weightless—anything con- 
tained within it weighs only “16 its normal 
weight. Any subject weighing up to 5,000 
pounds can be telekinetically lifted in the sphere 
by the caster. 

Range of control extends to a maximum dis- 
tance of 10 yards per level after the sphere has 
succeeded in encapsulating one or more sub- 
jects. Note that even if more than 5,000 pounds 
of weight is englobed, the perceived weight is 
only Ye of the actual weight, so the orb can be 
rolled without exceptional effort. Because of 
the reduced weight, rapid motion or falling 
within the field of the sphere is relatively harm- 


re 
N NS 


PONS aS io. 
A R 


AN 


less to the object therein, although it can be dis- 
astrous should the globe disappear when the 
subject inside is high above a hard surface. The 
caster can dismiss the effect with a word. 

In addition to a hemispherical piece of dia- 
mond and a matching piece of gum arabic, the 
caster must also have a pair of small bar mag- 
nets as material components for this spell. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Ottar’s Mask 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster or any willing 
being touched by the caster to perfectly 
assume the face and frontal appearance of an- 
other being. The being must be visible to the 
caster at the time. The adopted shape is a toes- 
to-hair duplicate of the front facing of the body 
only. 

The being whose form is taken can be of a 
different gender, age, and race. The imposture is 
undetectable; not even a betraying dweomer is 
exhibited. Eye hue, hair length and hue, moles, 
wounds, and the like are all duplicated, as are 
scents and textures. Assumed features gained by 
use of this spell are fully usable (drow eyes have 
infravision, for example), but the spell does not 
grant spell-like natural powers of a race whose 
guise has been assumed. The spell recipient’s 
Dexterity is also unchanged. 

The magic is powerful enough to cause crea- 
ture-specific poisons and spells to react as if the 
frontal image is the whole being (thus a human 
in drow form and attacked frontally is unlikely 
to be charmed, though a hit by an arrow of elf 
slaying would be fatal). The spell recipient can 
drop the guise instantly by silent act of will. The 
changed form has no effect on the spell recipi- 
ent’s spellcasting ability, although the recipient 
must be careful to not allow material compo- 
nents to be transformed into part of the assumed 
frontal shape. 

The material components of this spell are an 
eyelash a piece of skin from any creature. 

It is thought that no living wizards outside the 
Seven and some Harpers know this spell, 


po 


~ Otto’s Drums of Despair r 


— _ 
ANG $ 
ANNA 
RA 55 
Nee ` N ON \N 
XQ WHY QA 
P 

eve 


vi 
NY 


` 


a) 
SEN X ye: 
vou 


though there are persistent rumors of the 
Witches of Rashemen employing it. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Otto’s Chime of Release 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice, Song) 


Level: 1 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 chime 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a delicate chime rings 
out, the vibrations of which release any form of 
nonmagical bonds holding a single creature or 
person. Ropes are untied, chains and shackles 
loosened, leather straps unbound, a gag undone, 
even a wooden stock can be opened by the 
chime. The spell can release a bit and bridle on 
a horse, freeing the mount from a rider’s direct 
control. 

The material component is a small brass 
tubular chime, which disappears when the spell 
is cast. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otto’s Crystal Rhythms 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Unless the victim of this spell makes a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell, the creature’s ears 
are filled with the sound of energetic crystal 
chimes that no one else can hear. The creature 
immediately drops anything in its hands and 
begin clapping, so it cannot use its hands for 
anything else. Spells requiring a somatic com- 
ponent cannot be cast, thieving skills cannot be 
performed, tools cannot be used, and weapons 
cannot be wielded by the clapper. Obviously, 
only creatures that have hands are affected. Any 
creature with more than one pair of hands claps 
along with as many hands as it has. 

The material component of the spell is a pair 
of crystals worth 500 gp that vanishes after the 
spell is cast. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otto’s Drums of Despair 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Reversible 
(Artifice, Song) 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 400 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates the sound of oppressively 
loud war drums in a large area, filling all crea- 
tures in the area of effect with feelings of dread 
and despair. The spell covers an area at the di- 
rection of the caster, so a 10th-level wizard can 
affect an area 200 feet by 20 feet, 100 feet by 40 
feet, or 50 feet by 80 feet. The height of the 
effect is equal to the shortest other dimension. 

A successful saving throw vs. spell negates 
the effect. Creatures of 2 Hit Dice or less re- 
ceive no saving throw. Creatures of 2+1 to 4 Hit 
Dice have a —2 penalty, and creatures of 4+1 Hit 


FO EEE EN 


645 


>. 


~ Otto's Gong of Isolation : 


Dice and higher roll an unmodified saving 
throw against the effect. Affected creatures have 
a —2 penalty to all attacks, damage, and saving 
throws rolls, and suffer a -2 morale penalty. 

The material components are a pair of minia- 
ture bronze drums with onyx decorations, worth 
1,000 gp in materials and workmanship, that 
vanish after the spell is cast. 

The reverse of the spell, Otto's rousing 
anthem, produces a loud trumpet call that raises 
the spirits of all allied creatures in the same- 
sized area of effect. All affected creatures have a 
+] bonus to attack and saving throw rolls, and 
NPCs receive a +2 bonus to morale checks. 

The material component for the anthem is a 
set of four miniature silver trumpets trimmed 
with lapis lazuli, worth a total of 5,000 gp. The 
set vanishes when the spell 1s cast. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otto’s Gong of Isolation 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 
(Artifice, Song) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast upon a creature, the 
mind-numbing sound of an extremely loud gong 
fills its mind. If the creature makes a saving 
throw vs. spell at a —2 penalty, the creature is 
only stunned for one round. If the saving throw 
is failed, the creature loses all normal sensory 
input into the mind. The creature cannot see, 
hear, feel, taste, or smell, effectively making it 
helpless. If the creature engages in melee, all at- 
tacks are made at —6 penalty, but the creature has 
no idea of what it is attacking or even if the 
attack succeeds. Telepathic communication with 
the creature is still possible, and the creature 
might receive information about the world 
through such a link. A heal, restoration, or wish 
spell completely cures the condition. 

The spell requires a miniature gold gong and 
tiny gold striker with a jade stone as its head, to- 
gether worth 7,000 gp in materials and work- 
manship, which does not vanish after the spell is 
cast. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


646 


Otto’s Irresistible Dance 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1d4+1 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When an Otto ù irresistible dance spell is 
placed upon a creature, the spell causes the re- 
cipient to begin dancing, complete with feet 
shuffling and tapping. This dance makes it im- 
possible for the victim to do anything other than 
caper and prance; this cavorting worsens the 
Armor Class of the creature by —4, makes 
saving throws impossible except on a roll of 20, 
and negates any consideration of a shield. The 
creature must be touched, as if melee combat 
were taking place and the spellcaster was strik- 
ing to inflict damage. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Otto’s Rousing Anthem 
Reversed form, see Otto’s drums of despair. 


Otto’s Silver Tongue 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard’s voice 
takes on an enthralling sing-song tone that in- 
stantly catches the ear of any listener. Anything 
said by the caster sounds very convincing, as if 
the wizard had a 19 Charisma (+40% reaction 
adjustment). Any half-truth spoken by the caster 
has a 75% chance of sneaking past the notice ofa 
listener using a detect lie spell and an outright lie 
has a 50% chance of not being discovered by that 
spell. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


m 


~ Otto’s Sure-Footed Shuffle r 


Otto’s Soothing Vibrations 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


As the wizard casts the spell, all creatures in 
the area of effect begin to hear soothing vibra- 
tions that cause them to pause and listen. As the 
music continues, the creatures feel the wizard 
broadcasting peaceful, kindly thoughts to them. 
The creatures do nothing until the wizard has 
finished casting the spell. 

Thereafter, all animals in the area of effect of 
semi-intelligence or lower feel kindly toward 
the caster, and show no aggression or fear 
unless attacked first. All other creatures are en- 
titled to a saving throw vs. spell at +2 bonus to 
avoid the spell’s lulling effect. 

Affected animals and creatures failing the 
saving throw are more susceptible to charm 
spells cast before the soothing vibrations spell 
duration ends, and suffer a —2 penalty against 


any charm-type spell cast upon them, such as 
animal friendship, charm person or mammal, 
charm monster, and so on. 

There is no somatic or material component to 
the spell, just the soothing, vibrating voice of 
the caster. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otto’s Sure-Footed Shuffle 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 


(Song) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 turn/level + 1d6 turns 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the listeners hear 
fiddle music for one round. Thereafter, each 
creature in the area at the instant the spell is cast 
has the walking agility and surefootedness of a 
mountain goat. The creature can climb an in- 
cline of up to 50 degrees with no trouble. In any 
situation in which it might trip, slip, stumble, or 
lose its footing or balance, the affected creature 
is allowed a +4 bonus to a saving throw or Dex- 


Joo a TA 


647 


> | 


~ Otto’s Tin Soldiers m 


terity check to avoid falling, whichever the DM 
decides is applicable. 
The material components are a fiddle string 
and a sliver from the hoof of a mountain goat. 
Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otto’s Tin Soldiers 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 5 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


To use this spell, the caster must have a pair 
of small tin soldiers appropriate for one of the 
four versions of the spell. When the spell is cast, 
rousing martial music fills the air as the tin sol- 
diers grow to man-size and come to life. The tin 
soldiers obey all orders faithfully, even to de- 
struction. The type of soldiers that can be con- 
jured into existence depends on the level of the 
caster, as follows. 


° 7th-level: Two heavy footmen: AC 4 (chain 
mail and large shield); MV 9; HD 1+2; hp 8 
each; #AT 1; Dmg 1d6 (spear and short 
sword); THACO 18; AL N. 

9th-level: Two heavy foot archers: AC 5 
(chain mail); MV 9; HD 2+2; hp 15 each; 
#AT 2 or 1 (long bow or short sword); Dmg 
1d6 (arrow and short sword); THACO 16; 
ALN. 

12th-level: Two light horsemen (if there is 
room for the horses): AC 6 (ring mail); MV 
24 riding (12 on foot); HD 3+2; hp 23 each; 
#AT 2 or 1 (composite short bow or broad 
sword); Dmg 1d6 or 2d4 (arrow or broad 
sword); THACO 16; AL N. Light warhorses: 
AC 6 (leather barding); MV 24; HD 2; hp 
14; #AT 2; Dmg 1d4/1d4; THACO 16; AL 
N. 

14th-level: Two foot-knights: AC 2 (plate 
mail and large shield); MV 6; HD 4+2; hp 
30 each; #AT 1; Dmg 1d10+3 (long sword); 
THACO 15; ALN. 


Slain soldiers vanish, as do all remaining sol- 
diers when the spell expires. 

The material components are the pair of sol- 
diers worth 100 gp in workmanship and a 


miniature brass bugle worth 50 gp, which 
vanish after the spell is cast. 
Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otto’s Tonal Attack 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 
Level: 4 


Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes a spell-using creature to 
temporarily lose the knowledge of how to cast 
spells unless a successful saving throw vs. spell 
is made (priests have a +2 bonus to their saves). 
A successful saving throw means any spell cast 
by the affected creature is only reduced in effec- 
tiveness, as if cast by a character two experience 
levels lower for determining spell range, area of 
effect, duration, or damage. A specialist wizard 
affected by this spell does not impose the saving 
throw penalty due to his specialty. 

The material components are a sitar string 
and a crystal mallet (1,000 gp), which vanish 
after the spell is cast. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otto’s Tones of Forgetfulness 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: Special 


When the wizard casts this spell, the ears of 
the target being are filled with exotic tones no 
one else can hear. A being who fails to make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell loses all 
memory of one nonweapon proficiency. The 
wizard can chosen the proficiency if he knows 
the being to possess it, otherwise a nonweapon 
proficiency is randomly chosen by the DM. Any 
attempt to use the proficiency meets with fail- 
ure. A being whose saving throw is successful 
still suffers a —2 penalty to the chance of suc- 


, rr a aia. 


648 


- 


‘ Ozone Cloud r 


cess with the proficiency for the duration of the 
spell. 

The material components are a string from a 
sitar and a wooden mallet. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Otto’s Warding Tones 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 
Level: 4 


Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 50-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


All creatures affected by this spell have their 
ears filled with loud tones only they can hear. 
The notes drown out all other sounds, effec- 
tively making the creatures deaf. This gives im- 
munity to certain sound-based attacks, such as a 
siren’s song, a banshee’s wail, drums of panic, 
drums of deafening, or the first use of a horn of 
blasting. The spell does not give immunity 
against attacks that are caused by vibrations: 
shatter, the breath weapons of certain dragons, 
the second use of the horn of blasting, and so 
on. The spell also does not hinder the effects of 
holy word, most known power words, true 
name, or similar magics. 

The effects of deafness are: a —1 penalty to 
surprise rolls, a +1 penalty to initiative, and a 
20% chance of spell failure for spells with 
verbal components. 

The material components are two lumps of 
bee’s wax and a string from any orchestral string 
instrument. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Ozone Cloud 
(Evocation) 
(Air) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 40 x 20 x 20-ft. cloud 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell generates an invisible cloud of 
ozone that merely irritates most creatures, but 


649 


which inflicts 1d6 points of damage per level of 
the caster (count any ls rolled as 2s) upon 
fungi, gelatinous cubes, jellies, molds, oozes, 
puddings, and slimes. A successful saving 
throw vs. spell indicates half damage. 

Casting the spell also produces spectacular 
electrical spark; everyone in the cloud or within 
10 feet of the cloud must make a successful 
saving throw vs. petrification or be blinded for 
1d4 rounds. 

The material component is an extract from a 
whole volt, shocker, or electric eel. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Magazine.) 


LY 


AY a ais, 


É y 1I 


KAKU 


N 


Z by 7... ' NANS 
gy trys, i a N 
Cite WOA \ 

UAN SON 
Kð i D 


SHANI, 


NF a 


| f a 4 Ñ 
yt > Melly 
4 


A 1 
t uyot 
‘ 


f $ M 3 
fou $ 
f We i MAH 


Mi 
Ait a 
HK 


ie 
ANN 
caw 


ae i À À i 

4 1 + (DA S W \ 
% RAT A \ a 
ao i 2 3 i RSS i > HUN 


Ye, 


Pacify — Witch 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 


Level: 2 
Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 4 turns + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 2d4 creatures in a 
10 x 10 x 20-ft. area 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell magically calms 2d4 creatures of 6 
Hit Dice or less in the area of effect. Undead 
creatures are not affected by this spell. Other- 
wise, those who fail a saving throw vs. spell 
cease combat, confrontational discussions, and 
other energetic activities. 

Creatures that stop fighting are 50% likely to 
withdraw from the scene, and 50% likely to sit 
or lie down, falling into a light doze. As long as 
the pacified creature is not harmed, it remains 
under the influence of the spell. Each time an 
affected creature is injured or attacked, it gains 
an immediate saving throw to break free of the 
spell’s influence, with a +1 bonus per point of 
damage taken. 

The spell lasts until the duration expires or 
the subjects are awakened by attacks. 

Notes: Uncommon for witches and song 


mages; very rare for enchanters. 


+ 


Pact 
Athasian Dragon-King 
magic; psionic 
component renders the 
spell uncastable by 
wizards. 


Pain 
(Invocation) 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 Hit Die/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, the wu jen directs this spell at a 
single creature or group of creatures. If multiple 
creatures are affected, all must be within 20 feet 
of each other. All affected are struck by pains 


Pain Touch 


and agony. These pains pass in an in- 
J stant. Once past, however, the creatures 

“<4 find their muscles contorted and their 
strength reduced. 

Dexterity and Strength ability scores are re- 
duced to 3 for 2d4 rounds after the spell is cast. 
This gives an affected creature penalties of —3 
to attack rolls, —1 to damage, —3 to reaction at- 
tacking adjustment, and +4 to the defensive ad- 
justment. At the end of 2d4 rounds, the Strength 
and Dexterity of the creature return to normal. 
A strength or prestidigitation spell cancels the 
effects of the pain spell, either providing the 
needed vitality to restore Strength and Dexterity 
to normal ranges. 

The material components for this spell are a 
leech and stone scraped against a slate. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Pain Touch 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Pain touch enables the caster to touch an op- 
ponent in such a way as to induce extreme pain. 
The spell works if the caster touches any ex- 
posed part of an opponent’s body. The caster 
must be within arm’s length of the opponent for 
the spell to work. The spell requires a normal 
attack roll. 

The pain causes no damage, but for the next 
1d4 rounds, the opponent’s attack rolls and 
Armor Class are penalized by 2. The caster can 
cast the spell and touch the victim in the same 
round. Pain touch is only effective on human, 
demihuman, and humanoid opponents. 

The material components for this spell are a 
needle and the finger from a scorched glove. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; uncom- 
mon. 


651 


> 


~~ Paradox r: 


Paradox 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When paradox is cast, the chronomancer can 
alter a minor event from his past that may affect 
the present. Such an event might be exchanging 
one memorized spell for a more useful one, 
having bought a cask of ale instead of a cask of 
oil, or deciding that, instead of insulting the 
orcs’ chieftain (who has been harboring a 
grudge, and now the characters need his help), 
the heroes insulted their finest warrior. 

The event to be changed should not be more 
than three hours in duration, and it must be 
something that was personally done by the 
chronomancer, or something the chronomancer 
could have influenced. (Perhaps a thief actually 
made the insult, and the chronomancer uses 
paradox to explain it away at the expense of the 
orc warrior.) Something is always given up 
when this spell is used. The chronomancer can 
change an event as far back as one month. 

The DM decides how the change proceeds 
forward, if at all. Often, things will not work out 
as neatly as the caster might hope. The orc 
chieftain could still bear a grudge (that the war- 
rior was insulted), and the warrior might wish 
now for personal satisfaction. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; 
common. 


Paralytic Missile, Gemidan’s 
See Gemidan’s paralytic missile. 


Paralyzation 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 
Level: 3 


Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


652 


The paralyzation spell enables the illusionist 
to create illusionary muscle slowdown in crea- 
tures in the area of effect. Creatures’ whose 
combined Hit Dice are equal to or less than 
twice the illusionist’s experience level can be af- 
fected. Mindless creatures and those with more 
Hit Dice than the spell can cover are not af- 
fected at all. Creatures with the fewest Hit Dice 
or levels are affected first. Any creature that 
might be affected is allowed a saving throw vs. 
paralyzation to avoid the effect. A dispel illu- 
sion or dispel magic spell removes the effect 
immediately, and the caster can end the spell on 
command. The paralyzation lasts no longer than 
one hour in any event. 

Notes: Restricted to illusionists and shadow 
mages; uncommon. 


Paralyze 
Aka paralyzing touch. 


Paralyzing Field — Witch 
(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 80 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 12 rds. 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


If this spell is cast on a solid surface, it cre- 
ates a paralyzing field 10 feet high and 20 feet 
in diameter. This field lasts 12 rounds, inflicting 
a paralysis lasting 2d4 turns, subject to a saving 
throw vs. paralysis at a —4 penalty. The field is 
essentially invisible to normal vision, though 
with concentration a slight shimmer can be 
seen. 

The material component is a powdery clay 
that has been soaked in giant wasp venom. 

Notes: Restricted to witches, very rare. (Up- 
dated from DraGoN Magazine). This was origi- 
nally part of the paralyzing pit spell. 


g 


~ Part Sand r 


Paralyzing Pit — Witch 
(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 80 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


Much like the 2nd-level pit spell, the paralyz- 
ing pit conjures a circular pit 20 feet across and 
20 feet deep within the spell range. The pit 
forms only in earth, sand, clay, loam, mud, or 
other soft soil. If the caster creates the pit di- 
rectly under an opponent or in front of a moving 
opponent, the victim is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to avoid falling in. Stationary or slow- 
moving characters who fall in suffer 2d6 
damage; running or charging characters suffer 
3d6 damage. 

The pit entraps its victims with a powerful 
paralysis field. Any character or creature falling 
in must make a successful saving throw vs. par- 
alyzation with a —4 penalty or be paralyzed. The 
paralysis lasts for 2d4 turns. The caster is 
immune to the paralysis effect. The pit itself is 
as permanent as any hole in the ground, but its 
paralyzing field is active for only 12 rounds. 

The pit sides are steep, but not unclimbable. 
Given 2d4 rounds, any unparalyzed character 
can scramble free. Paralyzed characters are 
completely helpless, and anyone who enters the 
pit to aid them may be paralyzed as well. Any 
unparalyzed character in the pit makes a new 
saving throw against paralysis every second 
round. 

The material component is a claw-bone from 
a mole, dipped in giant wasp venom. 

Notes: Restricted to witches, very rare. (Up- 
dated from DRAGON Magazine). 


Paralyzing Touch 
(Necromancy) 
Level: 3 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


Upon casting this spell, a wizard gains the 
ability to paralyze those touched. The caster 
must make a successful attack roll in order to 
strike an opponent with the paralysis. Those 
touched must make a saving throw vs. spell to 
avoid the effect. 

If the saving throw is successful, the creature 
is unaffected. Creatures immune to paralysis, as 
well as undead and unliving creatures such as 
golems, are not affected by this spell. Failure 
means the creature is paralyzed for 2d4 rounds. 

The material component of this spell is a 
piece of ghoul flesh. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers from 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; otherwise, rare. 
Known to be in Myrl 's Text. 


Part Sand 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Sand) 


ay 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Part sand enables the caster to cause a promi- 
nence made of sand, gravel, or loose dirt—that 
is, a dune, hill, knoll, or rise, not a depression or 
level ground—to move apart, forming a 20- 
foot-wide trough. This trough extends 10 feet in 
length and 3 feet deep per level of the caster. 
(For example, a 12th-level wizard can create a 
trough 20 feet wide, 120 feet long, and 36 feet 
deep.) The caster can also elect to cut a smaller 
trough. After aiming the initial cut, he cannot 
angle it to change direction. The magic holds 
the trough clear of slipping earth or sand for the 
duration of the spell. It even whisks away earth 
introduced into the trough by someone physi- 
cally digging into its sides. 

If the wizard’s trough meets a solid rock face, 
the trough is blocked. (It cannot get larger.) 
However, a trough can be positioned along the 
edge of a rocky outcrop so as to expose it, pro- 
vided the outcrop doesn’t extend across the 
width of the trough at any point. 

This spell also can be used to inflict damage 
on an earth elemental or other being whose 
body is formed of earth or sand (such as a san- 
dling or a sand lion conjured by spell). A crea- 
ture that is in phase with such substances (such 


S i a a ONA 


653 


> . 


~ Part Water 


as a xorn) is also vulnerable. 

When the trough encounters such a creature, 
its progress ends immediately (digging no far- 
ther). The creature in the path of this spell im- 
mediately suffers 4d8 points of damage. Unlike 
part water, this spell does not panic such crea- 
tures—but it does force a saving throw vs. spell 
to avoid being slowed (to half movement rate 
and attacks) for 1d6 rounds. 

Creatures that are not earth-based are not 
harmed by part sand. Large, solid objects (such 
as corpses and living bodies) unearthed in the 
path of the trough merely settle to the bottom; 
they are not flung aside. 

The material component of this spell is two 
small stones. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Part Water 
(Alteration) 
(Water) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. x 3 ft./level x 30 ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By employing a part water spell, the wizard 
can cause water or similar liquid to move apart, 
thus forming a 20-foot-wide trough. The depth 
and length of the trough are dependent upon the 
level of the wizard, and a trough 3 feet deep by 
10 yards long is created per level. For example, 
at 12th level the wizard would part water 36 feet 
deep by 20 feet wide by 120 yards long. The 
trough remains as long as the spell lasts or until 
the wizard who cast it opts to end its effects. If 
cast under water, this spell creates an air cylin- 
der of appropriate length and diameter. If cast 
directly on a water elemental or other water- 
based creature, the creature receives 4d8 
damage and must roll a successful saving throw 
vs. spell or flee in panic for 3d4 rounds. 

The material components for the spell are 
two small sheets of crystal or glass. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Passwall 
(Alteration) 
(Earth, Shadow) 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 5 x 8 x 10 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


A passwall spell enables the spellcaster to 
open a passage through wooden, plaster, or 
stone walls, but not other materials. The spell- 
caster and any associates can simply walk 
through. The spell causes a 5-foot wide x 8-foot 
high x 10-foot deep opening. Several of these 
spells can form a continuing passage so that 
very thick walls can be pierced. If dispelled, the 
passwall closes away from the dispelling caster, 
ejecting those in the passage. 

The material component of this spell is a 
pinch of sesame seeds. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Passweb — Drow 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the caster (or one creature) 
to pass through existing webs, both natural and 
magical, as though they did not exist. It also per- 
mits passage through barriers of rope or vine, pro- 
vided the area to be passed through incorporates 
only nonmagical, organic materials. The webs or 
barriers are not disturbed or altered in any way by 
this spell or the passage through them. 

A recipient of this spell can try to free creatures 
or objects already trapped in a web. This requires 
a successful saving throw vs. petrification, and a 
success ends the spell immediately. (If a trapped 
being is unwilling to be freed, and able to actively 
resist, failure is automatic.) 

This spell does not confer immunity to the ef- 
fects of viscid globs (created by a particular mag- 
ical wand used by the drow). 

Notes: Restricted to drow; common. 


654 


4 J EAA i 
4 ʻA J? | 
of Ny 


R 
Beis 
f 
f N 


¥\ 
AN 


— d i 
| 
wae 


SA p 


655 


Patternweave 


Past Life 


(Divination) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By touching the remains of a dead creature, 
this spell allows a caster to gain a mental image 
of the deceased’s former appearance. The re- 
mains can be of any age. Only a tiny fragment is 
required, such as a bone splinter or a strand of 
hair. 

At 7th level, the wizard can view the final 
minute of the subject’s life from the subject’s 
point of view. 

At 9th level, the wizard can substitute a per- 
sonal possession of the subject (a ring, a fa- 
vorite walking stick, etc.) for bodily remains. 
The final minute can be viewed only if the item 
was present at the subject’s demise. 

Notes: Common for diviners; otherwise, un- 
common (ToM). 


Patternweave* 
(Divination) 
(Wild) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. square 
Saving Throw: Special 


Patternweave allows the caster to make sense 
of apparent chaos. The caster can see such 
things as pottery shards reformed into a whole 
pot, shreds of paper formed into a page, scat- 
tered parts as a working machine, or specific 
trails appearing out of overlapping footprints. 

After casting the spell, the wizard studies 
seemingly random elements broken bits of 
glass, shreds of paper, intermingled trails, etc. 
The items to be studied must be tangible— 
coded flashing lights, garbled speech, or 
thoughts of any kind cannot be studied. 

The wizard must study the random elements 
for one round, after which the DM secretly 
makes a saving throw vs. spell for the wizard. If 


~~ Penultimate Cogitation, Mordenkainen’s a 


the saving throw is failed, the spell fails. How- 
ever, if the saving throw is successful, the caster 
sees in his mind the pattern these objects form. 
If the items studied are truly random, no infor- 
mation is gained. 

After the caster has visualized the pattern, he 
can attempt to reassemble the parts into their 
original form. This requires another saving 
throw vs. spell to determine whether the wizard 
remembers sufficient details to accomplish the 
task. The amount of time required and the qual- 
ity of restoration vary according to the com- 
plexity of the pattern. Reassembling a shredded 
map may be easy; reassembling a broken clock 
is significantly more difficult; rebuilding a 
shattered mosaic is extremely difficult. In any 
case, the wizard can make only a reasonable 
copy of the item. He can use this spell to restore 
works of art, but they will be worth only a small 
percentage of their original value. 

The material component is a small hand lens 
through which the caster studies the objects. 
The lens is not consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages; common. 


Penultimate Cogitation, 
Mordenkainen’s 


See Mordenkainen’s penultimate cogitation. 


Permanency 
(Alteration) 
(Universal) 


Level: 8 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects the duration of certain other 
spells, making the duration permanent. The 
wizard can cast this spell in three different ways: 
on himself, on other creatures, and on an area. 

¢ On Himself: The wizard casts the desired 
spell and then follows it with the permanency 
spell. Each such permanency spell lowers the 
wizard’s Constitution by 1 point. This applica- 
tion of permanency can be dispelled only by a 
wizard of greater level than the spellcaster was 
when he cast the spell. The personal spells upon 
which a permanency is known to be effective 
are as follows: 


comprehend languages protection from evil 


detect disease protection from hunger 
and thirst 

detect evil protectionfrom normal 
missiles 

detect invisibility protection from 
paralysis 

detect life read magic 

detect magic tongues 

infravision unseen servant 

past life 


protection from cantrips 


¢ On a Creature: This application can be dis- 
pelled only by a spellcaster of greater level than 
the wizard was when he cast the spell. The fol- 
lowing can made permanent if cast on another 
creature: 
enlarge fear 
invisibility 


* On an Object or Area: These applications to 
other spells allow a permanency to be cast si- 
multaneously with any of the latter. The entire 
spell complex can be dispelled normally, and 
thus negated. The permanency spell can be used 
to make the following object or area-effect 
spells permanent: 


alarm prismatic sphere 
audible glamer solid fog 

dancing lights stinking cloud 
distance distortion teleport 

enlarge Von Gasik’s refusal 
fear wall of fire 

gust of wind wall of force 
magic mouth web 


Otiluke’s dispelling screen 


The permanency spell is also used in the fab- 
rication of magical items (see the 6th-level spell 
enchant an item). In the fabrication process, 
Constitution is only 5% likely to be lost. 

The DM may allow other selected spells to be 
made permanent. Researching this possible ap- 
plication of a spell costs as much time and 
money as independently researching the se- 
lected spell. If the DM has already determined 
that the application is not possible, the research 
automatically fails. Note that the wizard never 
learns what is possible except by the success or 
failure of his research. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Je —— ee 


656 


~ Persistence r 


Optional: Permanency might become un- 
stable or fail after a long period—at least 
1,000 years. Unstable effects might operate 
intermittently or fail altogether. 


Permanent Antimagic Field, 
Thiondar’s 


See Thiondar’s permanent antimagic field. 


Permanent Illusion 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube + 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is cast, the wizard creates an 
illusion with visual, auditory, olfactory, and 
thermal elements. The spell can create the illu- 
sion of any object, creature, or force, as long as 
it is within the boundaries of the spell’s area of 
effect. It affects all creatures that view the illu- 
sion, even to the extent of them suffering 
damage from falling into an illusory pit full of 
sharp spikes. 

Creatures that attempt to disbelieve the illu- 
sion gain a saving throw vs. spell. If successful, 
they see it for what it is and add +4 bonuses to 
associates’ saving throws, if this knowledge can 
be communicated effectively. Creatures not 
sensing the spell effect are immune until they 
become aware of it. The permanent illusion is 
subject to a dispel magic spell, of course. 

The material component of the spell is a bit 
of fleece. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Persistence 
(Invocation/Evocation) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Related to both the contingency and perma- 
nency spells, persistence allows a wizard to cast 
a spell of 6th level or lower and then hold it until 
it is needed. There are two general uses for the 
spell: to use a personal spell effect as needed up 
to the maximum duration of the persistence 
itself, or to prepare an instantaneous spell and 
hold it ready until the caster wishes to use it. 

A) Personal Spell. Any spell that augments 
the wizard’s natural abilities—detect magic, 
protection from evil, jump, infravision, fly, 
wraithform, or other caster-affecting spells— 
can be made persistent. The wizard casts persis- 
tence and then immediately follows with the 
desired spell. Instead of taking effect immedi- 
ately, the second spell is held ready for use by a 
simple act of will. The wizard can then turn on 
or turn off the girded spell as often as he likes 
over the duration of the persistence. The dura- 
tion of the girded spell runs only while the spell 
is active, so a 15th-level wizard who makes a fly 
spell persistent can use 15+1d6 turns of flight 
(the duration of his fly) over the next 15 days 
(the duration of the persistence) as he sees fit. 

B) Held Spell. Spells that have an instanta- 
neous effect, such as most attack spells and 
some movement spells like teleport or dimen- 
sion door, can be rendered persistent as well. 
The held spell can be activated or discharged at 


nie 
` 


ORT a & 
- i jol A 
aue pY ei ae yh 

bg 


DA NG “iN 


i n 


aa WANN 
ee EE 
i 
DA 


Persona of Death 


any time during the duration of the persistence, 
but its magic is then exhausted as if it had been 
cast normally. This resembles the effect of a 
contingency spell, but the effect has no prede- 
fined conditions and simply occurs when the 
caster wills it to. 

Damaging or offensive spells that have a du- 
ration (for example, flaming sphere or wall of 
fire) cannot be made persistent. A wizard can 
have no more than one persistence spell active 
at any given time; if he girds a new spell while 
an old one is still persistent, the old spell is 
simply replaced by the new one. 

The material component is a crystal chalice 
of exquisite workmanship worth 2,000 gp. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Persona of Death 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Generally cast in conjunction with animate 
dead, this variant of mask of death makes a 
corpse (or a relatively intact zombie) to appear 
to be a living person. If the body is animated, it 
can be made to look, sound, move, and behave 
like a specific individual. Of course, the caster 
must have a good idea of how the duplicated 
person sounds and acts. The persona is fairly su- 
perficial, but those who don’t know the dupli- 
cated person very well are usually fooled unless 
there’s a reason for them to be suspicious. Even 
people familiar with the duplicated individual 
can be deceived for short periods of time. Note 
that while the body may have the appearance 
and mannerisms of a particular individual, it is 
mindless and has none of the individual’s mem- 
ories or knowledge. The caster must maintain 
conscious control of the corpse to direct its 
movements, speech, and behavior. 

The material component is a drop of dopple- 
ganger blood. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; rare. This 
spell can be researched only on the Demiplane 
of Dread. 


Pestilence — Hishna 
(Conjuration) i 
Level: 3 
Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: 100 yds. square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


The pestilence spell creates a mild form of 
insect plague, nowhere near as frightful as the 
5th-level priest spell, but far more long-lasting. 
The pestilence spell summons crawling insects, 
such as ants, roaches, weevils, caterpillars, and 
other types of bugs. These creatures will infest 
the area of effect, devouring plant life and dri- 
ving animals away. After one day, the area will 
be picked clean, but the creatures remain for the 
full duration of the speil. 

Creatures within the area of pestilence sus- 
tain one hit point of damage per turn (or frac- 
tion of a turn) within the area, from the bites 
and stings of the creatures. The pestilence 
cannot be moved once it is cast. 

The material component is a bit of spider’s 
venom and the husk of a dead june bug. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Petrification 
Aka petrify wood. 


Petrification Gaze 
Aka petrifying gaze. 


> i a a il © 


Phantasmagoria 


Petrify Wood 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 large/2 
small wooden items 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell petrifies nonliving wood. If cast on 
a wooden weapon, it causes that weapon to have 
the properties of a weapon of stone, such as flint 
or obsidian. This effectively reduces the 
weapon’s attack penalty from —3 to ~2, and its 
damage penalty from —2 to —1; the weapon is 
now also completely fireproof. The dweomer 
lasts until the spell’s duration ends (or until a 
missile enchanted with this spell strikes its 
target). Low-level wizards often create their 
first magical weapons with this spell. One large 
or two small weapons can be affected by this 
spell (as per enchanted weapon). Weapons nor- 
mally made of wood (clubs, staves, etc.) gain no 
additional benefits other than being fireproof. 
To a native of impoverished Athas, this spell can 
mean the difference between life and death in 
combat. 

The material component is a chip of petrified 
wood. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from the 
DaRK SUN setting, uncommon for Savage 
mages; otherwise, very rare. 


Petrifying Gaze 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Level: 7 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 7 rds. + | rd./level over 14th 
Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


While this spell is in effect, the caster’s gaze 
becomes as dangerous as that of a basilisk. The 
caster can employ this power against one enemy 
per round, in addition to casting another spell, 
engaging in melee, or taking other actions. A 
target creature within 60 feet that meets the 
gaze must make a successful saving throw vs. 
petrification or be turned to stone. The caster’s 


gaze extends into the Ethereal Plane and can 
affect out-of-phase and ethereal creatures. 

Intelligent opponents can choose to fight 
with their eyes shielded (as by looking at a mir- 
rored image) or turned away in order to avoid 
meeting the gaze. Any doing so suffer a —2 
penalty to attack rolls and Armor Class. 

The caster is subject to her own reflected 
gaze; if subjected to her own gaze, the caster 
must save vs. petrification or turn to stone her- 
self. The caster can end this spell at will. 

The material component is an ointment pre- 
pared from powdered basilisk scales or the 
ashes of cockatrice feathers. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Phantasmagoria 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1600 sq. ft. + 100 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the caster prepares a 


659 


special form of the 3rd-level spectral forces 
spell that is triggered by some special action. 
The phantasmagoria typically is a full visual, 
audial, olfactory, and touch illusion that in- 
volves falling, sliding, or moving rapidly. The 
effect can be aimed at making the subjects be- 
lieve that they are doing so or that something 
else is doing so. For example, the phantasmago- 
ria may be triggered when falling into a pit, 
reaching the center of an area, opening a door, 
or performing some like action. The subject(s) 
will then believe that the fall continues for 
scores of feet; that a pit has opened and that 
they are helplessly sliding down into an un- 
known area; that a wall of water is rushing down 
from the area beyond the just-opened door, or 
whatever. Note that unlike the programmed illu- 
sion spell, the phantasmagoria spell must 
always involve the illusion of something falling 
or rushing, or a rapidly dwindling perspective. 

Notes: Restricted to illusionists; uncommon. 
(Originally from 1st Ed. PHB.) 


Phantasmal Force 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 1 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 400 sq. ft. + 100 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates the illusion of any object, 
creature, or force, as long as it is within the 
boundaries of the spell’s area of effect. The illu- 
sion is visual and affects all believing creatures 
(undead are immune) that view it. It does not 
create sound, smell, or temperature. Effects that 
depend on these senses usually fail. The illusion 
lasts until struck by an opponent—unless the 
spellcaster causes the illusion to react appropri- 
ately—or until the wizard ceases concentration 
upon the spell (due to desire, moving, or a suc- 
cessful attack that causes damage). Saving 
throws for illusions are explained under “Illu- 
sions” in Chapter 7: Magic and under “Adjudi- 
cating Illusions” at the beginning of Appendix 2. 
Creatures that disbelieve the illusion see it for 
what it is and add +4 to associates’ saving throws 
if this knowledge can be communicated effec- 
tively. Creatures believing the illusion are sub- 
ject to its effects (again, as explained in Chapter 
7). 


660 


ON 


~ Phantasmal Force m 


The illusionary effect can be moved by the 
caster within the limits of the area of effect. The 
DM has to rule on the effectiveness of this spell; 
detailed guidelines are outlined in Chapter 7: 
Magic and under “Adjudicating Illusions” at the 
beginning of Appendix 2. 

The material component of the spell is a bit 
of fleece. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Phantasmal Killer 
(IHusion/Phantasm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is cast, the wizard creates the 
illusion of the most fearsome thing imaginable 
to the victim, simply by forming the fears of the 
victim’s subconscious mind into something that 
its conscious mind can visualize—the most hor- 
rible beast. Only the spell recipient can see the 
phantasmal killer (the caster sees only a shad- 
owy shape), but if it succeeds in scoring a hit, 
the subject dies of fright. The beast attacks as a4 
Hit Dice monster. It is invulnerable to all attacks 
and can pass through any barriers. Once cast, it 
inexorably pursues the subject, for it exists only 
in the subject’s mind. 

The only defenses against a phantasmal killer 
are an attempt to disbelieve (which can be tried 
but once), slaying or rendering unconscious the 
wizard who cast the spell, or rendering uncon- 
scious the subject of the spell for its duration. To 
disbelieve the killer, the subject must specifi- 
cally state the attempt and then roll an Intelli- 
gence check. This roll has a —1 penalty for every 
four levels of the caster. 

Special modifiers apply to this attack: 


Modifier 
-2 


Condition 
Subject surprised 


Subject previously attacked by this spell +l 
Subject is an illusionist +2 
Subject is wearing a helm of telepathy +3 


Magic resistance, bonuses against fear, and 


Wisdom adjustments also apply. The subject’s | 
magic resistance is checked first; if the spell 


~ Phantom Blade r 


overcomes the resistance, the subject’s 
fear/Wisdom bonuses (if any) then apply as 
favorable modifiers to the Intelligence check. 

If the subject of a phantasmal killer attack 
succeeds in disbelieving, and is wearing a helm 
of telepathy, the killer can be turned upon the 
caster, who must then disbelieve it or be subject 
to its attack and possible effects. 

If the subject ignores the killer to perform 
other actions, such as attacking the caster, the 
killer may, at the DM’s option, gain bonuses to 
hit (for flank or rear attacks, etc.). Spells such as 
remove fear and cloak of bravery, cast after the 
killer has attacked, grant another check to disbe- 
lieve the effect. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Phantom Armor 
(Alteration, Illusion) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard creates a 
quasi-real suit of plate mail. This semi-illusory 
material covers the subject and actually gives 
some real protection unless the opponent ac- 
tively disbelieves in the armor (saving throw vs. 
spell), or else a dispel illusion or dispel magic 
spell is cast upon it, or a wand of negation af- 
fects it. The spell will not function with any 
other form of magical protection. 

Until gone, or disbelieved, the armor protects 
the wearer as if it was plate mail (AC 3). For 
each level of the spellcaster, the phantom armor 
will absorb 1 point of damage delivered by a 
blow that would otherwise hit Armor Class 3. 
When the armor has absorbed as many points of 
damage as the spellcaster has levels of experi- 
ence, it is dispelled and vanishes. Any remaining 
damage accrues to the wearer. 

Additionally, phantom armor gives a bonus of 
+] to saving throws against all attack forms that 
would be similarly modified by magical armor. 
The dweomer in no way affects the movement or 
spellcasting abilities of the wearer. Phantom 
armor is not subject to rust monster attack (and 
such may enhance disbelief). 

The material component is a small plate of 
mithral (10 gp value) that disappears when the 


661 


spell is cast. 
Notes: Uncommon spell. (Originally from 
Unearthed Arcana.) 


Phantom Blade 
(Evocation) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 
Components: V, $ 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a translucent, shadowlike, 
weightless area of magical force extending from 
the fingers of one of the caster’s hands. This silent 
construct is blade-shaped. Its cutting edges inflict 
damage just as do those of a real sword. The 
caster wields the phantom blade as if proficient in 
the use of this weapon, at her normal THACO. 

A phantom blade counts as a +2 magical sword 
for purposes of what it can hit (though it does not 
gain this attack or damage bonus), and cannot 
harm inorganic things (such as ropes) because it 
has no solid existence. Against living foes, it cuts 
and chills for 1d10 points of damage per success- 
ful strike. Against undead creatures, beings phas- 
ing into or out of the Ethereal Plane, or beings 
maintaining any simultaneous dual-plane exis- 
tence, it gives a +4 bonus to the wielder’s attack 
roll and causes 4d4 points of damage. A phantom 
blade is nonmetallic, nonmagnetic, and does not 
reflect light or conduct electrical energy. It cannot 
be dropped or torn from the caster’s grasp, but it 
vanishes instantly if the caster desires. 

A phantom blade is also effective against non- 
prismatic magical barriers (such as a wall of 
force) and fields (such as a minor globe of invul- 
nerability). At each contact with such a barrier, 
roll 2d12. A maximum of one contact between the 
phantom blade and the barrier can occur per 
round. When the total of all such attacks exceeds 
the field’s total points, the field or barrier is de- 
stroyed, along with the phantom blade. For pur- 
poses of determining when a barrier falls, a 
barrier has 10 points per spell level; assign 70 
points for effects with unknown level. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers; uncommon. 
Optionally, uncommon for shadow mages. 


~ Phantom Light — Witch r. 


Phantom Light — Witch 


(Conjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 40 yds. 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 4 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


In most respects, phantom light is identical to 
the Ist-level priest spell, faerie fire. However, 
the light appears as a ball of phosphorescent 
witch-light, somewhat similar in shape and size 
to a will-o’wisp. The phantom fire can be blue, 
green, or violet as decided by the caster at the 
time of casting. Illuminating a 20-foot radius 
with the equivalent of bright moonlight, it re- 
sponds instantly to the caster’s mental com- 
mands. The spell ends if the light moves more 
than 120 feet from the caster. 

At the witch’s command, the light disperses 
to outline one or more objects or creatures with 
a pale glowing light. The number outlined de- 
pends upon the number of number of feet the 
caster can affect; that is, 10 feet per level of the 
caster (roughly one man-sized creature per 10 
feet). Enough footage enables several objects or 


creatures to be outlined, all within a 40-foot 
area. Outlined objects or creatures are visible at 
80 yards in the dark, 40 yards if the viewer is 
near a bright light source. Outlined creatures are 
easier to strike, thus opponents gain a +2 bonus 
to attack rolls in darkness (including moonlit 
nights) and a +1 bonus in twilight or better. Out- 
lining can render otherwise invisible creatures 
visible; however, noncorporeal, gaseous, and 
ethereal creatures cannot be outlined. The light 
has no special effect on undead or dark- 
dwelling creatures. The phantom light causes no 
harm to the object or creature illuminated. 

When the caster desires, the dispersed light 
reforms into concentrated witch-light in a single 
round. 

The material component is a small piece of 
foxfire. 

Notes: Restricted to witches; common. 


Phantom Steed 
(Conjuration, Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard creates a 
quasi-real, horselike creature. The steed can be 
ridden only by the wizard who created it, or by 
any person for whom the wizard specifically 
creates such a mount. A phantom steed has a 
black head and body, gray mane and tail, and 
smoke-colored, insubstantial hooves that make 
no sound. Its eyes are milky-colored. It does not 
fight, but all normal animals shun it and only 
monstrous ones will attack. The mount has an 
Armor Class of 2 and 7 hit points, plus 1 per 
level of the caster. If it loses all of its hit points, 
the phantom steed disappears. A phantom steed 
moves at a movement rate of 4 per level of the 
spellcaster, to a maximum movement rate of 48. 
It has what seems to be a saddle and a bit and 
bridle. It can bear its rider’s weight, plus up to 
10 pounds per caster level. 

These mounts gain certain powers according 
to the level of the wizard who created them: 

8th Level: The ability to pass over sandy, 
muddy, or even swampy ground without diffi- 
culty. 


> 


Phase Door r 


10th Level: The ability to pass over water as 
if it were firm, dry ground. 

12th Level: The ability to travel in the air as if 
it were firm land, so chasms and the like can be 
crossed without benefit of a bridge. Note, how- 
ever, that the mount cannot casually take off and 
fly; the movement must be between points of 
similar altitude. 

14th Level: The ability to perform as if it 
were a pegasus; it flies at a rate of 48 per round 
upon command. 

Note that a mount’s abilities include those of 
lower levels; thus, a 12th-level mount has the 
8th-, 10th-, and 12th-level abilities. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Phantom Wind 
(Alteration, Illusion) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10 ft. wide path 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is employed, the illusionist 
creates a wind that cannot be seen or felt. This 
movement of air does, however, serve to blow 
light objects before it, flutter curtains or drapes, 
flap loose clothing (such as capes, cloaks, and 
mantles), fan fires, and move clouds of gaseous 
materials (such as a wall of fog, fog cloud, 
cloudkill, and so on). The wind created moves in 
the direction in which the illusionist points, its 
effects being felt in a progressively longer path 
as the spell continues, at a movement rate of 10 
feet per round, with the effects lasting the entire 
course of the path. Thus, for example, the spell 
could be used to move several sailed vessels, 
but the first affected by the wind would also be 
the one to move the farthest. 

Notes: Restricted to illusionists; uncommon. 
(Originally from Unearthed Arcana.) 


RAN 


a oN) Wy 


Á Ai 


i, z 


Phase Door 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension, Shadow, Geometry) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | usage/2 levels 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard attunes his 
body, and a section of wall is affected as if by a 
passwall spell. The phase door is invisible to all 
creatures save the spellcaster, and only he can 
use the space or passage the spell creates, disap- 
pearing when the phase door is entered, and ap- 
pearing when it is exited. If the caster desires, 
one other creature of man size or less can be 
taken through the door; this counts as two uses 
of the door. The door does not pass light, sound, 
or spell effects, nor can the caster see through it 
without using it. Thus, the spell can provide an 
escape route, though certain creatures, such as 
phase spiders, can follow with ease. A gem of 
true seeing and similar magic will reveal the 
presence of a phase door but will not allow its 
use. 


, a a. 


663 


~ Phase Shift — Savant r| 


The phase door lasts for one usage for every 
two levels of experience of the spellcaster. It 
can be dispelled only by a casting of dispel 
magic from a higher-level wizard, or from sev- 
eral lower-level wizards, casting in concert, 
whose combined levels of experience are more 
than double that of the wizard who cast the spell 
(this is the only instance in which dispel effects 
can be combined). 

Rumor has it that this spell has been adapted 
by a certain powerful wizard (or wizards) to 
create renewable (or permanent) portals, which 
may (or may not) be keyed to specific individu- 
als (henchmen) or items (such as rings). 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Phase Shift — Savant 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to instantaneously 
go to and return from the Ethereal Plane when 
attacking, an action similar to that employed by 
the phase spider. 

The material component is a bit of phase 
spider webbing. 

Notes: Common for savants, uncommon for 
dimensionists; otherwise, very rare. 


Phase Trap 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Upon casting this spell, the wizard locks the 
target creature onto the plane they currently 
occupy (usually the Prime Material Plane). The 
caster must have the creature in sight at the time 
of casting. 

When subject to this spell, a phase spider or 


similar creatures are immediately put “in phase” 
and can be attacked normally. A blink dog 
cannot blink and a displacer beast cannot use its 
displacement power. A xorn loses its invulnera- 
ble walk through solid objects and, if in a solid 
object, takes 2d10 points of damage per round 
until it can free itself. 

Magical items that put an individual into the 
Ethereal Plane or open holes into pocket dimen- 
sions (such as the portable hole) do not function 
while this spell operates. Spells of 4th level or 
less (such as rope trick and blink) do not func- 
tion. If already functioning, such spells cease to 
exist, bringing affected individuals back to the 
caster’s plane immediately. Spells of Sth level or 
higher that access other planes or dimensions 
(such as phase door) function normally. 

The target creature is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to negate the effect. Creatures phasing 
through solid matter save at a —2 penalty, while 
those on the Astral Plane save at a +1 bonus. 

The material component is a clear gem worth 
at least 50 gp; the gem is lost in casting. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Aubayreer s 
Workbook. 


Phezult’s Awakening 
Reversed form, see Phezult’s sleep of ages. 


Phezult’s Sleep of Ages 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 10-ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, a stasis field is cre- 
ated about a special spell focus (see below). 
When it is cast, the stasis field ripples out ward 
from the focus in an expanding sphere. The rate 
of expansion is 20 feet per round, even through 
solid rock and other physical or magical barri- 
ers. Only an anti-magic shell, prismatic sphere, 
or a fully enclosed wall of force effect will pro- 
vide protection from the field. The field stabi- 
lizes when it reaches its maximum size—a 
sphere of radius equal to 10 feet per level of the 
caster. 

All living creatures within the stasis field, 


IT a a SSS UU 


664 


p” 


Photodraft r 


except the caster and any protected beings, must 
successfully save vs. spell or be placed in sus- 
pended animation whether they wish to be or 
not. Creatures of Hit Dice or levels from greater 
than the spellcaster to 3 levels or Hit Dice less 
than the caster save normally; creatures of 4 to 7 
Hit Dice or levels less than the caster save at —1; 
and creatures of far lesser levels save at an addi- 
tional —1 penalty per level less than seven below 
the caster’s. 

Creatures in stasis that are mentally con- 
tacted by magic or psionics while within the 
field do not respond, and the being contacting 
them is placed in stasis temporarily (awakening 
after 2d4 rounds) each time such contact is at- 
tempted. 

Creatures entering the field after it has 
reached its full extent, even decades or centuries 
after the spell is cast must save vs. spell to avoid 
falling into stasis. The penalties for level or Hit 
Dice apply, but they also receive a +3 bonus. 

A new saving throw must be made each time 
a creature enters the stasis field, even if it has 
entered and been unaffected before, but each 
creature needs save only once per exposure to a 
particular sleep of ages stasis field. Creatures 
who are physically removed from such a field 
without being magically roused will wake up by 
themselves 2d4 rounds after removal, with no ill 
effects; the casting of a dispel magic will 
awaken them instantly if cast upon them when 
they are outside the field. Physical means of 
awakening will not hurry the process. A crea- 
ture taken out of a stasis field and then taken 
back in before awakening returns to stasis with- 
out becoming conscious. 

The body functions of creatures affected by 
the stasis field virtually cease, but they do not 
die, nor will they grow older as the years pass. If 
a creature in stasis is slain by other means— 
physical attack; cashing, burial, or drowning 
due to physical changes around the body; and 
the like—stasis ends instantly and the body will 
decay normally, for the slain creature only. 

The stasis can be lifted from individual crea- 
tures without harm and without releasing other 
creatures under the same stasis by casting tem- 
poral reinstatement (the reverse of the 9th-level 
wizard spell temporal stasis) or the reverse of 
this spell. The stasis field shrinks gradually to 
nothingness at the same rate at which it origi- 
nally expanded, freeing any creatures formerly 
within it instantly and without any lingering ef- 
fects. No further gemstone material is lost. 

The Focus: Phezult’s sleep of ages requires a 


665 


special focus. The caster uses his or her own 
blood (at least nine drops) smeared into an un- 
broken ring on any stable surface (usually 
stone) of a radius not more than the overall 
length of the caster’s hand (wrist to fingertips). 
Into this ring are placed at least six gems of 500 
gp value, of any type. When the spellcasting is 
complete, four of the gems vanish, consumed in 
the act of releasing the spell’s power. The rest 
fuel the stasis field, and dwindle slowly as the 
time passes (roughly one year of stasis per 10 
gp value). 

Removing any gemstone from the circle or 
breaking the ring instantly ends the stasis effect. 
Otherwise, the effect ends when the gems are 
used up. However, any number of gems that fit 
can be placed inside the ring at any time to 
extend its duration. 

The reverse, Phezult’s awakening, requires 
neither gems nor blood in its casting, but merely 
seven drops of pure or holy water upon the spell 
focus. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
Elminster 5 Traveling Spellbook. 


Photodraft 
Aka Prismal’s pictograph. 


Physical Invisibility 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes the recipient to vanish from 
sight and not be detectable by normal vision or 
infravision. The spell works similarly to dust of 
disappearance: The creature can attack and 
remain invisible, and even detect invisibility 
will not reveal it. The invisible creature is not si- 
lenced with respect to noise, nor are scent or 
tracks masked. Attack rolls against the invisible 
creature are at a —4 penalty in addition to any 
other bonuses or penalties that apply. 

Dust of appearance or a successful casting of 
dispel magic can negate the spell. Dispel illu- 
sion has no effect on this spell. True seeing or a 
similar power allows its caster to see the invis- 


~ Pierce Any Shield r 


ible creature. A character of high Intelligence or 
level may have a chance to detect the invisible 
creature, but if the invisible creature moves (as 
opposed to remaining in melee range), a suc- 
cessful detection attempt must be made each 
round to keep from losing track of it again. 

The material components of the spell are a 
prism and a small mirror. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Pierce Any Shield 
(Alteration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A more powerful version of pierce magic re- 
sistance, this spell is cast one round before an 
offensive spell. The spell cast immediately after 
pierce any shield cannot be stopped by any 
known means: magic resistance, spell turning or 
absorption, anti-magic shell, counterspell immu- 
nity, and so on. The only defense for the target of 


this spell is a saving throw, if the spell in ques- 
tion allows one. Even then, such rolls suffer a -5 
penalty. The pierce any resistance spell does not 
protect the caster from events that would nor- 
mally disrupt the casting of the second spell. 

The material component is a silver spike or 
knife. 

Notes: Common in the MysTARA setting; oth- 
erwise, very rare. 


Pierce Magic Resistance 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 spell 
Saving Throw: None 


Pierce magic resistance makes another spell 
more potent: It pierces magic resistance and some 
spells that shield a target from spells. Casting 
pierce magic resistance affects only the spell a 
wizard casts in the next round. If the target of the 
second spell has magic resistance, its magic resis- 
tance check is rolled twice. Unless both checks 
succeed, the spell pierces the creature’s magic re- 
sistance. 

For example, if Therdillion the Invoker casts 
pierce magic resistance, then a disintegrate spell 
at a creature with 50% magic resistance, the DM 
rolls the resistance twice to see if it proves effec- 
tive. Unless both resistance rolls succeed, the spell 
gets through, forcing the creature to make a saving 
throw against the disintegration spell. If the saving 
throw is failed, the creature is disintegrated. 

The pierce magic resistance spell has a 50% 
chance of chance of instantly dispelling protec- 
tions against spells of 5th level or less, including 
shield, gaze reflection, minor globe of invulnera- 
bility, protection from cantrips, protection from 
weapons (any), protection from magic (any), as 
well as any wall spell within these limits, includ- 
ing wall of force. 

Nonmetal protective charms and amulets that 
add +2 or less to saving throws vs. spell must 
make a saving throw vs. disintegration or shatter 
after the saving creature’s saving throw is resolved. 

The material component is a small iron spike or 
knife. 

Notes: Common in the MysTARA setting; oth- 
erwise, very rare. 


> N a a, 


666 


~ Pillar of Sand r 


Pilfer Dweomer 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 spellcaster 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By casting a pilfer dweomer spell, a wizard 
can rob another wizard of one memorized spell. 
To use this dweomer, the caster must touch the 
target, who is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to 
resist it. Only memorized spells can be stolen; 
special abilities, inherent powers, device ef- 
fects, and so on cannot be pilfered. 

Upon touching the victim, the caster can name 
the exact spell pilfered. A wizard who does not 
know the spell’s name or whether the subject has 
memorized it can attempt either to steal a spell of 
a certain spell level or to steal a randomly deter- 
mined spell. The pilfer dweomer spell not indi- 
cate to the caster what spells—or even spell 
levels—the target wizard has memorized. 

The pilfer dweomer spell fails if: 

e The caster has a pilfered spell currently 

memorized. 

* The subject has no memorized spell of the 

specified name or level; 

° The pilfered spell is a higher level spell than 

the pilfering wizard can cast; 

* The pilfered spell is a spell from which the 

pilfering wizard is barred; 

* The pilfering wizard is a specialist and the 

pilfered spell is from an opposition school. 

* The subject caster practices a radically dif- 

ferent form of magic (for example, priest 
magic, pluma magic, etc.). The read magic 
spell should be used as a guideline, if the 
wizard can read the spell, he can pilfer it. 


The pilfered spell or spell level is determined 
by a die roll if not stated. (The DM assigns a 
number to each spell the target wizard currently 
has memorized and makes a die roll.) 

Stealing a spell wipes it completely from the 
mind of the target wizard, just as if it had been 
cast. The pilfering caster adds the spell to his 
memory, to use as desired within normal casting 
restrictions; for example, the pilfering wizard 
must provide any material components. 

The pilfer dweomer spell requires as a mater- 
ial component a gem worth at least 100 gp. The 


667 


gem is consumed when the wizard casts the pil- 
fered spell. If the gem is destroyed or taken 
more than 5 feet from the wizard, the pilfered 
spell is lost. 

Notes: Common in the MYSTARA setting; oth- 
erwise, very rare. 


Pilfering Fingers, DeGras’s 
A MYSTARA setting spell, see DeGras’s pilfering 


fingers. 
Pillar of Sand 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Sand) Qd 
Level: 2 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius around creature 
touched 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates a cylindrical pillar of sand 
that rises from the desert floor, carrying the 
target creature up toward the sky for a “bird’s 
eye” view. Those within 10 feet of the creature 
also rise, unless they manage to jump clear. The 
spell works only in a sandy region, since the 
sand that makes up the pillar is drawn from the 
surrounding area. The top of the pillar is a level 
circle with a 10-foot radius, centered on the re- 
cipient of the spell. After the pillar is formed, 
the creature can move from it. 

A successful saving throw vs. spell prevents 
the pillar from forming beneath an unwilling re- 
cipient. Once the pillar is formed, no saving 
throw can hinder its progress. The pillar can rise 
as high as available sand allows, or as high as 
the caster desires, to a maximum of 10 feet per 
level of the caster. 

Beings atop the pillar can see far away, reach 
high things, and possibly escape spells that are 
cast at ground level. However, if the sand pillar 
or those upon it strike another resisting object (a 
cave ceiling, for example), the pillar automati- 
cally stops rising. 

Otherwise, the caster can raise and lower the 
pillar 10 feet per round at will, as if it was an el- 
evator. The pillar has 50 hit points and is Armor 
Class 5. If physical attacks on the pillar destroy 
it, or a dispel magic or dig spell is used on it, the 
pillar collapses. 

Beings atop a pillar can leave and return to it 


(e.g., stepping onto a castle wall, moving inside 
the castle, and then returning to the pillar) with- 
out affecting its continued existence. An indi- 
vidual atop the pillar also may fall if knocked 
from his perch by high winds or other means, or 
if the pillar collapses; in any case, normal 
falling damage applies. 

The caster can collapse the pillar at any time 
by deliberate act of will; the pillar also falls 
when the spell’s duration has expired. Even if 
the caster dies before that period ends, the pillar 
will not collapse unless the caster makes a con- 
scious choice to destroy it. 

This spell requires enough sand to create the 
pillar, such as that found on a beach or in desert 
terrain. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


~< 


SS 


Pit — Witch 
(Alteration) 
(Earth) 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell conjures a circular pit 20 feet 
across and 20 feet deep within the caster’s 
range. The pit forms only in earth, sand, clay, 
loam, mud, or similar soft soil; the spell fails if 
used upon natural or dressed stone. If the caster 
creates the pit under an opponent, or directly in 
front of a fast-moving opponent, the intended 
victim is allowed a saving throw vs. spell; suc- 
cess means the opponent avoids the pit. Station- 
ary or slow-moving characters who fall in suffer 
2d6 damage; running or charging characters 
suffer 3d6 damage if they fall in. 

The pit sides are steep, but not unclimbable. 
Given 2d4 rounds, any character can scramble 
free, although characters with special climbing 
abilities can escape in a single round. 

The spell lasts until six creatures have fallen 
in or until it is dispelled. As the spell ends, those 
in the pit are returned to ground level. 

The material component is a claw-bone from 
a mole. 

Notes: Uncommon for Earth mages and 
witches; otherwise, rare. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Plague 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 7 days/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When cast, this spell causes the recipient to 
suffer from a powerful illusion spell that causes 
him to appear to be suffering from some loath- 
some (and likely contagious) disease. The illu- 
sion is very good, covering appearance, smeli, 
and tactile manifestations of the disease. The re- 
cipient is unaware of his own illusory appear- 


668 


> .. 
~ Pit -— Witch r 


| 
| 
| 
| 


| 


o 


~ Planar Door r 


ance, but others react as if the individual is a 
plague carrier. 

For maximum effect, the disease should be 
one that the caster is familiar with (mummy rot 
is a favorite). If the disease is well known to the 
caster, then the chance of detecting it as an illu- 
sion on reasonable examination is 5%. If the 
caster is creating a new disease or trying to du- 
plicate a disease he has heard of (say, for exam- 
ple, “the copper rot of Shar”), the chance for 
detection is raised to 30%. 

Cure disease has no effect on this illusory 
plague, but a dispel magic eliminates its mani- 
festation with the standard chances. The caster 
can also lift the plague at will, though he might 
also make some other demand of service or 
item for his “healing.” 

The material component of this spell is a 
pinch of soot or fungus. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Selvar 5 Ineffa- 
ble Conjurations, Magic, and Phantasms. 


The DM may restrict this spell by ruling 
that familiarity requires the caster to have 
observed the course of the chosen plague 
at close hand. 


Planar Call 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Level: 9 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature called 
Saving Throw: Special 


When cast, this spell allows the wu jen to 
summon any single creature he knows by sight 
into his presence, even creatures from other 
planes. The wu jen must know the specific iden- 
tity of the creature called, not just the general 
type. Calling for a ki-rin is not sufficient, the 
wu jen must have a specific ki-rin in mind. 
Creatures with names must be summoned by 
their true name. 

If the creature is on the same plane as the 
caster, no saving throw is allowed. If the crea- 
ture is on a different plane, then a successful 
saving throw vs. spell allows the creature to 
ignore the planar call. 


A creature called with more Hit Dice or 
levels than the caster gains a +4 bonus to its 
saving throw. Deities and similar powerful crea- 
tures are not forced to heed the planar call, al- 
though they may respond by choice. Once 
called, the creature is under no compulsion to 
remain or aid the caster. 

The material component for this spell is the 
same as that for call, a stick of incense a strip of 
paper. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Planar Door 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 creature/level 
Area of Effect: Creates | portal 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting a planar door spell opens a shimmer- 
ing doorway between the caster and a randomly 
determined Outer Plane. It also might draw the 
attention of planar creatures nearby, which may 
choose to step through to the caster’s location 
(10% chance). 

The caster of the planar door spell has no 
control over which plane is contacted, but no 
control over what creature, if any, appears. 

The door is an open portal between planes, 
though which any creature can pass without re- 
striction or obligation. Creatures can pass in 
either direction until a number of creatures 
equal to the caster’s level have passed through. 
The caster can close the door at any time, 
ending the spell. The casting ages a human 
caster one year (others 1% of the typical lifes- 
pan). 

The material component is vial of ethereal 
plasma. 

Notes: Uncommon for conjurers and dimen- 
sionists; otherwise, very rare. (Updated from 
DUNGEON Magazine). 


Option: A conjurer or a dimensionist has a 
60% chance to choose the plane onto 
which the door opens. The chance im- 
proves by 2% per level over 14th. 


Do EN 


669 


Planar Pacifier, Tymessul’s 


> 


An / 
oad 


J 
{ 
$ 
\ 


D ul Á i uti" ~~ 
ies ALOR t 


AD, = 
we 


Y 


Planar Pacifier, Tymessul’s 
See Tymessul’s planar pacifier. 


Plane Truth, Rary’s 
See Rary’s plane truth. 


Plant Death 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


With this spell, the wizard can destroy 
normal plant life. A vile, poisonous mist is 
sprayed on the area to be affected. After apply- 
ing the spray, the wizard can finish the spell at 
any time in the next 24 hours by speaking a 


single word. Trees are allowed a saving throw of 


11. Other normal vegetation dies. The dead 
plants wither and rot rapidly; no new plants will 
grow in the area for a year. Fungi and fungus- 
based creatures are not affected, nor are any 
forms of plant life that are immune to poison. 
The effects on magical vegetation vary and are 


decided by the DM. 

Plant-based creatures, such as treants, suffer 
6d6 damage (save vs. poison for half damage). 
Such creatures will perish in a few days if they 
stay in the area of effect. 

The material component is the fine mist 
spray. A potion-sized bottle, enough for a single 
casting, costs 400 gp. Its formula must be inde- 
pendently researched in the same way as a mag- 
ical potion. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers, for whom 
it is uncommon, and evil wizards, for whom it is 
rare. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine). 


Plant Entrapment 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 50 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, creatures within the 
area of effect are seized by tree branches, 
grasses, shrubs, and other plant life within the 
area. Creatures failing a saving throw vs. spell 
are caught by the roots, branches, and stalks of 
the vegetation around them. 

Creatures making a successful saving throw 
are limited to a movement of 10 feet per round 
and must make another saving throw each round 
they remain in the area of effect. 

The witch, if she desires, can order the plants 
to disarm or strangle the trapped creatures, as 
shown on the table. 


Prevalent Disarm Strangle Escape 


Plants Chance Damage Chance 

Grass 10% None Strength check 
Scrub 25% 1d4/round ¥2 Strength check 
Trees 40% 2dó/round 14 Strength check 


A trapped creature cannot move, attack, or 
cast spells, but may try to break free each round. 
The difficulty is determined by the type of 
plants that trap the creature—a creature can 
escape from grasses, weeds, and other light veg- 
etation with a Strength check; from thickets, 
briars, bracken, shrubs, or bushes at half their 
Strength, and from trees with one-fourth of 
their Strength (round down). Creatures without 
Strength scores can make a saving throw vs. 


A A N 


670 


aie 


~ Poison r 


paralysis (at +2, 0 and —2, respectively). At the 
DM’s discretion, very large or strong creatures 
may be able to break free or ignore the effects 
entirely. 

The material component is powdered quick- 
wood leaf. 

Notes: Common for witches, uncommon for 
transmuters and hedge wizards; otherwise, very 
rare. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Plant Growth 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: (Caster’s level}? x 100 sq. ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


When a plant growth spell is cast, the wizard 
causes normal vegetation to grow, entwine, and 
entangle to form a thicket or jungle that crea- 
tures must hack or force a way through at a 
movement rate of | per round (or 2 if the crea- 
tures are larger than man size). The area must 
contain brush and trees for this spell to work. 
Briars, bushes, creepers, lianas, roots, saplings, 
thistles, thorn, trees, vines, and weeds become 
thick and overgrown so as to form a barrier. The 
area of effect is the caster’s level, squared, times 
100 square feet. This area can be arranged in 
any square or rectangular shape that the caster 
desires. Thus, an 8th-level wizard can affect (8 
x 8 =) 64 x 100 square feet, or 6,400 square 
feet. This could be an 80-foot x 80-foot square, 
a 160-foot x 40-foot rectangle, a 640-foot x 10- 
foot rectangle, etc. Individual plant girth and 
height is generally affected less than thickness 
of brush, branch, and undergrowth. The spell’s 
effects persist in the area until it is cleared by 
labor, fire, or such magical means as a dispel 
magic spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Pluck a Petal of Spellflower 
A MYSTARA setting spell; aka pilfer dweomer. 


Poison 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The poison spell must be delivered by a suc- 
cessful touch attack. The creature touched must 
immediately make a successful saving throw vs. 
poison. Failure means the creature is incapaci- 
tated and will die in one turn unless the deadly 
poison is magically slowed or neutralized (as by 
the 2nd- and 4th-level priest spells, slow poison 
and neutralize poison). A dispel magic and the 
various cure wound spells cannot counter the 
poison. Unlike the priest’s neutralize poison 
spell, this spell is not reversible. The necro- 
mancer’s poison spell is often used in combina- 
tion with the 2nd-level spectral hand spell. 

Once the victim is poisoned, the caster can 
stop the action of the poison at will, or slow its 
effects to a maximum of 1 day per caster level 
before final incapacitation. If the poison is 
stopped by the caster, then the afflicted creature 


is free of it. Casting the poison spell is an evil 
act. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers, evil 
witches, and those trained by them; uncommon. 


Poison to Water 
Reversed form, see water to poison. 


Poisonstar — Alhoon 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 90 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 target per star 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates nine stars around one of the 
alhoon’s hands. These magical motes appear as 
purple winking sparks with writhing darkness at 
their centers. At the end of the round of casting, 
the alhoon can will these to fly at up to nine vis- 
ible creatures (dividing the stars between target 
creatures as desired). The stars pursue their tar- 
gets to the limits of the spell’s range, at move- 
ment rate of 30 (A), striking at THACO 9, 
without range penalties. 

Poisonstars harm only living and undead 
creatures, as follows: when one strikes, it in- 
flicts 1 point of corrosive damage on living 
beings, or 2 points on an undead creature. 

Living creatures must make a successful 
saving throw vs. poison at —2, or be wracked by 
waves of nausea and weakness for 1d4 rounds. 
This pain, a magical venom, causes the victim 
to make all ability checks at —2, attacks at —2, 
and has a 2-point Armor Class penalty. The 
penalties of multiple hits are noncumulative, 
but each requires a saving throw. 

The material components of this spell are a 
drop of poison, a drop of the caster’s spittle, and 
a spark or small flame (which goes out during 
casting). 

Notes: Restricted to alhoon (undead il- 
lithids), uncommon. Originally from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS Setting. 


Polar Screen, Otiluke’s 
See Otiluke’s polar screen. 


Pollute Water 
Reversed form, see cleanse water. 


~ Poison to Water 


Polymorph Any Object 
(Alteration) 


Level: 8 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Variable 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell changes one object or creature into 
another. When used as a polymorph other or 
stone to flesh spell, simply treat the spell as a 
more powerful version, with saving throws 
made with —4 penalties to the die roll. When it is 
cast in order to change other objects, the dura- 
tion of the spell depends on how radical a 
change is made from the original state to its en- 
chanted state, as well as how different it is in 
size. The DM determines the changes by using 
the following guidelines: 


Kingdom Animal, vegetable, mineral 

Class Mammals, bipeds, fungi, metals, 
etc. 

Relationship Twig is to tree, sand is to beach, 
etc. 

Size Smaller, equal, larger 

Shape Comparative resemblance of the 
original to the polymorphed state 

Intelligence Particularly with regard toa 


change in which the end product 
is more intelligent 


A change in kingdom makes the spell work 
for hours (if removed by one kingdom) or turns 
(if removed by two). Other changes likewise 
affect spell duration. Thus, changing a lion to an 
androsphinx would be permanent, but turning a 
turnip to a purple worm would be a change with 
a duration measured in hours. Turning a tusk 
into an elephant would be permanent, but turn- 
ing a twig into a sword would be a change with 
a duration of several turns. Generally the mini- 
mum duration will be 2 hours or turns. Changes 
in turns should not exceed one week in 
duration; changes in rounds should not exceed 
one day. 

All polymorphed objects radiate a strong 
magic, and if a dispel magic spell is success- 
fully cast upon them, they return to their natural 
form. Note that a stone to flesh spell or its re- 
verse will affect objects under this spell. As 
with other polymorph spells, damage sustained 


sare mereen AREE r e e o rr e 
eia a a a ee eee 


I E E 


672 


l Polymorph Other r 


| 


in the new form can result in the injury or death 
of the polymorphed creature. 

For example, it is possible to polymorph a 
creature into rock and grind it to dust, causing 
damage, perhaps even death. If the creature was 
changed to dust to start with, more creative 
methods to damage it would be needed; perhaps 
the wizard could use a gust of wind spell to scat- 
ter the dust far and wide. In general, damage 
occurs when the new form is altered through 
physical force, although the DM will have to 
adjudicate many of these situations. 

The system shock roll is applied to living 
creatures, as are the restrictions noted regarding 
the polymorph other and stone to flesh spells. 
Also note that a polymorph effect often detracts 
from an item’s or creature’s powers, but does not 
add new powers, except possibly movement ca- 
pabilities not present in the old form. Thus, a 
vorpal sword polymorphed into a dagger would 
not retain vorpal capability. Likewise, valueless 
items cannot be made into permanent valuable 
items. 

The material components of this spell are 
mercury, gum arabic, and smoke. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Polymorph Other 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The polymorph other spell is a powerful 
magic that completely alters the form and abil- 
ity, and possibly the personality and mentality, 
of the recipient. The change is from creature 
form to creature form; a creature cannot be 
changed into common plant or an object. Of 
course, while a creature with a lower Intelli- 
gence can be polymorphed in form into a crea- 
ture with a higher Intelligence, it will not gain 
that creature’s mental ability. The reverse— 
polymorphing a higher Intelligence creature 
into one of significantly lower Intelligence—te- 
sults in a creature much more intelligent than 
appearances would lead one to believe. The 
polymorphed creature must survive a system 
shock roll (see Table 3) to see if it survives the 
change. After this, it must make a special Intel- 


673 


ligence check to see if it retains its personality 
(see following). 

The polymorphed creature acquires the form 
and physical abilities of the creature it has been 
polymorphed into, while retaining its own 
mind. Form includes natural Armor Class (that 
due to skin toughness, but not due to quickness, 
magical nature, etc.), physical movement abili- 
ties (walking, swimming, and flight with wings, 
but not plane shifting, blinking, teleporting, 
etc.), and attack routines (claw/claw/bite, 
swoop, rake, and constriction, but not petrifica- 
tion, breath weapons, energy drain, etc.). Hit 
points and saving throws do not change from 
the original form. Noncorporeal forms cannot 
be assumed. Natural shapeshifters (lycan- 
thropes, dopplegangers, higher level druids, 
etc.) are affected for but one round, and can then 
resume their normal form. 

If slain, the polymorphed creature reverts to 
its original form, though it remains dead. (Note 
that most creatures generally prefer their own 
form and will not willingly stand the risk of 
being subjected to this spell!) As class and level 
are not attributes of form, abilities derived from 
either cannot be gained by this spell, nor can 
exact ability scores be specified. 

When the polymorph occurs, the creature’s 
equipment, if any, melds into the new form (in 
particularly challenging campaigns, the DM 
may allow protective devices, such as a ring of 
protection, to continue operating effectively). 
The creature retains its mental abilities, includ- 
ing spell use, assuming the new form allows 
completion of the proper verbal and somatic 
components and assuming the material compo- 
nents are available. Creatures not used to a new 
form might be penalized at the DM’s option (for 
example, —2 to attack rolls) until they practice 
sufficiently to master it. 

When the physical change occurs, there is a 
base 100% chance that the subject’s personality 
and mentality change into that of the new form 
(i.e., a roll of 20 or less on 1d20). For each 1 
point of Intelligence of the subject, subtract 1 
from the base chance on 1d20. Additionally, for 
every Hit Die of difference between the original 
form and the form it is assuming, add or sub- 
tract 1 (depending on whether polymorphed 
form has more Hit Dice [or levels] or fewer Hit 
Dice [or levels] than original, respectively). The 
chance for assumption of the personality and 
mentality of the new form is checked daily until 
the change takes place. 

A subject acquiring the mentality of the new 


DEN 


~~ Polymorph Self 


form has effectively become the creature whose 
form was assumed and comes under the control 
of the DM until recovered by a wish spell or 
similar magic. Once this final change takes 
place, the creature acquires the new form’s full 
range of magical and special abilities. 

For example: If a 1 Hit Die orc of 8 Intelli- 
gence is polymorphed into a white dragon with 
6 Hit Dice, it is 85% (20 - 8 Intelligence +5 
level difference [6-1] = 17 out of 20 = 85%) 
likely to actually become one in all respects, but 
in any case it has the dragon’s physical and 
mental capabilities. If it does not assume the 
personality and mentality of a white dragon, it 
knows what it formerly knew as well. 

The wizard can use a dispel magic spell to 
change the polymorphed creature back to its 
original form, and this requires a system shock 
roll. Those who have lost their individuality and 
are then converted back maintain the belief that 
they are actually the polymorphed creature and 
attempt to return to that form. Thus, the orc who 
comes to believe he is a white dragon, when 
converted back to his orc form, steadfastly 
maintains he is really a white dragon polymor- 
phed into the shape of an orc. His companions 
will most likely consider him mad. 

The material component of this spell is a 
caterpillar cocoon. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


< 


sng. 74 
9 
ASH Des 


If the caster chooses a form that cannot 
survive under local conditions, the recipi- 
ent suffers 1d4 to 1d8 points of damage 
each day, hour, turn, or round it is exposed 
to such conditions. For example, a goldfish 
in a desert might suffer 1d8 points of 
damage every round from heat and dry- 
ness. The same goldfish might suffer 1d6 
points of damage every turn on a dungeon 
floor or 1d4 points every day in a frigid 
mountain pool. Some creatures might be 
immune to environmental damage as long 
as their mentality remains intact. For ex- 
ample, a mummy turned into a goldfish 
does not suffer from the desert heat. 


Polymorph Self 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard is able to 
assume the form of any creature, save those that 
are noncorporeal, from as small as a wren to as 
large as a hippopotamus. Furthermore, the 
wizard gains its physical mode of locomotion 
and breathing as well. No system shock roll is 
required. The spell does not give the new form’s 
other abilities (attack, magic, special move- 
ment, etc.), nor does it run the risk of the wizard 
changing personality and mentality. 

When the polymorph occurs, the caster’s 
equipment, if any, melds into the new form (in 
particularly challenging campaigns, the DM 
may allow protective devices, such as a ring of 
protection, to continue operating effectively). 
The caster retains all mental abilities, including 
spell use, assuming the new form allows com- 
pletion of the proper verbal and somatic compo- 
nents and the material components are 
available. A caster not used to a new form might 
be penalized at the DM’s option (for example, 
-2 penalty to attack rolls) until he practices suf- 
ficiently to master it. 

Thus, a wizard changed into an owl could fly, 
but his vision would be human; a change to a 
black pudding would enable movement under 


> . 


~ Power Word, Banishment r 


doors or along halls and ceilings, but not the 
pudding’s offensive (acid) or defensive capabil- 
ities. Naturally, the strength of the new form is 
sufficient to enable normal movement. The 
spellcaster can change his form as often as de- 
sired for the duration of the spell, each change 
requiring a round. The wizard retains his own 
hit points, attack rolls, and saving throws. The 
wizard can end the spell at any time; when vol- 
untarily returning to his own form and ending 
the spell, he regains 1d12 hit points. The wizard 
also will return to his own form when slain or 
when the effect is dispelled, but no hit points are 
restored in these cases. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


The caster can assume the forms of crea- 
tures he has seen. For example, a caster 
who has never seen an ochre jelly cannot 
turn into one. In general, a non-flying 
movement rate greater than 24 and a flying 
movement rate greater than 36 should be 
considered a special ability. 


Portrait 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 glass globe 
Saving Throw: None 


Using this spell, the caster can capture a par- 
ticular scene permanently within a ball or globe 
of crystal; the area reproduced is a perfect 
sphere, so it fits smoothly within the crystal 
globe. The size of the captured scene depends 
on the caster’s level: A caster of 3rd to 5th level 
can capture a scene of up to 10 feet in diameter; 
a caster of 6th to 8th level can reproduce a set- 
ting up to 100 feet in diameter; and a caster of 
9th or higher level can duplicate a panorama up 
to 1,000 feet across. The image within the ball 
captures the scene in perfect visual detail. 

Note that in the case of writing, reducing a 
page or length of scroll sufficiently to capture 
its text in even a l-foot globe will reduce the 
size of the writing to near illegibility; such 
works are hard to transport and store, and are 


subject to breakage. 

The spell requires a sphere of glass or crystal 
that can be as small as 1 inch in diameter or as 
large as 1 foot in diameter. The crystal ball is 
held in one hand while the other hand is used to 
perform the spell’s somatic component. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Darsson's 
Notes. 


Potion, Darsson’s 
See Darsson’s potion. 


Power Word, Banishment 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 9 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster can banish 
one extra-planar creature, forcing it to return to 
its home plane. The effect is instantaneous. The 
subject cannot return without a special sum- 


moning, or some means of egress from its home 
to the plane from which it was banished. Fur- 
ther, the banishment lasts for a year and a day; 
not even a full wish allows re-entry before this 
time has elapsed. This spell closely resembles 
the 7th-level spell banishment, but is more pow- 
erful and more dangerous. The caster need 
merely look at the extra-planar creature and 
speak the name of its home plane. The effect 
happens immediately. 

The creature’s magic resistance is halved. Ifa 
caster fails to overcome the creature’s magic re- 
sistance, the spell merely fails. 

If the caster has correctly named the home 
plane of the creature, and if creature currently 
has 70 hit points or fewer, it is banished. If not, 
the caster is in great trouble. 

If the caster has named the wrong plane or if 
the creature is too powerful to be affected, the 
caster must immediately make a saving throw 
vs. death magic at a —4 penalty. Failure means 
he is banished to that plane himself. (However, 
he is not stranded for any set length of time, and 
may return to his home plane as soon as he can 
contrive to do so). A caster who succeeds is 
dazed and shaken by his brush with disaster, 
and can take no actions other than defense for 
the next two rounds. 

Even if the spell is entirely successful, the 
force of the magic is such that the wizard cannot 
concentrate enough to cast another spell until at 
least 1 full round has passed. 

This spell cannot be cast on oneself. The 
caster must be able to see the creature on which 
it is cast. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting, uncommon for conjurers and 
dimensionists; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Power Word, Blind 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Song) 

Level: 8 


Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


~ Power Word, Blind a 


When a power word, blind spell is cast, one 
or more creatures within the area of effect 
become sightless. The spellcaster selects one 
creature as the target center, and the effect 
spreads outward from the center, affecting crea- 
tures with the lowest hit point totals first; also, 
the spell can be focused to affect an individual 
creature. The spell affects up to 100 hit points of 
creatures; creatures who currently have 100 or 
more hit points are not affected and do not 
count against the number of creatures affected. 

The duration of the spell depends upon how 
many hit points are affected. If 25 or fewer hit 
points are affected, the blindness is permanent 
until cured. If 26 to 50 hit points are affected, 
the blindness lasts for 1d4+1 turns. If 51 to 100 
hit points are affected, the spell lasts for 1d4+1 
rounds. An individual creature cannot be par- 
tially affected. If all of its current hit points are 
affected, it is blinded; otherwise, it is not. Blind- 
ness can be removed by a cure blindness or 
dispel magic spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Power Word, Kill 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Song) 

Level: 9 


Range: 5 yds./2 levels 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


When a power word, kill spell is uttered, one 
or more creatures of any type within the spell 
range and area of effect are slain. The power 
word kills either one creature with up to 60 hit 
points, or multiple creatures with 10 or fewer hit 
points each, to a maximum of 120 hit points 
total. The option to attack a single creature or 
multiple creatures must be stated along with the 
spell range and center of the area of effect. The 
current hit points of the creatures are used. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


pee aaa an EEE Nee 


x Power Word, Silence r 


Power Word, Liquefy 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Water) 
Level: 9 


Range: 5 yds./2 levels. 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Upon casting this powerful spell, one or more 
creatures in the affected area are instantly 
turned to water if they fail saves vs. spells. The 
spell affects creatures of any type as per power 
word kill, and liquefies one creature with up to 
60 hit points or two or more with 10 or fewer hit 
points up to a maximum of 120 hit points. The 
option to liquefy one or more creatures, the 
spell range, and area of effect must be stated 
before casting. The current hit points of all 
target creatures are used to determine the spell 
effect. 


} 
$: 
KA 
k 
i 
; 
p 
$ 
3 £ 


ae ki 
a À 
% i 


677 


If the spell is cast underwater, the volume of 
all creatures liquefied causes no displacement 
and the liquid disperses in following rounds. 
The estimated volume of all creatures acts as 
normal fluid, possibly filling dungeon areas, 
soaking into the ground, running downhill, or 
filling empty containers nearby (fountains or 
pools). 

Creatures affected are forever slain and, 
unlike the power word kill spell, cannot be re- 
stored except by a wish or an act of the gods. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Power Word, Silence 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 6 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


In using this spell the caster points at an indi- 
vidual and utters the power word. For the rest of 
that round and the full next round that creature 
and everything within 1 foot of the creature 
cannot make any sound. 

The silence foils spellcasting as well as voice 
activation of magical items and normal speech. 
The silence also negates sound-based attacks 
both by the target and on the target (a silenced 
individual cannot hear a power word kill that 
followed, for example, but by the same token 
could not use a chime of opening or horn of 
blasting). 

The power word silence can be dispelled only 
by a limited wish or more powerful magic. A vo- 
calize spell will function under the limits of a 
power word silence, but must be cast before the 
power word is used. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Selvar s Ineffa- 
ble Conjurations, Magic, and Phantasms. 


> P 


~ Power Word, SLeep — Red Wizard : 


Power Word, Sleep — Red Wizard 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is like the normal Ist-level sleep 
spell, but it needs no somatic or material com- 
ponents. 

When the power word sleep spell is cast, one 
or more creatures (other than undead and other 
creatures specifically excluded from the effects) 
fall into a comatose sleep. All affected creatures 
must be within 30 feet of each other. The spell 
affects 2d4 Hit Dice or levels of creatures. 
Those with 4+3 Hit Dice or more are unaf- 
fected. The center of the area of effect is chosen 
by the spellcaster. The creatures with the least 
Hit Dice are affected first, and partial effects 
are ignored. 

For example, a wizard casts power word sleep 
at three kobolds, two gnolls, and an ogre. The 
roll (2d4) result is 4. All the kobolds and one 
gnoll are affected (1/2 + 1/2 + 1/2 +2 =3 1/2 Hit 


Dice). Note that the remainder is not enough to 
affect the last gnoll or the ogre. 

Slapping or wounding awakens affected crea- 
tures but normal noise does not. Awakening re- 
quires one entire round. 

Notes: Common for the Red Wizards of 
Thay, uncommon for conjurers from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; otherwise, virtu- 
ally unknown. 


Power Word, Stun 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Mentalism, Song) 


Level: 7 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V 

Casting Time: | 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When a power word, stun spell is uttered, any 
creature of the wizard’s choice is stunned—reel- 
ing and unable to think coherently or act—for a 
duration dependent on its current hit points. Of 
course, the wizard must be facing the creature, 
and the creature must be within the range of 5 
yards per experience level of the caster. 

Maximum movement for a stunned creature 
is one-third the creature’s rate, or 3, whichever 
is less. Barred are all forms of communication, 
spell use, item and innate ability use, psionics, 
fighting, or free movement. Attacks against a 
stunned creature have a +4 bonus. Creatures 
with 1 to 30 hit points are stunned for 4d4 
rounds, those with 31 to 60 hit points are 
stunned for 2d4 rounds, those with 61 to 90 hit 
points are stunned for |d4 rounds, and creatures 
with over 90 hit points are not affected. Ifa 
creature is weakened so that its hit points are 
below its usual maximum, then the current 
number of hit points is used. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Precipitation 
(Alteration) 
(Water) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. diameter cylinder up to 


> er a LN 


678 


< Prepare Enchantment r 


120 ft. high 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell precipitates a light rain out of the 
air, drizzling on everything in the area of effect. 
Small normal flames (candles) are extin- 
guished. Smal! normal fires (torches and camp- 
fires) gutter and smoke for a round after the 
drizzling stops. Bonfires and magical fires are 
unaffected. Large magical fire effects (fireball, 
wall of fire, flamestrike, and so on) cast into the 
area during the rain create a warm fog that ob- 
scures vision in an area 60 feet in diameter. This 
lasts 1d4+1 rounds, half that in a breeze, and 
but one round in a strong wind. 

The precipitation spell has doubled effect in 
humid climes, causes only slight dampness in 
arid climes, produces light sleet at temperatures 
near freezing, and creates snow if the temper- 
ature is below freezing. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. (Originally pub- 
lished in Unearthed Arcana.) 


Precognitive Sense 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell, the chronomancer 
may gain general knowledge of a single event to 
come. The event must affect the caster in some 
way. (An event that would affect another char- 
acter in the party might count, especially if the 
chronomancer relies on other party members 
for safety.) The chronal range is six hours into 
the future per level of the chronomancer, and 
the spell centers on the most important event 
during that time. 

Information is frequently misleading—the 
caster might discover that gambling will bring 
good fortune, only to discover after losing 50 gp 
that the winner wishes to hire him for an adven- 
ture—and there is always a 10% chance that the 
information is wrong. 

The material component is a piece of rose 
quartz held to the chronomancer’s forehead. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers, 
common. 


Predict Weather 
Lost spell. Believed known by the Red Wiz- 
ards of Thay before the Time of Troubles. See the 
Ist-level priest spell predict weather and the 
J] st-level wizard spell, weathertell. 


Prepare Enchantment 
(Enchantment) 


(Song) 
(Reversible) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enchants an item by forcing the al- 
teration of its “true name.” The caster must 
know the “true name” of the item to be created, 
which varies in complexity according to the 
complexity of the item. 

Immediately before casting the spell, the 
caster purifies himself by fasting. The cere- 
mony takes six days to prepare and one to per- 
form. The resultant drain on the caster prevents 
any other spell casting for the following 1d100 


a 


~ Preservation r 


days, and mental damage is possible. The base 
chance of success is 60%, modified as noted in 
the table. The maximum possible chance is 
85%. 

After casting the spell, the caster must save 
vs. spell (at a +3 bonus if the ceremony was suc- 
cessful) or be feebleminded as the 6th-level 
wizard spell. A caster who saves against the fee- 
blemind effect is magically drained for 1d100 
days despite whether the spell was successful or 
not. No activities involving magic can be pur- 
sued, including spellcasting, magical item use, 
the study of magical texts, spell research, item 
fabrication, and so forth. 

The material components vary according to 
the item to be enchanted. These are revealed to 
the caster as part of the “true name” of the item. 
They must be of at least 5,000 gp value; more 
valuable components enhance the chance of 
success. These materials are expended regard- 
less of the outcome. 

The reverse, destroy enchantment, is used to 
unmake an item created by this spell. A wizard 
can always unmake his own work. Otherwise, 
destroy enchantment is exactly like prepare en- 
chantment, except that no modifier for the type 
of material applies and that the level of the orig- 
inal creator is a negative modifier. A failure 
means the wizard cannot again try to destroy the 
enchantment again until gaining at least more 
experience level. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from /mag- 
ine Magazine.) 


Modifiers for “True Name” Magic 


Per pound of natural material -1% 
(wood, leather) 
Per pound of other non-ferrous -3% 
material 
Per pound of ferrous material* -10% 
Per caster level +1% 
Per day additional fasting +1% 
Per +1,000 gp extra material 
component value +1% 


* Includes iron, steel, and all magical metals 
(such as “meteor metal,” mithral, adamantite, 
cinnabryl, and any other magical metal not 
specifically excluded). 
Note: The chance for success of this method 
cannot be brought above 85% by any means. 


680 


Preservation 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell preserves meat and other natural 
foods as if just killed or harvested. It does not 
work on cooked food. The spell affects one 
creature of man-size or less or up to 9 cubic feet 
of natural food (enough to feed a party of 9 for 
three days). This dweomer does not preserve 
magical potency and is thus unsuitable for pre- 
serving spell components of any sort. 

The spell can be used on the dead to keep 
them intact until they can be spoken to or raised 
(time spent preserved does not count toward the 
time elapsed for these spells). Preservation can 
be used on corporeal undead to keep the body 
from rotting. 

The material component of this spell is a 
pinch of salt. 

Notes: Uncommon spell, originally from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Preservation, Thunguul’s 
See Thunguul’s preservation. 


Preserve 
(Abjuration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1⁄2 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


A preserve spell enables the caster to retain 
some item fresh and whole until some later time 
when it is needed. Of course, the dweomer Is in- 
effective in retaining the magical potency living 
component materials such as mistletoe, holly 
berries, and similar stuffs that must be gathered 
at specific times or under specific conditions. It 
is likewise ineffective in preserving the de- 
ceased for later resurrection. The material that 


fS Preserve From Decay r 


can be treated by a preserve spell depends upon 
the level of the caster. 


« 2nd level: Hard, relatively dry material 
* 5th level: Soft, relatively wet material 
* 8th level: Semi-liquid and liquid material 


A container is necessary only when a rela- 
tively high degree of moisture is concerned. 

The material components of the spell are a 
pinch of dust, a bit of resin (or amber), and a 
drop of brandy. 

Notes: Uncommon for transmuters and al- 
chemists from the WORLD OF GREYHAWK set- 
ting; otherwise, rare. (Originally published in 
Unearthed Arcana.) 


Preserve Dead 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: 1 body/2 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell delays the onset of decay, preserv- 
ing a corpse in its current condition for the 
spell’s duration. The wizard can affect one 
corpse at Ist level, two corpses at 3rd level, three 
at Sth, and so on to a maximum of five bodies at 
9th level. While the spell is in effect, the corpses 
do not rot or experience any other form of decay. 
Even corpses that are doomed to rise again as 
undead (such as individuals slain by ghouls or 
wights) or that host parasitic monsters, such as 
individuals killed by rot grubs, remain perfectly 
preserved throughout the spell’s duration. 

Preserve dead has two important effects. 
First, it extends the amount of time in which a 
raise dead spell can be effective—days in which 
the body is under the influence of preserve dead 
do not count against the normal limitations of 
the raise dead spell. Second, preserving a body 
renders it more suitable for subsequent anima- 
tion as a zombie. Any corpse animated while the 
spell is still in effect gains a bonus of +1 hit 
point per Hit Die when animated as a zombie, 
monster zombie, or juju zombie. 

The material component for this spell is a 
pinch of quicklime. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; uncom- 
mon. 


Preserve Food 
Aka preservation. 


Preserve From Decay 
(Chronomancy) 
Reversible 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 ft/level 
Components: V, 5, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 3 months/level 
Area of Effect: 25 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By use of the preserve from decay spell, the 
caster can halt the decay (including shelf ripen- 
ing) of any nonliving matter. Food or drink must 
first be placed in a closed container of some 
kind. The preserve from decay spell is broken 
when the container is opened. For material other 
than foodstuffs, the spell runs its full duration 
unless dispelled by some other means. 

The material component required is a small 
vial of salt, sealed with wax. 

The reverse of this spell, decay, causes imme- 
diate decay equal to one month per level of the 
chronomancer. The material component re- 
quired is a pinch of dung or mold. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers, 
common. 


681 


Preserve Wood 


ITU y 
A\y if ees a ww 


Preserve Wood 
(Abjuration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell protects an item made of wood, 
such as the members on a ship, from being de- 
formed or rotted by magic (for example, the 
2nd-level priest spell warp wood). A warp wood 
spell or wood rot cast by a higher level caster 
might affect the protected wood, the chance 
being 20% per level difference. The preserve 
wood spell does not affect spells of general de- 
struction, such as disintegrate, nor does it pro- 
vide protection from natural hazards or wear of 
any sort. 

The caster can protect up to 100 pounds of 
wood per level of the caster, but only one struc- 
ture (such as a ship or a palisade) per casting. 
Separate wooden items must be protected sepa- 
rately. 

Notes: Common for Sea mages and wizards 


AOO S a S T 


682 


from the FORGOTTEN REALMS Sea of Stars 
region; otherwise, uncommon. 


Preserver Metamorphosis 


Athasian Dragon-King 
magic; psionic component 
renders the spell J- 
uncastable by wizards 

Presper’s Double Wizardry 
(Alteration) 
Level: 8 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: | turn/level 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Presper s double wizardry allows the caster 
to store up to four spells for later use. These 
spells are cast in the normal manner during the 
turn after the double wizardry is cast. Each 
stored spell must be of 7th level or less, and 
storing each spell causes the caster a loss of 1d6 
hit points. These lost hit points must be regained 
by rest or healing, but cannot be regained while 
the spells they are linked to are still stored. 

During any round in which the double wiz- 
ardry is in effect, the caster can call forth one or 
two of the stored spells by silent act of will. 
They take their normal effects unless circum- 
stances prohibit this—for example, a caster who 
cannot see a target creature that must be in view 
for the spell to function. 

If a dispel magic is cast on the wizard while 
this spell is in effect, the least powerful spell in 
storage (or last memorized, if of equal level) 
erupts involuntarily. This lashes out at the 
source of the dispel magic spell. Other stored 
spells are unaffected. The death of the caster or 
the expiration of the double wizardry spell 
causes all stored spells to be lost. 

This spell does not allow a caster to augment 
the spells in his or her mind beyond normal 
limits: Stored spells are still considered memo- 
rized for this purpose. 

This spell is the predecessor of the famous 
Algarth’s embattlement. It is a less powerful 
version of the same concept that was developed 
two decades earlier by the adventurer-mage 
Presper. 

The material component of a double wiz- 
ardry is a double-yolked egg. The egg need not 


Presper’s Moonbow 


be fresh, and may even be petrified. 
Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Presper’s Moonbow 
(Evocation) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 to 4 rds. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast only at night when the 
moon is visible in the sky. Creating the moon- 
bow causes 1d4 small glowing motes of light to 
collect and spin around the caster resembling 
dancing lights in appearance. The number of 
moon motes appearing is random. 

On each of the following rounds, the caster 
can direct any or all of the motes to attack a spe- 
cific creature within range. The motes pursue 
the creature at a movement rate of 27 and follow 
around corners and obstacles. The motes are not 
foiled by illusions or invisibility. They strike as 
the caster with a +3 bonus to hit. Should they 
hit, they discharge an electrical bolt. Should 
they miss, they flicker out without inflicting 
further damage. 

The damage inflicted by a moon mote is de- 
termined by the number of other motes that 
were created: 


l Mote 4d6 points each 
2 Motes 3d6 points each 
3 Motes 2d6 points each 
4 Motes 2d4 points each 


There is no saving throw vs. the electrical 
damage; a mote must hit in order to inflict 
damage. 

At least one mote must attack per round. Any 
remaining motes hang spinning around the 
spellcaster until they are sent off. The spell- 
caster can move or cast other spells in addition 
to firing a moon mote in the same round. The 
casting times of all spells and the weapon speed 
of any attack made by the wizard are increased 
by 2 if any moon motes are sent off that round. 
It is possible, through several moonbow spells, 
for a caster to summon a constellation of moon 
motes orbiting about him. 


If around passes in which no moon motes are 
shot off at targets, all moon motes (in orbit 
around the caster or in flight) wink out even if 
they have been created by different spells. Simi- 
larly, if the caster ts slain rendered unconscious 
or unable to mentally direct the moon motes, the 
moon motes wink out of existence. 

The moon motes can be attacked physically; 
they have an Armor Class of —6. If struck, they 
immediately discharge and inflict their damage 
on all within 10 feet. If the moon motes are 
struck by a lightning bolt they discharge as well, 
inflicting their damage on all within 10 feet. A 
wizard with a herd of moon motes around him 
could meet a quick end, as unused moon motes 
are always within 10 feet of the caster. 

The material components for this spell are a 
wisp of cobweb an amber rod and a scrap of fur. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
Tome of the Covenant. 


E a 


À a 
fe. ae 
A f i S A 
> a s 
NX 
ON 


FEN 


683 


Prestidigitation 


Prestidigitation 
(Conjuration) 
Reversible Q 
Level: 1 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell heightens the manual dexterity of 
the wu jen and allows him to teleport small ob- 
jects to different points on his body. The wu jen 
can pick pockets, cause small objects to disap- 
pear from his hand, and cause objects on his 
person to suddenly appear in his hand. 

When the wu jen attempts to pick pockets, 
the victim is allowed a saving throw vs. spell. If 
the saving throw is successful, the attempt is 
discovered and whatever relevant consequences 
apply. If the victim fails the save, the wu jen 
successfully filches the item. 

Furthermore, with a quick pass of his hand, 
the wu jen can cause items small enough to fit 
in the palm of his hand to disappear and reap- 
pear elsewhere on his person (in a pocket, boot, 
other hand). This feat also can be used to bring 
items from elsewhere on his person into his 
hand. Again, the object must be small enough to 
easily fit in the palm of the hand. However, on- 
lookers are allowed a saving throw vs. spell to 
notice the prestidigitation. 

Such tricks take just seconds to perform and 
several can be done in the same round. Thus, the 
wu jen could pick up a rare gem, secretly trans- 
port the item to his hat, and replace it with a 
cheap substitute hidden in his pocket in a few 
seconds. 

The material component for this spell is a 
small drop of oil rubbed on the tips of the fin- 
gers. 

The reverse of this spell, fumble-fingers, is 
cast upon a creature within 30 yards. Any one 
action requiring manual dexterity, up to the du- 
ration of the spell, might fail. The spell does not 
affect large actions, such as melee combat, but 
might cause an archer to fumble an arrow, a 
ninja to drop thieves’ tools, or a spellcaster to 
confuse somatic gestures in spellcasting. The 
creature must make a successful saving throw 
vs. spell to perform the action; fumble-fingers 
ends after affecting one action. The material 
component is a small amount of oil flicked at 


the victim. 
Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Prevent Rot 
Reversed form, see wood rot. 


Primal Fury, Tenser’s 
See Tenser’s primal fury. 


Prismal’s Handy Mirror 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 2 turns/level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 mirror 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a floating mirror, which the 
caster can move about at a rate of 60 feet per 
round and angle or tilt at will. The mirror is 12 
inches plus 2 inches per level wide, and 24 
inches plus 4 inches per level long. For exam- 
ple, a handy mirror cast by a |2th-level wizard 
would be 36 inches wide and 72 inches tall, or 3 
feet by 6 feet. 

Prismal s handy mirror is quite strong and re- 
silient. It can support up to 10 pounds per caster 
level if oriented as a plane. The mirror’s motive 
force is not strong; most creatures can easily 
shove it aside if the caster attempts to block 
their movement or attacks with the mirror. At 
the end of the spell’s duration, the mirror 
rapidly shrinks and disappears. 

Prismal’s handy mirror can be broken only 
by a sharp blow from an individual with a 
Strength of at least 18/25 (or creature of at least 
Large size with 6 Hit Dice or more). If broken, 
razor-sharp shards explode outward in a shower 
that inflicts 1d6 points of damage on all crea- 
tures within 60 feet of the mirror. 

The material component is a small shard of 
glass. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Thought to be in Pris- 
mals Pocket Library, Vol. IV. 


684 


Prismal’s Revenge r 


Prismal’s Pictograph 
(Invocation) 
(Artifice, Geometry) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Originally developed by the evil wizard Pris- 
mal, this spell turns one creature or object in the 
wizard’s line of sight and range into an image 
on a surface the wizard touches. As the image is 
transferred, the actual creature or object slowly 
fades from view and vanishes, to appear on the 
surface as a drawing. 

For the pictograph to be successful, the caster 
must have an unimpaired view of the creature or 
object. The subject must remain in range for the 
entire casting time. The subject’s image must fit 
entirely on the surface the caster touches. The 
caster can reduce the object by a factor of 12 
(feet become inches), so a giant 10 feet tall can 
be rendered as an image 10 inches high. The 
caster must also have a suitable surface for the 
image—smooth stone or metal, paper or parch- 
ment, or even the skin of a cooperative accom- 
plice. The image is transferred in full color, and 
nothing less than the complete destruction of 
the surface can obliterate it. 

An unwilling creature is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. If the caster 
has specifically targeted an item carried by a 
creature, the item receives the creature’s saving 
throw. Magical items receive any applicable 
bonuses. For nonmagical objects and non- 
monstrous plants and animals, the spell is per- 
manent until dispelled. For other creatures and 
magical items, the pictograph state lasts for 1 
day per level of caster, unless a permanency 
spell is used on the image. 

At the end of the spell’s duration, or when a 
dispel magic is cast directly upon the image, the 
object or creature reappears. The caster can re- 
store the subject at any time by commanding it 
forth. 

The material components are an empty ink 
well, a feather pen, and the writing surface. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Thought to be in Pris- 
mals Pocket Library, Vol. IV. 


Prismal’s Revenge 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This sinister dweomer inflicts a potent, 
cursed disease upon the creature touched. A 
creature failing a saving throw vs. spell immedi- 
ately falls prey to a massive onslaught of dan- 
gerous maladies. The curse causes new diseases 
to constantly manifest in the victim’s body, 
overwhelming his system and killing him within 
four days. Even a paladin can fall prey to Pris- 
mal’s revenge. 

An afflicted victim must succeed in a second 
saving throw vs. spell, with a —4 penalty, or 
suffer the side-effects of Prismal’s revenge: 
Each day that the curse progresses, ability 
scores, movement rate, and hit points are re- 
duced by 25%, and THACO and saving throws 
worsen by 1d4 points. Prismal’s revenge is not 
contagious. 

To defeat the curse, a dispel magic must first 
be cast in order to stop the part of the spell that 
continuously regenerates the curse; then remove 
curse must be cast to halt the continuing mani- 
festation of diseases; and finally cure disease is 
required to defeat the current infections. (A 
properly worded wish may be effective, also.) If 
these spells are not cast in the proper order, and 
within the same turn, they have no effect: If 
only a cure disease is cast, the curse immedi- 
ately reinstates the disease, and if a remove 
curse only is cast, the magic of the spell rein- 
states the curse. 

The casting of Prismal’s revenge is an evil 
act. The late necromancer Purdue Darkwolf also 
claimed authorship of this spell. (The claim, it 
is suspected, led to his demise.) 

Notes: Very rare spell; invariably found in the 
hands of evil spellcasters. Known to be in Pris- 
mals Pocket Library, Vol. IX. 


Boo ee 


685 


D 


= Prismal’s Reversal gl 


e 


l AN / eo” 


Prismal’s Reversal 
(Alteration) 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 portal 
Saving Throw: None 


This enchantment reverses the relative veloc- 
ity of an object or creature that passes through 
the affected portal. The spell can be cast only 
upon an area bounded on four sides by a solid 
frame, such as a window or a door. The spell 
cannot be cast on a portal smaller than 3 feet by 
4 feet or larger than 18 feet by 24 feet. Creatures 
running or objects flying through the portal lose 
velocity, while those moving slowly are acceler- 
ated. 

The chart shows the time required to pass 
through the spell’s effect compared with move- 
ment rates. Once into the portal, a creature 
cannot withdraw or take any other actions until 
the portal has been passed completely. If pass- 
ing through the portal takes a round or more, a 


P e is * 


686 


creature caught in the frame loses any defensive 
Dexterity benefits until it clears the portal. 

Prismal’s reversal is resistant to the dispel 
magic spell. This has a 1% chance per level of 
the caster to negate the reversal. Physically de- 
stroying the frame ends the spell immediately. 

Prismal created this spell as a theft deterrent. 
Since thieves are apt to run from an establish- 
ment, this spell makes them easy to catch (a 
full-speed sprint can be five times the standard 
movement rate). 

The material component is a set of four 
matched ornamental stones, worth 400 gp in all, 
which are inset in the portal’s frame. They 
crumble to dust as the spell is activated. 

Notes: Very rare. Known to be in Prismals 
Pocket Library, Vol. IX. 


Speed of Time to 
Movement Pass Portal 

3 16 round 
6 Ys round 
9 1⁄4 round 
12 % round 
15 | round 
18 2 rounds 
21 4 rounds 
24 8 rounds 
27 16 rounds 
30 32 rounds 
Prismal’s Wormhole 

(Alteration, Illusion) 

(Dimension) 

Level: 8 


Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 hrs. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creates | wormhole 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows communication and possi- 
bly travel from the caster’s location to that of 
another individual, the caller. When a caller 
speaks the secret word of activation (most likely 
given to him by the caster), the spell is acti- 
vated, and a wormhole portal between the caster 
and the caller is created. Prismal’s wormhole 
has infinite range on the Prime Material Plane, 
and can cross planar boundaries (though move- 
ment into the RAVENLOFT setting is only one- 
way). 

On the caller’s side of the wormhole, a life- 


a—— 


~ Prismatic Eye va 


sized, stained-glass figure appears (an illusion), 
telling the caller one of two things: “Please wait 
for the wizard,” or “Sorry, the wizard is busy 
and chooses not to appear.” The stained-glass 
figure is not physically or visually threatening, 
nor can it cause harm of any kind. 

On the wizard’s side of the wormhole, two il- 
lusions appear: one a stained glass figure, 
telling the wizard someone has called, and the 
other a door knocker. The figure becomes a pic- 
ture of the caller if the caster desires. If the 
caster does not wish to appear, he wills the 
stained-glass figure on the other end to say he’s 
busy, whereon the wormhole collapses and one 
use of the spell is exhausted (““What? No ap- 
pointment? So sorry. No audience without an 
appointment.”’). 

If the wizard wishes to visit the caller, he 
need only grasp the knocker to appear directly 
before the caller (the knocker travels through 
the wormhole with the wizard). The wizard can 
return to his original location simply by operat- 
ing the knocker again. Only the caster can oper- 
ate the knocker. 

The caster can also use the knocker to open 
the wormhole with the knocker without actually 
going through it, and can close the wormhole at 
any time. The wormhole can stay open for a 
maximum of one turn per level of the caster. 
While the wormhole is open, the wizard can 
cast any spell he has available through the 
wormhole except dispel magic. He can do this 
even if he does not visit the caller. While it is 
possible for a spellcaster at the other end of an 
open wormhole to cast spells at the caster, it is 
not possible for anyone else to go through the 
wormhole unless accompanied by the caster. 
Regardless of the distance between the ends of 
the wormhole, the wormhole counts as no dis- 
tance for purposes of movement or spell range. 

A casting of Prismal’s wormhole allows the 
wormhole to be opened a number of times equal 
to the caster’s level; thus, a 16th-level wizard 
creates a wormhole that can be activated sixteen 
times, with each activation lasting up to 16 
turns. If the wizard chooses not to answer a call, 
one activation is used, exactly as if he had re- 
sponded. 

Preparation: The spell requires the wizard to 
be isolated before he can begin casting. If the 
caster does not have total concentration and 
complete silence, the spell is 50% likely to fail 
outright. The casting takes two hours. 

The material components are pine planks, a 
brass knocker, and least a pint each of red, blue, 


and yellow pigment. The wood planks must be 
laid on the floor in the shape of a door frame, 
and the knocker placed within the frame. The 
pigments are sprinkled in the course of the cast- 
ing. The secret word (often the wizard’s name) 
is woven into the fabric of the spell as part of 
the incantation. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in Pris- 
mals Pocket Library, Vol. IX. 


Prismatic Eye 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Artifice) 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creates 1 eye 
Saving Throw: None 


This magic creates a visible orb resembling 
an eye, much like a wizard eye, that floats above 
one shoulder of the caster. The caster can cause 
the eye to move at 120 feet per round and can 
see through it if he desires. The eye can be sent 
up to 10 yards away per experience level of the 
caster. The eye has 20-foot infravision and 
normal vision up to 60 feet in good light. 


~ Prismatic Sphere 


Prismatic Sphere Effects 


Color Order 
of Globe of Globe Effects of Globe 


B. 


Spell Negated By 


Stops nonmagical missiles—Inflicts 20 points of damage, cone of cold 
Stops magical missiles—Inflicts 40 points of damage, save gust of wind 
Stops poisons, gases, and petrification—Inflicts 80 points disintegrate 


Stops breath weapons—Save vs. poison or die; survivors passwall 


magic missile 


continual light 
dispel magic 


Red Ist 
save vs. spell for half 
Orange 2nd 
vs. spell for half 
Yellow 3rd 
of damage, save vs. spell for half 
Green 4th 
suffer 20 points of poison damage 
Blue 5th Stops location/detection and mental attacks—Save vs. 
petrification or be turned to stone 
Indigo 6th Stops magical spells—Save vs. wand or go insane 
Violet 7th Force field protection—Save vs. spell or be sent to 


another plane 


In the round in which it appears (the round 
after casting) and every fourth round thereafter, 
the prismatic eye can emit a straight, pencil-thin 
beam of clashing colors equal in effect to the 
Ist-level wizard spell color spray. The beam af- 
fects only one creature, and the caster must 
make a successful attack roll to strike a target. If 
the beam misses or if the caster chooses not to 
have the eye emit a ray, the color spray power is 
lost for another four rounds. 

The beam strikes a creature of up to 6 Hit 
Dice or levels unconscious for 2d4 rounds. A 
creature with less than 6 Hit Dice is automati- 
cally affected, a creature with 6 or more Hit 
Dice receives a saving throw vs. spell to avoid 
the effect. A creature of 7 or 8 Hit Dice or levels 
must successfully save vs. spell or be blinded 
for 1d4 rounds. A creature with more than 8 Hit 
Dice must similarly save vs. spell or be stunned 
(reeling and unable to think or act coherently) 
for one round. 

Instead of a color spray, the caster can will 
the eye to emit light as the Ist-level wizard 
spell, centered on the eye itself and lasting four 
rounds. The intensity is controlled by the caster 
but cannot be made so bright as to blind. 

If attacked, the eye is AC 3 and has 9 hit 
points. If it is destroyed, the spell ends. 

The material components of this spell are an 
eyeball (dried or preserved) from any sort of 
creature, and a polished, rainbow-hued slice of 
abalone, oyster, or tortoise shell. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in The Arcana- 
bula of Jume. 


a e aa, 


688 


Prismatic Sphere 
(Abjuration, Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the wizard to conjure up an 
immobile, opaque globe of shimmering, multi- 
colored light to surround him, giving protection 
from all forms of attack. The sphere flashes in 
all colors of the visible spectrum, seven of 
which have distinct powers and purposes. Any 
creature with fewer than 8 Hit Dice is blinded 
for 2d4 turns by the colors of the sphere. Only 
the spellcaster can pass in and out of the pris- 
matic sphere without harm, though he can cast 
it over others to protect them. 

The sphere can be destroyed, color by color, in 
consecutive order, by various magical effects; 
however, the first must be brought down before 
the second can be affected, and so on. Any crea- 
ture passing through the barrier receives the effect 
of every color still remaining. The following table 
shows the colors and effects of the prismatic 
sphere, as well as what will negate each globe. 

Note that typically the upper hemisphere of 
the globe is visible, as the spellcaster is at the 
center of the sphere, and the lower half is usu- 
ally hidden by the floor surface. 

Furthermore, a rod of cancellation or a Mor- 
denkainen'’s disjunction spell will destroy a 


, 


Prismatic Wall r 


prismatic sphere (but an antimagic shell will 
fail to penetrate it). Otherwise, anything short 
of an artifact or relic entering the sphere is de- 
stroyed, and any creature is subject to the effects 
of every color still active—i.e., 70—140 points 
of damage plus death, petrification, insanity, 
and instantaneous transportation to another 
plane. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Prismatic Spray 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 70 x 15 ft. spray 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is cast, the wizard causes 
seven shimmering, multicolored rays of light to 
flash from his hand in a triangular spray. This 
spray is 70 feet long and spreads to 15 feet wide 
at the end. It includes all colors of the visible 
spectrum; each ray has a different power and 
purpose. Any creature with fewer than 8 Hit 
Dice struck by a ray is blinded for 2d4 rounds, 
regardless of any other effect. 

Any creature in the area of effect will be 
touched by one or more of the rays. To deter- 
mine which ray strikes a creature, roll 1d8 and 
consult the table. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Prismatic Spray Results 


1 = red 5 = blue 
2 = orange 6 = indigo 
3 = yellow 7 = violet 
4= green 8 = struck by two rays, 
roll again twice 
(ignoring any 8s) 
Color Order 
of Ray ofRay Effect of Ray 
Red Ist Inflicts 20 points of damage, 
save vs. spell for half 
Orange 2nd Inflicts 40 points of damage, 
save vs. spell for half 
Yellow 3rd Inflicts 80 points of damage, 
save vs. spell for half 
Green 4th Save vs. poison or die; sur- 


vivors suffer 20 points of 
poison damage 


Blue Sth Save vs. petrification or be 
turned to stone 
Indigo 6th Save vs. wand or go insane 
Violet 7th Save vs. spell or be sent to 
another plane 
Prismatic Wall 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 4 ft./level wide x 2 ft./level high 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the wizard to conjure a 
vertical, opaque wall—a shimmering, multicol- 
ored plane of light that protects him from all 
forms of attack. The wall flashes with all colors 
of the visible spectrum, seven of which have a 
distinct power and purpose. The wall is immo- 
bile, and the spellcaster can pass through the 
wall without harm. However, any creature with 
fewer than 8 Hit Dice that is within 20 feet of 
the wall and does not shield its vision is blinded 
for 2d4 rounds by the colors. 

Each color in the wall has a special effect. 


pe fig Ja 


7 


Wily 
ft 


x Private Sanctum, Mordenkainen’s y 


Prismatic Wall Effects 

Order of 
Color Color Effects of Color 
Red lst 


save vs. spell for half 


Stops nonmagical missiles—Inflicts 20 points of damage, 


Spell Negated By 
cone of cold 


Orange 2nd Stops magical missiles—Inflicts 40 points of damage, save gust of wind 
vs. spell for half 

Yellow 3rd Stops poisons, gases, and petrification—Inflicts 80 points disintegrate 
of damage, save vs. spell for half 

Green 4th Stops breath weapons—Save vs. poison or die; survivors passwall 

suffer 20 points of poison damage 

Blue 5th Stops location/detection and mental attacks—Save vs. magic missile 
petrification or be turned to stone 

Indigo 6th Stops magical spells—Save vs. wand or go insane continual light 

Violet 7th Force field protection—Save vs. spell or be sent to dispel magic 


another plane 


Each color also can be negated by a specific 
magical effect, but the colors must be negated in 
the precise order of the spectrum. The accompa- 
nying table shows the seven colors of the wall, 
the order in which they appear, their effects on 
creatures trying to attack the spellcaster, and the 
magic needed to negate each color. 

The wall’s maximum proportions are 4 feet 
wide per level of experience of the caster and 2 
feet high per level of experience. A prismatic 
wall spell cast to materialize in a space occu- 
pied by a creature is disrupted and the spell is 
wasted. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Private Sanctum, Mordenkainen’s 
See Mordenkainen’s private sanctum. 


Procurement, Khazid’s 
See Khazid’s procurement. 


Produce Flame — Witch 
(Alteration) 
(Fire) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the witch to create a magi- 
cal flame each round, equal in brightness to a 
torch, that springs forth anywhere within 30 feet 


690 


of the caster. The flame does not harm the 
caster, but it is hot. The flame flashes on cre- 
ation, igniting combustibles within a three-foot 
diameter of its center of impact (paper, cloth, 
dry wood, oil, and so on). Although the magical 
flame lasts only an instant, combustibles that 
ignite continue to burn with normal fire. A crea- 
ture struck by the flame suffers 1d4+1 points of 
damage and, if combustion occurs, must spend 
a round extinguishing the fire or suffer like 
damage each round until the fire is extin- 
guished. 

The witch can create and hurl a magical 
flame as a grenade-like missile, or hold it for 
later use. While the witch can snuff out the 
magical flame any time desired, normal fires 
caused by the flame cannot be so extinguished. 
This spell does not function under water. 

Notes: Restricted to witches and fire mages; 
uncommon. 


Proficiency 
See weapon proficiency. For nonweapon profi- 
ciencies, see Rary’s aptitude appropriator. 


Programmed Amnesia 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 9 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: Special 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


x Programmed Amnesia r 


This spell allows the wizard to selectively de- 
stroy, alter, or implant memories in the subject 
creature as he sees fit. He can completely repro- 
gram a character, inventing a new persona, a 
new alignment, and assigning a new class as he 
sees fit. Only sentient beings can be affected; a 
subject that is not human, humanoid, or demi- 
human gains a +4 bonus to its saving throw. The 
wizard can make use of any or all of the effects 
listed below: 


A) Memory Erasure. Any or all memories 
possessed by the subject can be erased at the 
caster’s will, including knowledge of specific 
events, people, or places. 

B) Memory Implant. The caster can create 
false memories in the subject’s mind as he sees 
fit. Imaginary friends, events that didn’t really 
take place, betrayals by people the subject re- 
gards as his friends, or the friendship of an 
enemy all could be implanted in the subject’s 
mind. 

C) Skill Erasure. The subject can be made to 
forget any or all class-based skills or proficien- 
cies, including all or part of his THACO (it 
resets to 20), thief abilities, spellcasting, turning 
undead, or any other ability that stems from 
knowledge. About the only characteristics that 
can’t be affected by this usage of programmed 
amnesia are hit points, saving throws, and abil- 
ity scores. A character’s native language cannot 
be erased. 

D) Persona Erasure. Combining the effects 
of a skill erasure and a memory erasure, this 
leaves the subject as a clean slate. Only ability 
scores, hit points, saving throws, and native lan- 
guage remain. The character can assume any 
class or alignment available, beginning as a 1st- 
level character just as if he had decided to 
become dual-classed. (Even demihumans can 
become dual-classed in this fashion, since they 
forget all skills of their previous class.) 

E) Persona Implant. By erasing the existing 
personality and implanting a false set of memo- 
ties, the wizard can build a new persona for the 
mind-wiped character. In effect, he can decide 
what class, alignment, and personality the sub- 
ject will assume after his persona erasure. If the 
new persona is an adventurer, the character be- 
comes dual-classed, as described above. 

F) Programmed Erasure. The subject can be 
programmed to suffer a memory, skill, or per- 
sona erasure when a certain event takes place. 
For example, the wizard could set the subject to 
be wiped clean as a slate when the subject re- 


ceives a coded message or arrives at some desti- 
nation. Optionally, the wizard might decide to 
have an erasure partially or totally lifted when 
the programmed condition comes to pass. 


The casting time of this spell varies accord- 
ing to what effects the wizard wishes to impose 
on the subject. To cast just one of the listed ef- 
fects, the wizard must spend two days secluded 
away from any distractions—a personal labora- 
tory is a good example of a secluded place. In 
between the intense eight-hour casting sessions, 
the wizard can sleep and eat in the area he chose 
to seclude himself in. If the wizard breaks his 
seclusion for any reason, the spell is lost. Also, 
for every effect over the first, another day (with 
its eight-hour intense casting period) must be 
spent in seclusion. 

The wizard must be able to see the subject. At 
the end of each day of casting, the subject 
makes a saving throw vs. spell to negate the 
effect. 

Programmed amnesia is permanent, unless 
the wizard cares to specify a set of conditions or 
parameters that will end the effect (see F, 
above). Its effects can be undone only by a 
restoration or wish spell, or by successful use of 
the psionic science psychic surgery. A character 
who picks up new skills or class abilities while 
an amnesiac must make a saving throw vs. spell 
when his own real memories return; if he fails, 
the skills he learned as an amnesiac are gone 
forever, replaced by his former abilities, but if 
he succeeds he retains any new skills, and may 
even choose to continue in his new class as a 
dual-classed character. 

This powerful spell should be monitored 
carefully by the DM. Also, be aware that de- 
stroying a creature’s personality and replacing it 
with one more amenable to the wizard’s designs 
is not a good act. 

This particular spell was the last and most 
powerful spell developed by the archmentalist 
Rheizom. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO-:SM). 


ee NS 


691 


>. 


~ Programmed Glamer r 


Programmed Glamer 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube + 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates an auditory illusion that 
occurs at any desired distance within range 
upon command or when some specified condi- 
tion occurs. It is otherwise the same as the audi- 
ble glamer spell. 

Valid conditions might include statements 
such as, “when an elf enters this hallway,” 
“when I speak the phrase ‘What’s that?’ ” or 
“when an intelligent creature drinks from this 
fountain.” The trigger must be something that 
the wizard himself could determine if he were 
actually present, and events causing the trigger 
must be within the listed range of the pro- 
grammed glamer s area of effect. The spell can 
linger untriggered for years, but once triggered 
the spell is completed. A permanency spell can 
ensure that the programmed glamer is triggered 
each time the specified event occurs. 

The exact sound created can take any form 
the wizard likes, even proceeding through a dis- 
tinct program such as a whispered conversation, 
a choreographed fight, or the approach and 
attack of a monster. There are only two limita- 
tions: first, the program can run no longer than 
one round per caster level. Second, the maxi- 
mum volume possible is equal to that of 4 men 
per caster level. Thus, an 8th-level caster can 
create a volume of sound equal to about 32 men 
marching, singing, fighting, or shouting. As a 
rough guideline, a horde of rats makes about as 
much noise as 8 men, while a roaring lion is 
about as loud as 24 men. 

Those who actively disbelieve the sound are 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell. If successful, 
they hear only a faint murmuring or crackling 
sound. 

The material component is a bit of wool or a 
lump of wax. 

Notes: Uncommon for illusionists; other- 


wise, very rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 


Newszine.) 


692 


Programmed Illusion 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube + 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a spectral force spell that 
activates upon command or when a specific 
condition occurs. The illusion has visual, audi- 
tory, olfactory, and thermal elements. It can be 
of any object, creature, or force, as long as it re- 
mains within the boundaries of the spell’s area 
of effect. 

The occurrence that begins the illusion can 
be as general or as specific and detailed as de- 
sired, such as the following: “Begin only when a 
venerable female human carrying a sack of 
groat clusters sits cross-legged within one foot 
of this spot.” Such visual triggers can react to a 
character using the disguise ability. Command 
range is 5 yards per level of the wizard, so a 
12th-level wizard can command the pro- 
grammed illusion to occur at a maximum en- 
counter range of 60 yards. A programmed 
illusion cannot distinguish invisible creatures, 
nor alignment, level, Hit Dice, or class, except 
by external garb. If desired, the effect can be 
keyed to a specific noise or spoken word. The 
spell lasts until the illusion occurs; thus, the 
spell duration is variable. The illusion will last 
for a maximum of one round per level of the 
spellcaster. 

Creatures that attempt to disbelieve the illu- 
sion gain a saving throw vs. spell and, if suc- 
cessful, see it for what it is and add +4 bonuses 
to associates’ saving throws, if this knowledge 
can be communicated effectively. Creatures not 
sensing the spell effect are immune until they 
become aware of it. The illusion is subject to a 
dispel magic spell. 

The material component of the spell is a bit 
of fleece. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


p” 


`~ Prolific Vegetation r 


Project Image 
(Alteration, Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard creates a 
nonmaterial duplicate of himself, projecting it 
to any spot within spell range. This image per- 
forms actions decided by the wizard—walking, 
speaking, spellcasting—conforming to the 
actual actions of the wizard unless he concen- 
trates on making it act differently (in which case 
the wizard is limited to half movement and no 
attacks). 

The image can be dispelled only by means of 
a successful dispel magic spell (or upon com- 
mand from the spellcaster); attacks pass harm- 
lessly through it. The image must be within 
view of the wizard projecting it at all times, and 
if his sight is obstructed, the spell is broken. 
Note that if the wizard is invisible at the time 
the spell is cast, the image is also invisible until 
the caster’s invisibility ends, though the wizard 
must still be able to see the image (by means of 
a detect invisibility spell or other method) to 
maintain the spell. If the wizard uses dimension 
door, teleport, plane shift, or a similar spell that 
breaks his line of vision, the project image spell 
ends. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small replica (doll) of the wizard. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Projected Magnification 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: | mi. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. x 10-ft. plane 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon completing this spell, the image of an 
object within one mile of the caster is projected 
onto a flat surface or in the air within 5 yards of 
the caster. The projection is two-dimensional, 
covering an area up to 10 feet square. The object 


being viewed is outlined in a faint blue light. 

The image can be magnified or reduced, if 
desired. For example, the caster visualizes a 
palace, which is projected in front of him. The 
caster can change the projection to see a minia- 
ture view of the palace or examine a part of the 
palace as if a section were under a magnifying 
glass. This spell operates much like the clair- 
voyance spell, and can be foiled by any means 
that normally defeats scrying. 

The material component of the spell is a 
shard of glass. 

Notes: Uncommon for diviners, seers, and 
sages; otherwise, very rare. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Prolific Forestation 


Athasian Dragon-King 
magic, psionic component 
renders the spell Jii- 
uncastable by wizards. 
Prolific Vegetation 

Athasian Dragon-King 

magic; psionic component 

renders the spell Jii- 
uncastable by wizards. 


SS 


SS 
~~... 


Y SSH 


693 


~ Proof Against Fire, Daltim’s $ 


Proof Against Fire, Daltim’s 
See fireproof. 


Proof Against Teleportation 
Aka proof from teleportation. 


Proof From Teleportation 
(Abjuration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Duration: 2 hrs./level 

Area of Effect: 10 yd. radius/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell secures an area from magical intru- 
sion by means of teleportation, gates, or dimen- 
sion doors. The area extends out from the caster 
10 yards per level in all three dimensions and is 
not impeded by walls, doors, or other surfaces. 

When in operation, the spell prohibits the use 
of teleport spells into the region (including, but 
not restricted to dimension door, teleport with- 
out error and mage tunnel). Attempts to use 
these spells to enter or leave the affected area 
fail completely. 


To use the gate spell or similar magic that 
opens portals into other planes, the caster must 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell. Fail- 
ure indicates the spell fails, but is expended. 
Success allows the use of the gate. Further at- 
tempts require additional saving throws. 

Spells that tap the Ethereal Plane (such as 
vanish) and items such as armor of etherealness 
function normally, as do ethereal creatures. 
Other extraplanar creatures also function nor- 
mally, though they cannot gate or teleport. 

The proof against teleportation spell can be 
discontinued at any time by its caster. It can be 
brought down by dispel magic in the standard 
fashion. A limited wish or wish allows teleporta- 
tion to function in the secured area. 

The material component of the spell is 2 
pounds of sugar, salt, or other granular material 
stuffed into a 1-pound sack and dropped at the 
center of the spell’s area of effect. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Elminster s 
Traveling Spellbook. 


Proofing Versus Combustion 
(Abjuration) 
(Fire) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Proofing versus combustion renders an inani- 
mate object nearly impervious to fire, granting 
the affected item a +3 bonus to saving throws 
vs. magical fire (including dragon’s breath), and 
a +6 bonus to saving throws vs. normal fire. 
This is cumulative with the saving throw bonus 
of a magical item, so a cloak of protection +4 
could have a bonus of +7 to +10 on any item 
saving throw against combustion effects. Re- 
member that an item fails its saving throw on a 
natural roll of 1, regardless of any bonuses. 

The item affected must be one discrete con- 
struction or object, although it can be articu- 
lated or composed of several parts (for example, 
a suit of armor, a catapult, a house, or a car- 
riage). 

° At 9th level, the wizard can proof an article 

of clothing or a small piece of furniture; 

e At 12th level, the wizard can proof a small 


" 


~ Protection — Hishna r 


vehicle or large piece of furniture; 

* At 15th level, the wizard can proof a small 
building or large vehicle; 

‘At 18th level, the wizard can proof a 
medium building or a very large vehicle; 

¢ At 20th level or higher, the wizard can proof 
a large building or small fortification. 


A character dressed in a completely proofed 
article of clothing (a large cloak) gains a +2 
bonus to saving throws vs. fire. 

The renowned fire wizard Daltim developed 
this spell some years ago to protect important 
items or structures against the various incendi- 
ary spells with which he was familiar. 

The material component for proofing versus 
combustion is a fire-brick. Seafaring wizards 
often use this spell to protect their vessels from 
hostile fireballs and various fire-throwing de- 
vices. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Prophecy 


(Chronomancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the chronomancer 
enters a trance and, through visions of the 
future, attempts to divine an important event 
that shall come to pass. The event must directly 
affect the person touched, and this person 
cannot be the caster. The vision fades out and 
returns several times over the spell’s duration, 
and much of it is vague and open to interpreta- 
tion. The spell leaves the chronomancer physi- 
cally drained and unable to move for 1d4 hours. 

A caster cannot cast this spell more than once 
to prophesy the same event—at least not until 
the caster reaches his next level. 

At 10th level, the chronomancer can attempt 
to divine a prophecy concerning an event affect- 
ing a location on the scale of a town or king- 
dom. The caster has a low chance of success 
(1% per level of the caster), but the attempt can 
be made once per day. 

The material component for the first version 
is the root of a plant with hallucinatory proper- 
ties. For the second version, a gem worth 5,000 


gp must be buried near the center of the loca- 
tion. 
Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; 


common. 


Protection Spells 

Introductory Note: Many protection 
spells in this section were constructed from 
the protection scrolls in the DMG when the 
lst Edition was current. They are updated 
here. Some, such as protection from dragon 
breath (dragons being greatly strengthened 
in the current edition), have been with- 
drawn to the province of specially en- 
chanted items. 


Protection — Hishna 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Level: | A 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 character/level 
Saving Throw: None 


a. 


695 


~ Protection from Acid 


This spell improves the Armor Class of an af- 
fected character by 3. Thus, a character with AC 
8 gains AC 5. The caster can affect one charac- 
ter for every level of experience the caster has 
achieved. The Armor Class improvement con- 
ferred by this dweomer is of no benefit against a 
metal weapon. 

The material component of the spell is a 
piece of shell from a snapping turtle. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Protection From Acid 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects the creature from all forms 
of acid, negating acid damage to a limit of 90 
points. The spell lasts for a maximum duration 
of 5 rounds for each experience level of the 
caster, less if the damage limit is reached. The 
protection extends to the creature’s items, weap- 
ons, and so on. 

The material component for this spell is a 
small lump of chalk. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers and al- 
chemists; otherwise, rare. 


Protection From Air Elementals 
See protection from elementals, 10' radius. 


Protection From All Elementals 
See protection from elementals, 10' radius. 


Protection From All Lycanthropes 
See protection from lycanthropes, 10' radius. 


Protection From All Traps, 5' Radius 
See protection from traps, 5' radius. 


Protection From All Undead, 5' Radius 
See protection from undead, 5' radius. 


696 


Protection From Amorphs 
(Abjuration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This abjuration protects the recipient from 
the attacks of any of the various amorphous 
monsters, including slimes, jellies, oozes, pud- 
dings, gelatinous cubes, and slithering trackers. 
To qualify as an amorphous creature, the mon- 
ster must have an amorphous or fluid body, 
attack through acids or secretions of some kind. 
Most are native to the Prime Material Plane and 
are formless, primordial beings, as opposed to 
creatures such as elementals. The monster 
cannot stand the touch of the barrier surround- 
ing the protected character, and its natural at- 
tacks automatically fail. Ranged attacks by 
these creatures also fail. 

If the protected creature makes an attack 
against the monster, or forces the barrier against 
the monster, the spell ends and the creature is no 
longer protected. 

The material component is a mixture of rare 
salts sprinkled in a small circle around the crea- 
ture to be protected. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO: SM). 


Some extraplanar beings are affected by 
the protection from amorphs spell, in par- 
ticular certain minions of Juiblex, the Face- 
less Lord. Likewise, some Prime Material 
creatures will not be, such as mimics 
(MONSTROUS MANUAL) and algols (FIEND 
Fouro Tome). The former is malleable but 
not amorphic (like a doppleganger), the 
latter is a colony of animated algae rather 
than primordial ooze. 


Protection From Avians, 
Mordenkainen’s 
See Mordenkainen’s protection from avians. 


> 


~ Protection From Cold va 


Protection From Birds 
(Abjuration) 
(Air) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 5 rds. + 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell provides protection against most 
types of birds (any with feathers). Any bird with 
less than 2 Hit Dice is prevented from attacking 
the caster at a distance of one foot. Birds with 2 
to 9 Hit Dice attack the caster at —2, while birds 
of 10 Hit Dice or greater are not affected by the 
spell. 

The material component is a feather from any 
bird. If a feather from a roc or giant eagle is 
used, the duration of the spell is doubled. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers and air 
mages; otherwise, rare. In the WORLD OF 
GREYHAWK Setting, Mordenkainen'’s protection 
from avians is more common. 


Protection From Breath Weapons 
See protection from dragon breath. As the 
number of creatures with unusual breath weap- 
ons grows, a scroll that affects “everything 
else” except dragon breath is harder to justify. 
One approach is to use a scroll with a specific 
effect (for example, a scroll of protection from 
gorgon breath). On the other hand, a scroll not 
completely decipherable by a player character 
except in a general way (“Its good against— 
untranslatable—breath weapon...[t’s not the 
symbol for ‘dragon’ ”) is certainly possible and 
may add dramatic tension. 


Protection From Cantrips 
(Abjuration) 
(Universal) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 5 hrs. + 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature or object touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the wizard receives im- 
munity to the effects of cantrips cast by other 


697 


wizards, apprentices, or creatures that use the 
cantrip spell. The spell protects the caster, or 
one item or person that he touches (such as a 
spell book or a drawer containing spell compo- 
nents). Any cantrip cast against the protected 
person or item dissipates with an audible pop- 
ping sound. This spell is often used by a wizard 
who has mischievous apprentices, or one who 
wishes apprentices to clean or shine an area 
using elbow grease rather than magic. Any un- 
willing target of this spell must be touched (via 
an attack roll) and is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to escape the effect. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Protection From Charm 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Ps © 


Casting this spell gives the recipient a +1 bonus 
for every three levels of experience of the wu 
jen for any saving throw involving charm 
magic, including spells and spell-like effects. It 
is not effective against such attacks that have no 
saving throw, nor against any fascination effects 
of high Charisma. The maximum bonus is +5. 

The material component for this spell is a 
piece of a charming creature or the hair of char- 
acter with an Appearance or Comeliness score 
of at least 21. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. Optionally, uncommon for 
Savage wizards. 


Protection From Cold 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The creature touched by the caster is pro- 
tected from the effects of normal cold as low as 


~ Protection From Cold, 15' Radius ro 


absolute zero. Against magical cold, the spell 
gives a +4 bonus to the protected creature’s 
saving throw, and reduces damage by 50%. Oth- 
erwise, the effect of the spell varies with the 
caster’s level. 

The material component of the spell 1s a 
smoldering ember. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers; otherwise, 
rare. 


a d 
- lle 


TT 


ty 


st 


t 
Srii tth 


d Surti h H 

V es 

CR i LY 

TT T Ml 
í 


ef 


ot 

fo Ay ery 

Wie d 
hd, 

yet" My bie, 


l 
CUK í, % 


atts $ 

que’ 

rf 
7 MiA ilgi 
pice diy | z 


ALAIN 4 


x cl 


Protection From Cold, 15' Radius 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


All within this globe of protection are 
immune to normal cold as low as absolute zero. 
The sphere is centered on and moves with the 
creature touched. Against magical cold, the 
spell gives a +4 bonus to the protected crea- 


698 


ture’s saving throw, and reduces damage by 
50%. Otherwise, the effect of the spell varies 
with the caster’s level. 

At 12th level, damage from magical cold is 
reduced to one-quarter (save for one-eighth). 

At 15th level, damage from magical cold is 
completely negated. 

The material component of the spell is a 
smoldering ember. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers; otherwise, 
rare. 


Protection From Demons 
Protection From Devils 
See protection from fiends, 10’ radius. 


Protection From Dragon Breath 

A scroll of protection effect from the DMG. 
This should not be allowed as a spell, consider- 
ing the upgraded dragons of the current edition. 
Recommended prerequisites for creating the 
scroll are a sage-like knowledge of dragonkind 
and a minimum of 12th-level wizard status. 
Such scrolls may be limited to a certain family 
or type of dragon (metallic, red, etc.). In partic- 
ularly challenging campaigns, the DM may re- 
quire such scrolls to specifically name the 
target dragon. 


Protection From Earth Elementals 
See protection from elementals, 10' radius. 


Protection From Electricity 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The protected creature receives a +4 bonus to 
saving throws against electrical attacks, natural 
or magical. Any electrical damage received is 
reduced by 50%. If the saving throw is success- 
ful, then any secondary effects the electrical 
attack may have (stunning, paralysis, etc.) are 
negated. 

The material component is a thread of 
copper. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers; otherwise, 
very rare. 


E 


" 


~ Protection From Elementals, 10' Radius r 


Protection From Electricity, 
10' Radius 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


The globe of protection of this spell is identi- 
cal in all respects to a protection from electricity 
spell, except that it encompasses a much larger 
area. The effect is centered on and moves with 
the creature touched. 

The protected creatures receive a +4 bonus to 
saving throws against electrical attacks, natural 
or magical. Any electrical damage received is re- 
duced by 50%. If the saving throw is successful, 
then any secondary effects the electrical attack 
may have (stunning, paralysis, etc.) are negated. 

The material component is a thread of copper 
for each protected creature. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Protection From Elementals, 
10' Radius 
(Abjuration) 
(Air, Earth, Fire, Water, Geometry) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell covers a group of related effects. 
The one desired is selected when the spell is 
memorized. It creates a globe of protection that 
protects all within from the direct attacks of one 
type of elemental creature. The sphere is cen- 
tered on and mobile with the creature touched. 
If more elemental creatures attack than are pro- 
tected against, the remaining ones can cross the 
barrier and attack. Forcing the protection 
against such creatures negates the protection. 
Otherwise, the effect of the spell varies with the 
caster’s level. 


Two factors rule the degree of protection. 
First, the total number of Hit Dice hedged out is 
2 Hit Dice per level of the caster, to a maximum 
of 24 Hit Dice at 12th level. 

Second, as the caster becomes more power- 
ful, stronger elemental creatures can be hedged 
out. Thus, an 8th-level caster can keep out ele- 
mental creatures with a total of 16 Hit Dice or 
less, as long as the creatures have less than 8 Hit 
Dice each. 

At 7th level, creatures of a specific element 
with less than 8 Hit Dice can be hedged out. 

At 9th level, the protection is extended to 
creatures of a specific element with less than 16 
Hit Dice. 

At 12th level, the protection is extended to 
creatures of a specific element with less than 24 
Hit Dice. Further, the protection hedges out any 
type of elemental creature with 16 Hit Dice or 
less; thus, a 12th-level wizard who memorizes 
the air elemental version gains the ability to 
keep out earth elementals of 16 Hit Dice or less 
as well. 

At 15th level, protection is extended to any el- 
emental creature with 24 Hit Dice or less. 

Elemental creatures with more Hit Dice, or 
exceeding the total Hit Dice limit, can pass the 
barrier. For example, if a 9th-level wizard’s 
sphere is attacked by three 8 Hit Die elementals, 


699 


SD 


~~ Protection From Energy Drain Fe 


one penetrates the barrier. A sphere attacked by 
a single 24 Hit Die elemental is penetrated as 
well. Note that attacks by elemental creatures 
based on their element are blocked, but other at- 
tacks might not be. Thus, while an efreet could 
not affect protected creatures with its wall of 
fire, it could shoot a bow, if it had one. 

The material component of this spell is a 
piece of a substance that came from neither the 
Prime Material Plane nor any of the Elemental 
Planes. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers, conjurers, 
geometers, and elementalists; otherwise, rare. 
Elementalists are restricted to their own ele- 
mental form until they achieve 12th level. 


Optional: Spells similar to protection from 
elementals can be researched for para-ele- 
mental and quasi-elemental creatures as 
well. It is suggested that, for a 12th-level 
caster, 16 Hit Dice of any of these crea- 
tures can be hedged out, regardless of 
which spell the caster employs. 


Elementals 
Spells affecting elementals, such as pro- 
tection from elementals, also affect many 
similar elemental-based creatures. 
e Air creatures (includes djinn and invis- 
ible stalkers) 
e Earth creatures (includes xorn) 
* Fire creatures (includes efreet and 
salamanders) 
e Water creatures (includes tritons and 
water weirds). 


Protection From Energy Drain 
Lost spell. Reputed to be a Ist-level spell known 
to an obscure necromancy specialist, the Death- 
master (see negative plane protection). 


Protection From Evil 
(Abjuration) 
(Alchemy, Geometry) 
Reversible 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: 2 rds./level 


"a 


700 


Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, it creates a magical 
barrier around the recipient at a distance of 1 
foot. The barrier moves with the recipient and 
has three major effects: 

First, all attacks made by evil (or evilly en- 
chanted) creatures against the protected crea- 
ture suffer —2 penalties to attack rolls; any 
saving throws caused by such attacks are made 
with +2 bonuses. 

Second, any attempt to possess (as by a magic 
jar attack) or to exercise mental control over (as 
by a vampire’s charm ability) the protected 
creature is blocked by this spell. Note that the 
protection does not prevent a vampire’s charm 
itself, but it does prevent the exercise of mental 
control through the barrier. Likewise, a possess- 
ing life force is merely kept out. It would not be 
expelled if in place before the protection is cast. 

Third, the spell prevents bodily contact by 
creatures of an extraplanar or conjured nature 
(such as aerial servants, elementals, imps, invis- 
ible stalkers, salamanders, water weirds, xorn, 
and others). This causes the natural (body) 
weapon attacks of such creatures to fail and the 
creatures to recoil, if such attacks require touch- 
ing the protected being. Animals or monsters 
summoned or conjured by spells or similar 
magic are likewise hedged from the character. 
This protection ends if the protected character 
makes a melee attack against or tries to force 
the barrier against the blocked creature. 

To complete this spell, the wizard must trace 
a 3-foot-diameter circle on the floor (or ground) 
with powdered silver. 

This spell can be reversed to become protec- 
tion from good; the second and third benefits 
remain unchanged. The material component for 
the reverse is a circle of powdered iron. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


This spell does not specifically hedge 
out undead creatures (except ghouls, as 
stated in the MONSTROUS MANUAL acces- 
sory), unless these have been brought by a 
monster summoning spell or equivalent 
magic or are from another plane. 


~ Protection From Fire r 


Protection From Evil, 10' Radius 
(Abjuration) 
(Alchemy, Geometry) 
Reversible 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


The globe of protection of this spell is identi- 
cal in all respects to a protection from evil spell, 
except for its area of effect. The circle is cen- 
tered on and moves with the creature touched. 
Any protected creature within the circle can 
break the warding against enchanted or sum- 
moned monsters by meleeing them. If a creature 
too large to fit into the area of effect is the re- 
cipient of the spell, the spell acts as a normal 
protection from evil spell for that creature only. 

To complete this spell, the caster must trace a 
circle 20 feet in diameter using powdered silver. 
The material component for the reverse is pow- 
dered iron. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Protection From Fiends 
Personal protection is provided by the protec- 
tion from evil (good) spell. For area protection, 
see protection from fiends, 10' radius and pro- 
tection from evil, 10' radius. 


Protection From Fiends, 10' Radius 
(Abjuration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


The spell creates a globe of absolute protec- 
tion, centered on and mobile with the creature 
touched. The sphere protects those within from 
any attack by creatures from the Lower Planes. 
These include baatezu, tanar’ri, yugoloths, 
gehreleths, night hags, and similar creatures. 


701 


Their magic resistance is not a factor, nor can 
they dispel the protection by any means. Unlike 
most other protection spells, protected individu- 
als can launch attacks from inside the sphere 
against creatures that are hedged out. Forcing 
the protection against a trapped fiend still ends 
the protection immediately. Otherwise, the 
effect of the spell varies with the caster’s level. 

At 9th level, the protection cannot be pene- 
trated by creatures with fewer Hit Dice than the 
caster’s level. 

At 12th level, the protection cannot be pene- 
trated by creatures of less than demipower 
status. 

The material component of this spell is a 
powder containing a substance inimical to the 
type of fiend to be hedged out; for example, 
silver (baatezu) or iron (tanar’ri). The powder is 
scattered in a circle around the protected crea- 
ture during the casting. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers and geome- 
ters; otherwise, rare. 


Protection From Fire 
(Abjuration) 
(Fire) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The creature touched by the caster is immune 
to normal fire. Against magical flame, protected 
creatures receive a +2 bonus to saving throws 
against fire-based attacks, and such attacks in- 
flict only 50% of their normal damage. Other- 
wise, the effect of the spell varies with the 
caster’s level. 

The material component for this spell is a 
vial of water. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers and Fire 
mages; otherwise, rare. 


~ Protection From Fire, 15' Radius y 


Protection From Fire, 15' Radius 
(Abjuration) 
(Fire) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


All within this globe of protection are 
immune to normal fire. The sphere is centered 
on and moves with the creature touched. 
Against magical flame, protected creatures re- 
ceive a +2 bonus to saving throws against fire- 
based attacks, and such attacks inflict only 50% 
of their normal damage. Otherwise, the effect of 
the spell varies with the caster’s level. 

At 12th level, damage from magical fire is re- 
duced to one-quarter (save for one-eighth). 

At 15th level, damage from magical fire is 
completely negated. 

The material component for this spell is a 
vial of water. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers and fire 
mages; otherwise, rare. 


702 


Protection From Fire Elementals 
See protection from elementals, 10' radius. 


Protection From Gas 5' Radius 
(Abjuration) 
(Air) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


All remaining within this globe of protection 
are immune to toxic gases, poisonous vapors, 
and similar hazards. The 5-foot radius sphere is 
centered on and moves with the caster. Harm- 
less vapors that only obscure vision are unaf- 
fected, and the sphere has no effect on gaseous 
creatures. The degree of protection depends on 
the caster’s level. 

At 7th level, this spell protects against gases 
of nonmagical origin and those created by Ist- 
and 2nd-level spells (such as stinking cloud). 
Against other magical gases, the protected crea- 
tures receive a +2 bonus to any saving throw al- 
lowed. 

At 9th level, immunity is gained to magical 
gases created by spells of 4th level or magical 
creatures of less than 8 Hit Dice. 

At 12th level, the protection is extended to 
spells of 6th level and creatures of less than 16 
Hit Dice (such as a gorgon’s breath). 

At 1 Sth level, protection is extended to all such 
effects except those that are of demipower- or 
artifact-level origin. 

This spell’s unusually short casting time 
allows its rapid use when toxic gas is detected. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers and air 
mages; otherwise, rare. 


Protection From Good 
Reversed form, see protection from evil. 


Protection From Good, 10' Radius 
Reversed form, see protection from evil 10’ 
radius. 


Protection From Hunger and Thirst 
Lost knowledge. This Ist-level spell is rumored 
to have prevented hunger and thirst for one day 
per caster level. 


po 


X Protection From Illusions, 10' Radius r 


Protection From Hunger and Thirst 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When protection from hunger and thirst is 
cast, the recipient requires no food, water, or 
nourishment of any kind for the duration of the 
spell. The recipient can be the caster or any 
creature touched. Each day the creature remains 
under the effect of the spell, it is fully nour- 
ished, as if it had eaten and drunk normally. At 
the end of the spell ’s duration, the creature is no 
more hungry or thirsty than when the spell was 
originally cast. 

The spell can be divided among multiple 
creatures, which are protected proportionately. 
A maximum of one creature per level of the 
caster can be protected. For example, an 18th- 
level wizard can protect one creature for 18 
days, two creatures for 9 days, and so on, to 
eighteen creatures for a single day. 

The material components for this spell are a 
small piece of dried meat and a cup of water. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. 


Protection From Illusions 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell lets the subject see through any il- 
lusionary attack, knowing it for what it is. Pro- 
tection from illusion provides no protection 
against phantasms—-attacks that exist only in 
the mind of the subject, such as phantasmal 
killer. It does not counter such magics as invisi- 
bility, blur, or projected image, nor does it pene- 
trate illusions that conceal. 

Notes: Common for illusionists, uncommon 
for abjurers; otherwise, rare. 


Protection From Illusions, 10' Radius 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


The globe of protection of this spell is identi- 
cal in all respects to a protection from illusions 
spell, except that it encompasses a much larger 
area. The effect is centered on and moves with 
the creature touched. 

The protection allows those in the area to see 
through any illusionary attacks and know them 
for what they are. The spell provides no protec- 
tion against phantasms—attacks that exist only 
in the minds of those protected, such as phan- 
tasmal killer. It does not counter such magics as 
invisibility, blur, or projected image. 

Notes: Common for illusionists, uncommon 
for abjurers; otherwise, rare. 


Da 


~ Protection From Insects and Arachnids, Mordenkainen's = 


Protection From Insects and 
Arachnids, Mordenkainen’s 
See Mordenkainen’s protection from insects and 
arachnids. 


Protection From Lycanthropes 
10' Radius 
(Abjuration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell covers a group of related effects. 
The one desired is selected when the spell is 
memorized. It creates a globe of protection that 
protects all within from the direct attacks of one 
type of lycanthrope. The sphere is centered on 
and mobile with the creature touched. The globe 
keeps out 49 Hit Dice of that type of lycan- 
thrope (round up hit point bonuses of +4 or 
more). If more lycanthropes attack than are pro- 
tected against, the remaining ones can cross the 
barrier and attack. Forcing the protection 
against such creatures negates the protection. 
Otherwise, the effect of the spell varies with the 
caster’s level. 

At 7th level, a specified type of lycanthrope 
with less than 4 Hit Dice is hedged out (for ex- 
ample, wererats and lesser seawolves). 

At 9th level, the lycanthrope can have less 
than 8 Hit Dice (for example, werewolves, 
wereboars, weretigers, and werebears). 

At 12th level, all attacking lycanthropes of 
every type are hedged out, up to the limit, in- 
stead of just one type. Further, the protection 
also works against all other shapechangers, as 
well, such as doppelgangers, some dragon 
types, druids, jackalweres, and those under the 
influence of polymorph spells. 

The material component of this spell is dried 
wolfsbane, which is crumbled and scattered in a 
circle around the protected creature during the 
casting of the spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers and geome- 
ters; otherwise, rare. 


Protection From Magic 5' Radius 
A scroll of protection effect from the DMG. See 
the 6th-level wizard spell, antimagic shell. 


Protection From Magical 
Blunt Weapons 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1d4 rds. 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of this spell cannot be touched 
by a magical blunt weapon (type B). This pro- 
tection does not apply to spells such as magic 
missile or Mordenkainen’s sword that simulate 
the effects of weapons. This spell is cumulative 
with protection from magical edged weapons 
and protection from magical missiles. All three 
spells can be applied to the same recipient at the 
same time. These protections fail if cast on a 
creature protected from or immune to the ef- 
fects of normal weapons. 

The material component for this spell is a 
piece of a broken blunt magical weapon. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers; otherwise, 
rare spell. 


Protection From Magical 
Edged Weapons 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of this spell cannot be touched 
by a magical edged weapon (type P or S). This 
protection does not apply to spells such as Mor- 
denkainen’s sword that simulates the effects of 
weapons. This spell is cumulative with protec- 
tion from magical blunt weapons and protection 


from magical missiles. All three spells can be 


applied to the same recipient at the same time. 
These protections fail if cast on a creature pro- 
tected from or immune to the effects of normal 
weapons. 


S = eS 


704 


~ Protection From Nonmagical Traps, 5' Radius r 


The material component for this spell is a 
piece of a broken edged magical weapon. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers; otherwise, 
rare. 


Protection From Magical Missiles 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of this spell cannot be touched 
by a physical missile that is magical. This pro- 
tection does not apply to spells such as magic 
missile that are composed of magical energy or 
force. 

This spell is cumulative with protection from 
magical edged weapons and protection from 
magical blunt weapons. All three spells can be 
cast on the same creature at the same time. 
These protections fail if cast on a creature pro- 
tected from or immune to normal weapons. 

The material component for this spell is a 
piece of a broken magical missile weapon. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers; otherwise, 
rare. 


Protection From Magical Traps 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


The spell prevents magical traps (and alarms) 
from being triggered by the protected creature. 
The traps do not function, but neither are they 
revealed. The spell only prevents activation of a 
trap’s trigger. It provides no protection against 
traps triggered by an unprotected creature, nor 
does it provide protection against a trap without 
a trigger, such as an open pit. 

If the creator of the trap is more powerful 
than 12th level and also more powerful than the 
caster of the protection, then the protected crea- 
ture must make a successful saving throw vs. 


705 


spell to avoid triggering the trap. 
The material component is a broom straw. 
Notes: Uncommon for abjurers; otherwise, 
rare. 


Protection From Magical Traps, 
5' Radius 


See protection from traps, 5’ radius. 


Protection From Mechanical Traps 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell prevents mechanical traps (and 
alarms) from being triggered by the protected 
creature. The traps do not function, but neither 
are they revealed. The spell only prevents acti- 
vation of the trap’s trigger. It provides no pro- 
tection against traps triggered by an unprotected 
creature, nor does it provide protection against a 
trap without a trigger, such as an open pit. 

The material component is a bit of axle 
grease. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers; otherwise, 
rare. 


Protection From Nonmagical Gas, 
Drawmij’s 
See Drawmij’s protection from nonmagical gas. 


Protection From Nonmagical Traps, 
5' Radius 


See protection from traps, 5' radius. 


~ Protection From Normal Weapons = 


Protection From Normal Weapons 
These are three separate 3rd-level spells, 
each of which must be researched and mem- 
orized separately: protection from normal 
blunt weapons, protection from normal 
edged weapons, and protection from normal 
missiles. 


Protection From Normal 
Blunt Weapons 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard bestows 
total invulnerability to such normal bludgeon- 
ing weapons as maces, war hammers, mauls, 
and similar weapons (type B), when these are 
used to attack in hand-to-hand combat. Further- 
more, the protection causes a reduction of 1 
from each die of damage (but no die inflicts less 
than | point of damage) inflicted by magical 
blunt weapons (such as a mace +/ or the maul 
of the titans) or wielded by creatures of excep- 
tional size and strength (creatures with base Hit 
Dice of 4+1 or more, such as an ogre or a giant 
wielding a club). Note, however, that this spell 
does not confer any protection from such magi- 
cal attacks as spiritual hammer. 

This is actually one of three spells, each of 
which must be learned separately: protection 
from normal blunt weapons, protection from 
normal edged weapons, and protection from 
normal missiles. All three spells can be applied 
to the same creature at the same time. 

The material component for this spell is a 
piece of a broken blunt weapon. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers; otherwise, 
rare. 


Protection From Normal 
Edged Weapons 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard bestows 
total invulnerability to such normal edged 
weapons as swords, daggers, axes, spears, and 
similar weapons (types P or S), when these are 
used to attack in hand-to-hand combat. Further- 
more, the protection causes a reduction of | 
from each die of damage (but no die inflicts less 
than | point of damage) inflicted by magical 
edged weapons (such as a long sword +/ or the 
mattock of the titans) or wielded by creatures of 
exceptional size and strength (creatures with 
base Hit Dice of 4+1 or more, such as an ogre or 
a giant wielding an axe). Note, however, that 
this spell does not confer any protection from 
such magical attacks as Mordenkainens sword 
or flame blade. 

This is actually one of three spells, each of 
which must be learned separately: protection 
from normal blunt weapons, protection from 
normal edged weapons, and protection from 
normal missiles. All three spells can be applied 
to the same recipient at the same time. 

The material component for this spell is a 
piece of a broken edged weapon. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers; otherwise, 
rare. 


Protection From Normal Missiles 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard bestows 
total invulnerability to hurled and projected 
missiles such as arrows, axes, bolts, javelins, 
small stones, and spears. Furthermore, the pro- 
tection causes a reduction of | from each die of 


a 


706 


N Y A ş x B ve Ton ev wey 
NNN NY S X RAN ee a NCAR My 
ANN WY A \ \ NG 5 i ae . AS N ` N ` \ Ñ 
S “a S N N 4 Me = “A ~. i N ‘ aN A AA \ 
N3 \ N J f 4 N N Ñ N ` z” E Fa AN N . A D At 
NS SN a ~ : SS : ANAU ` 
5, v 


me b z f Ft LOS. 
= 7 $ 10 e i 


T 
A 
\ 


WX, i| 
ANY À ” D A 9 
wwe SM Sy Y å Ao yee ` 


Y NÝ | 


SKE 

VAN 

SA AAA OA 

AAAA vA 

NEY ONY NY \ 
RN 


- 


M 
“N | are N 
w 


co 


"DA 
WwW- 
KAOS 


SS 


EP Eo ` E 
x BANS 
N ` Ay va w F 7 Sy oN 
é a Amen WAVE NC 


~ Protection From Notice r 


damage (but no die inflicts less than 1 point of 
damage) inflicted by large or magical missiles, 
such as ballista missiles, catapult stones, hurled 
boulders, and magical arrows, bolts, javelins, 
etc. Note, however, that this spell does not 
confer any protection from such magical attacks 
as fireballs, lightning bolts, or magic missiles. 

The material component of this spell is a 
piece of tortoise or turtle shell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Protection From Notice 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: Special 
Duration: | year + | day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell can be cast on any inanimate object 
from a building to a sword. The effect is to 
render the object nondescript and without inter- 
est to the casual observer-—it is perceived in the 
same way as a wizard sees an armorer’s shop or 
a dwarf sees trees; they might recall that they 
had seen the place or the object, but would not 
remember where or the details of what they saw. 
A person might pass a building under this en- 
chantment every day but be unable to describe 
it, nor recognize it when it is described. Only 
someone concentrating—for example, counting 
doors—might notice the object, and even then a 
successful saving throw vs. spell is required. 
Even persons detecting magic might be de- 
ceived into thinking it is a magical effect of no 
importance. This spell lends itself well to the 
8th-level permanency spell. 

This spell in no way conceals attacks nor pre- 
vents an individual from reacting to them. Like- 
wise, protection from notice does not affect 
close-pursuit situations, although it may well 
hinder later reconstruction of the event. 

The material component is a pinch of saffron 
(1 gp) per square foot of outer surface to be pro- 
tected (roughly 2 gp for a long sword and 5,000 
gp for a medium-sized building). The casting 
time is 1 round per 10 square feet of surface 
area as the saffron is dusted over it. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from IMAG- 
INE Magazine.) 


Protection From Paralysis 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of this spell receives total im- 
munity to magical paralysis. Spells such as hold 
person and s/ow have no effect on the individ- 
ual. This spell also provides protection against 
the paralysis attacks of certain monsters (a 
ghoul’s touch, for example). This spell offers no 
protection against paralysis due to physical 
damage, such as a spinal injury; physical ef- 
fects, such as that of a massive electrical shock; 
or nonmagical paralytic poisons. The spell has 
no effect on existing conditions of paralysis. 

The material component is a bit of cloth 
taken from a priest’s robes. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Protection From Paralyzation 
Lost spell, known by the Red Wizards of Thay 
before the Time of Troubles. Reputed to be a 
3rd-level spell, it has been superseded by pro- 
tection from paralysis. 


Protection From Petrification, 
10’ Radius 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a circle of protection that 
extends from and moves with the caster. All 
creatures within the circle are absolutely 
immune to any attack forms or spells that cause 
flesh to turn into stone. If a protected creature 
reflects the gaze attack back outside the circle, 
the monster is not affected by its own gaze; the 
spell renders the petrification power inert. Pro- 
tection from petrification has no effect on crea- 
tures that have already been turned to stone. 


Da 


"o 


~ Protection From Poison r 


The material component is a pinch of pow- 
dered gorgon scales, sprinkled in a circle about 
the caster. 

Notes: Restricted to abjurers; very rare. The 
Red Wizards of Thay are believed to have had a 
slightly different version of this spell before the 
Time of Troubles. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newszine.) 


Protection From Plants 
A scroll of protection effect from the DMG. See 
the 6th-level priest spell, anti-plant shell. 


Protection From Plants 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


All natural forms of vegetable life (including 
fungi, slimes, molds, and the like), are unable to 
attack the protected creature. This includes 
normal plants controlled by magic such as en- 
tangle and speak with plants. Plant-based crea- 
tures suffer a —2 penalty to their attacks and the 
protected creature receives a +2 to any saving 
throw allowed against any special attacks based 
on their plant-like nature: spores, pollen, the 
charm effect of a fragrance, and so on. 

The material component is a pinch of ash 
from a dangerous plant-based creature. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers and Nature 
mages; otherwise, rare. 


Protection From Plants 10' Radius 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


All natural forms of vegetable life (including 
fungi, slimes, molds, and the like), are unable to 
attack creatures in this protective globe. The 
sphere of protection is centered on and mobile 


with the creature touched. Further, the sphere 
hedges out plant-based creatures, to a maximum 
of 24 Hit Dice. Forcing the protection against 
such creatures negates the protection. Other- 
wise, the degree of protection depends on the 
caster’s level. 

At 7th level, this spell protects against 
common plants of nonmagical origin, including 
those controlled by magic such as entangle and 
speak with plants. Plant-based creatures of less 
than 4 Hit Dice are affected (such as myconids 
and vegepygmies), as are special attack forms 
of a plant-like nature: spores, pollen, the charm 
effect of a fragrance, and so on. 

At 9th level, the protection is extended to 
plant-based creatures of less than 8 Hit Dice. 

At 12th level, the protection is extended to 
plant-based creatures of less than 16 Hit Dice 
(including treant-animated trees). 

At 15th level, protection is extended to all 
plant-based creatures, save those of demipower 
status or greater. 

Plant creatures with more Hit Dice, or those 
exceeding the Hit Dice limit in total, can pass 
the circle. For example, if a 9th-level caster is 
attacked by five kelpies (5 HD each), then one 
penetrates the barrier. 

The material component is ash from some 
form of dangerous plant-based creature, sprin- 
kled in a circle around those protected. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers and Nature 
mages; otherwise, rare. 


Protection From Poison 
A scroll of protection effect from the DMG. See 
the priest spells slow poison (2nd) and neutral- 
ize poison (4th). 


Protection From Poison 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This abjuration spell provides a protective 
barrier against creatures that possess venom or 
poison of some kind. Poisonous monsters or 
poison-using characters of 4 or less Hit Dice or 
levels are prevented from making physical con- 
tact with the spell recipient, while venomous 


DON 


709 


9 


~~ Protection From Poison — Red Wizard , 


creatures of 4+1 Hit Dice or poison-using char- 
acters of 5 levels or more suffer a —2 penalty to 
their attack rolls against the protected character. 

Only injected or contact poisons from natural 
or innate sources (such as compounds made 
from plants or the venom from a snake) in a po- 
sition to possibly injure the character are pro- 
tected against; a thief carrying a vial of 
ingestive poison in his pouch is not venomous 
for this purpose, while a character brandishing a 
poisoned short sword is. The spell recipient, for 
example, can still be poisoned by a spitting 
attack or a thrown dagger smeared with poison. 

If the spell recipient attacks a creature against 
which he has been warded or uses the resistance 
of the spell’s aura to force his antagonist to give 
ground, the spell ends. Reaching out to drink 
from a poisoned cup dispels the effect, so this 
spell offers no protection against ingested poi- 
sons. The spell functions normally if cast upon a 
poison-using creature or character. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Protection From Poison — 
Red Wizard 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1d10 rds. 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By use of this spell, the recipient becomes 
immune to one form of poison. At the time of 
casting, the wizard must choose the type of 
poison to protect the creature against: contact, 
ingested, inhaled, or injected. Poisons of types 
other than the one chosen affect the creature 
normally. Poison already in the creature’s 
system is unaffected by this spell. 

The material component of the spell is a sprig 
of belladonna. 

Notes: Restricted to Red Wizards of Thay 
and those trained by them; common. 


Protection From Possession, 
10' Radius 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level (Special) 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell generates a globe of protection that 
protects all creatures within its confines from 
possession by magical spell and spell-like at- 
tacks such as magic jar for two rounds per 
caster level. The sphere has no effect on estab- 
lished conditions, except at the highest levels. 
The globe is centered on and mobile with the 
creature touched. Otherwise, the degree of pro- 
tection depends on the caster’s level. 

At 7th level, the sphere protects against the 
magic jar spell, including that of ghosts and 
other creatures. Creatures with less than 4 Hit 
Dice or levels cannot take over or establish con- 
trol over those within the area. Dead bodies (as 
opposed to undead) within the circle are com- 
pletely protected from all control. 

At 9th level, the protection is extended to 


Protection From Telekinesis — Old Empire 


creatures of less than 8 Hit Dice. 

At 12th level, the protection is extended to all 
magical and psionic powers of possession and 
direct mind control, save those of demipower- 
or artifact-level status. 

At 15th level, the protection also bars the area 
to controlled beings. These avoid or eject them- 
selves from the sphere of protection if possible. 
If not, the possessing entity makes a single 
saving throw of 11, adjusted by the difference in 
level between it and the caster. For example, a 
20 Hit Die creature trapped in a sphere cast by a 
15th-level wizard has a saving throw of 6; a 10 
Hit Die creature has a saving throw of 16. 

If the saving throw is successful, the sphere 
of protection is destroyed. Failure means the 
possessing entity is ejected from the controlled 
being and its control is broken. 

The caster can choose to make the sphere sta- 
tionary. In this form, the duration is longer: two 
turns per caster level. 

The material component for this spell is a 
gem or rock crystal, which is smashed and 
sprinkled in a circle around those protected as 
the incantation is completed. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers, geometers, 
mentalists, necromancers, and (optional) Healer 
mages; otherwise, rare. 


Protection From Scrying, Rary’s 
See Rary’s protection from scrying. 


Protection From Shapechangers 
10' Radius 


See protection from lycanthropes, 10° radius. 


Protection From Slime, 
Mordenkainen’s 
See Mordenkainen’s protection from slime. 


Protection From Specific Elementals 
10' Radius 


See protection from elementals, 10' radius. 


Protection From Specific 
Lycanthropes 10' Radius 


See protection from lycanthropes, 10" radius. 


Protection From Specific Undead, 
5' Radius 


See protection from undead, 10' radius. 


Protection From Telekinesis — 
Old Empire 


(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects the creature against magic 
that moves its physical form, most notably push, 
levitate, repulsion, and telekinesis spells, but 
not reverse gravity, which is a fundamental al- 
teration of the laws of nature. The spell adds a 
+4 bonus to any saving throw involving this 
type of magic, or allows a normal saving throw 
against attacks that have none, such as repul- 
sion. This does not protect from spells that in- 
volve teleportation. 

The material component is a block of black 
granite. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


JSA 


Protection From The Elements 


Protection From The Elements 
(Abjuration) 
(Province: Flame, Sand, 
Sea, Wind) Cay 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: 5, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is usually bestowed by genies on 
their servants, and its secrets are well-guarded. 
It confers extensive protection to most harmful 
effects of a single Elemental Plane. This in- 
cludes immunity to nonmagical winds (includ- 
ing acidic rain and airborne poisons), earth 
(including toxic dusts and mineral poisons), fire 
(including molten metals, smoke, and lava, but 
not magical flames), or water (including drown- 
ing and pressure). To cast the spell, the caster 
must either touch the recipients on the forehead 
or kiss them (generally on the hand, cheek, or 
lips) while sprinkling perfume (air), chalk 
(earth), sulphur (fire), or salt (water) over them. 
When cast by a genie, the effects last an entire 
week; when cast by another creature, the effects 
last but 1 hour, plus 1 hour per level. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Protection From Time 


(Abjuration) 


(Chronomancy) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 1 week 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, it creates a magical 
barrier around the creature at a distance of one 
inch. The barrier moves with the creature and 
protects it from the adverse effects of time. This 
spell can be cast on any living creature, but mul- 
tiple spells are not cumulative. The creature does 
not age for the spell’s duration, though this won’t 
have a noticeable effect on its lifespan unless 
many such spells are cast in series; a player 
whose character receives such treatment should 


712 


keep track of how many protection from time 
spells have been cast on the character so the DM 
can add one week to the character’s total natural 
lifespan for each. A significant number of such 
spells can postpone aging effects. 

When confronted with a magical aging effect 
(such as a wish spell or certain powerful undead 
creatures), the recipient gets a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid the effect (or an additional save if 
one is already allowed). Whether or not the 
saving throw succeeds, the protection spell ends 
immediately. 

The spell ts not automatically dispelled upon 
the character’s death—it continues to protect the 
body. If the “Hovering on Death’s Door” rule is 
used (DMG, Chapter 9), a recipient falling to 0 
hit points or below does not automatically lose 
one hit point each round. Also, for purposes of 
magical revival through raise dead or reincar- 
nation spells, time since death for the recipient’s 
dead body does not start accumulating until 
after the protection from time spell has ended. 

This spell does not cause time to stop within 
the barrier around the recipient, who moves 
through time at the same rate as other charac- 
ters. The character must still eat, drink, and rest 
as usual. This spell does not affect the duration 
of other spells. 

The material component is a golden hour- 
glass filled to capacity with diamond dust (min- 
imum 75 gp value). 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from the 
DARK SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. Option- 
ally, uncommon for chronomancers. 


Protection From Traps, 5' Radius 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


The spell creates a globe of protection that 
prevents traps (and alarms) from being trig- 
gered by those within the area. The sphere is 
centered on and mobile with the creature 
touched. The traps within the sphere do not 
function, but neither are they revealed. The 
sphere only prevents activation of the trap’s trig- 
ger. It provides no protection against traps trig- 


p 


~ Protection From Water Elementals r 


gered by an unprotected creature, nor does it 
provide protection against a trap without a trig- 
ger, such as an open pit. The degree of protec- 
tion depends on the caster’s level. 

At 7th level, the sphere protects against me- 
chanical traps and alarms. 

At 9th level, the protection is extended to 
magical traps and alarms created by those of the 
caster’s own level or less. 

At 12th level, the protection is extended to 
magical traps and alarms created by those up to 
4 levels higher than the wizard. 

The material component is a bit of axle 
grease (mechanical traps) and a broom straw 
(magical traps). 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers; otherwise, 
rare. 


Protection From Undead 5' Radius 
(Abjuration, Necromancy) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell covers a group of related effects. 
The one desired is selected when the spell is 
memorized. It creates a globe of protection, 
that protects all within from the direct attacks 
of one type of undead creature. It does not pro- 
tect against the creature’s magical spells or 
other attack forms. The sphere is centered on 
and mobile with the creature touched. The 
globe keeps out 35 Hit Dice of undead crea- 
tures (round up hit point bonuses of +4 or 
more). If more undead creatures attack than are 
protected against, the remaining ones can cross 
the barrier and attack. Forcing the protection 
against such creatures negates the protection. 
Otherwise, the effect of the spell varies with 
the caster’s level. 

At 7th level, one type of undead creature with 
less than 4 Hit Dice is hedged out (ghasts or 
lesser creatures). 

At 9th level, one type of undead creature with 
less than 8 Hit Dice is hedged out (spectres or 
lesser creatures). 

At 12th level, all attacking undead are hedged 
out, regardless of type, up to the limit, including 


“special” undead and those that cannot be 
turned at all. 

The material component of this spell 1s dust 
from a destroyed undead creature of the type to 
be hedged out (at least vampire dust if all are 
hedged out) scattered in a circle around the pro- 
tected creature during the casting of the spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers, geometers, 
and necromancers; otherwise, rare. 


Protection From Vermin 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a magical barrier around 
the recipient, preventing the attacks of nonintel- 
ligent monsters of less than 1 Hit Die. Creatures 
in this category include normal centipedes, spi- 
ders, bats, and rats, but any monster with an In- 
telligence of low or better can ignore the spell’s 
effects. 

The barrier extends about one foot from the 
protected character’s body and moves with him; 
vermin cannot tolerate the aura’s touch and 
recoil from the character. Any attacks that re- 
quire physical contact (bites, stings, claws, etc.) 
automatically fail, but a creature with a ranged 
attack can still attack the recipient. 

The spell ends if the recipient attacks a crea- 
ture he has been protected against, or tries to pin 
or trap the vermin by forcing the repelling bar- 
rier against them. 

The material component for this spell is a 
cone of pungent incense burned in a tiny bronze 
censer. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Protection From Water 
Lost spell, believed to be 3rd level and known by 
the Red Wizards of Thay before the Time of Trou- 
bles. See also, water walking, water breathing, 
airy water. 


Protection From Water Elementals 
See protection from elementals, 10" radius. 


713 


> 


~ Protective Amulet a 


Protective Amulet 
(Abjuration, Enchantment) R 
(Artifice) a 
Level: | 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 hr. 

Duration: 1 week/level 

Area of Effect: 1 piece of jewelry 
Saving Throw: None 


This enchantment is cast on a small talisman, 
such as a pendant, amulet, or other item of jew- 
elry. The item is thus transformed into a protec- 
tive device against a single specific spell. The 
spell must allow a saving throw and be one that 
the caster knows how to cast. For instance, an 
amulet can be made to protect against charm 
person, but not against sleep or magic missile. 

If the wearer of a protective amulet is at- 
tacked by the spell the amulet wards against, a 
normal saving throw is rolled. If the saving 
throw fails, the amulet absorbs the spell energy 
and shatters; the wearer is treated as if the 
saving throw succeeded. 

A protective amulet must be an item of jew- 
elry, costing at least 25 gp to protect against a 
Ist-level spell. The cost doubles for each spell 


714 


level: 50 gp for an amulet against a 2nd-level 
spell, 100 gp for a 3rd-level spell, 200 gp for a 
Ath-level spell, and so on to 6,400 gp for an 
amulet against a 9th-level spell. 

If a person wears more than one amulet of 
protection against the same spell, their energies 
cancel and none of them work. 

Notes: Common for hedge wizards and 
witches. Uncommon for artificers; otherwise, 
rare. 


Setting Note: The protective amulet 
spell was originally from a Roman setting. 
In that setting, the base price for an amulet 
against a Ist-level spell is 10 denarii and 
doubles from there. In that setting, witches 
often sell protective amulets; it is a major 
source of income. Most towns have a witch 
of Ist to 3rd level who makes a good living 
selling amulets against common Ist- or 
2nd-level offensive spells such as charm 
person, hypnotism, spook, blindness, 
forget, or irritation. Depending on her re- 
action to the prospective buyer, the charge 
is usually two to five times the base cost of 
the amulet. 


Protective Amulet 

Optionally, the DM may allow this spell to 
Savage mages. In this case, the amulet is made 
of natural materials and requires a special ma- 
terial component. This is a quest item recovered 
by the one for whom the amulet is made (an 
eagles feather, a tuft of giant badger fur, etc.). 
Components from a creature should be from one 
whose Hit Dice are at least equal to the level of 
the spell warded against. Items not won by the 
prowess or cleverness of the recipient will prove 
useless and the enchantment will fail. 


Prying Eyes 


(Divination) 


Level: 5 

Range: | mi. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1d4 eyes + 1 eye/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell conjures a small horde of semitan- 
gible magical orbs or eyes that can be used to 


| 


| 


} 


waa 


‘ Pseudodragon — Dragon r 


reconnoiter an area at the wizard’s command. 
Each of the eyes is about the size of a small 
apple and can see 120 feet (normal vision only) 
in all directions. 

In order to report their findings, the eyes 
must return to the caster’s hand to replay in the 
caster’s mind everything they have seen during 
their existence. The eyes are subject to illusions, 
darkness, fog, and any other factors that would 
affect the wizard’s ability to receive visual in- 
formation about his surroundings. It takes an 
eye only one round to replay one hour of 
recorded images. 

The spell conjures 1d4 eyes, plus 1 eye per 
caster level. The eyes exist for up to 1 hour per 
caster level, or until they return to the wizard; 
after relaying its findings, an eye disappears. 
Each eye is AC 4, flies by levitation at a rate of 
12, and has only 1 hit point—a single hit from 
any weapon or damaging spell destroys it. A 
successful dispel magic destroys all eyes caught 
in the area of effect. While the individual eyes 
are quite fragile, they’re small and difficult to 
spot, especially in conditions of poor visibility 
such as darkness, fog, or rain. Of course, if the 
eye is sent into darkness, then it’s very possible 
that it could hit a wall or other similar obstacle 
and destroy itself. 

When the wizard creates the eyes, he can 
specify any set of instructions or orders that he 
wishes, up to 25 words. Any knowledge the 
wizard possesses is known by the eyes as well, 
so if the wizard knows what a typical Jakallian 
merchant looks like, the eyes do as well. Sample 
commands might be: “Surround me at a range 
of 400 yards and return if you spot any danger- 
ous creatures,” or “Spread out and search the 
town for Arweth; follow him for three turns, 
staying out of sight, and then return.” 

Note that in the first command, the eye only 
returns if it spots a creature that the wizard 
would regard as dangerous; a seemingly innocu- 
ous peasant that is actually a shape changed 
dragon wouldn’t trigger the eye’s return. In any 
event, if an eye is ever more than one mile dis- 
tant from the wizard, it instantly ceases to exist. 
However, the wizard’s link with the eye is such 
that he won’t know if the eye was destroyed or if 
it just wandered out of range. 

Some command words can be used to abbre- 
viate the directions. For example, “surround 
me” directs the eyes to form an equally-spaced 
ring at whatever range is indicated, and then 
move with the wizard. As eyes return or are de- 
stroyed, the rest automatically space themselves 


715 


to compensate. “Spread out” directs the eyes to 
move away from the wizard in all directions. 
Other commands that might be useful include 
having them form a line in a certain manner, 
making them move at random within a certain 
range, or have them follow a certain type of 
creature. The DM is the final judge of the suit- 
ability of the wizard’s directions. 

The material component is a handful of crys- 
tal marbles. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Pseudodragon — Dragon 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a draconic monster summoning 
spell that summons 2d4 pseudodragons within 
1d4 rounds. The summoned pseudodragons are 
tiny replicas of the summoner; that is, a green 
dragon conjures green pseudodragons, a blue 
dragon summons blue ones, and so forth. The 


È 


~ Psionic Dampener E 
| 


pseudodragons share the alignment of the 
dragon who cast the spell, and serve their sum- 
moner with complete loyalty. Otherwise, these 
pseudodragons conform to the abilities and 
characteristics of pseudodragons noted in the 
MONSTROUS MANUAL tome. 

Once the pseudodragons arrive, they fight on 
the summoning dragon’s behalf until they are 
slain, until the dragon commands them to stop 
fighting, or until the spell’s duration expires. If 
all opponents are slain, the summoner must 
grant the pseudodragons a portion of the kill. 

If no opponents are available, the dragon can 
assign the pseudodragons other tasks. In return, 
the dragon must give each pseudodragon a gem- 
stone (before aid is rendered) worth at least 50 
gp. If no gems are forthcoming, the summoned 
dragons immediately return from whence they 
came. Similarly, the dragon must give each sur- 
viving pseudodragon a 50 gp gemstone after a 
battle with the dragon’s enemies. (If a dragon 
makes a habit of killing or refusing to pay the 
pscudodragons, the pseudodragons summoned 
by subsequent castings may refuse to assist or 
may simply refuse to answer the summons.) 

Notes: Restricted to dragons; uncommon. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Psionic Dampener 


(Alteration) 


(Mentalism) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Concentration +1d4 rds. 
Area of Effect: 1 individual 
Saving Throw: Neg. 

Use of this spell allows the caster to disrupt 
the psionic activities of one individual. It has no 
effect on a nonpsionic individual. A psionic indi- 
vidual is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to 
negate the effect. Whether successful or not, a 
psionic individual immediately knows that the 
spell was cast and who cast it. 

If the spell is successful, the individual is 
unable to expend psionic strength points (PSPs) 
for the spell's duration. The spell lasts for 1d4 
rounds after the wizard stops concentrating. The 
affected psionic individual can otherwise func- 
tion normally. If the individual moves beyond 
the caster’s range, the spell is broken and PSPs 
can be used, even if the individual later comes 
within the caster's range. 


716 


Dampening requires concentration. The caster 
can move at half speed and converse, but cannot 
attack or cast other spells; moving at full rate, 
casting spells, engaging in melee, or receiving 
damage ends the spell. 

The material component for this spell is any 
small object within a blown glass sphere. 

Notes: Common in the DARK SUN setting 
(Athas), uncommon for mentalists; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Psionic Tracer 
(Divination) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 ft./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: Special (1 rd./level maximum) 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 

Saving Throw: Special 


When the spell is cast upon an individual cur- 
rently receiving of any form of psionic contact, 
the individual instantly becomes aware of the 
location of the psionic creature initiating the 
contact. The psionic creature receives a saving 
throw vs. spell and, if unsuccessful, its identity 
is revealed (see spell components). If success- 
ful, its identity is not revealed, and it becomes 
aware of the tracer. 

If the psionic creature maintains contact, its 
location can be monitored until contact is 
broken. If contact is not broken first, the tracer 
lasts a maximum of one round per level of the 
caster. Note that the range is for the wizard’s 
initial casting; the psionic tracing has no dis- 
tance limit. Only one contact can be traced or 
monitored at a time. 

Tracing a contact requires concentration. The 
tracing individual can move at half speed and 
converse, but cannot attack or cast other spells 
while actively tracing; moving at full rate, cast- 
ing spells, engaging in melee, or receiving 
damage prevents tracing but does not end the 
spell. The tracer allows a tracing wizard to tele- 
port to the psionic creature’s location as if it was 
a place “studied carefully.” 

A wizard with this spell memorized can cast 
it instantly in response to a psionic attack, as if 
using a psionic defense mode. A previously de- 
clared action can be changed to the casting of 
this spell. An immediate initiative roll is made. 
If the caster wins, the spell succeeds. If the 


~ Psychic Impressions — Savant r 


caster loses, the incoming psionic attack dis- 
rupts the spell. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small, platinum mirror. The image of the 
psionic creature is revealed in the mirror if its 
saving throw fails; a silhouette appears if save is 
successful. 

Notes: Uncommon for mentalists, rare for di- 
viners; otherwise, very rare. Optionally uncom- 
mon in the DARK SUN setting. (Updated from 
DraGoN Magazine.) 


Psychic Drain 
(Necromancy) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 6 

Range: 50 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Concentration + 1d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 10 x 10 x 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates an immobile area of nega- 
tive psychic energy that hinders the use of 
psionic abilities. Any creature trying to use or 


maintain psionic abilities in the area of effect 
must make a saving throw vs. death magic. If the 
saving throw is successful, double psionic power 
points are required. Failure means that any 
pSionic power use by the creature, other than a 
psionic defense mode, is negated. Psionic crea- 
tures outside the area are affected when project- 
ing their powers into the area, but are not 
affected when using their powers elsewhere. 

The area persists until as long as caster con- 
centrates (up to half movement only is allowed), 
ending 1d4 rounds after the caster's concentra- 
tion ceases. If the caster is killed, rendered un- 
conscious, or is mentally incapacitated, the spell 
ends instantly. 

The material component is the preserved, soft, 
porous body of a sessile marine creature. 

Notes: Uncommon for mentalists; otherwise, 
very rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON News- 
zine.) 


Psychic Impressions — Savant 
See read object, instead. 


Ds 


~ Psychic Protection - 


Psychic Protection 
(Abjuration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell provides the caster a +6 bonus to 
saving throws (or allows a saving throw if one is 
not normally allowed) against spells or effects 
that command or destroy the mind. These in- 
clude command, domination, feeblemind, hold, 
magic jar, insanity, possession, and the psionic 
powers of domination, mass domination, and 
switch personality. These fail if the saving throw 
is successful. 

The wizard is still vulnerable to spells or ef- 
fects that influence his actions indirectly. At- 
tacks that simply encourage the victim to act in 
a certain way or influence his perceptions do 
not trigger the spell. A partial list of effects that 
are not defended against is: charm, suggestion, 
emotion, confusion, hypnotism, fear, antipathy, 
beguiling, Otto's irresistible dance, a mind 
flayer’s mental blast, and most psionic attacks. 

The material component for this spell is a 
tiny figurine of the wizard, cast in iron. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Psychic Reversal 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: | rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is cast, a line of magical 
force is created from the wizard to any one crea- 
ture psionically attacking or contacting the 
wizard, regardless of range. The psionic crea- 
ture must make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell at a —2 penalty or be disoriented for 1d6 
rounds, during which no psionics other than 
psionic defense modes can be used. 

The force also acts as a conduit for any en- 


chantment/charm spell of 5th level or less that 

the caster has available (including scroll spells). 
These spells are cast normally, but range is ig- 
nored; the conduit allows the dweomer to reach 

the target creature regardless of distance. The | 
creature is permitted any saving throw a subse- 
quent spell allows. 

A wizard with this spell memorized can cast 
it instantly in response to a psionic attack, as if 
using a psionic defense mode. A previously de- 
clared action can be changed to the casting of 
this spell. An immediate initiative roll is made. 
If the caster wins, the spell is cast normally. If 
the caster loses, the incoming psionic attack dis- 
rupts the spell. 

The material component is a small, silver, U- 
shaped tube of fine craftsmanship (50 gp). The 
tube is consumed in the casting of the spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for mentalists, rare for 
enchanters; otherwise, very rare. Optionally un- 
common in the DarK SuN setting. (Updated 
from Dracon Magazine.) 


Pugnacious Pugilist, Bigby’s 
See Bigby’s pugnacious pugilist. 


Purdue’s Revenge 


Aka Prismal’s revenge. 


Pure Breed 
Athasian Dragon-King 
magic; psionic component 
renders the spell 
uncastable by wizards. 


Push 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Force, Mentalism) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. + 5 yds./2 levels 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


Upon pronouncing the syllables of this spell, 
the wizard causes an invisible force to strike 
against whatever object he is pointing at. The 
force of the push is not great, being | foot-pound 
per level of the caster. The force generated by a 
Ist-level wizard can move a one-pound object 
up to 1 foot in a direction directly away from the 
caster, topple an object under the proper condi- 


~ Pyrotechnics r 


tions, cause a creature to lose its balance, or dis- 
rupt a spell. 

Other creatures are unbalanced only if the 
force of the push multiplied by 50 does not 
exceed the creature’s mass; that is, a Ist-level 
wizard can effectively push a creature weighing 
up to 50 pounds. Such a creature is unable to 
attack that round if it fails a saving throw vs. 
spell. 

A push spell can be used against an object 
held by an attacking individual. The opponent’s 
attack roll or the defender’s saving throw 
against the attack, as applicable, is reduced by 
the level of the caster of the push spell, up to a 
total penalty of —10 (the creature deducts the 
force of the spell in foot-pounds: 1, 2, 3, etc.). 
Further, the attacking individual must make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell or have the 
object torn from his grasp and propelled with 
the force of the push. 

Likewise, an opposing spell being cast is in- 
terrupted and ruined by a push if the opposing 
caster fails a saving throw vs. spell. This saving 
throw is also reduced by up to —10, depending 
on the force of the push. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small pinch of powdered brass, which is blown 
from the palm prior to pointing at the object of 
the spell. 

Notes: Common spell. (Updated from the Ist 
Ed. Player's Handbook.) 


Putrefaction 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This vile spell spoils all food and water in the 
area of effect. Magical potions and holy water 
may be ruined; roll 1d20 for each potion or con- 
tainer of holy water in the area; a roll of 8 or 
more (that is, the saving throw of a 12th-level 
wizard) leaves the fluid unaffected. 

In addition, all creatures in the area of effect 
suffer 1d4 points of damage and must make a 
successful saving throw vs. poison. Those who 
fail suffer an additional 1d4 points of damage 
and are 25% likely to contract a rotting disease 
that will prove fatal in 1d6 months. For each 


month the rot progresses, an afflicted creature 
loses 2 points of Charisma permanently. Unlike 
mummy rot, the disease does not affect the 
curing of wounds. 

The material component is a bit of rotten 
meat. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newzine.) 


Pyrotechnics 
(Alteration) 
(Fire, Alchemy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10 or 100 times the 
fire source used 

Saving Throw: None 


A pyrotechnics spell draws on an existing fire 
source to produce one of two effects, at the 
option of the caster. First, it can produce a flash- 
ing and fiery burst of glowing, colored aerial 
fireworks that lasts one round. This effect tem- 
porarily blinds those creatures in, under, or 
within 120 feet of the area and that have an un- 
obstructed line of sight to the burst. Creatures 
viewing this are blinded for 1d4+1 rounds 
unless they successfully save vs. spell. The fire- 
works fill a volume 10 times greater than that of 
the original fire source. 

This spell can also cause a thick, writhing 
stream of smoke to arise from the source and 
form a choking cloud that lasts for one round 
per experience level of the caster. This covers a 
roughly spherical volume from the ground or 
floor up (or conforming to the shape of a con- 
fined area) that totally obscures vision beyond 2 
feet. The smoke fills a volume 100 times that of 
the fire source. All within the cloud must roll 
successful saving throws vs. spell or suffer —2 
penalties to all combat rolls and Armor Class. 

The spell uses one fire source within a 20- 
foot cube, which is immediately extinguished. 
An extremely large fire used as a source might 
be only partially extinguished. Magical fires are 
not extinguished, although a fire-based creature 
(such as a fire elemental) used as a source suf- 
fers 1 point of damage per caster level. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


> a aa. o 


719 


Quell 


Quell 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When the quell spell is cast, the wu jen points 
his finger at the target and utters a few mystic 
words, attempting to instantly subdue the sub- 
ject. The subject must be intelligent but does not 
need to understand the language of the caster. A 
creature with more Hit Dice or levels than the 
wu jen is unaffected. The creature must make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
effect. Failure means the creature instantly sur- 
renders, as if subdued in combat or by any other 
means. 

In addition, the wu jen can demand some ser- 
vice of the subdued creature if it understands 
the speech of the wu jen. If attempted, the crea- 
ture is allowed a second saving throw vs. spell. 
Success breaks the quell spell; if unsuccessful, 
the creature agrees to the service and attempts 
to complete it. 

Any service that does not cause the certain death 
or injury of the creature and has hope of success in 
a short time can be requested. The affected crea- 
ture won’t leap into a fire (unless immune to fire) 
but will risk dashing into a burning building to re- 
cover some object or rescue someone, if a reason- 
able chance for success exists. Furthermore, 
service is completed by the safest, easiest, and 
most efficient method, according to whatever 
preparations the creature’s Intelligence allows. In 
the above example, the creature might soak itself 
with water and cover itself with wet blankets 
before making the attempt (if it was smart enough 
to think of this). 

Once the service is completed, the creature is 
freed from the quell spell. A creature that feels 
powerful enough may attempt to wreak vengeance 
on the caster as soon as the spell is lifted. If the 
service has no set completion (“guard and protect 
me”), the creature is allowed a new saving throw 
every day to break the spell. This saving throw 
might be increased by +2 if the spellcaster and his 
friends seem especially weakened in the eyes of 
the creature. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


720 


Quench Fire Creature 
Reversed form, see enhance fire crea- 
ture. 


Quenchtouch 
Reversed form, see firebrand. 


Question Ball — Paramander 
(Alteration, Conjuration) 
(Artifice, Dimension) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 ball of crystal 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms a ball of normal crystal 
into a unique question ball, which answers any 
questions put to it. The ball is a partial manifes- 
tation of an extraplanar humanoid being of 
divine nature, which uses a gem of seeing and its 
own powers to discern the answers to the 
caster’s questions. The being speaks Common 
and two or three other languages, as well as 
tongues exclusive to its mysterious plane. The 
being is bound to answer a number of questions 
equal to the caster’s level. 

A percentile roll of less than 50 minus the 
level of the caster indicates the being tells a 
carefully fabricated and reasonably believable 
lie. Thus, a 10th-level caster has a 40% chance 
the being will lie to him. When the being has 
answered a number of questions equal to the 
level of the caster, the guestion ball darkens and 
crumbles to useless powder. 

The being can be released on the Prime Mate- 
rial Plane. If any of the following events occur, 
the ball shatters and the creature and all its pos- 
sessions (including the gem of seeing) appear: 

1. If any attempt is made to move the ball to 
another plane; 

2. If trap the soul, gate, monster summoning 
VII, or cache is cast on the ball; 

3. If the ball is destroyed using any of the 
methods for destruction an artifact or relic; 

4. If a wraith or similar creature performs an 
energy drain on the ball. 

The material components of the spell are a 
ball of crystal, a gem of seeing, and a pound of 
pure sulphur. The caster piles the sulphur in a 
heap and burns it with the gem and ball in the 
middle. While the flames consume the gem and 


x Quimby's Enchanting Gourmet r 


ball, the caster performs the verbal and somatic 
components of the spell, upon the completion of 
which the gem and crystal disappear in a sul- 
phurous explosion (no damage) marking the 
creation of the question ball. 

Notes: Common for paramanders (a rare 
form of paladin-mage); otherwise, very rare. 
(Updated from Dracon Magazine.) 


Being of the Ball: AC 2; MV 9 FI 18 (B); 
HD 10+6; THACO 11; #AT 3; Dmg 
1d6/1d6 (claw), 2d6 (fang); SA disease 
(claw, 5%/hit), poison (fang, save at —2), 
spells; SD spells; AL N; SZ M; ML 15; XP 
6,000. The being’s poison causes sleep for 
1d6 days, during which time the being eats 
its victim. The being has all the spell-like 
abilities of a vrock (greater tanar’ri), and 
can travel in the Astral and Ethereal Planes. 
Its other possessions number 2d6, each 
having a 20% chance of being magical in 
nature. 


Quiet Storm 
Lost spell. Reference appears in the Prism 
Pentad saga. 


Quimby’s Enchanting Gourmet 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Force) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 40-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This specialized version of the unseen ser- 
vant was developed with one particular task in 
mind—cooking and cleaning in the kitchen 
while its creator is otherwise occupied. 

The enchanting gourmet is a magical force 
under the control of the wizard. It can perform 
simple kitchen actions like stirring, carrying, 
measuring, cutting, and minding the fire. It is 
no stronger than an unseen servant and no more 
dexterous than its creator. The enchanting 
gourmet can be left to cook on its own, provided 
that it is cooking a meal that the wizard himself 
has prepared at some point in his life. If some- 
thing disrupts the smooth flow of the meal (such 


as the arrival of a dragon or an explosion in the 
kitchen), the enchanting gourmet will seek the 
advice of its creator. 

The enchanting gourmet can be dispelled by 
the caster at will, by a dispel magic spell, or by 
taking 6 points of damage from area effect at- 
tacks such as breath weapons, explosions, and 
the like. 

The enchanting gourmet cannot be used to 
brew potions and other magical drinks, but has 
been used to generate simple poisons and in one 
case to serve as a bartender. The creator of this 
spell, Quimby of Procampur, was an impatient 
cook but a lover of fine food in quantity. The 
spell is not one normally studied by adventuring 
wizards, but is often used by retired sages and 
other sedentary types. 

The material components of this spell are a 
block of wood and some string. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
Jaluster 5 Orizon. 


FN 


721 


p, 


7 
l 


N 
es ` E 
x AN i 
SX o ; 
ENS 
T X N 
NI 


wee 


| iia? Be) FS Lids 
| y! ay ial j 
Ail 
ri 


ey 


M |: £ = g 
| F i 

orn - 

a | 


Radiant Arch, Nystul’s 


See Nystul’s radiant arch. 


Radiant Baton, Nystul’s 
See Nystul’s radiant baton. 


Radiant Screen, Otiluke’s 
See Otiluke’s radiant screen. 


Raging Griffon, Laeral’s 


See Laeral’s raging griffon. 


Rain of Blood 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft./level radius, 
height to 10 ft./level 

Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


Only necromancers use the rain of blood 
spell. It calls forth a cloudburst of deadly blood 
from the Negative Material Plane. The blood is 
sticky and red, far more red than any mortal 
blood. Where it strikes bare flesh, the rain 
leaches out vitality. The droplets remain on 
flesh for one round before caking into a gray 
dust and falling to the sand. 

Every round that a character remains in the 
area of effect and is not completely sheltered 
from the rain, damage is taken. The exact 
damage is determined by the armor worn. Each 
creature suffers a number of points of damage 
equal to its Armor Class for every round that it 
remains in the area of effect. A successful 
saving throw will reduce this damage by one 
half. Creatures with a 0 or negative Armor Class 
take 1 point of damage per round. Dexterity- 
based Armor Class adjustments are ignored 
when determining damage. 

The material component for this spell is a 
small vial of pure water that darkens and turns 
to blood as the spell is cast. As the last syllables 
of the spell are spoken, the vial is hurled into 
the air. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers, common 
for those from an arabian setting; otherwise, 
very rare. 


a 


Rainbow Pattern 


Rain of Terror 
(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: | mile 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1-mile diameter 
Saving Throw: None 


ey 


This spell causes a cursed rain storm to de- 
velop over the next 3 turns; though if storm 
clouds are already overhead, the rain begins im- 
mediately. The rain lasts for 1 hour, plus 1 turn 
per level of the caster; it covers a circle one mile 
in diameter. This will cover most villages and 
small towns. 

The caster can choose the nature of the rain, 
within the limits of his level. Living creatures 
that rain down are 50% likely to survive. Thus, 
after a rain of toads, half are alive and hopping 
around, the other half are dead, killed by the 
impact. None of these animals are dangerous or 
able to harm anyone. 

Notes: Uncommon in the RAVENLOFT setting; 
otherwise, very rare. Generally used by evil 
wizards. 


Wizard’s Level Type of Rain 

1-2 Black, putrid water 
3-4 Ash 
5-6 Steaming blood 
7-8 Toads 
9-10 Dead bats 

11-12 Snakes 
13+ Spiders 


Rainbow Pattern 
(Alteration, Iusion/Phantasm) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the wizard creates a 
glowing, rainbow-hued band of interweaving 
patterns. Any creature caught in it may become 
fascinated and gaze at it as long as the effect 
lasts. The spell can captivate a maximum of 24 


723 


ka 


~ Rainbow Shield | 


levels, or Hit Dice, of creatures—-24 creatures 
with | Hit Die each, 12 with 2 Hit Dice, etc. All 
creatures affected must be within the area of 
effect, and each is entitled to a saving throw vs. 
spell. An attack on an affected creature that 
causes damage frees it from the spell immedi- 
ately. Creatures that are restrained and removed 
from the area still try to follow the pattern. 

Once the rainbow pattern is cast, the wizard 
need only gesture in the direction he desires, 
and the pattern of colors moves slowly off in 
that direction, at the rate of 30 feet per round. It 
persists without further attention from the spell- 
caster for 1d3 rounds. All affected creatures 
follow the moving rainbow of light. If the pat- 
tern leads its subjects into a dangerous area 
(through flame, off a cliff, etc.), allow a second 
saving throw. If the view of the lights is com- 
pletely blocked (by an obscurement spell, for in- 
stance), the spell is negated. 

The wizard need not utter a sound, but he 
must gesture appropriately while holding a 
crystal prism and the material component, a 
piece of phosphor. 

Notes: Common spell (PH). 


Rainbow Shield 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
Level: 4 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell envelops the caster or a touched 
and willing spell recipient in a glowing aura of 
swirling colors. Though its hues are ever-shift- 
ing, the overall color of the aura corresponds to 
the caster’s mood (purple for despair, yellow for 
nausea, red for anger, black for pain, blue for 
happiness, green for affection and friendliness, 
and white for pride, exultation, or manifesting 
magical power). 

Though the rainbow shield has been used just 
to impress gullible observers, its purpose is to 
defend its wearer in combination with another 
spell. 

This second spell must be of 3rd level or less. 
The spell is cast into the shield and is absorbed. 
Thereafter, until the shield fades away at spell 
expiration, the effects of the protector spell 
(typically fireball or lightning bolt) are visited 


724 


on anyone seeking to strike at or through the 
shield. Normal saving throws against the pro- 
tector spell, if any, still apply. 

Though the rainbow shield only affects crea- 
tures making direct physical attacks (not missile 
or magical attacks), it can inflict full damage (or 
spell effects) once per round upon each attacker, 
as often as there are invaders to deal with, even 
if several creatures attack simultaneously. The 
protector spell becomes part of the rainbow 
shield and fades away when the shield does; its 
own duration is ignored. 

The material component of this spell is an iri- 
descent shell, such as polished abalone. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. (Updated 
from The Seven Sisters.) 


Rainfire 
(Conjuration) 
(Fire) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


The effects of this spell are both limited and im- 
pressive. When cast on a small pile of flammable 
material, that material bursts into flames and burns 
as a normal fire for a period of one turn per level of 
the caster. Aside from being a handy way to light a 
fire at a short distance, the spectacular component 
of this magic is that the fire created will burn even 
in a driving rain or a howling wind. Even underwa- 
ter, it will burn for one round per level of the caster. 

The material need not be dry to be lit (al- 
though it must be a material that is flammable if 
dry), but no other fires can be lighted from the 
magical one, as the magical flames will not 
spread past the 1-foot radius of the spell’s effects. 

Rainfire can be used as a touch attack. A caster 
who makes a successful melee attack can ignite 
the clothing or hair of a target creature that fails a 
saving throw vs. spell. Damage inflicted by burn- 
ing clothing is 1d4 points per round; if the burn- 
ing clothing is removed, no further damage is 
taken. Hair burns for a round per size (1 for T, 2 
for S, etc.). 

The material component of the spell is a 
small pile of brush or other material to fuel the 
fire. 


| 


| 


x Ranike Cloud r 


Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 


DRAGON Magazine.) 


Raise Nation 
Athasian Dragon-King 
magic; psionic 
component renders the 
spell uncastable by 
wizards. 


Raise Water 


Reversed form, see lower water. 


Ramael’s Cyclical Light 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 4 

Range: 90 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the continual light 
spell, except that it fades and glows in response 
to the outside light. It can be cast only on an 
object (as opposed to a creature or location). 

The spell is immediately bound to the object 
upon which it is cast. If this occurs in full day- 
light, no effect is noticed. When the object is 
taken into a dark place, it begins to brighten im- 
mediately. In total darkness, it shines as brightly 
as full daylight. If some light is present, the 
glow is no brighter than necessary to bathe the 
object in the equivalent of full daylight. The 
effect requires from 1d4+1 rounds to adjust to 
changes in outside light. 

A stone with this spell, placed deep in a back- 
pack, or wrapped with black silk glows with full 
brightness when unwrapped, even in torchlight 
or the presence of other light spells. Other light 
must fall upon the enchanted object before the 
light begins to dim. 

The material components of this spell are op- 
tional. If cast with no material component, the 
light resembles a normal continual light spell. If 
a small gem, worth at least 10 gp, is used in the 
casting, the light will be the same color as the 
gem. 

This spell is very popular in Halruaa. Most 
wizards actually give credit to Ramael for it, 
considering it the one spell he truly invented, 
Some wizards theorize that a cyclical darkness 


spell is possible, but no one has yet spent the 
time or energy to research it. 

Notes: Common or uncommon in the Hal- 
ruaa region of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; 
rare or very rare elsewhere. 


Random’s Commodious Pocket 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 6 turns + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 garment 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell, when cast on the pocket of a gar- 
ment, creates an access to an extradimensional 
space, much like a temporary bag of holding. 
The commodious pocket holds up to 50 pounds 
weight or up to a 4 cubic foot volume. If over- 
loaded, if sharp objects are placed within, or if 
the spell expires, then the pocket ruptures and 
the contents spill at the feet of the wearer. 

The effective maximum encumbrance of the 
pocket is 5 pounds. The same garment cannot 
have more than one commodious pocket. If so, it 
is 50% likely that each time one of them is 
opened that all such pockets in the garment will 
collapse, spilling their contents immediately. 
The spell can be ended instantly with the utter- 
ance of a command word, which is set at the 
time of casting. Note that the placement of an 
extradimensional space within another is often 
catastrophic. 

The material component is a gold coin, 
placed in the pocket, which vanishes as the spell 
is cast. 

Notes: Uncommon for dimensionists; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from IMAGINE Maga- 

Ranike Cloud 


zine.) 


(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 40 x 20 x 20-ft. cloud 
Saving Throw: None 


LOO a a a, 


725 


~ 


~ Rapid Reflex Response r 


This spell creates a cloud of pungent smoke 
exactly like the smoke produced when the sap 
of the ranike tree is burned. This smoke limits 
visibility as does a blizzard or dense fog, but its 
main asset is its ability to repel all insects and 
insectlike creatures, including thri-kreen, that 
come in contact with it. Once those creatures 
are engulfed in the cloud, they immediately flee 
the area in the manner of undead turned by a 
cleric. Intelligent insects like the thri-kreen 
might run before they are touched, once they 
see what’s coming. 

The cloud moves away from the caster at a 
speed of 10 feet per round, rolling along the sur- 
face of the ground. A moderate breeze can alter 
the cloud’s course, but not move it back toward 
its caster. A strong wind breaks up the cloud 
within four rounds; stronger winds keep the 
cloud from forming in the first place. Very thick 
vegetation disperses the cloud in two rounds 
(the only place on Athas that qualifies as such 
terrain is the halflings’ forest). The smoke does 
not sink as do many vapors do (for example, 
cloudkill); it cannot penetrate liquids or be cast 
underwater—not a great concern on Athas. 

The material component is a chunk of wood 
from the ranike tree. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from the 
DaRK SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. 


pth 
Pipih, 


Rapid Reflexive Response 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, this spell enables the caster to 
grab hurled or projected missiles, such as 
arrows, axes, bolts, small stones or similar ob- 
jects that weigh less than seven pounds, out of 
the air and immediately hurl them back at the 
attacker with a +4 bonus on the attack roll. 

The caster can grab one object with each 
hand and return them in the same round. An 
attack roll is required for each attack. The spell 
expires at the end of the stated duration or as 
soon as the caster performs an action other than 
the reflexive response. (The spell speeds up the 
caster’s reflexes to a superhuman level, so to 
perform a normal action, such as casting a spell, 
the caster must end this spell.) 

This spell was claimed by the infamous 
Ramael the Reader, but most Halruans give 
credit to the famous Mycontil. 


A ai, oe a 

-@ 

4 NE 
i 


A 
0) 7 
i 
5 ue 5 
LP 2 
K 
=f 
= x 
} ry 
say 3 a 


ssi 
i, 
Ny 
pats 
cle 


E AADO 
=) WW 


i] ny) “get. 
lee 


z ayy 


p 


X Rary's Memory Alteration r 


The spell requires a glove once worn by a 
halfling (or a throwing weapon specialist), 
shaving of licorice root, and a frog’s tongue. The 
caster eats the latter two components as part of 
the casting. The glove remains and can be 
reused. 

Notes: Common in the Halruaa region of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; otherwise, rare. 


Rary’s Aptitude Appropriator 
(Alteration, Divination) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


By using this spell, the wizard can temporar- 
ily acquire the ability to use a nonweapon profi- 
ciency known to another creature. The caster 
must touch the creature already possessing the 
desired skill. If the creature is willing to transfer 
its knowledge of the proficiency, the transfer 
takes place without difficulty. If the creature is 
unwilling to transfer the proficiency, the crea- 
ture receives to a saving throw vs. spell to pre- 
vent the transfer from occurring. The creature 
touched does not lose its knowledge of the pro- 
ficiency, the spell merely allows the caster to 
know the proficiency as well. 

Only nonweapon proficiencies can be trans- 
ferred. Other skills, abilities, powers, or types of 
knowledge are not transferred. The wizard’s 
level of ability with the proficiency is exactly 
that of the original owner, even if the appropri- 
ate ability for the proficiency differs between 
the caster and creature. The proficiency is 
gained for one turn per level of the caster. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Rary’s Empathic Perception 
(Divination) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 1 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Casting Time: | 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: | creature/probe 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to sense the 
basic emotions of a creature, person, or animal, 
such as fear, hunger, thirst, anger, pain, joy, or 
love. The spell will work on all creatures pos- 
sessing a mind, but not automatons, golems, 
undead, or nonhuman beings from other planes. 
One creature can be probed every five rounds, 
and must be within the caster’s line of sight, not 
behind a door or wall. A shielded mind cannot 
be probed empathically. 

The material component for empathic per- 
ception is a copper piece. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Rary’s Memory Alteration 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 4 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, $ 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This more powerful version of the forget spell 
allows the wizard to actively alter a part of a 
creature’s memory. The portion of memory the 
caster can affect is limited to one specific event 
in the creature’s life. The memory of a real event 
can be altered as the caster wishes. The wizard 
could replace real facts about the event with 
false ones, or even place a completely new 
memory into the creature’s mind, causing the 
creature to remember an event that never hap- 
pened. The caster, however, is unable to remove 
a memory of an event in its entirety. There is no 
time limit on how far into the past an event can 
be altered. The creature is entitled to a saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid having its memory 
changed. A heal, restoration, or wish spell cast 
for this purpose will correct any alterations 
made to a creature’s memory. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


, aa a: 


727 


~ Rary's Mind Scan 


Rary’s Mind Scan 
(Divination) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/probe 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows for deeper study of an un- 
shielded mind than ESP can accomplish. The 
caster can pick up the surface thoughts or emo- 
tions of a creature on the first round of the 
probe, read deeper thoughts or memories on the 
second through fourth rounds (allows a saving 
throw vs. spell), and can access the deepest 
memories beginning with the fifth round. The 
caster may learn a creature’s dreams, sup- 
pressed memories, or primal desires. One major 
fact or subject can be learned or studied per 
round of deep probing. The limits on which 
topics can be probed are the same as for the ESP 
spell. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Rary’s Mind Shield 
(Alteration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1⁄2 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is used to protect a creature from 
intrusions into the mind. Spells or mental 
powers that can probe a mind have no effect on 
the creature. The creature makes its saving 
throw at +2 against all enchantment/charm 
magic that can affect thoughts, memories, or be- 
havior—charm, fascination, suggestion, emo- 
tion, and others. The mind shield allows a 
saving throw at —2 to avoid a geas spell. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Rary’s Mnemonic Enhancer 
(Alteration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: | day 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard is able to 
memorize, or retain the memory of, three addi- 
tional spell levels (three Ist-level spells, or one 
Ist and one 2nd, or one 3rd-level spell). The 
wizard has two options: 

A) Memorize additional spells. This option is 
taken at the time the spell is cast. The additional 
spells must be memorized normally and any 
material components must be acquired. 

B) Retain memory of any spell (within the 
level limits) cast the round prior to starting to 
cast this spell. In the round after a spell is cast, 
if the enhancer is cast successfully, then the 
first spell is restored to the caster’s memory. 
However, the caster still must acquire any 
needed material components. 

The material components of the spell are a 
piece of string, an ivory plaque of at least 100 
gp value, and ink consisting of squid secretion 
with either black dragon’s blood or giant slug 
digestive juice. These disappear when the spell 
is cast. 

Notes: Common spell (PH). 


Rary’s Plane Truth 


(Divination) 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: | creature/2 rds. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a more precise and exacting ver- 
sion of know alignment. A creature’s alignment 
is revealed to the caster in the first round of 
study. With a second round of concentration, the 
creature’s home plane is revealed. The deity or 
deities worshiped by the creature also become 
known to the wizard. The spell is blocked by 
any means that foils the know alignment spell. 


> . 


, es aa 


728 


- 


~ Rary's Spell Enhancer r 


One creature can be studied for every two 
rounds of the spell’s duration. 
Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Optional: In the SPELLJAMMER setting, this 
spell reveals the name of the creature’s 
home world. However, it has never re- 
vealed this information about the race 
known as the Arcane. 


Rary’s Protection from Scrying 
(Abjuration, Divination) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 1 hr. + % hr./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects a creature from scrying at- 
tempts and intrusive divination. Clairaudience, 
clairvoyance, ESP empathy, telepathy, crystal 
balls, a magic mirror, and the like will not suc- 
ceed in locating, detecting, or studying the pro- 
tected creature. The warded creature immedi- 
ately becomes aware of the attempt, no matter 
how great the distance between the scryer and 
creature. Detect evil/good and know alignment 
do not work on the protected creature. 

If the wizard is the protected creature, the fol- 
lowing apply: The wizard has a 5% chance per 
level to learn the location of the scryer after one 
round of concentration. The scryer receives a 
saving throw vs. spell; failure reveals the 
scryer’s identity to the wizard. 

However, if the scrying is carried out by 
means of a direct visual link (either through an- 
other creature or by means of a spell such as 
wizard eye), then the wizard has only a 5% 
chance per level to detect the scrying. Only if 
the linked observer is captured and examined 
does the wizard have the 5% chance per level to 
discover the identity of the scryer. 

The protection is focused through a star sap- 
phire worth 5,000 gp that must be kept on the 
person of the protected creature for the duration 
of the spell. If it is removed, lost, or destroyed, 
the spell ends immediately. The stone can be 
reused. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


729 


Rary’s Replay 
(Divination) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to read the resid- 
ual psychic impressions in a room or area. (An 
especially unusual or violent event often leaves 
behind psychic vibrations that remain for years. 
The more important the event, the stronger the 
psychic residue and the longer the impressions 
last.) 

When the wizard casts the spell, the strongest 
impressions currently in the area enter the 
caster’s mind. The event that produced the psy- 
chic impressions is replayed in real time, so the 
replay takes as long to complete as the original 
event. The replay is crystal clear, so the caster 
can readily identify persons, creatures, or ob- 
jects. 

If the spell is cast again in the same area, the 
event that created the second strongest psychic 
impressions is replayed. The caster can continue 
replaying past events, reading weaker and 
weaker psychic impressions, until all psychic 
residue in the area has been reviewed. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Rary’s Spell Enhancer 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Special 
Components: V 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 spell 
Saving Throw: None 


This one-word spell focuses and increases the 
effectiveness of a spell cast by the wizard. The 
spell enhancer is cast first, followed immedi- 
ately by the attack spell to be enhanced, during 
the same round. The enhanced spell strikes with 
greater power, resulting in a —2 penalty to all 
saving throws the spell requires. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


~ Rary's Superior Spell Enhancer > 


LG 
M, 
i 


"Hye 


Rary’s Superior Spell Enhancer 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 
Components: V 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enhancer increases the amount of 
damage caused by a spell cast by the wizard. 
The one-word superior spell enhancer is cast 
first, followed immediately by the attack spell 
to be enhanced. When the attack spell is 
launched, all saving throws against the spell are 
made at a —1 penalty. The spell inflicts an addi- 
tional point of damage per die of damage of the 
spell, so a fireball inflicts 1d6+1 point of 
damage per die. When a magic missile is cast 
after the superior spell enhancer, each missile 
inflicts 1d4+2 points of damage. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Rary’s Telepathic Bond 
(Alteration, Divination) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 5 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 2 turns/level 

Area of Effect: Two or more creatures 
within 60 ft. 

Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the wizard can forge a tele- 
pathic bond between two or more creatures with 
an Intelligence of 6 or higher. The bond can be 
established only between willing creatures. The 
creatures involved need not all speak the same 
language to communicate via the bond. The 
telepathic bond can be placed upon one creature 
for every three levels of the caster, so a 16th- 
level wizard can forge a telepathic link among 
five creatures. 

Once the bond is formed, the creatures can 
stay in contact only if they remain on the same 
plane. No special power or influence is con- 
ferred by establishing the bond. A permanency 
spell cannot make a telepathic bond permanent. 
A wish spell can, but no more than two crea- 
tures can be permanently bonded together in 
this way. 

The material components are a piece of a shell 
from the eggs of two species of egg-laying crea- 
tures. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). A 
marginally different version appears in The 
Complete Wizard's Handbook. This is the pre- 
ferred form. 


Rary’s Urgent Utterance 
(Alteration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Up to 24 hrs. 
Area of Effect: 1 spell 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell empowers the wizard to specially 
prepare another spell for quick casting in an 
emergency. Urgent utterance is cast first, fol- 
lowed by the spell to be readied, except the last 
word of the spell. When the wizard needs to cast 


a a anne. < 


730 


p” 


‘ Ray of Fatigue r 


the readied spell, the caster need only utter the 
final word of the spell. The utterance of the final 
word has a casting time of 1, saving much time 
on most spells. 

The readied spell will stay in the caster’s mind 
for only one day before it fades from memory. 
No more than two readied spells can be in the 
caster’s mind at any time. Almost any spell of 
6th level or less and a casting time of | round or 
less can be readied for quick casting, except 
Tenser's transformation. 

The material component is a sapphire worth 
1,000 gp, crushed when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Rastor’s Mystical Spy 
(Divination, Enchantment) 


(Artifice) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Y2 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell is cast on a copper brooch. When 
the spell is cast and the brooch pinned on an- 
other individual, the caster can see and hear 
everything that individual witnesses. If the 
brooch passes farther away than 1 mile per five 
levels of the caster, then no information is re- 
ceived. The spell is negated if the brooch is re- 
moved. 

The spell requires a copper brooch, which can 
be reused. The brooch can be of any shape or 
style, but must be made mostly of copper. 

Notes: Uncommon for diviners, enchanters, 
and artificers; otherwise, very rare. (Updated 
from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Ray of Cold 
A spell unique to the wizard Delsenora of the 
Crystalmist Mountains in the WORLD OF 
GREYHAWK setting. For all practical purposes, 
the spell is identical to the Sth-level spell, cone 
of cold. 


Ray of Enfeeblement 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 2 
Range: 10 yds. + 5 yds./level 


731 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of a ray of enfeeblement, a wizard 
weakens an opponent, reducing its Strength and 
thereby the attacks that rely upon it. Humans, 
demihumans, and humanoids of man-size or less 
are reduced to an effective Strength of 5, losing 
all Strength bonuses and suffering an attack roll 
penalty of —2 and a-1 penalty to damage. Other 
creatures suffer a penalty of —2 on attack rolls. 
Furthermore, they have a —1 penalty for each die 
of damage they inflict. (But no damage roll can 
inflict less than 1 point per die of damage.) Your 
DM will determine any other effects appropriate 
to the affected creature. If the target creature 
makes its saving throw, the spell has no effect. 
This spell does not affect combat bonuses due to 
magical items, and those conferring increased 
Strength function normally. 

Notes: Common spell (PH). 


Ray of Fatigue 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. + 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell affects the victim’s life energies, 
increasing any fatigue or exhaustion the victim 
currently possesses. Alert and well-rested crea- 
tures suddenly become tired and sluggish, and 
those who are already fatigued may be reduced 
to near-helplessness. 

The ray adds one level of fatigue or encum- 
brance to the target creature. Moderately en- 
cumbered characters suffer a —1 penalty to 
attack rolls; heavily encumbered characters 
suffer a —2 penalty to attack rolls and a —1 
Armor Class penalty; and severely encumbered 
characters suffer a —4 penalty to attack rolls and 
a —3 Armor Class penalty. (Assume that mon- 
sters suffer a —1 penalty to their attack rolls and 
reduce their movement rates by 33%.) The 
target creature is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to negate the spell’s effects. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Ray of Oblivion 


If using the fatigue rules from the 
PLAYER’S OpTION™: Combat & Tactics 
book, fresh characters become fatigued, 
gaining one level of encumbrance; fatigued 
characters become exhausted, gaining two 
levels of encumbrance; and exhausted 
characters collapse unable to move or 
attack. 


Ray of Oblivion 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


From the caster’s hand, a shimmering, color- 
less ray stabs out to the target; if the target is 
within range and not completely enclosed by 
solid or liquid material, the ray strikes unerr- 
ingly (no attack roll required), dodging around 
obstacles, other creatures, etc. 

When struck, the target creature must make a 


732 


successful saving throw vs. spell (spellcasters at 
a —1 penalty) or forget one item of magical 
knowledge at random. If the target creature has 
one or more spells memorized, one spell will be 
forgotten, harmlessly lost, as if an attempt to 
cast it had failed. If the creature is not a spell- 
caster, or has no spells memorized at the time, 
any of the following may be forgotten: the com- 
mand word of a magical item; the name of a 
spellcaster known to the creature; a legend, 
rumor, or piece of news involving magic use; 
the name or configuration of a magical symbol, 
glyph, or rune; or some other fact of the same 
sort. Only a heal, restoration, or wish spell re- 
stores the lost knowledge. 

The target creature must have been seen, 
however briefly, by the wizard in the turn prior 
to the casting of the ray of oblivion. The ray will 
seek out a target that is within range but ob- 
scured by cover, invisible, blinking, or even 
ethereal at the moment of the completion of 
casting; the caster need not know the creature’s 
precise location, only the fact that it is present 
(and, presumably, within range). 

The material component for this magic is a 
pinch of dust; it vanishes as the caster tosses it 
into the air and points at a target to complete the 
casting. 

Notes: Common for an incantatrix, rare for 


Po 


~ Raze r 


an enchanter or mentalist; otherwise, very rare. 
Originally from the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Ray of Ondovir 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Ray, 80 ft. long (1 creature) 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates a ray of glowing light that 
leaps from the caster’s fingertips to a distance 
of 80 feet. Only the first creature touched by the 
ray is affected and it can avoid the ray by 
making a successful saving throw vs. spell at a 
penalty of —3. 

An affected creature exactly repeats the ac- 
tions it took in the preceding round. Thus, if it 
took two steps forward and one step left in the 
previous round, it would take two steps forward 
and one step left in the current round. The re- 
peated actions are carried out even if they force 
the affected creature into an obstacle, over a 
cliff, or into a chasm. 

The ray of Ondovir ruins any attacks or spell- 
casting that the target creature begins in the 
same round that the ray strikes. If the creature 
struck by the ray had spent the previous round 
readying weapons, it spends this round doing so 
too; if it fought with weapons, it duplicates its 
previous movements exactly—thus a mobile 
opponent can avoid the creature’s attacks and 
strike it with relative ease—the creature’s 
Armor Class 1s worsened by 4 for the round. 

If the affected creature cast a spell on the pre- 
vious round, an attempt to cast the same spell 
must be made in the current round. If a second 
identical spell has not been memorized no spell 
effect occurs (even if a second spell is available 
it will be cast in the exact location as the first). 

When the round of helpless repetition caused 
by the ray of Ondovir is complete, the creature 
is instantly released from all control. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in the Tome of 
Rathdaen. 


733 


Ray of Paralysis 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 20 yds. + 5 yds./level 
Component: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell projects a green, pencil-thin ray of 
enervating energy at the subject. The target 
creature is allowed a saving throw vs. breath 
weapon (Dexterity modifiers apply) to dodge 
the narrow beam altogether; if the creature 
dodges the ray, another creature standing in a 
direct line behind it might be struck, at the 
DM’s discretion. A creature struck by the ray of 
paralysis must make successful saving throw 
vs. paralysis with a —2 penalty or be paralyzed 
for 3d4 rounds. A paralyzed creature 1s physi- 
cally helpless and can be bound or slain easily 
by anyone with the opportunity to do so. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers, other- 
wise, rare. (Updated from Dr4aGon Magazine). 


wht 


Raze 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell duplicates the life-draining effects 
peculiar to defiling magic. The spell can be cast 
by a defiler or a preserver, though a defiler will 
cause more damage with it. 

The casting of the spell causes a large area of 
vegetation to instantly give up its magical po- 
tential and turn to ash. Unlike the natural de- 
struction defiling magic, raze affects all 
vegetation within the radius of the spell, regard- 
less of the terrain. The area of effect for a pre- 
server is one yard per level of the caster. For a 
defiler, it is five yards plus one yard per level of 
the caster (instead of normal defiling damage). 

The ash created is black and gray, completely 
devoid of life or life-giving elements. Nothing 
will grow there for half a year, leaving a lifeless 
circular scar on the ground. 


~ Razorfangs — Dragon r 


The material components for this spell are a 
handful of ash (either from a previous raze spell 
or from normal defiler magic) and a pinch of 
salt. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from the 
DARK SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Razorfangs — Dragon 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is a highly improved version of the 
sharptooth spell. When a razorfangs spell is 
cast, the dragon’s teeth become exceptionally 
hard, strong, and sharp. Due to this alteration, 
any successful bite attack inflicts +2 per age 
category to each damage roll. Furthermore, on 
an unmodified roll of 19 or 20, the bite severs 
an opponent’s limb (or other extremity, as ap- 
propriate), just as if the victim had been struck 
with a sword of sharpness. If the victim fails a 


saving throw vs. death magic, his head is sev- 
ered as if by a vorpal sword. The razorfangs 
spell is useless to a nondragon. 

Notes: Restricted to dragons; uncommon. 
(Updated from Dracon Magazine.) 


Read Arcane Runes 


(Divination) — 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Using a read Arcane runes spell, a wizard can 
decipher the secret writing hidden in a text by 
means of an Arcane runes spell. Deciphering 
does not necessarily impart understanding. A 
wizard who is not an Arcane must use this spell 
to peruse texts already deciphered, unlike a read 
magic spell. Texts often referenced are usually 
transcribed from Arcane runes into Common or 
some other easily read language. Native Ar- 
canes can read Arcane runes on sight; a non- 
Arcane must be at least 7th level to use this 
spell. 

The spell’s material component is a small 
candle; a hand lens is also required. The candle 
is lit and held behind the sheet of paper or 
parchment such that its light shines through. 
The wizard looks through the hand lens and 
reads the runes aloud. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from a 
spelljamming culture; otherwise, very rare. 


Read Illusionist Magic 
(Divination) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is the same as the 1st-level wizard 
spell read magic, except that it applies only to 
spells usable by and used by illusionists, as well 
as to various other inscriptions written in illu- 
sionist-type magical script by illusionists. Writ- 


D a e N 


734 


~ Read Object r 


ings decipherable by this spell cannot be read 
with read magic, comprehend languages, or 
similar spells. 

Notes: Restricted to illusionists; universal for 
them. 


Read Magic 
(Divination) 
(Universal) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of a read magic spell, the wizard is 
able to read magical inscriptions on objects— 
books, scrolls, weapons, and the like—that oth- 
erwise would be totally unintelligible. (The 
personal books of the wizard, and works already 
magically read, are intelligible.) 

This deciphering does not normally invoke 
the magic contained in the writing, although it 
may do so in the case of a cursed scroll. Fur- Read Object 
thermore, once the spell is cast and the wizard (Divination) 
has read the magical inscription, he is thereafter (Mentalism) 
able to read that particular writing without re- 
course to the use of the read magic spell. The Level: 5 
duration of the spell is two rounds per level of Range: Touch 
experience of the spellcaster; the wizard can Components: V, S, M 


read one page or its equivalent per round. Casting Time: 5 
The wizard must have a clear crystal or min- Duration: 1 rd. 
eral prism, which is not expended, to cast the Area of Effect: Object touched 
spell. Saving Throw: None 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). All those who 
cast wizard spells must know this spell, save By handling an object, the wizard can deter- 


those with specific alternative disciplines mine the current or previous owner’s race, class 
(hishna, pluma, paramanders, bards, the Old or profession, alignment, and possibly his fate. 
Empire in the FORGOTTEN REALM setting, illu- These can be determined with 95% accuracy; 
sionists in some settings, and so on). failure results in no reading. 

The owner’s fate is not revealed past the 
moment he lost possession of the item or died in 
its immediate vicinity; for example, if the previ- 
ous owner dropped his hat while being kid- 
napped, reading the hat tells the wizard nothing 
about the owner’s current location. 

The caster has a 5% chance per level of deter- 
mining a command word associated with a 
magical object. If the item is an artifact or relic, 
the DM decides what information, if any, is 
learned. If the object has a particularly tragic or 
legendary history, the caster is 30% likely to ex- 


735 


~ Read Paramandic Magic — Paramander r 


perience a vision of the item’s past. 

The material component of the spell is an in- 
cense of rare aromatics costing no less than 100 
gp- 

Notes: Uncommon for diviners and mental- 
ists; otherwise, rare. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Magazine). 


Read Paramandic Magic — 
Paramander 
(Divination) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a paramander to read the 
complex, guttural language used in paramandic 
magic. With the exception of these parameters 
and the material components of a pinch of bone 
and a silk string, the spell is essentially identical 
to the Ist-level wizard spell read magic. Para- 
mandic writings do not yield to read magic, 
comprehend language, or other such dweomers. 

Notes: Restricted to paramanders (a rare 
form of paladin-mage); universal for them. (Up- 
dated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Read Southern Magic — Old Empire 


(Divination) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


In the Realms, one fundamental difference 
between the magical discipline of the South and 
the North is reflected in the system used for 
recording spells. The southern discipline is 
known as Thoth mage-script. 

Following the rebellion of the Red Wizards of 
Thay, the priest-mages of Thoth created a new 
magical script with which to record their spells. 
This writing was meant to prevent the Red Wiz- 
ards of Thay from learning the priests’ secrets. 
This writing is undecipherable to a standard 
read magic spell. A read southern magic spell is 


required to perform this function; and this can 
be learned only from southern wizards. 

Since the creation of Thoth mage-script, read 
southern magic has spread and been adopted as 
a standard by all wizards of Muhlorand and 
Unther, and by some in Chessenta. While many 
southern wizards also know the standard read 
magic spell, these are rarely used. 

The wizard must have a clear crystal or min- 
eral prism, which is not expended, to cast the 
spell. 

Notes: Restricted to Old Empire wizards of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, and to those 


trained by them; universal for them. 


Reanimation 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is identical to the 4th-level 
shukenja spell, reanimation. It allows a wu jen 
to revive a recently dead character (dead for no 
more than 24 hours) into a state of half-life, nei- 
ther dead nor fully alive. The reanimated char- 
acter must make a successful system shock roll 
for the spell to have effect, although this does 
not cause a loss of Constitution. 

If successful, the reanimated character has 1 
hit point. The reanimated character cannot fight 
or use magical items and has no spells memo- 
rized (nor can it regain spells), but it can move 
and speak. The movement rate is half normal 
and the speech is slow and slurred. Further- 
more, the reanimated character’s memory is 
cloudy and confused and it has trouble remem- 
bering even basic details concerning its past life 
and friends. If left unwatched, the character is 
prone to wander off randomly with no concep- 
tion of where it is going or where it has been. 
The reanimated character can be slain again 
(and reanimated again if necessary). While in 
this state, the character has no need of food, 
sleep, or drink. 

The reanimated character can be returned to 
normal function by means of a raise dead, res- 
urrection, limited wish, or wish spell. 

The material components for the spell are a 
white shawl, incense, and a golden amulet 


736 


ie 
Recharge r 


shaped like a phoenix. 
Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Rebinding 
(Alteration, Enchantment, 
Invocation/Evocation) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Rebinding is possibly the most powerful spell 
known to hedge wizards, and it is certainly the 
most rare. Rebinding is cast upon a broken mag- 
ical item such as a /ong sword +1 to bind the 
magics into the materials of the item. The item 
must be forged anew or repaired by an expert (a 
master swordsmith for a long sword, for exam- 
ple), then rebinding must be cast again on the 
item. 

On both occasions, the item must make a 
saving throw of 10 or better. It must fail both 
saving throws for the item to be remade. The 
item has a —1 penalty to the saving throw per 
2,000 XP value or fraction. Thus, a sword +/, 
+4 vs. reptiles has a —1 penalty, while eyes of 
the eagle have a —2 penalty. 

The spell fails if the item was charged and 
has run out of charges, has been disintegrated, is 
missing some pieces, or has been fundamentally 
altered. (If, in the example, the long sword was 
destroyed by a crvstalbrittle or Mordenkainen's 
disjunction spell, it cannot be remade by a re- 
binding spell.) 

The spell is typically used to repair family 
heirlooms, items made in accordance with a 
prophecy, or similarly irreplaceable items. Out 
of a thousand hedge wizards, one might know 
this spell. Its development requires many years 
of research in secluded retirement, and locating 
a caster able to employ this spell usually re- 
quires a special quest. 

The material component is two pieces of 
lodestone and a skein of silver wire costing 50 
gp, both vanishing during the casting of the 
spell. 

Notes: Restricted to hedge wizards, savants, 
sages, and the occasional artificer; very rare. 


Recall Spell — Savant 
Replaced by Mordenkainen’s lucubration; these 
are essentially the same. 


Recharge 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Artifice) 

Level: 6 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 hr. 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 wand, staff, or rod 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell acts as a funnel to channel magical 
spell energy into a wand, staff, or rod as addi- 
tional charges. Each spell cast into the device 
restores the number of charges required to dis- 
charge that spell effect from the device. For ex- 
ample, a fireball would restore two charges to a 
wand of fire. While only those spells cast by the 
recharging wizard are funneled into the device, 
that wizard can cast spells from scrolls, a ring of 
spell storing, or a similar source into the device. 
Restored charges can be used for any device 
function that requires charges; for example, 
charges restored to a wand of fire by a fireball 
spell can be projected later as a wall of fire. 

Using the recharge spell in other way ends it 
immediately, with the funneled spell having its 
normal effect. Typical misuses include: Funnel- 
ing spells and spell-like effects from devices or 
other casters into the device; recharging a 
device that cannot be recharged; recharging 
with a power that requires no charges; and cast- 
ing a spell into a device that the device cannot 
project (such as a cone of cold into a wand of 
fire). In last case, the wand would have to make 
an item saving throw vs. magical cold, and any 
creature in the cone’s area would be subject to 
its effects as well. 

The caster will seldom know exactly how 
many charges a wand, staff, or rod has, making 
the recharging process hazardous. If the caster 
wants to fully recharge the device and does not 
know how many charges are safe, the DM can 
secretly roll 1d6 on the table provided. For ex- 
ample, a wizard wants to recharge a wand of 
fire, which he doesn’t know has 90 charges. The 
DM rolls a 6 (that is, 1d4 charges over), then a 
three, the wizard believes that it is safe to add 
13 additional charges to the wand, when in fact 
it is only safe to add 10 charges. 


Ye a TT TT 


737 


os 


~ Reckless Dweomer, Nahal's r 


A device that is overcharged burns out, be- 
coming useless, unless it has a retributive strike 
(such as a staff of power). In this case, the ret- 
ributive strike is triggered. In either event, the 
recharge spell ends immediately. 

The material components are one cubic inch 
of the material from which the device to be 
recharged was fabricated (iron, silver, oak, and 
so on), and a sapphire worth at least 2,000 gp 
through which the spell energy is funneled. Any 
material components for the funneled spells are 
required as well. The verbal component must in- 
clude the command word that triggers the fun- 
neled spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for enchanters and artifi- 
cers: otherwise, very rare. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Die Caster’s Estimate of 

Roll Remaining Charges 

1-2 1d4 charges under true maximum 
3-4 Accurate estimate of maximum 
5-6 1d4 charges over true maximum 


The original spell level for recharge was 
4th. The change to 6th is deliberate—a basic 
requirement for recharging is the ability to 
construct the original item. 


AN ie 
fo 


738 


Reckless Dweomer, Nahal’s 
Reconnect 


See Nahal’s reckless dweomer. 


(Evocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | hr/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is used to re-attune a wizard to his 
own magical powers following spellslaying. 
The duration of the spell determines how long 
this “reconnection” lasts. If the spellslaying 
would have kept the wizard from casting spells 
for longer than this spell’s duration, the wizard 
cannot cast spells when the reconnect spell 
ends. After that, the spellslaving has to run its 
course. 

This spell is one of the best kept secrets of the 
Brotherhood of the True Flame and should not 
be available to player characters—unless those 
characters manage to discover the spell in the 
course of an adventure. This would be a very 
difficult undertaking and would certainly put 
the character at odds with the Brotherhood of 
the True Flame. 

Notes: Common for arabian spellcasters 
from the Brotherhood of the True Flame; other- 
wise, virtually unknown. 


Reconstruction 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a wizard can tem- 
porarily restore or make whole a broken physi- 
cal object, even if it is badly shattered and with 
portions or parts missing. The item is fully re- 
stored and can function normally for the dura- 
tion of the spell. 

The reconstructed item will stand up to 
almost every test as identical to the original 


Ņ Reflection r 


object—smell, touch, and physical properties. A 
detect magic spell will reveal the spell’s 
dweomer, and a true seeing spell or equivalent 
will show the item as truly broken. 

A fragmented gold coin can be restored to 
full size by this spell, as can a crushed gem. A 
magical item restored will radiate magic (from 
the spell) but will not regain lost magical prop- 
erties. Attempts to render a repair permanent 
with permanency, enchant a weapon, or similar 
magics end the reconstruction spell immedi- 
ately. A reconstructed item can be broken again, 
which breaks the spell. At the end of the spell 
duration, the item falls apart again. 

Living things cannot be affected by a recon- 
struction spell, nor can an unbroken item be re- 
stored to the original form of its component 
materials. 

The material components of this spell are a 
pinch of fine sand and a dollop of sticky sap or 
gum 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in The Alcaister. 


whe 


Recruitment 
Athasian Dragon-King 
magic; psionic 
component renders the 
spell uncastable by 
wizards. 


Reduce 


Reversed form, see enlarge. 


Reflected Image — Witch 


(Ilusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 1 

Range: 40 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: Surface up to 20 ft. square 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell the witch can cause any visual 
image in her mind to form on a single suitable 
reflecting surface. Mirrors are the obvious 
choice, but a calm, still pool or lake can be used 
as well. The image is static once formed, and 
lingers for one day per level of caster before dis- 
appearing—breaking the mirror or disturbing 
the water ends the spell immediately. 

For example, the caster could disguise a 
mirror by creating an image that matches the 


Hee 


wall, or hide a small pool by making it appear to 
be a continuation of the ground or floor. 

Notes: Common for witches, uncommon for 
illusionists; otherwise, very rare. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Reflection 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./4 levels 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard reflects all 
harmful 1st- through 3rd-level spells cast at him 
back upon the casters. The casters are allowed 
saving throws against their own spells, as ap- 
plicable. The duration of this spell is one round 
for every four full levels of the caster; for exam- 
ple, the spell lasts two rounds for an 11th-level 
wizard. 

The spell also reflects all normal and magical 
missiles hurled at the wizard during the spell ’s 
duration. The reflection spell does not affect at- 
tackers physically meleeing the wizard, nor 


739 


~ Reflection — Witch = 


does it affect area spells not cast directly upon 
the wizard. 
The material component is a small mirror. 
Notes: Rare for abjurers; otherwise, very rare 
(WoG). Believed to have been originated in the 
Valley of the Mage. 


Reflection — Witch 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This evil spell creates a shimmering cloud 
around the caster, causing any magical attacks 
against her to be turned against the attacker. At- 
tacks with normal weapons are not reflected. 
Magical weapon attacks are reflected, as are the 
physical attacks of innately magical creatures 
such as unicorns, fiends, or ki-rin. 

Speils, items, and spell-like abilities that 
affect an area that includes the caster are also 
reflected, the caster’s portion is returned to the 
attacker as a magical bolt with the same effect 
as the caster’s share of the attack. 

A reflected spell or attack affects the origina- 
tor normally. Attack rolls, saving throws, and 
damage are all determined as if the character or 
creature was striking at itself. Naturally, if the 
creature is immune to its own attack (a red 
dragon wielding a wand of fire, for instance), it 
has nothing to fear. 

Divination spells are not reflected, but give 
no reading. Spells of banishment operate nor- 
mally, and a dispel evil spell negates the reflec- 
tion instead of returning the witch to her home 
place. 

Notes: Restricted to witches; uncommon. 


Reflectorum Arcana 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 3 rds. + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


740 


Casting this dweomer causes a golden hemi- 
sphere to attach to the shield arm of the target 
individual. The magical shield bestows a +3 AC 
bonus and reflects magical projectiles, includ- 
ing the following spells: magic missile (includ- 
ing similar spells), Melf s acid arrow, flame 
arrow, and Melf’s minute meteors. In addition 
the shield halves the damage of lightning bolts 
that are hurled at its bearer. The direction of the 
reflection is rolled randomly (see table). 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine. ) 


Die Roll Reflection 
1-2 Right front 
3-4 Left front 
5-6 Rear 
7-8 Front 

9 To caster 
10 Above 
Regenerate 


The Red Wizards of Thav are rumored to have an 
8th-level spell that duplicates the 7th-level priest 
spell, regenerate. 


Regenerate Self 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 12 hrs. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell bestows on the caster a number of 
hit points equal to half the damage the caster in- 
flicts in hand-to-hand combat (melee, nonmis- 
sile, nonspell). It does not otherwise cause 
regeneration or restore life or limb. In no case 
will this spell increase the caster’s hit point total 
above his or her normal maximum. This spell 
effect cannot be transferred to another creature 
in any way. 

Notes: Known to the wizard Delsenora, of 
the Crystalmist Mountains in the WORLD OF 
GREYHAWK setting. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newszine.) 


| 


: 


| 


po 


‘ Release Weapon r 


Reincarnation 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the wizard can bring back to 
life a person who died no more than one day per 
level of experience of the wizard before the 
casting of the spell. The essence of the dead 
person is transferred to another body, possibly 
one very different from his former body. Rein- 
carnation does not require any saving throw, 
system shock, or resurrection survival roll. The 
corpse is touched, and a new incarnation of the 
person will appear in the area in 1d6 turns. The 
person reincarnated recalls most of his former 
life and form, but the character class, if any, of 
the new incarnation might be different indeed. 
The new incarnation is determined on the fol- 
lowing table. If a player character race is indi- 
cated, the character must be created. 

Very good or very evil persons will not be 
reincarnated as creatures whose general align- 
ment is the opposite. 

The material components of the spell are a 
small drum and a drop of blood. 

Notes: Common spell (PH). Optional rules 
for creating humanoid characters can be found 
in the DMG and The Complete Humanoid 
Handbook. 

Reincarnation Table 


1d100 Roll Incarnation 
01-05 Bugbear 
06-11 Dwarf 
12-18 Elf 
19-23 Gnoll 
24-28 Gnome 
29-33 Goblin 
34-40 Half-elf 
41—47 Halfling 
48—54 Half-orc 
55-59 Hobgoblin 
60-73 Human 
74-79 Kobold 
80-85 Orc 
86—90 Ogre 
91-95 Ogre mage 
96—00 Troll 


741 


Rejuvenate 


(Alteration) 
(Earth) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 5-ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell grants to an area of ground the 
ability to support vegetation. In the case of 
ground made barren by defiler magic, rejuve- 
nate negates the ground’s sterility; it can imme- 
diately support vegetation. The spell can be cast 
on any ground short of solid rock, including 
sand, rocky sand or soil, or dust. The spell af- 
fects the ground in a circle extending away from 
the caster, who stands in the center of the area to 
be revitalized. The radius of the circle is 5 feet 
per level of the caster. The soil is enriched and 
moistened, and a layer of fine grass emerges in- 
stantly. Defilers cannot cast this spell. 

Once cast, the moist soil and grass are not 
magical, and are subject to all natural forces. 
They will, however, survive a week in even the 
worst of conditions. Rejuvenate will otherwise 
last until another defiler spell destroys the vege- 
tation there. 

The material component of the spell is a seed 
(of any type) and a drop of water. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from the 
DARK SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Release Weapon 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 

Component: S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/5 levels 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Release weapon causes a weapon-wielding 
creature to drop its weapon immediately. A suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell means that the 
spell had no effect. Unless aware of the caster, 
an affected being will likely believe that he 
dropped the weapon due to his own clumsiness. 
Recovering the weapon requires a full round, 
unless the weapon was dropped into a pit, over a 


Remove Curse 


cliff, etc. For every five additional levels of the 
caster, one more creature can be affected. Thus, 
a 6th-level wizard can disarm two opponents, an 
l 1th-level caster can affect three, and so on. 

This spell applies specifically to weapons or 
objects being used as weapons. It does not cause 
other items to be dropped. 

Notes: Common in the MYSTARA setting; oth- 
erwise, very rare. 


Remove Curse 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


Upon casting this spell, the wizard is usually 
able to remove a curse—whether it is on an 
object, on a person, or in the form of some un- 
desired sending or evil presence. Note that the 
remove curse spell cannot affect a cursed shield, 
weapon, or suit of armor, for example, although 
it usually enables a person afflicted with a 
cursed item to be rid of it. Certain special curses 
may not be countered by this spell, or may be 
countered only by a caster of a certain level or 
higher. A caster of 12th level or higher can cure 
lycanthropy with this spell by casting it on the 
animal form. The were-creature receives a 
saving throw vs. spell and, if successful, the 
spell fails and the wizard must gain a level 
before attempting the remedy again. 

The reverse of the spell is not permanent; the 
bestow curse lasts one turn for every experience 
level of the wizard casting the spell. It causes 
one of the following effects (roll percentile 
dice): 


d100 Roll Result 


1-50 Lowers one ability of the subject to 3 
(the DM determines which by 
random selection) 

51-75 Worsens the subject’s attack rolls 
and saving throws by —4 
76-00 Makes the subject 50% likely per 


turn to drop whatever it is holding 
(or simply do nothing, in the case of 
creatures not using tools) 


742 


It is possible for a wizard to devise his own 
curse, and it should be similar in power to those 
given (the DM has final say). The subject of a 
bestow curse spell must be touched. If the sub- 
ject is touched, a saving throw is still applicable; 
if it is successful, the effect is negated. The be- 
stowed curse cannot be dispelled. 

Notes: Common spell (PH). 


Remove Disease 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: None 


The remove disease spell is most often used 
by charlatans without true healing abilities. It 
merely removes a patient’s symptoms, an effect 
that the practitioner tries to pass off as a full 
cure. Sometimes this leads to an incidental cure, 
if the patient’s symptoms only prevented rest or 
eating well, but more often the patient’s condi- 
tion secretly worsens. 

All effects dealing with the affected person’s 
physical appearance and perception of pain or 
discomfort vanish, but losses of hit points and 
ability scores continue, as do system shock 
checks and saving throws. Because the subject 
can feel no symptoms, he usually takes no fur- 
ther steps to deal with the illness and eventually 
dies trom a disease he might otherwise have 
survived (for example, a pneumonia sufferer 
with symptoms removed might go out into the 
cold and damp to do a day’s work, and suffering 
double pneumonia without realizing it). 

The material component is a fertile egg from 
an avian or reptile. 

Notes: Rare in the DRAGONLANCE setting; 
virtually unknown elsewhere. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Krynn Lore: Remove Disease 

During the Age of Darkness, true clerics 
were not to be found on Krynn, but false cler- 
ics took their place. Some renegade wizards 
used “miracles” to con- 
vince people of their 
authenticity as messen- 
gers of the gods; one 
such was the dangerous 
remove disease spell, 
still seen on rare occa- 
sions in isolated areas 
of Ansalon. 

When this spell is 
performed, the symp- 
toms of the patient are 
transferred to the mate- 
rial component—a 
freshly laid, fertile egg 
from any avian or rep- 
tile, including dragons. 
Depending on the 
severity of the symp- 
toms, the creature de- 
veloping within the egg 
is likely to be disfig- 
ured but strangely not 
ill (such as a chick with 
all of the ly not ill (such 
as a chick with all of 
the physical symptoms 
of the plague but with- 


A Y{ 
I 


WAL AY, 


WN 
~S 


out the plague germs 
themselves, which still 
covertly attack the pa- 

tient). « 

If the patient should Ẹ NYS = 
die from the disease (i ISS 
before the false cleric íl Si | 
can get out of town, the A ill i 
egg can be brought 
forth and broken, with the pitiful creature 
inside being blamed for the miscasting of the 
spell (“If the egg you villagers had provided 
me was truly fresh, this would not have hap- 
pened.” [crack!] “See? The evidence of your 
mistake is to be seen in the contents of the 
egg.”) 

The false clerics wisely attempted to keep 
the nature of this spell secret, but even where 


743 


Remove Disease 


the truth was known some people were will- 
ing to pay the cleric’s price in order to get 
relief from aches and pains they suffered, 
even knowing that the disease itself might 
still affect them. Given 
a choice between pain, 
nausea, fever, and the 
like while waiting for a 
possible recovery (or at 
least feeling comfort- 
able during the wait), 
many sufferers of this 
Age were willing to pay 
the price, which was 
wildly variable, and 
take the gamble. Some- 
one in a later Age who 
acquires a scroll in- 
scribed with this spell 
will likely have no 
quick way of knowing 
the spell’s true nature (a 
successful Intelligence 
check The false clerics 
wisely attempted to 
keep the nature of this 
spell secret, but even 
where the truth was 
known some people 
were willing to pay the 
cleric’s price in order to 
get relief from aches 
and pains they suffered, 
even knowing that the 
disease itself might still 
affect them. Given a 
choice between pain, 
AO nausea, fever, and the 
li : like while waiting for a 
; l ! possible recovery (or at 
least feeling comfort- 
able during the wait), many sufferers of this 
Age were willing to pay the price, which was 
wildly variable, and take the gamble. 
Someone in a later Age who acquires a 
scroll inscribed with this spell will likely 
have no quick way of knowing the spell’s true 
nature (a successful Intelligence check after 
three hours of study reveals the spell’s actual 
effects.) 


~ Remove Life Level — Witch y 


Remove Life Level — Witch 


(Enchantment) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, 5, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is a specialized curse, allowing the 
caster to temporarily remove one life energy 
level from the chosen victim. If the victim is 
wary, the caster must make a successful attack 
roll; otherwise, a mere touch is sufficient. The 
victim receives a saving throw vs. spell with a 
-5 penalty; failure means the loss of an experi- 
ence level for the duration of the spell. 

The victim loses one Hit Die and any applic- 
able level-based abilities such as THACO, 
saving throws, thief abilities, and spells. The in- 
dividual functions at the reduced level, gaining 
no experience until the spell ends. If used 
against a 1st-level character, the character be- 
comes 0-level for the spell’s duration. A 0-level 
character affected by the spell is slain if a saving 
throw vs. death magic is failed; otherwise, the 
character sickens within a day and requires 
complete bedrest for the spell’s duration. 

If cast by a full witch coven, the duration is a 
year and a day; otherwise, it is a month. A wish 
can undo the curse before the spell ends, and the 
caster can remove it at will (usually in exchange 
for a service). The casting of this spell is an evil 
act. 

The material component is a coin taken in 
payment for a betrayal. 

Notes: Restricted to witches and evil en- 
chanters; uncommon. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Remove Smell 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: None or Neg. 


744 


This spell has two forms; the caster can 
decide which form to use at the time of casting. 
The first form renders one creature or object 
undetectable by smell for the duration of the 
spell. No saving throw is required. 

In its second form, the spell is cast upon a 
living creature, depriving it of its sense of smell 
for the duration. An unwilling creature receives 
a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. 
While attacks such as stinking cloud incapacita- 
tion do not affect a being who cannot smell, 
caustic fluids still burn, thick clouds obscure 
vision, etc. 

The material component is a sliver of soap. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Cyclopedia Phantastica Vol. HI. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Remove the Instrument of Death 
A MYSTARA setting spell, aka release weapon. 


Repel Undead 


(Abjuration, Necromancy) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius around creature 
touched 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell forces undead away from the recip- 
ient’s person. Undead that fail a saving throw 
vs. spell at a -3 penalty are repelled from the 
area (in places dedicated to evil, evil undead 
may save at a lesser penalty, —2, —1; or normally, 
at the DM’s discretion). 

Affected undead leave at their best speed. Ifa 
solid barrier prevents them from fleeing the 
area, they are held at bay until the spell expires 
or the protected creature moves away. The spell 
effect remains centered on and moves with the 
creature protected. 

Undead failing the saving throw but able use 
missiles or spells can do so, but they cannot op- 
erate freely in the spell’s area for its full dura- 
tion, regardless of the subsequent actions or 
status of the protected creature and regardless 
of any attacks made against them. 

An undead creature making a successful 
saving throw vs. spell at a -3 penalty can take 
normal actions for one round but must save at 
the beginning of each and every round. Upon 


~ Resist Injury — Old Empire r 


any failure to save, the spell forces the undead 
creature to move directly away from the caster 
at full movement rate. 

The material component of this spell is a bar 
magnet with a drop of the caster’s blood on one 
end and a fragment of bone or carrion placed on 
the other. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in the Book of 
Shangalar the Black. 


Repulse Metal 
(Abjuration) 
(Earth) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 7 rds. 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. wide path, 100 ft. long 
Saving Throw: None 


By manipulating unseen forces, the wizard 
creates waves of magical force that impel all 
metal within the area of effect and not solidly 
anchored to move away from the caster at the 
rate of 30 feet per round. The spell also affects 
nonferrous metals like gold and lead. Metal ob- 
jects on the wizard’s person are not affected. 

The force ceases 100 feet from the caster, so 
a sword 99 feet away is pushed only 1 foot 
before it stops moving. The wizard can change 
the direction of the force at the beginning of 
each round simply by pointing, or can keep the 
force focused in one direction from round to 
round if he prefers. Metal-tipped missiles and 
hurled weapons are repelled automatically if the 
spell is directed at the missile-firing characters 
or creatures. 

The repulsive force is proportionate to the 
amount of metal present. A character carrying 
or wearing more than one pound of metal must 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell even to 
hold his position, and succeed by a margin of 4 
or more in order to advance towards the caster. 
(Such an advance is adjudicated by the DM, a 
maximum possible movement of 30 feet is sug- 
gested.) The character suffers a —1 penalty to 
the saving throw for every 10 pounds of metal 
carried (round up), so a warrior in 75 pounds of 
plate mail would suffer a —8 to his saving throw. 
A character can avoid the check or reduce the 
penalties by releasing metal items and allowing 
them to fly away. 


Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in Zala 5 
Book of Barriers aka Lakharemtolma Zalarem. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Repulsion 
(Abjuration) 
(Force) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./2 levels 

Area of Effect: 10 ft./level x 10 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard is able to 
cause all creatures in the path of the area of 
effect to move directly away from his person. 
Repulsion occurs at the speed of the creature at- 
tempting to move toward the spellcaster. The re- 
pelled creature continues to move away for a 
complete round even if this takes it beyond the 
area of effect. The caster can designate a new di- 
rection each round, but use of this power counts 
as the caster’s principal action in the round. The 
caster can, of course, choose to do something 
else instead of using the repulsion attack. 

The material component for this spell is a 
pair of small magnetized iron bars attached to 
two small canine statuettes, one ivory and one 
ebony. 

Notes: Common spell (PH). 


Resilient Sphere, Otiluke’s 
See Otiluke’s resilient sphere. 


Resist Energy Drain 
The Red Wizards of Thay are rumored to have a 
spell that duplicates the 3rd-level priest spell, 
negative plane protection. 


Resist Injury — Old Empire 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects the caster from injury, so 
that all attacks cause only half damage against 


A a e UUE 


745 


~ Resist Magic r 


him (rounded up). 
For instance, if a warrior inflicts 13 points of 


damage with an attack against a wizard who has 
an active resist injury spell, the attack is re- 
duced to 7 points of damage. Attacks that allow 
a saving throw for half damage, such as a fire- 
ball spell or dragon breath, inflict half damage 
if the saving throw fails, or one-quarter damage 
if it succeeds. 

This spell does not help the caster against at- 
tacks that charm, drain life levels, or totally de- 
stroy (such as death or disintegration spells). 

The material component for this spell is an 
amethyst or jade pendent, which must be worn 
for the duration of the spell. 

Notes: Rare spell. As a FORGOTTEN REALMS 
Old Empire spell, initial exposure requires a 
mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


Resist Magic 


-— 


(Abjuration) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Casting Time: 7 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this Cerilian spell, a wizard can 
bestow temporary resistance to magic on one 
creature. The recipient gains 50% resistance to 
lesser magic (all spells in the schools of divina- 
tion and illusion, as well as all spells of 1st and 
2nd level) and 25% resistance to true magic 
(everything else). 

When a wizard casts this spell upon himself, 
the magic is more potent. The caster gains 65% 
resistance to lesser magic and 40% resistance to 
true magic spells. 

A protected creature that becomes the target 
of a spell immediately rolls to see if the magic 
resistance repels the spell. Failure still allows 
any saving throw that might apply. Resist magic 
has no effect on spells already affecting the 
creature at the time it is cast. 

The material components for this spell are a 
piece of string, a block of wood, and an unlit 
candle. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; unknown elsewhere. This spell func- 
tions only in the Cerilian setting. 


“se 


M, 
NCCU 


== 
= 
=e 
= 


Resist Turning 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds./level unless triggered 
Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius 


This spell protects undead creatures from 
being turned or commanded by priests (includ- 
ing paladins). When a turning attempt is made 
against protected undead, the DM secretly rolls 
a single resistance roll. The resistance succeeds 
on a 1d20 roll of 16 or more, adjusted for the 
difference in level between the caster and turn- 
ing priest. Successful resistance means the at- 
tempt fails. For example, if the caster is 9th 
level and the turning priest is Sth level, the roll 
needed to resist turning is 12 or better. A resis- 
tance roll of 1 means the resistance fails, re- 
gardless of level difference. 

Once this protection is triggered, the spell 
protects undead in its area for that round, then 
ends. If not triggered within two rounds per 
level of the caster, the spell ends. 

The caster can center this spell on himself, on 


746 


- 


~ Reveal Invisible r 


a particular creature or object, or on a fixed lo- 
cation. The spell protects undead within 15 feet 
of the focal point at the instant of the triggering 
turning or command attempt. The area is mobile 
with its focus. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; rare. 
(Updated from POLYHEDRON Magazine.) 


Restoration — Red Wizard 
The Red Wizards of Thay are rumored to have a 
9th-level spell that duplicates the 7th-level 
priest spell, restoration. 


Restore Mind 


Reversed form, see dismind. 


Restore Wood 
Reversed form, see wood rot. 


Return to Sand 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 7 

Range: 20 ft./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 object or a 5-ft. x 5 ft. area 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By using this spell the wizard causes a 
normal item of metal, stone, or earth to return to 
the sand from which it was made. The spell af- 
fects a single item but can also target a 5 x 5 x 
1-foot area if so desired. 

The item receives a saving throw vs. spell if 
carried by a creature; otherwise, the base saving 
throw is 17. Failure means it immediately crum- 
bles into sand. It will remain sand until the end 
of the spell’s duration, at which point it returns 
to its original form. If the affected area is part of 
a larger whole, when it returns to its original 
form it will also return to the whole from which 
it came. This occurs even if the sand has been 
dispersed. 

This spell has no effect on creatures of any 
kind, including golems or other enchanted con- 
structs. The return to sand spell has no effect on 
magical items. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


747 


Reveal Invisible 
(Divination) 
(Province: Wind) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a sphere that no one can 
see. Invisible beings and objects within the 
sphere are clearly revealed to all observers. Nat- 
urally invisible, magically invisible, and psioni- 
cally invisible creatures and objects are 
revealed. The sphere has no effect on other illu- 
sion/phantasm magics, however; it won’t by 
itself reveal extraplanar, out-of-phase, or dis- 
placed creatures—unless they are invisible. 

The caster can move the sphere 30 feet hori- 
zontally and 10 feet vertically per round. Many 
casters choose to center the area of effect on 
themselves, and then will it to remain there, al- 
lowing the sphere to move with the caster. The 
caster must decide where the spell is centered at 
the time of casting, and cannot change this later. 

No saving throws are allowed against this 


(ee SH a V 
R NS 
Mes eere x hide, Nin 
wll. les 
te > r ON Ma P 


li 


rafa 


ae 
R aw / | 
ARRAS i 
OS agin 


Se 
c> 
SS 


sphere, although it is destroyed instantly if the 
caster is slain or loses consciousness. An invis- 
ible being or object returns to invisibility when 
the reveal invisible spell expires or when the 
area of effect moves on. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Reveal Magic 


(Alteration, Divination) 


Level: | 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a wizard can make the hidden 
auras of magical spells and items visible to all, 
rather than personally viewing the same via 
detect magic. The spell can be cast two different 
ways, each with distinct effects. 

A) Cast on an Area. The spell reveals all 
magical radiations within a 10-foot radius, with 
an additional 5-foot radius for every two levels 
of the wizard (for example, a 7th-level wizard 
reveals magic in a 25-foot radius area). This 
casting is immobile. The intensity and type of 
magic cannot be determined, as all magical 
items and fields glow equally bright (akin to 
torchlight). 

B) Cast on One Item. The spell reveals the 
item’s magical aura as flickering flames; the 
higher the flames, the more powerful the magic. 
The color of the flames grants the wizard a 10% 
chance per level to identify whether a certain 
type of magic is present: alteration, conjuration, 
etc. If a curse is present on the item, the magical 
flames are 20% likely to be black; otherwise, 
they just register the type of magic in the item. 

Like detect magic, this spell is blocked by 1- 
foot thick stone walls, solid metal of 1-inch 
thickness, or a yard or more of solid wood. 

The spell was created by Dagsumn of Water- 
deep, and was sold to the Watchful Order of 
Magists & Protectors for guild membership and 
enough gold to buy a townhouse in Castle Ward. 
Dagsumn also sells the spell on scrolls to 
anyone with 500 gp. 

Notes: Common the City of Waterdeep, un- 
common elsewhere in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


748 


~ Reveal Magic n: 


Revelation 
(Divination) 


Level: 6 

Range: Sight 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 portent 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting a revelation spell, a wizard imme- 
diately understands, in unerring detail, the com- 
plete meaning of an omen or portent. This spell 
can be used only when the spellcaster sees the 
omen, and must be used while the portent 1s re- 
mains visible. The revelation spell cannot pre- 
dict the future, except as indicated by the 
portent, nor identify what power sent the omen. 
The spell only reveals the exact meaning of the 
omen. 

Should a spellcaster attempt to use revelation 
to understand an unusual event that is not an 
omen, the spell fails, although the caster does 
learn that there is no great importance to the 
supposed sign. 

This spell can be blocked by magic or by 
powers of demigod status or greater, in which 
case only the general nature of the blocking 
forces might be revealed. 

Notes: Uncommon for diviners; otherwise, 
very rare. (Updated from Legends & Lore.) 


Revelation of Auras 
(Divination) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 hrs. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is most often used as an adjunct to 
the distort life, ritual of twaining, and similar 
spells related to magical breeding. It gives the 
wizard a 10% per level chance to divine the 
exact nature of one “aspect” of a creature under 
inspection. (An “aspect? is a creature character- 
istic chosen by the caster: size, coloring, a detail 
of external or internal structure, a special abil- 
ity, etc.) The subject must be held perfectly still 
so that the auras are stable to the inner eye. Any 
failed roll within 10% of success gives a wrong 


} 


Reverse Fossilization 


result; otherwise, it just fails. 

The material component is an eagle’s eye, 
which the wizard must swallow. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from /MAG- 
INE Magazine.) 


Revenance 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Undead within 15-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster makes a 
number of undead creatures immune to one 
turning attempt by priests, paladins, or others 
with this ability. The spell does not provide im- 
munity from magical items such as the mace of 
disruption nor to magical spells such as protec- 
tion from evil. 

One undead creature can be protected per ex- 
perience level of the caster; however, no single 
creature with more levels or Hit Dice than the 
caster can be protected. Affected creatures radi- 
ate a faint aura of magic. 

The protection for an individual creature lasts 
until a turning attempt is made that would other- 
wise turn or destroy it. Once a successful turn- 
ing attempt is blunted by the revenance spell, its 
protection ends for that creature. The spell oth- 
erwise lasts a maximum of 24 hours. The pro- 
tection given by this spell is not cumulative with 
itself, all effects end immediately when the pro- 
tection is triggered. 

The material components of this spell are a 
flake of ash, a pinch of dust, and a drop of 
blood. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in the tome, Stud- 
ies in Death. 


Revenge, Prismal’s 
See Prismal’s revenge. 


Revenge, Purdue’s 
See Prismal’s revenge. Claiming this spell is be- 
lieved to be the cause of Blackwolf Purdue's 
demise. 


Reversal, Prismal’s 
See Prismal’s reversal. 


Reverse Animal Growth 
Reversed form, see accelerate animal growth. 


+ 


Reverse Flow 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 4 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 1/4 sq. mile/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to reverse the 
flow of any body of water within the area of 
effect. A stream or river would run upstream, an 
ocean current would flow in the opposite direc- 
tion, even a waterfall would fall up. The change 
of direction has no ill effects on the body of 
water. The primary use of this spell is to aid the 
travel of vessels against the prevailing current or 
upstream. However, the spell also reverses the 
flow of pumps, drains, water traps, and the like. 

The reverse of this spell, normal flow, returns 
the water to its normal condition. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Reverse Fossilization 


(Enchantment) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Weapon(s) touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes stone weapons to become 
equivalent to their bone counterparts, cutting 
their attack penalty from —2 to —1 (damage is the 
same). This spell is not as potent as stoneiron (see 
later), but is far more common on Athas due to its rel- 
ative simplicity. One large or two small weapons can 
be enchanted by a single casting of this spell; missiles 
lose the dweomer when they hit a target. 

The material component of this spell is a piece of 
fossilized bone. 

Notes: Uncommon for spellcasters from the Dark 
SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


A E ais A 


749 


Reverse Gravity 


t A 


a's We, 


È 


Reverse Gravity 
(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30 ft. x 30 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell reverses gravity in the area of effect, caus- 
ing all unattached objects and creatures within it to 
“fall” upward. The reverse gravity lasts as long as the 
caster desires or until the spell expires. If some solid 
object is encountered in this “fall?” the object strikes it 
in the same manner as it would during a normal down- 
ward fall. At the end of the spell duration, the affected 
objects and creatures fall downward. As the spell af- 
fects an area, objects tens, hundreds, or even thousands 
of feet in the air above the area can be affected. 

The material components of this spell are a lode- 
stone and iron filings. 

Notes: Common spell (PH). 


Reverse Lifeline 
Reversed form, see accelerate lifeline. 


a a a Cr a aaa 


Reverse Loyalty 


Athasian Dragon-King 


magic; psionic 
component renders the 
spell uncastable by 
wizards. 

Reverse Missile — Old Empire 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 80 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell reflects attacks from all missile weapons, 
including spells such as magic missile and Melf5 acid 
arrow, and large missiles such as ballista attacks (but 
excluding non-missile ranged attacks, such as fireball 
and disintegrate spells). The missile returns to strike 
the one who fired it, as long as that being is within the 
range of the spell. If beyond the range, then the missile 
drops to the ground upon reaching the reverse missile 
range limit. Reflected missiles attack the creature they 
tum back upon as if launched by the original attacker. 

Notes: Rare spell. As a FORGOTTEN REALMS Old 
Empire spell, initial exposure requires a mentor or a 
read Southern magic spell. 


To determine the magical effects the reverse 
missile spell affects, use the following criteria: a) 
Is there a physical missile? b) Does the original 
attacker make an attack roll? If the answer to 
both is yes, then the spell applies. Magic missile 
should be viewed as a special exception; a non- 
physical energy attack that would normally fall 
outside the spell effect. Since it is included, all 
spells that function as magic missile are also re- 
flected. Since magic missile automatically hits, it 
also does so when reflected. 


Reverse Plant Growth 
Reversed form, see accelerate plant growth. 


- 


x Ride The Wind r 


Reverse Teleport 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 8 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V 

Casting Time: | 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Within one round of another’s teleport spell, 
a caster can use reverse teleport to instantly 
bring the teleporter back (including any individ- 
uals who went with him). The caster must be 
within 30 yards of the teleporter’s point of de- 
parture or the spell fails. 

This spell works on any teleportation spell 
that operates on a single plane (such as dimen- 
sion door, Drawmij s instant exit, the priest spell 
word of recall, and so on), but may fail if the 
subject has teleported into a heavily warded, 
magically turbulent, or magically dead area. 
The spell will not bring back a creature that has 
plane-shifted or gone through a magical portal 
(cubic gate, phase door, etc.), or used an alter- 
native mode of transport (psionics, probability 
walk, and so on). An individual wearing a helm 


of teleportation receives a saving throw vs. spell 
to avoid being retrieved, but regardless of the 
outcome, the helm’s teleportation spell is ex- 
pended. 

Notes: Common in the MySTARA setting; oth- 
erwise, very rare. 


Revoke Lifeforce Exchange 
Reversed form, see exchange lifeforce. 


Revoke Lifeforce Transfer 
Reversed form, see transfer lifeforce. 


Revoke Lifeproof 


Reversed form, see lifeproof. 


Ride the Wind 
(Alteration) 
(Air) 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 
Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows creatures chosen by the 
caster to become virtually weightless and be 
lifted upon the wind. If no wind is present, this 
spell has no effect. This spell can be cast only 
on living creatures, and these must be within 30 
feet of each other at the instant the spell is cast. 
Affected creatures can control their altitude by 
rising or descending at a movement rate of 2, 
but are at the mercy of the wind for speed and 
direction. Recipients can stop their forward 
movement only by grasping something to 
anchor themselves in place. Unwilling creatures 
are allowed a saving throw vs. spell to resist the 
effect. 

Each creature and its equipment must weigh 
less than 100 pounds per level of the caster. 
Thus, a 6th-level wizard could affect six crea- 
tures each weighing 600 Ibs. or less. 

The material components are a small handful 
of straw and a dry leaf. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


~ Rift d 


Rift 
Athasian Dragon-King 
magic; psionic 
component renders the 
spell uncastable by 
wizards. 


A 


Ring of Disintegration 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


Another of the stolen spells of “Mycontil,” 
this one is also falsely claimed by Ramael the 
Reader. When cast, a tiny bit of annihilating 
matter is brought into existence, growing to the 
form of a six-inch circlet at impact. A success- 
ful attack roll must be made by the caster, with a 
+4 bonus. The target creature is entitled to a 
saving throw vs. petrification. Affected crea- 
tures suffer 1d6 points of damage per level of 
the caster (to a maximum of 15d6), and also 
lose an appendage. 

Creatures that successfully save suffer half 
damage and no appendage is lost. Large crea- 
tures (size L or larger) are not subject to the loss 
of a limb, since the sphere is too small to affect 
them in that way. For purposes of determining 
which appendage is lost, roll at random (the 
head counts as an appendage). 

This spell can be very dangerous. On an 
attack roll of a natural 1, the caster must make a 
saving throw vs. spell or fumble the throw, 
losing his own hand. 

The material component for this spell is a 
specially prepared silver bracelet worth at least 
100 gp, with | gram of mithral worked into it. It 
is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting (most common in Halruaa, the Shining 
South); virtually unknown elsewhere. 


752 


Ring of Swords 
(Alteration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This ward establishes an area defended by an- 
imated metal-bladed weapons, usually swords. 
The spell is often used by wizards to defend a 
sanctum or sleeping area, but is expensive and 
requires preparation. The spell range is the dis- 
tance from which the spell can be cast on the 
prepared location (see Preparation). A ring of 
swords typically has four or more blades, with 
an upper limit defined by the caster’s willing- 
ness to spend money on components. 

The spell causes the blades to levitate and 
drift into a ring of any size desired, up to a max- 
imum radius of 10 feet per level, as set by the 
caster. They orbit slowly around the boundaries 
of the invisible protected area, forming a pro- 
tected sphere (MV 9). Intruders are attacked and 
pursued as far as 70 feet from the protected area. 

The protected area can be safely entered and 
left repeatedly by the caster, and by any who 
were in the area at the time of casting. In addi- 
tion, the area can be entered by anyone who cor- 
rectly speaks a certain pass-phrase upon coming 
within 10 feet of a warding blade. The pass- 
phrase, set at the time of casting, must be at 
least four words long. Authorized beings can 
even touch or handle the blades without activat- 
ing their magic. When released, a blade flies 
back to the ring to resume its place. 

Another being assuming the caster’s shape 
never successfully fools the magic. Any intruder 
who enters or reaches into the protected area 
(including casting spells into it) triggers the 
magic, and the swords then attack. 

When activated, the blades from a ring of 
swords fly at a rate of 21 (Maneuverability 
Class B). They strike twice per round with a 
THACO of 4. The blades attack only those who 
trigger them; and an intruder’s companion who 
strikes at, tries to divert, or attempts to restrain 
an activated sword instantly becomes a target, 
as well. The swords cease attacking and return 
to their drifting ring when all intruders have 
perished or withdrawn more than 70 feet from 
the ring. 


~ Rip r 


The activated swords are AC 0. One can be 
rendered inanimate by dealing it 29 points of 
damage in melee combat. Swords rendered 
inanimate are not damaged. The spell ends 
when all of the swords are rendered inanimate, 
destroyed (by disintegrate, rust touch, etc.), the 
caster ends the magic by uttering the pass- 
phrase in reverse (only the caster can end the 
magic this way), or 29 years to the instant have 
passed since the caster of the ring of swords 
died. 


A dispel magic has no effect on a ring of 


swords other than to cause a single blade to fall 
inanimate for one round per level of the caster 
of the dispel. Magical barriers can be thrust 
through the ring, but the swords seek to fly 
around them, attacking ceaselessly. 

The blades in a ring of swords often vary in 
size and shape, as the caster uses what weapons 
are available. Magical blades retain their 
powers, and always strike to inflict the most 
potent result. The spell preserves the blades 
from the elements and does not harm them in 
any way. 

Preparation: The material component of the 
spell is one sapphire, of not less than 4,000 gp 
value, for each blade. These are powdered; 
some powder is then touched to each blade and 
some is sprinkled at the center of the area to be 
protected, whereon it vanishes. Any attempt to 
use Magic to substitute for or bypass the mater- 
ial component causes the spell to fail. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Ringweave 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: 20 ft./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to precisely du- 
plicate a single power or function of a magical 
ring that the caster has previously used. The 
caster need not possess the ring or have investi- 
gated its enchantments. The ring power func- 
tions as many times as the caster has experience 
levels (if called on that many times before the 
spell expires), and the ring power erupts from 
any single nonliving item chosen by the caster 


during spellcasting. The caster can even make 
the power erupt from a nonmagical ring, to fool 
observers into thinking the ring bears a perma- 
nent dweomer. The power manifestations only 
come forth from this one focus item, and the 
spell is broken if the item is destroyed. 

A dispel magic cast directly on the item has 
no effect on the functioning of the ringweave 
spell except to prevent any power discharge for 
one round per level of the caster of the dispel 
magic. The ring power is called forth by silent 
act of will, but the wizard can perform no other 
spellcasting in the same round as the ring is 
called upon. If the ring power is carefully called 
upon, the caster may well be able to conceal the 
focus item, which can be positioned anywhere 
in spell range. The caster need not be wearing 
the focus item or be in contact with it. 

This spell will not duplicate the following 
ring powers: 

* Spell storing, 

* Any power from a ring with limited charges 
(those from the DMG include: djinni sum- 
moning, mammal control, ring of the ram, 
telekinesis, wishes [both], and wizardry), 

* Any power from an artifact or relic (for ex- 
ample, the Ring of Gaxx). 

¢ Any power from a cursed ring. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers; very rare. 


Rip 
(Alteration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 5 

Range: 20 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell telekinetically moves part of an 
object in one direction while moving the rest of 
the object in a completely different direction. 
The resulting tug tears the object into two sepa- 
rate pieces, killing most creatures outright. 
Creatures or objects weighing more than 1,000 
lbs. are not affected. As the movement is not es- 
pecially rapid, damage builds up slowly. 

If cast on a creature, the first round the crea- 
ture takes 2 hit points damage; on the second, an 
additional 4; on the third, an additional 6; and so 
on. By the fourth round, the target has taken 20 


FT 


753 


~ Rising Colossus r 


hit point damage (2+4+6+8). The spell has a 
maximum duration of one turn. 

If cast on an object, the object requires a suc- 
cessful item saving throw or be torn in half (see 
table). 

As noted above, the movement is not espe- 
cially rapid, and bystanders are in no danger 
from flying debris. A dispel magic dissipates 
the ripping force but does not repair damage al- 
ready done. Once the rip is cast, further concen- 
tration by the caster is unnecessary. 

The material component of this spell are two 
black gloves, without a speck of dust on them. 
These gloves cost 10 gp a pair and are con- 
sumed in the casting. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Material Save Material Save 
Bone/Ivory 12 Pottery 12 
Cloth 18 Rock, crystal 5 
Glass 14 Rope 9 
Leather 10 Wood, thick 8 
Metal 7 Wood, thin 14 
Paper 19 


Note: Oils and potions are not affected. 


s. 
Wes? 


” 
Na 

ü a a 

at dpt pm Aah cbetese ee 


ieee itp 
SAAS, 
x Y al 


n 

wn 
1 fe 
Hi 


peed x 
x ` `A 
a i “ 
i T \ 
PNT h oy ` 
T uy 
a i 
€ 
. RATE TAA BS EBAR! 
nee EVAR ee 
=< X 
NS = v 
en) ay 
' 


N 


¢ 
Ni W 
Ni 


aie ni 


ia 
hA 


i ne 
: Marry 
Ñ 


Rising Colossus 
(Evocation) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell calls into being a large humanoid 
torso (head, shoulders, and arms) that seems to 
rise up out of the ground in front of the caster, 
facing away from its creator. The colossus can 
be up to 100 feet in height, with a reach of up to 
80 feet. It can turn all around, but its base 
cannot move from the location in which it first 
appeared. It is AC —2, has 99 hit points. and at- 
tacks targets (chosen by silent will of the caster) 
with its fists. It can strike once with each fist in 
a round using the caster’s THACO, and it deals 
6d8 points of damage per successful blow. It 
cannot pick up anything (for example, to lift 
someone or something safely up to a high place) 
except the caster and beings and items touching 
the caster. It cannot grasp or constrict things 
otherwise, only smash them. 

A colossus looks like a bald-headed human 
with no recognizable features except a mouth. It 
seems to be made of the same substance as the 
ground it appears from, although it is purely a 
spell manifestation. It can roar out a word or a 
phrase of up to six words that are whispered by 
the caster during the spell’s casting, as often as 
desired. These words cannot be a spell incanta- 
tion, and they do not issue forth if they are 
words that trigger or activate any magic. 

The usual use for a colossus is to smash a 
way into or out of a structure or to shield the 
caster from harm. Its sheer bulk can block vol- 
leys of arrows, and it magically attracts to itself 
all magic specifically meant for the caster such 
as magic missile, feeblemind spells, and so on. 
The spell effects are then visited on the colos- 
sus, not the caster. Spells that normally rebound 
from solid forms or burst, such as fireball and 
lightning bolt, are drawn into its body so that 
they do no harm to the surroundings. 

Any blow landed on a desired target by a 
colossus shortens the duration of its spell “life” 
by one round. Any spell that strikes the colossus 
also shortens the spell’s life by a round, even if 
the spell does not destroy the colossus form by 


754 


Po 


N River of Sand r 


cumulative points of damage. When the spell 
duration runs out (possibly in a considerably 
shortened period), or the colossus is destroyed 
by accrued damage, the colossus simply fades 
away. 

The material components of this spell are a 
ball of clay that fills the caster’s palm and a bit 
of string wire, or natural fiber. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Ritual of Twaining 

Lost spell. A complex and arcane spell of 4th 
level, used in magical cross-breeding of dis- 
similar natural species; creating, for example, 
a rabbit-lion, an owl-bear, or some similar 
creature. 

A recommended substitute is to treat this 
ritual as a prerequisite to breeding a specific 
combination. The processes required to pro- 
duce the combination are discovered through 
the spell research system (the ritual of twaining 
rabbit and lion being the equivalent of a 4th- 
level spell in terms of time and monetary cost). 

The DM has the final say over what combina- 
tions are possible or viable once created; the 
wizard in this case is merely studying a promis- 
ing lead. 

For example, a rabbit-lion might be white, 
furry, and herbivorous, with 4 limbs, a mane, a 
quivery nose, long ears, big canine teeth, and a 
manic depressive disposition. Such a “success- 
ful” crossbreed might well die off in the wild. 

The original text appeared in Imagine maga- 
zine, along with age animal, animal magnetism, 
clone animal, distort life, hasten growth, and 
several other spells of this type. 


Ritual Strength — Shai’ir 


(Alteration) Q i 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Saving Throw: None 
Area of Effect: Self 


This spell is used by sha’irs to prepare them- 


` selves for the strenuous rituals they must endure 


in order to improve their gen. As long as the 
spell lasts, the sha’ir suffers no effects from ex- 
haustion due to ritual performance. This spell 
has no effect beyond protecting sha’irs from 


755 


over-exertion during rituals. 
Notes: Restricted to sha’irs, common. Found 
most often in an arabian setting. 


lll 
AUN 4 


River of Sand 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Sand) 
Level: 8 


Components: V, S, M 

Range: Special 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 rd./3 levels of caster 

Area of Effect: Cylindrical path, 20-ft.diameter, 
80 feet long 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a snakelike “river” of sand, 
80 feet long, which barrels over obstacles in its 
path. To cast it, a wizard begins with a mouthful 
of sand. Then he whispers (or mumbles) an in- 
cantation, and spits the sand in the desired di- 
rection. The expelled sand travels along the 
ground, picking up more sand as it goes, gather- 
ing size and strength. Within one round, it be- 
comes a roaring torrent. 

The river travels 40 yards per round. During 
the first round, it has no destructive force, but it 
can sweep any item up to the size of a small hut 


p 


~ Rodbane j 


or large wagon out of its path. Thereafter, the 
river has the power to tunnel through dunes, de- 
stroy structures, inflict siege damage as a ram, 
and strike beings so hard that their clothes and 
hair are stripped away. 

All items in the river’s path must make a 
saving throw vs. crushing blow or be destroyed. 
Individuals in the river’s path must make a suc- 
cessful Strength check to retain items that are 
carried or held. If an individual tries to move 
out of the river’s way, he must make a Dexterity 
check. Success means that he’s flung 1d20 feet 
aside, taking 1d4 + 1 points of impact damage. 
Failure means that he takes the full brunt of the 
river—a potentially fatal blow. All creatures 
struck fully the river suffer 6d8 points of 
damage. They must also make a successful 
system shock roll. If the system shock roll fails, 
they perish instantly. 

The caster cannot choose to restrict a river of 
sand’s length; it always grows to 80 feet. Nor 
can the caster change this juggernaut’s direction 
once it begins to flow. 

A mouthful of sand and the spittle it collects 
are the material components of this spell. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Rodbane 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 90 yds. 

Casting Time: 1 
Components: V, 8 
Duration: 4d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 device 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Rodbane temporarily prevents the wielder of 
a rod, staff, or wand from using the item’s 
powers. The wizard casts the spell upon a char- 
acter in physical contact with a rod, staff, or 
wand. If the subject has more than one such 
device, the caster must specify which one the 
spell targets. Should the wielder fail a saving 
throw vs. spell, the device in question will not 
function for that character for 4d4 rounds. Wand 
wielders save at —6, staff wielders save at —4, 
and rod wielders save at -2. Rodbane has no 
effect on other magical items. 

Notes: Very rare spell, based on the MySTARA 
setting spells wandband and itembane. 


756 


Rolling Road 
Athasian Dragon-King 
magic; psionic 
component renders the 
spell uncastable by 
wizards. 


ahi 


Rope Trick 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast upon a piece of rope 
from 5 to 30 feet long, one end of the rope rises 
into the air until the whole rope hangs perpendicu- 
lar, as if affixed at the upper end. The upper end is, 
in fact, fastened to an extradimensional space. The 
spellcaster and up to seven others can climb up the 
rope and disappear into this place of safety where 
no creature can find them. The rope can be taken 
into the extradimensional space if fewer than eight 
persons have climbed it; otherwise, it simply stays 
hanging in the air (extremely strong creatures 
might be able to remove it, at the DM’s option). 

Spells cannot be cast across the interdimen- 
sional interface, nor can area effects cross it. 
Those in the extradimensional space can see out of 
it as if there were a 3-foot x 5-foot window cen- 
tered on the rope. Creatures in the extradimen- 
sional space will not run out of air while the spell 
lasts. 

The persons in the extradimensional space must 
climb down prior to the end of the spell, or they 
are dropped from the height at which they entered 
the extradimensional space. The rope can be 
climbed by only one person at a time. Note that the 
rope trick spell enables climbers to reach a normal 
place if they do not climb all the way to the ex- 
tradimensional space. Note also, that creating or 
taking extradimensional spaces into an existing 
extradimensional space is hazardous. The spell is 
ineffective in any locale where extradimensional 
spaces are inaccessible, such as the Astral Plane. 

The material components of this spell are pow- 
dered corn extract and a twisted loop of parch- 
ment. 

Notes: Common spell (PH). 


~ Run — Old Empire r 


Ruby Ray of Reversal 
(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The ruby ray of reversal is a powerful spell 
developed by Nezram the Transmuter to reverse 
the effects of other spells and situations. It har- 
nesses the magical energy naturally occurring 
within a ruby, creating a beam that lances out in 
a straight line in the caster’s chosen direction. 

Upon contact with any of the following situa- 
tions or spells, the ruby ray will correct the situ- 
ation as listed, then wink out of existence. The 
ruby ray can affect only one such item, creature, 
or situation per casting. Situations and spells af- 
fected by the ray include: 

¢ Webs (natural and mystical) or viscous 
globs immediately melt away, one patch of 
webbing or glob totally vanishing. 

e Mechanical or magical traps are automati- 
cally sprung, affecting normally any crea- 
tures or objects in their area of effect. 

e Knots are untied; chains, straps, and other 
restrictive devices fall loose. 

e An entangling device or situation brought 
about by spells is negated and those affected 
are freed. 

e A locked and barred door is opened upon 
the ruby ray striking it. 

* A wizard locked or held portal is opened. 

* A 1-foot-wide hole is opened in a wall of 
force or force cage. The force structure ts 
not destroyed by the spell, but the hole may 
allow escape and opens a channel for spells 
to pass through. 

e An illusion struck by the ray is dispelled im- 
mediately. 

¢ A transformed individual, whether turned to 
stone or polymorphed, is returned to his 
original state. A system shock roll is re- 
quired if normally necessary. 

* A magic jar spell is reversed, freeing the 
controlled individual and returning the in- 
truder to the magic jar. 


The ruby ray cannot pass through solid ob- 
jects, nor effect creatures or items in other di- 
mensions. It cannot pierce an antimagic shell or 


prismatic sphere. It cannot affect any magics or 
situations other than those listed. 

The material component is a ruby worth at 
least 1,000 gp, which crumbles to dust when the 
spell ends. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in the tome, 
Unique Mageries. 


Run 


(Enchantment) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 4 hrs. + 1d4 hrs. 

Area of Effect: One or more persons 
Saving Throw: None 


Only persons (cf. charm person: human, 
demihuman, or humanoid of man-size or 
smaller) in their natural form are affected by 
this spell. The run spell enables the person to 
run at twice normal speed, up to a movement 
rate of 24. This pace can be maintained for 5 to 
8 hours without tiring. However, after so run- 
ning the individual must spend a like number of 
hours resting, as well as drinking plenty of liq- 
uids and eating heartily. 

For every 2 levels of experience of the spell- 
caster, another person can be affected: at 4th 
level, 2 persons can be empowered to run; at 6th 
level, 3 persons; etc. The spell is mostly used for 
quick travel by messengers, scouts, and others 
who must travel far and quickly. Generally, it in- 
creases a day’s foot travel rate by 70% to 100%. 

The material component of this spell is an 
elixir made of spring water and the oil of 5 to 8 
beans of a spurge (caster oil) plant. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. (Originally pub- 
lished in Unearthed Arcana.) 


Run — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a single creature to run at 


Fo EN 


757 


~ Ruornil’s Footprints i 


triple ground movement rate. Thus a creature 
with a normal running movement of 12 has a 
ground movement of 36 while under the effect 
of this spell. This spell can affect most creatures 
with legs, including horses and summoned crea- 
tures, but it is not cumulative unnaturally fast 
movement or with magic, such as, for example, 
a quickling or creature affected by a kaste spell. 
Creatures moving at their maximum move- 
ment gain a +2 bonus to their Armor Class 
while under the effect of this spell. This spell 
does not affect other movement rates, such as 
flight, burrowing, swimming, and climbing. 
The material component is a rabbit’s foot. 
Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


Ruornil’s Footprints 
Reversed form, see Ruornil’s tracks. 


Ruornil’s Tracks 


(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: | turn/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This alteration enables the recipient to leave in 
his wake the tracks of a native animal instead of 
his own, thus thwarting those who attempt to 
track his movements. Those in pursuit can iden- 
tify the true nature of the tracks only if they make 
successful tracking proficiency checks with a —2 
penalty. 

For every experience level above 3rd, the 
wizard can affect one additional creature. Thus, a 
5th-level wizard could affect himself and two 
other individuals. The spell can affect creatures 
up to large size, so a wizard could prevent horses 
or other mounts from leaving identifiable tracks. 

The reverse of this spell, Ruornil 5 footprints, 
causes affected individuals to leave deep, notice- 
able footprints or other marks of passage in their 
wake. These tracks can be followed easily by 
anyone. 

The material component of either version is a 
handful of ashes sprinkled at the caster’s feet. 

Notes: Common in the BIRTHRIGHT setting; 
otherwise, rare or very rare. 


758 


Rusting Grasp 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy, Water) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


By casting this spell, the wizard gains the 
power to corrode ferrous metals and alloys at a 
touch. Iron and iron-based alloys such as steel, 
meteoric iron, and adamantite are affected, but 
noble metals such as gold, silver, and copper are 
not subject to reduction through rusting. Any 
ferrous metal touched by the wizard must make 
an item saving throw vs. disintegration (usually 
a 17 or better on 1d20) or be destroyed. Magical 
arms or armor apply their bonus to this save, so 
a sword +3 would gain a +3 to its roll. Other 
magical metal items may receive a +1 to a +6 
bonus based on the DM’s estimate of their 
power. 

The wizard employs rusting grasp in combat 
by simply touching the equipment of metal- 
wearing characters or creatures; a successful 
attack roll against the character’s unarmored AC 
is required. If the armor touched fails its save, 
rusting grasp permanently destroys 2d4 points 
of AC through corrosion. For example, plate 
mail +2 (base AC 1) that fails its item saving 
throw is reduced to a base AC of between 3 and 
9. 

Weapons are more difficult to grasp; the 
wizard must make an attack roll against AC 4, 
modified by the opponent’s Dexterity, in order 
to touch the weapon. A weapon failing its 
saving throw vs. disintegration is destroyed. A 
deliberate touch is required, the wizard doesn’t 
corrode weapons simply by being hit. 

Against metallic creatures, rusting grasp in- 
flicts 2d8+1 point of damage per successful 
attack. The spell lasts for one round per level, 
and the wizard can make one touch attack per 
round. 

The material component is an antenna from a 
rust monster. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Rust to Metal 


Reversed form, see metal to rust. 


- 


Rusting Touch — Witch r 


Rusting Touch — Witch 
(Alteration) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: Object touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


A witch who casts this spell gains the power 
of a cursed touch that affects metals of any type 
with a highly destructive version of the rust 
monster’s touch. Normal ferrous metals—iron, 
steel, and various alloys—are destroyed in- 
stantly; nonferrous metals and alloys such as 
gold, platinum, copper, and even brass are enti- 
tled to an item saving throw vs. disintegration (a 
roll of 17 or higher on a d20) to avoid destruc- 
tion. Protection from evil effects adjust the 
saving throw. 

A magical item of ferrous metal is allowed a 
saving throw vs. disintegration at a -3 penalty, 
modified by the item’s magical enchantment. 
For example, a sword +1 has a base save of 17 
with a total penalty of —2, saving on a 19 or 20. 


759 


A magical item of nonferrous metal is allowed a 
saving throw vs. disintegration with a +2 bonus. 

If this spell is used against a creature of living 
or animated metal, the creature must make a 
successful saving throw vs. death magic or be 
destroyed, suffering 3d8+3 points of damage if 
successful. 

If used in combat to destroy an opponent’s 
armor, a successful attack roll against AC 5 is 
required, adjusted for the wearer’s Dexterity and 
magic-based adjustments to Armor Class. 

Destroying a weapon wielded by an enemy is 
more difficult, requiring an attack roll against 
AC 4 adjusted for the wielder’s Dexterity. The 
witch must touch the item to be affected, not the 
other way around, so she can be injured or killed 
by opponents wielding steel weapons. 

The witch can affect as many items as she can 
touch in the spell’s duration. Unusually large 
objects (1,000 pounds or more) may require 
more than one round of contact to destroy, at the 
DM's discretion. 

The material component is a rust monster 
scale. 

Notes: Restricted to evil witches; rare. (Up- 
dated from Dracon Magazine.) 


Sacremon’s Acid Wit 


Sacremon’s Acid Wit 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a large floating 
mouth, similar to a magic mouth appears and 
follows the victim. The mouth criticizes, ha- 
rangues, insults, and berates the victim in the 
victim’s native tongue. If the victim is fighting, 
he suffers a —2 penalty to all initiative and 
combat rolls, as he is distracted by the constant 
barrage of verbiage from the mouth. The mouth 
is immune to physical attacks, although a dispel 
magic spell will destroy it. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Safe Fall 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Up to 100 sq. ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


Safe fall resembles the 1st-level wizard spell 
feather fall, but is more versatile. The spell can 
slow the falling rate of any number of objects 
(or creatures) that hit its area of effect; it can 
also deflect incoming missiles. Only solid ob- 
jects are affected by the spell. 

Safe fall creates an invisible, magical sheet 
that must be anchored to at least two solid, dia- 
metrically opposed points, such as opposite 
walls. The precise dimensions of the spell’s area 
are chosen when the spell is cast, but the area 
must be rectangular. The area must have sides of 
at least 1 foot in length (acceptable dimensions 
include | foot x 100 feet, 2 feet x 50 feet, 4 feet 
x 25 feet, etc.). A side’s length cannot exceed 
the length of any item to which the side is an- 
chored. 

Safe fall eliminates inertia in one direction, 
either forward (horizontal) or downward (verti- 
cal). If the effect is oriented vertically (as a 


wall), it eliminates forward inertia. If the 
effect is oriented horizontally (as a 
floor), it eliminates downward inertia. 
For example, if the effect is positioned verti- 
cally to prevent missile fire, a missile loses its 
forward inertia when it hits the effect, then falls 
straight to the ground. Should the effect be an- 
chored so the safe fall area is at an angle, it still 
eliminates inertia in only one direction; a safe 


fall positioned closer to the horizontal would 


eliminate only downward inertia, and one posi- 
tioned closer to the vertical would eliminate 
only forward inertia. If the spell is positioned at 
exactly 45 degrees, the DM should randomly 
determine in which direction inertia is blocked. 

An object’s inertia is eliminated when any 
part of it touches the area of effect as long as the 
weight of that object does not exceed 200 
pounds plus 200 pounds per level of the caster; 
larger objects are unaffected. If the object falls 
downward to hit the area of safe fall, its down- 
ward inertia is harmlessly dissipated when it 
hits the area of effect; for the distance from the 
effect to the floor or ground, the object falls as if 
it had begun falling at the safe fall area of effect. 

Safe fall can be cast directly onto a floor, as 
long as it can still be anchored to vertical walls, 
fences, or other objects on two opposite sides. If 
this is done, a falling object’s inertia is elimi- 
nated instantaneously as it hits the floor, pre- 
venting falling damage. 

The material component of this spell is a 
square inch of a close-woven net. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Darssons 
Notes. 


Safeguarding 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Use of this spell protects the wizard and 
anyone in the area of effect from damage caused 
by the rebounding of the wizard’s spells. This 
includes damage from a fireball cast in an area 
too small for its effects, a reflected lightning 
bolt, or any other offensive area spell that over- 
laps the safeguarding 5 area of effect. The pro- 


a Sand Form r 


tection is effective against spells of 7th level 
and lower. The protection does not apply to 
damage from spells rebounded by any form of 
magical spell turning or reflection. This spell 
does not protect the wizard against damage 
from spells or attacks cast by enemies or other 
party members. 

A wizard who has cast safeguarding is free to 
move and act normally. The spell’s effect is 
always centered on him, regardless of his ac- 
tions. Other creatures are free to enter and exit 
the area of effect. 

An area-effect spell cast by the wizard takes 
effect normally, but is negated within the area of 
the safeguarding spell. This applies only to area 
spells centered outside the radius of the safe- 
guarding spell. If the wizard casts an offensive 
area-effect spell within the area of the safe- 
guarding, the protection is immediately negated 
and those within the area suffer full damage 
from the spell. The wizard is free to cast nonof- 
fensive area-effect spells and individually tar- 
geted spells within the protected area. 

The material component is a piece of pre- 
served skin from any creature that possesses 
natural magic resistance. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Salamander’s Seismic Seizure 
Lost spell. This 6th-level spell was reputed to 
cause a huge and temporary crack in the earth. 
Those falling in and unable to escape before it 
closed perished. Its effects on structures re- 
mains unrecorded. 


Sam Shock 
Sam Shock is a legendary wizard credited with 
creating the following spells (from POLYHEDRON 
Magazine): capacitor farseer, farspeaker, flash- 
light, lightning rod, magic ear, and ozone cloud. 


ey 


Sand Form 
(Necromancy) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables an individual touched by 
the caster to animate a body made of sand im- 


mediately. The recipient wills the sand body to 
move and act, and can even cast spells through 
it—all while his own body is safely up to 100 
miles away. The sand body resembles the recip- 
ient as closely as a pile of sand can; unless illu- 
sionary magic is cast upon it, few will believe it 
to be living flesh. 

The recipient (who may be the caster) can 

see, hear, and sense through the sand form. The 
form can fight, talk hoarsely, and carry things— 
in fact, it can perform all tasks less exacting 
than lock-picking, sewing, and similar handi- 
crafts. It can even go adventuring and earn ex- 
perience points for its “master.” 
The recipient’s mind functions in two places si- 
multaneously—within the sand form, and 
within his real body. The real body can still 
sense (see, hear, smell, etc.) exactly as before, 
even benefiting from enhancements such as a 
magical ring. The tradeoff is paralysis. Besides 
breathing, blinking, and moving his eyes, the re- 
cipient cannot move his real body while the 
sand form is animated. (A few friendly guards 
are a wise precaution. So is a pleasant or strate- 
gic view.) The real body does not need to eat, 
drink, or sleep. It heals damage as if resting, re- 
gardless of the sand body’s activity. 

The recipient is vulnerable when his sand 
form is the target of magical and psionic powers 
that affect the mind. The sand form can be 
fooled by illusion spells to the same degree as 
the recipient himself. They are of “like mind.” 
Physical attacks against the sand form don’t 
damage the real body, but they do harm the sand 
form. The form has a number of hit points equal 
to the recipient’s normal maximum (even if the 
recipient is currently crippled). The sand form 
has the recipient’s natural Armor Class, too. It 
can wear armor and carry weaponry, with the 
same restrictions that apply to the recipient. The 
sand body does not benefit from anything worn 
or carried by the recipient’s real body, however. 
Cuts and bruises on the sand body are reflected 
by crumbling sand. Otherwise, the sand body 
can withstand attacks just as well (or as poorly) 
as the recipient can normally. There are two ex- 
ceptions: if the sand body is immersed in water 
for more than a turn, or exposed to heavy rain 
for the same time, it disintegrates. If the sand 
form drops to 0 or fewer hit points or disinte- 
grates, the owner must make a system shock 
roll. Failure indicates that the real body also 
dies. 

The recipient of this spell can abandon his 
link with the sand form at any time, without 


~ Sand Gems r 


harm to himself. The sand form collapses into 
loose sand and the recipient immediately re- 
gains control of his real body. The same thing 
occurs when the spell ends, or if the sand form 
moves beyond the 100-mile limit or to another 
plane. Anything carried or worn by the sand 
form simply falls to the ground. 

If the recipient of this spell wishes to teleport 
later, note that locales visited by the sand form 
will count at least as “seen casually.” While the 
sand form is animated, the recipient also can 
direct it to “carefully study” a locale. 

The material components of this spell are a 
fistful of sand and a hair or piece of skin from 
the recipient. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Sand Gems 
(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: [Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This rare spell turns a handful of sand into 
1d12 real, permanent, cut and polished gems. 
They are always amber or red in hue, and of any 
type and size visualized by caster, so long as 
they are small enough to all fit in the caster’s 
closed fist. Their value is equal to 1d6 x 1,000 
gp, regardless of their size. Each time this spell 
is cast, the caster must make three saving throws 
vs. spell. Each time one of these saving throws 
tails, the caster permanently loses | hit point. 

Notes: Known to the desert mages of the 
Anauroch region of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Sand Healing 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to use a handful 


762 


of sand, a drop of water, spittle or tears, and a 
drop of blood or sap, to heal wounds. Applied to 
the wounds, the components cure 2d4 points of 
damage, but can’t heal blindness, disease, in- 
sanity, or ongoing poison effects: only physical 
hurts. 

Notes: Restricted to the desert mages of the 
Anauroch region of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting and those trained by them. 


Sand Jambiya 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Sand) Cy 
Level: 1 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: 1 rd./level + 1d6 rds. 
Area of Effect: 1 item 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell turns a fistful of sand into a keen- 
edged, dun-colored metallic blade, held firmly 
by the caster. Like an actual jambiya (a kind of 
dagger), it is double-edged and curved. The 
blade can measure no more than twice the 
length of the caster’s own hand, nor weigh more 
than five pounds. The caster decides the size. 
The weapon is as hard as steel, but cannot be af- 
fected by magnetic forces or heat, and it is nota 
good conductor. 

The sand jambiya deals 1d4+1 points of 
damage. For determining which creatures or ob- 
jects are vulnerable to it, the blade is considered 
a+] magical weapon. 

A sand jambiya crumbles into loose sand 
under the following conditions: when it’s dis- 
pelled, upon the caster’s mental command, upon 
the caster’s death or loss of consciousness, or at 
the end of the spell’s duration. 

When combined with flving jambiya, this 
spell can create an airborne weapon. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Sand Quiet 


Aka sand whisper. 


Sand Seal 
(Alteration, Conjuration) 
(Province: Sand) 


“ey 


Level: 3 
Range: 20 yds. 


Sand Slumber 


Casting Time: 3 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 doorway or similar portal 
Saving Throw: None 


When casting this spell, the wizard must 
throw a handful of sand at the doorway to be 
sealed. When the spell is complete, sand swirls 
in the doorway, coalescing into a solid barrier. 

This magical barrier of sand has 1d6 hit 
points per level of the caster and an AC of 8. To 
remove the sand seal, it must be attacked and its 
hit points reduced to zero. If the attack roll is a 
1, the weapon is shattered (a magical weapon 
receives a saving throw vs. crushing blow, ad- 
justed for its bonus). If the weapon is a hand, 
foot, or other natural appendage, the attacker 
suffers 1d6 points of damage. The sand seal can 
be magically dispelled. The material component 
of this spell is a small lump of wax. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 


bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Sand Shadow 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 3 hrs. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The sand shadow conceals one being com- 
pletely as long as the recipient is mostly or 
wholly in shadow. Only those using magical de- 
tection can see him. If the recipient moves from 
shadow to shadow by crossing an unshaded 
area, he suddenly appears in the light, then van- 
ishes again, and can do this repeatedly. 

The spell lasts three hours. It cannot be ended 
prematurely by will of the caster or the recipi- 
ent. However, dispel magic ends the sand 
shadow effect when cast upon the recipient. A 
light spell also makes the recipient visible 
again, but only while he remains within the 
light’s area of effect. A concealed recipient 
might also reveal his position by picking up an 
object—which remains visible unless a separate 
sand shadow spell is cast upon it. 

The recipient can attack and be attacked 
without disrupting the sand shadow spell. 


Attack rolls against the recipient suffer a —4 
THACO penalty. The recipient’s vision is not al- 
tered by the spell. 

The casting of this spell requires a pinch of 
dry sand and an eyelash, which are tossed into 
the air. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


ey 


Sand Shroud 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes sand or loose earth to open 
up under a target like a grave, and then swallow 
it up instantly. Enough sand or earth must be 
present—for example, the spell works in a 
desert setting or barren field, but not on culti- 
vated land or solid rock. A target creature or 
object must be dead, undead, or never have 
lived. Its size must be “Large” or less. It is 
buried 60 feet deep, without any mark or trace 
on the surface of its grave. 

Intelligent undead, animated magical items, 
and creatures able to assume gaseous form are 
imprisoned for only 2d8 rounds. The spell is 
typically used to quickly hide treasure or the ev- 
idence of a fatal fight. 

The material component of this specialized 
magic is a lump of mud, clay, dried dung, or 
other powdery substance, which is crushed 
during spellcasting. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


dy 


Sand Slumber 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1d4 + 2 rds. 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


763 


ss Sand Sword r 


dy 


This spell causes a magical sleep to come 
upon a single, living being of any species, class, 
or level, provided the individual normally needs 
sleep. The spell cannot affect undead creatures 
or magical constructs. It can, however, affect 
genies and extradimensional beings. 

The target creature is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell. If the save fails, the creature instantly 
sinks into a slumber for the duration of the 
spell, typically falling down and dropping held 
items. This fall never awakens the creature, but 
any subsequent violent impact or attack will do 


so. Noises alone cannot rouse the creature. If 


the save succeeds, the creature is merely 
slowed—just as if affected by the 3rd-level 
wizard spell—for a single round. 

The material component of this spell is a 
pinch of fine sand, cast into or sprinkled upon 
the face of the being to be affected. In combat, a 
successful attack roll is required to apply the 
sand. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


i if aA i 
coll dele 


Or ss 
ct yin (ee 
eee . il a 


N 
E 
"1 ` MEEN 


eri 


a h; a Ai 
Ay aft ” s < 
ae 4 ig Ws 
{ A Ft On 
ox 


|e, 
m ) r . tgi y 


764 


Sand Sword 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: 1 rd./level + 1d6 rds. 
Area of Effect: | item 

Saving Throw: None 


Like sand jambiva, this spell creates a keen- 
edged, metallic blade that is as hard as steel, is 
unharmed by magnetic forces or heat, and is a 
poor conductor—all from a small parcel of sand. 
In this case, however, the blade is larger, and 
cannot be coupled with the flying jambiya spell. 
The sand sword can be as long as the caster’s 
arm, but still cannot weigh more than five 
pounds. The weapon deals 2d4 points of damage 
per strike, and is considered a weapon of +1 en- 
chantment for purposes of what it can hit. It can 
be wielded by someone other than the caster. 

A sand sword crumbles into loose sand if the 
sword is dispelled, if the spell’s duration ends, 
or if the caster so wills. It also disintegrates 
upon the caster’s death, but not if the wizard 
merely falls unconscious. 

The sand sword can be created anywhere, if 
about two pounds of sand—the material compo- 
nent—are available. The sand can be reused. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


“ay 


Sand Tools 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 4 + 1d4 hrs. (maximum) 

Area of Effect: Creates one or more tools 
Saving Throw: None 


Mechanicians developed this spell so they 
wouldn’t need to be without their special tools. 
When cast, it magically fashions a small tool set 
(useful for working on mechanicals) from a 
small area of sand. 

The spell creates a number of standard tools: 
hammer, wrench, screwdriver, crowbar, etc. All 
these tools are formed from sand but have the 


OSOS 


~ Sand Whisper r 


T 


i 


strength of iron. Additionally, they adjust their 
size to fit the current need, making them quite 
useful by duplicating a wide variety of tool 
sizes and uses. Thieves’ tools cannot be dupli- 
cated in this way. 

However, these tools cannot be carried about 
and used whenever needed. The spell ties them 
into the task at hand, and when that task is com- 
pleted the spell expires. Thus, while the spell 
may last seven hours, if the job the tools were 
created for only takes three hours, the tools will 
disappear at that time. Also, if anyone attempts 
to use the tools as weapons, they immediately 
dissipate. 

The material component for this spell is a 
small bagful of sand from which the tools can 
be drawn as needed. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


ey 


Sand Whisper 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | rd./level + 1d4 rds. 


Area of Effect: | creature or item 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes silence to reign in the area 
immediately surrounding a touched item or 
creature. The effects resemble those of the 
priest spell silence, 75’ radius, but without the 
area effect. The target is muffled: All sounds 
emanating from the target-——including those 
caused by something striking it—are transmit- 
ted far away and emitted in a random location 
(defined below). Likewise, sounds created by 
something held by or attached to the target are 
randomly displaced. 

The recipient item or being is allowed a 
saving throw. If the saving throw succeeds, the 
spell fails and is lost. As usual, a recipient who 
wishes to be silenced (such as the caster him- 
self) can waive his saving throw. Unlike the si- 
lence spell, sand whisper does not prevent the 
recipient from speaking words of activation, 
such as those for magical items. Nor does it pre- 
vent him from uttering the vocal components of 
spellcasting. The recipient’s ability to cast a 
spell is unchanged as long as that spell’s effect 
is not sound-based. (The shout spell, for exam- 
ple, won’t work.) Noise-based attacks (such as 
the wail of a banshee or roar of an androsphinx) 
are not canceled. They still occur, but like any 
sound, their effects are turned elsewhere. 

Where, then, do the muffled sounds go? They 
emanate from random locations as far from 
their actual source as 2d6 miles plus 1 mile per 
level of the caster. The new location may lie in 
any of the eight cardinal directions from the 
source——north, south, east, west, and their com- 
binations—but not up or down. (The DM rolls 
1d8 and assigns a direction to each result.) 
Other individuals at these locations can hear the 
sounds clearly. These (often confused) individu- 
als are vulnerable to the effects of any sound- 
based attack cast against the recipient. 

Due to the injury, confusion, and annoyance 
such errant sounds can cause, several local 
emirs have forbidden the use of this spell within 
20 miles of their palaces. Other rulers both 
permit and enjoy these interruptions. If the 
errant sounds appear interesting, the emirs may 
send out guards or wizards to investigate. Ad- 
venturers should check local customs before 
casting sand whisper. 

The material component of this spell is two 
handfuls of sand, sprinkled upon the recipient. 
In combat, a successful attack roll may be re- 
quired to apply the sand. 


eo rl 


765 


~ Sand Worm | 


Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting and among the desert mages of the 
Anauroch area of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 


ting; otherwise, very rare. 


Sand Worm 
(Necromancy) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 6 turns/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell turns the recipient into a “sand 
worm”—a man-sized, mouthless, mute, mottled 
thing that no longer needs to breathe, eat, drink, 
or eliminate. It can burrow through sand with 
ease to hide or sleep beneath the surface. The 
worm can sense major temperature changes, 
such as nightfall on the surface above, but tem- 
perature extremes do not harm it. 

While underground, its infrared sense also 
allows it to detect warm-blooded creatures who 
are man-sized or larger within 30 feet; above 
ground the range is doubled. Transformation 
into worm-form heals 2d4 points of damage for 
the recipient. A sand worm can wriggle on the 
surface with a movement rate of 9. It can wrig- 
gle at the same rate upon a sea floor or lake 
bottom, though it can’t swim. When burrowing 
beneath the sand, its movement rate increases to 
12. The sand worm can carry objects up to the 
size and weight of an armored man—provided 
someone else ties the cargo to the worm. The 
worm has no limbs (or mouth) with which to 
hold anything. 

A sand worm’s Armor Class is 6 and its 
THACO is 17. It can fight only by rolling over 
or slapping at an opponent with its bulk, inflict- 
ing 3d4 points of crushing damage per round. 
The spell recipient’s intellect and senses are un- 
changed, but the worm cannot speak or cast 
spells. Further, the recipient cannot escape his 
worm-form before the spell expires unless the 
caster wills it, or unless someone applies dispel 
magic or a similar spell. 

The material component of this spell is any 
live worm, which must be swallowed by the 
caster. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


766 


Sand Worm: AC 6; MV 9 Br 12; hp As 
creature; THACO 17; #AT 1; Dmg 3d4; SZ L. 


Sandcone 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Sand) 


ey 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Cone 10 ft. deep/level with 10- 
ft. diameter/level 

Saving Throw: None 


With this spell a wizard can excavate a cone- 
shaped area of sand at a location upon which he 
concentrates. The base of the cone is toward the 
surface; the tip points downward. Excavated 
sand (or dust) is transported to a random loca- 
tion 1d6 miles away. Often, the sand is dis- 
persed in a windy gust. Only sand and dust are 
moved; rocks, plants, animals, and buried ob- 
jects remain in place. As a result, this spell 
works best in regions of great expanses of sand, 
such as open desert. 

The sandcone spell keeps the area clear of 
sand as long as the caster remains conscious 
and concentrating. When this ceases, sand falls 
in normally. The cone’s magic does not prevent 
sand slides or collapses if another individual 
begins excavating around the cone. 

The sandcone spell enables the wizard to dig 
toward anticipated water and uncover buried 
beings or things. It can also create a prison or 
trap. For the last purpose, the caster can create a 
pit in the loose sand beneath an enemy’s feet. 
When the foe falls in, the caster deliberately 
ends the magic, trapping the opponent at the 
bottom of the pit. 

The material components of this spell are the 
hair of a desert rat (jerboa) and a pinch of sand. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Sands of Time 


ahi 


(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 


_ Sands of Time r 


Duration: 1 rd. 
Area of Effect: Up to 10 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, a wizard can reverse the ef- 
fects of aging and erosion on any nonliving, ma- 
terial object. The degree of aging that can be 
reversed depends upon the level of the caster. 

The table also shows the average effects of 
time and the elements on various materials 
(items protected from the elements might take 
longer to erode, but use these times for all 
restoration). Papyrus and wooden objects fade 
over time, making it difficult, but not impossible 
to read or identify surface features. Fragile ob- 
jects must survive an item saving throw vs. fall 
each time they are used; brittle items must sur- 
vive vs. crushing blow. Crumbled items are un- 
usable but still identifiable as papyrus or wood; 
dust is completely unidentifiable and unusable. 

Stone and metal items wear away over time, 
and their shapes smooth out until the item is 
completely worn away. Paint indicates that arti- 
ficial coloration is gone or unrecognizable; 
etching means carved letters or pictures are 
worn away; relief indicates that deeply carved 


letters or images are severely eroded; form indi- 
cates that time has eroded away all but the basic 
form of the original stone or metal. The frac- 
tions 1⁄2 and % tell when the item has lost that 
amount of its original mass. Dust means the 
original item is completely gone, eroded away 
to nothing. 

An 18th-level wizard could, for example, turn 
even a pile of dust back into the new, clean 
piece of papyrus it once was, turn the crumbled 
remains of a staff back to its original form, or 
even restore a painted map on the wall of a 
temple constructed of soft stone. This spell 
cannot restore damage done to an object by any- 
thing other than natural aging or erosion; for ex- 
ample, it could not recover a wand whose final 
charge was expended. Use the table as a guide 
for other objects that don’t exactly fit into these 
categories. 

The reverse of this spell, accelerate erosion, 
allows the wizard to speed up the erosion of any 
nonliving material object. In the example above, 
the 18th-level wizard could turn a clean piece of 
papyrus to dust, turn a new staff of wood into 
crumbled pieces, or erase a painted map from a 
wail of stone. 


Sands Of Time Table 
Time Effects on: 
Level Reversed Papyrus Wood Soft Stone Hard Stone Metal 
9 30 days Faded - - — - 
10 l year Fragile - -~ -— - 
ll 2 years Brittle Faded _ _ - 
12 5 years Crumbled Fragile -= ~ _ 
13 10 years Dust Brittle — - — 
14 20 years — Crumbled Paint — — 
15 50 years — — - — — 
16 100 years — Dust Etching - _ 
17 200 years - — Relief Paint — 
18 500 years -— — Form ~ Paint 
19 1,000 years _ _ 1/2 Etching — 
20 2,000 years — — 3/4 _ Etching 
21 5,000 years - _ Dust Relief — 
22 10,000 years - — — — Relief 
23 20,000 years — — — Form — 
24 50,000 years — — — ~ Form 
25 100,000 years - — - 1/2 — 
26 200,000 years — - ~ ~ 1/2 
27 500,000 years — — — 3/4 — 
28 1,000,000 years — ~ - - 3/4 
29 2,000,000 years - - ~ Dust ~ 
30 5,000,000 years - — — — Dust 


a 


767 


Sandspray 


The material components for this spell are a 
tiny hour glass (during the spell, the sands run 
up) or for the reverse, a miniature sundial that 
timed the passage of at least 1 year. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from the 
Dark SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. Option- 
ally, uncommon for chronomancers. 

Sandspray 


“ey 


(Alteration) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: 2 


The sandspray spell causes a pillar of sand up 
to 30 feet high to erupt around one creature. The 
blinding spray causes 1d6 damage for every two 
levels of the caster (round down) and requires no 
attack roll. The creature is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell for half damage. Even a creature 
that saves will be blinded by sand for 1d4+1 
rounds. While blinded, the creature cannot cast 
spells and attacks with a 4 penalty. 


The material component ts a pinch of sand. 
Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Sandstorm — Old Empire 
(Evocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster creates a 
vortex of violently churning sand. All creatures 
within the area of effect suffer 3d10 points of 
damage. The sand blinds creatures while they 
are in its area of effect, and there is a 50% 
chance that any creature trying to move in the 
area falls down. Torches and small fires are ex- 
tinguished by the storm. 

The material component for this spell is a 
fistful of sand. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


Sandswallow 
(Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: | yard/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell can be used only in an area of sand, 
quicksand, mud, or bog. It causes a circular area 
of the surface to suddenly collapse 30 down- 
ward, so the surrounding sand or mud rushes in 
to fill the hole. Any creatures in the affected 
area must save vs. spell to “swim” and avoid 
being buried (they finish atop the morass, re- 
duced to half movement rate and lacking any 
items they were holding; these are buried). 

Buried beings can dig upwards 6 feet each 
round in which they make a successful Dexterity 
Check. After the second round of imprisonment, 
any creature without a magical source of air, or 
the natural ability to exist in rock (for example, 
an umber hulk) suffers 1d4 suffocation damage 


x Sathrah’s Ingenious Recollection r 


per round. This continues until death occurs or 
the creature digs its way free. In the round in 
which they emerge, buried creatures cannot 
move from the spot in which they come up, and 
all attacks against them automatically hit. 

Notes: Known by the desert mages of the 
Anauroch area of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Sargasso 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10 x 10 ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a mass of thick seaweed in 
a body of water, making it difficult to sail 
through. The approximate depth of the seaweed 
is 5 feet. The caster can create a 10 x 10-foot 
mass per level—about 35 feet x 20 feet at 7th 
level. Ships sailing through the weed have their 
speed diminished by 2 mph if they are sail-pow- 
ered, or 3 mph if they are oar-powered. Ships re- 
duced zero speed or less are entangled (as the 
spell), and unable to move. At least half the 
ship’s length must be in the area of effect for its 
movement to be reduced. A large ship might not 
be affected by a small sargasso region, even if it 
sails right through. 

Swimming creatures have their movement re- 
duced by 6. Air-breathing creatures reduced to a 
move of 0 or less must make a successful saving 
throw vs. death or be trapped below the surface. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small amount of seaweed and a handful of live 
brine shrimp, which must be tossed into the 
water. 

Notes: Common in the Sea of Fallen Stars 
area of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, uncom- 
mon for Sea mages; otherwise, rare. 


If the Ships and the Sea rules are used, a 
sailing ship loses 4 of its base movement 
rate during any round in which it moves 
through a sargasso region able to affect it. 
Thus, a ship with a base move of 12 loses 4 
in the weeds. If the sail-driven movement is 
only 6, then the actual movement rate is 2. 


Oared ships lose ?⁄ of their base move- 
ment rate, and may be delayed 1d6 rounds 
after they leave the area if their blades 
become fouled with weed. Rower fatigue 
is doubled in the weed. For example, with a 
base movement of 9, the effective move- 
ment of an oared ship is only 3, and the 
rowers will tire more quickly. 


Sathrah’s Ingenious Recollection 
(Alteration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This potent spell allows the wizard to replace 
spells he currently has memorized with others 
of the same level from his spellbook. Spells al- 
ready cast cannot be replaced. The wizard can 
exchange up to one spell level per experience 
level in this fashion, so an 18th-level caster 
could exchange three 6th-level spells on the 
spot, or two 5th-level and one 8th-level spell, or 
any other combination up to his total number of 
experience levels that he likes. 

Those who know this spell usually can feel 
safe memorizing whatever spells they want. 
After all, if those spells seem inappropriate for a 
situation that develops, the character can 
change them. For example, if a wizard planning 
to study all day memorizes read magic, con- 
sume knowledge, and similar spells, then comes 
under attack by an invisible stalker, the wizard 
can change these spells to a more appropriate 
offensive and defensive selection. 

However, this spell cannot always save a 
wizard. Sathrah himself, one of the most self- 
important figures ever to teach at the Great 
School of Glantri, recently fell 100 feet to his 
death from the roof of his tower——presumably 
while trying to obtain fly. Some former stu- 
dents were disciplined for snickering over the 
tragedy, theorizing that Sathrah should have de- 
veloped a faster method instead of an ingenious 
one. The mighty wizard Sathrah preferred to 
call this spell Sathrah'’s ingenious method for 
the instantaneous recollection of dweomers and 
enchantments, but most scholars familiar with 


AO O O nn: 


769 


~ Sathrah’s Ingenious Method of Instantaneous Recollection of Dweomers and Enchantments r 


the work have reduced this grandiose title to 
Sathrah’s ingenious recollection. 

Notes: Common in the Mystara setting; oth- 
erwise, very rare. A PC using this spell should 
not be given unlimited time to consider his 
choices. 


Optional Rule: In tournament play (and 
otherwise at the DM’s option), the player 
must choose and physically (legibly) 
record his new spells within 60 seconds, as 
timed by the DM, with failure leaving the 
original selection unchanged. 


Sathrath’s Ingenious Method of 
Instantaneous Recollection of 
Dweomers and Enchantments 

A MYSTARA setting spell, aka Sathrath’s inge- 
nious recollection. 


7 


' 
ni 
hz 


oo 


770 


Satire — Bard 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1-12 days 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 individual 
Saving Throw: Special 


The use of this powerful song is a bit tricky. It 
reflects the ability of a high level bard to 
ridicule a prominent public figure who behaves 
incorrectly. The scandalous song has the effect 
of halving its target’s Charisma until he repents 
and atones for his actions. However, the target’s 
actions must truly be objectionable in the pre- 
vailing moral climate of the area (DM’s deci- 
sion, based on the prevailing alignment of the 
region); otherwise, the satire is unjust and the 
bard’s own Charisma is halved instead, until he 
travels at least 50 leagues away, and does not 
return to the region for one full year. While 
singing nasty songs about the evil Duke is fun, 
woe to the bard unlucky enough to be caught in 
the act by the Duke’s men. 

The bard must perform publicly before a 
sizeable audience, at least once per day for a 
number of days equal to a secret die roll made 
by the DM. The spell also requires the bard to 
play upon his instrument, while singing, as the 
verbal and somatic components of the spell. 

Notes: Restricted to bards; common. 


Scalding Spout 


(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


Holding out a hand palm forward, a wizard 
casting scalding spout projects a high-pressure 
stream of boiling water at a single target within 
range. The caster must make a successful attack 
roll with a +2 bonus to aim the blast. If he 
strikes his target, the victim suffers 2d6 points 
of impact damage, plus 1d6 points of heat 
damage for each level of the caster (up to 10d6 
points of heat damage). The target creature must 


> . 


Scapegoat 


roll two saving throws vs. spell: one to resist the 
impact and one to resist the heat. Success for 
either save cuts that portion of the spell’s 
damage in half. If the caster misses with his 
attack roll, the scalding spout may endanger an- 
other character near the target, at the DM’s dis- 
cretion. 

The material component is at least 1 ounce of 
fresh water. 

Notes: Common in the MYSTARA Setting; oth- 


erwise, very rare. 


Scalesnare — Hishna 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the caster to turn an ordi- 
nary snake skin into a tenaciously-grasping ten- 
tacle of hishna magic. The artisan enchants the 
skin by casting the spell upon it; he has one turn 
to use it. He must hurl it at a target creature 
within 10 feet, striking the victim with any part 
of the skin. All creatures are assumed to have an 
Armor Class of 10 against this attack. 

The scalesnare enwraps the target victim 
with a successful hit, pinning its arms (or front 
legs, if it is a four-footed creature). The en- 
snared creature can make no attacks with hands 
or forelegs, and loses any Dexterity benefit to 
Armor Class. A huge creature, or a large crea- 
ture with ogre strength or better can ignore the 
scalesnare attack. 

The snare remains effective for a full day. It 
cannot be cut by any nonmagical blade—even 
one of metal. A creature that can bite or slash 
creatures vulnerable to weapons of +1 enchant- 
ment or better can free itself in an amount of 
time decided by the DM. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Scapegoat 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius around 
creature touched 

Saving Throw: Special 


When a wizard finishes casting this enchant- 
ment on a living being, all those within a 20- 
foot radius believe the being is to blame for all 
of their troubles. The affected creatures attack 
the enchanted being until the spell wears off, the 
being dies, or a dispel magic is cast. 

Those within the area are affected if they 
have animal Intelligence or higher. Affected 
creatures are allowed a saving throw vs. spell 
each round to come to their senses. The caster is 
not affected by the enchantment. 

The material components are a pinch of 
goat’s hair and a stone that is thrown in the 
chosen target’s direction. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Pane 


ae F 
"i 


MORN 


A d Hy i ; N ‘i ' 
il! ny i 
hy ay 8 i 


magical limbo. The spell is sometimes used to 


y 


Scare 
—_i a 
| 


Scare 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Shadow) 

Level: 2 


Range: 30 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1d4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes creatures with fewer than 6 
Hit Dice or levels of experience to fall into fits 
of trembling and shaking. The frightened crea- 
tures have a —2 reaction adjustment and may 
drop items held if encumbered. If cornered, they 
fight, but with —1 penalties to attack rolls, 
damage rolls, and saving throws. 

Only elves, half-elves, and priests are al- 
lowed saving throws against this spell. This 
spell has no effect on the undead (skeletons, 
zombies, ghouls, and so on), or on upper or 
lower planar creatures of any sort. 

The material component used for this spell is 
a bit of bone from an undead skeleton, zombie, 


ghoul, ghast, or mummy. 


Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Scarf — Geisya 


(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 ft. 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 3 scarves/level 
Saving Throw: None 


The geisya casts the first half of this spell 
when a number of scarves are at hand—the 
casting requires one round. The scarves begin to 
vanish one by one; the geisya can make three 
scarves per level of experience vanish. The 
geisya casts the second part of this spell (which 
takes another two rounds) when the scarves are 
to reappear. The scarves can be maintained in 
the spell’s “holding area” for up to one day, at 
which time they automatically reappear around 
the geisya. A successful dispel magic spell 
makes the scarves reappear immediately. 

The geisya pulls scarves from her sleeves, the 
robes of her audience, another geisya’s ear, etc. 
The scarves are not detectable when in this 


transmit secret messages. 

Notes: Common for geisya in oriental set- 
tings, uncommon for wu jen and ninja spellcast- 
ers; otherwise, very rare. 


Scatterspray 
(Alteration) 


Level: | 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Upon casting this spell, the wizard can point 
to any collection of small, unsecured items 
grouped together within the spell’s range and 
cause them to fly off in all directions simultane- 
ously. The items fly 10 feet in random direc- 
tions, rebound against the limits of the spell, 
and bounce around inside the area of effect for 
one round, damaging those caught in the area. 

No less than six items nor more than 14 can 
be affected. The items can be no larger than 
chicken eggs and are typically such things as 
coins, marbles, gems, dice, or sling bullets. 
Items in pouches or otherwise restrained are not 
affected, though those in an open pouch can be 
affected by this spell. 

Creatures of size S generally take 1d6 points 
of damage from the shrapnel, while those of 
size M take 1d4 and those of size L and larger 
are unharmed. A successful saving throw vs. 
spell negates the damage. Small creatures flying 
into a scatterspray must successfully save vs. 
spell or be grounded, unable to fly, for 1d4 
turns. Size M or larger flying creatures are un- 
harmed. Magical protections such as shield, 
wall of force, Bigbv’s hands, and protection 


from normal missiles will protect those within 


from the effects of the spray. The caster is 
always unharmed by the spray, even if within its 
area of effect. 

The damage from the scatterspray spell as- 
sumes hard objects are used for missiles. Eggs, 
fruit, and other soft objects can be used, but this 
reduces damage by 2 points in all cases (down 
to a minimum of 0). Spellcasting is not possible 
from inside a spray if the spellcasting opponent 
fails a saving throw vs. spell. 

The material components of this spell are a 
flint and steel or tinderbox. 


, rn ne. 


772 


Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Briel s Book of 
Shadows. 


Scintillating Sphere 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 15 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell causes a grape-sized sphere to 
appear near the caster. The sphere than travels in 
a straight line at high speed to a location in sight 
of the spellcaster. 

Upon reaching this location, the sphere 
pulses outward twice and then disappears. 
Damage is caused by the second pulse only, and 
is electrical. Damage caused 1s 1d6 for every 
level of the caster, to a maximum of 10d6 (save 
vs. spell for half). Saving throws for items are 
made vs. lightning. 

The caster choses the location by pointing at 
the spot and speaking the distance for the 
sphere to travel. The sphere pulses at the dis- 
tance spoken. 

The material components are a small glass 
sphere and a pinch of iron oxide. The compo- 
nents are consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common in the Halruua region of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting (the Shining 
South); otherwise, very rare. 


Screen 
(Divination, [Ilusion) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell combines several elements to 
create a powerful protection from scrying and 
direct observation. When the spell is cast, the 
wizard dictates what will and will not be ob- 
served in the area of effect. 

The illusion created must be stated in general 
terms. Thus, the caster could specify the illusion 


of him and another playing chess for the dura- 
tion of the spell, but he could not have the illu- 
sionary chess players take a break, make dinner, 
and then resume their game. He could have a 
crossroads appear quiet and empty even while 
an army is actually passing through the area. He 
could specify that no one be seen (including 
passing strangers), that his troops be unde- 
tected, or even that every fifth man or unit 
should be visible. Once the conditions are set, 
they cannot be changed. 

Attempts to scry the area automatically 
detect the image stated by the caster with no 
saving throw allowed. Sight and sound are ap- 
propriate to the illusion created. A band of men 
standing in a meadow could be concealed as an 
empty meadow with birds chirping, etc. Direct 
observation may allow a saving throw (as per a 
normal illusion), if there is cause to disbelieve 
what is seen. Certainly onlookers in the area 
would become suspicious if the column of a 
marching army disappeared at one point to 
reappear at another! Even entering the area does 
not cancel the illusion or necessarily allow a 
saving throw, assuming the hidden beings take 
care to stay out of the way of those affected by 
the illusion. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


773 


h al 


~ Scrollsee — Hishna 7 


Scrollsee — Hishna 
(Divination, Enchantment) A 
Level: 2 
Range: Sight 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Up to 1 turn 
Area of Effect: 1-ft. x 1-ft. sheet 
Saving Throw: None 


The scrollsee spell allows the caster to record 
the events occurring around him on a piece of 
parchment, and to have those events replayed as 
moving pictures some time in the future. The 
caster must have a plain sheet of papyrus, 
parchment, or smooth bark. As he casts the 
spell, he looks at the scene he wishes to record. 
The casting can continue for up to a turn, 
though it requires full concentration from the 
caster—he cannot move, though he can be 
transported in a smooth-traveling craft. Horse- 
back riding, however, or a human-borne litter 
are too rough to allow sufficient concentration. 

The picture can be replayed by a recasting of 
the same spell, by the same or a different caster. 
The image is lifelike, but its quality is affected 
by the material used for the spell. Also, the size 
of the image is about a foot square, so tiny de- 
tails are indiscernible. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Sery 


(Divination) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1⁄3 mi./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to see and hear 
events within the area of effect of the spell, de- 
spite most obstructions. The spell requires a 
large bonfire, a pool of still water, a mass of 
clouds, a section of smooth natural stone, or a 
quiet grove (depending on the element, if any, 
favored by the wu jen). 

Upon casting the spell, the element forms a 
smooth polished mirror, unaffected by any out- 
side disturbance. By concentrating on this 
mirror, the wu jen can call forth any scene cur- 


D 


774 


rently occurring within the area of effect. Stand- 
ing outside a castle, a wu jen could scry into a 
pool of water to see what is currently transpir- 
ing within the walls of the castle. 

The spell provides a perfectly clear picture 
and normal sound just as if the wu jen were pre- 
sent where the scene is taking place. The com- 
munication is strictly one-way—the wu Jen 
cannot speak or otherwise influence the scene 
he is observing. 

Spells cannot be passed through this mirror. 
The scrying is blocked by a thin coating of lead 
or gold that is at least Ys-inch thick. Of course, 
magical protections likewise prevent the opera- 
tion of a scry spell. 

The element used as a spell focus returns to 
its original state at the conclusion of the spell. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Sculpt Features 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 rds. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This cosmetic polymorphing spell allows the 
caster to physically alter the appearance of any 
one creature touched, including himself. He 
cannot create new appendages or organs, lose 
old ones, or otherwise alter basic body struc- 
ture. The caster also cannot alter the subject's 
basic mass. An unwilling and resisting subject 
receives a saving throw vs. spell to negate the 
spell’s effect. 

The caster is free to rearrange the subject’s 
mass to a considerable extent. He can, for ex- 
ample, make the subject up to 10% taller or 
shorter than its original height or create the im- 
pression that the subject has gained or lost up to 
one third of its original weight. 

Beyond these limitations, the caster can alter 
the subject’s appearance as he chooses. He can 
make a man look like an elf, change a wolf into 
a Great Dane, turn a freckle-faced little girl into 
a haggard old woman, or cover a cow’s hide 
with purple spots. 

A caster who wishes to duplicate the exact 
features of a particular creature must possess 
either skill with disguises or artistic ability as a 


~ Seal Path r 


sculptor. An appropriate proficiency check is 
required (or an Intelligence check if the non- 
weapon proficiency rule are not being used). If 
the check fails, the copy is imperfect. 

The effects of a sculpt features spell are cos- 
metic only. No system shock roll is required to 
survive the change and no magic is needed to 
maintain the change once it is made. The sub- 
ject of a sculpt features spell does not radiate 
magic and does not return to its original form 
through death or a dispel magic spell. The sub- 
ject’s new features become its natural features. 

The material components of this spell are a 
few drops of doppleganger blood and a pow- 
dered moonstone worth no less than 50 gp. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 


POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Sea Sight 
(Divination) 
(Province: Sea) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of this spell gains the ability to 
see beneath the waves almost as easily as he can 
on land. His range of vision underwater be- 
comes twice what it is normally. (See the Un- 
derwater Combat rules in the DMG for details.) 
For example, the base range of sight for charac- 
ters is normally 50 feet in fresh water and 100 
feet in sea water; with this spell, it becomes 100 
feet and 200 feet, respectively. Modifications 
for depth, underwater vegetation, and darkness 
still apply. For example, at a depth of 50 feet in 
fresh water, a character can normally see 10 
feet; with this spell, he can see 20 feet. 

More important, sea sight enables a recipient 
who is above the waters’ surface to stare down 
into without the problems of refraction and re- 
flection. His range of vision equals his usual 
base range (doubled by the spell), minus his dis- 
tance above the water. There is no depth penalty, 
but rules for darkness and vegetation still apply. 
For example, an ocean-faring character can nor- 
mally see up to 200 feet underwater with this 
spell. If he stands on a ship deck 20 feet above 
the water, he can still see 180 feet below the sur- 
face. In this way, he can watch for attackers 


swimming up from below. 

The material component of sea sight is the 
eye of an octopus or squid, which is destroyed 
during the casting. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Seal Mouth 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell prevents a person from being able 
to speak against the caster. A subject who fails a 
saving throw vs. spell is unable to say anything 
that he believes to be insulting, critical, or oth- 
erwise defamatory about the caster—if he tries, 
his lips seal shut and no words come out. This 
seal cannot be dispelled, but a remove curse is 
effective. 

The spell’s material component is a mouse 
hole, sealed with pitch. 

Notes: Common for evil witches, uncommon 
for enchanters; otherwise, very rare. 


Seal Path 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 wizard 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The wizard affected by this spell can learn no 
more spells in a path, such as a school or other 
specialty (chosen by the caster from among 
those the caster knows the target follows), until 
this spell is removed. A targeted wizard who 
fails a saving throw vs. spell by 4 or more also 
suffers the effects of a close path spell affecting 
the same path for the remainder of the day. 

A wizard who makes the saving throw by 
more than 4 can reflect the spell back at the 
caster. The caster is entitled to a saving throw 
against the weakened, reflected spell with a +4 


775 


~ Searing Serpent r 


+ 


(TUS 


776 


bonus; if he succeeds there is no effect, but if he 
fails the spell affects him normally. The spell 
cannot be reflected more than once. 

The seal on the chosen path can be removed 
only by an open path spell (the reversed form of 
seal path), a limited wish, or a wish spell. 

The material component is a shining seal 
made of a special alloy of lead and mithral. The 
seal is inscribed with the victim’s name or sigil. 
Its cost is not less than 1,000 gp, and it disap- 
pears when the spell is cast. 

The reversed form, open path, removes the 
effect of a seal path spell. The material compo- 
nent is the same. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
Dracon Magazine.) 


Searing Serpent 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Fire) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds. + | rd./level 
Arca of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


Use of this spell conjures a serpent composed 
of writhing flame from the Elemental Plane of 
Fire. The serpent appears anywhere within the 
spell’s range. It can be moved at a rate of 15 if 
concentration is maintained and the serpent re- 
mains within the spell’s range. The serpent 
strikes using the caster’s THACO, causing 1d8 
points of fire damage per successful strike. The 
serpent also sets fire to flammable items that its 
body contacts (wooden floor, bed, carpets, etc.), 
requiring a saving throw vs. normal fire for 
every round of contact. For every additional 
round after the first that an item is fully exposed 
to the serpent’s flame, a —1 penalty is applied to 
the save, to a maximum of —3. 

Items on a target, such as clothing, are also 
required to make an item saving throw. This 
spell cannot be cast underwater. It is easily ex- 
tinguished by as little as a quart of water (a suc- 
cessful attack must be made against the serpent, 
using the wizard’s Armor Class, for the water to 
extinguish the serpent). 

Notes: Rare for conjurers and fire mages; 
otherwise, very rare. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


- 


Secure r 


Secret Chest, Leomund’s 
See Leomund’s secret chest. 


Secret Page 
(Alteration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 page, up to 2 ft. sq. 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, a secret page spell alters the 
actual contents of a page so that they appear to 
be something entirely different. Thus, a map can 
be changed to become a treatise on burnishing 
ebony walking sticks. The text of a spell can be 
altered to show a ledger page or even another 
form of spell. Confuse languages and explosive 
runes spells can be cast upon the secret page, 
but a comprehend languages spell cannot reveal 
the secret page’s contents. The caster is able to 
reveal the original contents by speaking a com- 
mand word, perusing the actual page, and then 
returning it to its secret page form. The caster 
can also remove the spell by double repetition 
of the command word. Others noting the dim 
magic of a page within this spell cloaking its 
true contents can attempt to dispel magic, but if 
it fails, the page is destroyed. A true seeing spell 
does not reveal the contents unless cast in com- 
bination with a comprehend languages spell. An 
erase spell can destroy the writing. 

The material components are powdered her- 
ring scales and either will o’ wisp or boggart 


essence. 


Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Secret Signs 
(Alteration) 


Level: | 

Range: 0 

Components: S 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Caster and one other 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a secret method of commu- 
nication between the wu jen and one other intel- 
ligent creature. The creature to be communi- 


cated with is named when the spell is cast and 
must be within hearing and visual distance of 
the caster. By means of secret signs, the caster 
can communicate a complete thought of 25 
words or less through a single gesture, utter- 
ance, or even the placement of an object. The 
message is understood by the creature regard- 
less of language, although the interpretation of 
the message is another matter. 

The wu jen could, for example, wave his hand 
in the air transmitting the message, “Come see 
me when all are asleep,” or place a scroll on the 
table in such a way to say, “Leave now and wait 
for me to contact you.” Obviously, the recipient 
of the message must be able to see and hear the 
wu jen clearly for the spell to work. The secret 
signs spell cannot be used to trigger or deliver 
other spells of any type. 

The spell has no component other than the 
somatics of the specific method used to send 
the message. Thus, this spell might be used even 
when the wu jen is bound and gagged. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Secret Word, Odeen’s 
See Odeen’s secret word. 


Secure 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 10 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the caster makes a door, 
chest, or portal proof against being opened or 
passed through by any means short of physical 
destruction of the door or chest. The portal, 
door, or chest cannot be opened by anyone, in- 
cluding the caster himself. A dispel magic spell 
can bring the secure spell to an end and a lim- 
ited wish will end it, but otherwise the door or 
chest cannot be opened normally again. 

The door or chest is protected from all physi- 
cal attack for a number of rounds equal to the 
caster’s level. After that, the door or chest can be 
broken physically but retains a number of other 
protections: It cannot be damaged by fire, cold, 
or electricity, nor can its object be affected by 
spells that would change the nature of the area 


777 


- 


~ Secure Shelter, Leomund’s = 


of the spell effect: vanish, reduce, dig, or trans- 
mute rock to mud. Such spells do not have any 
effect on the door or chest. 

A knock spell does not open a secured area, 
though chimes of opening do. Glyphs, explosive 
runes, and symbols cannot be cast upon an area 
protected by a secure spell; they immediately 
detonate or take effect if the attempt is made. A 
portal protected by this spell can be bypassed by 
dimension breaching magic such as dimension 
door or by entering the Ethereal Plane. Such 
movement does not alter the security of the 
portal. The area protected by this spell radiates a 
strong aura of alteration magic. 

The material components of this spell are a 
small piece of iron and a semiprecious gem- 
stone of any type. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Orjalun’s Arba- 
tel. 


Secure Shelter, Leomund’s 
See Leomund’s secure shelter. 


Seduction — Witch 

This series was originally presented in 
an early DRAGON Magazine article detail- 
ing an NPC class, the Witch. Designed for 
a combat-oriented playing style; the classic 
encounter was the disarming of the hero 
before a trap was sprung. This update 
brings the spell more into line with con- 
temporary play. 

The saving throw vs. spell is changed to 
one vs. paralyzation. This give the witch 
about a 50% chance of success (assuming a 
Charisma in the “High” range) against 
characters of equal level (though warriors 
and rogues will fare somewhat less well...). 

DMs preferring the original version can 
simply substitute a saving throw vs. spell, 
broaden the warrior code bonus to all 
groups, and restrict the spell to affect male 
humans and half-elves only. 


778 


Seduction I — Witch 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: | 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: | turns 

Area of Effect: | male human, demihuman, or 
humanoid 

Saving Throw: Special 


Any male human or demihuman affected by 
this spell casts aside all weapons, armor, and 
clothing in an attempt to seduce the witch; a 
male humanoid becomes a fanatical guardian 
and protector, instead. The victim is allowed a 
saving throw vs. paralyzation. 

The level of the seduction spell (/ through 
VIII) and the witch’s Reaction Check adjust- 
ment for Charisma are applied as penalties to 
the subject’s saving throw. Wisdom adjustments 
and any resistance to charm spells apply as well. 
Warriors who are true to strict codes of chastity 
or virtuous behavior gain a +4 bonus to resist 
the spell’s effect. (At the DM7’s discretion, a 
character with the opposite habits might receive 
a penalty of —1 to —4.) For example, a witch 
with a Charisma score of 16 (Reaction Check 
adjustment of —5) using seduction 1l (penalty 
of —3) creates a saving throw penalty of —8. 

A human or demihuman character who fails 
to resist first discards his gear, then approaches 
the witch with romance in mind, regarding her 
as a beloved paramour; note that it may take 
several rounds to get rid of plate mail or other 
heavy armor. The witch can exercise the influ- 
ence of the charm person spell over him, but 
about the only course of action that seems rea- 
sonable to the subject is to passionately em- 
brace the caster. If the witch wishes, she can 
then attack (or have her allies attack) the un- 
armed and unarmored subject. If harmed by the 
witch’s minions, the victim immediately gains 
another saving throw to escape the witch’s influ- 
ence. If the witch herself injures him, the spell 
is immediately broken. 

The seduction I spell lasts for two turns, or 
until broken by attack. When the spell ends, the 
subject regains his senses, requiring one to four 
rounds to re-arm and re-equip himself, depend- 
ing on the type of armor worn. 

Notes: Restricted to witches (common) and 
female enchanters (uncommon). 


> 


N Seduction IV — Witch r 


Seduction I-VIII 
Charisma Reaction Adjustments 


Charisma Adj. Charisma Adj. 
1 -7 13 +] 
2 —6 14 +2 
3 -5 15 +3 
4 4 16 +4 
5 -3 17 +5 
6 -2 18 +6 
7 -1 19 +7 
8-12 0 20+ +1/point 


Seduction II — Witch 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: 1 male human, demihuman, or 
humanoid 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell resembles seduction / in most re- 
spects, with a —2 base penalty to the saving 
throw vs. paralyzation, and a duration for the 
charm effect of 2 turns. The witch’s Reaction 
Check adjustment for Charisma is a penalty to 
the saving throw. Chaste or virtuous warriors 
gain a +4 bonus to their saving throws. Resis- 
tance to charm spells can negate the spell. 

A human or demihuman male who fails to 
make a saving throw vs. paralyzation discards 
his gear and approaches the witch with romance 
in mind, regarding her as a beloved paramour; a 
male humanoid becomes a fanatical guardian 
and protector, instead. 

A male human or demihuman who fails to 
resist is effectively charmed, but with a roman- 
tic bent. The victim immediately gains another 
saving throw to escape the spell if injured or 
harmed. If the witch herself injures him, this 
spell is instantly broken. 

The seduction H spell lasts for two turns, or 
until broken. When the spell ends, re-arming 
takes one to four rounds, depending on the 
armor worn. 

Notes: Restricted to witches (common) and 
female enchanters (uncommon). 


Seduction HI — Witch 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 3 turns 

Area of Effect: 1 male human, demihuman, or 
humanoid 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell resembles seduction I and // in 
most respects, with a base —3 penalty to the 
saving throw vs. paralyzation, and a duration for 
the charm effect of 3 turns. The witch’s Reac- 
tion Check adjustment for Charisma 1s a penalty 
to the saving throw. Chaste or virtuous warriors 
gain a +4 bonus to their saving throws. Resis- 
tance to charm spells can negate the spell. 

A human or demihuman male who fails to 
make a saving throw vs. paralyzation discards 
his gear and approaches the witch with romance 
in mind, regarding her as a beloved paramour; a 
male humanoid becomes a fanatical guardian 
and protector, instead. 

A male human or demihuman who fails to 
resist is effectively charmed, but with a roman- 
tic bent. The victim immediately gains another 
saving throw to escape the spell if injured or 
harmed. If the witch herself injures him, this 
spell is instantly broken. 

The seduction HI spell lasts for three turns, or 
until broken. When the spell ends, re-arming 
takes one to four rounds, depending on the 
armor worn. 

Notes: Restricted to witches (common) and 
female enchanters (uncommon). 


Seduction IV — Witch 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 4 turns 

Area of Effect: 1 male human, demihuman, or 
humanoid 

Saving Throw: Special 


The spell resembles seduction / through /// in 
most respects, with a base —4 penalty to the 
saving throw vs. paralyzation, and a duration for 
the charm effect of 4 turns. The witch’s Reac- 


, a a ra, 


779 


~ Seduction V — Witch 


tion Check adjustment for Charisma is a penalty 
to the saving throw. Chaste or virtuous warriors 
gain a +4 bonus to their saving throws. Resis- 
tance to charm spells can negate the spell. 

A human or demihuman male who fails to 
make a saving throw vs. paralyzation discards 
his gear and approaches the witch with romance 
in mind, regarding her as a beloved paramour; a 
male humanoid becomes a fanatical guardian 
and protector, instead. 

A male human or demihuman who fails to 
resist is effectively charmed, but with a roman- 
tic bent. The victim immediately gains another 
saving throw to escape the spell if injured or 
harmed. If the witch herself injures him, this 
spell is instantly broken. 

The seduction IV spell lasts for four turns, or 
until broken. When the spell ends, re-arming 
takes one to four rounds, depending on the 
armor worn. 

Notes: Restricted to witches (common) and 
female enchanters (uncommon). 


Seduction V — Witch 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 5 turns 

Area of Effect: 1 male human, demihuman, or 
humanoid 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell resembles seduction I through IV 
in most respects, with a base —5 penalty to the 
saving throw vs. paralyzation, and a duration for 
the charm effect of 5 turns. The witch’s Reac- 
tion Check adjustment for Charisma is a penalty 
to the saving throw. Chaste or virtuous warriors 
gain a +4 bonus to their saving throws. Resis- 
tance to charm spells can negate the spell. 

A human or demihuman male who fails to 
make a saving throw vs. paralyzation discards 
his gear and approaches the witch with romance 
in mind, regarding her as a beloved paramour; a 
male humanoid becomes a fanatical guardian 
and protector, instead. 

A male human or demihuman who fails to 
resist is effectively charmed, but with a roman- 
tic bent. The victim immediately gains another 
saving throw to escape the spell if injured or 
harmed. If the witch herself injures him, this 
spell is instantly broken. 

The seduction V spell lasts for five turns, or 
until broken. When the spell ends, re-arming 
takes one to four rounds, depending on the 
armor worn. 

Notes: Restricted to witches (common) and 
female enchanters (uncommon). 


Seduction VI — Witch 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 6 turns 

Area of Effect: 1 male human, demihuman, or 
humanoid 

Saving Throw: Special , 


This spell resembles seduction I through IV 
in most respects, with a base —6 penalty to the 
saving throw vs. paralyzation, and a duration for 
the charm effect of 6 turns. The witch’s Reac- 


I a TTE 


780 


q Seduction VIH — Witch r 


tion Check adjustment for Charisma is a penalty 
to the saving throw. Chaste or virtuous warriors 
gain a +4 bonus to their saving throws. Resis- 
tance to charm spells can negate the spell. 

A human or demihuman male who fails to 
make a saving throw vs. paralyzation discards 
his gear and approaches the witch with romance 
in mind, regarding her as a beloved paramour; a 
male humanoid becomes a fanatical guardian 
and protector, instead. 

A male human or demihuman who fails to 
resist is effectively charmed, but with a roman- 
tic bent. The victim immediately gains another 
saving throw to escape the spell if injured or 
harmed. If the witch herself injures him, this 
spell is instantly broken. 

The seduction VI spell lasts for six turns, or 
until broken. When the spell ends, re-arming 
takes one to four rounds, depending on the 
armor worn. 

Notes: Restricted to witches (common) and 
female enchanters (uncommon). 


Seduction VII — Witch 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 7 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 7 turns 

Area of Effect: | male human, demihuman, or 
humanoid 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell resembles seduction 1 through VI 
in most respects, except that the subject suffers 
a —7 penalty to his saving throw, and the dura- 
tion of the charm effect is 7 turns. The witch’s 
Reaction Check adjustment for Charisma is a 
penalty to the saving throw. Chaste or virtuous 
warriors gain a +4 bonus to their saving throws. 
Resistance to charm spells can negate the spell. 

A human or demihuman male who fails to 
make a saving throw vs. paralyzation discards 
his gear and approaches the witch with romance 
in mind, regarding her as a beloved paramour; a 
male humanoid becomes a fanatical guardian 
and protector, instead. 

A male human or demihuman who fails to 
resist is effectively charmed, but with a roman- 
tic bent. The victim immediately gains another 
saving throw to escape the spell if injured or 
harmed. If the witch herself injures him, this 
spell is instantly broken. 


The seduction VII spell lasts for seven turns, 
or until broken. When the spell ends, re-arming 
takes one to four rounds, depending on the 


armor worn. 
Notes: Restricted to witches (common) and 
female enchanters (uncommon). 


Seduction VIH — Witch 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 8 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, $ 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 8 turns 

Area of Effect: 1 male human, demihuman, or 
humanoid 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell resembles seduction I through VH 
in most respects, with a —8 penalty to the saving 
throw, and a duration for the charm effect of 8 
turns. The witch’s Reaction Check adjustment 
for Charisma is a penalty to the saving throw. 
Chaste or virtuous warriors gain a +4 bonus to 
their saving throws. Resistance to charm spells 
can negate the spell. 

A human or demihuman male who fails to 
make a saving throw vs. paralyzation discards 


, a e a O TTT 


781 


~ See Hidden Doors — Savant > 


his gear and approaches the witch with romance 
in mind, regarding her as a beloved paramour; a 
male humanoid becomes a fanatical guardian 
and protector, instead. 

A male human or demihuman who fails to 
resist is effectively charmed, but with a roman- 
tic bent. The victim immediately gains another 
saving throw to escape the spell if injured or 
harmed. If the witch herself injures him, this 
spell is instantly broken. 

The seduction VIII spell lasts for eight turns, 
or until broken. When the spell ends, re-arming 
takes one to four rounds, depending on the 
armor worn. 

Notes: Restricted to witches (common) and 
female enchanters (uncommon). 


See Hidden Doors — Savant 
(Divination) 


Level: 3 

Range: 40 ft. 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 wall less than 50 ft. long 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the savant to note secret or 
concealed doors within the area of effect. The 
surface of one wall up to 50 feet long can be 
scanned. 

The material component is a polished glass 
lens through which the caster peers. 

Notes: Restricted to savants, common. (Up- 
dated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


See Through Other Eyes 


(Divination) 


Level: 2 

Range: 90 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: | creature per probe 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a wizard can look 
through the eyes of any living creature within 
range. If the wizard knows a specific creature or 
person is within range, the spell can be made to 
take effect upon that specific creature. Other- 
wise, the wizard will find himself looking 
through the eyes of any creature within range, 


782 


determined randomly. 

The creature thus affected experiences noth- 
ing to indicate that a spell is acting upon it, and 
remains in control of its own actions. (In other 
words, the wizard cannot force the subject to 
look at something.) Looking through another’s 
eyes gives the wizard all of the visual capabili- 
ties of that creature (for example, infravision). 
Magic that prevents location or scrying prevents 
the operation of this spell. For example, the 
spell will not create a link with a creature wear- 
ing an amulet of proof against location and de- 
tection. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Seek — Witch 


(Divination) 


Level: 9 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 item, place, or creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting seek, a witch gains the ability to 
determine the location of any single item, place, 
or creature, and visualize all major aspects of its 
immediate surroundings (within 50 feet). She 
learns in what part of the world the thing being 
sought exists; the closer she is to the thing 
sought, the more definite her general idea of its 
location and the more details she can learn (see 
table). 


Distance Location Viewing Time 
250 mi. Building/Site 1 turn 

2,500 mi. Town/Landform 5 rds. 

25,000 mi. Region l rd. 
Extraplanar Plane Glimpse 


For example, if a witch seeks an ancient 
spellbook hidden in a forgotten tower 800 miles 
away, she receives an impression of the nearest 
town or major landform (mountain, lake, etc.), 
and can examine the book and its surroundings 
for up to five rounds. If the book is actually 
3,000 miles away, she gains only a one-round 
glimpse and an impression of the country or 
kingdom in which it lies. 

If the witch is not personally familiar with the 
thing sought, the results are one step worse than 
normal. Spells or items that defeat scrying or 


> 


Seeking, Soondal’s r 


detection are effective against seek and may 
confuse or block the results. 

The material component is a small lens of 
precious crystal, worth at least 500 gp. 

Notes: Common for witches, optionally un- 
common for diviners; otherwise, barred. 


Optional: A witch who uses the seek spell 
to locate a thing protected against scrying 
can penetrate the protection, if she holds 
some physical object closely related to it; 
for example, a lock of hair from an individ- 
ual, a pinch of dirt from a location, a scab- 
bard that held a weapon, etc. 

Breeching such protections ages the 
witch 1 to 5 years, depending on the 
strength of the protective magic. The witch 
knows the exact cost and can abandon the 
spell if desired. Artifacts and relics can be 
located, but these always age the caster. As 
payment for her services, the witch might 
require a magical item or a sum of 
10,000-40,000 gp (50% chance for either). 


Seek Teleporter 
(Divination) 


Level: 6 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Range: 0 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 90-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard can discern 
the exact destination of another individual who 
used teleport, dimension door, or shadow walk 
within the last turn and possibly follow. The 
caster must decide whether to simply learn the 
quarry’s destination or to actually follow him 
during the casting process—before anything 
else is known. The caster must be within 90 feet 
of the place from which the other individual 
vanished. 

A) Divination. This tells the wizard exactly 
where the traveler went in relation to the point 
of departure (for example, 838 feet directly 
south), but not conditions at that spot. 

B) Follow. This option instantly transports the 
wizard (and possibly allies) to the traveler’s des- 
tination exactly like a teleport spell, except that 
the original traveler’s knowledge of the destina- 


tion location is used. 
Notes: Common in the MysTARA setting; oth- 
erwise, very rare. 


Seek the Traveler 
A MYSTARA setting spell, aka seek teleporter. 


Seeking — Elf 


(Enchantment, Invocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 1 missile/3 levels (5 maximum) 
Saving Throw: None 


The seeking spell takes the normal laws of 
momentum and gravity, and then twists them 
slightly in a way favorable to the caster. 

The caster can ensorcel a number of normal, 
nonenchanted missiles no larger than a javelin. 
One missile for each three levels of experience 
can be prepared with this dweomer, to a maxi- 
mum of five missiles at 15th level. The caster 
can use the enchanted missiles or give them to 
his companions. 

When shot or hurled, the missiles unerringly 
seek the target, hitting nothing else. The target 
must be within the weapon’s normal range when 
fired. The missiles can follow the target around 
objects or corners if the target was visible when 
the missile was fired, but cannot pass through 
solid obstructions. For example, if the target 
creature closes a door, the missile slams into the 
door with great force and cannot be removed 
until the spell wears off. 

The missile will follow the target beyond the 
weapon’s normal range, as long as the opponent 
uses only ordinary methods of escape. If some 
means of instantaneous transport is used (tele- 
port, blink, etc.), the missile no longer homes in 
on its target. It falls to the ground, useless. 

Notes: Common for the elves of Evermeet in 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, uncommon for 
other elves. This spell is guarded jealously. 


Seeking, Shoondal’s 


See Shoondal’s seeking. 


Po NS 


783 


~ coming r 


Seeming 
({Husion/Phantasm) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10-ft. radius 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 12 hrs. 

Area of Effect: 1 person/2 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to alter the ap- 
pearance of one person for every two levels of 
experience he has attained. The change includes 
clothing and equipment. The caster can make 
the recipients appear as any generally man- 
shaped bipedal creature, each up to | foot 
shorter or taller than his normal height, and thin 
or fat or in between. All those affected must re- 
semble the same general type of creature: 
human, orc, ogre, etc. Each remains a recogniz- 
able individual. The effect fails for an individual 
if the illusion chosen by the caster cannot be ac- 
complished within the spell parameters (for ex- 
ample, a halfling could not be made to look like 
a centaur, but he might be made to look like a 
short, young ogre). Unwilling persons receive 
saving throws vs. spell to avoid the effect. Af- 
fected persons resume their normal appearances 


; h h 4 


if slain. The spell is not precise enough to dupli- 
cate the appearance of a specific individual. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Seismic Seizure, Salamander’s 
See Salamander's seismic seizure. 


Seizure 
(Enchantment/Charm, Íllusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, (M) 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


Like the /apse spell, this spell can be cast upon 
a trigger object, which then delivers the spell’s po- 
tential to the first creature that touches it. Saving 
throws for the seizure follow the same pattern as 
for a lapse: repeated saving throws until a failure 
occurs. In case of a seizure, a saving throw is 
rolled at the start of every round of melee combat 
in which the victim is involved. Note that the 
mental attack adjustment for Wisdom affects this 
saving throw. 

The creature does not know that a seizure is 
pending, though a detect charm will reveal the 
spell’s aura. 

The effects of a seizure upon the recipient 
cause him to collapse in fits, thrashing wildly 
about while making choking noises and strangled 
cries. The body quivers and contorts. This lasts 
for 1d4+1 rounds, ending in one round of the 
victim being stiff in a state of rigor, followed by 
1d4+1 rounds of unconsciousness. The victim is 
virtually helpless for 3d6 rounds after regaining 
consciousness, and is unable to fight or engage in 
spellcasting or strenuous activity. Thereafter, the 
victim can react normally, though with a -2 on 
saving throws, attacks, and defense for 5d4 
rounds more (with a 10% chance of spell failure 
when casting any spell during that time). 

While thrashing about, the victim takes 1d4 
points of damage per round unless restrained. The 
victim strikes aimlessly at his restrainers with all 
limbs, inflicting no damage except to those with 
AC 9 or AC 10 (50% chance of 1 point of damage 
per round). In the one round of rigor, the victim 
must save vs. death magic at +2 or choke, dying 
1-3 rounds later, useless someone is nearby who 
can prevent the choking with simple aid. The 
final result of a seizure is a temporary loss of 1—4 


D a 


Semipermanency 


won ~a 
\ 


NS . A 


Xx 


points of Strength and Constitution, which are re- 
covered at a rate of | point each per day (no 
system shock roll 1s required). 

The illusionist can also cast this spell by 
touching the recipient, in which case there is no 
material component. The recipient then gets one 
saving throw vs. the spell, and either has an im- 
mediate seizure (failed saving throw) or the 
spell is wasted (successful saving throw). 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Cyclopedia Phantastica Vol. II]. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


À a 
G 
Y 


Semipermanency 


J 


(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects the duration of certain other 
spells, making the duration significantly longer. 
To the casual observer, the effects may seem 
permanent, but in fact the duration is limited to 
some number of years, based on the caster’s 


level; roll 1d20 and subtract the result from the 
caster’s level to yield the duration of the spell in 
years. If the result is 0 or less, roll 1d12 instead 
to find the spell’s duration in months. The DM 
should roll these duration dice and keep the re- 
sults secret from the caster. Casting this spell 
has no effect on the caster’s Constitution score. 

The personal spells upon which a semiperma- 
nency spell is known to be effective are the 
same as those listed for the more powerful per- 
manency spell. The wizard casts the desired 
spell upon himself, then follows with the semi- 
permanency spell. This application of semiper- 
manency can be dispelled only by a wizard of 
greater level than the spellcaster was when he 
cast the spell. Affected spells included: 


comprehend languages 
detect evil 

detect invisibility 

detect magic 

infravision 

protection from cantrips 
protection from evil 
protection from normal missiles 
read magic 

tongues 

unseen servant 


The semipermanency spell can be used to 
lengthen the duration of some spells affecting 
creatures, objects, or areas, as follows: 


enlarge 

fear 

gust of wind 
invisibility 
magic mouth 
prismatic sphere 
stinking cloud 
wall of fire 

wall of force 
web 


Finally, the following spells can be cast upon 
objects or areas only and rendered semiperma- 
nent: 


alarm 

audible glamer 
dancing lights 
solid fog 

wall of fire 
distance distortion 
teleport 


OO 


785 


~ Sending r 


In applications other than those directed on 
the caster, this spell can be dispelled normally 
to negate its effects. 

The DM may allow other selected spells to be 
made semipermanent. The selected spell must 
be researched anew, costing as much and taking 
as long as its original research. The DM must 
decide whether a specific spell can be made 
semipermanent. The semipermanency spell 
cannot be used in the process of manufacturing 
magical items. 

The material components are a drop of 
dwarf’s blood and a tiny metal anvil (50 gp min- 
imum). 

Notes: Uncommon in the DARK Sun setting; 
otherwise, very rare. 


Sending 
(Evocation) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 5 

Range: Unlimited 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster can contact 
a single creature with whom he is familiar and 
whose name and appearance are known. If the 
creature in question is not on the same plane of 
existence as the spellcaster, there is a base 5% 
chance that the sending does not arrive. Local 
conditions on other planes may worsen this 
chance considerably, at the option of the DM. 
The sending, if successful, can be understood 
even by a creature with an Intelligence as low as 
1 (animal intelligence). 

The wizard can send a short message of 25 
words or less to the recipient; the recipient can 
answer in like manner immediately. Even if the 
sending is received, the subject creature is not 
obligated to act upon it in any manner. 

The material component for this spell con- 
sists of two tiny cylinders, each with one open 
end, connected by a short piece of fine copper 
wire, 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


786 


Sending — Hishna 
(Evocation) A 
Level: 4 
Range: 25 mi./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


The sending spell can be used to convey the 
power of hishna a great distance away. Its most 
common employment is to send a message di- 
rected to another individual. The latter receives 
it telepathically whether awake or asleep, 
though the receiver cannot ask questions of the 
sender. 

A sending can also be used to augment an- 
other spell of hishna, though this requires two 
casters. The first, and more experienced, must 
cast the spell of sending. The second then casts 
the other spell, which can be directed to what- 
ever location the sender directs. 

The material component of the spell is the leg 
bone of a vulture. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Sense Shifting 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 3 turns 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Sense shifting allows the wizard to affect all 
spells of Ist through 3rd level that he casts 
within the duration of the spell. For each spell, 
he can modify one of three sensory features per- 
taining to the spell: color, sound, or patterned 
visual appearance of the spell effect. The 
changes produced by this spell do not alter the 
functions of the affected spell nor any saving 
throws that apply against their effects. 

Sense shifting might be used to produce 
green fireballs, magic missiles that streak 
through the air with a scream, colored continual 
light globes, customized designs for a hypnotic 
pattern, or a spectral hand that makes scrab- 


oes 


{ 


5 
i 


Sepia Snake Sigil 


bling sounds as it attempts to grasp a target. 
Sense shifting cannot create any form of in- 
visibility. It cannot completely silence a spell 
effect (thus, a fireball’s blast might be muted, 
but not wholly eliminated). 
The material component is a twist of multi- 
colored ribbon with a small silver bell fastened 


to its end. 


Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Sense Treason 
(Divination) 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 
Components: S 

Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a shinobi spellcaster can de- 
termine that the clan has been deliberately be- 
trayed. 

The DM determines what constitutes such 
betrayal, but the spell normally reacts when a 
clan member has deliberately taken an action 
that puts his own welfare above the clan’s. 

However, the spellcaster cannot determine 
the identity of the betrayer or reveal details of 
that betrayal. The spell has no range, so the trai- 
tor could be anyone in the clan. 

The spell does not react to exiles, outcasts, or 
clan members the spellcaster believes to be 
dead. 

This is a spell used most often by shinobi 
mage advisors to clan leaders. Though it is nec- 
essary to know about such betrayals to protect 
the clan, this spell can be as much a curse as it is 
a blessing, because it makes the clan lord and 
his advisors paranoid. 

Notes: Restricted to ninja spellcasters and 
those trained by them; common. 


Separation, Dulark’s 
Reversed form, see Dulark’s animerge. 


787 


Sepia Snake Sigil 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 3 

Range: 5 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 sigil 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a small written 
symbol appears in the text of any written work. 
When read, the so-called sepia snake springs 
into being and strikes at the nearest living crea- 
ture (but does not attack the wizard who cast the 
spell). Its attack is made as if it were a monster 
with Hit Dice equal to the level of the wizard 
who cast the spell. If it strikes successfully, the 
victim is engulfed in a shimmering amber field 
of force, frozen and immobilized until released, 
either at the caster’s command, by a successful 
dispel magic spell, or until a time equal to 1d4 
days, plus 1 day per caster level has elapsed. 
Until then, nothing can get at the victim, move 
the shimmering force surrounding him, or oth- 
erwise affect him. The victim does not age, 
grow hungry, sleep, or regain spells while in 
this state. He is not aware of his surroundings. If 
the sepia snake misses its target, it dissipates in 
a flash of brown light, with a loud noise and a 
puff of dun—colored smoke that is 10 feet in di- 
ameter and lasts for one round. 

The spell cannot be detected by normal ob- 
servation, and detect magic reveals only that the 
entire text is magical. A dispel magic can 
remove it; an erase spell destroys the entire 
page of text. It can be cast in combination with 
other spells that hide or garble text. 

The components for the spell are 100 gp 
worth of powdered amber, a scale from any 
snake, and a pinch of mushroom spores. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


~ Sequester r 


Sequester 
(Abjuration, Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Geometry) 
Level: 7 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | week + 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: 2-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


When cast, this spell not only prevents detec- 
tion and location spells from working to detect 
or locate the objects affected by the sequester 
spell, it also renders the affected object(s) invis- 
ible to any form of sight or seeing. Thus, a se- 
quester spell can mask a secret door, a treasure 
vault, etc. Of course, the spell does not prevent 
the subject from being discovered through tac- 
tile means or through the use of devices (such as 
a robe of eyes or a gem of seeing). If cast upon a 
creature who is unwilling to be affected, the 
creature receives a normal saving throw. Living 
creatures (and even undead types) affected by a 
sequester spell become comatose and are effec- 
tively in a state of suspended animation until the 
spell wears off or is dispelled. 

The material components of the spell are a 
basilisk eyelash, gum arabic, and a dram of 
whitewash. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Serpent Missile 
(Evocation) 


Level: 1 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level yp "E 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 to 5 creatures in a 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is a savage variation of the 
common magic missile spell. It utilizes a scale 
of a venomous snake to produce each missile. 
By throwing one or more scales, depending 
upon the caster’s level, of course, one or more 
glowing green serpent forms appear from the 
caster’s fingertips and flash toward the desired 
target or targets. A saving throw is required for 
cach serpent. If the target creature makes a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell, then only | point 
of damage per missile is inflicted. If a saving 


ye ee T E T 


788 


par \\ wre 


sm, P vs ay". 


g“ $ TE 
i, z ' 


7 il Xi ut w G` id 


“atti 


Uy 


throw is not made, then 2-8 points of damage 
are inflicted. The spell creates on serpent mis- 
sile at Ist level, and an additional missile every 
second level thereafter, to a maximum of 5 mis- 
siles at 9th level. 

Notes: Uncommon for jungle witch-doctors, 
rare in neighboring lands; otherwise, very rare. 
Originally found on the Isle of the Ape in the 
WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting, it is recorded 
only in a few rare tomes. 


Serrel’s Confining Sphere 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is cast, it creates a magical, 
transparent sphere of force around the item or 
creatures specified by the caster. Half the 
sphere is above the ground, the other half below. 
The sphere can be used to entrap a creature or to 
protect something. If the sphere is cast upon an 
unwilling creature, a successful saving throw 


> a 


~ Serrel’s Major Enchantment r 


vs. spell allows the creature to escape the area 
of effect; no other condition allows a saving 
throw against this spell. 

The sphere is immobile, and no solids, liq- 
uids, or magically—created gases can pass into 
or out of it. In addition, spells cannot be cast 
into or out of Serrel 5 confining sphere, nor do 
spell areas of effect penetrate the barrier. The 
sphere is immune to dispel magic and disinte- 
grate spells. However, the sphere can be de- 
stroyed before the expiration of the spell by any 
of the following means: 

* A properly worded /imited wish or wish 

° A rod of cancellation 

° A cube of force, set against all things, that is 

triggered inside the sphere 

* A weapon of +4 enchantment or better that 

inflicts 50 or more points of physical 
damage on the sphere in a single round 

* A sphere of annihilation. 

The material components are a small quartz 
sphere and a lump of earth. 

Notes: Very rare spell. 
POLYHEDRON Newszine). 


(Updated from 


Serrel’s Guardian 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 6 hrs. + 1d4 hrs. 
Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell brings forth a quasi—real fighter. 
The guardian does not perform actions such as 
retrieving objects, sounding alarms, opening 
doors or chests and the like; it engages only in 
combat. The guardian makes no sound when it 
moves and cannot speak. 

The guardian can be commanded by the 
caster, but cannot be given standing orders ex- 
ceeding 25 words. If ordered to move out of the 
spell’s area of effect, the guardian is instantly 
dispelled as it passes beyond the area affected 
by the spell. 

The guardian is invulnerable to all spells 
except dispel magic, dismissal, disintegrate, 
limited wish, wish and the like. These spells de- 
stroy the manifestation. The guardian is imper- 
vious to missiles and to fire-based attacks. The 
guardian remains in existence for 7 to 10 hours 
or until dispelled or brought to 0 hit points. 


The material components are a small silver 
statue of a fighter and a ball of cotton. The 
guardian’s appearance will match that of the 
Statue. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine). 


Serrel’s Guardian: AC 8; MV 6; HD 4; 
hp 22; #AT 1; THACO 17; Dmg 1d6. 


a Wagy 


ne an 
Coy ee Wed 


is a Ht waive jf _ i J” il F a 
i of gull ha IA fi’ ¥} Deh 
pal, i Ji AR j 

k “y y” 


Pim nig’ 


; evan 


W ye 
a TY at 


afi 
MN RITE eee: xg 


Serrel’s Major Enchantment 
(Enchantment) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is the same as Serrel’s minor en- 
chantment except that it grants a +2 bonus and 
works on any item a character can hold, includ- 
ing weapons (which receive both an attack 
bonus and a damage bonus). The spell can in- 


ee 


789 


~ Serrel’s Minor Enchantment 5 


crease the bonus of an existing magical item, 
but only to a combined bonus of +3 or less. 

The material components are powdered silver 
and powdered gemstones valued at 200 gp or 
more, which are sprinkled over the item while 
the spell is cast. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Serrel’s Minor Enchantment 
(Enchantment) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: None 


When a wizard casts this spell upon a normal 
item, a +1 protective bonus is temporarily be- 
stowed. This spell only affects armor, shields, 
cloaks, and other objects worn by an individual. 
For example, a cloak would gain a +1 protec- 
tion. This spell can be cast upon a permanently 
enchanted item. The spell increases the item’s 
bonus by +1, but only if the combined bonus is 
+3 or less. 

The material components are powdered silver 
and a cracked gem valued at 100 gp or more. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Serten’s Spell Immunity 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, 5, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd./recipient 
Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature(s) touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By use of this spell, the wizard can confer 
virtual immunity to certain spells and magical 
attack forms upon those he touches. For every 
four levels of experience of the wizard, one 
creature can be protected by the Serten 5 spell 
immunity spell; however, if more than one is 
protected, the duration of the protection is di- 
vided among the protected creatures. 

For example, a 16th-level wizard can cast the 
spell upon one creature and it will last 16 turns, 


or place it upon two creatures for eight turns, or 
four creatures for four turns. The protection 
gives a bonus to saving throws, according to 
spell type and level, as shown in the following 
table. 


Spell Level Wizard Spell Priest Spell 
Ist—3rd +9* +7 
4th—6th +7 +5 
7th-8th +5 +3 


* Includes beguiling effects. 


The material component of this spell is a dia- 
mond of at least 500 gp value, which must be 
crushed and sprinkled over the spell recipients. 
Each such creature must also have in its posses- 
sion a diamond of at least one carat size, intact 


and carried on its person. 


Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Servant Horde 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 6 turns + 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the wu jen creates a number 
of invisible servants similar to the unseen ser- 
vant spell. The number of servants that can be 
created is equal to 2d6, plus 1 per level. These 
servants have all the limitations of the unseen 
servant except that they can be used for 
common laboring tasks as well, provided they 
are carefully directed by the spellcaster. They 
could serve at a banquet, help dig earthworks, 
row a ship, act as porters, or assist in a farmer’s 
fields. A 9th-level caster creates a servant horde 
that lasts four hours. 

The material component is a small stick 
crossbar to which many lengths of knotted 
thread are attached. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Bg 


, a a ia.“ 


790 


~ Sever Lifeline r 


Seven-Eyes 
(Abjuration, Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 7 eyes 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell conjures into existence seven mag- 
ical orbs that float above the caster’s head in a 
ring about 5 feet in diameter. The eyes remain 
for 1 round per level, or until the caster chooses 
to expend an orb by using it in attack or defense. 
In addition, as long as at least one eye is still in 
existence, the caster gains 360-degree vision 
and can detect invisibility and detect phase at 
will, with a 60-foot range. The powers of each 
eye are described below: 


* Eye of the Mind. This orb protects the 
caster against mental attack, charm, or in- 
fluence, including charm, beguiling, hold, 
and emotion effects. The first such attack is 
negated by the orb and destroys it in turn. If 
the wizard desires, the eve of the mind can 
be used instead to charm person like the |st- 
level wizard spell, although this also ex- 
pends the orb. 


+ Eye of the Sword. This eye deflects the first 
physical attack that endangers the caster, in- 
cluding hand-held or missile attacks, and 
then disappears. The wizard can also 
employ the eye of the sword to create five 
magical blades that strike as magic missiles 
for 1d4+1 points of damage each. 


* Eye of the Mage. One manifestation of raw 
energy, such as lightning, fire, force, cold, 


or a similar effect, is absorbed by the eve of 


the mage. The eye can also project a 60-foot 
long by 5-foot wide lightning bolt that in- 
flicts 4d8 damage (save vs. spell for half 
damage) upon all in its path. Either use ex- 
pends the eye’s power. 


«Eye of Venom. This eye can be used to halt 
any one attack or effect that could poison 
the caster. Against an attacker armed with 
an envenomed weapon, the caster may 
decide to expend either the eve of venom or 
the eye of swords to block the attack. The 


eye can also be used to poison one creature 
within 30 feet; the victim must make a 
saving throw vs. poison or die in one round. 


° Eye of the Soul. The first attack that affects 
the victim’s life energy, including strength 
or energy drain, cause wounds, trap the 
soul, magic jar, or death spell, is parried by 
the eye of the soul. The wizard may instead 
choose to expend the eye’s power by casting 
enervation (see the 4th—level wizard spell) 
upon one target within 30 feet. 


e Eye of Artifice. This eye deflects and is de- 
stroyed by the first attack directed at the 
caster from a magical device. If the attack 
also takes a form that can be blocked by an- 
other eye (for example, the bolt from a wand 
of lightning), the caster chooses which eye, 
if any, is expended. If used to attack instead, 
the eye of artifice functions as a dispel 
magic spell. 


*Eye of Stone. This eye offers protection 
against the first attack that could petrify the 
caster and then vanishes. It can be expended 
to cast hold person. 


Although any number of eyes can defend the 
wizard in a single round, only one eye can be 
used to attack per round. When the caster uses 
an eye to attack, he cannot cast a spell, attack 
physically, or employ another magical item in 
the same round; willing the eye to discharge its 
energies requires his complete concentration. 
Eye attacks have an initiative modifier of 1 (ora 
speed of Very Fast in the PLAYER’S OPTION: 
Combat & Tactics initiative system). 

The material component is seven blessed 
gemstones worth at least 50 gp each. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO-SP). 


Sever Lifeline 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell permanently detaches the caster 
from his lifeline. This negates the rule concern- 


A ian 7a 


791 


~ Shades f 


ing doubling lifelines, and that’s all most casters 
know. 

The material components are a small silver 
knife enchanted to store a tether, and diamond 
dust worth 10,000 gp, sprinkled across the 
blade. This spell is cast on Temporal Prime, and 
the knife is used to physically sever the chrono- 
mancer’s lifeline at the point it turns into the in- 
substantial silver mist trail. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers, 
common. More information on chronomancer 
spells are given in the Wizard's Spell 
Compendium, Book 4. 


Shades 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 

Level: 6 


Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is related to the shadow monsters 
and demishadow monsters spells. The shades 
spell uses material from the Demiplane of 
Shadow to form semireal illusions of one or 
more monsters, up to 1 Hit Die per caster level. 
All shades created by one spell must be of the 
same sort, and they have 60% of the hit point 
total the real creatures would have. Those who 
view the shades and fail their saving throws vs. 
spell believe the illusion. 

The shades perform as the real monsters with 
respect to Armor Class and attack forms. Spe- 
cial attack forms such as petrification or level 
drain do not actually occur, but a subject who 
believes the shades are real will react appropri- 
ately, until the illusion is countered by a dispel 
magic spell or the condition is countered by a 
heal spell. Those who roll successful saving 
throws see the shades as transparent images su- 
perimposed on vague shadowy forms. These are 
Armor Class 6 and cause only 60% of the true 
monsters’ normal melee damage. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


792 


Shadow Blink 
(Alteration, Hlusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 
Level: 3 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd./level maximum 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a limited form of teleportation 
that allows the caster to instantaneously blink 
from shadow to shadow. The shadows must be 
within 60 yards of each other, and must be large 
enough to allow a thief the size of the caster to 
hide in shadows. The caster arrives in exactly 
the spot desired. The caster can blink to another 
shadowed area he can see within range, or that 
he knows by direct and recent knowledge is pre- 
sent. The caster can blink with up to 250 pounds 
of encumbrance. If the desired destination is oc- 
cupied by a solid object, if no shadow exists at 
the intended destination, or if the weight limit is 
exceeded, the attempted blink fails and is 
wasted. Shadow blinking is strenuous; the 
caster can take no other action in the same 
round after arriving at a destination. 

The caster can make one blink per three 
levels of experience; thus, a 6th- to 8th-level 
caster can make two blinks, a 9th- to 1 1th-level 
caster can make three, and so on. Only one blink 
can be taken per round; all must occur within 
one round per caster level or be wasted. 

Notes: Uncommon for illusionists and 
shadow mages; otherwise, very rare. (Updated 
from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Shadow Bolt 
(Iilusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1-2 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, the caster brings into 
being a semi-real phantasm of an onrushing 
missile. The large, gray teardrop-shaped illu- 
sory projectile glows with a faerie fire-like radi- 


Shadow Bolt 


EHN 


L o 


Da 
TE 


~$ © 

SS. 
NX Q 

WON 


ance of any hue the caster desires; it appears The shadow bolt strikes in the round follow- 
behind the caster and rushes at any one creature ing casting—unless the target shifts out of 
the caster concentrates upon (the caster must be range, in which case it will travel for a second 
able to see the target as the spell is cast). The round to strike (or return upon the caster). A 
projectile begins as a tiny, silent mote that shadow bolt will apparently teleport to follow a 
rapidly grows in size with a frightening, in- target that does so, but if the target thus evades 
creasing moan of rushing air, so that it appears the bolt for the full two rounds, the shadow bolt 
to have come from a great distance at great dissipates harmlessly. The strike of a shadow 


speed (a shadow bolt actually travels at a move- bolt is a considerable blow; the victim must 

ment rate of 27). It swerves to follow the target make a Strength check to avoid falling, and a 

even if the target teleports or otherwise escapes successful Dexterity check is required to protect 

the caster’s view. exposed fragile items (otherwise, these must 
Any other creature struck by the moving bolt make saving throws vs. crushing blow to escape 

en route to its target suffers its effects instead— damage from the character’s fall). 

but if the target creature shifts to another plane, Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 

the bolt returns to strike at its caster. A shadow REALMS setting. Known to be in Tasso s Ar- 

bolt is otherwise affected only by magical barri- canabula. 

ers, not by spells or physical attacks. It inflicts 

1d8 damage, plus one point per level of the Shadow Bolt 

caster. If disbelieved (the target creature makes A 2nd-level spell, renamed shadow burst to 

a successful saving throw vs. spell), a bolt in- avoid confusion with the better-known 3rd-level 

flicts only half damage. (Note that a being unfa- spell of the same name. 


miliar with magical illusions who encounters a 
shadow bolt for the first time has no reason to 
disbelieve such an attack). 


S a a ans, 


793 


~ Shadow Burst r 


Shadow Burst 
(Necromancy) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a burst of gray, shadowy 
force that leaps from the caster directly toward a 
target creature. If the creature is within range, 
visible and in a direct line from the caster as 
casting is completed, then it hits; if not, then the 
burst is wasted. (Another creature blundering 
into the spell’s path might suffer the spell’s ef- 
fects instead; the burst vanishes after it strikes a 
living creature.) 

Any living creature struck by a shadow burst 
must make a successful saving throw vs. spell. 
Success means the creature takes only 1d4 
points of damage. Failure means the creature 
suffers 1d6 points of damage, plus 1 point per 
level of the caster; further, until the end of the 
round after the burst hits, the creature is 
wracked by pain, suffering a —1 penalty to 
attack rolls, Armor Class, saving throws, and 
ability checks. 

Notes: Uncommon for shadow mages and 
necromancers; otherwise, very rare. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Shadow Cloak 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 
Level: 3 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This. spell creates a shadowy, insubstantial 
mantle around the caster, allowing him to 
become effectively invisible upon stepping into 
an area of shadows large enough to contain his 
body. The caster reappears briefly upon making 
an attack or casting a spell, but can fade back 
into the shadows by concentrating undisturbed 
for one round. The shadow cloak is instantly 


dispelled by natural sunlight or light equal in in- 
tensity to a sunburst or sunray. 

Its material component is a square of black 
silk. 

Notes: Uncommon for illusionists and 
shadow mages; otherwise, very rare. (Updated 
from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Shadow Dance 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the caster or a touched 
recipient creature and all worn or carried mater- 
ial into a translucent, insubstantial state, resem- 
bling the creature known as a shadow. Like a 
shadow, this form is 90% undetectable in all but 
the brightest sunlight, except to an observer 
who knows of its presence and watches it con- 
tinuously. While affected by the spell, the recip- 
ient’s movements are silent, and he can pass 
through any crack or opening. Though an intan- 
gible creature cannot cast spells requiring mate- 
rial components or launch physical attacks, the 
state can be ended instantly by the recipient’s 
silent act of will. 

The user of a shadow dance is protected at all 
times by an effect identical to a feather fall 
spell, and is immune to all undead or magical 
energy draining attacks. This immunity includes 
the strength drain of shadows, lifeforce attacks 
(such as the chill touch of a lich or a wizard em- 
ploying the spell of the same name), and the 
level draining of more powerful undead. 

Shadow dance users cannot fly, but can dive 
downward, trusting to the feather fall property 
of the spell for protection. They can also climb 
empty air in a rhythmic manner that resembles 
some dances. This upward movement is equal to 
a levitation spell (an upward movement rate of 
2, no horizontal movement, weight limit of 100 
Ibs. per level of experience of the caster). 

The material component of this spell is a 
cobweb or eyelash that has been touched at 
some time by moonlight. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers; uncommon. 


oe 


~ Shadow Dragon — Dragon r 


Shadow Door 
(IHusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 
Level: 5 


Range: 10 yds. 
Components: S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard creates the 
illusion of a door. The illusion also permits the 
wizard to appear to step through this “door” and 
disappear. In reality, he has darted aside and can 
flee, totally invisible, for the spell duration. 
Creatures viewing this are deluded into seeing 
or entering an empty 10-foot x 10-foot room if 
they open the “door.” A true seeing spell, a gem 
of seeing, or similar magical means can dis- 
cover the wizard. Certain high Hit Dice mon- 
sters might also notice the wizard (see the 
invisibility spell), but only if making an active 
attempt to do so. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Shadow Dragon — Dragon 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Used almost exclusively by shadow dragons, 
this spell allows a dragon to transform itself 
into pure “shadowstuff.” While so transformed, 
the dragon retains all of its powers and abilities, 
including spell-use, breath weapon, and so 
forth. In dim, shadowy areas, a shadow dragon 
can hide in shadows with a 90% chance of suc- 
cess, and the dragon is totally invisible in utter 
darkness (either magical or natural). 

Once in this form (and during the one full 
round it takes for the dragon to transform), the 
dragon is impervious to most attacks, though it 
is not entirely invulnerable. Attacks that can 
harm a shadow dragon include: 


* Light-based spells inflict 1d6 points of 
damage per spell level for each round a 
shadow dragon remains in their area of 
effect. Thus, a light or a faerie fire spell in- 
flicts 1d6 points of damage per round of ex- 
posure, a continual light inflicts 3d6, and 
the light of a prismatic sphere inflicts 9d6 
points of damage each round a shadow 
dragon remains within its radiance. Spells 
that create a flash or burst effect inflict 
double this damage, but allow a saving 
throw vs. spell for half damage. All other 
spells will not harm a shadow dragon unless 
specifically designed to affect shadows or 
creatures composed of shadow, or drag- 
onkind in general. (While fireball and other 
fire-based spells do shed some light, they 
are not considered light-based for purposes 
of this spell.) 

Normal weapons do not harm a shadow 
dragon unless augmented with a light-based 
spell, in which case damage is inflicted as 
above, according to the spell used (the 
weapon itself inflicts no damage, nor do 
bonuses from magic or high Strength 
scores). An augmented weapon implies the 
use of a light, continual light, or similar 
spell that has been placed directly on the 
weapon. 

Magical weapons inflict damage equal to 
their magical bonus. If augmented with a 
light-based spell, the light damage and the 
magical damage are combined. Strength 
bonuses and normal weapon damage are ex- 
cluded. Magical weapons that normally 
shed light inflict damage as an augmented 
weapon, as described above. 

Full sunlight immediately negates the spell 
and forces the dragon back into its true 
form. The change occurs in a single round, 
during which time the dragon is helpless 
and can do nothing other than suffer through 
the forced transformation. Opponents gain a 
free round of attacks. While the transforma- 
tion takes place, the light-based attacks 
noted above have no effect, but other attack 
forms have normal effects. 

Notes: Restricted to dragons. Uncommon for 

shadow dragons; otherwise, very rare. (Updated 

from DRAGON Magazine.) 


> a i a a air 


795 


~ Shadow Form 


4 
T1 MEM E E Pa a 


tise 


7 y 


aay 2 
zi 


ORES SS EEE EE ee. 


ep: 


Shadow Form 


(Necromancy) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster temporarily 
changes himself into a shadow. The caster gains 
the movement rate, Armor Class, Hit Dice, and 
all abilities of a shadow. His chilling touch re- 
quires a normal attack roll. It inflicts 1d4+1 
points of damage and drains one point of 
Strength (drained Strength returns 2d4 turns 
later). A human or demihuman reduced to 0 hit 
points or 0 Strength by the caster in shadow 
form has lost all life force, and is immediately 
drawn into the Negative Material Plane to for- 
ever after exist as a shadow, unless recovered by 
means no less potent than a full wish. 

All of the caster’s weapons and equipment 
stay with him, but cannot be used while the 
caster is in shadow form. The wizard is unable 
to cast spells in shadow form, but is immune to 


> a i i an 


796 


sleep, charm, and hold spells (save those specif- 
ically effective against undead), and cold-based 
attacks. He is 90% undetectable in all but the 
brightest of surroundings. A wizard in shadow 


form can be turned by a priest as a “Special” 


undead. 

When the spell ends, there is a 1% chance 
that the caster will permanently remain as a 
shadow. Nothing short of a wish will return the 
caster to his normal form. 

The material components for this spell are 
the shroud from a corpse at least 100 years old 
and a black glass marble. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers, rare 
for shadow mages; otherwise, very rare. 


Shadow-Form — Ninja 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 5 

Range: Unlimited 
Components: S 

Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Duration: | hr. or until struck 
Area of Effect: Creates 1 shadow-form 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the ninja creates a transparent 
duplicate of himself. The duplicate, or shadow- 
form, appears adjacent to the spellcaster. It 
wears all the clothing and carries all the equip- 
ment that were in the ninja’s possession when he 
cast the spell, leaving him unclothed and un- 
armed; the clothing and equipment are not 
transparent. 

For the duration of the spell, the ninja con- 
trols the shadowform’s actions and sees through 
its eyes. It is an extension of him and possesses 
all of his physical and mental skills but not his 
magical abilities. (In other words, it moves, 
sounds, and fights just as he does but cannot 
cast spells.) The ninja sees through both sets of 
eyes at once. When the shadow-form is waiting 
or resting, the ninja can take actions on his own, 
but he cannot make both his real body and his 
shadow-form act at the same time. 

If the shadow-form is hit in combat or struck 
with a dispel magic spell, it disappears—leav- 
ing behind all the clothing and equipment it was 
carrying. Also left behind is a handful of leaves 
inside the clothes, all that remains of the insub- 
stantial body. 

Spellcasting ninja use this spell to perform 
short-term assignments. The shadow-form can 
be sent off to attack someone, to deliver a mes- 


Daa 


> 


x Shadow Gauntlet r 


sage, to scout a dangerous area, or to undertake 
any sort of action in which the ninja cannot 
afford to be caught. Usually the spellcaster 
dresses in a ninja nightsuit before casting this 
spell, so that it is not readily obvious that the 
form within the clothing is transparent. When 
the shadow-form wears a nightsuit and moves 
around in the dark, it is difficult to see that it is 
not a physical being. 

Notes: Restricted to ninja spellcasters and 
those trained by them; common. 


Shadow Gauntlet 
(Evocation, Ilusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates | gauntlet 
Saving Throw: Special 


A shadow gauntlet is a more powerful ver- 
sion of shadow hand that can wield weapons, 
snatch at items, or act as a shield for the caster 
or other creatures. The spell effect appears in 
midair, as a gleaming, silvery metal gauntlet. Its 
size can range in proportion from human to gar- 
gantuan (12 feet long), and its luminosity can 
range from dark to the intensity of faerie fire. 

These specifics, the handedness (right or 
left), and the initial location of the gauntlet are 
chosen by the caster during the casting. There- 
after, the gauntlet moves as the caster wills, up 
to 240 feet per round. The caster need not con- 
centrate upon the spell to maintain it, but he 
cannot cast a spell in any round in which the 
gauntlet attacks or shifts to a new opponent or 
function. 

The gauntlet can strike weaponless once in a 
round for every three levels of its caster (normal 
attack rolls apply). All weaponless attacks in a 
given round must be directed at a single oppo- 
nent. Successful hits inflict 1d4+1 points of 
damage. An individual who disbelieves the ex- 
istence of the gauntlet and makes a successful 
saving throw vs. spell takes only 2 points of 
damage from a weaponless hit by the gauntlet. 

The gauntlet can wield a weapon, striking 
once per round, using the caster’s THACO. Mag- 
ical weapons can be employed by a shadow 
gauntlet, but it cannot use any special abilities 
of the item (for example, powers triggered by 


empathy or command words). 

Inattention will cause a previously attacking 
shadow gauntlet to hang motionless in midair 
until control is reapplied. If the caster falls un- 
conscious, the gauntlet ceases its actions; if the 
caster dies, the gauntlet silently vanishes. If a 
caster goes insane, the gauntlet wildly attacks 
random living beings within range, at double 
speed (six attacks per round, three at one oppo- 
nent, three at another). 

Alternately, a gauntlet can snatch at items 
held by others. It lacks the strength or solidity to 
dislodge an object from any grasp, but it can 
foil telekinesis and hamper enemy weapons as 
described below. It can carry objects weighing 
up to one pound (for example, a key, a ring, a 
gem) for up to two rounds. 

A gauntlet can hamper one creature in a 
given round, slowing it to half its movement 
rate, temporarily worsening its Armor Class by 
one point, causing any attacks made by the crea- 
ture to be at a —2 penalty to hit, and ruining all 
of the creature’s spellcasting except verbal-only 
spells (magical item command words can be 
used also). 

Finally, a gauntlet can be interposed between 
a specific creature and foes attacking it. The 
gauntlet adds a +1 bonus to saving throws 
against special attacks from the protected side. 


AW a d 
. w ’ r 


~ Shadow Hand r 


It also absorbs 1d2 points of damage from any 
attack that strikes the protected side; the ab- 
sorbed damage counts against the gauntlet 
itself. 

The shadow gauntlet can perform only one 
function during a round. If its caster does not 
concentrate on it, it will continue to perform the 
last function it was directed to do (other than at- 
tacking), moving about as necessary to perform 
its function. 

If the gauntlet is attacked, it has an effective 
Armor Class of 2 (AC 4 if interposing). The 
gauntlet has as many hit points as its caster; 
when these are expended, it is destroyed and the 
spell ends. The spell has a maximum duration of 
one round per level of the caster. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in The Arcanab- 
ula of Jume. 


Shadow Hand 
({Husion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 
Level: 5 


Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 hand 
Saving Throw: Special 


A shadow hand is a smoky, translucent coa- 
lescence of force, shaped like a human hand. 
Appearing in midair near the caster, its size, ini- 
tial location, handedness (left or right), and lu- 
minosity (from nothing to the equivalent of 
faerie fire) are chosen during casting. 

The shadow hand moves as the caster wills, 
remaining within 10 yards per level of the caster 
at all times. The hand is under the control of the 
caster: It can point the way or indicate items of 
interest (such as concealed doors), warn away 
intruders, engage in combat, and so on. Chang- 
ing its activity requires the caster’s attention, 
but continual concentration is not required to 
maintain the spell—the caster can choose to 
perform other actions, such as spellcasting, 
rather than manipulating the hand. 

A shadow hand has no direct effect against 
the undead, golems, mechanical monsters or 
constructs, creatures from the Outer Planes, or 
living things with extremely primitive nervous 
systems (oozes, slimes, nonsentient plants, and 
so on). 


a a 


798 


Otherwise, the hand can slow to half speed 
any opponent of less than 1,000 pounds weight 
trying to push past it, moving to block one op- 
ponent per round as the caster desires. (If the 
shadow hand is operating in a narrow tunnel or 
passage, slowing the foremost of a group of 
creatures may impede those behind.) 

Alternately, a shadow hand can strike an op- 
ponent as directed by its caster; the caster 
cannot cast another spell in the same round. The 
shadow hand attacks once in a round for every 
three levels of the caster, requiring an attack roll 
for each attack. The hand has the same THACO 
as the caster and inflicts 1d4 points of damage 
with a successful hit. An individual who tries to 
disbelieve in the hand receives a saving throw 
vs. spell. If successful, hand strikes against that 
individual inflict only 1 point of damage each. 
A shadow hand cannot be dispelled by physical 
attacks, nor can it carry weight. It has no appre- 
ciable force—it can neither push an opponent 
off-balance nor shatter breakables. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in The Arcanab- 
ula of Jume. 


Shadow Head 
(Evocation) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 5 

Range: 90 ft. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is memorized, it is woven 
around any already-memorized spell of Ist 
through 4th level (typically a combat spell). The 
two spells combine, becoming a single 5th-level 
spell in the caster’s mind, and freeing up the 
mind-space occupied by the lesser spell. 

When this spell is cast, it creates a spectral 
head: a humanlike, disembodied, floating head 
that appears to be composed of translucent 
shadow. The head can be the size of the caster’s 
own or larger, to a maximum height of the 
caster’s entire body. The head moves and speaks 
as the caster wills. Controlling it and maintain- 
ing its existence does not prevent the caster 
from casting other spells. 

A shadow head typically gives a guiding or 
warning message. The caster can speak through 


> 


x Shadow Monsters r 


its mouth as long as the head is within range, 
though spell incantations or magical item words 
of activation uttered by the head do not work. 
The head can be empowered to speak when cer- 
tain triggering conditions are met, in the same 
way as a magic mouth spell. The predetermined 
message can be up to 50 words long, can be de- 
livered in any language the caster knows, and 
can be spoken in any voice the caster can 
mimic. 

A shadow head has no solid existence and 
can do nothing but speak (though it may 
threaten or mislead). If any attack, magical or 
physical, passes through it, then the spell it was 
combined with (typically fireball or lightning 
bolt) is instantly launched from the head at the 
source of the attack. The head then vanishes. 

The material components of this spell are a 
scrap of cobweb that a shadow has once fallen 
across and a bit of tongue from any creature. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Shadow Magic 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 
Level: 5 


Range: 50 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: Special 


The shadow magic spell enables the wizard 
to tap energy from the Demiplane of Shadow to 
cast a quasi-real wizard evocation spell of 3rd 
level or less. For example, this spell can be 
magic missile, fireball, lightning bolt, or so on, 
and has normal effects upon creatures in the 
area of effect if they fail their saving throws vs. 
spell. Thus, a creature failing to save against a 
shadow magic fireball must roll another saving 
throw. If the latter roll is successful, the creature 
suffers half the normal fireball damage; if the 
roll is not successful, the creature suffers full 
normal fireball damage. If the first saving throw 
was successful, the shadow magic nature is de- 
tected and only 20% of the rolled damage is re- 
ceived (rounding down below fractions below .4 
and rounding up fractions of .4 and above). 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Shadow Monsters 
(IlHusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


A wizard casting the shadow monsters spell 
uses material from the Demiplane of Shadow to 
shape semireal illusions of one or more mon- 
sters. The total Hit Dice of the shadow monster 
or monsters thus created cannot exceed the level 
of experience of the wizard; thus, a 10th-level 
wizard can create one creature that has 10 Hit 
Dice, two that have 5 Hit Dice, etc. All shadow 
monsters created by one spell must be of the 
same sort. The actual hit point total for each 
monster is 20% of the hit point total it would 
normally have. (To determine this, roll the ap- 
propriate Hit Dice and multiply the hit points by 
.2, Any remainder less than .4 is dropped—in 
the case of monsters with 1 or fewer Hit Dice, 
this indicates the monster was not successfully 
created—and scores between .4 and 1 are 
rounded up to 1 hit point.) 

Those viewing the shadow monsters are al- 
lowed to disbelieve as per normal illusions, al- 
though there is a —2 penalty to the attempt. The 
shadow monsters perform as the real monsters 
with respect to Armor Class and attack forms. 
Those who believe in the shadow monster suffer 
real damage from their attacks. Special attack 
forms such as petrification or level drain do not 
actually occur, but a subject who believes they 
are real will react appropriately. 

Those who roll successful saving throws see 
the shadow monsters as transparent images su- 
perimposed on vague shadowy forms. These are 
Armor Class 10 and inflict only 20% of normal 
melee damage (biting, clawing, weapon, etc.), 
dropping fractional damage less than .4 as done 
with hit points. 

For example: A shadow monster griffon at- 
tacks a person who knows it is only quasi-real. 
The monster strikes with two claw attacks and 
one bite, hitting as a 7-Hit Die monster. All three 
attacks hit; the normal damage dice are rolled, 
multiplied by .2 separately, rounded up or down, 
and added together to get the total damage. Thus, 
if the attacks score 4, 2 and 11 points, a total of 4 


799 


~ Shadow Play , 


points of damage is inflicted (4 x .2 = .8 

[rounded to 1], 2 x .2 = .4 [rounded to 1], 11 x .2 

= 2.2 [rounded to 2]. The sum is | + 1 +2 = 4). 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Shadow Play 
(Illusion/Phantasm, Divination) 
(Shadow) 

Level: 5 


Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 1 hr, + 1 turn/level maximum 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 

Saving Throw: None 


By placing a candle in the center of a room 
and casting this spell, the wizard causes an 
event to be replayed. Shadows projected by the 
candle transform into the outlines of the room’s 
previous occupants. The shadows reenact what 
transpired between those individuals during the 
past hour or more, depending on the level of the 
caster. Although no sound is involved, the caster 
may discern what took place by watching the 
shadows. Voices can be added by casting a 
shadow speak spell. This spell does not replay 
the actions of undead creatures, and it will not 


function in a room larger than 30 feet by 30 feet. 
The spell’s duration is one hour, plus 1 turn per 
level of the caster above 5th. Once the starting 
point is selected, projections from further in the 
past are not shown. 

The material component is the candle, which 
is consumed by the completion of the spell. Pre- 
maturely extinguishing the candle ends the 
spell. 

Notes: Rare for illusionists; otherwise, very 
rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Shadow Scry — Dragon 


(Divination) 


Level: 1 

Range: Special 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | turn + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, a dragon can use a 
shadow within its lair as a form of scrying 
device. The shadow chosen as the spell focus 
must be in the dragon’s line of sight, no more 
than 10 yards distant. 

Once the spell is cast, the dragon can contact 
another shadow within its lair and see out of it 
as if the dragon was actually standing within 
that shadow, regardless of the shadow’s size or 
shape or the boundaries of the dragon’s lair. The 
dragon can sce everything within sight from the 
contacted shadow—-including the passage of in- 
visible creatures—the dragon’s normal visual 
capabilities function normally through the 
shadow sery spell. Shadows outside the lair 
cannot be reached. 

(The DM must use common sense when de- 
ciding the extent of the dragon’s lair. For exam- 
ple, while a dragon may claim an entire forest as 
its territory—and may well control such a large 
amount of terrain—its lair should be regarded 
as the area where the dragon sleeps, keeps its 
treasure, and generally feels most comfortable 
and powerful.) 

As long as the spell remains in effect, the 
dragon can switch shadows to inspect different 
areas, or view the same area from separate 
shadows to gain a different vantage point. How- 
ever, only one shadow can be contacted at a 
time. The spell does not allow the dragon to cast 
other spells through the link between shadows; 
it allows vision only. 


Bi a 


Shadow Skeleton 


Switching from one contacted shadow to an- 
other requires a round and the mental command 
of the casting dragon; the shadow used as the 
shadow scry focus does not change. While com- 
plete concentration is not required for this spell, 
a small amount of attention is needed. If the 
dragon casts another spell, moves more than 10 
yards away from the focus shadow, or no longer 
wishes to use the spell, the spell immediately 
ends. 

Like normal scrying magic, shadow scry is 
revealed by a detect scrving spell. The contacted 
shadow radiates a faint dweomer, and, once de- 
tected, such spells as dispel magic or screen can 
be used against it (the former spell negates the 
shadow scry if cast successfully). Detection- 
and location-obscuring magic impedes the 
spell’s effectiveness just as it impedes all other 
divination magic. Eliminating shadows with 
bright light or utter darkness prevents the spell 
from working in the illuminated or darkened 
area, but the dragon caster could still view these 
areas from a shadow just outside such effects. 

Notes: Restricted to dragons. Uncommon for 
shadow dragons; otherwise, very rare. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Shadow Skeleton 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | rd. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to weave human, 
demihuman, or humanoid skeletons of shadow- 
stuff. All the skeletons created by a single 
shadow skeleton spell must be of the same type. 
One skeletal image per level of the caster can be 
created; the caster can choose to create fewer 
images if desired. 

Shadow skeletons cannot grasp carry or 
wield solid objects such as weapons. They 
appear smoky and vague in outline of ivory or 
bloody hue and may have any appearance the 
caster wishes (split skulls, missing limbs, and 
so on). They can be created with illusory clothes 
and weapons so as to appear from a distance as 
living guards or servants. The spell cannot be 
worked, however, to give the illusion of life or 


flesh. The skeletons materialize in an area 
15-foot radius and can move about freely there- 
after. 

The skeletal images are silent and cannot be 
turned, dispelled, or affected by heat, fire, or 
cold; they are under the control of the caster just 
as a priest controls skeletons animated by use of 
animate dead. 

Shadow skeletons vanish at the spell’s expira- 
tion, upon the death or unconsciousness of the 
caster. Solid matter, including living creatures, 
can pass through shadow skeletons without re- 
sistance. Any living creature that comes into 
direct contact with a shadow skeleton must save 
vs. spell at +2 or be stunned (reeling and unable 
to act coherently) for one round. Such contact 
does not harm or dispel a shadow skeleton, but 
it is possible for a living creature to charge 
through one. 

The spell requires a piece of bone. This 
serves as a focal point for the spellcaster’s con- 
centration and is not consumed or altered by the 
magic. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS. Known to be in Tasso s Arcanabula. 


Shadow Skeleton: AC 6; MV 12; 2 hp each; 
#AT 1; THACO 20, Dmg 1d4. 


801 


Shadow Speak 


Shadow Speak 
(Illusion/Phantasm, Divination) 
(Shadow) 

Level: 6 


Range: 10 yds. 

Casting Time: 3 
Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell only works in conjunction with the 
shadow play spell. Through this enchantment, 
the shadows speak, repeating the words the 
room’s previous occupants said, in the language 
they were originally spoken. A comprehend lan- 
guages spell will be needed if the wizard does 
not understand the original dialog. The duration 
is one hour, plus one turn per level of the caster 
above 5th. 

Notes: Rare for illusionists; otherwise, very 
rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Shadow Summoning 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2d8 rds. 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the 5th-level spell 
summon shadow, with two important differ- 
ences. First, the shadows appear |d8 rounds 
after the spell is cast instead of at once. Second, 
1d6+1 shadows appear—the actual number 
varies from casting to casting, and is not related 
to the caster’s level. The shadows are under the 
control of the spellcaster and attack his enemies 
on command. They appear within a 10-foot 
radius when summoned, but can move freely 
thereafter. The shadows remain until slain, 
turned, or the spell’s duration expires. Shadows 
are described in the MONSTROUS MANUAL® Tome. 

The material component is a crushed black 
opal, worth at least 50 gp. 

Notes: Very rare spell; found only in the most 
complete necromantic libraries. 


Shadow Veil — Jann 


ey 


(IHlusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: Special (1 hr./level max.) 
Area of Effect: 10 creatures/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell draws a cloak of darkness over 10 
man-sized creatures per level of the caster, al- 
lowing them to move silently and invisibly to 
both normal sight and infravision. The spell 
lasts until sunlight strikes the affected creatures 
or | hour per level of the caster has elapsed, 
whichever comes first. Jann frequently use this 
spell to marshall their hosts before dawn, so that 
the rising sun reveals their ranks drawn up 
before their enemy, where moments ago was 
only empty desert. 

The material components include a black 
opal worth at least 500 gp, a panther’s paw, and 
a black owl’s feather. 

Notes: Uncommon for jann; otherwise, very 
rare. Most often found in an arabian setting. 


Shadow Walk 
(Enchantment, Illusion) 
(Dimension, Shadow) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: | hr./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


In order to use the shadow walk spell, the 
wizard must be in an area of heavy shadows. 
The caster and any creature he touches are then 
transported to the edge of the Prime Material 
Plane where it borders the Demiplane of 
Shadow. In this region, the wizard can move at a 
rate of up to 7 miles per turn, moving normally 
on the borders of the Demiplane of Shadow but 
much more rapidly relative to the Prime Mater- 
ial Plane. Thus, a wizard can use this spell to 
travel rapidly by stepping onto the Demiplane 
of Shadow, moving the desired distance, and 
then stepping back onto the Prime Material 
Plane. The wizard knows where he will come 
out on the Prime Material Plane. 


AO ee 


ea 


The shadow walk spell can be used to travel 
to other planes that border on the Demiplane of 
Shadow, but this requires the potentially per- 
ilous transit of the Demiplane of Shadow to 
arrive at a border with another plane of reality. 

Any creatures touched by the wizard when 
shadow walk is cast also make the transition to 
the borders of the Demiplane of Shadow. They 
may opt to follow the wizard, wander off 
through the plane, or stumble back into the 
Prime Material Plane (50% chance for either 
result if they are lost or abandoned by the 
wizard). Creatures unwilling to accompany the 
wizard into the Demiplane of Shadow receive a 
saving throw, negating the effect if successful. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Shadowcat 
(IHusion) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard brings into 
being a cat made of shadow. The shadowcat is 
the size of a normal cat and may be either gray 
or black at the caster’s option. The caster has 
complete telepathic control of the feline; he can 
see, hear, and even speak through it. While the 
caster does not need to concentrate on the shad- 
owcat to maintain it, using its senses requires 
the caster’s actions for the round. 

A shadowcat makes no sound as it moves. It 
is 90% undetectable in all but the brightest con- 
ditions. It can pass through small holes or 
narrow openings. At the moment it moves far- 
ther than 10 yards per level from the wizard, the 
shadowcat vanishes. 

The shadowy feline is insubstantial, making 
it subject only to magical or special attacks, 
such as those by weapons of +1] or better en- 
chantment. It has AC 5, a movement rate of 18, 
and saving throws equal to those of the caster. 
The cat dissipates if it loses hit points equal to 
one-half the caster’s total hit points. The skad- 
owcat has no attacks of its own and cannot 
touch or carry objects. A successful dispel 
magic spell causes the cat to vanish. 

The material components of this spell are a 


~ Shadowshield r 


black pearl of at least 100 gp value and a claw 
from a gray or black cat. 
Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Shadowcat: AC 5; MV 18; hp % caster’s; 
THACO nil; #AT nil; Dmg nil; SD +1 weapons 
to hit; SZ S. 


NW 
NAN 
` . 


Shadowshield 
(Alteration) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables a wizard to make a crea- 
ture more likely to survive an attack by imbuing 
the creature with a phantom shadow of itself. 

This phantom possesses half the creature’s 
normal hit points. When the creature struck by 
an attack, there is a 60% chance that the phan- 


ĪJT EEN 


Shadowsteal 


tom absorbs all the damage. The shadowshield 
is ineffective against psionic or magical attacks 
that affect the mind. 

The phantom makes saving throws just as the 
affected creature. If reduced to 0 or fewer hit 
points, the shield is dispelled and cannot be re- 
ceived again until one day has passed for each 
point of damage the phantom has taken. A crea- 
ture attempting to use this spell more than three 
times per year must make a successful Constitu- 
tion check or lose one point of Constitution. 

The recipient’s shadow must be visible at the 
time the spell is cast or the spell fails. 

Notes: Uncommon for shadow mages; other- 
wise, very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. 


Shadowsteal 
(Alteration, Ilusion/Phantasm) 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be triggered at its casting or 
long after the casting by uttering a command 
word or by the fulfillment of certain conditions 
set during the casting (as a magic mouth spell). 
It affects the caster or a willing recipient 
touched by the caster during casting. Once the 
spell is activated, it lasts for one hour per level 
of its caster or until the special conditions de- 
fined below occur. 

When the shadowsteal is activated, the pro- 
tected being acquires a shapeshifting, shadowy 
appearance that conceals its identity and even 
its race. The continually altering shape emits 
ever-changing heat and cold that foils even in- 
fravision. All opponents relying on sight attack 
the protected being at a —3 penalty to their 
attack rolls. 

The shadowy being can move, cast spells if a 
spellcaster, and fight normally. There is no real 
alteration of its body or any worn or carried 
items. The protected being sees and speaks nor- 
mally, and this spell empowers it to dimension 
door once (as the 4th-level wizard spell) any 
time while the spell continues, but using this 
ends the shadowsteal instantly. 

A shadowsteal spell waiting to take effect is 
negated by the death of the being it is cast on or 


by a successful dispel magic spell. It is unaf- 
fected by other magic. 

In ancient times, this spell was a favorite of 
wizards seeking to slay foes and escape without 
being recognized. The Seven have used it to 
fight Zhentarim and Red Wizards of Thay with- 
out revealing their identities. 

The material component is a smokey topaz 
worth at least 600 gp that has been exposed to a 
full eclipse. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers; rare. 


Shadowstrike 


ey 


(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | attack 
Area of Effect: 1 attack 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is used by wizards to attack a crea- 
ture through its shadow. The spell is cast by the 
wizard, who then thrusts a dagger into the 
shadow of his opponent. Target shadows are AC 
10. If the shadow is hit, the creature takes 
damage just as if stabbed with the dagger, plus | 
point of damage per level of the caster. 

The shadow must be attacked as soon as the 
spell is cast; otherwise, the spell loses power 
and becomes ineffective. A steady shadow re- 
quires a strong, relatively stationary light 
source. Torchlight or a swinging lantern will not 
provide light enough to form a shadow that can 
be affected by this spell, though a large bonfire 
would. The light source may shine from any di- 
rection as long as the target’s shadow is cast 
toward the attacking wizard. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Shadowy Distinction, Shaefpaete’s 
See Shaefpaete’s shadowy distinction. 


Shadowy Transformation, Lorloveim’s 
See Lorloveim’s shadowy transformation. 


Shaefpaete’s Shadowy Distinction 
(Divination) 4 $ 


(Shadow) 


Level: 4 


AOO a O nn i i a a T 


804 


‘ Shandaril’s Tracer va 


Range: 10 yds. 
Component: V 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: 50 cu. yds. 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell mimics the Cerilian halfling ability 
to see into the Shadow World and to distinguish, 
in a particular location, the thickness of the veil 
that separates that realm from the real world. 
The spell does not confer the Cerilian hal flings’ 
ability to detect evil, detect undead, detect 
magic, shadow walk, or dimension door. 

A wizard who uses this spell has a 5%, plus 
1% per caster level, chance of finding a hidden 
portal to the Shadow World (an area where no 
veil exists). These are dangerous places, since 
denizens of the Shadow World can use such por- 
tals to cross over to the real world. While under 
the effect of this spell, the caster can also make 
such crossings. 

A wizard in the Shadow World can use this 
spell to find portals back to Cerilia. Of course, 
since time and space in the Shadow World are 
reputed to be different from on Cerilia, the 
caster may find himself somewhere or some- 
when other than the place or time he left. 

This spell is rumored to have been developed 
by a wizard of the Zweilund Islands, a small 
domain in the Krakennauricht. Whether the 
Shadow World (source of the Azrai and many 
undead) can be accessed from worlds other than 
Cerilia is currently unknown. 

Notes: Common or uncommon in Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting; virtually unknown else- 
where. 


Shalantha’s Kiss 
Aka magic missile reflection. 


Shandaril’s Tracer 
(Divination) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 object up to | cu. ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster places an 
invisible rune on a single, nonliving, solid 


object (typically a chest, book, wand, or gem). 
The tracer is permanent unless dispelled or de- 
stroyed (when the object it guards is destroyed). 
The caster becomes aware of either occurrence 
immediately. 

Whenever the wizard concentrates on the 
protected object, the spell reveals the direction 
and distance from the caster of the object—even 
if it is on another plane—and also whether the 
object is being handled or used by another crea- 
ture or creatures. This precise fix on the loca- 
tion of the object provides the caster with a 
focus for teleportation or sending other crea- 
tures to the traced object. 

Creatures coming into contact with the object 
are only hazily revealed to the caster of the 
tracer. The caster can learn of each its align- 
ment, race, and the presence or absence or mag- 
ical ability—but not a creature’s name, 
description, or level. 

Various magical means can reveal the pres- 
ence of a tracer, but the caster is always aware 
of these being used, and can act accordingly to 
prevent himself from being traced in turn, if de- 
sired. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS. Known to be in Shan- 
daril s Workbook. 


805 


~ Shape Change r 


Shape Change 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice, Geometry) 
Level: 9 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a wizard is able to assume the 
form of any living thing or creature below demigod 
status (greater or lesser deity, singular dragon type, 
or the like). The spellcaster becomes the creature 
he wishes, and has all of its abilities save those de- 
pendent upon Intelligence, innate magical abilities, 
and magic resistance, for the mind of the creature 
is that of the spellcaster. Thus, a wizard can change 
into a griffon and fly away, then to an efreet and fly 
through a roaring flame, then to a titan to lift up a 
wagon, etc. These creatures have whatever hit 
points the wizard had at the time of the shape 
change. Each alteration in form requires only a 
second, and no system shock is incurred. 

For example, a wizard is in combat and assumes 
the form of a will o’wisp. When this form is no 
longer useful, the wizard changes into a stone 
golem and walks away. When pursued, the golem- 
shape is changed to that of a flea, which hides on a 
horse until it can hop off and become a bush. If de- 
tected as the latter, the wizard can become a 
dragon, an ant, or just about anything he is familiar 
with. 

A wizard adopting another form also adopts its 
vulnerabilities. For example, a wizard who be- 
comes a spectre is powerless in daylight, and is 
subject to being turned, controlled, or destroyed by 
opposing clerics. Unlike similar spells, a wizard 
who is killed in another form does not revert to his 
original shape, which may disallow certain types of 
revivification. 

The material component is a jade circlet worth 
no less than 5,000 gp, which shatters at the end of 
the spell’s duration. In the meantime, the circlet is 
left in the wake of the shape change, and premature 
shattering ends the spell immediately. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Optional: The DM may require the caster to have 
had first-hand experience or sage-like knowledge of 
the creature whose shape is taken. 


P a ai < 


806 


Shape Mountain 
Lost spell. Mythal magic from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting, taken away by the gods. 


Shark Bolt 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Water) 

Level: 2 


Range: 50 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/bolt 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


Use of this spell creates one or more bolts of 
water, each the size and shape of a small, dark 
brown shark (size S). Once the spell is cast, each 
shark bolt “swims” directly from the caster’s 
hand through the air or water to bite the indicated 
target creature. The bolt moves at a rate of 24 and 
strikes at the target creature as a 6 HD monster 
(THACO 15), inflicting 2d4 points of bite 
damage per bolt. Each bolt pursues its target until 
striking or until traveling beyond the range of the 
spell. Concentration is unnecessary; the bolt pur- 
sues the target creature as long as the creature 
was visible to the caster at the spell’s casting and 
does not become invisible, teleport, or similarly 
escape by magical means. Any physical barrier 
that completely blocks the passage of a bolt will 
cause it to splash and dissipate harmlessly. 

The bolt can be attacked and reduced in 
strength. The bolt is Armor Class 4; if struck by 
a physical weapon of any sort, it loses some of 
its volume, causing it to attack as a smaller 
shark. The first hit reduces the bolt to attack as a 
3 HD shark (THACO 17), causing 1d4 points of 
damage if struck once. A bolt dissipates if 
struck a second time. Bolt initiative is deter- 
mined normally. 

The spell creates a number of bolts equal to 
half the level of the caster (rounded down), to a 
maximum of 10. 

The necessary material components for the 
spell are a pinch of salt, three whole shark’s 
teeth, and a dram of water. The ink of a squid or 
octopus is also used to add coloration to each of 
the bolts. The ink component can be omitted for 
underwater casting, making each bolt effec- 
tively invisible (AC 0). 

Notes: Uncommon for water and Sea mages; 
otherwise, very rare. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine. ) 


i 


! 


Sharpen 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 2 weapons/level 
Saving Throw: None 


An enterprising wizard who lived near a 
castle gate came up with this spell. It sharpens 
and straightens edges in weapons, clearing the 
normal dents and nicks out. The edges will have 
a normal sharpness, not conferring any bonus to 
damage or attack rolls. Blunt weapons are not 
affected by this spell, though piercing weapons 
are. Hedge wizards have been known to cast this 
spell for city guardsmen at a discount especially 
before inspection, just in case the wizard needs 
a hand later. 

Notes: Uncommon for hedge wizards and ar- 
tificers; otherwise, very rare. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Sharptooth — Dragon 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: The casting dragon 
Saving Throw: None 


This simple spell is a favorite among dragons 
who enjoy sinking their teeth into combat. The 
spell alters the dragon’s fangs, making them 
harder and sharper. In melee, this adds +1 per 
age category to each damage roll on any suc- 
cessful bite attack, for as long as the spell lasts. 
Dragons also employ sharptooth when gnawing 
apart a tasty but tough meal, such as orcs, ar- 
mored dwarves, or knights in plate armor. 

Notes: Restricted to dragons; uncommon. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


i Shatterhull r 


Shatter 
(Alteration) 
(Song) 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 3-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The skatter spell is a sound-based attack that 
affects nonmagical objects of crystal, glass, ce- 
ramic, or porcelain, such as vials, bottles, 
flasks, jugs, windows, mirrors, etc. All such ob- 
jects within a 3-foot radius of the center of the 
spell effect are smashed into dozens of pieces 
by the spell. Objects weighing more than one 
pound per level of the caster are not affected, 
but all other objects of the appropriate composi- 
tion must save vs. crushing blow or be shat- 
tered. Alternatively, the spell can be focused 
against a single item of up to 10 pounds per 
caster level. Crystalline creatures usually suffer 
1d6 points of damage per caster level to a maxi- 
mum of 6d6, with a saving throw vs. spell for 
half damage. 

The material component of this spell is a chip 
of mica. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Shatterhull 
(Evocation) 


ey 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. diameter circle 
Saving Throw: Special 


The shatterhull spell weakens a wooden 
structure that’s immersed in water. Usually, it is 
cast upon a ship’s hull. The spell weakens the 
hull within the area of effect, creating multiple 
leaks that can cause the entire area to give way. 
A seaworthiness check determines whether the 
ship is holed. If the check fails, the ship starts to 
sink immediately. Even if the check succeeds, 
the small leaks must be plugged or sealed; oth- 
erwise, a seaworthiness check must be made 
each subsequent hour. 


, i a a rr. 


807 


~, Shayn’s Infallible Indentification BS 


The target need not be a ship, however. For 
example, shatterhull can be aimed at a wooden 
door in a flooded dungeon. In that case, the 
spell forces an immediate saving throw vs. 
crushing blow or the target is destroyed. 

The material component of this spell is a thin 
glass needle, which is placed against the tar- 
geted surface. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Shayn’s Infallible Identification 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | year 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster creates a link be- 
tween an object and its owner. A line of magical 
force, visible only to the caster, connects the 
object to one part of its owner’s body, usually 
the head or heart. The line winks out if the 
object is taken more than three feet from the 
owner, but automatically reappears when the 
object comes within range, provided the spell’s 
duration hasn’t expired. The line can be seen 
with detect magic, detect invisibility, true 
seeing, or a robe of eyes. 

The material component is a long piece of 
thread coated with glue at both ends. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Shield 
(Evocation) 
(Force, Geometry) 


Level: | 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, an invisible barrier 
comes into being in front of the wizard. This 
shield totally negates magic missile attacks. It 
provides the equivalent protection of AC 2 
against hand-hurled missiles (axes, darts, 


J STe i a TTT 


808 


javelins, spears, etc.), AC 3 against small 
device-propelled missiles (arrows, bolts, bul- 
lets, manticore spikes, sling stones, etc.), and 
AC 4 against all other forms of attack. The 
shield also adds a +1 bonus to the wizard’s 
saving throws against attacks that are basically 
frontal. Note that these benefits apply only if 
the attacks originate from in front of the wizard, 
where the shield can move to interpose itself. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Shield of Winds 


(Evocation) 
(Province: Wind) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. x 30-ft. vertical barrier, 
2 ft. thick 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a windy barrier that can be 
felt but not seen. The spell summons up 
breezes, draws them into thin “threads,” then 
weaves them into a tapestry of chaotic, 
whistling gusts. The result is a wall that is 
nearly impenetrable. No herd of beasts can 
batter through it; no titan can break it apart. 
Once created, the shield cannot be moved. 

Magical and nonmagical creatures cannot 
penetrate the shield of winds. Nor can nonmagi- 
cal weapons. Gas clouds and whirlwinds are 
stopped, too, whether magical or natural in 
origin. Movable objects made of force cannot 
pass through, nor can prismatic spell effects and 
the like. 

Some assaults do penetrate the shield, how- 
ever. Purely magical weapons can pass through, 
provided they have no solid, tangible form. For 
example, magic missiles can penetrate the wall, 
but an existing arrow enchanted with the flame 
arrow spell, or a spear +2, cannot. The follow- 
ing can also penetrate the wall: divination 
spells, magics such as charm, illusion spells 
such as phantasmal force, energy attacks, as 
well as sound and sound-based attacks. 

Dispel magic can bring the wall down, while 
an antimagic shell temporarily negates that part 
of the wall in its area. The caster himself can de- 
stroy it instantly at will. He doesn’t have to con- 
centrate upon the wall to maintain it. In fact, the 
caster can die, leave the area, or undertake other 


i 


ea 


~ Ship Invisibility r 


spellcasting without affecting the shield in the 
slightest. 

A shield of winds has no material component 
other than sufficient air to create the wall. The 
spell can’t function underwater or in other 
places with a paucity of air. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Ship Invisibility 


(llusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: 24 hrs. 

Area of Effect: Ship touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a wizard can cause the 
ship he is aboard to become invisible, along 
with all its equipment and all creatures aboard. 
While the spell is in effect, creatures aboard 
ship can see and hear each other and the ship 
itself, but creatures not aboard can see and hear 
nothing. A clever watcher, however, may notice 
the ship’s wake, any disruption of water by its 
oars, if any, or other clues. People or objects 


\ y | 
T 


that fall overboard, or otherwise leave the ship 
become visible; anybody or anything coming 
aboard becomes invisible. The spell is negated 
when anyone on board ship engages in any 
attack against anyone or anything beyond the 
ship. Traveling at ramming speed for more than 
two rounds will also terminate the spell. This 
spell is treasured among wizards who adventure 
on the Sea of Fallen Stars, and knowledge of its 
casting is closely guarded. 

The material components of the spell are a 
splinter from the deck of the ship to be made in- 
visible and the tentacle of a jellyfish. 

Notes: Rare in the Sea of Fallen Stars region 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; otherwise, 
very rare. (Updated from DUNGEON Magazine.) 


> Sela’ 
oe 


Ship of Fools 


Ship of Fools 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Province: Sea) 


Level: 6 

Range: 100 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: | vessel 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


aa 
ey 


This is a specialized version of the Sth-level 
wizard spell feeblemind. Instead of reducing a 
wizard to idiocy, the ship of fools deprives a 
ship’s crew of all knowledge of the sea. The cap- 
tain shouts gibberish orders, the crew pulls on 
the wrong lines, the charts become “unread- 
able,” and the navigator tipsy. Any rowers pre- 
sent lack coordination, as the drum-beater 
conducts new experiments in freeform percus- 
sion. 

As a result, the sailors perform like ordinary 
landlubbers. The seamanship, navigation, and 
any other proficiencies that might aid in 
shiphandling are negated. The speed of a rowed 
vessel is cut in half, and the vessel has a 20% 
chance of changing direction each round—30 
degrees right or left, determined randomly. The 
speed of a sailing vessel is reduced by a third, 
while the chance of a sudden change of tack in- 
creases to 40% per round. 

The spell affects one vessel, which may be 
the vessel upon which the caster is standing. 
The ship’s captain is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell. If he fails, he and his entire crew are 
under the effect of the ship of fools. If the cap- 
tain succeeds, the ship is unaffected (good lead- 
ership outweighs foolish magics). Passengers, 
slaves, and other members who are not crew 
make individual saving throws. Player charac- 
ters are always allowed individual saving 
throws. However, if a PC captain fails his saving 
throw, the entire crew is affected, excluding 
PCs, who get their own saving throws. 

If a captain under the effect of this spell is 
knocked unconscious, tied up, or otherwise “re- 
leased” from command, his replacement (a new, 
temporary captain) must make a new saving 
throw—whether he’s an NPC or a PC. With this 
second saving throw, a previously unaffected in- 
dividual may become “foolish.” 

This spell usually helps a wizard at sea evade 
pursuers (who become bumbling fools) or to set 
up an opponent’s ship for assault. The disability 


of the crew applies only to their seamanship; 
they can fight, cast spells, and otherwise act 
normally. 

The ship of fools spell requires as a focus a 
ring, taken from the body of someone who lived 
a good life and died happy (this is reusable). 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


SPELLJAMMER® Notes: On a spelljam- 
ming ship, the helm operator instead of the 
captain makes the saving throw for the 
crew. The general effect of the spell is to 
make the crew “green” (untrained), with 
all the appropriate modifiers. 


Shipshock 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Sea) Cy 
Level: 5 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 turn/level + 1d6 turns 
Area of Effect: 1 ship 
Saving Throw: ¥2 or Neg. 


This spell acts as a security device, protecting 
ships from underwater attacks. (It can protect 
other submerged wooden or reed structures, 
too.) Once cast, shipshock does nothing until 
the vessel is touched by a living underwater 
creature with Intelligence above “animal.” Most 
fish don’t qualify, so don’t accidentally dis- 
charge the spell. 

When the spell is triggered, the ship releases 
a bright blast of electrical energy, inflicting 1d6 
points of damage per level of the caster, to a 
maximum of 15d6. 

The individual who touched the ship (and 
caused the blast) makes a saving throw vs. spell; 
success indicates that only half damage is in- 
curred. In addition, all creatures in the water 
within 100 feet of the discharge must make a 
saving throw vs. spell. Success means they suffer 
no damage; failure means they suffer half. 

The blast does not harm those who are out of 
the water, including any aboard the ship, nor 
does it harm the ship itself. Shipshock carries 
only one charge. If the blast is not triggered 
before the duration of the spell elapses, it fades 
away harmlessly. 


~ Shoondal’s Seeking r 


| 


The material component of this spell is a 
small silver rod, which is pushed into the pro- 
tected ship’s keel like a nail. The rod is con- 
sumed if the blast is triggered, but not if the 
charge merely fades. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Shock — Witch 


(Invocation/Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 60-foot radius 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell invokes a rapidly expanding sphere 
of electrical energy that expands outward from 
the witch, inflicting 4d8 points of damage upon 
all creatures within the area of effect (except the 
caster). A saving throw vs. spell is allowed for 
half damage. Both friend and foe alike are in- 
jured by shock, so the spell is usually saved for 
a time when the caster is surrounded by ene- 
mies. For item saving throws, shock is consid- 
ered an electrical attack (not lightning). The 
energy does not penetrate solid barriers, except 
that it will be conducted through metal to affect 
any creature in contact with the metal surface. 

The material component is a copper piece 
and a strip of zinc. 

Notes: Restricted to witches; uncommon. 


Shock Shield 


(Invocation/Evocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch yp S 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius of creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, an invisible field of 
magical energy surrounds the protected crea- 
ture. Every other creature within the area at- 
tempting to make a melee attack against the 
protected creature suffers 1d6 points of damage 
each round an attack is made, with no saving 
throw against the shield allowed. 

The shock shield has no effect on those 


811 


making missile or ranged spell attacks; only 
creatures closing for hand-to-hand combat 
suffer the effects of the shield. Creatures at- 
tempting to strike, grapple, pummel, bite, claw, 
overbear, punch, push, or likewise attack the 
caster are affected; including those delivering 
spell attacks by touch. Those in the area but not 
attacking the protected creature suffer no harm. 

The material component is a small bronze 
disk, cupped in the caster’s palm as the spell is 
spoken. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Optionally, may be 
uncommon in savage settings. Known to be in 
Prismal’s Pocket Library, Vol. IV. 


Shocking Grasp 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When the wizard casts this spell, he develops 
a powerful electrical charge that gives a jolt to 
the creature touched. The spell remains in effect 
for one round per level of the caster or until it is 
discharged by the caster touching another crea- 
ture. The shocking grasp delivers 1d8 points of 
damage, plus 1 point per level of the wizard (for 
example, a 2nd-level wizard would discharge a 
shock causing 1d8+2 points of damage). While 
the wizard must come close enough to his oppo- 
nent to lay a hand on the opponent’s body or 
upon an electrical conductor that touches the 
opponent’s body, a like touch from the opponent 
does not discharge the spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Shoondal’s Seeking 


(Divination) 


Level: 5 

Range: 40 feet 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 9 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell empowers the caster to see all 
locks, keys, and fastenings within 40 feet. All 


FN 


~ Shooting Stars r 


Aee T 


812 


such devices glow a bright gold. They are visi- 
ble to the caster’s gaze even through concealing 
frescoes, wood overlays, clothing, tapestries, 
and other materials up to the density of a 3-inch 
thickness of solid stone. Even magical disguises 
overlying a lock, key, or fastening do not con- 
ceal it from Shoondal’s seeking. 

If any of the revealed devices are enchanted, 
their auras seem ruby-red to the caster, not 
golden. If there are mechanical traps or alarms 
linked to revealed devices, the devices glow 
blue. If both mechanical traps and magic are 
linked to the same item, the magical glow takes 
precedence, unfortunately concealing any hint 
of the mechanical link. The spell does not show 
which locks and keys go together. 

The material component of this spell is a key 
from any source, which is consumed in the cast- 
ing. It need not be one familiar to the caster, or 
even a real key. A piece of metal shaped like a 
key the caster has seen will suffice. 

Notes: Rare or very rare in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Shooting Stars 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Fire) 


Level: 8 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates three small, glowing mis- 
siles with fiery tails that shoot forth from the 
caster’s fingertips, flying in a straight path 
toward any target within range designated by 
the caster. No attack roll is required, but crea- 
tures targeted by the spell receive a saving 
throw vs. spell to dodge each shooting star. This 
saving throw is modified by the target’s range; 
creatures within 20 yards save with a —2 
penalty, creatures within 40 yards save at a —1 
penalty, and creatures more than 40 yards away 
save normally. 

The shooting stars detonate on impact, in- 
flicting 12 points of damage upon the creature 
struck, and then explode for 24 points of fiery 
damage in a 10-foot radius. Creatures within 
this area (included the original target) receive a 
saving throw vs. spell for half damage. Untar- 
geted shooting stars or those that miss their in- 


tended targets simply explode at the end of the 
spell range. 

The missiles can be released one at a time or 
simultaneously, but any not released before the 
spell’s end are lost. 

The material component is a wax candle that 
must be lighted and held while the spell is in 
effect. 

Notes: Rare for fire mages; otherwise, very 
rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Shout 
(Evocation) 


(Song) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10 x 30 ft. cone 
Saving Throw: Special 


When a shout spell is cast, the wizard gives 
himself tremendous vocal powers. The caster 
can emit an ear-splitting noise that has a princi- 
pal effect in a cone shape radiating from his 
mouth to a point 30 feet away. Any creature 
within this area is deafened for 2d6 rounds and 
suffers 2d6 points of damage. A successful 
saving throw vs. spell negates the deafness and 
reduces the damage by half. Any exposed brittle 
or crystal substance subject to sonic vibrations 
is shattered by a shout, while those brittle ob- 
jects in the possession of a creature receive the 
creature’s saving throw. Deafened creatures 
suffer a —1 penalty to surprise rolls, and those 
that cast spells with verbal components are 20% 
likely to miscast them. 

The shout spell cannot penetrate the 2nd- 
level priest spell, silence, 10' radius. This spell 
can be employed only once per day; otherwise, 
the caster might permanently deafen himself. 

The material components for this spell are a 
drop of honey, a drop of citric acid, and a small 
cone made from a bull or ram horn. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Shrink Animal 


Reversed form, animal growth. 


Ng 


5 Shround of Flame r 


Shroud of Flame 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: | creature, size L or smaller 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Also called the trollkiller spell, casting this 
spell causes a single creature to burst into 
flames. A successful saving throw vs. spell 
negates the spell’s effect entirely. Failure, how- 
ever, means the creature takes 2d6 points of 
| damage per round from the fire. Each round 
i thereafter, the creature is allowed another 
saving throw vs. spell. As soon as one of these 
saving throws succeeds, the flames die out, in- 
flicting no damage that round. 

While immolated, all flammable objects on 
the target are burned (magical items receive 
saving throws vs. fire). If flammable oil is on 
the character, it is ignited by the flames and in- 
flicts additional damage. 

The shroud of flame shoots off gouts of fire 
as it burns. All those within 10 feet of the burn- 
ing creature take 1d4 points of damage from the 
flame. Flammable objects near the flame will 
ignite and burn as well. Items such as rings of 
fire resistance and spells such as the priest’s 
protection from fire protect both the target crea- 
ture and those around it from the fire damage of 
the spell. They do not negate the immolation 
and possible burning of flammable items, how- 
ever. Complete immersion in water ends the 
spell. 

The material components of this spell are a 
pinch of saltpeter, a small piece of phosphorus, 
and a small scrap of lace cloth or spider web. 

Notes: Uncommon spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in The 
Spellbook of Daimos and Daltim s Tome of Fire. 


813 


~ Sidhelien Bow 


Sidhelien Bow 
(Enchantment) ; ; 
Reversible 
Level: 1 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special (3 rds. + 1 rd./level) 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 1 bow 

Saving Throw: None 


When a wizard casts this spell upon a non- 
magical short bow, long bow, or crossbow, the 
weapon gains a +1 attack bonus. The spell 
takes effect when the first shot is fired and then 
lasts for three rounds, plus one round per level 
of the caster. The first shot must be fired within 
24 hours of casting or the enchantment is lost. 
The bow’s bonus alone does not enable archers 
to hit creatures that can be attacked only by 
magical weapons; magical arrows are needed 
as well. When this spell is cast by a Sidhelien 
wizard, the target bow may be magical or non- 
magical, and gains a +1 bonus to attacks and 
damage. 

Multiple spells can be cast upon a single bow 
to extend the duration of the enchantment. 
Doing so does not create additional attack 
bonuses or extend the 24-hour limit. 

The reverse of this spell, decrepit bow, makes 
a nonmagical bow suffer a —1 attack penalty. 
When cast by a Sidhelien wizard, a decrepit bow 
enchantment causes —1 penalties to attack and 
damage rolls. 

The material component for both versions is 
a thread from a silkworm. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Sidhelien Discord 


Reversed form, see Sidhelien mien. 


Sidhelien Mien 


(Enchantment/Charm) 


Reversible 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 2 turns/level 

Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/2 levels 
Saving Throw: Special 


By casting this spell, the wizard bestows cer- 
tain qualities natural to Sidhelien upon a crea- 
ture not of elf descent. The recipient gains 90% 
resistance to sleep and charm spells, and is un- 
affected by aging attacks and normal diseases. 
The recipient also gains partial camouflage in a 
woodland setting; when standing still or moving 
slowly, he has a 30% chance of remaining unde- 
tected. An individual moving faster than a 
normal walking pace is still 15% likely to 
remain unseen. 

Though the recipient gains elven abilities, his 
appearance does not change. Nor does he gain 
other elven qualities not listed above. 

The number of individuals a wizard can 
affect with this spell depends on his level; a 9th- 
level caster can affect four individuals, a 10th- 
level caster can affect five, and so on. 

The reverse of this spell, Sidhelien discord, 
adds a -3 penalty to the target individual’s 
saving throws vs. charm and sleep spells, and 
prevents him from moving unseen in woodland 
settings. An individual who takes special pre- 
cautions, such as lying still in underbrush, can 
hide in woods normally. When moving, how- 
ever, any observers are 15% more likely to spot 
him. 

Sidhelien mien has no effect when cast on 
elves; its reverse, however, does. Elves gain a 
normal saving throw against the Sidhelien dis- 
cord version of the spell. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Siege Sphere, Otiluke’s 
See Otiluke’s siege sphere. 


Sighing Chain 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./levels 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell brings into being a shimmering 
silver-blue chain of force that coils snakelike 
around a single chosen target creature. The 
spell’s name comes from the loud, continuous 
sighing sound the chain makes as it loops and 
writhes around the creature. The chain sur- 


” i i as Cae ii ae a aan 


~ Silence 15' Radius — Bard r 


rounds the creature automatically. Its move- 
ments do not require the caster’s continued at- 
tention; the caster is free to work other magic or 
even leave the scene. 

The creature within the sighing chain is not 
prevented from moving about or performing de- 
sired actions, but the chain imposes a —2 penalty 
on the creature’s attacks, damage rolls, and 
saving throws; adversely affects ability checks 
and movement rate by 2; and increases the cast- 
ing time of any spell cast by a spellcasting en- 
chained creature by 2. 

Creatures trying to pull at the chain suffer 
2d4 points of bludgeoning damage per tug, and 
such attempts are always futile. Foes of the 
creature trying to strike at it past or through the 
chain suffer a —2 penalty to attack rolls, but are 
otherwise unaffected by the chain. 

Aside from waiting for its disappearance at 
the expiration of the spell, the chain can be 
gotten rid of by dispel magic, by destroying it, 
or by the death of the creature. If the chained 
creature dies and the spell has not expired, the 
caster can direct the chain to move to another 
creature, coiling and writhing at MV 9. To en- 
chain this subsequent creature requires a suc- 
cessful attack roll at the caster’s THACO, and 
directing the chain consumes the spellcaster’s 
action for that round. This is the only way a 
sighing chain can change creatures. If the chain 
is not directed to a new creature in the round 
following the death of the first, it dissipates. 

To destroy a sighing chain, it must be dealt 
21 points of damage. It is only AC 6, but the 
nature of the magic causes all damage done to it 
by any spell or being, not just the chained crea- 
ture, to be visited point-for-point on the chained 
creature. Thus, the creature must suffer 21 
points of damage to be free of a sighing chain 
that is “killed.” 

The material component of this spell is a 
length of at least three joined links of chain of 
the finest steel or of any pure metal. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Signature Sigil 
(Alteration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Permanent 


815 


Area of Effect: 1 square foot 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to magically in- 
scribe a sign, signature, or picture onto any 
inanimate material. Unlike the Ist-level spell 
wizard mark, the signature sigil cannot be made 
invisible; it always glows. 

The signature sigil has two additional func- 
tions, which rely on special command words 
designated by the caster when the sigil is cast. 

A) Flare. The sigil is commanded to flare 
brightly, making it clearly visible up to 100 
yards away for a round. 

B) Explode. The sigil is commanded to ex- 
plode, inflicting 2d6 points of damage upon all 
creatures within 5 feet (save vs. spell for half 
damage). A detonated sigil is destroyed, leaving 
a charred and blackened area. 

The commands function if the speaker is 
within 100 feet of the sigil. Once command 
words are designated, anyone can trigger the 
effect, not just the caster. The caster can change 
the command words any time by simply touch- 
ing the sigil and speaking the new words. From 
that point forward, the new command words are 
functional. This process can be repeated as 
often as desired. A signature sigil can be re- 
moved by a successful dispel magic spell. 

The signature sigil was created by one of the 
League’s wizards purely by accident, when he 
attempted to create an improved version of the 
wizard mark spell. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from Tal- 
adas in the DRAGONLANCE setting; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Silence 15' Radius 
Lost Spell. The Red Wizards of Thay are ru- 
mored to have had this spell before the Time of 
Troubles. 


Silence 15' Radius — Bard 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell, complete silence 
prevails in the affected area. All sound is 


~ Silent Alarm 


stopped: conversation is impossible, spells with 
verbal components cannot be cast, and no noise 
issues from or enters the area. The spell can be 
cast into the air or upon an object, but the effect 
is stationary unless cast on a mobile object or 
creature. The spell lasts two rounds for each 
level of the experience of the caster. If the spell 
is centered on a creature, the effect then radi- 
ates from the creature and moves as it moves. 
An unwilling creature receives a saving throw 
vs. spell. If successful, the spell effect is cen- 
tered about one foot behind the position cf the 
creature at the instant of casting (the effect 
does not move with the creature in this case). 
This spell provides a defense against sound- 
based attacks, such as harpy singing, a horn of 
blasting, etc. 
Notes: Restricted to bards; rare. 


Silent Alarm 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


Combining elements of the spells magic 
mouth, message, and ESP this spell creates a 
magical alarm around the affected object. This 
spell is often keyed to alert the owner of the es- 
tablishment or the guardian of the site if his 
property or charge is disturbed. 

When a specified event occurs, the dweomer 
is triggered. For example, the event might be the 
approach of an unauthorized person, an attempt 
to open a chest without the key, or the casting of 
a spell within 10 feet of the object. 

When triggered, a prestated telepathic mes- 
sage is immediately sent to a person specified at 
the time of casting—up to 25 words. The mes- 
sage is strong enough to wake the person from a 
deep sleep and is repeated twice, but does not 
cross planar boundaries. 

The wizard must have the person to be 
alerted and any individuals that are to be specif- 
ically authorized (or excluded) at hand; if these 
persons cannot be physically present, a lock of 
hair or similar personal effect suffices. The 
silent alarm remains in place until triggered or 
dispelled. 

The material component is a button, and a 


strand of hair from each person involved in the 
spell. 
Notes: Rare spell. 


Silver Tongue, Otto’s 
See Otto’s silver tongue. 


Simbul’s Skeletal Deliquescence 
(Alteration) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1] day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is sometimes called the boneless 
spell because it enables the caster to turn all of 
the bones in any one touched creature to jelly. 
The creature collapses into a helpless, heaving 
mass that is able to speak, breathe, and per- 
ceive—but do little else! Nothing can be held by 
a being affected by this spell. The creature can 
flow downhill at MV 3, and ooze across level 
surfaces at MV 1, but cannot move uphill at all. 
Worn or carried items are not affected by the 
deliquescence, and typically fall around the 
creature. 

A boneless creature is AC 10 and has no 
physical attack forms except smothering a 
prone, helpless being by flowing over its means 
of breathing. A boneless creature can float on 
water, swim through it at MV 3 (by forming 
flaps like a ray does and flexing its gelid mass), 
and can breathe by filtering oxygen from the 
water. 

When the spell expires, the creature returns 
to its normal form. No system shock survival 
roll is necessary. Liquids (even if boiling), 
vapors, poisons, and corrosive substances, such 
as acid, do no harm to a boneless creature, but 
the creature automatically fails all Dexterity 
ability checks and makes all saving throws at a 
—3 penalty. 

A onetime apprentice of the Simbul took this 
spell to the Red Wizards of Thay when he joined 
them. Their use of it since then suggests they 
believe its effects to be permanent. Several vic- 
tims have regained their own shapes when left 
“to die” by Red Wizards. 

Notes: Known by the Seven Sisters, their ap- 
prentices, and select Harpers; rare or very rare 
them and the Red Wizards of Thay. 


x Simbul’s Spell Supremacy r 


Simbul’s Spell Sequencer++ 


(Alteration, Conjuration, Evocation) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 366 days 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When memorizing this spell, a wizard must 
select one to three other spells of Ist to 4th 
level. The number of spells is at the discretion 
of the wizard, though the maximum cannot be 
exceeded, and the spells can be of the same 
level or even identical—for example, three fire- 
ball spells. The selected magics must be cast 
immediately after the spell sequencer is memo- 
rized, employing the usual material compo- 
nents, but each casting is preceded by the word 
that will later unleash the spell sequencer. This 
word forms the verbal component of the spell; 
when it is spoken the sequencer is cast. 

The linked spells need not be cast by the 
wizard memorizing the sequencer, or even by a 
wizard; priest spells can be linked to a se- 
quencer. The linked spells have no effect until 
the trigger word is uttered. Then all of the linked 
spells take effect in the same round, one after 
the other, in the order in which they were cast, 
until all have taken effect. Spell damage is 
always the maximum possible, and targets are 
selected by the will of the sequencer-caster. The 
sequencer-caster must be able to see all in- 
tended targets when the sequencer is cast. 

Notes: Unique spell, known to the Simbul. 


Simbul’s Spell Supremacy 
(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful, little-known spell has won the 
Simbul many magical duels. It allows the 
caster’s next two spells to be cast by silent act of 
will alone, without material components, and 
with a casting time of 1. Moreover, both spells 
manifest for their full possible damage and du- 


~ Simbul’s Spell Trigger = 


ration. Spell supremacy is only effective in aug- 
menting the effects of spells of 6th level or less. 
If the caster uses more powerful spells, they do 
not benefit, but the spell supremacy magic is 
exhausted in any case. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers; very rare. 


Simbul’s Spell Trigger} + 


(Alteration, Conjuration, Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 366 days 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When memorizing this spell, a wizard must 
select one to four other spells of Ist to 7th 
levels. The number of spells is at the discretion 
of the wizard, though the maximum cannot be 
exceeded, and the spells can be of the same 
level or even be identical—for example, four 
death spells. The selected magics must be cast 
immediately after the spell trigger is memo- 
rized, employing the usual material compo- 
nents, but preceding each casting with the word 
that will later unleash the trigger. (The word 
forms the verbal component of the spell; when 
it is spoken the spell trigger is cast.) The spells 
need not be cast by the wizard memorizing the 
spell trigger, or even by a wizard; priest spells 
can be linked to a spell trigger. 

The spells have no effect at the time they are 
cast, but when the trigger word is later uttered 
(casting the spell trigger), all of them take effect 
in the same round, one after the other, in the 
order in which they were cast, until all the spells 
have taken effect. Spell damage is always the 
maximum possible, and targets are selected by 
the will of the trigger caster. The trigger-caster 
must be able to see all intended targets when the 
spell trigger is cast. 

Notes: Unique spell, known to the Simbul. 


A e a aia: 


818 


Simbul’s Synostodweomer 
(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Created by the Simbul and adopted by the 
Red Wizards for its usefulness, this spell allows 
the caster to transform the energy of another 
spell memorized by the caster into healing 
magic. The synostodweomer is cast, followed by 
another spell of the caster’s choosing. The 
second spell does not take effect, although any 
material components it requires are consumed 
or altered in the usual manner for that particular 
spell, and the spell still vanishes from the 
caster’s mind. 

Any being touched by the caster regains 2 hit 
points for every level of the transformed spell, 
so a 9th-level spell would give an injured being 
back 18 hit points. This spell does not grant 
extra hit points, but excess points can have spe- 
cial effects. An excess of 5 points cures the in- 
jured creature of any one disease, and an excess 
of 7 points banishes all effects of poison. If both 
afflictions are present, the caster must choose 
which to cure unless there is enough of an 
excess—12 points—to cure both. A synostod- 
weomer does not affect lycanthropy. If the re- 
cipient is neither diseased nor poisoned or less 
than 5 extra points are conveyed, the excess 
curing is simply lost. 

The healing capability endowed by the synos- 
todweomer must be used within three rounds or 
both it and the transferred spell are lost and 
wasted. Healing can be granted only by direct 
flesh-to-flesh contact. 

Only spells memorized by the caster of the 
synostodweomer can be transformed into heal- 
ing energy by this spell. It cannot transform 
spells from scrolls or spell-like magical item 
functions or abilities. 

Notes: Known to the Seven Sisters, their ap- 
prentices, select Harpers, and the Red Wizards; 
rare or very rare. Known to be in Vaerendroons 
Ineffable Enchantments. 


ae 


N Sinister Cantrip r 


Simulacrum 
(Iusion/Phantasm) 
(Artifice) 
Level: 7 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 simulacrum 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard is able to 
create a duplicate of any creature. The duplicate 
appears to be exactly the same as the original, 
but there are differences: The simulacrum has 
only 51% to 60% (50% + 1d10%) of the hit 
points of the real creature, there are personality 
differences, there are areas of knowledge that 
the duplicate does not have, and a detect magic 
spell will instantly reveal it as a simulacrum, as 
will a true seeing spell. At all times the simu- 
lacrum remains under the absolute command of 
the wizard who created it. No special telepathic 
link exists, so command must be exercised in 
some other manner. The spell creates the form 
of the creature, but it is only a zombielike cre- 
ation. A reincarnation spell must be used to 
give the duplicate a vital force, and a limited 
wish spell must be used to empower the dupli- 
cate with 40% to 65% (35% + 5 to 30%) of the 
knowledge and personality of the original. The 
level of the simulacrum, if any, is from 20% to 
50% of that of the original creature. 

The duplicate creature is formed from ice or 
snow. The spell is cast over the rough form and 
some piece of the creature to be duplicated must 
be placed inside the snow or ice. Additionally, 
the spell requires powdered ruby. 

The simulacrum has no ability to become 
more powerful; it cannot increase its level or 
abilities. If destroyed, it reverts to snow and 
melts into nothingness. Damage to the simu- 
lacrum can be repaired by a complex process re- 
quiring at least one day, 100 gp per hit point, 
and a fully equipped laboratory. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Simulate Skill 


(Necromancy) P 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 10 hrs. + 1d10 hrs. 
Area of Effect: The lich 
Saving Throw: None 


After casting this spell, the lich is able to use 
any weapon or nonweapon proficiency that a 
dead person possessed in life. The person 
cannot be more than twelve hours dead, and the 
lich must have witnessed him using the profi- 
ciency in order to know that it exists. The 
person is not deprived of the simulated ability, 
so a resurrected warrior whose skill with arms 
has been imitated will still have them. 

The material components of this spell are a 
magnet and a piece of reflective glass. 

Notes: Uncommon for liches and other 
undead spellcasters in the RAVENLOFT setting; 
very rare elsewhere. This spell can be re- 
searched only on the Demiplane of Dread. 


Sinister Cantrip 


anal” 


(All) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


While most cantrips do not cause any partic- 
ular distress or harm to the subject, the sinister 
cantrip is a much more powerful spell that can 
create horrifying and startling effects. Grue- 
some apparitions such as insects crawling out of 
foodstuffs, a sensation of bugs burrowing into 
the victim’s flesh, flesh rotting from the victim’s 
hands or face, blood streaming out of canteens, 
horrifying shrieks and moans, and unearthly 
chills or starts of terror, all can be induced by 
means of the sinister cantrip. 

Generally, these dire illusions and frights can 
cause one of the following effects at a time, as 
the caster directs: 

e The victim suffers a —1 penalty to attack 

rolls or Armor Class or saving throws as 
long as the caster concentrates, with no 


FT 


819 


~ Sinister Surroundings : 


saving throw allowed; 

e The victim recoils in horror for 1 round or 
drops a carried object unless a saving throw 
vs. spell is made; 

¢ An NPC or low-level monster must make a 
morale check; 

e A spellcaster’s concentration broken if he 
fails a saving throw vs. spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for liches and undead 

spellcasters in the RAVENLOFT setting and for 
evil spellcasters. 


Sinister Surroundings 


(Necromancy) p 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: 1 month/level 
Area of Effect: 1 mile radius/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell does not change the look of the af- 
fected area as would a hallucinatory terrain 
spell. Rather, it creates a grim and dismal feel 
around the caster’s lair. In the RAVENLOFT set- 
ting, non-evil characters suffer a —1 penalty to 
fear and horror checks in the area of effect. 

Notes: Uncommon for liches and undead 
spellcasters in the RAVENLOFT setting and for 
evil spellcasters. 


Sink 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 
(Earth) 
Level: 8 


Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object, max. 1 cu. 
ft./level 

Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, a wizard can force a 
creature or object into the very earth or floor 
upon which it stands. When casting the spell, 
the wizard must chant the spell for the remain- 
der of the round without interruption. At that 
juncture, the subject creature or object becomes 
rooted to the spot unless a saving throw vs. spell 
(for a creature) or disintegration (for an object 
with magical properties) is successful. (Note: 


“magical properties” include those of magical 
items as listed in the DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 
those of items enchanted or otherwise of magi- 
cal origin, and those of items with protection- 
type spells or with permanent magical 
properties or similar spells upon them.) Items of 
a nonmagical nature are not entitled to a saving 
throw. If a subject fails its saving throw, it be- 
comes of slightly greater density than the sur- 
face upon which it stands. 

The spellcaster now has the option of ceasing 
his spell and leaving the subject as it is, in which 
case the spell expires in four turns, and the sub- 
ject returns to normal. If the caster proceeds 
with the spell (into the next round), the subject 
begins to sink slowly into the ground. Before 
any actions are taken in the new round, the sub- 
ject sinks one-quarter of its height; after the first 
group acts, another quarter; after the second 
group acts, another; and at the end of the round, 
the victim is totally sunken into the ground. 

This entombment places a creature or object 
in a state of suspended animation. The cessation 
of time means that the subject does not grow 
older. Bodily and other functions virtually 
cease, but the subject is otherwise unharmed. 
The subject exists in undamaged form in the 
surface into which it was sunk, its upper point 
as far beneath the surface as the subject has 


patte 
Eis 


irae 


AN ar yee 


as 


Co 
v 


PON: 


d ' 
© 

Yc) ù 

ay), 


nE 


er * a 


= ig N Ke 
i À eed 
Bu ny, 


am 


x Skeletal Bride r 


height—a 6-foot-tall victim will be 6 feet be- 
neath the surface, while a 60-foot-tall subject 
will have its uppermost point 60 feet below 
ground level. If the ground around the subject is 
somehow removed, the spell is broken and the 
subject returns to normal, but it does not rise 
up. Spells such as dig, transmute rock to mud, 
and freedom (the reverse of the 9th-level spell 
imprisonment) will not harm the sunken crea- 
ture or object and will often be helpful in recov- 
ering it. If a detect magic spell is cast over an 
area upon which a sink spell was used, it reveals 
a faint magical aura of undefinable nature, even 
if the subject is beyond detection range. If the 
subject is within range of the detection, the 
spell’s schools can be discovered (alteration and 
enchantment). 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Sinking 


Reversed form, swim. 


Sinuous Horrors 


(Alteration) i 
Level: 4 á 
Range: 0 

Components: S D E 


Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1d6 + 4 rds. 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell transforms each of the wizard’s 
arms into a writhing, hissing serpent that can 
strike at any opponent within reach. Each 
snakelike tentacle can attack once per round as 
a monster with as many Hit Dice as the wizard 
has levels of experience. 

The snakes each inflict 1d3 points of damage 
with their fangs, and there is a 3% chance per 
level of the spellcaster that the serpents are poi- 
sonous to humanoid creatures. Anyone bitten 
by a venomous snake must make a saving 
throw vs. poison at —2 or go into violent con- 
vulsions for a number of rounds equal to the 
caster’s level. A convulsing creature suffers 1 
point of damage per round and is incapable of 
any action. 

The wizard cannot cast this spell while hold- 
ing any object or while wearing anything on his 
hands (such as rings or gloves). Similarly, the 
wizard cannot grasp anything while trans- 
formed, nor can he cast spells with somatic 
components. A snake charm can pacify the ten- 


tacles for 1d4+1 rounds if the wizard fails a 
saving throw vs. spell. Note that the sinuous 
horrors cannot be compelled to attack their 
host, and that they remain in effect until the ex- 
piration of the spell, regardless of the wizard’s 
desire. 

Notes: Very rare spell, known mostly to 
necromancers. Optionally, may be uncommon 
for wizards from savage settings. Known to be 
in the Cryptichronos, aka Book of Horrors (Up- 
dated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Skeletal Bride 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a skeletal form of the same 
height and proportions as the caster. The form 
has a smooth, flesh-hued, featureless globe for a 
head with whatever type and length of hair the 
caster wills, but the rest of the body is always 
skeletal. 


821 


~ Skeletal Deliquescence, Simbul’s > 


This skeletal form is not undead and cannot 
be turned or influenced by spells acting specifi- 
cally on undead. It moves with the same gait 
and mannerisms as the caster, but only moves at 
the caster’s mental urging. It collapses into dust, 
ending the spell, if it ever passes out of spell 
range. 

The caster can dress the skeletal bride in 
clothing to make it appear to be herself or a 
companion, and can control its actions from 
afar, so long as the caster and the bride remain 
within range of each other. Skeletal brides often 
take ambushes or stealthy night attacks meant 
for their casters, or dupe others into thinking the 
caster has friends to aid her. Inventive Harpers 
have used this spell to create diversions (by 
making other folk think they see an intruder or 
known rival), to guide folk in places where the 
Harper cannot safely go, and to fool foes into 
thinking they have killed the Harper. The most 
common use of the spell is simple to scare folk. 
Female Harpers often use this spell to scare 
away overamorous men on the road, who are 
usually startled indeed to find that under a 
bride’s clothing are only bones! 

Skeletal brides can carry or support a total 
weight of only 20 lbs. or less, such as clothes 
and a light weapon. Overloading them causes 
them to collapse into dust. They are AC 7 and 
can withstand 19 points of damage before col- 
lapsing, though single attacks dealing more than 
10 points of damage at a time crush or sever in- 
dividual limbs, the head, etc. This sort of 
damage does not end the spell or impair the 
functioning of what is left of the skeletal form, 
although the loss of a leg may slow its mobility. 
(The animating magic can hold a bride that is 
carrying or wearing 10 pounds or less of mater- 
ial upright) 

Skeletal brides cannot speak, but magic 
mouth, ventriloquism, and similar spells can be 
cast on one to make it appear to speak. 

The material component of this spell is a 
human bone. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and Harpers; rare. 


Skeletal Deliquescence, Simbul’s 
See Simbul’s skeletal deliquescence. 


Skeletal Hand 
(Necromancy) n” d 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. + 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: The caster 


Like the 2nd-level spell spectral hand, this 
spell causes a semi-corporeal, bony hand 
shaped from the caster’s life force to materialize 
within the spell’s range. The hand moves as the 
caster directs. It can convey touch-delivered 
attack spells of 4th level or less, striking as the 
caster, but with a +4 bonus to hit. At the caster’s 
option, the skeletal hand may instead make a 
physical attack, inflicting 1d10 points of 
damage with a successful hit. The caster may 
use the skeletal hand in either fashion from 
round to round, or simply allow the hand to 
hover in place while she performs other activi- 
ties. The hand receives flank or rear attack 
bonuses if the caster is in a position to do so. 

The skeletal hand is vulnerable to attack. 
Only weapons of +1 or better magical enchant- 
ment can strike it, as if it had AC —4. Any 
damage ends the spell and inflicts 1d4 points of 
damage upon the caster. 

In addition, a priest of good alignment can 
keep the hand at bay with a successful turning 
attempt as if against an undead creature of 5 Hit 
Dice. 

The material component is a splinter of bone 
from the hand of a ghast. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers and 
undead spellcasters, rare. Living necromancers 
can research this spell only on the Demiplane of 
Dread. 


Skeletal Hands 


(Necromancy, Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 ft. + 10 ft./3 levels 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 4 rds./level. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, a wizard brings into ex- 
istence a pair of bony hands that levitate in 


AE e T S a 


822 


` Skulltrap r 


midair and move as directed by the caster, who 
uses verbal commands and somatic gestures to 
guide them. The hands can perform only simple 
grasping, lifting, and carrying activities. They 
cannot perform complex movements, such as 
somatic spell components, or movements that 
require great dexterity, such as picking locks. 
The hands can open unlocked doors, drawers, 
chests, or turn pages in a spellbook. They can 
carry up to 5 pounds each; together, they can 
carry an object of up to 20 pounds. They can 
move anywhere within their range (if the caster 
is 3rd level, this is 20 feet; 6th level, 30 feet; and 
so on). 

Each hand can make a clawing attack every 
round, using the wizard’s THACO, and inflicting 
1d3 points of damage with a successful hit. The 
hands can wield weapons within their weight 
limits. 

When using weapons, the skeletal hands 
attack at half the caster’s level, with applicable 
penalties for nonproficiency. Hand-held melee 
weapons inflict half damage (round up), be- 
cause the hands cannot generate the proper 
forces that the weapons need to inflict normal 
damage. The hands can fire a loaded crossbow 
and inflict normal damage, however, because 
the crossbow provides the necessary force to 
propel the bolt. All other missile weapons are 
reduced to one-quarter range and half normal 
damage (round up). 

The hands can be physically attacked (each 
has AC 5, hit points 4, and MV 6). 

The spell requires the complete skeletal 
hands of any human, demihuman, or humanoid. 
These can be reused if not damaged or de- 
stroyed in combat. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; uncom- 
mon. 


Skull Watch 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | turn + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. x 90-ft. path 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell requires the complete skull (in- 
cluding jaw) of an intelligent humanoid crea- 
ture. Once the spell is cast, the skull is set in 
midair facing a particular direction. The skull 


will then hang there in midair. The eye sockets 
of the skull define a path 20 feet wide by 90 feet 
long. Physical boundaries such as walls do limit 
that path. 

Any living creature that enters the area of this 
path within the limitations of the spell activates 
the skull watch. The skull emits a piercing 
shriek that can be heard up to a quarter-mile 
away. In addition, the wizard who cast the skull 
watch is immediately aware that something has 
tripped the spell. Silence spells and similar 
magics can stop the audible shriek but the 
wizard becomes aware of the event regardless of 
location as long as the wizard is alive conscious 
and on the same plane. 

The skull can be moved from its position 
without activating it as long as the individual 
does not step within the path. The skull can be 
destroyed. The skull has 1 hit point per level of 
the caster and an AC of 7. The skull makes no 
other attacks. The caster is not made aware if 
the skull is destroyed without the spell being 
triggered. 

A wizard who has multiple skull watches op- 
erating is unable to discern which has been 
tripped as the scream and mental awareness are 
similar for all skulls created by this spell. 

After being triggered, the floating skull sinks 
slowly to the ground and can be reused at a later 
time. 

Notes: Uncommon spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in the 
tome, Tidings of Conflict and Woe. 


Skulltrap 


(Necromancy, Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 skull 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This ward can be placed on any nonliving 
skull or the skull of an undead skeleton. The 
skulltrap remains dormant until the skull is 
touched by living matter or is struck and dam- 
aged by nonliving matter (for instance, it’s 
struck in combat or falls to the floor). Assume a 
normal skull is AC 8 and has 2 hit points. This 
simple warding does not discriminate; it can be 
triggered just as easily by the wizard who cast 
the spell as by a curious rat brushing up against 


A E a a TTN 


823 


~ Skycastle d 


it. 

When the skulltrap discharges, the skull 
flashes briefly with red or violet light and vio- 
lently explodes, releasing a blast of energy 
drawn from the Negative Material Plane. The 
burst of negative energy inflicts 2d4 points of 
damage plus 1d4 points of damage for every 
level of the caster. All living creatures within 10 
feet of the skull are allowed a saving throw vs. 
breath weapon to suffer only half damage from 
the blast. 

Because the trap is so easily triggered, the 
skull is often placed in its final resting place 
before the spell is cast upon it. The trapped skull 
can be moved without triggering the trap, but 
must be moved very slowly and without contact 
with living matter. Gloves or other thin materi- 
als used to cover the flesh of a living being are 
not enough to prevent the skulltrap from being 
discharged. 

The material component is a pinch of dust 
from the physical remains of a corporeal 
undead being with strong ties to the Negative 
Material Plane, such as a wight or vampire. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; uncom- 
mon. 


Skycastle 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 castle 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting this spell on a castle or other building 
gives the structure the ability to fly, controlled 
by the caster’s mental command. Although rela- 
tively slow (movement rate 3) and clumsy (ma- 
neuverability class E), the skycastle has a 
tremendous carrying capacity and can travel 
even when the caster is asleep, as it can main- 
tain a particular course and speed unattended. 

Siege engines and the like affect the skycastle 
normally, but do not negate the dweomer until 
the skycastle has been breached on all four 
sides. A successful dispel magic removes the 
spell, however. In both cases, the dweomer is so 
large and diffuse that it does not end immedi- 
ately. When negated, the spell takes time to 
drain, according to the following schedule: on 


round 1 the skycastle stops in mid-flight; on 
rounds 2-5 it sinks earthward at 10 feet per 
round; rounds 6-9 it drops earthward at 100 feet 
per round; and from round 10 on it plummets 
earthward. Plummeting more than 200 feet de- 
stroys the skycastle and kills everyone within. If 
in doubt, assess falling damage against the in- 
habitants normally, with saving throws vs. death 
magic for those in danger of death from massive 
damage, as per the DMG. 

Deliberately dropping the skycastle on a soft 
target such as a cottage or a living creature 
crushes the target, with damage adjudicated by 
the DM. Dropping it on a hard target damages 
both structures equally. 

To cast the spell, the wizard must have an ab- 
solutely clear mental image of the skycastle- 
equal to that gained by overseeing its 
construction or walking every inch of it for at 
least one month. Reading a map or blueprints is 
not sufficient. 

The material component of this spell is a 
beautifully appointed couch or sofa (1,000 gp 
minimum), which must be occupied by the 
caster for the entire turn. A new couch must be 
purchased for each casting. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Skyhook 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 3 turns + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creates 1 hook 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the wizard creates a solid 
hook of force invisible to all but the caster, at a 
desired location. The hook need not be attached 
to anything, and is usually created in midair 
over a pit or chasm. Once cast, it remains immo- 
bile. Creatures can hang on to it, ropes can be 
tied to or hooked over it, and so on. It supports 
up to 30 tons of weight. 

If the weight limit is exceeded, the skyhook 
instantly vanishes. Otherwise, it lasts until the 
spell expires, fading into invisibility two rounds 
before its end as a warning of its impending ex- 
piration. It is too small to be stood upon (for ex- 
ample, to climb further, or cast spells or fire 


, i a E ae, 


824 


~ Sleep r 


missile weapons from), but its hook is large 
enough to permit thick cables and many grasp- 
ing hands to find purchase. 

A skyhook, once created, cannot move. Ropes 
and other things secured to it appear to crea- 
tures other than the caster to be tied to nothing. 
The skyhook is solid enough to harm creatures 
flying into it or striking it but cannot itself be 
physically harmed. A skyhook saves vs. a dispel 
magic cast against it as if it were the caster, with 
a +4 bonus. It saves as the caster (no bonus) 
against a disintegrate spell, and can be de- 
stroyed readily by a properly-directed limited 
wish or more powerful spell of this type. The 
caster of a skyhook can will it out of existence 
instantly. 

The material component is a miniature metal 
fishhook. 

Notes: Uncommon spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS Setting. Known to be in 
Shandaril’s Workbook. It is also known to drow, 
dwarves, and some human miners in that set- 
ting. 


Skywrite 
(Alteration) 
(Air, Geometry) 


Level: 3 

Range: Sight 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A less subtle version of the message spell, 
skywrite creates words in thin cloud formations 
above a point chosen by the caster. One word 
per caster level can be created; the words are 
spelled out one letter at a time at the rate of ten 
letters per round. The spell must be cast in day- 
light so that the white cloud letters can be seen; 
it does not work against a cloudy sky. 

The letters appear about 100 feet above the 
ground and are each 10 feet tall. Everyone 
below the skywritten message can see what it 
says; this could be an entire city. Of course, the 
caster has no control over the actions of those 
seeing the message, so judicious choice of 
words is recommended. “Attack enemy’s right 
flank” probably is not a wise message, nor is 
“Treasure below statue in town square”, unless 
the caster wants to mislead an enemy or wreak 
havoc. 


While the spell is active, the clouds remain in 
place, despite strong or even magical winds. 
They are harmless and insubstantial. When the 
spell’s duration expires, the clouds begin to 
filter away on the wind, slowly dissipating to 
nothing. 

The spell requires chalk and a slate, upon 
which the message is written. If the caster is in- 
terrupted in his writing, whatever portion of the 
message was written appears in the sky. “Attack 
us at your peril” would be an entirely different 
message if interrupted after the second word. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Myrl s Text. 


Slam Portal 
Reversed form, see hold portal open. 


Slaying Wind 
Lost spell. Mythal magic from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Setting, taken away by the gods. 


Sleep 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Shadow, Song) 

Level: 1 


Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When a wizard casts a sleep spell, he causes a 
comatose slumber to come upon one or more 
creatures (other than undead and certain other 
creatures specifically excluded from the spell’s 
effects). All creatures to be affected by the sleep 
spell must be within 30 feet of each other. The 
number of creatures that can be affected is a 
function of Hit Dice or levels. The spell affects 
2d4 Hit Dice of monsters. Monsters with 4+3 
Hit Dice (4 Hit Dice plus 3 hit points) or more 
are unaffected. The center of the area of effect is 
determined by the spellcaster. The creatures 
with the least Hit Dice are affected first, and 
partial effects are ignored. 

For example, a wizard casts s/eep at three 
kobolds, two gnolls, and an ogre. The roll (2d4) 
result is 4. All the kobolds and one gnoll are af- 
fected 42+ %+%+2=3 % Hit Dice). Note 
that the remainder is not enough to affect the 
last gnoll or the ogre. 

Slapping or wounding awakens affected crea- 


825 


~ Sleep of Horror = 


tures but normal noise does not. Awakening re- 
quires one entire round. Magically sleeping op- 
ponents can be attacked with substantial 
bonuses (see “Modifiers to the Attack Roll” in 
Chapter 9: Combat). 

The material component for this spell is a 
pinch of fine sand, rose petals, or a live cricket. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Sleep of Horror 
(Necromancy) a 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The victim of this spell is wracked with 
nightmares while asleep, completely disrupting 
any restful effects such as recovering spells, hit 
points, or psionic strength points (PSPs). A 
sleep spell negates the sleep of horror, as does a 
successful saving throw vs. spell. Certain spe- 
cial warding magics may prevent the spell from 
taking effect altogether. 

In the RAVENLOFT setting, the victim has a re- 
curring nightmare each night for 1d10 nights, 
and must make a horror check each night. 

The material component of this spell is a 
pinch of black sand. 

Notes: Uncommon for liches and evil spell- 
casters in the RAVENLOFT setting, and for Dream 
mages; otherwise, very rare. This spell can be 
researched only on the Demiplane of Dread. 


Sleepless Curse 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this dire enchantment is cast, the 
wizard curses a single creature to endure rest- 
less and sleepless nights. For the duration of the 
spell, the subject cannot sleep. Furthermore, the 
creature is immune to all spells that cause sleep, 
and not even a dispel magic can relieve this con- 


826 


dition. However, a remove curse by a caster of 
level equal to or higher than the wizard lifts the 
enchantment, as does any wish spell. The 
wizard can cancel the spell at any time. 

For each sleepless night, the creature loses 
one hit point, as well as one point from each 
ability score (if not rated, roll 3d6 for the crea- 
ture). When any score reaches zero, the creature 
dies of exhaustion and delirium. Once the spell 
ends, the creature recovers ability score points 
and hit points at the rate of | hit point per hour 
for each hour of sleep after the first eight. Note 
that this spell also affects creatures that do not 
actually sleep, but have extended periods of re- 
duced activity. 

The material components for this spell are a 
dried petal of a blue lotus flower and a small, 
burning brazier, into which the petal is dropped. 

Notes: Common for Dream mages; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from DraGoN Maga- 
zine.) 


Sleepwalking 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Casting Time: 1 turn 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 sleeping creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell works only on a sleeping creature. 
If the sleeper is already dreaming (that is, af- 
fected by a slumber spell or similar enchant- 
ment, or at the DM’s option), then the subject’s 
saving throw suffers a penalty. When sleep- 
walking is cast, the caster plants a powerful 
suggestion in the subject’s unconscious, which 
compels the dreamer to rise without waking 
and perform simple commands from the caster. 
These commands can be no more elaborate 
than those allowed by a suggestion spell. 
Should the spell run its entire course uninter- 
rupted, the subject has no conscious memory of 
his actions. 

Commands that the subject physically harm 
himself immediately negate the spell. Com- 
manding the subject to violate his alignment 
immediately allows a new saving throw at a +1 
to +3 bonus, depending on the severity of the 
alignment violation. For instance, commanding 
a sleepwalking ranger to commit murder would 
allow a new saving throw at +3. But command- 


T 


N 


ing that same ranger to borrow his friend’s book 
without asking permission might grant only a 
+1 bonus. 

The material components for this spell are a 


crushed petal of a blue lotus flower and a drop 
of honey or a bit of honeycomb. 

Notes: Common for Dream mages; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from DraGoN Maga- 
zine.) 


Slingstar 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Artifice) 
Level: 1 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 or more sling stones 
Saving Throw: Special 


This variant of the magic missile spell 
changes sling stones or bullets into magic mis- 
siles. A wizard temporarily charges his sling 
with magical energy, and the change occurs as 
the stone is readied and discharged. The physi- 


cal missile is consumed, and the target is hit for 
1d6 points of damage, plus 1 point per level, to 
a maximum of +10. If the wizard does not have 
a weapon proficiency in sling, the target re- 
ceives a saving throw vs. spell to negate the 
missile hit; if the wizard has sling proficiency, 
the hit is automatic. 

For every three levels, a caster can create an- 
other missile (at 3rd, 6th, and 9th level). Only 
one stone can be changed and fired per round 
(for example, a 10th-level wizard can create 
four slingstars within 10 rounds). The spell cre- 
ates a maximum of 4 missiles at 10th level. 
Slingstars are affected by all items that affect 
magic missiles, except that they can penetrate a 
shield spell. 

The material component for this spell is a 
small stone or sling bullet to be consumed by 
the spell for each missile. The movement of a 
sling is its somatic component. 

Notes: Known to Danilo Thann, Gemidan, 
Laeral, and the Watch-Wizard Corps of Water- 
deep in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; uncom- 
mon. (Updated from original version.) 


Slow 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 90 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, 5, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. cube, 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A slow spell causes affected creatures to 
move and attack at half their normal rates. It 
negates a haste spell or equivalent, but does not 
otherwise affect magically speeded or slowed 
creatures. Slowed creatures have an Armor 
Class penalty of +4 AC, an attack penalty of —4, 
and all Dexterity combat bonuses are negated. 
The magic affects a number of creatures equal 
to the spellcaster’s level, if they are within the 
area of effect chosen by the wizard (i.e., a 40- 
foot cubic volume centered as called for by the 
caster). The creatures are affected from the 
center of the spell outward. Saving throws 
against the spell suffer a —4 penalty. 

The material component of this spell is a 
drop of molasses. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


ĪSA 


827 


~ Slow Metabolism > 


Slow Metabolism 
(Chronomancy) 
Reversible 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When placed upon a creature, this spell can 
drastically increase the length of time required 
between meals. The recipient only requires food 
and drink once every 12 hours per the chrono- 
mancer’s level, up to 7 days. Also, if the creature 
has been poisoned, this spell slows the onset by 
one hour per caster level (assuming the full 
effect of the poison has not already taken 
place). A cure still must be found. 

The material component is a small wafer that 
consumed by the recipient. No saving throw is 
required. 

The reverse of this spell, speed metabolism, 
requires an attack roll. It quickly weakens a 
creature from lack of food and water. If a saving 
throw vs. death magic is failed, reduce the 
target’s Constitution and Strength by 1 point for 
every two levels of the chronomancer (mini- 
mum of 1), until the victim eats. This does not 
kill the creature unless the loss of the Hit Dice 
modifier drops it below 0 hit points. 

The material component for the reverse is a 
piece of spoiled food that is hurled at the target. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; 
common. 


Slow Mutation 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This curse wreaks a permanent physical 
change upon the affected creature, according to 
strictures laid down by the caster. 

The spell is cast on an object, such as the end 
of a staff, where it glows red with the power of 
its dweomer. Any creature that touches or is 


828 


touched by the dweomer discharges the effect. 
A saving throw vs. polymorph is required to 
avoid the slow mutation. Once triggered, the 
complete change occurs in 3d6 stages. 

The physical effects of the spell vary accord- 
ing to the description given by the caster as the 
verbal component of the spell. This has two as- 
pects. The first is a condition required to trigger 
the change (for example, contact with a certain 
substance, performance of a certain action, 
etc.). The second aspect is the slow change of 
the creature’s form into that set by the caster 
during the casting. For example, the creature 
might turn more into a troll each time it turns 
invisible; or a person might become increas- 
ingly translucent when he pets a cat. 

The spell can be eliminated by a successful 
dispel magic spell while still on the object. 
Once a creature is affected, only a remove curse 
can stop the process, allowing a polymorph 
other, limited wish, or wish cast for this purpose 
to return the creature to its original form. Once 
the spell is discharged or dispelled, the object 
that carried it is again normal in every way. 

The material component of this spell is a 
piece of whatever the caster wishes his subject 
to become (for example, a kenku feather to turn 
him into a kenku, or a drop from a potion of in- 
visibility to turn him invisible). 


E 


` Slumber r 


Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from IMAG- 
INE Magazine.) 


Slowspell 
(Alteration) 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: 2 (Special) 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


A slowspell surrounds the protected creature 
with a magical field, delaying targeted magical 
effects for one or more rounds. Spell effects (in- 
cluding devices and innate creature abilities) 
are slowed in a manner somewhat like the ef- 
fects of a slow spell on physical movement. 

The slowspell has no effect on touch-deliv- 
ered spells. Otherwise, the incoming magic is 
delayed one to three rounds, depending on the 
level of the wizard casting the slowspell. The 
spell might, at the DM’s option, give an addi- 
tional saving throw bonus of up to +2 if the 
slowing makes the effect easier to dodge. 

The caster can choose during casting to 
shorten the delay to as little as one round. The 
delay can’t be lengthened beyond three rounds 
by any known means. 

* 8th level or less 1 round maximum 

e 9th to 12th level 2 rounds maximum 

e 13th level or more 3 rounds maximum 

The wizard can call instantly upon this spell 
in his own defense, even under conditions of 
complete surprise. When cast on another crea- 
ture, the spell has a casting time of 2. Once acti- 
vated, it runs for one round per caster level. If 
dispelled, the protection fades over two rounds. 
A slowspell cannot be made permanent. 

The slowspeil has no effect on magic cast or 
wielded by the being it protects. 

The material component is a faceted gem- 
stone (which is consumed in the casting). 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Slowspell, 10' Radius 
(Alteration) 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 4 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 (Special) 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is much the same as slowspeil, 
except that it creates either a 10-foot radius 
globe of protection centered on and mobile with 
the caster, or a stationary globe with a maxi- 
mum radius of 10 feet per level of the caster. 
The slowspell, 10' radius affects all spell effects 
originating in or cast into that area from any 
source, including touch-delivered spells and 
those of the caster. 

The affected magic is delayed one to three 
rounds, depending on the level of the wizard 
casting the slowspell. The spell might, at the 
DM’s option, give an additional saving throw 
bonus of up to +2 if the slowing makes the 
effect easier to dodge. 

The caster can choose during casting to 
shorten the delay to as little as one round. The 
delay can’t be lengthened beyond three rounds 
by any known means. 

* 8th level or less 1 round maximum 

e 9th to 12th level 2 rounds maximum 

e 13th level or more 3 rounds maximum 

The material component is a faceted gem- 
stone (which is consumed in the casting). 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. (Updated 
from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Slumber 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is a more potent version of the 1st- 
level wizard spell sleep. While it affects only 
one creature, its range and duration are both 
greater, and it can affect creatures of more than 
four Hit Dice. Those creatures with 4 Hit Dice 
or level more than the caster are immune to this 
spell. 

Not only does this spell place its subject in 
deep, unbreakable slumber (unlike the common 


829 


~ Slumber — Old Empire = 


sleep spell), but also it stimulates the sleeper’s 
subconscious, causing him to dream. The caster 
must use other methods to influence these 
dreams. 

A successful saving throw vs. spell negates 
this enchantment. The saving throw is reduced 
by a —1 penalty for every four levels of the 
caster. Creatures resistant to sleep spells suffer a 
-20% penalty to their resistance. 

Slapping or wounding a slumbering creature 
does not awaken it, nor does loud noise or any 
other normal means of waking a sleeper. Cast- 
ing a successful dispel magic is the most 
common way to awaken a slumbering creature. 

The material component for this spell is a 
pinch of sand from the eyes of a hibernating 
bear, or the crushed petal of a blue lotus flower. 
The latter component is so potent that the sub- 
ject’s saving throw suffers a —2 penalty. 

Notes: Common for Dream mages; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from Dracon Maga- 
zine.) 


Slumber — Old Empire 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 50-ft. cube (see below) 
Saving Throw: None 


When a wizard casts a slumber spell, he 
causes a comatose sleep to come upon one or 
more creatures (other than undead and certain 
other creatures with immunity to sleep effects). 
All creatures to be affected must be within 50 
feet of each other. 

The number of creatures affected is a func- 
tion of Hit Dice or levels. This spell affects 
4d10 Hit Dice (or levels) of monsters. Monsters 
from other planes of existence and monsters 
with more than 7 Hit Dice are unaffected. 

The center of the spell is determined by the 
spellcaster. Creatures with the least Hit Dice in 
the area of effect are affected first; creatures 
that would be only partially affected are not af- 
fected at all. 

The material component is a pinch of dust. 

Notes: Rare spell. As a FORGOTTEN REALMS 
Old Empire spell, initial exposure requires a 
mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


830 


Slumberward 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects one creature against 
drowsiness, weariness, and similar conditions 
caused by magic, particularly those of the en- 
chantment/charm variety. The protected being is 
immune to such effects, and also has a +1 bonus 
to saving throws against charm, suggestion, com- 
mand, hold, and other will-force magic and spell- 
like powers. The spell provides no protection 
from nonmagical hazards such as poisons or so- 
porific drugs, nor from stunning or loss of con- 
sciousness from other attacks (even if magical). 
The caster can use this spell on himself or others. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS. Known to be in Galadaster 5 Orizon. 


Smelting 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Flame, Sand) Cay 
Reversible 
Level: 2 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 turns 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Up to 2,000 Ibs. of ore 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell refines the poorest ore into ingots 
of pure metal. The ore is refined by the casting 
of the spell. Only metal of the proper type can 
be extracted from a pile of ore, and the better 
the quality of ore, the better the results. High- 
grade ore releases 1 Ib. of metal for 10 Ibs. of 
ore; low-grade ore releases only 1 lb. metal for 
100 or even 1,000 Ibs. of ore. 

This spell does not affect gems or semi- 
precious stones, and fails when cast on stone 
that contains no metal. Interrupting the casting 
stops the process at that point, but even a dispel 
magic spell will not return refined ingots to 
their original ore. 

The reversed form of this spell, hide normal 
metal, takes ingots or even worked metal and 


Smoky Form 


makes it part of the nearby earth again, thus 
magically hiding it from sight. Dispelling the 
reversed form restores the metal to its original 
condition. The reversed form cannot affect en- 
chanted metals or any creature. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 


bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Smoke Shape 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: | cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to shape and 
mold masses of smoke, mist, or fog into any 
form he desires. A misty warrior can be made, 
or thick smoke can be fashioned into a solid- 
looking wall. The shape still has all the proper- 
ties of smoke or fog, but retains its form under 
all conditions until the spell’s duration is over. 
Further, upon finishing the form, the wu jen can 
give it a gentle push, propelling it in one direc- 
tion at the rate of 30 feet per round. 

The fineness of detail permitted by the spell 
is not great, but is sufficient to fool onlookers at 
a distance. At the end of the spell’s duration, the 
form dissipates quickly. 

The spell requires no material component, 
but a source of mist or smoke must be present 
for the wu jen to work upon—early morning 
fog, a large smoky fire, or other source. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Smoke Screen 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Fire) 


Level: 2 

Range: 80 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10 ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell creates a large sphere of thick, 
black smoke. The smoke always floats 2 feet 
above the ground, and creatures below the cloud 


can breathe normally. Otherwise, creatures in 
the area of effect take 1d4+1 points of damage 
per round from smoke inhalation; half damage 
is taken if a saving throw vs. spell is successful. 

It is not possible to see into or through the 
area affected by a smoke screen, and visibility 
within this area is reduced to 2 feet. The re- 
duced visibility makes combat difficult; attack 
rolls are made at a -3 penalty. A gust of wind 
spell extends the cloud along its full length, pre- 
venting the damage effect and reducing the du- 
ration to no more than 1 d4 rounds. 

The material component of this spell is a 
pinch of soot. 

Notes: Rare for conjurers and fire mages; 
otherwise, very rare. Known to be in the Fire- 
Eye Scrolls. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 

Smoky Form 
(Alteration) Q 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell changes the wu jen and all he car- 
ries, or any creature touched by him, into a 
cloudy mass of smoke. Unwilling creatures are 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
effect. The mass has roughly the same shape 
and appearance of the original creature, but pos- 
sesses the insubstantial properties of smoke. 
While in this form, the creature cannot be hurt 
by weapons of +2 or less enchantment, and can 
easily disappear into a mass of smoke or fog. 
Spells cannot be cast while in smoky form, nor 
can the creature take part in combat. 

The spell does not alter the dimensions of the 
creature; it cannot slip through cracks or other 
small openings. However, the creature has the 
weight of smoke. Thus, a wu jen in smoky form 
could step off the top of a castle wall and gently 
drift to the ground without suffering damage. 

A creature in smoky form is particularly sus- 
ceptible to winds. Light breezes push the smoky 
form about, while strong breezes can easily 
sweep the creature away. A gust of wind spell in- 
flicts 2d10 points of damage on the character. 
Wind breath causes twice the normal amount of 
damage to a creature in smoky form, and divine 
wind destroys the creature utterly. 


, ns T © 


831 


~ Smoky Sphere, Otiluke’s = 


The material component for this spell is a 
stick of burning incense. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Smoky Sphere, Otiluke’s 
See Otiluke’s smoky sphere. 


Snake Charm — Hishna 
(Enchantment/Charm) i 
Level: 1 
Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 snake/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to charm one or 
more snakes within range. The caster does not 
have to see the snakes; if present, they approach 
him when the spell is cast. 

The charmed snakes will perform guardian 
functions for the caster, or can be sent to attack 
another individual—if the caster has a clear idea 
of that individual’s appearance and where- 
abouts. The snakes will tenaciously continue 
their task for the duration of the spell. 

The material component for the spell is the 
tail of a rattlesnake, which is rattled while the 
spell is cast. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Snapping Teeth 
(Alteration, Conjuration) 
(Artifice) 
Level: 3 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster causes a set 
of teeth to appear on a person or object; the 
teeth appear in the exact location touched by the 
caster. The snapping teeth are contained in a 
mouth-like orifice about 6 inches in diameter 
and are can snap at those within 1 foot. 

A) Cast on a Creature. A person or creature 
with the snapping teeth can cause them to snap 


832 


at will, effectively giving him an extra attack 
per round. A normal attack roll is made, and a 
successful hit inflicts 1d4 points of damage. The 
creature attacked must be within range of the 
teeth and normal facing considerations apply 
(for instance, snapping teeth in the back of a 
person’s head can only attack those who are 
behind the person). 

B) Cast on an Object. The spell can be placed 
on a nonliving object, such as a tree or a door. In 
such cases, the teeth are invisible until they 
attack. The teeth attack any creature that comes 
within 1 foot of the object, attacking as a 4 HD 
monster. A successful hit inflicts 1d4 points of 
damage. These attacks are automatic and are not 
controlled by the caster. 

Most attacks cannot be directed against the 
snapping teeth, but a dispel magic spell causes 
them to vanish. 

The material component for this spell is a 
tooth from any carnivorous animal, such as a 
wolf, shark, or serpent. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. 


`i 


a 
i l 


Snilloc’s Cream Pie 
A rumored but unconfirmed 2nd-level spell, be- 
lieved to be much like Snilloc’s snowball, differ- 
ing only in the form of the missile. 


di 


~ Snowball, Snilloc’s r 


Snilloc’s Major Missile 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Snilloc’s major missile functions in most 
ways as the Ist-level wizard spell, magic mis- 
sile, save for increased damage and limitation to 
a single missile. The major missile inflicts 
1d4+1 points of damage upon a single creature, 
much as does a magic missile. The caster gains 
an additional 1d4+1 damage for every two 
levels thereafter, to a maximum of 15d4+15. 
Snilloc’s major missile cannot be split between 
multiple targets. It is affected by all spells that 
negate or affect the magic missile spell. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in The 
Collected Wisdom of Snilloc. 


Snilloc’s Snowball 
(Evocation) 
(Water) 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 target 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a mystical snowball in the 
hand of the caster, which can then be thrown 
immediately against any target within range. 
The snowball hits automatically for 1d3 points 
of damage, 1d6 points if used against a fire- 
using or fire-dwelling opponent. The snowball 
strikes like a magic missile and can be affected 
or repelled in the same way. (A brooch of 
shielding or thunderlance gives the same pro- 
tection against both spells, for example.) 

Against objects, the snowball has the same 
effect as a nonmagical snowball. 

Snilloc s snowball is considered by most wiz- 
ards to be a lesser form of magic missile, though 
it has the advantage in range at higher levels (as 
opposed to multiple strikes) and can be directed 


against an object as well as a creature. It is also 
more effective against fiery creatures. 

The material component of this spell is a 
chunk of ice or a small bit of ivory. 

There are reports of a 2nd-level variant of 
this spell with identical effects called Snilloc’s 
cream pie. These reports are unconfirmed. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in The 
Collected Wisdom of Snilloc. 


Snilloc’s Snowball Swarm 
(Evocation) 
(Water) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: 4% 


By means of this spell the caster causes a 
flurry of magical snowballs to erupt from a 
point within his range. The snowballs fly in all 
directions, hitting everything in the area of 
effect, including the caster, and causing 1d3 
points of damage per level of the caster, to a 
maximum of 8d3. Against fire-using and fire- 
dwelling creatures, the spell inflicts 1d6 points 
of damage per level of the caster (again to a 
maximum of 8 dice of damage). 

Unlike the higher-level fireball, the snowball 
swarm is completely contained within its area 
of effect. Obstructions and low ceilings do not 
cause the cloud of snowballs to deform—they 
just hit the walls and splatter. These snowballs 
are considered normal missiles when determin- 
ing the effects of protection spells. All targets 
are considered AC 10 against the snowballs, 
however; only Dexterity modifiers apply. 

This spell is much less powerful than the fire- 
ball spell, but useful where the dimensions of 
the area of effect are unknown or against fire- 
using or fire-dwelling creatures. 

The material component of this spell is a 
chunk of ice or a single pearl. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in The 
Collected Wisdom of Snilloc. 


Snowball, Snilloc’s 
See Snilloc’s snowball. 


ZN 


833 


b 


~ Snowball Swarm, Snilloc’s 


Snowball Swarm, Snilloc’s 
See Snilloc’s snowball swarm. 


Solid Fog 
(Alteration) 
(Air) 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2d4 rds. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20 x 10 x 10 ft. volume/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard creates a 
billowing mass of misty vapors similar to a wall 
of fog spell. The caster can create less vapor if 
desired, as long as a rectangular or cubic mass 
at least 10 feet on a side is formed. The fog ob- 
scures all sight, normal and infravision, beyond 
2 feet. However, unlike normal fog, only a very 
strong wind can move these vapors, and any 
creature attempting to move through the solid 
fog progresses at a movement rate of 1 foot per 
round. A gust of wind spell cannot affect it. A 
fireball, flame strike, or wall of fire burns it 
away in a single round. 

The material components for the spell are a 


pinch of dried, powdered peas combined with 
powdered animal hoof. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Solidify Air — Witch 
(Alteration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the witch causes the 
atmosphere to condense and solidify into a 
porous, translucent substance that is dense and 
hard as stone. On the first round, the air in the 
affected area becomes misty and thick, equiva- 
lent to a fog cloud. By the third round, has 
thickened into solid fog, reducing movement to 
but one foot per round. By the fifth round, the 
air has set and hardened, trapping any creature 
still within the area as if it was encased in solid 
rock. The solidified air is porous enough to 
allow breathing, and carries speech and sound 
as well. 

The substance is not affected by dispel magic 
or any similar spell. Furthermore, the witch can 
command the solidified air to become non- 
porous, smothering those within it in a single 
round or can command the solidified air to turn 
to fog, releasing the trapped creatures (but re- 
ducing their visibility as normal fog). No saving 
throw is given against this spell, which lasts 
until the witch commands it to dissipate or is 
slain. 

Notes: Restricted to witches; rare. 


Solvent of Corrosion 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: % 


This spell conjures a corrosive, acidic slime 
of horrid strength on one surface or creature 
within the spell’s range. Up to one square foot 


, a a a: 


4 


~ Soothing Vibrations, Otto’s r 


of surface area per caster level can be affected, 
so a 5th-level caster can affect 5 square feet— 
enough to create a 2-foot by 3-foot hole in a 
door or wall, or thoroughly drench a man-sized 
creature. The acid eats through 6 inches of 
wood, leather, or bone, 4 inches of stone, or 1 
inch of metal each round. Against monsters 
composed of stone, metal, or wood, the solvent 
inflicts 1d3 points of damage per square foot af- 
fected in the first round, 1d2 in the second 
round, and 1 in the third and final round. Thus, a 
10th-level wizard who strikes a treant with sol- 
vent of corrosion inflicts 10d3, then 10d2, and 
finally 10 points of damage. Each round, the 
victim is allowed a saving throw vs. spell for 
half damage. 

Against flesh, the solvent is much less effec- 
tive; it is caustic and burns painfully, inflicting 
1d3 points of damage, plus | additional point 
per caster level in the first round, but no further 
damage in the second or third round. However, 
the burning in the following rounds inflicts a —2 
penalty to the creature’s attacks while the sol- 
vent is active. The solvent is extremely likely to 
cause extensive damage to the victim’s armor 
and equipment; item saving throws vs. acid may 
apply at the DM’s discretion. Magical armor or 
equipment receives the usual bonuses allowed 
to magical items. 

The great alchemist Vandarien developed his 
solvent to dissolve iron grates, stone and wood- 
work traps, and other such hazards. The sol- 
vent’s effectiveness against mineral and 
wood-based creatures was a mere side effect of 
his research. 

The material component of this spell is a 
mixture of vinegar, water, and a drop of black 
dragon acid. 

Notes: Uncommon for conjurers and al- 
chemists; otherwise, rare (PO-SM). 


Song of Battle — Elf 
(Elven High Magic) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is an ancient chant that is used to 
encourage armies in battle. All allies of the 
caster within range of the spell are filled with 


bravery and fighting spirit. The spell lasts one 
turn per level of the caster. During this time, no 
one who heard it need check morale, regardless 
of cause. Fear spells, dragons, and similar crea- 
tures have absolutely no effect on those under 
the power of this spell. 

The spell requires the caster to play a harp or 
lute. 

Notes: Restricted to elves able to use High 
Magic; common. 


Soothe the Beast 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 
Level: 1 


Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | animal 
Saving Throw: None 


Soothe the beast affects only domesticated 
animals or those already friendly toward the 
caster, of common, giant, or minimal variety. 
Once cast, the spell makes the animal feel con- 
tent, well fed, calm, and ready for sleep. These 
feelings overcome any adversity due to food 
shortage, inhospitable climate or environment, 
frightening situations, and so on. 

However, while the creature may feel well 
fed, this spell does not replace the need for 
food. Even under this enchantment, an animal is 
subject to starvation and its physical effects. 
Soothe the beast only allows the animal to 
remain blissfully unaware of the condition. 

Notes: Common in the MysTARA setting; oth- 
erwise, uncommon for Nature mages, song 
mages, and bards, and very rare for others. 


Soothing Vibrations, Otto’s 
See Otto’s soothing vibrations. 


A OO T a 


835 


~ Sorcerous Scribe 


Sorcerous Scribe 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 ft. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting sorcerous scribe conjures a magical 
quill to write down anything the caster says for 
the duration of the spell (as long as the wizard 
stays within range). The quill transcribes in the 
language the caster is speaking and fails if no 
written form of the language exists. The quill 
only records actual words; these are in no way 
imbued with any magical power. Only the mag- 
ical writing quill is created; the wizard must 
provide parchment (or other writing material) 
and ink. 

Notes: Common in the Mystara setting; oth- 
erwise, very rare. 


Sorcerous Transcription 


A MYSTARA setting spell, aka sorcerous scribe. 


Soul Anchor 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Level: 5 a 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell ties the victim’s life force to a par- 
ticular edifice-—a building, an estate, a castle, 
etc. This prevents the victim from leaving that 
place unless released from the spell—a simple 
dispel magic or remove curse will do the trick, 
but the spell also is negated if the owner of the 
building or estate grants permission to leave. 
(The owner can be charmed or otherwise forced 
into granting permission.) 

The specified place of the anchor must have 
clearly defined borders, such as the walls of a 
castle. A stand of trees does not have a clearly 
definable border and hence is an unsuitable 


; ' Pt azan 


~ Spark Burst r 


place for a soul anchor. DMs should note that 
property lines, if clearly known and understood 
by both the caster and subject, are acceptable 
for this purpose. 

Notes: Common in the RAVENLOFT setting; 
otherwise, rare. 


Soul Freedom — Elf 
(Elven High Magic) 


Level: 9 

Range: | yd./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 evil creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell can be used against any creature of 
evil alignment. The subject of the enchantment 
must successfully save vs. spell at —6 or be in- 
stantly converted to good alignment. The sub- 
ject must again successfully save vs. spell at —6 
once a month for one year, then once a year for 
10 years, or return to its original alignment. 
After 10 years, the realignment is permanent. 

Notes: Restricted to elves able to cast High 
Magic; common. 


Soul Shift — Old Empire 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 9 

Range: 10 mi. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This extremely powerful spell will transfer 
the lifeforce of the wizard from his own body 
into a previously prepared corpse. This corpse 
must be within the area of effect of the spell and 
be unmarred by disease, wounds, or injury. At 
any time during this spell’s duration, the wizard 
can choose to abandon his body and travel into 
the corpse. The wizard’s true body remains 
alive, but in a zombielike state. 

When the wizard’s lifeforce reaches its new 
home, the wizard must immediately roll for res- 
urrection survival, failure means death. If suc- 
cessful, the new body is restored as it was 
before death, except for the loss of 1 point of 
Constitution. The wizard retains the knowledge 


of all of the spells he knew before to the trans- 
fer. This transfer is one-way; the wizard cannot 
return to his old body. 

The material component for this spell is a 
crushed ruby of at least 1,000 gp value. 

Notes: Very rare spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


Sound Bubble — Bard 


(Abjuration, Evocation) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 

Duration: 10 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, an invisible bubble 
springs into existence. This can be centered on 
and mobile with the caster or can be cast on an 
area. The mobile bubble has a radius of 10 feet, 
while the area bubble has a radius of 5 feet per 
caster level. The bubble has only one effect: 
sound can’t pass through it. Thus sound gener- 
ated within the bubble can’t be heard by those 
on the outside and vice versa. 

Bards often use this spell to enhance the 
quality and effect of their performances. It is 
useful when a bard wishes to use one of his tal- 
ents in a dungeon or other limited setting in 
which noise is sure to draw unwanted attention. 

Besides its entertainment functions, sound 
bubble is also useful in many situations in 
which silence is used. 

The material component of the spell is a 
blown egg shell or a soap bubble. 

Notes: Restricted to bards; uncommon. 


Sounding Stick, Odeen’s 


See Odeen’s sounding stick. 


Spark Burst 


(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: 12 


A- a a a E OT 


Spark Shower 


This spell agitates the matter of phlogiston or 
atmosphere in a chosen location, releasing elec- 
trical energy. The spell can work through a crys- 
tal sphere portal or across void wildspace to 
other atmospheres, but has no effect on a void. 

In atmosphere, this spell damages all beings 
in the affected area equal to 1 point per caster 
level, and may detonate explosive or flammable 
substances touched by its sparks. In phlogiston, 
the sparks ignite all flammables in the area of 
effect (with possible additional damage), and 
ignite the phlogiston. All beings in the area 
suffer 1d4 points of damage per caster level. For 
every 10 dice of damage of a spark burst, 1 hull 
point of damage is dealt to any ship in, or par- 
tially in, the area of effect. 

In the flow, this spell does not endanger the 
caster, because the electrical energy does not 
emanate from him, occurring only at a distance. 

The material components are a piece of flint 
and a chunk of ferrous metal, of any size. 

Notes: Uncommon for spellcasters from a 
spelljamming culture; otherwise, very rare. 


Spark Shower 
(Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. wide x 20-ft. long cone 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a cloud of sizzling purple 
sparks, originating from the caster’s hands and 
spreading outward in a cone 20 feet long and 10 
feet wide at the far end. All creatures in the area 
of effect take 4d4 points of electrical damage if 
in contact with metal (that is, wearing metal 
armor or holding metal weapons) or 2d4 points 
otherwise. 

The material components are a piece of flint 
and a piece of iron, which are struck together 
when casting the spell. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


838 


Spawn Heritage 


(Divination) 
Level: 2 wise 
Range: 30 ft. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 

Saving Throw: None 


On Athas, the elves of the coast traffic in spell 
components and mystic powders. Tentacles of 
the silt spawn are used for both; however, differ- 
ent types of silt spawn are needed for different 
spells and powders. This spell reveals the type of 
silt horror the spawn will become. 

The spell requires a bit of dried hide from an 
adult silt horror. The spell will only reveal if the 
silt spawn is of the same type as this bit of dried 
flesh. The more types of dried silt horror hide 
the caster is holding, the more types of silt 
spawn can be identified. 

Although the silt spawn is a delicacy among 
the giants of the Silt Sea, the tentacles are not, 
being hard and rubbery with a bitter flavor. The 
giants trade the tentacles to the elves. 

Notes: Common among the elves on the coast 
of the Silt Sea of Athas (the DarK SUN setting); 


~ Speak With Dead — Wu Jen Pa 


otherwise, rare in that setting and virtually un- 
known elsewhere. 


Speak in Tongues — Witch 
(Aiteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 turns + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 individual 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell enables a witch to understand the 
language of any one intelligent entity and com- 
municate with that entity in that language. Only 
one language is understood and spoken for each 
casting of the spell, but up to three languages 
can be understood at once, with three separate 
castings. It does not change the predisposition 
of any creature. 

Notes: Restricted to witches; uncommon. 
(Updated from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Speak with Dead 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


Much like the 3rd-level priest spell, this spell 
enables the necromancer to ask questions of a 
dead creature. The necromancer can ask at a 
rate of one question per round to a maximum of 
seven questions (see table). A portion of the 
creature’s remains must be touched by the 
necromancer and questions must be posed in 
language known to the dead creature. The 
length of time the creature has been dead is a 
factor. The spell does not function under water. 

The dead tend to give extremely brief and 
limited answers, often cryptic, and to take ques- 
tions literally. Furthermore, their knowledge is 
often limited to what they knew in life. 

At the DM’s option, the casting of this spell 
on a given creature might be restricted to once 
per week. 

The material component is a pinch of uncon- 
secrated graveyard dirt. Some portion of the 


creature’s remains are required. 
Notes: Restricted to necromancers (common) 
and, optionally, diviners (uncommon). 


Caster’s Maximum Time Number of 
Level Time Dead Questioned Questions 
To 7th 1 week 1 round 2 

7-8 1month 3 rounds 3 
9-12 1 year l turn 4 
13-15 10 years 2 turns 5 
16-20 100 years 3 turns 6 

2lst-up 1,000 years 6 turns 7 


Option: In some campaigns, the DM 
may allow other wizards research speak 
with dead as a 4th-level spell (the 2nd-level 
version is not available to them). The spell 
details remain the same. 


Speak With Dead — Wu Jen 
A 6th-level spell in all other 
respects similar to the 
2nd-level necromancer s spell, 
but commonly available to wu jen 
from this setting. The dead of this 


setting tend to hold grudges against the living 
who disturb them. 


~ Spearflight — Pluma r 


Spearflight — Pluma 
(Alteration) i 
Level: 1 
RANGE: 30 YDS. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1d6 rds. 

Duration: 3 turns/level 

Area of Effect: 3 spearthrowers/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell benefits spearmen by doubling 
their range and adding +1 to each die of damage 
inflicted by their missiles. It works on spearmen 
casting spears or javelins by hand, or those 
using a device (such as an atl-atl) to hurl the 
weapon with greater force. 

The material component is a tiny piece of 
hawk’s beak. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of pluma 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Special Effects 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to create a physi- 
cal effect of a visual, auditory, olfactory, gusta- 
tory, or tactile nature. The effect must be 
nonharmful, but can take almost any form: 
lightning-like traces on a wall, haunting music, 
a stone floor that feels spongy, a sweet sensation 
on the tongue, or a room that smells like a pine 
forest. The spell can affect one object or an area 
up to 10 x 10 x 10 feet in size. 

If cast at a living being, the creature gets a 
saving throw vs. spell, with success indicating 
the spell has no effect. Unlike an illusion, the 
effect is real and permanent until successfully 
dispelled. 

The material component of this spell is some 
representation of the desired effect: a picture; a 
sample of an odor, taste, or feel; or something 
that creates the desired sound. 

Notes: Uncommon for transmuters and arti- 
ficers; otherwise, rare. This spell is most often 
found in wizard strongholds. 


Spectral Dagger, Othnal’s 
See Othnal’s spectral dagger. 


Spectral Ears 
(Necromancy, Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, a wizard establishes an 
auditory link between himself and a skeleton or 
zombie within the spell’s range. This link allows 
the caster to hear any sounds that occur within 
the vicinity of the undead being. The wizard can 
hear exactly as if he were standing where the 
undead creature is standing (a wizard/thief can 
use the thiefly “hear noise” ability, too). 

The spell also allows the caster to order the 
undead creature via the link. Such commands 
are limited to four words (“turn left,” “walk for- 
ward two steps,” and so on). If the undead crea- 
ture moves beyond the spell’s range, then the 
spell ends immediately. 

The material component for this spell is a 
mummified ear. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from DraGoN Maga- 
zine.) 


Spectral Eyes 


(Necromancy, Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell establishes a visual link between 
the caster and a skeleton or zombie within the 
spell’s range. The spell lets the caster see what 
the undead creature sees as if looking through 
the creature’s eyes. The spell also allows the 
wizard to order the undead creature (each com- 
mand up to four words long). If the creature 
moves beyond the spell’s range, then the spell 
ends immediately. 

If the caster has infravision, he sees what the 


A e e a i EN 


840 


N Spectral Hand g 


creature sees with infravision as well. 

The material component of this spell is a 
carefully preserved eye. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from DraGoN Maga- 
zine.) 


Spectral Force 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yd./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. cube + 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


The spectral force spell creates an illusion in 
which sound, smell, and thermal illusions are 
included. It is otherwise similar to the improved 
phantasmal force spell. The spell lasts for three 
rounds after concentration ceases. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Spectral Guard 


(Evocation, Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yd. 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an invisible guardian at a 
specific, immovable location. The spectral 
guard waits, undetectable by normal, nonmagi- 
cal means, until dispelled or until specific con- 
ditions, stated in the spellcasting, are met. Such 
conditions are typically the unlocking of a cer- 
tain door or chest, a creature who is not the 
caster entering a certain area or touching spe- 
cific objects, and so on. When the conditions 
are fulfilled, the spectral guard will appear as a 
wraith-like, swirling, flying being, with a taper- 
ing, legless form and distinct limbs necessary 
for wielding of the weapon. The wraith-like 
weapon will be a duplicate of the material com- 
ponent weapon consumed in the casting, and 
will do normal weapon damage. It is noncorpo- 
real, able to pass through solid barriers, shields, 
and so on. It can strike ethereal and gaseous 
creatures, and creatures normally hit only by +2 


841 


or better magical weapons. Victims struck feel a 
chill as the spectral blade strikes. 

The spectral guard strikes twice per round, is 
AC 0, strikes as the caster would, has hit points 
equal to the caster’s at the time of casting and, if 
not dispelled by being slain, fights for one 
round per level of the caster. Dispel magic is in- 
effective against a spectral guard. The guard 
flies at a rate of 24 per round, is Maneuverabil- 
ity Class A, and is utterly silent. It cannot be 
charmed, turned, repelled, blinded, or duped by 
illusions. Further, it detects living creatures un- 
erringly within 5 feet. Once activated, a spectral 
guard can be dispelled at will by its caster. In 
this case, another spell is needed to replace the 
guard. The physical appearance (features, 
height, etc.) of spectral guards can be fashioned 
by the caster during casting, to resemble a spe- 
cific real person or beings of a particular build, 
race, age, and/or sex. 

The caster requires a spare weapon, a bone, a 
drop of blood, and the eye of any creature, 
which may be dried or preserved (all are con- 
sumed during the casting). 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in The Collected 
Wisdom of Snilloc. 


Spectral Guard: AC 0; MV FI 24 (B); 
HD As caster; THACO As caster; #AT 2; 
Dmg by weapon; SA Hits creatures vulner- 
able to +2 weapons or less; SD immune to 
charm, blinding, confusion, repulsion, 
turning, and illusion/phantasms; SW Ig- 
nores undead; AL N; SZ M; ML Nil. 


Spectral Hand 
(Necromancy) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. + 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 opponent 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a ghostly, glowing hand, 
shaped from the caster’s life force, to material- 
ize within the spell range and move as the caster 
desires. Any touch attack spell of 4th level or 
less that is subsequently cast by the wizard can 


~ Spectral Voice 


be delivered by the spectral hand. The spell 
gives the caster a +2 bonus to his attack roll. 
The caster cannot perform any other actions 
when attacking with the hand; the hand returns 
to the caster and hovers if the caster takes other 
actions. The hand lasts the full spell duration 
unless dismissed by the caster, and it is possible 
to use more than one touch attack with it. The 
hand receives flank and rear attack bonuses if the 
caster is in a position to do so. The hand is vul- 
nerable to magical attack but has an Armor Class 
of —2. Any damage to the hand ends the spell and 
inflicts 1d4 points of damage upon the caster. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Spectral Voice 
(Necromancy, Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 

Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the Ist-level spell ven- 
triloquism in that it allows the caster to throw 
his voice. However, the caster’s voice issues 


842 


only from the mouth of a specified zombie or a 
skeleton. The voice coming from the undead 
creature will not sound like the caster’s voice, 
but like a scratchy, raspy whisper. For the dura- 
tion of this spell, the caster is unable to cast any 
spells requiring verbal components. The caster 
can end the spell at will. 

The material component for this spell is a 
preserved tongue. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; common. 


Spectral Wings 
(Evocation, Necromancy) 
(Shadow) 
Level: 4 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creates wings, 26-ft. span 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a misty, gray, largely intan- 
gible flying steed. The spectral wings appear as 
a set of gray, ghostly wings, 12 feet long, with a 
wingspan of 26 feet. The mount is visible to 
others but seems foglike and insubstantial. 
Those riding on the spectral wings feel it as a 
solid object. 

The wings are a magical force under the 
mental control of the caster. This force is not a 
living thing; it cannot be slain or affected by 
normal weapons but can be dispelled normally. 
The caster must remain in contact with the 
wings in order to control them. If the caster is 
taken out of contact with the wings or is slain or 
rendered unconscious, the wings will perform 
the last order they received. 

The spectral wings are utterly silent and have 
maneuverability class B and a speed of 15. They 
can pass through solid objects, but that ability is 
not passed along to the individuals and equip- 
ment that the wings carry. The wings can carry 
up to 100 Ibs. per level of the caster. If over- 
loaded, the additional weight falls through the 
wings. The wings provide a solid base for spell- 
casting and missile fire. The caster can engage 
in other actions while riding the wings, but the 
wings will continue to move according to their 
last orders if this is the case. 

The material component of this spell is a 
wing bone from any type of flying creature. The 
wings resemble the wings of that particular 
creature. 


> 


~ Spell Drain — Savant g 


Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in The Collected 
Wisdom of Snilloc. 


Speed 
(Alteration) 
(Artificer) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a person (cf. charm person) 
run at twice normal running rate with no fa- 
tigue. The speed gained also makes the person 
harder to hit (2 bonus to Armor Class), but it 
does not permit any additional attacks per 
round. In addition, the spell ends if the runner 
stops running for more than one round. 

The spell requires a pair of specially con- 
structed shoes, which must fit the person per- 
fectly (minimum 100 gp value). The shoes are 
reusable but are rendered useless by any rips or 
tears; a new pair must then be made. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Speed Metabolism 


Reversed form, see slow metabolism. 


Speedmount — Elf 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 mount 
Saving Throw: None 


Speedmount affects one horse or other land- 
based riding animal. When this spell is cast, the 
creature’s ground movement is doubled for a 
number of turns equal to the caster’s level. 

The material component is a horseshoe. 

Notes: Restricted to elves; uncommon. 


843 


Spell Drain — Savant 
(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 hr./level. 

Area of Effect: 1 spellcasting creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the savant to drain and uti- 
lize the memory of a spell possessed by a spell- 
using creature. The savant, if aware of the spells 
known by the target, may declare the spell 
drained; otherwise, the most recently memo- 
rized of the target creature’s highest-level spells 
is drained. The savant cannot regain the 7th- 
level spell slot until the stolen spell is cast or the 
memory is lost. 

Material components are also necessary if the 
spell normally requires them; the savant knows 
what components are required, if any. 

Notes: Restricted to savants; uncommon. 
Stealspell may be an imperfect copy of this 
spell. (Updated from Dracon Magazine.) 


~ Spell Engine 


Spell Engine 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
(Force) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10-ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


In casting this spell, the wizard calls into 
being the spell engine, a great wheel that ab- 
sorbs magical energy—in particular, cast spells. 
When initially cast, the engine is unactivated 
and remains invisible in the location where the 
wizard cast it. Once a spell is cast in the area of 
effect around the engine, the spell engine acti- 
vates. A great intangible wheel 12 feet in diam- 
eter and 2 feet thick shimmers into existence. 

ff Magical energies used in the area of effect 
ot fj" 7 causes the great wheel to turn, shining with a 
fibh ue glowing white light from the energy present. 
Once activated, the spell engine will not deacti- 


vA . 
Sa 4 ya vate; rather, it eventually slows from lack of 
e A A y spell energy and becomes ghostly and translu- 
cent. 


When activated, the spell engine absorbs all 
spell energy cast in the area of effect, reaching 
through solid objects to do so. Wizard and priest 
spells, spell-like abilities of monsters and indi- 
viduals, and magical items with castable 
charges will not function in this area. Their 
energy is sucked into the wheel, which glows 
brighter and spins faster with every addition. 
Unlike spel/trap, the spell engine cannot be 
overloaded. 

An engine can be destroyed by direct contact 
with a magical item (excluding potions and 
scrolls but including artifacts and unique magi- 
cal items). The engine explodes on contact with 
such an item, inflicting 1d20 points of damage 
on everyone within 10 feet and 1d8 points on 
everyone between 10 and 20 feet away from the 
. SANI Ne wheel itself. The magical item is destroyed 
NS c xq x + p A Q along with the spell engine in the explosion. AT- 
X tifacts and unique items (such as special pur- 
v | We ` pose swords) are not destroyed, but they (and 

EEN ak their wielders) are bodily moved to another 

ar i plane or dimension. Getting home from there is 
the wielder’s problem. 

A dispel magic spell does not destroy a spell 
engine, as its energy is sucked up by the engine. 
Symbols, glyphs, and abjuration magics already 


ww 


W 


; 


i ge xe 


~ Spel! Immunity r 


in place at the time the spell engine is activated 
are not absorbed, though new spells of that vari- 
ety cast in the area are. A disintegrate spell 
causes the engine to explode as if it contacted a 
magical item. 

A detect magic spell reveals the presence of 
an unactivated spell engine, as does the ability 
to detect invisibility, though neither activates 
the engine if cast before entering its area of 
effect or if they are natural abilities. 

An operating spell engine has one beneficial 
sidelight—if a spellcaster studies or prays in its 
light, the amount of time required to learn or re- 
ceive spells is halved. The required amount of 
rest is not reduced, only the time needed to 
memorize spells. 

Other than the powers listed above, the spell 
engine does not affect living beings. Individuals 
with magical items do not affect an unactivated 
spell engine. Only the casting of a spell in the 
area of effect calls an existing spell engine into 
being. 

The material components of this spell are a 
disc of polished marble, shell, or bone, a tear 
from the caster, and a gem worth at least 1,000 
gp. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Sabirine’s 
Specular. 


Spell Enhancer, Rary’s 


See Rary’s spell enhancer. 


Spell Fangs — Phaerimm 


(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 15 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a more powerful version of the 
toothed tentacle spell. It creates a shadowy, in- 
substantial “tentacle” or flexible, retractile arm 
extending from the phaerimm out to the limits 
of spell range. This weightless arm ends in a 
cluster of 1d6+2 long-toothed, snapping mouths 
(round roll up, to an even number; that is, there 
are 2, 4, 6, or 8 mouths). 

These are solid and very real, and exist to 
bite, slash, and savage opponents. They can be 
attacked by up to three creatures at once, but 


can strike at more than one target only if the 
beings are grouped around the cluster of mouths 
to engage them (to the maximum of three). 

The mouths bite for 2d6 points of damage 
each, every round, are AC 5, and have 14 hit 
points each. Every time a mouth is “killed,” it 
fades away, taking another mouth with it; if this 
leaves no mouths, the spell is ended. 

Damage done by the mouths is gained by the 
phaerimm, healing any existing damage first. 
Hit points gained in excess of the phaerimm’s 
maximum are retained for two turns before 
fading away; any damage suffered during this 
time is subtracted from them first. 

Only the mouths and their cluster of eel-like 
“necks” can be attacked; the shadowy tentacle 
cannot be hit or harmed (except by application 
of a dispel magic, which ends the spell in- 
stantly). The tentacle can be passed through 
freely, and even be intersected by solid barriers 
and objects, without harm to the phaerimm or 
the spell (though the phaerimm must be able to 
see foes to use the mouths against them). 

The phaerimm must concentrate on directing 
the tentacle; if it is killed, loses consciousness, 
or undertakes the study or casting of another 
spell, the tentacle fades away and the spell ends. 
“Phantom” hit points already gained through 
use of this spell are not lost immediately when 
the spell ends—they fade only through time, or 
are used up by damage. 

The material components of the spell are a 
hair and at least three teeth, which can be from 
any creatures (and need not be from the same 
corpse or species). 

Notes: Restricted to phaerimm; common. 


Spell Immunity 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard renders a 
creature touched immune to the effects of a spe- 
cific spell of 4th level or less. It protects against 
the spell in all its forms, including the spell-like 
effect of magical items and the innate spell-like 
abilities of creatures. It does not protect against 
breath weapons or gaze attacks of any type. 


845 


~~ Spell Immunity, Serten’s = 


The caster must have directly experienced the 
effect of the spell specified. For example, a 
caster who has been attacked by a fireball at 
some time can use spell immunity to provide 
protection from a fireball. 

The spell fails if cast on a creature already 
magically protected by a potion, protective 
spell, ring, or other device. Finally, only a par- 
ticular spell can be protected against, not a cer- 
tain sphere of spells or a group of spells that are 
similar in effect; thus, a creature given immu- 
nity to the /ighting bolt spell is still vulnerable 
to a shocking grasp spell. 

The material component for spell immunity is 
the same as that for the spell to be protected 
against. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Spell Immunity, Serten’s 
See Serten’s spell immunity. 


Spell Invulnerability 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of this spell is rendered com- 
pletely immune to one spell, spell-like effect, or 
magical item. The spell, spell effect, or item is 
specified at the time of casting. 

When describing a particular spell or spell 
effect, a full description is necessary. Invulnera- 
bility to a light spell, for example, is not suffi- 
cient, since the spell can be either a wizard spell 
or a priest’s spell. A correct casting would be to 
ward against the “Ist-level wizard spell, light.” 

Such protection is complete for the recipi- 
ent—it is as if the spell or item does not exist 
for the protected individual. A character ren- 
dered invulnerable to the wall of iron spell can 
walk through an iron wall, if it was created by 
the spell. Invulnerability to a particular spell 
provides no protection from related or lesser 
versions of that spell, nonmagical equivalents, 
and spell-like abilities that duplicate the spell. 
These affect the protected character normally. 

Against spell-like abilities, spell invulnera- 
bility provides complete protection from one 
spell-like ability used by one type or species of 


846 


creature. Invulnerability to a beholder’s cause 
serious wounds eye provides no protection from 
the beholder’s other eyes, from the cause seri- 
ous wounds eye of a spectator, or from any other 
form of cause serious wounds. 

Against a magical item, the spell protects 
from all attacks by that item and all identical 
items. Invulnerability to a long sword +1 makes 
the character invulnerable to all such swords 
(they pass through him harmlessly). A short 
sword +1 or along sword +1, +4 vs. reptiles af- 
fects the spell’s recipient normally. Invulnera- 
bility to a magical item protects only against 
effects that work directly on the recipient. Invul- 
nerability to a potion of berserker rage protects 
a character who drinks it, but provides no pro- 
tection from the attacks of someone else who 
drank it. Scroll spells are considered magical 
spells rather than items; thus, immunity to the 
lst-level wizard spell light extends to that spell 
cast from a scroll. 

This spell provides no protection against arti- 
facts, relics, and unique magical items (the 
Blade of Inverness, for example, of which only 
one exists). Further, the spell does not give gen- 
eral protection against living things, magical 
creatures (such as golems), extra-dimensional 
and extraplanar beings, or nonmagical items. 

Only one spell invulnerability can be cast on 
an individual at one time. The spell cannot be 
cast on the dead, on an item, or a location. 

The spell invulnerability is considered by ab- 
jurers to be one of their masterpieces. It is be- 
lieved that the spell was developed as a reply to 
the transmuters’ spel/strike spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Caddelyns 
Workbook. 


Spell-Lash — Red Wizard 
(Alteration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 25-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell is used by Red Wizards who are in 
danger of death or capture. It completely de- 
stroys the wizard’s body and inflicts explosive 
damage on all within a 25-foot radius. The 
amount of damage inflicted is equal to 1d4 


` Spell Semse a 


times the level of the caster. A 25th-level wizard 
would, for example, inflict 25d4 points of 
damage upon all individuals within 25 feet. 
Nonmagical items in the area must make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. disintegration with a +4 
bonus or be destroyed. Spellbooks and magical 
items must also make a successful saving throw, 
but have a +8 bonus. Artifacts, relics, and simi- 
lar unique magical objects survive. 

While the wizard’s body is destroyed, the 
wizard’s essence may be protected by means of 
clone, magic jar, or a similar spell. 

Notes: Restricted to the Red Wizards of Thay 
and those trained by them; common. 


Spell Mirror 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 6 

Range: 20 ft/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is cast on a reflective surface, stor- 
ing a spell to be released upon intruders when 
activated. For one turn after a spell mirror is 
cast, the first spell of 4th level or less or magi- 
cal item discharge directed at the mirror is ab- 
sorbed and stored. When the activation 
conditions are met, the stored magic springs 
forth with its normal effect and area. Specific 
targeting directions and range are set by the 
caster when the spell mirror is cast. Any saving 
throws associated with the stored spell are al- 
lowed. 

The stored spell is activated when the mirror 
is looked into by those specified in the casting 
of the spell mirror, or when the mirror is de- 
stroyed. Typical specifications are: “any orc 
shaman,” “Eldaerus the Mage of Neverwinter,” 
“a priest of any evil faith,” or even “any mage 
who is not me or Aldagh or Shonter.” 

The material components of this spell are the 
mirror and a handful of dust from any powdered 
object that was once magical. The mirror sur- 
face is not damaged by the spell process, even 
when the stored spell erupts. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Spell Reflection 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


An invisible aura comes into being around 
the protected creature, and protects him or her 
as does a ring of spell turning, turning all 
magics back upon the caster, except the follow- 
ing, which are not reflected: 

* Area-effect spells that are not centered di- 

rectly upon the protected wizard, 

e Spell effects delivered by touch, and 

e Spell effects from devices such as wands, 

staves, and so on. 

Spells cannot be cast by the protected being, 
but the spellcaster can end the protection in- 
stantly if she so wills. (This must be a deliberate 
act; it does not occur if the incantatrix turns her 
attention to another matter or is rendered un- 
conscious.) 

The material component for this spell is a 
small glass or metal mirror, held by the recipi- 
ent (which may be the incantatrix herself or an- 
other creature she touches) and consumed 
during the casting. 

Notes: Uncommon for incantatrixes; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from DRaGoN Maga- 
zine.) 


Spell Sense 


(Divination) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 25-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


A wizard who casts spell sense instantly be- 
comes aware of all spells as they are being cast 
in a 25-foot radius around him, as well as the 
nature of the magic: the general effect of a spell 
being cast, level of the spell, whether its power 
originated from a magical item, etc. 

The wizard can tell when another spellcaster 
in the area of effect begins casting a spell, pos- 


"a a < 


847 


~ Spell Sequencer, Simbul’s i 


sibly allowing him to react before the new spell 
takes effect. This detection is possible only if 
the other spellcaster is inside the 25-foot radius, 
regardless of where the spell will take effect. 
Spell sense does not inform the caster of magic 
that took effect before its casting. 

Notes: Common in the MySTARA setting; vir- 
tually unknown elsewhere. 


Spell Sequencer, Simbul’s 
See Simbul’s spell sequencer. 


Spell Shape* 
(Wild) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1d4 + 1 rds. 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell gives the wild mage the ability to 
seize magical energy directed at him and re- 
shape it as he desires. While it is in effect, the 
spell gives no visible sign of its existence. It 
offers no protection against area-effect spells, 
save those centered directly on the wild mage. 

If a wild mage is the target of a spell or mag- 
ical item, this spell automatically allows him a 
saving throw. Failure means the opponent’s spell 
has normal effects. Success means the spell 
shape absorbs the magical energy of the oppo- 
nent’s spell. The wild mage can then choose to 
let the energy dissipate or can instantly use it to 
cast a spell back at the opposing wizard. The 
return spell must be of an equal or lesser spell 
level than the original one and must be currently 
memorized by the wild mage. The act of return- 
ing the spell does not cost the wild mage any of 
his memorized spells. Spell energy cannot be 
saved; if not used immediately, it dissipates. 

For example, Hamos, a wild mage, is pro- 
tected by a spell shape and is struck by a finger 
of death (a 7th-level spell). He succeeds at his 
saving throw and is now able to cast a spell of 
7th level or lower. Hamos currently has feeble- 
mind memorized. Since it is only a 5th-level 
spell, he chooses to cast it back at his enemy. He 
makes his level variation check (and doesn’t get 
a wild surge) and the feeblemind is sent hurtling 
back at his foe. Hamos still has his original fee- 
blemind memorized. The remaining two spell 
levels are lost, since they were not used in the 


same round. 

A wild mage struck by two spells at once 
chooses which spell to shape. He suffers all ef- 
fects of the remaining spell. 

The material component is a diamond worth 
no less than 2,000 gp. When the spell is cast, the 
diamond is transformed into a lump of coal. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages; common 


(ToM). 


Spell Shield 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell upon herself or another 
creature that she touches, the incantatrix con- 
fers strong protection against certain spells and 
magical attack forms. The protection gives a 
saving throw bonus as follows: 


—7 vs. beguiling, charm, suggestion 

-5 vs. command, domination, fear, hold, scare 
—3 vs. geas, quest 

—1 vs. confusion, feeblemind, 
antipathy/sympathy 


The material component is a diamond of any 
size, which disappears, with a flash of white 
light, during casting. 

Notes: Uncommon for incantatrixes and ab- 
jurers; otherwise, rare. 


Spell Supremacy, Simbul’s 


See Simbul’s spell supremacy. 


Spell Trigger, Simbul’s 
See Simbul’s spell trigger. 


Spell Turning 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Up to 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


A EE aa! 


848 


N Spell Ward r 


This powerful abjuration causes spelis cast 
against the wizard to rebound on the original 
caster. This includes spells cast from scrolls and 
innate spell-like abilities, but specifically ex- 
cludes the following: area effects that are not 
centered directly upon the protected wizard, 
spell effects delivered by touch, and spell ef- 
fects from devices such as wands, staves, etc. 
Thus, a light spell cast to blind the protected 
wizard could be turned back upon and possibly 
blind the caster, while the same spell would be 
unaffected if cast to light an area within which 
the protected wizard is standing. 

From seven to ten spell levels are affected by 
the turning. The exact number is secretly rolled 
by the DM; the player never knows for certain 
how effective the spell is. 

A spell might be only partially turned— 
divide the number of remaining levels that can 
be turned by the spell level of the incoming 
spell to see what fraction of the effect is turned, 
with the remainder affecting the caster. For ex- 
ample, an incoming fireball is centered on a 
wizard with one level of spell turning left. This 
means that 2/3 of the fireball affects the pro- 
tected wizard, 1/3 affects the caster, and each is 
the center of a fireball effect. If the rolled 


KU 


damage is 40 points, the protected wizard re- 
ceives 27 points of damage and the caster suf- 
fers 13. Both (and any creatures in the 
respective areas) can roll saving throws vs. spell 
for half damage. A partially turned hold or 
paralysis spell will act as a slow spell on those 
who are 50% or more affected. 

If the protected wizard and a spellcasting at- 
tacker both have spell turning effects operating, 
a resonating field is created that has the follow- 
ing effects: 


d100 Roll Effect 


01-70 Spell drains away without effect 

71-80 Spell affects both equally at full 
damage 

81-97 Both turning effects are rendered 
nonfunctional for 1d4 turns 

98-00 Both casters go through a rift into 


the Positive Energy Plane 


The material component for the spell is a 
smal] silver mirror. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Spell Ward 
Aka spell invulnerability. 


849 


~ Spelicaster r 


Spellcaster 
(Enchantment) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


Using this spell, a wizard imbues a stationary 
object with the ability to store, then later repeat- 
edly cast, another spell. 

After the object has been enchanted, a spell is 
cast into it. Thereafter, the item will cast the 
second spell, with normal effects centering on 
or originating from the item, at intervals of 
1-10 rounds. The interval is determined when 
the item is enchanted; it can’t be changed. 

Any spell up to 3rd level, except dispel 
magic, can be used as the repeating spell. A suc- 
cessful dispel magic can affect either the spell- 
caster spell or the repeating spell; elimination 
of either renders the item useless. Moving the 
item also breaks the enchantment. 

The object to be enchanted must be of the 
finest quality, with a cost above 10,000 gp. 
Gems and statues are common receptacles. 

Notes: Uncommon for enchanters; other- 
wise, very rare. Items enchanted with this spell 
are often found in strongholds. 


Spelldoor 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A very powerful variation on the 5th-level 
teleport spell, spelldoor transports a spell’s 
effect. The caster’s next spell is instantly con- 
veyed to the location specified during spell- 
door’s casting. The spel/door functions only on 
spells that have a range (not 0 or touch), and 
conveys them only to a point to which the caster 
has been. 

The transported spell’s effect unfolds nor- 
mally at its point of arrival. For example, a 


wizard can send a fireball to an enemy’s fortress 
or a detect magic spell to a spot to which the 
wizard will later teleport. 

Spelldoor does not modify a spell’s effect— 
only its range. Further, the wizard must trans- 
port the entire effect—a chain lightning spell 
would not affect two targets within range of the 
caster and then travel through a spelldoor. 

This method of transport has the same chance 
to send a spell exactly where the caster desires 
as a normal teleport spell’s chance of success. 

The material component is a bronze ring ex- 
actly 1 inch in diameter. 

Notes: Common in the MYSTARA setting; vir- 
tually unknown elsewhere. 


Probability of Teleporting: 


On 
Destination is: High Target Low 
Very familiar 01-02 03-99 00 
Studied carefully 01-04 05-98 99-00 
Seen casually 01-08 09-96 97-00 
Viewed once 01-16 17-92 93-00 
Spelistorm 

(Alteration) 

Level: 9 

Range: 0 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 70-ft. sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, this spell takes effect in a sphere 
centered on and mobile with the caster. It causes 
every normal physical weapon that comes 
within its area of effect to activate, tearing free 
of scabbards, bindings, hiding places, and 
chests to fly about at MV 15 (A), attacking the 
nearest living thing once per round with the 
casters THACO. For the purposes of this spell, 
normal physical weapons are all unenchanted 
objects that were made or carried thence with an 
intent to do harm to other living beings, or have 
been so used in the past. 

While the spellstorm is in effect, unen- 
chanted weapons cannot harm the caster—not 
even missile weapons launched from outside the 
area of effect. The spellstorm turns these weap- 
ons aside. The caster can ignore them, cast other 
spells, sleep, or stroll unconcernedly. 

This spell is often used by the Seven Sisters 
to wreak havoc in a hostile castle, army en- 


A aa a a ana. 


850 


~ Spelltouch r 


campment, or on a battlefield. Some use it to 
defend themselves by preparing a reception 
room in their towers hung with many weapons, 
and use the spell there. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers; very rare. 


Spellstrike 
(Alteration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This extremely powerful spell represents the 
height of the transmuters’ craft; it permits the 
caster to negate the effect of a spell cast in 
either the previous round or the round that the 
spellstrike is cast. 

The caster of the spellstrike does not need to 
know the type of spell or magic cast the previ- 
ous round, only some part of its effect. The 
spellstrike can be used against only one particu- 
lar spell per casting. 

Spellstrike does not cause a spell to be re- 
flected, turned, trapped, or sent elsewhere. The 
spell merely ceases to exist, retroactively, 
though it is still lost to the original caster. Even 
spell-like abilities are affected by this spell, 
though magical items and artifacts are not. Per- 
manency is affected by spellstrike, though con- 
tingency, limited wish, and wish are not. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in the tome, 
Unique Mageries. 


Spelltouch 
(Enchantment) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 item (of less weight and 
volume than the caster) 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell, cast on a nonliving item, allows 
any spell of 3rd level or less cast on it in the fol- 
lowing round to be stored and remain dormant 
until the item touches a target creature. The 
caster of the spelltouch can specify what race 
and sex, or type (undead, summoned, living, 
avian, etc.) of creature will trigger or be af- 
fected by the second spell. The second spell 
(which need not be known to or be castable by 
the caster of the spelltouch) is unleashed by 
contact between the item and the triggering 
creature. Any saving throws allowed by the 
stored spell are resolved normally. For example, 
a gem set into a throne could unleash a fireball 
spell when triggered by the touch of a guard. 
(“A living human male” or “female” can be 
specified, but not “a wizard” or “the king.”) 

During casting, the caster can designate a 
single type of being as immune to the spell. An 
immune being will not trigger the stored spell 
and, if in the unleashed spell’s area of effect, re- 
ceives a +4 bonus to any saving throw the un- 
leashed spell allows. An item can bear only one 
spelltouch effect or equivalent. 

The material components of this spell are a 
pinch of powdered gemstone (of 200 gp value 
per level of the stored spell) and a pinch of the 
ash left by any fire created or augmented by a 
spell, combined with a drop of water and 
touched to the item during the casting. The 
components of the stored spell are also re- 
quired. The item must be purified and magically 
prepared for the casting, a process that requires 
a full week per level of the stored spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for incantatrixes; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Option: The DM may require spelltouch 
effects to be renewed at least monthly or 
fade away. This and similar effects should 
not replace the standard magical item fab- 
rication procedures. 


> a a aan. < 


851 


~ >pelitrap r 


Spelltrap 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting this spell creates a visible silvery oval 
that hangs over the head of the caster. This oval 
can absorb spell attacks cast directly upon the 
wizard and discharge them randomly at a later 
time, within the duration of the spell. 

Any spell cast directly on the spellcaster is au- 
tomatically sucked into the spel/trap. This in- 
cludes spells that never miss (such as magic 
missiles) and those requiring the caster’s touch, 
but not area-effect spells (such as fireball). The 
wizard using the spelltrap does not know what 
spells have been absorbed, other than obvious 
clues (again such as magic missiles slicing 
toward him or an enemy wizard shouting power 
word—kill!). 


Spell-like abilities are absorbed by the spell- 
trap, if they can be rated against existing wizard 
or priest spells. If they cannot be rated against a 
wizard spell of a particular level, then the spell- 
like effect takes effect on the wizard using the 
spelltrap as if the spelltrap did not exist. If in 
doubt, such spells can be absorbed, but count as 
9th-level spells for purposes of overloading. 
Spells cast by the wizard on himself are not 
sucked up by the spel/trap. 

The spelltrap can absorb a number of spell 
levels equal to twice the caster’s experience level. 
A 17th-level wizard can have 34 spell levels ab- 
sorbed by his spe//trap, with a Ist-level spell 
counting as one spell level, a 3rd-level spell 
counting as three spell levels, etc. If the spel/trap 
is overloaded, it explodes immediately, inflicting 
6d4 points of damage upon everyone within 20 
feet and stunning the survivors for two rounds (a 
saving throw vs. spell does not negate the blast 
damage, but does negate the stun). 

As long as a spell is within the spe//trap, the 
wizard can fire off a random spell lodged within 
it by pointing at a target and summoning the 
magical energy. The caster cannot know which 
spells are within the spel/trap or, if multiple 


Wi 


“4 


~ Spendelarde’s Chaser r 


spells are currently trapped, which spell will be 
fired. 

When a spell is released from the trap, roll ran- 
domly among the spells currently trapped to de- 
termine which one is released. The spell then 
takes effect as if cast by its original caster, but 
against the target selected by the spelltrap's 
caster. If the spell is inapplicable or the target is 
beyond the range of the spell, the spell is wasted. 
The target must be within 10 yards per level of 
the caster in any event for the trapped spell to 
fire. Spells that require “touch” to be effective 
can be fired up to a range of 10 yards per level in 
this fashion. 

The spelltrap can be fired in this fashion once 
per round. If physically attacked with hand-held 
weapons, the spelltrap fires immediately against 
the attacker. Finally, the spel/trap fires if a dispel 
magic is cast upon it. These other firings can take 
place in addition to the one discharge per round 
permitted to the caster; if attacked from multiple 
directions, it will respond multiple times in the 
same round. The spe/ltrap itself is immune to 
hand-held and missile weapons. It will not re- 
spond if hit with missile weapons. 

The spelltrap winks out of existence without 
discharging remaining spell energies at the end 
of its duration. It ceases to exist if the wizard is 
feebleminded, slain, or rendered unconscious. 
The spelltrap remains with the caster who uses 
magic to change location or even move to an- 
other plane. 

This spell, it has been suggested, was created 
by a wizard who disliked other wizards, since the 
common tactic for battling it (once it is recog- 
nized) is to overload the spel/trap with beneficial 
spells. 

The material components are a diamond frag- 
ment worth at least 2,000 gp and a moonstone, 
both of which are lost in the casting. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in the tome, 
Unique Mageries. 


Spelltrap — Paramander 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The Paramander 5 spelltrap allows a second 
spell to be set as a trap, delaying its effects until 
triggered. When the caster casts a spelltrap on a 
small immobile object such as a book or a 
weapon, another spell can be cast into the object. 
The spelltrap will fade in 5 rounds if another 
spell is not placed in it. If the item is moved or 
probed in any way before a second spell is placed 
inside, the spel/trap vanishes. 

When the item is moved or probed (by detect 
magic, or similar effect), the second spell takes 
effect, just as if the spelltrap caster had cast it. A 
successful dispel magic spell is 75% likely to 
erase only the second spell, leaving the spelltrap 
empty (and fading) and ready to receive another 
spell; otherwise, dispel magic will eliminate the 
spelltrap, releasing the effects of the second spell 
and exploding the item on which it was placed, 
causing 2d6 points of damage to all within a 20- 
foot radius. 

Only the following spells can be placed in a 
spelltrap: light (on the same item as the spell- 
trap), message*, audible glamer, magic mouth, 
scare, fireball*, gust of wind*, lightning bolt*, 
confusion, fear, polymorph other*, conjure ele- 
mental, azure flame, guards and wards, slow mu- 
tation (dweomer placed on same item as the 
spelltrap). Spells marked with an asterisk are re- 
leased from the spel/trap in a random direction. 
Only the use of a gem of seeing can detect a 
spelltrap. 

Notes: Restricted to paramanders (a rare type 
of paladin-mage); common. 


Spendelarde’s Chaser 
(Necromancy) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell was created originally to facilitate 
mental recovery from brewery research expedi- 
tions (in other words, as a hangover cure). How- 
ever, it was discovered to have a beneficial side 
effect in regard to protection against injected, in- 
gested, and contact poisons. 

Cast upon an individual, it negates the adverse 
effect of drugs (including alcohol) on the system, 
restoring the individual to mental coherence and 


ťJ TTTS 


853 


~ Sphere of Eyes y 


relieving hangovers or other ill effects. Real 
damage (to body or to mind) is not healed by this 
spell—it only aids the body to purge the chemi- 
cals within. The chaser won’t affect insanity or 
magically-induced effects. 

If the individual was poisoned, the spell allows 
a second saving throw vs. poison, even if one was 
not allowed initially. 

The spell can be cast as a preventive measure, 
and if so, its protection lasts for one turn per level 
of the caster. If the individual is poisoned while 
under the effect of the chaser, the individual is 
permitted a +4 modifier to the saving throw vs. 
poison (or an unadjusted saving throw if one is 
not normally allowed). 

The material component of this spell is a drop 
of holy water. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in The 
Wizards’ Workbook. 


Sphere of Eyes 
(Divination, Illusion/Phantasm) 
Level: 4 
Range: 70 ft. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a caster to create a sphere of 
radiance in which thousands of glistening, glow- 
ing eyeballs float, darting and swarming in 
random directions. Once cast, the sphere of eyes 
is immobile, and its radiance is at all times equiv- 
alent to a silvery-blue faerie fire spell. The eyes 
are intangible, and do not react to their surround- 
ings. 

Any illusion or magical invisibility that comes 
into contact with a sphere of eyes is instantly and 
permanently negated. Beings who actually have 
changed their shapes by use of magic or a natural 
ability are seen with a clear, bright silvery-blue 
“ghost” image of their other form superimposed 
upon their current one. This spell also negates op- 
erating forget, misdirection, obscurement, nonde- 
tection, and undetectable alignment magics, and 
allows feebleminded creatures an immediate new 
saving throw to escape the condition. 

The material component of this spell is an eye- 
ball (from any source). 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


854 


Sphere of Ultimate Destruction 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 9 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


This awful spell brings into existence a short- 
lived sphere of annihilation (as described in the 
DMG). The sphere is a black ball of nothingness 
about 2 feet in diameter that instantly and ut- 
terly destroys any matter that comes into contact 
with it. The sphere appears anywhere in the 
spell’s range and moves up to 15 feet per round 
as the wizard directs. If the wizard attempts to 
bring the sphere into contact with a living crea- 
ture, the potential victim gains a saving throw 
vs. breath weapon to dodge aside, but a victim 
who is unaware of the spheres appearance or 
unable to move is destroyed without a saving 
throw. 

Once conjured, the sphere of ultimate de- 
struction may not move exactly as the caster 
wishes. The wizard has a 75% chance to control 
it, plus 1% per point of Intelligence over 12 and 
3% for each point over 15. In other words, a 
wizard with an Intelligence of 18 would gain a 
+12% bonus to his chance to control the sphere. 
If the wizard fails to control the sphere in any 
given round, it automatically moves directly 
toward him at its maximum speed of 15 feet per 
round. Unlike the magical item, another wizard 
cannot contest the caster’s control of a sphere of 
ultimate destruction unless the second wizard 
possesses a talisman of the sphere. 

Should a gate spell be cast upon the sphere, 
there is a 50% chance that the sphere is de- 
stroyed, a 35% chance that nothing happens, 
and a 15% chance that a gap is torn in the spa- 
tial fabric, catapulting everything in a 180-foot 
radius to another plane of existence. If the 
sphere is touched by a rod of cancellation, a 
tremendous explosion inflicts 3d4 x 10 points 
of damage to everything within 60 feet as the 
two forces negate each other. No other spell or 
magical item has any effect on a sphere of ulti- 
mate destruction. 

There is a 5% chance that any particular man- 
ifestation of this spell does not utterly destroy a 
victim but instead transports him to a random 


~ Spider Gout — Neogi r 


plane of existence. The conjuring wizard has no 
way of knowing whether he has destroyed his 
enemy or merely blasted him into some remote 
dimension. 

The material component of this spell is a dark 
crystal ball that can be comfortably held in two 
hands. 

Notes: Uncommon for dimensionists; other- 
wise, very rare (PO:SM). 


Sphere of Wonder 


(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: 10 ft./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 90-ft. diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell calls into being a stationary sphere 
of magical radiance equal in effect to a light 
spell, in which no spells or magical item dis- 
charges can take effect (or persist, if already in 
effect) except those of a type silently chosen by 
the caster during spellcasting. For example, the 
caster could choose to allow only spells involv- 
ing fire to function, or only electrical discharge 
magics (such as lightning bolt). The prohibition 
cannot be narrowed down to allowing only a 
particular spell (for example, to allow fireball 
but not flaming sphere is not possible), but there 
is no way for beings other than the sphere-caster 
to tell what spell type works except by trial and 
error. 

Spells of the wrong type cast into the sphere 
from outside are negated at the point where they 
touch the sphere. The magic has no effect on 
beings or items once they leave the sphere. A 
rod of cancellation brings the shpere down in- 
stantly. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Spider Climb 
(Alteration) 


Level: | 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A spider climb spell enables the recipient to 
climb and travel upon vertical surfaces as well 
as a giant spider, or even hang upside down 
from ceilings. Unwilling victims must be 
touched and are then allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to negate the effect. The affected creature 
must have bare hands and feet to climb in this 
manner, at a movement rate of 6 (3 if at all en- 
cumbered). 

During the spell, the recipient cannot handle 
objects that weigh less than a dagger (one 
pound), for such objects stick to his hands and 
feet. Thus, a wizard will find it virtually impos- 
sible to cast spells if under a spider climb spell. 
Sufficient force can pull the recipient free; the 
DM can assign a saving throw based on circum- 
stances, the strength of the force, and so on. For 
example, a creature with a Strength of 12 might 
pull the subject free if the subject fails a saving 
throw vs. paralyzation (a moderately difficult 
saving throw). The caster can end the spell 
effect with a word. 

The material components of this spell are a 
drop of bitumen and a live spider, both of which 
must be eaten by the spell recipient. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Spider Gout — Neogi 
(Conjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Instant 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell creates a magical glob of spider 
venom in the neogi’s mouth, which it can spit at 
any single target within range. The neogi can 
hold the venom for a number of rounds equal to 
half its level. If held longer, the neogi suffers the 
damage detailed below, with no saving throw. 


A E a a ais © 


855 


~ Spider Leap — Drow 


The venom can be spit up to 10 yards. The 
neogi must make a successful attack roll to 
strike the target (no range penalties apply). Fail- 
ure means the venom glob missed, causing it to 
dissolve harmlessly. Creatures struck must save 
vs. poison or suffer 2d4 points of damage plus | 
hit point per level of the caster (to a maximum 
of 2d4+10 points of damage at 10th level). A 
successful saving throw means only half 
damage is taken. 

The material component is the neogi’s own 
poisonous saliva. 

Notes: Restricted to neogi; common. 


Spider Leap — Drow 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This specialized variant of the dimension 
door spell allows the caster to transfer himself 
to the present location of a previously seen or 
touched arachnid of any sort (including spiders, 
scorpions, ticks, pedipalps, and so on). The 
spell is wasted and does nothing if no arachnid 
is within 30 feet per experience level of the 
caster. 

If the desired arachnid (on which the caster 
concentrates) is beyond this range, but another 
arachnid is within reach, the caster is taken to 
the other arachnid, even if unwilling (if several 
arachnids are within range, determine the one 
arrived at randomly). 

This special form of teleportation bypasses 
physical obstacles, but can’t pass through water 
or magical barriers. If the caster would arrive in 
a spot occupied by a solid object, the caster is 
simply shifted in a random direction to a nearby 
open space, but is confused for 1d2 rounds. A 
caster who arrives without a solid surface under 
his feet (for example, the spider is on a wall, 
and the caster arrives in midair), suffers falling 
damage unless further magic 1s employed. 

The spell does not confer any protection 
against, influence over, or friendship with the 
arachnid focus. The caster requires | round to 
recover from the use of this spell (unless con- 
fused as noted above). The caster can bring all 
worn or carried items, up to a weight limit of 


500 pounds of non-living matter, or 250 pounds 
of living matter. If the weight limit 1s exceeded, 
the spell flickers for | round, during which the 
caster must shed excess items to cause the spell 
to work at the end of the round. During this 
time, the caster remains at his initial location, 
vulnerable to attack. Failure to shed sufficient 
weight in time causes the spell to be wasted. 
Notes: Common for drow; otherwise, rare. 


Spider Shape — Drow 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 4d4 rds. + 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the caster to confer a spe- 
cialized arachnid form (such as any of the spi- 
ders found in the MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM 
Tome). An unwilling subject receives a saving 
throw vs. spell with a +2 bonus. If the saving 
throw is successful, the spell is broken, and the 
victim avoids its effects. 

Beings newly assuming spider form require 1 
to 2 rounds (determine randomly, by odd/even 
die roll) to become aware of their newly gained 
abilities, and to learn how to make the arachnid 
body respond. During this time, they are mo- 
tionless and vulnerable. 

The spell recipient commands all the normal 
abilities of the spider form. This extends (even 
if a real spider of the same sort doesn’t have 
these powers) to the ability to spider climb (as 
the Ist-level spell) and the power to move along 
or through natural or magical webs without 
being slowed down or becoming stuck. 

The being in spider shape can also leap if a 
real spider of the same form usually can, and 
bite for the same damage. Poison effects are not 
gained. Web-spinning abilities aren’t gained, 
but even if a real spider of the same form can’t 
spin webs, a being in spider shape can cast one 
web spell (as the 2nd-level wizard spell, but 
with no material component required). Unless 
the form chosen is too small, a being in spider 
shape can also carry burdens of up to 600 
pounds, including riders, without being torn off 
walls or ceilings by the weight. 

The change to spider shape neither heals ex- 
isting damage nor causes harm; any armor worn 


J rer FT ”~—~CS 


856 


x Spider Strand r 


is hurled away by the spell. The recipient is 
trapped in spider form until touched by the 
caster, or until the spell expires; the caster can 
resume his own form at will, ending the spell. A 
slain being automatically reverts to his normal 
form. 

No system shock rolls are required for trans- 
formation to or from spider shape, and beings in 
spider shape are highly resistant (+4 to all 
saving throws) to hostile polymorph spells and 
magical effects. 

Notes: Uncommon for drow; otherwise, very 


rare. 


Spider Strand 
(Evocation) 
Reversible 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


With this spell, the caster causes a single 
strand of strong spider web to shoot forth from 
his hand. The web becomes part of the caster for 
the duration of the spell or until he wishes it to 
detach itself from him. He need not hold onto 
the strand with the casting hand, leaving it free 
for casting other spells, but cannot hold any- 
thing with that hand. 

The strand itself is roughly half an inch in di- 
ameter and very strong and sticky. The length of 
the strand is one yard per level of the caster, and 
it holds up to 2,500 pounds without breaking. 
Any creature wishing to break the strand must 
roll half its bend bars chance. 

A strand is shot at an inanimate object, such 
as a wall or ceiling, automatically hits. The 
strand sticks to its target and can be torn loose 
only by putting more than 2,500 pounds of ten- 
sion on it or by a successful half bend bars roll. 

Only one creature can be entangled by this 
spell. If the strand is shot at a creature, the crea- 
ture receives a saving throw vs. spell to avoid it. 
If hit, the creature is wrapped by the excess 
length, and might be immobilized, impeded, or 
unaffected, depending on its size (see table). For 
instance, a bugbear standing 10 yards away, 
struck with a strand from a 15th-level wizard, is 
wrapped in five yards of the strand and immobi- 
lized. 


An immobilized creature cannot move, 
attack, or cast spells (however, a creature of 
gargantuan size cannot be immobilized). An im- 
peded creature moves at half rate and attacks 
only half as often, with a —2 penalty to the 
attack roll. Every yard must be broken, each re- 
quiring a bend bars roll at half the normal 
chances. 

The material component for this spell is the 
webbing gland from a spider that was at least as 
large as the caster’s hand. 

The reverse of this spell, weaken webs, 
allows the person touched to move freely 
through webs either naturally or magically cre- 
ated (even those made from a spider strand 
spell). The material component is a pair of tiny 
shears. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from the 
DARK SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Yards to Yards to 
Creature Size Immobilize Impede 
Tiny l l 
Smaller 2 ] 
Man-sized 3 2 
Large 5 3 
Huge 10 7 
Gargantuan — 30 


~ Spidercloak Armor — Drow r 


Spidercloak Armor — Drow 
(Conjuration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell surrounds the caster with a floating 
swirling, shadowy network of nonsticky webs 
(of irregular “scraps” of force) and magical 
shadows. This magical, partially-solid barrier 
helps to deflect both physical and magical at- 
tacks, improving the Armor Class of even a sta- 
tionary, pinioned, or attacked-from-behind 
caster by +3, plus | or 2 points more (odd or 
even roll; check each round, as it fluctuates). 

Spidercloak armor also gives a variable aid to 
saving throws, of either nothing (odd roll) or +1 
(even roll; check each round), and its benefits 
are cumulative with those of other protective 
spells or items. The armor also conceals the 
caster’s alignment aura, and any magical auras 
carried on his or her person, from magical 
scrutiny. 

The material component of this spell is a bit 
of spiderweb, or a living spider (crushed during 
casting). 

Notes: Common for drow; otherwise, rare. 
Optionally, may be uncommon for shadow 
mages. 


Spidereyes — Drow 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 spider 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a wizard can see 
through the eyes of a single normal or giant 
arachnid within 60 yards. A small, harmless 
living spider is usually employed, the caster 
using it as a spy to see things where the caster 
dare not go. The spell does not function on in- 
telligent spider-like creatures. 

The caster has no any control over the arach- 
nid selected, nor even direct mental contact with 


858 


it, merely a mystical linkage with its eyes. 

Most spiders have eight eyes—simple eyes 
whose vision is readily understandable to most 
intelligent races (they do not have compound 
eyes). The sight afforded by the spell has the ef- 
fectiveness—range and possible infravision—of 
the spider. 

The link itself has unlimited range as long as 
the spell duration lasts—depending, of course, 
upon how far the spider travels. The link cannot 
be maintained if either arachnid or caster move 
to another plane of existence, including the 
Astral or Ethereal Planes. 

Often, this spell is used to try to spy out a 
cavern, hall, or other guarded area before the 
caster or companions enter or attack 1t—but 
often the chosen spider refuses to cooperate by 
looking where the caster wants it to, unless con- 
trolled or influenced by additional spells. Cer- 
tain magical barriers might block the link 
between spellcaster and spider. 

Notes: Uncommon for drow; otherwise, a 
very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. Known to be in The Libram of Lathintel. 
(Updated version.) 


Spirit 
Aka spirit form. 
Spirit Armor 
(Necromancy) 
(Shadow) 
Level: 3 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the wizard to surround him- 
self with a portion of his own life essence, 
which takes the form of a shimmering aura. The 
spirit armor offers protection equivalent to 
splint mail (AC 4) and grants the wizard a +3 
bonus to saving throws vs. magical attacks. The 
spirit armor s effects are not cumulative with 
other types of armor or magical protection, but 
Dexterity bonuses apply. 

The spirit armor is effective against magical 
and nonmagical weapons and attacks. It does 
not hinder movement or add weight or encum- 
brance. It does not interfere with spellcasting. 

When the spell ends, the aura dissipates and 


Spirit Self 


the caster must make a successful saving throw 
vs. spell or temporarily loses a bit of his life 
essence, suffering 2d3 points of damage. No 
damage is sustained if the save is successful. 
The lost hit points can be regained only through 
magical healing. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; uncom- 
mon. 


Spirit Form — Witch 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 4 turns + 1d8 turns 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell confers upon the creature the abil- 
ity to shift its body into a noncorporeal spirit 
form. In this form, the creature is of translucent 
and ghostly appearance, and can pass easily 
through walls, doors, or even solid ground at its 
normal movement rate. 

The creature can walk right through hillsides 
or castle walls; however, it is deaf and blind 
while inside solid objects, so any lengthy jour- 
neys through solid matter are a matter of hit- 
and-miss. While the creature does not gain the 
power of flight, it can scale or descend any cliff 
at its normal movement rate, or will itself to 
ascend or descend up to 10 feet per round inside 
solid matter. 

In spirit form, the creature ignores normal 
weapon or missile attacks, including physical 
hazards such as falling blocks of stone or pit 
traps. Magical weapons inflict half damage on 
the noncorporeal creature, and offensive spells 
are 30% effective (half this if a saving throw is 
made). The creature becomes vulnerable to 
spells that affect enchanted and noncorporeal 
beings. The noncorporeal creature inflicts no 
damage on corporeal creatures—unless armed 
with a magical weapon, in which cast it inflicts 
half normal damage with no Strength bonus. A 
spell-using creature can cast only Ist- and 
2nd-level spells against corporeal foes. 

The spirit form allows the creature to engage 
other noncorporeal creatures as if both were 
completely real and tangible to each other, so is 
useful in battling shadows, spectres, wraiths, 
ghosts, or phasing monsters. 

The creature can shift back and forth from 


corporeal to noncorporeal state for the entire 
spell duration, but it takes one full round to ac- 
complish each transition. 

The material component is a pinch of dirt 
from a ghost’s grave. 

Notes: Restricted to witches; uncommon. 


Spirit of Servitude 
A MYSTARA setting spell, aka spirit servant. 


E 


Spirit Self 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 3d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 240-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to send his spirit 
outside his body while maintaining some sem- 
blance of life in the physical body. When the 
spell is cast, the wu jen’s spirit invisibly sepa- 
rates itself from the body and is free to move 
around. The body does not fall into a trance, but 
assumes a type of half-awake state. The wu jen 
(in spirit form) can instruct the body to take 
simple actions such as walk, converse, or eat 
while he does other things in spirit form. The 
body behaves as if in a daze. The spirit form of 
the wu jen retains the ability to cast spells, al- 
though doing so instantly forces the return of 
the spirit form to the body. The spirit form is 
considered to be a spirit for the purposes of pro- 
tection from spirits and other spells. 

Damage taken by the body or the spirit is 
subtracted from the hit points of the wu jen. If 
the body is destroyed, the wu jen is slain. If the 
body is moved beyond the range of the spell, the 
wu jen is unable to return to it. A spirit form that 
does not return to the body before the end of the 
spell’s duration is trapped outside the body. The 
wu jen’s body falls into a catatonic state while 
the spirit must wander aimlessly. With the expi- 
ration of the spell, the character loses the ability 
to cast spells while in spirit form. The spirit can 
be returned to the body through the means of a 
restore spirit spell. 

The material component for this spell is a 
small mandala. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


, a nn, © 


859 


Spirit Servant 


Spirit Servant 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: | 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Spirit servant works like the Ist-level spell 
unseen servant in all respects except one—the 
force it creates looks like a brightly glowing 
mass of energy. This energy changes shape as 
need be: It might extend tendrils to open doors 
or lift objects, for instance. While casting, the 
wizard can dictate the servant’s color and, to 
some extent, can even make it to take on a cer- 
tain general shape or outline: humanoid, an- 
gelic, frightening, etc. 

The material components are a brightly col- 
ored piece of yarn and a bit of wood. 

Notes: Common in the MYSTARA setting; oth- 
erwise, very rare. 


N 
Š 
? 


Spiritwrack 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 ft. + 10 ft./level 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


A spiritwrack spell is a strong protection and 
punishment spell against the powerful creatures 
of the nether planes, but to employ the magic 
the spellcaster must know the name of the crea- 
ture on whom it is to be cast. Prior to actually 
uttering this spell, the wizard must prepare an 
illuminated sheet of vellum, carefully inscribing 
the spell and the creature’ name. He must use 
special inks made from powdered rubies and the 
ichor of a slain tanar’ri, then ornament the 
vellum with gold leaf. This preparation requires 
8 to 32 (1d4x8) hours and costs 6,000 gp for all 
supplies. If the outer-planar creature is present, 
the caster can then begin the actual incantation. 

During each round of reading, the target has a 
25% cumulative chance to concede to the 
caster’s will without any other inducements. 

When the caster begins reading the docu- 
ment, the target creature is rendered immobile 
unless it makes its magic resistance roll. Even if 
this succeeds, the monster is discomfited and 
90% likely to retreat to its own plane if it can. 
Regardless of the result, the target is powerless 
to attack the wizard while he reads the spell. 

Reading the first part continues for 1 round, 
with the target’s discomfiture increasing. 

During the second round, the creature loses 1 
hit point per Hit Die it possesses (for example, a 
9-Hit Die tanar’ri loses 9 hit points). At the end 
of this round, the target is in extreme pain. 

The third and final round reduces the crea- 
ture’s remaining hit points by 50%, causes ex- 
cruciating pain, and exiles the creature to its 
home plane-—there to remain imprisoned and in 
torment for the number of years equal to the 
level of the wizard. 

Creatures subjected to the complete spell 
become the sworn foes of these wizards, a fact 
few spellcasters care to deal with. Most wizards 
are far more likely to create the document and 
use it as a threat to force a creature into submis- 
sion rather than actually complete the spell 
itself. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. 


~ Sprites r 


Spoil Holy Water 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 40-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


This baneful dweomer affects holy water in 
the area of effect. All holy water containers in 
the area of effect are checked, the holy water in 
a container is spoiled (rendered harmless to evil 
creatures and unusable as a material compo- 
nent) on a roll of 10 or less on 1d20. 

A holy water font or basin and its contents 
are unaffected unless the spell is focused only 
on the font or basin alone and delivered by 
touch. It gives its water +1 to +5 bonus to the 
roll depending on its material (copper, silver, 
electrum, gold, or platinum). If the holy water is 
spoiled, the font is rendered useless until it can 
be purified and reconsecrated. Unholy water is 
not affected by this spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers and 
undead wizards; otherwise, very rare. (Updated 
from POLYHEDRON Newzine.) 


Spook 
(Iusion/Phantasm) 
(Mentalism, Shadow) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A spook spell enables the wizard to play upon 
natural fears to cause the target creature to per- 
ceive the spellcaster as someone or something 
` inimical. Without actually knowing what this is, 
the wizard merely advances threateningly upon 
the creature. If the creature does not make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell, it turns and 
flees at maximum speed as far from the wizard 
as possible, though items carried are not 
dropped. The creature has a saving throw 
penalty of —1 for every two experience levels of 
the caster, to a maximum of —6 at 12th level. 
Note that a natural (unmodified) roll of 20 auto- 


matically succeeds, regardless of saving throw 
penalties. 

Although the caster does not actually pursue 
the fleeing creature, a phantasm from its own 
mind does. Each round after the initial casting, 
the creature receives another saving throw, 
without penalty, until it successfully saves and 
the spell is broken. In any event, the spell func- 
tions only against creatures with Intelligences 
of 2 or more, and undead are not affected at all. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Spout of Scalding Wrath 
A MYSTARA setting spell, aka scalding spout. 


Sprites 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Level: 7 
Range: 50 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 6 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell was created as a result of an an- 
cient pact between the elves and the sprites. 
When this spell is cast, 2d10 sprites immedi- 
ately appear, anywhere within range, and fight 
for the caster for the duration of the spell, after 
which time they vanish. Slain sprites vanish as 
well, in the same manner as creatures brought 
by a monster summoning spell. 

Exactly where the sprites come from, no one 
knows. The sprites of Evermeet say that the 
summoned sprites do not come from their 
number, nor is there any evidence that the 
sprites are summoned or teleported from any- 
where on Toril. Most believe that the sprites are 
actually the spirits of slain sprite warriors who 
died in service to the elves in ages past. 

The material components of this spell are a 
piece of sprite clothing and a small silver bell. 

Notes: Restricted to elves. Most common 
among the elves of Evermeet in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; otherwise, very rare. 


> i ae 


861 


~~ Most Widely Known Spells ge 


Most Widely Known Spells 


Common, Uncommon, and Rare Spells Found in this Volume 


While more complete lists are given in the final volume of this series, this list can be used as a 
quick guide to the most common spells in this volume, suitable for nonspecialized PCs. Humanoid, 
monster, chronomancer, and Maztican spells are not listed here. Common spells are in bold. Spells 
in italic are very rare or otherwise restricted; see individual spell entries for details. Drow, necro- 


mancer, ninja, and Athasian specialty lists are given separately. 


Level 1 

moonglow 

Mord.’s protection from avians 
mount 

Murdock’s feathery flyer 
normal aura 

Nystul’s dancing werelight 
Nystul’s flash 

Nystul’s magic aura 
Odeen’s magic tailor 
oilskin 

Otiluke’s bubbling buoyancy 
Otiluke’s smoky sphere 
Otto’s chime of release 
phantasmal force 
phantom armor 
precipitation 

protection from evil 
protection from vermin 
protective amulet 

push 

Rary’s empathic perception 
ray of fatigue 

read magic 

reveal magic 

run 

scatterspray 

shield 

shocking grasp 

sleep 

slingstar 

Snilloc’s snowball 

soothe the beast 

sorcerous scribe 

spider climb 

spirit servant 

spook 


Level 2 

moon rune 

Mord.’s encompassing vision 
MOUSE 

murmuring Masses 

mystic writing 

net 


Nimodes’ major delousing 

Nimodes’ unseen butler 

Nystul’s blackmote 

Nystul’s blazing beam 

Nystul’s crystal dagger 

Odeen’s magic cloud 

Odeen’s sounding stick 

Otiluke’s boiling oil bath 

Otto’s soothing vibrations 

Otto’s tones of forgetfulness 

past life 

portrait 

preserve 

preserve food 

projected magnification 

protection from birds 

protection from cantrips 

protection from mechanical 
traps 

protection from paralysis 

protection from plants 

protection from poison 

pyrotechnics 

Quimby’s enchanting gourmet 

rainfire 

Rary’s aptitude appropriater 

ray of enfeeblement 

ray of Ondovir 

resist turning 

ride the wind 

rope trick 

Ruornil’s tracks 

safe fall 

scare 

seal mouth 

see through other eyes 

sense shifting 

shadow burst 

shark bolt 

shatter 

signature sigil 

skeletal hands 

skyhook 

slumberward 

smokescreen 

Snilloc’s snowball swarm 


spark shower 
spectral hand 
speed 


Level 3 

monster summoning I 

moonglow symbol 

Mord.’s defense against 
lycanthropes 

Mord.’s defense against 
nonmagical reptiles and 
amphibians 

Mord.’s protection from insects 
and arachnids 

mummy touch 

nautical ironwood 

Nchaser s glowing globe 

nightscar 

nondetection 

numbness 

Nystul’s crystal dirk 

Nystul’s expeditious fire 
extinguisher 

Nystul’s golden revelation 

Nystul’s radiant baton 

Odeen’s secret word 

one-way lock 

Otiluke’s acid cloud 

Otiluke’s force umbrella 

Otto’s crystal rhythms 

Otto’s sure-footed shuffle 

paralyzation 

paralyzing touch 

phantom steed 

preserve wood 

Prismal’s pictograph 

proof from teleportation 

prot. from amorphs 

prot. from cold 

prot. from evil, 10' rad. 

protection from fire 

protection from illusions 

prot. from magical blunt 
weapons 

prot. from magical edged 


Se 


862 


~ Most Widely Known Spells r 


weapons 

prot. from magical missiles 

prot. from magical traps 

prot. from normal blunt 
weapons 

prot. from normal edged 
weapons 

prot. from normal missiles 

psychic drain 

Random’s commodious pocket 

remove smell 

revenance 

scalding spout 

searing serpent 

secret page 

sepia snake sigil 

Serrel’s minor enchantment 

shadow blink 

shadow bolt 

shadow cloak 

skull watch 

skulltrap 

skywrite 

slow 

slumber 

solvent of corrosion 

spectral force 

spell sense 

spirit armor 


Level 4 

monster summoning II 
Mord.’s celerity 

Mord.’s electric arc 
Mord.’s faithful phantom 
shield-maidens 
Mord.’s force missiles 
Mord.’s protection from slime 
Murlynd s ogre 

nautical ball lightning 
Nystul’s blacklight burst 
Nystul’s grue conjuration 
Nystul’s lightburst 
Odeen’s impenetrable lock 
Othnal’s spectral dagger 
Otiluke’s dispelling screen 
Otiluke’s resilient sphere 
Otiluke’s steaming sphere 
Otto’s drums of despair 
Otto’s silver tongue 

Otto’s tin soldiers 

Otto’s tonal attack 

Otto’s warding tones 
phantasmal killer 

phase trap 

plant growth 

polymorph other 


polymorph self 
Prismal’s handy mirror 
programmed glamer 
prot. from electricity 


prot. from elementals, 10' rad. 


prot. from gas, 5' rad. 

prot. from lycanthropes, 
10' rad. 

prot. from plants, 10' rad. 


prot. from possession, 10' rad. 


prot. from traps, 5' rad. 
prot. from undead, 5' rad. 
psionic tracer 

psychic protection 
rainbow pattern 
Ramael’s cyclical light 
Rary’s memory alteration 
Rary’s mind scan 

Rary’s mnemonic enhancer 
Rary’s spell enhancer 
Rastor’s mystical spy 

ray of oblivion 

recharge 

remove curse 

repulse metal 

sargasso 

scapegoat 

shadow monsters 
shadow skeleton 
shadowshield 


Shayn’s infallible identification 


ship invisibility 
shout 

sinuous horrors 
sleepwalking 

solid fog 

special effects 
spectral wings 
spelltouch 
Spendelarde’s chaser 
sphere of eyes 


Level 5 

monster summoning III 

Mord.’s faithful hound 

Mord.’s faithful phantom 
defenders 

Mord.’ involuntary wizardry 

Mord.’s private sanctum 

Morgannaver 5 sting 

Morphail’s unholy blessing 

motion 

Muirara'’s map 

Nemicron 5 transference 

Nulathoe s ninemen 

Nystul’s enveloping darkness 

Nystul’s radiant arch 


oathbinding 

open the living 

Otiluke’s electrical screen 
Otiluke’s polar screen 
Otiluke’s radiant screen 
Otto’s gong of isolation 
ozone cloud 

passwall 

phantom blade 

physical invisibility 

pierce magic resistance 
pilfer dweomer 

Presper’s moonbow 
proofing versus combustion 
prot. from acid 

prot. from cold, 15' rad. 
prot. from fiends, 10' rad. 
prot. from fire, 15' rad. 
prot. from illusions, 10' rad. 
prot. from notice 

prot. from petrification, 10' rad. 
prying eyes 

Rary’s mind shield 

Rary’s replay 

Rary’s superior spell enhancer 
Rary’s telepathic bond 

read object 

reflectorum arcana 
revelation of auras 

rip 

rusting grasp 

Sacremon’s acid wit 
safeguarding 

secure 

seeming 

sending 

Serrel’s major enchantment 
shadow door 

shadow hand 

shadow magic 

shadow play 

Shandaril’s tracer 

shock shield 

shroud of flame 

silent alarm 

sleepless curse 

slow mutation 

Snilloc’s major missile 
spell immunity 

spell shield 


ZEEE EN 


863 


~~ Most Widely Known Spells 


Level 6 

monster summoning IV 

Mord.’s faithful phantom 
guardian 

Mord.’s lucubration 

move earth 

multi-lock 

Murlynd 5 void 

Obold’s brightness 

Otiluke’s diamond screen 

Otiluke’s excruciating screen 

Otiluke’s freezing sphere 

Otiluke’s orb of containment 

part water 

permanent illusion 

petrifying gaze 

power word, silence 

prepare enchantment 

prismatic eye 

programmed illusion 

project image 

prot. from electricity, 10’ rad. 

psychic reversal 

Rary’s protection from scrying 

Rary’s urgent utterance 

reconstruction 

reincarnation 

repulsion 

revelation 

seek teleporter 

seizure 

Serrel’s confining sphere 

shades 

shadow gauntlet 

shadow speak 

spiritwrack 


Level 7 

monster summoning V 
Mord.’s magnificent mansion 
Mord.’s penultimate cogitation 
Mord.’s sword 

negative plane protection 
neutralize gas 

Ongeldyn’s fist 

Otiluke’s death screen 
Otiluke’s fire and ice 
Otiluke’s siege sphere 
persistence 

phase door 

planar door 

power word, stun 

Prismal’s reversal 

prismatic spray 

prot. from hunger and thirst 
Rary’s plane truth 

repel undead 


> i a an, 


resist magic 
reverse gravity 
rodbane 

ruby ray of reversal 
sequester 
seven-eyes 
shadow walk 
shadowcat 
simulacrum 
spectral guard 
spell turning 
spelltrap 


Level 8 

monster summoning VI 
Otiluke’s telekinetic sphere 
Otto’s irresistible dance 
permanency 

polymorph any object 
power word, blind 
Presper’s double wizardry 
Prismal’s wormhole 
prismatic wall 

reverse teleport 

screen 

Serten’s spell immunity 
shooting stars 

sink 

spellcaster 

spelldoor 


Level 9 

monster summoning VII 

Mord.’s disjunction 

Mycontil s last resort 

Mylsibis s arcane contention 

Phezult’s sleep of ages 

pierce any shield 

power word, banishment 

power word, kill 

Prismal’s revenge 

prismatic sphere 

programmed amnesia 

Sathrath’s ingenious 
recollection 

shape change 

skycastle 

spell invulnerability 

spel] ward 

spell-lash 

spellstorm 

spellstrike 

sphere of wonder 


864 


SPECIAL LISTS 


Drow 

spidereyes (1) 

spider leap (4) 

spider shape (4) 
passweb (5) 
spidercloak armor (5) 


Necromancer 
preserve dead (1) 
spectral ears (1) 
spectral voice (1) 
spoil holy water (1) 
sinister cantrip (2) 
speak with dead (2) 
spectral eyes (2) 
spectral hand (2) 
pain touch (3) 
paralyzing touch (3) 
ray of paralysis (3) 
snapping teeth (3) 
spirit armor (3) 
poison (4) 
putrefaction (4) 
shadow form (8) 


Ninja 

scarf (3) 
shadow-form (5) 
sense treason (6) 


Red Wizard 
Nybor 5 gentle reminder (1) 
power word, sleep (2) 
protection from poison (2) 
Nybor’ mild admonishment (3) 
negate magical weapon (4) 
Nybor 5 joyful voyage (7) 
Nybor 5 stern reproof (7) 
Simbul 5 synostodweomer (7) 
Nybor 5 wrathfid castigation (8) 


Athasian 

petrify wood (1) 

spawn heritage (2) 
reverse fossilization (3) 
ranike cloud (3) 
psionic damper (4) 
raze (4) 

spider strand (4) 
ejuvenate (5) 
semipermanency (7) 


ISBN 0-7869-0791-6 


| wine 
HH) | 
11) 

WU N 


9"°780786"907915 


Sug. Retai 
U.S. $24.95 


