Encyclopedia Magica™ 


Accessory 


Credits 
Design: It is impossible to list all of the creators of the items cataloged in these volumes, but 
credit goes to everyone who has created a magic item in a module, boxed set, accessory, 
hardbound, or magazine article published in the last 20 years. 
Compilation and Development: slade 
Development and Editing: Doug Stewart 
Project Coordination: Steve Winter 
Interior Black and White Art: Arnie Swekel 
Interior Color Art: Clyde Caldwell, Jeff Easley, Roger Raupp, Robh Ruppel 
Graphic Coordination: Stephen A. Danicle 
Graphic Design: Dee Barnett 
Prepress Coordination: Dave Conant 
Typesetting: Nancy J. Kerkstra 
Production: Paul Hanchette 


Acknowledgments: L. Richard Baker III, Anne Brown, Bruce Heard, Colin McComb, 
Ed Greenwood, Roger E. Moore, slade, Steven E. Schend, Doug Stewart, Georgia S. Stewart, 
William Moots, and Skip Williams who supplied new and unique magical items. And, of course, 
James M. Ward, for laughing when he heard slade had this project. 


Volume Four 


Theories on Converging Transitions (Spellbook) to Zweiback of Zymurgy 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


SiEciaeneeeg a E a Ge Se VAD 94S OURS aby peace T Mette ee GNA 1251 
j Pe ee etre crore ert Merrie rc ree Tee eee T EITT 1417 
LR APINE ers AE EE E TE EI E EE EE AA Ia Seen ERT 1465 
M iaiia a8 Saha A EEA TE IG OA Ee EA eae EA N a 1469 
WEEE EEE DEDE aaie ETAETA ETTE EA E ER Ce NETSE ee E EE oe 1473 
PO D A REIRE E A RIDE NEON RSA E E E ETA TINE A LASAT 1563 
Last Word: Bibliogranhy. ciori rzs ariin cae EE A A N wee a oe weiss Sa 1566 
a P ES TA N E A r T C Tole erm nS LE SE 1567 
n ra sis TEATE 1597 


TSR, Inc, TSR Lid 
201 Sheridan Springs Road 120 Church End 
Lake Geneva Cherry Hinton 
WI, $3147 Cambridge, CBI 3LB 
USA United Kingdom 


AD&D, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AL-QADIM, BATTLESYSTEM, BLACKMOOR, CARDMASTER, D&D, DARK SUN, DRAGON, 
DRAGON'S CROWN, DRAGONLANCE, DRAGON MOUNTAIN, DRAGON QUEST, DUNGEON, DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, DUNGEON MASTER, 
FIEND FOLIO, FORGOTTEN REALMS, GAMMA WORLD, GREYHAWK, HOLLOW WORLD, MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, MYSTARA, 
POLYHEDRON, RAVENLOFT, RPGA, the RPGA Logo, SPELLJAMMER, and WORLD OF GREYHAWK are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Ine. 
ALWAYS AN ADVENTURE! , CREATURE CRUCIBLE, DEITIES & DEMIGODS, ENCYCLOPEDIA MAGICA, LIVING CITY, MENZOBERRANZAN, 
MONSTROUS MANUAL, PLANESCAPE, RAVENS BLUFF, ROLE PLAYING GAME ASSOCIATION, WILDSPACE, and the TSR Logo are trademarks 
owned by TSR, Ine. 


AlI TSR characters, character names, spell names, magical item names, unique place locations, and the distinct likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by TSR, 
Inc, LANKHMAR is a trademark owned by and used under license from Fritz Leiber. 


Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English language products of TSR, Inc. Distributed to the toy 
and hobby trade by regional distributors. Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Lid. 


This work is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or art work presented 
herein is prohibited by law without the express written permission of TSR, Ine. 


©1995 TSR, Inc, All Rights Reserved. Printed in the LLS.A 
First Printing, November 1995 
2161XXX1501 


0 "ys 
G 


Ce a 
+ ~ Vr EE ce Ee 
a ve 
ete TER « 
"cc < 


Spelibook 


Theories on Converging Transi- 
tions 


XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
DRAGON” Magazine 82 

Lhegrand’s spellbook has dimension door, pass- 

wall, and an archaic version of the gate spell 

penned in it. 


Theory of the Invisible Forces 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Penned by Tenser, this spellbook contains push, 
unseen servant, strength, and Tenser 5 floating disc. 


Theory of Occult Visual Shock 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 

Ye’Cind penned fear, minor creation, phantasmal 
killer, and major creation into this small spell- 
book. 3 
Theories on Perception 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 

j DRAGON Magazine 82 
The wizard Kuroth penned this manuscript. The 
spellbook contains detect evil, clairaudience, true 
sight, and deafness. 


of Thorns 

GP Value: 16,000 
The Magister 
The Spellbook of Thorns is two plain oak boards, 
2 hand widths wide by 3 tall, bound with a thorn- 
root vine to four parchment sheets, on which are 
set down four druid spells, one to a page. 

This plain tome was given to the reclusive 
Aubaerus “the Ravenmaster,” a druid of the Dale- 
lands, by the Battledale Seven, a now-vanished 
circle of druids. They in turn had it from an ear- 
lier circle of druids, the Ring of Wyvernwater. Its 
maker is unknown, but said by some to be the 
Hierophant Druid Khamlautas Iriphar of Cormyr. 

The book’s spells are call lightning, greenwood 
(a rarely seen druid spell, detailed hereafter), con- 
trol vapor (another rarely seen druid spell, 
described below) and wall of thorns. 


XP Value: 1,600 


Greenwood 

(Alteration) 

Level: 3 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: 10 feet per level 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 turn per level 
Saving Throw: None 


1251 


Spellbook of Thorns 


Area of Effect: 9 cubic feet, plus 1 cubic 
foot per level 
Definition: By means of this spell, a 
druid can temporarily make dead and 
withered trees appear living, green, and healthy. 
Dead or bare trees, shrubs, and vines can be made 
to cloak themselves in leaves (enough to afford 
concealment, but not enough to use for an entan- 
gle spell). Dry firewood can be made damp 
enough that it won't light—or, if already alight, 
the flames simply die down to a thick, choking 
smoke (in a cloud equal in effects to that pro- 
duced by the druid pyrotechnics spell). Dry, sea- 
soned wood (such as a ship’s mast) can be made 
to bend and snap under a strain like green wood; 
rotten wood (such as an old bridge or ruin) will 
usually collapse or become unsafe to carry any 
future load. 

Damage to plants from such a condition is per- 
manent, but the wood otherwise reverts to its for- 
mer state after the expiration of the spell. 


Control Vapor 
(Alteration/Conjuration/Summoning) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 40 feet 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: 10 feet per level, hemispherical 
Definition: By means of this spell, a druid is able 
to alter the movement rate and direction of nat- 
ural or magical smokes and vapors, including 
incendiary clouds, smoke ghosts, breath weap- 
ons, and creatures in gaseous form. Within the 
area of effect, wind effects are negated even if of 
magical origin, and a druid is able to hold the 
vapor stationary or move it up to 1 foot per level 
per round in any desired direction. If the vapor 
passes out of the stationary area of effect of the 
spell, control is lost. 

Unlike the 5th-level wizard spell hold vapor, 
control vapor affords no saving throw to creatures 
in gaseous form. Vapors cannot alter their form or 
split it unless the druid wills it, although creatures 
normally able to alter their gaseous form into 
another form can do so despite the druid’s wishes 
(the process takes twice as long as it ordinarily 
does). Clouds of insects and similar insubstantial or 
amorphous but nongaseous creatures or groups of 
creatures are not affected by this spell. 


Phezult’s Sleep of Ages 
(Alteration/Reversible) 
Level: 9 

Components: V, S, M 


Range: 10 feet per level 
5132 


Spellbook of Time 


pe 


Casting Time: 3 rounds 
Duration: Permanent 
Saving Throw: Negates 
Area of Effect: All living creatures in range 
Definition: By means of this spell, a stasis field is 
created about the spell focus, radiating outward in 
an expanding sphere through solid rock and other 
physical or magical barriers (only an antimagic 
shell, prismatic sphere, or a closed cube or spheri- 
cally shaped wall of force will stop its effects), 20 
feet per round, until it reaches a maximum spheri- 
cal volume of 10-foot-radius per level of the caster. 
All living creatures within this field except the 
caster and any beings protected as noted above 
must save vs. spell or be placed in suspended ani- 
mation, whether they wish to be or not. Creatures 
of levels or Hit Dice equal to, greater than, or up to 
3 levels or HD less than the spellcaster save “at 
par”; creatures of 4 to 7 HD or levels less than the 
caster save at —1, and creatures of even lesser lev- 
els save at an additional —1 penalty per level less 
than 7 below the caster’s. The body functions of 
affected creatures’ virtually cease, but they do not 
die as a direct result of this state nor will they grow 
older as the years pass. If a creature in stasis is 
slain by another means—physical attack, crushing, 
burial, or drowning due to physical changes 
around the body—stasis ends instantly and the 
body decays normally, for the affected victim only. 
The caster requires his or her own blood (at least 
nine drops) smeared into an unbroken ring on any 
stable surface (usually stone) of a radius not more 
than the overall length of the caster’s hand (wrist to 
fingertips), into which are placed at least six 500 
gp value gems, of any sort. This is the “spell 
focus” referred to above. When the spellcasting is 
complete, four of these gems vanish, consumed in 
the act of releasing the spell’s power. The rest fuel 
the stasis field, and dwindle slowly as the time 
passes (roughly one year of stasis being yielded 
per 10 gp of gem value). Removal of any gemstone 
from the circle, except its consumption by the 
field, or the breaking of the ring itself, instantly 
ends the stasis effect, as will using up all of the 
gems, but any number of gems that will fit can be 
added to the inside of the ring at any time to 
“refuel” the spell, extending its period of efficacy. 
The stasis can be lifted from individual crea- 
tures without harm and without releasing other 
creatures under the same stasis by casting temporal 
reinstatement (see temporal stasis in the PHB) or 
the reverse of this spell, Phezult’s awakening 
(which requires neither gems nor blood in its cast- 
ing, but merely seven drops of pure or holy water) 
upon the spell focus rather than upon individual 
creatures. The stasis field shrinks gradually to 
nothingness at the same rate at which it originally 
expanded, freeing any creatures formerly within it 


instantly, and without any lingering effects as it 
does so. No further gemstone material is lost. 

Creatures entering the field after it has reached 
its full extent, even decades or centuries after the 
spell was cast, must save vs. spell to avoid falling 
into stasis, The penalties for levels and Hit Dice 
described above apply, but so does a +3 bonus to 
the save for any creature arriving in the field after 
it has stabilized at full extent. Such a save must be 
made each time a creature enters the stasis field, 
even if it has entered and been unaffected before; 
but each creature needs save only once per expo- 
sure to a particular s/eep of ages stasis field. Crea- 
tures who are physically removed from such a field 
without being magically roused wake up by them- 
selves 2d4 rounds after removal with no ill effects; 
the casting of a dispel magic will awaken such 
beings instantly if cast upon them when they are 
outside a field, but physical means will not hurry 
the process. A creature taken out of a stasis field 
and then taken back in before awakening returns to 
stasis without becoming conscious. Creatures in 
stasis who are mentally contacted by magic or 
psionics while within the field do not respond, and 
the being contacting them is placed in stasis (tem- 
porary, awakening after 2d4 rounds as described 
above) each time such contact is attempted. 


of Time 
XP Value: 4,400 GP Value: 44,000 
Lost Tomb of Martek 
This book, bound between platinum plates, contains 
the following spells: haste, slow, dimension door, 
distance distortion, passwall, teleport, disintegrate, 
limited wish, permanency, temporal stasis, and time 
stop. This work may be handled by any player. 


Tomorast’s 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 100,000 
Mordenkainen’s Fantastic Adventure 

This spellbook is scribed with the following 
spells: affect normal fires, jump, magic missile, 
protection from good, darkness 15' radius, invisi- 
bility, levitate, web, wizard lock, dispel magic, 
flame arrow, lightning bolt, phantasmal force, 
suggestion, confusion, dimension door, poly- 
morph other, wall of ice, cone of cold, feeble- 
mind, magic jar, teleport, repulsion, spiritwrack, 
and monster summoning V. 


Trance of the Intellect 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Aspirin, a wizard believed to have appeared just 
outside the capital of Greyhawk during the recent 
wars that ravaged the lands—from an awry cast- 
ing of alter reality—was carrying this book when 


he was incarcerated. To this day, the officials of 
$135 


Cee 


l 


252 


O a N O E EE E ERL 


Spellbook, Tymessul’s Enchiridion of Travel 


~ Spe r 


Greyhawk believe he is a spy sent from Iuz to 
infiltrate the highest ranks of the country to 
assassinate the leaders (using wish and limited 
wish spells) as dictated by an extraplanar contact 
(using the book’s contact other plane spell). The 
brigand was then to use feign death to deceive the 
officials that he was killed in action, so he could 
easily escape without provocation. Aspirin, to this 
day, denies any such aspirations. 


Transcendental Impenetrabilities 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
This spellbook is one of Leomund’s most famous 
works. It includes Leomund’s tiny hut, minor 
globe of invulnerability, globe of invulnerability, 

prismatic sphere. 


Tymessul’s Enchiridion of Travel 
XP Value: 7,200 GP Value: 72,000 
DRAGON Magazine 166 

This volume actually consists of five waxed 
papyrus scrolls, each tied shut with a ribbon of 
red silk. Each ribbon has a small black symbol 
woven into it, in the form of Tymessul’s rune. 
Each scroll is quite long, nearly 10 feet, and each 
bears, at the top, in silvery ink, the name of the 
work (the Enchiridion of Travel) and the number 
of the scroll (1 through 5). The five scrolls are 
held in a light-green box of oiled wood, with a 
simple yet devious lock on the front. The box is 
unremarkable except for the fact that it has sur- 
vived for nearly 350 years without any apparent 
ill effects from age. The box has a jade rune set in 
the top—Tymessul’s symbol when he was alive. 

The rune of Tymessul “the Wanderer” on the 
box and each of the ribbons makes the origin of the 
work obvious to scholars of Shalomnese history. 
The Enchiridion 5 origins are further substantiated 
in this respect by the fact that the work is written in 
the delicate spidery glyphs of a tongue used on the 
upper Outer Planes, for the Wanderer was the only 
resident of Tikkun Shalom to know this language 
at that time. The Wanderer did acknowledge a sec- 
ondary source: Acheulea, an archmage from the 
Paraelemental Plane of Magma, who was a long- 
time associate of Tymessul and often accompanied 
him on his voyages to the Outer Planes. 

Previous to his disappearance, Tymessul was 
renowned for his prolonged trips to the Outer 
Planes, for his founding of the Alliance of Green 
Mages, and for the spells he had researched and 
perfected (some of which are written in the 
Enchiridion). Indeed, his castle, whose magical 
defenses remain unbreached to this day, is rumored 
to contain many powerful magical items and arti- 
facts from the Outer Planes that he collected dur- 
ing the decades of his voyaging and must also 


1253 


contain several previously unknown spells. Fur- 
thermore, although the exact date of origin of the 
work is unknown, it is evident that the Wanderer 
completed the scrolls at a time very near his disap- 
pearance, for the scrolls contain many powerful 
spells, none of which he is known to have used. 

After Tymessul’s official disappearance (this 
may have occurred at a much earlier date, but only 
became apparent when he failed to turn up for a 
meeting of the Green Mages), the Enchiridion was 
examined by his colleagues in the Alliance. The 
group is largely neutral, dedicated to the preserva- 
tion of the natural order on the Prime Material 
Plane and the use of the combined magic of wiz- 
ards and druids toward this goal. Accordingly, the 
group worked closely with the Sorrow Sea druids 
in the southern part of Shalom, where the Green 
Mages are also located. It was in the joint library 
that the two groups maintain that the Enchiridion of 
Travel ended, as did the rest of Tymessul’s works, 
when his disappearance was acknowledged. 

This work apparently remained in that library 
until it was lent to the secretive monks of Saint 
Shastri, who wished to examine the documents for 
clues that might help them in their private battle 
against the fiend Nuckalavee (this, almost 350 
years after Tymessul disappeared). While the 
monks were examining the first two scrolls and 
consulting with Ghulam, a Hierophant of the Cabal 
allied with the Sorrow Sea druids, a ball of bright 


red light, 2 feet in diameter, appeared in the room, 
$137 


~ 5pellbook, Tymessul’s Enchiridion of Travel - 


scooped up the scrolls and the box, and disappeared 
with them. The Green Mages quickly instituted a 
magical search for the scrolls, but failed to turn up 
anything. Ghulam later speculated that it was 
Acheuba who abruptly took the scrolls to help his 
friend, but this theory must remain purely specula- 
tion, for neither Tymessul nor Acheulea have been 
heard from in all the intervening years. 

Fortunately, the contents of the work are well 
documented by several of the members of the 
Green Mages who had occasion to study the 
scrolls during the time they were in their library. 
The notes of the Green Mages clearly show that 
the scrolls contained in the work were of the type 
that Tymessul favored. The scrolls also contain 
most of his major researches, to which he devoted 
much time in order that he could continue the 
love of his life: traveling to ever more exotic loca- 
tions. From their notes then, it is apparent that the 
first two scrolls were filled entirely with text on 
the methods of traveling to the Outer Planes and 
various warnings and pieces of advice for planar 
travelers. The next two scrolls contain many 
spells used for travel of all sorts, including all of 
the following, in standard form and written in 
Common: astral spell, blink, dimension door, fly, 
gate, levitate, mount, succor, teleport, teleport 
without error, and Tymessul s cerulean traverse 
(unique spell). The final scroll of the collection 
contains the spells that Tymessul found particu- 
larly useful during his travels, all of which are 
written in Common but are otherwise in standard 
form: airy water, antimagic shell, fireball, Leo- 
mund’s secure shelter, sink, and Tymessul 5 pla- 
nar pacifier (unique spell, apparently a gift from 
Acheulea). The two unique spells described in the 
Enchiridion of Travel are as follows: 


Tymessul’s Cerulean Traverse (Alter- 
ation/Enchantment) 
Level: 9 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: Touch 
Casting Time: 3 rounds 
Duration: | day per level 
Saving Throw: None 
Area of Effect: Caster plus special 
Definition: When a wizard invokes this powerful 
enchantment, the wizard and a limited number of 
companions to journey through space and across 
planar boundaries. The caster may affect one 
companion for every 6 levels, in addition to the 
caster (all fractions rounded down). For example, 
a 23rd-level wizard could cast a spell that includes 
three companions. 

Each recipient of the spell must hold hands 
with the caster for the entire time that the spell is 
being cast, or be a part of a circle that includes 


the recipients and the caster. Any interruption of 
the circle will ruin the spell. Once the dweomer is 
cast, the individuals affected by the spell may 


_ Separate, though the recipients must rejoin in a 


circle if they wish to cross any planar boundaries. 
Although there is no saving throw against a 
cerulean traverse, it does not work on unwilling 
or unconscious subjects; if this is tried, the entire 
spell is ruined for all involved. 

The prime function of the traverse is to allow 
the wizard and his companions to move to other 
planes, as if they had passed through a small, per- 
sonalized gate. Each planar boundary that is 
crossed by the power of the traverse must be 
crossed by all the subjects of the spell simultane- 
ously. Concentration must also be maintained for 
one round while the planar boundary is crossed. 
Each planar boundary crossed reduces the dura- 
tion of the spell by one day. Furthermore, while 
under the influence of this spell, no person may 
cross a planar boundary by any means other than 
the traverse, including wish, gate, well of the 
worlds, or even with the presence of an artifact. 

This spell grants certain lesser powers that may 
be used by the recipients, with no need to stay in 
a circle. These actions include the ability to fly, as 
the wizard spell, and the ability to enter gaseous 
form at will (along with all equipment) and move 
at three times the normal movement rate. A per- 
son in gaseous form is extremely hard to damage, 
immune to most magical attack forms and virtu- 
ally all physical attacks—but cannot cross a 
magic circle or antimagic shell. 

The use of this spell in no way guarantees the 
safety of its users once they reach their destina- 
tion, and in no way protects them from any dam- 
age they take during their journey or while they 
are on a foreign plane. The material components 
of the spell are a circular platinum chain large 
enough for all who are to be affected by the spell 
to grasp, which must cost a minimum of 10,000 
gp for each person the spellcaster wishes to 
enchant, and at least 1,000 gp of powdered emer- 
ald for each subject, to be sprinkled in a circle 
enclosing the subjects. The chain is not consumed 
by the spell, but the powdered emerald is. 


Tymessul’s Planar Pacifier 
(Alteration/Evocation) 

Level: 9 

Components: V, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | per object 

Duration: | week per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: 1 object per 6 levels of the caster 
Definition: The casting of a planar pacifier by a 


wizard enables some types of magical items to 
5137 


" aaa 


1254 


a ee a ee 


Spellbook, Unique Mageries 


EERE 


operate normally while being used on a foreign 
plane. The magical items a planar pacifier may 
affect include only those items that have 
“pluses”—swords, shields, armor, rings and 
cloaks of protection (but not bracers of defense), 
luckstones, and so on. The protection extends 
across one planar boundary for every three levels 
of the wizard casting the spell. While the objects 
so enchanted remain within this limit, they oper- 
ate at their normal strength. Thus, a shield +4 
taken to the first layer of Baator is still +4 in 
strength. However, once the object becomes far- 
ther removed than this from its plane of origin, it 
loses one “plus” for each additional plane it 
crosses, over and above the limit imposed by the 
level of the caster. If an 1 8th-level wizard were to 
protect a sword +4, the sword would remain +4 
on the Astral Plane and on the first five layers of 
Baator; on the sixth layer, it is reduced to +3; on 
the seventh, to +2; on the eighth, to +1; and if 
taken to the ninth layer, it loses all magical power 
as long as it remains there. 

The spellcaster loses 1 hp for each item pro- 
tected with a planar pacifier, investing this hit 
point as a bit of energy from the Prime Material 
Plane that surrounds the object and simulates the 
conditions of the Prime Material Plane for the 
object. Furthermore, the wizard may protect only 
half as many items as the character has Constitu- 
tion points (even if the pacifier is repeatedly 
cast). The wizard may regain lost hit points sim- 
ply by touching the enspelled items within one 
day of the end of the dweomer. If the magic is 
dispelled or otherwise removed from the item 
(such as by means of Mordenkainen 5 disjunction 
or a rod of cancellation), the hit points are perma- 
nently lost and may be regained only by means of 
a wish, The pacifier is not affected by dispel 
magic—more powerful magic can dispel it. 

Magical items from other planes may be protected 
in a similar manner, but only if the caster comes 
from the same plane as the item to be protected, or is 
able to expend a wish to enhance the pacifier $ power 
(that also makes the pacifier permanent). In any 
case, the spell works only if cast while on the item’s 
plane of origin. The material components of this 
spell are a drop of the caster’s blood and 5,000 gp 
worth of powdered diamond for each item to be pro- 
tected. Both are consumed when the spell is cast. 


of Unicorns 
XP Value: 400/spell GP Value: 4,000/spell 
DRAGON Magazine 139 
The Book of Unicorns explains the powers of uni- 
corn items to the one chosen as the ruler of the 
unicorns. (The items of the unicorns include the 
crown of unicorns and the bow of unicorns.) It 
also serves as a wizard’s spell book with all 


known spells from the PHB up to the 4th level. 
The DM may add spells to the book or rule that 
certain spells might be unknown to it, however. 


Unique Mageries 

XP Value: 8,400 GP Value: 84,000 

The Magister 
This large, thin tome measures 4 hand widths 
across by 10 in height and its covers are of carved 
and polished ivory, with black obsidian inlays 
picking out the letters of the title, surrounded by a 
circle. The book has 21 gilt-edged parchment 
pages: each contains one spell. 

This boastfully titled volume is the work of the 
ancient wizard Nezram “Worldwalker,” who left 
it behind some 700 years ago when he ventured 
to another plane—and never returned. 

Nezram’s tower in the sparsely settled south- 
western reaches of Mulhorand was later destroyed 
by a young green dragon, Chathuuladroth. The 
dragon tore apart the tower and seized the tome 
along with Nezram’s other treasures, flying off 
westward into lonely, mountainous areas. Some- 
where therein was Chathuuladroth’s lair, and it 
held the book in its hoard for six centuries, grow- 
ing vast and terrible and amassing much treasure. 

The adventuring company known as The Black 
Gauntlet finally slew the great dragon, and bore 
Unique Mageries back to their stronghold near 
Starmantle. The company later disbanded in dis- 
array after the deaths of its leaders, the fighter 
Jhastan and the wizard Quarra, at the claws of an 
improperly summoned fiend. The book disap- 
peared. In the meantime, in need of money, 
Quarra (“a fey lady,” Elminster comments) had 
rented the book to Elminster for a time, and he 
noted its contents and copied those spells he 
needed. 

The book contains four truly unique spells (that 
is, previously found nowhere else) and 17 standard 
spells, all listed below. The volume contains: 
magic missile, stinking cloud, wizard lock, dispel 
magic, feign death, gust of wind, infravision, 
tongues, water breathing, fear, fumble, polymorph 
self, remove curse, wall of sand (unique spell), wiz- 
ard eye, telekinesis, antimagic shell, Nezram'’s 
ruby ray (unique spell), spelltrap (unique spell), 
power word blind, and spellstrike (unique spell). 


Wall of Sand 

(Evocation) 

Level: 4 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: 5 feet per level 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | round per level 
Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 


5139 


aaa a a e a e 


1255 


es CU 


~ Spellbook, Unique Mageries y 


Definition: This spell creates a wall of swirling, 
opaque sand, |-foot thick per level of the caster, 12 
feet high, and 4 feet long per level of the caster. It 
must be cast so that it rests on a solid surface and 
must remain in contact with that surface, although 
the caster may move it about. The sand is thick and 
choking; insects cannot fly through it, but are bat- 
tered to death, their wings crushed. All creatures 
save those with infravision will be rendered blind 
for as long as they are within the wall’s confines, 
and are —2 on attack rolls and -3 on AC on the 
round after they emerge from the wall, as they try 
to draw breath, clear their eyes, ears, mouths, and 
noses of sand, and so on. 

The sand extinguishes any open flame, and 
renders breathing difficult. Any creature that 
needs to breathe loses 1 point per round spent 
within a wall of sand, after an initial round of 
exposure in which no damage occurs. 

Spellcasting and speech are both impossible 
within a wall of sand; normal vision and tracking 
are also prevented. Opponents fighting within a 
wall of sand are at —4 to attack rolls unless they 
possess infravision, which reduces the penalty to 
-2. Creatures possessing infravision can see 
dimly within the sand (though they must keep 
clearing sand from their eyes) but cannot see 
through the sand to areas outside the wall. The 
sand does not slow movement, nor is it solid 
enough to support weight or resist passage. The 
sand vanishes at spell expiration. A caster can 
move a wall of sand about, shifting it 10 feet per 
round in which such movement is concentrated 
upon (in other rounds, the caster can take part in 
such activities as normal combat and/or spellcast- 
ing without the wall ceasing to exist), so as to 
block different areas or keep opponents within it. 
A wall of sand can fit into a smaller space than its 
dimensions allow, simply by collapsing into itself 
(that is, the same sand fits into a smaller space). 
Once collapsed, it can never expand into its larger 
dimensions again. The compressed form does no 
greater damage to creatures within it. 

The caster of a wall of sand can dispel it at 
will, The material component for this spell is a 
handful of sand. Note that electrical discharges of 
any sort (including lightning bolts) are conducted 
throughout a wall of sand, free of all its effects, 
by providing a protected area around the caster. 
No such spells, short of a limited wish, will per- 
mit a continuous hole in such a wall. The tunnel 
created by a passwall spell, for instance, is clear 
on the round following casting, begins to collapse 
on the following round (conducting electricity 
and obscuring vision, but not preventing speech 
or spellcasting, or causing damage or combat 
penalties), and is gone completely, obliterated by 
the shifting sands, by the third round. 


Nezram’s Ruby Ray 

(Alteration) 

Level: 7 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: The material component for this spell 
is a ruby of not less than 1,000 gp value, which is 
consumed in the casting, and causes a red ray of 
force to lash out from the caster’s pointing finger; 
where it touches, webs (like the spell or magical 
item function) and viscid globs melt away, locks 
(normal and magical) open, triggering any 
attached traps, knots untie, and chains and straps 
loosen and fall away. A ruby ray destroys wizard 
locks and holds on portals, and permanently 
breaks holes in forcecages, shields, and walls of 
force (although it does not cause such effects to 
be totally destroyed.) The ray can be ended at will 
by the caster. It can affect only one creature (see 
below) or device per round, It destroys any magic 
jar upon contact. 

If a ruby ray touches any creature (or the 
direct shape or prison of a concealed creature) 
that has been magically transformed (such as 
turned to stone, polymorphed, or affected by 
Tenser’s transformation) or concealed (perhaps 
by a statue spell, an illusion, or invisibility), the 
ray restores the creature to its original form. If a 
creature has been altered several times, it is 
changed back to its original form. These trans- 
formations are empowered by the ray’s magic 
with such delicacy that a system shock survival 
roll is never required. Such transformations are 
involuntary (no saving throw), taking one entire 
round to complete after the touch of the ray. 
During that time, the creature being changed 
back can only think and use psionics. It is physi- 
cally helpless—it cannot voluntarily move, 
speak, attack, cast spells, or exercise magical 
powers, Such creatures are not under the control 
of the caster ofthe ray. Beings who are astral or 
ethereal, or in another dimensional space 
through the use of blink, rope trick, or a portable 
hole or a similar magical item cannot be reached 
by a ruby ray. The ray cannot penetrate 
antimagic shells or stronger magical barriers 
(such as a prismatic sphere) and cannot pene- 
trate solid matter (with the exceptions already 
noted). Thus, it cannot reach imprisoned crea- 
tures. A ray is destroyed if its caster begins to 
cast another spell, teleports, dimension doors, 
passes into another plane, or is rendered uncon- 
scious or feebleminded. 


5139 


1257 


Spellbook, Unique Mageries 


selenite ai 


Spelltrap 

(Abjuration/Alteration) 

Level: 7 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Special 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: When this spell is cast, the wizard 
causes an oval, glowing ball of silvery hue to 
form in the air over (1 to 2 feet above) his or her 
head. It floats there silently until the spell 
expires, and need not be further concentrated 
upon to maintain its existence. Any spell, magi- 
cal power, or magical item effect that is cast 
directly upon the wizard (as opposed to area- 
effect magic) will be attracted to, and utterly 
absorbed by, this floating spelltrap. This 
includes magic missiles and other “never-miss” 
spells. Except by visual observation, the caster 
of the spelltrap does not know the precise nature 
(and level) of any spells absorbed by the trap, 
but always feels the assimilation of each and 
every spell incorporated by the trap. The trap 
can only absorb spells of the 6th level and lower, 
and magical abilities of like or lesser power. 
During any round in which the caster is awake, 
alert, and not engaged in spellcasting, he or she 
may mentally direct the spelltrap to unleash one 
spell upon a target, who must be within 10 feet 
per level of the caster. 

The speilltrap unleashes the spell exactly as it 
was cast (except for the new choice of target and 
range) with normal effects. 

Only one spell per round can be unleashed 
from a spelltrap. At the expiration of a spelltrap, 
its energies (including any stored spells) dissipate 
harmlessly and are lost. If a spelltrap is ever over- 
loaded, it explodes with deadly effect, in a burst 
of pure energy that deals 6d4 points of blast dam- 
age to all within 20 feet, and stuns all survivors 
for 1d2 rounds after that. (All items within this 
radius must save vs. magical fire; no creatures are 
allowed saving throws to lessen or escape dam- 
age.) A spelltrap can only hold spell energy in 
spell levels equal to twice the number of experi- 
ence levels of the caster, at any one time. Thus, a 
17th-level wizard’s spelltrap could hold a maxi- 
mum of 34 spell levels during any round, and 
would explode if 35 or more were taken in. A 
spelltrap can absorb any number of spells during 
a single round—if a party hurls a variety of spells 
and item effects at it, all will be tracelessly 
absorbed until the maximum capacity is 
exceeded. Even a wizard who realizes the danger 
from overloading can unleash only one spell per 
round from the trap, and is never aware what is 


being released until the effects begin. (Released 
magic could well aid opponents.) Releases are at 
random once the controlling wizard wills the trap 
to let something out. A caster cannot will a spell- 
trap out of existence, nor escape it by teleporta- 
tion or employing protective barriers; the 
spelltrap always accompanies the caster. There is 
one curious anomaly in spel/trap absorption; the 
casting of dispel magic on a trap always causes 
the trap—by itself, and in addition to any release 
directed by the trap’s user—to unleash one spell 
at random directly at the caster of dispel magic. 
(This is the only case in which a spelltrap releases 
more than one spell in a given round; if the caster 
wills it to release a spell, both spells are cast out 
of the trap.) If no spells were absorbed by the 
spelltrap, nothing is unleashed, but in both cases 
the spelltrap absorbs the dispel magic spell and 
remains in existence. 

Missile attacks upon a spelltrap have no effect; 
direct physical attacks drain a spelitrap of one 
spell, at random (unleashed directly upon the 
attacker in addition to any those ordered by the 
trap user). The material components of this spell 
are a diamond or diamond fragments of not less 
than 2,000 gp value and a moonstone of any size, 
both consumed in the casting. 


Spellstrike 

(Alteration) 

Level: 9 

Components: V 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This rare and potent magic enables 
the wizard to instantly negate and cancel all 
effects of any one spell. The spell may only be 
one that took effect in the previous round, or that 
is being cast in the same round as the spellstrike 
is uttered. The precise nature of the spell need not 
be known to the caster of the spellstrike, but a 
particular spell must be consciously willed in 
order to cancel it—that is, “whatever spell that 
being is casting” or “the spell that made X turn 
purple last round,” not “any spell that affected X 
last round.” 

Spellstrike does not cause a spell to be reflected 
back on anyone, but merely to go out of existence 
and dissipate harmlessly. Magical powers are 
affected by this spell, but magical item and arti- 
fact powers are not. Permanency is affected by a 
spellstrike, but contingency (and spells tied to it), 
alter reality, limited wish, and wish are not. 


5139 


1258 


O 


Spellbook, Vaerendroon’s Ineffable Enchantments 


Universal Astronomy 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Melf’s work contains the spells Melf’s minute 
meteors, meteor swarm, and fireball. 


Unknown Movements 
of the Universe 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Arnd penned run, shadow walk, teleport without 
error, succor, and vanish into this spellbook. 


Vaerendroon’s Ineffable 
Enchantments 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
The Magister 

This slim volume is bound in red-dyed rothé hide 
and six vellum sheets have been sewn into it. 
Each sheet is edged all around by electrum edge- 
channels. The hide of the cover is stretched over 
slabs of slate and has electrum corner-caps. The 
tome’s title is branded with small, flowing letters 
in Thorass into the cover, and each letter is care- 
fully picked out in silver. 

Vaerendroon was a sage of magical lore who 
was known to trade much magic for a particular 
spell he desired, often approaching the poor 
apprentices of great wizards to get this magic. He 
has not been seen for some 20 winters, and is 
generally presumed to have died or been slain 
(although Elminster suspects he may have taken 
up residence on another plane). Once, when in 
great need of cash, Vaerendroon assembled his 
manual, a collection of only six spells, and sold it 
in Baldur’s Gate for 90,000 gp. Its purchaser was 
the wizard Haljann, who was murdered by the 
thief Galmorgh, who in turn was slain by 
unknown hands in the city of Scornubel. 

Galmorgh’s belongings were ransacked and a 
magical dagger, all his gold, and the spellbook 
were taken, The book’s present whereabouts are 
unknown. 

The manual’s six pages bear six spells, one to a 
page. The first three are standard magic—disinte- 
grate, astral spell, antimagic shell—and the last 
three are unique spells, collected in this spellbook 
for the first time. They are the spells dire charm, 
vipergout, and The Simbul s synostodweomer, the 
latter a spell devised by the famous ruler of 
Aglarond. Details of these spells are given hereafter. 


Dire Charm 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Level: 2 
Components: V, S 
Range: 120 feet 
Casting Time: | 


Duration: 1d4 rounds plus 1 round per level 
Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effect: One person 

Definition: By means of this magic, the caster 
charms one person (“person” is defined the same 
as for the charm person spell) to enjoy killing, 
and to indiscriminately attack any friend or foe 
nearby. The target creature is allowed an initial 
saving throw, but if this fails, the victim instantly 
attacks all living creatures visible to him or her, 
seeking to kill until the spell expires (the 1d4 
extra rounds beyond the levels of the wizard are 
determined randomly and secretly by the DM). 
The caster is the sole exception to this murderous 
behavior; the charmed creature never harms or 
menaces the caster, and always attacks beings 
approaching the caster over other creatures. Such 
a berserker is not under the direct control of the 
caster, and gains no special physical endurance, 
Strength, or other abilities by means of this spell. 


Vipergout 

(Conjuration/Summoning) 

Level: 7 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 5 rounds plus 1 round per level 
Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 


Definition: By means of this magic, the casting of 
5142 


eS ee aaa 


1259 


Se 


Spellbook, Vampire Book 


j Hin a 


which involves a piece of snakeskin (or a portion 
of a dead snake) which is consumed by the magic, 
the caster instantly teleports snakes to his or her 
location. These living snakes appear in the caster’s 
mouth, and are vomited out. They do not choke or 
otherwise harm the caster, and never attack a 
caster either. Until the spell expires, they serve the 
caster, fighting to the death, The snakes are nor- 
mal, not giant varieties, and may be both ven- 
omous and constrictors. One snake appears for 
every three levels of the caster (rounding down); a 
maximum of six serpents can issue from a caster’s 
mouth in any one round. Until all of them have 
been expelled out of the mouth, speech, spellcast- 
ing, or pronunciation of magical item activation 
words on the caster’s part is impossible. The caster 
can breathe normally, can swallow without affect- 
ing the arrival of the snakes, and can freely engage 
in movement and combat. 

Summoned snakes range in Armor Class from 
9 to 6, move 12 to 15 per round, have up to 2+2 
Hit Dice, and attack by biting for 1d2 points of 
damage (plus, if venomous, poison of insinuative 
types A, B, or C) and constricting (if constrictors) 
for 1d4+1 points of damage per round. While the 
spell lasts, the caster’s control of the snakes can- 
not be broken by any means except slaying the 
caster or the snakes—dispel magic and charm 
magic do not end or overcome the caster’s control 
of the reptiles. Controlled snakes attack or not as 
the caster wills, switch targets if desired, constrict 
without harming (or biting), use their coils and 
jaws to gnaw ropes or turn keys, carry wands to 
the caster or move other small objects about, and 
engage in other noncombatant activities. 

However, a vipergout does not enable a caster 
to empower a snake with special powers, 
increased Dexterity or Intelligence, or force a 
snake to attack itself. 


The Simbul’s Synostodweomer 
(Alteration/Necromantic) 

Level: 7 

Components: V, S 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throws: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: Similar to a power possessed only by 
the most powerful of the mysterious incantatrixes, 
this spell allows the caster to use the magical 
energy of any spell already memorized by the 
caster to heal the caster or another being. 

This second spell must be cast in the round fol- 
lowing the casting of the synostodweomer; even 
if this subsequent casting is incomplete or inter- 
rupted, the synostodweomer works. The second 


spell is lost from the caster’s mind, and any mate- 
rial components are consumed in the normal 
manner—but rather than taking effect, the spell’s 
energy is channeled into the caster, who can 
absorb its energy as healing or pass it on by 
directly touching another (single) being. Only if 
there is excess energy can the caster choose to 
heal both self and another being—the other being 
is completely healed, and the remaining energy 
heals the caster, excess energy is simply lost. The 
healing occurs in the round following the infu- 
sion of spell energy. If the caster has extra energy 
but is unable to touch another injured creature 
during this time, the extra energy is lost. A spell 
used to heal by this means yields energy enough 
to heal 2 points of damage per level of the spell. 
Once the synostodweomer is cast whatever spell 
the caster casts in the following rounds is used to 
heal, regardless of the caster’s subsequent wishes 
or the level of the spell unleashed. If no spell is 
cast on the following round, the magic is lost and 
no healing occurs. Spells from scrolls and magi- 
cal item effects, as well as spells cast by beings 
other than the caster of the synostodweomer, can- 
not be used for such healing. 


Vampire Book* 
XP Value: +600 GP Value: +100 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
The unlucky owner of this volume will lose one 
book at random per week, as the contents of the 
owner's library are slowly drained by the Vampire 
Book. The books affected are left with blank 
pages, but those pages reappear in the Vampire 
Book. When another book is drained, the pages of 
the previously drained book disappear to make 
room for the new ones. However, the title and 
markings on the cover of the Vampire Book do not 
change, making it difficult and probably time 
consuming for the owner to discover which book 
is doing the draining. After the owner of a Vam- 
pire Book notices that the contents of some prized 
books are disappearing, he or she may choose to 
conduct a search of the library to find the cause 
(assuming that the owner figures out the cause). 
Each book must be examined individually to see 
if the contents match the cover, or to see if a book 
now contains writing drained from another book. 
This process takes one turn per book examined, 
and the chance of finding the Vampire Book on 
any given turn is expressed as “one in x,” where 
“x” is the number of books in the library that 
have not yet been searched. This can be a long 
and tedious endeavor for a character who owns a 
large library, and for the DM who must determine 
if and when the search is successful. (Depending 
on circumstances, a detect magic spell or other 


magical or psionic methods may speed the 
5143 


1260 


a 


Spellbook, Wizard’s Workbook 


5 ee. He NOT a 


search.) The vampire power cannot function if the 
book is kept in a metal container by itself, or if it 
is stored at least 10 feet away from other books. 
Its power is triggered 1d12 weeks after it is 
obtained. 


Variations on Visual Perception 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Mhzentul placed hypnotism, hallucinatory ter- 
rain, paralyzation, and veil into this spellbook. 


Weapons of the Ether 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Melf and Mordenkainen collaborated on this 
work that contains whip, Melf’s acid arrow, 
magic missile, enchant an item, enchanted 
weapon, and Mordenkainen's sword. 


White’s Codicil 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON* Magazine 15 
The White's Codicil is a tall, thin volume bound 
in white ermine over seasoned boards of white 
pine and sealed with a clasp and lock of tarnished 
silver. The ermine is somewhat worn about the 
edges from use. The 27 pages within are of vel- 
lum edged in crimson paint on their outer bor- 
ders. The whole is sewn to a leather binding with 
strips of sinew, making it quite durable. 

It has been postulated that the Codicil was 
written by priests of Auril as a primer on her wor- 
ship and on the uses of the cold in which the 
Frostmaiden revels. It has been seen only once 
outside the devout circle of her followers. Ten 
winters ago, an adventuring company known as 
the Company of Seven Stars gained the Codicil as 
part of the spoils from a group of bandits they 
slew while guarding an early spring caravan to 
Neverwinter. They sold the book to the sage 
Erpalio of Neverwinter, whose description of the 
volume is the only record of it in the Realms. 
Agents of the sect of Auril are assumed to have 
recovered the book the next winter, for Erpalio 
was found frozen in his warm study, and the Cod- 
icil was gone. It has not been seen since, although 
it is doubtless present at ceremonies in the North 
honoring the Frostmaiden. In addition to the 
denominational lore it contains and the knowl- 
edge of secret ceremonies it discloses, possession 
of the Codicil also grants the owner resistance to 
cold (as the priest spell) as long as it is carried on 
the owner. 

The first page is simply a title page with the 
snowflake rune of Auril. The next 13 pages cover 
the rites and services of Auril, the Frostmaiden, 
in chilling detail, One of these rituals includes the 


1261 


summoning of an ice paraelemental. The next 13 
pages include spells and major ceremonies. The 
priestly ceremonies for coming of age, burial, 
dedication, investiture, ordination, and special 
vows are all described. Due to the large number 
of evil spellcasters, witch doctors, and frostmen 
who worship Auril, the priest spells are followed 
by the wizard spells chill touch, frost fingers, 
shatter, gust of wind, and wall of ice. 


Frost Fingers 

(Evocation) 

Level: | 

Components: V, S 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: | round 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This is essentially a cold form of the 
burning hands spell. When cast, it causes freez- 
ing cold and shards of ice to blast from the 
caster’s fingertips to a distance of 3 feet in a 
120(DG) arc in front of the caster. Any creature 
in the area of cold takes 1 point of damage for 
every level of the spellcaster, and no saving throw 
is possible. Liquids engulfed by the cold will 
freeze unless it survives a saving throw vs. cold. 


Wizard’s Workbook 
XP Value: 2,800 GP Value: 28,000 
DRAGON Magazine 69 

While the details of the physical appearance of 
the Wizard's Workbook (also known as The Work- 
book) are unknown, it is said to be a bound vol- 
ume with no inscriptions on its covers, Once in 
the elven city of Myth Drannor there was a 
school of magic. Its teachers were known as the 
Seven Wizards, and included the one known only 
as Mentor. Its founding and objectives are 
forgotten, for Myth Drannor has long since fallen 
to ruins, and the Seven Wizards disappeared even 
before Myth Drannor’s destruction. Many of the 
wizards, whose names are now known throughout 
the Realms, were tutored at the Wizards’ school, 
and it is common knowledge that Mentor caused 
the spells of his pupils’ devising to be collected in 
a book, once he had tested and approved their 
dweomercraft. Accounts of The Workbook’s con- 
tents vary; it is quite possible that more than one 
such book was collected, although only the exis- 
tence of this one book is certain. 

The sage Flamsterd, of the Moonshae Isles, 
purchased the tome known as The Wizards’ Work- 
book from a band of adventurers, and carefully 
copied its contents. He later sold the secrets of 
several of The Workbook’s spells for very large 


amounts of gold, and purchased the entire island 
5147 


Spellbook, Wizard’s Workbook 


Niinan 


that now bears his name, though his enjoyment of 
the isle was short-lived. It is thought that one of 
his clients guessed what the sage possessed, for 
one night the sage and his entire Tower, on the 
leeward side of the island, simply vanished. 
Others believe the sage came to grief while prac- 
ticing magic. Still others hold that he left this 
plane of existence. 

No sudden rise in power was noted among 
those of the Art, however, and it is thought that 
The Workbook may have been lost or destroyed. 
Instaliments of Flamsterd’s personal diaries, the 
Moonshae Chronicles, were sent regularly from 
the sage’s isle to his friend Elminster, and in one 
was set down the entire text of The Workbook. 
The purchased records of individual spells still 
exist, of course, scattered throughout the Realms. 
It is from Elminster’s library that we learn the 
spells below; the present contents of The Work- 
book may well vary slightly. Dismind is thought 
by some to be the work of Khelben “Blackstaff” 
Arunsun, and by others to be the work of Mentor 
himself. The other spells bear the names of their 
creators. 


Spendelarde’s Chaser 

(Necromantic) 

Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Duration: 1 turn per level 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Saving Throw: None 

Definition: This spell negates the adverse effects 
of all drugs (including alcohol) in the recipient. 
Dexterity and mental impairments are instantly 
“cured,” leaving the individual clearheaded and 
free of pain, able to undertake complex tasks 
requiring intense concentration, such as spellcast- 
ing. The pain of even mortal wounds is removed, 
although the chaser does not heal any damage of 
mind or body. If the condition has not righted itself 
by the time the spell wears off, the effects return. 
But natural body processes continue while a crea- 
ture is under the influence of the chaser, so that a 
hangover or other temporary discomfort may well 
vanish before the spell expires. The chaser has no 
effect on insanity or magical conditions (such as 
feeblemind), but does give a +4 saving throw vs. 
poison present in the recipient during the time the 
spell is in effect. (If a saving throw vs. poison has 
already failed, application of the chaser permits a 
second, though unmodified saving throw—no +4 
bonus, but no subtractions either.) The material 
component of this spell is a drop of holy water, 
touched to the tongue or skin of the recipient. (The 
spell may be cast on oneself.) 


Caligarde’s Claw 

(Conjuration/Summoning) 

Level: 4 

Range: 60 feet 

Duration: | round per level 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Saving Throw: Neg. 

Definition: Use of this spell requires the claw or 
foot of a creature, which is consumed in the cast- 
ing, and brings into existence an invisible claw of 


force. The spellcaster indicates (by pointing 


toward a location; sight is not necessary) a target 
within 60 feet. If the target saves, the claw does 
not come into existence. If the target does not 
save, the claw must locate the target (with an 
attack roll, as though it was a weapon wielded by 
the caster). If it does so successfully, it immedi- 
ately causes 1d4 points of damage. After that, it 
strikes infallibly once per round for 1d4 points of 
damage until the spell expires, the claw is 
destroyed, or the target escapes pursuit by becom- 
ing ethereal or otherwise physically leaving the 
plane of the caster. 

Although the claw never misses, the damage 
done by its strike can be negated by an antimagic 
shell, shield, Bigby'’s interposing hand, or a simi- 
lar magical barrier. It can be destroyed by dispel 
magic, but cannot be controlled or physically 


harmed. It is not a living thing, it is not intelli- 
5147 


ibook, Wizard’s Workbook 


Fiscal aie et ee 


gent, and it cannot perform any task other than 
slashing, tearing, and rending. It can be dispelled 
at will by the caster, but does not require contin- 
ued concentration for its maintenance. It does not 
vanish if the caster is killed or rendered uncon- 
scious. Its attacks do not necessarily interfere 
physically with the actions and movements of the 
target, who may well cast spells or engage in 
physical combat. 

The claw remains with its target unshakably, 
regardless of distance traveled, physical barriers, 
or aerial or underwater travel. It never changes 
targets, vanishing at the death or disappearance of 
its target. If it fails to initially locate its target, it 
remains within 10 feet of the intended target’s ini- 
tial location, an invisible presence, until the spell 
expires. If any creature approaches within 10 feet 
of its location after the intended target withdraws, 
the claw automatically strikes (attack roll 
required) without any attention or act of will on 
the part of the caster. The claw can be cast at a 
door to prevent unharried, future entrance or 
egress. Note that a careless or forgetful spell- 
caster could well be attacked by his or her own 
claw, if it is approached too closely after missing 
its intended target. A spellcaster does not know if 
a claw is active, once cast, except by observing 
the behavior of the target—or by suffering a sur- 
prise attack. The claw can be immediately dis- 
pelled by the caster. If unsuccessful in a second 
attack against a secondary target, the claw contin- 
ues to attack any target within a 10-foot radius 
until the spell expires, and may attack the target it 
originally missed if the target leaves and reenters 
the area of a Caligarde’s claw. The claw does not 
attack anything if the original target remains in 
the area—but such immobility seldom occurs in 
battle. The claw can only locate and affect targets 
with a tangible existence on the plane in which it 
is cast. 


Tulrun’s Tracer 

(Divination/ Alteration) 

Level: 4 

Range: 10-foot-radius 

Duration: 4 rounds per level 

Area of Effect: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Saving Throw: None 

Definition: When this spell is cast, the tracer—a 
continuous, luminescent pathway akin to a light 
spell—comes into being within a 10-foot radius 
of the caster. It shows the most recent trail of any 
single creature whose path the caster wishes to 
trace, described verbally by the caster over the 
material component (a pinch of phosphorus or a 
glowing life form such as a fungus or glow- 


worm). The creature must have been present in 
the 10-foot radius about the caster within a period 
of one day per level of the caster for the tracer to 
appear. Tulrun 's tracer shows the route of the 
creature within the 10-foot area, and then expands 
at a rate of 60 feet per round along the route taken 
by the creature, moving in that direction for the 
duration of the spell. Once beyond the 10-foot 
initial radius, it only shows the trail of the crea- 
ture as long as it remains in physical contact with 
the ground. Pass without trace and similar spells 
do not confuse the tracer, and it will follow the 
creature’s route through physical barriers and 
across all gaps of up to 14 feet. It will not other- 
wise show aerial travel, but it does shine in and 
under water. 

The path ends when the target creature is 
reached, the spell expires, or at any place to 
which the target creature teleported, left the plane 
of the caster, or embarked upon a mount or con- 
veyance such as a cart, ship, or carpet of flying. 
In the latter case, an individual reaching the 
path’s end receives a clear mental picture of the 
destination, even if on another plane. If the target 
creature took a mount or conveyance, the mental 
picture is of the act of doing so and not of the 
eventual destination. Portions of the tracer can be 
negated by dispel magic, continual darkness, and 
the like, but it cannot be physically disturbed (a 
gust of wind would not shift it). When the spell 
expires, the tracer slowly fades into nothingness; 
if it has not its target, there is no mental picture of 
the target’s destination. The tracer is intangible, it 
may be passed through or traveled within without 
harm and does not activate magic upon contact 
nor does it distort magic or physical phenomena 
passing through it. 


Tasirin’s Haunted Sleep 

(Enchantment/Charm) 

Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Duration: | turn per level 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | round 

Saving Throw: Neg. 

Definition: This spell can only be cast success- 

fully upon a sleeping creature. The slumber 

must be normal—unconsciousness, coma, or 

similar states of mental injury, such as concus- 

sion, potions, astral or psionic activity, and 

charm-related spells cause the spell to be inef- 

fective. Tasirin s haunted sleep puts the recipi- 

ent into a deep sleep for one turn per level of 

the caster, and early awakening from this state 

can only be accomplished by limited wish, dis- 

pel magic, the infliction of acute physical pain 
$147 


— Oe eee 


1263 


Spellbook Wizard’s Workbook 


[A | 


(wounding) upon the recipient, or at the caster’s 
will. The target creature is allowed a saving 
throw, which, if successful, negates the effects 
of the spell. 

The caster is never directly aware of the tar- 
get’s thoughts or mental state, or of the success 
of the spell. While in such a deep sleep, the 
creature is open to the influence of subcon- 
scious visions or dreams. The spellcaster can 
project one specific scene or vision into natural 
mental activity, and this will come into the vic- 
tim’s consciousness soon after awakening. The 
vision’s clarity, detail, and accuracy depend 
upon the caster’s concentration, for the scene 
must be held in mind during the casting. Such 
visions can masquerade as divine communica- 
tions or memories, and can be used to influence 
decisions, goad the recipient into a certain 
course of action, trouble the recipient, or, con- 
versely, to calm and rest the recipient at a time 
of mental anguish or troubles. A spellcaster 
skilled in the use of this spell can boost morale, 
joy, or enthusiasm—or crush them, 

During “haunted sleep,” the recipient is espe- 
cially susceptible to any one suggestion spell, 
which can be cast by the caster of the haunted 
sleep or another spellcaster, and is saved against 
at —3 by the creature in “haunted sleep.” Such a 
suggestion will be “heard” by the recipient as an 
inner mental voice, and must be in a language 
that the recipient understands to be successful. 
This spell cannot be cast on oneself. 


Laeral’s Dancing Dweomer 
(Alteration/Illusion/Phantasm) 

Level: 3 

Range: 20 feet +10 feet per level 

Duration: | turn per level 

Area of Effect: 4-inch-diameter sphere 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Saving Throw: Neg. 

Definition: This spell requires a pinch of dust 
thrown into the air about the caster and any object 
(not changed in any way by the spell) radiating a 
dweomer at the time. When cast, the spell causes 
many magical auras to flicker and dance about 
from object to object (including creatures and 
areas with large surfaces, such as walls). The 
auras are not visible to the unaided eye (deteci 
magic or similar means must be used), and are 
not seen by creatures saving against the spell or 
having true sight. If the saving throw fails, the 
auras will totally confuse detect magic or the like 
for the spell duration. The auras do not disappear 
when touched, but dispel magic destroys all auras 
within its area of effect. 


Archyeult’s Skybolt 

(Alteration) 

Level: 4 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Duration: 2 rounds 

Area of Effect: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Saving Throw: ⁄ 

Definition: This spell requires a crystal at least 1 
inch in length. The crystal may be a faceted gem, a 
piece of quartz, or cut glass. The spellcaster throws 
the crystal at a target creature or area while speak- 
ing the final words of the spell, and its path creates 
a glowing “bolt” in the air, similar in appearance to 
Tulrun's tracer. The bolt is 4 feet in diameter, 
begins 10 feet from the caster, and extends onward 
to a maximum length of 10 feet per level of the 
caster, The bolt cannot materialize underwater and 
ends if the crystal strikes water, any barrier, or 
passes beyond the caster’s range. The crystal is 
consumed instantly, in a burst, if it passes beyond 
the caster’s maximum range, and is otherwise con- 
sumed at the expiration of the spell. 

Any living thing coming into contact with the 
bolt suffers 1d4 points of shock damage per level or 
Hit Dice it possesses (ignoring additions; a 5+5- 
HD monster would take 5d4). A creature struck by 
the crystal (an attack roll, with any modifications 
for missile weapon ranges, is made when the spell 
is cast) suffers 1d6 points of damage per level or 
HD it possesses. The creature may grasp the crystal 
and hurl it back at the caster, and the bolt continues 
to form to the limit of the caster’s range (so that a 
caster may be struck by his or her own bolt), but 
when directly grasping the crystal, any creature suf- 
fers a further 1d6 points of damage per level or HD 
and must make a system shock survival roll. A sky- 
bolt lasts for two rounds after its casting. It can be 
destroyed in whole or in part by contact with an 
antimagic shell, wall of force, shield, or similar 
spells, dispel magic, or gust of wind. It cannot be 
deflected, grounded, or opposed by insulation. It 
does not conduct through metallic substances, but 
note that armor that is not airtight and does not 
negate the effects of a skybolt. Creatures and non- 
magical objects entering the skybolt do not deflect, 
negate, or sever it. A crystal entering an area of 
magical protection that does not allow formation of 
a bolt is instantly rendered harmless. 


Dismind 
(Enchantment/Charm/Reversible) 
Level: 9 

Range: Touch 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: One creature 


Components: V 
5147 


a 1264 ` 


| Spellbook of the Wyvernwater Circle 
| ee 2 


Casting Time: 2 

Saving Throw: Neg. 

Definition: This spell consists of a phrase spoken 
while the caster touches the recipient (the spell 
may be cast on oneself, serving as a “last resort” 
escape from certain death, torture, or mental 
damage), causing the recipient’s mind to fly from 
his or her body. The body instantly undergoes a 
curious transformation—it remains in the posi- 
tion it was in when the spell was cast, surrounded 
by a glowing aura of force that allows nothing to 
touch the body and stopping all physical and 
crushing attacks or probes. The limbs of the body 
can be shifted by pushing on the invisible armor 
of force, but when released will slowly drift back 
to the original position. Magical attacks, fire, poi- 
sons, and corrosive or disease-producing sub- 
stances (including ochre jelly, green slime, rot 
grubs, and the like) cannot reach the body. The 
bodily processes of a disminded person are totally 
suspended, so that the body does not age or 
breathe. Disminded persons have a vacant stare. 
They cannot use any of the senses of the body 
they have abandoned, nor can they return to it 
without aid. 

The freed mind wanders behind mental 
defenses of its own making, immune to all forms 
of magical, psionic, or other mental contacts and 
attacks. A wandering mind is not detectable by 
any known means, and never leaves the Prime 
Material Plane. It cannot control where it goes or 
what it observes, and typically retains little mem- 
ory of its visions and speculations. (A DM should 
describe 1d6 scenes or phrases of thought with- 
out giving any explanations.) A wandering mind 
cannot deliberately pray, study, or research spells, 
or choose to observe any particular event, locale, 
or individual. 

The mind can be fully restored to its body by 
alter reality, limited wish, or restore mind, the 
reverse of this spell. The reverse can also be used 
to cure insanity and all mental disorders, feeble- 
mindedness, and physical brain damage. It will 
end any mental controls (including quest, geas, 
and magical charms cast by spell or by creatures 
such as nixies or vampires) of any form upon a 
recipient mind, totally freeing the mind from their 
influences without causing the individual any 
harm—but it cannot restore lost psionic powers. 
A delirious, drunken, or exhausted creature can 
become clearheaded and mentally alert by means 
of this spell. A saving throw applies to both 
spells, and, if successful against restore mind 
(regardless of the wishes of the disminded recipi- 
ent creature), the spell has no effect. Such a fail- 
ure does not mean the mind cannot be restored, 
but only that the particular spell cast at that time 
did not work. 


of the Wyvernwater Circle 

XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 164 
This spellbook is two octagonal, half-rounded 
slabs of shadowtop wood enclosing 16 vellum 
pages. Each page contains a single druidic prayer 
(written spell as follows: detect magic, faerie fire, 
invisibility to animals, pass without trace, wailing 
wind (a unique spell), cure light wounds, fire 
trap, locate animals or plants, produce flame, 
touchsickle (a unique spell), call lightning, cure 
disease, flame shield (a unique spell), hold ani- 
mal, mold touch (a unique spell), and water 
breathing. The book is old and well worn, but 
protective magic prevents normal heat, flame, 
water (even a heavy rainfall), or cold from harm- 
ing it. 

The Wyvernwater Circle was a group of 
druids who flourished over 200 years ago, 
when elves ruled the western Dragonreach and 
much of Cormyr and what is now the Dales 
were still cloaked in heavy forest. The circle 
(of 12 to 16 members; their numbers varied 
over time) dwelt on the northern shores of the 
Wyvernwater, at its eastern end. The area they 
protected is now mostly rolling farmland, 
although part of its easternmost reaches sur- 
vive as the Hullack Forest. 

Hullack, leader of the circle, was a firm and 
true friend of the elves. It is said that he lies 
buried in a hidden magical refuge known as the 
Elfhold, somewhere in the depths of the forest 
that bears his name. Hullack created the book, 
well aware of his own mortality and of the need 
to preserve the woodlands—a need that could 
only grow more pressing as men became more 
numerous around the Wyvernwater. It was his 
intention that the tome serve as an aid in train- 
ing new recruits to the circle. The book could 
also aid the druids’ allies in the defense of the 
trees if the circle were absent, weakened, or 
destroyed. 

In the end the circle did fall, battling beholders 
who were served by gargoyles, bugbears, and 
quicklings. The eye tyrants sought to establish a 
realm in the area, where they would be served by 
human and elf slaves (whom they might herd like 
cattle and hunt for sport and food). The circle 
slew at least five eye tyrants and drove the rest 
northward, into the mountains. The fell woodland, 
where the beholders continue to lurk, is known 
today as the Spiderhaunt Wood, but it was not 
then isolated from the great forest that covered all 
the land from the advancing desert of Anauroch 
to the coastal marshes of the Inner Sea. The tome 
was lost in the battles at which the circle mem- 
bers were slain, driven mad, or scattered. Today, 


the tome’s whereabouts are unknown. 
5148 


1265 


Spellbook of the Wyvernwater Circle 


j,i RRR i 


The contents of the Tome of the Wyvernwater 
Circle come down to us from surviving initiates 
of the circle, and include four prayers said to 
have been given to Hullack by the goddess 
Eldath herself. 


Wailing Wind 

(Alteration) 

Level: | 

Components: V 

Range: 100 feet per level 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: | turn per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: By means of this spell, a druid or 
other priest creates a magical warning system. 
When any creature enters a guarded area (a pas- 
sage, chamber, cavern, doorway, or cave mouth of 
up to a maximum size of 10 cubic feet per level 
of the caster), a wailing, whistling blast of wind 
blows from the guarded area toward the druid. 

The wind travels toward the druid regardless of 
intervening distance if the druid is on the same 
plane as the guarded area. The wind can reach up 
to 100 feet per level of the casting druid. The 
wailing wind has a distinctive tone and can be 
heard by all creatures. It transmits and magnifies 
any sounds (speech and movement) made by the 
triggering being at the time it is activated, and it 
can give any listener a clue as to what sort of 
intruder approaches. 

The spell cannot be modified to be activated by 
only specific beings or types of creatures. Once 
the guarded area is entered and the wind rises, the 
spell is exhausted. The wind itself lasts for one 
round per level of the druid, although the caster 
may end it sooner. 

Once ended, the wind cannot be restarted 
except as follows: As the level of the caster 
increases, the number of activations per single 
spell (the number of blasts of wind, occurring for 
different intruders at different times) is also 
increased, A 1st- or 2nd-level caster creates only 
a single-blast wailing wind; a 3rd- or 4th-level 

caster creates a wind of two blasts; a Sth- or 6th- 
level caster creates a wind of three blasts, and so 
on (no known maximum). 


Touchsickle 

(Alteration) 

Level: 2 

Components: V, S 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rounds per level 
Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Self 


Definition: By means of this spell, one of the 
caster’s hands temporarily becomes a magical 
weapon. The extremity is able to strike all crea- 
tures who can be hit only by magical weapons 
(even if such creatures are normally hit only by 
magical weapons of +2 or greater). The extrem- 
ity gains no attack bonus, but its slightest touch 
does the same damage as a sickle (1d4+1 vs. 
S/M; 1d4 vs. L). Its touch can slash or stab like 
a normal sickle, as the caster wills. A druid may 
use the enchanted extremity to harvest greater 
mistletoe as though it were a gold or silver 
sickle. 


Flame Shield 
(Evocation) 
Level: 3 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 0 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: | round per level 
Saving Throw: None 
Area of Effect: Special 
Definition: This spell brings into being a pulsat- 
ing, 6-foot-high shield of darkness at the end of 
the druid’s hand. The shield is weightless and has 
no solid existence, Missiles and other weapons 
and solid objects (including parts of the caster’s 
body) pass harmlessly through it. The shield 
remains attached to one of the druid’s hands (cho- 
sen during the casting) unless the druid touches 
another creature’s hand and wills control of the 
shield to pass to the other (who must agree to the 
transfer or it cannot occur), 

The shield works against flame. Its touch 
extinguishes normal torches, flaming oil, and 
candles instantly. Larger fires are diminished. A 
fireball striking or exploding around the bearer of 
a flame shield, for example, does only half dam- 
age. A flame blade coming into contact with a 
flame shield is harmlessly destroyed. A flame 
shield can prevent a flame strike only if it is 
directly in the path of the strike. Flame-related 
illusions, hypnotic patterns, and the like have no 
effect on any being viewing them through a flame 
shield. A magical flaming sword striking through 
a flame shield encounters no resistance and does 
normal weapon damage (but not flaming dam- 
age). The shield doesn’t permanently affect the 
blade in any way, but the part of the blade that has 
passed through the shield remains free of flames 
while any part of the blade is in contact with the 
shield; thus a flaming sword striking through a 
flame shield cannot ignite a scroll or other flam- 
mable object by touch. 

The material components for this spell are a 
piece of phosphorous, a drop of mercury, and a 


cobweb. 
5148 


" a ey aaa 


1266 


N 


— eee 


Spellbook of Zargos 


ee a eT NETS i 


Mold Touch 
(Alteration) 
Level: 3 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: Touch 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Definition: This spell empowers a druid to trans- 
mute mistletoe, holly, or oak leaves (the material 
components) into brown mold spores without 
suffering personal harm. Any creature touched by 
the caster within six rounds of the casting is 
infected by brown mold. (An attack roll is 
required; if the druid cannot touch any creature, 
the mold spores vanish at the end of six rounds.) 
The mold spores created by this spell cannot live 
on plant or inorganic material. All the spores cre- 
ated by the spell are transferred to any creature 
touched by the druid. Thus, the druid can infect 
only one creature per spell (in the event of an acci- 
dent, it could well be a friend or ally). A mold touch 
spell does 4d6 points of damage to the target crea- 
ture (half damage if a saving throw vs. spell is 
made). Brown mold spreads upon the victim; in the 
second round after the attack, the mold does 2d6 
points of damage (save for half damage). On every 
round after that, the victim receives a saving throw 
vs. spell. If the save is successful, no damage is 
taken and the spell ends. If the save fails, the victim 
takes 1d6 points of damage in that round. Brown 
mold created by this spell is of limited duration, 
and a victim cannot infect other creatures, even if 
intending to do so. Magical cold harms mold cre- 
ated by this spell in the usual manner (but also 
affects the creature on which the mold is growing). 


of Zargos 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
The Milenian Empire 
As a greater artifact, this spellbook has 320 
power points and recharges at the rate of 20 per 
turn. 

This powerful artifact was created a century 
ago by the Entropic Immortal named Nyx while 
in her mortal form as a Milenian wizard named 
Zargos. With the “death” of Zargos, the book was 
left to his followers, the Zargosians, who have yet 
to uncover all of its powers. Nyx created the book 
in the hope that mortals would one day use it to 
destroy the sun, and plunge the Hollow World 
into eternal darkness. 

The Book of Zargos is currently in the hands of 
the Zargosians, and is kept upon an altar within 
the Tower of Night. The Zargosians use it to con- 
trol the weather around the tower, to create 
undead creatures and other monsters, and to 


develop new magical spells. 

The covers of the book are made of a black, 
leathery substance like the skin of a bat’s wings. 
Fixed to the front cover is the horned skull of 
some diabolical creature. Its eye sockets are filled 
with obsidian, and glow blackly. The pages of the 
book appear to be made of thin sheets of bone. A 
coded language of strange glyphs and sigils cov- 
ers the pages, and seems to have been etched with 
a claw or sharp instrument. 

Weapon Characteristics: None. 

Armor Characteristics: None. 

Constant Powers: The following two powers 
are permanent effects and cannot be used for any 
purpose other than that described: 

Phantasmal force (50 PP) makes the Tower of 

Night appear as a huge, gnarled tree. Anyone 

touching the “tree” sees it as it really is: a 

strange, obsidian tower. 

* Weather control (80 PP) keeps thick clouds 
and fog around the Tower of Night, bathing it 
and 240 yards of terrain in all directions in 
deep shadow. 

Other Powers: Through a secret ritual, priests 
and wizards of Zargos become “attuned” with the 
book. This allows them to draw upon any of the 
following powers, but only while they are within 
420 feet of the artifact: 

* Animate dead (50 PP). 

* Cause fear (10 PP). 

* Create poison, reverse of neutralize poison 
(30 PP). 

* Infravision (20 PP). 

* Speak with monsters (60 PP). 

The following powers are actually spells writ- 
ten in the book. Because of the coded language in 
which these spells are written, not all of them 
have been deciphered by the Zargosians. Those 
marked with an may be used by Zargosian wiz- 
ards and may be found in their individual spell 
books. The others have not been deciphered, and 
cannot be used . ny Yet. 

+ Animate dead . 

* Close gate. This is a special version of the 

reverse of the gate spell in that range is extended to 

line-of-sight. Thus, it could be cast upon the sun of 
the Hollow World. This “‘sun” is actually the energy 
released from a permanent gate to the Sphere of 

Energy. If the “sungate” were closed, the Hollow 

World would be plunged into absolute darkness. 

Cloudkill 

Lightning bolt 

Power word blind 

Shield X 

Weather control 

Everyone attuned to the book becomes suscep- 

tible to the sun’s rays, suffering 1 point of damage 


per round of exposure. The damage can be healed 
5149 


1267 


~ Spelljammer Detector = 


by spells and rest as normal. Those attuned to the 
Book of Zargos slowly change over time; their 
skin pales from lack of sunlight, their eyes 
become sunken, and their lips pull back from 
their teeth. The overall effect makes them look 
like undead creatures, though they do not truly 
become the undead. Affected characters lose 
Charisma at the rate of 1 point per month, until a 
minimum Charisma of 4 is reached. 

Each use of the book’s powers (but not spells 
learned from it) drains 1 hit point from the user. 
The damage cannot be healed by the use of 
spells; only by rest, and at the rate of 1 hit point 
per day. If a user’s hit points drop to 0 as the 
result of using a power, the character is dead. 

When using the artifact’s animate dead power, 
there is a 40% chance the character’s alignment 
changes to a chaotic bent, if not already chaotic. 

Users of the book become obsessed with pro- 
tecting it from harm. 

Notes: A detect evil spell reveals the book’s 
evil nature. It can be utterly destroyed only by 
being burned in the fiery heart of the Hollow 
World’s sun. 


Spelljammer Detector 


XP Value GP Value 
Detector: — 300,000 
Helmet: — 10,000 


War Captain’s Companion 
This rare, almost priceless item looks much like a 
huge, insectoid face that stares blankly into the 
void of space. Commonly 40 feet long or more, 
found on asteroids or similar bases, the detector 
shows the location of all human-size or larger 
objects within a 20,000-yard radius (40 hexes). A 
helmet of liaison is needed to link the detector to 
the wearer of the helmet (much as a smaller 
antennae of triangulation). The helmet relays the 
information found by the detector in exact detail. 

When the helmet is worn, the wearer immedi- 
ately gains a 360(DG), spherical picture of the 
area around the base. Every minute detail can be 
seen in his or her mind. The positions of the 
details change as the base revolves, rotates, and 
changes heading. If there is a chance that the 
operator might lose an object being tracked, or 
that some significant detail might be missed, he 
or she must make a Wisdom check. Using the 
detector is fully as fatiguing as manning a 
spelljammer helm, and is subject to the same 
requirements for resting afterwards. 

A spelljammer detector (and a helmet of liai- 
son) might be purchased for 300,000 gp or more, 
depending upon availability and the reaction roll 
of the seller, but not for less than that price. The 
spelljammer detector, can be used as long as a 
rested operator is available. 


Spelljamming Ram 


XP Value GP Value 
Blunt +1: 50/ton 1,000/ton 
Blunt +2: 100/ton 2,000/ton 
Blunt +3: 200/ton 4 000/ton 
Grappling +1: 50/ton 2 000/ton 
Grappling +2: 200/ton 4,000/ton 
Grappling +3: 400/ton 8,000/ton 
Piercing +1: 50/ton 1,000/ton 
Piercing +2: 100/ton 2,000/ton 
Piercing +3: 200/ton 4,000/ton 


War Captain’s Companion 

Somewhat rare items, magically enhanced rams 
are highly desirable additions to any ship. The 
bonus they possess applies to both the attack roll 
and the damage determination. A small ram fits a 
ship of 10 to 40 tons. A medium ram fits a ship of 
40+ to 60 tons. A large ram fits a ship of 60+ 
tons. 


Sphere 


Spheres are ball-shaped objects and may be con- 
structed from a multitude of different materials. 
They can be leather, sculpted wood, rock, crystal, 
or even chunks of absolute nothing. Spheres are 
commonly used to divine answers beyond the 
user’s normal senses. 


of Annihilation 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DUNGEON MasTER® Guide 

A sphere of annihilation is a globe of absolute 
blackness, a ball of nothingness 2 feet in diame- 
ter. The sphere is actually a hole in the continuity 
of the multiverse, a void. Any matter that comes 
in contact with this sphere is instantly sucked into 
the void, gone, utterly destroyed—even wishes 
and similar magic can’t bring it back. 

A sphere of annihilation is basically static, 
resting in some spot as if it were a normal hole. It 
can be caused to move, however, by mental effort. 
The brain waves of the individual concentrating 
on moving it bend spatial fabrics, causing the 
hole to slide. Control range is 40 feet initially, 10 
feet per level once control is established. Basic 
movement rate is 10 feet per round, modified as 
shown below. 

Concentration control is based on Intelligence 
and level of experience—the higher the level the 
greater the mental power and discipline. For every 
point of Intelligence above 12, a wizard adds 1%; 
for every point over 15, another 3% is added. In 
other words, add 1 to each point from 13 to 15, and 
an additional 3% for each point from 16—18—the 
maximum to move it, but if control is not estab- 
lished, the sphere will slide toward the wizard 


attempting to move it. The sphere will continue to 
5152 


1268 


Sphere, Glain’s Crystal 


Wa 
WW 


N 
N 
Ņ 


` \ 

À A SN Ñ 
N ` NN 

N VSL > 


~X a 
AS NS 


Ss 


N 


move in this direction for 1d4 rounds and as long as 
the wizard is within 30 feet after that. 

If two or more wizards vie for control of a sphere 
of annihilation, the one with the highest percentage 
chance to control the sphere is checked first, then 
the next strongest, and so forth. Control chance is 
reduced 5% per person, cumulative, when two or 
more wizards concentrate on the sphere, even if 
they are cooperating. If none are successful, the 
sphere will slip toward the strongest. Control must 
be checked each round. 

Should a gate spell be cast upon a sphere, there 
is a 50% chance that the spell destroys it, 35% 
that the spell does nothing, and 15% that a gap is 
torn in the spatial fabric, and everything in a 180- 
foot radius is catapulted into another plane or 
universe. If a rod of cancellation touches a 
sphere, a tremendous explosion will occur as they 
negate each other. Everything within a 60-foot 
radius sustains 3d4x10 points of damage. (See 
also Talisman, of the Sphere.) 

In Ravenloft: Anyone who attempts to control 
this sphere in the demiplane captures the atten- 
tion of the Ravenloft powers and must make a 
powers check. 


of Darkness 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The sphere of darkness was developed, it is said, 
to block the keyholes of the doors to Orlow’s 


5 1269 = 


study and so prevent anyone from seeing that he 
was napping and not creating exotic magic as he 
claimed. These are spheres, 1-inch-diameter that 
consist of an area in which light cannot exist (and 
is thus totally black). They obey any command 
given by their owners, but never travel more than 
20 feet from him or her for any reason. When not 
otherwise ordered, the sphere floats directly over 
the head of the user (probably attracting unwanted 
attention or even derision). They cannot be 
harmed and obey their owners until death. Upon 
the death of its owner, the sphere obeys the next 
sentient being that touches it. 


of False Calling 

GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 145 
A sphere of false calling resembles a sphere of 
warning. This cursed sphere, however, sounds a 
random alarm every 1 d6 months, and tends to 
glow and hum at particularly inopportune 
moments (such as before a wedding or a visita- 
tion from friendly forces). This sphere never 
glows before an attack. 


XP Value: — 


Gax’s Sphere of Annihilation 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 30,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 29 
This dangerous sphere can be commanded by any 
wizard, but only by one at a time. Intelligence 
scores are used to determine who controls the 
sphere when two or more wizards are vying for it. 
If both of the competing wizards are of the same 
Intelligence, then a successful initiative roll 
determines control for one round, during which 
time the sphere may be moved 10 yards in the 
direction of the controller’s choice. Initiative 
must be reestablished every round. Unchallenged 
wizards are able to move the sphere 10 yards each 
round for every point of Intelligence they pos- 
sess. The sphere cannot remain stationary when 
not uncontrolled. 


Glain’s Crystal 

GP Value: 1,500 
IMAGINE Magazine 12 
These are small, 4-inch-diameter hollow spheres 
with porcelain cores. Enlarge and shatter are cast 
upon the cores, and mending upon the glass 
spheres, which binds them into incredibly strong, 
single units, without any flaws or weaknesses, 
each containing a core. Each individual crystal 
sphere has a command word that negates the 
effects of the binding spell. Once the command 
word is spoken, the slightest movement of the 
sphere causes the core to expand and shatter with 
a fragmentation effect. The effect causes 4d6 


points of damage to all creatures within a 10-foot 
5156 


XP Value: 500 


> 


Sphere, Karnrohb’s Airy 


radius. The spheres can be used as a booby trap 
by placing a magic mouth upon one, primed to 
repeat the command word. 


Karnrohb’s Airy 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 

Otherlands 
Used mostly in rescuing air breathing creatures 
from drowning, this tiny glass globe creates a 
globe of energy 6 feet in diameter. Inside the 
globe is a constantly replenishing supply of fresh 
air. Water is kept out, but the energy cannot keep 
out spells or living creatures. 

To activate the tiny globe, it must be either 
hurled at the subject or tapped on the subject's 
forehead. The sphere can be hurled up to 20 feet 
away, 

The sphere can be used three times a day, each 
use lasting three hours. This tiny item has a very 
limited offensive capability; a resourceful person 
could throw the sphere at a water-breathing foe, 
causing the enemy to “drown” in the air. The 
thrower performs this action by making a stan- 
dard attack roll (the target is AC 10 minus any 
bonuses for Dexterity, quickness, or speed), - 

The sphere always remains centered on the 
subject, though he or she may voluntarily depart 
by actively concentrating on leaving the sphere. 
The subject can take no other action that round, 


Mierest’s Starlit 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 2,000 
The Magister 

Said to be a gift from the purple-cloaked arch- 
mage to a traveler who visited Shamblegate, the 
sphere is of shining silver metal that no blow can 
crush or mark and that does not tarnish, rust, cor- 
rode, or show any effects of heat or flame. It has a 
diameter of 4 inches, weighs about a pound, and 
always feels comfortably warm to the touch. 

The sphere twinkles with a shifting pattern of 
cold, blue-white pinpoints of light, whose soft 
glow clearly illuminates a 20-foot radius. Within 
this area all sounds are hushed, no winds blow, 
and all dancing lights, darkness, faerie fire, light, 
and illusion spells are dispelled. Within the area 
of the globe’s illumination, all vision is aided by 
true sight. If passed through an open flame, the 
sphere emits soft music of muffled chimes that 
dies away in 1d4 rounds if the sphere is not 
brought into a flame again, This music can be 
heard up to 110 feet away, and stills shriekers 
who hear it, as well as fascinating most bards. 

Undead will not willingly enter or remain in 
the sphere’s illumination, and the more powerful 
among them usually seek to kill the bearer by 
magical means and destroy the globe . 


Sa AE o 


Thaddigren’s Glowglobes 

XP Value: 30 GP Value: 300 
Dungeon Magazine 24 
Thaddigren Dentiata’s glowglobes are 1-foot in 
diameter silver spheres enchanted with modi- 
fied continual light spells. The spell is triggered 
on and off by touching a 4-inch-square silver 
plate that was created at the same time as the 
glowglobe but was installed elsewhere. Most of 
the glowglobes are fixed in place and impossi- 
ble to remove without damaging them. The 
portable glowglobes are activated by touching a 
l-inch-diameter, ruby jewel on their square 
bases. If the jewel is pried from its setting, it 
becomes worthless and the glowglobe is ren- 
dered useless. 

Any portable glowglobe removed from the 
tower requires recharging after 10d4 turns of use. 
A recharged glowglobe works for 10d4 turns 
before needing to be recharged again. Recharging 
requires a spellcaster who knows, or can success- 
fully research, the modified spell. Dentiata has 
the third-level recharge glowglobe spell written in 
his spell book. The spell will work only on a pre- 
viously prepared glowglobe, but manufacturing a 
glowglobe from scratch is much more difficult. 

The silver content of a spent or damaged glow- 
globe is worth 20 gp; normal glowglobes are 
worth 300 gp each, and their encumbrance is 10 
pounds each. 


of Warning 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 18,000 
DRAGON Magazine 145 

A sphere of warning is a 2-foot-diameter globe 
suspended in gold or silver framework. The entire 
device is over 4 feet high and 3 feet in diameter, 
weighing about 300 pounds. The outside of the 
magical globe is bright green marble streaked 
with black or red. This sphere is a divination 
device that begins to glow and hum exactly three 
days before the structure in which it is contained 
is to be attacked by any force (an attack is defined 
as any outside party attempting forced entry into 
or committing hostile action against the edifice 
containing the sphere of warning or the proper 
ruler of this edifice). The sphere is capable of 
fine distinctions, and generally has the DM’s 
tastes with regards to the definition of “proper 
ruler,” The hum and glow of the sphere begin qui- 
etly, but increase in intensity during the three 
days before the attack. Unfortunately, the alarm 
of a sphere of warning is always the same, 
whether heralding an army of 3,000 orcs led by 
an archmage or signaling the arrival of three half- 
lings armed with pointed sticks. 

When a sphere of warning is taken from one 


structure to another, it ceases to function, resum- 
5160 


1270 


ee 


` Spyglass s- 


ing operation only when a command word is 
uttered (there is a 50% chance this command 
word is engraved somewhere on the sphere). 


Spiderwalker 
N GP Value: 2,500 

Maztica Campaign Set 
The spiderwalker is an enchanted being created 
from the body of a dried tarantula. When imbued 
with the powers of hishna, the spiderwalker 
becomes a deadly terror. 

It can only be activated at night, and lasts for 
the duration of that night only. It ceases to func- 
tion when the first rays of the sun rise—even if 
that sunrise is concealed by clouds, or the spider- 
walker is indoors or underground. It has the fol- 
lowing statistics: 


XP Value: 5 


Spiderwalker: AC —4; MV 6; HD 13; THACO 7; 
#AT 1; Dmg 1 + poison. 


The creature can spring up to 10 feet in order 
to attack, It can drop from any height, falling with 
amazing accuracy (+2 on attack) onto a victim 
below. 

A spiderwalker can be given very specific 
instructions by one who knows the command 
word. It can be directed to strike at a single indi- 
vidual, or to attack as many of a certain group as 
it encounters. 


Spinning Wheel 


XP Value GP Value 

Cursed: — 1,000 

Normal: 600 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 


This rare item can be used to spin straw into gold. 
The user may spin up to 100 gp per night, for the 
wheel does not function during daylight hours. 
While being used, however, there is a 5% chance 
per night it will attract an undead monster (phan- 
tom, haunt, or spirit); if so, the monster arises 
from the earth with normal chances for surprise. 

Some rare spinning wheels are cursed, so that 
the user automatically pricks a finger on a poi- 
soned spindle. The victim must make a saving 
throw vs. poison with a —4 penalty to the roll or 
sleep until the curse is removed by the kiss of a 
prince or princess. This curse cannot be broken 
otherwise, even by a wish; however, the sleeping 
victim needs no food, water, or air. 


Springerie 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Secret of the Slavers’ Stockade 
Much like a wand of opening, a springerie, when 
struck against a locked or bound object, opens it 
like a knock spell. 


4 1271 : 


Spyglass 

XP Value: 500 ‘ GP Value: 2,500 
Champions of MYSTARA* 
This 2-foot-long, hollow metal tube has an eye- 
piece at one end and a large crystal at the other. 
Anyone looking through the eyepiece can view 
any spot up to one mile distant as though it were 
10 feet away. 


Staff 


Staves are usually 5 or 6 feet long and as thick 
as a young sapling—about 1% inches at the base, 
tapering to | inch at the tip, although they can 
be of nearly equal diameter throughout. Staves 
are typically fashioned of wood, often carved, 
bound with metal, and likely to be gnarled and 
twisted. They can be unusual or quite ordinary. 
Staves, like wands and rods, are powered by 
charges. A stave typically ha 1d6+19 charges 
when found. It is possible for a stave to have 


fewer charges, although almost none have more . 


than this number. Some staves can be recharged 
according to the rules for making magic items. 
Once all the charges are used, the staff is rendered 
nonmagical and cannot be recharged. 

Unless inapplicable or otherwise specified, 
staves function at the 8th-level of magic use. 
Their spell discharge is that of an 8th-level wiz- 
ard with respect to range, duration, and area of 
effect. Damage is nominally 8d6 with respect to 
fireballs, lightning bolts, and other effects. 

Remember that a wizard who possesses a staff 
always has a weapon in hand as well. A staff, 
although magical and possessing one or more 
magical abilities, can also be used as a hand-to- 
hand weapon. These staves cause the same dam- 
age as a normal quarterstaff. 

Command Words (Optional Rule): If the 
DM desires, unleashing the power of a stave can 
require a specific command word or phrase that 
must be discovered or researched separately 
from the item itself. The command can be as 
simple as a single word (“heal”) or as compli- 
cated as a rhyming phrase that must be adjusted 
to fit the circumstances (“I touch this elf; restore 
his health,” or “In this moment of greatest toil, I 
command thee, staff, uncoil!”). Since command 
words are the keys to great power, wise owners 
will memorize them and destroy all other evi- 
dence. Indeed, knowledge of command words 
can be used as a bargaining point in surrender 
negotiations. 


5164 


M 


Staff of Air and Water 


Roll Staff Type 


01-04 Blade Pole 
05-08 Bo Stick 
09-12 Climbing Pole 
13-17 Fustibalus 
18-21 Hooked Pole 
22-25 Jitte 
26-29 ~Jo Stick 
30-33 Kumade 
34-37 Lajatang 
38-42 Lathi 
43—46 Litte 
47-50 Mirror Pole 
51-54 Quabone 
55-58 Quarterstaff 
59-62 Shikomi-Zue 
63-67 Sode Garami 
68-71 Staff 
72-75 Staff-Bow 
76-80 Staff-Mace 
81-83 ` Staff Sling 
84-87 Stick A 
88-92 Sword Stick 
93-96 Sword-Staff 
97-00  Tetsubo 

of Air and Water 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 4,000 


The Minrothad Guilds 
This staff provides the ability to breathe water, 
and its effects on the Elemental Plane of Water 
automatically extend to a 10-foot radius. 


Alar Ch’Aranol’s 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Dark Sun” MC Appendix 
Alar Ch’Aranol, the leader of the Peace-bringers, 
owns a staff of conjuring elementals that is able 
to summon one of each type of lesser elemental 
each day. The summoned elementals always rec- 
ognize Alar as a friend and treat him as they 
would an elemental noble, 


of Aquatic Wizardry 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Otherlands 
Always made from a long piece of driftwood and 
ritually purified during Solinari’s High Sanction, 
these staves are eagerly sought by all Dargonesti 
wizards. They can be wielded as normal weapons 
with a +2 enchantment. They act as rings of pro- 
tection +2 and as necklaces of adaptation, 
enabling the owner to exist above or below the 
sea. 

The staff also enables the wielder to create a 
waterspout three times a week. The spout is a 
funnel of water 100 feet high and 40 feet wide at 
its top, tapering down to 5 feet in width. Anything 


caught up in this fearsome water form is help- 
lessly tossed about, unable to take any action. If 
the staff’s wielder wishes, the victim can be spat 
out of the spout at a movement rate of 48. Should 
the victim’s momentum be halted by something 
hard, like a rock, the impact inflicts 5d12 points 
of damage. The waterspout can be created under 
the sea or on the water’s surface. It lasts for 2d4 
rounds, and has a speed factor of 1. Making a 
waterspout expends two charges. 

The staff also has the following powers, requir- 
ing one charge each: alarm, enlarge, fog cloud, 
shield, summon swarm (tiny marine animals), and 
whispering wave (as whispering wind, but under- 
water). 

The following spells can be cast at the expense 
of two charges: airy water, animal growth (sea 
creatures only), chain lightning, control weather, 
crystalbrittle, dust, Evard’s black tentacles, lower 
water, part water, summon water elemental, 
transmute water to dust, and water breathing. 


Arctor’s Staff of Swarming 
Insects 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 1,500 
1993 Collector Card 350 
Arctor’s staff functions much as a typical staff of 
swarming insects, expending one charge to create 
a swarm of insects (60 insects plus 10 per level of 
the user). However, Arctor can alternately choose 


to create 2d4 —1 giant insects by expending three 
5168 


sae 1272 E 


OO 


charges. In either case, the range of the created 
swarm is 60 feet +10 feet per level of the caster. 


Aric’s Staff of Power 
XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 75,000 

1992 Fantasy Collector Card 22 
Aric’s version of this powerful staff is a variation 
of the staff of power. The following powers con- 
sume one charge: continual light, fire burst, dark- 
ness 5' radius, ray of enfeeblement, cone of cold, 
and ride the wind. Expending two charges will 
grant the following: shield 5’ radius, globe of 
invulnerability, and lower resistance. In addition, 
the staff gives Aric a +2 bonus to his Armor Class 
and saving throws, and a +4 bonus to saving 
throws vs. alteration spells. Expending charges 
does not cause additional damage. 


of Battle 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 173 

This staff is a +3 weapon that cannot be cut by 
any blade. Its magical speed enables its bearer to 
strike first in any round, and it attracts all missiles 
(even magic missiles) passing within 10 feet of 
any part of it. The missiles avoid striking any liv- 
ing being, but touch the staff and are absorbed 
harmlessly. If a staff of battle’s attack roll 
(adjusted with its bonus) is 20 or greater, any 
armed opponent that it strikes must make a suc- 
cessful Dexterity check on 4d6 or be disarmed, 
the opponent’s weapon flying out of immediate 
reach (1d10+10 feet away). These functions are 
all automatic and continuous, and do not drain 
any charges. 

A staff of battle can repel (as the 6th-level wiz- 
ard spell repulsion) all creatures within 10 feet. 
This power drains two charges per use and can be 
exercised only once every six rounds. The repul- 
sion lasts for only two rounds, after that affected 
creatures are free to return. 

Once per day (144 turns), a staff bearer can 
designate any successful hit to be a thunderstrike. 
The decision must be made immediately upon 
striking the target, and the blow instantly drains 
eight charges from the staff (insufficient charges 
produce no result). A thunderstrike can be heard 
as a deep, booming noise; it is a magical force 
sufficient to deal double damage to any opponent 
of human-size or smaller (no saving throw) and 
triple damage to all larger creatures. Any creature 
struck must make a successful Dexterity check on 
1d20 to avoid being thrown to the ground, and 
also make a successful Strength check on 1d20 or 
be stunned for 1d3 rounds. If stunned, the victim 
reels helplessly; gains a —3 penalty to Armor 
Class; is unable to attack, cast spells, or concen- 
trate; and is liable to drop any held weapons or 


Staff, Blackstaff 


Tee 5 


other objects unless a Dexterity check on 1d20 is 
made for each. 

If used against nonliving objects, a thunder- 
strike does | point of structural damage and 
forces any object it strikes to successfully save vs. 
crushing blow at a —3 penalty or be crushed. 


of Battle II 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This staff +1 allows its user double the normal 
number of attacks allowed per round. Once a day, 
it can also be thrown while spinning and does 
double normal damage to the first being it strikes. 


Blackstaff 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 

luz the Evil 

This ghastly blackwood staff is shod with silver 

bands and topped by a carved head that is banded 

and decorated with runes of Iuz’s cult. Only the 

highest-level (13+) priests of luz can possess a 

blackstaff, and very few of these staves exist. The 

staff may only be used by priests or clerics. 

Blackstaffs are charged items, rechargeable by the 

joint efforts of a priest of level 16+ and a wizard 

of the same level. They have a range of effects, 
some of which do not require the use of charges. 

A blackstaff is a +3 magical weapon, but on a 

successful attack roll of an unmodified 18, 19, or 

20, it inflicts double damage (2d6+6) on crea- 

tures of good alignment. 

A priest employing a blackstaff is permanently 
protected from good as long as he or she wields 
the staff. By gripping the staff firmly and touch- 
ing one target creature, the priest may cast com- 
mand or cause fear (reverse of remove fear) three 
times per day each, These functions do not 
expend charges. 

By expending one charge, the priest may create 
any of the following effects: 

Create a screaming skull. 

* Create an 8-HD fireball. 

* Cast cause critical wounds to a range of 30 
yards. 

* Create an acid vortex of 10-foot radius to a 
range of 60 yards. Damage is 8d4 points, 
halved if a successful saving throw vs. staves 
is made. 

By expending two charges, the priest may cre- 
ate any of the following effects: 

* Summon a vampiric mist that persists for up 
to six hours. 

* Inflict a death touch, which requires a success- 
ful attack roll to be made in melee combat. 

* Cause harm to an opponent, again requiring a 
successful melee hit. 


5172 


¥ 1273 7 


d 


Staff, Caduceus 


a ES 


Caduceus 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 9,000 
DRAGON Quest* Game 

This magical staff is carved from oakwood. It has 
two feathered wings on top and two snakes coiled 
around the staff. Three times per adventure, the 
holder of the caduceus may command it to cure 
someone. The effects of this magic are the same 
as the spell of the same name (in other words, 
1d8 points of damage are healed), Only priests 
can use this item. 


of Caracanomnos 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 15,000 
The Milenian Scepter 

It is believed that Caracanomnos created this staff 
from the bones of his own father, who was him- 
self a powerful sorcerer. Over the years, the staff 
has gained a reputation for its destructive power, 
having been the doom of several Milenian heroes 
who sought to defeat Caracanomnos. 

The staff is made of fused bones and topped by 
a leering skull. The eye sockets of the skull are 
filled with obsidian. The staff is only usable by 
wizards. It may be wielded as a staff +2. Addi- 
tionally, it may be used to duplicate the following 
magical spell effects: 
* Curse: Black beams from skull’s eyes, range, 
two charges. 
* Darkness: One charge, radius 10 yards. 
* Magic missile: Four missiles per round, one 
charge. 


Catstaff 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 13,000 
DRAGON Magazine 99 
This item is a black, 7-foot-long staff of stout 
wood, topped with a sculpted knob resembling a 
cat’s head. When carried or strapped to one’s per- 
son, it imparts abilities related to silent movement 
and concealment, The bearer of a catstaff is able 
to perform the following thief-based skills. 


Skill Percentage Change for Success 
Climb walls 98% 
Move silently 70% 
Hide in shadows 94% 


The user can also see with infravison to a 60- 
foot range, and cast shadow six times per day. 
This shadow is a 10-foot-radius globe of semi- 
darkness centered on the staff; the gloom does 
not block infravision, and is negated by a light 
source within its confines. It can be dispelled by 
magical (not normal) light that touches its periph- 
ery. Unless dispelled or canceled by the desire of 
the staff holder it remains in effect for 1d4 turns. 
The shadow does not allow normal vision into or 


through its area of effect, and as such serves as a 
defense against visual attacks (gaze weapons, 
hypnotic and dazzling effects, and the like). 

The catstaff is a magical weapon and can be 
used in combat as a normal quarterstaff would be; 
however, it has no bonuses to attack or damage. It 
can be employed as a weapon while any or all of 
its magical properties are being used. The staff 
never makes any noise while tapping, scraping, 
striking, or otherwise contacting solid objects. 
Many of these staves contain secret compart- 
ments for the carrying of small items such as 
thieves’ tools, spell components, magical tokens, 
and the like. If broken in two, all magical proper- 
ties are lost. 


Catstaff II 

XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 13,000 
The Magister 
This item is a black, 7-foot-long staff of stout 
wood topped with a sculpted knob resembling a 
cat’s head. When carried or strapped to one’s per- 
son, it gives the user the abilities of silent move- 
ment and concealment. The bearer of a catstaff is 
able to climb walls (if both hands are free) and 
move silently as a 9th-level thief, hide in shadows 
with a 94% chance of success, see with infravi- 
sion to a 60-foot range, and cast shadow six times 
a day. The shadow is a globe of semidarkness, 10- 
foot-radius, centered on the staff; its gloom does 
not block infravision, and is negated by a light 
source within its confines. It can be dispelled by 
magical (but not normal) light that touches its 
periphery, and unless dispelled or canceled by the 
desire of the staff holder, it remains in effect for 
1d4+1 turns. The shadow does not allow normal 
vision into or through its area of effect, and 
serves as a defense against visual attacks (gaze 
weapons, hypnotic and dazzling effects, and the 
like). 


The catstaff is a magical weapon and can be 
used in combat as a normal quarterstaff, although 
it gives no bonuses to attack or damage rolls. It 
can be employed as a weapon while any or all of 
its magical properties are being used. The staff 
never makes any noise itself while tapping, scrap- 
ing, striking, or otherwise contacting any solid 
object. Many such staves contain secret compart- 
ments for carrying small items such as thieves’ 
tools, spell components, magical tokens, and the 
like. If it is broken, the staff’s magical properties 
are all lost. 


Centeotl’s 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 35,000 
Legends & Lore 
When victims are hit by Centeotl’s staff, they 


must save vs. poison or fall ill and suffer an addi- 
5177 


a ge ee ee 


l 


274 


~ Staff of the Couatl 


tional 1d6 point loss from Constitution. The loss 
is permanent, although the points can be restored 
by a cure disease spell. 


of Cirulon 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
Dragon Keep 
This is a staff of clear crystal, 6 feet in length. It 
holds a maximum of 50 charges and can be 
recharged at a rate of three charges a day if 
exposed to sunlight. The staff can perform all of 
the following functions once a day like the vari- 
ous spells, each function requiring one charge: 
detect evil, detect magic, cure light wounds, cure 
disease, neutralize poison, and purify food and 
drink. 


of Command 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This device has three functions, only two of 
which are effective if the wielder is a wizard; all 
three work when the staff is in a priest’s hands. 
The staff can be recharged. The three functions 
are: 

Human influence: This power duplicates that 
of the ring of the same name. Each suggestion or 
charm draws one charge from the staff. 

Mammal control/animal control: This power 
functions only as mammal control (as the ring of 
that name) when the staff is used by a wizard. In 
the hands of a priest it is a staff of animal control 
(as the potion of the same name, all types of ani- 
mals listed). Either use drains one charge per turn 
or fraction of it. 

Plant control: This function duplicates that of 
the potion of the same name, but for each 10- 
square-foot area of plants controlled for one turn 
or less, one charge is used. A wizard cannot con- 
trol plants at all. 


of Commanding 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS” Rules Cyclopedia 
Usable by all spellcasters, this item has all the 
powers of the rings of animal, human, and plant 
control, 


of Conjuration 
XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 60,000 
POLYHEDRON” Newszine 82 

This weapon is a magical quarterstaff +3. Carv- 
ings depicting animals, flying creatures, 
humanoids, and monsters of several kinds cover 
its complete length. Any conjurer (specialist wiz- 
ard) can use the special powers of this staff. 
* The staff can use up to seven charges per day to 

cast monster summoning spells. Monster sum- 


| rrr ae, 


l 


275 


N 
A 
Ai 
N S 
A 
i 


fr 


moning I costs one charge and greater spells 
cost additional charges according to their 
power; monster summoning VII costs seven 
charges. The staff cancels all protection from 
evil/good spells in a 30-foot radius, making it 
possible for the conjured creatures to attack. 
Once a day, the conjurer can cause four black 
tentacles to grow from his or her sides. Each 
tentacle is AC 4, 15 feet long, and has 20 hit 
points. The tentacles attack with a THACO of 
15. A successful hit inflicts 1d6 points of dam- 
age and the tentacle wraps around the target. On 
each round after the first, the victim takes 2d6 
points constriction damage and must make a 
saving throw vs. spell each round or loses | 
point of Strength. A creature can escape by 
making a successful open doors roll. This power 
drains three charges. 


of the Couatl 
XP Value: 7,500 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 86 
The staff of the couatl is a device much appreci- 
ated and used by good priests, particularly those 
who follow the good-aligned deities of the Cen- 
tral American mythos. The lawful neutral priests 
of Quetzalcoatl, however, may use staves of this 
sort normally. A staff of the couatl is about 7 feet 
long, with the top 3 feet of the staff fashioned in 
the shape of a winged couatl. Such staves are usu- 


ally made from precious materials such as ivory 
$182 


k. 


o eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeesesesesesasi‘isésOsOsCtC 


Staff of Curing 


E 


over a silver core, and are magically strengthened 
so they can be used in combat (as quarterstaves). 
This powerful staff has the following abilities: 

* It can be used to summon one couatl a month to 
serve the needs of the priest possessing the staff. 
The couatl has randomly determined hit points 
and psionic abilities. It fights on behalf of the 
summoning priest until the opponent is van- 
quished or escapes, or until the user of the staff 
commands the attack to cease. If the couatl is 
summoned to fight against insurmountable odds, 
or if the combat does not seem to be favoring the 
side of the couatl and the priest, the couatl will 
wrap its tail around the priest and transport both 
of them to a place of safety elsewhere on the 
Prime Material Plane (by traveling through the 
Ethereal Plane). The destination is not under the 
control of the priest. In any event, the couatl van- 
ishes back into the Ethereal Plane 1d4+4 turns 
after being summoned, or sooner if the priest 
commands it. This power may be used only by 
lawful good priests who follow Quetzalcoatl. 

So long as the staff is carried, the priest gains a 
+2 bonus to saving throws vs. spell, including 
magical effects, and a +4 bonus to saves vs. poi- 
son. These bonuses are cumulative with those 
offered by other devices, like a ring of protection. 
The staff is +1 on attack and damage rolls when 
used in combat. 

The staff may be used to affect the casting of 
certain spells: detect evil and snake charm each 
three times a day; neutralize poison and sticks to 
snakes each once a day; and wind walk once a 
week. All spell effects are at the 8th level of 
ability. 

A priest of neutral alignment, with the excep- 
tion of neutral good priests, (that is, lawful neu- 
tral, chaotic neutral, or neutral evil) who grasps 
the staff is never harmed, but cannot use any of its 
powers (except for priests of Quetzalcoatl). An 
evil priest who picks it up takes 1d4+1 points of 
damage each round the staff is held. If a priest of 
Tezcatlipoca, Quetzalcoatl’s chief rival, is struck 
by or picks up this staff, damage is doubled, and 
the priest must save vs. poison each round the 
staff is held or die. 


of Curing 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This device can cure disease, cure blindness, cure 
wounds (3d6+3 hit points), or cure insanity. Each 
function drains one charge. The device can be 
used once per day on any person (dwarf, elf, 
gnome, half-elf, halfling included), and no func- 
tion may be employed more than twice a day (the 
staff can function only eight times during a 24- 
hour period). It can be recharged. 


of Curing II 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 35 
This staff has the ability to slay any porcine crea- 
ture, including certain humans, for its strike turns 
them into a roughly triangular, semi-boneless 
heap. 


Damh’s 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar’s staff can affect 2d4 korreds, satyrs, 
or atomies as a potion of invulnerability by touch 
once a day. 


of Devotion 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 35,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This magical staff may only be used by priests (of 
any kit), Hierarchy priests (pragmatists, ethoists, 
and moralists) gain additional advantages. Any 
priest may use the following powers without 
draining any charges, three times a day, once per 
round: atonement, bless, create food & water, 
cure light wounds, avert evil eye, purify food & 
drink. The following powers use one charge each 
but may be used multiple times in one day, once 
per round, by any type of priest: cure serious 
wounds, dispel magic, enthrall, neutralize poison, 
remove curse. The following powers use three 
charges each and may only be used by hierarchy 
priests (the pragmatist, ethoist, and moralist kits): 
flame strike, holy word, legend lore, raise dead, 
restoration. In addition, the staff provides a +2 
bonus to all saving throws of the individual who 
holds it. 


Dionysus’s 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
Legends & Lore 
Anyone who is touched by the staff of Dionysus’s 
avatar must save vs. spell or suffer from confu- 
sion as the priest spell. 


of Disjoining 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 22,500 
DUNGEON Magazine 35 

Records of how to construct this powerful staff 
have been lost in antiquity, though it seems cer- 
tain to require the aid of a high-level priest. This 
type of staff is unadorned, resembling a gnarled 
walking stick. Sacred in nature, a staff of disjoin- 
ing may be used only by a priest of the appropri- 
ate alignment. 

A staff of disjoining has two powers. At the 
cost of one charge, the staff may inflict feeble- 
mindedness (like the spell) on any being it hits. 


The staff’s primary power, however, is much 
5188 


j 1276 F 


i = 


~ Staff of Divergence y 


more awesome. At the cost of two charges (more 
may be spent for greater effect if the user so 
desires), the user may attempt to disjoin any 
being hit, separating the victim’s body from its 
mind. The victim must be hit by the staff and is 
allowed a saving throw vs. staves at —2 to avoid 
the effect. 

If the saving throw fails, the victim’s body and 
mind enter a state of suspended animation for a 
number of turns equal to the number of charges 
spent. When the disjoining ceases, the victim 
returns to a normal state. 

If the user of the staff is a high priest, he or she 
may opt to permanently disjoin the target. The 
target must first be disjoined by the staff in the 
normal way. Then the high priest speaks a special 
command word and the staff floats into the air, 
maintaining the state of disjunction in the target 
until the staff is moved by an outside force. 

Each staff of disjoining has a specific align- 
ment. Only beings of the same morals as the staff 
(good, neutral, or evil) may disturb a floating 
staff. Others who attempt to may conclude that 
the staff is illusory—hands or objects pass 
through it. If the staff is touched or bumped by a 
being of the same morals, there is a 75% chance 
that either the mind or the body of the disjoined 
being is released (50% chance for each). If the 
staff is grasped, both are released. 

The act of permanently disjoining a target uses 
up all of the staff’s remaining charges. Temporar- 
ily disjoining a target does not require the staff to 
remain in place and may be done any number of 


_ times, depending on the staff's total charges. 


These staves cannot be recharged. 


of Dispelling 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DuNGEONS & DRaGoNns Rules Cyclopedia 

The touch of this item has the same effect as a 
dispel magic spell from a 15th-level caster, but it 
will affect only the item or magical effect 
touched. Any potion or scroll touched is com- 
pletely destroyed, and any permanent magical 
item touched becomes nonmagical for 1d4 rounds 
(including armor and weapons). This effect may 
be permanently harmful to intelligent swords 
(DM’s choice). Each use of the staff costs one 
charge. This staff is usable by any character. 


of Displacement 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DRAGON Magazine 173 
This magical staff functions at all times as a cloak 
of displacement +2 when up to three beings hold 
it. The protection functions continuously and 
drains no charges. 
The staff can also, upon command (a silent act 


of will not requiring a gesture or utterance), 
enable a single creature grasping the staff to 
Jump, as the Ist-level wizard spell. This function 
drains one charge and may be activated as often 
as desired, once per round. 

The staff can also part water by touch in a 5- 
foot cylinder. The cylinder is centered on the staff 
and extends 4 feet beyond either end of it, 
enabling beings to breathe air while submerged. 
Magical processes replenish the air continuously 
to keep it fresh and drain one charge per round 
from the staff while performing this function. 
This function requires the utterance of a secret 
command word to activate the staff. The function 
ceases upon the mental command of any being 
grasping the staff, and it may be used as often as 
desired. 

Finally, all staves of displacement can tem- 
porarily negate (but not destroy) wizard locks and 
hold portal spells, regardless of the level of the 
caster. The touch of the staff causes the guarded 
door or portal to glow with a faint radiance for 
1d4 rounds; during this time, all creatures who 
wish to do so may pass freely through the guarded 
area. When “free passage” ceases, any creatures 
caught passing through the guarded area may 
proceed but must suffer a system shock roll. This 
function operates automatically, whether passage 
is desired or not, and drains one charge per level 
of the caster of the hold portal or wizard lock. 


of Divergence 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 9,500 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 

This sort of staff is a defensive weapon. Upon its 
crafting, the staff must be set to guard against one 
type of attack (typically “fire” or”lightning”). It 
is effective only against the chosen types of 
attack, of both natural and magical origin, and 
regardless of intensity. 

Any attack of the chosen type directed within 9 
feet of any part ofa staff of divergence is auto- 
matically turned away, to a spot or target within 
90 feet chosen by the staff bearer. If no one is 
holding the staff or if the bearer does not choose a 
destination for the attack, determine where it 
takes effect randomly. This function of the staff 
drains three charges per use, and can be used only 
six times in any 24-hour period. 

Divergence is effective against spells and mag- 
ical item discharges employing the attack form 
guarded against, but it cannot guard against “all 
spells” or “all poisons.” It could be crafted to 
ward off “all acids,” but all flaming attacks and 
all electrical and energy discharge attacks are by 
far the most common attack types guarded against 
by such staves. 


A staff of divergence has an additional power, 
5191 


1277 


Staff, Diviner of Life 


fp ene ae 


usable at will and requiring no charges. It can 
emit a faerie fire radiance of any hue desired. The 
staff must be held to change the intensity and 
color of the radiance, or to end it. These processes 
require concentration that precludes spellcasting, 
but can be accomplished within a round. 


Diviner of Life 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
Dragons of Dreams 
This magical artifact was created by Waylorn 
Wyvernsbane during the Age of Might. The staff 
is 4 feet long. Each end is capped with a band of 
gold and steel that is 6 inches long. The staff has 
a 3-foot long section of what appears to be clear 
glass in the middle. It will withstand 20 points of 
damage before breaking. If the glass breaks, the 
staff is useless. 

There seems to be a swirling white fog within 
the glass section. When the keyword is spoken, 
the fog clears completely. If the staff then touches 
a living being, the life force (hit points) of that 
being will register as a bright green line that 
extends from the bottom of the staff, 1 inch per 
10 hit points registered. The staff was used by 
commanders for determining the general condi- 
tion of their troops. 


Dolmaria’s Staff of Withering 
XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 40,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 75 

Delmaria’s staff is a +2 weapon to attack and 
causes 1d4+2 points of damage when a single 
charge is expended. If two charges are expended, 
the struck enemy also ages 20 years. Three 
charges will wither a random limb of the struck 
creature. Ageless creatures are unaffected by the 
staff, However, there is always a 5% chance per 
charge expended that the effects of the staff will 
backfire on Delmaria (one charge has a 5% 
chance; two charges, 10% chance, and so on). 


Druid 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Moonshae 
The druid staff is a shaft of oak with a head 
carved in the shape of a wild animal, usually a 
boar, wolf, deer, or eagle. The staff allows the 
user to perform several special functions. 

It can be used to summon animals of the type 
carved onto the staff. At a cost of two charges, the 
user can send out a call. All animals of the appro- 
priate type within 12 miles hasten to the druid as 
quickly as possible. Once they reach the druid, 
they act as if under an animal control spell. 

The staff can also be used to cast animal con- 
trol on any animal within sight of the staff, at a 
cost of one charge. The staff functions as a magi- 


cal weapon, with a +2 bonus to attack, inflicting 
1d6+2 points of damage on a successful hit. 

The staff also functions as a python staff, with 
the characteristics of the staff of the serpent. This 
includes the destruction of the staff if the snake is 
killed. Using the staff as a snake costs one charge. 

At a cost of two charges, the staff can be used 
to cast one of the following druidic spells: call 
lightning, dispel magic, cure serious wounds, 
plant growth, cure disease, and speak with plants. 

Once a month, with no cost in charges, the 
staff can perform one of the following greater 
abilities: wall of fire, transmute rock to mud, con- 
jure fire elemental, insect plague, wall of thorns, 
and conjure earth elemental. 

After using its greater power once, the staff 
only regains this ability if it is recharged ina 
Moonwell beneath a full moon. 


of the Druids 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

This staff is usable only by druids. A druid carry- 
ing one gains an extra spell at each spell level. 
The extra spells must be selected when the usual 
spells are acquired (usually during morning med- 
itation). Each day’s use of the staff uses one 
charge. The staff is a weapon +3 as well, and may 
be used as such (inflicting 1d6+3 points of dam- 
age) without using any charges. 


of an Element 


XP Value GP Value 
Earth: 10,000 20,000 
Air: 10,000 20,000 
Fire: 10,000 20,000 
Water: 10,000 20,000 
Earth and Fire: 20,000 45,000 
Air and Water: 20,000 45,000 
Elemental Power: 30,000 65,000 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
Usable only by wizards, there are seven types of 
these staves; roll 1d100 to learn the exact type 
found. 


Roll Staff Type 

01-21 of Earth 

22-42 ofAir 

43-63 of Fire 

64-84 of Water 

85-91 of Earth and Fire 
92-98 of Air and Water 
99-00 of Elemental Power 


Each staff is a staff +2 and may be used as one 
without using any charges, striking for 1d6+2 
points of damage. Staves of two elements gain all 
the powers of both staves, and the staff of elemen- 


tal power has the powers of all four. 
5196 


” a a 


1278 


ee ee ee eee ee eee a a a a T M u 


~ Staff of the Elements y- 


Each staff contains the following powers when 
used on the Prime Material Plane: 
+ A +4 bonus to saving throws vs. attack forms 
based on that element. 
* Complete immunity to attacks by any elemen- 
tal of that type. 
* The ability to summon one 8 HD elemental of 
that type per day (as the wizard spell), each sum- 
moning costing one charge. 
* Certain spell-like effects, each costing one 
charge per use. These created spell effects are 
treated as if cast by a 10th-level spellcaster. The 
effects are dependent on the type of element as 
follows: 
* Earth: web, wall of stone 
* Air: lightning bolt, cloudkill 
* Fire: fireball, wall of fire 
* Water: ice storm or wall 
When used on the elemental plane of the corre- 
sponding type, the powers are quite different. As 
long as one or more charges remain in the staff, 
the powers granted to the holder are not the pow- 
ers given above, but rather the following powers: 
* Immunity to damage from the plane itself, 
with vision to 60-foot range. 
* Movement within the plane at the rate of 120 
feet per turn (60 feet/round). 
* Communication ability with any resident of 
that plane. 


* A-—4 bonus to Armor Class if attacked by a 
resident of that plane. 

Note that these staves do not provide the ability 
to breathe on the plane; some other device or 
spell must also be used. However, when a staff is 
used along with a matching ring of elemental 
adaptation or talisman of elemental travel, all 
effects given above are extended to a 10-foot 
radius around the user. 

Except for the staff of elemental power, each 
staff can be used to negate effects relating to the 
element to which it is opposed at the cost of one 
charge if the effect was produced by the opposite 
staff or two charges if a normal spell was used. 
For example, a staff of air could be used to negate 
a wall of fire spell cast by any wizard, at the cost 
of two charges. 

A summoned elemental may be sent back to its 
home plane with the same cost of charges (one if 
produced by the opposite staff, two if conjured by 
spell), but the elemental must be touched by the 
staff (possibly requiring a normal attack roll). 

If a staff is ever taken to the plane it is opposed 
to, it immediately explodes, inflicting 20 points 
of electrical damage plus 1d8 points of damage 
per charge remaining in the staff. The explosion 
fills a sphere of 60-foot-radius; all creatures 
within the effect may make a saving throw vs. 


spell with a -4 penalty to the roll to take half 
damage. The wielder of the staff, however, gets 
no saving throw. 


of the Elements 


XP Value GP Value 
Earth: 10,000 25,000 
Air: 10,000 25,000 
Fire: 10,000 25,000 
Water: 10,000 25,000 


Tome of Magic 
This powerful item appears to be a staff +2. If it 
is grasped by an elementalist, however, its true 
power becomes evident. 

A staff of the elements is charged by the life 
force of an elemental trapped within it. The staff 
has charges equal to the number of Hit Dice of 
the elemental multiplied by 2. Thus, a staff hold- 
ing a 12-HD elemental has 24 charges. Every 
time two charges are expended, the elemental 
loses 1 Hit Die. When all charges are expended, 
the elemental dies and the staff becomes dor- 
mant. 

If a dormant staff is used to successfully strike 
an elemental, the creature must immediately 
attempt a saving throw vs. Rod, staff, or wand. If 
the save fails, the elemental is absorbed into the 
staff, thereby recharging the device. If the roll is 
successful, the creature avoids the effect, but suf- 
fers normal damage from the strike of the magi- 
cal staff (1d6+2). It is possible to absorb an 
elemental only if the staff is dormant. Only one 
elemental may be held in the staff at one time. 

The staff holds the following powers that do 
not drain charges; each may be used once per day 
even if the staff does not hold an elemental: 


Affect normal fires 

Detect elementals within a 100’ radius 
Fool’s gold 

Metamorphose liquids 


Wall of fog 


An occupied staff has the following powers 
depending upon the type of elemental trapped 
within. For example, if a fire elemental is held in 
the staff, only those powers related to fire are 
available. 

The following powers require the expenditure 
of one charge per use: 


Earth: Dig, Maximilian 5 stony grasp 
Air: Stinking cloud, wind wall 

Fire: Fireball, pyrotechnics 

Water: Water breathing, watery double 


The following powers drain two charges per 


use: 
5197 


aa eS 


1279 


o E 


~ Staff of the Elements: Air 5 


Earth: Passwall, transmute rock to mud 
Air: Cloudkill, solid fog 

Fire: Fire shield, wall of fire 

Water: Airy water, wall of ice 


The most powerful abilities of the staff drain 
four charges per use: 


Earth: Crystalbrittle, stone to flesh (reversible) 

Air: Airboat, suffocate 

Fire: Forest's fiery constrictor, Malec-Keth s 
flame fist 

Water: Abi-Dalzim’s horrid wilting, transmute 


water to dust 


The powers of a staff of the elements may be used 
only by an elementalist. Note that elementalists are 
restricted against the use of spells and magical items 
of the element that directly opposes their element of 
specialty. Thus, an elementalist specializing in water 
cannot use the staff’s powers if it contains a fire ele- 
mental. Using a staff of the elements can be danger- 
ous. Each time a power is used that requires the 
expenditure of one or more charges there is a 5% 
chance that the trapped elemental bursts forth, 
destroying the staff in the process. A successful dis- 
pel magic spell cast on the staff automatically 
releases the creature. An escaped elemental will cer- 
tainly seek revenge against its tormenter. 


of the Elements: Air 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 20,000 
í Infinity Sphere 
Slightly modified from the version found in the 
Tome of Magic, this staff has the following prop- 
erties: 
+ Affect normal fires three times a day 
* Fireball, pyrotechnics, magic missile twice a 
day 
* Fire shield, wall of fire once a day. 
* Forest's fiery constrictor, Malec-Keth’s flame 


fist 


of the Elements: Fire 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Infinity Sphere 
A slightly modified version of that in the Tome of 
Magic, this staff has the following powers: 
* Wall of fog, three times a day 
* Stinking cloud, wind wall, twice a day 
* Cloud kill, solid fog, once a day 
* Airboat, suffocate, once a week 


of Ethereal Action 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Magister 
Also known as a blink staff, this item appears to 
be a normal wooden staff, but when a command 


word is spoken, it allows the holder to blink, as in 
the spell, for a cumulative period of up to two 
turns per day. In battle, the blinking stops (and 
begins again) instantly upon the holder’s com- 
mand. 

This staff +1 is able to strike creatures on the 
Ethereal Plane (such as couatl, ghosts, phase spi- 
ders, and characters using armor or oil of ethere- 
alness), as well as those on the Prime Material 
Plane. This staff neither has nor requires charges. 


of the Fates 
XP Value: 25,000 GP Value: 90,000 
Fate of Istus 

The staff of the fates can be used as a staff of 
striking, but it also has magical powers that the 
user can call upon. Every time the holder uses 
the staff in this fashion, his or her Intelligence 
score suffers a temporary decrease. The device 
goes inert (and no point loss occurs) if the user 
tries to call upon a power that would reduce the 
Intelligence to less than 9. Lost Intelligence 
points are regained at the rate of 1 each day, by 
resting or sleeping for at least four hours. Frac- 
tional lost points are disregarded for purposes 
of Intelligence-related abilities; for instance, a 
character with a score of 15% makes Intelli- 
gence Checks as if his or her score was 16. The 
following powers can be employed by the user 
once a day: 

Powers costing 2 points: Timestop, tempus 
fugit, magic mirror (unlimited range and dura- 
tion, contact other plane; no chance of failure or 
insanity). 

Powers costing 1% points: reincarnation, 
sending, truename, geas. 

Powers costing 1 point: divination, true see- 
ing, find the path, word of recall. 

Powers costing % point: all cantrips and all 
Ist-level priest spells. 


Fiend 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Vault of the Drow 
The fiend staff has a number of functions, but 
each can be used only once per day. 
* Touch causes fear (no save). 
+ A hit causes 4d6 points of damage. 
* Summon any lesser baatezu. 
* Transforms the holder into any lesser baatezu 

for 5 rounds. 


of Flames 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This staff allows any wizard to use the following 
powers, at the cost of one charge per use: affect 


normal fires, flaming sphere, pyrotechnics, sun- 
5203 


. naa 


1280 


Se —— EEE —E———— 


dazzle, sunfire. The following powers use two 
charges, except in the case of flame mages, who 
expend only one charge from the staff: conjure 
fire elemental, sun stones, enhance fire creatures. 
Only a flame mage may use conflagration, it con- 
sumes four charges (the staff wielder’s level is 
used to determine the duration of this spell). The 
wielder is also considered to be under the effects 
of a flameproof spell as long as he or she holds 
the staff. The flameproof effect disappears when 
all charges of the staff are expended. 


Fraz-Urb-Iuu’s 
XP Value: 18,000 GP Value: 90,000 
The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth 
Fraz-Urb-[uu’s own weapon is a staff that com- 
bines the abilities of a rod of beguiling, a rod of 
rulership, and a staff of command. This weapon 
was stolen when he was imprisoned, and has 
since disappeared. No one, not even other fiends, 
wishes to see this artifact recovered. 


of Fury 

GP Value: 40,000 
Old Empires 
This staff is used in conjunction with a wizard’s 
normal arsenal of spells. When a wizard casts 
spells while holding this staff, all spells are +1 on 
casting time, but become devastatingly powerful. 
Damage spells gain +1 per die, even exceeding 
maximums. All saving throws against the spells 


XP Value: 8,000 


of a wizard using a staff of fury suffer a —2 
penalty. Each time this function is used, it drains 
the staff of a charge. 

This staff can also be used as a defensive 
weapon. In this case, the caster cannot perform 
any offensive actions that round, but may use the 
staff to block up to three successful attacks each 
round, be it with a weapon in combat, or at range 
with a missile weapon. Each block drains the 
staff of one charge; the wizard must specify how 
many potential attacks are being blocked at the 
start of the round. It is rechargeable. 


Geb’s Quarterstaff 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 45,000 
Legends & Lore 

Geb’s avatar traditionally carries a quarterstaff 
+3 in combat that can duplicate the function of 
any magical item or spell relating to the earth. For 
example, it can be commanded to function as a 
spade of colossal excavation or to cast a trans- 
mute rock to mud spell. 


of Glyphs 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 
DRAGON Magazine 50 

This is a charged item whose sole function is to 
create certain glyphs of warding. The staff has a 
predetermined set of givphs (up to three), each of 
which require an increasing level of charges. For 
example, a staff might contain Fryz, cast by use 
of one charge, Cino by use of two, and Wod by 
use of three charges, the name of the g/yph being 
the appropriate command word. The item is used 
by touching it to the area to be warded (the size of 
the area should also be predetermined and con- 
stant). Only a priest can use it, and it does not 
automatically give the priest the power to cast a 
particular g/yph. 


of Gnatmarsh 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
GREYHAWK* Adventures 

Enchanted by a shaman of the tribesmen in Gnat- 

marsh, this rechargeable staff has the following 

magical functions: 

+ Death magic against a single insect or insec- 
toid monster, fatal unless a saving throw vs. 
death magic is successful (one charge). 

* Animate dead insect or fallen insect life in a 
10-foot area (two charges). 

* Summon 1d4+2 friendly thri-kreen (or insects 
chosen by the DM) to fight for the summoner 
for eight hours or until slain, at which time 
they disappear (three charges). 


5208 


—— SS —Ee ee 


1281 


Staff of Harming 


D, i ee 


of Harming 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 35,000 
Red Arrow, Black Shield 

The staff of harming functions like a reversed 
staff of healing, but at the cost of one charge per 
creature harmed. It inflicts 1d6+1 points of dam- 
age if it touches any creature (no saving throw); a 
normal attack roll may be required. This is in 
addition to normal weapon damages (1d6 points), 
if applicable. The staff can also create the follow- 
ing effects, with the costs noted. Each effect is 
identical to the reversed form of a priest spell. 
Note that the use of this staff is an evil act. 


Effect Charges 

Cause blindness 2 charges 

Cause disease 2 charges 

Cause serious wounds 3 charges 

Create poison 4 charges 
of Healing 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 40,000 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
Usable only by priests, this staff will heal 1d6+1 
points of damage per use. It may only be used 
once a day per person, but it will heal any number 
of persons once a day. It does not have or use 
charges for healing. 

As an option, the DM may add charges to the 
staff (in addition to its curing abilities) to create 
the following effects, at the cost of the charges 
indicated. 

* Cure blindness: | charge 

* Cure disease: 1 charge 

* Cure serious wounds: 2 charges 
* Neutralize poison: 2 charges 


of Hornwood 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 15,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This wooden staff was enchanted by a wizard 
who wanted to make his travels in the wilderness 
less dangerous. When the command word is spo- 
ken, the staff creates an area of antipathy in a 20- 
foot radius that is avoided by normal animals 
(including giant variations) unless attacked by the 
staff holder or the party. Animals with higher 
than animal Intelligence can enter the warded 
area if a successful saving throw vs. staff is made. 

Enchanted creatures of the forest will be irri- 
tated by the operation of the staff; 75% of the 
time they will leave the area in disgust, and the 
other 25% of the time they take steps to drive 
away the staff holder. 

The staff can also be used as a melee weapon, 
in which case the antipathy effect causes any ani- 
mal struck to flee the encounter, subject to any 
applicable saving throw. Each hit drains a charge 


from the staff. Note that with sufficient time and 
effort, animals can be trained to withstand the 
effects of this staff. The staff can be recharged. 


Idun’s 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 45,000 
Legends & Lore 
Anyone struck by the avatar’s staff becomes 10 
years younger (save vs. spell to negate). If the 
victim’s age falls below 15, one point of Strength 
and Wisdom is lost for every two years below 15. 
If the victim’s age falls below 8, physical attacks 
are not possible. Below the age of six, magic can 
no longer be used. 


Ixtlilton’s 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
Legends & Lore 
Anyone hit by the avatar’s staff must save vs. 
spell or be stunned for 1d4 rounds and take nor- 


mal damage. 


Jizo 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
DRAGON Magazine 40 

This staff can be used only by priests, and that 
includes druids. It has 1d100 charges of protection 
from undead 15' radius, each charge lasting 1d6 
hours. While any charges remain, the staff is also a 
staff of striking +2. Striking with this staff does not 
use charges; only the use of the protection aspect 
drains charges. This staff has no final strike. 


of Kitsyrral 

GP Value: 42,500 
Falcon’s Revenge 
This staff enables a priest to store spells for later 
use. The staff can hold 10 charges: each charge is 
equal to one spell level. 

By casting spells on the staff, the priest imbues 
it with spell energy. This charges it and later 
allows the priest to draw upon the stored energy. 
Any level of spells may be cast on the staff, but 
the total levels stored can never exceed 10. 
Excess spell levels are lost. 

The priest can cast any spells on the staff. 
Since they are stored as energy and not as spells, 
they may later be cast from the staff, regardless of 
when a specific spell was stored originally. Spell 
levels may be stored or cast in any combination. 

The priest may expend charges at will, using 
them in any combination (any four 2nd- and two 
Ist-level spells, or ten 1st-level spells, or any 
combination totaling 10 charges). He or she may 
not cast spells that are above the character’s level 
of spell ability. Spells cast from the staff take 
effect in half the normal casting time, but at the 
very least have a casting time of 1. 


XP Value: 3,500 


5215 


1282 


n Å 


x Staff of the Magi ø- 


Kuan Yin’s Quarterstaff 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
Legends & Lore 
In combat, Kuan Yin’s avatar employs a magical 
quarterstaff +5 that inflicts stunning damage 
only. 


K’uei Hsing’s 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 25,000 
Legends & Lore 
K’uei Hsing’s avatar uses a staff +3 that also acts 
as a rod of cancellation. This weapon is also 
known as Chung Kuel s Staff. 


K’ung Fu-tzu’s 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 18,000 
Legends & Lore 
Anyone hit by the staff of K’ung Fu-tzu’s avatar 
must save vs. paralyzation or be stunned for 1d10 
rounds. 


Kura Okami’s 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 72,000 
Legends & Lore 
Upon command, Kura Okami’s staff unleashes a 
torrent of water 10 feet wide, causing creatures 
caught in its path to save vs. petrification or be 
washed 2d100 yards away. 


Ky Trencha Ukang 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Kara-Tur 

The great wu jen Kixa To’u created the Ky Tren- 
cha Ukang, a staff of eldritch powers. Fearing 
his creation, Kixa To’u transformed the staff 
into five magical scroll reels with unbreakable 
(AC —2) enameled cases, each of which magi- 
cally rewrote any spent, blank magic parchment 
placed inside. Only one of these scroll cases is 
known to still exist, and it is owned by the wu 
jen Yuraka of Singye. The other reels have been 
lost for more than five centuries. It is rumored 
that if all the pieces are brought together, the 
staff will reform. The staff's powers are bind at 
will, disguise at will, fire enchantment, poly- 
morph other, wall of fire (three times a day), 
wall of iron (twice a day), major creation (once 
a day), aura (once a week), and power word 
stun (once a month). Its primary power is call, 
as in the 8th-level wu jen spell, but the wielder 
of Ky Trencha Ukang need not have actually 
seen the person or spirit called; he or she just 
needs to know the correct name. Its side effects 
are insomnia and arthritis. It has an Intelligence 
of 17 and a neutral evil alignment. 


Lao Tzu’s 
XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 82,000 
Legends & Lore 
Anyone hit by the staff of Lao Tzu’s avatar- must 
save vs. paralyzation or be permanently paralyzed. 
Nothing short of a wish can counter this curse. 


of the Magi 
XP Value: 15,000 GP Value: 75,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This potent staff contains many spell powers and 
other functions. Some of its powers drain charges; 
others don’t. 


The following powers do not drain charges: 
Detect magic 
Enlarge 
Hold portal 
Light 
Protection from evil/good 
The following powers drain one charge per use: 
Invisibility 
Fireball 
Knock 
Lightning bolt 
Pyrotechnics 
Ice storm 
Web 
Wall of fire 
Dispel magic 
Passwall 
These powers drain two charges per use: 
Whirlwind 
Conjure elemental 
Planar travel 
Telekinesis’ 
! The whirlwind is identical to that caused by a 
djinni. 
? The staff can be used to conjure one elemental 
of each type per day, each having 16 Hit Dice. 
> Telekinesis is at 8th level (200 pounds maximum 
weight). 


The staff of the magi adds a +2 bonus to all 
saving throws vs. spell. It can be used to absorb 
wizard spell energy directed at its wielder, but if 
the staff absorbs energy beyond its charge limit, it 
will explode as if a “retributive strike” (see 
below) had been made. The spell levels of energy 
absorbed count only as recharging the staff, but 
they cannot be redirected immediately, so if 
absorption is desired, that is the only action pos- 
sible by the staff wielder that round. Note also 
that the wielder has no idea how many spell lev- 
els are cast at him or her, for the staff does not 
communicate this knowledge as a red of absorp- 
tion does. Absorbing spells is risky, but absorp- 


tion is the only way this staff can be recharged. 
1522 


1283 


~ Staff, Magical Quarterstaff r 


Retributive strike is a breaking of the staff, it 
must be done purposefully and declared by the wiz- 
ard wielding it. When this is done, all levels of spell 
energy in the staff are released in a globe of 30-foot 
radius. All creatures within 10 feet of the broken 
staff suffer points of damage equal to eight times 
the number of spell levels of energy in the rod (1 to 
25), those between 10 and 20 feet take 6 times, and 
those 20 to 30 feet distant take 4 times the number 
of levels. A successful saving throw vs. spell indi- 
cates that one-half damage is sustained. 

The wizard breaking the staff has a 50% 
chance of traveling to another plane of existence, 
but if not, the explosive release of spell energy 
totally destroys the wizard. This staff and the staff 
of power are the only magical items capable of a 
retributive strike. 

In a DRAGONLANCE” Campaign: Staves of the 
magi do not exist on Ansalon. 

In Ravenloft: This staff is incapable of planar 
travel while in Ravenloft. Attempts to use it for 
planar travel do not expend any charges. 


Magical Quarterstaff 


XP Value GP Value 
+1: 2,500 15,000 
+2: 3,000 20,000 
+3: 3,500 5,000 
+4: 4,000 30,000 
+5: 4,500 5,000 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This item seems to be a normal bronzewood staff 
banded with iron. The shaft is actually as strong 
as steel, and has two magical qualities. Upon 
command, the staff will alter its length from as 
short as 6 feet to as long as 12 feet (or any length 
in between). It also inflicts damage as a quarter- 
staff (base amount, 1d6 points), with additions to 
attack and damage rolls based upon its magical 
bonus. 


Roll Type 
01-25 +] 

26-50 (normal form) +2 
51-75 +3 

76-90 +4 

91-00 +5 


of Magius 
XP Value: 13,000 GP Value: 72,000 
Tales of the Lance 

This polished mahogany staff is topped with a 
crystal ball held tightly in a bronze dragon claw. 
Its powers are limited only by its user; once the 
wizard learns the staff’s true nature, great power 
may be summoned. 

Legends say the wizard Magius aided Huma in 
his quest to drive dragons from the face of Krynn. 


Magius’s staff of legend still bears the wizard’s 
spirit and lends it to save the world Magius loved. 
Many wizards of renown have used this staff and 
added to its powers. 

The staff acts like a ring of protection +3, 
improving the wearer’s AC by -3, and adding a 
+3 bonus to all saves. The staff strikes with a +2 
on attack rolls, inflicting 1d8 points of damage. 
Once a day, it can create continual light, 60-foot 
radius; it can save its owner with a feather fall. 
When used by a wizard of 6th level or higher, the 
staff doubles spell durations, adds +2 points dam- 
age per die, and maintains spells for one round 
after concentration is broken. Other powers may 
exist. 

This staff has hidden powers. Only a master 
wizard can summon them. If a wizard of 6th level 
or higher uses the staff, the DM rolls 1d10. Ona 
1, a random effect occurs. The DM should select 
the effect from the list below. Once an effect has 
occurred three times, the wizard may attempt to 
master the power by making a % Intelligence 
check. 

The following powers cost one charge each: 
Continual light, featherfall, darkness 15' radius, 
hold portal, detect magic, protection vs. 
evil/good, enlarge, strike at double damage. 

The following cost two charges each: Entan- 
gle, gust of wind, jump, magic missile (x3), knock 
spiderclimb, levitate telekinesis (25-foot range). 


The following powers cost four charges each. 
1524 


1284 


Staff, Mirandos’s Staff of Insect Command 


AALS TNE ESS 


The user must make a Constitution check or 
become exhausted for 2d6 rounds, suffering a —2 
on all rolls and moving only at half-rate: Dispel 
magic, lightning bolt (6d6 points damage), feign 
death, locate object, fire shield, paralyze, invisi- 
bility, summon swarm. 

The staff recharges at the rate of one charge an 
hour while in the light of Solinari (up to 8 points 
a day). The staff can carry up to 20 charges. 


of Magius IT 

XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 412 
Magius was a wizard who aided Huma. His staff 
eventually fell into Raistlin Majere’s hands. It can 
be used only by wizards. Any new owner imme- 
diately knows that it functions as a ring of protec- 
tion +3, weapon +2 (1d8 damage) and can 
perform feather fall and continual light once per 
day, Prolonged use will reveal that, in the hands 
of a 6th- or higher-level wizard, the staff doubles 
the duration of spells that influence light, air, and 
the mind. It also maintains spells that require 
concentration for one round after the wizard 
stops concentrating and adds 2 points of damage 
to every die of damage inflicted by a spell of the 
staff’s owner. 


of the Magius 
XP Value: 15,000 GP Value: 75,000 
Dragons of Triumph 
The staff of the magius can only be used effec- 
tively by wizards. The first paragraph of abilities 
is automatically known to the wielder, while 
those in the second paragraph may be discovered 
when casting certain spells, 

The staff of the magius functions as a ring of 
protection +3. It can strike as a +2 magical 
weapon and cause 1d8 points of damage. Once 
per day the user can command the staff to per- 
form a featherfall and a continual light spell. 

In the hands of a wizard of 6th-level or higher, 
the staff can enhance spells cast by the wizard. It 
doubles the duration of spells that influence light, 
air, and minds. It maintains spells that require 
concentration for one round after concentration 
ends. It also adds +2 points of damage to every 
die of damage done by a spell cast by the holder 
of the staff. 


Meriadar’s Quarterstaff 
XP Value: 3,200 GP Value: 25,000 
Monster Mythology 
Meriadar’s avatar carries a quarterstaff +3 that 
affects any goblinoid struck by it as a symbol of 
persuasion (normal saving throw vs. spell). 


of Miracles 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 

These wizards’ staves were once common, made 
in Myth Drannor and elsewhere, but the secrets of 
their crafting are known by but a few today. When 
firmly held and ordered, these staves glow with a 
brief, blue-white radiance and allow a +4 bonus 
on saving throws for up to four beings touching 
it. The protection lasts for the round in which the 
staff is touched and the following round, and 
drains the staff of four charges each time this 
power is activated. A staff of miracles may heal 
(as the 6th-level priest spell) once every 24 hours. 
This function drains five charges. 

The staff may also be used to delay death once 
every 24 hours. This function, which drains six 
charges, is similar to the death s door spell, and 
permits a dead being, if touched within three 
rounds of death, to be brought to | hit point 
despite any wounds, dismemberments, or even 
decapitation. Breathing, bleeding, and all life 
functions are magically halted for seven turns; if 
curative magic or other means are applied to the 
unfortunate during this time, actual death may be 
averted. A system shock roll may apply if a DM 
judges it appropriate. 

Once every 66 days, a staff of miracles allows 
the bearer one limited wish, at a cost of 12 charges 
(insufficient charges cause failure to function). 
When this function is used, a roll of thunder is 
heard overhead. The staff bearer is not aged by 
the use of this power. The limited wish is akin to 
the 7th-level wizard spell. If death is involved, it 
cannot be directly caused by the spell, and it can 
only be undone or reversed for one creature. If 
the limited wish involves the undoing of acts, 
spells cast, or words said, it can only reach back 
into the immediate past to a maximum of one 
turn. 


Mirandos’s Staff of Insect 
Command 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 130 

Mirandos bears this magical staff and uses it in 
Ixtul, a lost city in Far Payit. The staff is a varia- 
tion of the staff of command, with the following 
powers: It can cast summon insects, speak with 
animals (insects only), giant insect, and repel 
insects by expending one charge each, or it can 
cast insect plague when two charges are 
expended. Any insects summoned or created by 
the staff act as though charmed by Mirandos, 
with no saving throw. 


Staff of Mishakal 


) 


of Mishakal 

GP Value: 25,000 
Tales of the Lance 
The first gift of Mishakal to the people of Krynn 
upon her return to the world was the blue crystal 
staff of Mishakal given to Riverwind. Carved 
from crystal, its crown is topped with a bladed 
cap and a blue gem. Mishakal granted Riverwind 
the staff to bring Goldmoon to her and to the 
disks of Mishakal (see Book). 

This staff is sentient and of lawful good align- 
ment. Its Intelligence equals 13 (empathic with 
user) and its Ego is 10. It can control the actions 
of a user whose combined Intelligence, Cha- 
risma, and level (—1 per five rounds) is less than 
23. Only lawful good characters may use the 
staff; others suffer 4d6 points of electrical dam- 
age if they try. The staff strikes as a +3 weapon, 
adding +3 to all attack rolls. For each attack the 
user can choose to spend 1, 2, or 3 charges to 
inflict +3, +6, or +9 (respectively) to damage. 
The staff can cast any of the following priest 
spells (cost of two charges per spell level). 

* 1st: Command, cure light wound, remove fear. 

* 3rd: Continual light, cure blindness, cure dis- 
ease, remove curse. 

* 5th: Cure critical wounds, raise dead, teleport 

(15 charges). 

* 7th: Restoration, resurrection, deflect dragon 
breath (10 charges). 

The staff holds up to 20 charges and regains 
one charge per day in moonlight. 


of Mishakal II 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Dragons of Despair 
This staff is carved from a single piece of blue 
crystal. It is about 5 feet long and has a 2-inch- 
diameter shaft. The ornamentally bladed head of 
the staff bears a gem in its center. 

Although Riverwind does not remember, a 
manifestation of the goddess Mishakal gave him 
the staff. It is an Intelligent artifact of lawful 
good alignment and has an Ego of 10. It can only 
be used by those of that alignment—others who 
try to wield the staff take 4d6 points of electrical 
damage. A lawful good person may use the staff 
to heal the electrical damage it has caused. The 
staff has the following powers: 

* Strikes as a staff of striking (1d3 charges per 
use), 
* Casts any of the following priest spells (two 
charges per level of spell): 
Ist: Command, cure light wounds, remove 
fear 
3rd: Continual light, cure blindness, cure 
disease, remove curse 
5th: Cure critical wounds, raise dead 


XP Value: 5,000 


7th: Restoration, resurrection 
* Teleports at its own discretion, using 15 
charges. 
* Deflects dragon breath weapons in a 10-foot 
radius (10 charges per use). 

The staff holds up to 20 charges at a time. It 
regains one charge a day from the combined 
influences of Krynn’s three moons, but it can be 
recharged instantly and completely at the statue 
of Mishakal. 


Monkey’s 

GP Value: 15,000 
Hall of Heroes 
The Monkey’s strength lies within the towering 
oak staff he carries. The staff, capped with the 
three silver rings of his profession, enhances both 
the Monkey’s saving throws vs. magical attacks 
by +4 and his shukenja spell rolls by +3. 


XP Value: 2,500 


of the Moonglow 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DRAGON Magazine 173 
Devised long ago in the early days of the northern 
city of Silverymoon, staves of this sort are most 
often found in the hands of Harpers and elves. 
They are activated and deactivated by silent act of 
will combined with physical contact and can be 
used by all races and classes of intelligent beings. 

At a cost of one charge per round of use, the 
wielder of a staff of the moonglow can pass with- 
out trace (as the Ist-level priest spell), find the 
path (as the 6th-level priest spell), or have free 
action (as the 4th-level priest spell). A staff of the 
moonglow can also (at a cost of one charge per 
round of use) be made to glow with a pearly, 
blue-white radiance. The light fills a sphere 30 
feet in radius, centered on the midpoint of the 
staff. Besides providing illumination for reading 
and other sight-related tasks, this radiance allows 
a ring of shooting stars located within it to oper- 
ate as if it were underground, reveals the auras of 
all magical dweomers within its area of effect as 
amber faerie fire glows, and causes all undead 
within it to attack at -3 on their attack rolls. All 
magical inscriptions and wizard marks located 
within the moonglow shine forth clearly and dis- 
tinctly, even if normally invisible or magically 
concealed. 

Whenever a staff of the moonglow strikes an 
opponent, the bearer can elect (at a cost of two 
charges) to forego all physical attack damage in 
exchange for forcing the struck creature to “stay.” 
This power allows no saving throw and operates 
as follows: All creatures able to shift out of phase 
(into the ethereal or elsewhere), blink, or teleport 
(including related spells or creature powers, such 


as the dimension door ability of a boggle) are pre- 
5233 


ji 1286 7 


i ee ee . 


a NS 


vented from doing so for one round. In other 
words, for the round that follows the staff attack, 
they cannot escape by magical means and may be 
attacked normally by the staff wielder and his or 
her companions, Creatures not able to use such 
abilities or spells are merely s/owed for the one 
round following the staff attack. 

A staff of the moonglow operates as a weapon 
+4 when used under an open, moonlit sky. If used 
under a starlit sky or under a night sky in which 
the moon is concealed by weather, it functions 
only as a weapon +1. Underground, it has no 
bonuses, except that in all locations and condi- 
tions, the strike of a staff of the moonglow does 
double damage to all undead; it also counts as 
“holy,” silver, and magical for attack purposes, 
and it affects trolls and other creatures suscepti- 
ble to fire damage as though the physical damage 
of its striking were caused by flame. These staff 
properties drain no charges. 


of the Necromancer 
XP Value: 13,000 GP Value: 65,000 
Old Empires 
This staff belongs to Hodkamset, the most power- 
ful wizard in the service of the god Set. Hodkam- 
set made this alabaster staff from the spine bones 
of a dragon. 

Hodkamset pursued the art of necromancy and 
built this item to aid in spellcasting. It was stolen 
from him by the priests of Osiris, in a battle two 
years ago, but assassins of Set retrieved it before 
the priests could destroy it, and once again Hod- 
kamset wields it. It has a maximum of 25 charges, 
and absorbs magic as a staff of the magi. In addi- 
tion, it has the following powers that cost no 
charges: detect magic, speak with dead, and pro- 
tection from good. 

The following powers cost one charge per use: 
animate dead, darkness 15' radius, dispel magic, 
and hold person. 

The following powers cost two charges per 
use: command undead, enfeeble, feeblemind, and 
life level drain. This last attack form drains one 
life level, has a 100-foot range, and automatically 
strikes one target within that range. 


of Night 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 
A staff of night is not (despite folk beliefs to the 
contrary) an evil item; like many staves, it has no 
alignment. Anyone taking hold of this staff is 
automatically afforded infravision to a range of 
90 feet. By wordless mental command (at a cost 
of one charge), this staff can dispel any magical 
spell radiance whose area of effect it contacts 
(light, continual light, or faerie fire, but not glow- 


q 1287 ie 


Staff of the Ninja 


ing magical auras, as from swords). Radiances of 
normally permanent duration return 1d4+1 turns 
after this function is exercised. 

The bearer of a staff of night can also create 
darkness in a 10-foot-radius sphere centered on 
the midpoint of the staff. The darkness is equal in 
effect to that created by the 2nd-level wizard spell 
darkness 15' radius, and it moves with the staff. 
This function costs one charge per use and can be 
ended by mental command of the bearer; it can 
also be continued indefinitely, even if the staff is 
no longer in contact with a living being. 

Once every seven days, the greatest power of a 
staff of night may be used. When the bearer of the 
staff feels (by a faint, continuous tingling) that 
this power is ready, a command word is spoken to 
activate the power. Doing this drains six charges 
from the staff each time it is invoked. Within one 
round, an umber hulk appears. It fights or other- 
wise performs at the staff bearer’s bidding for 
three rounds, then vanishes again. The umber 
hulk always has 60+ hp and obeys diligently and 
loyally in undertaking even obviously dangerous 
tasks (if directly asked to harm itself, it does 
nothing). The bearer of the staff is rendered 
immune to the confusion power of the gaze of all 
umber hulks while the staff is held. If the umber 
hulk is slain while in service to the staff bearer, 
the staff instantly crumbles to dust, its power 
gone forever. 

Lord Aumry of Shadowdale (husband of the 
“witch” Syluné) once bore such a staff. It was 
stolen from his tomb by Lashan of Scardale, who 
is thought to be still alive and in hiding—he may 
well still have it. 


of the Ninja 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 126 

This staff appears to be an ordinary bo stick until 

checked for magic. It is +2 to attack and damage 

rolls, and has other special abilities as well. If the 

appropriate command words are known, the fol- 

lowing things may occur at the user’s command: 

* A spear head slides out of one end, turning the 

weapon into a shakujo yari +2. The head retracts 

when the command word is repeated. 

+ A sword blade juts out of the other end, turning 

the staff into a shikomi-zue +2. As before, the 

blade retracts if the command word is repeated. 

* The staff has a saving throw vs. crushing blows 

of 1, making it virtually unbreakable. 

+ It has balancing ability. 

* Once a day, each concealed weapon blade may 

be envenomed. The venom is wiped off and 

expended on the first successful blow, acting as if 

it had come from a dagger of venom. 

* The staff dances for five rounds, attacking the 
5236 


A 


Staff, Oberon’s 


jp, E 


enemy as if wielded by an 8th-level ninja. The 

staff can dance as a bo stick, shakujo yari, or 

shikomi-zue—the form in which the owner 

wishes it to fight, however, must be determined 

before the weapon is made to dance. When time 

runs out or it is recalled, the staff returns to the 

owner. 

* It acts as a ring of water walking. 

* Four times a week, the bearer of the staff can 
pass through stone or metal walls up to 3 feet 
thick. 


Oberon’s 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Monster Mythology 
Oberon’s avatar carries an enchanted staff that 
can be used as a changestaff once a day. 


of Oceans 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Kara-Tur 

This is an ornate staff, laminated from many 
types of wood and carved into intricate designs of 
dragons, hawks, and faces. It was created by the 
first Lord of Oceans, who used it to flood a 
frozen battlefield and defeat the nobility’s forces. 
It has the following powers (all using one charge): 
spell immunity (one turn duration), create water, 
air walk, and cure serious wounds. For three 
charges, the staff can raise dead or cast an ancient 
curse. It can discharge up to 10 lightning bolts 
each day (6d6 each, no charge required). The staff 
of oceans is the ruling instrument of Tabot, so it 
is always carried by the High Lord of Oceans 
when in public. 


O-Kuni-Nushi’s 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
Legends & Lore 
Any being struck by the avatar’s staff must make 
a Strength check or fall to the ground. 


of Osiris 
XP Value: 1,500 

Old Empires 
This staff is made of dark mahogany and is cov- 
ered with painted hieroglyphs. A guarterstaff +3, 
it is a favored weapon of the priests of Osiris; at 
least 20 are known to still exist today. 

In addition to its attacks, the staff blocks one 
successful attack each round; the first successful 
melee attack against the wielder is automatically 
negated. This does not prevent ranged attacks, 
such as missile weapons and spells, from causing 
damage but it does stop sword thrusts, other 
staves, daggers, and melee weapons. In spite of 
its name, a staff of Osiris may be used by any 
priesthood, including Set’s. 


GP Value: 7,500 


Osmal’s Staff of the Woodlands 

XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 45,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 264 
Osmal § staff is made from the severed limb of a 
treant—a bolt of lightning cut the branch free and 
nearly killed the treant in the process. As a result, 
the staff has all of the powers of a staff of the 
woodlands +2, and it can call lightning (three 
bolts) in two rounds, once a week. Each bolt of 
lightning inflicts 5d8 points of damage (save for 
half damage). There must be at least partial cloud 
cover in order for the staff to work. Osmal abhors 
violence, so he has never called upon the staff’s 
unique power, and the electrical ability may 
become a lost secret if Osmal dies without reveal- 
ing it. 


Panzuriel’s Quarterstaff 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 8,500 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar’s powerful quarterstaff +4 delivers 
1d10 points of electrical damage in addition to 
normal melee damage (a saving throw vs. spell is 
allowed to halve the electrical damage). 


Pharaoh’s Ruling 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Pharaoh 

In the hands of one who knows how to use it, this 
staff is capable of three magical acts: 
* Striking the tip to the ground three times causes 
the staff to polymorph itself into a large ven- 
omous snake (AC 4; MV 15; HD 4; hp 28; #AT 1; 
Dmg 1d4 + save vs. poison or die; AL the same 
as whoever wields the staff). The snake will not 
attack the wielder of the staff. Grasping the snake 
by the tail firmly, at —2 on attack rolls, poly- 
morphs the snake back into the golden staff. 
* Striking the ground twice and then spinning the 
tip in the air creates a globular ball of lightning 
that, for every round it is spun before released at 
its target, develops 1d10 points of damage poten- 
tial. Note, however, that the person spinning the 
lightning must concentrate both on its spinning 
and on its direction for detonation. If the spinner 
is disturbed during spinning (moves, is hit, or is 
distracted) then the ball detonates on the spot 
with as much damage as had been spun to that 
point. 
* Striking the ground once and then pointing it 
skyward produces a clap of thunder of such vol- 
ume that all exposed creatures within 1,000 feet 
must save vs. petrification or be struck with fear 
for 1d10 rounds. 

The staff holds only five charges of each type. 
Only a sage (for a fee) can extract the above 
information—or a little lucky experimentation. 


$243 


= 1288 . 


Staff, Quirks of Magical Staves 


ee ine G 


of Power 
XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 60,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

The staff of power is a very potent magical item, 
with offensive and defensive abilities. The powers 
below cost one charge each: 

Continual light 

Magic missile or lightning bolt 

Darkness, 5' radius 

Ray of enfeeblement 

Levitation 

Cone of cold or fireball 
The following powers drain two charges each: 
* Shield, 5' radius 

* Globe of invulnerability 

*Paralyzation 

Paralyzation is a ray from the end of the staff 
extending in a cone 40 feet long and 20 feet wide 
at the far end. 

The DM may assign alternate powers by ran- 
dom die roll. 

The wielder of a staff of power gains a +2 
bonus to Armor Class and saving throws. The 
staff may be used to smite opponents. It strikes as 
a magical weapon +2 and inflicts 1d6+2 points of 
damage; if one charge is expended, the staff 
causes double damage, but two charges do not 
cause triple damage. 

A staff of power can be broken for a retributive 
strike (see Staff, of the magi). The staff can be 
recharged. 


of the Priest Kings 
XP Value GP Value 
Type I: 5,000 25,000 
Type II: 5,500 27,500 
Type II: 6,000 30,000 
Type IV: 6,500 32,500 
Type V: 7,000 35,000 
Type VI: 7,500 37,500 


Strategic Review Magazine 7 
This staff is the priestly equivalent of a staff of 
wizardry, and combines the following functions: 
* The snake staff 
* Sticks to snakes spell. 
* Insect plague spell. 
* Create/pollute food and water spell. 
* Cure/cause disease spell. 
* Continual light spell. 
* Neutralize poison spell. 
* Cure light and serious wounds spell. 


This is the basic staff, which is +1 on spell 
effectiveness. Other staves may be found, accord- 
ing to the following percentages: 


Roll Other Staves 


00-65 Basic staff. 

66-75 As basic staff with the pillars of flame 
and smoke (a spectacular find the path 
spell). 

76-85 As basic staff with earthquake and 

hold person. 

86-95 As basic staff with raise dead (2d4, 
burns two charges). 

96-99 As basic staff with resurrect (1d6, 


burns three charges per spell). 

00 As basic staff with restoration (144, 
four charges per spell), and blade bar- 
rier, +2 on spell effectiveness, 

Like staves of wizardry, these have 200 
charges, but have no fìnal strike capacity. 


Quirks of Magical Staves* 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DRAGON Magazine 163 

The AD&D* game has one of the largest compi- 
lations of magical items in the fantasy gaming 
industry. The following tables have been created 
to add some spice and variety to existing magical 
items in the AD&D game worlds. A table of non- 
standard, magical item abilities is offered for 
each major type of magical item in the AD&D 
game. 

Most items are created normally, and they 
function exactly as a standard item of the same 


type in the DMG. However, sometimes there is a 
5246 


š 1289 z 


Staff, Quirks of Magical Staves 


i 


slight mishap in the creation of the device: the 
steps are not followed in the proper order, the 
astrological signs do not bode well, the item’s 
creator is disturbed to begin with, the instructions 
are incomplete, or something just plain goes 
wrong. Any of these results may cause a magical 
item to behave differently from others just like it. 

Not all quirks are bad, however. Some are 
detrimental to the item or its user, some are neu- 
tral, and some are even beneficial. The possibili- 
ties of quirks existing (and the actual number of 
quirks) are determined by using the table below 
to determine the exact quirks a magical staff 
possesses. 


Roll Quirks Present 


01-86 No quirks 

87-94 One quirk 

95-98 Two quirks 

99-00 Three quirks 

Roll Result 

01-04 Staff is inefficient; double the number 
of charges expended for each use. 

05-07 Staff has an extra command word that 
allows it to shrink to half its regular size 
or return to normal. 

08-13 Staff is made of metal and is magnetic; 
consequently, the staff is attracted to 
any large concentration of metal of at 
least 30 pounds. 

14-18 Staff glows a random color (as faerie 
fire) whenever its powers are used. 

19-22 Staff radiates nondetection and regis- 
ters negatively at any attempt to detect 
magic. 

23-25 Staff does | point of damage to its 
wielder each time its powers are used. 

26-30 Staff is easily broken; the staff must 
make all saving throws at —2 to the roll. 

31-34 Somatic gestures, as well as a com- 
mand word, are necessary to activate 
the staff’s powers. The gestures force 
the user to suffer a -1d4+4 initiative 
penalty. If the gestures cannot be per- 
formed (if, say, the wielder’s arms are 
tied), the staff does not work. 

35-39 Staff does not work if the wielder’s 
hand is covered, gloved, or gauntleted. 

40-44 Staff is unstable; it fizzles out and does 
nothing 10% of the time that is activated. 

45-50 Staff is unaffected by fire, magical or 
normal. 

51-52 Staff is invisible to everyone except its 
user. 

53-55 Staff's wielder must concentrate for one 


round when speaking the command word 
in order to activate the staff’s powers. 


Staff is unaffected by acid. 

Staff cannot be snapped or broken by any 
creature of less than 18/50 Strength. This 
also applies to any retributive strike made 
by another wand, staff, or rod. 

Staff does not work if the wielder is 
wearing metal armor of any kind 
(including elven chain mail). 

Staff has a tendency to overload. It can be 
used up to three times in a 24-hour period. 
Any attempted use beyond that limit 
causes the staff to short itself out for 24 
hours, and the charges activated are lost. 
Staff is extremely powerful; any saves 
against its effects are at —2 to the die 
roll. 

Staff is unable to function in environ- 
ments colder than freezing. 

Staff is unable to function in environ- 
ments warmer than normal human body 
temperature. 

Staff does not function underwater. 
Staff activates whenever the command 
word is spoken by anyone within 30 
feet, whether it is being held or not. 
Staff can be used as a weapon (if it is 
not already one). It has a +1 bonus with 
respect to hitting creatures unharmed 
by normal weapons, but has no actual 
bonus on attack or damage rolls. A 
wand does damage as a jo stick; a rod 
does damage as a club; and a staff does 
damage as a quarterstaff. 

If all of the staff’s charges are used, the 
staff explodes in a fiery blast. The blast 
has a radius of 15 feet and does 5d4 
points of damage to anyone therein. 
Those within 5 feet of the staff receive 
no saving throw; others may save vs. 
breath weapon for half damage. 

Staff is capable of being placed in auto- 
matic mode; every round, it performs 
one function as designated by the 
wielder, using the normal amount of 
charges, until it is taken out of auto- 
matic mode. During this time, the 
wielder is able to cast short spells (ini- 
tiative modified spells of three or less), 
or with a—1 penalty on attack rolls. 

00 Staff is intelligent; roll on the Sword 
Intelligence Table (see Sword, Special) and dis- 
regard any result of no Intelligence. The staff also 
has an Ego; its personality must be determined as 
well. Though the staff does tell its owner of the 
powers it offers, it never reveals the number of 
charges it possesses. Note that an Intelligent staff 
never willingly uses its last few charges. These 
staffs can always be recharged, regardless of type. 

5246 


64-68 


69-71 


94-96 


97-99 


= 1290 E 


wN a S 


Staff, Rilantaver’s 


ee a 


of Raket 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DRAGON’S CROWN” Sourcebox 

Only 4 feet long, this staff was originally empow- 
ered by Raket’s master with the psychometabolic 
science Energy Containment. He further modi- 
fied it as a receptacle, holding a pool of 383 PSPs 
to access in times of need. He was able to give the 
staff access to this pool to maintain its inertial 
barrier. Though intelligent, the staff communi- 
cates only semi-empathically, by tingling. The 
watery blue crystal in the head of the staff pro- 
tects him from the effects of the Psionatrix. The 
staff has the following statistics: Intelligence 12; 
Ego 3; Alignment N; Psionic Summary: PSPs 
12; Sciences: Energy Containment. 


Ranike 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
DRAGON Magazine 197 

This enchanted staff has the same powers as the 
ranike rod, though it strikes any target as a quar- 
terstaff +1. It is also restricted to 25 charges (1d6 
+ 19) at most. If two charges are expended at 
once, the staff creates a billowing cloud of ranike 
sap smoke, 40 feet wide, 20 feet high, and 20 
feet deep. The cloud’s movement is controlled by 
the staff’s wielder as long as there is no strong 
wind. Wind dissipates the cloud as a cloudkill 
spell. The cloud travels at a speed of 10 feet per 
round and lasts for 12 rounds. The smoke is not 
heavy like a cloudkill vapor, so it does not sink 
into low areas, making it useless for driving out a 
colony of giant ants from their underground nest. 
However, it is still a useful weapon, particularly 
against the thri-kreen. The staff may not be 
recharged. 


of Recording 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Revenge of Rusak 

This is an ornamented staff topped with a single 
crystal orb. When placed upright in the earth, it 
can either record or display. When the command 
word is spoken to record, the staff records all 
events within a 30-foot radius for up to 24 hours. 
Likewise, when it shows, it plays back everything 
that it has recorded. The staff can only have one 
scene recorded at any given time. If a new scene 
is recorded, any previous scene is lost. 


Reptilla’s Staff of the Serpent 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 265 
This staff was specially created by Reptilla, but 
she lost it in a battle with a bronze dragon whose 
lair she attempted to occupy while he was not at 
home. This staff is an adder staff—it strikes as a 


+1 magical weapon and does 2d2 points of dam- 
age. Upon command, the head of the staff 
becomes that of an adder (AC 5, 20 hp) and 
remains so for one full turn. When the snake- 
head scores a hit, the victim must make a saving 
throw vs. poison. Because Reptilla is an expert 
with poisons, she has designed the staff to inject 
different classes of poison—classes C—F and 
O-P. Each poison type has its own command 
word. 


Rheddrian’s 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Wrath of the Immortals 
This item is a 6-foot-tall black staff made of 
heavy enchanted ebony. The weapon is +1 on 
attack and damage rolls, and causes 1d10 points 
of damage per strike. 

Defense Power: Protection from normal mis- 
siles as spell of same name. The power can be 
used five times a day. 

Information Power: Can be used to commune 
with the artifact’s creator once a week. 

Activation of Powers: All that is needed to 
activate commune is to meditate for a minute and 
then call “Rheddrian.” To activate protection from 
normal missiles, the wielder simply says “Shield 
me!” 

Handicap: Saving throw penalty. The charac- 
ter suffers a —2 penalty whenever attacked by fire 
magic. 

Penalty: Forgetfulness. When the commune 
power is used, the invoker suffers a 20% chance 
to forget one spell from memory; the protection 
from normal missiles power causes a 10% chance 
to forget one spell from memory. Only mortals 
are affected by these penalties. 


Rilantaver’s 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DRAGON Magazine 173 
The elusive trickster Rilantaver long ago van- 
ished from his usual haunts around the Sea of 
Fallen Stars and is believed to have perished in 
some misadventure. Elminster suspects he merely 
decided to make his home on some other plane of 
existence. His legacy to the Art of the Realms 
includes some spells (of spectacular effect but 
minor power) and the process of making the sort 
of staff named after him. Many were made in 
Amn and Starmantle, where Rilantaver ran a 
business of sorts to fund his carefree travels and 
shady pursuits. 

A Rilantaver'’s staff affords +3 protection on 
saving throws and Armor Class for up to six 
beings touching it. This power is automatic and 
drains no charges. Upon command, the staff can 


detect magic in a 20-foot radius sphere centered 
5252 


1291 


Staff, Rohalan 


io cans 


on the staff. The staff bearer can clearly see magi- 
cal auras, but the staff does not enable others not 
touching it to do so. No charges are drained. 

The bearer can also exercise telekinesis on any 
object touched by the staff. This function must be 
exercised as the touch is made, is activated and 
ended by silent force of will, and drains three 
charges, plus one charge per round after the 
round of activation. Moving creatures and objects 
require a successful attack roll to be touched, and 
any living, conscious, unwilling creature receives 
a saving throw vs. spell each round to break free 
of the power. Telekinesis is identical in effect to 
the Sth-level wizard’s spell, but the staff’s weight 
limit is 1,000 pounds. Once telekinetic control 
over an object or creature is lost, it cannot be 
regained except by touching the target again and 
reactivating the power. 


Rohalan 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 25 
This staff belongs to Avenel Whytstagg. It is 
made of rosewood, shod in iron at one end and 
silver at the other, and is covered with magical 
sigils and runes. It can cast the following spells 
without expending any charges: continual light, 
knock, and detect magic. If one charge is 
expended, the wielder can cast lightning bolt, 
shocking grasp, fireball, or dispel magic. Two 
charges allow the wielder to cast wall of force 
once per day or teleport without error once per 
week. The staff also provides the user a base AC 
of 8. 


of the Sands 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

This staff allows any wizard to use the following 
powers, at the cost of one charge per use: move 
sand, sand slumber, sand sword, stoneskin, trace- 
less travel. The following powers use two charges, 
except in the case of sand mages, who may 
expend only one charge from the staff: conjure 
earth elemental, desert first, create shade. Only a 
sand mage may use the following power, which 
consumes four charges of the staff: sink. Addi- 
tionally, the individual holding the staff is consid- 
ered to be under the effects of a cool strength 
spell while holding the staff. The cool strength 
effects disappear when the last charge of the staff 
has been expended. 


of Savona 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
Nightwatch in the Living Crry™ 
This staff allows the possessor to gate a single 
para-elemental of the summoner’s choice once a 


week. If the creature summoned has fewer Hit 
Dice than twice the summoner’s level, it is able to 
be controlled—if the creature has more Hit Dice 
than twice the summoner’s level, it may turn on 
the owner. The creature remains for one turn 
before returning to its own plane of existence. 


of Scrivening 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DRAGON Magazine 173 

One end of a staff of scrivening will transfer a 
written spell of any level and type from its origi- 
nal text to another surface, such as a blank page 
of the staff-bearer’s spell book. It even transfers 
spells forever denied to the staff bearer for rea- 
sons of class. The original text must be touched. 
This function is by touch, drains two charges, and 
takes four rounds. In the first round, the original 
text must be touched; in the second, the staff must 
be moved to the surface to be written upon; in the 
third and fourth, the staff must be continuously 
touched to the surface to be inscribed. One 
charge per round is drained, and if the process is 
interrupted, the charges used thus far are lost, and 
the attempt to write the spell fails. Writing 
requires no special spell inks or movements of 
the staff, nor even adequate light. The end prod- 
uct is always an exact duplicate of the original, 
including any faults. A spell concealed by a 
secret page spell cannot be written by use of this 
sort of staff, but the staff can be employed to copy 
a secret page spell itself. 

At a cost of one charge per round, the bearer of 
a staff of scrivening can read magic (as the 1st- 
level wizard spell). Note that this power does not 
reveal the auras of magical dweomers, nor does it 
identify, activate, or reveal glyphs or symbols. 

Anyone touching a staff of scrivening when a 
glyph or symbol is discharged is automatically 
protected against all effects of that glyph or sym- 
bol. This protection drains six charges per spell 
effect being defended against. 

All staff functions are activated by silent force 
of will and require physical contact with the staff 
and concentration that must precede spellcasting. 


of the Sea 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Land of Fate 
This staff allows any wizard to use the following 
powers, at the cost of one charge per use: cool 
strength, depth warning, converse with sea crea- 
tures, water blast, waterbane. The following 
powers use two charges, except in the case of sea 
mages, who expend only one charge from the 
staff: conjure water elemental, ice storm, com- 
mand water spirits. Only a sea mage may use the 


following power, which consumes four charges of 
$257 


le a 


1292 


SSE eee 


Staff of Shock 


ii 


the staff: maelstrom. The individual holding the 
staff is considered to be under the effects of a 
water breathing spell as long as the staff is held. 
The water breathing effect disappears when all 
charges of the staff are expended. 


of the Serpent 
XP Value GP Value 
Adder: 7,000 35,000 
Python: 7,000 35,000 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
There are two varieties of this staff—the python 
and the adder. Neither staff has nor requires 
charges. 

The python staff strikes as a +2 magical weapon 
and inflicts 1d6+2 points of damage when it hits. 
Ifa priest throws the staff to the ground, it grows 
from its 6-foot length, to become a constrictor 
snake, 25 feet long (AC 3, 49hp, MV 9). This 
happens in one round. The snake entwines if it 
scores a hit, the opponent being constricted for 
2d4+2 points of damage per round. The victim 
remains trapped by the python until he or she dies 
or the creature is destroyed. Note that the python 
will return to its owner upon command. If it is 
destroyed while in snake form, the staff is 
destroyed. 

The adder staff strikes as a +1 magical 
weapon and does 2d2 points of damage when it 
hits. Upon command the head of the staff 
becomes that of an actual serpent (AC 5, 20 hp). 
The head remains for one full turn. When a hit is 
scored, damage is not increased, but the victim 
must roll a successful saving throw vs. poison 
(strength E) or be slain. Only evil priests employ 
adder staves. If the snake head is killed, the staff 
is destroyed. 


Roll Staff Type 


01-60 Python 
61-00 Adder 
Shadowstaff 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 


The Official RPGA* Tournament Handbook 
The shadowstaff is an artifact that draws its 
power from the Demiplane of Shadow. When 
used as a weapon, it acts as a staff of striking with 
an unlimited number of charges; thus, the posses- 
sor always gains the greatest possible damage 
bonus. 

In addition, the shadowstaff is linked with the 
Demiplane of Shadow, constantly drawing power 
from that place, which it feeds to its possessor. 
Because of this shadow power, the possessor 
instantly becomes a shade upon grasping the 
staff. As a shade, the holder retains all normal 
powers and abilities. 


The shadowstaff generates shadowy light in a 
120-foot sphere around the user. This effect is 
drawn from the Demiplane of Shadow, and can- 
not be halted or dispelled by any mortal spell or 
device. Only divine light or darkness or the 
death of the shadowstaff’s holder will stop this 
effect. 

Minor benign powers: Shield (3/day); 
immune to sleep, charm, hold, and paralysis; 
possessor need not eat or drink for up to one 
week. 

Major benign powers: Minor globe of invul- 
nerability (once a day), regenerate 2 hp per turn. 

Minor malevolent effect: —1 penalty to sav- 
ing throws vs. spell. 

Major malevolent effect: User becomes a 
shade upon first use of major power. 


Shang-ti’s 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Legends & Lore 
Shang-ti’s avatar carries a staff of thunder and 
lightning. 


of Shock 
XP Value GP Value 
Greater: 2,000 5,000 
Lesser: 1,000 2,500 


The Final Enemy 

This is a device peculiar to priests of marine 
races, though it can be used by any character 
class. It is made of metal with a high resistance to 
corrosion and can be used under water without 
deterioration. The staff is about 3 inches long and 
in diameter; one end has a handgrip made of 
insulating material and a cup-shaped hand-guard 
of the same material. It is employed in a thrusting 
mode, similar to that of a fencing foil, but has 
neither edge nor point. 

The staff is rechargeable and can hold up to 
100 charges. A single charge is expended when 
the metal comes into contact with an opponent; 
an attack roll is required, though no command 
word is necessary and the target is not allowed a 
saving throw. When not in use, the staff is usually 
kept in a cylindrical scabbard of insulating mater- 
ial to prevent accidental contact with the body of 
the owner or anyone nearby. The staff is just as 
effective under water as in air; note that, unlike 
the wand of lightning and the spell lightning bolt, 
the use of this weapon under water does not pro- 
duce a sphere of effect—only the person or crea- 
ture touched suffers damage, along with anyone 
else in physical contact with the victim at the 
time the staff is used. In this case the effect is 
conducted through the body of the first victim to 
the second, who takes 2 fewer points of damage 


than the first victim. The effect can be transmit- 
5261 


1293 


~ Staff, Shou Hsing’s Walking Stick r 


ted through multiple victims if all are in contact 
with the staff’s target. There are two varieties of 
this device: 

The lesser staff of shock causes 1d6 points of 
electrical damage on its victim. It confers a +1 
attack bonus, but no damage bonus. 

The greater staff of shock causes 2d6 points of 
electrical damage and confers a +2 attack bonus. 
Otherwise, it is identical to the lesser staff. 


Shou Hsing’s Walking Stick 

XP Value: 16,000 GP Value: 70,000 
Legends & Lore 
Shou Hsing’s avatar carries a walking stick that is 
a +5 magical weapon and also functions as a staff 
of withering. In addition to the normal powers of 
this weapon, it can cause any living creature to 
age 5d10 years instantly. This special power can 
be used once per day and, although an attack roll 
is required to hit the target, no saving throw is 
allowed, 


of Silence 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DRAGON Magazine 173 
A staff of silence drains one charge per round 
when activated. It can be used continuously, as 
long as the activator retains hold of the staff. 
Activation and deactivation are by silent act of 
will and take only an instant. This type of staff 
conceals all noises created by the bearer from all 
other beings, including footfalls, spell incanta- 
tions, the sounds made by things the bearer 
breaks by direct contact, and so on, within a 12- 
foot radius. 

The bearer may also invoke a special sort of 
deafness upon himself to provide total protection 
against all spell, magical item, or monster attacks 
that rely on sound (the roar of an androsphinx or 
the singing of harpies or bards). The deafness 
prevents real deafness from being inflicted upon 
the staff bearer (except by physical damage to the 
auditory organs), but does not prevent truename- 
based magic from affecting the staff bearer, or 
similar magic from taking normal effect. Other 
creatures, even if they touch the staff, are not pro- 
tected by the staff in any way. 

Once per day (144 turns), the bearer of a 
staff of silence can release the sounds it has 
“swallowed” and stored in a sonic blast attack. 
This attack has a cone-shaped area of effect, 
extending from one end of the staff up to 60 
feet away, widening from |-foot in width at the 
tip of the staff to a 30-foot-diameter circle at 
the farthest extent of the cone. It is activated by 
will and occurs instantly, its effects ceasing at 
the end of the round of activation. The sonic 
blast sounds like a high-pitched shriek. It can 


a ee ae ee 


1294 


cause deafness (lasting 1d4+1 turns) and stun 
(lasting 1d6 rounds) all creatures in the area of 
effect who are able to hear and who fail saving 
throws vs. poison against each effect. The sonic 
blast also deals physical damage to living and 
nonliving objects, equal to one structural point 
or 2d12 damage (a successful save vs. spell 
equals half damage). Any tiny object may, at 
the DM’s option, be flung 2d10 feet away from 
the staff by the blast. Any creature who fails a 
Dexterity check on 1d20 may be hurled off its 
feet and thrown 1d10 feet farther away from 
the staff. 

There is no known “overload point” for such 
staves. A staff of silence has never exploded nor 
ceased to function because its stored sounds were 
not discharged. Activation of a sonic blast drains 
only one charge; the blast itself is powered by the 
sound energy stored by the staff. 


of Skulls 
XP Value GP Value 
Greater: 1,500 25,000 
Lesser: 900 15,000 
The Magister 


This staff, usable by all classes, can animate 
skeletal remains. Each operation—triggered by 
the word “Arise!”—drains one charge. Animated 
skeletons are under the command of the wielder 
of the staff (see animate dead spell). If the staff 
should change hands, control of the skeletons 
goes with it. Skeletons need not be complete, but 
the skull must be present, and skeletons lacking 
parts of course have their actions and mobility 
impaired. Such animation is permanent, lasting 
until the magic is dispelled or the skeletons 
destroyed. 

Twenty-five percent of these staves have a 
secondary function: mending the broken bones 
of both living and dead creatures. This takes 1 
charge, and in a round it can reattach a severed 
limb or digit, although it does not restore hp 
lost due to the wounds. Limbs or bones not 
belonging to the recipient may be used; thus a 
heap of bones can serve as “spare parts” for a 
guard of skeletons. Typically, these staves are of 
ebony topped with an ivory skull, or con- 
structed of a smooth-polished skull and a thigh- 
bone of giant size. 


Roll Staff Type 


01-75 Lesser staff of skulls 
75-00 Greater staff of skulls 


5264 


5 Staff, Snake II gy- 


Skull-Staff of Hepmonaland 


XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 20,000 

GREYHAWK Adventures 
This is a 7-foot-long pole that is topped with a 
skull with a wild mane of white hair and sharp, 
fiendish features. The shaman who uses the staff 
claims that it is the skull of an ancient fiend, 
though many suspect that it belonged to an evil 
wizard who died in the hands of headhunters in 
Hepmonaland. 

The skull can magically cause fear in any crea- 
ture gazing upon the skull when this power is 
invoked. Its secondary powers, which require no 
charges, are a personal protection from evil effect 
that surrounds the wielder, and displacement, as a 
cloak of displacement (a +2 bonus to Armor 
Class and saving throws, and the first attack 
misses) against creatures from the lower planes. 
The rod has up to 25 charges and cannot be 
recharged. 


of Slinging 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This magical quarterstaff appears to be a +1 
weapon unless it is grasped by a druid, when its 
power of slinging becomes evident. This power, 
which can be employed only by a druid, is acti- 
vated when one end of the staff is touched to a 
heavy object of roughly spherical shape (a 
stone, metal ball, pottery crock) of up to 9 


-XP Value: 7,000 


inches in diameter and 5 pounds in weight. The 
object adheres to the end of the staff, and the 
wielder need then only swing the staff in an 
overhand arc to release the missile toward a 
desired target. 

The missile leaves the staff on the downstroke 
of the overhand swing and travels in a low-rising 
trajectory, with the missile going 1 foot upward 
for every 10 feet traveled. Of course, the arc may 
be higher, or the missile aimed so as to travel 
nearly vertically. (In the latter case, reverse the 
arcing ratio so that 1-foot of distance laterally is 
covered for every 10 feet of vertical rise.) The 
maximum range of such a missile is 180 feet, 
with limits of 60 feet and 120 feet on short and 
medium range, respectively. 

This staff also carries charges, and a druid 
wielding the item can expend one charge and 
thereby use the staff to hurl a missile of large 
size, as if the wielder were a stone giant (range 
out to 300 feet, 3d10 points of damage per hit). 
Whether used as a magical quarterstaff or by 
employing one of its slinging powers, the staff 
bestows +1 to the wielder’s attack roll and +1 per 
die to damage dealt out. The weapon may be 
recharged by a druid of 12th or higher level. 


Snake 

GP Value: 35,000 

The Keep on the Borderlands 

The snake staff adds +1 to attack rolls and does 
1d6+1 points of damage. On command the staff 
turns into a snake and coils around the person hit. 
The victim is held helpless until the user recalls 
the staff (or for 1d4 turns maximum). The snake 
staff crawls back to the priest on command. 


Snake II 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

Usable only by priests, this magical staff is a staff 
+] and inflicts 1d6+1 points of damage per hit. 

Upon command, the staff turns into a snake 
and coils around the creature struck. The com- 
mand may be spoken when the victim is hit. The 
victim is allowed to make a saving throw vs. spell 
to avoid the serpent’s coil. Any human-size or 
smaller victim is held helpless for 1d4 turns 
(unless the snake is ordered by the owner to 
release the victim before that time). Larger crea- 
tures cannot be ensnared in the snake’s coils. The 
snake’s characteristics are as follows. 


Snake: AC 5; HD 3; hp 20; MV 6; #AT 1 
(special); Dmg Nil (special); ML 12; XP 6 


When freed, the snake crawls back to its owner 


and becomes a staff once again. The snake is 
5268 


—_.° ee 


1295 


—————————————————— 


x Staff of Spell Focusing í 


completely healed when it returns to staff form. If 
killed in snake form, it cannot return to staff form 
and it loses all magical properties. This item does 
not have or use charges. 

At the DM’s option, the staff can be given 
charges. The user can spend charges to add 
bonuses to the snake’s attack roll (+1 bonus per 
charge spent); up to five charges can be used in a 
single attack (for a +5 bonus). 

A charge can also be used to cure the snake 
while it is in combat. The user casts a curing spell 
of any type and expends one charge to transfer 
the cure to the snake. The amount of curing is 
determined normally; no range limit applies. 


of Spell Focusing 

XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
This staff aids in the casting of a wizard’s spells, 
and makes the magic more effective if the spell is 
cast successfully. It must be held in the caster’s 
left hand throughout the casting of the spell, 
whether or not the magic requires a somatic com- 
ponent. (Any gestures requiring movement of the 
left hand are automatically modified by the staff 
if necessary.) 

When properly employed, the staff of spell 
focusing causes the target of a spell to suffer a 4 
penalty on the saving throw against the magic, if 
a saving throw is normally allowed. If the spell 
does not allow a saving throw, the duration of its 
effect is increased by 50% of the normal time. 
This effect does not apply to spells with a non- 
specific duration or to those that have a perma- 
nent duration. 

Each use of the staff, for either purpose, 
expends one charge from the item. It can be 
recharged. If the holder of the staff tries to 
enhance a spell that cannot be affected (such as 
hallucinatory terrain, which allows no saving 
throw and has a nonspecific duration), the staff 
simply fails to function and a charge is not 
wasted, 

The staff of spell focusing can only be used in 
this manner by a wizard. It can be wielded as a 
weapon by characters able to employ a quarter- 
staff, but grants no combat bonuses and has no 
magical properties. 


of Spheres 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dragon Magazine 173 
This rare, strange staff was devised by Elminster 
himself long ago, when he was in Myth Drannor 
at the height of its greatness. All the staff does is 
create spheres—giant, transparent, floating bub- 
bles that glow with a faint silver blue radiance. 
The bubbles are 6 feet in diameter and, upon their 


a 
fis 

seal UY) 

villie 


ll» 


MAIHI 


< 


creation, can be commanded to remain floating 
and motionless, to follow or precede the staff at a 
certain distance, height, and orientation, or to fol- 
low a straight-line journey away from the staff 
wielder, in any direction. 

A bubble can carry any collection of things, 
of up to 140 pounds, including living manner (if 
this limit is exceeded, the bubble will instantly 
burst). Any pointed or sharp objects allowed to 
contact the surface of a bubble will also destroy 
it. A bubble gives off enough light to read by, 
but not enough to blind any creature or affect 
undead. 

If cast around beings, a sphere allows the 
enclosed creatures clear vision and breathing, and 
it protects them with a feather fall spell if its 
movement is directed downward or it bursts in a 
location that spills its occupants out for a fall (if 
the bubble fails due to weight overload, this pro- 
tection does not apply). A spell, magical item, or 
artifact power of any sort cast into or out ofa 
sphere is negated, but it destroys the sphere. 
When a sphere fails due to the contact, it negates 
any magic (including magical creature powers) 
entering or leaving its area in that round, not just 
one spell or effect. 

Spheres are not prisons; any conscious, mobile 
being can easily break a sphere to escape 
(securely bound creatures cannot, nor can caged 
creatures, if the sphere is formed around a 


smooth-edged cage). Wizards typically use such 
5270 


Oe ee ee een E 


1296 


x Staff of Striking and Curing g~ 


spheres as traveling storage for coins, food, weap- 
ons, or even open spell books, for which the 
sphere provides handy reading light. Spheres can 
also be used to convey food, treasure, or other 
items to creatures one does not wish to approach 
too closely. 

A sphere has a movement rate of 16 when trav- 
eling “free” (that is, not linked to the location of 
the staff that formed it), but it can never develop 
sufficient velocity to break or move objects in its 
path, nor to deliver a weapon in an attack. Spheres 
can serve to deliver lit oil pots or torches to 
intended destinations, as nonmagical flame does 
not affect a sphere. 

A staff of spheres can create a maximum of 
one sphere per round. Each sphere drains one 
charge during its creation, which requires an 
entire round to complete. 


Staff-Mace 
XP Value GP Value 
Great Mace: 1,500 7,500 
Mace: 1,500 7,500 
Quarterstaff: 1,500 7,500 


The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror 
This priests’ weapon appears to be a normal 
wooden staff of the type used when trekking in 
the wilderness. This staff is typically made of 
bronzewood, reinforced by heavy bands and tips 
of iron. It gives off a very faint aura of alteration 
magic. Upon command, the staff-mace takes on 
one of three forms, as desired by the possessor: 
* Quarterstaff: iron-shod quarterstaff +3. 
* Great Mace: iron footman 5 mace +1. 
* Mace: iron horseman’s mace +2. 


Staff-Spear 
XP Value GP Value 
+1: 1,000 5,000 
+2: 1,500 7,500 
+3: 2,000 10,000 
+4: 2,50 12,500 
+5: 3,000 15,000 
+3: 3,500 17,500 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

When this seemingly ordinary quarterstaff is 
examined magically, it displays an aura of alter- 
ation. Upon proper command, a long and sharp 
spear blade shoots forth from its upper end. This 
makes the weapon into a spear rather than a staff. 
Upon a second command, the weapon elongates 
to a full 12 feet, and a third command recalls it to 
its original form. The powers and value of each 
staff-spear are determined randomly when the 
item is first employed: 


Attack 
Roll & Damage’ 
01-06 +1 
07-10 +2 
11-13 +3 
14-16 +4 
17-19 +5 


20 +3 (grants +3 AC bonus when held) 
' Does damage as ranseur (2d4), but still acts as a spear if 
used to thrust or when set to receive a charge. 


of Striking 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This oaken staff is the equivalent of a +3 magical 
weapon. (If the weapon vs. armor type adjust- 
ment is used, the staff of striking is treated as the 
most favorable weapon type vs. any armor.) It 
causes 1d6+3 points of damage, expending one 
charge. If two charges are expended, bonus dam- 
age is doubled (1d6+6); if three charges are 
expended, bonus damage is tripled (1d6+9). No 
more than three charges can be expended per 
strike. The staff can be recharged. 


of Striking 

(Local 531) 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 

DRAGON Magazine 156 

When this heavy oaken staff is swung at an oppo- 
nent in combat, a large placard pops out of the 
end, reading “ON STRIKE! PCs Unfair to Magi- 
cal Items!” After that, it resists all attempts to 
wield it in combat, making hits impossible. If the 
owner persists in trying to use it, it may animate 
and attack, although PCs take no damage if they 
happen to be wearing scarabs of protection. The 
staff can be temporarily returned to normal func- 
tioning by burning at least three sticks of incense 
of mediation. 


of Striking and Curing 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Mists of Krynn 
This glowing, wooden staff combines the pow- 
ers of a staff of striking and a staff of curing, 
and is usable by any good priest. The staff con- 
tains 20 charges but recharges itself at the rate 
of five charges a day in sunlight, to a maximum 
of 50. 

As a Staff of striking, it acts as a +3 weapon, 
inflicting 1d6+3 points of damage per use, with- 
out draining a charge. If two charges are 
expended, the staff can strike for double damage. 
However, it cannot be used for curing until an 
hour has passed after a double-damage blow is 
struck. 


As a staff of curing, two charges are required 
5275 


1297 


~ 


~ Staff of Stunning r 


for each usage. The staff will cure disease, blind- 
ness, or 3d6+3 points of damage with the follow- 
ing limitations: It may only be used once per day 
on any given individual and only six times in a 
24-hour period. 


of Stunning 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Old Empires 

This is a quarterstaff +3, with the added benefit 
that, on a natural roll of 18-20, a blow from this 
quarterstaff knocks an opponent unconscious (no 
saving throw) for 3d4 rounds. If a natural 18-20 
is not a successful attack against the opponent, 
the staff has no effect. These staves are typically 
made from yew; many of them are used by sailors 
on the Alamber Sea. 


of Surprises 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 

This type of staff is usable by all intelligent crea- 
tures who know the command words of the par- 
ticular specimen they are holding. Each staff 
function can be used in combination with all 
other staff functions, but only one function can be 
activated or deactivated per round. Each function 
drains one charge whenever activated, but “pro- 
gramming” item functions requires only the nec- 
essary spellcasting, speech, and concentration; no 
charges are drained. Activation requires a com- 
mand word; deactivation requires that the word 
be spoken backward. 

A staff of surprises can, upon command, sud- 
denly grow a blade from either end of itself, 
doing 1d8 hp damage (1d12 to creatures larger 
than human-size) when used as a weapon. The 
weight and balance of the staff do not change. 
Such a staff can also suddenly extend in length up 
to 60 feet, to serve as a pike, sliding pole, bridg- 
ing or reaching aid. It will remain utterly straight 
and rigid, and can withstand 16 hp damage or 777 
pounds before breaking. 

A Se Ne Sa can emit a “prepro- 
grammed” sound or speech, of up to seven sec- 
onds’ duration or 15 spoken words. This may be a 
message, warning, incantation, threat, or an intent 
to deceive others into thinking a particular being 
or monster is near. If the sound is a spell incanta- 
tion, no spell can be cast or set off, but the sound 
can be an activation word for a magical item if 
touch or will power is not also required. The 
staff’s user determines what sounds will be “pro- 
grammed.” 

A staff of surprises can also emit a visual illu- 
sion of any human-size creature or object. This 
image must be created by casting any illusion- 
producing spell upon the staff, which absorbs an 


illusion contacting it if the staff’s command word 
is spoken at the time. The illusion will be as good 
as the cast original (ranging from vague and 
fuzzy to utterly lifelike) and can move, gesture, 
and act; range and area of effect are as per the 
original spell or power. The image cannot speak 
or be made to react to its surroundings in any 
way, but it lasts for up to seven rounds (fewer if 
the programmer desires or if the staff wielder 
ends it sooner). Touching the image will not dis- 
pel or disrupt it. 


of Swarming Insects 
XP Value: 100/charge GP Value: 500/charge 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

A staff of this sort is typically short and thick. 
When initially obtained or encountered, much of 
its length is covered with finely done carvings 
depicting winged biting and stinging insects 
(bees, deerflies, horseflies, wasps, and the like). 
Any priest character (cleric, druid, shaman, witch 
doctor) holding it can command the staff to create 
a swarm of insects, at the same time expending 
one of the staff’s charges, 

Range is 60 feet +10 feet per level of the 
user. The number of insects produced is 60 plus 
10 per level. Every 10 insects inflicts 1 point of 
damage upon the target victim, regardless of 
Armor Class, unless the victim is protected by a 
force field, engulfed in flames, or in another 
impossible position for the insects. Note, how- 
ever, that the insects cannot affect creatures 
larger than human-size with a natural Armor 
Class of 5 or better. 

When a vulnerable target is attacked by the 
swarm of flying insects, the creature will be 
unable to do anything other than attempt to dis- 
lodge and kill the things. The insect attack lasts 
for one round. Each time the staff is employed, 
one of the insect-shapes carved into its wooden 
surface disappears, so it is easy to determine how 
many charges are left in the staff. Unlike others 
of its kind, a staff of this sort can have as many as 
50 initial charges. However, it cannot be 


recharged. 


Thoth’s 
XP Value: 48,000 GP Value: 200,000 
Legends & Lore 

Thoth’s avatar wields a magical staff that acts as a 
combined staff of command, staff of curing, staff 
of the magi, staff of striking, and staff of power 
with unlimited charges. No other being can han- 
dle this staff without being instantly affected as if 
hit by feeblemind. There is no saving throw and 
even characters who do not use magic can be 
affected by this curse. 


$279 


1298 


x Staff, War Staff of Nyrond ø- 


of Thunder & Lightning 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
Casual examination of this stout quarterstaff 
shows it to be exceptional, and if it is magically 
examined, it radiates an aura of alteration magic 

Constructed of wood (ash, oak, bronzewood, or 
similar woods) and bound with iron set with sil- 
ver rivets, it has the properties of a +2 magical 
weapon without any expenditure of its magical 
charges. Its other magical properties are as fol- 
lows: 

Thunder: The staff strikes as a +3 weapon, and 
unless the attacked opponent saves successfully 
vs. staves, he or she is stunned from the noise of 
the staff’s impact—unable to take any further 
action in that round, and automatically having last 
initiative in the following round. This power 
requires the expenditure of one charge. 

Lightning: A short-spark of electricity leaps 
forth when the opponent is struck, causing nor- 
mal staff damage, and 2d6 additional points of 
damage from shock. Note that the staff might not 
score a hit, but the electrical discharge discounts 
any form of metal armor (making the target effec- 
tively AC 10 for this purpose), so only such dam- 
age might apply. This power requires the 
expenditure of one charge. 

Thunderclap: The staff sends forth a cone of 
deafening noise, 5 feet wide at the apex, 40 feet 
long, and 20 feet wide at a point farthest from the 
source. All creatures within this cone, wholly or 
partially, must roll a successful saving throw vs. 
staves or be stunned for 1d2 rounds (unable to 
attack during this time) and unable to hear for 
1d2 additional rounds. Those who save are unable 
to hear for 1d4 rounds, but suffer no loss of 
attacks. This function requires the expenditure of 
two charges. 

Lightning Stroke: A bolt similar to that from a 
wand of lightning is generated, but it is 8d6 in 
strength, causing 16—48 points of damage (all 1s 
are counted as 2s) to failed saving throws. The 
stroke can be single or forked; this uses two 
charges. 

Thunder & Lightning: This power combines 
the thunderclap, described above, with a forked 
lightning bolt as in the lightning stroke. Damage 
from the lightning is a total of 8d6 with rolls of 1 
or 2 counted as rolls of 3, for a range of 24-48 
points. A saving throw applies, with deafness and 
half damage suffered by those who are success- 
ful. This power requires the expenditure of four 
charges. 

The casting time required for any function is 
equal to the number of charges expended; thus, 
the thunder & lightning function costs four 
charges and has an initiative modifier of +4. 


Ushas’s 

GP Value: 25,000 
Legends & Lore 
The avatar can fire a brilliant ray of golden light 
from her staff, up to a distance of 100 feet. This 
ray always hits its target, inflicting 4d8 points of 
damage. Those struck must also save vs. para- 
lyzation or are blinded for 1d10 rounds. 


XP Value: 3,000 


of Vision 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 

This rare type of staff drains one charge per 
round when activated and held by a living crea- 
ture. It is usable by all intelligent creatures, and is 
controlled by force of will. A staff of vision may 
be activated and used within the same round. 
Shutting down any power of the staff requires 
only an instant, but switching from one power to 
another requires an entire round between uses of 
the different powers. 

Such a staff can empower the bearer or any 
creature touching the staff (but only one being at 
a time) to detect invisibility (as the 2nd-level wiz- 
ard spell, with an effective range of 90 feet), or 
use infravision (as the 3rd-level wizard spell), or 
have true seeing (as the 6th-level wizard spell, 
without any use of ointments). 

Such staves never allow X-ray vision, and 
cannot be used continuously for very long, as 
their effects are mentally tiring. A staff of vision 
can be used by one being only for as many 
rounds as the user has Intelligence points. After 
using such a staff for six rounds or more, any 
user must refrain from using it for at least four 
rounds, or wild hallucinations will result (pre- 
cluding proper use of the staff powers, and pos- 
sibly guiding the affected being into behavior 
dangerous to self or companions). 

Each staff of vision has a secret command 
word. Anyone who knows and utters it while 
touching the staff to any being (including them- 
selves) may call forth the special power of this 
type of staff at a cost of three charges. Such a 
staff can cure blindness (unlike the 3rd-level 
priest spell, the staff repairs or restores damaged 
eyes). Insufficient charges cause this special 
power to fail. 


War Staff of Nyrond 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 30,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
Just after Nyrondal, when troops willingly with- 
drew from the Theocracy of the Pale and the 
County of Urnst, a Nyrond wizard created this 
staff because he feared that other lands might see 
this as a sign of weakness and attack the King- 


dom of Nyrond. Though such attacks never 
5283 


a N e e 


1299 


Staff of the White Well 


i i 


occurred, the staff was useful to certain powerful 
wizards guarding the borders of Nyrond. 

Possession of this wooden staff allows a wizard 
of at least 11th level to attract personal followers 
as a fighter of the same level. A wizard can use 
the staff only once per year, and it must remain in 
the spellcaster’s possession for a full month after 
the followers have gathered, or the troops will 
disband and desert. Once the month has passed, 
the troops will be personally loyal to the spell- 
caster for one year, barring exceptional condi- 
tions or poor treatment. Note that this in no way 
affects the hiring of men-at-arms in the normal 
fashion. 


of the White Well 
XP Value: 15,000 GP Value: 75,000 
Hall of Heroes 
The staff of the white well is a superior form of 
druid staff. It is a long staff of white ash that 
allows the user to perform several special func- 
tions, 

Unlike other druid staffs that have an animal 
likeness carved into them, and can summon ani- 
mals of all members of the species carved on the 
staff, this staff can summon animals of any 
species the bearer chooses. However, the user 
must be specific as to the species summoned, nor 
can the user summon every species in the forest 
at once. Each summoning takes two charges. All 
animals of the called species within 12 miles has- 
ten to the druid as quickly as possible. Once they 
reach the druid, they act as if under an animal 
control spell. The staff can also be used to cast 
animal control at any animal within sight of the 
staff’s user, at a cost of one charge. 

The staff is also a magical weapon, with a +2 
bonus on attack rolls, inflicting 1d6+2 points of 
damage on a successful hit. The staff also func- 
tions as a python staff with the characteristics of 
the staff of the serpent. This includes the destruc- 
tion of the staff if the serpent is killed. Using the 
staff as a snake costs one charge. 

Ata cost of two charges, the staff can be used 
to cast one of the following druidic spells: call 
lightning, plant growth, dispel magic (as if cast 
by a |Sth-level druid), cure disease, cure serious 
wounds, speak with plants. 

Once a month, with no cost in charges, the 
staff can perform one of the following greater 
abilities: wall of fire, insect plague, transmute 
rock to mud, wall of thorns, weather summoning, 
conjure fire elemental, conjure earth elemental, 
fire storm. After using its greater power once, the 
staff only regains this ability if it is recharged in 
the Moonwell beneath a full moon. 

Use of the spells of the staff by a druid who 
does not have the experience to normally use the 


spells drains the energy of the druid. For every 
such spell used in battle, the druid must rest for 
10 minutes after the battle. If more than one such 
spell is used in a battle, the user must make a 
Constitution ability check every time the staff is 
used, after the first time. If the staff is touched by 
a person or creature of evil alignment, the toucher 
takes 3d6 points of damage every round the staff 
is held. The staff can be fully recharged by expos- 
ing it to the light of the full moon once a month. 


of the Winds 

XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Land of Fate 
This staff allows any wizard to use the following 
powers, at the cost of one charge per use: alter 
normal winds, flying jambiya, solid fog, wind 
blade, wind wall. The following powers use two 
charges, except in the case of flame mages, who 
expend only one charge from the staff for the fol- 
lowing effects: conjure air elemental, cloudkill, 
wind carpet, summon wind dragons. Only a wind 
mage may use the following power, which con- 
sumes four charges of the staff—windtomb. The 
individual holding the staff is in addition consid- 
ered to be under the effects of a feather fall spell 
as long as he holds the staff. This feather fall 
effect disappears when all charges of the staff are 
expended. 


of Withering 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 35,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

The staff of withering is a +1 magical weapon. A 
hit from it causes 1d4+1 points of damage. If two 
charges are expended when a hit is scored, the 
creature struck also ages 10 years, its abilities and 
lifespan adjusted for the resulting age increase. If 
three charges are expended when a hit is made, 
one of the opponent creature’s limbs can be made 
to shrivel and become useless unless it success- 
fully saves vs. spell (check by random number 
generation for which limb is struck), Ageless 
creatures (undead, fiends, and the rest) cannot be 
aged or withered. 

Each effect of the staff is cumulative, so that 
three charges will score damage, age, and wither. 
Aging a dwarf has little effect, while aging a 
dragon could actually aid the creature. 


of Wizardry 
XP Value: 15,000 GP Value: 75,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
Usable only by wizards, this staff +1 has all the 
powers of a staff of power, plus the wizard spell 
effects of invisibility, passwall, web, and conjure 
elemental. It may also be used to create a whirl- 


wind (as if from a djinni) or shoot a cone of para- 
5287 


1300 


Stair, Endless 


0 Ee Seen” g 


lyzation (as the wand). In addition, the user may 
break the staff, which releases all of its power at 
once. This final strike is an explosion that inflicts 
8 points of damage per charge remaining in the 
staff. All creatures within 30 feet (including the 
user!) take damage (but all may make a saving 
throw vs. staff for half damage). 


of the Woodlands 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This sort of staff is always made from oak, ash, or 
yew, finely grained, beautifully carved, and 
bound with bronze. It is effective only in the 
hands of a druid, Each such staff has the follow- 
ing powers, with each expending one charge per 
use: 
* Wall of thorns 
+ Animal friendship and speak with animals 
* Animate tree' 
! This function duplicates the ability of a treant to 
cause a large tree to move at a rate of 3 and attack 
as if it were the largest size treant. In all other 
respects it becomes a virtual treant for eight 
rounds per charge expended. Note that one round 
is required for the tree to animate, and it will 
return to rooting on the eighth, so only six of the 
initial eight rounds are effectively available for 
the attack function. 


In addition to these powers, each staff of the 
woodlands has a magical weapon value. Those 
with a lesser value have extra magical powers that 
do not require charges and can be employed once 
per day. To determine which sort of staff has been 
discovered and its powers, roll on the table below. 


Roll Staff Type 

01-25 The +4 staff has no additional powers, 

26-50 The +3 staff also confers the power of 
pass without trace 


51-75 The +2 staff confers the powers of pass 
without trace and barkskin 
76-00 The +1 staff confers the powers of the 


+2 staff and the power of the tree spell. 


In a DRAGONLANCE Campaign: The staff of the 
woodlands does not exist on Ansalon. 


Stair 
A magical stair is a wooden board, usually 5 feet 
long, a foot wide, and a half-inch thick. When 
placed on a floor and commanded, it creates a 
magical wooden stairway of some kind, which 
remains until it is commanded to vanish or until 
dispel magic is applied (treat the stairway as 25th 
level magic). Most stairways created in this fash- 
ion can support up to 2,000 pounds of weight 


(counting all items and creatures upon them); any 
additional weight causes it to collapse as if com- 
manded to disappear. 


of Ascending 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
On command, this board creates a stairway 10, 
15, or 20 feet high. The stairway appears leading 
up from the user. When commanded to disappear, 
the uppermost stair remains and may be picked 
up and reused. This item functions up to three 
times a day. 


of Breaking 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item appears and functions as either an 
ascending or descending stair but supports only 
500 pounds of weight before collapsing. It may 
be used up to three times a day. 


Cold 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This stair appears and functions as either an 
ascending or descending stair. Upon command, it 
becomes ice cold, inflicting 1 point of damage 
per foot traveled upon everyone using it. Crea- 
tures resistant to cold are not affected, and any 
other victim may make a saving throw vs. spell to 
take half damage. For example, one might take 10 
points damage descending a 20-foot stairway if 
the saving throw is made. When collapsed, the 
stair returns to normal temperature. 


of Descending 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This stair is similar to an ascending stair but cre- 
ates a stairway leading downward. When com- 
manded to disappear, the bottom stair remains 
and may be picked up and reused. This item func- 
tions up to three times a day. 


Endless 
XP Value: 15,000 GP Value: 75,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 58 
This magic item consists of two 2-foot by 1-foot 
rectangular metal plates. When cast at the ground, 
both hover in place, one above the other, forming 
a small stairway. When someone steps on the first 
plate, the plate levitates to a position above the 
second, thus continuing the stair. The stair can be 
turned by climbing in the desired direction, for a 
maximum of a 45(DG) angle change per step. 
The stair has no altitude limit, but neither does it 


confer any special abilities on the user. Therefore, 
$293 


F 1301 A 


Stair of Judgment 


j,i a 


if the user climbs above the atmosphere, he or she 
will die unless some form of magical protection 
is used, The plates can be used in a vacuum, but 
not in a zero gravity environment, as they would 
not sense where to go next. If the climber falls or 
otherwise leaves the stair in midair, the plates 
will collapse. However, if the climber ascends to 
a safe surface, the plates will stay in place. Each 
plate has an armor class of —1 and can sustain 10 
points of damage before becoming useless. The 
plates cannot be used to descend. 


of Judgment 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This stair appears and functions as either an 
ascending or descending stair. However, anyone 
using the stairway in the wrong direction (up on a 
descending stair, down on an ascending stair) 
never reaches its end and instead walks through a 
gate to an Outer Plane. Any victim of this effect is 
met by an Immortal and immediately judged on 
alignment behavior. After the judgment, the vic- 
tim is returned to a safe spot in the Prime Mater- 
ial Plane, near the point of departure. 

If alignment behavior has been perfect, no ill 
effects occur (even to chaotics). If alignment 
behavior is flawed, a quest is assigned (as the 
priest spell) which must begin within one month. 
Death is the reward for poor alignment behavior. 
(Alignment judging is a tricky matter and the DM 
should handle it carefully.) 


of Slipping 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This stair appears and functions as either an 
ascending or descending stair but on command 
becomes quite slippery. Each victim using the 
slippery stairway must make a saving throw vs. 
spell or fall and tumble down the stairs. The fall 
inflicts 1 point of damage per foot; a victim slip- 
ping from the top of a 20-foot stairway thus takes 
20 points of damage. 


Standing Stones 
XP Value: 50,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Legends & Lore 

Celtic priests can create formations of standing 
stones in order to intensify their magic. The cere- 
monies during the creation of a ring of standing 
stones make them highly magical places where 
mere lesser mortals fear to tread. 

The creation of standing stones is a lengthy 
process that requires many priests. There must be 
at least 50 levels of priests or druids who worship 
at least four different Celtic gods. One of the 
priests must be at least a 10th-level worshiper of 


Wr 
aA WA 


Belenus in order to have the all important enchant 
stones spell. The site must have stones available 
and be at least five miles from any other existing 
standing stones. All of the priests must spend an 
entire month assembling the stones and attending 
ceremonies—the enchant stones spell must be 
cast at the end of each week and again at the end 
of construction. If the priests are interrupted in 
any way during that time, the enchantment fails 
and they must start again. During creation, the 
standing stones’ site must be dedicated to one 
sphere of spells forever (for instance, standing 
stones—divination). Once created, the magic of 
the standing stones is permanent. 

The actual physical parameters of the standing 
stones are fairly loose. The exact size and number 
of the stones are unimportant for game pur- 
poses—they are arranged at creation to follow the 
seasons, stars, constellations, suns, moons, or 
whatever. It is only important that they be 
arranged in a series of circular patterns. Since 
they are generally between 10 and 30 meters 
across, standing stones are some of the largest 
magical items in existence. 

Once created, ceremonies can take place at the 
site to cast spells within its assigned sphere. The 
total of priest levels involved in the ceremony can 
be used as a direct multiplier to any of the follow- 
ing: range, duration, or area of effect. As an 
example, if 50 priest levels are involved in a cere- 


mony at standing stones to cast an animate object 
5296 


a EN 


1302 


A ng ee eel 8" eS C(“#§. |e 


Statue, Old Salt Statues of Power 


a NTN TEI 


spell, they could either multiply the range by 50 
(to 1500 yards), the duration by 50 (to 50 rounds 
per level), or the area of effect by 50 (50 cubic 
feet per level). One of the priests must actually 
cast the spell to be amplified by the standing 
stones, and his is the base from which all other 
information is extrapolated. 


Holy Star of the 
Bright Desert 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

This is a copper star marked with the silver axe and 
energy bolts of Heironeous the Invincible. It was 
fashioned by dervishes to aid them in holy battles 
against infidels. The star gives a good wearer 30% 
immunity to fear, and a +20% bonus to reactions 
with dervishes in the Bright Desert. An evilly 
aligned wearer has a —4 penalty on all saving 
throws involving fear (magical or otherwise), and a 
-4 morale penalty. The device glows brightly 
within 30 feet of any extremely evil creature. 


Statue 
Statues are carved from wood, stone, or marble 
and their subject matter varies widely according 
to the whim of the sculptor or the demands of a 
commission. Statues have also been produced by 
pouring molten metal, ceramic, or plaster into a 
mold. 


Boli 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 189 

Boli is a human-size statue of humanoid figure that 
is dedicated to the skilled crafts—metal and 
leatherworking, jewelers, all smiths, or any other 
craft. If the boli is given a small offering of food or 
drink every day, the craftsperson can only automat- 
ically fail proficiency checks on a roll of 20, and 
receives a—1 bonus to the die roll. If the offering is 
not made, the craftsperson always fails proficiency 
checks until the offerings are made again. 


Corellon’s Crystal Statuette 
XP Value: 3,200 GP Value: 16,000 
Monster Mythology 
Corellon’s avatar typically carries a crystal stat- 
uette that allows him to summon 1d4 16-HD air 
elementals to do his bidding for 2d4 turns once a 


Golden 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Storm Riders 
This golden statue depicts the Padhrasattva of 
Erudition, Mahavidi. Mahavidi is the personal 


Padhrasattva of the Dalai Lama, and is consid- 


ered the highest of Padhra’s incarnations. 

Mahavidi’s statue is solid gold and is valued at 
more than ten million gold pieces. It weighs over 
30 tons, and is built directly into the foundations 
of a building. Other than this, its only defense 
against theft is the famous Ra-Khatian karma 
curse, in this case, a permanent karma curse. The 
curse is activated whenever someone touches the 
statue while thinking thoughts of larceny. The 
conditions for removing the curse are returning 
anything that was stolen from the statue, and then 
performing an act of contrition equivalent to the 
act that began the curse. 


Old Salt Statues of Power 


XP Value GP Value 
Medic with Bag: 1,500 7,500 
Old Captain with Pipe: 1,900 9,500 
Old Salty with Raincoat: 800 4,000 
Pirate Mate with Rapier: 900 4,500 
Pirate with Pegleg: 1,400 7,000 
Sails Boy with Rope: 900 4,500 
Skipper with Hat: 1,000 5,000 
Swabbie with Bucket: 700 3,500 
Weaponsmaster: 850 8,500 
Whaler with Harpoon: 800 4,000 


War Captain’s Companion 
There are several different old salt statues of 
power. Each appears as a small statue of a sailor a 
foot or so tall. When the statue is rubbed and the 
command word (usually engraved on the bottom 
of the stand) is spoken, its power is activated. 

If an old salt statue of power is broken or 
destroyed, it is forever ruined, all magic is lost, 
and it has no power. If it is slain in its human 
form, it merely reverts to statue form and can be 
used again at a later time. They can be used once 
per day, unless otherwise stated in the following 
text. 

Medic with Bag: At a word, this statue grows 
to human size. It has AC 10, hp 8, and MV 12. 
The statue can cure light wounds five times a day, 
cure serious wounds twice a day, or cure critical 
wounds once a day. It cannot use more than one 
cure type in a single day. Alternately, the statue 
can heal once a week, but this power replaces all 
other curative powers of the statue for that week. 
The old salt statue can only be used to cure an 
individual once in a single 24-hour period, which 
means that all five cure light wounds cannot be 
spent on the same individual. 

Old Captain with Pipe: Once a day, this 
statue can be activated to give the ship’s captain 
unerring advice. The advice the statue gives is 
limited to directions toward an intended destina- 
tion, or the advice on how to better attack an 
enemy ship. (When the latter advice is used, the 


ship gains a + 1 bonus on all initiative and attack 
5302 


ee aa ae 


1303 


Statue, Pirate with Peg Leg 


D ee E 


rolls for 1d4 rounds.) The statue has AC 4, hp 23, 
and MV 12. After use, it reverts to statue form, 
leaving behind a pleasant odor of beechwood 
pipe smoke. 

Pirate with Peg Leg: When this statue is acti- 
vated, all enemies aboard a ship must roll a save 
vs. spell or be forced to dance the pirate’s jig for 
1d6 rounds. During that time, all those who failed 
the save cannot fight. Those who make the save 
have their attack rolls penalized by —1. The statue 
has AC 10, hp 2, and MV 12. If destroyed, its 
magical effects on the opponents are immediately 
dispelled. 

Pirate Mate with Rapier and Parrot: Once a 
day, this statue can be activated to fight with the 
ship’s crew. The pirate mate with rapier and par- 
rot can be used once a day. With an evilly aligned 
crew, the statue gains the following statistics: 


Statue, Evil Crew: Int Average; AL LE; 
AC 6; MV 12; HD 6; hp 60; THACO 15; 
#AT 3/2; Dmg 1d8+3; SA +3 on attack and 
damage rolls; SZ M (6’ tall); ML 20; XP 
650. 


With a good or neutrally aligned crew the 
statue has the following statistics: 


Statue, Good Crew: Int Average; AL LN 
or LG; AC 5; MV 12; HD 6; hp 60; THACO 
16; #AT 3/2; Dmg 1d8+2; SA +2 on attack 
and damage rolls; SZ M (6’ tall); ML 20; 
XP 650. 


Sails’ Boy with Rope: This statue can be acti- 
vated once a day for one hour each use. The sails’ 
boy can increase the MC of a spelljamming ship 
(or even a normal sailing ship) by one class for 
that time. If killed while performing his duties, 
the sails’ boy cannot be reactivated for one full 
week. Only one can be active on a ship at one 
time. It has AC 6, hp 12, and MV 12. 

Old Salty with Raincoat: This statue of power 
has no human form. Instead, it divines the weather 
for the next 24 hours. (If the weather is being mag- 
ically tampered with, the sailor's squinty eye glows 
and the divination will change to match the 
approaching weather.) When the weather is divined 
as being fair, the statue appears as a barechested 
sailor with short legged pants and no shoes. 

If the weather is to be stormy and wet, the statue 
wears a raincoat. If the weather is cold or snowy, 
the statue wears a thick parka and tall, stout boots. 
This item is useful in the phlogiston as well, since 
it predicts the occasional eddies and high and low 
pressure cross-currents that resemble ocean 
storms. It operates constantly, and cannot be deac- 
tivated or fooled, save by magic. 


Skipper with Hat: When this statue is active, 
it directs the motions of the ship by yelling (often 
obscene) commands to the helmsman. As a result 
the ship is able to perform faster than normal. 
The ship gains a +1 to its SR. The skipper can be 
used once a day for one hour at a time. If more 
than one skipper with hat is used on the ship at 
one time, the number of skippers equals the SR 
penalty the ship receives instead. With two skip- 
pers with hat, SR 6 turns into SR 4. This penalty 
arises from the skippers yelling different com- 
mands; thus confusing the crew. The statue has 
AC 2, hp 35, and MV 12. 

Swabbie with Bucket: When activated, this 
statue will clean and polish every deck on the 
ship. The job takes one round per 5 square feet 
(keel length multiplied by beam width gives 
square footage). It continues its job until it either 
finishes, or until killed. It has AC 8, hp 12, and 
MV 9, and can be activated once a week. 

Weaponsmaster: This statue takes the place of 
a whole weapon’s crew. It can be activated for one 
hour every day, or until the human form is 
destroyed. This statue has AC 4; 6th-level fight- 
ers, hp 45; MV 12. 

Whaler with Harpoon: When activated, this 
statue goes to the edge of the ship, armed with its 
harpoon and summons fish. Even in the phlogis- 
ton, the whaler can summon and spear 1d12 fish 
every day (each fish averages 1d20+20 inches 
long). Once the DM determines the number of 
fish that are caught, the whaler returns to statue 
form, and cannot be reactivated for 24 hours. 

If a large aquatic creature (whale, sea serpent, 
kraaken, or the like) is attacking the ship, the 
whaler can, if not previously activated, fight dur- 
ing the encounter with a +2 bonus, inflicting dou- 
ble damage. 


Roll Statue Type 


01-10 Medic with Bag 

11-20 Old Captain with Pipe 

21-30 Old Salty with Raincoat 

31-40 Pirate Mate with Rapier 

41-50 Pirate with Pegleg 

51-60 = Sails’ boy with Rope 

61-70 Skipper with Hat 

71-80 Swabbie with Bucket 

81-90 Weaponsmaster 

91-00 Whaler with Harpoon 
Scorpion Ward 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 1,250 

The Glory of Rome 


Romans greatly feared the power of wizards with 
the evil eye. One of the magical items used to 
protect against it was the scorpion ward. This is a 


small, hardened clay or metal statue of a scorpion 
5312 


z 1304 J 


EE —— ————— E | 


of average workmanship. If one is placed just 
inside the doorway of a home and a short prayer 
said to the household gods, the magic of the 
statue protects the people who live in the house 
against the evil eye. Any residents of the house- 
hold (including family members, servants, and 
slaves, but not guests) receive a +3 bonus to sav- 
ing throws against the evil eye, as long as the 
scorpion ward remains in the doorway. 


Singing 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dragons of Light 
The statue of singing is a hollow statue of beaten 
gold, formed in the shape of Mishakal, the Healer. 
If water is poured into the hole at the top, the 
statue begins to hum a varied, peaceful tune. The 
statue has the following properties while singing: 
it acts as a chime of opening against any locked or 
held door; it prevents undead from approaching 
within 20 feet of its wielder; it heals 1d6 points 
of damage, once a day, on any person within 10 
feet. 


Singing II 
XP Value: 3,750 
Tales of the Lance 
These hollow statues of gold were smithed into 
their form by the goddess Mishakal, the Healer. 
Each statue stands about 6 inches tall. 

If water is poured into the hole at the statue’s 
top, the statue begins to hum a peaceful tune. 
When the statue “sings,” it acts as a chime of 
opening against any locked or held door, it pre- 
vents undead from approaching within 20 feet of 
the wielder, and it heals 1d6 points of damage to 
all people within 10 feet (including the wielder). 
This last power is usable only once a day. The 
duration of singing is 4d4 turns. If the water is 
prematurely spilled, the singing stops. 

These statues were common in pre-Cata- 
clysmic times. Now that the clergy of Mishakal 
have been restored, the singing statues have 
begun to reappear with increasing frequency. 


GP Value: 


Stone Horse 
XP Value GP Value 
Courser: 2,000 12,000 
Destrier: 3,000 15,000 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

Each of these items appears to be full-size, 
roughly hewn statue of a horse, carved from some 
type of hard stone. A command word brings a 
steed to life, enabling it to carry a burden, and 
even to attack as if it were a war-horse. There are 
two sorts of mounts: 

Courser: This stone horse travels at the same 
movement rate as a light horse (movement rate 


Statue of Substitution 


24) and attacks as if it were a medium war-horse 
(three attacks for 1d6/1d6/1d3). It is Armor Class 
3 and has 18 hit points. It saves vs. all applicable 
attack forms as if it were “Metal, hard.” 

Destrier: This stone horse travels at the same 
movement rate as a medium horse (movement rate 
18) and attacks as if it were a heavy war-horse 
(three attacks for 1d8/1d8/1d3). It is Armor Class 1 
and has 26 hit points. It saves vs. all applicable 
attack forms as if it were “Metal, hard.” 

A stone horse can carry 1,000 pounds tire- 
lessly and never needs to rest or feed. Damage 
inflicted can be repaired by first using a stone to 
flesh spell, thus causing the stone horse to 
become a normal horse. If allowed to graze and 
rest, the animal heals its wounds at the rate of 1 
point per day. When fully healed, it automatically 
reverts to magical form. 


of Substitution 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 126 
Upon close examination, this statue reveals a 
small cavity in its back. The statue is hollow and 
large enough to hold one pint of blood. In order 
to make the statue work, the character to carry or 
use it must pour one pint of blood into the statue, 
which magically seals when full. Once this bond 
has been created, the statue benefits the character 
using it as if using the shukenja spell substitution. 


The first 20 points of damage the character takes 
5316 


1305 > 


~ Statue, Xanthippe of Annoyance r 


in combat are absorbed by the statue, which dis- 
appears automatically when the limit is reached. 
The statue will benefit no one but the character 
whose blood it holds, and only one statue may be 
so used by a character at a time. If small amounts 
of blood from several characters are poured in, 
the statue will not give each of the characters lim- 
ited benefits; it will, in fact, be worthless. 


Xanthippe of Annoyance 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This item appears to be a tiny statue of a shrew. If 
one command word is spoken, it turns into a giant 
shrew but may then make a saving throw vs. 
spell. If the throw is successful, the shrew imme- 
diately flees at its maximum movement rate. If 
the saving throw fails, the shrew understands and 
obeys the user of the statue. 

If touched and a second command word spo- 
ken, the shrew returns to statue form. Otherwise, 
a dispel magic spell is needed to return the crea- 
ture to its normal inanimate state; remove curse 
does not affect it. 

A third command word turns the statue into an 
ethereal being resembling a human female. This 
being is immune to all attacks and has no attack 
forms itself. When created, however, it immedi- 
ately begins loudly criticizing the user; all with 
60 feet understand the words. This speech can 
continue for any duration but the being returns to 
statue form on command of the user or if dispel 
magic is applied. 


Stick of Standing 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The sticks of standing were developed to support 
Orlow’s tomato plants. These are 4-inch-thick, 2- 
foot-long pieces of wood. When placed perpendic- 
ular to any horizontal surface they remain standing 
unless moved by a living creature. 


Stirrups of Horsemanship 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
DRAGON Magazine 126 
When fitted on a horse, these stirrups give any 
character who rides that animal the same skills in 
riding that he or she would have with the horse- 
manship proficiency (this applies to riding skill, 
leaping onto the animal, using two-handed weap- 
ons on horseback while guiding the animal with 
the legs alone, and so on). The stirrups may be 
used on any horse or horselike animal (ki-rin, 
unicorn, or the like), and must be attached to the 
saddle trappings if they are to work properly. No 
additional bonus is given to characters who 

already have the horsemanship proficiency. 


Stocking 


Stockings are long, tight-fitting garments that are 
often worn in place of socks. Stockings protect 
the whole leg, where socks only keep the calf and 
feet warm. Some cultures frown upon men’s 
stockings, however, frigid climates generally 
prompt everyone to wear stockings, especially in 
cultures where trousers haven't been invented. 


of Elf Summoning 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 
This plain, long stocking is typical of the type of 
socks worn by peasants. When hung by a chim- 
ney and the command word is spoken, a fat, 10th- 
level elf will appear by descending through the 
chimney, wearing a bright red and white fur out- 
fit. The elf will assist the user for up to one hour, 
and then vanish. The stocking functions once a 
year. 


of Mystery 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 
This stocking is useful when pulled over the 
head. The user then becomes completely unrec- 
ognizable, even by close friends. The stocking 
functions once a day, for up to three turns per use. 


Stone 
Magical stones are generally polished to a bril- 
liant shine. See Gem and Rock for additional 
magical possibilities. 


Roll Stone Type 
01-25 Ornamental Stone 
26-50 Semiprecious Stone 
51-75 Fancy Stone 
76-00 Hardstone 

Roll Ornamental Stone Type 
01-03 Agni Mani 

04-05 Algae 

06-08 Augelite 

09-11 Bluestone 

12-13 Chrysocolla 
14-16 Corstal 

17-18 Crown of Silver 
19-21 Disthene 

22-24 Epidote 

25-26 Fire Agate 

27-29  Fluorspar 

30-32 Frost Agate 
33-34 Goldline 

35-37 Greenstone 
38-39  Hyaline 

40—42 Lynx Eye 


x Statue, Beauregard’s Beautiful Bauble s- 


43-45 Mocrocline 19-23 Heliodor 
46-47 Nelvine 24-27 Horn Coral 
48-50 Nune 28-32 Jargoon 
51-53 Oolite 33-36 Kornerupine 
54-55 Ophealine 37—41 Laeral’s Tears 
56-58 Rosaline 42—45 Octel 
59-61 Sagenite 46-50 Orbaline 
62-63 Sanidine 51-55 Raindrop 
64-66 Sarbasso 56-59 Rusteen 
67-68 Satin Spar 60-64  Scapra 
69-71 Sharpstone 65-68 Shandon 
72-74 Sheen 69-73 Sinhalite 
75-76 Silkstone 74-77 Sphene 
77-19 Snowflake Obsidian 78-82 Star Siopside 
80-82 Sunstone 83-86  Tremair 
83-84  Thurarlial 87-91 Ulvaen 
85-87  Variscite 92-95 Waterstar 
88-89  Violane 96-00 Ziose 
90-92 Webstone 
93-95  Wonderstone Roll Hardstone Type 
96-97 Woodtine 01-06 Alabaster 
98-00  Zarbrina 07-11 Archon 
12-17 Hornbill Ivory 
Roll Semiprecious Stone Type 18-22 Iris Agate 
01-04 = Alestone 23-28 Ivory 
05-07 Andar 29-33 Lumachella 
08-11 Aventurine 34-39 Luspeel 
12-14 Boakhar 40—44 Marble 
15-18 Cleiophane 45-50 Meerschaum 
19-21 Datchas 51-56 Pipestone 
22-25 Dioptase 57-61 Psaedros 
26-29 Gold Sheen 62-67 Serpentine Stone 
30-32 Hambergyle 68-72 Soapstone 
33-36 Hydrophane 73-78 Star Metal 
37-39 Hypersthene 79-83 Sulabra 
40-43 Iol 84-89 Tempskya 
44-46 Irtios 90-94 Turritella 
47-50 Luriyl 95-00 Xylopal 
51-54 Malacopn 
55-57 Meliochrysos Beauregard’s Beautiful Bauble 
58-61 Mykaro XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
62—64 Mynteer POLYHEDRON Magazine 57 
65-68  Orprase This small stone looks very much like a robin’s 
69-71 Phenalope egg and will radiate a faint aura if detect magic is 
72-75 Rainbow Obsidian used. The bauble has the power to release a calm- 
76-79 Samarshite ing effect on all who look at it. Anyone viewing 
80-82 Serpentine the bauble must make a saving throw vs. charm; 
83-86 Skydrop those who are successful hear soft music and 
87-90 Spodumene believe that the bauble is one of the most beauti- 
91-93 Tabasheer ful things they have ever seen. Those who fail the 
94-96 Tchazar saving throw are instantly calmed, at peace with 
97-00  Witherite themselves and their surroundings. When placed 
in the hands of someone who is angry or afraid— 
Roll Fancy Stone Type even one who is magically enchanted to be angry 
01-05 Angel Skin of afraid—the person becomes calm and happy 
06-09 Brandeen and any enchantment of anger or fear is instantly 
10-14 Euclase negated. 


15-18 Flamedance 
5322 


1307 


Stone, Bimbomushi 


Bimbomushi 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 40 
These come in two imitative forms, either similar 
to magical gems or to other magical stones (lode- 
stone, earth elementals, and the like). When car- 
ried on a person in battle with a creature of more 
Hit Dice (in a mixed group, if any one of the 
enemy has more Hit Dice) than the carrier, the 
bimbomushi acts as a ring of protection -3 for its 
carrier as long as he or she is conscious and in 
active battle.. 


Bloodstone of Fistandantilus 
XP Value: 15,000 GP Value: 75,000 
Tales of the Lance 

Legends state that no one can possess the blood- 

stone of Fistandantilus; one is possessed by it; 

such is the bloodstone’s power—such is evil. 

Even if the artifact itself does not turn the user 

mad, it offers prizes that just might—a new body, 

a new mind, and immortality. In mortal combat, 

Raistlin wrested this artifact from Fistandantilus. 

Some say the bloodstone wanted Raistlin to win, 

some say it drove him mad. 

The bloodstone has survived from the early 
days of magic, crafted from the blood-speckled 
jasper found at the Ravaged Heart valley of the 
Khalkist Mountains. A 3-inch-long, teardrop 
shaped gem, the bloodstone takes its name from 
the scarlet speckles that run through it. The gem 
rests in a plain silver setting that is worn about 
the neck on a silver chain. 

Once a day, the wearer can speak a command 
word to cause the bloodstone to cure 2d8+1 
points of damage to himself. The stone cannot 
cure systemic damage as caused by poison or pet- 
rification. 

A separate command word causes the blood- 
Stone to activate in the following round, attacking 
anyone in a 40-foot radius. When successfully 
used, the bloodstone dislodges the victim’s spirit 
and transfers the wizard’s spirit into the victim’s 
body. Use of the bloodstone in this fashion auto- 
matically shifts the character one full alignment 
toward evil (good becomes neutral, neutral 
becomes evil and so on). In the round after the 
second command word is spoken, both victim 
and wielder roll a saving throw vs. spell with the 
following results: 

* If both fail, each loses 1d10+5 hit points. The 
victim can make one attack. The wizard can 
elect to receive the attack, hoping to use the 
bloodstone again in the next round, or may 
break concentration and try to avoid the 
attack. 

* If both save, the victim’s spirit is firmly 
entrenched and has battled back the attack. 


Both roll again. 

+ Ifthe victim saves and the wizard fails, the 
wizard suffers 1d10+5 points of damage and 
cannot perform an action in the next round. 
The victim takes a free action that round. 

¢ Ifthe wizard saves and the victim fails, the 
victim’s spirit dislodges and departs to the 
gods. The wizard’s spirit inhabits the emp- 
tied body and his old body crumbles to dust. 
The wizard all former ability scores (Str, 
Dex, Con, and so forth) except where the 
victim’s scores are higher. For such abilities, 
the wizard’s scores increase to match those 
of the victim. If the victim exceeded the wiz- 
ard in level, the wizard attains the higher 
level, gaining the experience points and 
powers of the new level. 


Chardalyn 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Volo’s Guide to the North 

These rare, black stones are found only in the 
northern Sword Coast area of Faerûn. They occur 
naturally, and are not a specially enchanted stone. 
Each stone can naturally entrap a single spell cast 
into it, releasing the magic for its usual spell 
effects later, when the stone is shattered. 

If a chardalyn is hurled at an enemy and 
breaks, it could become the focal point of a fire- 
ball cast into it years earlier. A chardalyn can 


only absorb one spell. Once it is “full.” other 
5325 


l 


308 


in E 


magic has no effect on it. 

These stones always absorb spells cast delib- 
erately into them. They can also absorb incom- 
ing spells on a roll of 7 or less on 1d12. This is 
useful when the incoming spell is hostile and 
directed at the stonebearer. Chardalyn can take 
in lightning bolts and fireball flames that have 
already manifested (preventing any damage 
from them from occurring), but the bearer of a 
stone can’t choose when this power will or won’t 
work. (Once again, it only has the potential to 
work if the chardalyn is not already holding a 
spell.) Several veteran Riders of Nesmé wear 
rings of fire resistance coupled with shields 
studded with chardalyns that hold fireball spells 
into battle. A foe who shatters a chardalyn with 
a weapon blow suffers immediate damage from 
the exploding flames. 


of Cold Immunity 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 
No command word is needed for this rare item. It 
automatically absorbs cold damage that could 
otherwise affect the bearer. All cold damage is 
reduced to | point per die, and the bearer may 
make appropriate saving throws to take damage 
equal to half of the reduced figure. The stone of 
cold immunity functions for 1d6+6 months 
(regardless of the amount of cold absorbed) 
before becoming nonmagical. This item cannot 
be constructed or recharged. It is a disposable 
body part from a very rare creature (the sotyuch). 


of Continual Light 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
Talons of Night 
These normal stones are enchanted with the con- 
tinual light spell. Generally they are attached to 
the walls of dungeons or castles in order to light 
the hallways. ° 


of Controlling Earth Elementals 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 12,500 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
A stone of this nature is typically an oddly shaped 
bit of roughly polished rock. The possessor of 
such a stone need but utter a single command 
word, and an earth elemental of 12 HD will come 
to the summoner if earth is available, an 8-HD 
elemental if rough, unhewn stone is the summon- 
ing medium. (An earth elemental cannot be sum- 
moned from worked stone, but one can be called 
out of mud, clay, or even sand—although one 
from sand is an 8-HD monster.) The area of sum- 
moning for an earth elemental must be at least 4- 
foot square and have 4 cubic yards of volume. 
The elemental appears in 1d4 rounds. For detailed 


Stone, Dream 


information about elementals and their control 
see the Monstrous Manual accessory. The stone 
can be used to summon one elemental a day. 

In Ravenloft: The elemental can only return to 
its native plane through one of Ravenloft’s rare 
exits. If it some how gains its freedom, it attacks 
the summoner. 


Coruskian 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 8,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
Set in a golden necklace, this green stone was 
enchanted by a Nyrondese spellcaster who sought 
to control the griffons of the Corwkian Moun- 
tains. Though the magical item worked well, the 
wizard overlooked his inability to ride airborne 
creatures, and he met his doom at the bottom of a 
deep and jagged chasm. Since then, the stone has 
been used by the nomads and tribesmen who hap- 
pen to find it. 

The stone gives its owner the ability to charm 
griffons (saving throw applicable) once a day. 
Charmed griffons will allow the charmer and all 
allies to ride them. Airborne riding maneuvers 
that do not require a proficiency check can be 
accomplished using land-based riding tech- 
niques, but airborne maneuvers that require a 
check automatically fail if the rider has no profi- 
ciency in airborne riding. If the wearer rides a 
griffon into combat, the chances of breaking the 
spell are doubled (check before the battle). 


Cursed Well 

GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 145 
In appearance, this stone looks exactly like a 
stone of the well. A cursed well stone, though, 
causes any well into which it is placed to dry up 
immediately; likewise, all wells within a one-mile 
radius of a cursed well stone also dry up immedi- 
ately. This item counters a stone of the well, and 
no new well dug in the area of effect of a cursed 
weil stone will yield water, even if the ground is 
saturated. Once activated, an exorcism or remove 
curse is required to be rid of this malefic stone’s 
influence. 


XP Value: — 


Dream 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
In Search of Dragons 

Dream stones are golden pebbles that reveal 
actual or possible events in the future. Eons ago, 
the gods of neutrality presented the bag of dream 
stones to the primitive Lor-Tai tribe. Lor-Tai 
leaders use the stones to help predict natural dis- 
asters and to forecast the year’s harvest. 

Each dream stone is etched with from 1 to 3 


symbols of a moon at high sanction. When the 
$331 


1309 


i T S 


Stone of Everburning 


i, E 


number of symbols on a dream stone is the same 
as the number of high sanction moons in the sky, 
a dream is revealed, but only if the owner sleeps 
through the night with the stone beneath his or 
her head. Each dream stone can be used once. 

The dream stones can be useful tools for pro- 
viding the PCs with information, clues, and 
warnings. They can also be helpful in getting 
stalled PCs back on the track. However, the 
dreams are not necessarily accurate, nor are they 
always easy to interpret. 

To receive a dream, the PC must sleep with the 
dream stone under his or her head for at least six 
uninterrupted hours. The symbols on the dream 
stone must match exactly with the moons in the 
sky. For instance, if a particular dream stone 
shows two moons in full sanction and there are 
three moons in full sanction, no dream cream will 
occur, 

The dreams are visions of events that may 
occur in the future. A dream is experienced as a 
series of flickering images; the end of one image 
dissolves into the beginning of the next. Unless 
the DM is using the dream stones to feed specific 
information to particularly incompetent or 
unlucky PCs, the images should be vague and 
indefinite. It makes for a more interesting adven- 
ture if you can tie these dreams into the personal- 
ities of the PCs. 


of Everburning 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Old Empires 
This stone is unremarkable, except that it radiates 
searing heat at all times. If a stone of everburning 
contacts exposed flesh, it inflicts 1d3 points of 
damage for each round of contact. The stone’s 
most remarkable property is its longevity; some 
have stayed hot more than 3,000 years, even when 
continuously immersed in water. These items are 
used in the steam engines of Mulhorand. 


Finder’s 

XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 409 
This artifact was destroyed in the final battle 
against the evil god Moander. By holding this 
unique magical item and concentrating, any per- 
son could get it to emit a beacon of light indicat- 
ing the quickest path to any object, Any member 
of the Wyvernspur family could: peer into the 
stone to read knowledge stored within; cause the 
stone to cast an illusion of the bard Finder 
Wyvernspur, singing any of his songs: use the 
stone as a rechargeable wand, holding many 
spells, including detect magic, continual light, 
dispel magic, fly, tongues (permanent), and tele- 
port. 


Glowstone 
XP Value: 1,400 GP Value: 7,000 
Dwarves Deep 
These famous “gems” are synthetic crystals. 
Clear, faceted, and oval, and as long as a man’s 
hand, glowstones bloom with a continuous, heat- 
less white radiance equal to a continual light 
spell. The radiance cannot be dimmed by magical 
darkness, dispel magic, or other means, with the 
exception of draining the stone of all power. 
When power is being drained from a glowstone, it 
pulses and flickers. 

Glowstones are used to power all magical 
items requiring charges. A glowstone that is 
brought into contact with an item sticks to it. This 
is an attraction akin to magnetism, which can be 
broken by a strong pull, but not by accidental 
contact. Once attached to another magical item, 
the glowstone begins to recharge the item, restor- 
ing one charge per full turn of continuous con- 
tact. If the item is used during this time, it loses 
no charges, the required magical energy being 
drawn from the glowstone in addition to the 
recharging energy being released. 

Magical items which do not use charges but 
which can normally be used only a limited num- 
ber of times in a set period gain one additional 
use (of each power or function) after they are 
exhausted. They must be touched to a glowstone 
for five continuous rounds. This boost cannot be 
fed into an item before a given power is 
exhausted, storing the energy for later use. 

In addition, dwarf priests can release the power 
of a glowstone which they are touching by means 
of a special spell, glowglory. This potent magic 
allows them to unleash beams of power froma 
glowstone, as weapons or tools. A beam of power 
is a cutting beam of radiant force that cuts stone, 
wood, and flesh alike—doing an automatic 6 
points of structural damage per round to the for- 
mer two objects, and does 6d6 points of damage 
per contact to living things. For more information 
on beams of power, please refer to the spell glow- 
glory. 

Unleashing a beam of power from a glowstone 
drains it of 20 charges per round. Charging an 
item from a glowstone drains however many 
charges are transferred to the item, at the rate 
given above. Boosts for chargeless items cost 
seven charges each. 

Glowstones have 1,000 charges when made, 
and can never be recharged, but charges can be 
transferred from one glowstone to another. A 
little-known side benefit of this last practice: any 
being holding two glowstones together and will- 
ing one to give the other energy experiences the 
energy flow through his or her body. It does not 
heal damage, but does burn away poisons, a 

53 


aa 


1310 


i  ______ ____ ee 


Stone of Gul and Thiondar 


eases, parasitic infestations, and embedded for- 
eign materials, purifying the body. 

To destroy a glowstone, one must strike it with 
a disintegration spell or magical effect, or deal it 
physical or magical damage (or a combination of 
the two types) totaling more than 66 points in one 
round (cumulative totals are ignored). Even when 
disintegrated, a glowstone explodes in a violent 
blast dealing 1d10 points of damage per charge it 
had left, to all creatures within 70 feet (save for 
half damage, allowed only if at least 25 feet dis- 
tant from the stone). Glowstones that are entirely 
drained do not explode. Their light simply fades 
silently, and then they crumble away to dust. 


of Good Luck 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 25,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
The /uckstone, a magical stone, is typically a bit 
of rough polished agate or similar mineral. Its 
possessor gains a +1 (+5% where applicable) on 
all dice rolls involving factors such as saving, 
slipping, or dodging—whenever dice are rolled to 
find whether the character suffers from some 
adverse happening. This luck does not affect 
attack and damage rolls or spell failure dice. 
Additionally, the luckstone gives the possessor a 
+1% to +10% (at owner’s option) on rolls for 
determination of magical items or division of 
treasure. The most favorable results will always 
be gained with a stone of good luck. 


1311 


of Gul and Thiondar 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 75,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 30 

In the distant past, long before the rise of man 
and the creation of dwarves and gnomes, giants 
ruled the surface of the continent and wor- 
shiped many deities. One of the giants’ deities, 
a young and rash demigod named Gul, pro- 
voked the terrible wars that fragmented the 
giants into separate races and created the 
mutant ettins, cyclops, and fomorians. As pun- 
ishment for his terrible deed, the deities of the 
giants stripped Gul of most of his powers and 
imprisoned his essence forever in a 2,500 1b. 
ruby. Unwilling to destroy another immortal 
being, the gods of the giants deposited this 
prison in the heart of a mountain and tried to 
forget about Gul. Near the mountain, the gods 
raised a temple to commemorate their deed and 
to warn mortals to beware the terrible Gul. 

The stone of Gul is a relic of awesome and for- 
midable power. Designed especially for its 
immortal prisoner, who was once a deity of flame 
and travel, the stone drains the magical and spiri- 
tual abilities from Gul and shunts them into the 
nearby environment. The stone drains Gul’s most 
powerful immortal powers, using them to teleport 
a nearby river in an endless loop and to heat a 
nearby valley. 

Millennia passed, and the climate of the moun- 
tain range gradually became colder, except for 
the valley warmed by the stone. When the Ch’thar 
discovered the valley, King Thiondar found an 
opening at the base of the tallest mountain at the 
south of the valley. Intrigued, he descended 
beneath the mountain and discovered the stone of 
Gul. 

As the king (a powerful wizard) studied and 
tested the relic, he fell into its power and became 
insane. Thiondar emerged from the mountain a 
week later to tell his worried subjects that the 
Ch’thar would be settling in the valley. He ordered 
the Ch’thar to build a town, while he returned to 
guard what he now considered his relic. 

It was plain to all of the elves that something 
had befallen their leader. Lioshand, the king’s 
champion, followed the king into the mountain 
and witnessed Thiandar meditating in the pres- 
ence of a huge glowing ruby. Lioshand con- 
fronted the king about the relic, whereupon 
Thiandar, deranged by the power of the stone, 
accused him of treason and slew him with 
magic. The king emerged from the mountain to 
denounce his faithless subjects and to pro- 
nounce a horrible curse on Lioshand’s soul. 
Thiondar repeated his order for the Ch'thar to 
build a town, and again returned to the mountain 


to guard the relic. 
5336 


~ Stone of Gul and Thiondar a 


As soon as Thiondar left, the Ch’thar began 
to argue bitterly among themselves. They spec- 
ulated about what Thiondar had found under 
the mountain, which was soon named King’s 
Mountain by the elves. Many despised the 
king’s actions, for they knew that Lioshand had 
always protected the king and acted out of con- 
cern for Thiondar’s safety. Even more hated the 
environment of the valley, which was filled 
with a dark rain forest and populated with great 
reptiles. 

The dissenters—nearly a thousand strong—lett 
the valley and called themselves the gray elves. 
Ashamed for their king’s unjust behavior, their 
own weakness, and their cowardly escape, the 
gray elves never documented what happened in 
the valley and retain their somber name to this 
day. 

A few hundred of the Ch’thar remained in the 
valley, some out of loyalty, some out of fear. 
Inspired by the divine intelligence in the stone, 
Thiondar devised two wards to prevent interrup- 
tion from the outside world. As the centuries 
passed and Thiondar’s insanity developed, he 
ordered all of the Ch’thar to settle inside King’s 
Mountain, 

Thiondar began experimenting with the powers 
of the stone, and in doing so diverted energy from 
the relic’s original tasks. As a result, the valley 
became too cold to support a rain forest. As the 
millennia passed, the swampy valley dried up and 
all the water settled in a lake at the foot of King’s 
Mountain. Time soon eroded the Ch’thar’s aban- 
doned buildings in the valley, and the entrance to 
the caverns under King’s Mountain became par- 
tially flooded with water from the lake. 

If a spellcaster spends but eight hours meditat- 
ing in the presence of the stone, he or she can 
learn how to invoke some of its powers at the 
20th level of ability: fireball (three times a day), 
fire charm (once a day), levitate (at will), dimen- 
sion door (once a week), control weather (once a 
week), and earthquake (once a week). Spending 
one day pondering the mystical energies of the 
stone permanently raises a spellcaster’s Intelli- 
gence by | point due to the close contact with a 
work of divine genius. 

In addition, the stone has the ability to inspire a 
spellcaster to create a new work of magic. For 
every day spent in meditation in front of the 
stone, there is a 1% cumulative chance that the 
spellcaster will be imparted with a burst of genius 
and understand all the steps to manufacture a 
magical item or research a spell. If the character 
is inspired, roll percentile dice and consult the 
following table: 


Roll Inspiration 

01-36 Spell 

37—45 Ring 

46-50 Rod 

51-60 Staff 

61-70 Wand 

71-90 Miscellaneous magical item 


Miscellaneous magical weapon 
Armor 


The specific item or spell can be determined 
by using the spell tables in the PHB or the magi- 
cal item tables in the DMG, or the magical gener- 
ation tables in this back of this volume. An 
inspiration will result in a 100% chance of suc- 
cess and one-fourth the time and expense required 
in research for the particular item or spell. How- 
ever, the knowledge gained by the inspiration 
lasts for only as many months as the spellcaster 
has points of Intelligence, and a recipient cannot 
be visited by more than one inspiration at a time. 
If the inspiration is not or cannot be immediately 
acted upon (perhaps because the spellcaster 
receives inspiration for a spell beyond his abil- 
ity), the spellcaster will never be able to enchant 
the item or research the spell, no matter how 
much time and effort are expended. Furthermore, 
the inspiration is a gut feeling, a hunch, an inde- 
scribable instinct to complete the item or spell. It 
cannot be translated into words and can never be 


written down. 
5336 


1312 


Stone of Mysterious Sounds 


ere a 


Hampering with divine insight has its dangers. 
For every day spent meditating in front of the 
stone, there is a 5% cumulative chance that the 
spellcaster will be afflicted with one of three 
major forms of permanent insanity. If the PC fails 
a Wisdom check, roll percentile dice and consult 
the following table: 


Roll 
01-40 


Insanity Result 

Delusional Insanity: The character 
becomes utterly convinced that he is the 
demigod Gul and will be violently 
upset if any mortals around him do not 
recognize his divine status. The PC will 
otherwise act in a normal manner. 

Split Personality: The character devel- 
ops an additional personality that is 
chaotic evil. Every day, there is a 1-in-6 
chance of the personality emerging; this 
chance becomes l-in-6 per round in 
stressful situations (like combat). The 
new personality makes up a new name 
for itself but retains the old personal- 
ity’s abilities. It is perfectly aware of its 
other self and despises it but will not 
commit suicide. 

Feeblemind: The character behaves as 
if he or she were the victim of the 5th- 
level wizard spell. 


41-90 


91-00 


A character can be afflicted with but one form 
of insanity; the condition can be reversed only by 
a wish or restoration spell cast at the 20th level. 

Finally, the relic seeks its own preservation at 
any price. Once a character has been granted a 
point of Intelligence by the stone, he or she 
becomes extremely protective of the relic and 
desires to spend all of his available time in its pres- 
ence. The stone’s new guardian will attempt to 
destroy anyone that is perceived as wanting to harm 
the stone, and will allow no one to approach it. 

Since effective protectors are hard to find, the 
stone has the ability to halt its guardian's aging 
(and all need for nourishment and rest). Should 
the protector be separated from the stone (by 
more than a mile) for over a day, the character 
returns to his normal physical age and starved 
condition. After 10-40 years have passed in the 
service of the stone, the protector becomes 
increasingly paranoid and forgets his previous 
name, instead referring to himself as “The 
Keeper.” 


Honing 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
This magical item appears to be a normal stone, 
but it will glow faintly green if a detect magic 


spell is cast. If a sword or other edged weapon is 
rubbed against the stone, the weapon perma- 
nently gains or loses one plus. Consult the table 
below, Each stone has 2d4 charges when found. 
Sharpening a weapon expends one charge. 


Percentage chance to: 


Weapon Increase Decrease 

Bonus Bonus by 1 Bonus by 1 
0 01-90 91-00 

+1 01-70 71-00 

+2 01-60 61-00 

+3 01-40 41-00 

+4 01-30 31-00 

+5 01-10 11-00 


Myste’s Stone of Mixed Luck 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 132 
This stone gives Myste good luck 85% of the 
time on all die rolls involving saving, slipping 
and dodging. Myste gains a +1 (or +5%, when 
applicable) bonus to her rolls. This does not 
include attack or damage rolls or spell-failure 
chances. However, 15% of the time, the stone 
causes Myste to automatically suffer a failure to 
those rolls, with the most disastrous effects pos- 
sible. Thus far, Myste has only had to endure 
some rather comical, embarrassing, and annoying 


gaffes. 


of Mysterious Sounds 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 99 

This stone appears to be similar to any other mag- 
ical stone, though it is malleable and can be easily 
grasped and reshaped. The stone cannot be pulled 
apart into smaller stones, and it has only limited 
elasticity. Each stone weighs 5 pounds. 

This stone may be thrown up to 30 feet. If the 
character’s Strength is 15 or greater, the stone 
sticks to whatever (nonliving) surface it strikes 
(attack rolls are against AC 6). The stone remains 
stuck until pulled off (which doesn’t require a 
Strength roll). Beginning the next round after it 
sticks to a surface, the stone emits one of a num- 
ber of different sounds. The stone broadcasts this 
sound until it is pulled free of the surface to 
which it is stuck. 

A character may also fit the stone onto a solid 
surface (requiring a Strength of 15 or better, but 
no attack roll), then strike it with a heavy, blunt 
object to start the sound production (again, no 
attack roll). 

The stone of mysterious sounds is useful for 
distracting and deterring opponents from pursuit, 
to allow the characters to escape or gain time for 


other actions. Each time the stone is activated, a 
5339 


Serr ean "aia. ~ 


l 


313 


O S E E eee > 


~ Stone, Nanorion 


roll must be made on the following table to deter- 
mine what sound it produces. 


Roll 

01-04 
05-08 
09-12 
13-16 
17-20 
21-24 
25-28 
29-32 
33-36 
37—40 
41-44 
45-48 
49-52 
53-56 
57-60 
61-64 
65-68 
69-72 
73-76 
77-80 
81-84 
85-88 
89-92 
93-96 
97-00 


Noise produced 
creaking 

buzzing bees 
groaning* 
footsteps 

ocean waves on 
stones grinding 
laughter* 
coughing* 
sneezing* 

muted whispering* 
whip cracks 
fingers snapping 
mumbled chanting* 
screaming* 

animal growling 
birds chirping 
horns (musical) 
steady rain beach 
wind chimes 
fighting (swords clashing, shouts, etc.)* 
speech** 
whistling* 

chains rattling 
crying* 

wind blowing 


* The race of the person making the sound can- 

not be determined, and no intelligible speech 
can be discerned. 
The race of the person speaking can be deter- 
mined using the Random Languages Table 
in the DMG. The content of the speech may be 
determined by the DM as desired. 


Nanorion 
XP Value: 11,000 GP Value: 55,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 

These stones are mainly found in the hearts of 
fiends—in fact they are fiends’ hearts. Their 
function is to awaken sleepers no matter what the 
cause of slumber, or raise the dead regardless of 
when death occurred. 


Oval Stone of Tzolo’s Guardian 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 37 
The oval stone of Tzolo’s guardian is a magical 
stone connected to a stone-shaped chain that 
allows its user to wear it like a necklace. Posses- 
sion of this item allows the ability to cast a sink 
spell once a week and a wail of stone spell twice a 
day. 


Philosopher’s 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 

DRAGON Magazine 2 
The philosopher's stone looks exactly like the 
luckstone and loadstone, but is valuable only in 
the hands of an alchemist. The stone contains 2d4 
charges. One charge may be used to add 20% to a 
research roll or to transmute 10 pounds of lead 
into gold or silver (50% chance of each). In addi- 
tion, while the stone has any charges left, the 
alchemist may use it to cure disease once per day 
without the use of a charge. The alchemist may 
not contract a disease while he carries the stone 
on his person. As the stone is immune to heat 
(even dragon breath), it may be tested by throw- 
ing it into a vat of molten lead (which would, of 
course, destroy a /uckstone). The stone disinte- 
grates when the last charge is used. 


Philosopher’s II 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Unearthed Arcana 

This is a rare and magical substance that appears 
to be an ordinary, rather blackish, sooty piece of 
rock. It radiates a faint dweomer of indeterminate 
sort. If the stone is broken open, a geode cavity 
will be discovered. The interior of this cavity is 
lined with a quicksilver that will enable the trans- 
mutation of the basc mctals, iron and lead, into 
silver and gold. Either an alchemist or a wizard is 
required to effect such transmutation, however. 
From 50 to 500 pounds of iron can be made into 
silver, or from 10 to 100 pounds of lead can be 
turned into gold from a single philosopher's 
stone. Transmutation must be made fully upon 
the first attempt, all the quicksilver being 
employed at one time. Better still, there are two 
additional substances possible within such a 
stone. The first is a greenish, crystalline salt that 
allows the manufacture of 1d4 potions of 
longevity; this substance has a 75% chance of 
occurring inside a given stone. The second is a 
pure white powder that, when mixed with a 
potion of longevity, can actually restore life to a 
dead human or demihuman if administered inter- 
nally within one week of his or her demise (see 
the raise dead spell). There is a 25% chance that 
the white powder occurs. Note that the experi- 
ence point value and gold piece sale value apply 
only to an unopened stone. 


of Sampling 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 61 
The stone allows the owner to record up to fifty 
20-second pieces of speech or music. These 
“samples” can be recalled mentally by the owner 


of the stone at any time with no effort, and the 
5344 


ý 1314 
E 


Stone, Travel 


eee eee, 


samples will remain in the stone until erased by 
the owner of the stone. The stone is green and 
smooth, and glows when replaying samples. 


of Shielding 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
The Ruins of Undermountain 
This single-use item is a spherical white stone 
about an inch in diameter. When crushed, it acti- 
vates its power, and can thus be unintentionally 
activated by a fall or attack. A stone of shielding 
causes a sparkling, winking aura to spring into 
being around the creature who crushed it. This 
aura lasts for three rounds, boosting the Armor 
Class of the affected being by a —6 bonus on the 
first round, a -3 on the second round, and —1 on 
the third round, during which it flickers before 
finally winking out. Therefore, a wizard of AC 6 
crushes a stone of shielding and gains an Armor 
Class of 0 the next round. This reduces to AC 3 at 
the end of the following round, and AC 5 after that. 


of Silence 
XP Value GP Value 
Khelben’s: 1,200 6,000 
Normal: 1,000 5,000 


The Ruins of Undermountain 
This is a hand-size stone with the spell silence 
15' radius cast on it. Ten percent of these stones 
carry a Khelben 5 suspended silence spell. 


Spongestone 
XP Value GP Value 
1 cubic foot: 2,000 15,000 
2 cubic feet: 4,000 30,000 
3 cubic feet: 6,000 45,000 


DRAGON Magazine 48 
In its “dry” state, a spongestone is a chunk of 
stone that is rigid, quite porous, and relatively 
light in weight compared to an ordinary piece of 
stone. This substance has the ability to absorb 
water from any solid or liquid substance with 
which it is placed in contact, Each spongestone 
can absorb a volume of water equal to 30 times 
the volume of the stone itself—a spongestone 
with a volume of | cubic foot will soak up 30 
cubic feet of water before becoming saturated. A 
dry stone will automatically soak up its capacity 
in water in the space of three rounds, assuming 
that a sufficiently large source of water is at hand. 
When dry, a spongestone is light brown in color. 
When it is filled with water to one-third of its 
capacity, it becomes a darker brown. At two- 
thirds of capacity, the stone turns light blue, and 
when it is filled to the maximum, the stone 
assumes a deep blue color. (This property makes 
a spongestone quite conspicuous in certain cir- 
cumstances, such as when it is found on the bot- 


tom of a body of water.) A spongestone is not 
“softened” by the absorption of water, such as an 
actual sponge would be; it retains its rigidity no 
matter how much water it contains. Any sponge- 
stone which is saturated to capacity can be forced 
to release its stored-up water by the utterance of a 
command word, Water that is released in such a 
manner will drain out of the stone twice as fast as 
it was absorbed, so that 1% rounds after being 
commanded, a spongestone will be dry and the 
water it contained will have drained into a recep- 
tacle or onto the ground. A stone which has just 
released all its water will not be able to begin 
absorbing water again for one round; at the end of 
that time, the stone will begin to reabsorb the 
water it had just released, if it has not yet been 
removed from the water. 

A spongestone which has absorbed water up to 
its capacity can be transported without danger to 
the bearer. However, a dry or partially filled stone 
will draw water from the body of a character or 
creature who touches it without the benefit of 
clothing or armor or some other protection which 
acts as a barrier to absorption. Anyone who 
comes into contact with the stone against an 
unprotected body part will take 1d6+4 points of 
damage per round due to dehydration, risking 
unconsciousness and death if the contact with the 
stone is not broken in time. 

A spongestone will absorb pure water, filter- 
ing out all impurities and pollutants, so that the 
water which is released is equally pure and may 
be safely consumed. A spongestone of rela- 
tively large size may be cleaved in half by a 
blow from any magical edged weapon, as long 
as the original stone was at least 4 cubic foot in 
volume. However, each time such a cutting is 
attempted, there is a 50% chance that one of the 
resulting halves will lose its magical properties, 
a 25% chance that both halves will be rendered 
useless, and a 25% chance that both halves will 
be unaffected. 


Roll Effect of Cutting 


01-50 One half loses it magical properties. 
51-75 Both halves lose their magical properties. 
76-00 Both halves retain their magical 
properties. 
Travel 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 


DUNGEON Magazine 31 
Centuries ago, a race of psionicists, known in leg- 
end as the Mystics, experimented with modes of 
teleportation and dimensional travel. They 
wanted to create a mode of travel usable by all 
Mystics, regardless of their psionic talents, and 


their first experimental teleportation devices 
5348 


1315 7 


Stone, Travel 


5 a 


were called travel stones. 

The most powerful Mystics worked together to 
empower the stones, but the stones had limiting 
and catastrophic flaws. First of all, travel from 
stone to stone was made possible only by opening 
entry and exit gates on the Quasielemental Plane 
of Vacuum (otherwise known as the Void), Ini- 
tially, both the entry and exit gates were practi- 
cally superimposed, and one could travel between 
gates with little or no physical discomfort. How- 
ever, over time the entry and exit gates in the Void 
began to drift apart. As decades passed, those 
who used the stones found themselves spending 
more and more time in the Void between gates. 
The power of the stones is enough to partially 
shield travelers from the intense cold (absolute 
0(DG)) and the absence of atmospheric pressure 
in the Void, but as the distance between the gates 
increased, even shielded travelers fell subject to 
dangerous side effects. 

Finally, the use of these gates attracted the 
attention of some of the Void’s inhabitants. The 
longer the gates were kept open, the more likely it 
became that a shadow or a group of shadows 
would step through the portals and enter the 
Prime Material Plane. By the time the Mystics 
discovered the flaw in their creations and started 
dismantling the stones, it was already too late, 
Many shadows were already on the rampage near 
the Mystics’ cities and were multiplying too 
quickly in some areas to be controlled. 

The Mystics were forced to abandon some of 
their settlements because of the shadows. Where 
the Mystics finally settled remains a mystery; 
none remain on the worlds where stones still exist 
(the Mystics considered those worlds unsafe). In 
time, the Mystics and the use of the stones were 
forgotten. Today in Silver Rise, what was once a 
travel stone is now remembered as The Travel 
Stone, a shrine of good luck for travelers on the 
north road leading out of the village. 

If the sole power of the stones was simply to 
open gates, then their history would have ended 
long ago once their use was forgotten. However, 
the Stones also have the ability to temporarily 
endow psionic powers on strong-willed human 
and demihuman minds. Characters and NPCs of 
Ist or higher level will be endowed with wild-tal- 
ent psionic power after spending one month 
within two miles of the stone, or itamediately 
after passing through its gate. This is what hap- 
pened to Lenchros, Ardy, and Dame Moore, who 
have kept their talents a closely guarded secret for 
many years. Born and raised in Silver Rise, the 
three went their separate ways but returned to 
their home town—and soon developed psionic 
powers. 


Travel Stone Wild Powers: Entries in this table 
use the following format (page references are to 
The Complete Psionics Handbook): Name of 
power (CPH page reference) PS = Power Score; 
SS = Starting Strength (in PSPs) ; IC = Initial 
Cost (in PSPs); MC = Maintenance Cost (in 
PSPs over time); R = Range; Prep = Preparation 
Time (in rounds); A/E = Area of Effect. 


d100 

Roll Powers 

01-08 All-Round Vision (page 33): PS Wis 
—3; SS 22; IC 6; MC 4/round; R 0; 
Prep 0; A/E personal. The PC effec- 
tively sees in all directions at once; no 
one can sneak up without using magic 
or concealment, but there is a—4 penalty 
on gaze attacks. 

Clairaudience (page 30); PS Wis —3; 
SS 22; IC 6; MC 4/round; R unlimited; 
Prep 0; A/E special. A PC can hear 
sounds from distant location by men- 
tally picking a spot from which “hear,” 
then covering his or her ears and con- 
centrating. Anything can be heard that 
would normally be heard while stand- 
ing in that spot. The more distant the 
image, the harder it is to use this power; 
selecting listening spots up to 100 yards 
from the psionic character may be done 


normally, but selecting a listening spot 
5348 


09-12 


a 1316 l 7 


Stone, Travel 


iin 


13-16 


17-24 


25-32 


33-40 


41-48 


49-56 


farther away places a power-score mod- 
ifier on the use of this power (up to 
1,000 yards, —2; up to 10 miles, —4; up 
to 100 miles, —6). This form of scrying 
is nonmagical and cannot be detected 
or warded off by magic. 

Clairvoyance (page 30): PS Wis —4; 
SS 23; IC 7; MC 4/round; R unlimited; 
Prep 0, A/E special. A PC can see a 
view of a distant location by mentally 
picking a spot from which he wishes to 
“see,” closing his or her eyes and con- 
centrating. Anything can be seen that 
would normally be seen standing in 
that spot. The more distant the image, 
the harder it is to use this power; view- 
ing spots up to 100 yards from the 
psionic character may be viewed nor- 
mally, but selecting a viewing spot far- 
ther away places a power-score 
modifier on the use of this power (up to 
1,000 yards, —2; up to 10 miles, —4; up 
to 100 miles, —6). This form of scrying 
is nonmagical and cannot be detected 
or warded off by magical means. 
Combat Mind (page 33): PS Int —4; 
SS 21; IC 5; MC 4/round; R 0; Prep 0; 
A/E personal. This power gives a —1 
bonus to party initiative thanks to the 
user’s understanding of his enemy’s 
fighting tactics. 

Conceal Thoughts (page 80): PS Wis; 
SS 17; IC 5; MC 3/round; R 0; Prep 0; 
A/E 3-yard radius. The PC is protected 
against all psionic powers and magical 
spells that detect or read thoughts, 
including ESP, probe, mindlink, and life 
detection. 

Danger Sense (page 33): PS Wis —3; 
SS 13; IC 4; MC 3/turn; R special; 
Prep 0; A/E 10 yards. This power warns 
a PC when danger is imminent. Infor- 
mation about the type of peril involved 
is not gained, but the general direction 
of the threat is given. 

Know Direction (page 34): PS Int; SS 
1; IC 1; MC n/a; R 0; Prep 0; A/E per- 
sonal. The PC knows in what direction 
north lies. 

Lend Health (page 62): PS Con —1; SS 
4; IC 4; MC n/a; R touch; Prep 0; A/E 
individual. With a successful power 
check, the PC can transfer as many of 
his or her own hit points as desired (to a 
minimum of 1) to the person touched, 
thus healing the recipient. This takes 
one round. The user cannot go below 1 
hit point, and the recipient cannot get 


57-64 


65-68 


69-76 


77-84 


85-88 


89-96 


more hit points than the character would 
normally have. 

Life Detection (page 87): PS Int -2; SS 
15; IC 3; MC 3/round; R 100 yards; 
Prep 0; A/E 40 yard. A PC can detect 
the presence of all living, thinking crea- 
tures in range within a 180(DG) arc. 
Two rounds of scanning accurately 
reveals all beings, including unintelli- 
gent monsters. 

Object Reading (page 31): PS Wis —5; 
SS 16; IC 16; MC n/a; R 0; Prep 1; 
A/E touch. A PC can detect and inter- 
pret the psychic residue imprinted on 
an object by its most recent owner, 
gaining information on the owner's 
race, sex, age, alignment, and how the 
item was gained and lost. 

Poison Sense (page 91): PS Wis; SS 1; 
IC 1; MC n/a; R 0; Prep 0; A/E |-yard 
radius. The character can detect any 
poison and its exact location within the 
area of effect, but cannot identify the 
poison type. Any substance causing a 
saving throw vs. poison counts, even 
animal venom and poisonous gases and 
potions. 

Psychic Messenger (page 90): PS Con 
-4; SS 16; IC 4; MC 3/round; R 200 
miles; Prep 2; A/E | square yard. This 
power lets the character to create an 
insubstantial, three-dimensional, per- 
sonal image that can appear in range 
and deliver a message that everyone 
present can see and hear. Communica- 
tion is one-way only; the PC cannot 
hear or see anything going on around 
the messenger’s image. 

Sensitivity to Psychic Impressions 
(page 32): PS Wis —4; SS 20; IC 12; 
MC 2/round; R 0; Prep 2; A/E 20-yard 
radius. A PC can detect psychic residue 
imprinted on a place by events that 
involved strong emotions or psychic 
energy. Divide the power check roll by 
2 and round up to get the number of 
strong events that can be sensed in one 
place. 

Spirit Sense (page 37): PS Wis -3; SS 
10; IC 10; MC n/a; R 0; Prep 0; A/E 
15-yard radius. The PC with this power 
can sense the presence of ghosts, ban- 
shees, wraiths, haunts, and other non- 
corporeal undead that bear the 
remnants of their former personalities. 
This awareness extends out to 15 
yards, but the user cannot tell exactly 


where the undead are. Spirit Sense 
5348 


_— °° °°. <_< O T 


1317 


cannot detect zombies, skeletons, 
shadows, or similar undead. (Lenient 
DMs may allow the detection of other 
noncorporeal undead, such as shad- 
ows, but should strictly define which 
undead fall into this category.) 

97-00 Choose one of the above powers. 

* Details for determining starting Strengths for wild 
powers are given in the CPH, page 20. Wild talents 
gain 4 PSPs for every level of experience they attain 
after they acquire psionic powers, not for levels they 
possessed before such powers were gained. 


Wardstone 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Otherlands 
Carved into the shape of a sea creature friendly to 
the Dargonesti, wardstones are made from small 
pieces of coral. When held in the palm of the 
hand, they sense the presence of hostile creatures 
in a 100-foot radius. 

As a user of a wardstone gets closer to the bel- 
ligerent creatures, the stone gets warmer to the 
touch. If the user so wills, the stone can also emit 
a soft, greenish light either in place of, or in addi- 
tion to, the heat. 


Warfu 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Kara-Tur 
The magical stones were placed on Kara-Tur by 
the Lords of Karma, at the direction of the Celes- 
tial Emperor. They have many colors, but always 
sparkle with an inner fire or seem to encase 
movement. They cannot be crushed or melted, 
and, when in use, float over the head of the 
wielder, or circle the head like a miniature moon. 
Warfu stones have been found and used by heroes 
and villains throughout history, and the stories 
that surround their use often mention incredible 
feats attributed to the stones. Here are the types 
of warfit stones known in T’u Lung: 


Roll Color Power 

Ol-11 Green Raises level by 1 

12-22 Blue Bestows flight 

23-33 Red Protects from fire 

34—44 Yellow Raises Strength by | point 

45-55 Violet Raises Charisma by 1 point 

56-66 Opal Doubles ki power. 

67-717 White Raises comeliness by | point 

78-88 Black Allows one additional martial 
art special maneuver 

89-00 Crystal Increase weapon proficiency 


by +2 


~~ Stone, Wardstone r 


Warmth 
GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
A flat oval stone, about 4 inch thick and 4 inches 
long. When placed between two hands, the stone 
becomes very warm. 


of Weight 

GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A loadstone is a magical stone that appears to be 
any one of the other sorts, and testing will not 
reveal its nature. However, as soon as the posses- 
sor of a stone of weight is in a situation where he 
is required to move quickly in order to avoid an 
enemy—combat or pursuit—the item causes a 
50% reduction in movement, and even attacks are 
reduced to 50% normal rate. Furthermore, the 
stone cannot be gotten rid of by any nonmagical 
means—f it is thrown away or smashed, it reap- 
pears somewhere on the character’s person. If dis- 
pel evil is cast upon it, the item disappears and no 
longer haunts the character. 


of the Well 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 30,000 
DRAGON Magazine 145 

A stone of the well is highly prized in villages and 
castles located on dry plains and deserts, In spite of 
the facts that these items command prices as high as 
30,000 gp in dry regions, and wars are sometimes 
fought for their possession, stones of the well are 
worthless in much of the world. Such an item 
appears as a perfectly spherical, black granite rock 
with a smooth surface. It functions when placed 
within a well at least 30 feet deep, as long as the 
stone is covered by at least 2 feet of standing water. 
The stone immediately fills its well to a depth 
halfway between its bottom and upper rim, and sim- 
ilarly fills and maintains all wells within a one mile 
radius. The water produced by a stone of the well is 
pure and refreshing. No well within one mile of the 
stone will run dry. A stone of the well placed in a dry 
well cannot work until covered with water. 


String 

String is woven flax or hemp, a thin version of 
normal rope. Magical string may be found in 
short lengths or in a ball of string, (a single piece 
of 50-foot-long string with 1d4 pieces of magical 
string wound into a ball), from which pieces may 
be pulled. It may be found entangled in the hair 
of a monster, forgotten in a corner, or in a care- 
fully guarded treasure room. Magical string can- 
not be broken or harmed by force, even from 
magical weapons, but it can be destroyed by any 
damage-causing spell (such as fireball), any 
dragon breath except gas, and by normal fire. 


XP Value: 500 


XP Value: — 


5353 


1318 


String of Warding 


Se 


of Attachment 

XP Value: 50 GP Value: 250 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This short piece of string may be tied to any other 
normal or magical item. If tied to a creature or to 
an item that does not belong to the user, it unties 
itself. Once properly tied, it cannot be untied 
except by a wish or the proper command word. If 
the tied item is taken from the owner without per- 
mission, the string tugs at the owner and stretches 
up to 50 feet; it cannot stretch further. 


of Lashing 

XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This apparently normal piece of string will, on 
command, turn into a whip +3. It remains in whip 
form for up to one turn, or until a second com- 
mand word is spoken, and then returns to string 
form. The whip may be created up to three times 
a day. 


of Pearls 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When the command word for this 2-foot-long 
piece of string is spoken, 5d6 pearls appear upon 
it, with one firmly attached to each end. Each 
pearl may be removed easily, magically, without 
damaging the string. Except for the end pearls, 
each has a randomly determined effect (roll 1d6). 


Roll Effect 

1-3 A pearly white light fills the area within 60 
feet of the pearl; all within the effect must 
make a saving throw vs. spell or feel peace- 
ful enough not to attack unless attacked. 

4-5 Strange music is heard by all within 60 feet 
of the pearl; all those affected must make a 
saving throw vs. spell or begin swaying and 
dancing until the music ends (but with no 
effect on Armor Class or saving throws or 
other statistics). 

6 Nothing happens, but the pearl remains 

(2,000 to 8,000 gp value). 


The light or music lasts for 1d4+1 rounds, and 
then the pearl disappears. If either end pearl is 
removed while others remain on the string, all the 
pearls remaining fall off and roll around on the 
floor or ground for 1d6 rounds, immediately 
becoming nonmagical. The user and all others 
within 30 feet must stand where they are; if they 
attempt to walk they fall down and are unable to 
rise or even crawl. A victim standing still may 
cast spells, use items, and the like, but a fallen 
victim cannot. Magical flight or other means of 
escape may enable the victims to avoid the effect, 


but there is no saving throw. If the end pearls are 
left alone until all the others have been used, they 
have normal effects determined randomly as 
above. 


of Shackles 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This short piece of string may be tied about a 
creature’s wrists and commanded to hold. How- 
ever, the string does not work unless the victim is 
held, paralyzed, asleep, or gives its consent 
(which may be accomplished with a charm). 
Creatures entrapped by the string of shackles can- 
not break the string by force. The string frees the 
victim if the command word to release it is spo- 
ken within 10 feet. 


of Tangle 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This item looks like any other ball of string, but 
anyone unraveling it is immediately confused 
and may not speak, attack, cast spells, or per- 
form any other action voluntarily. The victim 
may be led about at half normal movement rate. 
If the tangle of string is taken from the victim, 
paralysis strikes both the creature removing the 
tangle and the original victim and lasts until the 
tangle is replaced. If a remove curse is applied 
by a caster of 15th or higher level while the vic- 
tim holds the tangle, the string and the confu- 
sion both vanish. 


of Warding 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

On command, this small piece of string may be 
stretched as long as 50 feet. If tied to two 
upright objects (such as trees), it prevents cer- 
tain objects and creatures from passing between 
it and the ground; a maximum of 1,000 square 
feet of space can be affected (20 feet high, 50 
feet wide). The string of warding cannot block 
spells but prevents the passage of all nonliving 
items (including missiles) and all creatures of 3 
Hit Dice or less. Other creatures may make a 
saving throw vs. spell to break through the 
effect (but not the string). If the string is tied 
and looped in an attempt to ward a space more 
than once, it has no effect and can be easily bro- 
ken, which destroys the magic permanently. It 
can, however, be tied so as to enclose a horizon- 
tal area (for example, around an outdoor 
encampment). If any creature is between the 
string and the ground when it is tied in place, 
the string wards against items only. 


$359 


~ Stringed Instruments, Fochlucan Bandore = 


Stringed Instruments 
Stringed instruments are musical devices that have 
strings which must be plucked or stroked to pro- 
duce sound. See the other two musical instrument 
categories, Percussion Instruments and Wind 
Instruments, for more magical possibilities: 


Roll Instrument Type 

Aeolian Harp 

Amir al-Tarab 

05 Bagpipes (see Wind Instrument) 


87-88  Tallharpa 

89 Theorbo 
90-91 Tromba Marina 
92-93 ‘Ud (‘Oud) 
94-95 Viol 

96 Violin 
97-98 Virginal 
99-00 Zither 


Fochlucan Bandore 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 


06-07 Balalaika If this small, three-stringed instrument is played by 
08-09 Bandora a Ist-level bard (probationer) or a nonbard, it has a 
10-11 Biwa 50% chance per round of playing to cast a faerie 

12 Buzuk fire spell, but there is a 10% chance that the musi- 
13-14 Chitarrone cian will be limned by the glow of the spell, rather 
15-16 Cimbal than the desired target. A bard of Fochlucan or of a 
17-18 Cimbalom higher college casts the faerie fire spell at base 

19 Citole 50% per level of bard experience above 1st, reduc- 
20-21 Cittern ing the reverse effect by 1% per level above Ist. 
22-23 Clarsach Furthermore, the Fochlucan bandore also has four 
24-25 Clavecin mae properties when properly played. 

26 Clavicembalo Add 10% to the bard’s charm percentage. If 
27-28 Crwth the bard’s charming ability exceeds 100% 
29-30 Double-necked Lute with the instrument bonus, the creature saving 
31-32 Dulcimer against the magic does so at—1 for every 5% 

33 Ganun above 100%, rounding the charm bonus to the 
34-35 Guitar nearest Sth digit. 

36-37 Handharp * Entangle once a day. 
38-39 Harp * Shillelagh once a day. 

40 Harpsichord * Speak with animals once a day. 

41-42 Hurdy Gurdy If a Ist-level bard attempts these powers, there 
43-44 = Jawzah is a 30% chance that they will work, but a 70% 
45-46 Kit chance that the player will take 2d4 points of 

47 Koto damage. 

48-49 Lira da Braccio Any character able to play this instrument can 
50-51 Lira da Gamba sing and do one of the following for as many 
52-53 Lirica Fiddle turns as the character’s has levels, divided by two 

54 Lute (round fractions up), once each day. Each ability 
55-56 Lyra of the instrument takes an initiative modifier of 5 
57-58 Lyre to activate. 

59-60 Mandoline (Mandolin) * Protection from evil 10' radius. 

61 Mandora * Become invisible, although the strumming 
62-63 Organistrum and singing can still be heard distantly, the 
64-65 Pandora (Bass Cittern) exact location is impossible to discover unless 
66-67 Psaltery detect invisible is possible. 

68 Qanun ¢ Levitation. 

69-70 Rababah ° Fly. 
71-72 Rebec 
73-74 Rota Biwa of Calming 

75 Santouri XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 
76-77 Santur Oriental Adventures 
78-79  Shamisen The biwa is a stringed instrument similar to a 
80-81 Short-Necked Fiddle lute. This biwa, like all magical instruments, is of 

82 Sitar exceptionally fine and tasteful construction. 
83-84 Spiked Fiddle When played by a person proficient in its use, the 
85-86 Spinet clear and dulcet tones of the instrument produce 

5361 


1320 


i a Se ae ee S > eee 


OE a sitesi ei g 


an air of dignified calm. This has the effect of a 
pacify spell to all listening within a 30-foot 
radius. The effect lasts only so long as the instru- 
ment is played. Furthermore, the musician must 
roll against his or her proficiency each round of 
playing. If the die roll is 1, the music is excep- 
tionally poor and unharmonious, and the calming 
effect is immediately broken for the remainder of 
the encounter. The instrument cannot be used 
effectively again so long as there are hostile crea- 
tures present who previously heard the musician’s 
musical butchery. 


of Charming 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,000 
Oriental Adventures 
This instrument appears identical to other magi- 
cal biwa. When played by a person proficient in 
the instrument, a proficiency roll is made. If suc- 
cessful, the character can cast one suggestion 
spell that round. If the saving throw fails (but is 
greater than 1), the music has no effect. Ifa 1 is 
rolled, the musician’s playing is so poor that the 
instrument acts as a biwa of discord. 


of Discord 
XP Value: — GP Value: 8,000 
Oriental Adventures 
Identical to other magical biwa, this instrument 
emits painful and discordant tones when played, 
enraging all within 30 feet. Those enraged attack 
the musician 50% of the time and the nearest tar- 
get the other 50%. This frenzy lasts for 1d4+1 
rounds. The player of this instrument is not 
affected by the frenzy. The properties of the 
instrument cannot be detected until it is actually 
played in earnest—tuning and idly strumming the 
strings only create lucid, clear tones. 


MacFuirmidh Cittern 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 17,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This instrument, similar to a lute, is 50% likely to 
deliver 3d4 points of damage to any nonbard or bard 
under 5th-level who picks it up and attempts to play 
it. A Sth- or higher level bard who uses the cittern 
has a 15% better chance of charming and can sing 
the following songs once per day. If the bard’s 
charming ability exceeds 100% with the instrument 
bonus, the creature saving against the magic does so 
at—] for every 5% above 100%, rounding the charm 
bonus to the nearest multiplier of 5. 
* Barkskin once a day. 
* Cure light wounds once a day. 
* Obscurement once a day. 

Lower level bards cannot use the cittern in the 
above fashion even if they do not harm them- 
selves (whether they take damage or not). 


Stringed Instruments, Dugal’s Musical Instrument 


Any character able to play this instrument can 
sing and do one of the following for as many 
turns as the character has levels, divided by two 
(round fractions up), once each day. Each ability 
of the instrument takes an initiative modifier of 5 
to activate. 

* Protection from evil 10' radius. 

* Become invisible, although the strumming 
and singing can still be heard distantly, the 
exact location is impossible to discover unless 
detect invisible is possible. 

¢ Levitation. 


° Fly. 
Dugal’s Musical Instrument 

XP Value GP Value 
Alter Self: 600 3,000 
Blur: 600 3,000 
Change Self: 500 2,500 
Comprehend Languages: 500 2,500 
Continual Light: 600 3,000 
Detect Invisibility: 600 3,000 
Detect Magic: 500 2,500 
Dispel Magic: 700 3,500 
Gust of Wind: 700 3,500 
Knock: 600 3,000 
Tongues: 700 3,500 
Whispering Wind: 600 3,000 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 56 
Myriad tiny runes are etched into the wood of 
these instruments. Most customers see the runes 


5365 


me | 


Stringed Instruments, Anstruth Harp 


eit ee -e 


only as decorative additions already finely 
crafted instruments. However, wizards who 
examine them immediately notice a similarity 
between these runes and ones found on magical 
scrolls. 

The runes are part of a unique process to 
enchant musical instruments without using high 
level spells. Each special instrument is endowed 
with one magical spell of first through third level 
that can be cast up to three times a day by playing 
a melody to which the instrument’s runes are 
attuned. 

The enchantments require only verbal and 
somatic components. The runes on the instrument 
are an inscribed version of a particular spell, and 
the melody is a repetitive musical rendition of the 
verbal component. When the melody is played, 
which takes a full turn, the instrument resonates 
and activates the runes, thus serving as the 
somatic component and in effect casting the 
spell. 

Dugal’s enchantments are limited to those 
spells in his spell book. Of these, he uses only 
defensive or benign spells. A devout individualist 
and recent pacifist, he never uses a spell such as 
charm that infringes on the freedom of another, 
or a spell such as magic missile that would harm 
another. 

The spell on an enchanted instrument can be 
invoked by any musician who plays the appropri- 
ate melody. Dugal teaches the melody to the 
buyer at the time of purchase. He also explains to 
customers that, except for casting time, the capa- 
bilities of a spell cast using one of these instru- 
ments are exactly as if Dugal cast it himself. 
Thus, all spells are cast at 5th level. 


Anstruth Harp 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 16,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 

This powerful instrument is 90% likely to cause 
8d4 points of damage to any nonbards or bards of 
less than 17th level who attempt to strum it. In 
the hands of a 17th-level bard (and above), the 
harp adds 35% to charming abilities and can be 
played so as to cast the following spells, one 
each, every day: If the bard’s charming ability 
exceeds 100% with the instrument bonus, the 
creature saving against the magic does so at —1 
for every 5% above 100%, rounding the charm 
bonus to the nearest multiplier of 5. 

* Cure critical wounds once a day. 

* Create a wall of thorns once a day. 

* Weather summoning once a day. 

Any character able to play this instrument can 
sing and do one of the following for as many 
turns as the character has levels, divided by two 
(round fractions up), once each day. Each ability 


of the instrument takes an initiative modifier of 5 

to activate. 

* Protection from evil 10' radius. 

* Become invisible, although the strumming 
and singing can still be heard distantly, the 
exact location is impossible to discover unless 
detection of invisibility is possible. 

¢ Levitation. 

¢ Fly. 


Azler’s 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 12,000 
DRAGON Magazine 115 

When struck, the tones of this harp soothe rages 
of all sorts, and drives away fear, hopelessness, 
and despair of natural or magical origins within 
one round of being heard. The harp’s maximum 
range about 8 feet, more if played in a cavern, a 
breeze (downwind only), or a quiet place. While 
it is played, all charms and mental controls of 
any sort are blocked (not removed or ended, but 
held in abeyance) in all creatures hearing the 
harp’s tones—and no new charms or suggestions 
can be successfully laid on those listening to the 
harp, even by a bard using the harp for such a 
purpose. The strings of the harp glow with blue- 
light (as in the wizard’s cantrip) while they are 
being played. 


Bragi’s 
GP Value: 12,000 
Legends & Lore 
Bragi’s avatar carries a harp that modifies all 
creatures’ saving throws by +4, while it is being 
played. 


XP Value: 4,000 


Bragi’s Harp of Calm 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 12,000 
Derties & Demicops™ Cyclopedia 
Any mortal hearing Bragis Harp of Calm ceases 
fighting or quarreling for seven days (unless 
attacked in that time). This harp has all the pow- 
ers of all magical bard instruments plus the abil- 
ity to stop any creature from any violent intent for 
a short period of time, and the ability to uncharm 
anything. 


Broken 
XP Value: — GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This harp appears to be a harp of charming but 
instead it makes the user feel very sad. Morale 
drops to 3, if applicable; otherwise, a —4 penalty 
applies to all attack and damage rolls. There is no 
limit on the number of times this effect may be 
produced; each effect lasts for one hour. 


5370 


1322 


~ Stringed Instruments, Esheen’s Harp y- 


of Charming 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
The music produced by this harp can be heard 
within a 60-foot range but does not affect the 
user, Each victim hearing the music must make 
a saving throw vs. spell or be charmed (as a 
standard charm person or charm monster 
effect). In addition, those within 30 feet of the 
harp are unable to attack (or even think of 
attacking) the user; this effect lasts as long as 
the harp is played (no saving throw, and regard- 
less of the results of the charm effect). The user 
may speak to the charmed victims while contin- 
uing to play. The harp may be played magically 
once a day for up to one turn per use, once the 
user stops playing, the magical music cannot be 
resumed. 


of Charming II 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 

This instrument is identical to all other magical 
harps. When played by a person proficient in the 
instrument, the player is able to cast one sugges- 
tion spell each turn of playing. Optionally, the 
DM can require a successful proficiency check 
be made to cast suggestion. On a die roll of 20, 
the harpist has played so poorly as to enrage all 
those who hear. 

Once per turn a bard is able to cause the harp 
to cast a command spell as a caster equal to the 
bard’s level. 


of Charming III 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,000 
CARDMASTER® Adventure Design Deck 
The harp can hold a monster in a charmed state, 
so that the user can escape (save applicable). Can 
be used once a day. 


Damh’s 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 11,000 
. Monster Mythology 
This harp can create an Otto 5 irresistible dance 
in up to 1d4 creatures, three times a day. The 
avatar must spend one full round playing the 
instrument to generate the effect. 


Defender’s 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 20,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
Although a powerful magical item, this 
medium-size harp betrays only faint magical 
radiation when a detect magic spell is cast. 
When the highest-pitched chord is plucked, all 
nonmagical weapons, shields, and glass objects 
within 100 feet of the musician must make a 


saving throw vs. crushing blow or immediately 
shatter. This power can be used once an hour. 
Bards who play a defender 5 harp can call upon 
the instrument’s secondary power. This allows 
bards to double their ability to alter NPC reac- 
tion rolls. 


of Discord 
GP Value: 1,500 
Elves of Evermeet 
Unfortunately for bards, their greater musical tal- 
ents cause the effects of this instrument to last for 
2d4+2 rounds after the music stops. Jesters (a 
bard kit) cause the effect to last for 2d4 turns. 


XP Value: — 


Dove’s 

XP Value: 600 GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 115 
The playing of this harp causes a gentle sooth- 
ing in the minds of all within 20 feet who hear 
it. The soothing quells insanity while it is being 
played, and instantly (and permanently) calms 
listeners, dispelling fear, despair, discord, rage, 
and hopelessness of any sort, and lightening 
black moods or grief for a time. The music of 
Dove’s harp can also cure light wounds once for 
any listener within 20 feet who hears the harp’s 
song for at least two full rounds in succession, 
such curing being effective in that creature only 
once every nine days. The harp cannot other- 
wise combat the effects of poison. While the 
music of Dove's harp is healing a creature as 
described above, both it and the harpist (not the 
assisted person, unless the harpist is practicing 
self-healing) radiate a faint white faerie fire or 
nimbus. 


Esheen’s 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 115 
The tones of this harp cause all glass and metal 
within 30 feet to ring and resonate, “singing 
along with” the playing of the harp; this is an 
eerie and attention-gathering effect. When the 
harpist plucks the lowest string on the harp, all 
glass and crystalline objects up to 30 feet dis- 
tant that face the harpist must save vs. crushing 
blow or shatter instantly. A single metallic 
object within this range may be affected as well. 
Magical armor, bracers, weapons, and other 
magical items (note that a metal or glass vial 
containing a magical oil, ointment, or potion is 
not itself magical) gain a bonus on their saving 
throws of +1 or whatever their magical “plus” 
may be to avoid being affected by the harp. The 
harp can shatter items that have saved success- 
fully against its effects on earlier rounds, but 


the harpist cannot choose to affect some items 
5378 


— =< aG 


1323 


String Instruments, Harp of Fingerbreaking 


gl 7 


in the harp’s path of effect and not to affect 
others, save for choosing the metallic item to be 
destroyed. The harp can be used in this fashion 
once per round. 


of Fingerbreaking 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This harp is like a harp of throbbing but has a 
20% chance per use of entangling the user’s fin- 
gers. If so. the victim takes damage equal to of 
current hit points, which may be restored in the 
usual ways, but the hands become useless and 
remain so until a regenerate spell or effect is 
applied. The victim’s Dexterity score also drops 
by 6 points (to a minimum of 3). 


Fochlucan 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 36,000 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 6 

This harp adds 10% to a bard’s chance of 
charming a creature. In addition to this it has 
three songs. The first and most powerful of 
these is a song of protection from evil that is 
equivalent to the 3rd-level spell. The second 
song is one of defense that casts a shield around 
the bard and is like the Ist-level spell shield. 
The last song casts a circle of light around 
whatever the bard desires (the party, an object, 
anything) and is equivalent to the 2nd-level 
wizard spell continual light. The songs of this 
harp are playable only once a day. 


of Gold 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 24,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This large harp weighs 400 pounds. When 
played for one hour and commanded all the 
while, it turns all silver, electrum, and platinum 
within 30 feet into gold. The harp of gold can- 
not affect magical items of any sort but changes 
all nonmagical coins, weapons, and other 
forms of these metals to a maximum of 2,000 
pounds per use. Most weapons are made of iron 
or steel and a solid silver weapon changed to 
gold is nearly unusable; a gold weapon, unlike 
a silver one, cannot harm a lycanthrope. The 
harp can be played magically once a week. If 
the user is interrupted or silenced during the 
hour of playing, the harp has noeffect. If magi- 
cally reduced or enlarged, it becomes forever 
nonmagical. 


Handharp 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 16,000 
Halls of the High King 
This rarity is a favored item of traveling Harpers, 
who are believed to have created it in ancient 


times. A handharp is a crescent-shaped, wooden 
instrument about the size of a man’s hand and 
strung with magical, metal strings. 

Its powers can be employed by anyone able to 
play a tune. When it is played, four small blue 
globes of light (equal in effects to the Ist-level 
wizard spell dancing lights) come into being 
around the harp. The globes may be mentally 
directed by the harp player, as a wizard directs 
dancing lights, without full concentration. 

Undead suffer damage and attack roll penal- 
ties of —2 within 10 feet of a playing handharp. 
Saving throws against all life-force draining, 
paralyzing, and related natural spells and magi- 
cal abilities (such as a chill touch spell) are 
made at +2. Creatures within 10 feet of a play- 
ing handharp cannot be charmed, and charmed 
creatures who venture within 10 feet of a play- 
ing handharp will be dazed (treat as the effects 
of a power word stun) as long as they remain in 
the handharp’s area of effect. All of these pow- 
ers can be used as often as desired and do not 
drain the item. 

A handharp has one additional power, which 
can be used only once a day, though all of the 
handharp s magic is exhausted for one turn after 
this use. By plucking a certain string and singing 
a particular note simultaneously, the bearer can 
will the handharp to dimension door up to 90 feet 
away. This power will take along all carried and 
worn items, but not another living creature. 

Such travel is instant, but subject to the same 
dangers that the spell has: if the intended destina- 
tion is improperly described or not concentrated 
upon, midair appearances and falling damage are 
possible. Note that a handharp bearer can men- 
tally state (aloud to the DM) any visible destina- 
tion without giving its coordinates in distance and 
direction and still arrive safely. 

In the hands of a bard, a handharp’s area of 
effect doubles to 20 feet distant, and it can be 
made to dimension door the bard up to 180 feet 
away. 


of Healing 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Complete Bard’s Handbook 

When this magical harp is played within 10 feet 
of wounded creatures, it heals each creature by | 
point per hour of playing. However, once the 
music stops or a new player takes over, further 
playing is useless unless new wounds are 
received, After eight hours of continuous playing, 
a bard must begin to make successful Constitu- 
tion rolls once an hour or misplay the harp. If the 
harp is misplayed, healing ends. 


5383 


š 1324 i 


bazo oo 


Stringed Instruments, Jhantra’s Harp 


Jhantra’s 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 115 

The playing of this harp causes the harpist and 
any other creatures touching the harpist, up to a 
limit of four creatures, to be concealed. This 
occurs after the playing of the harp continues for 
one round. Those hidden are invisible even to 
animals and infravision, and cannot be scented 
or tracked. They can also pass without trace (as 
the Ist-level druid spell), move, and speak while 
cloaked in silence, even though their speech and 
movements are clearly audible to one another. 
The protection lasts for as long as the harp is 
played (its own music can be clearly heard, but it 
always sounds far off and as though coming 
from all directions). Any creature losing even 
momentary contact with the harpist instantly 
becomes audible and visible, and cannot regain 
this protection even if touching the harpist or 
other protected creatures again until the harp 
has been stilled. When it is stilled, and playing 
begins anew, a full round of playing must always 
occur before the harp’s concealment is renewed. 
Spellcasting is possible when under the harp’s 
concealment, but at the instant of the spell’s tak- 
ing effect, the caster appears even if contact 
with the harpist has not been lost. A creature 
cannot play the harp and cast spells or cantrips 
of any sort simultaneously, nor activate and con- 
trol magical items. 


MacFuirmidh 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 6 

This harp adds 20% to a bard’s chances of charm- 
ing a creature and also possesses the three songs 
of the Fochlucan harp. In addition, the harp has 
two more songs. The first of these turns the bard 
invisible until he or she stops playing. In this state 
the player may still be located by the sound of the 
harp, though the sound appears to come from 
nowhere; this makes the bard very hard to hit and 
baffles creatures of low or lower Intelligence, The 
second song enables a bard to strengthen fighters 
like the 2nd-level strength spell except that it 
lasts as long as the bard has strength to keep play- 
ing, the spell is broken when the bard stops or is 
stopped by interruption. The MacFuirmidh harp 
is playable once a day. 


Marks 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 24,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item has three command words: “shrink,” 
“enlarge,” and “scribe.” It can be reduced to 
pocket-size or enlarged to a normal, 6-foot-tall 
harp as often as desired. When its player com- 


N A 


mands it to scribe, the harp creates a glowing 
magical symbol of any type (but with no special 
powers) on any item or surface within 30 feet. 
The mark cannot be placed on any living or 
undead creature or upon any carried item. It is 
useful for marking doors, explored passages, and 
trails. 


Methild’s 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 115 
The music of this harp parts all webs, opens all 
locks, breaks all bonds, and unties all knots 
within 10 feet (as per multiple uses of the knock 
spell). Magical locks and knots gain a saving 
throw vs. breath weapon to avoid being affected; 
anything thus saving against such a harp is for- 
ever immune to the effects of that particular 
Methild’s harp. All webs, bonds, locks, and knots 
affected by the harp are outlined with an orange 
faerie fire from the moment of their being 
affected (within one round of being within effec- 
tive range of the harp’s playing) for one turn. 
Magical barriers such as protective symbols, 
shields, walls of force, forcecages, and the like, 
having no designed opening, are not affected by 
the harp. A rope of constriction, rope of entangle- 
ment, or rug of smothering within 10 feet of the 
harp when it is played ceases to function for 1d4 
rounds and releases any creature it has 
entrapped—although a creature actually 
entrapped by this could not play the harp to free 
itself. 


Murlyn’s Harp of Charming 

XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 25,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 27 
When Blind Lemon Murlyn plays this magical 
harp, it allows him to cast a suggestion spell on 
the audience. Blind Lemon uses this magic when 
he is trying to recruit individuals for one of his 
Harper-sponsored missions. Blind Lemon’s harp 
has one slight difference from normal harps of 
charming, however. There is a 1 in 20 chance that 
a wild surge will result along with the suggestion. 
So far, Blind Lemon has experienced being tem- 
porarily changed into a gnome and exuding a 
stinking cloud. 


Nithanalor’s 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
DRAGON Magazine 115 
The music of this harp affects only its player and 
all things held or carried by the player (including 
the harp itself). The player is instantly protected 
for as long as the harp is played as though by a 
stoneskin spell (as per the 4th-level wizard spell); 


the harp and all things worn or carried, no matter 
5389 


= 1326 ~% 


EEE Eat 


Stringed Instruments, Harp of Spirit Restoration 


how fragile, are similarly protected, making them 
almost immune to physical attack. In addition, a 
moving field of protection exists about the harp 
and the player's arms, so that it is extremely diffi- 
cult to physically prevent or restrain the harpist’s 
playing. Note that magical attacks are unaffected, 
and the harp’s protection is ended by a silence 15' 
radius or a hold person cast upon the harpist. No 
other creatures or items can be protected by the 
harp’s music, even if touching the harpist. 


Ollamh 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 18,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
Ifan Ollamh harp is played by any nonbard or 
bard under 20th level it inflicts 10d4 points of 
damage upon that individual. When played by a 
bard of 20th or higher level, it adds 40% to his or 
her charming abilities and can cast one each of 
the following spells daily: If the bard’s charming 
ability exceeds 100% with the instrument bonus, 
the creature saving against the magic does so at 
-1 for every 5% above 100%, rounding the charm 
bonus to the nearest multiplier of 5. 
* Confusion once a day. 
* Control weather once a day. 
* Fire storm once a day. 

Any character able to play this instrument can 
sing and do one of the following for as many 
turns as the character has levels, divided by two 
(round fractions up), once each day. Each ability 
of the instrument takes an initiative modifier of 5 
to activate. 

Protection from evil 10' radius. 

Become invisible: although the strumming 
and singing can still be heard distantly, the 
exact location is impossible to discover unless 
detection of invisibility is possible. 

Levitation. 

Fly. 


Questing 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This harp looks exactly like a harp of charming 
but, when played, places a quest upon the user (as 
the 5th-level priests’ spell; the task must be cre- 
ated and assigned by the DM). The victim may 
make a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the harp 
quest, but with a —4 penalty to the roll. 


Rhingalade’s 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 12,000 
DRAGON Magazine 115 
The tones of this harp cause the harpist to blink 
(as the 3rd-level wizard spell) for as long as 
desired while the harp is played. In addition, 14 
mirror images of the harpist are instantly created, 


and these blink in the same manner as the harpist 
at slightly different times, so that the harpist (or 
rather, at least one image of the harpist) is always 
in view. Such images vanish forever when struck 
by a weapon (using the harpist’s own Armor 
Class), but they otherwise remain in existence 
until the harp is stilled. The harpist cannot cast 
other spells or make attacks during this time, for 
when the harping ends, so do the effects, and they 
cannot be recreated until the harp rests, unplayed 
for at least three rounds. 


of Spirit Restoration 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Crown of Ancient Glory 
This rosewood instrument, decorated in gold and 
inlaid with silver, appears to be an attractive, nor- 
mal harp. In fact, it is a magical item that can 
restore hit points to characters of any chaotic 
alignment. Any chaotically aligned adventurer 
who sees and hears the harp will recover lost 
vitality (as if enjoying a cure critical wounds 
spell). 

Neutral characters who hear the harp feel 
dispirited, and lose 4 morale points for a period of 
1d10+11 rounds. 

Lawful characters who hear the harp suffer a 
hit point loss equal to a cause critical wounds 
spell. Furthermore, they become insane unless 
they save vs. spell. The insanity lasts 1d4 days 


and the individual is unable to function in a rea- 
5393 


1327 


Stringed Instruments, Storm’s Harp of Methild 


eet ed cl hate ne te a G | 


sonable manner. A remove curse spell negates the 
effects of the insanity. 

The harp only functions once a day. At other 
times its strings produce no sound at all. 


Storm’s Harp of Methild 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 301 
Storm possesses a rare magical harp, recovered 
from Myth Drannor, known as Methild’s harp. 
Whenever Storm plays this magical harp, all 
locks are opened, all knots are undone, all bonds 
are broken, and all web spells are parted within 
10 feet. All of the above forms of restraint 
affected by the harp are outlined in an orange 
form of faerie fire for one turn. Magical barriers 
(such as a wall of force) are not affected by the 
harp. 


of Throbbing 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
The music produced by this harp affects all liv- 
ing creatures within 60 feet. None of those 
affected can die of wounds or poison while the 
harp is played; they cannot be reduced to below 
0 hit points. Creatures reduced to 0 hit points 
will fall, appearing to be dead, but are kept in a 
semiliving state by the music, their hearts 
throbbing in time with the harp. If magical cur- 
ing is applied while victims are in this state, the 
curing works normally, and the victim awakens. 
If an otherwise deadly poison is neutralized, the 
victim awakens with | hit point remaining. The 
harp does not, however, affect dissolving or 
digesting damage, or other forms of disintegra- 
tion. The harp of throbbing can be magically 
played once a day for up to one turn per use; if 
its music is magically silenced or neutralized, it 
has no effect. 


Valarde’s 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DRAGON Magazine 115 
The player employing Valarde 5 harp can, at will, 
cause either of two effects to occur, each taking 
effect at the end of one complete round of play: a 
gust of wind moving outward from the wide end 
of the body of the harp, or a wind wall 20 feet 
square, lasting for three rounds, although the 
harper can end it sooner if desired. Tiny points of 
radiance flicker, dance, and wink out on the 
strings of Valarde'’s harp, and about the brow or 
head of the being playing it, while its strings are 
in motion. 


Zunzalor’s 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 115 
The tones of this instrument create a globe of 
pearly-white continual light centered on the harp 
and extending to a 30-foot radius. The radiance 
lasts as long as the harp’s strings sound, and 
within this radiance the following effects are pre- 
sent: dispel illusion (as the 4th-level wizard 
spell), dispel invisibility (all sorts except psionic), 
and reveal glyph or symbol. This latter power 
reveals all magical or illusionary runes, marks, or 
inscriptions, including wizard mark, illusionary 
script, and unreadable magic. It also uncovers 
protected writings, glyphs of warding, symbols, 
and the like, revealing them in outline in a lumi- 
nous blue so they can be precisely located or even 
tentatively identified or drawn for later study. The 
harp’s music does not trigger such magic, nor 
visit their effects upon persons studying them. 
The harp does not prevent the normal operation 
of such magical things—they may be triggered by 
being touched or in some other prescribed man- 
ner. Shadows, tweens, and other hard-to see crea- 
tures are made clearly visible, outlined in blue 
radiance, if they pass within the harp’s globe of 
radiance. A wizard employing duo dimension 
appears as a thin vertical line of blue radiance in 
midair while within the sphere of effect of Zunza- 
lor’s harp. 


Lyron’s Harpsichord of 
Commanding 
XP Value: — GP Value: 10,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 190 
This strange magical item actually holds the life- 
force of Baron Lyron Evensong and is the focal 
point of his curse. Whenever the harpsichord is 
played, those listening to it must make a success- 
ful saving throw vs. spell or be unable to resist 
following commands issued by the baron. If the 
harpsichord is destroyed, the baron is destroyed 
and his curse is lifted. 


Cool Hand Lute 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 

This common musical instrument causes the 
bearer to become resistant to fire (in a manner 
identical to a ring of fire resistance). However, it 
has the side effect of causing the user’s hands to 
become cold, for a —1 penalty to all attack rolls. 
When the cool hand lute is played for the first 
time, the user’s eyes turn a beautiful blue color, 
and the user must make a saving throw vs. spell 
or develop an affinity for bovines. 


5399 


328 


Dos 
XP Value: 2,200 GP Value: 11,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This instrument is 60% likely to deliver 4d4 points 

of damage to any nonbard or bard under 8th level 

who picks it up and attempts to play it. An 8th- 

level or higher bard who plays the lute has a 20% 

better chance of charming and can sing the follow- 

ing magical songs once per day. If the bard’s 
charming ability exceeds 100% with the instru- 
ment bonus, the creature saving against the magic 
does so at —1 for every 5% above 100%, rounding 

the charm bonus to the nearest multiplier of 5. 

* Hold animal once a day. 

* Neutralize poison once a day. 

* Protection from fire 10' radius once a day. 
Any character able to play this instrument can 

sing so as to do one of the following for as many 

turns as the character’s level divided by two 

(round fractions up), once each day. Each ability 

of the instrument takes an initiative modifier of 5 

to activate. 

* Protection from evil 10' radius. 

* Become invisible, although the strumming 
and singing can still be heard distantly, the 
exact location is impossible to discover unless 
detect invisible is possible. 

* Levitation. 

° Fly. 


of Loot 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 16,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

Though this lute plays on command, it has no 
apparent effect. However, all magical items 
within 10 feet become cursed; any NPC thief see- 
ing such a lute will, upon returning to his or her 
guild, report its existence and last known loca- 
tion, along with all known details about the items 
and characters nearby. The guild will try to obtain 
the lute and other items, usually by burglary, 
sending the most skilled thieves available. The 
lute of loot plays as often as desired but can cre- 
ate its magical effect only once per day. A remove 
curse removes the “loot aura” from one item. 


Singalong 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When this lute is held and commanded to play, it 
produces enchanting music. Each creature within 
60 feet who hears the song must make a saving 
throw vs. spell with a —4 penalty to the roll. If it 
fails, the victim stops, listens, and tries to sing 
along with the tune. If the saving throw is suc- 
cessful, the music has no effect. The user of the 
lute is immune to its enchantment. Those affected 
are merely distracted, suffering no penalty to sur- 


Stringed Instruments, Building Liar 


ren Me iste ete inal Suc 


prise rolls and quite able to ignore the song if 
attacked. The singalong lute plays as often as 
desired but can produce its enchanting music 
only once a day. 


Skywalker 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 24,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 

If this normal musical instrument is held in hand 
and commanded to play, the user can fly (as the 
wizard spell) with up to 300 pounds encum- 
brance. The skywalker lute can fly up to three 
times a day, for up to one hour per use. However, 
the user also develops a desire for action, travel- 
ing far in search of opportunities to fight for 
deserving causes (especially for those who can- 
not afford normal mercenaries). 


Woodwalking 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This lute enables the user to pass through wood- 
lands in relative safety, as long as no hostile 
actions are needlessly initiated. When held and 
commanded to play, the lute produces a soothing 
song that can be heard as much as 120 feet away. 
It plays magically only in woodlands. The user 
will not be attacked by any Intelligent woodland 
creature (centaur, dryad, elf, halfling, pixie, 
sprite, or treant) as long as the song lasts. But if 
the user attacks any such creatures, the lute shat- 
ters and the creatures become enraged, gaining a 
+2 bonus to all attack, damage, and saving 
throw rolls for one turn. The user may fight nor- 
mally if attacked by some other monster and the 
lute plays all the while; the lute then bestows a 
+2 bonus to all the user’s attack, damage, and 
saving throw rolls. If any normal or giant-size 
animal, tree, or other lawful or neutral woodland 
creature is harmed by the user, the lute will 
thereafter refuse to play until it falls into the 
hands of a more deserving owner. When prop- 
erly used, the /ute of woodwalking plays for up 
to 12 hours per day. 


Building Liar 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 156 

This small harp is fashioned entirely from solid 
brass. It radiates a dweomer, but it can be 
strummed until the player’s fingers turn to ham- 
burger and it will never lay a single brick-on- 
brick. However, it incessantly brags about the 
edifices it constructed in the hands of other, more 
competent musicians. (“Yeah, I’m the guy who 
put up the Empire Sta—the Emperor’s Stables, 
yeah, that’s the ticket.”) 


Stringed Instruments, Building Lyre 


Fp Sinaia niet ee 


Building Lyre 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 

The enchantments placed upon this instrument 
make it indistinguishable from a normal one. 
Even if its magic is detected, it cannot be told 
from an ordinary instrument until it is played. If 
the proper chords are struck, a single use of the 
lyre negates the effects of a horn of blasting, a 
disintegrate spell, or the effects of up to three 
rounds of attack from a ram or similar siege item. 
The lyre can be used in this way once a day. 

The lyre is also useful with respect to actual 
building. Once a week its strings can be strummed 
so as to produce chords that magically construct 
buildings, mines, tunnels, ditches, or whatever. 
The effect produced in but three turns of playing 
is equal to the work of 100 men laboring for three 
days. 

A check must be made whenever the lyre is 
played. Under normal circumstances, a false 
chord is sounded on a roll of 1-3 on 1d20. (Char- 
acters with the musical instrument proficiency 
play a false chord only on a roll of 1.) If the 
player of the lyre is under physical or mental 
attack, the chance of a false chord increases to 
1-10. (Proficient characters resolve a proficiency 
check by the standard rules under these circum- 
stances.) If a false chord is struck, all effects of 
the lyre are 20% likely to be negated. 

This harp can be used to build or repair ships. 

A bard can negate the effects of a horn of blast- 
ing, a disintegrate spell, or the effect of up to 
three rounds of attack from a ram or similar siege 
item. This works once a day for every three levels 
of the bard. When the lyre is used to perform 
work, a bard is able to achieve the work of 100 
men plus 10 men per level. If a bard should hap- 
pen to fail the false chord check, a saving throw 
vs. paralyzation is also allowed. Success indicates 
that the bard recovered from the mistake without 
mishap. 


Canaith 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 22,000 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 6 

This lyre adds 40% to a bard’s chance of charm- 
ing creatures and has all the abilities of a Doss 
Lyre. In addition, it has two special songs. The 
first song is like the 4th-level confusion spell. The 
second is like the 4th-level fear spell. In addition 
to this, the lyre has a healing song that, when 
played, can heal the listeners from 2d6 points of 
damage. All songs are playable but once a day. 


Cli 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 32,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A Cli lyre is 80% likely to cause 6d4 points of 
damage to any nonbard or bard of less than the 
14th level of experience who plays it. A 14th- or 
higher level bard adds 30% to charming ability 
and can cast the following spells by singing and 
playing on the lyre, once each per day. If the 
bard’s charming ability exceeds 100% with the 
instrument bonus, the creature’s save vs. spell is 
at —1 for every 5% above 100%, rounding the 

charm bonus to the nearest multiplier of 5. 

* Control winds once a day. 

¢ Transmute rock to mud once a day. 

* Create a wall of fire once a day. 

Any character able to play this instrument can 
sing so as to do one of the following for as many 
turns as the character has levels, divided by two 
(round fractions up), once each day. Each ability 
of the instrument takes an initiative modifier of 5 
to activate. 

* Protection from evil 10' radius. 

* Become invisible, although the strumming 
and singing can still be heard distantly, the 
exact location is impossible to discover unless 
detect invisible is possible. 

¢ Levitation. 

° Fly. 


Dorus’s 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 20,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 87 

Only a dozen of these finely crafted ebonwood 
instruments are rumored to exist. Carved images 
of forest creatures cover the instrument. Created 
by the famed bard, Dorus of Griswold Barrens, 
Dorus'’s lyre can be used by anyone with a non- 
weapon proficiency in stringed instruments. The 
lyre produces sweet tones and never needs tuning. 
It is virtually indestructible, having an effective 
Armor Class of —4. In the hands of a bard, the 
strings glow a pale blue and the magic is realized. 
A bard of any level may call upon its ability to 
speak with animals or to cast animal friendship. 
Both spells can be used three times a day. 


Doss 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 16,500 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 6 
This lyre adds 30% to a bard’s chance of charm- 
ing creatures and has all the abilities of the Mac- 
Fuirmidh harp as well. In addition, the lyre has 
two special songs. The first song enables the bard 
to fly up to the limitations of the 3rd-level spell 
fly with the exception that it lasts as long as the 
bard is able to play. The faster or the higher a bard 


tries to fly the quicker he or she becomes tired. 
5410 


Fa a a a 


1330 


Ee ee eee 


x Stringed Instruments, Canaith Mandolin s- 


Generally, a bard is only able to keep up maxi- 
mum speed or very high altitudes for as many 
turns bard levels; after this a roll of 1—4 on a 1d6 
indicates the bard has collapsed, unconscious 
from the effort. The second song of the lyre is 
equivalent to dispel magic cast at the bard’s level. 
These two songs are playable but once a day. 


Fu Hsing’s 
XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 45,000 
Legends & Lore, 2nd Edition 
With a strum of his magical lute, Fu Hsing’s 
avatar can cast any wizard spell of 1st through 4th 
level. 


Loquacious 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 21,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 90 
A dozen of these enchanted musical instruments 
exist, and they are much sought after by bards. 
The instruments are intelligent and have neutral 
alignments. 

A loquacious lyre provides a +3 to any bard’s 
musical instrument proficiency. A bard who does 
not have the musical instrument proficiency, 
gains the ability. However, the lyre bemoans the 
fact that any bard could be so ignorant to not 
know how to play such a melodious and perfect 
instrument. 

Once each day the lyre can sing accompani- 
ment to the bard’s voice, providing harmony in 
any key. It is telepathic with its owner, but also 
can “speak” using its strings, so it can chat with 
others. It speaks five languages, in addition to 
Elf, Dwarf, and Common. 

A loquacious lyre can cast charm person three 
times a day by speaking or singing. It can cast 
detect magic once a day, and once a week it can 
identify items as a bard of 10th level. 

Loquacious lyres are made of polished bone 
carved with a delicate elf face near the top. They 
are inlaid with many gems, and are strung with 
copper, silver, and gold wires. They are usable 
only by bards. Each lyre has an Intelligence of 16, 
an Ego of 15, and a Personality Score of 31. 


of the Spheres 
XP Value: 2,200 GP Value: 11,000 
War Captain’s Companion 
The lyre of the spheres is used near a crystal 
sphere to locate or create a portal through which 
a spelljamming ship can pass. Any bard can use 
this item to create a portal. All other characters 
can use the item only to locate the nearest exist- 
ing portal. The item can be used but once a week. 


of Wounding 
XP Value: — GP Value: 2,000 
The Complete Bard’s Handbook 
This cursed item appears normal in every way 
until it is first played. When the musician’s fin- 
gers strike its strings, they sever the tips of the 
player’s fingers. Roll 1d6 for the number of fin- 
gers that the musician loses: 


Roll Effect 
1—4 The number of lost fingers. 
5 Musician loses all fingers and the 
thumb. 
6 Musician escapes unscathed. 


Each lost finger causes 1d2 points of damage, 
but the musician should not be lowered below 1 
hit point due to lost fingers. Each lost finger 
causes the musician’s proficiency at playing 
musical instruments to suffer a penalty of —2. 
Other proficiencies and activities requiring man- 
ual dexterity are likewise reduced, at the DM’s 
discretion. Lost digits can be regenerated magi- 
cally. As with cursed swords, whenever the musi- 
cian decides to play, the lyre leaps into his or her 
hands; magically altering the form of the instru- 
ment does not abate the curse. 


Canaith Mandolin 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 42,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
The mandolin is 70% likely to cause 5d4 points 
of damage to any nonbard or bard of under 11th 
level who attempts to utilize its power by playing 
it. An 11th- or higher-level bard is able to employ 
the instrument to add 25% to his or her charming 
ability and also can cast the following spells once 
per day. If the bard’s charming ability exceeds 

100% with the instrument bonus, the creature 

saving against the magic does so at —1 for every 

5% above 100%, rounding the charm bonus to the 

nearest multiplier of 5. 

* Cure serious wounds once a day. 

* Dispel magic once a day. 

* Protection from lightning 10' radius once a 
day. 

Any character able to play this instrument can sing 
and do one of the following for as many turns as the 
character has levels, divided by two (round fractions 
up), once each day. Each ability of the instrument 
takes an initiative modifier of 5 to activate. 

* Protection from evil 10' radius. 

* Become invisible: although the strumming 
and singing can still be heard distantly, the 
exact location is impossible to discover unless 
detect invisible is possible. 

¢ Levitation. 

° Fly. 


5415 


Stringed Instruments, Cli Mandolin 


jj ne 


Cli 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 17,000 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 6 

This mandolin adds 50% to a bard’s chance of 
charming creatures and has all the abilities of a 
Canaith lyre. In addition to this it has the power 
of telekinesis, contains one elemental, and can 
heal better than the Canaith lyre, being able to 
heal from 3d6 points of damage. (Note that this is 
the only healing it can perform—the abilities of 
the Canaith lyre are not cumulative in this man- 
dolin.) This mandolin also has a song of fire 
which can remove curse like the 4th-level spell. 


Pick of Proficiency 
New Item 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
This enchanted pick grants a proficiency in 
music and singing to all who pick it up and use it. 
However, these abilities last for only three hours 
and the pick usually times the cessation of its 
boon to strike in the middle of a performance. 


of Propitiousness 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 78 
This magical implement functions only when a 
skilled musician uses it to play on a stringed 
instrument. During the first round of playing, the 
user must sing the exact name of a particular foe, 
If the exact name is not known, the foe must be 
precisely identified. 

All characters within 50 feet of the user receive 
a +2 bonus to all attack rolls against the stated 
enemy, even if the foe is not within 50 feet of the 
user. If the foe enters the area of effect, he or she 
suffers a —1 penalty on all attack rolls. 

The pick of propitiousness can be used once a 
week for up to one hour. The user must concen- 
trate on playing and must remain motionless 
while using the pick. The user can perform no 
other actions while playing, and loses concentra- 
tion if damage is taken or if struck by a missile or 
melee attack. A silence spell also breaks the 
effect. Optionally, the DM might require a music 
proficiency check for every 10 minutes of play- 
ing, failure breaking the effect. 

The user must have an unobstructed line of 
sight to the named foe, and must keep the enemy 
in sight while playing. 


of Strumming 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,200 
The Complete Bard’s Handbook 
This magical pick enables the user to play any 
stringed instrument that is normally plucked with 
fingers or a pick. This includes harps, lutes, man- 
dolins, and so on. The person grasping the pick 


can play any song he or she has ever heard. The 
pick’s magic is so great that all functions of the 
instrument are instantly mastered. Thus, a bard 
automatically knows the proper chords positions 
for a lute, how to hold a harp, how to adjust the 
strings of a mandolin, and all other virtuoso 
details. His or her skill level rivals that of a 
master musician proficient in the instrument’s 
use. Also, a bard who uses this pick to play the 
lyre of wounding does not suffer any severed fin- 
gers. 


Qanun of Charming 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,000 
Oriental Adventures 

This instrument looks like any other quanun. 
When played by a person proficient in the instru- 
ment, a proficiency roll is made. If successful, 
the character can cast one suggestion spell that 
round, If the saving throw fails (but is greater 
than 1), the music has no effect. If a 1 is rolled, 
the musician’s playing is so poor that the instru- 
ment acts as a qanun of discord. 


of Discord 

GP Value: 8,000 
Oriental Adventures 
Identical to other magical qanun, this instrument 
emits painful and discordant tones when played, 
enraging all within 30 feet. Those enraged attack 
the musician 50% of the time and the nearest tar- 
get the other 50%. The frenzy lasts for 1d4+1 
rounds. The player of this instrument is not 
affected by the frenzy. The properties of the 
instrument cannot be detected until it is actually 
played in earnest—tuning and idly strumming the 
strings only create lucid, clear tones. 


XP Value: — 


of Quiet 
XP Value: 5,000 

Land of Fate 
While this magical instrument is played, it creates 
a magical zone of protection and silence 30 feet 
in radius. Those inside may talk among them- 
selves and clearly hear noises beyond the range of 
the magic, but none outside the radius can hear 
what is happening within the zone over the sound 
of the qanun. Further, divination spells will not 
reveal thoughts, words, intentions, alignment, or 
the presence of magic while the qanun is being 
played. 


GP Value: 25,000 


of the Spirits 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DRAGON Magazine 190 
The qanun is made of the finest mahogany 
brought from the Isle of the Elephant. Its strings 


are said to be solidified light, though others 
5423 


1332 


Stringed Instruments, Game Violin 


report they are made of spun gold, hardened and 
tightened to the breaking point. Its picks are 
carved from a single emerald gem. 

The ganun of the spirits is the most powerful of 
the five instruments of the jann. When the qanun 
is played, the player has the effect of the fire 
truth, the 1st-level wizard spell. Instead of fire, 
the truth of the speaker’s words is determined by 
the sweetness of the instrument’s tone. Untrue 
statements create sour notes. The spell may be 
used once per day, twice if the player is a bard. 

A bard also may use the qanun to “call the 
ancestors”: to speak with dead (as the 3rd-level 
priest spell), and to animate dead (as the 2nd- 
level priest spell), both as if the bard were a 20th- 
level priest. Each of these abilities may be 
performed once a week, and the qanun is needed 
only to cast the magical abilities, not to maintain 
control or contact. 


Rababah of the Dao 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 190 
The rababah of the dao is constructed of the 
finest materials. Its bow is made of the hair of the 
fastest horse in the High Desert, and the circular 
soundbox is made of the skull of a great roc. 

The rababah of the dao allows its user to cast 
an entangle spell, as the 1st-level priest spell of 
the same name. This operates against any target 
on sand or soft soil as opposed to those near grass 


and vines, but the effects of the spell are the 
same. This spell may be cast once a day, twice a 
day if the rababah is used by a bard. 

A bard also may use the rababah of the dao to 
“shift the earth,” to call into being an earth ele- 
mental of 8 HD, once a week. The elemental is 
under the full control of the rababah player, such 
that if the musician stops or is interrupted, the 
elemental will return to its native plane without 
attacking the bard. 


’Ud of the Marids 

XP Value: 3,200 GP Value: 28,000 
DRAGON Magazine 190 
The ‘ud of the marids is solid white, its hardwood 
surfaces covered with thin, ornate carvings of 
pearl. The soundbox itself is made of a single 
great pearl, harvested from the largest clam in the 
deepest part of the Crowded Sea. The marids do 
not risk their own lives in these endeavors, but 
instead avail themselves of lesser beings to 
recover the pearls. 

The ‘ud of the marids allows a bard to cast a 
powerful charm person spell, as the |st-level wiz- 
ard spell, with a —4 penalty on all saving throws 
against the spell. This spell may be cast once a 
day, twice a day if the ‘ud is used by a bard. 

A bard, regardless of kit or origin, may use the 
‘ud to “raise the waters,” to summon a water ele- 
mental of 8 HD once per week, A suitable amount 
of water, such as a river or lake, must be available 
to use this ability. The elemental is under total 
control of the ‘ud player, and if the ‘ud player 
stops, the elemental will return to its native plane 
without harming the bard. 


Extreme Violins 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 

These items appear identical to unnecessary vio- 
lins, but when an attack roll of 20 occurs, the user 
flies into a battle rage, dropping any shield car- 
ried and gaining a +4 bonus on attack and dam- 
age rolls while suffering a +4 penalty to Armor 
Class. The victim will fight until slain, or until all 
enemies are slain, without thought of personal 
safety. There is no limit to the duration or fre- 
quency of the effect. 


Game 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 

These items cause their owners to become unable 
to explain any detailed action in combat. The vic- 
tim cannot aim at a specific portion of a target 
(such as a tentacle); when any victim reaches 0 
hit points, it quietly sits down and expires, with- 
out bleeding, moaning, or performing any other 

$427 


1333 


o D 


String Instruments, Violin Rack 


S a eT, 


normal dying activity. These items appear normal 
but are exceptionally clean, as are all types of 
game violins. 


Rack 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 

This item is a wall rack upon which two violins 
can be hung. The instruments may be easily 
removed from the rack, which then disappears. 
Each violin will affect the creature carrying it, 
and no other; each will vanish if put down, given 
away, sold, or if otherwise caused to leave the 
possession of the original owner. The violins 
should be rolled randomly. 


Saxon 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 
These violins are of an ornate design, but have no 
known effect. They are so rare that none have 
ever been found—that’s why no one has ever 
found Saxon violins in the AD&D game. 


Unnecessary 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 
These fiddles enable their owners to score critical 
hits whenever an attack roll of 20 occurs. (The 
DM must create a chart detailing critical hits, 
such as the severing of body parts, extra damage, 
and the like.) 


Zither of Speed 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
The Complete Bard’s Handbook 

This zither appears to be a normal musical instru- 
ment. However, if it is played in a rapid tempo 
and the musician says, “allegretto,” all allies 
within 30 feet are affected as if under the influ- 
ence of a haste spell. 

If the zither is played slowly and “adagio” is 
spoken, all foes within 30 feet are affected as if 
under a s/ow spell (no saving throw). The effects 
last as long as the bard concentrates upon the 
music or until he plays the zither at a moderate 
tempo and says, “Andante.” If the bard moves, 
defends, suffers damage, rolls for a saving throw, 
or performs any other action, concentration is 
broken. 

A zither of speed functions only once per day. 
Furthermore, for every successive day in a row 
that its magic is used, there is a 10% cumulative 
chance that one of its strings breaks, rendering it 
useless unless it can be repaired. 


of Zombie Control 


XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 25,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This musical instrument is shaped like a flat box 
with strings attached. When strummed and the 
command word spoken, all zombies within 60 
feet hear and obey the user to the best of their 
abilities. However, if the zombies leave the area 
of effect, they are released from the enchantment 
and can no longer be affected by it. This item may 
be used three times per day. 


of Zombie Protection 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item appears and may function as a zither of 
zombie control, but there is a 50% chance per use 
that it will malfunction. If so, the zombies are 
enraged and attack the user with a +4 bonus to all 
attack rolls; they inflict maximum damage (8) per 
hit. Furthermore, they are magically protected. If 
the zombies are turned by a priest, each may 
make a saving throw vs. spell; if the throw is suc- 
cessful, the turn fails and the priest can no longer 
affect the creatures. Once the zombies are 
enraged, they retain the bonuses and protection, 
regardless of distance from the zither, until the 
user is slain. 


5433 


334 


Stylus of Scribing 

XP Value: 25 GP Value: 100 
The Ruins of Undermountain 
This wand of black stone animates itself when 
commanded, and is able to write three words in 
Thorass. The activator must utter a command 
word marked on the wand (typical word: “Kath- 
las”) while touching the stylus. The next three 
words spoken by the activator will be graven 
deeply and clearly on any nonmagical, nonliving 
surface mentally selected by the caster that is on 
the same plane. 

If no surface is chosen by the activator, the 
DM should choose a nearby stone surface at 
random, If the stylus is moved (physically car- 
ried) between words, it can be made to do its 
work on two or three surfaces rather than one. 
Upon writing the third word, it vanishes forever. 
Note that the stylus cannot distinguish between 
the user’s unintentional speech and desired 
words—but the activator can, by force of will, 
alter spellings. 

If the activator does not speak three words 
before abandoning the stylus, it retains some 
magical power. If touched by a another being 
and its command word uttered, it writes that 
being’s next words, but the stylus won’t write 
more words than it has words remaining—the 
second user of this item may only get one word 
inscribed before the item disappears. If no 
being speaks the command word, and the origi- 
nal activator never utters another word on the 
same plane as the stylus, a stylus will hover 
above the location of its last writing until physi- 
cally moved elsewhere. The stylus of scribing is 
often used by adventurers to leave messages for 
others on dungeon walls. 


Sundial 


The sundial is a primitive but accurate timekeep- 
ing piece that requires sunlight to operate. A sun- 
dial’s flat face has numerals inscribed on its 
surface. A small, triangular pillar in or near the 
center casts a shadow upon the face. As the sun 
moves in the sky, the shadow tracks across the 
face, pointing to the correct hour. 


of Direction 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 4,500 
DRAGON Magazine Issue 73 

This looks like a wooden sundial without numer- 
als, about 4 inches in diameter. Close examina- 
tion will reveal that there are 16 marks rather than 
12, When the command word is spoken, the “fin” 
or “hand” of the dial points due north. It does not 
work underground. 


Sweatsuit 


of Timekeeping 

XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This large item consists of a stone pedestal and 
table with an iron finlike attachment atop it, and 
is similar to an ordinary sundial. However, the fin 
always casts a shadow on the dial as if it were in 
bright sunlight. It functions only on the Prime 
Material Plane but keeps perfect time even on 
cloudy days or if taken indoors, or underground, 
It need not be aligned with the position of the 
sun, as would a normal sundial; it works upside 
down, sideways, or when rotated. Its magic can 
be dispelled, though with difficulty (treat as 36th- 
level magic). 


Sweatsuit 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 72 

This magical suit +5, if worn constantly for 
longer than one day, allows the wearer to cast the 
equivalent of a stinking cloud spell up to three 
times a day after that. A nonjock who attacks a 
jock attired in such a magical sweatsuit can 
choose to try to tear either the shirt or pants from 
the jock’s body instead of attempting a normal 
attack in combat. Once a sweatsuit has been 
“activated,” burning is the only way to get rid of 
the stinking cloud property of the suit; not even 
soap of scrubbing will do any good. The sweat- 
suit also acts as a cloak of protection. 


Sword 

All magical swords are listed with a plus or 
minus (for example, a sword +1 or a cursed 
sword —1). The number is the amount added to or 
subtracted from the result of the attack roll and to 
the damage done. (Example: A sword +1 would 
adjust a roll of 17 to 18, and if 5 points of damage 
were rolled, 6 would actually be inflicted.) 

Once a cursed weapon is used in battle, it may 
not be gotten rid of except by use of a remove 
curse or dispel magic spell. 

Some magic swords have additional abilities or 
Intelligence. For example, a sword +1/+2 vs. 
lycanthropes would give a bonus of +2 on attack 
and damage rolls (instead of the normal +1) when 
used against any werecreature. All other abilities 
are listed in the descriptions. 

Special Touches: For the DM who likes to add 
special touches to the weapons given to player 
characters, here is a list of idea generators: 

* Blade materials: adamantite, bone, ceramic, 
crystal or glass (magically strengthened with 
glassteel), damascus (layered steel), high car- 
bon (will rust), mithral, obsidian, stainless 
steel. 

* Blade shapes and features: blood grooves 

37 


335 


Sword, Aasimon 


(fullers), curved, kris (wavy blade), notches, 
straight, tapered. 

* Hand-guard materials: brass, bronze, nickel, 
steel. 

* Hand-guard shapes: arched snakes, clashing 
dragons, clenched fists, human or godlike 
forms. 

* Handle materials: antler, dragon teeth, ebony 
or exotic wood, fossilized ivory, horn, human 
or monster bone, ivory, jade, leather-wrapped 
metal, marble. 

* Handle shapes and features: fluted (with 
straight or spiral grooves), hand-fitted, hollow 
(detachable pommel; can hold small items like 
gems, coins, small tools, papers, liquid), prism 
(flat sides, not rounded), straight, tapered. 

* Pommel materials: crystals or large gem- 
stones (magically strengthened), steel. 

* Pommel shapes and features: cruciform, 
family crest, hand or paw, holy symbol, mon- 
ster’s head, short blade, skull, treetop. 

* Accents: jewels and gems, magical runes, pic- 
ture carvings or etchings, precious metal 
inlays, word engravings. 


Roll Sword Types 


01-02 Adya katti 
03-04 Babanga 
05-06 Basilard 
07-08 Bastard sword 
09-10 Boku-toh 
11-12 Broad 

13-14 Choora 

15-16 Claymore 
17-18 Cutlass 

19-20 Drusus 

21-22 Dwarven claymore 
23-24 Falchion 
25-26 Flamberge 
27-28 Flatchet 
29-30 Flyssa 

31-32 Gladius 
33-34 Great scimitar 
35-36 Impaler 
37-38 Kashara 
39-40 Katana 

41-42 Khandar 
43-44 Khopesh 
45-46 Kora 

47-48 Kukri 

49-50 Long 

51-52 Mariner's 
53-54 Masai 

55-56 Ninja-to 
57-58 Nyek-ple-nen-toh 
59-60 One-handed bastard 
61-62 Pata 

63-64  Piercer 


65-66 Ram dao 
67-68 Rapier 
69-70 Sabre 
71-72 Scimitar 
73-74 Shamshir 
75-76 Short 
77-78 Shotel 
79-80 Sivak draconian 
81-82 Sosun pattah 
83-84 Spatha 
85-86 Sword-staff 
87-88 Swordlet 
89-90 Takouba 

91 Talwar 
92-93 Two-handed 
94-95 Two-handed bastard 
96-97 Wakizashi 

98 Yatagan 
99-00 Zafar takieh 

Aasimon 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 35,000 
Outer Planes MC Appendix 


Each solar fights with a mighty sword that only it 
can wield. The weapon acts as a sword +5 and 
has all the properties of a sword of dancing and a 
vorpal sword. A solar can attack with its sword 
four times per melee round, and does a base of 
2d10 points of damage per hit. 


Abhorrence of Shape Changers 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This sword gives an additional +2 bonus against 
shapechangers and werecreatures—those able to 
assume the form of another creature (such as a 
vampire or a druid), or any creature under the 
influence of a polymorph or shape change spell. 


Adjatha, the Drinker 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
DRAGON Magazine 74 

Adjatha is a sword +2 of fine blue steel, hilted 
with a steel, single quillon and a plain, spherical, 
polished knob pommel. Set in the heart of the 
tang, where the quillons meet, just above the fine 
chain-wrapped grip, is a large (1-inch-diameter), 
cabochon-cut black sapphire (worth 6,000 gp). 
There are no markings or runes on the blade, and 
it does not shed any radiance. 

However, when this sword touches any magical 
item (not including scrolls), Adjatha siphons off 
magical energy, causing the item to glow, shed- 
ding a pale green-white radiance, until the item is 
drained of dweomer or the sword and the item are 
separated. 

The Drinker can never permanently drain an 
artifact, but it can steal the magic of lesser ae 

5 


= 1336 = 


a E 


Sword, Albruin 


NE Ay 


In all cases, the touch of Adjatha causes one 
power or effect (per round of contact) of the item 
to be nullified for 1—4 turns after contact. If the 
item has limited charges or operates but once, 
sufficient contact with Adjatha can drain it 
entirely of magic. The blade absorbs the dweomer 
into itself in a peculiar way, retaining magical 
energy to protect itself and its bearer. 

Adjatha gains 2 hit points per charge drained 
or round of contact (many lesser items of magic 
are drained after 13 or so rounds of contact). It 
has 9 points of Strength, and may add any magi- 
cally drained points to its own, without (known) 
limit. Any attack on Adjatha or its bearer must 
exhaust the phantom hit points before they can 
harm the physical entities of blade or bearer. 
When reduced to its original 9 hit points, Adjatha 
cannot absorb further damage for its bearer, and 
is itself vulnerable. Anyone grasping the grip of 
Adjatha receives its hit point protection; there is 
room for a maximum of two bare human hands to 
grasp the hilt at one time. 

Adjatha, it must be noted, cannot repeatedly 
drain the vitality of the same item; after two con- 
tacts with any single item, the Drinker cannot 
drain any more from it—but note also that a con- 
tact, if uninterrupted, can continue for up to one 
turn before any bearer must withdraw or risk the 
onset of feeblemindedness due to a magical back- 
lash (10% chance each round beyond one turn of 
continuous contact). Drained hit points gained by 
Adjatha do not cure existing damage to the user, 
but merely absorb all further attacks until 
exhausted. 

Adjatha cannot drain or negate spells cast at it 
or its bearer, and confers no special magic resis- 
tance except immunity to psionic domination, 
charm spells, and similar direct mind-control 
spells. That immunity does not extend to sleep, 
suggestion, ESP, and the like. 

The Drinker is first known to have existed 
more than 400 years ago, in the reign of Kurskos 
Ironhand; it was the sword of that monarch’s her- 
ald and chief counselor, Amrok of the Dwarves. 
Kurskos slew Amrok in a night of revelry after a 
Shieldmeet, and took Adjatha the Drinker (and 
the enmity of the dwarves) as his own. Amrok 
was of almost human stature, and it has often 
been said Adjatha is of human and not dwarven 
manufacture, for it is of the full size and heft for 
a strong, long-armed, human swordsman. 

The stories of its creation are many and color- 
ful—most are doubtless as fanciful as the tale 
told by Thyri of Amn, who stole Adjatha from 
the palace vaults in the sack of Aumreayum on 
the death of Kurskos. Thyri held that Adjatha 
was given to his grandfather by the gods, and 
made any of the family who wielded it invulner- 


able in battle. 

Thyri was easily, almost contemptuously, slain 
by the first man who challenged him, a merchant 
from Calimshan. That merchant, whose name is 
lost, was slain while in a caravan soon after by a 
mischievous kenku. In like manner, the Drinker 
has often changed hands over the years, usually 
remaining with any one owner for only a short 
time. Elminster saw Adjatha 40 winters ago at the 
court of Nesker of Mulmaster, when the sorcerer- 
king was studying it to increase his own arts. It 
disappeared before Nesker’s death and came to 
light briefly in reports of fighting in the Shaar, 
apparently being wielded by one of the nomad 
chieftains. The sword was stolen from him, and 
despite sending agents far afield, he was unable 
to recover it. The present whereabouts of the 
blade are unknown. 


Albruin 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 74 

Albruin is a sword made from an alloy that com- 
bines steel, electrum, and silver, demonstrably as 
effective as silver against undead and other crea- 
tures who suffer particular effects from contact 
with that metal. It is +1 on attack rolls and +3 on 
damage. It sheds an eerie blue radiance (up to 10- 
foot radius) when drawn from its scabbard. It is 
of chaotic neutral alignment (Intelligence 17, Ego 
13), communicates by speech (Common, Elf, 
Drow, Thieves’ Cant), and can read languages 
and magical writing. 

Albruin’s bearer can, at will, activate the 
sword’s power to detect invisible objects in a 10- 
foot radius, maintaining it by concentration, 
Albruin can also neutralize poison once every 
three days, and heal its bearer once every 12 
days. These powers are evoked at the will of the 
bearer, or by the sword if the bearer is uncon- 
scious and Albruin deems it advantageous to acti- 
vate either power by itself. Physical contact 
between Albruin and the flesh of the bearer is 
necessary for the powers to work. 

Albruin is believed to be the creation of the 
long-dead smith Surdee, who was famous in his 
day for thecraftsmanship of the work that came 
out of the forges of icebound Glister, where he 
worked ore fresh from the mines above the city, 
on the edge of the glacier. The blade itself evades 
questions about its origins; there are no markings 
or definite touches of workmanship that identify 
Albruin as the work of anyone in particular. 

Albruin was held for decades in the royal house 
of Cormyr, kept as a family treasure, but seldom 
(due to its alignment) borne by the kings of that 
land. It was stolen from the palace at Suzail some 
90 winters ago by the thief Nyparr (“Nipe”), a 

$441 


4 1337 ‘ 


i = ———————————————— kL Ett 


ED in 
=i 


2 
g 


4 
j 
Z 
Z 
í 
f 
: 
A 
Z 
A 
Z 


~ Sword, Annacon s- 


halfling who was soon arrested at Wheloon by 
soldiers of Cormyr and slain while attempting to 
escape. Nipe did not have the blade when he was 
seized, and did not reveal its whereabouts. It was 
rumored among the thieves of that place that he 
had sold it to a “gray trader” (a “fence”) by the 
name of Blusken Shtult, who had a merchant 
barge on the Wyvernwater, and that Blusken had 
sailed from Wheloon up to a port on the northern 
shore of the Wyvernwater and delivered the blade 
to a waiting buyer. 

The blade’s whereabouts were uncertain for 
some 24 winters, until a lady of high birth in Sel- 
gaunt, one Shamur, found the blade left behind in 
her bedchamber by a visitor fleeing the city 
guard. He never returned, and Shamur sold it 
when she married. It was bought by an adventurer 
visiting the city of Selgaunt on matters of trade 
(gold for mercenaries), and wielded thereafter in 
several minor skirmishes about the Eastingreach 
before its owner died in an ambush, His slayer, 
the adventurer-prince Thaum of Telflamm, used 
Albruin to help him take the lands of Impiltur 
forcibly from his father and found his own king- 
dom. Thaum eventually died by magic (a wizard 
hired by his father Kuskur, who was unable to 
regain control of the lost lands), and Albruin was 
acquired by one of Thaum’s warriors, who fled 
the dead king’s keep and took the blade back 
westward into the Dalelands. 

This warrior, one Adjuz by name, perished at 
the hands of brigands on a northern road, and 
Albruin disappeared from view—but not before 
Adjuz had sought out a sage in Shadowdale to 
learn the blade’s true nature and powers. 

After the death of Adjuz, the trail of the sword 
is hidden for some eight winters, but it is known 
to have been in the hands of the mercenary gen- 
eral Malakar on his visit to Zhentil Keep in the 
spring of the ninth year following, and was iden- 
tified again by the sage Murail of Sarbreen when 
a mercenary warrior sought him out to learn the 
blade’s properties in that city some six winters 
beyond that time. From then until now, the where- 
abouts of Albruin are unknown, but Elminster is 
careful to remind us that its plain appearance and 
its ability to control many of its bearers would 
contribute to its anonymity. 


Amatsu-Mikaboshi’s 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Legends & Lore 
Anybody hit by the avatar’s sword blade suffers 
an additional 1d10 points of poison damage each 
round until the poison is neutralized. 


Anduvar 

XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
DRAGON MOUNTAIN® Campaign Set 
This sword +3 is intelligent. To activate the dor- 
mant weapon, one needs only to speak its name, 
which is etched in elven runes along the blade. Its 
alignment is chaotic good, and it communicates 
through empathy. Its only power is to detect evil 
10' radius. 


Angurvadal 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 8,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Angurvadal, also known as the Stream of Anguish, 
was owned by the hero of “Frithiof’s Saga,” a 
13th- Century Scandinavian work. This sword +4 
allows the user to cast one water elemental spell 
(Ist through Sth level) per day. 


Annacon 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 8,000 
DRAGON Magazine 92 
Falrik Moondance is a rather eccentric elf. While 
quite bright and a good-natured sort, he is also 
rather impulsive. His appearance is youthful, but 
he gives the impression that he is much older and 
wiser than he seems at first glance. Fairly suspi- 
cious, almost to the point of paranoia, he panics 
easily, Often he does things that seem quite clever 
(in a twisted sort of way) but are bound to be mis- 
interpreted by others at the moment he acts. His 
impulsiveness and shortsightedness do not make 
his deeds logical in a conventional (that is, law- 
ful) sense, but he is very cunning and has an intu- 
itive grasp of the “smartest thing to do” in most 
situations. 

Falrik does not like being a fugitive, but he 
likes the idea of being unjustly executed for his 
rash acts even less. He has certain knowledge 
about Annacon which might help save him, but 
he doesn’t think that the local villagers will 
believe him. He is stubborn as well as cautious 
and suspicious, so it will prove difficult to get 
him to believe that a pardon is not a trap. 

Basically a peaceable sort, Falrik avoids com- 
bat as much as possible. He will not attempt to 
physically harm anyone who is not attacking him, 
preferring to harass, confuse, and frustrate them 
into leaving him alone. The DM should carefully 
consider what spells he and the sword have avail- 
able when deciding Falrik’s tactics. Charming 
characters with the sword, for instance, is one 
possibility, as is going invisible and hiding if in 
danger of being discovered. 

Falrik Moondance is a lawful good, 3rd-level 
elf fighter with silvery hair and gold-colored 
eyes. He stands 5S’ 4” tall and weighs 104 lbs.; he 


is 263 years old. His statistics are: Str 15, Int 17, 
5445 


Se OS a a e L a 


1339 -> 


Sword, Ansanther 


[2 


Wis 7, Dex 17, Con 15, Cha 14, hp 18. He has AC 
2 from armor, Dexterity, and magical bonuses, 
has a +1 to hit and damage in combat, and has a 
+2 bonus with missiles. Falrik speaks Common, 
Elf, Ore, Hobgoblin, Gnoll, Halfling, and Pixie. 
He carries three spells at all times: hold portal, 
ventriloquism, and invisibility. His current pos- 
sessions include: Annacon, a bow +1; a chain- 
mail suit; a ring of protection +1; a quiver with 
20 arrows (4 of them with silver arrowheads); a 
pack with his rations, water, spellbook, and tin- 
derbox; and his prize, a wand of illusion with 12 
charges. 

Annacon is a sword +2 with charm person 
ability. It has an Intelligence of 8 and an Ego of 6 
(total Will Power: 14), and possesses two primary 
powers: it can detect lies spoken within 10 feet of 
the person holding it, and it detects elves within a 
10-foot radius. Annacon is of lawful good align- 
ment and as such damages wielders who are not 
lawful good, causing 1d6 points of damage per 
round of contact. 

Unfortunately, both abilities cause the sword 
blade to glow with the same blue color, shining as 
brightly as a /ight spell, and therein lies the prob- 
lem—Falrik, knowing from tales told among the 
elves in the region about the latter ability of the 
weapon, realized that the sword would glow in his 
presence because he is an elf. He feared that the 
people who knew of the sword’s detect lies ability 
would assume he was always lying. The duration 
of the sword’s blue glow varies from a mere three 
seconds (in the case of the detect lie power) to 
potentially infinite (for as long as an elf remains 
in detection range). 

The elven legends about Annacon say it was 
forged by a dwarf weaponsmith and a human 
wizard ally about three centuries ago. At that 
time, the elves and dwarves of this region were 
fighting a war against each other over the damage 
that dwarven surface mines were doing to local 
forests and wildlife. The battles were settled long 
ago, though some slight hostility between the two 
races still exists. 


Ansanther 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Treasures of GREYHAWK 
Ansanther, a holy avenger, has an alignment of 
lawful good, an Intelligence of 14, and an Ego of 
18. She has the ability to speak common. Her pri- 
mary abilities allow her to detect evil, and locate 
objects. Her special purpose is to slay Xenous 
Zenpor with the special purpose power of disinte- 
gration. (Xenous Zenpor is an evil wizard who, 
years ago, slew Ansanther’s last adventuring 
group, and she lost her wielder.) 
Ansanther wants an owner of “most pure of 


SS ee ee 


1340 


i 


heart” to carry and wield her. She will use her 
new powers to the best of her ability when 
wielded by a lawful good individual. She will 
make her presence and desires known to the first 
person who picks up the sword. 


The Answerer 
(Fragarach) 


XP Value: 18,000 GP Value: 90,000 
Scabbard: 35,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 
This hefty steel broad sword bears a mighty 
enchantment. It was originally fashioned for a 
demigod of elsewhen and eventually passed into 
Greyhawk. It served well for a short time, all too 
soon falling into the hands of the minions of 
chaotic evil. It has been in their grasp fora 
decade or more, resting in hiding in the Temple of 
Elemental Evil, guarded by the worst of elemen- 

tal grues. Fragarach means The Answerer. 

The sword is of chaotic good alignment. Any 
lawful creature trying to grasp it takes 1d6 points 
of damage and falls senseless for 1d10 rounds. A 
neutral creature holding it takes only 1d3 points 
and swoons for 1d4 rounds. In evil hands, Fra- 
garach has no attack bonus whatsoever; in chaotic 
neutral hands, it will strike but one opponent per 
round. The sword functions perfectly only for a 
chaotic good user. In such hands, its +4 bonus 
always operates, and it will strike as many oppo- 


nents unerringly as have struck at its possessor. 
5447 


x Sword of Arak y- 


Fragarach always hits all such targets, the +4 per- 
taining to additional damage only. Note, however, 
that The Answerer always strikes last in a melee 
round. Against evil opponents, the bonus doubles 
(to +8) whenever a natural 20 is rolled for attack 
determination. 

The sword has a hilt of silver and gold wire, 
most cunningly wrought. Its guard and pommel 
are set with perfect emeralds (corundum)—seven 
gems, total value 65,000 gp. Its scabbard is like- 
wise trimmed with precious metal and decorated 
with many gems of green and golden hue, worth 
another 35,000 gp. 


The Answerer I-VII 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Scabbard: 16,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 
When Fragarach first came to this world, it 
received immediate attention and quick renown; 
so much so, in fact, that six other swords like it 
were forged and enchanted. These are lesser 
weapons, of course, and their alignments vary. 
Each has a +2 bonus (and cannot hit opponents 
struck only by +3 or better weapons). On a nat- 
ural attack roll of 1, no bonus applies; on a nat- 
ural 20, like their predecessor, the bonus is 
doubled (to +4). These lesser swords are identi- 
fied by the differing gems set in guard and pom- 
mel, They are reported to be amethyst, 
aquamarine, garnet, peridot, topaz, and tourma- 
line stones, with combined value of about 24,000 
gp per weapon, 16,000 gp per scabbard. These 
weapons are named Rebutter, Scather, Replier, 
Retorter, Squelcher, and Backtalker, in honor of 
Fragarach. 


Roll Sword 

01-17 Rebutter 

18-33 Scather 

34-50 Replier 

51-67  Retorter 

68-83 Squelcher 

84-00  Backtalker 
Anton’s Vorpal Blade 

XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 21 


Anton’s weapon has an Intelligence of 12 (6 Ego 
points), the ability to detect magic in a 10-foot 
radius and a hidden compartment in its pommel 
with a pale lavender ellipsoid ioun stone (see 
Ioun Stone) that absorbs spells up to the 4th level 
(10d4 spell levels). This chaotic good weapon 
grants a +3 to attack and damage rolls, and uses 
the following table to determine when it severs a 
limb: 


1341 


Opponent is: d20 Roll* 
Normal/Armored 18 
Larger than human-size 19 
Solid material or stone 20 


(* 01-17: Consider only the +3 bonus of the sword). 


of Arak 
XP Value: 4,200 GP Value: 18,000 
RAVENLOFT* Campaign Set 
Evil drow wizards created this sword, and no 
human was ever meant to hold it. The drow have 
lost the sword, however, and as of this writing no 
one knows its current location. 

To any physical and magical examination, the 
item appears to be a sword of sharpness +2. 
Indeed, it performs as one. But the sword also 
carries an evil curse—a horrid thirst for blood. 
Once a day, it must kill or help to kill a creature 
no smaller than a large dog. The sword is not 
required to deal the fatal blow, but blood must 
spill from the wound of the blade, and the victim 
must die no more than an hour after those first 
drops flowed. 

Each day the sword’s thirst is not quenched, its 
owner suffers, losing | point from each of mental 
attribute (Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma) 
and gaining | point in each physical attribute 
(Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution). After the 
first such adjustment, the owner becomes so fond 
of the blade that he or she cannot bear to be with- 
out it. If someone forcibly separates the owner 
from the sword, the character will do anything to 
regain it. 

When one or more of the character’s mental 
attributes drops to 3, the conversion is complete. 
He is now bestial—a monster that looks like an 
ogre. The DM runs the character. Usually, the 
beast will have superhuman physical abilities at 
this point, with scores above 18. Its only goal is to 
satisfy the blade’s thirst for blood. The creature 
may embark on a mindless rampage or—if there 
is a shred of Intelligence left—begin a series of 
clever, fiendish murders. 

If the sword is removed from the character's 
possession before a mental attribute drops to 3, 
the former wielder begins to recover gradually 
and regains | point to each mental ability, and 
losing 1 from each inflated physical score each 
day. Until this process is complete, the character 
still covets the sword and is unable to resist the 
urge to pursue it. 

Once the conversion is complete, even remov- 
ing the sword will not cure the monster. Only 
powerful magic—or the monster’s death—can 
remove the curse at this point. The remove curse 
spell may at first appear successful, but it can 
provide only temporary relief. 


Sword, Arbane’s Sword of Agility 


jp, CNR a o 


Arbane’s Sword of Agility 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Magister 

The first of these swords were created by the elf 
wizard, Lord Arbane of Myth Drannor many cen- 
turies ago. His first was stolen, so he made a sec- 
ond with the aid of an apprentice, who sold the 
secret to two other wizard-swordsmiths. The form 
of manufacture is thought to be forgotten now— 
Elminster has heard of no one making one in the 
last 500 years—but there are over a dozen in exis- 
tence. Some have even been created with sen- 
tience and further powers. 

This is a weapon +2 that boasts several pow- 
ers. These are under the mental control of who- 
ever holds its hilt. The wielder can jump, as in the 
spell (a single leap) twice a day. Two rounds of 
hasted action per 24 hours are also possible—and 
such activity does not age the character (though it 
may age the sword). 

The sword grants the wielder immunity to hold 
and s/ow spells, glowing brightly. The glow fluc- 
tuates as the sword moves and strikes, in a stro- 
belike manner; this property of the sword negates 
magical darkness, and destroys the effects of hyp- 
notic pattern or fire charm within a 20-foot 
radius of the drawn blade. The wielder of the 
sword gets a saving throw vs. spell (saves at +1 if 
6th level or higher). 


Ar’ondight 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Ar'ondight, the sword of Launcelot of the Lake, 
was mentioned in several Arthurian legends. This 
sword is +5 on attack rolls as long as the target is 
not of a good alignment. If used against good 
individuals, the sword becomes a cursed weapon 
-3, 


Arvoreen’s 
XP Value: 6,400 GP Value: 32,000 
Monster Mythology 
Arvoreen’s avatar’s dancing short sword +4 gains 
his Strength bonus (+3) to damage in combat. 


of Arvoreen 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

The nine known swords of Arvoreen were forged 
eons ago by dwarf smiths and enchanted by pow- 
erful halfling priests of Arvoreen the Defender. 
The short swords were crafted during the time the 
world was in chaos and many halfling villages 
were threatened by invaders. In the hands of 
someone other than a halfling, the swords are +1. 
However, when wielded by a halfling, the swords 
have the following powers: 


* +1 vs. all creatures, +2 vs. evil creatures, +4 
vs. evil creatures over 5 tall. 

* The swords inflict triple damage when the 
wielder is defending his or her home or home- 
land. 

* When a wielder defending his or her home or 
homeland chooses to parry rather than attack, 
the parry is always successful. 

In addition, each of the nine swords is attuned to 

a single enemy. Any individual enemy struck by the 
sword must save vs. death magic or die. Sages have 
documented that three of the swords, owned com- 
munally by halfling villages, are attuned to hill 
giants, trolls, and goblins, respectively. It is not 
known if the other six swords repeat these enemies 
or if they are attuned to other creatures. 


of Assassination 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
The sword of assassination, also known as the 
ruby sword, is a potent weapon in the hands of an 
assassin. If handled by any other type of charac- 
ter, the sword appears to be a regular blade. All 
swords of this type have a ruby of not less than 
500 gp value mounted on the pommel; hence the 
second name. 

When used by an assassin character, a sword of 
assassination gives the wielder a bonus to attack 
and damage rolls and adds a bonus to all assassi- 
nation rolls while using the weapon. The power of 
a certain sword is determined randomly: 


Assassination 
Roll Bonus 
01-60 +5% 
61-90 +10% 
91-95 +15% 
96-99 +20% 
00 +25% 


The assassination bonus is only gained if the 
assassin has a chance of actually assassinating the 
victim. Thus, the sword would give no chance for 
an assassination roll to a 3rd-level assassin trying 
to slay a 12th-level victim—but the assassin 
would gain the sword’s combat bonuses. A sword 
of assassination has the same chance as any other 
magical sword to be intelligent, and always has 
an evil alignment if intelligence is indicated. 
Intelligent swords of this sort never betray their 
nature to any nonassassin. 


Aziza’s Scimitar of Dancing 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 187 
Aziza’s magical scimitar is a weapon +3 in all 


respects, with some additional powers. It func- 
5555 


1342 


ee a A ——— 


Sword, Bane of Enchanted Beings 


| ami aaa aia ee 


tions as a sword of dancing, except that its cycles 
last for only three rounds (instead of four), and its 
maximum bonus is +3. Once a week, when a 
command word is uttered, it creates food and 
water as the 3rd-level priest spell, cast at the 6th 
level. 


of Azor’alq 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Treasures of GREYHAWK 
The sword of Azor’alg is a long sword +4. It has 
an Intelligence of 17 and an Ego of 21. It is 
aligned, neutral good, and has the special purpose 
of slaying evil otherplanar beings. Any such 
being struck by it must make a saving throw vs. 
spell or be disintegrated. 

The sword speaks Elf, as well as communicat- 
ing telepathically with its possessor. It can detect 
evil in a 20-foot radius, and detect invisible 
objects in a 10-foot radius. Once a day it allows 
the possessor to fly, at a rate of 40 yards per 
round, for up to an hour. 

The sword is very proud, and does not wish to 
serve anyone who is not an important baron or 
king. It also expects its owner to provide it with a 
new scabbard, with many gems fixed to it. In gen- 
eral, the sword thinks it is in charge of any owner, 
and, given its Intelligence and Ego, it may well 
be. If the sword is in control, it will compel its 
owner to seek out and destroy powerful otherpla- 
nar beings of evil alignment. The sword espe- 
cially hates fiends of all sorts, and the owner may 
soon find himself on a quest in another plane, if 
the sword has its way. 

The sword retains all of its powers on any 
plane, although on the lower planes, the detect 
evil power is neutralized by the overwhelming 
evil of the plane. Any randomly encountered 
fiend will have a 10% chance of having seen or 
heard of the sword of Azor alq, and will seek to 
destroy the possessor and take the sword. 


of Babette Maelstrom 

XP Value: 1,000,000 GP Value: 10,000,000 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 
Babette’s formidable weapon is a long sword +5, 
+10 vs. regenerating creatures, and +15 vs. 
dragons. Once a year, the sword can: 
* Cause an explosion, 200-foot radius, 200d100 
(200-20,000) points of damage. 
* Create a sphere of force, as per the wall of 
force spell; and dispel magic at the 45th level. 
This item was part of a contest to name the sword 
featured on the cover of POLYHEDRON Newszine 
70. Never, ever give this item to a player!. It is 
included here for the sake of completeness. 


of Backstabbing 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 7,000 
The Complete Thief’s Handbook 

In the hands of any character this is a magical 
weapon +2, but in the hands of a thief it is espe- 
cially potent. When a thief makes a backstab 
attempt with this short sword, it allows the thief 
to attack as if four levels higher than the actual 
experience level of the character, with corre- 
sponding improvements in THACO, attack rolls, 
and damage multiplier on a successful hit. 


Balisarda 
XP Value: 2,100 GP Value: 10,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Balisarda was made by the witch Falerina. Treat 
this weapon as a sword of sharpness. 


Balmung 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 

Balmung was the sword of Siegfried of the Scan- 
dinavian legends. It was made by Wieland, a Ger- 
manic name for the immortal blacksmith Volund, 
known as “Wayland Smith” to the English. 
Wieland may be similar to earlier legends, such 
as the Greek Hephaestus and the Roman Vulcan. 
This is the equivalent of a vorpal sword +4. 


Balor 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Outer Planes MC Appendix 

The true tanar’ri known as balor use a great sword 
that looks like a bolt of lightning. In the hands of 
the balor, these swords are vorpal and can detect 
evil/good in a 30-foot radius. Any creature that 
picks up a balor sword, regardless of whether the 
creature’s flesh actually touches it, immediately 
suffers 1d10 points of damage and must make a 
saving throw vs. spell or die immediately. 


Bamboo Scimitar 
XP Value: 7,500 GP Value: 40,000 
Kara-Tur 
The Jade Warrior (see Crystal Warriors) wields 
a bamboo scimitar +5 that acts as a sword of 
sharpness. On command, the scimitar can cast 
wood rot. 


Bane of Enchanted Beings 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This weapon, a sword +1/+2 vs. magic-using and 
enchanted creatures, always provides a +1 bonus. 
The +2 bonus takes effect when the sword is 
employed against wizards, monsters that can cast 
spells, and conjured, created, gated, or summoned 
creatures. Note that the +2 bonus would not operate 

5463 


1343 


~ Sword, Bane of the North - 


against a creature magically empowered by an item 
(such as a ring of spell storing) to cast spells. 


Bane of the North 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Adventures in BLACKMOOR* 
Timothy Curlytop, the Shiremaster of Booh, car- 
ries a lawful-good short sword +1/+3 vs. fiends, 
that he has rather grandly dubbed Bane of the 
North. This valuable little weapon has an Intelli- 
gence of 9, an Ego of | and the powers to detect 
shifting walls and rooms, detect slopes, and see 
invisible. The morale of all halflings within 25 
feet of Bane of the North is raised by 1. 


Barnus’s Gnomebane 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 3,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 189 
Barnus’s short sword is a typical weapon +1 in 
most respects. Against gnomes, however, the 
sword adds a +3 bonus to attack rolls and inflicts 
double normal damage. Barnus was given this 
sword by a friend of a friend who knew of his 
hatred for gnomes. 


of Bast 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
IMAGINE Magazine 19 
Few intelligent magical items have a geas cast 
upon them, since the presence of the geas is 
revealed instantly to the new owner through the 
rapport he or she has with the item. However, the 
sword of Bast is an example of a weapon with a 
voluntary geas, that is to say, one in which the 
nature of the restriction or command is revealed 
to the new owner by the item itself, allowing the 
prospective owner to decide whether to accept the 
item and the penalty attached, or to decline it. 

The sword of Bast informs the wielder: “I am a 
simply enchanted sword dedicated to the service 
of Bast. If you use me, you will find a geas 
placed upon you—that you may not kill or will- 
ingly harm any of the catkind, nor suffer others to 
do so. Do you accept the geas?” 

If the answer is “yes,” the sword waits until the 
wielder has taken the effect of the geas and then 
reveals itself in its full majesty. It is +2, +3 vs. 
lawful evil, +4 vs. followers of Set. No cat ever 
harms the wielder, and tame felines are friendly. 
The sword hopes the owner becomes a follower 
of Bast, but does not coerce. Instead, it confers 
additional powers on those who pursue a vigor- 
ous campaign against Set’s followers and min- 
ions. There is a 25% chance that it allows the 
owner to attract a cat familiar; it allows the 
wielder to move silently on a percentile roll of 
99%, and allows the wielder to speak all feline 
languages. 


Belenus’s 
GP Value: 40,000 
Legends & Lore 
Belenus’s avatar carries a long sword that can be 
made to flame once per turn, doing an additional 
2d10 points to creatures affected by fire. 


XP Value: 4,000 


of the Believer 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
Land of Fate 
This magical weapon inflicts damage only against 
unenlightened creatures, that is, those who do not 
accept the Law of the Loregiver or are ignorant of 
it. An enlightened creature will take no damage 
from the sword, which will appear to pass right 
through his or her body. The unenlightened 
(including monsters of low sentience, savages, 
ordinary objects without sentience, barbarians, 
and unenlightened foreigners) take normal dam- 
age. This sword can be used as a test for such 
enlightenment, but also is useful in cases where a 
civilized man is swallowed by a large, nonsen- 
tient creature, and must be cut out without harm- 
ing him. Profession of belief is all that is required; 
it is beside the point whether one is “good” or 
“evil,” just enlightened. 


Benn Griff’s 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Against the Cult of the Reptile God 
Benn Griff’s weapon is a short sword +1/+2 vs. 
scaly creatures with no other special abilities, 


Berserk Dancing 

GP Value: +200 

IMAGINE Magazine 14 

A berserk dancing sword behaves as a normal, 
magical, intelligent sword, until in mortal combat 
with a strong foe of opposite alignment. A ran- 
domly determined alignment should be used if 
the sword is determined to be neutral. The sword 
leaps into the air and begins to dance in the same 
manner as a standard sword of dancing, except 
that its combat bonus may be as high as +5. Once 
it has become a sword +5, it remains one. 

When the monsters are finally beaten, the 
sword turns on its wielder and any companions. If 
they run, the sword follows at a Movement rate of 
15. Spells or boots of speed are the characters’ 
only hope of escape, for the sword cannot be 
physically attacked. Once all the combatants in a 
particular melee are dead (or have escaped), the 
sword sinks to the ground and resumes its “sane,” 
normal status. 

When the berserk dancing sword result is 
rolled on the random item chart, the Dungeon 
Master should roll another effect and combine the 
results together. 


XP Value: — 


5470 


1344 


(a eS ES a 


Black 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 

Black Courser 
A lawful-neutral obsidian sword +3/+6 against 
emperors, this is a truly magnificent weapon— 
and a truly dangerous one to wield. Its other 
properties: Intelligence 17, communicates tele- 
pathically and through speech (but only in 
Imaskari); can cast dispel magic three times a day 
as 15th-level wizard, darkness 15' radius at will, 
silence 15' radius at will. It was created at the 
height of the Imaskari empire to overthrow the 
emperor, and has been the weapon behind dozens 
of regicides since that time. It will use its Ego of 
18 to force its wielder to attack Ambuchar 
Devayam whenever they meet. 


Black Flame 

XP Value: 4,100 GP Value: 27,500 
Adventures in BLACKMOOR 
As king, Uther the Rectifier normally carried a 
lawful-good two-handed sword +2 named Black 
Flame. This weapon, now in the keeping of the 
Regency Council, has an Intelligence of 9, an 
Ego of 3, the powers detect evil and detect magic, 
and the extraordinary powers extra damage and 
healing. 


Blackflame 
XP Value: 4,100 GP Value: 27,500 
Dragon Keep 
This black sword is a sword +1/+4 vs. undead. 
The sword becomes enveloped in cold black 
flames when within 10 feet of an undead crea- 
ture; the flames themselves cause no damage. 


of Blackflame 
XP Value: 30,000 GP Value: 275,000 
The Five Shires 

Certain slim, rapier-like short swords borne by 
hin are in reality swords of blackflame. These pre- 
cious and powerful weapons can be identified by 
the appearance of their blades—shimmering, 
ever-shifting glossy black, with white bubbles 
and cloudy mottling within the metal that move 
about constantly. In shadows, darkness, and near- 
darkness such blades become invisible. They are 
undetectable by infravision and detect magic 
spells and abilities. 

A sword of blackflame is a weapon +4. By 
mental command, anyone holding a drawn sword 
of blackflame can bring magical silence into 
being in a 20-foot radius centered on the blade’s 
hilt. The silence can be instantly ended by will of 
the wielder at any time, and can last for up to six 
continuous rounds. Up to four such periods of 
silence can be created by a sword of blackflame in 
an hour. All creatures within the area of effect 


Sword, Blackjammer’s Cutlass 


will be silenced with no saving throw allowed, 
including the blade-wielder 

A sword of blackflame can also reflect back at 
its origin one magical attack per round (addi- 
tional attacks in a single round will have normal 
effects). This ability is automatic and only works 
once an hour. The power affects spells, natural 
magical powers, and the effects of magical items. 
The sword will suck all of an area-effect magic 
(such as a fireball) into itself, so that the attack 
does no damage to any creature within the area of 
effect. The attack is then cast back in full upon its 
source in the following round. This reflection can 
be escaped only by leaving the plane the sword is 
on, in which case the sword pulses to tell its 
bearer that this has occurred. The bearer can then 
discharge the magic wherever desired, with range 
and effects as originally cast or unleashed. This is 
the only case in which the blade-bearer can 
choose where to direct magic that the blade 
reflects. If no discharge is willed within the 
round, the sword will forever absorb the magic, 
silently and harmlessly. 


Blackjammer’s Cutlass 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
Blackjammer'’s cutlass is a distinctive weapon of 
outdated style. The blade is fashioned from a 
nonreflective black crystal, and is clearly not 


metal, The hilt is silver and fitted with an enor- 
5475 


1345 


5 


~ Sword, Blackrazor - 


mous basket depicting a sailor being keelhauled. 
For all of its apparent size, it is far lighter than an 
ordinary cutlass. The cutlass is often found in 
SPELLJAMMER™ campaigns. 

It is said that Blackjammer 5 cutlass was forged 
in an old port hidden in the Tears of Selûne of 
Realmspace. Its first owner was a pirate now 
known only as Captain Blackjammer, his own 
name forgotten in favor of his sword. Whatever his 
name once was, Blackjammer is still viewed as a 
paragon of piratical ruthlessness and skill. Since 
Blackjammer’s death (if he is dead, for there is 
some argument about this), the cutlass has passed 
through the hands of many other captains and 
mates. The last known owner of the sword was 
Elsun of the Dragon Claw, killed when her ship ran 
afoul of an elven man-o’-war. The story claims that 
the cutlass fell overboard and is now drifting in the 
Flow somewhere between Oerth and Krynn. 

Although the cutlass first made its appearance in 
the SPELLJAMMER setting, there is no reason that it 
cannot be used elsewhere. Its powers are universal 
to all worlds where sailing and piracy occurs. 

The powers of the cutlass, while useful, are not 
great enough to completely unbalance a cam- 
paign. Thus, the item can remain in PC posses- 
sion for a long time. 

The DM can use rumors of Captain Blackjam- 
mer’s continued existence as the motive for sev- 
eral adventures involving the sword. In backwater 
ports, NPCs may be convinced that the character 
wielding the cutlass is Captain Blackjammer— 
and there is still a price on his head. Another pos- 
sibility is that the captain still lives in a lich state 
and is determined to regain his sword. 

Constant Powers: The cutlass has +2 bonuses 
to attack and damage rolls and improves the char- 
acter’s Armor Class by 2. 

Invoked Powers: The cutlass can create the 
effects of a darkness 15' radius spell (at will) that 
does not affect the wielder. It also endows its 
owner with proficiency in all forms of navigation 
and seamanship (no chance of failure). 

Random Powers: Three from Artifact Table 
1-02: Combat. 

Curse: Blackjammer 5 cutlass is imbued with a 
strong, freebooter’s personality (Int 19, Ego 20). It 
can speak, doing so often and loudly, preferring 
bawdy songs and coarse jokes. It will insult the 
toughest thug in a bar, not caring if its owner is 
killed; there is always another. The owner also risks 
artifact transformation, being changed into a black- 
hearted pirate always on the lookout for ships to 
plunder and saying “Arrgh, matey!” far too much. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* The cutlass must be subjected to the combined 
fire of the Elven Armada. 
* It must be crushed between two rushing meteors. 


Blackrazor 
XP Value: 20,000 GP Value: 200,000 
White Plume Mountain 

Blackrazor, a chaotic-neutral sword +3, as an 

Intelligence of 17 and an Ego of 16. Its special 

purpose is to steal life essences. It is a black 

sword that shines like a piece of night sky filled 
with stars, and it is sheathed in a black scabbard 

decorated with pieces of cut obsidian. On a 

killing stroke, Blackrazor temporarily adds the 

number of levels of the dead foe to its bearer’s 
levels (in terms of fighting ability), The bearer 
also temporarily gains the full hit points of the 
victim. All subsequent damage to the sword’s 
wielder is removed from the added hit points 
first. The extra levels and hit points last a number 
of turns equal to the number of levels received. 

The essences of all entities killed by Blackrazor 

are sucked out and devoured; those killed by the 

black sword cannot be raised. 

For every three days the sword remains unfed, 
its Ego increases by one point, until it can compel 
its bearer to kill a human or humanoid being. 
Upon feeding, its Ego returns to 16. 

The DM will note that Blackrazor is a negative 
energy entity that exists by absorbing positive life 
energy levels from those it kills. However, if it 
even strikes a creature of negative energy such as 
an undead (except for ghouls and ghasts), it will 
work in reverse, transferring one level and corre- 
sponding hit points from the wielder to the crea- 
ture attacked. It will do this each time it strikes. 
Under these conditions, the wielder can actually 
die and have his or her essence sucked out by the 
sword. If the wielder survives, he will need a 
restoration spell or twice the usual number of lev- 
els received from positive kills to replace the lost 
levels. Those killed for replacement must be of the 
same race as the sword-wielder. Blackrazor may 
very well keep this little drawback a secret until 
the first time the sword bites into a wight or a vam- 
pire. The DM must remember that Blackrazor 
exists solely to feel power and life forces coursing 
through itself, and sometimes it may not be too 
picky about where the energy is coming from. 

In addition to the above, the sword has the fol- 
lowing powers: 

* Speech and telepathy (common and whatever 
tongues its wielder knows, which it learns 
telepathically). 

* Detects living creatures, 60-foot radius. 

* Haste spell (bearer only, 10 round duration), 
once a day. 

* Up to 100% magic resistance to charm and 
fear (exact percentage depends on the level of 
the opponent casting such a spell; -5% per 
level difference if the caster is higher level 


than the sword wielder). 
5476 


346 


~ Sword, Bloodsword y- 


Blade of Black Ice 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Rary the Traitor 
Lord Robilar, Rary’s companion and military 
commander, is a grim, black-haired, saturnine 
man with a brooding countenance, deep-set eyes, 
and a short goatee. In battle, he wields the blade 
of black ice, a sword said to have been forged by 
luz himself. Seemingly made of ice, the blade 
inflicts 1d10+3 points of damage (with an addi- 
tional +3 for Robilar’s Strength bonus), as well as 
acting as a sword +3, frost brand. The bonus 
against fire-based creatures is therefore +6 (+9 
with his Strength bonus). With this sword, Robi- 
lar suffers no ill effects for wearing his armor in 
the desert. 


Blades of Corusk 
XP Value GP Value 
Dreamsinger: 3,000 18,000 
The Edge: 3,200 16,000 
Greenswathe: 4,000 20,000 
Harmonizer: 3,000 15,000 
Stalker: 1,800 22,000 


Howl From the North 
The blades of Corusk include the following 
blades: 


Name Al Weapon Type 
Dreamsinger N Broad sword +3 
The Edge CN Bastard sword +3 
Greenswathe N Scimitar +3 
Harmonizer N Defender, two-handed 
sword +5 
Stalker NG Long sword +3 
Blade of Lathander 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Curse of the Azure Bonds 


The Blade of Lathander is a magical broad sword 
of incredible power, forged by a renowned dwarf 
smith in the fires of the morning sun itself, in the 
Temple of Lathander at Saerloon. It was created 
for one purpose: to slay the spirit of Tyranthraxus, 
master of the Pool of Radiance. 

The sword is a broad sword +3 with a blade of 
smoked ruby quartz, unbreakable in normal com- 
bat. On its golden pommel are the symbols of 
Lathander and Tyranthraxus, the latter crossed 
out. In normal combat, the sword functions as a 
broad sword +3. In combat with Tyranthraxus or 
those he has possessed, the sword will glow a 
bright pink. When it glows it is +6 on attack rolls 
and inflicts 3d10 points of damage. Tyranthraxus 
must make a saving throw vs. spell (at —6 for the 
body he inhabits) or be forced to retreat to the 
Pool of Radiance. 

Unlike the gauntlets of Moander and the helm of 


dragons, the sword has no other special powers. 
Since its forging, it has never been used against 
Tyranthraxus, though its existence is said to have 
kept him in the North during his peak of power. It 
was stolen from Saerloon and the Temple of Lath- 
ander 100 years ago, and has bounced from trea- 
sure vault to treasure vault for the past hundred 
years. Two years ago it was stolen from the Zhen- 
tarim by a halfling. The Black Network recovered 
the sword and sank the ship the thief was escaping 
in. The Zhentarim have since put out the rumor 
that the sword was lost at sea, when in reality it is 
being kept by Fzoul Chembryl in his tower. 


Bladeless 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Old Empires 
This sword was created by the smith Holin. It has 
a hilt of solid silver (a much rarer metal in the 
South than gold) and is encrusted with opals. The 
blade itself is magical; it is invisible and intangi- 
ble, seemingly without existence. The blade is 
really in the Ethereal Plane; it harms only those 
creatures that require magical weapons to strike 
them. It causes double damage to creatures 
affected only by magic, and it inflicts triple dam- 
age to undead. For the purposes of calculating 
damage, it is considered to be a khopesh sword 
+4. 


Blood Drinker 

XP Value: 4,400 GP Value: 22,000 
DRAGON Magazine 99 

A thirsty sword of wounding. 


Bloodletter 

XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 22,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 
A chaotic neutral /ong sword +3 (Int 17, Ego 16). 
Its primary abilities are detect reptiles in a 30- 
foot radius, detect magic in a 10-foot radius, and 
detect invisibility in a 10-foot radius. Its extraor- 
dinary power—wounds from Bloodletter con- 
tinue to bleed, causing an additional 5 points of 
damage each round until the victim is magically 
healed. Its special purpose is to slay reptiles or 
anything resembling a reptile (the sword can’t tell 
the difference). On a natural roll of 17 to 20 a 
reptile is automatically decapitated (save vs. spell 
to avoid). Against dragons, the sword does triple 
damage. The sword speaks Common, Orc and 
Elf. 


Bloodsword 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
This elegantly crafted long sword gives its wielder 
a +2 attack and damage bonus against any creature 
5482 


1347 


Sword, Blue Dragon Bane 


that has blood. Against foes without blood, such as 
undead, noncorporeal beings, or gaseous creatures, 
it functions as a normal sword. The sword never 
needs to be cleaned; any blood on the sword is 
immediately absorbed into the blade. 

Once the sword is drawn, it must draw blood 
before it can be sheathed. The sword’s wielder 
cannot sleep with the sword unsheathed, as the 
sword, which communicates telepathically, will 
keep its owner awake until its blood lust is sated. 


Blue Dragon Banc 
XP Value: 4,100 GP Value: 27,500 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 
This finely crafted artifact is a long sword +4, +5 
vs. blue dragons. The sword gives its wielder sev- 
eral benefits; invulnerability to lightning-based 
attacks and the ability to cast a globe of invulner- 
ability and heal each once a day. Each time the 
wielder slays a blue dragon, the sword casts 
longevity on the wielder, as the potion (including 
the side effects). The scabbard is magical. Should 
the sword ever be lost, the wielder can reclaim the 
weapon by grasping the scabbard and willing the 
blade to return, 


Brightblade 

GP Value: 27,000 
Tales of the Lance 
This two-handed sword is among the finest weap- 
ons ever crafted by dwarves for humans. Rumored 
to be over 2,900 years old, the Brightblade 
remains keen and vital, showing no wear from the 
long wearying ages. Legends regarding the sword 
remain few, lost with the death of the ldst of the 
Brightblades. 

In the time of Vinas Solamnus, a warrior 
named Berthel defended a lone dwarf traveler 
from the savagery of bloodthirsty hobgoblins. As 
a reward, the dwarf noble crafted a beautiful shin- 
ing sword for his savior. The sword bore the name 
of the Brightblade. 

In the years that followed, Berthel wielded the 
Brightblade in the service of Vinas Solamnus 
during the Rose Rebellion. Afterward, Berthel’s 
son Bedal took up the honor, and proved himself 
as heroic as his father. Ile singlehandedly 
defended a strategic pass from fierce desert 
nomads. 

The Brightblade continued in the service of 
Berthel’s line until its owner was slain and it was 
lost to ogres. After the Cataclysm, a descendant of 
Bedal’s, Bayard Brightblade, recovered his family’s 
sword, which he then passed on to Galen Pathwar- 
den di Caela Brightblade, his adopted son. Although 
Galen’s beginnings were humble, he became known 
as a knight of great virtue and prowess. 

Through history the sword passed to Emelin 


XP Value: 2,700 


EMP “iN 


Ay 


a 


PUUA 


lg 


Ay 


2. 
= 
Q: 


Brightblade, grandsire of Sturm, and thence to 
Angriff Brightblade. The sword was lost during 
the peasant rebellion called the Outcrying, but 
Sturm at last reclaimed his heritage when he 
came of age and faced down Lord Wilderness’ 
challenge of the heart. The Brightblade defended 
Sturm to the last, when he fell at the High Clerist’s 
Tower during the War of the Lance. The sword’s 
current location is unknown, 

The Brightblade is a two-handed sword +3 of 
dwarven make. It resists rust and corrosion and 
its edges never lose their sharpness. Strong dwar- 
ven runes of protection cover it, forbidding those 
unworthy to use it. Only those of noble heart, 
virtue, and courage can command its full powers. 
If used by one of dark purpose, weak beliefs, or 
evil will, it will shatter, and may only be restored 
by the grace of the gods. 

The sword’s runes of friendship and peace 
grant the wielder +2 to all response checks from 
others. Further, this two-handed sword has the 
speed and swiftness of a long sword. Finally, the 
Brightblade can summon light and provide pro- 
tection from evil once a day. 


Caeren-Uroth 
XP Value: 2,600 GP Value: 13,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
This is the fabled blade given to Reortin, a human 
ranger, who was hailed as “Defender of the 


Forests” by a large settlement of gray elves under 
5485 


CUCU le eee oo 


1348 


Sword, Celestial Fury 


nee nN SE 


siege by a platoon of gnolls who wanted to turn 
the forest into lumber. 

The sword, whose name in Elf means “Blade 
of the Forest,” grants abilities as if the wielder 
were an elf, and allows the bearer to automati- 
cally speak with animals and cast animal friend- 
ship three times each per day. 

Caeren-Uroth is a broad sword +3 in the hands 
of any person who can wield a sword, but its spe- 
cial abilities only work when in the hands of a 
neutral good ranger. The sword is finely and sim- 
ply crafted, and the crossguard is shaped like a 
ring of oak leaves. An amber gem in the center of 
the hilt contains a splinter of wood from a holy 
tree of Rillifane Rallathil. The sword’s current 
location is unknown. 


Calathangas 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 8,000 
DRAGON Magazine 188 

Also called the rat blade and the sting of Xeras- 
tos, this unique sword first appeared over 80 win- 
ters ago during a plague that swept the Dalelands. 
It was used by a warrior of Battledale named 
Rathinor, who eventually fell fighting a band of 
thieves in the wood, killing and wounding several 
of them before dying himself. The rogues were 
never seen again and presumably disbanded. 

The blade disappeared for 15 years, until a 
young and ruthless soldier named Xerastos 
bought it from a peasant for the price of six 
sheep. He quickly grew in infamy as the captain 
of a small but powerful group of adventurers. His 
enemies feared him no less because of rumors of 
an awful curse upon his sword than for his 
prowess with the weapon. 

Xerastos met his fate a decade later at the 
hands of an eager paladin who sought to destroy 
the blade. The paladin killed the wicked man and 
intended to return Calathangas to his church, but 
took ill before completing his quest and disap- 
peared. The weapon has not been seen since. 

Calathangas is a short sword with a very 
sharp, steel blade and a plain hilt set with a white 
moonstone (worth 250 gp). It is +1 on attack rolls 
and +3 on damage rolls. Although it is not intelli- 
gent, it is evil and inflicts lycanthropy (wererat) 
upon anyone who so much as holds the blade 
without passing a saving throw vs. spell; this 
check must be repeated each week the weapon is 
used. 

In combat, anyone injured by the blade, but not 
actually killed by it, has a 20% chance of con- 
tracting wererat lycanthropy. The sword glows 
only when rats are within 50 feet of it; if the 
wielder desires, he or she can summon and con- 
trol 2d12 giant rats (30%) or 6d12 normal rats 
(70%). They arrive in 1d4 rounds if any are 


nearby. Should the wielder compete with a vam- 
pire or other creature for control of the rats, 
Calathangas succeeds 70% of the time. 


Canopa’s 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Temple of Death 
This sword +2 has an Intelligence of 8 and an 
Ego of 5. It can find shifting walls and rooms and 
find traps. 


Captain’s 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Treasure Maps 
The captain’s sword is an intelligent sword +4 
with a lawful evil alignment. It has the special 
ability to find treasure. 


Casterbane 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
Castle Amber 
This neutral sword +//+2 vs. spell users has an 8 
Intelligence and an Ego of 8. It detects invisible 
and detects traps. 


Celestial Fury 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DRAGON Magazine 181 
Many years ago, fierce tempests and fires ignited 
by lightning ravished the province administered 
by daimyo Hoshi Katahiroi. The daimyo’s advis- 
ers, all respected shukenjas, soon divined that 
Nature was not to blame, but a powerful dragon 
of an unknown order. Some of the wise men sug- 
gested that the creature was an abomination; 
others believed it was born of Primal Chaos 
before Kara-Tur was formed. All the advisers 
agreed to name it Celestial Fury. 

Yet daimyo Hoshi did not want to categorize 
the scourge of his province; he wanted to destroy 
it, He commissioned the famed Chigatta (a reclu- 
sive artisan, master of mystic arts), to construct a 
weapon that might sunder the dragon’s spirit as 
well as cleave its scaled body. Chigatta’s labors 
resulted in the finest katana imaginable, dubbed 
Celestial Fury after the beast it was fashioned to 
destroy, and enchanted with the power of flight. 

With this weapon, Hoshi sought his province’s 
bane among the storm clouds. Shouts and roars 
resounded through the heavens for days, and 
forked fire lit up the nights. At long last, Hoshi 
destroyed the dragon’s body and trapped its spirit 
within his sword, merging the two Celestial 
Furies and imposing order over chaos. To finalize 
his victory, Hoshi had Chigatta fashion a scab- 
bard from the dragon’s hide and embed its magic 
pearl in the hilt. 

Yet the dragon had its revenge. Hoshi was 

5490 


3 1349 5: 


Sword, Chainsword 


i Ni i A 


skilled in battle but weak of will. Celestial Fury 5 
spirit took control of Hoshi, forcing him to slay 
Chigatta and then slay himself. The katana subse- 
quently disappeared (most likely, Hoshi’s griev- 
ing family discarded the traitorous weapon) and 
has perhaps changed many hands in the years 
since. 

Celestial Fury is a katana of excellent con- 
struction—a flexible but unbreakable blade of 
razor sharpness, a hilt covered with comfortable 
leather, and a huge pearl fixed at its end. The 
magical characters for celestial fury are inscribed 
on the blade, which glows pale violet and crack- 
les with electricity when drawn (5-foot radius 
illumination). The sword is sheathed in a scab- 
bard of dragon hide, the slate-gray scales of 
which constantly flash with streaks of silver, blue 
and violet. 

Only chaotic-good, chaotic-neutral, or chaotic- 
evil individuals may safely handle Celestial Fury; 
others receive an electrical shock for 9 points of 
damage each round they touch it. On compatibly 
aligned characters, Celestial Fury bestows com- 
plete immunity to all forms of lightning—mun- 
dane and magical—and protects the user and all 
possessions from wetness due to fog or rainfall 
(even during a hurricane) but not immersion. 

Each time Celestial Fury is drawn, thunder and 
lightning explode from the scabbard, causing 
everyone within 10 feet to save vs. wands twice— 
once to prevent blindness for 1d4 rounds, the sec- 


ond time, deafness lasting 2d6 rounds. The 
wielder is immune to these effects, and characters 
who take suitable precautions (those who do not 
look at the wielder or who stop their ears with 
cotton) save at +5. Celestial Fury is a +3 magical 
weapon with the following additional powers: 

* Storm Gathering: Once drawn, Celestial 
Fury and its wielder are constantly surrounded 
by foul weather for a two-mile radius, despite 
the environment’s natural tendency. This 
power has an effect similar to the 6th-leyel 
shukenja spell control weather except that the 
weather only gets worse—precipitation moves 
toward cloudiness, winds become stronger, 
temperature is unaffected. This effect cannot 
be dispelled, though an anti-magic shell will 
stop it. 

* Booming Thunder: Each and every success- 
ful strike on an opponent causes a deafening 
boom. While of lesser intensity than the sound 
resulting from Celestial Fury being drawn, the 
thunder is sufficiently violent to stun an oppo- 
nent for one round unless he saves vs. spell. 

* Shocking Blow: Three times each day, the 
wielder may designate a given strike as a 
shocking blow before the attack die is rolled. 
A successful hit causes an additional 20 points 
of electrical damage. If the blow misses and 
the opponent wears metallic armor, a second 
attack roll against AC 10 is made; a hit signi- 
fies the opponent takes 10 points of damage 
from arcing electricity. Opponents in non- 
metallic armor must be struck for this power 
to work. Once called, the blow counts as one 
usage of shocking blow, whether or not it suc- 
ceeds, 

* Lightning Strike: Once a day, Celestial Fury 
may release a lightning bolt at a target within 
240 yards, causing 10d6 points of damage. 

* Flight: This power operates for four hours per 
day, at MV 18 and Maneuverability Class B. 
Celestial Fury is a sentient weapon (Intelli- 

gence 12, Ego 9) of chaotic-neutral alignment. It 

communicates its desires through semi-empathy. 

Its thoughts revolve around causing foul weather 

and mindless exhibitions of power. It also seeks 

vengeance against the descendants of Daimyo 

Hoshi and Chigatta. 


Chainsword 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 12,500 
DRAGON Magazine 132 
The chainsword is a huge, unique, two-handed 
sword that has the special purpose of slaying tre- 
ants. This weapon was created by a very secretive 
wizard named Jufe Bairo, who did the work 
under the commission of an evil warrior named 


Regenetir. Apparently, Regenetir has a great 
5491 


1350 


a i a E aa E E 


Sword of Cleaving 


ba ee aNlie 


hatred of treants; the source of his anger is 
unknown (the bards didn’t do a very good job of 
recording this story). 

Regenetir, though certainly over 50 now, still 
actively hunts for treants. Recently, in fact, 
Regenetir came upon a treant and several druids 
at a place where many forest paths meet. A 
slaughter ensued. Because of the human casual- 
ties, the incident has become very famous and is 
called the Nexus Chainsword Massacre. 

The chainsword itself is somewhat unusual, 
though it lacks decoration. About the edge of the 
blade is a series of small metal teeth set on a 
metal loop. An additional handle is mounted on 
the side of the weapon to aid in balancing it while 
the chainsword’s toothed band is running. The 
weapon is 6-foot-long and weighs 25 pounds gp. 
When it was created, it cost 12,500 gp and took 
55 days of labor. The construction of the 
chainsword, in addition to its enchantment, also 
required the research and development of a new 
spell that Jufe called motion. This research cost 
an additional 5,000 gp and took an undetermined 
amount of time. 

Any being struck by the chainsword while it is 
“turned off” takes normal damage from a magical 
sword. If the toothed band is activated with the 
command word (“Gettum!”), an additional 1d6 
points of damage is done by the rotating teeth. If 
used against an opponent wearing armor, the oppo- 
nent’s armor must save vs. crushing blow or be 
reduced one step in value; magical armor failing 
this save loses 1 point of enchantment or 1 special 
ability. If a treant is struck by this weapon, the 
rotating teeth are automatically activated, and the 
treant must save vs. petrification or be sawed in 
half and slain. Only treants are subject to this 


destructive effect. If the toothed band is activated, ` 


the user must hold the weapon by the hilt and by 
the secondary handle on the sword’s blade in order 
to control it. Special attacks made without the use 
of the secondary handle are at —2 on attack rolls. 
Details of the motion spell propelling the 
chainsword have been kept secret by Jufe, though 
spies have found it is a Sth-level spell which creates 
instantaneous velocity to affect the movement of an 
object. If cast on the wheels of a wagon, for exam- 
ple, a motion spell would allow the wheels to move 
independently of outside forces (such as horses or 
downhill slopes). Without permanency, the motion 
spell lasts only one turn per level of the caster, but 
during that time it may be turned on and off at the 
caster’s command. This spell was cast upon the 
toothed band of the chainsword and made perma- 
nent. When the chainsword is activated by com- 
mand or by striking a treant, the motion spell 
causes the toothed band to rotate at a tremendous 
speed and with great noise. The toothed band wraps 


around the blade of the sword and through a hollow 
spot at the top of the hilt, allowing it to rotate in a 
continuous loop. The user, of course, loses all 
chances to surprise foes. 

Certain imperfections found in the 
chainsword’s operation may plague the wielder. 
First, when the weapon is cutting through a tre- 
ant, the chainsword has a 10% chance to become 
jammed in place. The motion spell continues to 
operate, but since the toothed band can no longer 
move, the entire sword is swung about. A Strength 
check must be made on 1d20 to hold onto the 
sword and withdraw the blade. If the roll fails, the 
chainsword tears itself from the user’s grasp and 
is stuck, requiring a bend bars/lift gates roll to 
free it. If the user manages to hold the jammed 
weapon, the sword makes a saving throw vs. 
crushing blow (as hard metal with its magical 
attack bonus as a saving throw bonus); failure 
indicates that the toothed band snaps, is flung 
from the weapon, and is either lost in the sur- 
rounding area or hurled at the wielder for 2d8 
points of damage (50% chance for either result). 


of Charm Person 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 2,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Expert Rules Set 
This sword can cast charm person (\st-level wiz- 
ard spell) on command, up to three times a week. 
The effects are the same as the spell. 


Chopping 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

This +2 weapon does | point of structural dam- 
age if used on an inanimate object, cutting 
through wood and stone equally well. It destroys 
an opponent's shield, if so commanded before the 
attack is rolled, if the sword hits the target’s 
Armor Class; no damage is done to the victim, 
but the shield must save vs. crushing blow. Other- 
wise, it is merely a sword +2. 


Clamorour 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Hall of Heroes 
Piergeiron, “The Paladinson,” wields Clamorour, 
a holy avenger, the sword of his father, and 
though he prefers diplomacy to battle, he fights 
with the knowledge that he is blessed by his god. 


of Cleaving 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
The Throne of Bloodstone 
This lethal blade, swung by Glyphimhor, a power- 
ful lieutenant in the Lower Planes, causes double 
damage on an attack roll of 18, 19, or 20. The 


sword requires a Strength of 18/00 or greater to use. 
$495 


E °* —-——-  .* 


1351 


4 


Sword, Colada 


) ahaa AAAA 


Colada 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
DunGeons & DRAGONS Master Set 
Colada was the sword of the hero El Cid. It is the 
equivalent of a holy avenger +5. 


of Cold 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Greyhawk 
In addition to a +2 bonus vs. creatures of fiery 
origin, this weapon scores triple damage when- 
ever a 20 is rolled. It is able to dispel a wall of fire 
and gives its user the same protection as a ring of 
fire resistance. 


Companion 
XP Value: 1,400 GP Value: 30,000 
Old Empires 
This Jong sword +3 currently belongs to Furifax, 
a tall half-elf fighter. He also calls the blade My 


Brother of Arms. 


Corgon’s Breath 
See Heart of Stone, below. 


Corellon’s 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar wields a long sword +5 that causes 
4d10 points of damage per round to anyone else 
holding it (double that for goblinoids), 


Corthalis 

XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 60,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 
Corthalis is a brilliant, silver-bladed sword +2. 
However, in the hands of a woman with a Cha- 
risma of 17 or more, it is +5. The neutral good 
blade can speak Common, Elvish, Dwarvish and 
Orcish. However, it prefers to speak only to beau- 
tiful women. The sword’s special abilities become 
known only to women who wield it. Twice a day 
the sword can shoot lightning equal to a lightning 
bolt spell cast at 9th-level. In addition, the sword 
can detect evil and detect lies each four times a 
day. 


Courtain 
XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 120,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 

Courtain, known also as The Short Sword, was 
used by Ogier the Dane, a Paladin of Charle- 
magne (who, known as Holger Danske, is the folk 
hero of Denmark). The smith Munifican took 
three years to make Courtain. This sword com- 
bines the power of a holy avenger +4, a vorpal 
blade, and a sword of sharpness. 


of Cowardice 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
Developed by certain gods of mischief, notably 
Loki, this weapon is a magical sword +5 with a 
pommel formed in the shape of an animal, mon- 
ster, or human head. The sword is capable of 
speech, with a minimum Intelligence of 14 and 
special abilities as determined by the charts 
under Sword, Special. This wonderful weapon, 
however, has also been infused with a cowardly 
personality. The first time it is swung at an 
opponent in combat, the sword’s head-shaped 
pommel shrieks in terror and cries for help. The 
noise attracts all wandering monsters within a 
120-foot radius. The sword continues to yell 
and cry for 2d6 turns unless a silence spell is 
cast upon it. 

The sword will also attempt to avoid combat, 
twisting in the user’s hands. The holder must 
make a successful open doors roll at the start of 
every combat round, or else the sword twists out 
of the user’s grasp and falls to the floor, still 
shrieking. If the user can hold onto the weapon, it 
may be wielded normally during that round, with 
all appropriate bonuses to attack and damage. 

Some of these swords are so timid that even 
being brought within sighting distance of a non- 
human monster causes them to start shrieking. 
Though these swords are not cursed to remain 


with a particular owner, they are often regarded 
5502 


. 1352 š 


n ee eee 


= Sword, Crysomer s- 


as too valuable to dispose of (how many swords 
+5 does one find?) and are usually kept despite 
their disadvantages. 


Crusader 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
The Mines of Bloodstone 

Crusader, a long sword +5, holy avenger, pro- 
vides 50% MR in a 5-foot radius, dispel magic at 
17th level in a 5-foot radius, +10 damage vs. 
chaotic evil opponents. If a tanar’ri is slain with 
Crusader, the sword gains following special pow- 
ers: heal once a day, strength once per day when 
fighting evil opponents, charm person on contact 
once per day. The sword will disintegrate a 
tanar’ri on a natural (unmodified) 20. It is tele- 
pathic with its owner, and can commune with the 
minor deity Lalibela once a week. The sword’s 
Ego and Intelligence are 17. The sword will howl 
in anguish if the wielder runs from a tanar’ri. On 
the second instance of cowardice in the face of a 
tanar’ri, the sword will instantly teleport away, 
leaving its owner behind. 


Crysomer 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Doc’s Island 

When used by a lawful good nonpaladin, 
Crysomer will not reveal its true identity, but 
seems, by all tests, to be an unintelligent Jong 
sword +2. If touched by a creature not of lawful 
alignment, or one not good, it waits until it is used 
in combat, at which time it shocks the user for 
3d8 points of electrical damage (no saving throw, 
no resistances apply unless of divine origin). 
When wielded by a paladin, the sword bestows 
50% magic resistance in a 5-foot radius (auto- 
matic unless commanded otherwise), on com- 
mand it can dispel magic in a 5-foot radius, as if a 
wizard of the paladin’s level, does +10 damage 
vs. chaotic evil opponents (instead of +5, auto- 
matically). 

Its other abilities and properties include an 
alignment of lawful good, (as a holy avenger), an 
Intelligence of 17, and an Ego of 38. It can detect 
evil with a 20-foot range on command, detect 
shifting rooms and walls with a 10-foot range on 
command, detect magic with a 10-foot range on 
command, detect invisibility with a 20-foot range 
on command, read languages on command or 
voluntarily, read magic on command or voluntar- 
ily, has telepathy with user, regenerates user 1 hit 
point per turn (automatic), and can teleport with 
user once per day (DM rolls normally, as the 5th- 
level wizard spell, but Crysomer adjusts the roll 
by 5%, and the Initiative modifier for activation 
is +1—a maximum weight of 600 pounds can be 
carried). This sword can speak Common, Dwarf, 


Halfling, Fire Giant, Gold Dragon, and High Elf. 

Crysomer s special purpose is to defeat chaos. 
When used against a chaotic opponent, a success- 
ful attack forces the victim to save vs. spell 
(including Wisdom adjustment, if applicable) or 
be paralyzed for 1d4 rounds. 

As soon as Crysomer is touched by a paladin, 
it informs the paladin of its name and abilities, 
in the order listed above, at the rate of one bit of 
information per round. This may be pertinent if 
the paladin needs to use certain abilities of the 
sword quickly (for example, to teleport out from 
within a lurker or trapper). Remember that a 
character’s ToPS (Total Personality Strength) is 
Intelligence + Charisma + Level. Note the ToPS 
of Crysomer (Intelligence+Ego) is 55; it usually 
controls all but the most powerful paladins. 
However, its behavior and preferences are for 
the ideals of the paladin. It is extremely lawful 
and good, and tolerates no nonsense from 
chaotics. If Crysomer assumes control, it relies 
on the user for Wisdom and counts on its own 
Intelligence. Where applicable, the user there- 
after introduces himself or herself by both 
names. In other words, if a paladin named Athel- 
sta was using Crysomer, as an example, she 
would introduce herself as “We are Athelsta 
Crysomer, paladin.” 

Though often misinterpreted as the use of the 
royal or editorial “we,” it is literally an intro- 
duction to the two life forces merged into one 
being. Needless to say, Crysomer does not 
allow any other magical sword to be used by its 
paladin, regardless of the results of the compar- 
ison between personality strengths. It does not 
object to the use of other magical items or 
weapons. 

Crysomer uses the regeneration and teleport 
abilities as commanded or as needed, but does 
not use the latter voluntarily unless the situation 
is desparate. It demands that it be decorated 
once per month. If not appeased, it withholds 
abilities until satisfied (unless the user faithfully 
promises to “feed” it as soon as possible). It 
only accepts emeralds, rubies, or diamonds as 
decorations, and of a minimum value of 5,000 
gp per month. The gems currently on its hilt 
total 50,000 gp in value. 

Crysomer was forged in the distant past, and, 
as one of the Great Legendary Swords, it leads 
young paladins on the road to fame and fortune. 
Once it has a paladin under its control, it does not 
needlessly endanger the character. However, it 
does occasionally wear out the users if they are 
not up to the epic tasks it sets before them. 


5504 


7 1353 x 


Sword, Cuprumbane 


ja A S; 


Cuprumbane 

GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 99 
This is a sword +2, a bronze dragon slayer. It 
can detect precious metals (type and amount) 
within a 20-foot radius and detect secret doors 
within a 10-foot radius. It has the ability to speak 
the blue dragon tongue as well as Common. It has 
an Intelligence of 14, an Ego of 7, and an align- 
ment of neutral evil. This sword, often called 
Cuprumbane, is greedy, hateful, and probably has 
concerns for its master only insofar as its own 
interests are concerned. The sword’s abilities are 
killing bronze dragons and finding their loot, 
however well hidden it might be. It speaks the 
blue dragon language so that it can communicate 
with them and find their most hated enemies, the 
bronze dragons. Whenever Cuprumbane gets 
within one mile of a bronze dragon, it tells the 
wielder where the dragon can be found. If the 
wielder does not immediately head to destroy the 
creature, the sword tries to overthrow the host’s 
body. The wielder must roll a save vs. spell every 
10 rounds (one turn) while within the one-mile 
dragon detection radius. 


XP Value: 700 


Cursed 
XP Value: — GP Value: 600 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This is a sword that gives off a magical aura and 


performs well against targets in practice, but 


when it is used against an opponent in combat it 
reduces its user’s attack rolls by —2. Only by care- 
ful observation can this lowering be detected. All 
damage scored is reduced by 2 points, but never 
below a 1 in any event. The sword will always 
force the character to employ it against enemies, 
appearing in the character’s hand. It can be gotten 
rid of only by means of limited wish or wish. 


Cursed II 
XP Value: — GP Value: 400 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This sword performs in all respects as a weapon 
+1, but when its wielder is faced by an enemy, 
the sword will weld itself to the character’s hand 
and force him to fight until the enemy or the 
wielder is slain. After that, the possessor can 
loose, but never rid himself of the cursed sword. 
No matter what is done, it will appear in hand 
whenever an opponent is faced. The character can 
be freed of the weapon only by a remove curse 
spell. 


Cursed Berserker 
XP Value: — GP Value: 900 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This performs by every test, save that of the heat 
of battle, as a +2 magical sword of some sort. 
However, in actual battle its wielder will go 
berserk, attacking the nearest creature and contin- 
uing to fight until dead or until no living thing 
remains within 60 feet. The sword has a +2 bonus 
and otherwise acts as a cursed sword +1. The pos- 
sessor of a cursed berserker sword can be rid of it 
only if it is exorcised via a remove curse spell or 
wish. 


Cutter 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 

Sabre River 

Cutter is a sabre +5 with a lawful good align- 

ment. It has an Intelligence of 12 with the ability 

to speak common. The sword has the following 
abilities: 

* The sabre can attack by itself and move 
through the air as if flying. 

* The sabre can locate all secret doors within 10 
feet up to three times a day. 

¢ The sabre can read magical writings and 
scrolls. 

* The wielder can inflict 4 times the normal 
damage for 1d10 rounds once per day. 

* The sword can detect all types of gems within 
60 feet by pointing itself in that direction. 
Cutter 's real name is Erbas, adopted son of 

Korse. As an infant, he was found on the banks of 

the river. Cutter is really the polymorphed sabre 

of the Alphatian general, created by the lightning 
5509 


a a 


1354 


ESE E E 


Sword of Dancing s- 


that cut the sabre in two. Cutter is unaware of his 
true nature. He does not know he is a sabre. 

As a boy, Cutter has the same abilities as the 
sword, with a few alterations. He can move and 
attack by himself, but only on foot and with his 
fists or a handheld weapon, he cannot do extra 
damage. Cutter can find secret doors as the sabre 
can. However, he doesn’t always think to tell his 
friends what he sees. When they are not looking, 
he might pass through the secret door. Cutter can 
read magic and detect gems just as the sword can. 


of Cymrych Hugh 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Hall of Heroes 

Tristan wields the sword of Cymrych Hugh, a 
long sword first used by his ancestor to defeat 
Kazgaroth and found the line of the high kings. 
When he found it, its hilt was wrapped in old, dull 
leather, and it rode in a scabbard of dull, brown 
leather. The blade, however, is silver, and it shines 
with a light all its own. The blade is emblazoned 
with a crest and motto in the Old Script. Accord- 
ing to the “Ballad of Cymrych Hugh,” the sword 
was forged by dwarf smiths from metal forged by 
the goddess herself. This sword is a long sword 
+4. It has a special purpose of defeating Kaz- 
garoth. Its special purpose power is to cause fear 
in its target for 1d4 rounds. It can detect evil in a 
20-foot radius and communicates by empathy. Its 
Intelligence is 12, and its Ego 13. If Kazgaroth is 
within 360 feet of the sword, and the wielder 
touches the sword by the hilt, a successful saving 
throw vs. spell must be made or the character is 
compelled to seek out the monster and do battle. 


Cyric’s 
XP Value: 4,000 

Waterdeep 
Although it resembles a short sword of dancing 
+2, this chaotic evil weapon is intelligent and has 
powers almost on the level of an artifact. Its ori- 
gin and purpose remain a mystery. 

If directed to parry, the sword hurls back any 
weapon it contacts, regardless of weapon velocity 
or wielder’s strength. 

The sword has vampiric abilities. On any 
killing blow, the sword can drain all the blood and 
life energy of its victim. This causes the sword to 
glow a bright rose red. If the sword has not 
drained a victim in 24 hours, it gradually wanes 
in color. 

If it desires, the blade can release drained life 
energy to heal or revive its wielder (but no one 
else). It cannot be forced to do this. The sword 
also keeps the wielder comfortable in extreme 
heat and cold. 

The sword can speak with its user telepathi- 


GP Value: 20,000 


cally, It has an Intelligence of 17 and an Ego of 
10. The sword has other powers determined by 
the DM. 

This weapon’s principle drawback is a curse 
that causes blood lust in the wielder. Also, as with 
many objects of powerful evil, the item gradually 
preoccupies its owner’s mind. The wielder even- 
tually grows paranoid, obsessed with the sword, 
and knows no peace if the sword is taken away. 


Dale 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Adventures in BLACKMOOR 

Willem of the Heath (also known as the Blue 
Rider) was a legendary warrior who wielded a 
sword of blue flame and rode an incomparable 
blue-black stallion. The weapon legends speak of 
it as a sword +1, that flames on command, In 
essence, this is the equivalent to a sword +1, 
flame tongue. 


of Dancing 

XP Value: 4,400 GP Value: 22,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
On the first round of melee this weapon is +1, on 
the second +2, on the third +3, and on the fourth 
it is +4. On the fifth round, it drops back to +1 
and the cycle begins again. In addition, after four 
rounds of melee its wielder can opt to allow it to 
“dance.” 

Dancing consists of loosing the sword on any 
round (after the first) when its bonus is +1. The 
sword then fights on its own at the same level of 
experience as its wielder. After four rounds of 
dancing, the sword returns to its wielder, who 
must hold it (and use it) for four rounds before it 
can dance again. In other words, it is loosed to 
dance for four rounds, going from +1 to +4, and 
must then be held by its wielder at a +1 state and 
physically used for four successive rounds of 
combat. 

When dancing, the sword will leave its owner’s 
hand and may travel up to 30 feet away. At the 
end of its fourth round of solo combat, it will 
move to its possessor’s hand automatically. Note 
that the dancing sword cannot be physically hit, 
although certain magical attacks such as a fire- 
ball, lightning bolt, or transmute metal to wood 
spell could affect it. 

Finally, remember that the dancing sword 
fights alone at the same level (and class) as its 
possessor—if a 4th-level fighter, the sword fights 
alone exactly the same; if a 7th-level thief is the 
wielder, the sword will so fight when dancing. 
Relieved of his weapon for four melee rounds, 
the possessor may act in virtually any manner— 
resting, discharging missiles, drawing another 


weapon and engaging in hand-to-hand combat— 
5513 


— —  — an 


1355 


— 


Sword, Dancing Sword of Bronze 


po or 


as long as he or she remains within 30 feet of the 
sword. If further than 30 feet from the weapon, it 
falls lifeless to the ground and is a +1 weapon 
when again grasped. 

Bards can release a sword of dancing on any 
round in which its plus isn’t a 1. Blades (a bard 
kit) of Sth level or higher can release the weapon 
after the first round; it will fight on its own for a 
number of rounds equal to the blade’s level before 
returning for one round, 


Dancing Sword of Bronze 

XP Value: 4,800 GP Value: 35,000 
Legends & Lore 
This ancient weapon appears to be a tarnished 
sword of bronze. If wielded by a being with a 
Strength of at least 18, however, its true nature 
becomes apparent. It no longer looks corroded, 
and performs as a sword of dancing +1 as 
described in the DMG. When held by its owner, 
the dancing sword of bronze has the ability to 
shoot a 30-point lightning bolt once per round. If 
its owner is killed, or moves more than 30 feet 
away from it, the sword vanishes, only to reap- 
pear in its corroded form years later in some 
farmer’s field. In the hand of any being with a 
Strength of less than 18, the sword appears to be 
nothing more than a corroded, —1 weapon of 
bronze. 


Dancing Sword of Lightning 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 32,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
A dancing sword of lightning behaves as a danc- 
ing sword except that it shoots one lightning bolt 
from its tip per turn that does 3d10 points of dam- 
age. 


Darius’s 

GP Value: 4,000 
The Lost City 
This is a sword +1 that can cast a light spell on 
command with a glow of 30-foot-radius. This 
power can be used three times a day, and func- 
tions as though cast at the 12th level. 


XP Value: 800 


Death-to-Monsters 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 
This bastard sword +5 (Int 15, Ego 14) has a 
lawful good alignment. Primary abilities: detect 
magic 10' radius, detect sloping passage 
10'radius and detect traps in a 10’ radius. Special 
power—it paralyzes victims for 1d4 rounds 
(unless they save vs. paralyzation). Special pur- 
pose—slay nonhuman monsters. The sword 
speaks fluent Common. 


Deep Sashelas’s 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 16,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar’s Jong sword +4 inflicts double dam- 
age on sahuagin and ixitxachitl and can create a 
20-HD lightning bolt once a day. 


Defender 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This weapon gives its wielder the option of using 
all, some, or none of its +4 bonus in defense 
(improving Armor Class) against any opponent 
using a handheld weapon, such as a dagger, 
mace, spear (not hurled), or sword. For example, 
the wielder can, on the first round of battle, opt to 
use the sword as +2 and save the other 2 bonus 
factors to be added to Armor Class. This can be 
done each round. Note that there is also a 
defender +5. This is identical to the +4 sword 
with 1 extra bonus point. 


Desert Blade 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Land of Fate 
This weapon is similar to the sun blade save that it 
is a great scimitar and requires both hands to wield. 
Optional: Roll on the table below to find the type 
of Genie affected by the sword. 


Roll Genie Type 


1 Djinni 

2 Dao 

3 Efreeti 
4 Marid 


Dragonbait’s Holy Avenger 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Curse of the Azure Bonds 

This oddly shaped sword +5 was Dragonbait’s 
chief weapon during his adventures with Alias. It 
has a wide, top-heavy blade with jagged teeth and 
a short handle. It functions in the same manner as 
the holy avenger sword, providing a magic resis- 
tance of 50% in a 5-foot radius, dispelling magic 
at the same level as the wielder, and inflicting 
+10 points of damage to chaotic evil opponents. 
To all others, it functions as a sword +2. Humans 
in particular find this sword difficult to wield, 
and as such are —2 with it, regardless of its magi- 
cal bonus, until proficiency with the weapon 
(technically a “saurial broad sword”) is gained. 


Dragon Claws 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Mad Monkey vs. the Dragon Claw 
The dragon claws are an evil artifact that may or 


may not have a malicious will of their own. Their 
5522 


AOO as, a 


1356 


ee 


~ Sword, Dreamsinger y- 


origin is unknown. They are a pair of hooked 
swords, golden in color and extremely sharp, 
inflicting 1d10 points of damage each—save vs. 
crushing blow on a 2. 

The greatest power of the dragon claw swords 
is to produce two more swords, which are then 
linked back to the original swords and their 
owner. The holder of the original dragon claws 
can see what the holders of the lesser swords can 
see, direct their actions, and, using the dragon 
claw school of fighting, pull hit points from other 
holders of lesser swords to heal wounds (the 
holder of the original swords can never lose hit 
points in this fashion). The lesser swords inflict 
only 1d8 points of damage. The fiend Lung Jua is 
the holder of the original dragon claws. 


Dragon Crippler 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
Dragon Knight 
This sword +2 has an additional +1 bonus against 
all evil dragons. 


Dragon Slayer 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This sword has a +4 bonus against any sort of 
true dragon. It inflicts triple damage against one 
sort of dragon (3d12+4), Note that an unusual 
sword with intelligence and alignment cannot be 
made to slay dragons of the same alignment. 
Determine the dragon type (excluding unique 
ones like Tiamat and Bahamut) by rolling 1d10. 


Roll Dragon Roll Dragon 
l Black (CE) 6 Gold (LG) 
2 Blue (LE) 7 Green (LE) 
3 Brass (CG) 8 Red (CE) 
4 Bronze(LG) 9 Silver (LG) 
5 Copper(CG) 0 White (CE) 


In a Dragonlance Campaign: Dragon slayer 
swords are extremely rare on Ansalon. If the DM 
rolls a dragon slayer on the treasure charts, he or 
she should reroll. If dragon slayer comes up with 
the next roll, keep the item. 


Dragonslayer 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 

There are as many varieties to these swords as 
there are dragons. The weapons deal out 3d12 
points of damage against dragons, and 1d10 
points of damage to all other creatures. Each is 
treated as a sword +2, +4 vs. a particular type of 
dragon. For example, a blue sword would be +4 
on attack and damage rolls against blue dragons. 

In addition, each sword has an alignment, and 


~~ -  °  «° << °° — —_ 


will not strike dragons of the same alignment. For 
example, if a red sword had a lawful good align- 
ment, it would not strike gold dragons. 


of Dragon Slaying 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
GREYHAWK 

Determine what type of dragon this sword is pri- 
marily meant to be used against (it is +2 against 
all other types), and when it hits such a dragon it 
does 4d10 points of damage. Roll 2d12 on the 
table below. 


Roll DragonType Roll Dragon Type 
02 Amethyst 14 Green 
03 Black 15 Mercury 
04 Blue 16 Mist 
05 Brass 17 Red 
06 Bronze 18 Sapphire 
07 Brown 19 Shadow 
08 Cloud 20 Silver 
09 Copper 21 Steel 
10 Crystal 22 Topaz 
11 Deep 23 White 
12 Emerald 24 Yellow 
13 Gold 

Drain Life Energy 


XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Expert Rules Set 

When this sword hits, it drains one life level or 

Hit Die (like a spectre) on command, in addition 

to normal damage. The sword can drain only 

1d4+4 levels, after that it becomes a normal mag- 

ical sword +1. 


Draxalon, Defender of 

Feminine Virtue 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 11,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 
Draxalon is a sword +3 that allows its female 
wielder to cast haste upon herself once per day. 
The sword does not allow itself to be used by a 
male; those who try discover that they cannot lift 
the blade. Draxalon was created 200 years ago by 
the wizard Eriel for her sister, the fighter Diana. 
Diana wielded it for many years before she disap- 
peared while adventuring in the ruins of Myth 
Drannor. 


Dreamsinger 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 18,000 
Howl From the North 

Dreamsinger is a neutrally aligned weapon cre- 
ated for bards. It has a white steel blade, a plat- 
inum filigree crosspiece, and a pommel set with 
fine moonstones. In the hands of anyone other 
than a barbarian bard, it is simply a magical 

$529 


1357 


A 


Sword, Dugmaren Brightmangle’s Broad Sword 


ip, ci eh aie ENE 


sword +1. In the hands of a barbarian bard, it is a 
+3 weapon that also confers a—1 bonus to the AC 
and a +1 bonus to all saving throws. There is one 
exception to this: The wielder of Dreamsinger 
has a -1 penalty to saving throws vs. illusions and 
mind-affecting spells because of the strange men- 
tal effects of the weapon. 

Dreamsinger allows a barbarian bard to cast 
spells from it. The spells ESP and augury are 
usable once per day each, and divination can be 
used once per week. The answers and information 
gained by the bard through the use of these spells 
should always be conveyed in a metaphor, simile, 
or allegory of some kind. 

The special purpose of Dreamsinger is to find 
the other Blades of Corusk (The Edge, Harmo- 
nizer, Greenswathe, and Stalker), and this should 
be interpreted fairly strictly by the DM. Dream- 
singer should be close to another blade, or close 
to someone or something that has information 
about the Blades of Corusk, for its special pur- 
pose powers to operate. 

Dreamsinger has a vicious, special purpose 
power. It launches a 10-foot firespear of intense 
burning power in any combat situation related to 
its special purpose. This firespear is treated as a 
missile thrown by the wielder of the blade for 
attack roll purposes (maximum range of 80 
yards). A successful strike inflicts 6d10 points of 
damage. No saving throw is allowed, but magic 
resistance (against 20th-level magic) applies, and 
half damage is sustained by a creature that is 
under the influence of a resist fire spell, a ring of 

fire resistance, or similar protection. The fires- 
pear can be launched twice a day. 

When the firespear is launched from dream- 
singer, a wave of sound ripples radiates out to a 
60-foot radius from it with a faint antiphonal 
sound. This produces an effect equivalent to a 
prayer spell affecting the sword’s user and the 
party positively and enemies negatively in the 
area of effect. This lasts for 1d6+6 rounds. 

This special purpose power isn’t communi- 
cated to the wielder initially. Dreamsinger makes 
it known only when its special purpose is first 
aroused, 

Dreamsinger has an Intelligence of 14, com- 
municates in its own special way (dreaming), and 
has an Ego of 12. 


Dugmaren Brightmantle’s 
Broad Sword 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar employs a broad sword +4 that can 
cast feeblemind twice a day. 


Durandan 
XP Value: 16,400 GP Value: 82,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 

Durandan (or Durandal, Durandana, or the 
Inflexible) was the Sword of Roland, given him 
by Charlemagne, It once belonged to Hector, the 
noble chieftain prominent in the fall of Troy, This 
sword combines the powers of a vorpal blade and 
a sword of sharpness +3. 


Dyerwaen 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
DRAGON Magazine 188 
Also known as the Forester s Friend, this unique 
weapon was forged by the gray elves of old Myth 
Drannor as the first men began to fill the Dale- 
lands. It was given to Torek Craybeard, the leader 
of the new human settlement, as a token of 
friendship between the two races. When Torek 
died childless, he willed Dyerwaen to his nephew 
Tireen, who bore it proudly until his disappear- 
ance on a hunting trip six winters later. ' 

The sword surfaced briefly 12 winters ago in 
the hands of a goblin raiding party The goblins 
clashed with passing adventurers and were 
defeated; Dyerwaer was taken to Cormyr to be 
sold at auction. Stolen by thieves en route, it has 
not been seen since. 

Dyerwaen is a fine steel broad sword with a 
rose etched along the length of the blade; its hilt 
is tightly wound with green velvet. It has a +2 
attack bonus, but no bonuses on damage. The 
weapon sheds light (up to a 10-foot radius), and 
glows at the user’s will. 

In a forest setting, Dyerwaen 5 bearer is cam- 
ouflaged so as to be 90% invisible when motion- 
less, nor does he or she leave any trace when 
traveling through such an environment. In addi- 
tion, if the sword is suspended from a rope, the 
blade always points to true north. The wielder is 
entitled to use the Tracking and Weather Sense 
proficiencies at a +2 bonus on ability checks. 

A few spell effects can be used by the wielder 
of Dverwaen as well. Invisibility to animals can 
be invoked at will, or speak with plants as a 7th- 
level priest once a day. These powers require only 
a command word and havc an initiative modifier 
of +3. 

Finally, elves and woodland creatures of 
good alignment regard the sword bearer as 
though his or her Charisma were 1 point higher, 
to a maximum of 18. Dyerwaen is itself chaotic 
good, although it has never displayed any sign 
of intelligence. 


$532 


1358 


~ Sword, Ebonbane r 


of the Ebon Flame 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Mordenkainen’s Fantastic Adventure 
This long sword +2/+4 vs. lawful good align- 
ment, is evil, usable by all evil alignments. It is 
not intelligent, although it can communicate 
through empathy. It has no ego at all. The sword’s 
face and edge have many small, black flickering 
flames upon it, though these do not radiate 
warmth. When used in combat, the sword bursts 
into black flame, which runs from pommel to tip 
but does not affect the wiclder in any way. Any 
victim hit by the sword must make a saving throw 
vs. wands or be burned for 1d10 points of dam- 
age in addition to normal sword damage plus 
magic and Strength bonuses, if any. A person 
burned by the sword catches fire, taking 1d4 
additional points per round until the fire is extin- 
guished, The burning victim makes another sav- 
ing throw each round; if the save is successful, 
the flame is extinguished. The ebon flame cannot 
be doused by any nonmagical means, including 
water. 

When unsheathed and held, this weapon gives 
the wielder infravision with a 90-foot range. The 
wielder is also harder to surprise, and receives 
1d8 for surprise checks instead of the usual 1d6. 

Each sword of the ebon flame comes complete 
with a curse determined individually by the DM. 
Normally, the curse of the sword consists of 
attack penalties when fighting some type of crea- 
ture or alignment, For example, one sword might 
be -3 against lawful evil creatures while another 
might be —3 against fiends. Creatures named in 
the curse of the sword will become instantly 
aware of it when they come within 60 feet of it. 
There is a base 50% chance that these beings will 
attack the sword wielder because of this weak- 
ness, even if they had been neutrally disposed 
originally. 

In addition to the above limitation, the sword 
inflicts 1d4 fewer points of damage than normal 
against creatures of water and fire, such as ser- 
pents, mermen, elementals, fish, dragons, and 
salamanders. All fires started by the sword will 
burn for only one round and then automatically 
extinguish. 

It is thought that several varieties of these 
swords were made by some great artificer for all 
alignments. If researched by the player charac- 
ters, the history surrounding their placement in 
the Flanaess will be scarce and unreliable, sug- 
gesting instead that the swords might be more 
likely found in the outer realms. 


Ebonbane 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 18,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 31 
Ebonbane was crafted of a special cursed iron 
brought into the world from another plane. In its 
plane of origin, the metal was far less powerful 
than it is in Ravenloft. Like all evil things drawn 
into Ravenloft by the Dark Powers, Ebonbane's 
power has been greatly enhanced. The following 
information details Ebonbane 5 abilities when in 
Ravenloft. 

Ebonbane ’ blade is a deep, jet-ebony and has 
been set with runes of purest evil. These act as 
symbols (of whatever type Ebonbane wishes); 
each symbol can be activated once per day. This 
weapon has all the powers of a vorpal sword +4 
and a flame tongue, as well as the ability to move 
about on its own (MV 9) and attack by an innate 
form of levitation (at human height). 

Ebonbane has an Intelligence and Ego of 17, is 
chaotic evil, and can communicate with both 
speech and telepathy. It can attack once per round 
with a THACO of 10, inflicting a base 1d8 points 
of damage. Anyone who tries to attack Ebonbane 
discovers that it is AC —10 and can be harmed 
only by magical spells and +3 or better weapons. 
Any successful spell or weapon attack against it 
scores 1 point of damage (regardless of what that 
attack would normally inflict). After 10 hits are 
inflicted, Ebonbane must make a saving throw 
appropriate for the type of attack. If the sword 
fails its throw, it breaks up and is destroyed. If it 
makes the saving throw, it is unharmed, and an 
additional 10 hits must be scored before it must 
save again. Multiple attacks from a single source 
(like a volley of magic missiles) count as only a 
single attack in fighting Ebonbane. 

Ebonbane controls the weather about Shadow- 
born Manor, generating any effect the DM 
desires, from lightning to wind storms. It can also 
command blades (any sword or dagger, including 
artifacts) to animate and attack people (THACO 
10, damage by weapon type); innate powers of 
such swords function (such as vorpal or life steal- 
ing powers), but triggered powers do not (sunray 
or wish-casting powers). Like all the domain 
lords of Ravenloft, Ebunbune is the absolute 
master of all that transpires in its own domain. If 
it wants the walls of the manor house to bleed, 
they bleed; if it wishes pillars of stone to rise out 
of the earth, they rise. 

Each round that a person grasps Ebonbane's 
hilt and attempts to wield it in combat, the 
“Weapons vs. Characters” rules in the DMG 
should be consulted. If the wielder is dominated 
by Ebonbane, his or her spirit is instantly con- 
sumed and Ebonbane controls the former PC’s 


body (this does not happen to those struck by the 
5534 


ee a 


1359 


Sword, Ebonbane II 


Tinsel 


blade). Resurrection of the PC is now impossible. 
Such a body acts like a zombie, 0-level human 
under the control of the sword (death follows in 
1d6+1 days). If the PC is not dominated, the 
weapon is a vorpal blade and flame tongue. 

Being an unnatural creature, Ebonbane sus- 
tains itself by drawing off the life energies of liv- 
ing creatures in its domain. All animal life has 
perished around Shadowborn Manor as a result. 
Nonmagical healing cannot take place; spells, 
psionics, or magical items must be used to 
recover from wounds suffered here. 


Ebonbane II 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 18,000 
Darklords 
Not all of Ravenloft’s foul lords are living or 
once-living things. One, at least, is fashioned 
from cold metal and even colder darkness. Manu- 
factured in a forge of foulest evil, the enchanted 
sword Ebonbane has repeatedly proven its right 
to a domain in the Demiplane of Dread. 

Physically, Ebonbane appears as a slender- 
bladed, long sword. Its hilt has been cast from a 
single piece of silver that, mysteriously, never 
seems to tarnish. Although ornate, Ebonbane’s 
pommel has no special powers or abilities. 

Its blade is fashioned from a strange, alien 
metal that was brought to the Prime Material 
Plane from another dimension. Along its length, 
the keen blade is set with foul-looking runes of 


ee a oe ee Se See 


1360 


purest evil. These runes have many powers, all 
described later; they seem to glow with an eerie 
black aura. 

The macabre lore that surrounds the origins of 
Ebonbane begins, curiously enough, with a tale 
of justice and devotion to the holy cause of truth, 
Centuries ago, there lived a young woman named 
Kateri Shadowborn. Her parents were wealthy, 
but they were humble and just people. Much of 
their money went to the betterment of life for all 
those who dwelled in their lands. 

As Kateri grew from a little girl into a young 
woman, she began to feel an emptiness in her 
heart. For all the good that she and her ancestors 
had done, there was something missing. By the 
time she had reached her midteens, Kateri Shad- 
owborn knew what it was that she needed, 

From that time on, she vowed to follow the 
holy path of the paladin. No longer would the 
Shadowborn name be simply associated with 
kindness and mercy; now it would be synony- 
mous with justice and holy vengeance. As the 
years passed, Kateri Shadowborn fought evil on 
every front. She single handedly drove back 
hordes of marauders and destroyed nests of evil 
that threatened the well-being of her church. 

Despite her prowess, Kateri Shadowborn was 
as vulnerable to time as any mortal. Eventually 
she was forced to lay down the holy sword that 
had served her for so many years. Having had 
no time in her busy life for romance, courtship, 
or motherhood, she planned to live out her 
autumn years peacefully. From her home in the 
ancestral Shadowborn Manor, she would over- 
see the family wealth and its allocations to 
charity. In the end, when she died, she planned 
to turn all of her family’s possessions over to 
the church. The Shadowborn name would die 
with her, but the good that it had done would 
live on for decades. 

Such a quiet end to a warrior’s life was not to 
be, however, In her day, Kateri had made many 
enemies. While most of those who had opposed 
her church and its teachings had been destroyed 
or converted, there were others who plotted 
revenge. 

One such group, a band of evil priests in the 
service of a dark deity whose name is best unspo- 
ken, decided that Lady Shadowborn had to die. 
Further, as an example to all who opposed their 
dark designs, she had to die horribly and in some 
way that would destroy her much-vaunted faith. 

Over the course of several months, they began 
to fashion an evil magical weapon: the sword that 
was to be called Ebonbane. When the final dark 
rune was set upon the blade, an evil being from 
the Outer Planes was imprisoned in the weapon. 


Much to the surprise of the sword’s creators, how- 
$535 


ag gs eee 


( Cr: 


Sword, Ebonbane II 


j i i 


ever, the spells that they had woven to control the 
extradimensional entity were woefully inade- 
quate. When they cast the last component of this 
mystical enchantment upon Ebonbane, they 
found its power turned back upon them. Now 
they were slaves of the presence they had 
attempted to contain. 

One aspect of the magical spell cast on Ebon- 
bane did succeed, however. Although the sword 
was free-willed, it still had become gripped with 
an utter hatred for Lady Shadowborn and all her 
works. The weapon quickly began to plan her 
destruction. 

Ebonbane arranged to be found by a monk 
from a monastery near the Shadowborn estate. 
As soon as the unsuspecting holy man reached 
out to touch the weapon, Ebonbane struck. 
Lashing out with its titanic will, it utterly 
destroyed the monk’s vital life energies and 
took over his body. 

With the body of the monk nothing more 
than a puppet under the control of the evil 
Ebonbane, the sword instructed the monk to 
carry it to Shadowborn Manor. When the monk 
was received by Lady Shadowborn, he 
explained that the workers at the monastery had 
found this sword and wanted her advice on what 
to do with it. When Lady Shadowborn saw the 
unholy weapon, her natural ability to sense evil 
warned her of the treachery. 

The battle that followed was magnificent. With 
every ounce of faith that she could muster, the 
aging paladin fought off the influences of the 
weapon. Time and time again, the animated 
sword tried to run Lady Shadowborn through, but 
always her holy sword turned it aside, In the end, 
however, Ebonbane was too much for her. Calling 
on all the power of the dark dimension that had 
spawned it, Ebonbane delivered a final titanic 
blow that shattered Lady Shadowborn’s holy 
avenger. 

As the battle had raged on, Ebonbane was 
unaware that it was drawing the attention of 
Ravenloft’s dark powers. With each iota of 
fiendish energy that it drew from the evil plane of 
its birth, it increased their interest in it. Finally, as 
the last stroke of this deadly artifact took the life 
of Kateri Shadowborn, the Mists engulfed the 
estate. 

When Ebonbane, thrilled with the victory that 
it had won, tried to leave the grounds, it found 
that it could not. At every turn, it was confronted 
by an impassable stone wall. It was imprisoned in 
the Demiplane of Dread. 

Ebonbane has found its time in Ravenloft 
utterly unbearable. It knows that its powers here 
are a hundred times what they were in the outside 
world, but it feels that this is no consolation for 


the loss of its own freedom. 

Curiously, Ebonbane has never been able to 
grasp the full meaning of what has happened to it. 
It believes that it has been imprisoned by some 
trick of Lady Shadowborn, Even if confronted 
with absolute proof that it is imprisoned in a spe- 
cial demiplane full of evil creatures, Ebonbane 
would not believe this. In fact, the odds are good 
that anyone who dares to confront it with such 
information would die horribly. 

In addition to its own rage over having been 
imprisoned in Ravenloft, Ebonbane finds that it 
has not been wholly successful in its attempt to 
slay Lady Shadowborn. The paladin, now in the 
form of a geist, remains a part of her ancestral 
home and, thus, of Ebonbane’s domain. 

Ebonbane has tried many times to drive Lady 
Shadowborn from its land, but it has always 
failed. The vital faith and religious strength that 
guided her through her life as a paladin still serve 
her in death. So long as Lady Shadowborn’s pure 
faith remains unshaken, she seems to be able to 
resist Ebonbane’s powers. 

From time to time, when certain signs are 
right and the stars are in their proper positions, 
Lady Shadowborn is able to reach out of 
Ravenloft and draw in persons who are directly 
related to her. Thus, in addition to serving as a 
thorn in the darklord’s side, Lady Shadowborn 
has sought to destroy it several times. While she 
has been no more successful at defeating it than 
it has been at breaking her spirit, these occa- 
sional attacks have only served to remind Ebon- 
bane that it is not the absolute master of all that 
takes place in its domain. Ebonbane has 
destroyed every group of heroes that Lady 
Shadowborn has been able to call into Ravenloft 
to battle it. With each defeat it feels the faith of 
its enemy slipping a little bit. 

Lady Shadowborn has learned that Ebonbane 
can be destroyed only by those who can gather 
together four “keys” and use them against the evil 
blade. Each of these magical components is 
based upon one of the four elements and has a 
special significance. The key of earth, for exam- 
ple, is symbolic of the metal from which Ebon- 
bane was fashioned, and the key of fire represents 
the evil flames that forged its body into its current 
shape. Ebonbane is unaware that these elemental 
components even exist, let alone that it can be 
destroyed by them. Thus, it is possible that a 
group of heroes drawn into the domain by Lady 
Shadowborn may one day be able to assemble 
these keys and use them against Ebonbane. With 
each failure, however, the power of Ebonbane 
becomes stronger and the faith of Lady Shadow- 
born diminishes. If she is to be freed from the 


curse of an eternal battle of wills with Ebonbane, 
5535 


ae, 


1362 


” 


Sword, The Edge 


EN 


it must happen soon. 

Although Ebonbane is as much a thinking 
creature as any of Ravenloft’s other lords, it is 
wholly inorganic and, as such, difficult to quan- 
tify in game terms. The following conventions 
should suffice for encounters with the dreaded 
Ebonbane. 


Ebonbane: AL Chaotic Evil; Str N/A, Dex 
N/A, Con N/A, Int 17, Wis 17, Cha 15, AC 
—10; MV 9; Level/HD n/a; hp n/a; THACO 
10; AT 1; Ego 17; Dmg 1d8; SA See text; 
SD See text; MR Nil. 


Long before its imprisonment in Ravenloft, 
Ebonbane was both powerful and intelligent. 
Infused with a cruel and cunning intelligence by 
its creators, it could communicate telepathically 
or by speech with anyone who held it. If wielded 
in combat, it acted as a +4 weapon. When not in 
the hand of a warrior, however, Ebonbane was far 
from helpless. It could move about via an innate 
form of levitation and strike on its own. 

As is often the case, however, Ebonbane found 
that its transformation into a darklord greatly 
increased its abilities. Like all the lords of 
Ravenloft’s domains, Ebonbane is now an almost 
unstoppable force. 

The runes on Ebonbane’s blade are powerful 
and unholy, so much so that they act as symbols 
of whatever type it wishes, It can invoke each 
manner of symbol but once per day, however, so 
some measure of protection against this attack 
form can be had by careful record keeping on the 
part of those exploring its domain. 

Ebonbane is a +4 weapon able to move about 
and attack at will via its own levitation ability. 
Since coming to Ravenloft, however, Ebonbane 
has also acquired the powers of a vorpal sword 
and a flame tongue. 

Although Ebonbane’s domain (Shadowborn 
Manor and its grounds) is small, its power there is 
virtually absolute. For example, the weather 
around the manor is wholly under its control. It 
can change a peaceful spring day into a freezing 
ice storm. This power extends to the point of con- 
trolling day or night, the phase of the moon, and 
similar effects. Thus, Ebonbane could cause the 
sun to stand high in the sky, as if at noon, for 
hours on end only to have it suddenly plunge 
beneath the horizon when a party of adventurers 
nears the manor itself. 

Another of Ebonbane’s more dangerous pow- 
ers is the ability to animate blades. No sword or 
dagger is safe from the evil powers of Ebonbane, 
not even holy avengers or artifacts like the sword 
of Kas or the mighty Excalibur. At will, Ebon- 
bane can animate any and all swords and daggers 


in its domain and cause them to attack nearby 
characters or creatures. These weapons strike 
with a THACO of 10 and inflict their normal dam- 
age with each successful strike. Magical abilities 
inherent in the weapon, such as those of a vorpal 
blade or a sword of life stealing, function nor- 
mally, while those requiring a trigger by the 
wielder, as is the case with the sunray power of a 
sun blade, do not work. Ebonbane greatly enjoys 
turning a party’s own weapons against its mem- 
bers and will often hold back on more lethal 
attacks in order to satisfy its taste for this vicari- 
ous hacking away at victims. 

Ebonbane is able to dominate those who 
wield it in accordance with the normal rules for 
intelligent weapons in the DMG. When it takes 
control of the person wielding it, Ebonbane 
instantly destroys its holder’s spirit. What 
remains of the living body of someone who has 
lost such a duel of wills with Ebonbane is noth- 
ing more than a husk. The body remains alive 
for a few days (a week at most) and then simply 
collapses and dies. While the body lives, it 
obeys Ebonbane’s commands and, in game 
terms, acts much like a zombie. 

Since it is an unnatural creature, Ebonbane 
survives by drawing off the life energies of living 
creatures that enter its domain. Because of this, 
nonmagical healing does not take place in or 
around Shadowborn Manor. The natural recuper- 
ative powers normally associated with living 
creatures are drawn off by this dreadful sword 
and serve to satisfy its dark hunger. 


The Edge 

XP Value: 3,200 GP Value: 16,000 
Howl From the North 
The Edge is the most unusual-looking sword of 
the five Blades of Corusk. It is a bastard sword 
whose blade is made from grayish steel. Its edge 
never dulls or nicks. Attempts at sharpening and 
honing its edge are fruitless. It is said The Edge is 
so sharp that it splits hairs with the slightest 
touch. 

The hilt of the sword is covered in soft suede 
leather, giving the sword a comfortable feel. Jut- 
ting from the pommel, three blackened daggers 
point outward like venomous fangs. These dag- 
gers can be commanded to fly from the pommel 
as though they were arrows of accuracy +2. An 
attack roll is required, as though firing an arrow, 
All three daggers can be shot in one round if the 
wielder so chooses. 

The daggers streak to their target. If they hit, 
the opponent must roll a successful saving throw 
vs. poison with a —2 penalty or die instantly. The 
daggers can be shot off while the fighter strikes 


with the sword; the command is a single word 
5536 


a a- 


1363 


S 


Sword of Efreeti Slaying 


jh a E ~ 


(The Edge informs its wielder of the command 
word). After firing, the daggers must be retrieved 
and placed in the pommel. Should the fighter lose 
two of the daggers, the remaining dagger no 
longer has the capacity to fly on command. (The 
daggers are poisonous only when they are com- 
manded to fly from the pommel; otherwise they 
are daggers +1.) 

This sword was especially made for a pure 
fighter’s hands. In this case, paladins, rangers, 
and all other fighter subclasses are excluded. In 
the grasp of a fighter, The Edge is a bastard 
sword +3. Should any other character class use 
this sword, it serves as only a bastard sword +1 
with no other benefits. 

The Edge gives the fighter who possesses it a 
unique ability. Should the character roll a natural 
18 through 20 on an attack roll, the sword slices 
through whatever was in its way. If the opponent 
was parrying with a weapon, The Edge slices 
through the weapon as though it was lard. (If the 
weapon attacked is magical in nature, the weapon 
is required to roll a successful saving throw vs. 
disintegration with a —3 penalty, otherwise it per- 
manently loses a plus or a special ability—deter- 
mined randomly by the DM. This drain continues 
with each additional high-quality hit until the 
weapon is destroyed.) 

If armor is struck with an 18 to 20 attack roll, 
the armor must roll a successful item saving 
throw vs. disintegration with a —3 penalty or lose 
| point of magical bonus or special ability— 
determined by the DM or randomly. When the 
armor is no longer magical, it is damaged, penal- 
izing the AC it gives by one point. When the AC 
of the armor is reduced to 10, it is completely 
useless. 

The Edge has an alignment of chaotic neutral, 
possesses an Intelligence of 16 and an Ego of 12. 
The Edge has the ability to find Harmonizer, the 
fifth Blade of Corusk. The Edge, when held by 
the blade-stops, points toward Harmonizer. This 
works only when the blade is within 1,000 feet of 
Harmonizer. 


of Efreeti Slaying 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Creature Catalogue 
The mighty leader of the Brotherhood of Sun 
Brothers is rumored to wield a glorious sword of 
efreeti slaying that instantly kills all efreeti with a 
successful strike (and a subsequent failed saving 
throw vs. spell on the part of the efreeti), 


l 


3 


Elkhorn’s 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Shady Dragon Inn 
Elkhorn’s sword +1 is set with a huge ruby that 
glows when he is within 25 feet of gold. 


Elgqillar 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 188 

Also known as the sword of many faces, this 
unique blade has been difficult to trace but is at 
least 700 winters old. Although some scholars 
maintain that it was forged by the elves to spy 
upon the activities of young and rising races, it is 
probably the work of a Calishite illusionist named 
Akhir Ahad, who was forced to excel in sorcery 
by the power of his political enemies. Legend 
reports that he constructed the weapon to help 
him escape numerous assassins. Eventually, the 
night rogues caught him, but not before he had 
passed the blade on to his most trusted body- 
guard, whose name has escaped the record books. 
The latter used it to such effect that it is impossi- 
ble to locate it with certainty until some 300 win- 
ters later, when it appeared at an auction in 
Waterdeep. A number of murders ensued, and the 
sword was again lost. 

Its most recent wielder is said to be an assassin 
who calls himself “The Rider in White.” He is a 
well-educated individual with an excellent repu- 
tation, working artfully rather than with cruelty. 
Many of the little governments surrounding the 
Inner Sea have at one time or another hired him 
to remove undesirables, the victims often (though 
by no means always) being of evil alignment. 

Elquillar can change its shape to become any 
type of sword, scimitar, or dagger, though it’s 
always +1 on attack and damage rolls. Such a trans- 
formation occurs whenever the wielder desires 
another weapon to appear, and it takes less than a 
round to complete. Multicolored runes spelling out 
its name appear on the blade regardless of its cur- 
rent shape or any efforts to conceal them. 

Elquillar’s master may alter his or her own 
shape as though wearing a hat of disguise; this 
requires that the sword be kept on the person, 
though it needn’t actually be held (it can be in its 
scabbard). Furthermore, the bearer is protected as 
though by a ring of mind shielding, although in 
this case Elguillar must be firmly grasped in the 
hand. Finally, whenever this weapon touches (or 
strikes in combat) a creature in other than its nat- 
ural form, El/quillar returns the target to its true 
shape. There is no saving throw against this 
effect. Thus a gold dragon, a shape-changed wiz- 
ard, a vampire, a polymorphed griffon, ora 
doppleganger might all be induced to assume 


their normal appearances at a touch. 
5539 


64 


Sword, Everstriking 


SS Se EEE e 


Elven 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Elves of Alfheim 
This blade is made from enchanted oakwood 
treated with the sap of a Tree of Life. It is as light 
as a short sword but as long as a normal sword (or 
a broad sword) and harder and sharper than steel. 
The damage done by this weapon is 1d6+1 and 
it counts as a magic weapon, though not as a 
weapon with pluses. Thus, it can affect lycan- 
thropes, gargoyles, and spectres or any other 
monster that can be affected only by magic weap- 
ons, but it does not affect monsters that must be 
struck with a +1 weapon or better. 


Elven II 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Quest Game 
This magical blade looks like any other sword 
until it is used in combat. Then, the blade gleams 
with a magical blue light, and the sword becomes 
as light and easy to use as a dagger. Anyone who 
uses this sword in combat adds a +1 bonus to 
attack and damage rolls. This is a medium weapon 
(Size M; Dmg 1d8+1). 


Emperor’s 
XP Value: 19,400 GP Value: 97,900 
Legends & Lore 
This samurai sword is a sword of dancing, life 
stealing, and sharpness +5, but it becomes a 
cursed berserker sword in the hands of anyone 
but a member of the Imperial family. 


Enchanted Sword of Sylaire 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Castle Amber 

The enchanted sword of Sylaire is a sword +3/+5 
vs. undead. Its purpose is to slay undead and it 
automatically kills any undead it hits on an 
unmodified roll of 18 or better. It can also detect 
evil and detect invisible and gives the user the 
ability to fly (as the spell) for up to three turns 
three times a day. 


Equalizer of Gran March 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
Also known as the sword of neutrality, this sil- 
ver long sword is a tool for the balancing powers 
of the universe, Its creator desired that it be used 
to equalize (or, more accurately, to terminate) 
the extremes of nature, shifting the universe 
closer to the true neutral alignment, Only a char- 
acter of true neutral alignment can fully use this 
sword. In the hands of such a character, the 
weapon is treated as a +3 weapon when deter- 
mining what can be hit by it, even though its 


attack and damage bonuses are only +1. In the 
hand of a true neutral character, the sword 
receives special combat modifiers according to 
the opponent’s alignment: 


Attack Damage 


Opponent’s Alignment Bonus Bonus 
Lawful neutral, chaotic neutral +1 +2 
Neutral good, neutral evil +2 +4 
Lawful good, chaotic good +3 +6 
Lawful evil, chaotic evil +3 +6 


Each time an opponent of an extreme align- 
ment is struck, the creature must make a saving 
throw vs. spell or be disintegrated. Against true 
neutral opponents the sword receives only the 
bonuses of a long sword +1. 


Everstriking 

GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
An everstriking sword always hits an intended 
target unless an impossible blow is attempted, 
like striking at a character who is out of range. 
This weapon has no attack or damage bonuses, 
but a peculiar thing happens play when such a 
sword is used in combat. 

If the sword is swung at an opponent and the 
die roll indicates a miss, then the wielder of the 
sword loses a number of hit points equal to the 
difference between the failed attack roll and the 
number needed to hit the target—and the sword 
does hit, in effect using the wielder’s own energy 
to guide the attack home. This energy drain is felt 
as a sudden, sharp pain coupled with a feeling of 
exhaustion. 

If the sword is used against a creature that 
can only be hit by magical weapons, it drains an 
extra set of hit points for every “plus” normally 
required to hit such a monster—double the 
amount against a creature hit only by +1 weap- 
ons, three times the amount against a creature 
hit only by +2 weapons, and so forth. Regard- 
less of the number of hit points needed to make 
a successful attack, this sword always does only 
normal damage for whatever type of sword it is, 
with a damage bonus for Strength added if 
applicable. 

Any character who uses this sword once in 
combat is cursed to always draw the sword in any 
further combat, and will ignore all other weapons 
carried in favor of this one. This curse can only 
be removed by a wish or a remove curse spell, and 
the sword must be discarded immediately after 
that. 


XP Value: 800 


5545 


-— yf “mee ll 


1365 


~ Sword, Evil Wyrmslayer pa 


Evil Wyrmslayer 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 
This sword +2, +5 vs. evil male dragons, makes 
its wielder immune to the effects of dragons’ fear 
aura. It confers a +5 bonus to all saving throws 
against the breath of evil dragons. 


Evithyan’s Blade 
XP Value: 2,200 GP Value: 11,000 

DRAGON Magazine 188 
Evithvan was a high elf hero of old, no less a 
skilled wizard than a warrior. It is widely held 
that he fashioned this sword himself, nearly 1,000 
years ago in ancient Myth Drannor, then used it 
to fight the drow in the Underdark. When his 
time came to pass over the sea to Evermeet, he 
gave the weapon to his apprentice, Calthalyon. In 
turn, the young elf used it to great effect and 
eventually handed it to another. This changing of 
the guard lasted for several hundred winters, until 
one elf met a premature fate and the blade was 
lost. 

It reappeared in Hillsfar 70 years ago in the 
possession of a novice thief, who had somehow 
stumbled upon the weapon. He was poisoned in 
less than a week; although he survived, the sword 
was taken and has not been seen in the years 
since. 

The long sword has a well-balanced steel blade, 
the haft being of mithral and set with a small emer- 
ald. The sword is normally of +3 enchantment. 
When used against the drow, however, it becomes 
+5. On a natural 20, the blade drains 2d4 Constitu- 
tion points in addition from a dark elf, unless a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell is made. The lost points can be 
regained at a rate of | point per day of complete 
rest. Any elf who loses all Constitution points to the 
blade will die. The drow are aware of this and fear 
the weapon accordingly; they must make a morale 
check whenever they are confronted by Evithyan 5 
Blade. 


Excalibur 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 80,000 
Deres & DemiGops Cyclopedia 
King Arthur wields the sword Excalibur, a +5 
lawful good sword of sharpness, whose scabbard 
prevents him from being cut by any attack. 
Thrusting and slashing attacks against Arthur do 
half damage (from the force of the blow), and 
bludgeoning attacks do full damage. 


Excalibur I 
XP Value: 20,000 GP Value: 200,000 
New Item 
Also known in Old French as Escalibor, and 
occasionally as Calibar, this is the legendary 


Sword in the Stone that was given to the Lady of 
the Lake upon the death of Arthur, King of all the 
Britons. In the unlikely event that this unique arti- 
fact is ever found in a campaign, it is a +10 (to 
attack and damage), lawful good weapon. A holy 
avenger, Excalibur has all the other holy avenger 
abilities. It telepathically bonds with a lawful 
good paladin (and only a paladin) of at least 7th 
level—Excalibur and the character becoming a 
single being during combat. It will not permit any 
other character, even of lawful good alignment, to 
pick it up—the hilt slips out of the hand as if it 
were greased. If a character of evil alignment so 
much as touches the scabbard, he or she must 
save vs, paralyzation, or be frozen to the spot for 
2d10 rounds. (A second touch by the same char- 
acter results in death, no saving throw allowed.) 
Upon the death of its paladin, a geas is placed on 
the paladin’s companions (or, if the warrior died 
alone, its next nonevil discoverer—if not a pal- 
adin) to return the sword to the Lady of the Lake. 
In this case it will permit itself to be carried, and 
even to be used in the defense of its return, by any 
lawful good character (but functions as a holy 
avenger +5). If the party does not have another 
lawful good character, one will have to be found. 
In that case, until such a person is found, Excal- 
ibur will permit itself to be carried, if necessary 
even wielded as a broad sword +3, by any char- 
acter of good alignment. 


5549 


1366 


re a 


Excalibur Il 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 80,000 
Legends & Lore 

Given to Arthur by the Lady in the Lake in return 
for a favor to be named later, Excalibur is the 
magical sword that gave Arthur the power to unite 
the kingdoms of Britain. Its origins are as misty 
as the location of Avalon, but it is clear that the 
weapon was forged by some supernatural being 
in order to assist worthy kings in defending 
Britain. Excalibur is a sword of sharpness +5 that 
can only be wielded by a lawful good warrior of 
18 Strength or greater. If stolen, taken by treach- 
ery, or lifted in an evil cause, Excalibur will 
break upon contact with another weapon. It can 
only be mended by returning all of the pieces to 
the Lady of the Lake, and she will only mend it 
for a worthy king, such as Arthur. 

As valuable as Excalibur itself is the sword’s 
scabbard, which prevents blood from flowing from 
its wearer's wounds. Anyone wearing the scabbard 
suffers damage only from bludgeoning, magic, fire, 
and other forms of noncutting attacks. The scab- 
bard functions only for a lawful good wearer. 


Farrinae 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 

This is a special dragon slayer. Farrinae is an 
intelligent (Int 15, Ego 10) female sword, chaotic 
good by alignment. She is able to communicate 
verbally in Common, Dwarf and the languages of 
all good dragons. Created to slay evil dragons, 
she is +/ vs. all opponents, but +3 vs. evil 
dragons. Farrinae does double damage to green 
and blue dragons, can detect all dragons in a 150- 
foot radius, bestows a +2 bonus to her wielder’s 
saving throw vs. dragon breath, and gives her 
wielder a +4 Charisma bonus with respect to 
dragonkind. 


Fate’s Promise 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 

1992 Fantasy Collector Card 134 
Shalandain recovered this highly magical and Intel- 
ligent sword from the wreckage of a neogi mindspi- 
der. The sword, named Fate's Promise, grants a 
magic resistance of 50% in a 5-foot radius, dispels 
magic in a 5-foot radius, and grants a bonus of 10 
additional points of damage upon chaotic evil 
opponents. In addition, Fate's Promise can cast 
strength once a day and heal twice a day. 


Fiendbane 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
Legend speaks of a great, multicolored blade 
whose origin has been forgotten, but which was 


Sword, Final Word 


SAS a 


wielded by the great paladin Nord in his single- 
handed destruction of the Citadel of Conjurers. It 
is written that he overthrew succubi and glabrezu 
“beyond number” with his sword Fiendbane, and 
caused the summoned fiend-lord N’dulu to flee 
from this plane. Fiendbane earned its name in 
this battle, but its whereabouts now are not 
known. Nord disappeared shortly after the fall of 
the citadel, and “not a stone of his keep remained 
when the sun rose that morning” (or so wrote the 
sages). 

With Fiendbane in hand, a warrior is rendered 
immune to all enchantment and charm spells cast 
by fiends, and gains a +3 bonus on saving throws 
vs. other magical attacks by fiends (tanar’ri, 
baatezu, and yugoloths). The user becomes 
unusually alert, and can only be surprised on a 
1d12 chance. 

Fiendbane glows with a cold, blue light (equal 
to a light spell in effect) when brought within 60 
feet of one of the listed fiends above, and emits 
no light at any other time. It can cause a fiends’ 
amulet to shatter at a touch (amulet must save vs. 
disintegration). The weapon is a sword with a +3 
attack and damage bonus normally, rising to +5 
when used against fiendkind. Only good-aligned 
fighters may use this weapon; it falls immediately 
from the grasp of anyone else who tries to seize 
it. Naturally, this sword has carned the utter 
hatred of all fiends and can be identified at a 
glance by any of them. Anyone using this sword 
gains the instant and permanent wrath of all 
fiends who see him or her, and they will commu- 
nicate the sword’s location and ownership to all 
their fellows. 


Final Word 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Unearthed Arcana 
Final Word swords are very rare items—only nine 
of these blades are known to exist. Each is pat- 
terned after the legendary broad sword Fragarach 
(which means “final word” in the tongue of the 
ancient Oeridians). Each of these weapons is 
thought to have a differing alignment, but in all 
other respects each is alike. If a creature of an 
alignment different from that of the sword 
attempts to wield it in battle, the weapon has no 
bonuses. In the hands of a creature of like align- 
ment, the sword becomes a blade +3 that always 
strikes last in any round, but which will strike 
unerringly and do damage to any opponent that 
struck at the wielder earlier in the same round, 
regardless of whether the opponent successfully 
hit the wielder, up to the wielder’s available num- 
ber of attacks per round. (Of course, since the 
weapon is a blade +3, opponents immune to 


weapons of less than +4 value cannot be harmed.) 
5554 


— °° °»x© we  — 


1367 


Sword, Finder 


patie E A 


Each of these swords has a gem of 10,000 gp 
value set in its pommel, and each gem is different 
in type from all the others. Each sword also bears 
a name; the nine appellations are Answerer, 
Backtalker, Concluder, Lastquip, Rebutter, 
Replier, Retorter, Scather, and Squelcher. 


Finder 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Gateway to Ravens BLUFF™, The Living City 

Finder is the sword used by a 9th-level paladin, a 
human male named Tordon Sureblade, who cur- 
rently serves as Lord Chancellor for the City of 
Ravens Bluff. The blade is a long sword +3 with 
an Intelligence of 12, and Ego of 4, a lawful good 
alignment. It is semi-empathic. It can detect 
secret doors within a 5-foot radius. 


Fionnghuala’s 
XP Value: 2,700 GP Value: 13,500 
Monster Mythology 
Fionnghuala’s avatar wields a /ong sword +4 that 
can heal her once a day. 


Fist of Odin 
GP Value: 4,500 
DRAGON Magazine 99 
A giant slayer, this sword is +1 against all crea- 
tures, +3 against giants. 


XP Value: 900 


Flamberge 
XP Value: 3,600 GP Value: 18,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Flamberge, or Floberge (meaning “flame cutter”) 
was the sword of Charlemagne. In game terms, it 
is the equivalent of a flame tongue +3. 


Flame Blade 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 9,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 47 
This sword +/ has a black hilt and a ruby blade 
that glow with an inner light akin to faerie fire. In 
battle, the glow calls up flames that do an addi- 
tional 1d6 points of damage (1d8 to cold-using or 
cold-dwelling creatures). The sword also acts as a 
ring of warmth. 


Flame of the North 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Ruins of Undermountain 
If any being of an alignment other than chaotic 
good touches the sword, it seems to spit blue fire 
and the being takes 3d4 points of electrical dam- 
age. After its initial contact damage, the sword 
does no more harm to nonchaotic good beings, 
but in their hands it is —3 on all attack and dam- 
age rolls, 
Flame of the North is a steel two-handed sword 


+2, with an additional +2 against all creatures of 
chaotic evil alignment. Its blade is treated to be 
everbright; it cannot rust, tarnish, or be stained or 
harmed by acid, blood, flames, or other sub- 
stances. 

Whenever any spell is cast on someone holding 
the drawn blade, there is a 10% chance that the 
spell is reflected back on its source. This effect 
can happen regardless of the will of the sword 
wielder. All electrical attacks and magic missiles 
cast at the sword-wielder are absorbed harmlessly 
by the sword, and used to recharge its powers. 

In the hands of a chaotic good being, the sword 
blazes constantly with blue-white flames while 
drawn, The flames give light equal to a faerie fire, 
but the wielder does not incur the standard com- 
bat disadvantages of that spell. The flames cannot 
be quelled except by breaking the blade. They are 
illusory, and cannot heat or ignite anything. 

Whenever the flame is drawn by a chaotic 
good being, and any chaotic evil creature comes 
within 20 feet of the sword, the sword-wielder 
hears an inner voice, endlessly chanting, “Strike! 
Strike! Strike!” This effect occurs regardless of 
any magical defenses that cloak or confuse the 
reading of true alignment; the sword infallibly 
detects the presence of chaotic evil beings within 
its range. The sword has no intelligence, ego, or 
coercive powers beyond its verbal imploring. 


5560 


368 


Sword, Foebane r 


Flame Tongue 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This is a sword +1, +2 vs. regenerating creatures, 
+3 vs. cold-using, flammable, or avian creatures, 
+4 vs. undead. It sheds light when its possessor 
speaks a command word or phrase. When acti- 
vated, Flame Tongue 5 fire illuminates the area as 
brightly as a torch. The flame from this sword 
easily ignites oil, burns webs, or sets fire to 
paper, parchment, and dry wood. Cold-using 
creatures are those whose attack mode involves 
cold (ice toads, white dragons, winter wolves, 
yeti, and the like). 


Flames on Command 

XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
DUNGEONS & DraAcons Expert Rules Set 
This sword blazes with flames when commanded 
by its user. It remains flaming until commanded 
to go out. While flaming, it gives a bonus of +2 
on attack rolls against trolls, pegasi, hippogriffs, 
and rocs; a +3 bonus against treants and undead 
monsters. Damage from this sword is treated as 
fire damage (for example, trolls cannot regener- 
ate damage inflicted by it). It will cast light and 
burn as if a torch (when used against a web, for 
example) 


Flaming 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Steading of the Hill Giant Chief 
Having a chaotic alignment of either good or neu- 
tral, an Intelligence of 10, and an Ego of 12, this 
sword detects gems, including kind and number; 
communicates by empathy. 


Flaming I 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Steading of the Hill Giant Chief 
This sword is neutral in alignment with either a 
good or lawful bent, and Intelligence and Ego of 
6; it also has the powers of a flame tongue sword. 


Floating Blade of Shin Lu 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Kara-Tur 
The famous floating blade of Shin Lu is one of a 
matched pair of swords, forged on the day of the 
two half-brothers’ (Shin Lu and Shin Ginsen) 
birth. The second sword is known as the shim- 
mering blade of Shin Ginsen. The weapon is a 
sword +3 in the butterfly-tipped Shou style, and 
has the following powers: vorpal blade, luck 
blade, casts illusion and charm 3 times each day. 
However, in the presence of the matching blade, 
the sword becomes a mere magical blade (with 
only its bonuses to attack and damage), unable to 


tap into its greater powers. The blade is currently 
on display in the Capital of Shou Lung. The float- 
ing blades alignment is lawful-good. 


Flying Scimitar of Tusmit 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

Forged in preparation for a possible war against 
Ekbir, this enchanted weapon is used only by the 
Pasha’s most trusted war-ministers. When used in 
combat it gains +3 on attack and damage. It can 
also be thrown (minimum range: 10 feet, maxi- 
mum: 30 feet). When thrown, the scimitar spins 
like a razor-edged propeller and strikes as a 
sword of sharpness. It returns to the thrower’s 
hand the next round, Anyone else who attempts to 
catch the flying sword must make a saving throw 
vs. death magic or lose the member. There is no 
effect on the weapon’s flight. 


Foebane 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 

This is the legendary blade borne by Fflar, Cap- 
tain of Myth Drannor. It lies somewhere in the 
rubble of Myth Drannor’s streets, and is active (it 
animates and attacks, when touched). One of six 
blades crafted by the Archmage Demron, this 
blade is sometimes known as Demron'’s bane, 
because a thief used it to kill him. 

Foebane is a one-handed bastard sword +4. In 
addition to its base damage of 1d8+4 (1d12+4 vs. 
L-size or larger creatures), it “burns” the life or 
unlife energy of certain targets so as to deal an 
additional 1d8 points of damage to all undead crea- 
tures, all beings not native to the Prime Material 
Plane, and all creatures of evil alignment. It glows 
with a flickering blue flame whenever drawn; the 
light is bright enough to be used to read. 

Foebane's +4 bonus applies not only to its 
damage and attack rolls, but also to any saving 
throws made by anyone holding it drawn. It 
reflects back magic cast at it or at its wielder— 
each round, roll 1d8. If hostile magical item dis- 
charges or spell effects are of a level lower than 
the roll, they are reflected back 100% at the 
source. If higher, they have normal effects. If of 
the same number, both sword-wielder and source 
are affected, for half damage or results (if the 
nature of the spell makes this impossible, a “wild 
magic” effect occurs instead). 

Foebane and any creatures touching it (up to a 
maximum of eight) are affected as if by a feather 
fall spell, and when grasped and ordered, the 
blade can jump itself and up to three beings 
touching it, twice a day. 

Once a day, Foebane can “drink” life force, 


when grasped and ordered. After this power is 
5567 


D EES a aa O U O O o 


1369 


Sword, Foefinder 


jp, Oia O E., 


activated, the next successful attack made by the 
blade does double normal damage—and these 
doubled hit points are gained by the blade- 
wielder as healing hit points. The blade-wielder 
can’t gain extra hit points in this way, and the 
blade can’t create zombies, or drain more hit 
points than a target has (if 0 is reached, the target 
dies, and is not made undead). 

Foebane can be commanded to guard when- 
ever its owner is touching it. If the owner ceases 
to touch it after the order is given, the blade 
remains vigilant—and if the next entity to physi- 
cally touch the blade is not the owner, the blade 
emits a very loud singing sound as it animates 
and attacks that entity, levitating about at MV FI 
24 (A), THACO 6. Consider the blade to have 77 
hit points when it is striking by itself. The blade 
attacks the entity until it does 20 points of dam- 
age, the entity dies, or its owner reclaims it. This 
power was typically used to guard against the 
theft of the blade from a sleeping owner. 

Lastly, the blade was intended for use by war- 
riors. If wielded by a fighter, paladin, or ranger, 
all strikes are at 1 point higher than normal level; 
if wielded by any other class of character, they 
strike at —1 point. 


Foefinder 
GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 99 
This sword +1 has the ability to detect evil con- 
stantly. 


XP Value: 500 


Forseti’s 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 70,000 
Legends & Lore 
When the avatar swings his sword at a being who 
has spoken a lie within the last seven days, it 
never misses. Otherwise, the weapon functions as 
a sword of sharpness +5. 


Forester’s Friend 
See Dyerwaen, above. 


Fragarach 
See The Answerer, above. 


9, 
S 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
This sword slays fire giants as Heimdall ’s sword 


slays frost giants. Against other giants, it merely 
adds +5 to damage. It has no bonus on attack rolls. 


Frey’s II 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Legends & Lore 
Any being struck by the avatar’s sword must save 
vs. spell or lose all desire to fight. 


Frey’s Two-Handed 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Derries & Demicops Cyclopedia 
Frey's two-handed sword +4 does 2410 points of 
damage each strike on all creatures but giants; it 
does 10d10 points to fire giants, and 5d10 to all 
other giants. 


Frey’s Two-Handed II 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DRAGON Magazine 110 

Frey possesses an ice-blue two-handed sword +4 
that strikes for 2d10 points of damage (with 
bonuses for Strength and the magical plus of the 
weapon added). The sword causes 6d10 points of 
damage (plus bonuses) against any true giant 
(giantkin excluded). Against any fire giant other 
than Surtur himself, any successful blow with the 
weapon (only if it is being used by Frey) kills out- 
right; there is no saving throw. Those not of neu- 
tral good alignment are unable to grasp the sword, 
even if their characters’ alignments are temporar- 
ily altered through the use of magic. 


Freya’s Frost Brand 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 110 
Though she prefers to use magic and her special 
abilities, Freya uses a frost brand +3 in battle if 
necessary. The sword charms all mortals within 
20 feet (saving throw at —3 applicable if handled 
by a mortal). Those of chaotic good alignment are 
the only ones who can even touch this sword. 


of Friendship 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 

Tales of the Lance 
During the Dwarfgate Wars, Caramon proposed a 
contest to bring the two quarreling factions of hill 
dwarves and plainsmen together. Caramon raised 
a tall wooden post in a sea of mud, placing the 
Axe of Brotherhood and the Sword of Friendship 
at the top. Whoever climbed the post could claim 
these as prizes. There was a catch, of course. Not 
only was the post greased, but Caramon had the 
contest rigged so that the dwarves and men had to 
work together to reach the prizes. The Sword of 
Friendship has a +3 bonus on attack and damage 
rolls. 


Frost Brand 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This is a sword +3 frost brand, +6 vs, fire- 
using/dwelling creatures. This sword always pro- 
vides a +3 bonus. The +6 bonus takes effect 
against creatures that use fire or live in fiery 


environments. The weapon does not shed any 
5376 


1370 


| ST ne eee 


Sword, Genies” Bane II r 


light, except when the air temperature is below 
0(DG) F. It does give special benefits against fire, 
for its wielder is protected as if wearing a ring of 
fire resistance. The frost brand sword also has a 
50% chance of extinguishing any fire into which 
its blade is thrust. This power extends to a 10-foot 
radius—including a wall of fire but excluding 
fireball, meteor swarm, or flame strikes. 


Galanti 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
Adventures in BLACKMOOR 
Marcovic, the Duke of Borno, carries a sword +1 
named Galanti, but the weapon lacks special 
powers. 


Gemsword 
GP Value: 20,000 

Lost Ships 
These very rare, ancient swords were devised by 
the earliest spacefaring elves. Over the ages, the 
secret of making and repairing them has been 
lost. Only the Arcane and certain archmages 
know how to recharge them. 

Gemswords are +4 weapons of electric-blue 
metal (a very fine sort of steel). Slim and bejew- 
elled, with ornately twisted and curled hilts, they 
are beautiful to behold, prized by all spacefarers. 
Gemswords constantly gather light energy from 
nearby sources, and, once a day (a 144-turn 
period of time), can be commanded to make a 
power strikes, A power strike requires an attack 
roll. Upon hitting, it deals 1 hull point of damage 
to a ship, or 3d4 points of damage to an individ- 
ual. (If the attack roll fails, the blade flashes with 
light, loosing its stored energy harmlessly.) A 
being struck by the sword must roll a save vs. 
breath weapon or be confused (as the 4th-level 
wizard spell) for 12 rounds. 

Each such sword has several show gems (gem- 
stones that are only decorative, although they 
may be very valuable), but it may also have one, 
two, or three power stones. These blue-green 
gems are able to hold magical energy within 
them. Identifiable by their cut, they can hold the 
following spells: 

Cabochon: Regenerate when grasped and 
ordered, as the 7th-level priest spell, but affecting 
only one creature touching the blade (up to 7 
charges). 

Crown cut: Lightning bolt from the tip of the 
blade, as the 3rd-level wizard spell, with a range 
of 222 feet and dealing 7d6 points of damage (up 
to 3 charges); 

Square cut: Teleport without error when 
grasped and ordered, affecting the sword wielder 
and up to two other beings of medium size or 
less, or one large size being plus the wielder, and 


XP Value: 4,000 


who must also touch the blade. The teleportation 
is to another known location within a sphere, but 
not from one sphere to another (up to four 
charges). 

Each charge equals one spell, called forth by 
mental command of the wielder, who is always 
aware of what the sword can do, at least in rough 
physical terms, and how many charges it has 
(magical ability is not required to use the sword’s 
gem properties). 

Recharging gemswords is known to involve the 
casting of the spells they hold, but the process 
(and associated spells) remain secret. Characters 
will have to research this their own. The DM may 
also wish to devise other gem cut/spell combina- 
tions. 


Genie Slayer 

XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This sword +2 acts as a +4 weapon when used 
against any genie. Further, it inflicts double dam- 
age (doubling any damage bonus as well) when 
used against one of the following genie types 
(roll 144): 


Roll Genie 
1 Djinni 
2 Dao 
3 Efreeti 
4 Marid 


The sword inflicts double damage against the 
common and noble versions of the particular 
genies. Other types of genies (including jann, 
gen, and tasked genies) are only attacked with a 
+4 bonus to attack and damage rolls. 


Genies’ Bane 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
These swords grant a +1 combat bonus to attack 
and damage rolls. It also grants a + 2 against any 
genielike creatures, including gen, common 
genies, tasked genies, noble genies, and jann. 


Genies’ Bane I 


XP Value GP Value 
Dao: 700 3,500 
Djinn: 700 3,500 
Efreet: 700 3,500 
Marid: 700 3,500 


DRAGON Magazine 179 
These weapons grant a +2 bonus in combat, but 
provide an additional +1 to attack and damage 
rolls against one specific genie type (dao, marid, 
efreet, or djinn). They may affect both common 


and noble versions of these types, but they affect 
5587 


1371 


Sword, Genieblight 


j 


all other genies, even other genies of the same 
elemental type, with the weapon’s standard attack 
and damage bonus. 


Genieblight 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
Land of Fate 
These swords may be of any type. They grant a 
+1 combat bonus to attack and damage rolls, and 
grant a +2 against any of the geniekind, including 
common genies, tasked genies, noble genies, 
jann, and even gens. 


Geniescourge 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Land of Fate 
These weapons grant a +2 bonus in combat, but 
provide a +3 to attack and damage rolls against 
specific geniekind (dao, marid, efreeti or djinni). 
They may affect both common and noble ver- 
sions, but affect all other genies, and even other 
genies of the same elemental type, as simply +2. 


Giant Slayer 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This provides a +3 bonus vs. any giant, giant kin, 
ettin, ogre mage, or titan. Against any of the true 
giants (hill, stone, frost, fire, cloud, storm) the 
sword causes double damage (2d12+3). 

In Kara-Tur: This sword affects all new giants 
introduced in this set and in the AL-QADIM® 
MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM” Appendix, gaining an 
additional +2 attack bonus against them. 


of Giant Slaying 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Steading of the Hill Giant Chief 
This neutral good sword is unique, with Intelli- 
gence of 14 and an Ego of 8. The sword speaks 
Hill, Stone, and Frost Giant in addition to Com- 
mon. It detects enemies, but the sword has no other 
powers. It has a +2 damage bonus, +4 vs. giants. 


of the Giants 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Legends & Lore 

When Beowulf followed Grendel’s mother into 
her watery lair, he found his own sword would 
not injure her. Fortunately, the glowing sword of 
the giants happened to be hanging on the wall 
where he could seize it. This sword accomplished 
what his own could not, and he slew the fierce 
ogress. It is not known what later became of the 
sword. The sword of the giants is a vorpal sword 
+5 that glows with a constant golden light. In 
addition, it acts as a ring of free action and allows 
its possessor to breathe water. 


Githyanki Silver 
XP Value GP Value 
Knight: 2,000 10,000 
Leader: 12,000 60,000 
Outer Planes MC Appendix 


Githyanki knights of 7th level and above always 
carry a silver sword—a two-handed sword +3 
that, if used astrally, has a 5% chance per hit of 
cutting an opponent’s silver cord, but mind barred 
individuals are immune. 

A supreme leader of a lair will carry a special 
silver sword +5, with all the abilities of a vorpal 
weapon that also affects mind barred individuals. 

Githyanki never willingly allow a silver sword 
to fall into the hands of a nongithyanki. If a spe- 
cial silver sword should fall into someone’s 
hands, very powerful raiding parties will be 
formed to recover the sword. Failure to recover 
one of these highly prized weapons surely means 
instant death to all the githyanki involved at the 
hands of their merciless lich-queen. 


Glorius 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 

Glorius, the sword used by the hero Oliver, broke 
nine swords made by the famed smiths Ansias, 
Galas, and Munifican. It is a sword of sharpness 
+4, Every time the user strikes an opponent, 
rolling exactly what is needed to strike, the user’s 
weapon must roll a saving throw vs. crushing 
blow or be snapped. (Magical weapons gain a 
saving throw bonus equal to their magical 
enchantment.) 


Goblinvolent 
GP Value: 2,000 
The Knight of Newts 
The bonuses of this magical sword apply to both 
attack and damage rolls. The sword causes 1d8+1 
points of damage to all targets, except for gob- 
lins, in which case damage is 1d8+2 points. 


of the Golden Gulf 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 


XP Value: 400 


Land of Fate 
This magical cutlass is a favorite weapon of cor- 
sairs and other sea travelers. In addition to pro- 
viding a combat bonus, the sword allows the 
wielder to survive underwater as if under the 
effects of a water breathing spell as long as the 
cutlass is in hand. 


Golembane 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
Mordenkainen’s Fantastic Adventure 
Against a golem, this weapon gains a +3 attack 


bonus and inflicts 3d10 points of damage per 
5591 


= 1372 5 


See T OG OO OO EE ———— 


Sword, Guardian Blade 


a SS 


strike, plus any other bonuses applicable. It is 
otherwise a normal long sword +1. 


Gram 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,000 
DuNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Gram (German for grief) was another famous 
sword of Siegfried. This weapon is the equivalent 
to a sword of nine lives stealing +3. 


Grankhul’s 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Monster Mythology 
Grankhul’s avatar wields a long sword +3 that 
strikes its victim dumb for 1d4+2 rounds unless a 
saving throw vs. spell is made. 


Graz’zt’s 

XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,500 
Monster Manual II 
Graz’zt normally employs a huge, wavy-bladed 
sword (equal to a bastard sword) that drips acid 
on command. The acid inflicts an additional 
1d4+4 points of damage. Those who own nonliv- 
ing materials must make a saving throw vs. acid 
if Graz’zt strikes with a natural 20 on his attack 
roll. 


Greenswathe 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Howl From the North 
Greenswathe is a strange-looking weapon, arcane 
and almost alien. It appears to be made of gold, 
but it is as hard as adamantite. Peculiar 
arabesques and signs are etched into the blade 
and decorate the handle. It has a single emerald 
set into the pommel. 

Greenswathe is a neutrally aligned weapon 
designed for a druid. In the hands of anyone else, 
itis simply a scimitar +1. In the hands of a druid, 
itis a +3 weapon that also confers bonuses of —1 
to the character’s AC and +1 to all saving throws. 
A druid who possesses Greenswathe is allowed to 
cast one additional spell per day in each level he 
is capable of casting, with the proviso that the 
extra spell comes from the plant or animal sphere. 

Greenswathe has no special purpose, but it 
does have a special attack form usable once a 
day—the armor-piercing strike. On command, 
Greenswathe simply sweeps in an arc through 
armor as if it did not exist. A target is treated as 
having no armor, though any magical bonuses are 
still counted. For example, striking at a target in 
plate mail +3 that would normally have an AC of 
0, Greenswathe attacks as if striking at a target 
with AC 7 (AC 10, -3 for the magical bonus). In 
addition, if the strike is successful, Greenswathe 
inflicts 1d3 times the usual damage—between 


4-11 and 12-33 points of damage to a small or 
human size target. 

A druid picking up Greenswathe instantly has 
the feeling that this weapon has further latent 
powers that are currently unknown. 


Gregory’s Holy Avenger 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
1993 Collector Card 357 

The holy avenger long sword +5 in Gregory’s 
possession is known as Thrivaenstel, which 
means Truth’s Right Arm in an ancient tongue. As 
with all holy avengers, in a paladin’s hands Thri- 
vaenstel generates 50% magic resistance in a 5- 
foot radius, dispels magic within the same radius 
at a level equal to the paladin’s, and allows the 
paladin to inflict 10 extra points of damage per 
successful strike against chaotic evil opponents. 
In any other person’s hands, Thrivaenstel merely 
functions as a long sword +2. 


Grinthane 

XP Value: 3,600 GP Value: 18,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 
This is a sword +5 defender, with a finely carved 
jade pommel. The elvish runes along the blade 
say, Go for the Green Heart, hinting at its special 
purpose to slay green dragons. In the hands of an 
elf, the blade is +5 on attack rolls and confers a 
+5 bonus to Armor Class. It grants its wielder a 
+5 saving throw bonus against green dragon 
breath. Its other abilities are: detect green dragons 
in a l-mile radius, detect precious metals in a 
120-foot radius and detect gems in a 120-foot 
radius. It speaks Elf, Common, and Green 
Dragon. 

In the hands of all other creatures, it functions 
as a normal sword. Grinthane enjoys verbally 
abusing its victims, especially if those victims are 
green dragons. Immediately on sighting a green 
dragon, the sword begins yelling insults in Green 
Dragon. 


Guardian Blade 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 
The Assassin's Knot 

The chief function of a guardian blade is to lie 
with a sleeping character and warn of approach- 
ing danger. It can detect enemies like a wand of 
enemy detection within a 20-foot sphere. Upon 
detecting an enemy, the guardian flashes a single 
burst of light, telepathically alerts its owner, and 
goes out. This power can be used once a day, and 
operates continuously for a period of up to six 
hours. It may be used while the character is 
awake and moving, but once used, it cannot func- 
tion again for 24 hours. 


5598 


1373 


Sword, Hachiman’s 


j aiana 


Hachiman’s 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Legends & Lore 
Hachiman’s avatar wields a sword of sharpness 
+5. 


Hades’s 
GP Value: 25,000 
Legends & Lore 
Opponents of Hades’s avatar must save vs. death 
magic or die when they are struck by his sword. 


XP Value: 5,000 


Harmonizer 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Howl From the North 
Harmonizer is a sword especially made for 
thieves. Across its shiny surface are etched 
images of a wizard performing a ritual over five 
swords can be clearly seen. The wizard is wearing 
a white robe, and behind the wizard, a swirling 
mass of wind and earth coils eerily. 

In the hands of a thief, the sword is a neutrally 
aligned defender two-handed sword +5, but in 
any other hands, the sword is merely a two- 
handed sword +1. Its size and composition make 
the weapon look heavy and bulky, but it weighs 
the same as a standard dagger, making it a perfect 
weapon for weaker thief characters. 

When this sword is first retrieved, it scans the 
immediate area, determining who is a foe and 
who is a friend of the thief who possesses the 
weapon. Once this has been determined, the 
sword waits until the friends are alone. At this 
moment, Harmonizer brings into being exact 
replicas of the characters. The newly arrived 
clones begin fighting the characters with the pre- 
cision and skill of the characters. They also pos- 
sess identical weapons and magical items. 
Harmonizer does this in order to determine the 
worth of its new wielder. 

When battling another thief, a thief PC realizes 
one more bad side effect of the sword. It gives the 
PC the same thieving and fighting abilities as the 
opponent in order to even the battle. If the oppos- 
ing thief is lesser in level, Harmonizer increases 
the opposing thief’s ability to match that of the 
PC. If the thief puts the sword down to battle at 
an advantage, the tactic works, but the thief and 
his companions must again fight their duplicates 
when the thief picks up the sword again. 


Harpo’s Orcslayer 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 77 
This magical blade belongs to Harpo Bogglinn. 
He loves this sword, the chief weapon in his 
unceasing war against orcs. When within 50 feet 
of an orc or orog, the sword begins to quiver, 


almost as if in eager anticipation of slaying one of 
the creatures. Against orckind in battle, the blade 
confers a +4 combat bonus, and any successful 
hits cause double damage to orcs and orogs. 
Harpo uses the weapon to kill the 1,001 orcs nec- 
essary to return home and reconcile with his 
father. Against all others, Orcslayer functions as 
a magical sword +2. 


Hawksblade 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 23 

This sentient weapon, wielded by Audrianna 
Adayr, is a flaming long sword of dancing +4. It 
can ignite on command, the flames causing an 
additional 1d6 points of damage to cold-based or 
undead creatures. In addition, it will perform 
exactly as a sword of dancing, going from a +1 
weapon to a +4 weapon over four rounds, and 
attacking on its own every other four round 
period. Hawksblade can also detect evil in a 10- 
foot radius, cast cure light wounds three times a 
day, and cast cure critical wounds once a day. 


Heart of Stone 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 188 
Also known as Corgon 5 Breath, this short sword 
has an intricate silver blade with runes that spell 
Heart on one face and Stone on the other. Both 
the scabbard and the rather spartan pommel are 
made of black adamantite. 


This is a sword +3, though it cannot damage 


creatures from the Elemental Plane of Earth. 
Such elementals do not normally harm the bearer, 
however, unless provoked. On a natural 20, the 
target must save vs. petrification or be turned to 
stone; the bearer saves vs. petrification at +1. The 
wielder may cast the following spells once a day: 
meld into stone (double weight capacity), pass- 
wall, and stone tell. In addition, any of these 
spells may be cast once each a week: contact 
other plane (Elemental Plane of Earth only), 
stone to flesh, and stoneskin. All spells are cast at 
the 12th level. 


Heartseeker 
XP Value: 4,400 GP Value: 22,000 
DRAGON Magazine 99 
Heartseeker is a sword of dancing. 


Heimdall’s 

GP Value: 15,000 
Legends & Lore 
Heimdall’s avatar carries a vorpal sword +3/+5 
vs. frost giants. 


XP Value: 3,000 


5606 


1374 


Sword, Hornblade 


O ener 


Hel’s 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Legends & Lore 
Any being hit by the avatar’s sword must save vs. 
death magic or contract a disease that causes 5 


points of damage each round until cured. 


Ho Masubi’s 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Legends & Lore 
The avatar’s sword is made of fire and does 10 
extra points of fire damage when it hits (but gets 
no Strength bonus). Struck target’s armor must 
save vs. magical fire or be destroyed. 


Hofud 

XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 

Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
This sword combines two abilities when wielded 
by the avatar of the bright god Heimdall. 
* Itslays frost giants with but a single hit. 
+ It has vorpal blade ability with the absence of 
the antimagic circle. 


Holy 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Greyhawk 
As a holy sword +5, this weapon will display its 
true worth only in the hands of a paladin. Wielded 
by a paladin, it negates all spells (including 
wands and staves) in a radius of 10 feet, thus 
making the paladin virtually magic-proof. 


Holy Avenger 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

In the hands of any character other than a paladin, 
this holy sword will perform only as a sword +2. 
In the hands of a paladin, however, it creates a 
magic resistance of 50% in a 5-foot radius, dis- 
pels magic in a 5-foot radius at the level of magic 
use equal to the experience level of the paladin, 
and inflicts +10 points of bonus damage upon 
chaotic evil opponents. 


Holy Revenger 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 15,000 
IMAGINE Magazine 14 
This sword was made for a halfling assassin who 
disguised himself as a paladin for so long, he 
came to believe it. The blade alternates between 
being a holy avenger and a dagger of venom. In 
either guise, it causes 1d4+1 points of damage. 
As a holy avenger, it does +5 damage in the 
hands of a paladin, has all the other holy avenger 
abilities, and can detect invisible objects, cast a 
protection from evil once a day, detect traps, and 
summon a ki-rin for one turn once every two 


weeks, Against an assassin, it does extra dam- 
age—the assassin’s level x 2 points of damage. 

When this weapon is a dagger of venom, it 
poisons any victim on a natural roll of 20. Even if 
the saving throw vs. poison (at a —1 penalty) is 
successful, the victim is in such pain that all sub- 
sequent attacks are made at a —4 penalty for the 
next full turn. A paladin’s normal saving throw 
bonus becomes a —4 penalty against the venom of 
this weapon. The venom never needs to be 
renewed. The blade can detect good, cast protec- 
tion from good once a day, and summon a dao or 
efreet for one turn every two weeks. The user of 
the blade must concentrate upon controlling the 
summoned monster, lest it turn upon him or her. 

The nature of the blade varies in an unpre- 
dictable fashion, but it never spends more than 
three weeks in one form. It has an Intelligence of 
17 and an Ego of 19. It attempts to slay all who 
are not assassins or paladins. 


of Honor 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
War Captain’s Companion 

This is an extremely rare short sword awarded 
only to the bravest of commanders in the Wa navy 
and army. It grants the bearer a +4 to all saves 
against mind-altering and mind-controlling spells 
and influences both magical and natural. For 
example, the bearer gains the bonus to saves with 
respect to the confusion attack of an umber hulk, 
the mind altering effects of alcohol, the effects of 
a hypnosis spell, and so on. It does not affect 
psionic attacks, though it is itself immune to 
psionic effects. The wakizashi of honor has a 
12,000 gp value on the open market. In Wa, the 
sale of these weapons is illegal, and punishable 
by death. All swords of honor have names. 


Hornblade 
XP Value 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This is a magical weapon with a sicklelike 
blade resembling some sort of animal horn. 
Hornblades range in size from that of a knife to 
somewhat less than the length of a short sword. 
Even a close inspection is 90% unlikely to 
reveal it as anything other than a piece of horn, 
% to 1% feet in length, set in some sort of han- 
dle or grip. If magic is detected, a hornblade 
radiates faintly of enchantment magic. How- 
ever, if the proper pressure is applied in the cor- 
rect spot, a curved blade of great strength and 
sharpness springs out. 

The small versions (knife and dagger size) are 
usually enchanted to +1 or +2, and the largest 
version (scimitar size) commonly has a bonus of 


+2 or +3. Smaller hornblades can be thrown, and 
5614 


Aaa ——— ya 


1375 


E 


Sword of Horus 


ee 


the bonus applies to both attack and damage rolls. 

Any character class permitted to use sickle 
weapons can use a hornblade. The possessor can 
use it with proficiency, providing he or she has 
proficiency with the appropriately sized weapon 
(knife, dagger, or scimitar). 


of Horus 
XP Value: 18,600 GP Value: 93,000 
Legends & Lore 
Horus’s avatar wields a sword of Horus in com- 
bat. This magical weapon acts as a sword +5, 
holy avenger, but also has the special abilities of 
a luck blade, defender, and vorpal sword. 


Ice Claw 
XP Value: 2,600 GP Value: 13,000 
DRAGON Magazine 188 

This sword was forged by the dwarves of Citadel 
Adbar centuries ago to stem the onslaught of 
dragons in the Ice Mountains. Their high king 
maintained the weapon in his personal armory 
and bestowed it on a select group of champions 
for specific quests; it had no exclusive wielder 
and was only seldom used. Dwarven tradition 
holds that Jee Claw has slain at least one dragon 
and three fiends during its colorful history, as 
well as many lesser foes. 

One hero failed in his appointed task and lost 
Ice Claw to treachery; he shaved his beard in 
shame, then left in exile to recover the blade. He 
died without success 116 winters ago. 

The sword remained lost for the better part of 
four decades before it eventually found its way 
into the hands of one Captain Farzahd of an 
obscure mercenary company. When he later tried 
to force himself on an elf maiden named 
Ulshanya, she slew him with sorcery and took the 
sword for herself. She is still an active adventurer 
and travels across the Realms with the weapon. 

Ice Claw is a unique short sword with a pol- 
ished off-white blade that is cool to the touch. 
The pommel is silver, twined with black adaman- 
tite thread and set with a large diamond (worth 
5,000 gp). It is of lawful neutral alignment (Intel- 
ligence 17, Ego 20), communicates by speech (in 
Common or Dwarf) or telepathy, and can read 
mundane and magical writing when touched to 
the script. 

This sword acts as a frost brand +3 with a spe- 
cial purpose to defeat dragons of any alignment. 
The wielder gains a +2 to all saving throws and 
takes —1 point per die of damage sustained in 
combat against dragons (to a minimum of 1 point 
per die). Jce Claw 5 bearer is also immune to the 
aura of fear surrounding some dragons. 


Ilbratha, Mistress of Battle 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DRAGON Magazine 74 

Ilbratha is a bronze sword with a row of six 
matched bloodstones set into the fuller of the 
blade along one side only. Each bloodstone is 
worth 70 gold pieces; as an undamaged set of 
stones, they might bring 500 to 600 gp if sold 
shrewdly. //bratha does not glow and bears no 
inscriptions, It is +1 on attack and damage rolls, 
and, when grasped by a fighter of any alignment, 
its powers are communicated telepathically to the 
holder. This is a feature of its magical manufac- 
ture—it is not sentient. 

Ilbratha gains its name from its powers, which 
are very useful in combat. When held (bare flesh 
on the handgrip) and mentally ordered, //bratha 
can jump (as the spell; one leap only) with its 
bearer three times a day, blink itself and its bearer 
once a day, and create a mirror image of itself and 
its bearer once a day. It also rings like struck 
chimes or tubular bells when it touches magic; 
this includes spell effects from devices and physi- 
cal contact with enchanted items, but not physical 
effects (such as a stinking cloud or gust of wind) 
caused by spell casting. This power is a warning 
only, and is in not a protection against magic. 

Ilbratha was created by unknown hands at the 
behest of Azoun I, long-dead king of Cormyr. He 
bore it once into battle, at Ithmong in his war 
with Tethyr, and then lost it in a storm that 
wrecked his ship on the rocks of The Neck. The 
sword was found by the fishers of Teziir and sold 
to a rich merchant, Sevan of Amnwater. He took 
it west on a caravan along the Trader’s Road and 
the river Chionthar to Scomubel, where he sold it 
to Phelas Urm, a merchant of Thentia. Phelas 
brought it overland through Cormyr, where it was 
recognized in Arabel. Agents of King Azoun I 
attempted to recover it, and slew Phelas, but in 
the confusion the blade was either lost or stolen 
by one of the agents. 

All trace of it was lost until, 200 winters later, 
the sage Thallastam of Procampur was offered 
the blade for 1,500 gold pieces by a peddler from 
a nearby town who seemed ignorant of its true 
nature. Thallastam brought the blade to Elminster 
in Shadowdale, the only loremaster with an inter- 
est in swords whom he trusted. 

Elminster identified the blade from the writ- 
ings of Azoun I (the old king’s great-grandson 
had just come to the throne), and Thallastam bore 
it back toward Procampur by way of Tilver’s Gap 
and Essembra. But he was never seen again, and 
did not reach Procampur. His ruined diary, staff, 
and a skeleton were found some years later when 
the Pool of Yeven in Battledale was dragged, but 


the sword was never found. Elminster believes it 
5617 


A 1376 ~ 


x Sword, Joyeuse s 


is in the hands of brigands, or perhaps mercenar- 
ies, who have not drawn the blade since, at least 
not in battle near the Dales. 


Ilneval’s Broad Sword 
XP Value: 2,200 GP Value: 11,000 
Monster Mythology 
His dreadful broad sword +3 causes bleeding 
wounds (lose 1d4 points per round until a cure seri- 
ous wounds or a higher-level healing spell is cast). 


Ilyana 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,500 
Dark of the Moon 
Gregor is a barrel-chested man with powerful 
limbs and an arrogant, commanding manner. He 
has a thick beard and a heavy brow, and his eyes 
burn like coals when he is angry. Gregor is a 
shape-changing werewolf, or loup du noir, and is 
lord of the domain of Vorostokov, As a human, 
Gregor wields a bastard sword +3 named Ilyana 
(reaver) two-handed. //yana has the power to heal 
its wielder once a day. 


Indra’s Flaming 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Legends & Lore 
Indra’s avatar carries a flaming sword +5 that is can 
be used to ignite objects just as Flame Tongue can. 


of Insanity 
GP Value: 3,500 

DRAGON Magazine 91 
These swords function as +1 weapons, they are 
never Intelligent. On any modified attack roll of 
20 or better, the sword generates an energy field 
around the blade that causes any nonpsionic crea- 
ture struck to suffer an effect similar to that 
caused by a psionic blast attack, producing tem- 
porary confusion or insanity. Nonpsionic beings 
struck are affected as recorded in The Complete 
Psionics Handbook, the being’s combined Wis- 
dom and Intelligence scores determining the 
weapon’s effects, Note that insane beings, those 
with more than 6 Hit Dice, and those who are 
immune to psionic attacks cannot be affected. 

If a psionic character is struck with this sword 
and a score of 20 or greater is achieved on the 
attack roll, the being suffers a psionic blast attack 
of 100 PSPs. The sword cannot be psionically 
attacked in return. 


XP Value: 700 


of Intercession 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
This magical weapon is a holy (or unholy) sword 
that always has an alignment and a patron deity. A 
character of any different alignment may wield a 


sword of Intercession, but it functions then as a 
normal, nonmagical weapon. A character of the 
same alignment as the sword may wield it as a +2 
weapon. A character who worships the sword’s 
patron deity may wield it as a sword +4, and in 
addition gains a 5% magic resistance and a +2 
bonus on all saving throws so long as the sword is 
held or carried. Such a character is also able to 
commune with his or her deity once a week, ask- 
ing one yes or no question at that time. The sword 
does not work for those who have only converted 
to their new alignment or religion within the last 
year. 


Ironfang 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Children of the Night 

Jacqueline’s favored weapon is /ronfang, her vor- 
pal sword. /ronfang was fashioned ages past from 
meteoric iron by the drow of Arak, from whom 
she stole it long ago. She is able to use this 
weapon even when wearing the head of a wizard 
or other character class which might normally be 
unable to employ such a sword. This weapon 
functions in all ways as described in the DMG. 
Jacqueline has made it a practice to “harvest” 
new heads only with this blade. 


Jaysen’s Magebane 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 79 

Jaysen’s Magebane is a magical long sword that 
provides a +1 bonus in combat, and (despite its 
name) a +2 bonus vs. all users of magic. How- 
ever, the sword also acts as a magical lightning 
rod, and all area-of-effect spells that encompass 
Jaysen concentrate on him. Saving throws suc- 
cessfully made by all other individuals reduce the 
damage to one quarter, while failure results in 
half damage. Jaysen must successfully save to 
take full damage—a failed save means Jaysen 
suffered +150% damage. 


Joyeuse 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Joyeuse (French for joyous) is the great sword 
that Charlemagne wielded. It took the smith Gal- 
las three years to forge this powerful weapon. It is 
a bastard sword +4 with the ability to cast a per- 
manent version of curse (the reverse of bless). 
When an opponent is struck by this sword, a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell (at —4) must be 
made or the victim suffers a permanent —1 to all 
attack rolls and saving throws. To remove a single 
—l penalty, the wielder must be subjected to a 
remove curse spell. A remove curse is required 


for each —1 curse inflicted by this sword. 
5625 


— OO a 


1377 


OO ————————— 


~ Sword, Justicer r 


Justicer 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Adventures in Blackmoor 
Owned by the baron of Bramwald, Bram Tagus, 
Justicer is a sword +2 with no extraordinary 
powers. 


Kabal 

GP Value: 25,000 
Fate of Istus 
Cymbelline’s long sword is highly magical, a 
flame tongue +3 whose light is blinding white. 
The sword’s name, Kabal, is a word from an 
archaic (and mostly forgotten) dialect of the Bak- 
lunish tongue. The word means fate, but with a 
special twist: when someone “meets his or her 
fate” in a contest of arms, that is kabal. Kabal is a 
unique weapon, created by Fate herself—sentient, 
strictly neutral in alignment, with an Intelligence 
of 20 and an Ego of 30. 

The sword has the following powers: read lan- 
guages, read magic, know alignment (once a 
day), energy drain (three times a day), detect 
magic (once a turn), detect invisibility (once a 
turn), charm person (three times a day), telepathy 
(once per turn), suggestion (twice a day), and 
slow (twice a day with a —3 penalty to saving 
throws). All these powers are similar to spells of 
the same name, and operate at the 18th level. 

Kabal has a special purpose—to aid Istus in 
her test of the character classes. The weapon 
communicates telepathically. It will let no one but 
its current owner touch the sword. If a wizard 
casts detect magic on the weapon, the caster 
receives a fleeting impression of frightening 
power; then the connection is broken. If anyone 
else touches the hilt of the sword while its current 
owner is alive, the weapon delivers 3d12 points of 
electrical damage. 


XP Value: 5,000 


Kaldair Swiftfoot’s 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Monster Mythology 
Kaldair carries a dancing short sword that para- 
lyzes even creatures normally immune to para- 
lyzation (a normal save at —4 negates). 


Kali’s 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Legends & Lore 
Anyone hit by Kali’s sword must also save vs. 
death magic or be killed. 


Karali’s Silver 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 242 
Karali’s magical short sword is a typical magical 
weapon +3 in most respects. However, when it is 


wielded under the light of a gibbous or larger size 
moon, it drains 1 energy level from any victim it 
successfully hits. Each time that the sword drains 
an energy level, Karali’s life force is also altered 
slightly, taking him ever closer to the final, true 
form of a darkling. 


of Kas 
XP Value: 13,000 GP Value: 65,000 
Eldritch Wizardry 
Another item connected with the legend of the 
lich Vecna is the sword of Kas, his onetime body- 
guard. This sword is said to have a thin, gray 
blade of some metallic substance. Its powers are 
only dimly hinted at by legend, but Kas was said 
to be the mightiest swordsman of his age. 

The sword has +3 bonus, +5 vs. undead and 
fiends, and an Intelligence of 18 and Ego of 18. It 
is an evil weapon, and if possible, it will control 
any fighter who picks it up and turn him evil. 
Additionally, it has the following abilities/penal- 
ties: 
¢ Water breathing 
e User may become ethereal twice a day. 

* Cause serious wound of double effect twice a 
day. 

¢ As long as the user carries the artifact, the 
character acts as a magic drainer. No magic 
directed at the user has any effect, and the user 
can use no magic. Any magic that touches any 
part of the user’s body permanently loses its 
magical ability. 

* User may restore one lost level (as a restora- 
tion spell) once per week (perhaps one drained 


from a nearby friendly PC). 
of Kas II 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 


While this sword has a 6-foot blade and a 2-foot 
hilt, it can be easily wielded in both hands by any 
warrior. The blade is rippled, with a vein of gold 
running down the center. The hilt is wrapped in 
red leather flecked with gold. The narrow quil- 
lons are of unicorn horn and capped with small, 
black pearls; the basket surrounding the hilt is 
formed in the image of a leering, bearded face. 

The history of Kas the Bloody Handed is irrev- 
ocably linked to Lord Vecna, for his sword was 
created by Vecna’s own skills. Kas was Vecna’s 
lieutenant, warlord, and assassin, and the sword 
was his symbol of authority. 

The sword is as evil as its maker, and it whis- 
pered dreams of treachery to Kas until finally, 
blade in hand, he confronted his dread master. 
The battle between the two of them was titanic, 
and both are said to have died in the end. All that 


remained behind were the sword of Kas and the 
5632 


"aa aan 


1378 


Sword, Kura, The Darkness 


O Ney 


hand and eye of Vecna. 

Although the sword is thoroughly evil, PCs 
may be allowed to use it, but only for a short 
period of time. Any appearance of the sword of 
Kas should be matched by the introduction of the 
hand and eye of Vecna as well, since the sword 
exists to destroy Vecna. Use of the artifact should 
be built around that story. 

The sword may be discovered by the adventur- 
ers as a prelude to a campaign involving the hand 
and eye, as the owner of the sword becomes 
obsessed with finding Vecna’s artifacts. This 
leads the party into the DM’s planned adventure 
for the hand and eye. 

The sword is also the bane of the Cult of 
Vecna, since the death of Vecna’s followers indi- 
rectly fulfills the sword’s goals. Thus, the sword 
could lead the characters into a conflict with the 
cult of Vecna (which in turn leads to the hand and 
eye). 

The sword of Kas is intelligent (Int 19, Ego 20) 
and communicates telepathically, revealing only 
two random powers when first touched. 

Constant Powers: The sword acts as a 
defender +6 (double damage to planar beings), 
grants foresight, and defiles holy water within 30 
feet. 

Invoked Powers: Upon command, the sword 
can shield (3/day) or bestow fire giant Strength 
(+4 to hit, +10 damage, | turn duration, 3/day). 

Random Powers: The sword grants three abil- 
ities from Table 1-14: Immunity and two abili- 
ties from Table 1-15: Major Powers. 

Curses: First, the sword inflicts 2d20 damage 
the first time it’s touched. Second, all powers fail 
when it’s brought within 60 feet of Vecna or his 
artifacts—a fact of which the sword is not aware. 
Third, the wielder risks artifact domination; the 
sword’s goal is to destroy Vecna and his artifacts. 
Finally, it must be quenched in blood once a day 
and tries to force its owner to do so. If successful, 
the character is compelled to kill (even another 
member of the party). 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* The death of Vecna, now a demigod. 

* The sword is hammered into a plowshare with 
the cudgel of St. Cuthbert. 

* All memory of Kas must be wiped from Oerth. 


Kirren’s Frostbrand 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 244 
Kirren found this magical sword wedged in the 
skeleton of a red dragon. It provides a +6 bonus 
to attack rolls against fire-using or dwelling crea- 
tures while providing protection to the wielder as 
a ring of fire resistance. The blade does not glow 
unless the temperature is below 0(DG) F. Any- 


time the blade is thrust into a fire source, there is 
a 50% chance of extinguishing it. Kirren’s blade 
can also cast ice storm as an 8th-level wizard 
once a week. When used against all other crea- 
tures, frostbrand is a +3 magical weapon. 


Kullervo’s 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
Kullervo'’s sword provides a +3 on attacks and 
when it strikes it slays any fighter (save vs. spell 
applicable). The sword communicates with 
Kullervo by talking. 


Kura, The Darkness 


XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 35,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

This unique onyx shard can be worn around the 
neck on a chain or at the belt as a netsuke. It is 
smooth and curves slightly, looking almost like a 
miniature katana. If none of the shard’s special 
powers are being used, the onyx radiates an aura 
of abjuration magic. The magic detected is the 
spell that locks Kura, an intelligent being from 
the Negative Material Plane, into the stone. Kura 
was tricked into the stone centuries ago by a 
ninja/wu jen. Kura has two goals—to free itself 
and to assist anyone who makes use of the power 
of darkness. 

Kura has an affinity with ninja and will badger 
any wearer into becoming a ninja. The stone will 


not willingly serve nonrogues. Kura is by nature 
5638 


— °° °°» -—...  — = 


1379 


a rr 


Sword, Kusunogi no Tsurugi 


jp, SE Ren ee 


temperamental and devious. Over the centuries 
that Kura has spent trapped in the shard (most of 
the time serving ninja) the creature has developed 
a strong distrust of humans. 

Kura is chaotic neutral and is treated as a weapon 
with an Intelligence of 14, an Ego of 10, and a per- 
sonality of 24. Kura speaks to its wielder by telepa- 
thy and has the following abilities, functioning as if 
cast by an 8th-level wu jen and usable once a day: 
detect invisibility, darkness 15' radius, and fly. In 
addition, it can generate a blade of Negative Plane 
energy in the shape of any medium or small melee 
weapon. The blade is pitch black, effectively invis- 
ible in the dark, and has a +3 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls on all targets except undead. When 
used against undead, the item suffers a —1 penalty 
on attack and damage rolls. 


Kusunogi no Tsurugi 
(Grass Quelling) 

GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 40 
Roll randomly for alignment. No Intelligence or 
Ego, and with an ordinary bonus, this is the best 
quality katana for a samurai. When the sword is 
drawn, it automatically casts a continual light and 
all normal fires within a 10-foot radius go out. 
Magical fires are treated as though a dispel magic 
spell were cast by a 12th-level wizard. When the 
sword is drawn, the user is immune to all forms 
of flame damage. In addition, the sword does 
double damage to all vegetation or plant creatures 
and allows the user to cut through thick brush and 
tall grass with great ease or chop down trees as if 
it were a lumber axe. However, the sword was 
created from a dragon. No one (including the car- 
rier) within a 50-foot radius of the sword can do 
any damage to dragons, and the sword itself never 
does damage to dragons. 


XP Value: 500 


Lafarallinn’s 
XP Value: 6,800 GP Value: 34,000 
Tome of Magic 
Lafarallinn’s avatar wields a long sword +3 with 
the property of wounding. 


Lancelin’s 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
The Shady Dragon Inn 
Lancelin Openhand wields a broad sword +1/+3 
vs. enchanted creatures. 


Laprov 
XP Value: 15,000 GP Value: 75,000 
The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror 
This short sword is a vorpal blade. It has an Intel- 
ligence and an Ego of 14. Its abilities are detect 
magic, detect invisible object, and locate object. 


It speaks eight languages, it is lawful neutral in 
alignment, and it desires to return to its master, T. 
Deeous, as soon as possible. This sword was 
taken by a roc, held by a jub-jub bird for a time, 
and then stolen by a bandersnatch. If it can gain 
control of its current owner, it will do so, then 
begin shouting “Snickersnack! Snickersnack! I'll 
cut your heads off if you don’t take me back!” If 
the party attempts to retain this weapon, the DM 
must remember that it will never, under any cir- 
cumstances, be a willing servant. It will always 
seek to destroy those who wield it until such time 
as it is brought back to its rightful owner. (Have it 
shout in situations and reveal the presence of the 
party, attempt mutiny or try to control the charac- 
ter holding it, and mislead the party about its 
powers whenever possible.) 


Lassiviren’s 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 
The Rogues’ Gallery 

Lassiviren’s sword functions as a sword +2. 
However, every time it hits it drains 2 energy 
levels from the opponent. The victim is allowed 
a saving throw vs. spell, and if the save is suc- 
cessful, the sword attempts to draw 2 energy lev- 
els from its user. If the wielder successfully 
saves, no energy levels are lost and the sword 
does its normal damage. 


Lawful 
See Woodhold, below. 


Lemmikainen’s 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
This is a sword +5 with both sharpness and flam- 
ing abilities combined. 


Life Saver 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 
A neutral good sword +2, a life saver blade con- 
tinuously detects evil and undead within a 30- 
foot radius. When the weapon is drawn, it grants 
its wielder immunity to all energy-draining 
attacks. Once a week, the sword can emit a sun- 
burst. 


Life Stealing 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This +2 weapon will eliminate 1 level of experi- 
ence (or Hit Die) and accompanying abilities 
when it strikes any opponent on a natural roll of 
20. This function is the same as the level-draining 
ability of certain undead creatures. The sword 


wielder can gain as many hit points as an oppo- 
5643 


= 1380 F 


5 Sword, Mamluk Sword of Obedience r 


nent loses to this function of the weapon, up to 
the maximum number of hit points the character 
is allowed (only a character who has suffered loss 
of hit points can benefit from the function). 

In Ravenloft: The swordsman must make a 
powers check each time this weapon steals a life. 


Life Taker 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 
DraGoN Magazine 99 
Life Taker isa nine-lives stealer. 


of Light 

GP Value: 4,000 
Rary the Traitor 
This unique magical item is currently in posses- 
sion of the rogue dervish, Tolan Kai. It functions 
as a scimitar +4 but also can emit blinding light 
(three times a day, anyone within 20 feet must 
successfully save vs. spell or be blinded for 2d4 
rounds), and cure serious wounds (once a day). 


XP Value: 800 


Lightning Blade 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

Only three of these swords are known to exist. 
Each is crafted of shining platinum inlaid with 
golden lightning bolts running down the sides. 
Ten rounds after the blade has been drawn, or 
upon the speaking of a command word, the sword 
glows blue and can discharge a 7-die lightning 
bolt once a round for up to the next seven rounds. 
When not aglow, the sword gives a +4 bonus on 
attack and damage rolls, and a +5 bonus when 
used against water-breathing creatures. On the 
round during which the sword begins to glow, the 
wielder suffers 2d6 points of electrical damage. 
The wielder suffers 2d6 points of damage each 
subsequent round until a lightning bolt is 
released. Once the blade has been drawn, it can- 
not be sheathed until a lightning bolt is released. 


Locate Object 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
DUNGEONS & DraGons Expert Rules Set 
Once a day, this sword may be used to locate 
object up to 120 feet away in the same manner as 
the 2nd-level wizard spell. 


of Luck 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 
This elven sword is a luck blade that at one time 
held four wishes. Now the steel is colder and only 
a single wish remains. The sword’s pommel is 
engraved with a face that emits dull, haunting 
moans in battle. All opponents hearing the moans 
must save vs. spell or flee in fear for 1d4+1 turns. 


Luck Blade 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This gives its possessor a +1 bonus to all saving 
throws and has 1d4+1 wishes. The DM should 
keep the number of wishes secret. 


Lydia’s Broad sword 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
The Assassin's Knot 
Lydia’s weapon of choice is a broad sword +2 
with an Intelligence of 15, an Ego of 5, and an 
alignment of lawful neutral. It possesses empathy, 
the ability to detect good, and the ability to detect 
evil. 


of Lyons 

XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Assault on the Aerie of the Slave Lords 

This legendary sword is an invisible sword +1. 
While sheathed, its user is invisible (as the spell 
invisibility) until he or she attacks. When the 
sword is drawn the invisibility ends, but the 
sword itself is always invisible. 


Madoc’s 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
The Shady Dragon Inn 
Madoc Gwynn wields a sword +1 with the ability 
to locate objects three times a day. 


Malign 
XP Value: 3,600 GP Value: 18,000 
Book of Lairs, Lst Edition 

Malign is a defender bastard sword +4 that 
causes 2d8+4 points of damage. It speaks Cloud 
Dragon, Faerie Dragon, Mist Dragon, Shadow 
Dragon, Fomorian Giant, Firbolg, Verbeeg, 
Marid, Quickling, and Thri-kreen. It can speak 
verbally and telepathically. It detects traps at 
double distance and invisible objects at double 
distance. It can also charm person. Its purpose 
is to slay wizards; its Intelligence is 17 and its 
Ego is 28. 


Mamluk Sword of Obedience 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
In addition to their magical bonuses, these weap- 
ons also have additional powers over humanoid 
creatures (including men, elves, dwarves, 
gnomes, goblinoid creatures, lycanthropes in 
human form, and giants, but not creatures who 
are obviously nonhuman, such as lizard men, who 
have tails). An individual struck by a magical 
mamluk sword must make a saving throw vs. 
spell or be charmed, immediately surrendering to 


the victor in combat, providing that the individual 
5654 


DE e E E a y e 


1381 


Sword of Mammal Slaying 


jp eR A E 


wielding the sword is of a higher level or has 
more Hit Dice than the victim. The effects of the 
spell are the same as those for charm person or 
charm monster. 


of Mammal Slaying 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Prince of LANKHMAR™ 
This sword works as a standard nonmagical 
weapon when used against nonmammalian life 
forms. Against mammals, however, the sword 
gains a +1 bonus. Against mammals of good 
alignment, the sword gains an additional +2 
bonus to attack and damage rolls. 

When the mammals are intelligent enough to 
have an alignment, the bonus rises to a +3 if the 
creature is of any good alignment. When the 
sword is around mammals, it vibrates, causing a 
slight humming noise. When a good-aligned 
mammal is within 60 feet, the sword hums at a 
higher pitch, and actually begins pulling out of 
the scabbard partially. The sword does not mind 
being used by a mammal, as long as another 
mammal is being killed by it. If a week goes by 
with no mammal blood on its blade, the sword 
will actually incite a berserker rage until the 
sword is coated with it. 

This slightly intelligent sword does not appear 
to be evil when detect evil is cast upon it. The 
sword is only antigood and antimammal. 

Also, the sword is similar to a sword of sharp- 
ness in the fact that it causes the wound to bleed 
profusely for 1d4 rounds after that. This exces- 
sive bleeding causes an additional point of dam- 
age for every round. Therefore, the total amount 
of damage this sword does in combat is 
1d8+3+1d4. 

This magical sword is very rare. It is a com- 
mon sight among lizardmen, who use the blades 
when fighting off the human infestations within 
their lands. Against lizardmen, however, the 
sword acts like a cursed sword —3, This cursed 
effect occurs even if a nonmammalian creature is 
wielding it. 


Mantooth 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Dragons of Triumph 
This potent sword looks like an ordinary long 
sword +1. It is also known by the names Spell- 
cleaver, Darkstar, Caramon s Sword, and Mage- 
fool. Its abilities are primarily directed at 
countering magic. 

Mantooth gains a +2 bonus on attack and dam- 
age rolls against wizards and enchanted crea- 
tures. The sword can possibly sever a magical 
barrier—it has a 1% chance per point of damage 
inflicted. Finally, it can be used to turn a spell 


cast against the wielder. To activate the ability 
that causes the spell to rebound against its caster, 
the wielder of the sword must roll to hit AC 0, 
with no bonuses applied to the roll. 


Mantooth II 

GP Value: 13,500 
Tales of the Lance 
Silvanesti legends tell of this warrior’s blade that 
could shatter enchantments and turn spells—the 
true wizard’s bane. It is known by many names: 
Spellcleaver, Darkstar, Magefool, and Mantooth. 
Folktales credit this blade with the undoing of the 
sorceress Silvyana 500 years ago and the binding 
of the ogre mage Shril. The sword’s origin and 
purpose are unknown, as is its current location. 
Mantooth last appeared in the treasury of Sil- 
vanost. 

Mantooth is a long sword +1 (+2 vs. wizards 
and magical creatures). It deflects a magical 
attack back on the attacker by rolling against AC 
0 (without bonuses), The spellcaster may still 
save to dodge the attack. Mantooth also may 
sever magical barriers. Roll to hit AC 0. Every 
point of damage inflicted on the barrier causes a 
1% cumulative chance that the barrier will fall. 


XP Value: 2,700 


Maroon 

XP Value: 1,400 GP Value: 14,500 
Adventures in BLACKMOOR 
Maroon is an extremely powerful, lawful good 
sword +2/+3 vs. undead and dragons. It has an 
Intelligence of 12 and an Ego of 5 and possesses 
the powers see invisible, detect evil, and detect 
magic. It can also read magic and has the extraor- 
dinary powers of healing, levitation, and telepor- 
tation. It speaks Dragon, Dwarf, Elf, Gnome, Orc 
and Pixie. 


Mayonaka’s Silver Katana 
(Tasogare) 
XP Value: 1,800 GP Value: 9,000 
Children of the Night 

Mayonaka wields a keen silver katana that has 
been in his family for generations. Oriental runes 
run down the side of the blade, naming it Tasog- 
are or Twilight in the language of Mayonaka’s 
homeland. The katana can be used either one- or 
two-handed. As a one-handed weapon it does 
1d10 points of damage against small or medium 
size targets and 1d12 against large ones. As a 
two-handed weapon it does 2d6 to both types of 
targets. The katana is a medium weapon that 
weighs six pounds and has a speed factor of 4, 
Tasogare is enchanted, giving it a +3 on all attack 
and damage rolls. In addition, once a day it can 
be used to cast a darkness 15' radius spell. Any- 
one holding the sword’can see normally in the 

5659 


" ee ee 


1382 


__o a | 


= °° = °° ° ° °° °° — * = i iii 


Sword, Movanic Deva r 


area of darkness, which remains centered on the 
weapon itself. Mayonaka’s Strength bonus of +3 
to attack and +7 to damage applies when using 
Tasogare. 


Melior 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Book of Lairs, Ist Edition 
Melior is a lawful good, two-handed sword +3 
that causes 1d10+3 points of damage. It speaks 
the following dragon tongues; Red, Black, Green, 
White, Blue, and Dragon Turtle; it has speech and 
telepathy. Melior detects precious metals, gems, 
invisible objects and possesses x-ray vision (like 
a ring of x-ray vision). Its purpose is to slay non- 
human monsters. Its Intelligence and Ego are 
both 17. 


Meredin’s Luck Blade 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

1992 Fantasy Collector Card 82 
This magical sword has so far helped Meredin 
out of several very difficult scrapes. The blade 
confers a +1 bonus to all of Meredin’s saving 
throws, and when all else seems to fail, luck saves 
Meredin. For instance, Meredin once found him- 
self cornered by some thugs on the docks, and 
wished for them to disappear. At that instant, a 
large net full of freshly caught fish broke free of 
its hoist and fell on top of the thugs, hiding them 
from his view. 


Mimung 
XP Value: 6,800 GP Value: 34,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Mimung, sword of the hero Wittich, was lent to 
Siegfried for a time. It is the equivalent of a 
sword of wounding +2. 


Mitra’s Sword of Light 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Legends & Lore 
Mitra’s avatar’s sword of light cuts through any 
armor as if the wearer’s AC were no better than 5. 


Monster Slayer 

XP Value: 5,200 GP Value: 26,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 

Monster Slayer is a bastard sword +5 (Int 15, 
Ego 14, AL LG). The sword has the following 
abilities, powers, and purpose: 
Primary abilities: Detect magic 10' radius, 
detect sloping passages 10' radius, and detect 
traps in a 10' radius. 
Special power: Paralyzes victims for 1d4 rounds 
(unless they save vs. paralyzation). 
Special purpose: To slay nonhuman monsters. 
The sword speaks fluent Common. 


Moon Blade 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 25 
This sword is the opposite of a sun blade. Regard- 
less of the size of the moon blade, it can be 
wielded as if it were a short sword with respect to 
encumbrance, speed factor, and so on. 

In normal combat, the pale yellow blade of the 
weapon is equal to a sword +1. When used 
against a creature of good alignment the bonus is 
+2. Against paladins and good-aligned clerics, 
the sword scores double damage. All moon blades 
are of evil alignment. 

Moon blades have a special moonbeam 
power. Once a day, upon command, the blade 
can be swung vigorously above the head, and it 
will shed a soft, pale light similar to moonlight. 
The light illuminates a 10-foot radius around 
the wielder and spreads outward at the rate of 5 
feet per round for 10 rounds. When the swing- 
ing stops, the light fades to a dim glow that per- 
sists for another turn before disappearing. 
Unlike the normal moonbeam spell, the sword’s 
moonbeam power works equally well in day- 
light or darkness. It can light a dark place or 
dim the sunshine. When used in daylight, the 
light in the area of effect is dimmed to that of 
pale moonlight or a dark night. This power is 
extremely helpful to creatures unable to abide 
the sun. Those that normally fight with a 
penalty in bright sunshine, such as goblins, 
orcs, and kobolds, have all such penalties elimi- 
nated when fighting in the moonbeam’s area of 
effect. (See also Sunblade.) 


rglay 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dunaceons & DRAGONS Master Set 
Morglay, also known as Big Ben, was the sword 
of Sir Bevis. It is a sword +1 luck blade. 


Movanic Deva 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 9,000 
Outer Planes MC Appendix 

Although they are often seen carrying a variety 
of weapons, they most often employ a great 
two-handed sword with which they can attack 
twice per round. The great enchanted blade is, 
in all respects, equal to a sword +1 flame 
tongue. It does damage equal to a two-handed 
sword (1d10 to S or M, 3d6 to L) with each 
strike. If a moyanic deva forfeits one or both of 
its attacks, it can parry one strike per attack for- 
feited. The parry is automatically successful 
and requires no die roll. The parry can be used 
against magical attacks, even spells that would 
normally always hit. 


1383 


Sword, Naesowen, Ghost Blade 


jh TEE, 


Naesowen, Ghost Blade 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 
Naesowen was forged in the Tower of Ergoth by 
the power of Black Robe Wizards during the days 
when they were hunted, following the Cataclysm. 
The wizards summoned and trapped an evil spirit 
within the blade to give it strength and additional 
powers. Naesowen is a lawful evil sword +1, +2 
vs. spellcasters and enchanted beings. At will, it 
detects magic and invisibility, detects lies and 
casts know alignment. Three times a week, the 
sword can cast an antimagic shell. In addition, 
when wielded against Wizards of the White 
Robe, it can cause confusion for 2d6 rounds, 
The sword speaks Common and Ancient Com- 
mon, verbally and telepathically. It can also read 
those languages, as well as read magic. 


Nagelring 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Nagelring, or nail-ring, was the sword of Dietrich 
of Bern, a Germanic hero. It is a sword +5 
defender. 


Namara Neversleep 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 74 
Namara is a finely forged sword +2 on attack 
rolls, +4 on damage rolls. It glows with a pale, 
mauve radiance when drawn and spits white 
sparks when it strikes other metal. On one side of 
the blade is etched in Common “Namara,” and on 
the other face “Never Sleep.” The bearer may, at 
will, evoke the sword’s power to emanate silence 
15' radius. Neversleep is as heavy as a normal 
weapon, but floats on top of any liquid (fresh 
water, brine, oil, wine). The sword has no align- 
ment or sentience. 

Namara appears in many legends and tall tales, 
but the designation the “Neversleep Sword” 
appears to be derived only from the inscription on 
the blade and does not refer to any specific prop- 
erty of the sword. Its origin is unknown; Namara 
appears to have existed for as long as tales have 
survived, wielded by such mythic heroes as Eth 
and Brensy! the Tall. Even the most critical of 
sages (Kumur the Skeptic, First Speaker of Ever- 
noster) cannot determine Namara 5 probable time 
or place of origin, or find any references in the 
tales of a world to a time “before Namara was 
forged.” 

Within the last 500 years, Namara has been the 
blade of Serrus the Great, founder of Amn, and a 
blade borne there by his descendants for three 
generations. His fourth direct descendant, 
Ereskas, bore Namara north to found the city of 


Mirabar. Ereskas died without issue, and Namara 
was carefully preserved atop his tomb in the city. 
There it remained for 60 winters, until Mirabar 
was overrun and plundered in the Goblin Wars. 
The goblin chieftain Nethaug seized the sword 
and bore it back to a ravine so deep in the moun- 
tains that the goblins, who were subsequently 
almost eradicated from the North, still hold that 
ravine to this day. 

The blade remained in goblin hands for almost 
200 seasons, until a goblin named Ghaur was 
slain by a band of adventurers known as the Com- 
pany of the Gryphon. The leader of the band, a 
warrior called Flarr, gave the blade to Thulmar 
One-Eye of Port Llast in exchange for training 
some 80 winters ago. 

Thulmar bore the blade until his death in the 
Cold Winter, when it passed to the Mistress of 
Port Llast, Stormraven the Proud Queen. Storm- 
raven, who rode and fought at the head of her 
men, jet-black hair flowing wildly about, briefly 
made Port Llast great. She is remembered fondly 
by old warriors, and will live long in fireside 
tales. At length she married a former enemy, Parl- 
dulph of Neverwinter, and gave Namara to her 
son Rivenhelm. 

Rivenhelm became one of the greatest knights 
and passed the blade on to Tamper Tencoin, an 
adventurer, Tencoin stood over the wounded 
knight in battle with the mercenary company of 
the Flaming Fist for most of a day in a vain 
attempt to save Rivenhelm’s life. The tiny band 
held on ‘till nightfall, when the mercenaries fell 
back and drove in their tracking dogs to ravage 
the wounded enemy. Rivenhelm handed Namara 
to Tencoin in the darkness and said “This is 
yours now.” Leaving a trail of blood behind him, 
Rivenhelm crawled forward to choke the life out 
of one dog and died under the jaws of halfa 
dozen more. 

Tencoin lost the blade when he was poisoned 
in the Whistling Wizard Inn four winters ago. The 
poison made him mad for days, and when he 
returned to his senses, Namara was gone. Elmin- 
ster, who saw the blade when Tencoin visited 
Shadowdale some years before this event, 
believes it was stolen by local thieves and will 
soon turn up again. And when it does, Tamper 
Tencoin will come looking for it. 


Neekar 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 188 
Also known as the Sword of Tongues or the 
Waterdhavian Diplomat, this unique blade first 
appeared centuries ago in the treasury of a noble 
house of Waterdeep. It was lost in a duel to a rival 


family, who in turn sold it a generation later when 
5671 


= 1384 


SE n 


Err 


Sword, Nighwatcher 


O -EEE y 


the family briefly fell from fortune. Both houses 
would doubtless pay a handsome sum for its 
recovery. 

Neekar is a steel broad sword with a plain sil- 
ver pommel and an ivory scabbard. It sheds no 
light and has no combat bonuses. If detect magic 
is cast on it, it radiates an aura of divination. It is 
of lawfully neutral alignment (Intelligence 16, 
Ego 10), communicates by speech, and can read 
nonmagical writing. 

Neekar's primary ability is its power to speak 
in any language native to the Prime Material 
Plane, a function derived from the complicated 
use of a fongues spell in its creation. This is even 
applicable to archaic or regional dialects. By the 
same token, it lets its wielder read any text writ- 
ten in those languages merely by touching the 
blade to the work (the sword reads whatever is 
exposed to the blade’s “sight”). No mouth or eyes 
appear on the weapon; its sensory abilities are 
purely magical in nature, so it can see in every 
direction from its blade, and hear all that’s said 
within a 60-foot radius. It cannot use telepathy, 
even with its wielder. 

The weapon was meant to be an inconspicuous 
aide in politics and is a shrewd negotiator. It has a 
history of participation in delicate treaties that it 
is quite proud of, and the sword is often willing to 
parley on behalf of its wielder over even trivial 
matters. 


Nepanth 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
The Duchy of Ten 
Kay Degern owns a sword +2 with the power to 
charm person. He calls this sword Nepanth. 


of Night 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
Though some magical swords shed light, a sword 
of night, also known as a black sword, sheds dark- 
ness. The sword’s wielder determines the radius 
of the sphere of darkness given off by the sword; 
it can be from 5 feet to 25 feet, in 5-foot incre- 
ments. Within this radius, no creature but the 
sword's wielder is able to see and they suffer a -4 
penalty on their attack rolls, as well as losing any 
Armor Class bonuses for Dexterity. Infravision is 
similarly useless within this radius. The sword’s 
user sees normally and can use the sword as a +1 
weapon on attack and damage rolls. 

This sword can also cause fear in all creatures 
within the darkness who fail a saving throw vs. 
spell (with Wisdom bonuses applicable). This fear 
power is generated at the wielder’s unspoken com- 
mand, and may be produced up to three times a 
day. Creatures affected by fear move away from 


the darkness at full speed for 1d6+1 rounds. A 
light spell cast at the sword negates all of its pow- 
ers (except for its +1 combat bonus) for one round 
per level of the caster, if the sword fails to save vs. 
lightning (as hard metal). A continual light spell 
negates the darkness power for twice as long, and 
the save against it is made at a —3 penalty. 


Nightwatcher 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 12,000 
DRAGON Magazine 188 

This unique blade first appeared on the Sword 
Coast nearly 200 years ago in the possession of a 
grizzled old adventurer who claimed to have 
found it in an ancient ruin deep within the Great 
Desert, Anauroch. The old man gave it as a wed- 
ding present to his eldest daughter’s fiance, and 
since then it has passed from father to son for 
four more generations until a distant grandson 
used it to pay off his gambling debts. 

Nightwatcher changed hands with bewildering 
frequency over the next 50 or 60 winters, show- 
ing up all across the Realms. It was finally pur- 
chased by an eccentric adventurer who met 
disaster in a battle with trolls 30 years ago. It has 
not been seen since. 

Nightwatcher is a long sword with a very 
sharp, black-adamantite blade with a silver pom- 
mel, worked in ivory and set with a large, black 
pearl (worth 500 gp). It is a +3 weapon that radi- 


ates no light. 
5674 


Dro o e OAR a O e 


1385 


Sword, Nightwind 


j i R 


The sword’s bearer can see at night under an 
open sky as well as if it were daylight. All magical 
darkness within 30 feet of the blade is dispersed, 
though darkness of natural origin is unaffected, 
except as noted above. When planted firmly into 
the ground, Nightwatcher hums loudly if anyone 
with intent to harm its wielder approaches within 
60 feet. This functions even if the thugs are con- 
cealed or invisible, though Astral and Ethereal crea- 
tures cannot be sensed by the sword. 


Nightwind 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Shady Dragon Inn 
Warduke, an evil warrior, named his sword +1 
Nightwind since it is the first magical item he has 
ever found. The sword has no special powers, but 
was used in an attempt to overthrow Kelek, a 
kindly wizard-leader of a small territory. War- 
duke also uses a nightmare as a mount. 


Nine Lives Stealer 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This always performs as a +2 weapon, but it also 
has the power to draw the life force from an 
opponent. It can do this nine times before the 
ability is lost. A natural 20 must be scored on the 
wielder’s attack roll for the sword to function. 
The victim is entitled to a saving throw vs. spell. 
If it succeeds, the sword does not function, no 
charge is used, and normal damage is determined. 
In Ravenloft: Each time this sword steals a 
life, a Ravenloft powers check is required. 


Nine Steps Draining 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 
GREYHAWK 

This weapon appears to be a typical +2 sword, but 
it also drains energy in progressive steps from 1 
to 9 on any hit of 20. Thus, on the first 20 scored 
it will drain one level, the next, it drains two, and 
so on until on the ninth 20 it drains nine levels. 
After that it reverts to a normal +2 sword and can 
never be made anything else. 


Nomog-Geaya’s Broad Sword 
XP Value: 7,200 GP Value: 36,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar’s broad sword +3 has the property of 
wounding. 


Oberon’s 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Monster Mythology 
This avatar’s ong sword +3 casts light or contin- 
ual light as Oberon wills and once a day can pro- 
ject a sunray. 


of Odin 

GP Value: 17,500 
Legends & Lore 
During a banquet one day, a mysterious stranger 
(Odin in disguise) brought this gleaming sword to 
the Volsung’s hall and plunged it into a living 
tree, saying that whoever could remove it could 
have it. Only the hero Sigmund could pull it free. 
He later used it to avenge a terrible wrong done to 
his family, then passed it on to his son, Sigurd. 
Sigurd made good use of the weapon, using it to 
slay the dragon Fafnir and rescue the valkyrie 
Brynhild from her imprisonment in a ring of fire. 
Unfortunately, the sword seems to have been lost 
after Sigurd’s death. 

The sword of Odin is a dragon slayer, forged 
by the dwarfs of Asgard for the purpose of slay- 
ing red dragons. While the sword is normally a 
+3 weapon, against these terrible beasts it 
becomes a +5 weapon and does triple damage. 
The sword of Odin also shields its bearer against 
fire damage, whether normal or magical. It can 
only be wielded by one of lawful good alignment. 


Odin’s 


XP Value: 3,500 


XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,500 
DEITIES & DEMIGODS 

Sigurd wields Odin 's sword, a dragon slayer 

+4/+5 vs. red dragons. In addition to its normal 

magical bonus, it does triple damage to red 

dragons and renders him immune to all magical 

and mundane fire damage. 


of Olynthos 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Milenian Scepter 

Emperor Olynthos was renowned for his skill in 
combat and athletics and his willingness to do 
anything to win. The sword is yet another exam- 
ple of his hunger for victory. It was enchanted by 
the wizards of the Academy of the Arcane, and 
presented to Emperor Olynthos many circles 
(years) ago. It remains with Emperor Olynthos in 
his sleep in a crypt beneath the Acropolis, where 
Olynthos stands as Eternal Guardian of the 
Milenian Scepter. 

The sword of Olynthos is a short sword with a 
well-honed, iron blade. The handle is also made 
of iron, wrapped with leather, and fashioned in 
the shape of an eagle’s claw clutching a large 
ruby (worth 7,500 gp). Written along the blade in 
Milenian script are runes that translate to: “We 
call upon Palartarkan that this blade might bring 
health and victory to our courageous Emperor 
Olynthos!” Palartarkan is the Immortal patron 
within the Milenian Empire. By speaking aloud 
the Immortal's name, it is possible to invoke the 


sword’s healing power. 
5682 


eo el ae 


1386 


o —XSl 


x Sword of the Planes 


The sword has a weapon modifier of +4 on 
attack and damage rolls. Once a day, it may be 
commanded to heal the wielder by the same 
amount of damage it inflicts on the next strike. 
For example, if the wielder strikes an opponent 
for 10 points of damage (including all modifiers 
for Strength and the sword’s +4 weapon modi- 
fier), the wielder recovers 10 lost hit points. The 
user cannot gain more hit points than his or her 
normal maximum. The hit points are not perma- 
nently lost by the victim, who may heal normally. 


Owen’s 

XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Shady Dragon Inn 
Owen the Powerful wields a special broad sword 
+1 that flames upon command. When com- 
manded to flame a target, the sword unleashes a 
fireball of the size dictated by the user (up to 6 
dice). The sword has 12 dice of fireballs at its dis- 
posal each day, and the user has the ability to 
specify the size of this fiery blast (from 1 to 6 
dice), 


Paramel 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Egg of the Phoenix 

Paramel is a sword of neutral good alignment 
(usable by any good character). It speaks when 
held but does not reveal anything about itself 
until a single individual is selected to be its per- 
manent owner. This long sword +3 has an Intelli- 
gence score of 14, Ego of 9, and a Total 
Personality Strength (ToPS) of 23. It speaks 
Common, Lammasu, and Salamander. It can 
detect magic in a 10-foot radius when com- 
manded and can cast telekinesis (as if cast by a 
10th-level wizard) once a day. 

Please note that ToPS = Int+Charisma+Level; 
compare totals for determining control. However, 
Paramel usually goes along with the party’s 
wishes—it is neutral good. Remember that swords 
have Intelligence but no Wisdom, no spirit, and 
rarely possess a soul. If traded between party mem- 
bers after an “owner” is selected, Paramel becomes 
sullen and refuses to cooperate for 1 week. 


Partisan 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,500 
Book of Lairs, Ist Edition 

Partisan is a neutral scimitar +5 that causes 
1d8+5 points of damage. It speaks the following 
tongues: Elf, Dwarf, Orc, Goblin, Halfling, Ogre, 
Kobold, Hill and Storm Giant. It has speech and 
telepathy, detects shifting rooms, sloping pas- 
sages, and magic, and has telekinesis. Its purpose 
is to cause paralysis. It has an Intelligence of 17 
and an Ego of 19. 


Peacemaker 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Adventures in BLACKMOOR 
Peacemaker is simply a sword +2 owned by Pesh- 
wan Na Shepro, Baron of Dragonia. 


Peregrine’s 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
The Shady Dragon Inn 
Peregrine the Hawk wields a sword +2 with the 
ability to charm person twice a day as though 
cast by an 8th-level priest. 


Phantom 
GP Value: 2,000 
Children of the Night 
Desmond’s rapier, Phantom, gains a +1 bonus on 
all attack and damage rolls, inflicting a total of 
1d6+2 points of damage to Small or Human size 
foes, and 1d8+2 points to larger ones. 


XP Value: 400 


Philippan 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Philippan was the sword of Mark Antony, a mem- 
ber of the Second Triumvirate of Rome (43 BC). 
This is a sword +1/+2 vs. public officials. 


Piercer 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
DRAGON Magazine 99 
Piercer is a sword of sharpness. 


Plak’s 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Night’s Dark Terror 
Plak, the goblin king of the Yellow-Fang Clan, 
carries a sword +2 with the ability to cast cure 
light wounds once per day. The command word 


“silmar” is engraved on the blade. 


of the Planes 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This magical weapon has a bonus of +1 on the 
Prime Material Plane, but on any Inner Plane 
that bonus increases to +2. (The +2 bonus also 
applies on the Prime Material Plane when the 
weapon is used against opponents from the 
Inner Planes.) Similarly, when used on an Outer 
Plane or against creatures from the Outer 
Planes, the sword becomes a +3 weapon. 
Finally, it operates as a +4 weapon on the Astral 
and Ethereal Planes or when used against oppo- 
nents from those planes. 

In Ravenloft: Ravenloft is essentially part of 
the Ethereal Plane; therefore, this sword has a +4 


bonus in the demiplane. 
5692 


= <<. —_— ee 


1387 


ee I 


~ Sword, Poisonsword £ 


Poisonsword 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Mordenkainen’s Fantastic Adventure 

This 5%-foot-long sword is wrought from crystal- 
encased iron. A greenish, viscous fluid oozes 
from its surface. This substance is poison. When 
the user scores a hit, its victim takes 2d12 points 
of immediate damage and must make a saving 
throw vs. poison or die. 


Porpherio’s 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Beyond the Crystal Cave 
This /ong sword +2 can detect magic in a 10-foot 
radius. It has an Intelligence of 12 and an Ego of 
3; 


Purta Blue’s 

GP Value: 10,000 
The Duchy of Ten 
A lawful good sword +1, this blade has an Intel- 
ligence of 9, an Ego of 4, and the powers detect 
invisibility, detect evil, and find traps. 


XP Value: 2,000 


of Quickness 

XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This is a special blade +2 that enables the wielder 
to strike first in every combat round. If the 
wielder encounters someone with a similar 
weapon (such as a scimitar of speed), both strike 
simultaneously. 


of Rage 


See Stonefist, below. 


Ratri’s 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Legends & Lore 
Any being struck by Ratris sword must save vs. 
paralyzation or be permanently blinded. 


Red Death 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Red Death is a bastard sword +4, with an Intelli- 
gence of 17, Ego 22, and a lawful good align- 
ment. Its abilities (once a day) are telepathy, read 
languages, detect magic, detect evil, strength, and 
heal. Red Death can speak Common and Elf. The 
sword has a special purpose to defeat evil priests, 
and its special purpose power is disintegrate three 
times a day. Red Death 5 current whereabouts are 
a mystery. 


Red Robin 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Adventures in BLACKMOOR 
Red Robin, owned by Bascom Ungulian, Baron 
of Glendower, is a sword +2 with no special ben- 
efits or powers. 


Red Sabre 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Legends & Lore 
This sabre +3 casts an antimagic shell that does 
not limit the user’s own spell abilities. 


Redeemer 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Dragons of Faith 
Redeemer is actually Wyrmsbane, the lesser mate 
to Wyrmslayer, sword of Kith Kanan. It is nor- 
mally a sword +2, but it inflicts double damage to 
dragons and draconians and triples damage to 
black and sea dragons. This sword cannot become 
stuck when a Baaz draconian dies. The DM 
should quietly record the extra damage against 
the above monsters. 

Redeemer can also locate object three times a 
day. If the user desires to find something he 
knows well and if it is in range, the DM should 
steer him in the right direction. (See Wyrmsbane 
ll for more details). 


Rel Astran Sword of Enmity 

XP Value: 750 GP Value: 3,750 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This long sword was enchanted for a paladin 
from the City of Rel Astra. The weapon has a 
normal bonus of +1 attack and damage in com- 
bat. However, it also raises the wielder’s attack 
and damage rolls by an additional +2 when 
used against racially hated opponents. Exam- 
ples of those gaining the bonus include: pal- 
adins against chaotic evil creatures, rangers 
against giant-class creatures, barbarians against 
wizards, elves against driders and drow elves, 
and so on. 


Ren’s Sword of Dancing 
XP Value: 4,400 GP Value: 22,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 22 
This is a neutral weapon +2 both on attack and 
damage rolls on all rounds. It forces the wielder 
to make it dance on any second round of com- 
bat—the sword fights by itself for four rounds 
and then teleports back to the hand of the 
wielder for two more rounds. The wielder can 
verbally command the sword to switch adver- 
saries at any time. The sword has an Intelligence 
of 16, an Ego of 8, and can read maps and lan- 


guages of a nonmagical nature. It can also detect 
5703 


Fe ee ee 


1388 


SS o M a O 


CE 


secret doors, detect evil and good, and teleport 
up to 600 pounds once a day. 


Reptilian Legionnaire 
XP Value: 1,400 GP Value: 7,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This sword gives an additional +3 bonus against 
such creatures as dinosaurs, dragons, hydras, 
lizards, snakes, wyverns, and lizard men. 


Retaliator 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Legends & Lore 
Manannan macLir’s avatar wields a sword called 
Retaliator that automatically slays his worst ene- 
mies, the fire giants, when he strikes (no saving 
throw). He can also call upon up to 100 HD worth 
of undersea creatures to fight with him. The crea- 
tures must be able to get to the scene of the battle 
under their own power, but once there, they fol- 
low his commands to the letter. 


Retaliator II 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
Normally a +1 weapon, The Retaliator is +5 vs. 
any creature that has struck the wielder in physi- 
cal combat within the last hour. 


Rutterkin Flatchet 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Outer Planes MC Appendix 
The least tanar’ri, rutterkins, use a saw-toothed 
flatchet (broad-headed sword that is +1 damage 
vs. unarmored opponents). The weapon weighs 
three pounds, is Size L, has a speed factor of 4, 
and causes 2d4/1d6 points damage. 


of the Sands 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 90 

When first gazing upon this weapon, most assume 
it is just an ornamental blade because the entire 
weapon, including the hilt and quillons, is made 
of glass. However, the glass has been magically 
enhanced to make it as strong and durable as any 
steel sword. The hilt magically adjusts to the 
wielder’s hand to provide a secure grip. 

This +1 (or rarely +2) weapon can be used by 
anyone proficient with scimitar. If the wielder has 
the nonweapon proficiency of display weapon 
prowess, then during a successful display (profi- 
ciency check) a curtain of whirling sand 10 by 10 
by 5 feet can be made to appear up to 20 feet in 
front of the blade. The curtain operates in all 
ways as a dust curtain spell (from the Arabian 
Adventures rulebook) except that it lasts for 1d4 
rounds. 


ee 


389 


1 


Sword, Scales of Justice 


Once a day the scimitar can cast the hissing 
sands spell, as a 10th-level wizard. The sand 
movement is controlled by pointing the tip of the 
weapon in the desired direction. In addition, 
when the weapon is held, the wielder can at will 
pass without a visible trace across the desert like 
a traceless travel spell. 

Finally, the wielder is protected from the blind- 
ing effects of sand. This includes sand blown by 
the gentle breeze to grains whirling about in 
sandstorms. 

Although the identity of the individual who 
first developed this enchantment to create a scim- 
itar of the sands has been lost, a few sand mages 
in Zakhara have discovered that the use of the 
sand sword spell followed by other, secret incan- 
tations will turn steel scimitars into glass. Fur- 
ther, one or more glasstee/ spells are cast upon 
the finished weapon, as are enchant an item and 
permanency spells. 


Sauvagine 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Sauvagine was another of Ogier’s swords, also 
made by Munifican. This weapon is a sword +1 
flame tongue. 


Savitri’s 
XP Value: 4,100 GP Value: 27,500 
Legends & Lore 
Any armor touched by Savitri 's fire sword must 
save vs. magical fire, or it falls off. 


Scale Cleaver 

XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 

This weapon appears to be a skillfully crafted 
long sword with intertwining symbols in the lan- 
guage of the rare race of marsh-dwelling elves in 
the jungles of Chult. Those able to decipher the 
symbols can tell that the blade was crafted to aid 
the elves in their long struggle against the lizard 
men. Against beings with a natural, scaly cover- 
ing, such as lizards, snakes, dragons, fish, and so 
on, the weapon is a sword +5. In addition, it 
grants its wielder a magical bonus against foes 
clad in armor made of natural scales. Against all 
other opponents, the sword is +1. 


Scales of Justice 
XP Value: 2,200 GP Value: 11,000 
Hall of Heroes 
Tardeth is unusually possessive of his sword, 
which he calls the Scales of Justice. This intelli- 
gent blade, a /ong sword +3 (neutral good, INT 
15, Ego 8, detect traps, Magic; heals once/day. 


Speaks Common), belonged to Alain, and wit- 
5712 


Sword, Scalebane 


jo S 


nessed his death. The man and sword understand 
each other well. Once, long ago, Tardeth became 
mentally unstable as a result of difficulty in deal- 
ing with guilt over his brother’s death. Fortu- 
nately, “Scales” recognized what was happening, 
and took control of its possessor. It prevented a 
major tragedy. Since then, Tardeth has come to 
rely on Scales as a sort of security blanket should 
such an event again occur. 


Scalebane 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
DRAGON Magazine 99 


Scalebane is a sword +1, +4 vs. reptiles. 


Schakha 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 

This scimitar +] has an alignment of lawful neu- 
tral and an Intelligence of 14. It speaks Azer, 
Common, Dwarf and the language common to 
giants, It can detect gems within a 5-foot radius, 
detect secret doors within 5 feet, and detect traps 
in a 10-foot radius. 


Scimitar of Speed 


XP Value GP Value 
+1: 500 2,500 
+2: 600 3,000 
+3: 700 3,500 
+4: 800 4,000 
+5: 900 4,500 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This is a magical weapon, usually of +2 bonus, 
that automatically grants its wielder the first 
attack in a round, even though some magical 
effect might have otherwise slowed the user’s 
speed and reaction time. It also allows more 
than one strike in some rounds, increasing the 
wielder’s figure for attacks per melee round by 
one place, so that if one attack is normal, the 
improved figure is three attacks every two 
rounds, and if three/two is normal, then the 
improvement is to two attacks per round. This 
increase in attacks is cumulative with any other 
bonus attacks (such as those provided by a 
haste spell). 

The order of attacks in the round is determined 
normally after the wielder of the scimitar of 
speed has made the first attack to begin activity 
in the round. It is possible, for instance, that a 
wielder entitled to three attacks in the round will 
attack once before any other action takes place, 
and then (because of poor initiative rolls or other 
factors) take the remaining two attacks at the very 
end of the round. 

There is a chance (25%) that the weapon will 
have a bonus of something other than +2; if this 


occurs, roll percentile dice and refer to the fol- 
lowing table to determine the appropriate bonus: 


Roll Type 

01-25 +] 

25-50 +2 

51-75 +3 

76-90 +4 

91-00 +5 

Scorbane 
XP Value: 2,200 GP Value: 10,000 


Blade of Vengeance 
Scorbane is a sword +2/+4 vs. dragons, triple 
damage vs. red dragons. It has an Intelligence of 
11, an Ego of 11, and a total Personality of 23. It 
has a neutral good alignment. 

Scorbane 5 blade is inscribed with an enameled 
red dragon and the hilt is in the form of a dragon’s 
head. At Scorbane’s pommel, a magical green 
gem is clenched in the dragon’s teeth. This gem 
has the property of being able to cure light 
wounds (as the spell) on the sword’s owner only, 
three times a day. In addition, Scorbane has the 
following powers: 

* Detect magic: 20-foot range, 3 times a day. 
* Find traps: 10-foot range, 3 times a day. 
* Find secret doors: 10-foot range, 3 times a 


day. 

* Read magic: as the |st-level wizard spell, at 
will. 

* Immunity: To the charm spells of red 
dragons. This power is passed onto the bearer 
of the sword. 

+ Languages: Common, Dragon, Elf 

Scorbane is proud of its abilities and expects 
respect even from its owner. It will always seek to 
kill chaotic evil and lawful evil dragons, subdu- 
ing only if forced. 

If Scorbane is found without a scabbard, it will 
insist that one be found or made for it as soon as 
possible. It always craves the finest gems for the 
adornment of its scabbard and demands that other 
magical swords, already owned, be discarded. 

If its demands are denied, Scorbane sulks and 
is surly in its attitudes. Given the opportunity, 
Scorbane will point out to others how niggardly 
its owner is, treating it as though it were nothing 
more than a normal sword. 

However, if Scorbane is well treated, and the 
owner gives in to its demands and flatters its 
ego, its vanity will be appeased and it becomes 
a willing tool, eager to aid its owner in any way 
possible. 


Sword, Sh’arien, Sun Blade 


nS 


Scourge of Regenerators 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This sword gives an additional +2 bonus to its 
wielder even when the regenerating creature does 
so because of a magical device—such as a ring of 
regeneration. 


Serpent Slicer 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 

Serpent slicers are made of a dull, gray metal and 
have a caduceus engraved near the hilt. They have 
steel hilt guards with rubies embedded in them. 
The serviceable hilts are of plain leather that 
appears to be well used. These swords are always 
found in a sheath of dragon hide—the sword 
prefers to be sheathed in dragon flesh. 

Serpent slicers are swords +1, +3 vs. dragons. 
The pommel glows in the presence of any dragon. 
The sword bestows upon its wielder the ability to 
speak with any dragon. 


Sess’innek’s 
XP Value GP Value 
Long Sword: 1,000 5,000 
Two-Handed Sword: 3,000 15,000 


Monster Mythology 
The avatar usually employs four long swords +2 
with a two-handed sword +4 that can plane shift 
(sword-wielder only) once a month and dispel 
magic in a 30-foot radius to a range of 120 feet 3 
times a day. 


Seventh Blade 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 

In the hands of a woman with a Charisma of at 
least 13, this fine blade operates as a long sword 
+1 flame tongue. The sword can, at will, detect 
evil, detect magic, and detect invisible with a 30- 
foot radius. Its extraordinary powers, which can be 
used twice a day, are X-ray vision and ESP. The 
scabbard functions as a rod of victory. Neither the 
sword nor the scabbard can function for males or 
for women who have a Charisma of less than 13. 


Shadowsword 

GP Value: 4,500 
IMAGINE Magazine 12 
This sword is made from the finest steel, infused 
with night hag’s blood to darken the metal to a 
deep, almost black, ebony. Once the blade has 
been forged, it is treated during construction as a 
+4 weapon. The wizard casts enchant an item, 
monster summoning IV to call a shadow, geas, 
and polymorph object, turning them into a hand- 
grip for the sword. This is then joined to the blade 


XP Value: 900 


with a mending spell. 

Know alignment is placed on the sword by a 
limited wish and shocking grasp is added to the 
mix. The wizard then casts invisibility and bathes 
the sword in a mixture of skulk spittle and blink 
dog blood. Finally, the wizard binds all the 
dweomers together with a permanency spell. 

The resulting weapon varies its attack effec- 
tiveness according to the lighting conditions. In 
bright sunlight, the shadowsword is treated as a 
normal sword; in overcast conditions, it acts as a 
sword +1; in torchlight, it is +2; in darkness, +3. 
Once a day, the sword confers invisibility upon its 
user until he or she attacks. 

The shadowsword is always of chaotic evil 
alignment, as must be the wizard who constructs 
it, the weaponsmith who forges it, and the person 
who wields it. 


Shalandain’s Holy Avenger 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 134 
Shalandain recovered this highly magical and 
intelligent sword from the wreckage of a neogi 
mindspider. The sword, named Fate's Promise, 
grants a magic resistance of 50% in a 5-foot 
radius, dispels magic in a 5-foot radius, and 
grants a bonus of 10 additional points of damage 
upon chaotic evil opponents. In addition, Fates 
Promise can cast strength once a day and heal 
twice a day. 


of Shame 

GP Value: 2,500 
Secrets of the Lamp 
This scimitar +1 magically impugns the honor of 
the opponent, upon command. The effect is the 
same as a taunt spell, an opponent with an Intelli- 
gence of 2 or more will rush to physically attack the 
wielder, ignoring his or her own spells and ranged 
attacks. The opponent is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell, which may have a bonus up to +4 if the oppo- 
nent serves a particularly charismatic leader. 


Sh’arien, Sun Blade 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 20 

Sh’arien is an intelligent bastard sword of chaotic 
good alignment wielded by Ael Ra’kolth. When 
wielded by someone who is proficient with either 
the short sword or the bastard sword, Sh’arien 
feels like a short sword (speed factor and encum- 
brance), yet causes damage as a bastard sword, 
The sun blade functions as a weapon +2, but 
against creatures of the Negative Material Plane, 
it is +4. Once a day, Sh’arien can create a sunray, 
a 60-foot globe of sunlight, potent against undead, 
which Sh’arien rabidly despises. 


XP Value: 500 


$724 


-_— a  —* 


1391 


Sword of Sharpness 


Do ie 


of Sharpness 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This weapon is treated as +3 or better for pur- 
poses of who or what can be hit by it, even though 
it gets only a +1 bonus to attack and damage 
rolls. Its power is great, however, for on a very 
high attack roll, it will sever an extremity—arm, 
leg, tail, tentacle, whatever (but not head)—¢eter- 
mined by random dice roll, considering only the 
sword’s bonus of +1: 


Modified Score 


Opponent is to Sever 
Normal/Armored 19-21 
Larger than human size 20-21 
Solid metal or stone 21 


A sword of sharpness will respond to its 
wielder’s desire with respect to the light it 
sheds—none, a 5-foot circle of dim illumination, 
a 15-foot light, or a 30-foot radius glow equal to a 
light spell. 

Shazzellim 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,500 
DRAGON Magazine 74 

Shazzellim is a scimitar of rather poor quality 
steel but with a keen edge. It has a crosspiece of 
iron that curves into a set of rearing serpents. Its 
grip is of leather, dyed red, but this may now 
have been replaced. Shazzellim is neutral evil, 
has an Intelligence of 16 and an Ego of 14, and 
communicates by speech (Common, Thieves’ 
Cant, and Orc). It is +1 on attack rolls, can 
detect magic in a 10-foot radius if the bearer 
wills it while wielding the sword unsheathed, 
and, in like manner, can locate object in a 30- 
foot radius. It can also detect secret doors in a 
10-foot radius at the bearer’s will, and read any 
nonmagical language or map. It can keal its 
bearer once a day, at the bearer’s will, and has a 
special purpose—to slay bards. Any bard struck 
by Shazzellim is disintegrated unless the victim 
makes a successful save vs. spell. 

Shazzellim was created by (or at least created 
under the orders and with the assistance of) Lau- 
zoril of the Red Wizards of Thay, in order to 
destroy his primary enemies the Harpers. Little is 
known of the Harpers; they consist of bards and a 
few rangers, their device is a silver moon and a 
silver harp, they operate in the northern regions 
on both sides of the Great Desert, and they are a 
secret organization, rather than a band, tribe, or 
race of people. Of the bards of great power, only 
Mintiper is thought not to be a member, and of 
the high-level rangers, only Thulraven and 
Estulphore are believed to be independent of the 
Harpers. 


It is not clear if the Harpers are anything more 
than a private club or fellowship at present, 
although in the past they have acted in concert to 
keep kingdoms in the northern lands and in the 
Dalelands reduced in power, and on at least two 
occasions have forcibly prevented the expansion 
of farms and settlements into the elven woods. 
The cause of Lauzoril’s enmity toward the 
Harpers is unknown. 

Elminster saw Shazzedlim when Ahlzul, a cap- 
tain of the armies of Thay, brought it to Archen- 
dale to slay the ranger Dove. Mistakenly, Ahlzul 
attacked the wrong woman, a knight named 
Jasilmer, and was himself slain. AhIzul’s men 
recovered Shazzellim and their captain’s body, but 
were later killed by men of Archendale over a 
code-of-conduct dispute. 

Shazzellim disappeared from view briefly, was 
later identified by the sage Helavaster of Hillsfar 
when it was brought to that city by the caravan 
master Lhemako Tarsakh, and subsequently 
passed into the hands of Lhemako’s superior, 
Meer. The scimitar does not appear to have been 
passed on to Meer’s superiors in Zhentil Keep 
(unless one of the lords of that city is hiding it 
from his fellows for some reason), and it may 
have been stolen, hidden, or passed to another by 
Meer before his disappearance. The blade’s pre- 
sent whereabouts are unknown. 


392 


Sword, Shichi’s Katana 


Ee ee ENEE A EEEE EA TT 


Shichi’s Katana 
XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 45,000 
New Item 

Shichi No Ken, born of noble blood, stands in the 
shadow of those who lived before her. Greatness 
she can never hope to duplicate augurs a life of 
frustration and futility. Shichi No Ken realizes 
she will never have her own individuality; people 
who know her will always identify her by the 
accomplishments of her family—not her own. It 
has been a long, hard battle, but she thinks she 
has conquered this anxiety—only time will tell. 

Rich, powerful, and aspiring for even more 
honor for the family, Shichi No Ken’s parents 
wanted her to be groomed and polished, made into 
the perfect lady. Hoping Emperor Po’s favorite 
nephew would become the next Emperor with the 
passing of the elder, Shichi was introduced to the 
nephew. The couple fell in love and bonded in a 
palace ritual seven months and seven days after his 
parents publicly announced the betrothal. 

Once espoused, she and Hai Chi moved into a 
large villa in the center of a small village owned by 
Shichi No Ken’s parents. The two were given the 
honor of receiving 30% of the taxes from the town 
as their personal income; all the while, the prop- 
erty remained in the ownership of her parents. 

After being married for two years, she begat a 
child, Hai Chi. To his dismay, the midwife told 
him the firstborn child was a daughter, not a son 
to carry his birth right. Blaming Shichi for this 
abhorrent event, he beat the mother and murdered 
the child. 

To this day the town people who witnessed the 
lamentable event say they saw nothing, but 
rumors and tales of the incident traveled quickly 
through the land until they reached the ears of 
Shichi No Ken’s father. A few days later, he res- 
cued the young mother who was still clutching 
her child—her long-dead child. 

He took Shichi to the Seven Roses Monastery in 
Pe Nok, a city by the coast, where the inquisitive 
eyes and loathsome spies of her husband’s family 
could not find her. There, the monks healed her, 
cared for her, helped her recover from the tragic 
death of her child, and they taught her strength. It is 
unusual for a woman to be allowed in a monastery, 
but where gender fails, money succeeds. 

She began as a pupil of the Master of the East 
Wind. Under his patient tutelage, she learned, 
hoping one day to enact her dreams of revenge on 
her husband. Until Shichi No Ken learned to van- 
quish her anger, however, she was unable to 
master the mental disciplines she needed. After 
years of methodical control, she learned the men- 
tal disciplines. 

Hai Chi’s spies found Shichi after almost 10 
years of searching. Hai Chi and 30 liegemen 


invaded the Seven Roses Monastery, intent on 
killing Shichi and the monks who helped her. The 
young monks fell easy prey to the talents of Hai 
Chi’s apostles, but the masters quickly eliminated 
the murderous force. The monks never laid hands 
upon Hai Chi; they left this honor for their com- 
panion, Shichi No Ken. 

In a fury of repressed feelings and horror, 
Shichi almost succumbed to the terror in her 
heart when she saw her husband facing her with 
the fury of a thousand deaths in his eyes. After 
several strikes from his vicious hands, she rose to 
her own defense. Using all the skills taught by the 
Master of the East Wind, she defeated and killed 
her husband. 

The Emperor’s soldiers came soon thereafter to 
investigate the scene. In the proper manner, the 
soldiers first asked permission from the Grand 
Master of Flowers to enter. He, of course, allowed 
them to enter, but the delay allowed the other ini- 
tiates to gather Shichi’s belongings and create an 
escape for her. 

The soldiers, however, were not there to arrest 
her. The news of Hai Chi’s deeds reached the ears 
of his father and uncle (Emperor Po), and they 
had decided to put an end to Hai Chi’s tyranny 
using any means necessary. Since she performed 
the deed for them, they were saved the disgrace 
of public execution. Emperor Po and Hai Chi's 
father both owed Shichi No Ken a debt of grati- 
tude. Hai Chi’s surviving apostles, however, still 
search for her; it is believed that more than 20 of 
them are still alive. 

Shichi No Ken was allowed to return to the 
monastery, but she refused to stay. Instead, she 
asked permission to become a “walking initiate.” 
The Grand Master of Flowers approved. As she left, 
the Grand Master of Flowers gave Shichi a daikyu 
and a katana, which he had magically enchanted. 

As a monk of the Brotherhood of the Seven 
Roses, she must uphold peace and tranquility 
above everything else; these are the greatest laws. 
Naivety is considered a weakness, and she must 
not allow herself to become too removed from the 
world; to defeat her enemies, she must under- 
stand them. 

Paladin by profession, way of life, and attitude, 
she does not consider herself a paladin, nor does 
anyone call her Paladin. To call her that would be 
incorrect. She is treated as a paladin by her deity, 
Amaterasu, however, and is given the benefits and 
penalties of that life. Her weapon of choice is the 
katana, but she enjoys using martial arts in both 
combat and mental discipline, as well as her daikyu. 
She does not wear armor of any kind since this 
detracts from her ability to protect herself properly. 

Shichi’s katana is a katana +3 with the ability 


to detect evil, It can cast banishment by touch 
5727 


g 1393 F 


Sword, Shimmering Blade of Shin Ginsen 


jip A NS AE ee E 


once a week, remove curse three times a day, and 
cast cure serious wounds once a day on anyone 
other than the owner. In addition, her katana has 
all the functions of a paladin’s holy sword, which 
projects a circle of power 30 feet in diameter 
when the sword is unsheathed and held. The 
power dispels hostile magic of a level up to the 
paladin’s experience level. 


Shichi No Ken, 6th-level Paladin: Str 18/96; 
Dex 17; Con 18; Int 15: Wis 18; Cha 17; AC 7; 
THACO 15; hp 72; Alignment: LG; Languages: 
Wa, Shou Lung, Common; Weapon Proficien- 
cies: katana, daikyu; Martial Arts: choke hold, 
eagle claw, flying kick, missile deflection, iron- 
skin, weapon catch; Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
calligraphy, etiquette, horsemanship, music, 
painting, poetry. 


Shimmering Blade of Shin Ginsen 
XP Value: 17,000 GP Value: 51,000 
Kara-Tur 
The infamous Shimmering Blade of Shin Ginsen 
is one of a pair of matched swords, forged on the 
day of the two half-brothers’ (Shin Lu and Shin 
Ginsen) birth. The other sword is known as the 
Floating Blade of Shin Lu. The weapon is a sword 
+3 in the butterfly-tipped Shou style, and has the 
following powers: vorpal blade, luck blade, illu- 
sion, and charm 3 times a day. However, in the 
presence of the matching blade, the sword 
becomes a mere magical blade (with only the 
bonuses to attack and damage in force), unable to 
tap into its greater powers. The blades are cur- 
rently on display in the Capitol of T’u Lung. The 

shimmering blade’s alignment is lawful evil. 


Shina-Tsu-Hiko’s 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Legends & Lore 
Shina-Tsu-Hiko’s avatar’s sword slices through 
any armor as though the wearer’s AC was never 
better than 5. 


Shock Blade 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
DRAGON Magazine 188 
There are perhaps a score or more of these magi- 
cal weapons throughout the Realms. While of 
many different sizes, the swords are often identi- 
fied by the large opals fitted to their hilts. 

A shock blade inflicts a bonus of 2 points of 
electrical damage (over and above its normal 
bonus) on every strike; metallic armor and 
shields (even if magical) are discounted for attack 
roll purposes, as the tiny arc of energy can hit its 
target even though the sword itself may have 
missed. In addition, the wielder is protected as if 


by a ring of shock resistance (+3 on saving 
throws vs. electricity, -2 per die of damage). 
Finally, the bearer may call lightning twice daily 
if a storm is in the area. 


Shu’s 

GP Value: 20,000 
Legends & Lore 
In combat, Shu’s avatar employs a gleaming short 
sword +5. Anyone struck by this weapon must 
save vs. breath weapon or be caught up in a great 
wind and carried from the battle. Such persons 
suffer 3d20 points of damage and are moved one 
mile away for each point inflicted. 


Sif’s 


XP Value: 4,000 


XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Legends & Lore 
Her sword +3 renders her invulnerable to spells 


from the illusion/phantasm school. 


Silencer of Bodash 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 

The Silencer of Bodash is a mighty two-handed 
broad sword almost 7 feet in length. Its blade is 
long and straight and made from an unidentifiable 
alloy of red metal harder than enchanted steel. The 
blade is diamond-shaped in cross-section and is 
unusually wide—nearly 7 inches at the hilt. The 
only decoration appears on the crossguard—a red, 
glowing rune of ancient design whose meaning is 
now lost. The hilt is made of black, watered steel 
and wrapped with braxat hide. The pommel is 
crafted in the shape of a serpent’s skull. 

The sword appears to be too large and unwieldy 
for any warrior short of a half-giant’s stature, but 
it is amazingly light and well-balanced. The mas- 
sive blade is far lighter than a steel edge of the 
same size. This sword is usually only found on 
Athas. 

In the ancient wars that ravaged Athas, the city 
of Bodash was a great neutral power. Its armies 
and magicians jealously guarded the lands of the 
city-state while the rulers refused all offers of 
alliance with the warring defilers and preservers. 
Eventually, the great defiler warlords decided to 
eliminate Bodash, and a great host gathered to 
destroy the city. 

The leader of this host was a human defiler, a 
warlord named Irikos, “the Left Hand of Rajaat.” 
It was Irikos’s ancient duty to destroy the race of 
orcs, and when the last orc was no more, he 
turned to the conquest of all who did not stand 
with Rajaat’s captains. 

Irikos possessed a powerful weapon called The 
Silencer. Using this weapon, he and his host sys- 


tematically destroyed the armies of Bodash and 
$733 


= 1394 % 


Be ~ a re Be “SE ee a a 


Sword, Silencer of Bodash 


NNR 


sacked the city. Still, the last and most powerful 
sorcerers of Bodash managed to cast a mighty 
spell of destruction against the defiler warlord, 
which blasted Irikos to ashes even as his hordes 
threw down Bodash with fire and sword. Only 
The Silencer survived. 

About three Kings’ Ages ago, a wandering 
adventurer named Rimmon discovered the 
ancient weapon in the heart of Bodash’s ruins. 
With it, she led a band of heartless raiders and 
rose to great power. However, Rimmon dared too 
much. In her arrogance, she gathered a horde to 
attack Balic, but only succeeded in angering 
Andropinis himself. The sorcerer-king and his 
soldiers slaughtered Rimmon’s desert rabble, 
although it is recorded that the bandit-queen slew 
a hundred half-giants with The Silencer before 
she was killed herself. The sword was reportedly 
carried away by one of Rimmon’s lieutenants, a 
wily elf who escaped to the wilderness. 

Over the years, The Silencer has appeared in 
the hands of a succession of slave tribes, raiders, 
and savages. Twelve years ago, it was recovered 
by a patrol of Tyrian soldiers from the lair of a 
fierce bandit and brought back to Kalak’s armory. 
But with Kalak’s death, the sword disappeared 
again. It is thought that one of Kalak’s templars 
took the blade and fled into the desert. 

The Silencer is a powerful and evil weapon that 
deludes its owner with dreams of glorious con- 
quest and righteous destruction. In fact, its 


extremely impressive array of offensive powers 
lends a fair amount of credence to these urgings, 
and there are few more powerful weapons to be 
found anywhere on Athas. However, The Silencer 
is a “double-edged sword.” 

In dealing with The Silencer, the old adage of 
“He who lives by the sword, dies by the sword,” is 
remarkably accurate. If a PC gets his or her hands 
on the sword, allow the character to become 
intoxicated with new-found power. With a weapon 
of this great might, a character could unite the 
raiders of the desert, tame the thri-kreen of the 
Hinterlands, or master the giants of the Silt Sea. 
In time, the character could rattle the golden 
thrones of the sorcerer-kings themselves! 

Yet one day it will come to an end. 

Like all the petty warlords and bandit-kings 
who have previously owned The Silencer, the 
character eventually finds that he or she is con- 
fronting an enemy beyond even the power of The 
Silencer. The character's empire will then col- 
lapse around his or her ears before the might of 
an angry sorcerer-king—or the Dragon itself. 

Another campaign use for the sword lies in its 
potential as a weapon for good. A great quest in 
search of a weapon potent enough to assassinate a 
sorcerer-king might be built around the legendary 
blade. Tracing the weapon’s bloody trail across 
the Tablelands and bringing it to bear against a 
villain could make a fine adventure. 

Several of the sorcerer-kings in the Tyr region 
know of this weapon and remember it from Irikos’ 
days. They recognize the potent threat it poses and 
act to take it for themselves or destroy it altogether. 
The PC who holds the weapon is inviting the wrath 
of the sorcerer-kings themselves! 

Constant Powers: The Silencer of Bodash is a 
two-handed sword +5 that swings like a long 
sword. The blade is incredibly sharp—it ignores 
any nonmetal armor and passes through it with- 
out resistance. (Targets wearing nonmetal armor 
are effectively AC 10, but may count magical 
adjustments and Dexterity bonuses.) Tree trunks 
and stone walls can be hacked through at a rate of 
10 feet per round. The sword also provides a +2 
Armor Class bonus to its owner. 

Invoked Powers: By swinging the weapon in 
great, horizontal sweeps, the wielder can effec- 
tively attack all creatures in a 10-foot circle. The 
swordsman suffers a —4 attack penalty when 
assailing multiple targets this way, unless the 
enemy is very tightly packed (a shield-wall or 
pike formation). If the wielder uses the blade in 
such a reckless fashion, he or she must also make 
attack rolls against any allies within the 10-foot 
radius of the sword. 

Three times a day, the sword can release a mam- 


moth blast of pure force at any target up to 20 feet 
$733 


j 1395 7 


Se 


Sword, Singing 


ga aie a O A 


away. This has the effect of a 40-foot-square earth- 
quake spell. Gates are sundered, walls collapse, 
small buildings are destroyed, and trees uprooted. 
When aimed at living creatures, a normal attack 
roll must be made (as if firing a missile weapon, 
and without the sword’s magical bonus). Any crea- 
ture hit suffers 5d10 points of damage. 

Three times a day, the sword can project a 
Tower of Iron Will psionic power for up to one 
turn. 

Random Powers: The sword possesses three 
abilities from Table 1—11: Enchantment/Charm, 
and one ability from Table 1-23: Protection. 

Curse: The sword thrives on bloodlust. Every 
week, the character must save vs. death magic or 
permanently lose | point of Wisdom. 

The sword also inflicts artifact possession, 
seeking to drive its owner to deeds of glory, con- 
quest, and violence. The owner may attempt to 
seize command of any group, of any size (the 
bigger, the better), and lead those forces against 
any foe. Worse still, the possessed character 
develops a fanatical hatred of those who would 
defy or imprison Rajaat. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* Melt The Silencer in the Dragon’s breath. 

* Break it on an anvil of meteoric iron. 

* Dissolve it in the foam of the sea (suitable 
only on Athas). 


XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 10,000 
The Magister 

It is rumored that these relatively recent additions 
to the armories of the world were created for use by 
the Harpers. Certainly the primary attribute of the 
sword has to be created with some connivance of 
one or more bards. With their usual taciturnity, the 
Harpers are not taking any credit for them, and no 
bard has actually been seen using one—though this 
may be more a factor of a dislike of competition 
than holding the sword in disfavor as a sword. 

This is a silver bastard sword that sings con- 
stantly, and loudly, while drawn. It is +3, but this 
may be temporarily negated by magical silence. 
While the song is heard, the bearer of the sword is 
infused with a sense of confidence and excite- 
ment, and never checks morale. The song confers 
upon the bearer immunity to charm, command, 
confusion, fear, friends, repulsion, scare, and 
suggestion. Emotion cast on the bearer only 
evokes a rage result (focussed on the spellcaster). 
The sword’s song can still shriekers and negate 
the song effect of harpies, but a bard can easily 
negate its powers by singing a counterharmony. 
The sword’s song can entrance intelligent crea- 
tures of up to 2 Hit Dice (not including undead or 
creatures from other planes). If such creatures fail 


to save vs. spell, they are subject to a suggestion 
from the sword’s bearer. Anyone capable of using 
a sword can use these swords, though it is 
rumored that some have been created with sen- 
tience and alignment, usually good. 


Siva’s Scimitar 

XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Legends & Lore 
Anything hit by the avatar’s scimitar must save 
vs. disintegration (items) or death magic (beings). 
Failure means the item or being has been disinte- 
grated and cannot be reconstructed (raised or 
reincarnated). 


of Skewering 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 

The Rogues Gallery 
This sword is lightweight and appears to be some- 
what flimsy, but it is a powerful magic weapon. 
Although it has no bonuses to attack or damage and 
only does damage equal to a short sword, it can 
negate the bonuses given to.magical armor. There- 
fore plate mail +4 would be treated as if it were 
Armor Class 3 when determining whether this 
weapon would score a hit. It does not negate magi- 
cal bonuses for attacks by other weapons on that 
opponent, nor does it permanently cancel any 
bonuses. The sword may also strike any monster 
not normally hit by nonmagic weapons. 


Slayer 
GP Value: 200,000 
Legends & lore 
Slayer kills anything its blade touches (no saving 
throw allowed). If used to kill for food, the meat 
cannot be eaten—it has no nutritional value and 
is unpalatable. 


XP Value: 40,000 


Snakebane 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 99 
Snakebane is a sword +1, +4 vs. reptiles. 


Snoop 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 
This long sword +1 has an alignment of NG and 
an Intelligence of 13. It can communicate through 
empathy and can detect invisible and detect 
magic, each to a 10-foot range. 


Snow on the Mountain 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
The Duchy of Ten 
Sher Yakub owns a silver neutral-good sword +1 
named Snow on the Mountain. This weapon has 


an Intelligence of 8 and an Ego of 5 and has the 
5740 


s 1396 7 


a SEALY 4 


powers detect invisibility, flying, and healing. All 
powers can be used once a day. 


Soulblade 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Astromundi Cluster 

Soulblades are dreadful weapons, more feared 
than any other handheld weapon in the Astro- 
mundi Cluster. Carved from shadowstone, soul- 
blades are similar in size to short swords, though 
each individual blade has a unique design and 
decorative pommel. Soulblades are +2 magical 
weapons and cause 1d6+2/1d8+2 points of dam- 
age, whether the blade resembles a short sword or 
a small khopesh. 

Created by special sunmagic rituals, these blades 
always flicker with cold white flames. The flames 
cause no additional damage to sun mages, but they 
will cause a loss of 1d4 hit points to those who are 
not sun mages. The flames can also destroy cloth or 
nonmetallic armor with a successful strike; they 
will engulf leather or padded armor (and any nor- 
mal clothing, ropes, and the like) and consume it 
within one round (magical clothing or armor gains 
a saving throw against this effect.). 

If exposed to sunlight, a sou/blade begins to 
glow, its flames slowly turning red and brighten- 
ing to the intensity of a light spell. After three 
rounds in direct sunlight, the wielder may fire a 
30-foot-long beam of fiery energy that causes 
1d10 points of magical fire damage. The wizard 
must roll a melee attack as normal, but receives a 
+2 magical bonus to this roll. No natural or magi- 
cal resistances to fire provide any defense against 
this attack. After this energy discharge, the sword 
returns to its normal, dark color with white 
flames. Soulblades can only release this stored 
energy five times a day; after the fifth use it can- 
not absorb any energy for 24 hours. 


of Souls 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Halls of the High King 

The favored weapon of the evil Iyachtu Xvim, 
this infamous sword is a giant scimitar +3 that 
drains two life energy levels whenever it strikes a 
living opponent (no saving throw). The truth of 
its origins is lost in conflicting legends; it is 
known to be much heavier than most humans can 
comfortably use in battle (weighing about 30 
pounds) and is of lawful evil alignment. Crea- 
tures of other alignments who touch the scimitar 
feel a sickening, wrenching pain (—1 on attack 
rolls and Dexterity ability score while in contact 
with the weapon). Further, they suffer a loss of 
1d4 points per contact (or per round of continu- 
ous contact) if they are of any evil alignment, or a 
loss of 1d12 hp if they are not. 


Sword, Soulsecker 


Soulseeker 


XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DRAGON Magazine 180 

From the volcanoes of the Great Sand Sea come 
large amounts of lava, some of which has large 
chunks of obsidian in it. The desert nomads have 
learned the art of flint napping and have used 
obsidian tips on their spears for centuries. Highly 
skilled artisans are able to make large blades for 
daggers—Soulseeker is such a blade. 

A war fought deep in the Underdark’s caverns 
resulted in the destruction of many of the evil 
creatures involved. The remains of some of the 
vilest fiends were melted into a magical lava 
flow, forming an especially large hunk of obsid- 
ian. One of the great blade makers used this piece 
of obsidian to make Soulseeker, The name is 
derived from the fact that the fiend’s flesh in the 
blade is constantly seeking a soul for itself. This 
blade has killed many times and still seeks more 
souls. 

The blade traveled from the Great Sand Sea to 
the trading cities. A blade collector in Waterdeep 
sent for the dagger, but Soulseeker never reached 
its destination because it was stolen from the 
trading caravan. The last known rumor is that the 
blade is in the hands of Waterdeep’s black market, 
perhaps having made its way to the city of Skull- 
port. 

Soulseeker has a 30-inch, glassy black obsid- 


ian blade that is approximately 4 inches wide at 
$743 


1397 


Á 


~ Sword, Special E 


the guard. The blade was made using flint nap- 
ping and has a slow taper, reaching down to the 
point. The handle is fossilized ivory, the guard is 
gold with inlaid onyx runes, and the butt cap is 
also of gold and onyx. The blade travels in a silk- 
lined case made of ebony, with golden hinges and 
a cover that is a thin sheet of translucent obsidian. 

Soulseeker is +2 on attack rolls and +5 on 
damage rolls. It can soul steal on a failed saving 
throw vs. death magic, detect evil/good in a 60- 
foot radius, detect invisible objects in a 10-foot 
radius, and detect magic in a 30-foot radius. It has 
an Intelligence of 17, an Ego of 11, and its align- 
ment is chaotic evil. Soulseeker is able to com- 
municate in Common. 

This blade has one of the sharpest edges known. 
Obsidian edges are prized by nomadic healers for 
use in surgical procedures. The strongest power of 
Soulseeker lies in the stealing of souls. Anyone 
who is hit by the blade with a natural 20 must save 
vs. death magic or lose his or her soul to the blade, 
dying at once. If the victim dies from a hit by the 
blade, the character’s soul is automatically taken 
into the blade, and resurrection becomes impossi- 
ble. Only a wish spell will bring back a soul and 
permit resurrection. Those of alignments other 
than that of the blade suffer 1d6 points of damage 
every round they touch any part of this weapon, 
unless they are victims and suffer damage as 
detailed otherwise. 

Soulseeker makes no pretense of its true goals, 
but it is remarkably seductive to any chaotic-evil 
being that grasps its hilt. It always tries to control 
its owner, urging the user to slay victims at every 
possible turn, seeking all souls possible, though it 
will encourage stealth and duplicity to keep the 
killing spree going as long as it can. Soulseeker 
especially seeks victims of high level or high 
social standing, gladly stealing the soul of a great 
wizard, mayor, priest, or general. 

Soulseeker saves against attacks as rock +2 and 
can be destroyed in any number of ways. Two 
good-aligned churches, one assassins’ guild, and 
four adventuring parties are currently seeking 
this weapon to destroy it—or to use it. 


Special 
XP Value: Variable GP Value: Variable 
DRAGON Magazine 99 
The Magical Sword Tables in the DMG are more 
than adequate for most purposes. There are, how- 
ever, two problems with the magical sword cre- 
ation system. First, no experience point or gold 
piece value is given for primary abilities, extraor- 
dinary abilities, purpose swords, or languages. 
Certainly, a sword with any of these characteris- 
tics is worth more than an identical sword without 
them—but how much more? Secondly, the list of 


extraordinary abilities for swords is relatively 

short and this could create a situation where 

members of an adventuring party possess very 
similar weaponry in a long-term campaign. 

Primary abilities are as they appear in the 
DMG, because they are all powers of detection, 
and the existing abilities cover all necessities. 
What is new here is the addition of gold piece and 
experience point values of swords possessing 
these abilities. 

The extraordinary abilities, on the other hand, 
have been greatly expanded without perverting 
the original intent of the table. All spell powers 
granted by extraordinary abilities function at 8th 
level, and each is accompanied by additions to 
experience point and gold piece value. In the 
original DMG, it appears that sword abilities have 
levels of use as low as 6th, in some cases. This 
was increased to 8th level across the board, as 
some swords in the DMG tables could heal or 
teleport. Thus, levitation, fireball, strength, and 
magic missile are at the 8th level of ability when 
cast from a sword. It is suggested that all extraor- 
dinary powers be usable only with the knowledge 
of a command word or phrase. 

The greatest change in this entry is in the area 
of purpose swords. The original list of victims for 
purpose swords ignored subclasses or (perhaps) 
assumed their inclusion with the major classes. 
The original list also lumped all monsters together 
in the same category. A new table divides mon- 
sters by type or major grouping. Several purpose 
abilities, as well as experience point and gold 
piece values for those purposes, were added to 
the tables. 

Creating a table for languages spoken by a 
sword would be a monumental task. This is espe- 
cially true since many monster descriptions in the 
MONSTROUS MANUAL books and the MONSTROUS 
COMPENDIUM indexes do not say whether or not 
monsters have a spoken language. Therefore, lan- 
guages may be assigned for magic swords in sev- 
eral ways, using any or all of the suggestions 
below. 

1. A language may be assigned to every creature 
of at least low Intelligence. Most semi-intelli- 
gent creatures have a primitive spoken lan- 
guage of a few dozen words. 

2. Creatures such as fiends and extraplanar crea- 
tures have a common tongue capable of 
expressing most ordinary concepts. Other 
creatures possessing common tongues might 
include elementals, daemons, dragons, mod- 
rons, and so forth. 

3. Sword languages can be assigned as the DM 
sees fit, or may be rolled on the encounter 
tables for the lands where the campaign is tak- 


ing place. This takes into account factors such 
5743 


1398 


as where the sword was made, where it was 

intended to be used, and the relative frequency 

of various creatures in the campaign. 

The encounter tables from the MONSTROUS 
COMPENDIUM appendices are the most up-to-date 
yet published, and are admirably suited for use in 
generating languages for swords. A wizard 
enchanting a sword for use in the tropics would 
not bother enchanting the sword to speak the 
white dragon’s tongue. Similarly, in the desert, a 
sword that spoke the language of unicorns would 
have no great value. 

The personality of a sword should be consid- 
ered, To begin with, each sword, whether intelli- 
gent or not, should have a name, preferably 
engraved on the blade or hilt. All Intelligent 
swords should have a definite personality. A 
random table for sword personality cannot be 
created, because personality depends, for the 
most part, on alignment, abilities, Intelligence, 
Ego, special abilities, and purpose, if any. The 
language spoken would have an effect upon a 
sword’s personality; thus, a Pixie-speaking 
sword should be different from a sword that 
speaks Manticore. Magical swords have to be 
played by the DM just as any nonplayer charac- 
ter would be played. 

The benefit of a sword name should not be over- 
looked. Compare Excalibur, Anduril, and Storm- 
bringer to “my gem detection sword +3 that 
speaks Orc.” Names should relate to sword powers, 
origins, or the original owners if possible, and they 
may or may not give clues to their abilities. Each 
DM’s imagination must do the work. Under Sword 
and Dagger are many examples of weapon names 
that should your creativity flowing. 

The following are expanded and revised tables 
for the random generation of magical swords. 
They derive from the DMG, 1st Edition Tables. 


Table 1. Sword Intelligence and Capabilities 


Roll Int Abilities | Communications 

01-75 None None None 

76-83 12 l Primary Semiempathy 

84-89 13 2 Primary Empathy' 

90-94 14 2 Primary Speech? 

95-97 15 3 Primary Speech’ 

98-99 16 3 Primary Speech‘ 

00 17 3 Primary Speech, telepathy 

plus 1 extraordinary 
power 


'The owner receives a signal (a throb or a tingle) and 
feels urges when the ability functions. 

`The sword speaks its owner’s language plus 1 or more 
other languages—indicated on Table 6. 

"The sword can also read languages and maps of any non- 
magical sort. 


D Sword, Special r 


“The sword can read magical writings as well as other 
languages. 

‘The sword can use either communication mode at will, 
with language used like any speaking sword. 


Table 2. Sword Alignment 

Roll Alignment Roll Alignment 
01-05 Chaotic good 31-55 Lawful good 
06-15 Chaotic neutral 56-60 Lawful neutral 
16-20 Chaotic evil 61-80 Neutral 
21-25 Neutral evil 81-00 Neutral good 


26-30 Lawful evil 
Table 3. Sword Primary Abilities 


XP GP 
Roll Value Value 


01-11 


Ability 

Detect elevator/shifting 
rooms/walls, 10' radius 60 300 
12-22 Detect sloping passages, 


10’ radius 60 300 
23-33 Detect evil or good, \0' 

radius 120 600 
34—44 Detect gems, number and 

kind, 20’ radius 240 1,200 


45-55 Detect precious metals, 
kind and amount, 20' 


radius 240 1,200 
56-66 Find traps, 10' radius 240 1,200 
67-77 Detect magic, 10' radius 240 1,200 
78-82 Detect secret doors, 5' 

radius 120 600 
83-87 Detect invisibility, 10' 

radius 240 1,200 
88-92 Locate object, 120' 

radius 180 900 


93-98 Roll twice, ignoring 
scores of 93-98 
99-00 Roll on Table 4 instead 


Note that the detect good/evil sword power is 
one or the other, according to the alignment of the 
sword. (Evil swords detect good and vice versa.) 
Neutral swords detect one or the other (50% 
chance). 

If the same primary ability is rolled twice, the 
radius of the power is doubled. 

All abilities function only when the sword is 
drawn from its scabbard and held and the posses- 
sor is concentrating on the desired result. A sword 
cannot fight and detect at the same time. 

The experience-point and gold-piece values in 
the above table are based on, among other things, 
the value of wands with similar powers, and the 
swords are much less valuable than the wands 
(despite the fact that they have no charges to 


exhaust) for several reasons. First, few swords 
$743 


de ee ee N 


1399 


INNE ETAL TEO OE reuns 
EAEN EULA LATI e EE J 
= ET 


1400 


x Sword, Special g- 


have the detection radius of the corresponding XP (GP 
wand (for example, a wand of magic detection Roll Ability Value Value 
has a 30-foot radius, while the corresponding 42-44 Hold person on contact, 

sword has only a 10-foot radius). Secondly, the 2/day 420 2,100 


swords’ values derive primarily from the fact that 45-47 Hypnotic pattern, 2/day 420 2,100 
they are, first and foremost, weapons—most 48-50 Create illusion, 120' 

detection abilities are “icing on the cake.” Thirdly, range, 2/day as a wand 

a sword is not exactly an innocuous detection of illusion 480 2,400 
device. (Ever try to slip one up your sleeve?) 51-53 Invisibility on self, 3/day 360 1,800 
Thus, the gp values range from 300 to a of 1,200, 54-56 Levitate, 3/day, one turn 


based on perceived value to fighters and other duration 420 2,100 
sword users. 57-59 Lightning bolt, 8d6, 1/day, 

Extraordinary powers are, by definition, better 120' range 600 3,000 
than primary abilities. The weakest extraordinary 60-62 Magic missile, 4 missiles, 
swords are worth as much as 1,500 gp, and some 140’ range, 2/day 420 2,100 
of the mightiest are worth up to 3,000 gp. They 63-65 Mirror image, 2/day 360 1,800 
come in three general types (offensive, defensive, 66-68 Paralyzation on contact, 
and miscellaneous) and in low, medium, and high 2/day 80 2,400 
levels of power. Gold piece values assigned to 69-71 Protection from evil/good, 3/day, 
each category are as follows: 16 round duration 360 1,800 

72-74 Ray of enfeeblement, 2/day, 
GP Values 35% Strength loss, 30’ 

Power Low Medium High range 420 2,100 
Defensive 1,500 1,800 2,100 75-76 Strength on self, 1/day, 8 turn 
Offensive 1,500-1,800 2,100-2,400 3,000 duration 420 2,100 


Miscellaneous 1,500-1,800 2,100-2,400 2,700 771-79 Silence on self, 3/day 300 1,500 
80-82 Suggestion, 2/day on one creature 


Table 4. Sword Extraordinary Powers only, 5 turn duration 420 2,100 
83-85 Telekinesis, 250 |b, wt., 2/day, 
XP GP | round duration 420 2,100 
Roll Ability Value Value 86-87 Telepathy, 60° range, 
01-03 Add sword’s plus to saving 2/day 420 2,100 
throws, I/day, one turn 88-89 Teleportation, \/day, 600 
duration 300 1,500 pound weight maximum, 
04-06 Animate dead, \/day 420 2,100 Initiative modifier of 
07-09 Charm person on contact, +2 to activate 540 2,700 
3/day 360 1,800 90-92 Web, 2/day 360 1,800 
10-11 Clairaudience, 30' range, 93-94 X-ray vision, 2/day, | turn 
3/day, one round duration 360 1,800 duration 20 2,100 
12-14 Clairvoyance, 30' range, 95-97 Roll twice, ignoring scores of 95-97 
3/day, one round duration 360 1,800 98-99 Character may choose one power 
15-17 Color spray, 2/day 360 1,800 from this table 
18-20 Command, 3/day 300 1,500 00 Character may choose one power and 
21-22 Cure light wounds on self, roll for a Special Purpose 
3/day 300 1,500 
23-24 Determine direction and Note that all spell effects, including those con- 
depth, 2/day 300 1,500 cerning magic resistance, saving throws, and so 
25-27 Dispel magic, 2/day 480 2,400 forth, apply as if the spell were cast at 8th-level. 
28-30 ESP, 30' range, 3/day, If the same power is rolled twice, the number 
one round duration 480 2,400 of uses of that power per day is doubled. 
31-33 Fireball, 8d6, \/day, Powers function when the sword is drawn and 
180’ range 600 3,000 held and the possessor concentrates upon the 
34-36 Fly, 120'/round, desired effect. Most powers require that the user 
| hour/day 480 2,400 concentrate for at least a full round. 
37-39 Gaze reflection, 3/day 360 1,800 
40-41 Heal self, 1/day 600 3,000 


5743 


sleet 


1401 


~ Sword, Special r 


Table 5: Special Purpose Swords—Purpose 


XP GP 

Roll Purpose Value Value 
01-04 Defeat opposite alignment 200 1,000 
05-07 Defeat law 200 1,000 
08-10 Defeat chaos 200 1,000 
11-13 Defeat neutrality 200 1,000 
14-16 Defeat good 200 1,000 
17-19 Defeat evil 200 1,000 
20-23 Slay priests 225. 1,125 
24 Slay druids 225 1,125 
25-28 Slay fighters 225 1,125 
29 Slay paladins 225. 1,125 
30-31 Slay rangers 225 1,125 
32-34 Slay wizards 225: 1125 
35 Slay specialist wizards’ 225 1,325 
36-39 Slay thieves 225 1,125 
40-41 Slay assassins 225 1,125 
42 Slay monks 225. 1,325 
43 Slay bards 225 1,125 
44-46 Slay avians 200 1,000 
47 Slay baatezu 250 1,250 
48-50 Slay tanar’ri 200 1,000 
51-54 Slay demihumans 250 1,250 
55-58 Slay dragons 250 1,250 
59-62 Slay extraplanar creatures 250 1,250 
63-65 Slay faerie creatures? 250 1,250 
66—69 Slay giants 225 1,125 
70-72 Slay humanoids 200 1,000 
73-75 Slay insects 200 1,000 
76-79 Slay magic-using creatures 225 1,125 
80-82 Slay mammals 200 1,000 
83-85 Slay plant life 200 1,000 
86-88 Slay poison-using creatures 225 1,125 
89-91 Slay psionic creatures 250 1,250 
92-94 Slay reptiles 200 1,000 
95-97 Slay tanar’ri 225. 1,125 
98-00 Destroy undead 250 1,250 


'The particular specialist wizard can be deter- 
mined by rolling 1d8 on Table 5A 1 

*Faerie creatures are: brownies, centaurs, dryads, 
pegasi, pixies, satyrs, sprites, sylphs, unicorns, 
and the like (perhaps including elves, gnomes, 
and halflings). 


The purpose of a neutral sword of “defeat 
opposite alignment” is to ruin or slay creatures of 
the extreme alignments (LG, LE, CG, CE). 

With regard to the character classes mentioned 
in the above table, note that “fighter” does not 
include ranger or paladin, “wizard” does not 
include specialist wizards, and so on. 

A purpose must suit the type and alignment of 
the sword in question. Good-aligned swords only 
use purpose abilities on evil creatures, though 
neutral and evil swords are not so restricted. 
Thus, a good sword that was created to slay giants 


would not use its purpose ability to slay storm 
giants, for example. 

When a creature is struck by the sword, the 
sword will use its purpose ability if the creature is 
one the sword was meant to slay or destroy. The 
victim gets a save vs. spell. The power operates 
only in pursuit of the special purpose, and a char- 
acter who fails to attack a creature the sword was 
created to slay, or who fails to kill the creature 
with the sword, will have at best a strained rela- 
tionship with the sword—the weapon may, in 
fact, refuse to use any of its powers for the master 


until the affront is settled. 
Table 5A: Specialist wizards 
Roll Specialist Wizard 

1 Abjurer 

2 Conjurer 

3 Diviner 

4 Enchanter 

5 Illusionist 

6 Invoker 

7 Necromancer 

8 Transmuter 


Table 5B: Special Purpose Swords—Powers 
XP GP 


Roll Power Value Value 
01-08 Cause blindness for 2d6 

rounds 100 500 
09-15 Confusion for 2d6 rounds 100 500 
16-25 Death 200 1,000 
26-35 Disintegration 200 1,000 
36-42 Cause fear for 1d4 

rounds 100 500 
43-49 Feeblemind for 1d4 

rounds 150 750 
50-56 Insanity for 1d4 rounds 100 500 
57—66 Maze 100 500 
67-75 Paralyzation for 1d4 

rounds 150 750 
76-85 Petrification' 150 750 
86-93 Plane shif? 150 750 
94-00 Quested 150 750 


Any sword determined to have a special pur- 
pose is allowed one roll on Table 5A followed by 
one roll on Table 5B. However, a sword’s power is 
always appropriate to its purpose—a sword that 
destroys undead would not have fear as a purpose 
power. In a case where purpose and power con- 
flict, simply reroll on Table 5B until a noncontra- 
dictory set of characteristics is obtained. 

'The plane shifting power throws the victim to a 

random plane of existence. 

*The petrification power does not cause the sword 

to become entrapped in the body of the victim; this 
5743 


4 iN 


1402 


EES ene eee eee ee ee Ee 


effect may be undone by a stone to flesh spell. Any 
insanity caused will be catatonia, suicidal mania, or 
insanity involving constant hallucinations. 


Table 6. Number of Languages 


Number of XP GP 

Roll Languages Value Value 
01-40 l 50 250 
41-70 2 100 500 
71-85 3 150 750 
86-95 4 200 1,000 
96-99 5 250 1,250 
00! 6 300 1,500 


‘On a roll of 00, the minimum number of languages avail- 
able to the sword is 6, The GP and XP values reflect this 
minimum. When rolling twice on the table above, add the 
XP and GP values if the total is greater than 6. 

‘or the total of two additional rolls (ignoring further 
results of 00), whichever is greater. 


Languages should reflect the type of sword and 
its abilities. 


Table 7: Sword Ego 


Attribute of sword 

Each “plus” of sword! 
Each primary ability? 

Each extraordinary power 
Special purpose 

Each language spoken’ 
Telepathic ability 

Reading languages ability 
Reading magic ability 

'A sword +1 has 1 Ego point, but if it has another 
(higher) plus, the highest is also counted. In addi- 
tion, swords which have no extra pluses but have 
extra powers add double their “plus” rating for 
Ego. 

‘If the ability is doubled, double the Ego points. 
‘Round up. 


Ego points 


NK NO KUN YM 


A sword with a neutral alignment can be used 
by any character whose alignment in any part cor- 
responds with the nonneutral alignment of the 
sword. However, a neutral good sword (for 
instance) would dislike the lawfulness of a lawful 
good character’s actions just as much as a lawful 
good sword would dislike a neutral good charac- 
ter’s lack of orderliness. The same would be true 
for a lawful neutral sword and a lawful evil char- 
acter, and so on. 


Sword, Spellbinder 


Spectral 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

The spectral sword is a lightweight, well-bal- 
anced weapon. Its hilt is encrusted with jewels 
and has a skull on the pommel. The blade is non- 
corporeal and transparent in lighted surround- 
ings. However, in the dark the blade has a bluish 
cast and smoke appears to dance along its edge. A 
spectral sword can be used by any character, 
regardless of a character’s weapon proficiency. 
The wielder suffers no proficiency penalties. 
However, the sword can only be used against 
undead; all other creatures are unaffected by the 
noncorporeal blade. Undead struck by the sword 
suffer 1d10 points of damage. In addition, if the 
weapon is in the hand of its owner, it gives that 
character a +4 saving throw bonus vs. undead 
special attacks that have saving throws. 


Spellbinder 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 180 
A warrior named Algor and a nameless, evil wiz- 
ard decided to end their feud of many years with 
a duel. Algor, realizing his magical inferiority, 
had a special sword crafted that would absorb 
spells cast by an opponent. On the day of the 
duel, Algor presumed he was now superior, but 
he should not have trusted an evil wizard to fight 


fairly. At a decisive moment in their battle, the 
5745 


1403 


Sword, Spellblade 


bi S E E 


wizard was joined by two of his evil cohorts. 
Simultaneously, all three blasted Algor with 
spells. Algor was annihilated, and his possessions 
were thrown across space and time. Several years 
and many miles away, a farmer found Algor’s 
sword in his field, and traded the blade for ani- 
mals and equipment. The sword has changed 
hands many times since. Spellbinder was once 
reported to have been offered as payment for a 
glass of ale in a tavern. Most of its owners never 
realized Spellbinder s full potential. Spellbinder 
was once known as Algor s Weakness after its his- 
tory was made public by a wizard-sage. 

The extremely sharp, layered-steel blade is 
about 3% feet long; overall, this well-balanced 
weapon measures just over 4% feet. The blade has 
a single blood groove and two bilateral notches 
near the base. The handle is of deeply fluted 
dragon bone with a gold ring at each end of the 
flutes. The guard is curved toward the point and 
ends in two claws, each grasping a crystalline 
sphere. The face of the guard has two large trian- 
gular sapphires with their points together. The 
pommel is conical. If found, the crystal globes 
will probably already be shattered or absent. 

Spellbinder is +2 on attack rolls and +3 on 
damage. It absorbs (as a rod of absorption) up to 
12 levels of wizard or priest spells (12: lst-level 
spells, six 2nd-level spells, and so on) and detects 
magic in a 30-foot radius. It has an Intelligence of 
12, an Ego of 11, and a neutral alignment. It can 
communicate by empathy. 

This sword can be wielded by members of any 
alignment. It must be held by the grip to absorb 
incoming spells; no part of the hand can touch the 
blade or guard. The crystal spheres absorb the 
spells, each sphere absorbing six levels. If the 
wielder attempts to absorb more than this amount 
in a single round without discharging some of the 
spell energy, the spheres shatter and the sword no 
longer absorbs any spell levels until the crystals 
are replaced (they can be had at glassware shops 
for roughly 50 gp each, but enchanting each of 
the spheres with the proper spells is quite a bit 
more expensive, requiring a wizard of at least the 
16th level). 

Spellbinder is a bit of a snob and wants an 
owner that it cannot easily control. In the past, 
Spellbinder has constantly kept on the move from 
owner to owner, forcing its user to trade it away if 
he did not measure up to the sword’s standards. It 
is currently seeking an owner who understands 
the schools of magic, preferably a fighter-wizard., 
The weapon wants to be polished often and kept 
in a nice, gem-encrusted scabbard. 

The evil wizard who engineered Algor’s death 
has since become a lich. As a side interest, the 
lich has begun to look into rumors of a sword 


matching the one Algor used against it years ago, 
and it would like to obtain this weapon simply to 
add to its trophy collection. 


Spellblade 
XP Value GP Value 
1,000+100/level 6,000+2,000/level 
The Ruins of Undermountain 

These slim-bladed swords were once plentiful in 
the Realms. Recently, someone has rediscovered 
the secrets of making them again; new blades have 
begun to appear in the Dragonreach area, probably 
from a source in Sembia. A spellblade is a +2 mag- 
ical weapon. A single wizard spell is cast as part of 
its making, and after that, the sword is immune to 
and paramount over that particular spell. Anyone 
carrying a spellblade who is attacked by the partic- 
ular spell that the blade is linked to is utterly pro- 
tected against all of that spell’s effects. This 
immunity applies even if the spell is magic missile 
or another ‘unerring’ spell, or one that a weapon 
would normally be of no use against. 

The blade-bearer can reflect an offensive spell 
back upon its caster, choose to negate its local 
effects entirely (allowing a fireball to flow 
directly around the wielder with no effect), or 
direct it at a target of choice. This decision must 
be made the round the spell is cast, or the spell is 
negated. There is no known limit to the negation 
ability of a spellblade against its specific spell. 
This power does not prevent normal use of the 
weapon in the same round. 

As an item, the spellblade is usable by all 
classes; as a weapon, it is usable only by those 
allowed to wield swords. To gain the protection of 
the spellblade, it must be drawn from its scabbard 
with some part of its hilt or blade resting on the 
bearer’s flesh (a warrior’s hand or strapped to the 
leg of a wizard), Spellblades guard against spe- 
cific spells and identical magical effects, such as 
the fireball spell and the fireball emitted by a 
wand of fireballs, They do not guard against 
merely similar effects; for example, a fireball- 
specific spellblade would not guard against nor- 
mal fires, a wall of fire, a meteor swarm, a 
flaming sphere, or a delayed blast fireball. 

Most spellblades are crafted to protect against 
offensive spells such as fireballs, lightning bolts, 
magic missiles, or charm person spells; a rare few 
are made for specific purposes, and can breach 
prismatic spheres or walls of force. 


Spiritburner 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Islands of Terror 
Spiritburner is a sword owned by Diamabel, a 
chaotic evil fighter of 12th level. The sword is a 


flame tongue +3. 
$747 


Mas OTL a A O O ee 


1404 


Sword, Stormbringer 


XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Howl From the North 

Stalker is an enigmatic and powerful weapon that 
reveals its full powers only in the hands of a 
ranger. To anyone else, it is merely a long sword 
+1. It has a slender, long blue steel blade, but its 
hilt, pommel, and quillons are made of a stark 
black metal that is as hard as adamantite. If 
Stalker is stared at for any length of time, it 
seems to have wisps of shadowstuff moving 
silently across its surface, although this is just 
illusory . . . or is it? 

Stalker is a +3 neutral good weapon when used 
by a ranger. The ranger gains a +1 bonus to Wis- 
dom and Intelligence while in possession of this 
blade. The ranger also gains a +20 bonus to all 
hide in shadows and move silently attempts, and a 
+4 bonus on tracking skills. 

Stalker bequeaths an affinity with dogs and 
wolves on its owners for an unknown reason. The 
ranger has a Charisma of 18 when dealing with 
dogs and wolves (not including worgs, tyrgs, win- 
ter wolves, or other canine monsters, such as hell 
hounds). While holding Stalker, the ranger can 
speak with animals (dogs and wolves only) three 
times a day. 

The spells that can be used once a day each by 
Stalker's wielder are invisibility, invisibility to 
animals, and invisibility to undead. In the process 
of becoming invisible, Sta/ker’s wielder seems to 


become shadowy and semitranslucent before he 
fades from sight. 

Stalker does have a special purpose, but the 
sword seems to have never told anyone or had a 
chance to reveal this to its previous owners, nor 
the nature of its special purpose power. Stalker is 
an intelligent sword with Intelligence of 14 and 
an Ego of 11; it communicates by empathy. 


Starfall 
XP Value: 1,900 GP Value: 9,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 

Starfall is an exquisite sword that was forged from 
the heart of a meteorite by an ancient elf weapon- 
smith who had more than two centuries of experi- 
ence in his trade. The blade is long and slender, 
with remarkable balance and an exceptionally 
keen edge. This gives Starfall a +3 bonus to strike 
opponents in leather, padded or hide armor and a 
+2 bonus against opponents in metal armors. Its 
deadly edge delivers an additional 3 points of dam- 
age per strike. The unusual metal in the blade 
reacts violently when it comes in contact with the 
blood of a dragon, causing an additional 3d4 
points of damage when used against dragonkind. 
The strange and alien metal never dulls or corrodes 
and receives a +5 bonus on saving throws. It is 
immune to attacks from rust monsters. 


Stonefist 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
Also known as the Sword of Rage, this two- 
handed sword was enchanted during the reign of 
Vlek Col Vlekzed. No one is sure if Vlek wielded 
it himself, though the warriors of the Hold of 
Stonefist stubbornly (and violently) maintain 
that. No one doubts that the weapon contains the 
strength and ferocity upon which Vlek built his 
domain. 

Aside from its normal +2 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls, the sword allows the wielder to vol- 
untarily enter a state of mindless rage. While 
enraged, the character gains an additional +1 
attack, +3 damage, and an additional +2 hit 
points per level. (Note: The bonus hit points are 
lost to damage before the character’s own hit 
points, as a potion of heroism.) However, the 
character also loses any Dexterity bonuses to his 
or her Armor Class and cannot control the rage 
until a save vs. spell is successful (one attempt 
per round). 


Stormbringer 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
Chaotic in nature, this sword has an Intelli- 


gence of 12 and an Ego of 12, is +5 when strik- 
5751 


1405 


_ Sword, Sun Blade 


j,i | 


ing, is a dancing sword, and drains energy lev- 
els. On a roll of 1 1—20 it will drain all the 
energy levels from any being if it hits, with a 
roll of 7—10 allowing it to drain one-half of the 
energy levels. The energy levels gained from 
the battle are transferred to the user as Strength 
of 18/00. It also adds hit points by automati- 
cally rolling the proper die for the creature 
struck. If a wizard is hit, roll 1d4 and multiply 
the result by wizard’s levels. The same is done 
for all other classes and creatures. The sword 
becomes sated after draining off 300 energy 
levels, in which case, after 10 melee rounds, 
the user reverts back to his or her former 
Strength and hit points. The sated state lasts for 
50 full turns, at the end of which the sword will 
take another 300 levels. 


Sun Blade 


XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This sword’s enchantment enables the sun blade 
to be wielded as if it were a short sword with 
respect to encumbrance, weight, speed factor, and 
ease of use (the weapon appears to be a bastard 
sword, and inflicts bastard sword damage, but the 
wielder feels and reacts as if the weapon were a 
short sword). Any individual able to use either a 
bastard sword or a short sword with proficiency 
is proficient in the use of a sun blade. 

In normal combat, the glowing, golden blade 


of the weapon is equal to a sword +2. Against 
evil creatures, its bonus is +4. Against creatures 
of the Negative Material Plane or those drawing 
power from that plane (such as certain undead), 
the sword inflicts double damage. Furthermore, 
the blade has a special sunray power. Once a 
day, upon command, the blade can be swung 
vigorously above the head to shed a bright yel- 
low radiance like that of full daylight. The radi- 
ance begins shining in a 10-foot radius around 
the sword wielder, spreading outward at 5 feet 
per round for 10 rounds after that, creating a 
globe of light with a 60-foot radius. When the 
swinging stops, the radiance fades to a dim 
glow that persists for another turn before disap- 
pearing entirely. All sunmblades are of good 
alignment. 


Sunsword 

GP Value: 20,000 

RAVENLOFT 

The sunsword is a magical long sword. Its blade 
is a form of crystal glassteel, held by a platinum 
hilt and guard. It glows with dim blue light most 
of the time. It is a sword +2 against all creatures 
except undead. When within 30 feet of any 
undead, the blade suddenly glows a brilliant blue. 
The blade is +3 vs. undead (to attack and dam- 
age). When used against vampires, the blade 
flares and sparks when it strikes, inflicting 10 
additional points of damage per strike. 

Ages ago, Strahd employed a powerful magi- 
cian to destroy the sword. The first part of the 
process required that the hilt and blade be sepa- 
rated, then destroyed simultaneously. However, 
before the hilt and blade could be destroyed, the 
magician’s assistant stole the blade and attempted 
to flee from Barovia. Though his body was later 
found in the woods, the blade was never recoy- 
ered. When it was separated from the hilt, the 
blade took on the appearance of a normal long 
sword. 

Though the hilt remained in Castle Ravenloft, 
the blade has never been found. Strahd has always 
lived in fear that the blade may be reunited with 
the hilt. Currently, the blade has a normal hilt. If 
the blade’s owner finds the hilt, it will magically 
leap onto the blade, replacing the normal hilt and 
becoming the sunsword. 


XP Value: 3,000 


Surtr’s Flaming 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Legends & Lore 
Surtr’s avatar carries a flaming sword +3 that sets 
anything it touches ablaze (save vs. magical fire 
to negate) for 1d10 damage each round. 


Sword, Syrar’s Silver 


D tenia iieatamesineaiaaiitsiaiitiaemeel 


Surya’s Sword of Light 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Legends & Lore 

Any being within 10 feet of the avatar’s 
unsheathed sword of light must save vs. petrifica- 
tion or be blinded for 1d10 turns. The sword auto- 
matically dispels all illusion and darkness spells 
within 20 feet. 


Susanoo’s Blue 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Legends & Lore 
Any being struck by Susanoo 5 blue sword suffers 
an additional 2d10 lightning damage (save for 
half), 


Susk, the Silent 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 

DRAGON Magazine 74 
Susk is a slim sword of fine manufacture and 
flawless, oil-slaked steel. It is devoid of adorn- 
ment and inscriptions. It does not glow or reflect 
light, so it does not appear to be metal from some 
far place. Its nickname comes from its magical 
silence—the sword never rings, clatters, scrapes, 
or emits any sound, A blade struck against it may 
ring, but Susk itself remains silent. The silence in 
no way affects creatures, spells, objects, or any 
area about the blade. 

Susk is +3 on attack rolls, but does normal 
damage (1d8/1d12). It has no apparent Intelli- 
gence or sentience, and only one other magical 
property—it /evitates involuntarily. That is, it can 
never rise, fall, or move in any way by itself, but 
always remains stationary when released, even if 
in midair. It can be moved while so floating by 
being struck with other objects, or by magical 
effects (such as telekinesis), but will stop quickly 
when such force is removed. 

Susk cannot therefore be effectively hurled at 
an opponent or tossed away to prevent its cap- 
ture—it will stop mere inches from the point of 
release and hang in midair. There is no known 
limit to this ability and no known way to nullify 
it. Any creature may hold and wield Susk without 
harm. It confers no magic resistance or spell 
immunities upon the bearer. 

Susk is a blade mentioned repeatedly in tales 
and legends of the north. Its origin is unknown— 
and curiously, never mentioned in any folklore— 
but it seems to have always been around in the 
hands of someone or another. Its present where- 
abouts are a mystery; the sage Elminster can 
speak of its location with certainty only over a 
short span of time beginning some 20 winters 
ago, when he recognized it in the hands of 
Abadda, a northern prince of the Fallen King- 
dom, who was then a proud wanderer and bandit 


leader. Abadda was challenged by Disty] of 
Nesme at the court of Alustriel, High Lady of Sil- 
verymoon, in Elminster’s presence. During the 
fight that followed, Elminster and at least one 
other—the adventurer Urnen of Yartar—recog- 
nized the blade for what it was. 

Abadda was slain in combat, and Distyl right- 
fully took the blade. Shortly thereafter he was 
found dead by his campfire on the Trollmoors, 
and Urnen was seen in Longsaddle not much 
afterward, brandishing a blade that was demon- 
strably Susk—to Urnen’s eternal dismay—when 
he let go of it involuntarily in the middle of a tav- 
ern brawl, it hung in midair, beyond his grasp, as 
he was dragged to the floor and stabbed to death. 

A local bully, Usk Harpell, claimed the blade, 
but was found dead in a nearby alley within the 
night, the blade gone. It disappeared from view at 
that time, but recent reports from Shadowdale 
(some six winters back) and Mulmaster (two win- 
ters ago) suggest that the strange blade is still 
“changing hands the hard way” among the adven- 
turers and caravan merchants of the Realms. 


Sylabra 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 12,000 
Hall of Heroes 
Sylabra is Merith’s favored weapon. It is a silver 
long sword +3 of chaotic good alignment, with 
Intelligence 14 and Ego 6. It can detect invisible 
objects (10-foot-radius), detect magic (10-foot 
radius), and glow with a silvery-blue radiance at 
the bearer’s will. 


Syrar’s Silver 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,000 
The Magister 

This +1 silver weapon employs a combination of 
spells devised by the Archmage Syrar. The magic 
allows the blade to breach the barriers between 
planes in much the same manner as a cockatrice 
and similar animals do. Thus, it can strike targets 
on the Astral and Ethereal Planes that are suscep- 
tible to magical weapon attacks. But when 
wielded for this purpose (user on the Prime Mate- 
rial Plane, target on another plane), it is treated as 
a normal weapon attack. The +1 to damage 
applies in all cases. 

Anyone holding the sword can see into either 
the Astral or Ethereal Plane (one at a time) at will, 
viewing a spherical area with a 30-foot radius cen- 
tered on the tip of the drawn blade. The user need 
not employ the sword offensively in order to be 
able to use the viewing power; thus, priests and 
wizards can make use of this ability of the sword. 
However, viewing can only be maintained for a 
number of rounds equal to the holder’s Intelli- 


gence, plus 1d4 additional rounds, and the viewing 
5759 


aa RS S N 
1407 


S E E LE E E E E A E E 


Sword, Taragarth, the Bloodbrand 


ability only functions once a day, regardless of the 
length of time each viewing is sustained. 

Only the sword itself, and never any part of the 
wielder, or physical objects, or other form of 
attack or spell, can reach into the other planes. To 
creatures residing on the other planes, the weapon 
is clearly visible whenever it is drawn, and its 
bearer appears as a shadowy, indistinct figure 
whom they may reach through the planes to 
attack, but at a —2 penalty. 

The viewing ability also works for users on the 
Astral and Ethereal Planes with respect to their 
ability to see into the Prime Material Plane. 


Taragarth, the Bloodbrand 


XP Value: 2,200 GP Value: 11,000 
DRAGON Magazine 74 

Taragarth is a sword of steel fire-blackened along 
the length of the blade so that only the sharpened 
edges gleam. On the base of the blade, just ahead 
of the simple crossbar guard, a rune is etched into 
the metal. The rune is nonmagical and evidently 
the mark of the blade’s maker, but the name of the 
maker was lost over time. 

Taragarth requires strength and stature to 
wield, but while it is held unsheathed, the bearer 
is protected from fire (effects equal a ring of fire 
resistance) and is protected by a feather fall if 
descending 10 feet or more precipitously. Tara- 
garth strikes normally but does +3 damage. It 
does not glow and is not sentient. While gripping 
Taragarth (even sheathed), the bearer is protected 


koa 


from ESP and detection spells (including know 
alignment). Such spells simply have no effect. 
This protection does not affect charm, sleep, 
other control-related spells, or psionic attacks. 

Taragarth is believed to have been forged by Elf- 
gar of Silverymoon in the early days of the North 
and was given to the champion Aeroth when he led 
the armies of the kingdoms of the North against the 
trolls of the Evermoors. The might of the trolls was 
broken at the Long Battle (nine days’ duration) 
across the moors, and the bloody Taragarth was 
brandished aloft so often by the valiant Aeroth that 
it was dubbed the Bloodbrand. 

Much later, when Aeroth was gray-bearded, 
Rayuth of Silverymoon died, and the throne passed 
to his son. Aeroth, grieving for his lord (and none too 
fond of the sadistic, proud Tulven, Rayuth’s son), 
took ship west from Waterdeep, sailing first to the 
Isle of Toaridge-at-the-Sun’s-Setting and later to the 
Moonshae Isles. There, with his wife and six sons, 
Aeroth founded the City of Vlan. His descendants, 
the nucleus of a group swelled by other disenchanted 
or dispossessed mainlanders, were to become the 
feuding merchant houses of the Moonshae Isles. But 
Aeroth’s sword was not seen on his voyage, and most 
legends hold that he left it in Silverymoon, where it 
has been lost in some concealed hoard or in one of 
the many warrens of caverns beneath the city. A few 
sages know that, in truth, Aeroth hid the blade in a 
ruined well on the isle of Toaridge so that his argu- 
mentative sons would not fight over it. 

There it lay while ages passed, until an explo- 
ration party of illithids found it and carried it to 
their underground city on the mainland near what 
is now Beregost. There it was studied for only a 
short time before a band of adventurers plun- 
dered much of the city and gained it. 

The names of the band are now lost; one was a 
fighter who later took service in the Merchant 
Guards of Amn and died battling bandits on the 
banks of the Sulduskoon river. It seems likely that he 
bore Zuragarth, but no word of it can be found after 
it (presumably) fell into the hands of the bandits, 
until a wandering peddler offered it for sale in a mar- 
ket at Berdusk. It brought 400 pieces of gold from an 
adventurer who recognized it, but he mistakenly told 
a companion what he thought the sword was, and 
was dead by the next morning. So was the compan- 
ion, murdered in turn by the assassin Turl. 

Turl carried the blade north to the city of Scor- 
nubel, using it to pay off a debt to his guildmaster 
Iritan. Little is known of Iritan, who evidently 
ruled the guild with an iron hand for more than 
20 winters. One spring Turl appeared in Water- 
deep, dying of poisoned wounds, and gave the 
blade, and more wealth, to the wizard Marune. 
Much of Marune’s wealth was lost in subsequent 


upheavals, and the Bloodbrand fell into the hands 
5760 


i} 
A 1408 ) 


a 


~ Sword, Tri-Entity g- 


of an unknown person in Waterdeep. Where it 
traveled after that is not known, but four winters 
ago it was brought to Elminster for examination, 
when he was visiting Westgate, by a swarthy, 
scarred fighting man of Calimshan who gave his 
name as Vulph. The present whereabouts of 
Vulph and of the blade Taragarth are unknown. 


Tarl Vanovitch’s Sun Blade 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 23 

This neutral good weapon is +2 normally and +4 
against any evil creatures, but Tarl’s blade does 
triple damage against all undead creatures. Once a 
day, this blade can be swung over the head to create 
a bright light similar to that of the sun in a 60-yard 
sphere for 1d10 rounds. This renders it a particu- 
larly effective weapon against vampires as well as 
other exclusively nocturnal monsters. Tarl’s weapon 
has an Intelligence of 12 (10 Ego points) and the 
ability to detect invisible objects in a 10' radius. 


Tefnut’s 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Legends & Lore 
In combat, Tefnut’s avatar can command her 
sword to transform itself into a stroke of light- 
ning. Anyone hit by this weapon suffers normal 
damage and then must save vs. spell or take an 
additional 5d20 points of electrical damage. 


Tideripper 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Otherlands 

This mighty weapon was wielded by Drudarch 
Takalurion and is still used by Speakers of the 
Moon to this day. 7ideripper is a long sword +4 
that is usable only by a good-aligned warrior. The 
sword can also perform the following functions 
twice per day—detect evil (60' radius), detect lie, 
dispel magic, heal, part water, and strength. In 
addition, the sword vibrates with anticipation 
when an evil being of 12 or more Hit Dice or lev- 
els approaches within 100 yards. 

The wielder of Tideripper is unaffected by com- 
bat restrictions that apply to water. The wielder 
fights as if on dry land. There are some legends that 
say that nine such swords were forged, one for each 
day of Solinari’s quarter in High Sanction. If this is 
true, there are eight other swords like Tideripper 
scattered throughout Krynn. 


Timesweep 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Top Ballista 
Santarian Keltander, the pegataur Mayor of Ser- 
raine, owns a sword he calls Timesweep. Santar- 
ian is never without Timesweep, his magical 


two-handed sword +4. In addition to its fearful 
damage (1d10+7), the sword possesses a trio of 
special properties. First, it is fast. Santarian does 
not automatically lose initiative with this weapon. 
Second, he may s/ow an enemy five times a day 
(the reverse of a haste spell). Third, he may haste 
himself and up to six allies for three turns once a 
day. Timesweep is of elven manufacture and has a 
grip of Clan Erendy! design (the current Royal 
Clan of Alfheim). Though Santarian does not dis- 
cuss it, many guess that his family has owned the 
blade for three centuries. 


Token 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DRAGON Magazine 54 

Until needed, a token sword appears to be a sim- 
ple token. When required, it can magically grow 
from a miniature blade into a full size steel 
weapon, enabling the owner to smuggle a blade 
into a forbidden area. The full size sword lasts for 
4 turns, then it vanishes. This token is highly 
prized by assassins. 


Tri-Entity 
GP Value: 261,000 

New Item 
Widely known as a maverick, Jett is one of the 
most loathsome individuals any party of adven- 
turers could ever come across. He never fights 
fairly, always has the upper hand, and generally 
uses a squad of permanently invisible humanoids 
to help him combat his opponents. Recently, Pris- 
mal has come to believe that Jett is actually the 
avatar of a devious god of death, though he has 
yet to figure out which. One reason Prismal has 
come to this conclusion, is the great weapon of 
power that Jett carries with him. (At the very 
least, Jett is probably a “holy” warrior of this 
unknown chaotic deity.) 

This weapon, known simply as 7ri-Entity or 
Turbo, is a great, unhealthy looking three-bladed 
sword. The central blade is the equivalent of a 
long sword of sharpness while the two outer 
blades are similar in size to short swords of 
sharpness. When Jett swings and hits, he causes 
2d6+1d8 damage, with a +5 bonus for the 
weapon’s enchantment. 

The two outer blades can be shot from the hilt, 
attacking as arrows of accuracy +4. If the arrows 
miss their target, the blades fly back to the sword 
like a pair of boomerangs and reattach by the end 
of the current round. 

Across the hilt, the sword has 12 small black 
knives (about the size of well-balanced pocket 
knives). These knives of venom +1 can be thrown 
by the sword’s owner, however they must be 


found and reattached in order for the knives to 
5766 


XP Value: 52,200 


DOO E eS 


1409 


Sword, Tri-Entity 


a 


maintain their venomous qualities. If they are 
not reattached, they act as normal small knives, 
causing 1d2 points of damage (+1 for their 
enchantment). 

The equivalent of an unholy reaver (with all 
powers), its primary purpose is the destruction of 
law and good. It can detect invisible objects and 
creatures, can communicate telepathically with 
its user, and has a chaotic evil alignment. It has 
an Intelligence of 21 and an Ego of 20. The 
sword, however, has never tried to control Jett, 
and it is believed that it cannot, due to Jett’s status 
with his deity. 

When Jett’s attack roll is a 20, the DM should 
roll on the following chart to determine the exact 
effects of the strike. Being a gift from a chaotic 
deity, the sword’s critical table has effects that 
damage both user and opponent. All results are 
cumulative where applicable. 


Roll Critical Effect 

01 Life stealing: Treat as the sword of the 
same name. 

02 Damage the possessor: The blow harms 
the wielder instead of the opponent. 

03 Confusion: Effect lasts 2d4 rounds, save 
for half effect. 

04 Double damage to possessor: The sword 
transfers double the damage of the strike 
from the opponent to the wielder, 

05  Disintegrate: The opponent is disinte- 
grated unless a saving throw vs. spell is 
successful. 

06 Deafness: Wielder is struck deaf until a 
remove curse or heal is cast. No save 
applicable. 

07 Drain energy levels: 1d2 levels are 
drained from the opponent. A save vs. 
spell is applicable. 

08 Teleport: Wielder is teleported to a ran- 
dom (hospitable) location within 1,000 
miles of current location. 

09  Vorpal attack: Treat as a vorpal sword. 

10 Tasha’s uncontrollable hideous laughter: 
Wielder is struck with 2d4 rounds of the 
named spell. Saving throw vs. spell applies. 

11 Blindness: Opponent is permanently 
blinded. Save vs. spell applies. 

12 Drain energy levels: One level is drained 
from the wielder. Save vs. spell applies. 

13 Teleport: Opponent is teleported to a 
random (hospitable) location within 
1,000 miles of current location. 

14 Mute: Both wielder and opponent are 
struck dumb for 1d4 days (roll randomly 
for each). 

15-20 No special effect. 


5766 


1410 


Sword, Vainamoinen's II 


ian: 9 


The sword also has the following abilities: 


If the user says its name (usually under the 
breath), it will teleport into the user’s hand. 
Jett usually uses this feature to gain a surprise 
attack. 

The sword has a refillable “dart gun” in the 
hilt. It holds a total of 20 darts. When acti- 
vated by a small button, the dart flies from the 
back of the hilt. The dart has a range of 
25/50/100 feet. 

The sword can heal 1d100 points of damage 
each week (randomly rolled each week). Once 
these points are used, the wielder (and possi- 
bly companions) must wait for the next seven- 
day period to begin. 

The possessor regenerates missing body parts 
and heals all scar tissue. This process takes 
one week per point of damage that caused the 
affliction. 

If the possessor is struck with a lethal blow, 
the sword has a 45% chance to teleport the 
wielder away in time (to a random hospitable 
location within 1,000 miles) to save his or her 
life. This power can be used once a week. 

If the wielder is killed in battle, the sword can 
resurrect the user, without the usual necessary 
resurrection survival roll. This power can be used 
four times a year (at any point within that year). 
If nonevil individuals touch the hilt of the 
sword, they suffer 1d4 points of damage 
equivalent to the Negative Energy Plane touch 
of an undead creature. (The damage can be 
temporarily halted with the use of the Nega- 
tive Plane protection spell.) 


Troll’s Bane 
XP Value: 2,600 GP Value: 11,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
Many years ago, a warrior of Waterdeep was 
awarded an enchanted sword for helping stave off 
a troll raid. The warrior took leave of the city, and 
rumors hinted that he disappeared during a battle 
near Myth Drannor. Adventurers have been seek- 
ing his sword ever since. 

Troll’s Bane is a sword with a hilt wrapped in 
dyed-green griffon hide. The pommel is set with a 
large emerald, and the blade is engraved with the 
words Troll 5 Bane. The blade is polished to a mir- 
ror-like finish and never tarnishes. Normally, the 
sword is a magical weapon +1, but when it is 
employed against a troll it is +4 on attack and dam- 
age rolls. In addition, the blade glows when it is 
within 40 yards of a troll, and it emits a smoking 
stench when it strikes a troll. Trolls cannot regener- 
ate damage caused by the sword. The sword com- 
municates telepathically, and it can cast a heal spell 
and strength spell once a day on its wielder. 


1411 


Twinkle 
XP Value: 3,600 GP Value: 18,000 
MENZOBERRANZAN™ Campaign Set 
This scimitar, a defender +5, was given to Drizzt 
by the famed wizard, Malchor Harpel. The scimi- 
tar was forged by the surface elves and glows 
with an eerie bluish light when enemies are near. 


Tyr’s Sword of Sharpness 
XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 45,000 
Legends & Lore 
Tyr’s avatar carries a sword of sharpness +3 that 
also allows him to see invisible objects and know 
alignment. 


Undead Slayer 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 

This is a long sword +2/+5 vs. undead and 
necromancers. Its special powers include the 
ability to bestow upon its wielder a +2 saving 
throw bonus vs. undead attacks and necromantic 
spells. In addition, once a week, the sword can 
summon a valkyrie. 


of Underwear Snatching' 
XP Value: — GP Value: 2,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 

This is a rare and powerful sword of underwear 
snatching. If you look closely, it seems the sword 
wielder on POLYHEDRON Newszine 70 isn’t wear- 
ing any. Talk about chain mail teddy stereotypes! 
'This item was part of a contest to name the sword fea- 
tured in issue 70 of POLYHEDRON. 


Uranus’s 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Legends & Lore 
Uranus’ avatar wields a sword that cuts through 
any nonmagical material as if it were cloth. Thus, 
his enemy’s AC is never better than 5 (unless due 
strictly to Dexterity). 


Vainamoinen’s 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
This sword +3 has a 12 Intelligence and 12 Ego, 
speaks, slays monsters, throws a fear spell once 
per turn and is a sword of sharpness. 


Vainamoinen’s IT 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Deities & Demicops Cyclopedia 
Vainamoinen’s avatar wields an intelligent sword 
of sharpness +3. The sword speaks, and it can 
cast a fear spell once a day. 


5774 


~ Sword, Vampiric Regeneration A 


Vampiric Regeneration 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 188 
Half the damage inflicted by this sword +2 is 
immediately bestowed on the wielder, with all 
fractions rounded down. If the target of the blade 
is not a living creature (an extraplanar being, 
golem, or undead, for example), it functions only 
as a normal magical sword. It cannot otherwise 
cause regeneration, nor will it restore life, limb, 
or organ. The blade cannot increase the wielder’s 
hit points beyond the character’s normal maxi- 
mum. 


Vanya’s Wrath 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Into the Maelstrom 

This is a bastard sword +2, +5 vs. fiends. It is 
engraved with runes that say, The Strength of 
Vanya Protects the Conquerors. The sword, of 
neutral-good alignment, is intelligent and speaks 
Common, all elven tongues, any water elemental 
language, and Storm Giant. It reads magic and 
can detect invisible, detect creatures with ties to 
the Negative Energy Plane or the Demiplane of 
Shadow. It teleports back to Vanya if its bearer is 
destroyed or killed. 


Vasgo 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Adventures in BLACKMOOR 
Vasgo is a very special, lawful neutral sword +2 
with an Intelligence of 12 and an Ego of 10. Its 
powers are find traps, find secret doors, and see 
invisibility. It can also read magic and is blessed 
with the extraordinary power of telekinesis. It 
speaks Common, Dragon, Dwarf, Elf, Goblin, 
Halfling, Ogre, and Orc. Vasgo’s jeweled scab- 
bard is worth 75 gp. The small emerald mounted 
in the buckle of Vasgo’s sword belt is worth 1,000 


gp. 


Vergadain’s Broad Sword 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar’s broad sword +4 detects treasure 
within 20 feet. 


Vhaeraun’s 
XP Value: 3,200 GP Value: 16,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar’s jet-black long sword +4 is invisible 
in darkness. When holding it, the avatar can cre- 
ate a 70-foot range bladebend once every six 
rounds; the blade of any one edged weapon cur- 
rently held twists about to strike its holder for 
maximum damage. 


Vorpal 

GP Value: 40,000 
GREYHAWK 
The vorpal blade differs from a sword of sharp- 
ness in several ways: 
* Its attack roll bonus is +2. 
* Itneeds only 10% over the required score to 
hit, or an 18 through 20 to sever, and it always 
severs the neck. 
* It will perform in the hands of any lawful 
fighter, although it requires a paladin in order to 
act in its antimagic capacity. 


XP Value: 8,000 


Vorpal II 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
Similar but superior to a sword of sharpness, a 
vorpal sword has a +3 bonus to attack and dam- 
age rolls. Check the table below to determine 
whether an attack roll is good enough to sever the 
head from the neck of an opponent, considering 


only the sword’s bonus of +3: 

Modified Score 
Opponent is to Severe 
Normal/armored 20-23 
Larger than human size 21-23 
Solid metal or stone 22-23 


Note that many creatures have no heads or can 
change their form, and therefore cannot suffer 
decapitation. There are also creatures that have 
heads but will not necessarily be killed by decap- 
itation (among these are dopplegangers, elemen- 
tals, and golems). 


Warbringer 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DRAGONLANCE Adventures 

This gigantic two-handed sword, forged during 
the Age of Might, was in the possession of the 
half-ogre bandit, Steeltoe. The fine quality and 
workmanship of this sword means that it once 
must have belonged to a nobleman, possibly a 
Knight of Solamnia. Caramon won the sword 
when he slew the half-ogre. Caramon brought the 
sword forward into the future with him. It remains 
in his family, having been passed on to his eldest 
son. The sword has a +3 bonus on attack rolls and 
does 1d8+3 points of damage. 


Warlord Blade of the 
Shield Lands 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This magical broad sword +2 increases its pos- 
sessor’s leadership ability in combat. Thus, a 


commander’s Charisma is considered to be 18, 
5783 


ie ee a ee ee re 


1412 


Sword, Woodhold 


eS ee emit” 


giving a +2 morale modifier to troops under his 
command, The sword also doubles his or her 
command radius and gives the commander’s 
troops a +2 discipline modifier. 


Weasel 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Adventures in BLACKMOOR 

The Sheriff of Ranshead, Philo Holbytyn, wields a 
lawful neutral short sword +1/+3 vs. undead, 
called Weasel. This sword has an Intelligence of 9 
and an Ego of 5 and has the power to detect evil 
and see invisible. Since it is well known from ear- 
lier days, when it is drawn, all enemy forces within 
100 yards must make a morale check at —1. 


Whirlwind Blade 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 

DRAGON Magazine 126 
This sword +1 has from 8—16 charges which, 
once used, are gone for good. Whenever one 
charge is expended, the wielder of the sword may 
launch a whirlwind attack in the manner of an 
I1th-level kensai. All Strength bonuses and the 
like possessed by the character still apply. Even a 
kensai may use this weapon, provided that it is 
not a magical version of his or her weapon of spe- 
cialization. A kensai of 11th level or higher, if 
able to use this weapon at all, may use the abili- 
ties; the kensai may also use his or her own innate 
whirlwind attack potential. If the character 
expends a charge while conducting an innate 
ability whirlwind attack; however, no additional 
benefit is gained, the charge is wasted. 


White 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Adventures in BLACKMOOR 
Bolitho is custodian of the famous White Sword. 
This powerful lawful-good sword +2/+3 vs. gob- 
lins, ores, undead, and dragons has an Intelli- 
gence of 12 and an Ego of 12. It was forged at the 
command of a previous bishop to be the sword of 
champions and “the defense of the Church and 
the people” against evil. It has the powers to 
detect evil, detect magic, and see invisible. It can 
also read magic and has the extraordinary powers 
extra damage, telepathy, and healing. It speaks 
Gnoll, Gnome, Goblin, Hobgoblin, Kobold, 
Ogre, Orc, and Pixie. Unsheathed, the sword 
raises the morale of all friendly troops within a 
mile of the wielder by one. Though he cannot use 
the weapon himself, Bolitho assigns the sword to 
a champion before any military campaign in 
which High Church troops are involved. He has 
also been known to place it at the disposal of per- 
sons carrying out especially dangerous and diffi- 
cult missions on behalf of the High Church. Only 


lawful-good characters with an established repu- 
tation of honesty and loyalty can be so blessed. 


of the Wild Coast 
GP Value: 1,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This cursed two-handed sword was enchanted by 
a bitter wizard to expose the “true inner personal- 
ities that all warriors possess.” This weapon 
causes its owner to save vs. spell or become neu- 
tral evil and a lover of battle. Modifiers to the 
saving throw depend on the victim’s class; 


XP Value: — 


Paladin +6 
Ranger +3 
Fighter or thief -3 


If the saving throw fails, the wielder will 
always be looking for a fight and always fighting 
to the death. If he or she sees a fight or a drawn 
weapon, the urge to enter battle becomes over- 
powering. Even the threat of combat causes the 
character to make a Wisdom check or immedi- 
ately attack. The character can be released only 
by a remove curse spell. If a character dies while 
under the curse, the victim’s psyche travels to the 
Outer Plane of Acheron, never to return. 

Any character can attempt to wield this 
weapon, but one who is not neutral evil does not 
receive its +3 magical bonus. Also, a good- 
aligned character takes 1d4 points of electrical 
damage per use. 


Willow Wand* 
XP Value: +1,000 GP Value: +5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 40 
Willow wand swords are rolled as ordinary magi- 
cal swords (Intelligence, Ego, bonus, possible 
curse, and so on) and treated as such with the fol- 
lowing exceptions—they float and are immune to 
rust monsters and other metal destroyers. 


of Wishes 

XP Value: 1,800 GP Value: 9,000 
DUNGEONS & DraGcons Expert Rules Set 
This sword will grant 1d4 wishes once. A wish 
can be cast by holding the sword and stating the 
wish. Once the sword is used in this manner, one 
of the wishes is gone. Wishes are very powerful 
magic and the DM should handle them with great 
care. 


Woodhold 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Adventures in BLACKMOOR 
The Lawful Sword, better known as Woodhold, is 
a normal sword +2 in the hands of anyone but an 


elf. When borne by an elf, it comes alive, having 
5790 


$ 1413 ï 


~ Sword of Wounding r 


an Intelligence of 11 and an Ego of 8. It then has 
the power to detect evil and read magic and has 
the extraordinary powers illusion and flying. In 
the proper hands, it speaks Dwarf, Dragon, Gob- 
lin, Hobgoblin, Ogre, and Orc. All elves within 
100 yards of an elf bearing Woodhold adds 2 to 
their morale. The sword’s value to nonelves (by 
reason of materials and workmanship alone) is 
1,000 gp. To elves, it is priceless. 


of Wounding 

XP Value: 4,400 GP Value: 22,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This is a sword of only +1 bonus, but any hit 
made with it cannot be healed by regeneration. In 
subsequent rounds, the wounded opponent loses 
1 additional point for each wound inflicted by the 
sword. 

Thus, an opponent hit for 4 points of damage 
on the first melee round will automatically lose 1 
additional point on the second and each succes- 
sive round of combat. Loss of the extra points 
stops only when the wounded creature bandages 
its wound or after 10 rounds (one turn). 

Damage from a sword of wounding can be 
healed only by normal means (rest and time), 
never by potion, spell, or other magical means 
short of a wish. Note that successive wounds will 
damage in the same manner as the first. 


Wyrmcleaver 
XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 60,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 76 
This magical blade is a vorpal sword +4 with 
respect to all dragons. Against any other foes, the 
sword is +2, with no special abilities. 


Wyrmsbane 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Dragons of Triumph 

Wyrmsbane is a two-handed sword +2 for most 
normal situations. When used against dragons and 
draconians, however, it inflicts double damage. 
Against black and sea dragons it inflicts triple 
damage. The sword does not become stuck in the 
statue when a Baaz draconian dies and petrifies. 

Wyrmsbane can also locate objects three times 
a day. If the user desires to find something that he 
or she knows well, and the object is within 180 
feet, the DM should allow the find. 


Wyrmsbane II 
GP Value: 4,000 
Tales of the Lance 
This sword has had many owners and many 
names, it is also currently known as Redeemer. 
To most it is Wyrmsbane, sister sword to Kith- 
Kanan’s Wyrmslayer. It was forged in Silvanesti 


XP Value: 800 


during the Second Dragon War, but was given to 
the kingdom of Thorbardin and from thence to 
Ergoth. The sword’s blade is etched with elvish 
script, and its crosspiece bears the likeness of a 
falcon’s beak. 

Wyrmsbane functions as a long sword +2. 
When wielded against dragons, draconians, ser- 
pents, or lizard kin, it inflicts double damage; 
against serpent spawn of the sea and marsh (black 
dragons) it causes triple damage. It cannot be 
harmed by wyrm breath weapons, nor be trapped 
in the stony form of a dead draconian. The sword 
can also locate objects if the object is known and 
within 180 yards. The sword points in the direc- 
tion of the desired object (if the item is not 
shielded by lead or gold). This power functions 3 
times per day. 


Wyrmslayer 
GP Value: 45,000 
Tales of the Lance 
This mighty blade was the weapon of the ancient 
elf hero, Kith-Kanan. It was forged in Silvanesti 
during the second Dragon War and remained in 
the royal house until Kith-Kanan led his people to 
Qualinesti. He is said to have been buried with 
the sword. 
This weapon looks very much like Wyrmsbane 
(Redeemer), except that it is a little larger. It nor- 
mally functions as a two-handed sword +3. Like 


Wyrmsbane, Wyrmslayer is immune to the impris- 
5795 


XP Value: 9,000 


. rn: 


1414 


maa aaa ie | 


x Sword, Zosh’s Xebec of Doom = 


oning effect of a dying Baaz draconian, The 
sword causes double damage against any dragon 
or draconian. 

In addition, a character holding Wyrmslayer by 
the hilt gains a +3 bonus to all saves against 
dragon breath attacks and spells cast by dragons 
or draconians. Wyrmslayer does have the discon- 
certing tendency to buzz aggressively whenever it 
is brought within 30 feet of a true dragon (not a 
draconian). This buzzing sound is loud enough to 
be heard clearly and always awakens a sleeping 
dragon. 


Wyrmsvenin 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Dragon Keep 
This superbly crafted two-handed sword is an 
artifact from the Third Dragon War. It is similar 
to the legendary sword Wyrmsbane and it was 
also forged during the Age of Might. Wyrmsvenin 
acts as a two-handed sword +2 against most crea- 
tures. When used against dragons or draconians, 
however, it inflicts double damage. Against black 
dragons and sea dragons, it inflicts triple damage. 


Xiphoid Xebec 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This item appears and functions as a sword +/ in 
all respects. When immersed in water and the 
command word spoken, it turns into a three- 
masted ship with sails (treat as a small sailing 
ship). The xebec remains in ship form for as long 
as desired, a second command returns it to sword 
form. The xebec can only be damaged by magical 
attacks or by physical attacks from creatures of 
12 or more Hit Dice. If damaged, however, it 
never returns to sword form. 


Yondalla’s 
XP Value: 15,000 GP Value: 75,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar’s short sword +4 is a vorpal weapon 
that glows silver when it strikes. 


Zenchoo Katana 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Rage of the Rakasta 

The zenchoo katana belonged to Hirameki, the 
First Daimyo, who long ago united the warring 
rakasta clans under one supreme leader. It cannot 
be used by anyone who is not of lawful align- 
ment. In fact, neutral or chaotic characters will 
find that they cannot even lift this mighty sword. 
This special weapon is a katana +3 that also 
gives its wielder the ability to cast a clairvoyance 
spell three times a day. In order to invoke this 
power, a full turn of meditation is required. 


Zinzerena’s 


XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 


Monster Mythology 
She employs a magical short sword which ran- 
domly changes enchantment between +1 and +5; 
it is always magically enchanted with a paralyz- 
ing venom (saving throw is at—1 to —5 with a ran- 
dom variance; effect lasts 1d5x5 rounds. 


Zosh’s Xebec of Doom 
New Item 
XP Value: — GP Value: 4,000 
Zosh’s cursed sword —] is identical to a Xiphoid 
Xebec. If detect magic is used, a faint aura of 
magic is seen. If detect evil is cast, it hides its 
alignment. 

Zosh was an evil wizard who once used a 
xebec to escape the wrath of a more powerful 
rival. Unfortunately, The spells her enemy used to 
create a great sea storm sunk the vessel, leaving 
Zosh stranded on an unchartered island. Upon her 
return, she created this sword. It creates a three- 
masted ship that doubles the effects of magical 
attacks and creatures of more than 12-HD, and 
this ship is guaranteed to sink in three days. Now, 
if she could just get her rival to take delivery... . 


5801 


415 


Tabard of the Mystics 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Magister 
This garment is typically green with golden trim, 
having a stiff stand-up, flared collar, and may be 
worn over armor. Its construction is expensive 
(powdered gold and serpentine, for example, 
must be worked into the fibers of the cloth), diffi- 

cult, and known only to a few. 

Tabards of the mystics may be worn by any 
class, and have the following properties: they will 
not burn, and all fire damage suffered by the 
wearer is reduced by | point per die. Wearers are 
immune to the effects of a scarab of insanity, and 
gain saving throw bonuses of +1 vs. a magic jar 
attack, and +4 vs. all enchantment/charm spells. 
A symbol may be cast upon the tabard (typically 
upon the breast), and rendered invisible (inopera- 
tive) until it is touched and a command word spo- 
ken, or until the garment is removed from the 
wearer without a command word being spoken. 
In any case, the wearer or owner is immune to the 
effects of the symbol. Wizards wearing a tabard 
may open a wizard locked or held door or portal 
as though one level higher in experience. 


Table 


This piece standard of furniture may be of any 
size and of any material. Most magical tables are 


Table of Pienty 


made of wood, stand about 3 feet tall and 
5 feet square, and usually have four legs. 
* Their encumbrance is 250 coins unless 
otherwise noted, 


of Banquets 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This item seems to be a table of plenty but may be 
commanded to lengthen before creating dinner- 
ware and food. It can be extended in 5-foot incre- 
ments to a maximum of 60 feet. Thereafter, it can 
create an additional setting per side for each 5- 
foot extension, feeding six at 10-foot length, 
eight at 15 feet, and so on. Upon command to 
shrink, it turns into a square table. 


of Contents 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item appears and functions as a table of 
plenty; however, items may be put on plates, flu- 
ids (such as a potion) in cups and all commanded 
to disappear. The items are then stored, to return 
when the table is recreated. 


of the Elements 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This table is identical to a table of plenty but, 
when commanded to create food, it creates small 
elemental beings instead. A fire elemental 
appears on each of the two candles, an earth ele- 
mental on each plate, a water elemental in each 
cup, and a single air elemental in the center. The 
tiny monsters (AC 0; HD 1; MV 12; #AT 1; Dmg 
1d6; ML 12; AL N) are hostile and attack imme- 
diately. Tiny air elementals do not create whirl- 
winds, although their minicyclones are 2 feet tall 
and 6 inches wide and capable of slaying crea- 
tures with 2 hit points or less unless the victim 
makes a saving throw vs. death magic. 


of Plenty 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 22,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This plain, wooden table is 5 feet square and 
stands 3 feet tall. Upon command, it produces 
tablecloth, candles, plates, cups, and eating uten- 
sils for four; a second command produces food 
and drink on the plates and cups and lights the 
candles. It creates three meals a day. All foods 
created are real, but the items disappear if taken 
more than 5 feet from the table. A third command 
causes everything on it (including leftovers and 
crumbs) to disappear; a fourth command word 
turns it into a miniature table, | inch tall; and a 


fifth restores it to normal size. 
5806 


- OO ee 


l 


417 


Table, Writing 


jg aaao O 


Writing 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

When a quill, inkwell, and blank scroll or parch- 
ment are placed on the surface of this table and a 
command word is spoken, the writing table uses 
those writing tools to write one magic spell. The 
tools need not be magical. A priest spell is written 
unless the user is a wizard, in which case a wizard 
spell appears. The exact spell level is determined 
randomly using the following chart. The table 
functions once a month—at most. Roll 1d20: 


Roll Spell Level 


01-05 Ist 
06-09 2nd 
10-12 3rd 
13-15 4th 
16-17 Sth 
18-19 6th 

20 Tth 

Tablecloth 


Tablecloths are made of linen or lace that are laid 
over a table. They are decorative and make 
cleanups after meals easier. In earlier times, 
tablecloths served to decrease the number of 
splinters people received while eating at rough- 
hewn wooden tables and sideboards. 


Augricrone’s 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
When shaken and spread, this tablecloth miracu- 
lously provides a fine feast: meats, cheeses, hot 
and cold dishes, exotic fruits, fine wines, and 
breads, a full banquet capable of serving 20. The 
food must be eaten immediately; it cannot be 
saved for later consumption, and it all vanishes 
after two hours. When finished, one may simply 
gather the edges, fold, and store. It can be used 
only once a day. 


of Feasting 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 4,000 
DRAGON Magazine 145 
A tablecloth of feasting is thick, richly embroi- 
dered, and difficult to fold and move—it weighs 
30 pounds. The tablecloth automatically adjusts 
to fit any table on which it is placed, up to 900 
square feet in size. Once a day, a tablecloth of 
feasting can create a meal equal to a heroes’ feast 
of 15th level, although no furniture is created and 
the conjured food bestows no magical effects. 
They are usually found with 1d20+80 charges, 
and require a command word to function. If the 
meal is interrupted, however, the food does not 
vanish, 


Tablet 


Tablets are thick, flat pieces of granite, jade, or 
other hard-stone materials. Runes or other written 
information can be carved into them. Tablets are 
durable and able carry their messages over mil- 
lennia. Even if broken, they can be pieced 


together to reveal messages. 
Myrkul’s Tablet of Fate 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Wa! 


Indestructible in the hands of anyone except Lord 
Ao, each tablet of fate is made of plain, weath- 
ered stone, 2 feet high, with rounded ends and 
edges. The sides are engraved with the names and 
symbols of the gods and their divine portfolios. 
However, no one but a god can interpret anything 
except the gods’ symbols. 

These tablets reflect all spells back (100%) on 
the caster, but are otherwise inert. No one can use 
them offensively. Myrkul’s tablet of fate radiates 
strong magic, signs of the enchantments he has 
placed on it. These spells let his denizens cross 
from the Gray Waste into the Realms, maintain 
an open gate to Gray Waste, so that their power 
remains strong, allowing Myrkul to find the 
tablet wherever it is. 


of Spirit Summoning 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 

Oriental Adventures 
This item is a small jade tablet inscribed with 
characters. Upon uttering the command word, the 
character can cast summon spirit, as the 9th-level 
wu jen spell. The tablet is usable once a week. 
With each use of the tablet, one inscribed charac- 
ter fades magically from the surface. When all the 
characters have faded, the tablet is a smooth piece 
of jade worth 10 ch’ien. The tablet has 2d6 char- 
acters inscribed on it when found. 


Takht of the Jann 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DraGon Magazine 190 
Each of the instruments of the jann (the nay of the 
djinn, the riqq of the efreet, the ‘ud of the marids, 
the rababah of the dao, and the ganun of the spir- 
its) is mildly powerful in its own right, but 
brought together into a single orchestra, they 
prove to be an extremely powerful magical com- 
bination. If a takht (TAH-kt) of bards, rawun 
(rah-OON) or otherwise, all wield the instru- 
ments of the jann under the direction of a single 
sha’ir, the takht may summon into this plane an 
army of genies. There will be four units of genies, 
one of each of the four elemental genie races, and 


each under the command of a noble genie of the 
5812 


1418 


Da E 


x Talisman of Al'Akbar y- 


proper race—marid, dao, efreet, and djinn. Each 
unit consists of 100 members of the respective 
race. It takes an hour for all the troops to arrive 
and assemble, and if anything interrupts the sum- 
moning players, the spell fails and those that have 
arrived will not be under any control (and likely 
will be irritated at the sha’ir as well). 

If the summoning is successful, the genies will 
be under the command of the sha’ir directing the 
takht, and will remain so for an hour and a day 
(25 hours). During this time they will build, 
move, and attack at the whim of the sha’ir—they 
will even fight other genies if so instructed. After 
their time of servitude ends, they will return to 
their own plane, and will not harm or act against 
the sha’ir who commanded them for the next 101 
years. 

This is an incredible amount of power to place 
at the disposal of a single individual, and a com- 
plete set of instruments is only held in the hands 
of the living Amir of the High Desert. There are 
stories that a full set has also been collected and 
is in the hands of the Grand Caliph, but this is 
unsubstantiated. The genies are very aware of the 
potential of mortals who acquire a full set, and as 
such, all genie servitors (including gen and the 
like) are continually on the lookout for individu- 
als attempting to assemble a full collection of the 
instruments. Clever fakes, mysterious robberies, 
and even disappearances of collectors have been 
reported in legend and tales of those attempting 
to recreate the takht of the jann. 


Talisman 
A talisman is any magical object that is worn. 
Amulets are talismans that are usually worn 
around the neck. Phylacteries are talismans worn 
at the forehead, wrist, and occasionally on the 
upper arm or at the thigh. 


of A? Akbar 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
The talisman of Al'Akbar is an eight-pointed star 
of hammered platinum. It is small, no bigger than 
a large pendant, and comes with a chain of gold 
and pearls so it can be worn as a necklace. Each 
point of the star is tipped with a diamond that 
sparkles in the slightest light. From the points to 
the center run elaborate patterns of golden inlay. 
It does not radiate magic. 

Constant Powers: Anyone of good alignment 
touching the talisman receives the benefit of a 
remove curse spell. 

Invoked Powers: Once a day the talisman can 
cast a cure disease or cure blindness spell. 

Resonating Powers: Once a week, the talis- 
man and cup* can be used to create any one of 


the following potions: healing (5 batches), sweet 
water (3 batches), extra-healing (2 batches), 
elixir of health (1 batch), or vitality (1 batch). 
Furthermore, the items gain the power of a resur- 
rection spell (1/day), effective only on good or 
neutral creatures. 

Curse: These items can only be used by good 
humans and half-elves. When the powers of the 
talisman or the cup are invoked, the owner ages 
1d10 years. The aging is irreversible! Upon 
attaining maximum age, the owner is transformed 
into a zombie guardian of the artifacts, 
unraiseable by any means. 

Legend: The talisman and cup of al'Akbar are 
major holy relics. The two artifacts are always 
associated with a powerful god or goddess of 
healing, although the DM must select exactly 
which one is most appropriate from those in the 
campaign. In the FORGOTTEN REALMS” setting, 
Lathander could be used, while in the GREYHAWK 
campaign, Pelor would be appropriate. 

No matter what faith, according to the sect’s 
dogma, the talisman and cup were given by the 
deity after a great disaster that brought untold 
devastation and suffering to the land. The two 
items appeared before the high priest in a dream. 
When the clergyman awoke, the talisman and cup 
were there, still sparkling with the radiance of the 
deity. Blessed with the items and knowledge of 
their use, the holy man went out and cured the 
multitude of sick and injured. 

Unfortunately, the miraculous powers of the 
talisman and cup did not bring happiness to the 
people or peace to the temple. When travelers 
returned to their distant homelands with tales of 
these two wonders, emperors, kings, and warlords 
coveted the items. Driven by greed and fear, they 
marched their armies and sent their agents, to 
seize the treasures. 

Just what battles occurred and who won them 
is lost along with the names of those who fought 
for the artifacts, Perhaps one rose victorious over 
the others only to have the two treasures seized 
from him. Perhaps they were stolen by bandits in 
the chaos of war, All that is known is that when 
the wars finally ceased, the talisman and cup had 
disappeared forever. 

Even today, though, the legend of their miracu- 
lous power lives on in expressions as “cured by 
the cup” for any miraculous healing or “By the 
star of Akbar,” an oath to ward off disease. 

The cup and talisman of Al'Akbar, because of 
their powerful healing abilities, are both excellent 
items for the player characters to acquire and use, 
and yet unbalancing devices that are best taken 
out of player characters’ grasp quickly in any 
campaign where they appear. The talisman and 


cup can be immensely useful items in an incredi- 
5813 


- ©. <i 


1419 


EEE ey ee 


~ Talisman of the Beast r 


bly dangerous adventure where the characters fre- 
quently face horrible injury and death. These two 
artifacts may be vital for keeping the characters 
alive long enough to have a hope of concluding 
the adventure. 

At the same time, the DM should not use the 
talisman and cup more than once in this manner. 
The powers of the talisman and cup allow the 
characters to flaunt death (and thus perform 
supremely heroic acts), but if this risk is removed 
from all adventures, things will grow dull very 
quickly. 

Ideally, the characters find the talisman, cup, 
or both as the prelude to an even more harrowing 
task. The characters need the life-giving powers 
of these artifacts in order to travel to the Outer 
Planes (where their own magic will not function) 
and defeat a great foe. The items may be needed 
to survive a perilous journey of great importance. 

Furthermore, the talisman and cup are of great 
interest to nearly everyone. Followers of the orig- 
inal deity will want their relics returned. Warlords 
will want the healing power for their armies. Wiz- 
ards may covet the potion-making powers of the 
items. Characters must be ready to fight to keep 
the artifacts. 

Once the need for them has passed, the arti- 
facts should be removed. Ideally, the characters 
return the relics to their proper masters, or else 
they finally fall prey to the relentless efforts to 
buy, steal, or seize the items. If absolutely neces- 


sary, the original deity can appear and claim the 

items. Woe to the characters who would at this 

point be foolish enough to refuse. 
Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* The talisman must be placed in the cup, and 
the cup filled with water from the river Styx. 
The talisman dissolves and the cup is voided 
of magic. 

* Ten thousand curse spells must be cast upon 
the talisman, and then it must be struck against 
the cup, destroying both. 

* They must both be touched by the deity of dis- 
ease and death. 

(* See Cup, of Al-Akbar.) 

In a Dark SuN Campaign: These items do 
not exist on Athas. 


of the Beast 
XP Value GP Value 
Badger: 350 1,750 
Brown Bear: 4,200 21,000 
Deer: 1,200 6,000 
Eagle: 1,750 8,750 
Lynx: 1,750 8,750 
Porcupine: 150 750 
Skunk: 350 1,750 
Wolf: 1,200 6,000 


POLYHEDRON Magazine 19 
This talisman is crafted in silver, bearing an exact 
likeness of a forest creature. It hangs on a silver 
chain with links styled as leaves and a rune 
inscription on the back. 

The runes are the command words for the item, 
scribed in Druidic. One command is given for the 
Common tongue, and the other for the speech of 
an animal. When the item is worn, the bearer 
need only speak the proper (Common) command 
to shape change (in one round) into the animal 
whose likeness is on the talisman. The ability to 
speak with animals of the same species (at will) 
is also bestowed while in animal form. There is 
no limit to the duration. The wearer need only 
speak the proper (animal language) command 
word to return to normal form. The talisman will 
function normally seven times a week. If used an 
eighth time, the talisman traps the wearerin the 
animal shape. This effect is permanent until dis- 
pelled by the Great Druid, or by a wish, as the tal- 
isman was created by the first of the Great 
Druids. In addition, the talisman is not detectable 
as magical except by a druid’s detect magic spell, 
a true seeing spell, or a wish. 

Only eight talismans of the beast exist, each a 
unique item. Each bears the likeness of a different 
forest creature. 


5814 


sl 1420 > 


x Talisman of Elemental Travel y- 


of the Beast II 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
Old Empires 
This item was created by the Beast Cults, which 
were quite popular in Mulhorand and Unther at 
the height of their second empires (circa 1 DR), 
but have since been forgotten. 

These talismans have two functions: first, they 
enable their wearers to communicate with ani- 
mals at will, and second, they enable the wearers 
to change into the form of an animal three times a 
day. These animals cannot be monsters or giant 
size animals, simply normal beasts, from the size 
ofa fly to that of an elephant, bear, or tiger. 

While in animal form, the character has the hit 
points and Armor Class of his or her human form, 
but all the special abilities of the beast form. The 
wearer must revert to human form (or demihu- 
man or humanoid form) before taking on the 
characteristics of an animal again. 

The talisman is a string of multicolored beads 
strung on papyrus reeds, which spin to form ani- 
mal pictures. Only two of these talismans are 
known to exist. 


of Chaos Supreme 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 32,500 
GREYHAWK 
A device that looks exactly like a talisman of law- 
fulness but functions in exactly the opposite man- 
ner and has a total of six charges. 


of the Chimera 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Milenian Empire 
Typically worn on a silver necklace, this talisman 
is the actual dragon head of a chimera, shrunken 
to the size of a walnut through magical and 
alchemical procedures. The talisman enables the 
wearer to breathe fire like a chimera—a cone 50 
feet long and 10 feet wide at the end that inflicts 
3d6 points of damage. This can be done three 
times a day, 


of the Cockatrice 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Milenian Empire 
Made from a cockatrice’s chickenlike foot, this 
talisman is usually worn at the wrist, dangling 
from a bracelet. If the wearer touches a creature 
with the hand adorned by the talisman, the crea- 
ture must roll a successful saving throw vs. petri- 
fication or be petrified. The talisman can be used 
once a day. 


of Dreams 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 45,000 
DraGon Magazine 132 

This item, which can take any of several forms 
(usually a small object or piece of jewelry 
adorned by curious runes) gives the bearer the 
power of prophecy. Any new user will require two 
months minus one day per point of Intelligence 
and Wisdom of the learner. The talisman allows a 
5% chance anytime the bearer is asleep of having 
prophetic dreams of important events that will 
soon occur. Controlled or randomly, this foresight 
can operate once a week. 


of Elemental Travel 


XP Value GP Value 
Lesser: 750 7,500 
Greater: 1,000 10,000 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
There are five types of these talismans. Roll 1d10 
to learn the exact item found. 


Roll Talisman Type 

1-2 Lesser Talisman of Earth 

34 Lesser Talisman of Air 

5-6 Lesser Talisman of Fire 

7-8 Lesser Talisman of Water 

9-10 Greater Talisman (all elements) 


Lesser Talismans: These round amulets are 
usually found on chains; there are corresponding 
types to each of the four elements. They are 
engraved with a triangle in the center and a sym- 
bol above it (one of the 10 symbols of the ele- 
mental ranks). 

On the Prime Material Plane, a user may press 
the central symbol while casting a conjure ele- 
mental spell; the talisman will reverse the effect, 
sending the wearer into the appropriate elemental 
plane. While wearing the talisman, the user can 
breathe elemental matter as if it were pure, clean 
air, and gains heightened vision (normally in the 
range of 120 to 1,200 feet, depending on condi- 
tions). 

Greater Talisman: These talismans are similar 
to the /esser talismans in power, but their power 
applies to all the elemental planes. They are 
engraved with the four triangular symbols of the 
planes, meeting in the center. The 10 symbols of 
all the elemental ranks are inscribed around the 
edges. If the proper command words are known, 
the wearer may also force an elemental being to 
obey instructions. This uses one charge; the talis- 
mans can expend up to 10 charges per trip into an 
elemental plane. 


$822 


1421 


Talisman of the Faerie 


ee 


of the Faerie 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Milenian Empire 

This talisman is a small, hollow piece of yellow 
glass or crystal. It is usually worn from a head- 
band of woven vines, dangling at the wearer’s 
brow. The owner can use each of these powers 
once a day: assume gaseous form (like the 
potion), return to normal form (from gaseous), 
and create fog (100-foot square, 10 feet high, 
around the caster). 


Fiend 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 
Monster Manual 
Each type of lesser fiend has a special combina- 
tion of inscriptions that bind them to the wielder 
for the space of nine days, or at least prevent the 
fiends of that type from harming the user. Greater 
fiends can likewise be commanded for nine hours 
or kept at bay. Archfiend talismans will cause 
them to perform a single service or prevent the 
bearer from being harmed by a particular duke of 
Baator when properly used. The employment of 
any fiend talisman requires great care and cau- 
tion. Sacrifice is required of evil creatures using a 
talisman, 

Merely looking at these talismans is danger- 
ous. If not properly protected by spells or a magic 
circle, study of a charm gives a 10% chance of 
summoning the specific kind or fiend to whom 
the talisman belongs. Speaking the name on the 


10,000 


talisman always calls forth the kind or fiend. 
Archfiends will be aware of improperly protected 
talismans and they will send something to slay 
those who have them if the talismans pertain to 
them or their plane. 


Fiend II 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
FIEND FoLio* 
Greater fiends have a special combination of 
inscriptions that will bind them to the wielder. 
The employment of any fiend talisman requires 
great care and caution. Merely looking at these 
talismans is dangerous if not properly protected 
by spells or a magic circle, study of a charm gives 
a 10% chance of summoning the kind or specific 
fiend to whom the talisman belongs. Speaking 
the name on the talisman always calls forth the 
kind or specific fiend. 


Fire Pepper 
GP Value: 2,500 
Maztica Campaign Set 
This talisman creates 4d20 tiny round objects that 
can be used for a variety of purposes. Each is bright 
red, the size of a small pebble. They can be used to 
immobilize (or worse) unsuspecting victims. 

When dissolved in up to a gallon of drinkable 
liquid, a fire pepper talisman will create an odor- 
less threat. When someone takes a drink of the 
liquid, he or she is immediately immobilized for 
2d6 rounds, gasping and choking and writhing on 
the ground in pain from the hot burn of the drink. 
The victim suffers | point of damage for each 
round immobilized. If the character was merely 
taking an exploratory sip, a saving throw vs. spell 
is allowed. If successful, only half damage is suf- 
fered, and half the immobilization time is 
assessed. 

If an individual can be tricked into eating a 
pepper whole, he or she must make an immediate 
system shock roll, or die. For each pepper beyond 
the first taken on a single bite, the character suf- 
fers a —5% to the chances of surviving the system 
shock. Even those characters who survive are 
immobilized for 3d6 rounds, and suffer an equiv- 
alent number of points of damage. 


XP Value: 500 


of the Golem 
XP Value GP Value 
Amber: 900 9,000 
Bone: 1,800 18,000 
Bronze: 1,300 13,000 
Obsidian: 1,000 10,000 
Wood: 500 5,000 


The Milenian Empire 
There are five varieties of this talisman, each cor- 


responding to a different kind of golem (amber, 
5831 


= Talisman, Medicine Bundle 


bone, bronze, obsidian, or wood). Each talisman 
looks like an inch tall golem, and is made of the 
same material as the type of golem it affects (a 
bone talisman affects bone golems, for example). 
The wearer of the talisman can try to control one 
golem of the matching type within 60 feet. The 
golem is allowed a one-time saving throw vs. 
spell. If successful, that golem can never be con- 
trolled by that talisman. If the save fails, the 
golem must obey the commands of the wearer. It 
can be ordered to walk, attack, guard, and so 
forth. Once given a command, the wearer need 
not remain within 60 feet for the golem to fulfill 
its duties. Once a talisman is “attuned” to a golem 
(meaning the golem failed its saving throw), it 
cannot be used to control other golems until the 
original golem is destroyed. 


of the Griffon 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Milenian Empire 
This item consists of a griffon’s feather and claw, 
and is worn around the neck by a leather thong. 
The wearer gains a +2 bonus on all saving throws 
vs. fear effects. Additionally, all retainers of the 
wearer receive a +1 to their morale while in the 
wearer’s presence. 


Hwesta’s Talisman of 
Memorization 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

1992 Fantasy Collector Card 515 
Hwesta is a native of Greyhawk, but he and his 
companions found themselves banished across 
the planes to Toril by a powerful wizard who was 
incensed by Hwesta’s theft of his talisman of 
memorization. Half of these amulets only affect 
memorization of spells of levels 1-5, and Hwesta 
has not risen to a level where he can use 6th-level 
spells, so he doesn’t know if this one affects the 
memorization of 6th- through 8th-level spells. 
Nevertheless, Hwesta is betting that only losing 
an amulet that affects memorization of spells of 
levels 1d4 would make a wizard that mad. 


of Lawfulness 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 32,500 
GREYHAWK 

This small, silver device will cause any Patriarch 
to have the ability to sink an Evil High Priest to 
the center of the earth forever. It contains seven 
charges. It may never be recharged. If an evil 
priest touches it, it will deliver 5d10 points of 
damage, and any other persons who touch a falis- 
man of lawfulness, other than lawful priests, take 
5d6 points of damage. 


Medicine Bundle 
GP Value: 150 


XP Value: 30 

The Atruagin Clans 
The Children of the Horse believe that all crea- 
tures, good and evil, great and small, are imbued 
by the Immortals with magical power. In some 
this power is weak, leaving the individual unable 
to harness the supernatural powers of the uni- 
verse. In others it is great, and the spiritual forces 
of the world obey their commands. The former 
type of person follows a career that requires little 
or no contact with the supernatural, becoming 
fighters or thieves. The latter class of person 
seeks out the unknown and embraces it by becom- 
ing a wizard, priest, druid, or even shamani. 

Those without great access to supernatural 
power do not forsake that which they cannot 
wield, however. To do so would be folly. Rather, 
they seek the guidance of the tribe’s shamani and 
ask his help in the crafting of a makaki or medi- 
cine bundle. 

The making of a makaki begins with a hunt in 
which the character must seek out his or her own 
totem animal without the aid of a shamani’s mag- 
ical power. Once the animal is found, it is killed 
and the heart cut from the body. This heart is 
cured in such a way that it can be fashioned into a 
tough, leathery pouch. The rest of the carcass is 
burned in a special fire built by the shamani, and 
a handful of the ashes are placed in the makaki. 


They lay the spiritual foundation for the coming 
5835 


ze U a 


1423 


~ Talisman of Memorization r 


enchantments. 

Once the makaki is fashioned and the ashes 
have been gathered in it, the character begins to 
gather items associated with his totem spirit. For 
example, if the character’s totem animal is an elk, 
the character might gather a number of wild flow- 
ers that are known to be a popular food for the 
animal, or some of its dung from a game trails 
that it frequents. As soon as six of these items 
have been gathered, the character takes them and 
the bundle back to the shamani. 

In a ritual that must be held under the light of 
the full moon, the shamani calls upon the Immor- 
tals to bless the makaki. Each ceremony will 
allow the shamani to enchant one bundle per level 
of experience on each of the three nights of the 
full moon. Thus, a 5th-level shamani could 
enchant as many as 15 makaki per month, 
although he would seldom be called upon to 
undertake such a massive ceremony. 

The ritual ends with the coming of the dawn as 
the character holds out his left arm to the 
shamani. With a slender bone knife, the shamani 
cuts the supplicant’s flesh and allows the blood to 
drip onto the ingredients assembled in the bundle. 
Enough blood is drained to deprive the character 
of 1d4 hit points before the enchantment is com- 
plete. 

With the makaki now fully empowered, the 
character lashes it around the waist in the same 
way that citizens of other lands might carry a 
coin purse. Whenever a character with a makaki 
is called upon to make a saving throw or ability 
check while wearing his makaki, the wearer gains 
a +1 bonus. 

Further, the character can call upon the totem 
spirit for protection in the event that the save or 
check fails. If this option is selected, the die roll 
for the saving throw or ability check is ignored 
and the character is assumed to have successfully 
overcome the hazard. Whatever caused the char- 
acter to attempt the saving throw or ability check 
will destroy the makaki, however, forcing the 
character to fashion a new one if he wishes to 
regain his +1 saving throw and ability check 
bonus, 


of Memorization 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 

This talisman allows a wizard to memorize spells 
in half the normal time (five minutes per spell 
level). Half of these amulets (1-5 on 1d10) affect 
memorization of spells only of levels 1-5. The 
remaining half affects memorization of spells of 
levels 1-8. Spells of 9th-level are never affected 
by this talisman. 


Mire 
XP Value: 2,250 GP Value: 6,750 
DRAGON Magazine 178 
This is a 6-inch-diameter silver disk on which is 
mounted a rather ugly, grayish green stone. This 
talisman allows the user to call up ground water 
to form sticky, unpleasant swampy areas, charac- 
teristically used to protect a camp or flank since it 
takes so long to operate. 

Such a talisman has 1d20+40 charges and is 
rechargeable. One charge will turn a 40- by 40- 
foor area into shallow marsh, hindering move- 
ment on foot and making mounted travel 
dangerous (both types of movement are at half 
speed). Attempts to ride, run, or fight within the 
area requires a Dexterity check on 1d20 every 
round, or a slip and fall results. Two charges 
make the area all but impassable to those on 
horseback and very hard to traverse on foot. 
Mounts must save vs. paralyzation at —6 or fall; 
footmen attempting anything but the slowest, 
most careful walk (one-quarter usual speed, and 
no combat) must check against Dexterity on 
1d20 or fall. Damage from falling off an animal 
is only | point; the soft mud will usually cush- 
ion any fall. 

After activating the talisman’s magic, it takes 
10d4 minutes for the water to rise and remains 
for six hours. In addition, the talisman will not 
work in very dry areas such as deserts, or on 
sheer stone surfaces and areas where the water is 
prevented from rising, such as areas having per- 
mafrost. The effect will not cause buildings to 
sink into the ground, but will make them rather 
damp and dank for a while. 


Modified Talisman of Zagy 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 28 

This particular item is an experimental model of 
the famous talisman of Zagy. It allows the wielder 
one wish, but permanently turns him or her to the 
lawful good alignment—only a remove curse 
spell will return the user to his or her previous 
alignment. Also, the talisman inflicts 1 point of 
damage to the holder any time he or she comes 
within 20 feet of a magical weapon (only once for 
each new magical weapon encountered). 


Monkey Head Talisman 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Mad Monkey vs. the Dragon Claw 
The monkey head talisman was created by Hu 
Sen to aid individuals to quickly learn the fun- 
damentals of martial arts, in particular the Mad 
Monkey style. The monkey head allows the 
individual to learn up to three special maneu- 


vers per week while wearing the amulet, pro- 
5739 


~. aa, 


1424 


a = > — 


Talisman of the Sphere 


ES 


vided that activity appropriate to the maneuvers 
is undertaken. 

The individual will retain the knowledge of the 
monkey head talisman as long as the talisman is 
worn and for up to 24 hours after it is removed. 
As the character removes the talisman, he or she 
is aware that the knowledge will be lost unless the 
talisman is worn again in 24 hours. 

The monkey head talisman is silver with jew- 
eled eyes. As a particular skill or maneuver is 
learned, the eyes glow to show that the skill has 
been mastered. 


of Orcas 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
The Throne of Bloodstone 
This potent amulet was first devised by the lich- 
king Zhengyi. It makes the lich, and any other 
undead creature much tougher for a priest or pal- 
adin to turn. All turning attempts against the 
undead suffer a —6 penalty on the die roll. 


of Pure Good 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 27,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

A high priest who possesses this item can cause a 
flaming crack to open at the feet of an evil priest. 
The intended victim will be swallowed up forever 
and sent hurtling to the center of the earth. The 
wielder of the talisman must be good, and, if not 
exceptionally pure in thought and deed, the evil 
priest gains a saving throw vs. death. 

A talisman of pure good has seven charges. It 
cannot be recharged. If a neutral priest touches 
one of these magical stones, he or she will suffer 
7d4 points of damage. If an evil priest touches 
one, 12d4 points of damage are suffered. Only 
priests can be affected by the device. 


of Rahasia 

GP Value: 20,000 

Rahasia 

If the back of the pendant is inspected, the single 
word RAHASIA can be seen. When the holder of 
the talisman says “RAHASIA,” an invisible, 60- 
foot circle is created. No evil magic works in this 
circle. Spells cast by evil beings in the circle 
automatically fail, but existing spell effects or 
permanent items used by evil beings still work if 
removed from the circle. The circle will tem- 
porarily negate curses for its area and duration. 
The circle lasts 10 rounds and moves with the 
holder of the talisman. The talisman will function 
three times before disappearing, theoretically 
teleporting to its rightful owner. 


XP Value: 4,000 


Sacred Bundle 
XP Value: 30 GP Value: 150 
Legends & Lore 

A sacred bundle is a collection of 1d4+6 totemic 
items placed together in a pouch for the purpose 
of imbuing magical protection on the wearer. To 
create a sacred bundle, a warrior enters a trance 
(usually with the help of a shaman) and contacts 
his or her guardian spirit, asking for the spirit’s 
help in creating the magical talisman. After care- 
fully considering the warrior’s personality and 
nature, the spirit selects 1d6+3 items that the war- 
rior must collect. Usually, several of these items 
are difficult or dangerous to procure, such as a 
bear’s claw, a giant snake’s rattle, or a feather 
from the nest of an eagle. 

After the items are collected, the warrior goes 
to the tribe’s shaman and asks for help in mysti- 
cally binding the materials together. The shaman 
asks the warrior to gather one last rare item. 
Almost always, the shaman chooses an item 
needed for performing shamanistic duties, and 
when the warrior procures it, takes part of the 
item for personal use. 

Once all the items are assembled, the shaman 
performs a ceremony binding them into a sacred 
bundle, and from that point forward the warrior 
wears the bundle at all times. The sacred bundle 
bestows the following benefits upon the owner; 
+2 on all saving throws, the warrior is only sur- 
prised on a natural roll of 1, unarmored AC 
becomes 2, and one point is subtracted from each 
die of damage. 

If the sacred bundle is ever removed from the 
warrior’s body, all of its benefits permanently 
vanish, and he or she can never create another 
one. A sacred bundle never benefits anybody but 
the warrior who made it. 


of the Sphere 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This is a small adamantite loop and handle that is 
useless to nonwizards. Characters of any other 
class touching a talisman of this sort suffer 5d6 
points of damage. When held by a wizard con- 
centrating on control of a sphere of annihilation, 
a talisman of the sphere doubles the Intelligence 
bonus percentage for control (2% per point of 
Intelligence from 13—15, 6% per point of Intelli- 
gence from 16-18). 

If control is established by the wielder of a tal- 
isman, he or she only needs to check for contin- 
ual control every other round thereafter. If control 
is not established, the sphere will move toward 
the wizard at maximum speed (MV 16). Note that 
a wand of negation will have no effect upon a 


sphere of annihilation, but if the wand is directed 
5844 


E - eae ee N 


1425 


| ee eee 


Talisman of the Statue 


ee 


at the talisman it will negate its power of control 
as long as the wand is directed at it. 


of the Statue 
XP Value GP Value 
Crystal: 500 5,000 
Iron: 1,300 13,000 
Rock: 800 8,000 


The Milenian Scepter 
There are three varieties of this talisman, each 
corresponding to a different kind of living statue 
(crystal, iron, or rock). Each talisman looks like 
an inch tall statue, and is made of the same mate- 
rial as the living statue it affects (an iron talisman 
affects iron living statues, for example). 

The wearer of the talisman can attempt to 
control one living statue of the appropriate type 
within 60 feet. The living statue is allowed a 
one-time saving throw vs. spell. If successful, 
that living statue can never be controlled by that 
talisman. If the save fails, the living statue must 
obey the commands of the wearer. It can be 
ordered to walk, attack, guard, and so forth. 
Once given a command, the wearer need not 
remain within 60 feet for the living statue to 
fulfill its duties. Once a talisman is “attuned” to 
a living statue (meaning the statue failed its 
saving throw), it cannot be used to control other 
living statues until the original statue is 
destroyed 


of Tongues 

GP Value: 32,500 

Old Empires 

This medallion enables an individual to under- 
stand all languages both written and spoken, as a 
tongues or comprehend languages spell. The tal- 
isman of tongues also enables the wearer to speak 
these languages. Furthermore, it enables the 
wearer to read magic and read Mulhorand magic, 
at will. 

Only one of these talismans is known to exist, 
since the priests of Thoth have been hunting and 
destroying them to prevent foreigners from being 
able to decipher the secrets of Mulhorandi magic. 


XP Value: 3,500 


of Ultimate Evil 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 27,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This device looks like a talisman of pure good 
and is exactly its opposite in all respects. It has 
six charges. 
In Ravenloft: Using this item requires a 
Ravenloft powers check. 


TM 
WNW 
RRA AN 
Ss 


of Zagy 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

A talisman of this sort appears exactly the same 
as a stone controlling earth elementals. Its pow- 
ers are quite different, however, and are depen- 
dent upon the Charisma of the individual holding 
the talisman. Whenever a character touches a tal- 
isman of Zagy, a reaction check is made as if the 
individual were meeting another creature. Ifa 
hostile reaction result is obtained, the talisman 
will act as a stone of weight, although discarding 
it or destroying it results only in 5d6 points of 
damage and the disappearance of the talisman. 

If a neutral reaction results, the talisman will 
remain with the character for 5d6 hours, or until a 
wish is made upon it, whichever occurs first, and 
it will then disappear. If a friendly reaction result 
is obtained, the character will find it impossible 
to be rid of the talisman for as many months as 
the user has points of Charisma. 

The device grants one wish for every six points 
of the character’s Charisma. It will also grow 
warm and throb whenever its owner comes within 
20 feet of a mechanical or magical trap. (If the 
talisman is not held, its warning heat and pulses 
will be of no avail.) 

Regardless of which reaction result is obtained, 
when its time period expires, the talisman disap- 
pears. A base 0,000 gp diamond remains in its 


stead. 
5850 


1426 


x Tapestry of Folded Existence s- 


In a DRAGONLANCE Campaign: The talisman 
of Zagy is called the talisman of Lunitari on 
Ansalon. 


Talon 
See Claw 


Tanglefoot 
XP Value: 50 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 2 
This small, synthetic fungoid rapidly expands to 
fill a 10- by 10-foot area with rubbery tentacles. 
It takes three turns to force through the mass, but 
a giant size creature takes only one. The tendrils 
dissipate harmlessly in one hour. 


Tanglevine Root 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
Adventure Pack I 

These roots start to grow when exposed to body 
temperature, and sprout to form a barrier of 
writhing vines 10 feet wide. Any creature caught 
by one of these vines becomes entangled and 
must be cut free. It takes five rounds to cut some- 
one free. Oil loosens the vines’ grip and a victim 
may be freed in two rounds. Fire and alcohol kills 
and dissolves tanglevines. 


Tapestry 

Tapestries are thick wall hangings made from 
linen, wool, or other heavy materials. They are 
used to block drafts that whistle through badly 
constructed walls during winter, and to dampen 
unwanted sound. Tapestries in wealthy homes 
usually are ornamented with scenes of battle, por- 
traits of leaders (both great and small), heroes 
and heroines, pets, and idyllic landscapes. 


of Disease Warding 

XP Value: 1,250 GP Value: 12,500 
Tome of Magic 
This is a 3-foot-square cotton tapestry bearing the 
image of a rainbow. When hung in a building of 
10,000 square feet or less, it protects the occu- 
pants from nonmagical diseases. It has no effect 
on persons already suffering from diseases, but 
protects healthy characters from contracting con- 
tagious diseases ranging from common colds to 
deadly plagues. The tapestry offers no protection 
against any disease caused by magic or of a mag- 
ical nature. 

The tapestry of disease warding is subject to 
rips, fire, and other damage that could be sus- 
tained by a normal tapestry, although it is 
allowed a saving throw. Its magic is permanent 
only as long as it remains intact. The tapestry 
may be moved to a new location, but has no 
effect outdoors. 


of Ekbir 

XP Value: 1,250 GP Value: 12,500 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

This 10- by 15-foot woven tapestry displays a 
scene of a dark river in a bleak, rocky landscape. 
The tapestry was intended to be a gate from Ekbir 
to the lower planes for disposal of its worst crimi- 
nals. It is rumored, however, that the tapestry 
actually opens into a previously undiscovered 
plane, and not one of the Lower Planes, although 
the landscape is bleak enough. 

The command word causes a branch of the 
river to enter the Prime Material Plane. The water 
rushes out from the tapestry and forms a river 10 
feet wide and 5 feet deep. It flows for 50 feet 
before vanishing back into the plane that it nor- 
mally occupies. The river exists in the Prime 
Material Plane for three turns, and can only be 
summoned once a month. The water is brackish 
and evil-smelling, and the current is swift and 
strong. 

A character who enters the river must make a 
Strength check or be swept along with the water. 
This check must be made every five rounds, or 
once per 10 feet of the river traveled by swim- 
ming, whichever comes first. A character who 
fails the check in the last 10 feet of the river is 
carried through the gate and into the land beyond. 
There is no return. 


of Folded Existence 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
Assassin Mountain 

These tapestries always show an interior space 
such as a palatial room, the cavern of a genie’s 
hoard, or the interior of a ship. The viewer can 
enter or leave the magical room of a tapestry of 
folded existence simply by speaking a command 
word and walking into or out of the tapestry. With 
great detail, the threads of the tapestry depict 
everything (including people) brought into or out 
of it. They are generally used as treasuries, pris- 
ons, or workrooms. 

These tapestries always measure at least 6 feet 
by 10 feet and are of the finest craftsmanship. 
They require at least two people to carry. The 
interior room can vary from 5,000 to 10,000 
square feet. Creatures and items within a tapestry 
of folded existence require neither food nor drink 
and suffer no aging effects while they remain in 
the tapestry. These tapestries function only when 
placed on a wall or floor. They are items of con- 
cealed wizardry and cannot be discovered with 
detect magic spells. 


1427 


Tapestry of Rooms 


j Om 


of Rooms 

GP Value: 30,000 
Castle GREYHAWK 
This tapestry is an amazing artifact that Voyeux 
stole from the tyrant of Elredd on Woolly Bay. 
The user of this tapestry can see any room (or rel- 
atively enclosed outdoor space) he or she has ever 
been in, just by mentally commanding the picture 
to appear. The point of view given is one that the 
viewer previously occupied. If all the viewer has 
done is to duck his or her head into the room and 
out again, the view is from the door of the room. 
If the viewer is very familiar with the room and 
has walked every inch of it, the viewpoint is any 
one desired. 

Like many artifacts, this one has its drawbacks. 
In this case, it is a very subtle one. The viewer is 
ever more inclined to just sit on a couch or in a 
chair and watch the tapestry— forsaking any 
activity to watch what is going on in places where 
the viewer has been before. 

The viewer has only the basest instinct remain- 
ing—the only time he or she will move is to 
obtain food. As soon as food is in hand, the vic- 
tim races back to the tapestry, hoping not to have 
missed any of the activity. Even the food is not 
savored. It is just shoved into whatever eating ori- 
fice the viewer has and consumed without any 
real appreciation of its nature. It is said that 
Voyeux gained the artifact by poisoning the tyrant 
who had owned it. 


XP Value: 6,000 


Tart 
Tarts are pastries made from flaky dough and 
baked until lightly brown. Both sweet and sour 
fruit stuffing is used in tarts, creating a tantaliz- 
ing sensation on the tongue. 


of Accusation 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 

These pastries are tempting, anyone seeing them 
must make a saving throw vs. spell or pick one up. 
They cannot be eaten; anyone attempting to do so 
will merely put the tart away in a pouch or other 
container (no saving throw). The farts are cursed; 
anyone carrying a tart cannot hide in shadows, 
stay invisible, or otherwise remain unnoticed. A 
remove curse spell will cause the victim to eat the 
tart, requiring a saving throw vs. poison (or die). A 
dispel evil spell from a caster of at least 26th level 
will cause the tart to disappear. 


of Enticement 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 
These pastries appear and function as tarts of 
accusation in all respects, except for the reactions 


of others. Anyone carrying a tart attracts the 
attention of monsters encountered; such beings 
will always try to attack the owner of the tart, 
regardless of reaction or Morale rolls. The tarts 
can be removed in the same manner as farts of 
accusation, 


of a Summer’s Day 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 
These pastries, tarts of a summer's day, appear 
and function as farts of accusation in all respects, 
but have no effect on others. The owner of a tart 
may, on command, cause stormy or cloudy 
weather to change, becoming a brightly lit sum- 
mer’s day in but one turn. This use causes the tart 
to disappear. 


Tathlum 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DermiEs & Demicops Cyclopedia 
This weapon of war with magical properties can 
be made by anyone of the Celtic religions. First, 
cut off the head of an enemy and coat it with lime 
from a lime pool in the former territory of the 
dead person, allowing several coats to dry toa 
rock hard ball. It takes one day to do each coat, 
and each coat takes one week to dry. When 
thrown at friends of the former owner, under 
bright sunshine, it has the effect of doing damage 
up to % of the original hit points of the person hit. 
If the person hit is a relative of the head, 4 of the 
hit points are taken away. This weapon is usable 


only once. 
Tea of the Zhakar 


XP Value: 50 GP Value: 150 

Dwarven Kingdoms of Krynn 
The Zhakar are unique among dwarves in that 
they disdain potent drink. They prefer instead a 
watery tea made from a refined fungus powder, a 
drink that is poisonous to any nondwarf who sam- 
ples a sip. Those who partake must successfully 
save vs. poison at +2, or collapse with 1d6 hours 
of gagging sickness. 


Tea Set of Skill and Grace 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Magazine 126 
This tea set, made of the finest materials, enables 
its owner to conduct a tea ceremony as if he or 
she had filled a slot with the tea-ceremony profi- 
ciency. Possession of the set adds +4 to the 
chances of attaining utter concentration while 
conducting the ceremony; this benefit is the same 
whether or not the character has regular profi- 
ciency in the tea ceremony. The same +4 bonus 


applies if the character uses the set when engaged 
$861 


1 


428 


eee eet 


Eo 


E Tent of Luxury y- 


in a contest. If the character used the set while 
learning the ceremony, he or she still has +2 on 
the chance of contest-winning and attainment of 
utter concentration without the set. 


Telescope 

Telescopes are made of two cylindrical pieces of 
finely-crafted metal that tightly fit within each 
other, but are free to slide in and out. The user 
peers through a lens in the smaller end, where 
another lens is fitted, toward the desired arca of 
viewing. By adjusting the tubes in or out, the user 
can focus and see objects clearly, even at great 
distances. (See also Scope.) 


of Fantastic Vision 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

This appears to be a telescope of true vision and 
functions as such for the first 1d4 times. After 
this, the telescope reveals fantastic and lurid 
scenes, often the opposite of what it truly there 
(for example, a merchant fleet appears to be a 
pirate squadron in the spyglass, a safe harbor as a 
monster-ridden mirage, an upcoming city as a 
dark domain of evil). 


of True Vision 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Land of Fate 

This device appears as a normal spyglass bound 
in gold. It enables the viewer to see up to 50 times 
farther than normal (a character may see some- 
thing at 5,000 feet as if at 100 feet) at distances of 
50 feet or more. Upon speaking a command 
word, the spyglass functions as a gem of seeing 
for one round, revealing the true nature of what is 
viewed in the glass. The telescope of true vision 
has 20 charges at its full power. Its lens fractures 
and crumbles when the last charge is used. 


Tent 


A tent is portable shelter made of canvas or ani- 
mal skins. Portable dwellings, tents appear to be 
rolls of fabric, and may be mistaken for rugs. A 
tent may be unfolded and erected for use by sup- 
porting it with poles and ropes. A small one-man 
tent (3 by 6 feet when erected) weighs only 5 
pounds. The largest royal tents are made of sev- 
eral parts, weigh over 5,000 pounds total, and 
may cover an area 500 feet square. They require a 
large wooden or magical framework; the canvas 
is either hung from the framework or draped over 
it. The most common adventurers’ tent has a 10- 
foot-square base, tapers to 8 feet square at a 
height of 7 feet, and has a peaked top; it is 10 feet 
tall overall. The tent is supported by wooden 
poles, has sleeping room for two plus a storage 


area for other gear, and usually costs 25-50 gp. 

The act of erecting a tent is called “pitching” it. 
The packing, cleaning, and other actions involved 
in taking down a tent are collectively known as 
“breaking camp.” Pitching a tent usually takes 
one to two turns; breaking camp takes the same, 
plus 1d4 turns for packing other items, cleaning 
the area to avoid being tracked, and so forth. 

Magical tents appear identical to ordinary ones 
but are always of the highest quality canvas. They 
cannot be damaged by nonmagical weapons; 
magic weapons and spells have standard effects, 
and normal or magical fire can destroy most tents 
in one turn. All magical tents have command 
words. 


Roll Tent Type 


01-10 Bell Tent 
11-20 Bundle Tent 
21-30 Large Tent 
31-40 Pavilion 
41-50 Pyramid Tent 
51-60 Small Tent 
61-70 Tepee 
71-80 Wedge Tent 
81-90 Wigwam 
91-00 Yurt 
of Captivity 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 


This tent looks and functions like a tent of luxury. 
However, if the door is locked, there is a 25% 
chance it sticks shut. If the door sticks, the 
entrance to the tent cannot be opened by any 
means except a wish; those within the tent are 
forced to leave by the “back door” into the Ethe- 
real Plane. The tent of captivity cannot replenish 
its supplies while It is occupied. 


Dew 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When pitched and left standing for one night, this 
tent attracts and collects morning dew on its sur- 
face and channels it into a collection pouch in 
one comer. The dew tent provides sufficient water 
for two humans and their mounts for one day, 
even in the desert and other arid regions. 


of Luxury 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This tent appears identical on the outside to a 
standard size adventurer’s tent. It is much larger 
inside, however, and opens into an extra-dimen- 
sional space. The tent pitches itself on command 


and can also be commanded (from the inside 
5866 


ne ee ee ee 


1429 


— O 


Tent, Mist 


jp EEE 


only) to lock itself (as a wizard lock from a 30th- 
level caster). The area within the tent is 120 feet 
square and contains supplies and accommoda- 
tions for 10 humans and their mounts (horses or 
creatures of similar size) for one day. It contains 
comfortable silken beds, a stable, a large water 
basin, a food bush having fruits and tasty leaves, 
magical light that dims on command, a window 
through which the viewer can magically see the 
area around the tent (on the Prime Material 
Plane) from a point 10 feet above it, and a “back 
door” through which those in the tent can pass 
into the Ethereal Plane. The back door is very 
hard to find from the Ether (10% chance when 
using a detect invisible spell) and there is only a 
1% chance every three hours (not cumulative) it 
will attract some Ethereal visitor. The back door 
cannot be locked and Is best used as an emer- 
gency exit. If a tent of luxury is damaged while 
occupied, however, all living creatures within it 
are ejected into the Ethereal Plane. The tent’s 
contents cannot be removed by any means. All 
the supplies replenish themselves every 12 hours, 
but the tent must be folded up and then repitched 
for this to occur. 


Mist 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Tome of Magic 

A mist tent is contained in a small glass flask. 
Removing the stopper causes a stream of white 
mist to pour from the flask. One round later, the 
mist shapes itself into the form of a 10- by 12- 
foot tent with a single, open flap in the front. The 
stopper must be replaced in the flask as soon as 
the mist tent takes shape, or the tent will dissipate 
as described below. 

The mist tent has the density of a cloud when 
unoccupied. When one or more characters enter 
the mist tent, the flap can be closed; from the 
inside, the flap has the density of canvas, From 
the inside, the walls and ceiling of a mist tent 
appear as opaque white mist, and the floor is 
transparent. Despite its appearance, the entire 
mist tent has the density of canvas once the flap is 
closed. When the flap is closed, the following 
effects occur: 


* The mist tent and all occupants and items 
inside become invisible to all creatures outside 
the tent. A detect invisibility spell cast by a 
creature outside the tent will reveal it. 

* The mist tent rises 10 feet off the ground; it 
continues to hover in place as long as the flap 
remains closed. The transparent floor allows 
occupants of the tent to clearly see the sur- 
rounding area. The floor of the mist tent can 
support 1,000 pounds without rupturing. 


` ree i 
A ii aai a 
j ller irii i 


Me htes 


If the flap is opened, the mist tent’s walls, floor, 
and ceiling instantly become visible to outsiders, 
appearing as a thin, white mist. Additionally, the 
mist tent slowly descends, landing gently on the 
ground. If the stopper is removed from the flask, 
the tent dissipates, returning to the flask ina 
stream of white mist; if the bottle is not stoppered 
immediately, the mist pours from the flask to 
form the mist tent again. 

The mist tent is unharmed by any type of fire, 
but does not offer such protection to its occu- 
pants. The tent is susceptible to other forms of 
damage. It provides no more protection to its 
occupants than a normal canvas tent. 

The mist tent has AC 10. If it sustains 10 points 
of damage, it dissipates in a shower of light and is 
permanently negated. If this occurs while it is 
hovering, all occupants plummet to the ground. If 
the mist tent sustains less than 10 points of dam- 
age, it can be returned to its flask, then rere- 
leased; all damage repaired. 

In Ravenloft: The use of this magical item 
can be very dangerous in Ravenloft. There is a 
minimum 5% chance that the land will use the 
tent like the mists of Ravenloft. If it is used 
within the mists themselves, the chances rise to 
25%. The occupants are transported to some 
other location in the misty borders of Ravenloft. 
If the DM needs to keep the characters in their 
original domain, this new location is in that 


domain, just at a new place along the border. 
$867 


1430 


x Thread of Aging y 


The mists have no compunction about transfer- 
ring the tent to a place above a lake or into dan- 
gerous terrain. 


Polychromatic 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This white tent can be commanded to change its 
color, Any single color can be named, or the tent 
can be commanded to blend. If so, it assumes the 
appearance of its surroundings —grainy and 
sand-colored in the desert, green and brown in 
the woods—camouflaged. The polychromatic 
tent is always white when not pitched. 


Poor 
XP Value: — GP Value: 400 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This tent appears to be a polychromatic tent in all 
respects. Each person who spends a night in the 
tent has a 25% chance of dreaming about some 
detail of events to occur the following day. If so, 
only certain creatures or areas are revealed; no 
results can be portrayed, as that would depend on 
too many variables. In return for the dream, the 
tent causes a gem, cash, or other item worth 
100-600 gp to vanish during the night. The poor 
tent must be slept in for one full night to give the 
chance of dreaming. 


of Shelter 
XP Value: 1,000 

Dragon Dawn 
A tent of shelter looks like a small canvas tarp. 
When placed on the ground and the command 
word spoken, it forms into a shelter large 
enough for two people and up to 200 pounds of 
gear. At the entrance to the tent a small brazier 
of glowing coals appears for cooking and heat- 
ing, and enough foodstuffs for a moderate meal. 
The tent provides no magical protection for its 
inhabitants. 


GP Value: 5,000 


of Standing 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This tent needs no poles or ropes and pitches 
itself when a command word is spoken. A second 
command causes it to collapse, but it cannot oth- 
erwise be taken down except by a dispel magic 
spell (treat as 30th-level magic) or a wish. 


of Warning 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This tent looks and functions like the polychro- 
matic tent. However, if a hostile creature 
approaches within 240 yards, the tent changes 


1431 


color of its own accord once per round. The col- 
ors are usually bright and easily seen at long 
range and will probably attract nearby creatures. 


X 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This tent appears to be a tent of dew. However, its 
top bears a slight discoloration which is not visi- 
ble except from the air and at a distance of 240 
yards or more. The mark appears to be an “X” 
and may attract the attention of aerial passers-by 
(DM's choice of chances). The markings on the 
tent are visible to infravision and cannot be 
removed by any means. 


Thorn of Sleep 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
The Complete Ranger's Handbook 
The thorn of sleep looks like the thorn of a plant, 
about 3 inches long. It is dry and smooth to the 
touch. If pricked by the thorn, a creature must 
make a saving throw vs. paralyzation. Failure 
means the creature falls into a deep slumber. The 
creature will not awake until attacked or strongly 
roused. Noises, even those of battle, cannot 
awaken the sleeping creature. Each thorn can be 
used but once. Only 1 d8 thorns can be found at 
any one time. A thorn of sleep can be projected 


by a blowgun. 
Thread 


Magical threads appear identical to balls of string 
or spun spindles, but careful examination reveals 
threads to be of finer material. To activate a 
thread’s magic, it either must be unwound from 
the ball or spindle, touched against another magi- 
cal item, or sewn into a piece of cloth. 


of Aging 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item appears identical to a ball of string, but 
careful examination reveals it to be of finer mate- 
rial. It attunes itself to anyone who touches it. If 
the victim thereafter unwinds any of it, the unfor- 
tunate one ages one year for each inch unwound. 
Elves may ignore the effects of the first 200 years 
of aging; dwarves may ignore the first 50 years, 
and halflings the first 20 years. Otherwise, each 
10 years of aging cost the victim | point of Con- 
stitution—the loss is permanent. A wish restores 
l point lost in this manner, but less powerful 
magic cannot affect the loss. Once the thread has 
attuned itself, it cannot be neutralized unless 
remove curse is Cast upon it by a 36th-level 
caster; this makes the thread disappear along with 


all the victim’s magical aging. Otherwise, the vic- 
5875 


Thread of Commands 


"acini ea iii cae 


tim must guard the thread carefully because, if it 
is unwound by any means or creature, the victim 
to whom the thread is attuned is affected. (See 
also Ball, of String). 


of Commands 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This thread is identical to a thread of aging How- 
ever, if unwound and placed on any magical 
cloth, it sews itself into the form of the command 
words for that item. Ten inches of thread are 
needed for each command word. Once a word is 
sewn onto the item, the sewing disappears and 
cannot be seen unless detect invisible or similar 
spell effect is used. 


of Embroidery 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This thread is identical to thread of aging How- 
ever, if placed upon any normal cloth, it sews 
itself in beautiful patterns, and 100 gp value may 
be added for every 10 inches of thread used. The 
ball of thread contains 1d100x10 inches of thread 
when found. 


Throne 

A throne is an ornate chair made of wood or 
stone. Magical thrones are quite powerful and all 
the details about them should be studied before 
adding a throne to a campaign. A throne is usu- 
ally 8 feet high, 4 feet wide and with deep, plush 
furnishings and often ornately carved. Encum- 
brance is high, from 150 to 400 pounds or as 
given in the description. 


of Death 
XP Value: — GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This throne appears identical to a throne of 
power, but any creature sitting upon it dies 
instantly. Ten percent of the time, however, it 
merely damages and ejects the victim, who is 
severely wounded (down to | point). The throne 
has no effect on any creature forced to sit upon it, 
only those who do so of their own free wills. 


of the Gods 
XP Value: 24,000 GP Value: 120,000 
Eldritch Wizardry 
This massive, gold-inlaid throne was crafted by 
an ancient race in honor of their gods. It is carved 
into the heart of a mountain and cannot be moved, 
not even magically because it is still a part of the 
mountain. Anyone seated on the throne receives 
at best one item of magic, but can only be a recip- 
ient once. Also, anyone who sits on the throne 


can use and is subject to the powers of the throne. 

It has the following abilities and penalties: 

* Clairvoyance 

* Telekinesis 

+ Speak with dead 

* Read magic 

* Death spell twice per day 

* Charm monster with —3 on saving throw twice 
a day. 

* Teleport twice per day 

* Relic gives off a gas that renders all within 30 
feet unconscious for two hours (use saving 
throw for poison). 

* Locates treasure as follows (select one): 
1. Silver, gold within 90 feet 
2. Gems within 60 feet 
3. Magic within 10 feet 

* Has the power of a gem of seeing when held 
by the owner. 

* User may raise dead fully, once a day. 


of the Gods II 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
The throne of the gods is an ornate chair, large 
enough to seat a storm giant. Scintillating gems 
and mosaics adorn its arms, back, and legs. The 
throne itself protrudes from the rear wall of a cav- 
ern, 100 yards in diameter and sits upon a floor of 
billowing clouds. 

When the gods created the multiverse, they 
needed a way to communicate with mortals on 
the many planes, so they merged their powers and 
created the throne. The wondrous chair exists on 
all planes simultaneously, and it can be used by 
any god. Its existence has long since drifted into 
the legends of many planes, but it is the one on 
the Prime Material Plane that is discussed here. 

On occasion, an individual strives to preserve 
and protect the gods’ throne, but over the years 
most of them have banded together into a small, 
fanatical cult called the Seekers. In their quest for 
the throne, the Seekers have dispatched emis- 
saries throughout the lands, seeking signs of the 
artifact in ancient religious texts. Many of these 
tomes describe a divine throne located at the cen- 
ter of a mighty mountain, but as the religions 
share no common geographical location, the 
Seekers believe the throne moves about in a man- 
ner that is baffling to mortals. 

On rare occasions, mortals have found the 
throne, and Randy] the Bold was one of them. In 
a mountain reputed to hold great treasure, 
Randyl’s party fought many battles in twisting 
tunnels for many months. Randy] was the only 
one to find the throne room, but he was tired, 
bleeding from many wounds, and oblivious to his 


surroundings. He rested upan the huge throne, 
5880 


= 1432 = 


a e o a a a 


cc 


Throne of the Gods 


NE 


` 


Sow 


A 
4 
A 
g 
Z 
Z 
Z 
A 
KA 
A 
’ 
A 
A 
Zi 
A 
A 
A 


unaware of its true nature, wondering how he 
might be strong enough to escape, when he was 
engulfed in a bright, blue glow. Randyl leaped 
from the seat and watched in amazement as his 
arms, chest, and legs expanded with bulging 
muscles. Not understanding what had transpired, 
Randy] fled the room and escaped the mountain. 

Years later, the Seekers heard of Randyl’s 
exploit and sent the wizard Zatar to question him 
about it. Although the Seekers normally collected 
information about the throne to prevent power- 
hungry despots from finding it, Randyl’s tale 
sparked a flash of greed within Zatar; he was 
overwhelmed by the unlimited magical abilities 
that might be his. 

Secretly Zatar put together an expedition, and 
after many long months of searching and many 
great perils, Zatar and his company found the 
throne. Greedily he approached it, climbed upon 
the mighty seat, and sat there, running his hands 
over the treasures that protruded through the 
ivory and gold mosaics. Suddenly, an eerie blue 
glow radiated from the throne, engulfing the wiz- 
ard and blinding his companions. When the light 
receded, the party found a crumpled, whimpering 
figure on the throne, Zatar, now a babbling idiot, 
attacked his companions, who killed him in self- 
defense and quickly departed. 

The throne of the gods is an artifact designed 
for high-level parties. While any character can sit 
on the throne, the trick lies in deciding how the 


artifact will react. If and when a character sits 
upon the throne, the DM should instruct the 
player to declare what his character is thinking. 
The PC’s response determines the invoked power 
or subsequent curse. 

One possible adventure might find the party in 
a dying village. Approached by an elderly 
shaman, they are told of a mighty wizard who 
destroyed their holy idol. Ever since its destruc- 
tion, the village has been slowly wasting away. 

Unable to face the rigors of the journey him- 
self, the shaman gives the PCs a drawing of an 
idol. He tells the PCs that they must seek a 
mighty throne, which lies deep within a nearby 
mountain, sit upon the chair while staring at the 
picture, and then think only of the idol. The 
shaman warns the party that thinking of anything 
else will unleash the fury of the gods upon them 
all. 

Finding the chamber in which the throne lies is 
stuff for an excellent adventure in itself, but the 
addition of a powerful band of Seekers that zeal- 
ously attempts to prevent the party from achiev- 
ing its goal will spice up the scenario nicely. 

Constant Powers: An antimagic shell radiates 
from the base of the throne and fills the entire 
chamber—only the throne is unaffected. 

Invoked Powers: A character sitting upon the 
throne with a clear, concise desire in mind has an 
85% chance that the throne will fulfill that 
request. The throne reads the character’s desire 
and responds to it within one round. 

A single prime attribute score can be raised up 
to 3 points (not to exceed 20 points) if a PC 
requests it. The player must speak in character, (a 
character cannot say “I want my Strength score to 
improve.” Rather, “I want to fight with the 
endurance of a giant,” (increasing Constitution) 
or “I want to be as strong as a giant” (increasing 
Strength). Similarly, experience levels can be 
raised to within | point of the next level, but the 
request should center on the character desiring to 
be better in his or her class. 

A magical item also may be granted to a char- 
acter on the throne PCs requesting any item with 
variable bonuses receive a +1 magical version of 
the item. Others who desire a more potent version 
of an item they already possess add +1 to it (to a 
maximum of +3). Obviously, the exact item 
should be clearly visualized within the character’s 
mind. 

Curse: The gods are offended when mere mor- 
tals use the throne of the gods, even if they have 
humble intentions. Normally, the throne grants 
85% of reasonable requests. If the request is not 
granted, the gods were displeased for some 
unknown reason. The character suffers instead 


(determine randomly): a —1 cursed item, ~1 to all 
5880 


Throne, Hlidskialf 


pp a i E 


prime attributes, or is teleported 10 miles away. 

Any character daring the throne for a second 
try immediately incurs a wrath to match the folly 
(listed below). Those foolish enough to attempt a 
third try instantly find themselves alone, in a face 
to face combat with a random god on its home 
plane. 


* A character desiring godlike powers has all 
prime attributes reduced by 2. 

+ Ifthe character wants a magical item or device 
belonging to a god, an item buried in the 
throne, or a second magical item, the god 
grants the desire with a twist: The character 
receives a —4 version that appears to be the 
item requested if analyzed by any and all 
means, 

* Should something not listed under Invoked 
Powers be desired, the character is teleported 
in a random direction to some location 1d100 
miles away. 

+ Lacking a clear, concise desire in mind finds 
the character entirely at the mercy of the gods. 
One of the three above fates should either be 
hand-selected or randomly determined. 


Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* Force any major power, under pain of death, to 
unmake the throne 

* Wish it had never been built 1,000 times. 

* Dissolve the entire mountain currently hous- 
ing the throne, using 1,000 transmute rock to 
mud spells cast by fiends. 


Hlidskialf 
XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 60,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
Hlidskialf is Odin’s avatar’s magical all-seeing 
throne. Treat as an unlimited duration crystal ball 
with clairvoyance. 


of Incineration 
XP Value: — GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This throne is identical to a throne of power. 
When a creature sits on it, the usual saving 
throw is required; failure, however, causes the 
victim to catch fire, taking 40 points of fire 
damage per round (no protections or saving 
throws apply) until dead. The fire can be 
quenched only by a wish, and the victim cannot 
get up from the throne unless this remedy is 
applied. The remains of the victim burn com- 
pletely, leaving only ashes. 

If the saving throw is successful, the lucky 
victim is ejected from the throne immediately, 
and a loud laughing sound emanates from it. 
This noise attracts the attention of all creatures 


within 120 feet who usually come to investigate. 
The throne has no effect on any creature forced 
to sit upon it, only those who choose to do so of 
their own free will. 


of Power 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This large chair is made of wood, metal, and 
stone and adorned by 100 gems. If any creature 
voluntarily sits on the throne, the daring soul 
must make a saving throw vs. spell with a —4 
penalty to the roll. Those of royal (not merely 
noble) birth have no penalty to the saving throw 
and instead gains a +2 bonus. No other adjust- 
ments of any type, magical or otherwise, apply to 
the saving throw; the “base” saving throw for the 
class and level of the user is always applied. 

If the saving throw fails, the victim and carried 
equipment are instantly transported to an unoccu- 
pied room or corridor in the deepest part of the 
deepest dungeon on the planet. If the victim 
attempts to return to the throne by use of a tele- 
port or dimension door effect or spell (regardless 
of elapsed time between the ejection and the 
attempted return), the throne immediately trans- 
ports the victim in the same manner. 

If the saving throw is successful, the user is 
not transported and may remain and use the 
throne properly. The throne may be used by any 
race or class and telepathically instructs the suc- 
cessful user about all command words, spell 
powers, charges, and the proper use of each. The 
throne can produce the following spells, each 
once a day, as if cast by a 30th-level wizard: 
charm person, detect magic, detect evil, detect 
invisible, hold person, protection from evil 10' 
radius, dimension door, and remove curse. All 
magical effects are gained or directed by the 
user. In addition, while seated on the throne, the 
user’s charisma is 18. 

The throne grants 500 charges to the user and 
disappears when they are spent; each spell cast 
from the throne drains one charge. The throne 
also disappears after 1,001 days, regardless of 
charges used. Any person of royal birth may use 
the throne with unlimited charges, but it still dis- 
appears in 1,001 days. The day on which the sav- 
ing throw is made is counted as day one. 

The throne is immune to all attacks and dam- 
age except the physical act of prying a stone 
loose, and this is difficult (roll 1d8, 1 indicates 
success). The 100 gems are worth 50 gp each, but 
if even one is removed, the throne loses its power 
forever. Magical attempts at loosening stones 
have no effect. 

The throne cannot be moved except on com- 


mand of the user after the initial saving throw is 
5883 


| aa aa: 


1434 


Timberbane's Clockwork Chopper-Ripper 


ree ane erred eit ties “Ale 


made. The throne cannot be carried but teleports 
on command with no chance of error as long as 
the destination is well known to the user. It tele- 
ports only while the user sits in it and only four 
times during the 1,001 days. 


of Summoning 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This throne is exactly like a throne of power, but 
no saving throw is required to sit upon it. Instead, 
a 36th-level spellcaster is summoned, who 
appears within 120 feet and in sight of the throne 
at the point most convenient for the wizard. This 
powerful wizard is of the same alignment as the 
throne user. He solemnly intones, “I am com- 
manded to serve you once,” and then disappears. 
The user of the throne is then immediately 
ejected. When the user sits upon it again, the 
throne summons the wizard, who is enraged at 
being summoned unless some quite excellent rea- 
son is immediately given. If the wizard is not a 
player character, he or she has all due spells 
memorized and ready. The impending death of 
the user is sufficient reason for summoning, but if 
a reasonable chance of survival exists, or if the 
user merely lacks courage or foresight, the wiz- 
ard directs most attacks at the user of the throne. 


of Transformation 

XP Value: 13,000 GP Value: 65,000 
Crown of Ancient Glory 
This bizarre artifact is a special item in the pos- 
session of Ala, the Seawitch of Narvendul. With 
use of the proper command words, anyone sitting 
in the chair is transformed (polymorphed) into an 
ocean osprey, a young girl, an old man, an old 
woman, a gaseous form, or a wolf. The transfor- 
mation is purely physical and the user (victim) 
retains his or her own personality and character 
traits. In the case of animals, though, speech is 
not possible. 

By returning to the throne, the individual is 
able to return to his or her former condition, The 
chair can only function once per day, rendering 
one change only. 

If a character takes the throne without employ- 
ing the appropriate command words, the transfor- 
mation occurs in a random fashion. Without the 
proper command words, only remove curse, fol- 
lowed by wish, can restore a person to his or her 
natural state, Polymorph spells cannot transform 
victims of the throne. 


Throwing Stars 
(Shuriken) 
Shuriken are small throwing weapons, They come 
in many sizes and shapes, the most common bear 


the shapes of stars or spikes. Stars have three or 
more razor-edged points, ensuring that at least 
one will strike the victim when thrown. They 
come in a variety of sizes (here divided into small 
and large). Spikes are large pins, tapering to 
sharp points. Both are thrown by hand and have a 
limited range. Shuriken are easily concealed; they 
can be hidden in folds of clothing or tucked in 
sashes. Spikes can even be worn in the hair. 

Magical shuriken, of course, possess a variety 
of other talents. 


Roll Star Type 


01-10 = Caltrop 

11-20 Chatkcha 

21-30 Large Shuriken 

31-40 Shaken 

41-50 Shuriken 

51-60 Slashdisk 

61-70 Small Shuriken 

71-80 = Tetsu-Bishi 

81-90 Throwing Spike 

91-00 Throwing Star 
of Ojy-Do 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Kara-Tur 

The ninjas of Ojy-do, also known as the Fangs of 
Night, have magical shurikin, stars made of stone 
that always hit their mark. The victim must save 
vs. death magic or fall unconscious for one full 
turn. Whether the saving throw fails or succeeds, 
the victim suffers 2d4 points of damage. These 
shurikin are carried by the five highest-ranking 
warriors in the clan. 


of Returning 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
New Item 
If thrown and the attack misses, these shurikin 
always return to the owner at the end of the fol- 
lowing round, If a shurikin of returning strikes a 
target, it lodges itself into the target and cannot 
return. 


Timberbane’s Clockwork 
Chopper-Ripper 


XP Value GP Value 
Copies: 300 1,800 
Original: 2,500 15,000 


New Item 
This unusual tool looks like a small chainsaw 
made of iron and wood bolted together. A wind- 
ing crank (cord and handle) juts out from the side 
of the gear box. The gearbox contains an inge- 
nious spring-loaded mechanism driving the 


chainsaw. A famous tinker gnome by the name of 
5888 


i ia.” 


I ee lat 


1435 


Timepiece of Klorr 


[Ae ee a eT 


Springol Timberbane created the original device. 
His creation was equivalent to a magical +3, tre- 
ant-slayer weapon. (By treant, understand all 
manners of “living” trees.) Timberbane earned 
his notoriety from the chaotic architecture of the 
wooden palaces he built. The values for both the 
original device and nonmagical copies are given 
above. 

The clockwork chopper-ripper can be used as a 
two-handed weapon requiring to be held by its 
two handles. Over a period of several successful 
attacks, the weapon can deliver up to 40 points of 
cutting damage (not including damage bonuses 
due to magical enchantments) after which it must 
be rewound. Each round of rewinding resets the 
spring for 1d12 points. 

The weapon inflicts 2d4+2 points of damage 
against small or medium foes, or 2d6+2 against 
large foes, and has a speed factor of 8. Against 
wood, the weapon inflicts another 10 points of 
damage, which does not count against the 40 
points limitation of the spring motor. It is consid- 
ered a medium size weapon weighing about 10 
Ibs. Strength adjustments only apply to Attack 
Rolls (not damage). The weapon is totally inef- 
fective against rock or metal over 4 inch thick. It 
requires a weapon proficiency to be used in com- 
bat, and falls in the weapon category of short 
swords to determine the races or character classes 
that can use it. 

Natural scores of 1-2 on an Attack Roll cause 
the gears to jam (must roll every time it is used, 
even against inanimate objects like trees or 
doors). The weapon itself is ACO and can take up 
to 30 points of physical bashing before it’s 
beyond repair. Jams or damage can be fixed after 
combat with a successful proficiency check and 
an hour of gnomish tinkering. Add an hour of tin- 
kering for each failed check. The clockwork chop- 
per-ripper comes with a safety lock and a leather 
sheath for transport, but no warranty. 


Timepiece of Klorr 

XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Forbidden Lore 
This unusual pocket watch was brought into 
Ravenloft from an unknown world more than 200 
years ago. Since that time, it has proven itself to 
be an instrument of great power and great evil. 
Indeed, few who have ever learned of its exis- 
tence without owning it for themselves have lived 
long enough to pass on the story of its wondrous 
nature. 

Description: The timepiece of Klorr is crafted 
of an unusual alloy of gold, silver, and bronze. It 
is circular in shape, roughly 2 inches in diame- 
ter, with a hinged lid that snaps down to protect 
the face of the watch when it is put away. The 


timepiece hangs from a slender chain, fashioned 
from the same indestructible alloy as the watch 
itself. 

The metal from which the watch was made 
does not tarnish and cannot be harmed by any 
known force. Thus, the watch looks today just as 
it did when it was first created. Indeed, there is 
some evidence to indicate that the watch has 
actually become brighter and better polished over 
the years, although this might be an error caused 
by the sparsity of accounts of its existence. 

The casing itself is ornate and carved with 
many dark and sinister forms. Numerous shapes 
resemble the twisting and writhing figures of tor- 
mented souls, while others are clearly those of the 
fiends that torment them through all eternity, The 
hinges on the lid and the clasp that secure the 
cover when it is down are fashioned in the image 
of skeletal claws. 

When the cover is opened, the face of the 
watch is revealed. It is white in color—clearly 
some form of crystal—although its exact compo- 
sition is unknown. A glass lens covers the face, 
but like the rest of the watch, it appears to be 
impervious to any manner of damage. The face is 
numbered, in an ornate script, from 1 to 13. The 
movement of the hands is sharp and steady, pro- 
ducing an audible click with the passing of each 
second. Mysteriously, the hands never seem to 
pass between the hours of 12 and 13. Even if one 
watches the face of the timepiece carefully, the 
hands seem to click from 12:59 to 1:00. 

If opened in darkness, the white crystal of the 
face emits a soft glow so that the time may be 
easily read. No form of magical darkness can pre- 
vent the holder from seeing the illuminated dial, 
although it cannot be used to shed light upon sur- 
rounding objects in such a situation. That this 
effect is magical cannot be disputed, for at least 
one person who was wholly blind is said to have 
looked upon the face of the watch and saw it 
quite clearly. It is said that even a blindfold or 
similar obstruction cannot prevent the watch’s 
owner from gazing upon its face. 

The back of the watch is set with an inscription 
that is unreadable unless viewed with a read 
magic spell. When this is done, however, the fol- 
lowing verse becomes clear: 


By my power the sands are stayed, 
The hour of death is long delayed, 
The grip of time can be unmade, 
But beware the price that’s paid. 


History: The timepiece was created some 350 
years ago by Klorr, a watchmaker in a strange, 
mysterious, and nameless land. Klorr had always 


been fascinated by clocks and timepieces of 
5889 


ee a e 


1436 


Timepiece of Klorr 


Oo EEE a a 


every description. In fact, his love for these 
objects had passed the bounds of any reasonable 
man and had become nothing short of an obses- 
sion. His whole home was filled with all manner 
of timepieces, each kept in perfect working order 
and synchronized so that they differed from each 
other by not so much as a second. It is said that 
the cacophony of an hour chiming in Klorr’s shop 
was nearly enough to drive a man mad. Indeed, 
perhaps that accounts for the creation of this 
twisted chronometer. 

As Klorr grew older, he came to realize that 
there was one timepiece in his home that he could 
not regulate or control: the beating of his own 
heart. He was reminded of this his entire waking 
life, for the throbbing in his chest seemed never 
to be in synchronization with the staccato click- 
ing of the gears and springs of his countless 
clocks. It may be that this drove him mad, for he 
vowed that he would not permit his own heart to 
betray the perfect rhythms of his many time- 
pieces. 

Klorr spent years researching the magical pow- 
ers that he would employ to create his next watch. 
He sought out a race of master metalworkers and 
begged them to teach him the secrets of their craft 
so that he might manufacture the watch from a 
metal that no earthly hand could damage. He pur- 
sued the foul and accursed magic of the necro- 
mancer and sought to gain knowledge over the 
functioning of the living heart so that he might 


learn to pace it with a timepiece. Eventually, he 
explored the extradimensional magic of the Outer 
Planes and sought the guidance of a diabolical 
presence there to aid him in the last stages of his 
efforts. 

When Klorr had completed the construction of 
his pocket watch, he found that it did indeed con- 
trol the beating of his own heart. With every rum- 
ble of his pulse in his ears, the hands snapped 
forward and a sharp tick would split the air. 

Much to his own despair, however, he found 
that the watch seemed to control the beating of 
his heart to an even greater extent than he had 
intended. Indeed, it soon became clear to him that 
if the watch were not wound each day, if it were 
allowed to slow and stop, his heart would match 
its gradual paralysis. In the end, when the watch 
stopped, so would his heart. He seemed to have 
stopped aging as well. He needed no food, no 
drink, and the passing of the years meant nothing 
to him. The watch was the master of his fate now, 
not the fleeting fancies of time and many fates of 
the universe. 

Whenever he used the watch to invoke one of 
its magical effects, he found that a third hand 
appeared on its face. This hand would begin to 
tick off the seconds between the 12th and 13th 
hour on the clock’s face. Before that hour had 
passed, he was forced to kill someone in order 
to satisfy the hunger of the timepiece. He soon 
found that he was unable to resist the urge to 
use the watch’s magic, despite his desire not to 
do so. He also learned that the hunger of the 
watch was directly related to the exact power 
that he employed and the vitality of the person 
killed. 

Eventually, Klorr found himself unable to hold 
out against the overwhelming magic of the watch. 
He became locked in a cycle of killings. Each 
time he hunted, he would use the powers of the 
watch. This would, in turn, compel him to kill 
again. This vicious cycle became the pattern of 
his life. 

Powers: The timepiece of Klorr gives its 
holder many great powers, each of which can be 
used as often as desired. As soon as one is 
employed, however, the third hand appears on 
the face and the watch begins to count off the 
seconds of an hour. If it has not been able to 
absorb sufficient life energy to satisfy its 
hunger by the end of that hour, it will drain the 
energy of the holder, utterly and irrevocably 
destroying the unfortunate victim. Nothing, not 
even a wish spell, can restore life to one slain in 
this manner. 

Each time that one of the watch’s powers is 
used, the holder of the timepiece of Klorr is 


moved to seek out and kill others of its race. The 
5889 


ee ee 


1437 


Timepiece of Klorr 


De 


number of people that must be slain is deter- 
mined by the power required to invoke a given 
spell effect. Each power of the watch is followed 
with a parenthetical number that indicates the 
number of levels of life energy that the watch 
must drain. Thus, if it were used to invoke a 
featherfall (1) spell and then a haste (3) spell by 
an elf, the owner would have to seek out and kill 
four 1st- (or 0-) level elves, two 2nd-level elves, 
or some other combination that would total four 
levels. The use of any of the watch’s spells or 
spell-like abilities precludes taking another action 
in the same round. 

The magical spells that are available to the 
holder of the timepiece are as follows: featherfall 
(1), feign death (3), haste (3), hold person (3), 
hold undead (3), slow (3), extension I (4), dis- 
tance distortion (5), extension II (5), hold mon- 
ster (5), extension III (6), temporal stasis (9), and 
time stop (9). All of these spells function as 
described in the PH. 

In addition to its general magical abilities, the 
watch has several unique powers. As with the 
spell abilities, each of these has a cost associated 
with it. 

Successful Saving Throws (3): Anyone hold- 
ing the watch automatically succeeds on any sav- 
ing throw that he or she is called upon to roll. 
This requires no thought on the part of the watch’s 
holder, it just happens. In fact, the holder of the 
watch cannot even opt to fail a saving throw. If 
the person holding the watch has not yet been 
bound to it, the use of this ability links that per- 
son to the timepiece of Klorr. This is the only 
power of the watch that does not count as an 
action for the holder. The only exception to this 
ability is the saving throw required to discard the 
watch, as detailed below. 

Heal Damage (5): At any time, the watch may 
be called upon to heal damage that its holder has 
taken. When this is done, the effect is similar to 
that of a cure critical wounds priest spell, save 
that it can only be used on the keeper of the time- 
piece, 

Perfect Time (0): This ability of the timepiece 
of Klorr is an element of its nature and need not 
be invoked or “paid for” by the user. Nothing can 
upset the watch’s ability to keep perfect track of 
the passage of time. Even if it and its owner are 
placed in a state of temporal stasis, the watch 
keeps working. No known force can cause the 
timepiece to lose so much as a second. 

Visibility (0): Another side effect of the 
watch’s existence is the fact that its face cannot 
be hidden from its owner. So long as one is able 
to flip open the cover to reveal the watch’s face, 
no magical or physical blindness or obstruction 
can prevent the owner from looking upon it and 


knowing the exact time. As with the previous 
power, this one is free of any obligation on the 
part of the holder. 

The Curse: The watch has no power over 
someone until one of its abilities is used. This 
might be any of the spells or magical powers 
except for perfect time and visibility. Even the 
automatic power to successfully roll saving 
throws counts as a deliberate use, although the 
holder of the watch does not actually invoke this 
ability. 

Upon using one of the watch’s abilities, the 
holder becomes bound to it. From that point on, 
the individual’s heart beats at a perfect 60 beats 
per minute. Like the watch, the heart has become 
a perfect timepiece. 

Once bound to the watch, the holder must per- 
sonally kill the people required to repay the time- 
piece of Klorr for any used powers. If the owner 
fails in this effort, the watch claims the owner as 
victim instead. 

The timepiece of Klorr is a very difficult bur- 
den to rid oneself of, for once it has been taken 
up, the only time that an individual can attempt to 
discard it is when the watch’s hunger has been 
sated. That is, when the third hand is not showing 
and the owner of the watch is not under an oblig- 
ation to claim another victim. 

At this time, a remove curse or similar spell 
has a chance of breaking the watch’s bond to its 
owner. When the spell is cast, the recipient must 
roll a saving throw vs. spell. If the roll succeeds, 
the watch may be discarded simply by putting it 
down and walking away from it. Other, more dra- 
matic methods include sealing it in an iron box 
and casting it into the sea, tossing it into a vol- 
cano, or anything else that might satisfy the for- 
mer owner that the timepiece of Klorr has been 
destroyed. 

Of course, the timepiece cannot be so easily 
unmade. Those who granted Klorr the ability to 
create this great artifact will allow nothing so 
simple to destroy it. It is rumored that only the 
fires of the Outer Planes can cause the timepiece 
to be reduced to the elemental evil from which it 
was forged. 


Tome 
Books, Librams, Manuals, 
Spellbooks, and Tomes 
In the AD&D game system, each of these terms 
has a unique definition: 


Books may be used only by priests and some- 
times raise a specific character statistic. 
Librams are books used only by wizards, and 
occasionally boost stats. 

Manuals may be used by both fighters pe 


Fo a OOOO 


1438 


Bea o o y i āo tC 


Tome of Dogmatic Methods 


AE: aE G 


thieves, and some include boosts to stats. 
Spellbooks contain spells and surprises. Most are 
restricted to priests and wizards, but a few may be 
used by any class. 

Tomes may be used by all classes and some grant 
boosts to stats. 


All magical books, librams, manuals, and tomes 
appear to be normal works of arcane lore. Each is 
indistinguishable from others by visual examina- 
tion or by magical detection. 

A wish spell can identify or classify a magical 
work. Other spells, notably alter reality, com- 
mune, contact higher planes, limited wish, and 
true seeing are useless. A wish reveals the general 
contents of a book, telling what classes or charac- 
teristics are most affected (not necessarily bene- 
fitted) by the work. A second wish is required to 
determine the book’s exact contents. 

After being studied by a character, most magi- 
cal works vanish forever. However, one that is not 
beneficial to the reader may become attached to 
the character, and he or she is unable to get rid of 
it. If the work benefits another character align- 
ment, the owner is geased to conceal and guard it. 
The DM should exercise judgment and imagina- 
tion when deciding exactly how these items are to 
be treated. 


of Bodily Health 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
The metal-bound Manual of Bodily Health 
appears to be an arcane, rare, but nonmagical 
book. If a detect magic spell is cast upon it, the 
manual will radiate an aura of magic. Any char- 
acter who reads the work (24 hours of time over 
3-5 days) will know how to increase his or her 
Constitution by | point—this involves a special 
dietary regimen and breathing exercises over a 
one-month period. The book disappears immedi- 
ately upon completion of its contents. 

The point of Constitution is gained only after 
the prescribed regimen is followed. In three 
months the knowledge of the secrets to bodily 
health will be forgotten. The knowledge cannot 
be articulated or recorded by the reader. The tome 
will not be useful to any character a second time, 
nor is more than one character able to benefit 
from a single copy. 


Canon of Changes 
XP Value: 24,000 GP Value: 120,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
The Cannon of Changes is book of the gods that 
deals with redistribution of matter and motion. It 
allows the reader to create any nonmagical 
object. 


Canon of Changes II 
XP Value: 24,000 GP Value: 120,000 
Legends & Lore 

This book allows the reader to draw on the mystic 
Oneness of the universe to change the nature of 
matter to fulfill his own desires. Essentially, any 
nonliving object weighing up to 50 pounds can be 
converted into any, nonliving, nonmagical object 
of similar mass. 

If used in conjunction with the Analects of 
Magic (see Libram), the conversion can be done 
with up to 500 pounds of mass. In addition, the 
object may be converted into a magical weapon, 
armor, or shield with a bonus of up to +5, with 
one power based on any wizard or priest spell of 
up to Sth-level. Alternatively, the object could be 
converted into any monster of up to 10-HD. 

Only a being of at least 18 Constitution and 18 
Wisdom can read this book. Even for beings pow- 
erful enough to employ the tome, it requires 72 
hours of constant reading before he can execute 
the change, and he forgets everything he has 
learned from the book after the transformation is 
completed. A being may read the book as many 
times as he wishes, but he loses | point of Consti- 
tution each time he uses the knowledge gained 
from it. 

Any being who attempts to use this book while 
lacking the proper Constitution or Wisdom per- 
manently loses 1d6 points of Constitution. This 
book may not be used to alter living beings, 
attribute scores, or to create magic items except 
as described above. 


of Clear Thought 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 48,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A work of this nature is indistinguishable from 
any normal book. Any single character who reads 
a Tome of Clear Thought will be able to practice 
mental exercises that will increase his Intelli- 
gence by one point. Reading a work of this nature 
takes 48 hours time over six days, and immedi- 
ately thereafter the book disappears. 

The reader must begin a program of concentra- 
tion and mental disciplines within one week of 
reading the tome. After a month of such exercise, 
Intelligence goes up. The knowledge gained from 
reading the work can never be recorded or articu- 
lated. Any further perusal of a Tome of Clear 
Thought will be of no benefit to the character. 


of Dogmatic Methods 
XP Value: — GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 
This silver-bound book, studded with jewels, 
appears to be a tome of considerable value. The 


book is actually cursed, although this is not 
5894 


ee ea.” 


1439 


— ee y 


Tome of Dogmatic Methods II 


i i 


bee el ESE 


immediately obvious. The manual has the power 
to provide advice on any action that its owner 
might consider taking. The owner needs only 
open to any page in the book, and there before 
him will be a list of actions, most of them ritualis- 
tic in nature, to insure the success of any project. 

The first time the book is used, the owner is 
suddenly struck with the idea that he or she now 
owns a source of information that can give valu- 
able advice on any matter. It becomes a guide for 
life. The owner will not share the book or let any- 
one take it away. If anyone tries to remove it, the 
character will fight to keep the book. 

Following the first use of the book, the owner 
cannot do anything without first checking the 
book. The information in the tome is completely 
worthless, but the owner of the book does not 
realize this. The pages in the manual change con- 
stantly, offering its owner an obscure (and usually 
ridiculous) ritual to perform before doing any- 
thing. Thus, if a character is about to go into bat- 
tle, he might check the book and find several 
exercises he should undertake to loosen his mus- 
cles. If he is going to speak to a duke, he might 
find instructions for the color of his clothing 
according to the day of the year and the time of 
day of the meeting. If he or she is going to pray 
for a spell, there may be six pages of cleansing 
rituals that should be performed first. 

The manual’s instructions are almost never 
harmful, but they might delay the owner’s actions 
at a crucial moment. 

Whenever a character is in a situation that 
requires hasty action (for example, he is 
attacked), the book will delay its owner by 1d8 
rounds. If the owner is preparing for a lengthy 
activity (a long trip, for example), he or she will 
be busy for 1d4 days getting ready for the event. 
The DM should be creative in detailing the tasks 
the owner must perform before comfortably com- 
mitting him or herself to a goal. 

The compulsion to follow the manual’s instruc- 
tions can be ended with a remove curse spell. Fol- 
lowing this, the next person to open the book 
becomes its new owner. If an owner should die, 
the book becomes the property of the next person 
to open its cover. 

If possible, the DM should hint that the charac- 
ter is actually gaining bonuses for using the book, 
while allowing the other characters in the group 
to figure out the effects for themselves. 


of Dogmatic Methods II 
XP Value: — GP Value: 5,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 625 
This silver bound, gem-studded book has the 
power to provide advice on any action that its 
owner might consider taking. Opened to any 


page, a list of actions, most of them highly ritual- 
istic, appears to insure the success of any action. 
The owner immediately forms a dependence 
upon the book, and refers to it before taking even 
the most mundane actions. The book recom- 
mends extremely time consuming operations. 
Furthermore, the owner will not share the book 
with anyone and will fight to keep it. A remove 
curse spell, or similar magic, is required to neu- 
tralize its effects. 


i 
BU 


08 


E’soa Ho-chi 
XP Value: 6,500 GP Value: 65,000 
Kara-Tur 
E’soa Ho-chi, “the Herald,” was given to the 
lamas of Ko’Chung by Mei Lung as a chronicle 
to verify history in case the dragon had an unfore- 
seen accident. The tome is very large and thick 
and it is always open, with writing on the right 
side and unfinished script appearing magically on 
the left. A lama must stand vigil and turn the page 
to keep the magic flowing, but anyone might do 
the job. This book records history as the events 
unfold. The person who turns the page can direct 
the book’s recounting of current events to the 
people and places about which the reader wishes 
to learn, or he could read the book’s reports on 
the important events of Kara-Tur as decided by 
the book. Occasionally, mentions of the western 
barbarians appear on the pages. The herald 


weighs more than one man can lift and is adorned 
589% 


e e O E a E T 


1440 


Tome, Herald of Mei Lung 


| eC eS 


in gold and blue and green jades. 

Clearly, this is a very powerful instrument of 
the magical Celestial Heavens. The guards are 
fanatical about its safety, willing to die protect- 
ing it. Should it be stolen, all of Tabot (along 
with interested parties of T’u Lung and Shou 
Lung) would seek the tome. Some would seek to 
return it to the Gompa. Others would only want 
it for their own use. Once word of the theft was 
out, there would be virtually no peace for the 
thieves. 


of the Fool 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DRAGON Magazine 134 
This book is a 9”x12” leather bound book of 
approximately 100 pages. The Tome of the Fool 
radiates a hot-pink glow that is visible for up to 
100 yards around. By careful study of this tome 
over one month, a jester may gain enough experi- 
ence points to achieve the midpoint of the next 
level of experience. The tome works only once 
before disappearing, and that jester may never 
again use any tome of this sort. Any person other 
than a jester who reads this book immediately 
becomes a jester of 1st level (no saving throw 
allowed). 


of Gainful Exercise 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This work is similar to the Manual of Bodily 
Health, but its reading and prescribed courses of 
action will result in the addition of 1 point to the 
reader’s Strength. 


of Garden Flowers 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 8,500 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
Anyone reading the Book of Garden Flowers is 
immediately able to identify all garden flowers 
and plants from a seed, leaf, or blossom. 


of Glowing Pages* 
XP Value: +2,000 GP Value: +10,000 
Baltron’s Beacon 
The pages of this book magically glow when 
touched for easy reading. 


Herald of Mei Lung 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
The Herald of Mei Lung is a large tome, roughly 
the size of a small shield and 6 inches thick, but is 
otherwise of nondescript appearance. Its pages are 
of the thinnest paper and each is covered in an 
elaborate script penned in golden ink. The lan- 
guage is unknown to any who view it, but can be 


read with the aid of a comprehend languages spell. 

At the birth of the world, the great and wise 
dragon Mei Lung was given the task of recording 
all that has, is, or will transpire in the world. Sup- 
posedly, should the great dragon fail in his duties, 
the universe would end. To prevent this dire fate 
from occurring, Mei Lung created the Herald. 

Mei Lung was not merely satisfied to create 
the Herald, although many would view this as 
protection enough. Aware that disaster might 
befall not just him but his entire household (for 
dragons of that far eastern land lived in a style 
much different from the wyrms of the west), Mei 
Lung entrusted the magical volume to a sect of 
isolated and devout monks far away in the fast- 
ness of the highest mountains of the world. There 
the book has ever been, watched over by monks 
who now live only for its protection. 

The Herald of Mei Lung is one of the few truly 
beneficent artifacts, possessing no harmful pow- 
ers. As such, it can be a useful aid in a particu- 
larly difficult adventure, providing answers to 
mysteries and clues about the future. The player 
characters can never actually own the artifact. 
Instead they must go to it. This by itself is an 
adventure as the group treks across a hostile 
wilderness similar to the Himalayas to find the 
ancient monastery. Even then, dealings with the 
monks must be role-played, and the return jour- 
ney survived. 

Constant Powers: The Herald of Mei Lung is 
wondrous in that it writes by itself the history of 
every major and virtually every minor event in 
the world. Since this history starts with the cre- 
ation of the world, finding information can take a 
long time. For every day spent reading the book, 
there is a 1% cumulative chance of finding the 
correct information, What is revealed is the truth, 
although often one-sided in its presentation. 

The book records more than just the past, how- 
ever. Any event occurring in the present can also 
be read about. The character needs only turn to 
the final penned pages and read. It is even pos- 
sible to read about future events on the final 
pages, although since the tales are still forming 
themselves, there is only a 20% chance of gaining 
useful information, and even then it may be 
incomplete. 

The Herald is protected with a powerful spell 
that automatically teleports the tome back to the 
monastery if it has been absent for more than 12 
hours. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* Ifthe universe ends, the book also ends. 

* One must go back in time and prevent Mei 
Lung from becoming the Celestial Historian. 

* Mei Lung must be convinced that knowledge 


is meaningless. 
5901 


ee 


Tome of Hopeful Deeds 


of Hopeful Deeds 

XP Value: 700 GP Value: 5,000 
New Item 

After one week of study, a good character suffers 

a -3 penalty on all saving throws. This effect is 

permanent until a restoration or limited wish 

spell is used to counteract it. 


of Hopeless Deeds 
XP Value: — GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
When evil characters study this book for more 
than a week, they suffer a —3 penalty on all saving 
throws. This effect is permanent until restoration 
or limited wish negates the penalty. 


of Humorous Perspective 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 134 
This book looks exactly the same as the tome of 
the fool, and it is usable only by jesters. Like the 
tome of the fool, anyone who is not a jester and 
who reads it immediately becomes a Ist-level 
jester. When read, this book enables a jester to 
attain a different outlook on things—one in 
which death and other morbid topics are merely 
punch lines in the great game of life. The jester, 
because of his calm control of the situation, 
receives an extra +10% modifier to his morale- 
changing ability. The same jester may cast friends 
and charm person once a day in addition to nor- 
mal spellcasting abilities. Finally, the reader of 
this tome is forever immune to emotion-changing 
spells involving fear, hate, despair, discord, hope- 
lessness, and rage, as received from symbol or 
emotion spells. 


of Immoral Sanity 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
A good character who studies this book has a 5% 
chance per day, cumulative, of contracting some 
form of insanity. 


of Infinite Spells 
XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 45,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This magical work bestows upon any character of 
any class the ability to use the spells within its 
pages. However, upon first reading the work, any 
character not already able to use spells suffers 
5d4 points of damage and is stunned for 5d4 
turns. After that, he can examine the writing 
without further harm. The Book of Infinite Spells 
contains 1d8+22 pages. The nature of each page 
is determined by random die roll. Make a per- 
centile roll and consult the following table: 


Roll Page Contents 
01-30 Blank page 
31-60 Priest spell 
61-00 Wizard spell 


If a spell is written on a page, determine the 
spell level by rolling 1d10 for a priest spell and 
1d12 for a wizard spell. If the result is 8—10 (for 
priest) or 10-12 (for wizard) make a second die 
roll—1d6 for priests’, 1d8 for wizards’ spells, 
Once the spell level is known, the DM can select 
particular spells or determine them randomly, 
Record page contents secretly, and do not reveal 
this information to the holder of the book. 

Once a page is turned, it can never be flipped 
back—paging through a book of infinite spells is 
a one-way trip. When the last page is turned, the 
book vanishes. The owner of the book can cast 
the spell to which the book is opened, once a day. 
(If the spell is one that the character would nor- 
mally be able to cast by reason of class and level, 
however, the spell can be cast up to four times a 
day due to the book’s magical powers.) 

The owner of the book need not have the book 
on his person in order to use its power. The book 
can be stored in a place of safety while the owner 
is adventuring and still allow its owner to cast 
spells by means of its power. Each time a spell is 
cast there is a chance that the energy connected 
with its use will cause the page to magically turn 
(despite all precautions). The owner will know 
this and possibly even benefit from the turning by 
gaining access to a new spell. The chance ofa 
page turning is as follows: 


* Spellcaster employing spells usable by 


own class and/or level 10% 
* Spellcaster using spell foreign to own 

class and/or level 20% 
* Nonspellcaster using priest spell 25% 
+ Nonspellcaster using wizard spell 30% 


Treat each spell use as if a scroll were 
employed, including casting time, spell failure, 
and so on. 


Juia Lo’tanu 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Kara-Tur 
This tome is bound with the time-blackened skin 
of a giant eel, smooth and glossy. On its cover isa 
painting of a red and white spotted carp, the sym- 
bol of hard work and success. Inside are 20 paint- 
ings done on transparent silk that has been 
stiffened with clear lacquer. The paintings can be 
viewed from either side of the page. They are of 
tranquil subjects with hidden, deeper meanings. 


Examples of the subjects are: two kittens watch- 
5907 


Y COENE a a 


1442 


Tome, Juia Lo’Tanu 


ing swimming carp in a pool with water lilies; the 
sun setting behind a picturesque mountain; three 
girls farming in the rice-paddy. The book has no 
magical wards or traps, as it was designed to be 
accessible. 

This very beautiful work of art was painted by 
Da’u Ching Tso with the magical paints given to 
him by the pigfaced spirit from the Heavens. It 
was inspired by the teachings of the wu jen Kor- 
sanna the Orator, who infused his magic into 
Da’u’s expressions of art. The thoughts, feelings 
and knowledge of the student and master are 
gained through study of this tome. 

Korsanna took this treasured book through- 
out the land, using it as a teaching tool. This 
was in the years 1240-1280, and many great 
speakers are known from this period, most of 
whom followed Korsanna for a while. Then 
Korsanna died mysteriously in the village of 
Sou Tu, now ruins in southern Noka Jui Dis- 
trict. The Juia Lo’tanu passed through a few 
hands who admired it only as art, then came to 
rest in the hands of the Wai clan about the year 
1425. This tome was held and studied by the 
Wai family, and many believe that its magic 
enabled the Wai men to gain their power and 
stature in the communities of southern Shou. 
By the year 2000, the Wai clan was one of the 
most powerful noble families of southern Shou 
Lung, well known for their imaginative and 
engaging public speaking. 

Just before the Moon Feast Festival in the 
year 2065, the Wai clan fortress and compound 
was raided by a band of marauding jungle bar- 
barians, who succeeded in breaking through the 
main gate with a fireball from their leader’s 
magic staff. This group of fools stole many of 
the family heirlooms, but also took the Juia 
Lo'tanu. The ancestral home was located east of 
the modern city of Ha’chou, and the escaping 
brigands rode east to the Henai River, crossing 
at Tarepi. Here they were caught midstream by 
the Shou posse and many of them were killed 
by arrows. Only the wizard leader and five men 
eluded the law. Historians speculate that these 
barbarians were the same group that raided 
We’noa and Chin a year later, and were ulti- 
mately captured at Cufa Twi Caverns. The Juia 
Lo'tanu and the rest of the Wai heirlooms were 
lost. Gossip and legend place the treasure in a 
citadel deep inside the caverns, but this is only 
hearsay. 

If a character has an Intelligence of 15 or 
higher, he will gain from intense analysis of 
this tome. Alignment is unimportant for the 
magical lessons. After 1d4 months of scrutiny, 
the tome gives insight into the art of magical 
oratory, a fantastic gift, and the skill is passed 


on to the reader. It gives the character a magi- 
cal ability to influence any group he addresses 
toward his position or conclusions, often sway- 
ing a crowd’s support. The player must speak 
for a half-hour or more. The effectiveness of 
this ability is situational, and entirely depen- 
dent on the DM’s interpretation. It is nota 
mass hypnotism or suggestion, because it can 
be learned by any character class and it is not 
as powerful as a true wu jen spell. A magical 
speech will add 10 percent to the morale of fol- 
lowers or troops in the speaker’s command. It 
also increases the courtly abilities of poetry 
and Noh by increasing their base chance of 
success by 2. 

For example, if the magical orator is address- 
ing a group of friends, or any neutral crowd, they 
may be easily convinced that the speaker’s pur- 
pose or meanings are correct and true, and action 
may be expected. However, a speech before an 
angry Emperor or a lynch-mob may only save the 
character’s life, with a quick trip to the local 
prison or a public flogging the punishment—the 
situation will dictate the outcome. A low-classed 
bushi warrior can only expect a magical speech to 
get gentlemen to listen and maybe reflect on his 
words. A good benchmark is that 15 percent of 
any neutral group will be swayed to action or 
belief by magical oratory. 


1443 


Tome of Leadership and Influence 


[A 


of Leadership and Influence 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 60,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This leather-and-brass-bound book is similar to a 
Tome of Clear Thought, but upon completion of 
reading and practice of what was revealed therein, 
Charisma is increased by | point. 

When read by a bard, the character increases 
by one level. His or her experience points become 
equal to the minimum required to attain the new 
level. 


of Psionic Interaction 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Baltron’s Beacon 

This tome tells how to build psionic powers. If 
the reader cannot use psionics, the tome has no 
effect. If the reader is psionic, the study confers 
25 more psionic strength points immediately, and 
(at the usual rate, with level progression) one new 
attack mode, one new defense mode, and one 
minor discipline, If the reader is not psionic but 
has psionic potential, the study permits a check 
for them at double normal chances, even if a pre- 
vious roll for psionics has failed. However, if the 
roll is more than 30% under the minimum needed 
to gain such abilities, the victim is struck by cata- 
tonia (insanity) that can only be cured by a heal 
spell. The tome vanishes either after proper use or 
after causing three cases of catatonia. 


of Quickness of Action 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DUNGEON MAsTER Guide 

The heavy covers and metal bindings of this com- 
pilation will not distinguish it from other non- 
magical texts of small value. This work contains 
secret formulae and prescriptions for unguents 
and exercises that enable a single reader to assim- 
ilate the text (three days of uninterrupted study) 
and then practice the skills detailed therein. 

If this practice is faithfully done for one 
month, the character will gain | point of Dexter- 
ity. The manual will disappear immediately after 
reading, but the contents are remembered for 
three months. However, the reader cannot articu- 
late or otherwise record the information he 
retains. Only after the month of training is the 
Dexterity bonus granted. Further perusal of a 
similar text will not add to the same character’s 
Dexterity. 


of Saintly Sanity 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
An evil character who studies this book has a 5% 
chance per day, cumulative, of contracting some 
form of insanity, 


Seven Fingers 
(The Life of Thorstag) 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 25,000 

DRAGON Magazine 69 
This memoir is a thick bundle of vellum sheets 
bound about with two leather straps and enclosed 
in a leathern bag. A recent owner, the merchant 
Zephrum Nelagul, noted in his ledgers that Seven 
Fingers had 278 sheets, but also noted that it 
ended precipitously and seemed to have gaps in 
the narrative, which suggests that some pages 
have been lost or deliberately removed. 

The book was written by (or at least under the 
supervision of) the adventurer Thorstag “Seven 
Fingers” Amareh, a fighting man who rose to 
take the lordship of a tiny northern dale, where he 
died some 70 winters ago. Thorstag’s nickname 
and the main title of this volume come from his 
habit of severing the fingers of important ene- 
mies whom he slew, and storing these in an iron 
box. There were seven such enemies, and 
Thorstag evidently put the fingers to some sort of 
magical use, but their present location is 
unknown. The volume recounts Thorstag’s report- 
edly boring and trivial life (“wearisome pages of 
dreams, underhanded schemes, and malicious 
violence,” Zephrum records), but contains three 
passages of special note. 

The first is a detailed and exacting descrip- 
tion of the selection of a card, void, from a deck 
of many things, so complete that anyone who 
reads this section could immediately recognize 
the same effects if they occurred in his or her 
presence. 

The second is a recipe or description of the 
making of Keoghtom’s ointment, which may or 
may not be correct, Curiously, no owner of the 
memoir has made any mention of the accuracy of 
the recipe, but only of its inclusion; this hints that 
they have not attempted the process because it is 
obviously incomplete, or too difficult in execu- 
tion or the procurement of the ingredients, or the 
writing itself contains some magical trap or 
guardian they would prefer not to disturb. 

The third is a detailed inventory of the 
dowries of the princesses Elmyra and Hlassela 
of Cormyr, which Thorstag took part in guarding 
on an overland journey from Suzail, the capital 
of Cormyr, to Arabel, a city some distance to the 
north and east. The journey was safe, the 
princesses married, and set out forthwith east- 
ward with their (royal, but not identified by 
Thorstag) husbands. Neither Thorstag nor the 
sage Elminster has heard of their fate, but in 
some eastern tomb or treasury the greater part 
of these dowries must now lie. Thorstag’s list 
includes weights and identifying marks of jew- 


elry (since he had to guard against forgery and 
5912 


? 1444 


EEE ee 


x Tome, Vacuous Grimoire r 


substitution of the pieces), and adventurers or 
historians will surely find it a source of inspira- 
tion, if not a path to wealth. 

The present whereabouts of the memoir is 
unknown. It was last seen in the hands of an 
unidentified man “with the clothes and manner 
of a southern merchant,” according to Zephrum 
Nelagul, who sold it to said merchant at a bazaar 
in Waterdeep for 900 pieces of gold. Zephrum 
attests that he obtained the book from an igno- 
rant bailiff in Longsaddle, who sold it as part of 
the contents of a dead man’s house. The dead 
man, one Borwyn, was a trader in hides and 
leather goods who covered much of the north in 
his trade, and had acquired, in Zephrum’s words, 
“an odd assortment of keepsakes and valuables.” 
One can only conjecture that somehow Borwyn 
the trader visited the dale where Thorstag had 
ruled and was buried, or got the book from 
another person who was given it by Thorstag for 
safekeeping, or who took it after Thorstag’s 
death. If any reports come to light of the pos- 
sible missing pages, more might be said of how 
Borwyn got the memoir, and of its original, 
complete contents. 


of Ssu-Ma 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
The immortal hero Ssu-Ma is said to be the father 
of written knowledge, bringing mankind from 
barbaric chaos to civilization. His great tome is 
said to gather knowledge of all sorts from the 
very air itself, and is thus able to provide infor- 
mation on anything in existence. 

This large, bulky book is 5 feet square and 
nearly a foot thick. Its covers are each half an 
inch thick, fastened securely by a built-in lock. 
The covers are not marked in any way. 

The lock on the book cannot be opened magi- 
cally, and open locks attempts suffer a +50% 
penalty to the roll. Anyone who fails to pick the 
lock can never succeed in opening it. The con- 
tents of the book cannot be examined until the 
lock and book are opened. The first page of the 
book explains all of its powers and the page refer- 
ences where the command words and instructions 
for each power can be found. The tome can be 
read easily by anyone. 

The tome’s contents explain how the user, 
drawing on the power of the tome, can produce 
the effects of the given powers. The pages of the 
book cannot be used as materials for the effects 
(such as mapping). 


Suggested Powers: 

Feeblemind 

Lore (treat as a legend lore spell) 

Mapmaking (duration one turn; Treat as a map 

of mapping) 

Repair Normal Objects 

Open Locks (70% success rate) 

Memorize +5 spell levels (five \st-level 

spells, one 2nd-level and three Ist-level spells, 

and so on) 

Suggested Handicaps: 

When first used the user suffers a —6 penalty 

to Strength score. 

* Body part change: The user becomes hunch- 
backed, and suffers a +4 penalty to Armor 
Class and a —4 penalty to all THACO rolls 
because of this deformity. 

Suggested Penalties: 

* User involuntarily assumes gaseous form. 

* Memory lapse: The user immediately forgets 
any Ist-level spells memorized. 

* Service: The user is suddenly compelled to 
map an entire level of a nearby dungeon (or 
country side), using the tome, and will assem- 
ble an expedition to do so, leaving within 
three days. This effect ends when the map is 
completed. 


of Understanding 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 43,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
Identical to a Tome of Clear Thought, this work 
increases Wisdom by 1 point. 


Vacuous Grimoire 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A book of this sort is identical to a normal one, 
although if a detect magic spell is cast, a magical 
aura will be noted. Any character who opens the 
work and reads so much as a single glyph therein 
must make two saving throws vs. spell. The first 
is to determine if 1 point of Intelligence is lost or 
not; the second is to find if 2 points of Wisdom 
are lost. Once opened and read, the vacuous gri- 
moire remains; to be destroyed, the book must be 
burned and a remove curse spell cast. If the tome 
is placed with other books, its appearance will 
instantly alter to conform to the look of these 
other works. 


Tool Set 


“Tool Set” is a generic term for a set of imple- 
ments and devices craftspeople use when practic- 
ing their professions. It covers everything from 
pliers to saws, from vices to sets of lockpicks. 


5915 


1445 


Tool Set, Gemcutter's Tools of Sunndi 


(Ot el 


Gemcutter’s Tools of Sunndi 


XP Value GP Value 
—1: 3,000 25,000 
—2: 6,000 50,000 
—3: 9,000 75,000 


GREYHAWK Adventures 

This magical set of vises, hammers, blades, and 
chisels was enchanted by the mountain dwarves 
who work the gemstone mines in the County of 
Sunndi. They help any character with a gem cut- 
ting proficiency to increase the value of his or her 
work, For individual stones, the cutter can make a 
proficiency check to gain a modifier to the Gem 
Base Value Table found in the DMG. The DM 
rolls 1d8 to determine the modifier: 


Roll Modifier 
1-6 -] 
6-7 -2 

8 -3 


The tools are also useful for finishing stones in 
a mine; the cutter can add 20-50% to the final 
average value listed on Table 34: Gemstone 
Quality in the Dungeoneer s Survival Guide. A 
gem cutter with these tools can demand up to 
four times the normal fees for services. 


Thieves’ Tools of Stealth 

XP Value: 750 GP Value: 7,5000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
These magical thieves’ tools are a great boon to 
any thief or rogue. They do not appear to be made 
of metal, but instead appear to be constructed of a 
very dark, hard substance, perhaps obsidian. 
While they are magical, no means of detecting 
magic can reveal this fact. The tools confer a 
+10% bonus to a rogue’s open locks and remove 
traps rolls. 

The greatest power of the tools is revealed 
when they are placed inside their case, and the 
case is touched to the user’s skin. The case magi- 
cally melds into the individual’s body. There the 
tools safely remain, until the owner concentrates 
on bringing them to the surface. If a rogue is slain 
while the tools are melded with his skin, the tools 
reemerge. 

A thief’s tool set usually includes the following 
equipment: one set (universal lockpicks, prybar, 
waxed cord with two hooks and six thin steel 
spikes, whipsaw, cutters, two small black velvet 
bags, black leather gloves and mask, iron grapnel 
with 2-foot shank and end-ring), and 30 gp. 


Woodworker’s Tools of Dyvers 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 24,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This set of magical hammers, spikes, axes, chis- 


els, files, and other tools was created for a car- 
penter in the City of Dyvers, and though he paid 
much gold for it, the set eventually brought him 
great wealth. It allows a character with carpentry 
proficiency to build very sturdy wooden con- 
structions with 150% of normal defensive point 
values, Consequently, the carpenter receives dou- 
ble to triple the usual fees, or a weekly average of 
50 to 75 gp. 


Tooth 


These body implements allow creatures to chew 
their food. Many enchanted teeth come in sets; 
most of the values below are for a single tooth. If 
a whole set is desired, multiply the values by the 
number of teeth in the set to determine the total 
value. 


of Dahlver-nar 

XP Value: 40,000 GP Value: 200,000 

DUNGEON MasTER Guide, Ist Edition 
If any priest was more powerful than the 
renowned Dahlver-nar, histories do not tell us. 
The gods themselves gave special powers to 
him, and these have passed on to others by 
means of the great relics of Dahlver-nar—his 
teeth. Each of the teeth has some power, and if 
one character manages to gain a full quarter, 
half, or all of them, other grand benefits accrue, 
the additional powers and effects being cumula- 
tive. In order to gain the power of one of these 
teeth, however, the character must place it into 
his or her mouth, where it will graft itself in the 
place of a missing tooth. The teeth can never be 
removed once emplaced, short of the demise of 
the possessor. The DM is encouraged to decide 
the powers for the following (use the Artifact 
Rules in Volume 1). 
* Each of the 32 teeth. 
* The 8-tooth sets of 18, 9-16, 17-24, 25-32. 
* The 16-tooth sets of 1—16, 17-32. 
* The complete set. 


of Dalhvar-nar IT 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 

The teeth of Dalhvar-nar are a set of 32 ancient 
red dragon teeth: four 6-inch incisors, two 18- 
inch upper fangs, two 12-inch lower fangs, four 
8-inch canines, eight 6-inch canines, four 4-inch 
bicuspids, and eight 2-inch molars. They are car- 
ried in a deep, coppery red dragon-hide bag. 

Long ago, as the ancient red dragon Incendax 
sought to increase his territory, he chanced upon 
a large group of young mages and their teacher 
gathering spell components, and he murdered 
them all. The guild’s archmages were so outraged 


that 13 of their greatest members banded together 
59 


SO eee ee 


1446 


a cc 


Tooth of Dalhvar-nar II 


D 


to kill the dragon. They tracked Incendax to his 
lair and collectively attacked him with magic so 
potent that a massive explosion resulted. When 
the dust settled, all that remained of the two 
forces were the teeth of the dragon. 

Dalhvar-nar was a young priest of some wit 
and ability, whose path to fortune took him to that 
cave centuries later. With a bit of magical guid- 
ance, he found a patch of loose shale and cleared 
it away, exposing a dark passage. Dalhvar-nar 
crawled through, found a huge chamber, and was 
amazed as he looked upon scorched walls and 
blasted boulders, the remains of the great battle. 
Dalh searched through the cavern and eventually 
discovered the dragon’s teeth. He then gathered 
them up and stuffed them into his pack, figuring 
a wizard might pay a handsome sum for them, 

On the way back to town, Dalh heard some- 
thing heavy fall to the ground behind him. He 
turned to see what it was and found that one of 
the large dragon fangs had fallen out of his back- 
pack. In amazement, Dalh watched as the tooth 
buried itself into the earth, whereupon the ground 
trembled, and up sprang a mighty monster! Dalh 
quickly readied for battle, but instead of attack- 
ing, the beast kneeled at his feet awaiting his 
command. Instead of selling the teeth, Dalh 
decided to experiment with them. 

The priest’s friends thought it quite odd when 
the once generous Dalh suddenly grew extremely 
preoccupied with his possessions, constantly 
itemizing them and angrily demanding the return 
of everything he had ever lent to another, Then 
his order disowned him, having heard reports that 
he was raiding traveling caravans. At last, Dalh 
vanished after taking up residence in a remote 
mountain cave. It is rumored that he was last 
spotted in the clutched talons of a giant gold 
dragon. 

The curse associated with the teeth of Dalhvar- 
nar suits this item more to be used by soon-to-be 
villainous NPCs, rather than one of the player 
characters . . . unless the DM wants an antisocial, 
treasure-hungry, miserly PC wreaking havoc 
upon the entire campaign. 

An adventure might begin when the player 
characters enter a town to rest and recuperate. 
That night, the quiet town is attacked by a group 
of monsters led by a “mad old hermit” who lives 
on a nearby mountain. 

Constant Powers: A character holding any of the 
teeth is able to detect the exact number and type of 
all gems and precious metals within 60 feet. Having 
any of the teeth on his or her person also allows the 
character to speak and understand the language of 
red dragons, and the tongue common to all evil 
dragons. Finally, possessing any of the teeth grants a 
character immunity to all forms of fire. 


a = we ess ` 
SAS TIm rnr rR R 
“ag bee NAY 
-DN M Ko, AANA 


\ 
Y 


TN 
WSS +] 
Wie i 


Invoked Powers: These powers are released 
only if the teeth (not including the molars) are 
thrust point-first into the ground. If the surface is 
any form of soil (clay, dirt, sand), the teeth sink in 
and a monster emerges in 1d4 rounds. On any 
other surface, or if dropped on their sides, the 
teeth just lie there until picked up. After being 
used, they magically reappear among the rest of 
the teeth in 1d2 + 1 days. 

Summoned monsters serve the owner of the 
teeth for 30 rounds and follow all other guide- 
lines specified in monster summoning I. Each of 
the 18-inch upper fangs summons one 7-HD 
remorhaz or three 15-HD fire giants; the 12-inch 
lower fangs each summon three 7-HD wyverns or 
four 8-headed, 8-HD hydras; the 8-inch canines 
each summon six 4-HD fire toads; the 6-inch 
canines each summon 1d10 2-HD lizard men; 
and the 4-inch bicuspids each create a 60- 
foot—diameter wall of fire 20 feet high and lasting 
20 rounds. 

The eight molars work in the following man- 
ner: The tooth must be physically planted in a 
hole 2 inches or more in depth, which takes 1d4 
rounds. After the dirt is patted flat (one more 
round), a puff of smoke issues forth, engulfs the 
character, and endows him or her with its power. 
The DM should roll 1d8 and consult the follow- 
ing table: 


5920 


1447 


Tooth, Dragon 


j Te a E OS EE 


Roll Effect 
l The user can teleport without error. 
2 The owner can invoke from his palm a 


6-foot long cone of magical fire, grow- 
ing from 3 inches at the base to 3 feet at 
the end. 

3 The owner can fly (as the spell) for 25 


4 The character can make a suggestion 
with a duration of 21 hours. 

5 The holder can invoke domination with 
a 200-yard range. 

6 The owner can transmute rock to mud 
(or the reverse) in a 100-foot cube. 

7 The wielder can invoke improved invisi- 
bility with a 10-round duration. 

8 The user can invoke disintegrate. 


All powers of the molars have a casting time of 
3, once the character is empowered. Magical abil- 
ities can be interrupted and wasted, just like nor- 
mal spells. 

Curse: The character possessing the teeth 
immediately becomes chaotic evil in alignment 
and cannot bear to be separated from the teeth. 
The victim will immediately retrieve any teeth 
that fall upon an impenetrable surface, ignoring 
anything happening around him or her. 

After possessing the teeth for one week, the 
character begins to hoard possessions, developing 
accurate lists and going so far as to spend vast 
periods of time counting them—valuable or not. 
In the third week, the owner searches for a large 
cave extending deep within a mountain, to dwell 
in solitude. In the fourth week, anyone approach- 
ing the character or his or her possessions is per- 
ceived as a thief. The character receives a —5 
reaction adjustment to former friends and imme- 
diately attacks approaching strangers. Once the 
cave is established, the character assumes the 
habits and attitudes of an ancient red dragon. 
They maintain a haughty and condescending atti- 
tude, and enjoy surveying the surrounding coun- 
tryside from their caves. A fierce hatred of gold 
dragons develops, and the owner aspires to estab- 
lish a large territory. 

When the teeth are out of the possession of the 
owner for 1d4 + 2 weeks, the character returns to 
his or her original alignment and loses the traits 
of the dragon (in reverse order) over a period of 
two weeks. At the DM’s option, the side-effects of 
alignment change remain with the character. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* Allow the teeth to soak in 32 doses of sweet 
water for 1,000 years, whereupon they rot 
away. 

* Pull all the teeth of a conscious, ancient red 
dragon and replace them with the artifacts 


without explaining what you're doing. 
* Bathe the teeth in the breath of 32 different 
types of dragons in 32 days. 


Dragon 
XP Value: 100/HD GP Value: 1,000/HD 
DRAGON Magazine 98 

What do you do with a dragon once it’s dead? 
Dragon claws strung as a necklace make a nice 
souvenir. The teeth can be used to make unusual 
handles for swords or daggers, or, if big enough, 
they can be made into drinking horns. An enter- 
prising adventurer will find wizards quite willing 
to pay for genuine dragons’ blood and body parts, 
to be used in experiments. Some wizards have an 
even better use for a dragon's tooth than making 
an ale cup out of it. With the proper spells and 
materials, the tooth can be used to create “the 
children of the dragon.” 

A dragon's tooth can be enchanted so that, 
when planted in the ground and given a command 
word (usually “grow!”), the tooth sprouts an 
armed warrior of an Armor Class and alignment 
appropriate to the dragon from whose tooth it 
grew. Each dragonman will also have special 
abilities, unique to its type. 

Classical Greek mythology describes two sepa- 
rate incidents in which dragon's teeth were used 
for this purpose. Jason, as part of his quest for the 
golden fleece, had to prove himself worthy of the 
sacred golden fleece to King Aeetes of Colchis. 
His test was to harness the fiery bulls of the king, 
plow and sow a field with the teeth of a dragon, 
and then fight the crop of men that grew after- 
wards. The dragon's teeth sprouted armed war- 
riors, ready to fight at the slightest provocation. 
Jason quickly tossed a stone at the back of one of 
the dragonmen, who thought his sibling had 
struck him and so returned the blow. Soon, all the 
warriors were fighting each other; at length, they 
were destroyed. 

Cadmus, founder of the Greek city of Thebes, 
slew a foul serpent that had killed all of his men 
with its poisonous breath. Obeying a divine inspi- 
ration, he gathered the dragon 5 teeth and planted 
them. Up sprang a host of fully armed and 
armored warriors, who immediately began to 
fight among themselves until only five remained. 
The five survivors made peace, and they agreed 
to follow Cadmus, to help him build and populate 
his city. 

When discovered as part of a treasure trove, 
dragons ' teeth may be found in collections of 
1d20, usually contained in a leather bag. A single 
dragon ’s tooth is usually between 3 and 12 inches 
in length. Dungeon Masters may use the follow- 
ing table to determine the type of teeth found: 


5921 


Oe O 


o, o AE E EE REE 


Roll Dragon type 


01-04 Silver 
05-12 Blue 
13-20 Green 
21-35 Brass 
36-50 Black 
51-65 White 
66-80 Copper 
81-88 Red 
89-96 Bronze 
97-00 Gold 


Sometimes (10%), a bag may contain a mixed 
assortment of teeth, the different types deter- 
mined using the above percentile rolls. In such 
cases, the teeth might be color-coded or marked 
in some fashion that the player characters may 
puzzle out for themselves. Dragonmen will either 
obey or attack the person who caused the teeth to 
grow, depending on the alignments involved. 
Dragonmen of an alignment opposite to that of 
the possessor of the teeth (such as lawful good vs. 
chaotic evil, or chaotic good vs. lawful evil) will 
refuse to obey the owner of the dragon teeth and 
attack at once. 

If the owner’s alignment either differs in only 
one respect from the dragonman’s (lawful good 
ys. lawful evil, for example) or is neutral, then the 
dragonman must make a saving throw vs. spell to 
determine if it obeys the owner. Failure indicates 
the warriors obey, albeit reluctantly and without 
enthusiasm, Daily saves are made to determine 
continued fealty. A successful save allows the 
dragonman to desert, and it may, if the opportu- 
nity is there, injure or discomfit the owner of the 
tooth in some way. Dragonmen of the same align- 
ment as the possessor of the teeth are loyal to the 
death. (Dragonmen continue to “live” until 
killed.) Being magical constructs, they and all 
their apparel and items disintegrate when slain, 
with no possible chance of resurrection or saving. 

The dragonmen Jason faced grew from teeth 
that were enchanted in the normal fashion. It is 
likely that Aeetes himself spoke the command 
word to ensure that Jason would have to fight the 
dragonmen. In the case of Cadmus, the Greek 
gods caused the teeth to sprout, since Cadmus 
couldn’t enchant them, and they also caused the 
dragonmen to fight among themselves, for the 
purpose of selecting only the best warriors to 
serve Cadmus. 

To be worthy of enchantment, a dragon 5 teeth 
must be in perfect condition—without chips, 
cracks, or splits due to age, careless handling, or 
extraction. A dragon, according to one source has 
64 teeth in its mouth normally. After being slain 
in combat, there will be 2d8 teeth damaged from 
fighting or lost during the beast’s death throes. 


ee oe 


Tooth, Dragon 


Should adventurers decide to pull the remainder 
of the teeth for sale to a wizard, then each remain- 
ing tooth must save as bone vs. crushing blow 
during the extraction. Failure to save means the 
tooth is damaged during extraction and is useless 
for enchantment. Player character and NPC wiz- 
ards who wish to create enchanted dragons teeth 
may use the following method to do so. After a 
tooth has been prepared for enchantment, using 
the spell enchant an item, it is immersed in a 
crystal basin containing a broth composed of a 
mixture of the parent dragon’s blood and at least 
one of the following ingredients, according to the 


type of tooth being enchanted: 
Dragon Ingredient 
Black Black dragon acid, giant slug spittle, 


bombardier beetle glands, or large 
quantities of strong acid. 

Several crushed electric eels, dust or 
gems from the body of a shocker, 
umpleby hair or skin, volt barbs, or 
the skeleton of a boggart. 

The sleep eye of a beholder, teeth 
from a homunculus, sprite sleep oint- 
ment, glands from the leopard head of 
a kamadan, sandman sand, two hand- 
fuls of black lotus pollen, or bark 
from a black willow. 

A crushed chunk of pure amber (trans- 
parent gold in color) the size of two 
human fists, storm giant blood, behir 
blood, or the lightning eye of a 
retriever. 

The slow eye from a beholder, chips 
from a stone golem, mustard jelly 
venom, or a large amount of sloth 
blood. 

Refer to the ingredients for red and 
green dragonmen. A mixture of one 
ingredient each from the red and green 
lists will guarantee immunity to both 
fire and poison attacks. Either ingre- 
dient alone only results in immunity 
to fire or poison. 

Powdered ghast bone, scent glands 
from several giant skunks, a large 
amount of wolverine musk, a large 
amount of uropygi (giant pedipalp) 
scent, vapor rat blood, retch plant 
juice, large amounts of fatty excretion 
of taer, or one cup of flumph spittle or 
of witherstench musk. 

Chimera blood, hell hound blood, 
salamander blood, magman blood, 
phoenix blood (one drop alone will 
suffice), a pyrolisk eye, fire drake 


blood, firenewt or fire toad blood. 
5921 


Blue 


Brass 


Bronze 


Copper 


Gold 


Green 


Red 


1449 


i 


~ Tooth, Dragon r 


Silver As with the gold dragon tooth, a silver 
dragon’s tooth also requires one ingre- 
dient from the white dragon list in order 
to achieve the dual immunity to cold 
and paralysis. Venom from a carrion 
crawler, giant Portuguese man-o-war, 
giant wasp, crystal ooze, drider, tene- 
brous worm, assassin bug, fire snake, 
garbug, grell (a large amount), tenta- 
mort, or female tiger fly is also needed. 
Ice toad blood, hoar fox blood, ice 
lizard blood, or a frost man’s eye (the 
one covered by the patch). 

After an appropriate ingredient is found and 
put into the basin, a low fire is kept burning 
under the basin, and the tooth is allowed to steep 
for one hour. The wizard must then cast a limited 
wish over the tooth and let it sit overnight in the 
mixture, Then the wizard may remove the tooth 
and perform an identify spell to determine if the 
enchantment was a success. 

Some of the possible results of using teeth 
from each of the 10 major dragon types from the 
MONSTROUS MANUAL are described below. Each 
tooth can create a fighter who possesses a level of 
fighting ability equal to half the number of Hit 
Dice the parent dragon had (round fractions up). 
Each warrior also has half the number of hit 
points that the parent dragon once had (again, 
round fractions up). The warrior will make all 
saving throws as a fighter or wizard of equal level 
(whichever is more advantageous). A dragonman 
is of the same sex as the parent dragon. 

Black Dragon: An AC 3 warrior appears, 
dressed in black chain mail with shield and 
armed with a black long sword. Chaotic evil in 
alignment, with an average Intelligence of 10 and 
a Dexterity of 15, the warrior is immune to all 
acid-based attacks and can cast a Melf's acid 
arrow spell once a day (1d4+1 damage from 
arrow, 2d4 damage from acid with saving throws 
applicable, +1 on attack rolls). 

Blue Dragon: An AC 2 warrior appears, accou- 
tered in blue plate mail with shield and armed with 
a mace. Lawful evil in alignment, with an average 
Intelligence of 12, this warrior is immune to all 
electrical attacks and can perform a shocking grasp 
spell (1d8+3 damage) once a day. 

Brass Dragon: An AC 2 warrior appears, 
armored in brass plate with a shield and flail. 
Chaotic good with some neutral tendencies like 
its sire, this warrior has an Intelligence of 14 and 
tends to be verbose and often selfish, just like a 
brass dragon. The warrior is immune to s/eep 
spells and can cast a sleep spell once a day (the 
spell has a duration of 5 rounds). 

Bronze Dragon: An AC 0 warrior appears, 
wearing bronze plate mail with shield and armed 


White 


with two javelins and a short sword. This warrior 
is lawful good with an Intelligence and Dexterity 
of 16, and is immune to electrical attacks. Once 
per day, he may cast a lightning bolt for 2d6 
points of damage to a distance of 40 feet (save vs. 
spell for half damage). 

Copper Dragon: An AC | warrior appears, 
wearing copper-colored plate mail with shield 
and armed with a morning star. He has a Dexter- 
ity of 15 and an Intelligence of 14. Like the brass 
dragonman, he tends toward avariciousness 
despite his chaotic good alignment. He is immune 
to slow spells and can cast that spell once a day 
with a 4-round duration. 

Gold Dragon: An AC —2 warrior appears, 
wearing gilt-edged plate mail and carrying a 
shield. He is armed with a knife, a brace of six 
darts, and a short (4’) fisherman’s trident. He is 
lawful good with an Intelligence of 17 and a Dex- 
terity of 18 (+3 to strike with missile weapons). 
He may be immune to fire (45% chance), poison 
gas (45%) or both (10%), and he can cast one 
flaming sphere spell a day, of 3 rounds duration, 
for 2d4 damage. 


Roll Immunities 

01—45 Fire 

46-90 Poison gas 

91—00 Fire and poison gas 


Green Dragon: An AC 2 warrior appears, 
dressed in scale mail covered over with green 
vestments and carrying a bow, a full quiver of 20 
arrows, and a hand axe. This lawful evil warrior 
has an Intelligence of 11 and a Dexterity of 18 
(+3 to strike with missile weapons). He is immune 
to poison gas attacks and can cast a stinking cloud 
spell of 2 rounds duration once a day. 

Red Dragon: An AC -1 warrior appears, 
dressed in red plate mail with a shield and carry- 
ing a broad sword, Chaotic evil in alignment, this 
warrior has an Intelligence of 16 and a Dexterity 
of 17. He is immune to all fire- and heat-based 
attacks, and can perform a burning hands spell 
once a day for 1d6+1 damage. 

Silver Dragon: An AC —1 warrior appears, 
accoutered in silver-gilt plate mail with shield 
and carrying a sabre. Lawful good in alignment, 
with an Intelligence of 16 and a Dexterity of 17, 
this warrior may be immune to cold (45% 
chance), paralysis (45%) or both (10%), and he 
can cause paralysis for 1d6 rounds by touch, once 
a day. 


Roll Immunities 
01—45 Cold 

46-90 Paralysis 

91-00 Cold and paralysis 


5921 


fe ee 


1450 


Meee —“—s—s—s—s—“‘“<—< (Mr lll ll lL, UL 


Torc of the Goddess 


M RT a 


White Dragon: An AC 3 warrior appears, 
dressed in white splint mail with shield and car- 
rying a battle axe. This is a chaotic evil, berserker 
warrior with an Intelligence of 8. In battle, there 
is a 50% chance he will go into berserker rage 
and gains +2 on attack and damage rolls for 
offensive attacks and a —2 penalty on all saving 
throws and Armor Class. He is immune to cold. 
Once per day, he can do 1d10 damage with his icy 
stare (save vs. spell for half damage), similar to 
the attack of a frost man. 


Sweet 
XP Value GP Value 
Respite: 1,000 5,000 
Stamina: 1,500 6,000 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 
This is an artificial molar of human type, made of 
a ceramic material. It must be placed in the user’s 
jaw to have effect, in place of a natural tooth. 
Several different types may be created, including 
the following. 


Roll Tooth 

1-3 Respite: When the user deliberately 
bites down on this item, it produces a 
time stop effect, which lasts for one 
full round. The sweet tooth of respite 
may be used three times per week. 

3-6 Stamina: When the user deliberately 
bites down on this item, it cures the 
user of nearly all damage sustained, 
leaving |d6 points uncured. It has 
effect even if the user is diseased, 
poisoned, or suffers any other spe- 
cial effect that would normally pre- 
vent magical curing. The sweet tooth 
of stamina may be used once a 
month. 


Torc 
A torc is a band of precious metal that is worn 
around the neck. Torcs are often decoratively 
worked and many have gems or precious inlaid 
stones. 


Belenus’s 
XP Value: 3,400 GP Value: 17,000 
Legends & Lore 
Belenus’s avatar can blind any living creature 
within sight by making his magical torc shine 
with the brightness of the sun. He can also focus 
the light for one round, inflicting 3d10 damage 
provided he hits his mark. 


of Craftsmanship 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Van Richten’s Guide to the Lich 
This cursed neck-ring cannot be removed by any 
means short of a wish, except by a lich. While the 
wearer lives, he or she receives a +2 bonus to sav- 
ing throws vs. spell of the Necromantic school. 
When the wearer dies, however, the torc automat- 
ically absorbs all of the nonweapon proficiencies 
the person possessed in life. When the ring is, in 
turn, worn by another person or by a lich, the 
skills it absorbed become available to the wearer. 
Only nonweapon proficiencies are available for 
absorption; spells and weapon proficiencies are 
excluded. However, the skill to read, write, and 
speak foreign languages and scrolls are absorbed 
and can be used by the wearer. (A conversation 
generally constitutes a use, as does reading a 
scroll or sign.) The ring cannot enhance a skill 
already possessed. 

Central to the functioning of the torc is a ruby 
set in its center. Should the gem be taken from the 
torc, all of the skills are lost and the ring becomes 
nonfunctional. 

The torc may be used to perform up to 30 func- 
tions. After the 30th task is performed, it becomes 
jewelry of 500 gp value. The torc cannot be 
recharged, but it can be put on a different victim, 
whose skills are then absorbed into the neck-ring. 
The wearer has no method of knowing how many 
proficiency uses the torc contains unless a careful 
record is kept. 

These torcs are quite commonly employed by 
liches when they have the opportunity to capture 
live people. Note that the torc does not deprive 
the living person of skills, but merely copies what 
is within the person. 


of the Goddess 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Hall of Heroes 

The torque of the goddess is a silver band worn 
about the neck. It is commonly used by druids 
and other members of the Ffolk. This torque 
functions as a ring of protection +2 and can be 
used in conjunction with any other magical rings 
except other rings of protection. Additionally, the 
torque provides its wearer with immunity to 
lycanthropy, though not damage suffered from a 
lycanthropic attack. The wearer receives a +2 to 
all attack and damage rolls against a lycanthrope. 
Although the torque does not allow a weapon that 
would not normally harm a lycanthrope to harm 
one, the wearer can harm a lycanthrope with his 
or her hands or teeth. The leaders of hunting dog 
packs used to track lycanthropes are often 
equipped with such collars. 


5926 


1451 


Torc of the Gods 


|, i 


of the Gods 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
A magical device made by Goibhnie that allows the 
holder to shapechange at will. It appears as a short 
neck-plate with a large gem of any type in its center, 


of the Gods IT 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Derties & Demicops Cyclopedia 
This magical device, made by Goibhnie, allows 
the holder to shapechange or polymorph others. 
This is similar to the other druidic torcs, but it is 
made of rare metals and bears a large gem (of a 
random type) set into the center. 


of the Gods II 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Legends & Lore 
The torc of the gods was created by Goibhniu 
himself and is only bestowed upon the most brave 
warriors of the tribes. The torc allows the wearer 
to shape change or polymorph others at will, for 
any duration desired. The torc is forged of rare 
metals and has a gem set into the front. 


of the Gods at the Tor 


XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DRAGON Magazine 102 

The tore of the gods at the Tor has all the abili- 

ties of the torc of the gods plus several addi- 


tional powers. It allows the wearer to function 
as a 10th-level druid, adding the capability to 
cast the extra spells after the torc is worn fora 
full month. In addition, the torc causes all veg- 
etation within a 240-yard radius of the wearer 
to attack any targets the wearer designates as 
the entangle spell. This power may be used 
once a day. 

However, the torc’s powers only function if 
the wearer dedicates him or herself to the 
restoration and preservation of the druid’s tem- 
ple at the Tor. The wearer must give up all 
adventuring as long as the torc is owned, or else 
give the torc to another druid who will carry on 
the task. Taking the tore with the intent to use it 
on adventuring, or hiding the tore without giv- 
ing it to another druid, is cause for divine pun- 
ishment; the DM may cause the offending druid 
to lose all spellcasting powers until such time as 
amends are made. Note that a PC druid who 
keeps the torc may do so with the willing per- 
mission of the NPC druids in the area regard- 
less of the level of the possessor—so long as he 
or she agrees to stay and protect the druid’s 
temple. The tore at the Tor grants its wearer 
protection +2. 


of Stability 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
The wearer cannot be moved, except under his or 
her own power. This includes falling, dragging, 
pushing, carrying, or impact from a weapon. The 
wearer can walk, run, jump, and climb normally, 
but no outside force can. Any attack that would 
throw or push the wearer does 1d3 points of dam- 
age instead. The wearer cannot walk on walls or 
upside-down. 


Torch 


A burning torch can illuminate a 40-foot radius 
under optimum conditions. Although very light- 
weight, a torch can be used as a bludgeoning 
weapon that causes approximately one-half club 
damage (1d3 points of damage). Flaming torches 
can be quite effective weapons against highly 
opponents such as mummies. 


of Continual Fire 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Realmspace 
These small wooden torches can light up a 15- 
foot radius sphere, providing warmth for all 
within 20 feet of the torch’s light. The item has a 
command word that, when spoken, instantly 
ignites the top of the torch. Saying the word again 
douses the fire. At no time does the tip of the item 


heat up. The item possesses 1,000 charges. Each 
5932 


B- a o 


1452 


Transportation, Chemcheaux Teleport Pad 


aa nd 


charge can last as long as two hours, unless the 
command word is spoken again during that time, 
turning the torch off. 


Continual 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 181 

Everyone has had trouble with torches burning 
out or going out when dropped. If you want to 
spare player characters this problem but don't 
want to give them wands of illumination, the con- 
tinual torch is the answer. This is an enchanted 
torch whose flame will never go out. Though 
often a vital advantage in dungeon fighting, it can 
be inconvenient if you are trying to hide the light. 
Because of the magic that powers it, the continual 
torch needs no oxygen and can operate equally 
well underwater or in a vacuum. It also gives off 
nothing in the way of smoke. As to what makes it 
different from a wand of illumination, the light it 
sheds is no more than that of an ordinary torch 
(20-foot radius). The flame can burn what it 
touches, like ordinary fire, so the torch may be 
used as a weapon in the same manner as a normal 
torch (treat as nonmagical fire), Enchanted mon- 
sters cannot be harmed unless they are specifi- 
cally vulnerable to fire. 


of Control 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The torch of control was designed to save Orlow 
the trouble of putting out the torches in his house 
at night. Though lighting and burning like a nor- 
mal torch, the torch of control extinguishes itself 
upon command. 


Fiery Brand of Masauwu 

XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
The legendary Guardian of Death, Masauwu is 
greatly feared. It is rumored that he walks across 
the entire earth every night, appearing as a dark- 
skinned giant clad in animal skins and carrying a 
flaming torch. This device is sometimes left for 
others to use, especially if they can further his 
purposes. It has horrible and awesome powers, 
but if the user impresses Masauwu by employing 
it often and with diligence, he may grant even 
greater ones. 

This is a club-like torch, 4 feet long. It is not 
normally burning when found. If lit, it can only 
be extinguished by water. 

The artifact is active when found. Each time 
the user slays another creature by using the item, 
knowledge of one power is granted (maximum 
two per day). The artifact may be wielded as a 
club. 


The artifact must be lit for any powers to func- 
tion, issuing forth from the flames, on command. 

Suggested Powers: (All spell-like abilities are 
cast at 20th-level.) Meteor swarm, obliterate 
(Range 60’; effect kills all 7-HD or fewer crea- 
tures unless they save vs. spell at —4, all others 
take 6d10 points damage or save for half damage. 
Turn (as 20th-level priest), spell damage bonus 
(+1 to all spell attacks and damage dice), detect 
invisible, teleport 

Suggested Handicaps: When the first power 
is used, Constitution score permanently drops 5 
points (minimum score of 3). When turn undead 
is first used, energy drain—user loses three ley- 
els. When spell damage bonus is first used to 
augment meteor swarm, doom is sent. User and 
artifact utterly vanish, but all equipment carried 
is lost, either when user is next struck by any 
undead creature, or when spell damage bonus is 
applied to the meteor swarm a third time. 


Suggest Penalties: 

Cause critical wounds, affects user; save vs. 
spell for half damage. 

* Attract undead: If adventuring underground or 
outdoors after dark, 2d4 undead arrive in 1d6 
rounds. All are of one type; roll 1d12 to find 
Hit Dice type. 

* Operating Cost: User loses 20% of all treasure 
owned, not counting magic. 

* Die: User drops dead instantly, no saving 
throw. (Can be normally raised.) 

* Poison gas: Artifact releases 20,000 cubic feet 
of purple gas (roughly a 30-foot cubic cloud). 
Each living creature within it must make a 
Saving throw vs. Poison, with a —2 penalty, or 
die. User is not affected by the gas. 


Gruumsh’s Everburning Torch 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Monster Mythology 
This ever-burning torch cannot be dimmed (by 
fire quench, darkness, and the like). 


Transportation 
This section details miscellaneous transportation 
devices that cannot be categorized elsewhere. 


Chemcheaux Teleport Pad 
XP Value: 80,000 GP Value: 400,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 63 
These pads are found only in Chemcheaux Magic 
Shops. By specifying a number, the person stand- 
ing on the star-shaped pad is instantly teleported 
to the pad at the specified Chemcheaux. 

If a teleport pad is stolen, Prismal and several 
of the strongest mages in his employ feleport 
themselves to the stolen pad. The mages simply 

5937 


’ a nn "ia. 


1453 


ta = —- 


a 


Transportation, Teleportation Chamber 


ania 


stand on any of the remaining teleport pads, use 
the number of the Chemcheaux from which the 
pad was stolen, and appear at the stolen pad, 
wherever it is. 

The mages who come to retrieve the item are 
never under 18th level, and all carry items of 
extreme power. If the wizards do not experience 
hostilities when they arrive, they merely pick up 
the teleport pad, and teleport themselves, via 
spell, to the appropriate shop to return the item. If 
they meet aggression, they do not hesitate to 
obliterate the opponents as quickly as possible. 


Teleportation Chamber 


XP Value P Value 
1'x1'x1’: 2,000 20,000 
2'x2'x3': 2,500 25,000 
3'x3'x6’: 3,000 30,000 
3'x5'x6': 3,500 35,000 
5'x5'x10': 4,000 40,000 
10’x10'«10': 10,000 100,000 
Tome of Magic 


These devices are used to teleport matter (as the 
Sth-level teleport spell) and vary in size from a 
box a foot square to a 10-foot-square room. They 
are usually made of ornate wood, but can be fash- 
ioned of stone or metal. In any case, the interior 
walls are always covered with mirrored tiles, 
much like disintegration chambers. A small, 
green sphere is fastened to the outside of the 
chamber near the door, and another sphere is 
positioned on an inside wall. 

To activate the device, a creature must touch 
one of the spheres while concentrating on a men- 
tal image of the destination. The chance of error 
is exactly the same as that described in the PHB 
for casting the Sth-level teleport spell, with one 
exception. If the contents of the chamber are 
being sent to another teleportation chamber, the 
chance of a mishap is 0%. 

The number of people or objects that may be 
teleported is limited only by the size of the cham- 
ber. The size of any given chamber can be deter- 
mined from the table below. 


Roll Chamber Size 
1’ cube 
2'x2'x3’ box 
3'x3'x6' box 
3'x5'x6' box 
5’x5’x10' box 
10'x10'x10' box 


DAunkbwne 


All travelers and materials in the chamber 
arrive at the same destination, which is deter- 
mined by the activator. Distance is not a factor, 
but interplanar travel is not possible by means of 
this magical machine. Each use drains the device 


of one charge. Teleportation chambers generally 
have between 1d20+80 charges and may be 
recharged. 

In Ravenloft: These arcane devices cannot 
teleport anything outside of a domain when the 
domain’s borders are closed. If they are not, then 
the chambers function normally. 


Transporter Pad 


XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Infinity Sphere 

Used in conjunction with crystal ball IT, teleport 
pads allow groups of up to five individuals to 
transport to almost any location in a crystal 
sphere. Those locations magically protected from 
scrying, however, are immune to the teleport pad, 
The teleport pad can be used once a day. 


Trap-Springer 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

This coiled steel spring is prized by adventurers. 
It is a precisely wound spiral of flattened wire, 6 
inches in diameter and 6 inches tall. When the 
appropriate commands are spoken, the trap- 
springer performs the following services for its 
owner: 

When the first command word is given, the 
device springs end over end up to 50 feet along 


any straight passage, counting paces aloud as it 
5940 


eS ee ee ee 


1454 


Tree of Life 


u EE 


goes. When the second command is given and a 
race is named (human, elf, dwarf, and so on), the 
trap-springer magically alters its weight to 
approximate an average weight for the racial type 
named, thus triggering any pressure plates or pit 
traps along its course. A third command word 
calls the device back to its owner. A final com- 
mand word extends the trap-springer vertically or 
horizontally up to 50 feet, making the device 
rigid and allowing its owner to measure the 
depth, height, and length of any straight passage, 
or to use the coil as a ladder. The trap-springer 
cannot turn corners. 


Tree 
Magical trees often grow, change with the sea- 
sons, and require light, soil, air, and water to live, 
just as normal trees do. Each magical tree has at 
least one special magical ability that can be used 
by those who live near it or attend it. 


Great 
XP Value: 20,000 GP Value: 100,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
The fragments of this tree can make various 
magic items or are in themselves magical. The 
branches provide 1d10 magic arrows or one 
sword. 


of Life 
XP Value: 40,000 GP Value: 200,000 
The Elves of Alfheim 
Most elf clans have a “Relic” called the tree of 
life. Elven life is built around this tree. Among 
other things, it is the source of many of the 
unique magic of the elves. 

Like other demihuman relics, each tree of life 
has a Keeper with 2d4 acolytes. The Keeper is 
given a domination power which allows him to 
give unquestioned orders to any clan member 
except the Clanmaster. The Keeper also commu- 
nicates with the tree by using ESP spells. 

The tree has an ongoing aura with a turn 
undead power similar to that of a Sth-level priest. 
This aura normally has a 360-foot radius, but is 
diminished by 5 feet every time one of the magi- 
cal abilities described below is used. Once the 
aura is reduced to 0 radius, the powers cannot be 
used until the aura’s radius is recovered at a rate 
of 1d6—1 feet (minimum of one) per day. 

The Keeper can also have a tree of life use five 
magical abilities: cure blindness, cure disease, 
neutralize poison, cure serious wounds, and iden- 
tify item. The tree can also be used in rituals to 
create many magical objects. Creation of the 
elven lightboat and the oil of sunlight is described 
elsewhere. Other items that can be created 
include: 


% 
Zz 
Z 
F 
Zs 
Z 
J 
2 


> 
- 


jim 


: 


Uy) 


7 


Tree of Life II 


jE S 


Elven boots: These boots are soled with the 
treated bark of the tree of life. 

Elven cloaks: These cloaks are made from the 
other leaves of the tree of life (not the ones used 
for making oil of sunlight). They are pulped, 
drawn into fibre, and woven into cloaks. 

Healing potion: Distilled, from the sap of the 
tree of life. 

Magical bows and arrows: The wood of a tree 
of life can be used for making magical bows and 
arrows. 

Elven long swords: Very small quantities of the 
sap of the tree of life are used in the tempering 
oakwood into magical elven long swords. 

All of these magical items take a long time to 
manufacture. The need for the item must first be 
established, then the tree must be prepared with 
extensive ceremonies to give up a part of itself for 
the item. Strangely enough, it takes less time to 
gain the wood for bows and arrows than it does 
for any of the other objects. 

The tree of life is intelligent, like a treant, but 
normally immobile. Keepers also know a ritual 
that allows a tree of life to move, but the ritual is 
dangerous to the tree (75% chance the spell 
works minus 5% for every level of the tree- 
keeper’s below 20, otherwise the tree dies) and 
the tree’s movement is laborious. It can travel no 
more than a mile a day. 

The original tree of iife was created by the 
Immortal Ilsundal shortly after he became an 
Immortal of the Sphere of Energy. The tree is an 
avatar of Ilsundal. The First Tree is still alive in 
the Sylvan Realm. 

Since the emigration of Mealiden Stuwatcher 
from the Sylvan Realm, there have been 10 equal 
trees of life. Each is an avatar of Ilsundal. Each of 
the major clans of Alfheim has one of these trees 
of life except Clan Feadiel, which has a daughter 
of the original tree of life. All other trees of life in 
and outside of Alfheim are “daughter” trees, 
dependent upon the existence of their “mothers.” 
Should a mother tree die, all the daughters wither 
too. 
No Alfheim elf clan can take root in any place 
without a tree of life. When a clan has grown too 
big for its immediate area or must move for some 
other reason, a living branch is taken from the old 
tree of life to move with the clan. Some of the 
clan members stay to guard the original tree until 
the move is completed (often many years). 

When the emigrating clan finds an area that 
looks appropriate for the elven way of life, the 
treekeeper finds an oak tree and grafts the tree of 
life brunch onto the oak. In a matter of months, 
the tree of life effectively remakes the oak into 
another tree of life. However, the new tree of life 
gains none of its magical powers and attributes 


for about five years. That is the critical period for 
any attempt at an elven settlement, the time when 
most such attempts have failed, if they did. 

A tree of life grown in this way is spiritually 
dependent on the tree its branch was taken from. 
If the old tree withers and dies, so does the new 
one. 

To remove this dependency, a treekeeper per- 
forms an “adoption” ceremony that takes over a 
century to prepare. The newer tree becomes inde- 
pendent of the old tree and effectively becomes 
the proper home of the avatar of Ilsundal. The 
other daughter trees of the old tree are now the 
daughters of this new tree. Of course this cere- 
mony has to be performed with the approval of all 
the daughter trees of the original tree. Though the 
ceremony has been devised, it has never had to be 
performed in the known history of the elves of 
Alfheim. 

This dependence continues through every tree 
generation. Thus, if Grandmother tree is stricken, 
then mother tree is also stricken, and baby tree is 
likewise affected. Considering the wanderings the 
elves have done over the centuries, finding the 
source of a tree of life’s illness can be an incredi- 
ble quest. 

All subsidiary trees have the same powers as 
their ancestors. No two trees can exist within 50 
miles of one another without both sickening. In 
game terms, they cannot regain their magical 
abilities after they’ve been used and soon lose 
their immortality and normal invulnerability to 
plant diseases. Elf sages think that they take too 
much out of the basic magical essence of the 
world when too close together. 


of Life II 
XP Value: 60,000 GP Value: 300,000 
DARK SUN Campaign Set 

A tree of life is a mighty, magical tree, enchanted 
by a powerful priest or wizard. The magical life 
forces of trees of life make them virtually eternal. 
The greatest trees of life are ancient—many soli- 
tary trees predate the villages around them and 
others stand in entire groves, a quiet testimony to 
the great wizards of a bygone age. Present day 
priests and wizards still create new trees to enrich 
the world or, in the case of the defilers, to pervert 
their powerful life forces to further their destruc- 
tive, evil ambitions. 

A tree of life is, in essence, a living magical 
item. It stores and channels energies from all four 
elemental planes. Thus, though wizards can cre- 
ate a tree of life, only priests and druids can tap its 
special powers. 

Special Powers: Any priest or druid in contact 
with a tree of life receives from the tree four 


spells, each of which can be cast once a day. The 
5943 


a a a 


1456 


Tree of Life II 


ee 


spells gained are heal, augury, divination, and 
magic font. 

Destroying a tree of life: A tree of life has two 
distinct parts, its physical form and its life force. 
The stump, branches, roots, or leaves of a tree of 
life make up its physical form, and are not inher- 
ently magical. The same things that would destroy 
a normal tree will destroy the physical form of a 
tree of life (chopping it down, burning it) with 
one exception. Neither climate nor terrain affect a 
tree of life. One will flourish in the middle of the 
desert or on a rocky mountain face, regardless of 
drought, severe weather, natural lightning, earth- 
quakes, and so forth. 

Destroying the tree’s life force is much more 
difficult. A tree of life at any stage of growth 
(even sprouts) has 100 hit points (10 levels of 
10 hit points each) that can only be affected by 
life-draining magic. The wizard spells vampiric 
touch, enervation, trap the soul, and energy 
drain can each drain hit points; death spell, fin- 
ger of death, limited wish, and raze can each 
snuff out three levels of the target tree; and a 
wish slays the tree. The priest spells that affect a 
tree’s life force are raise dead (and its reverse 
slay being), restoration (and its reverse, energy 
drain), and resurrection (and its reverse, 
destruction). Undead creatures that have an 
energy drain attack can affect the life force of a 
tree of life. 

Defiler magic also affects a tree’s life force. 
Every level of defiler magic cast within 100 
yards of a tree of life drains one level of life force 
from the tree. This negates the effect the spell 
would otherwise have on surrounding vegetation. 

The life force of a tree of life is completely 
snuffed if it falls below 0 levels or hit points, The 
life force cannot regenerate if either of these 
numbers falls below 0, in which case both the life 
force and the physical form of the tree die. 
Regeneration: Both a tree of life's physical form 
and its life force regenerate. If the tree’s physical 
form is damaged or destroyed, it will grow back, 
to full size. The tree will regrow at a rate of one 
quarter of its full size each week. A sprout will 
appear in one day, grow to a sapling in one week. 
It will grow to a young tree in two weeks, then to 
a full sized adult tree in three. After four weeks, 
the tree of life will revert to its true form: an 
ancient and mighty tree. No matter how many 
times the physical form of the tree is destroyed, it 
will always grow back in four weeks. 

The life force of a tree of life regenerates one 
level (10 hit points) per hour. It regenerates even 
if the life force reaches 0 points, but not if it goes 
below 0. 

Though originally created by wizards to 


combat the destruction of nature, trees of life 
5943 


1457 z 


Tree of Malice 


Al E E 


are now heavily exploited by defilers, who use 
the trees’ powerful life forces to charge their 
defiling spells. Sorcerer-kings often have large 
gardens within their cities, even within their 
palaces, where groves of trees of life are 
tended and maintained. Thus, defilers can 
exercise evil magic from their citadels without 
decimating the cities below—a desperate mea- 
sure to keep their tiny verdant belts as plenti- 
ful as possible. 


of Malice 

GP Value: 10,000 
Islands of Terror 
This is a mulberry tree. Anyone who eats the fruit 
of this tree becomes filled with evil thoughts. 
Those who eat the fruit must successfully save vs. 
spell or become chaotic evil for four days. A save 
vs. spell should be made immediately, and then 
again for each truly evil act the character com- 
mits while under the influence of the new align- 
ment. A character who fails a saving throw 
becomes chaotic evil permanently. The fruit is 
considered delightful by chaotic evils, but does 
not otherwise affect them. 


XP Value: 2,000 


of the Ravenous 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Islands of Terror 

This appears to be a cherry tree. There are a 
dozen warriors who fight eternally under this 
tree, for anyone who eats the fruit of this tree 
becomes so enamored with its taste that they 
want nothing but to eat it, and they will fight to 
the death with anyone who tries to stop them. 
Those who attempt to take and eat a cherry are 
not prevented. However, anyone who tastes the 
fruit must successfully save vs. poison or join 
the battle. The tree resurrects anyone slain in 
this battle, so the war is endless. Over the 
course of the years, the warrior’s weapons and 
armor have become broken and useless, so now 
this battle has degenerated from honorable 
combat to the pure savagery of naked barbar- 
ians punching, wrestling, and gouging each 
other like animals. Cherry blossoms continually 
fall upon their fighting forms. The sight is dis- 
gusting enough to require a horror check when 
it is first seen. 


of Unending Lamentation 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Islands of Terror 
This is a willow tree. There are several dozen 
people here weeping pitifully. They are so over- 
whelmed with grief that they cannot move. They 
stay alive, without aging, by eating the leaves of 
this tree. Those who come within 90 feet of it 


must successfully save vs. paralyzation or fall 
prey to the lamentation and join in the weeping. If 
the tree is destroyed or the people are pulled 
away, they return to normal. 


of Venom 

GP Value: 10,000 
Islands of Terror 
This grove is filled with the scent of oranges so 
sweet that it is overbearing. However, the fruit of 
this tree is highly poisonous. Any who eat of the 
fruit must successfully save vs. poison with a -6 
penalty or die immediately, and even those who 
successfully save permanently lose 1 d6 hit 
points. The many skeletons under the tree are the 
corpses of those who have eaten the fruit over the 
centuries. 


XP Value: 2,000 


Triad of Betrayal 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
There are three elements in the Triad of 
Betrayal: a coin, a golden circlet, and a dagger. 
The coin appears as a common copper piece, 
both sides depicting a fat-jowled merchant. One 
face smiles cajolingly and the other sneers 
scornfully. The circlet is simply an unadorned 
circlet of beaten gold. There are no other identi- 
fying marks to be found on the circlet, not even 
the runes or marking typical of other powerful 


magical items. The dagger is double-edged, with 
5948 


Fe ES a Se oe 


1458 


| a LUL 


Triad of Betrayal 


Ne 5 


a nasty barb at its tip and a blood groove that 
runs the length of the blade. The hilt of the dag- 
ger is wrapped in mottled snake skin, though 
none can say for certain what type of serpent it 
came from. The pommel bears a bright (some 
would say flaming) red garnet. 

The Triad of Betrayal was created for the god 
Hiddukel by the mastersmith-god Reorx. Then, 
Hiddukel imbued each of the artifacts with his 
essence and set them free in the world, to thwart 
the will of the goddess Mishakal. The Triad of 
Betrayal was Hiddukel’s answer to Mishakal’s 
Circle of Love, and each of the evil artifacts fol- 
lows its good counterpart. 

The Triad first appeared in the Age of Might, 
when Hiddukel convinced Reorx that these items 
were necessary for the world. Trusting his fellow 
god, Reorx did as he was asked, not foreseeing 
the other’s evil intent in the matter. When Hid- 
dukel enchanted the items with evil and set them 
free in the world of Krynn, he placed them where 
they would be sure to attract attention. The 
malevolent deity knew that the Triad would even- 
tually end up in the hands of those who would use 
them for evil, and Hiddukel was ready to push 
them along that path. 

The three pieces of the Triad are the coin of 
luck (also known as the coin of greed), the dagger 
of vengeance, and the golden circlet (also known 
as the circlet of pride). 

Since the Triad of Betrayal was created to 
counter items created by the goddess Mishakal, 
the pieces of the Triad constantly follow in the 
path of the Circle of Love. Hence, the Triad can 
become involved in the campaign by having the 
PCs discover one or more parts of the Circle of 
Love. 

Constant Powers: The coin acts as a luck- 
stone, sometimes adding a bonus of +2 to any die 
roll (roll 1d6: even = +0; odd = +2). 

The dagger functions as a dagger of venom, 
but secretes its own extremely potent venom 
(successfully save vs. poison with a —2 penalty or 
die). 

The circlet can command up to 8 HD of crea- 
tures, once per turn. Commands must be only one 
word, spoken in a tongue that can understood, and 
each lasts for one round. (Alternatively, the user 
can focus on a single creature of up to 4 HD and 
within 60 feet, and control that creature as long as 
concentration lasts.) When this power is used, 
Hiddukel places into the mind of the user an offer 
of great power in exchange for an oath of service. 
If the person accepts, the full range of powers 
becomes available. 

Invoked Powers: After the coin has revealed 
itself as a tool of Hiddukel, the user can cast con- 


tinual darkness 15' radius. Once per turn, the 
bearer can also cast suggestion on anyone, but 
only to sow discord. Finally, it can cast curse and 
bestow curse (the reverse of bless and remove 
curse). 

If the dagger is used for vengeance, it can be 
used to backstab at +4 to strike. It inflicts 1d4 +2 
points of damage and requires a successful saving 
throw vs. poison with a —2 penalty to avoid death. 
On a roll of 18-20, the dagger injects a second 
dose of poison, requiring a second save vs. poi- 
son at +. 

The circlet can be used to heat or chill metal at 
will and to cast modified command spells of 
seven words or less. It also adds +2 to Charisma, 
but subtracts —2 from Wisdom. 

Random Powers: The coin can create a 20- 
foot antimagic shell at Hiddukel’s whim, which 
he does to place the bearer at a disadvantage so 
that he must bargain even further for his life. In 
this way, Hiddukel ensures that no bearer of the 
coin will escape his grasp. The dagger and circlet 
have no random powers. 

Resonating Powers: The Triad has no resonat- 
ing powers. True to the name of betrayal, each of 
these items works separately only. While they 
might be used by the same person, the items can 
never add their powers together, for cooperation 
is not in the nature of Evil. 

Curse: Anyone invoking the coin of greed 's 
powers must make a successful system shock roll 
or become scarred and lose | point of Charisma. 
The user of the coin eventually becomes more 
corrupt, greedy, and jealous, until he precipitates 
his own downfall or until Hiddukel can betray 
him in a fashion befitting such an evil god. 

The dagger slowly gains control over its wield- 
ers, especially those who harbor resentment or 
jealousy. With each use, the dagger gradually 
shifts its user’s alignment toward chaotic evil (as 
follows: lawful good, neutral good, chaotic good, 
lawful neutral, neutral, chaotic neutral, lawful 
evil, neutral evil, chaotic evil). The dagger ren- 
ders the user suspicious, paranoid, and tempera- 
mental. Anytime a PC or NPC does something 
the bearer might consider a threat, the bearer 
must make a Wisdom check, minus the number 
of times the character has used the dagger. If the 
check fails, the character flies into a rage and 
must attack the offender. Finally, the dagger calls 
out to its previous owners. Any owner who has a 
combined Intelligence and Wisdom of less than 
27 pursues the dagger fanatically, seeking to pos- 
sess it again. 

Anytime someone uses the major powers of the 
circlet, they lose 1 hit point permanently. How- 
ever, these hit points can be recovered by attack- 


ing someone with bare hands, feet, or teeth—a 
5948 


fi 1459 5 


Trimia’s Catalogue of Outer Planar Artifacts 


successful hit drains 2 levels from the target and 
restores 2 hit points, up to the user’s original 
maximum. However, each time this power is 
used, the user must make a successful system 
shock roll or permanently lose 1d3 Constitution. 
If the Constitution score falls to 0, the user 
becomes a mindless spectre and the circlet moves 
on to another owner. 

This artifact ultimately corrupts the user, leav- 
ing him or her conceited, arrogant, and boastful. 
Only then can the user attract minions who share 
the user’s prejudices and hatreds. 


Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* Coin: Place it atop its counterpart in the Cir- 
cle of Love, the Hands of the Healing Spirit. 

* Dagger: Clash it against its counterpart in the 
Circle, the Armband of Trueheart’s Warding. 

¢ Circlet: Place the Ring of Nature's Love, the 
circlet’s opposite, within the boundaries of the 
circlet. 

* Return any part to the god Reorx, who wishes 
to atone for the evil his creations have 
wrought. 

¢ Coin: Remint it in the fires of the 13 volca- 
noes around Sanction. 

* Dagger: Throw it through a portal into the 
Abyss, where Takhisis reigns and tolerates no 
meddling from Hiddukel. 

* Circlet: Place it upon the head of a com- 
pletely pride-free individual of lawful good 
alignment, where it shatters into 1,001 pieces. 


Trimia’s Catalogue of 


Outer Planar Artifacts 

XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 120,000 
Tome of Magic 
This magical device is a large book bound in 
heavy wooden covers that do not reveal the title 
or nature of the work. Upon opening to the first 
page, the owner finds the title of the book along 
with a table of contents listing the various outer 
planes. 

Upon opening the book to the desired page, the 
owner finds either a blank page (25 % chance) or 
a description of a magical device (75% chance) 
that provides transportation to that particular 
plane. Along with the description of the device is 
a price ranging from 1,000 to 20,000 gp 
(1d20x1,000). If the appropriate sum is laid on 
the open book and a vanish spell is subsequently 
cast on the coins, the transport device shown 
appears in place of the cash. The page then imme- 
diately goes blank and the catalogue disappears, 
teleported to a random location on the Prime 
Material Plane. 

The transport device can deliver characters to 


the outer planes and can return them to their point 
of departure on the Prime Material Plane. Each 
transport device brings a person or persons to the 
upper layer of an outer plane. The point of arrival 
in the plane is left to the DM and usually changes 
each time the device is used. 

Each device has a command word that is 
always the name of the plane associated with the 
device. Unless otherwise noted, anyone touching 
the device or touching the person who holds the 
device is transported to the Upper Plane of the 
Outer Plane named, 

Each transport device can be used once a day. 
With each use, there is a 5% chance the device 
will malfunction, sending the characters to the 
desired plane, but with the device itself disap- 
pearing. 

Abyss: Pazunia, the uppermost layer of the 
innumerable layers of the Abyss, can be reached 
through the use of a circular black cloth that 
looks like a portable hole. The cloth is 3 feet in 
diameter and can be folded to fit inside a pocket. 
When the cloth is spread on the ground and the 
command word is spoken, the cloth becomes a pit 
that leads to the plane. The cloth exists as a pit for 
1 turn, then returns to its state as a piece of cloth. 
It does not follow travelers to the Abyss. 

Acheron: The device used to reach Acheron is 
a 2-inch cube of black onyx. The cube always 
appears as a puzzle inside a black sack. The puz- 
zle is made up of 43 small pieces, which must be 
fit together to form the cube. When complete, the 
command word must be spoken. Solving the puz- 
zle require an Intelligence check at half a crea- 
ture’s Intelligence score. Each attempt to solve 
the puzzle requires 1d6 turns. Once the cube has 
been used to teleport, it falls to pieces. The pieces 
all reappear in the sack, wherever it might be. To 
use the device again, the pieces must be reassem- 
bled. 

Arborea: The device used to reach the Plane 
of Arborea is a silver chariot. The chariot can 
comfortably hold four passengers and their gear 
or eight passengers without equipment. A team of 
four horses must be attached to the chariot; when 
the chariot is in motion and the command word is 
spoken, the horses, chariot, passengers, and gear 
are conveyed to Arborea. The chariot arrives in 
motion. 

Arcadia: Arcadia’s transportation device is a 
palm size metal sculpture representing the out- 
lines of geometrical shapes. The largest shape is a 
six-sided cubic cage made of 12 silver rods. 
Within this cube is a four-sided pyramid, also 
made of silver rods. Inside the pyramid is a circle 
of silver. 

Baator: Baator can be reached by using spe- 


cial pieces of blood-red coal. When one of these 
5953 


= 1460 F 


= E a A 


Trimia’s Catalogue of Outer Planar Artifacts 


coals is lit or dropped into a flame, a ball of fire 
flares out from the coal. It does no damage, but 
transports all creatures and objects within 20 feet 
to Avernus. No command word is needed for the 
effect to take place. 

The Beastlands: A leaf sculpted of gold is the 
device used to arrive in The Beastlands. The leaf 
is about 2 inches long and is wrought in fine 
detail. 

Bytopia: This device appears to be a feature- 
less cube of silver measuring 3 inches on a side. 
If it is carefully examined, four small, nearly 
invisible buttons will be visible. If the four but- 
tons are pressed in the correct order, the cube 
splits in half. (The correct order can be deter- 
mined through the use of legend lore and similar 
spells.) The device will teleport to Bytopia when 
half the cube is held in each hand and the com- 
mand word is spoken. The travelers arrive in 
Dothion, considered the topmost plane. The two 
halves of the cube must be reassembled before it 
can again be used. 

Carceri: This device is a necklace of dull, red- 
dish pearls. A character who wears the necklace 
and speaks the command word will be trans- 
ported (along with anyone touching him) to Oth- 
rys, the topmost layer of the plane. 

Elysium: The device used to reach this plane is 
a sturdy currach, a primitive vessel made from 
thick hides stretched over a wood-and-wicker 
frame. This device functions as a normal ship, 


1461 


with a seaworthiness rating of 95%. If anyone 
touches the ship’s mast and speaks the word Ely- 
sium, the boat, its passengers and crew, and all 
cargo are transported to the Oceanus River in the 
plane of Amoria. 

Gehenna: Characters who wish to travel to 
Gehenna must gather in a small, enclosed room 
with this magical urn of silver and bronze. A 
flame must be lit within the urn using materials 
that cause a great deal of smoke. When the room 
is so choked with smoke that breathing is almost 
impossible, the command word may be spoken. 
This transports everyone and everything in the 
room, including the urn, to Khala, the uppermost 
layer of Gehenna. 

The Gray Waste: The device used to reach 
The Gray Waste is an iron keelboat. When any 
character on the boat speaks the command word, 
the keelboat and all its passengers are transported 
to the river Styx in Oinos, the uppermost layer of 
The Gray Waste. 

Limbo: Limbo is reached through the use of 
a magical mirror. When a person stands before 
the mirror, he or she sees a normal reflection. 
The reflected world in the background, how- 
ever, is in utter chaos—the bricks from the wall 
behind the character float in the air, flames drift 
across the room, gold and silver pieces break 
apart and wander aimlessly. If the command 
word is spoken as a character looks into the 
mirror, he is transported to any of the layers of 
Limbo. The mirror does not travel to Limbo. 
Another means of returning to the Prime Mater- 
ial Plane must be found. 

Mechanus: The device used to transport to 
the Plane of Mechanus is a small pocket watch, 
a device of unspeakable rarity. The watch keeps 
perfect time according to the yearly cycle of the 
sun and never needs winding. The timepiece is 
solid gold and has two long, thin gold chains 
that run through a metal loop at the top of the 
watch. 

Mount Celestia: A featureless sphere of gold 
is used to travel to Mount Celestia. The sphere is 
3 inches in diameter and would appear to be noth- 
ing more than a valuable bauble if not for the 
golden glow it always radiates. The glow has the 
properties of a continual light spell. 

Pandemonium: This device is a jar perpetu- 
ally filled with black pitch. When the pitch is 
spread on a stone wall and the command word 
spoken, a portal forms in the wall, leading to a 
cavern in Pandesmos. The pitch evaporates after 
five rounds and magically reappears in the jar. 

Ysgard: The device used to reach Ysgard is a 
prism approximately 3 inches in length. To oper- 
ate the device, the prism must be used outdoors to 


create a rainbow on the ground. When the com- 
5964 


~ Tub, Bath r 
of Lard 


mand word is spoken, the rainbow grows out of 
the ground and rises up into the sky. The rainbow 
lasts for one turn. Anyone who steps onto the 
rainbow is whisked up the colored path and into 
the Plane of Ysgard. 

In Ravenloft: The catalogue works almost as 
described. The sole exception is that there is 
almost always an additional item required besides 
the money to acquire the device. Some sample 
items are a drop of vampire’s blood, a feather 
from a wereraven, a stone from the temple of 
Gehenna, and so on. If some money and the items 
are placed upon the book, the magical device 
appears. 

The device that appears is one of the few ways 
to leave the Demiplane of Ravenloft. However, in 
Ravenloft there is a 20% chance of a malfunction, 
far greater than the normal 5% chance. The 
device vanishes when used, whether successful or 
not. If unsuccessful, the character remains in 
Ravenloft. 


Tub 


A magical tub is 3 feet in diameter, has sides 18 
inches high, and rope handles. It is made entirely 
of plain, unmarked wood; encumbrance is 30 
pounds. 


Bath 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Wizard's Challenge 
This large oval tub is made of fine wood trimmed 
with brass. At the pronunciation of the command 
words “bath time,” the tub fills with warm water. 
When the user says “bath over,” the water drains 
away. It can be used three times a day. 


of Fat 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This tub appears identical to a tub of lard, but 
when commanded to produce lard it causes the 
user to increase in weight by 50% instead. The 
weight appears simply as extra pounds of flesh. 
The extra weight breaks the straps of any armor 
worn, causing it to fall off immediately—this 
does not harm any enchantments and repairs are 
easily made by a leatherworker for a moderate 
fee. Clothing worn beneath the armor bulges but 
is not harmed. The extra fat can be removed 
quickly only with a heal spell, a wish, or a remove 
curse from a caster of 26th level or higher. The 
fat may also be removed by fasting for one week, 
but the character’s Strength, Dexterity, and Con- 
stitution drop to 3 during this time; he or she 
regains | point per day of full rest thereafter until 
back to normal. 


XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When this tub is touched and commanded to 
function, it creates 1 cubic foot of greasy lard. 
Anyone handling the lard must wipe it off care- 
fully afterward or have a 75% chance of dropping 
any item picked up or used (weapon, wand, any- 
thing solid). The lard may be smeared on 100 
square feet of surface; any creature crossing that 
area thereafter must move at half normal rate and 
must make a saving throw vs. spell or fall. A 
fallen victim cannot rise by physical effort but 
may crawl off the larded area in one round. The 
lard vanishes in one hour; the tub may be used 
once a day. 


of Sailing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This tub is identical to a tub of lard, but cannot 
create anything. If placed in any liquid, it floats 
and can support up to 500 pounds of weight with- 
out sinking. If a creature sits in the tub and com- 
mands it to sail, it moves at a movement rate of 
18. It is not affected by wind but is easily dam- 
aged (5 hull points, AC 9). 


Taryn’s 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 

Although this item appears as an ordinary 
wooden bucket, when the command word is spo- 
ken it expands into a wooden tub filled with 
comfortably hot water capable of holding up to 
six people. Twenty-five percent of the time, a 
wooden shelf also appears, it is attached to the 
tub and has chilled goblets of white wine resting 
on it. The tub shrinks back into a wooden bucket 
upon command. 


of Washing 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

Upon command, this tub magically fills with 
soapy water. Any items placed in the water and 
removed immediately are completely clean and 
dry; the water removes stains or dyes, even if 
magical, and works on creatures and objects. The 
tub functions once a day; the water disappears 
one hour after its creation. 


Tunic 
A tunic is a simple, straight garment similar to a 
modern “T-shirt.” Usually sleeveless, tunics were 
worn by all classes of Roman and medieval soci- 
eties, chiefly differenced by the ostentation of the 


embroidery work embellishing them. 
5970 


1462 


Bo nS, -_____ _____________ =, ee 


x Turret r 


of Glory 
GP Value: 40,000 
Twilight Calling 
The tunic of glory has the powers of an antimagic 
shell (as the spell), useable three times a day, and 
haste (as the spell) useable twice a day. 


Wizard’s 


XP Value: 4,000 


XP Value: 500 GP Value: 3,500 

The Emirates of Ylaruam 
This elegantly embroidered tunic was created by 
a master craftsman and wizard for a sultan. Its 
power is to reveal the silhouette of one’s perfect 
mate. The tunic was stolen from the craftsman by 
the sultan’s jealous vizier, who subsequently dis- 
appeared. 


Turban 

A turban is a long strip of fabric wrapped around 
the head. It is common in the Land of Fate. If 
wrapped around a skull cap, a turban forms a flat- 
tened sphere. If wrapped around a fez or other 
support, the turban is taller, rounder and more 
impressive. A turban wrap is often held in place 
with a pin or brooch, particularly if the wearer is 
wealthy or powerful. 


Feather 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Secrets of the Lamp 
This magical turban, made of woven peacock 
feathers, can create a gust of wind up to three 
times a day. In addition, it allows the wearer to 
assume the form of a wind shadow once a day 
and to summon a wind carpet once a month. 


of Multiplication 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
Assassin Mountain 
This turban is permanently enchanted to create 
mirror images of the user once a day as if cast by 
a 12th-level wizard. 


of Silence 
GP Value: 3,000 
Assassin Mountain 
This turban is enchanted to radiate a permanent 
silence, 15' radius, around the wearer. Silence 
can be activated up to three times a day and can 
be canceled by the wearer’s mental command. 


XP Value: 600 


of Tusmit 
XP Value GP Value 
Brown: 500 2,000 
Gray: 1,000 3,000 
Black: 1,000 2,000 
Red: 1,000 2,500 
White: 1,500 3,000 


GREYHAWK Adventures 

These colorful garments have been used for 
many purposes in Tusmit. Some of these tur- 
bans have brought their owners great wealth 
and fame, while others have caused their own- 
ers terrible suffering. Each turban can summon 
one of the geniekind each week. The genie’s 
reaction and the course of the action is decided 
in play. There are five turbans, each of a differ- 
ent color: 


Roll Color Turban Type 

01-20 Brown Turban of Jann Summoning 
21-40 Gray Turban of Djinni Summoning 
41-60 Black Turban of Dao Summoning 
61-80 Red Turban of Efreeti Summoning 
81-00 White Turban of Marid Summoning 


The summoned genie must obey the first order 
of the turban wearer. From then on there is a 5% 
cumulative chance per additional order that the 
summoned genie may ignore the order and attack 
the summoner. There is no way to tell how many 
times a turban has been used. If the genie is 
killed, the turban is useless. 


Turret 
XP Value GP Value 
Light +1: 800 4,000 
Light +2: 1,600 8,000 
Light +3: 3,200 16,000 
Medium +1: 1,000 5,000 
Medium +2: 2,000 10,000 
Medium +3: 4,000 20,000 
Heavy +1: 2,000 10,000 
Heavy +2: 4,000 20,000 
Heavy +3: 8,000 40,000 


War Captain’s Companion 
Somewhat rare items, magically enhanced tur- 
rets are a highly desirable addition to any ship 
or stronghold. About 10% of all magical turrets 
are magically stabilized. They are nonprotec- 
tive, but give a bonus to the attack roll of the 
weapon. 

Most magical turrets are protective turrets. 
These turrets add a magical plus to the standard 
—4 AC bonus that nonmagical protective turrets 
provide. For example, a turret +2 would give the 
crew a total AC adjustment of —6; an AC 7 crew 
would be AC 1. 


Secondly, the turret takes the brunt of any 
5977 


A a er 


1463 


Tvashtri’s Pinwheel 


magical attack. If it makes its saving throw, then 
the protected weapon is unharmed and the crew 
saves for half damage or none, with a bonus of 
+4. If the turret fails, its protective value is 
destroyed and the crew and the weapon save nor- 
mally. Magical turrets use the same amount of 
space as nonmagical turrets. 

The table above assumes the magical turret is 
ceramic. Subtract 25% from the values if the tur- 
ret is bone or thick wood. Add 25% if the turret is 
metal. Stone turrets are possible only to races that 
can manipulate stone (such as xorn and pech). 

Turrets are usually used with ballistae, cata- 
pults, and jettisons. 


Tvashtri’s Pinwheel 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
Legends & Lore 
The avatar carries a pinwheel that negates magic 
within 100 feet when he blows on it (as an 
antimagic shell). 


Tzolo’s Guardian 
XP Value: 16,000 GP Value: 80,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 37 

This powerful, sorcerous, human size creature, a 
gift to Tzolo from evil elementals, is a deadly 
adversary. It wields a bastard sword +2 that turns 
those it strikes to stone on a natural 20. The 
guardian has 18/99 Strength (+2 to attack rolls 
and +6 to damage with the sword). It attacks with 
the blade for 1d8+8 points of damage (including 
Strength and magical bonuses), and a combina- 
tion bite/tusk attack for 2d6 points of damage. 
These attacks can be directed at two separate 
individuals simultaneously. 

The guardian can survive in both earth and 
water elements. At will, it can cast detect good, 
detect invisibility, water breathing (on another), 
and dispel magic (at the 16th level). Three times a 
day it may cast fly (12th level), passwall, water 
walk, and ice storm. Once a day it can cast con- 
jure elemental (earth or water, 12-HD), transmute 
rock to mud, transmute mud to rock, stone shape, 
and stone tell. The oval stone it possesses allows 
it to cast a sink spell once a week and wall of 
stone spell twice a day. 

The guardian is not affected, either directly 
or indirectly, by any earth or water, therefore it 
is unharmed by certain spells (transmute rock to 
mud, flesh to stone, earthquake), cannot be 
drowned, and cannot be attacked by creatures 
from the Elemental Planes of Earth or Water or 
the Paraelemental Plane of Ooze. The guardian 
takes half or no damage from cold, acid, and 
electricity. If poisoned, it is unaffected and can 
return the toxin in a spray through its trunk (a 
cloud of poison 8 feet in diameter, which dissi- 


pates in two rounds). It is immune to all illu- 
sions and has a magic resistance of 50%, A +2 
or better weapon is needed to hit the guardian, 
and it regenerates 3 hp per round. After it is 
slain, the guardian continues regenerating and 
revives when it reaches 50 hp to seek out and 
destroy its attackers. 

Tzolo 5 guardian can be permanently slain only 
if burned by magical fire after it is reduced to 0 
hp. Until it is permanently slain, none of its pos- 
sessions can be removed; they are attached to the 
creature. When it has been permanently slain, the 
creature and its possessions are turned back into 
marble. At this point, the oval stone may be taken 
from Tzolo 5 guardian. 


5979 


1464 


Universal Solvent TON 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,000 
Unearthed Arcana 

Also known as the ultimate solvent, this strange, 
magical liquid appears to be nothing more 
remarkable than some sort of minor oil or 
potion. In fact, upon first examination it seems 
to have the properties of both oil of slipperiness 
and a potion of delusion. However, it is applied 
to any form of adhesive or sticky material, the 
solvent immediately dissolves it. Thus, for 
instance, the effects of sovereign glue are 
immediately negated by this liquid, as are those 
of any other forms of cement, glue, or adhesive. 
The area of effect of this liquid is 1 cubic foot 
per ounce, and a typical container holds 27 
ounces. If the liquid is carefully distilled to 
bring it down to half of its original volume, then 
each ounce will actually dissolve 1 cubic foot 
of material, organic or inorganic, just as if a 
disintegrate spell had been employed. To find if 
a target is affected by this concentrated solu- 
tion, a successful attack roll is required, and the 
subject is then also entitled to a saving throw 
vs. spell. Inanimate objects are automatically 
affected by the solution; however, for such 
items of magical nature a saving throw vs. spell 
applies. 


Unseen Ship Crew 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 25,000 
War Captain’s Companion 

When activated, this magical item (often a bosun’s 
whistle) summons an unseen crew that increases 
the size of a ship’s crew by 50%. The unseen crew 
are effectively unseen servants that perform 
sailors’ tasks (manning sail booms, working rud- 
ders, manning oars, scrubbing decks, and the 
like, depending upon ship design), The item can 
be used once per day for 1d4+4 turns, but cannot 
be activated in the phlogiston. 

Though the unseen crew is invisible, some of 
them can be seen occasionally as they pass 
through the magical currents of the spelljamming 
helm. Though these sightings may occur as often 
as once per turn, the glimpse is only for a brief 
second. 

The unseen ship crew works stations that are 
not currently manned. If an oar is unused, the 
unseen crew mans the oar, but if a three-man 
oar was currently manned by only one individ- 
ual, they would let it alone, manning something 
else instead, The unseen crew takes propor- 
tional losses as if they were 1 HD sailors 
(including area effect weapons), but can be 
used the next day. 

Captains who possess this magical item tend 


VOIR 


Um of Hindsight 


j to have very superstitious crews. When- 
S% ) ever the ship comes into port, the crew 


ASE) often speaks of ghosts manning the 


sails, throwing a life preserver over- 
board to a fallen comrade (whether to an unseen 
crewman or a real one), or looking out from the 
crow’s nest. 


Urn 


An urn is a vase with a rounded bottom and a 
wide mouth. Urns have round or fluted bases to 
keep them upright. Most urns also are equipped 
with tight-fitting covers. These vases tend to be 
highly decorative, and usually are made of pre- 
cious materials or heavily ornamented or both. 


of Ashes 

XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This ornamental container is 18 inches tall and 4 
inches in diameter. When found, it contains 
ashes, the remains of some creature or another 
(determined at random). If the ashes are burned 
in reverse by using blackflame, the immolated 
creature reforms and awakens. It understands and 
obeys the user for a month and a day, or until 
slain. 


of Awakening 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This urn is identical to an urn of ashes, but when 
the ashes are restored by blackflame, they form a 
liquid. This magical fluid can awaken any sleep- 
ing creature, even if powerfully cursed or forced 
to sleep. The urn then becomes nonmagical but is 
worth 1,000 gp if sold. If the ashes are removed, 
they are useless. 


of Curses 

XP Value: — GP Value: 800 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This urn appears to be and functions as an urn of 
ashes. However, any priest within 30 feet loses 
some ability to turn undead, Any result of “T” 
(an automatic T or a successful roll for a num- 
ber) has no effect; only “D” results apply nor- 
mally (see Table 47 in the DMG). If the ashes 
are recovered by blackflame, an undead creature 
(determined at random) is created and attacks 
the user. 


of Hindsight 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Wonders of Lankhmar 
This urn allows the holder to see into the past of 
all those who are within a 10-foot radius. The 


glimpse is so completely accurate that the 
5985 


a e O 


1465 


S aE. 


~ Urn of Water Purification E 


holder can even smell the odors and taste the 
tastes of the past being viewed. These feelings 
from the past are so vivid that the holder is able 
to recall all of them as long as he is in contact 
with the urn. 

The urn, unfortunately, has a side effect. While 
the possessor has it, there is a cumulative 1% 
chance per use that the user goes insane. This 
insanity manifests itself as egomania and acute 
paranoia. The user eventually believes that even a 
spouse or dearly loved partner is out to steal the 
magical item, or is out to kill him or her. The side 
effects wear off in the number of weeks equal to 
the number of times the item was used. In other 
words, if the item was used ten times, and the 
user became insane, it would require 10 weeks 
for the user to become sane again, once the urn 
was taken from his or her possession. 


of Water Purification 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
War Captain’s Companion 
This magical copper urn purifies all water placed 
into it. It has the capacity to hold 30 gallons of 
fluid, which it purifies at the rate of one gallon 
per turn. (In the phlogiston, the purification rate 
drops to one gallon per hour.) The urn removes 
all trace of pollutants, disease, alcohol, poison, 
salt, dirt, and every other known and unknown 
thing from the water. All that is left of 100% pure 
water—the urn even turns milk or juice into pure 
water. 

The urn looks much like a large jar, with sev- 
eral brass bands reinforcing its curving sides. It 
has a copper lid which is used primarily to keep 
excess dirt out, and to keep the water from evapo- 
rating too quickly. The lid is nonmagical. 


Utensil 


Utensils are a general group of items that are 
used during meals. 


Roll Utensil Type 


01-20 Butter Knife 
21—40 Carving Knife 
41—60 Fork 
61-80 Serving Spoon 
81-00 Sipping Spoon 
Birth Spoon 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This silver spoon functions only when placed in 
the mouth of a baby not more than one day old. It 
may be immediately removed but must be kept in 
the dwelling where the babe was born. Sometime 
in the first year of life, the lucky baby inherits 
from a long-lost, forgotten relative a fortune of at 


least 1,000 gp but not more than 50,000 gp. If the 
spoon is stolen, a curse of bad luck falls upon the 
baby, and all money and items owned are lost. 


of Cleanliness 
XP Value: 50 GP Value: 250 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This item may be any utensil or plate. When left 
in a bucket overnight, the object sheds all dirt, 
which gathers on the bottom of the bucket to be 
discarded. While in the bucket, the object cannot 
be reached by insects, and no odor is emitted. 


of the Cultured Palate 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 90 
These eating utensils are usually of the highest 
quality workmanship, though they may be made 
of almost any material. They consist of a cup, 
knife, fork, and spoon, normally very ornate and 
usually carried in a special pouch or box. 

When used, the utensils make any food or 
drink—no matter what its quality or age—taste 
like any food or drink the consumer desires. The 
food is as nutritious and satisfying as the imag- 
ined meal. The quantity of the food is not affected. 


of Etiquette 
GP Value: 3,500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This item is an ordinary-appearing set of cutlery 
that enables the user to eat in accordance with the 
standards or manners of any group with whom he 
or she shares a meal. 


XP Value: 700 


of Eating 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
Perhaps to avoid tasting the food, Orlow also cre- 
ated the spoon of eating that enabled him to eat 
an entire day’s rations in one bite without indiges- 
tion. 


of Medication 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When filled with honey and served to any crea- 
ture, this spoon removes any and all ordinary dis- 
eases afflicting the recipient. It does not cure 
lycanthropy or magical diseases. The spoon may 
be used magically once a day. 


of Mixing 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
The Complete Wizard’s Handbook 
This spoon increases the chance of successfully 
combining magical potions to create a new 


effect. When combining potions as per the 
5993 


AO EE N a N Se 


1466 


{<n å e 


_ 


y Utensil of Sugar y- 


Potion rules in the DMG, the percentile dice 
roll on Table 111 is modified by +10 when 
using the spoon of mixing. Treat all results 
greater than 00 as 00. Note that by using the 
spoon of mixing, there is no chance that the 
combined potions create an explosion, a lethal 
poison, or a mild poison. 


Murlynd’s 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 4,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This unremarkable eating utensil is typically 
fashioned from horn. It radiates a dim aura of 
conjuration if detection is performed success- 
fully. If the spoon is placed in an empty con- 
tainer, a bowl, cup, or dish, the vessel will fill 
with a thick, pasty gruel, Although this sub- 
stance has a flavor similar to warm, wet card- 
board, it is highly nourishing. It contains 
everything necessary to sustain any herbivo- 
rous, omnivorous, or carnivorous creature. The 
spoon will produce sufficient gruel each day to 
feed up to four humans. 

In a DRAGONLANCE Campaign: Murlynd's 
spoon does not exist on Ansalon. 


Musical 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This item is useless by itself, but when two musi- 
cal spoons are rapped together, they have several 
effects: 
* All within 30 feet of the noise are immune to 
magical songs and other sound-based effects 
(such as the charming song of a harpy). 
* The user may dispel any one silence 15' 
radius priest spell effect within 120 yards if 
desired, even if the spoons are used within 
silence. 
* The user may cast a silence 15’ radius spell to 
a range of 180 yards. 

The spoons function as long as they are rapped 
together, but only one silence spell may be cast or 
negated each turn. 


of Sticking 
XP Value: 50 GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This cursed spoon appears and is used as a spoon 
of medication. However, in addition to curing dis- 
ease, it also sticks in the recipient’s mouth and 
cannot be removed until a remove curse is applied 
by a caster of at least 15th level. The victim can- 
not speak or cast spells with verbal components 
until the spoon is removed. 


of Stirring 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The spoon of stirring was developed to aid in 
baking. On command, this spoon stirs any sub- 
stance up to the consistency of bread dough until 
ordered to stop. 


of Stirring II 

GP Value: 1,500 
Unearthed Arcana 
Appearing as a normal spoon of an unremarkable 
sort, this instrument does not radiate magic 
unless it is dipped into a magical potion. Immedi- 
ately upon being inserted into a magical liquid, 
the spoon gives off a burst of the alteration 
magic. The liquid is then magically altered into 
some other potion, and the spoon seems to be 
normal again. The spoon can be taken out of the 
liquid and used repeatedly. If the same potion is 
treated thus more than three times, the liquid 
loses all of its magical properties, becoming a 
noisome liquor of no value whatsoever. To find 
the type of potion produced by the spoon, use the 
random tables in this encyclopedia or those in the 
DMG. If the result is the same as the previous 
contents, then the appearance of the liquid has 
changed and the strength of the stuff is twice 
(01-50) or half normal (51-00). 


XP Value: 500 


of Sugar 

XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
Upon command, the spoon of sugar fills with 
magical sweetener. The sugar attracts the atten- 
tion of all normal and magical insects within 30 
feet. Giant-sized insects are permitted a saving 
throw vs. spell to resist the effect, but with a —4 
penalty to the roll. When attacking an attracted 
insect, the attacker gains a +4 bonus to the first 
attack roll, but the insect is then free from the 
magical attraction and its effects, even if the 
attack misses. An attack on one insect does not 
disturb the others. If sugar is removed from the 
spoon, it lasts for one turn. If the sugar is eaten by 
insects while in the spoon, the spoon is destroyed. 
The spoon produces the magical sugar once a 
day. 


5999 


1467 


Vainamoinen’s Tears 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Gods, Demigods, and Heroes 


When and if Vainamoinen’s avatar cries, he spills 
2d10 tears that turn into 5,000 gp value blue 
pearls. You will not find them just lying around 
Lapland though, for he collects these “gems.” 


Vampire Sheath 
XP Value: 25,000 GP Value: 125,000 
Nightstorm 
This device can only be created by Ultimate-level 
Immortals; Thanatos is the only Immortal known 
to have used it. 

The sheath can imprison an Immortal victim. It 
draws on the victim’s own power to trap the pris- 
oner in a pocket dimension, accessible only 
through the Time Stream. Whenever the victim 
tries to exert power, the sheath feeds on the power 
and shifts the victim back a few seconds in time 
to the point before he or she decided to use the 
power. Thus the victim remains perpetually on 
the verge of action, without acting. 

To an onlooker in the Time Stream, the shift 
backward in time makes the sheath appear to 
recede. All objects that move forward in time 
appear to approach the observer. 

Thanatos trapped the Immortal Asterius in 
this sheath shortly after the other Immortals 
were lured back to the headwaters of the Emer- 


Veil of X-Ray Vision 


ald River, Asterius, though, cleverly 
foiled some of the sheath’s restrictions. 
By reciting certain spells backwards, 
Asterius provoked the sheath’s move- 
ment back in time—and that, in turn, repeated 
the recitation of the spell forward, triggering its 
effects. 


Vane of Location 


XP Value GP Value 
Greater: 2,000 10,000 
Lesser: 1,000 5,000 


War Captain’s Companion 

This divination device is usually mounted on the 
foredeck, in the vicinity of a spelljamming helm, 
or in sight of the navigator. To activate the greater 
vane, the helmsman merely needs to ask it where 
a certain location is—crystal sphere, planet, or 
similar celestial body, and the vane of location 
points in the immediate direction (even up or 
down). 

The vane points in the direction of the body 
last requested until the ship arrives at that loca- 
tion; at which point it spins around slowly, wait- 
ing for its next command. The vane of location 
cannot be used to find the location of a specific 
individual or item. If the vane is set for a specific 
location, and a new location is wanted, a dispel 
magic spell must be cast on the vane to make it 
ready to receive the new command. 

If a location specified cannot be determined 
from another (two bodies with the same name), 
the crystal sphere name must be given as well. 
Lesser vanes, of half value, are keyed to the coun- 
tries and cities of specific spheres. 


Veil of X-Ray Vision 

XP Value: 1,000 “GP Value: 5,000 
Thieves of Lankhmar 
This appears to be a strip of fine, diaphanous 
cloth about 18 inches long and 4 inches wide. If 
bound over the eyes like a blindfold, it endows 
any wearer with the ability to see clearly 
through objects as though those objects were 
clear glass. The thickness through which the 
wearer can see depends on the material 
observed through. 


Material Thickness 
Lead % inch 
Other metals 2 inches 
Stone 2 inches 
Wood 6 inches 
Other common building materials 6 inches 
Flesh 12 inches 


It also gives the wearer the ability to see clearly 


in fog, smoke and other visibility-reducing 
6003 


4 1469 A 


Vest of Attraction 


| ee 


conditions (whether natural or magically 
induced). The veil has a number of obvious 
uses for a creative thief: seeing through walls 
or into locked boxes, and the like. It also gives 
thieves a 30% bonus to their Open Lock rolls— 
to a maximum of 98%—whether the locks are 
key or combination (the thief can see the tum- 
blers within the lock). It gives nonthieves a 
10% chance to pick a lock (they still require 
suitable tools, however). The veil can be used 
for a maximum period of 20 minutes (two 
turns) per day after which time it ceases to 
function for an entire day. 


Vest 
A vest is a close-fitting, waist-length piece of 
clothing. It is sleeveless, buttons tightly at the 
midriff, and opens at the chest to display a bit of 
shirt, and, perhaps, a neckerchief or cravat 
beneath. 


of Attraction 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This cursed vest functions as a vest of missile 
protection but also causes all incoming missiles 
to score maximum damage per hit (each arrow 
automatically inflicting 6 points, a sling stone 4 
points, and so on) The vest cannot be removed 
until a remove curse is applied. 


of Missile Protection 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This cloth vest is of quite normal appearance but 
absorbs 10 points of damage per round from nor- 
mal missiles. Excess damage affects the wearer 
normally. The vest is useless when worn under 
metal armor and cannot fit over it; it functions 
normally when worn under leather armor or in 
addition to normal clothing or robes. It has no 
effect on Armor Class. magical attack forms, or 
enchanted missiles such as magical arrows. 


Vestments of Power 


XP Value GP Value 
Greater: 3,000 30,000 
Lesser: 1,800 18,000 


Halls of the High King 
Priests of many faiths in the Realms possess cere- 
monial robes. Almost 25% of all 7th-level or 
higher priests encountered in their homes, tem- 
ples, or holy places will have access to magical 
robes. In most cases, these are vestments of 
power. Appearing only as unusually fine religious 
garments of the style, fabric, and hue normal to 
the faith, these robes possess magical powers as 
detailed below and may be worn and used in con- 


junction with other protective devices and magic 
items. 

Lesser Vestments: The wearer receives a +3 
Armor Class bonus, and a +4 bonus to all saving 
throws, while wearing the vestments. No attack 
or damage bonuses are gained. The vestments 
also provide the wearer with protection equiva- 
lent to the 3rd-level wizard spell protection from 
normal missiles, the |st-level wizard spell feather 
fall and a ring of fire resistance. 

Greater Vestments: These robes provide all 
the powers and protections of lesser vestment and 
two additional powers, both usable three times in 
any one-day period. These powers are true seeing 
and dimension door. The former power is equiva- 
lent to the Sth-level priest spell (no ointment is 
required), while the latter power is equal in effi- 
cacy to the 4th-level wizard spell, as if cast by a 
10th-level wizard (the one-round recovery period 
is retained). 

Greater vestments possess a secret command 
word. If spoken when the robes are touched but 
not worn, the robes will become invisible, and 
levitate in place, not moving unless physically 
snatched from their waiting location. The com- 
mand word must be spoken backwards within 
60 feet of their present location (they may have 
been moved from their original location by any 
number of disturbances) to make them reappear 
and cease levitation. Invisibility and levitation 


can continue for centuries if not commanded to 
6007 


°°», =<“  ° 


Dn i 


1 


470 


Violets of Pain 


aa tina’ a 


cease. Note that the protective powers of a 
greater vestment do not function while it is 
invisible and levitating. 


Vial of Durance 
XP Value: 3000 GP Value: 15,000 
Nightrage 

This small iron vial, 3 inches long and | finger’s 
breadth in diameter, can confine one or more 
magical creatures indefinitely. The tube contains 
no opening, but the silver runes engraved on it 
often include the words of command necessary to 
trap and release a captive. It often appears as an 
ornament on a necklace or bracer. 

When the user holds the vial within 6 feet of a 
magical creature and speaks the command word 
of trapping, all magical creatures in the vicinity 
must make a saving throw vs. spell. A failed roll 
means the creature is absorbed into the vial. The 
user and all nonmagical creatures are immune to 
the effect. 

When empty of captives, the vial of durance 
can be destroyed easily. While the vial holds its 
captive, it has an AC equal to the captives’ best 
AC, and hit points equal to the combined total of 
all captives. Damage to it damages all the cap- 
tives as well, If the vial is destroyed, all captives 
reappear, dead. 

Captivity lasts until the user holds the vial 
and speaks the command word of release. At 
once all creatures held in the vial are released 


1471 


(unless they desire otherwise). They reappear in 
the nearest open space large enough to hold 
them, and they have immunity against subse- 
quent captivity in that vial. The former captives 
have no obligation to their captor or to those 
who freed them. 

Durance vials are intrinsically evil and there- 
fore quite rare. Good heroes often feel honor- 
bound to free their captives and destroy the 
vials. If sold intact, the vial is worth about 
3,000 gp. 

Koresh Teyd received his vial from Thanatos. 
However, evil alchemists in the Known World 
have been known to manufacture them, so the 
vial doesn’t necessarily imply Immortal magic. 


Violets of Pain 
XP Value: — GP Value: 100 Per petal 
New Item 

Violets of pain are wildflowers that are commonly 
found on all worlds. They are deep purple in 
color, and very pleasing to the eye. Violets of pain 
are prized by evil wizards as ingredients for cer- 
tain spells, and by the ruthless for the properties 
of its refined poison—colorless, odorless, and 
tasteless, it cannot be detected by any known 
methods. 

When they are picked with bare hands, violets 
of pain secrete a virulent toxin that immobilizes 
unprotected pickers for 1d4 rounds (0 onset 
time), causing severe agony and 1|d6 points of 
damage each round. A successful saving throw 
vs. poison reduces the damage by half, but a cure 
serious wounds spell must be cast in order to heal 
the damage. 


Violin 
See Stringed Instrument 


Violin Rack 


See Stringed Instrument 


6009 


CULL aa 


te” 


i 


Wands 


Wands are 1/4 feet long and slender. They | 
are made of ivory, bone, or wood and are 
usually tipped with something—metal, crystal, or 
stone. They are fragile and tend to break easily. 
Because of this, they are often kept in cases. 

Wands perform at 6th level of experience with 
respect to the damage they cause, range, duration, 
area of effect, and so on, unless otherwise stated. 
At the DM’s option, 1% of all wands can be 
trapped to backfire. 

Wands are powered by charges, each uses cost- 
ing one or more charges (depending on the item). 
When created, a wand typically contains 1d20+80 
charges. Captured wands taken from a defeated 
foe often have far fewer charges. Wands never 
have a greater number of charges than those 
listed. Most wands can be recharged according to 
the rules for making magical items. 

When a wand runs out of charges, it can no 
longer be recharged. Alternatively, the DM can 
rule that the wand immediately crumbles into 
dust (settling the issue) or it has become a useless 
stick. 

Command Words (Optional Rule): Like rods 
and staves, wands can require the utterance of a 
command word or phrase to operate and, like 
those other items, the key is seldom found in the 
lock. The DM can rule that the command word is 
etched in magical writing on the wand (requiring 
read magic to translate) or require the characters 
to use such methods as commune spells or expen- 
sive sages. If the DM chooses not to use this 
option, ignore references to command words in 
the item descriptions below—all items simply 
work. 


Almen’s Wand of Illumination 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 262 
Almen’s wand was bestowed on him by Lath- 
ander as a scourge to all undead. It has only one 
power of a wand of illumination—it wields an 
enhanced version of the sunburst effect. When 
Almen holds the wand above his head and 
speaks its command word, the tip of the wand 
ignites with a brilliant, greenish-white light, 
effectively creating sunlight in a 120’ radius. 
Any undead within 40’ of the wand suffer 6d6 
points of damage per round; the wand continues 
to glow for 1d6 turns. 


of Animal Location 
XP Value: 1,250 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
A wooden wand. When used with the proper 
words, the wand points toward any animal lost by 


my y Q w7 


X WwW the person holding the wand or by his 


Wand of Arc Lightning 


$| employer. The wand cannot detect any 


AS =—2 animal over the horizon. 


of Animation 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 15,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 47 
These rare wands are crafted of crystal and tipped 
with a small golden orb with a faceted emerald in 
its center. When the command word is spoken, 
the wand enables the owner to animate any non- 
living object within a 20’ radius, with the follow- 
ing effects: 

Animate dead: When this power is used, 1d3 
corpses in the wand’s area of effect will be ani- 
mated for 3d10 rounds. The animated creatures 
have 1 Hit Die and can follow simple orders. This 
ability drains one charge. 

Animate object: 1d3 objects less than 3'x3'x3' 
can be animated through this ability for 3d10 
rounds. One charge is drained when this power is 
used. 

Animate Weapon: This ability causes one 
weapon of the wielder’s choice to become ani- 
mated for 1d6+9 rounds. The animated weapon 
will dance (as a sword of dancing), attacking as a 
5th-level fighter. Weapons held by unwilling 
creatures cannot be animated. This ability drains 
two charges. 

The wand is rechargeable and is usable only by 
wizards. 


Anything 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
Unearthed Arcana 

This device will perform as if it were an ordinary 
wand of wonder, although it will have no more 
than 50 usages before being totally expended. In 
addition, it has three other special uses: Upon 
command, it will perform as if it were any other 
sort of known wand, but it can only duplicate the 
effects of any given wand once. If it is com- 
manded to duplicate a single kind of wand more 
than once, the second or third such command will 
have no effect—and after three such demands, 
successful or not, the wand will be totally drained 
and useless. The item cannot be recharged. 


of Arc Lightning 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 40,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
The wizard Tesla created these wands. They have 
all the powers of normal wands of lightning. 
However, they have additional powers when used 
in matching pairs. When commanded, a pair of 
wands generate an arc of lightning 5 feet wide 
that jumps from one wand to the other. Every- 


thing in the area of effect suffers 6d6 points of 
6014 


1473 


OC DM M 


Wand of Armory 


——eeEEeee 


electrical damage (save vs. wand for half dam- 
age). One use of this feature drains two charges 
from the initiating wand and one from the receiv- 
ing wand. The length of the are is a minimum of 2 
feet to a maximum of 30 feet. 


of Armory 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
Curse of the Azure Bonds 

When touched to a target individual, this wand 
provides the target with an invisible field of force, 
providing AC 0 for six rounds. The field absorbs 
all magic missile attacks and all electrical-based 
attacks (including magical ones). Other spells 
will affect the target normally. A dispel magic, 
disintegrate, or limited wish will bring down the 
field, not affecting the person behind it. 


of Armory II 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 5,000 
The Magister 
The long-ago wizard Hosta worked on this 
device for many years, and he had many appren- 
tices; not a few of them carried the knowledge 
of making the complete and final item away at 
his death. The sorceress Myschanta of Arabel is 
known to possess one; others are in the royal 
treasuries of Cormyr and Aglarond. Many other 
specimens of this wand are believed to sur- 
vive—most (since Hosta lived in the North) 
probably now lie in tombs or dragon hoards. 


"a a 


1474 


One used in a tavern brawl in Waterdeep many 
years ago had the command word “Plessendar”, 
the tome High Magic of Mirabar lists among 
the treasures of that city a wand of armory 
(since gone missing) with the command word 
“Skulpin.” Elminster suspects that the parch- 
ment found behind paneling in the throne room 
at Suzail, which bears only the word or name 
“Ailun,” preserved the command word of Azoun 
II’s vanished wand of armory. 

When touched to a target creature (or activated 
upon the wielder’s person), this wand envelops 
the recipient from head to foot, and on all sides, 
with an invisible, magical field of force which 
slows and deflects physical attacks, affording the 
equivalent of Armor Class 0 protection. 

This field of force can be destroyed by dispel 
magic, limited wish, disintegrate (which does not 
affect the protected person, however), or similar, 
stronger spells; otherwise it lasts for six rounds. 
During this time it absorbs magic missiles and all 
electrical attacks (including magical ones) so that 
they do no harm to the wearer—or anything else 
coming into contact with the field—but other- 
wise does not affect spells cast into, or out of, its 
confines. 

The “force armor” may be cast over and in 
addition to real, physical armor worn by a target, 
and completely covers any size M or S creature 
(who need not be conscious, living, or even will- 
ing to be so protected; no saving throw allowed). 
Size L creatures have only their heads and torsos 
protected by the field of force. All classes may 
use this wand, which cannot be recharged. Each 
use of the wand drains one charge. 


of Banishment 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Waterdeep and the North 

Savengriff was a young magic-worker of Water- 
deep who fell in with a band of reckless adventur- 
ers and was slain in battle with a beholder. His 
corpse was found by the Archmage Khelben 
“Blackstaff” Arunsun, who arranged for his res- 
urrection. Savengriff became a loyal apprentice 
but has devoted much of his time since then to 
devising means of avoiding fearsome beings— 
and another death like his first. 

The wand of banishment was one result. Saven- 
griff made over a dozen of these before he van- 
ished into other planes than this; most passed into 
the hands of good wizards across the North, one 
Savengriff took with him, one he gave to Khel- 
ben, and he is thought to have hidden away at 
least one. Elminster gives the command word of 
one he examined as “Baerlaguth” but has not 
revealed in whose possession the wand was (or is 


now). 
6017 


Wand, Bisselite Wand of Peace 


ea EE, 


This wand is usable only by wizards; it cannot 
be recharged, and each use (effective or not) 
drains one charge. Upon command, a needle-thin 
ray of flickering green light shoots from the 
wand’s tip up to a distance of 40 feet, striking a 
single target creature (the target is allowed a save 
vs. spell at —1; a successful save means the ray 
missed). Creatures struck by the ray are affected 
as follows: 

* A summoned creature (from another plane) is 
instantly banished back to its own plane; it 
must save vs. wand at —4 to remain. If it does 
remain, it is held for one round. 

* A creature summoned from elsewhere on the 
Prime Material Plane (by monster summon- 
ing, call woodland beings, or the like) is dri- 
ven away; it will leave instantly at a normal 
movement rate, stopping only to defend itself 
if attacked, and not return. 

* A hostile creature of 2+2 Hit Dice or less 
(including enemy familiars and homonculi) is 
affected as if by a repulsion spell, for four 
rounds, The target is allowed a save vs. wand; 
if successful, the repulsion lasts for only two 
rounds. 

* A hostile creature of more than 2+2 Hit Dice 
must save vs. wand at —4; if successful, it is 
slowed for 1d4+1 rounds (if save is success- 
fully made, target creature is unaffected). 

* By draining six charges at once (the power 
will not work if less than six are left, but any 
attempt will exhaust the wand anyway), the 
wielder of the wand may try to repel any 
other wands within 40 feet. Any affected 
wands (all wands are allowed a save vs. 
lightning on the saving throw matrix for 
magical and nonmagical items at —3; if suc- 
cessful, they are unaffected) are instantly, 
and violently, telekinesed away from the 
wand of banishment for 1d6x100 feet of dis- 
tance, and held there for 1d4 rounds, Wands 
carried in the hand or belt tear free; wands in 
backpacks and chests will drag the owner or 
item with them—unless very heavy or bulky, 
in which case the wand will smash about 
within the item, perhaps being destroyed 
(save vs. crushing blow). Note that wands in 
extradimensional spaces (such as a bag of 
holding or that produced by a rope trick) are 
immune from this effect. 

Only one creature can be attacked with a 
wand of banishment per round; the ray will only 
affect one creature at a time, although it may 
affect any number of wands. Any given creature 
can be affected by any particular wand of ban- 
ishment only once every 12 hours; a creature 
cannot be repeatedly attacked, or attacked a sec- 
ond time or with a different function of the 


wand, if an initial attack fails. Subsequent 
attempts will merely waste charges; a creature 
that has saved once against the wand (or 
endured one successful attack) cannot be 
affected by the wand again until the dweomer 
built up around the creature by the wand dissi- 
pates (which takes 12 hours). 


of Beauty and Ugliness 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 89 

These two wands were fashioned using lava from 
a volcano and are virtually indestructible. The 
wand of beauty can provide | point of comeliness 
for each charge expended, but it can be charged 
only by beating someone with the wand of ugli- 
ness. Each strike by the wand of ugliness pro- 
vides one charge on the wand of beauty and 
reduces the victim’s comeliness by 1d6 points, 
though it does no other physical damage. Using 
the wand of ugliness is a chaotic evil act, and 
continued use eventually changes the wielder’s 
alignment to chaotic evil. 

Each strike with the wand of beauty adds 1 
point of comeliness. When a person attains a 
comeliness of 18, it requires 20 charges to 
increase comeliness another point, so a character 
with a comeliness of 18 must expend 20 charges 
to attain a comeliness of 19. 

History of the Wands: When an evil sorceress 
created them centuries ago, the wands were 
thought to be indestructible. However, a group of 
good wizards and priests worked for months 
finally to fashion a method for dealing with the 
foul magical items. They constructed a magical 
container from the volcano’s lava. The container 
consists of five parts: a sturdy box open on the 
top, a red velvet cushion with indentations for the 
wands, a glass lid, and two metal fasteners. When 
the wands are sealed within the container, all of 
their effects are immediately reversed. The con- 
tainer is not only indestructible but also sen- 
tient—it wants to contain the wands. 


Bisselite Wand of Peace 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This item has served the priests and border 
guards of the March of Bissel. Once a day it can 
cause all mortal beings in a 50-foot radius to save 
vs. wand or become calm and unwilling to fight. 
Calmed beings will defend themselves against 
attack but will not attack or otherwise take hostile 
action. However, those affected do not necessar- 
ily become friendly. The duration of the effect is 
three turns. 


6019 


— aa 


1475 


a 


~ Wand, Bonewand í 


Bonewand 


XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 12,000 
luz the Evil 

Usable by priests, warriors, or wizards, this black 
wooden wand may be recharged by the joint 
efforts of a priest of Iuz and a wizard, both of 
12th or higher level. When a charge is used, a vol- 
ley of sharp bone shards flies from the wand, fill- 
ing a cone-shaped area 60 feet long, with a 
10-foot radius at the terminus of the cone and a 1- 
foot radius at the tip of the wand, where the effect 
originates. All creatures within the area of effect 
suffer 6d4 points of damage from the flying 
shards. Damage is halved with a successful sav- 
ing throw vs. wand. The user of a bonewand may 
also create an animate dead spell, requiring the 
expenditure of two charges, but this function is 
only usable by a priest or wizard. 


Buckler* 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Unearthed Arcana 

This is a short, thick wand about 1% feet in length 
with an exceptionally sharp point on one end and 
a trigger mechanism built into the opposite end, 
which is blunt. The wand is usable by any charac- 
ter except one of the priest class and can be acti- 
vated with an initiative modifier of one. When 
the thick end is grasped firmly, and the trigger 
pressed, the tip of the wand becomes the equiva- 
lent of a dagger +1 and the rest of the shaft blos- 
soms into a round shield of buckler size having a 
+1 magic value. The whole becomes equal to a 
spiked buckler +1. Because of its dweomer, it can 
be employed by wizards, but no spells can be cast 
when it is in buckler form unless the possessor is 
a multiclassed character with fighter abilities in 
addition to wizard abilities. A thief who employs 
the wand’s powers cannot climb walls or perform 
other abilities requiring the use of his or her 
hands while holding the device. 


of Burdening 
XP Value: — GP Value: 2,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
This wand emits a gray beam up to a maximum 
range of 90 feet. Any creature struck by the beam 
who fails to make a saving throw vs. wand imme- 
diately feels as encumbered as if trying to carry 
200 pounds in addition to normally carried items. 


of Cluny 
XP Value: 120 GP Value: 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
A dozen of these wands were created by the wiz- 
ard Cluny the Great. They were supposed to write 
his name on any surface in bright glowing letters 
in a color specified by him, simply by expending 


a charge. Unfortunately, Cluny could not spell. 
The wielder of a wand of Cluny can write his or 
her name in a colorful script on any nonmagical 
surface by speaking a command word and 
expending one of the wand’s charges. However, 
the wand will never spell the wielder’s name cor- 
rectly. A wand of Cluny is found with 20d20 
charges, and the glowing script it writes lasts for 
24 hours. 


of Cold 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
This wand creates a cone of cold, 60 feet long and 
30 feet wide at the far end. All within the cone 
take 6d6 points of cold damage, but they may 
make a saving throw vs. wand for half damage. 


of Color 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,000 
Inside RAVEN’S BLUFF™, THE LtvinG City 

This item, usable by all classes and races, allows 
the user to change the color of cloth as the color 
spell. Shaped like a fine painter’s brush, the wand 
allows greater precision than a normal casting of 
the spell. The wand was created to be easily 
recharged, and a simple casting of the color spell 
will add another charge, up to the maximum of 
100 charges. 


of Conjuration 

XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
Grasping this device enables a wizard to recog- 
nize any cast or written conjuration/summoning 
spell (unseen servant, monster summoning, con- 
jure elemental, death spell, invisible stalker, lim- 
ited wish, symbol, maze, gate, prismatic sphere, 
wish). The wand also has the following powers, 
which require expenditure of one charge each: 
¢ Unseen servant 
* Monster summoning! 
1A maximum of six charges may be expended, 
one per level of monster summoning, or six mon- 
ster summoning I, three monster summoning II, 
two monster summoning III, or any combination 
totaling six. The wizard must be of a sufficient 
experience level to cast the appropriate summon- 
ing spell. 

A wand of conjuration can also conjure up a 
curtain of blackness—a veil of total black that 
absorbs all light. The curtain of blackness can 
cover a maximum area of 600 square feet 
(60’x10', 40'x15’, 30x20’), but it must stretch 
from ceiling to floor, wall to wall. The curtain 
takes two charges to conjure. The veil of total 
lightlessness can be penetrated only by physical 


means or magic. 
6026 


i aaa?" 


1476 


= Wand of Darkness y- 


The wand also enables its wielder to construct 
a prismatic sphere (or wall), one color at a time, 
ted to violet, at a cost of one charge per color. 

Each function of the wand has an initiative 
modifier of +5, and only one function per round 
is possible. The wand may be recharged. 


Continual Light 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Ruins of Undermountain 
This nondescript, unshaped stick has one simple 
spell cast on it: continual light. The light cannot 
be dimmed, so the user must either cast dispel 
magic on it or sheath it in a dark tube-shaped bag. 
(Often these wands are found with such a bag.) 


of Corridors 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Tome of Magic 

This wand allows its user to clear short corridors 
through the Plane of Elemental Earth and the 
Quasielemental Plane of Minerals. It does not 
function on any other plane, although it radiates 
magic. It is especially useful on the Plane of Min- 
erals since travelers need not contact the sharp 
edges of the minerals. One charge clears a 
10'x10'x50’ path. The corridor is completed in 
one turn. The wand has no effect on animals or 
living creatures. Thus, if the wand clears a path 
through a space occupied by an earth elemental, 
the creature is unharmed but is alerted to persons 
in the corridor. The wand can be recharged. 


Dalamar’s Wand of Lightning 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DRAGONLANCE* Adventures 
Though there have been many wands of light- 
ning, this particular wand carries its own curse. 
Because the wand was used by Dalamar to kill 
Kitiara, the dead Dragon Highlord unceasingly 
hunts for the wand and its current owner. 

This device works only for spellcasters. The 
wand casts lightning bolts at 1Sth-level. It nor- 
mally carries seven charges and recharges itself at 
the rate of one charge for every week in which 
there is a local thunderstorm. 

Each time a character uses the device, there is 
a 5% chance that his location is noted by Lord 
Soth, who comes to take the wand to his mistress, 
Kitiara. The death knight appears in 1d10 rounds 
to claim the prize. 


Dark Wand of the 
Sulhaut Mountains 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 8,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This ebony wand was enchanted by an elf wizard 
who traveled from Loftwick to the Sulhaut Moun- 


tains to hunt down the ancient enemies of his 
race. The wand is a specialized version of the 
wand of enemy detection. The range of the wand 
is 10 miles per charge expended. The wand has 
two functions, 

First, it can be used to discover the direction of 
the nearest drow or drider, The user simply so 
commands and pivots until the wand reacts. 

Secondly, the wand can be used to observe a 
drow or drider. When pointed in the proper direc- 
tion and commanded, the wand will create an 
illusory image of the nearest drow elf or drider in 
that direction and his or her immediate surround- 
ings. The wand user receives a vague impression 
of distance (such as, within a mile, within five 
miles, far away). The image lasts one turn and 
reveals whatever that drow or drider is doing in 
some detail, but not enough for the user to be able 
to read a scroll being read by the subject, for 
example. 


of Darkness 
XP Value GP Value 
Greater: 5,000 30,000 
Lesser: 4,000 25,000 
The Magister 


Human and drow wizards acting at the behest of 
the powerful forces of evil that inhabit the Lower 
Planes are believed to have made these fell magi- 
cal devices. They enable the weakest servants of 
evil to hold their own, and can be found through- 
out the Realms. They are made of ebony or 
carved and polished bone, and a few have small, 
ornamental claws at one or both ends. Elminster 
warns that they are dangerous to those of good 
alignment. Demons, devils, illithids, and other 
creatures of evil seem attracted to the use of such 
wands. From sources he does not reveal, Elmin- 
ster reports six known command words for such 
wands: “Orgul,” “Meth,” “Kulmur,” “Druu,” 
“Ulgukh,” and “Ssleer.” After the command word 
is spoken, choice of the wand function is by men- 
tal concentration of the bearer. 

A wand of darkness has four separate func- 
tions. It can be wielded by any intelligent, speak- 
ing creature of neutral or evil alignment. 
Creatures of good alignment cannot make the 
wand function, and suffer 1d2 points of damage 
per contact with the wand—or, if they grasp it 
continuously, 1d2 points of damage per round. It 
can be recharged. The powers of the wand are 
these: 

* It can cause darkness 15’ radius, lasting four 
rounds and centered on the tip of the wand, at 

a cost of one charge. The bearer of the wand 

(and anyone else, while touching the wand) 

can see perfectly in any darkness produced by 

the wand. 


6032 


7 1477 = 


Wand of Death 


\\ 


i 


The wand can be commanded to summon a 
nightmare at a cost of three charges. The sum- 
moning has a 4-in-6 chance of success; the 
charges are lost even if it fails. The nightmare 
is brought from an evil Outer Plane and 
appears in an explosion of black smoke and a 
brimstone stench within three rounds, where- 
upon it immediately knows and serves its 
summoner. It can be commanded to fight on 
the summoner’s behalf, or take the summoner 
into the Astral or Ethereal Plane. It so serves 
for nine turns at a time, and then vanishes. If 
the summoner is then astride it, he or she is 
taken along for the ride or flung off, usually to 
be hurt when landing. 

By touch, and at a cost of two charges, a wand 
of darkness can break a protection from evil 
circle or deal any creatures of good alignment 
1d4+1 points of fiery damage. Creatures 
immune to fire, or creatures of neutral or evil 
alignments, are unharmed, but the charges are 
lost. 

By touch, and at a cost of four charges, a 
wand of darkness can animate a single corpse 
of a size S or M creature. A zombie, skeleton, 
or animal zombie is thus produced and can be 
commanded by the wand wielder as though an 
animate dead spell had been cast. The undead 
creature serves until destroyed or until six 
turns have elapsed, then it collapses. If it is 
still intact, a corpse or skeleton can then be 


animated anew by the expenditure of four 
additional charges. Attempts to animate 
incomplete skeletons fail but still drain four 
charges. The wand cannot be used to control 
existing undead but only undead creatures cre- 
ated by the wand. 

In addition, 10% of these wands are greater 
wands of darkness, capable of summoning a 
shadow when so ordered. This function has a 1 in 
3 chance of success (2 in 3 if in deep caverns or 
ancient ruins) and expends 4 charges if successful 
or not. The shadow arrives in three rounds and 
does not attack any creature holding or touching 
the wand. 


Roll Wand Type 
01-90 Lesser wand of darkness. 
91-00 Greater wand of darkness. 


of Death 
XP Value: 20,000 GP Value: 100,000 
Eldritch Wizardry 
Orcus holds the wand of death (also known as 
Orcus’s wand) that is a rod of obsidian topped 
with a skull. This instrument causes death (or 
annihilation) to any creature, save those of like 
status (other fiends, godlings, and similar crea- 
tures), merely by touching their flesh. 


of Defoliation 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
Unearthed Arcana 

This wand is never constructed of any sort of 

wood; instead, ivory or bone is typically the 

major component. It has the following functions: 

* When one charge is expended, all chlorophyll 
in a 30-foot radius from the wand is destroyed. 
Thus, leaves turn to autumnal colors and drop 
off, grass becomes brown and dry, and so 
forth. 

* When two charges are expended, all normal 
plant life within the 30-foot radius area of 
effect withers and dies. Sentient plant crea- 
tures and other unnatural sorts of plants will 
not necessarily be killed, but they will each 
suffer 1d6 points of damage. If so desired, the 
possessor of the wand can direct the force of 
this power into a cone-shaped area of 30-foot 
length, widening to 10-foot diameter at the 
farthest point from the wand. Effects are the 
same as for the spherical area of effect, except 
that sentient and abnormal plant life within 
the cone suffer 6d6 points of damage instead 
of only 1d6. Any plant-creature or other 
abnormal plant that lies partially within the 
conical area of effect is entitled to a saving 
throw vs. wand and if successful takes only 4 
damage (3d6). 

6034 


1478 


Wand of Element Transmogrification 


en mmrmneraniscatis 


of Displacement 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 25,000 
The Magister 
This wand is exceedingly rare; probably only a 
dozen or so exist, and most are in the possession 
of thieves’ guilds in large cities. The inventor is 
thought to be the long-ago wizard Schollus, who 
made a few (which he sold for vast sums of 
money) before disappearing forever into other 
planes. He alone knew the secret of their making. 

These wands are among the most closely 
guarded (and eagerly sought) treasures of 
dweomercraft. The Guild in Baldur’s Gate is 
known to hold one, and it is thought that another 
lies in the hands of thieves in Hillsfar. Several are 
rumored to be in the rich cities of the South (due 
to the number of inexplicable thefts there), but 
the precise whereabouts of none can be heard or 
read. Elminster can only give a partial set of com- 
mand words for but a single wand (which one is 
not known), from all his books of lore; three of 
the six words for that wand are: “Tamyr,” “Urem- 
bom,” and “Lairu” 

A wand of displacement can teleport without 
error single pieces (or several pieces fastened 
together in some way) of nonliving material 
(which may be organic or formerly alive) up to 
160 feet away from their initial position. The 
wielder must touch the material to be teleported 
with the wand while speaking a command word, 
and later touch the intended new location of the 
material while speaking the same command 
word. The material will then be teleported from 
one location to the other within one segment. 
Once the teleport has been accomplished, the 
command word can be used for another object. 

Magical items (or any items bearing a 
dweomer) may be transported without affecting 
their magic in any way, but the following limita- 
tions apply: If the material is of over 30 cubic feet 
in volume (weight does not matter), or is con- 
tained within a magical prison (such as a protec- 
tive circle, protection from evil, a forcecage, 
imprisonment, and so on), or the intended new 
location is over 160 feet distant from its location 
at the time the wand wielder speaks the command 
word a second time, the teleport does not work 
and the magic is lost. The command word is 
again free for use. Material that is destroyed, con- 
sumed, or made living (such as a resurrected 
corpse) cannot teleport. 

The wand may touch the intended location any 
number of times without activating if the com- 
mand word is not spoken. A magical prison (such 
as a petrified creature, magic jar, or the like) 
could itself be teleported, and the teleportation 
circumvents any physical or magical barriers 
around the new location—or between the two 


objects. The wand cannot move objects from 
plane to plane. 

Each wand has six set and unchangeable com- 
mand words; up to six items can be simultane- 
ously carried or held ready to teleport. Teleports 
can be made in any order; the first word need not 
be spoken a second time before the second, third, 
or fourth is spoken. The teleport will not work, 
however, if a location is touched before the item. 
Dispel magic cast upon the item does not negate 
or foil a not-yet-completed teleportation; only 
magical imprisonment (see above) of the item 
can prevent the teleportation. Once teleports are 
wasted by failing to work or used successfully, 
the command words corresponding to them are 
freed again for reuse. Knowledge of only one or 
two command words permits simultaneously car- 
rying only one or two items. This wand may not 
be recharged, and each teleport, successful or not, 
drains one charge. This wand may be used by all 
classes. 


of Earth and Stone 
XP Value GP Value 
Normal: 2,000 10,000 
Powerful: 3,000 15,000 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A wand of this sort is typically short and tipped 
with some form of mineral. It is imbued with the 
following powers: 


Dig % charge per use 
Passwall | charge per use 
Move earth 2 charges per use 


In addition, 50% of these wands have the fol- 
lowing powers: 

Transmute mud to rock 

Transmute rock to mud 


1 charge per use 
1 charge per use 


of Element Transmogrification 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Tome of Magic 

This wand changes a quantity of one element into 
an equal amount of another element (water into 
fire, earth into air, and so on ). The element to be 
affected must be within 60 feet of the wielder, 
who merely points the wand at the element and 
speaks the command word. For every 10 cubic 
feet (or portion thereof) transformed, one charge 
is drained from the wand. 

The transmogrification is permanent unless a 
successful dispel magic is cast on the element. 
Elements created by this wand have special char- 
acteristics. Fire requires no fuel to burn. Water 
never evaporates. Air is absolutely pure, but 
unless contained the air mingles with the atmos- 
phere and is lost forever. Earth can appear as soil, 


sand, clay, or stone, at the wielder’s option. It is 
6038 


__ O e 


1 


479 


o S lle 


Wand of Enemy Detection 


ja: ae ae 


not possible to create treasure such as valuable 
metals or gemstones with this wand. 

This wand has no effect upon creatures of any 
kind, except those from the Elemental planes. By 
changing such creatures into their element of 
opposition (fire into water, air into earth, and the 
like), the creature is obliterated. Thus, transmut- 
ing a water elemental into fire disintegrates it. 

A creature attacked by the wand is allowed a 
saving throw vs. wand. If the save is failed, the 
elemental is destroyed. If the save is successful, 
the creature is not obliterated outright but suffers 
6d6 points of damage and retains its true form. 

In attacking an elemental, the number of Hit 
Dice of the elemental determines the number of 
charges used: one charge for an 8-HD elemental, 
two charges for a 12-HD elemental, and three 
charges for a 16-HD elemental. It is not possible 
to use this wand to change an elemental into 
another type of elemental. The wand may be used 
once per round and can be recharged. 


of Enemy Detection 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This wand pulses in the wielder’s hand and points 
in the direction of any creatures hostile to the 
bearer of the device. The creatures can be invisible, 
ethereal, astral, out of phase, hidden, disguised, or 
in plain sight. Detection range is a 60-foot sphere. 
The function requires one charge to operate for 
one turn. The wand can be recharged. 


of Eyes 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Magister 
This wand emits a wizard eye (see the 4th-level 
wizard spell) upon command; each such use 
drains one charge. The range and duration of the 
eye are as if cast by a 6th-level wizard, regardless 
of the level of the wielder. Any user who has 
never employed a wizard eye spell before typi- 
cally requires 1d2 rounds to master moving 
about, focussing, and comprehending what is 
seen by an eye. The wand can also cure blindness 
by touch and command (at a cost of four charges 
per use). If touched to the eyes of any one crea- 
ture (including the wielder) and properly com- 
manded, the wand can confer the ability to see 
invisible creatures and objects within the affected 
creatures’ normal range of vision for the follow- 
ing round only, at a cost of three charges. Note 
that this ability is not x-ray vision; items and 
beings concealed behind solid barriers cannot be 
discerned. This wand functions only once ina 
round regardless of how it is wielded, and not 
once for each of its functions. No known method 
of recharging these wands has yet been perfected. 


of Fear 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

When a fear wand is activated, a pale amber ray 
springs from the tip of the wand in a cone 60 feet 
long by 20 feet in base diameter that flashes on 
and instantly disappears. Each creature touched 
by the ray must roll a successful saving throw vs. 
wand or react as per a fear spell (1st-level priest 
spell, remove fear reversal). In other words, crea- 
tures affected by the wand turn and move at 
fastest possible speed away from the wielder for 
six rounds. Each use costs one charge. It can 
operate just once per round. The wand can be 
recharged. 


of Feathers 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

These wands are approximately 18 inches long, 
made of rune-carved wood, and tipped with a 
small clump of multicolored feathers, making 
them look much like feather dusters. A wand of 
feathers casts four different spells and usually has 
with 10d10 charges. 
* Gust of wind, two charges. 
* Tasha’s uncontrollable hideous laughter, one 
charge. 
+ Unseen Servant, one charge (lasts two hours). 
* Cantrip, one charge. 

All spells are cast as if the wielder were a 6th- 
level wizard. 


Fire Wand of Suloise 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 35,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

This wand may have been the device that caused 
the destruction of the Suel Empire, or it may have 
been created to reproduce the event. No scholar 
doubts that its creator was a wizard of great 
power and violent tendencies. The wand is rarely 
bought or. sold, since few wizards dare to use it. 
Often it merely-falls into the hands of an unsus- 
pecting spellcaster who never realizes its full 
powers and dangers until too late. 

The wand can summon a deadly “fire” to rain 
down in a 60-foot cube from a range of up to 80 
yards. The “fire” inflicts five points of damage 
per round to all creatures, regardless of protec- 
tions, resistances, or immunities to normal or 
magical flame. Such damage cannot be cured by 
any spell less powerful than a heal spell. Further- 
more, the fire will destroy buildings of less than 
stone construction, and evaporate freestanding 
liquid to a depth of one foot per round. Objects 
exposed to the “fire” must save vs. disintegration 
or be destroyed. Note, however, that matter is 
burned to dust and ashes, not vaporized. Though 

6043 


= 1480 F 


5 Wand of Flame Extinguishing 


5: N A- 
DN 


the wand itself is never affected by the fire, the 
wand has a 5% chance of a malfunction, in which 
case the effect is centered upon the wand user. 

The fire requires three charges to operate and 
has a minimum duration of six rounds. After this, 
the caster can end the rain by concentrating for a 
round and making a saving throw vs. spell. Each 
round the wand continues to operate will drain 
one more charge. If the wand is emptied, then the 
fiery rain vanishes and the wand explodes, 
engulfing the wizard and everything within 10 
feet in a blast that inflicts 3d10 points of damage. 

The wand can be recharged, but only in the 
Quasielemental Plane of Ash, which lies between 
the Elemental Plane of Fire and the Negative 
Energy Plane. 


of Fire 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This wand can function like the following wizard 

orm: 
* Burning hands: The wand emits a fan-shaped 
sheet of fire 10 feet wide at its end and 12 feet 
long. Each creature touched suffers 6 points of 
damage. The sheet of fire appears instantly, 
shoots forth dark red flames, and snuffs out in 
less than one second. It expends one charge. 

* Pyrotechnics: This function duplicates the 
spell of the same name. It has an initiative 
modifier of +2 and expends one charge. 


* Fireball: The wand coughs forth a pea size 
sphere that streaks out to the desired range (to 
a maximum of 160 feet) and bursts in a fiery, 
violet-red blast, just like the fireball spell. The 
initiative modifier is +2, and this expends two 
charges. The fireball inflicts 6d6 points of 
damage, but all 1s rolled are counted as 2s 
(that is, the burst causes 12-36 points). A sav- 
ing throw vs. wand is applicable. 

* Wall of fire: The wand can be used to draw a 
fiery curtain of purplish-red flames 1,200 feet 
square (10’x120', 20’x60’, 30'x40’, and so 
on). The flames last for six rounds and cause 
2d6+6 points of damage if touched (2d4 
points if within 10 feet of the fire, 1d4 if 
within 20 feet). The flames can also be shaped 
into a ring around the wand user (but the cir- 
cle is 25 feet in diameter). The initiative modi- 
fier is +3, and its use expends two charges. 
The wand of fire can operate just once per 
round. It can be recharged. 


of Fireballs 

GP Value: 16,000 
Unearthed Arcana 
This wand simply enables the wielder to cast a 
fireball spell as if he or she were a wizard of 6th 
level. Damage is 6d6 points, with saving throws 
applicable for half damage. The wand can be 
recharged by any wizard of at least 8th level. 


of Fireballs II 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 16,000 
Dunceons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 

This wand creates a fireball effect (as if using the 
wizard spell) up to 240 feet away. All victims take 
6d6 points of fire damage, but they may make a 
saving throw vs. wand for half damage. The wand 
cannot be recharged. 


XP Value: 2,000 


of Flame Extinguishing 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This sort of wand has three separate functions: 

* Nonmagical fires of normal size can be extin- 
guished without using any charges. Normal 
size includes anything up to the size of a bon- 
fire or a fire in a regular fireplace—equal to 
four to six billets of wood burning hotly. 

* To extinguish large nonmagical fires, flaming 
oil in quantity equal to a gallon or more, the 
fire produced by a fiend, a flame tongue 
sword, or a burning hands spell, one charge is 
expended from the wand. Continual magical 
flames, such as those of a sword or a creature 
able to ignite, will be extinguished for six 
rounds and will flare up again after that time. 


* When applied to large magical fires such as 
6047 


1481 


A 


Wand of Fog 


(a a E E 


from fireball, flame strike, or wall of fire 
spells, two charges are expended from the 
wand as the flames are extinguished. Ifthe 
device is used upon a creature composed of 
flame (a fire elemental, for instance), a suc- 
cessful attack roll inflicts 6d6 points of dam- 
age upon the creature. 


of Fog 

XP Value: 1,750 GP Value: 8,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 14 
When activated, this wand creates 1,000 cubic 
feet of fog per round for 1d6+6 rounds, like the 
Ist-level illusion spell wall of fog. Such usage 
drains the wand of one charge. The initial 
10'x10'x10’ fog cube can be centered on any 
area within 60° of the wand user and within his or 
her range of vision. On subsequent rounds, addi- 
tional cubes of fog can be created in adjacent 
10'x10’x10' areas as willed by the wand user. 
Each fog cube persists for one turn after its cre- 
ation. The wand is usable by all classes and may 
be recharged by illusionists of 12th or higher 
level. 


of Fog Control 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 79 

Usually made of hardwood, a wand of fog control 
looks like a discarded twig. Appearances are 
deceiving, however, as this is a powerful magical 
item. When a charge is expended, the wand cre- 
ates a bank of fog that encompassed 60,000 cubic 
feet. The fog obscures normal sight and infravi- 
sion beyond four feet. A second charge allows the 
wielder to shape the cloud. Another charge cre- 
ates a path through the fog that is 6 feet high by 6 
feet wide and follows a course dictated by the 
wielder. The duration of the fog is 10 minutes 
unless the wielder expends another charge to 
remove the fog earlier. Wands of fog control are 
found with 1d100 charges. 


of Force 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
The Forgotten Temple of Tharizdun 
Although it is rumored that the idea of sucha 
wand has taken many forms, the one which has 
been standardized, so to speak, is a trifunction 
device which requires considerable operator 
knowledge only in the application of its third 
function. 

First, a wand of force enables the wielder to 
cause a shaft of nearly invisible, blue-white 
energy to spring forth from its tip. This shaft of 
energy extends 4 feet and is equal to a bastard 
sword +5 with respect to attack rolls and damage. 
This usage expends one charge per turn. 


Secondly, a wand of force can be employed to 
create a wall of force duplicating the Sth-level 
wizard spell of the same name as if cast bya 
10th-level wizard. This function expends one 
charge per wall created, and a single usage per 
round is possible. 

Thirdly, a wand of force can be employed to 
create a nearly invisible plane of energy which 
performs as if it had been created by the casting 
of a Bigby s forceful hand spell. The wand user 
must actually be a wizard in order to activate this 
function, and regardless of his or her level, one of 
the various Bigby’s hand/fist spells must be 
recorded for study (not necessarily for casting) in 
the spell books of the wand wielder. Use of this 
function expends 4-charge per round. 

Fighters of all types are able to use the first and 
second functions of the wand. The device can be | 
recharged by a wizard of 16th or higher level, and 
in addition it can draw sufficient energy to regain 
a single charge by being touched to any of the 
following: a manifestation of one of the Bigby’s 
hand/fist spells, a manifestation of the Mor- 
denkainen'’s sword spell, or a manifestation of a 
wall of force. Touching any of these things with 
the wand causes the effect of a disintegrate spell, 
destroying the spell manifestation instantly, and 
enabling the wand to absorb power equivalent to 
a single charge. 


of Freshness 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 79 

These wands are always a bright color and are 
usually decorated with etchings of flowers. By 
expending a charge, the wielder is able to turn 
rancid, spoiled food into fresh, delicious fare. A 
single charge will cover one cubic foot of food. 
Wands of freshness are found with 1d100 charges 
and can easily be recharged. 


of Frost 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

A frost wand can perform three functions that 

duplicate wizard spells. The wand can function 

once per round and may be recharged. 

* Ice storm: A silvery ray springs forth from the 
wand and an ice (or sleet) storm occurs up to 
60 feet away from the wand holder. This func- 
tion requires one charge. 

* Wall of ice: The silvery ray forms a wall of ice, 
six inches thick, covering a 600-square-foot 
area (10'x60', 20’x30', and so on). Its initia- 
tive modifier is +2, and it uses one charge. 

* Cone of cold: White crystalline motes spray 
forth from the wand in a cone with a 60-foot 
length and a terminal diameter of 20 feet. The 

6052 


x Wand of Illumination y- 


initiative modifier is +2, and the effect lasts 
just one second. The temperature is —100(DG) 
F and damage is 6d6, treating all 1s rolled as 
2s (6d6, 12-36). The cost is two charges per 
use. A saving throw vs. wand is applicable. 


Gremlin 
XP Value: 3,000 

Top Ballista 
This wand is often a stout shaft of mahogany or 
ebony some 18 inches long, tipped with a wooden 
claw into which is set a sphere of quartz. It has 
three uses. First, the wand can detect gremlins. It 
does this automatically within 120 feet (if there is 
more than one gremlin in range, it detects the 
nearest). Within the sphere, a small blue glow 
shows the direction of the gremlin, and the closer 
the gremlin, the stronger the glow. This does not 
use any charges from the wand. 

Second, the wand provides protection against 
the chaotic aura effects of gremlins. The wand 
holder gains +4 on any saving throws he must 
make for himself or his equipment. If none would 
normally be allowed, he gets one anyway (but 
without the +4 bonus). This function uses no 
charges. 

Third, if a charge is drawn from the wand, all 
gremlins in a 30-foot radius from the wand must 
save vs. wand or flee in fear for 1d4 turns. They 
will not willingly approach within 300 feet of the 
spot from which they were forced to flee for 
1d4+4 weeks. Once all charges have been used 
from the wand, it decays to dust. 


GP Value: 10,000 


of Hammerblows 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 
The Magister 

The wizard Phultan recently developed this 
device, and has used it to shatter potion vials, 
delicate jewelry, brittle parchment maps and 
scrolls, lanterns, mirrors, ladder rungs, and 
even the material components of rival spellcast- 
ers. It can’t directly affect living creatures, and 
is thus little sought after by rival wizards, but 
Phultan has sold several to thieves and assassins 
in Westgate, Amn, the Vilhon Reach, and the 
Kingdoms of the South, who have seen its 
potential. Elminster has examined one that was 
found on a thief slain in Waterdeep, and sets 
down its powers below. Its command word, he 
reports, is “Dessout” 

This wand, when activated by a whispered 
command, causes objects to be affected as if by a 
“crushing blow” (forcing a saving throw to be 
made at par on the item saving throw matrix). 
Targets must be nonliving items, of any size, but 
at least some portion of them must be within 60 
feet of the tip of the wand—and they must be vis- 


ible to the wand-wielder when the wand is acti- 
vated. No known physical or magical barriers can 
stop the wand’s effect, which is silent and does 
not affect or alert surroundings—such as a crea- 
ture holding the item—at all. No actual physical 
blow is dealt, but rather there is a magical assault 
on the internal structure of the item. 

The wand can be used by any class, and is 
rechargeable. One charge is expended per ham- 
merblow, regardless of the blow’s effectiveness. It 
is not possible to hit an alternate item by acci- 
dent—the intended target is chosen mentally by 
the wand-wielder, and if it is missed nothing at all 
occurs. 


of Highfolk 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 18,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
A favorite weapon of high elves in the northwest, 
this wand causes dissension between humans, 
demi-humans, or humanoids of evil alignment in 
a 30'x30’ area. Any of these creatures that fail a 
saving throw vs. wand will become unusually 
factious and quarrelsome, convinced that their 
allies are in fact dangerous enemies. This may 
lead to open fighting: those affected by the wand 
must make a saving throw vs. spell at each signif- 
icant provocation to avoid coming to blows. If the 
DM desires, attacks by common enemies or 
strong leadership may improve the saving throws, 
while malicious insults or actual blows may 
worsen them. The effect of the wand lasts a maxi- 
mum of 1d6 turns, less if one faction has been 
slain. 


of Ice Storms 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 20,000 
Unearthed Arcana 
This device enables the wielder to cause an ice 
storm just as if he or she were a wizard of 7th 
level. Either damaging hail or sleet and slippery 
conditions are possible (see the ice storm spell 
explanation). The wand can be recharged by a 
wizard of 9th level. 


of Illumination 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This wand has four separate functions, three of 

which approximate wizard spells, and one of 

wines is unique. The wand can be recharged. 
Dancing lights: The wand produces this effect 
at a cost of one charge. 

+ Light: The illumination wand sends forth light 
at an expenditure of one charge. 

* Continual light: This function requires two 
charges, 


* Sunburst: When this effect is called forth, the 
6057 


Wand of Illusion 


py CAT EA 


wand delivers a sudden flash of brilliant, 
greenish-white light, with blazing golden rays. 
The range of this sunburst is 120 feet maxi- 
mum, and its duration is ⁄o of a second. Its 
area of effect is a globe with a 40-foot diame- 
ter. Any undead within this globe suffer 6d6 
points of damage, with no saving throw. Crea- 
tures within or facing the burst must roll suc- 
cessful saving throws vs. wand or be blinded 
for one round and be unable to do anything 
during that period. (Of course, the creatures in 
question must have sight organs sensitive to 
the visible light spectrum). The function 
requires three charges. 


of Illusion 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This wand creates audible and visual illusions 
(audible glamer, phantasmal force). The wand 
emits an invisible ray, with a 140-foot maximum 
range. The effect has an initiative modifier of +3. 
The wand wielder must concentrate on the illu- 
sion in order to maintain it—the user may move 
normally but can’t engage in combat during this 
time. Each portion costs one charge to effect and 
one per round to continue. The wand may be 
recharged. 


Iron 
XP Value: 19,000 GP Value: 95,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
This device makes all invisible things appear if 
within 30 yards of it. It can make objects disap- 
pear as disappearing dust, it acts as a staff of 
striking, and will grow to any length and become 
roughened for easy climbing. 


Karelia’s Wand of Illusion 

XP Value: 2,750 GP Value: 
1993 Collector Card 495 
Karelia’s wand generates audible glamer and 
phantasmal force spell effects just as any wand 
of illusion would. However, Karelia has man- 
aged to modify this particular one so that any 
visual effect created has a large amount of pink 
in it, which usually appears very odd. Karelia 
once created a fountain in the midst of a flower 
garden, but the trees and the fountain’s spray 
were pink. 


of Knock 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 15,000 
The Magister 

This rare and unusual type of wand has a variety 
of powers. It can perform only one such function 
in a round, and so operates only once in that 
round. Its most common function is to open all 
normal locks at a touch, noiselessly and within 
one round per lock. This drains one charge per 
lock but does not alert the wielder to, or deacti- 
vate, any traps or alarms associated with such 
locks. Magically held or wizard locked portals, 
doors, and hatches can be passed through freely 
at a touch of this wand. The kold on held things is 
negated, at a cost of one charge per level of the 
caster who put it there; a wizard lock is opened 
for six rounds, not destroyed, for the same cost in 
charges. This process takes one round for magical 
holds, and 1d3 (determine randomly) for locks; 
once begun, the wand wielder need not keep the 
wand in contact with the door and can turn his or 
her attention elsewhere. 

The wand can alert creatures up to 60 feet dis- 
tant, when grasped and soundlessly directed. This 
function does not expend charges, and takes the 
form of either an audible, faint but distinct 
“knocking” sound or a soundless tap on one crea- 
ture—a force insufficient to deal damage or 
affect balance or spellcasting—as the wielder 
chooses. At a cost of one charge, this wand can 
also operate as a shatter spell (see |st-level wiz- 
ard spell; 60-foot range, nonmagical glass only). 
This wand can be recharged. 


484 


Wand of Lloth y- 


of Light 
XP Value: 50 GP Value: 250 
Needle 
This odd and flexible wand is made of an 
unknown substance. If struck against any hard 
object, it glows to 30-foot radius for one turn, 
then goes dark. It can be used as often as desired 
and has no charges. 


of Lightening 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
DRAGON Magazine 35 
This wand, whether directed at an opponent or 
oneself, will cause the operator to gradually 
become weightless. Once the wand is activated it 
cannot be stopped until the process is complete (5 
rounds). Treat as gaseous form to see if the victim 
is blown by air currents, although the victim will 
obviously not be able to pass through cracks or 
holes. 


of Lightning 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This wand has two functions that closely resem- 
ble wizard spells: 
* Shock; This does 1d10 points of damage to a 
target struck in combat, with no saving throw. 
Characters wearing metal armor and shields are 
treated as Armor Class 10. Plain leather and 
wood work normally. Magic bonuses on metal 
armor do not affect Armor Class, but a ring of 
protection does. The shock uses one charge. 
+ Lightning bolt: The possessor of the wand can 
discharge a bolt of lightning. The stroke can be 
either a forked or straight bolt (see the wizard 
spell, lightning bolt). Damage is 12-36 (6d6, 
treating 1s as 2s), but a saving throw is applica- 
ble. This function uses two charges and has an 
initiative modifier of +2. 

The wand may be recharged. It can perform 
only one function per round, 


of Lightning Bolts 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 16,000 
Unearthed Arcana 
A wand of this nature enables the possessor to 
cast a lightning bolt as if he or she were a wizard 
of 6th level. Damage is 6d6 points, with saving 
throw applicable for half damage. Either form of 
bolt (forked or single stroke) is possible. The 
device can be recharged by a wizard of 8th level. 


of Lightning Bolts II 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 16,000 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
This creates a lightning bolt (as if using the wiz- 
ard spell), starting up to 240 feet away and 60 feet 


long from that point. The victims take 6d6 points 
of electrical damage, but they may make a saving 
throw vs. wand for half damage. 


Lightwand 
XP Value GP Value 
Ring: 200 2,000 
Wand: 30 300 


POLYHEDRON Magazine 26 

A lightwand produces soft light to a 30-foot 
radius when struck against a hard object. This 
effect lasts for one turn per strike. The wand can 
be used as often as desired, and uses no charges. 
A lightwand can also be fitted with a special ring, 
about 2 inches across. The ring focuses and 
amplifies the light, creating a damaging beam 
when the ring is slid along the wand. The maxi- 
mum rate of fire is two shots per turn. The ray has 
a range of 120 feet and can inflict 2d8 points of 
damage to a target creature with a successful 
attack roll. Any target is treated as AC 10, modi- 
fied only for magic and Dexterity bonuses. The 
victim may make a saving throw vs. wand for 
one-half damage. There are no class restrictions, 
but weapon proficiency applies. Fog or other 
obscurement cuts the range to 10 feet or less. The 
ring uses one charge per shot (whether hit or 
miss), and has 20 charges when new. 


of Lloth 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 25,000 
MENZOBERRANZAN Campaign Set 

This is a tiny device, no more than 8 inches long. 

It can be employed for several different purposes: 

* Web: The wand can launch the equivalent of 

one web spell per round, creating the effect up to 

120 feet away from the wielder. 

* Rope: The wand will launch a thin, but very 

strong, rope. The rope will travel up to 240 feet, 

to a secure location indicated by the user (or, 
alternately, it can hang straight down without 
being attached to anything). Once fastened, it 
remains affixed until the wielder commands it to 
release. The rope cannot be affected by fire or 
normal weapons; if attacked by magical weapons, 
it is assumed to have an AC of —4 and 12 hit 
points. However, it can be cut by the wielder of 

the wand with any knife or blade, by the use of a 

command word. 

The wand, when new, contains a full 240 feet 
of rope. If the rope is saved after each use (drawn 
back into the wand) the full length is available the 
next time. If any is lost, however, it is lost perma- 
nently. 

* Sting: The wand extends into a scorpion-like 
scimitar that functions in all respects as a poi- 
soned long sword +4. The user needs no pro- 
ficiency but must know a command word to 

6068 


TT —E=e O 


1485 


Wand, Mace-Wand of Lightning 


jp Weeden A 


activate the stingsword. Damage is inflicted 
normally (1d8+4 against human size foes), but 
anyone struck with it must also make a saving 
throw vs. poison. If the save fails, the charac- 
ter is paralyzed for 3d6 turns. 


Mace-Wand of Lightning 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Egg of the Phoenix 
This is a special combination weapon, it acts as a 
mace +2 and as a wand of lightning. The wand 
(handle) can be recharged. Once the wand uses its 
last charge, the weapon loses its magical abilities. 


; RAÐA 
J vil y j 
3 JE x) 


> 


t 
Yi 
¢ A 


of Magic Detection 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 22,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This wand is similar in operation to an enemy 
detection wand. If any form of magic is in opera- 
tion, or a magical item exists within a 30-foot 
radius, the magic detection wand pulses and 
points to the strongest source. Note that the wand 
will point tó a person upon whom a spell has been 
cast. 

Operation requires one round, and successive 
rounds will point out successively less-powerful 
magical radiations. The school of magic (abjura- 
tion, alteration, and so on) can be determined if 
one round is spent concentrating on the subject 
emanation. One charge is expended per turn (or 
fraction thereof) of use. Starting with the second 


round of continuous use, there is a 2% cumulative 
chance per round that the wand temporarily mal- 
functions and indicates nonmagical items as magi- 
cal, or vice-versa. The wand may be recharged. 


of Magical Mirrors 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Magister 

These wands were made by the Archmage Glendar 
who, though good and noble in life, became a lich 
and was later destroyed. The knowledge of their 
construction is now lost. Perhaps 20 were made, 
and most survive about the Realms in the posses- 
sion of powerful wizards, or in treasure caches. 
Elminster has found four known command words 
in his researches: “Phasral,” “Talusta,” “Ormduth,” 
and”’Resshemma.” To which wands these apply— 
and indeed, where specifically any of these wands 
are—is not known. 

Activation of this wand creates an opaque, sil- 
very, and reflective circular shield of force. The 
shield appears wherever the wand is pointing, 10 
feet distant from the wielder of the wand, facing 
outward. Its surface reflects images (including 
the gaze of the catoblepas and basilisk) like a 
mirror; the wand wielder can look through the 
mirror as though it was a window without suffer- 
ing any harm from such attacks—and when 
viewed through the shield, things appear as they 
truly are: illusions are invisible; creatures or 
items disguised by magic, mutable form, or invis- 
ibility (such as dopplegangers, shapechanged 
individuals, leprechauns, farastu gehreleths, and 
batezzu) are revealed in their true forms; and so 
forth. The mirror-shield lasts for 1d6+2 rounds 
(at random, not at the wielder’s command) and 
moves as the wielder moves the point of the 
wand. Each wand can only have one shield cre- 
ated from it in existence at a time (the first shield 
instantly disappears if the second is activated). 
The caster need not concentrate on the shield to 
maintain its existence and can even put the wand 
down or pass the wand to another (who thereby 
assumes control of the shield’s location) to 
engage in spellcasting or other activities. 

The shield has no tangible physical existence; 
it can neither ward off attacks nor be used as a 
weapon. Creatures pass through it as though it 
does not exist. It does, however, reflect color 
spray spells striking it from any direction directly 
back at the caster and harmlessly dispel darkness 
and prismatic spheres, walls, and sprays upon 
contact. Dispel magic, limited wish, wish, or alter 
reality destroys such a shield; it cannot otherwise 
be affected. Each creation of such a shield drains 
one charge from the wand, and such wands are 
not rechargeable. Wizards, illusionists, priests, 


and druids may use this wand. 
6071 


1486 


ne a -_—= 


ee ee Ul ll!” 


Wand of Misplaced Objects 


reesei aia i 


of Magic Missiles 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 35,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This wand discharges magic missiles similar to 
those of the Ist-level wizard spell of the same 
name. The missile causes 1d4+1 points of dam- 
age, It always hits its target when the wand is 
wielded by a wizard; otherwise an attack roll is 
required. The wand has an initiative modifier of 
+3, and each missile costs one charge. A maxi- 
mum of two may be expended in one round. The 
wand may be recharged. 


Meriadar’s 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Monster Mythology 
Meriadar’s avatar carries a wand of size alteration 
with which he can reduce hostile creatures down 
to 10% of their normal size to negate their offen- 
sive capability. 


of Metal Command 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 10,000 
Unearthed Arcana 
This wand appears to be nothing more useful than 
a wand of metal and mineral detection, but in the 
hands of a dwarf or gnome, its exceptional pow- 
ers become operational: 

If one charge is expended, the wand can trans- 
mute gold to lead, or lead to gold. The range of 
this power is 30 feet, and the amount of metal 
converted is 1d6 pounds. 

If two charges are expended, the user can heat 
metal in the same fashion as the druid spell of the 
same name. Range is 30 feet, and only a single 
target area of 3-foot-diameter can be affected, 
causing up to 60 pounds of metal within this area 
to become heated. 

If three charges are expended, the possessor of 
the wand can cast any one of the following spells 
just as if he or she were an 18th-level wizard: 
crystalbrittle, glassee, or glassteel. 


of Metal Detection 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
This wand will point toward any type of metal 
named if within 20 feet and if 100 pounds or 
more in weight. The user cannot detect the 
amount of metal. 


of Metal and Mineral Detection 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This wand has a 30-foot radius range. It pulses in 
the wielder’s hand and points to the largest mass 
of metal within its effective area of operation. 
However, the wielder can concentrate on a spe- 


cific metal or mineral (gold, platinum, quartz, 
beryl, diamond, corundum, and so on). If the spe- 
cific mineral is within range, the wand will point 
to any and all places it is located, and the wand 
possessor will know the approximate quantity as 
well. Each operation requires one round. Each 
charge powers the wand for two full turns. The 
wand may be recharged. 


Mirynda’s Wand of 
Polymorphing 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 30,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 261 

Mirynda’s wand is a bit more efficient than others 
of the like; she is not limited to polymorphing her 
victims into small, inoffensive animals—she can 
change them into rocks, plants, or monsters with 
Hit Dice equal to the victim’s level. If she uses 
the wand as a range weapon (60’ range), then the 
effects are temporary, lasting 1d6+6 hours: tar- 
gets are entitled to a saving throw, with success 
indicating a miss. If she rolls a successful attack 
roll and touches her victim with the wand, then 
the effects are permanent; unless the victim 
makes a successful saving throw, in which case 
the effects are temporary, as above. 


of Misplaced Objects 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Tome of Magic 
This wand emits a multitude of golden orbs that 
rush toward a target creature. The orbs surround 
the victim, swirling wildly for one round. During 
this time the victim is confused and can take no 
action. 

At the end of the round, the orbs vanish and the 
victim is free to act. The escapee discovers, how- 
ever, that all objects on his or her person have 
been moved. Some items are inconveniently 
located, while others are nowhere to be seen. A 
warrior might find his magical ring on one of his 
toes, his sword in his pants, his gold pieces in the 
sheath of his sword, and his breastplate on his 
head. The more possessions a victim owns, the 
more confused the situation becomes. The DM is 
encouraged to be devious. 

Because of the chaotic placement of items, the 
victim suffers several penalties. Movement is 
reduced by half. Armor Class of characters wear- 
ing armor is reduced by 2, since pieces are not 
worn properly. Attack rolls made by the victim 
are made at a —2 penalty. These penalties are 
eliminated if the victim devotes 1d4+1 rounds to 
rearranging all gear. 

A character requiring an item carried in a 
backpack, pouch, pocket, or other container must 
spend 2d6 rounds searching for the item. The 


penalty is canceled if three turns are spent 
6078 


1487 


ne >= ee 


Wand, Mistletoe 


ip ia a EEE 


unpacking and repacking all gear. 

The DM must define the locations of objects 
any time a character reaches for them or if they 
impair motion or sight. When deciding locations 
of objects, the DM should state the obvious 
effects of impaired sight and movement immedi- 
ately, such as boots worn on hands or a cloak over 
the face. 

Items held within a bag of holding, Heward 's 
handy haversack, or other magical containers are 
unaffected. However, the containers themselves 
are subject to relocation. The wand uses one 
charge per attack. It may be recharged. 


Mistletoe 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
DRAGON Magazine 187 

This wand is created by druids who expect to 
spend extended periods of time away from their 
native grove. When manufactured, a mistletoe 
wand has exactly 80 charges (if found, it has 80 
~2d20 charges). The wand transforms into a shil- 
lelagh (as the |st-level spell) at no expenditure of 
charges. For one charge per round, the druid may 
use it to cast any one of these spells: invisibility to 
animals, locate animals or plants, detect snares 
and pits, and pass without trace (wielder only). 
The most important power of the wand, however, 
is its use as a substitute for greater mistletoe. Any 
spell that requires mistletoe as a material compo- 
nent may be cast with this wand as the compo- 
nent instead (one charge is expended if the wand 
is used this way). To do so, the druid grasps the 
wand and speaks a command word; these actions 
do not delay the casting of the spell (there is no 
initiative penalty to use this wand). The wand 
cannot be recharged. If the wand is buried in the 
grove where it was made after its charges have 
been depleted, the amount of mistletoe available 
for harvest from that grove during the next full 
moon is twice normal. 


Mystic 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DRAGON Magazine 139 
This 6-inch glass wand becomes the hilt of a 
sword of light when a command word is spoken 
The weapon may be wielded by anyone and 
causes 1d10 points of damage. Another command 
word shuts off the weapon. 


Nabil’s Wand of Magic Missiles 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 35,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 296 
Nabil’s version of the wand of magic missiles 
shoots forth up to two magical missiles in a single 
round, each inflicting 1d4+1 points of damage to 
targets. In addition, each missile leaves a bright 


glowing path and issues a high-pitched shriek as 
it streaks toward its target. Various missiles have 
a different color of flaming path, and the sound 
each make is slightly different, much as various 
fireworks sound and appear unique during a 
pyrotechnical display. 


of Negation 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 15,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This device negates the spell or magical functions 
of rods, staves, wands, and other magical items. 
The individual with the negation wand points the 
device, and a pale-gray beam shoots forth to 
touch the target device or individual. This totally 
negates any wand function, and makes any other 
spell or magical function from a device 75% 
likely to be negated, regardless of the level or 
power of the spell. The wand can function once 
per round, and each negation drains one charge. 
The wand cannot be recharged. 


Nidus’s Wand of Endless Repetition 

XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 40 

Named for the legendary wizard who by its use 
gave us the oath “Nidus’s Curse!”, examples of 
this device typically have but 4d12 charges when 
found. The art of its fabrication is lost and has not 
yet been rediscovered. Upon command, sucha 
wand emits a gray cone of light that reaches a 40- 
foot diameter at its maximum range of 15 feet. 
The cone may be continually maintained at a cost 
of one charge per round. Creatures caught in its 
light are allowed a saving throw. Any victim not 
having special magic resistance who is physically 
touched by the wand gets no saving throw. 

Anyone affected by the wand is forced to end- 
lessly repeat actions taken during the preceding 
two rounds (or at least mimic them, as in the case 
of a spellcaster, who would continually try to cast 
the particular spell even after his magic is 
exhausted). This automation-style cycle of two 
rounds of action, two rounds of the same actions 
in reverse to the starting position once again, and 
so on will continue until dispel magic, remove 
curse, or a wish is cast upon the victim. Even if 
the victim should die from lack of food and 
water, or from damage inflicted by passing crea- 
tures, the corpse endlessly completes the cycles 
until it falls apart. 


of Obliteration 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
The Magister 
The origin and means of making these rare and 
powerful wands are now lost. Six were discovered 
in a chest on the island realm of Ruathym over 
6084 


| a ae a 


1488 


eee eee ee eee eee 


Wand of Ochalor’s Eye 


j A A ee 


100 years ago. One is now thought to be in the 
treasury of that nation—the finders sold the 
others at enormous prices and their descendants 
are now wealthy merchant families of that nation. 

If any others have been found since, no one 
knows about it. The whereabouts of all are 
unknown. Elminster believes that only about 10 
have ever existed in the Realms; he can find no 
hint of even a single command word for any of 
them. The wands are said to be dangerous; some- 
times they turn back upon the user. 

This wand can harmlessly erase and dispel 
symbols, glyphs of warding, and other written 
messages and runes (such as a wizard mark). It 
can obliterate scrolls and even pages from spell 
books, but all such items (regardless of how writ- 
ten and on what) gain a saving throw vs. “magical 
fire” on the Saving Throw Matrix for Magical 
and Non-Magical Items, as if they were “parch- 
ment or paper,” with bonuses and penalties as fol- 
lows: 

* Normal, nonmagical writing: —3 

* Wizard mark, identifying rune or sigil for 
magical person or thing, command word, mes- 
sage concealed by unreadable magic: +1. 

* Symbol, glyph of warding, protective circle or 
other magical rune: +2 


* Single written spell (such as a scroll), secret ` 


page magic: +3. 

* Spellbook page (or scroll if in close proximity 
to other scrolls or spell books); includes all 
multispell scrolls, but not secret page spell 
book pages: +4. 

Messages and marks deeply cut into stone can- 
not be destroyed by this wand. Only one message 
(regardless of extent), spell, or magical rune can 
be affected with the wand per round, and the fad- 
ing (if successful) takes a full round. If an erasing 
attempt is unsuccessful, there is a 5% chance the 
wand will explode, doing 4d12+6 points of dam- 
age to all within 10 feet. The wand cannot be 
recharged, and each use, successful or not, drains 
one charge. Only wizards, illusionists, and incan- 
tatrixes can use this wand. 


of Ochalor’s Eye 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 15,000 
DRAGON Magazine 40 
This wand is topped with a fiery orange gem, 
known as Ochalor’s eye, or the eye of fear. It 
pulses with light, and when glowing acts as an 
extra-strong fear spell; all creatures within its 6- 
yard range (cone-shaped area of effect as in fear 
spell) drop anything in their hands and quake in 
fear, rooted to the spot. They stare at the eye gem 
in a trance, oblivious to all else. Creatures of 
under 6 Hit Dice get no saving throw; creatures of 
6 Hit Dice and over get a saving throw as follows: 


Hit Dice Save Penalty 
6 -3 
7 -2 
8 -1 
9+ Normal 


Creatures that are afraid are frozen to the spot 
unless the gem is hidden from their view or they 
are physically struck, upon which they break free 
of their trance and flee blindly, screaming in ter- 
ror, for five rounds (or longer, if they are not out 
of sight of the wand by that time). 

It is said that those who look into the lighted 
gem see the manner of their deaths, endlessly 
replayed. Others speak of some cold and malig- 
nant intelligence which seems to know all their 
hurts and fears—and laughs contemptuously at 
them. Few afterwards remember what of this is 
true, but their fear and hatred of Ochalor 5 eye 
remain. Any creature who has suffered the effects 
of the wand is 50% likely to attempt to destroy 
any wand of this type they subsequently 
encounter, regardless of whether it is held by 
friend or foe 

Each wink of the gem expends one charge. 
Upon draining all charges, the gem shatters. The 
wand cannot be recharged. 


Odin’s Rune 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 60,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 

This wand is golden with etched Nordic runes of 

power upon and around its surface. Every time 

this wand is used the particular rune that repre- 

sents the power being used will shine. The wand’s 

many powers are 

* Acts as a Rod of Rulership. 

* Summons the Elements. (1d4 Elementals of 
the user’s choice). 

* Conjure or Dispel fiend. The user may sum- 
mon or dispel a fiend once a month. 

* Emanates a continual antimagic spell. The 
user’s magic can work through this shell. 

* Stores 12 spells of the user’s choice. 

* Causes instantaneous death to any mortal or 
nondeity who handles it. 

* It cannot be detected by detect magic spells. 


of Orcus 
XP Value: 20,000 GP Value: 100,000 
Eldritch Wizardry 
The wand of Orcus, also known as the wand of 
death, is a rod of obsidian topped by a skull. When 
used by any other than Orcus himself, the wand 
has a 50% chance of annihilating any creature 
(except fiends, godlings, and the like) merely by 
touch, but subjects the user to one of the curses 


stated below each time this is tried. In addition, it 
6087 


ee ne ee eee 


1490 


| 


3 Wand of Prime Material Pocket 


bestows the following abilities/penalties: 

* Move at double speed. 

* Cure light wounds once a day. 

* Speak with animals. 

* Cause serious wound; user receives 2d12 
points of damage. 


Orgel’s Wand of Earth Passage 

XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 45,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 626 

Orgel’s wand is basically the same as a wand of 
corridors: it allows its user to clear short corridors 
through the Plane of Elemental Earth and the Qua- 
sielemental Plane of Minerals. One charge clears a 
10’x10’x50’ path through either plane. The wand 
does not affect living creatures, so it cannot be 
used to attack an earth elemental, for example. 
Orgels wand has an additional ability, though. The 
expenditure of two charges will open a portal to 
the Ethereal Plane, allowing the user and his com- 
rades to exit the planes of Earth and Minerals. 


of Paralyzation 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This wand shoots forth a thin ray of bluish color to 
amaximum range of 60 feet. Any creature touched 
by the ray must roll a successful saving throw vs. 
wand or be rendered rigidly immobile for 5d4 
rounds, A save indicates the ray missed, and there 
is no effect. As soon as the ray touches one crea- 
ture, it stops—the wand can attack only one target 
per round. The wand has an initiative modifier of 
+3, and each use costs one charge. The wand may 
operate once per round. It may be recharged. 


Phandore’s Wand of Fire 
XP Value: 4,700 GP Value: 30,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 263 

Coming from a family of elf blacksmiths, Phan- 
dore has imbued his wand with an extra black- 
smith-like quality. He can expend two charges 
from the wand, then it to touch a weapon and 
temper that weapon as if it had passed through 
the smithy’s forge many times. This operation 
adds +2 to the weapon’s attack and damage for its 
next 10 attack rolls. After that, the weapon reverts 
to its former status. The wand also performs all of 
the functions of a wand of fire. 


of Polymorphing 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This wand emits a thin, green beam that darts 
forth to a maximum distance of 60 feet. Any crea- 
ture touched by this beam must make a saving 
throw vs. wand (success indicating a miss) or be 
polymorphed (as the polymorph other spell). The 


wielder may opt to turn the victim into a snail, 
frog, insect, or other creature, as long as the result 
is a small and inoffensive creature. 

The possessor of the wand may elect to touch a 
creature with the device instead. Unwilling crea- 
tures must be hit and are also entitled to a saving 
throw. If the touch is successful, the recipient is 
surrounded by dancing motes of sparkling emer- 
ald light, and then transforms into whatever crea- 
ture-shape the wand wielder wants. This is the 
same magical effect as the polymorph self spell. 

Either function has an initiative modifier of 
+3. Each draws one charge. Only one function 
per round is possible. The wand may be 
recharged. 


of Portraiture 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Inside RAVEN’S BLUFF, THE LIvING City 

Late in their brief adventuring career, Jantz and 
Joli discovered the wand of portraiture and a small 
crystal ball set in an ornately carved wooden case. 
These items were near the remains of an ancient 
wizard in an old tower. The wand showed no signs 
of use, but signs of research were nearby. With 
some sage help, they discovered how to operate the 
wand. It functions by being pointed at the person 
or object, the command “Ready” causes a sphere 
of light to leap from the wand, centering at a dis- 
tance determined by the wizard holding the item. 
With hand motions and pronunciation of the words 
“bigger” or “smaller,” the caster changes the size 
and focus of the ball. A sphere 10 feet in diameter 
or less costs only one charge, while spheres up to 
100 feet in diameter costs two. A ball can be made 
as large as 1,000 feet in diameter with the expendi- 
ture of three charges. With the pronunciation of the 
word “flash,” the caster causes the image sur- 
rounded by the sphere to become embedded in a 
crystal ball, which the wand wielder must hold in 
his other hand. 

If a crystal ball is not held, the image appears 
briefly before dissipating, wasting the charges. 

Worried that the wand would run out of 
charges, the couple hired a well-known young 
researcher called Darsson Spellmaker. With the 
fragmented notes from the site of the discovery, 
and a great deal of work, Darsson was able to cre- 
ate a reasonable duplicate of the spell, which he 
calls portrait. The wand can be recharged as often 
as necessary with this spell. 


of Prime Material Pocket 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 28,000 
Tome of Magic 
This wand allows a spherical pocket to be created 
in any plane. The conditions within the pocket are 


similar to the environment of the wielder’s Prime 
6093 


Er es ras.” 


1491 


rr ee 


Wand of Revealing 


ee EE 


Material Plane. The pocket typically contains 
ground, air, and a controlled temperature. The 
lower third of the sphere is usually occupied by 
land and water, while the upper portion of the 
sphere is usually occupied by atmosphere. 

The surface of the pocket is semipermeable, 
allowing creatures to exit and enter the sphere, while 
keeping the elemental conditions of the pocket com- 
pletely separate from the Elemental Plane. 

One charge creates a sphere 10 feet in diameter. 
If the wielder wishes, multiple charges can be used 
to create larger spheres. Thus, a 30-foot-diameter 
sphere could be created using three charges. 

The conditions inside the pocket are of the 
wielder’s choosing, although they must be similar 
to an area that naturally exists on the Prime Mate- 
rial Plane. The pocket cannot contain buildings or 
human-made items. 

The pocket lasts 1d6+6 hours on any plane 
other than the Plane of Fire, on which the pocket 
will last 1d6 hours. The wielder may choose to 
use the wand before the pocket dissipates to 
extend the life of the existing pocket. The pocket 
can be destroyed through the use of a dispel 
magic spell. The wand is not rechargeable. 


of Revealing 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 25,000 
CARDMASTER Adventure Design Deck 
The wand locates secret doors (50% chance) and 
identifies traps (75%). 


Robin Goodfellow’s 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 25,000 
Tall Tales of the Wee Folk 

Robin Goodfellow (also known as Puck) has per- 
fected the art of polymorphing others, and has 
placed this ability into a wand. He can, with the 
use of this wand, polymorph opponents to the 
extent that he is able to transform just parts of 
another being, if he so wishes; for example, he 
has been known to change a man’s head into that 
of an ass. He can also cast such a partial poly- 
morph, with limited duration, as a curse. Each 
use of the wand that partially polymorphs an indi- 
vidual costs one charge from the wand. 


Runestick 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 40,000 
Moonshae 

The runestick is a kind of magical wand that can 
be created by a druid of at least 7th level, buta 
Dexterity of at least 14 is required. The runestick 
is a short piece of oak (about 12 inches long), 
carved with a detailed pattern of runes and then 
wrapped in mistletoe or holly. It can be used to 
store up to five spell-levels of druidic spells. 

The stick takes 1d4 hours to create for each 
spell level cast into it (roll separately for each 
spell). Upon completing the runestick, the druid 
must cast upon it the spells he or she wishes to 
store. The runestick crumbles to dust one month 
after its creation; it cannot be recharged. 

The spells stored in the runestick are cast at the 
level of the druid who enchanted the runestick. It 
can be used by any druid who knows the com- 
mand word. It can also be used by any maiden of 
pure heart (use the unicorn test to decide this) 
who knows the command word. However, when 
used by a nondruid, the effects of the spells 
(radius, range, damage, and so on) are halved and 
the victim receives a +4 modifier to saving 
throws. 


Rust 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 35,000 
DRAGON Magazine 126 
This wand, which may be used only by wu jen, is 
a potent weapon against armored foes. Every 
time a charge is expended, a pencil-thin ray ofa 
rusty red color streaks out. Any metal object hit 
acts as though a metal to rust spell had been cast 
on it. Note: because the beam is so thin, a save vs. 
wand means that the beam has missed and could 
thus strike something else. The beam will travel 
100 feet before dying out if it hits nothing. As 
with the spell, the wand may also transform rust 
to metal. If one charge is expended while the 
wand is swirled around in a pile of rust (here the 


rust may be due to any cause), the affected item is 
6097 


> 1492 = 


ee ee eS 


EEE N 


Wand of Secret Door & Trap Location 


En ee rN Tea 


restored as per the spell. If less than 90% of the 
item’s rust is in that spot, the spell will not work, 
but the one charge will still be expended. The 
wand may be recharged. 


of Salt 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Old Empires 
This evil wand is used by the followers of the 
Cult of Tiamat. The wand produces powerful 
cramps and thirst pangs in any who are struck by 
its beam, so they suffer 2d6 points of damage per 
round (half if a saving throw vs. wand is success- 
ful, with a new saving throw applicable each 
round). This continues until they spend one full 
round drinking water, in which case the cramps 
stop. This wand can also render a 50-x50-foot 
section of land infertile. The wand is made of 
saltsteel, a magically hardened salt whose manu- 
facture is known only to the wizards of Unther. 
The surface is overlain with sand to give ita 
sparkling appearance. Only two of these cruel 
weapons are known to exist. 


Sathallarin’s Wand of Wonder 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 10,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 299 

Sathallarin’s magical wand is similar in many 
ways to a typical wand of wonder—each time a 
charge is expended, an unusual event occurs. 
When Sathallarin uses his wand, however, not one 
but two and sometimes three (10% chance) dif- 
ferent effects are created simultaneously, produc- 
ing some even more bizarre occurrences. 


Scant Wand of Storms 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 40,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This wand was created in the capital city of 
Onnwal, and has been used against raiding war- 
ships from the South Province. Its creator was 
undoubtedly influenced by observing the furious 
weather in the Sea of Gearnat. 

The wand is usable only outdoors and creates 
various weather effects with the following expen- 
diture of charges: 

+ Wall of fog 
Precipitation 
Gust of wind 
Cloudburst 
Chain lightning 
Influence weather 3 

Chain lightning is similar to the wizard’s spell, 
but with a range of 70 yards. The bolt strikes the 
first object targeted for 6d6 of damage (half dam- 
age if a saving throw vs. wand is successful) arcs 
randomly to another object within range for 5d6 
of damage, then to another for 4d6, etc. The bolt 


o N Nm m 


continues arcing between each object struck, end- 
ing when a sixth object has been struck for 1d6 
points of damage. 

Influence weather is similar to the spell control 
weather, but can be used only to increase cloudi- 
ness, rain/snowfall, and/or wind velocity. 

Each time the wand is used, the general weather 
conditions over a broad area can become unex- 
pectedly severe. The chance for and type of 
severe weather depends on the original effect that 
the caster has attempted to summon: 


Chance for 
Effect Severe Type of Charges 
Attempted Weather Weather Drained 
Wall of fog 10% Thick, 
persistent fog 3 
Precipitation 10% Rain or snow 
squall 


3 
Gale or tornado 4 
Hailstorm or severe 


Gust of wind 20% 
Cloudburst 20% 


snow 4 
Chain 
lightning 30% Lightning storm 5 
Influence 
weather 30% Heavy rain or 
blizzard 5 


The charges drained for severe weather are 
immediately lost from the wand if the severe 
weather occurs. The wand can be recharged. 


of Secret Door Detection 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The user may find any secret door within 20 feet, 
using one charge per secret door found. 


of Secret Door & Trap Detection 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 40,000 
The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan 
This wand will point at the location of a trap or 
secret door or in the general direction; range 15’ for 
secret doors and 30’ for traps. It will not identify 
how the door or trap works. It can only be com- 
manded to detect one of the two choices at a time. 


of Secret Door & Trap Location 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DUNGEON MASTER GUIDE 
This wand has an effective radius of 15 feet for 
secret door location, 30 feet for trap location. 
When the wand is energized, it pulses in the 
wielder’s hand and points to all secret doors or 
traps within range. Note that it locates either 
doors or traps, not both during one operation. It 
requires one round to function and draws one 


charge. The wand may be recharged. 
6103 


F 1493 = 


o i ee 


~ Wand of Size Alteration r 


of Size Alteration 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A wand of this sort enables the wielder to cause any 
single creature of virtually any size to enlarge or 
diminish. Either effect causes a 50% change in size. 

Relative Strength and power increases or 
decreases proportionally, providing the weaponry 
employed is proportionate or usable. For humanoid 
creatures enlarged, Strength is roughly proportional 
to that of a giant of corresponding size. For exam- 
ple, a humanoid enlarged to 9 feet tall is roughly 
equivalent to a hill giant (19 Strength), a 13-foot- 
tall humanoid equals a fire giant (22 Strength). 

The wand’s power has a range of 10 feet. The 
target creature and all it is wearing or carrying is 
affected unless a saving throw succeeds. Note 
that a willing target need not make a saving 
throw. 

The effect of the wand can be removed by a dis- 
pel magic spell, but if this is done, the target must 
roll a system shock check. It can also be countered 
if the possessor of the wand wills the effect to be 
canceled before the duration of the effect expires. 
Each use of the wand (but not the cancellation of 
an effect) expends one charge. It can be recharged 
by a wizard of 12th or higher level. 


of Sleep 

GP Value: 20,000 
Old Empires 
This wand is constructed from green willow 
vines from Ganathwood that are entwined and 
enchanted to become hard as stone. When the 
command word is spoken, the wand emits an 80- 
foot-long cone of sleeping gas, 10 feet wide at its 
base and 30 feet wide at its end. All caught in this 
cone must roll successful saving throws vs. wand 
or fall asleep for 3d4 rounds. Creatures with 
immunities to sleep have their normal resistances 
against the effect of this wand. This wand may be 
used only by a wizard. 


XP Value: 4,000 


of the Squid 

GP Value: 20,000 
The Final Enemy 
This is a device peculiar to high-level sahuagin 
priests. A slender wand about 11 inches long, it 
may be made of a variety of materials—bone, 
coral, stone, silver, almost anything. If it is 
pointed at an opponent and the command word 
spoken, the wand emits a thin, gray ray up to a 
range of 60 feet. The victim suffers 4d4 points of 
damage in the first round and is held (as the spell 
hold person cast at the 12th-level of spell use, so 
the effects last for 16 rounds). After the first 
round there is no further damage but the hold 
effect continues. The wand can, of course, be dis- 


XP Value: 5,000 


charged again at the same opponent if the user 
wishes to cause more damage. The effect is lim- 
ited to one victim, who gets the benefit of a nor- 
mal saving throw. If the victim makes the save, 
the initial damage is halved (2d4 points) and the 
hold does not take effect. 

The device will hold up to 100 charges, one 
charge being expended each time the device is 
used, and can be recharged. It requires a com- 
mand word to operate and may be used only by 
the priest class (including druids, and paladins 
and rangers of high enough experience level to 
cast priest spells). 


of Steam and Vapor 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 25,000 
Unearthed Arcana | 

A wand of this sort has two separate functions, 

each of which requires the expenditure of one 

charge: 

* Steam: The wand will spout forth a jet of 
superheated steam in a cone 10'x30'x50’. 
Any creature within this area takes 6d6 points 
of damage. The cloud persists, slowly cooling, 
so that on the second round it inflicts 4d6 
damage, and on the third and last round it 
causes 2d6 damage. Saving throws apply for 
half damage in all cases. Naturally, fire- 
dwelling or fire-using creatures will not be 
harmed by the steam—aunless they are harmed 
by dampness. 

* Vapor: The wand will gout forth billows of 
warm, steamy vapors. These vapors are equal to 
a fog cloud of 40-foot depth, 60-foot height, and 
80-foot breadth. This vaporous cloud persists 
for six rounds, remaining stationary unless 
moved about by magical or nonmagical breezes 
or winds. Cold-using creatures will suffer | 
point of damage per round while inside the 
vapor cloud, and cold-dwelling creatures will 
take twice that amount of damage. 


of the Sun 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 8,000 
A Dozen and One Adventures 

This wand discharges a shining golden ray up to 
30 yards long, similar in effect to the 3rd-level 
fire spell sunscorch. The luminous beam strikes 
its target unerringly, baking the target for 6d4 
points of damage plus an additional 2d4 if the tar- 
get is wearing metal armor or touching any metal 
weapon or item larger than a sword. Each use 
expends two charges. 

The wand of the sun, a favorite weapon among 
powerful members of the Brotherhood of True 
Flame, can be wielded by both fire mages and wiz- 
ards skilled in fire magic. However, it can only be 


recharged by a fire mage of 12th level or higher. 
6108 


Ao O T a O 


1494 


Be o O o o ne aM E Meo 


Wand of Trap Detection 


Tins 


of Teeth 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 15,000 

The Magister 
Lantan of Pelmarin, that sinister and rotund wiz- 
ard notorious for his ruthless domination of the 
wizards of the South through poison, subterfuge, 
and awesome magic, is said to have looked like a 
pomegranate in death. “Full of holes,” said the 
merchant Zustel of Amn, who viewed the body, 
“holes right through!” Lantan came out the loser 
in a battle with the bard Tamshan, a grim but gen- 
tle man who possessed a spell Lantan wanted. 
Tamshan still holds the cause of Lantan’s 
demise—a wand of teeth, one of the only seven 
known to exist. 

The origin and method of manufacturing these 
devices is lost in antiquity, and the few remaining 
wands are all thought to still possess only a few 
charges each. Anczibul of Neverwinter spent 
much of his apprenticeship to the Archmage 
Khelben “Blackstaff” Arunsun studying Khel- 
ben’s specimen of the wand, and from his diaries 
Elminster has decoded the hidden command 
word of Khelben’s wand, “Neverretha.”’ The Book 
of Bulgo, written by the Southern merchant of 
that name, attests that Elzir of Calimshan pos- 
sessed a wand of teeth and that its word of com- 
mand was “Orlethar.” 

This wand is not rechargeable; it calls forth a 
certain number of “teeth” (one per charge), fir- 
ing at targets up to 70 feet distant. The missiles 


it fires are daggerlike wedges or blades of force 
that coalesce out of nothingness within one sec- 
ond of activation. (Actually, Elminster believes 
they are drawn from material and kinetic energy 
from the Positive Energy Plane.) In the next seg- 
ment they flash arrow-straight from the tip of 
the wand to the extent of the wand’s range, pass- 
ing through everything in their paths except 
spheres of annihilation, prismatic spheres, 
shield spells, and walls or cubes of force, all of 
which swallow or absorb them. A forcecage 
spell, or an existing armor (as in the Ist-level 
wizard spell or that caused by the wand of 
armory) deflects a tooth. 

A strike by a tooth does 2d6+2 points of dam- 
age (save vs. spell reduces the damage by half) 
and strikes (as though a hand weapon directly 
wielded by the wand-wielder) at +2 on the attack 
roll. Solid rock deflects a tooth; any other mater- 
ial is struck and damaged by it, although magical 
items cause any plus they possess to be sub- 
tracted from the tooth’s attack roll. Wind wall and 
gust of wind spells, and similar air disturbances 
(such as those caused by windwalkers or air ele- 
mentals) have no effect on the flight of a tooth. 
All classes may employ this wand. 


Thithion’s Wand of Fire 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 30,000 
1993 Collector Card 495 

Thithion s wand functions just like a typical wand 
of fire, allowing the user to create the burning 
hands, pyrotechnics, fireball, and wall of fire 
spell effects. Thithion’s wand, however, generates 
the vilest, blackest flames of pure darkness. 
These flames burn just as hotly, inflicting just as 
much damage as normal ones, yet they discharge 
no light whatever. In fact, they absorb light from 
all sources, dimming the light level in a 60-foot 
area and creating the effects of a fear spell. 


Titania’s 
XP Value: 15,000 GP Value: 75,000 
Monster Mythology 

Titania’s avatar’s wand functions as a staff of power 
with the diamond atop it a gem of brilliance. It also 
gives +2 protection and radiates both protection 
from evil 30' radius and a prayer effect. From her 
wand, Titania’s avatar can create the following 
effects twice per day each: create food and water, 
heroes feast, and purify food and water. 


of Trap Detection 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEONS & DraGons Rules Cyclopedia 
This wand will point at all traps within 20 feet, 
one at a time, at a cost of one charge per trap 


found. 
6112 


1495 


rr 


~ Wand of the Underdark f 


of the Underdark 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 19,000 
MENZOBERRANZAN Campaign Set 

This wand can be used once per turn, to perform 

one of the following effects: 

* Darkness 30' radius: This expanded sphere of 
darkness will remain for a time period (up to 
permanent) specified by the caster at the time 
of the casting. It can be cast up to 120 feet 
away. 

¢ Silence 30' radius: This effect works within 
the same parameters as darkness, above. 

* Detect Magic: The wand can be used to indi- 
cate an object or area (up to a medium size 
room or 60 feet section of corridor). It will 
indicate whether the item is under any sort of 
enchantment, though it will not provide any 
further definition. 


of Viscid Globs 

XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 25,000 

Tantras 
Thought to be of drow manufacture, the wand of 
viscid globs is used as a deterrent or as a way to 
keep prisoners inescapably bound. When it is 
activated, a sphere of magical energy—appearing 
as a “glob” of some unknown substance—is pro- 
jected toward an intended target within 60 feet. A 
target that is able to move is allowed a saving 
throw vs. wand to dodge the glob, but someone or 
something that is bound or otherwise immobile 
cannot prevent the glob from striking. The wand 
can be used once per round. 

Solid items within the 5-foot-diameter glob 
when it strikes its target are permanently bound 
to one another—hands to weapons, armor to bod- 
ies, and so on. The specific effect on any charac- 
ter or creature struck depends on the position and 
orientation of the character’s body at the instant 
when the glob makes contact. A standing charac- 
ter will be rooted to the spot, but if he was hold- 
ing his weapon away from his body (and if the 
attachment of armor or clothing to skin does not 
completely hinder movement) he may still be able 
to use his weapon to defend himself. Globs are 
most often used to firmly bind victims who have 
already been trussed up by ropes or chains, mak- 
ing escape virtually impossible. 

No amount of struggling will enable a trapped 
character or creature to be free of a glob; all that 
will happen, if the victim tries hard enough, is 
minor damage (1d3 points per attempt) from 
strained or torn muscles. The magic of a glob 
negates any contrary magic that might have been 
available to or in effect upon a targeted character 
or creature (such as a ring of free action). A char- 
acter struck while flying or swimming will sink 
slowly to the ground (taking no damage from the 


fall) and will not be glued to the solid surface he 
comes in contact with, but may be frozen in posi- 
tion and unable to move—which could be a seri- 
ous problem for someone whose water breathing 
spell is about to expire. 

Dispel magic will cause a glob to vanish, and 
ordinary alcohol will dissolve a glob; a flask of 
wine contains enough liquid to undo the effects 
of two globs. The effect of the globs is not cumu- 
lative; a character already contained within one 
cannot be further affected by repeated applica- 
tions of the magic. 


of Warding 
XP Value GP Value 
Good-aligned version: 4,000 20,000 
Evil-aligned version: 4,000 20,000 


The Magister 

This device is not rechargeable. It can perform a 
variety of magical functions, one at a time and 
only once per round. All such spells are cast as if 
by a 12th-level wizard, rather than operating at 
the 6th level of expertise. All such effects emanate 
from the wand and protect the wand wielder 
only—protection from evil (two charges), push 
(one charge), shield (one charge), wall of force 
(four charges), guards and wards (six charges), 
repulsion (five charges). 

Ten percent of these wands casi protection 
from good rather than protection from evil but are 
not themselves aligned and otherwise operate 
identically. 


Roll Wand Type 
01-90 Good wand of warding 
91-00 Evil wand of warding 


of Water Finding 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Old Empires 

This useful item has saved many travelers in the 
desert heat. If this wand is activated within 50 
miles of any source of drinking water, the wand 
begins to vibrate; the closer the wand is to water, 
the stronger the wand vibrates. If water lies 
beneath the surface at a depth of 500 feet or less, 
the wand shoots a beam into the earth that draws 
water to the surface. The water found by this 
wand is always drinkable; it may not be pure, but 
it generally does not adversely affect the health of 
the character, 


of Whips 

GP Value: 12,000 
The Magister 
First used by the fell Wizards of Thay, whose 
wands create red, barbed whips (and have never 


been known to pass out of the wizards’ posses- 
6118 


XP Value: 2,500 


1496 


Wand of Wonder 


sion), the secrets of making such wands were 
passed west through unknown means (probably a 
renegade apprentice, such as the Adept of Mul- 
master or one of the Cowled Wizards of Amn). 
Wizards such as Nelver and Tusprun of the Ten 
Smokes are known to use such devices. One is 
thought to have been lost in the Vast Deeps when 
the sorcerer Alamanth was slain in battle aboard a 
ship off of Port Llast. 

Alamanth set down precise details of the pow- 
ers and means of using his wand—save for the 
command word, which is thought to have died 
with him—and it is from his records that Elmin- 
ster passes on all details of this type of wand. 

This wand shoots forth a whip-shaped field of 
white, shimmering magical force to a maximum 
(horizontal and vertical) range of 70 feet. The 
wielder of the wand names, looks at, or concen- 
trates upon a specific target creature or automa- 
ton (golem, undead, homonculus, and even 
invisible targets), and the whip attacks that crea- 
ture and that creature only. The whip remains in 
existence for four rounds; if the target is beyond 
70 feet from the wand when it is cast, the whip 
flashes instantly (in one segment) to the limit of 
its range, and hangs motionless, waiting, at the 
point closest to its target. Otherwise the whip 
strikes once per round, as a Quaal 5 feather token 
does: at +1 on attack and damage rolls, doing 1d6 
points of damage per strike, and binding fast an 
opponent for 1d6+1 rounds if a save vs. spell is 


not made after each successful strike. 

Once a whip has bound an opponent, the wand 
wielder cannot release it to strike again. The whip 
cannot change targets. A whip may follow an 
opponent that it has struck at least once, beyond 
70 feet, moving with the target, even if the target 
teleports, blinks, plane shifis, or enters a rock or 
plant. The whip can strike invisible and ethereal, 
but not astral, creatures without penalty. The 
wand of whips may be recharged. Only wizards 
may wield it. 


Witch 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine $ 

This wand can execute up to 10 charges each day, 
doing so until the wand’s charges are expended. It 
is capable of the following spells, all of which 
function as the wizard (or priest) spells of the 
same name: 

1 Charge per use: charm person, continual light, 
cure light wounds, darkness, hold person, locate 
object, and remove fear. 

2 Charges per use: charm monster, curse (reverse 
of remove curse), neutralize poison, plant door, 
plant growth, polymorph others, polymorph self, 
and remove curse. 

3 charges per use: change self, commune, dis- 
missal, hold monster, restoration, summon ele- 
mental (as summon shadow), and wither’. 

Wither is a magical power that causes all living 
plants within a 50-foot radius (centered on the 
wand-user’s location) to rapidly age and die, 
much like the effect of a defiler’s spellcasting in a 
DARK SUN Campaign. 

The wand has additional powers. It acts as a 
medallion of ESP and as a permanently cast pro- 
tection from normal missiles spell. The wand 
shields the holder from lycanthropes, undead, and 
elementals, acting as a ring of protection +3 
against their attacks. 


of Wonder 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

The wand of wonder is a strange and unpre- 
dictable device that generates any number of 
unusual effects, randomly, each time it is used. 
The usual effects are shown on the table below, 
but you may alter these for any or all of these 
wands in your campaign as you see fit. Possible 
functions of the wand include 


Roll Effect 

01-10 Slow creature pointed at for one turn. 

11-18 Deludes wielder for one round into 
believing the wand functions as indi- 


cated by a second die roll. 
6120 


1497 


eo iin 


Wand of Wonder II 


[Si EEE E ENT 


Rolle Effect 

19-25 Gust of wind, double force of spell. 

26-30 Stinking cloud at 30-foot range. 

31-33 Heavy rain falls for one round in 60- 
foot radius of wand wielder. 

34-36 Summon animal: 

01-25 Rhino 

26-50 Elephant 

51-00 Mouse 

37—46 Lightning bolt (70'x5") as wand. 

47—49 Stream of 600 large butterflies pour 
forth and flutter around for two rounds, 
blinding everyone (including wielder). 

50-53 Enlarge target if within 60 feet of wand. 

54-58 Darkness in a 30-foot diameter hemi- 
sphere centered at a 30-foot distance 
from wand. 

59-62 Grass grows in area of 160 square feet 
before the wand, or grass existing there 
grows to 10 times normal size. 

63-65 Vanish any nonliving object of up to 
1,000 pounds mass and up to 30 cubic 
feet in size (object is ethereal). 

66-69 Diminish wand wielder to 2 height. 

70-79 Fireball as wand. 

80-84 Invisibility covers wand wielder. 

85-87 Leaves grow from target if within 60 
feet of wand. 

88-90 10d4 gems of | gp base value shoot forth 
in a 30-foot-long stream, each causing | 
point of damage to any creature in path— 
roll 5d4 for number of hits. 

91-97 Shimmering colors dance and play over 
a 40'x30’ area in front of the wand— 
creatures therein blinded for 1d6 
rounds. 

98-00 Flesh to stone (or reverse if target is 


stone) if target is within 60 feet. 


The wand uses one charge per function. It may 
not be recharged. Where applicable, saving 
throws should be made. 


of Wonder II 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 147 
The guidelines for the wand of wonder state that 
the DM may see fit to change the wand’s effects. 
This has been done for three new wands of won- 
der. It should be noted that all of these wands’ 
magical effects are at the 6th-level of magic use 
with regard to damage, range, duration, area of 
effect, and so on, as applicable. Saving throws are 
applicable for the spell effects in question or as 
stated in each wand’s effects. Most effects should 
be removable with a dispel magic spell, cast 
against the 6th-level of use, unless otherwise 
noted. Special game effects should be determined 


by the DM (heavy rain might make some surfaces 
very slick, wash away small items, and ruin 
books and papers). Summoned creatures disap- 
pear if slain, and summoning effects otherwise 
conform to the monster summoning spell of the 
level appropriate to the type of creature produced. 
Nonliving items that are produced are permanent 
and cannot be dispelled. 

These wands use only one charge per usage, and 
they can never be recharged. It is highly recom- 
mended that the DM roll all of each wand’s effects 
in order to keep the nature of the roll-up tables a 
secret; the number of charges in each wand should 
also be kept secret so players do not overuse them 
(this is true of any rod, staff, or wand). 

Note that, in the hands of a leprechaun (see 
Wand, of Wonder IV, effect 85-87), a wand of 
wonder is very dangerous, as any desired effect 
can be created on command. 


Roll Effect 

01-10 The wand fires a web (like the spell; the 
wand acts as one anchor point). 

The wand shocks the wielder as per a 
shocking grasp spell; the wielder must 
make a Dexterity check on 1d20 at -2 
to keep holding the wand. 

Reverse gravity affects the target and all 
within a 30-foot radius (including the 
caster, if close enough) for 1d4+1 
rounds. 


11-18 


19-25 


6121 


CUO T 


Wand of Wonder II y- 


Roll Effect 

26-30 Tasha's uncontrollable hideous laugh- 
ter affects the target creature. 

31-33 800 small rubber balls (each 1 inch in 
diameter) rain down for 1d4 rounds 
within a 30-foot radius of the wielder, 
causing all in the area to make a Dex- 
terity check on 1d20 or trip and fall. 
The balls remain in the area, causing 
further checks at the start of each round 
of combat, until they are carried or 
swept away. 

34-36 The wand summons: 

01-25 Large dove (AC 7; MV 1, F136 (MC 
D); HD 4; #AT 1; Dmg 1; AL N). 

26-50 Large rabbit (AC 6; MV 18; HD 4; 
#AT 1; Dmg 1; AL N). 

51-00 Large iguana (AC 4; MV 18, Sw 16; 
HD 3; #AT 1; Dmg 1d4; AL N). 

37-46 The wand casts chain lightning at the 
target. 

47-49 The target creature and the wielder are 
covered in liquid chocolate. 

50-53 Haste affects the target. 

54-58 The wand casts hold monster at the target. 

59-62 Suds flow from the ground in a 90-foot 
radius around the wielder for 1d4+1 
rounds, at 3 cubic feet per round. The 
suds are either from: 

01-25 Soap. 

26-00 Beer. 

63-65 The target creature is polymorphed as 
per a wand of polymorphing into: 

01-75 A random creature; DM selects any 
random-monster table and rolls 
there. 

76-00 Nonliving item; DM selects from the 
Random Tables, this volume. 


66-69 The wand wielder spins: 

01-50 Clockwise 
51-00 Counterclockwise for 1d4 rounds and 
must make a Dexterity check in order to 
move or act each round thereafter for 
1d4 rounds. 
The wand heals the wielder for 1d8 hp 
if currently wounded. 
The wand fires a magic missile as per a 
wand of magic missiles. 
The target inflates like a balloon for 
1d4 rounds and deflates for another 1d4 
rounds; only living material of up to 
1,000 pounds is affected (the object 
will not float in the air). 
The wand stretches out and flies at the 
target for 2d6 points of damage (treat as 
6+4-HD creature; maximum range 90 
feet). 
The wand wielder breathes fire as a ran- 


70-79 
80-84 


85-87 


88-90 


98-00 


XP Value: 6,000 


Roll 
01-10 
11-18 


19-25 
26-30 
31-33 


34-36 
01-25 


26-50 


51-00 


37-46 


47-49 


50-53 
54-58 
59-62 


63-65 


66-69 


1499 


domly determined potion of fire breath- 
ing (only one breath use is allowed). 
The target is disintegrated as per the 
spell. 


of Wonder II 
GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 147 
Effect 
Scare is cast at the target. 
The wielder is affected by an irritating 
rash for 1d4 rounds, reducing Dexterity 
to 3. 
Darkness affects the target every other 
round for 1d8+2 rounds. 
Fumble affects the target at double nor- 
mal duration. 
The wand begins to gripe about the 
wielder’s treatment of it, loudly complain- 
ing about the bad working conditions, the 
lousy pay, the long working hours, etc. 
(this effect is similar to that of a magic 
mouth; the wand is not actually sentient). 
The wand summons 
Buzzard (AC 6; MV 3, Fl 27 (MC 
E); HD 1+1; #AT 1; Dmg 1d2; AL 
N). 
Giraffe (AC 7; MV 24; HD 5; #AT 
2; Dmg 1d4/1d4; AL N). 
Large kitten (AC 6; MV 5; HD %; hp 
1; #AT 3; Dmg 1/1/1; SA rear claws 
for 1/1; AL N). 
A delayed blast fireball takes effect 
from the point of casting, with a delay 
time of 1d4 rounds. 
The target and wielder are “exchanged” 
—that is, the wielder takes the place of 
the target, and the target takes the place 
of the wielder, exchanging clothes, 
equipment, etc., but otherwise retaining 
their normal physical appearances. 
Confusion affects the target. 
Mirror image affects the target. 
The target begins to recite very bad 
poetry for 2d4 rounds, taking no other 
action unless attacked, as if requested to 
do so under a charm spell. 
A dust devil is summoned (AC 4; MV 
18; HD 2; #AT 1; Dmg 1d4; AL N) and 
attacks the target as per the dust devil 
spell. 
Jump affects the wielder randomly. 


1 Forward 10 feet 

2 Left 10 feet 

3 Backward 20 feet 

4 Right 30 feet 

5-6 The wielder can jump only 10 
feet backward. 


6122 


~ Wand of Wonder IV r 


70-79 A force cage affects the target. 
80-84 The wielder is affected by a strength 
spell. 
85-87 The target’s weapon becomes: 
01-25 A teddy bear 
26-50 A leg of mutton 
51-75 A ladle 
76-00 =A herring 
If the target has no weapon, choose another 
possession. If the target has no possessions, 
roll again, ignoring this result. 
88-90 The wand spews colorless slime in a 
cone 30 feet wide and 6 feet long, 


affecting the area as a grease spell. 
91-97 A spell effect affects the target. 
01-50 Fear. 


51-00 Faerie fire. 
98-00 An incendiary cloud affects the target 
area. 


of Wonder IV 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 147 


01-10 Achromatic orb affects the target. 
11-18 The wielder is affected as if he had 
imbibed a philter of stammering & stut- 
tering. 
19-25 The wand creates a flaming sphere 
which affects the target. 
26-30 A ray of enfeeblement affects the target. 
31-33 The wand causes on of the following: 
01-25 A pillow 
26-75 A small table 


76-00 An anvil 

The pillow causes no damage; the table 
causes 1d6 points of damage (as a club); and 
the anvil causes 3d10 points of damage, and 
the target must make a Constitution check at 
—4 or be knocked unconscious for 2d6 turns. 


34-36 The wand summons 

01-25 An ugly painting 

26-50 Bellows 

51-00 A storm giant’s boot 

37-46 The wand affects the target as per a ring 
of the ram (3 charges expended at once). 

47-49 The wand fires 1d4+2 cream puffs at 
the target, doing no damage. 

50-53 The target is imbued with improved 
invisibility. 

54-58 Fascinate affects the target, who 
focuses on the wielder. 

59-62 The wand causes the target’s nose to 
grow 10 times its normal size for 1d4+2 
rounds, 

63-65 The target is affected as if a potion of 
gaseous form was imbibed. 

66-69 The wielder /evitates uncontrollably, 


always heading upward until the spell 


duration is reached (at which point the 
wielder falls). 

Evard’s black tentacles takes effect 
around the target. 

The wielder is affected by a stoneskin 
spell. 

The wand summons a leprechaun (AC 
8; MV 15; HD 1-1; hp 1d4+1; #AT nil; 
SA/SD spells, theft, 80% magic resis- 
tance AL N). The DM should play the 
leprechaun to the hilt, it will try to gain 
control of the wand that summoned it 
and cause complete chaos for as long as 
possible. 

A randomly chosen item on the target's 
person sprouts wings and attacks 
another enemy target for 1d2+1 rounds 
as a 6+4- HD creature. Only small hand 
held objects are so affected, and the 
DM should decide what the item is and 
what its combat statistics are (see the 
animate object spell). 

The wand fizzles for 1d4+1 rounds, 
then causes a hypnotic pattern to 
appear, affecting all within range who 
gaze upon it. 

A cone of cold affects the target area at 
double normal damage. 


of Wonder V 
(Alternative Wand of Wonder) 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 58 


70-79 
80-84 
85-87 


88-90 


91-97 


98-00 


1D20 

Roll Effect 

01 Summon 
01-50 Monkey 
51-75 Ape 
76-00 Baboon 


02 An invisible organ plays for 1d6 rounds. 
03 Target sprouts wings for 1d12 rounds. 
04 Wielder sings for 1d4 rounds. 

05 Target smells like horse dung. 

06 A 4-foot tall banana appears and dances 
for 1d8 rounds. 

07 5d4 roses shoot forth in a 20-foot long 
stream. 

08 The target’s armor turns to leaves. 

09 The target is turned invisible. 

10 The wielder must shout instead of talk 
for 1d4 rounds. 

11 The target grows a tail. 

12 An owlbear appears, runs toward the 
target, and hugs the victim for 1d4 
rounds. 

13 Mushrooms grow out of the target’s 
ears. 

14 Two tentacles grow on the wielder’s 

6124 


Wand of a Wonder r 


shoulders. 

15 Target’s hair turns into snakes. 

16 It rains in a 30-foot radius centered on 
the wielder for 1d10 rounds. 

17 Target is polymorphed into a dog. 

18 The target’s nose grows two inches 
longer. 

19 A meteor swarm detonates on the 
wielder, as the 9th-level spell. 

20 The wielder magic jars into the target’s 
body. 


of a Wonder 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 

Quite similar to its cousins, the ever-popular 
wands of wonder, this item produces strange and 
unpredictable results for users of any class or 
type. The exact effect produced in any single use 
is determined by a random 1d100 roll, with refer- 
ence to the following chart. The wand uses one 
charge per function. It may not be recharged. 
Allow saving throws wherever applicable, vs. 
wand unless the effect suggests another category. 
The wand performs at 6th-level of experience, 
and all physical changes produced (growths, 
polymorphs, and so forth) can be dispelled. 


Roll Effect 

01-02 Target loses all hair, fur, or feathers. 

03-07 Pit 10 feet deep (any necessary width) 
opens under target’s feet. 

08-09 Target gains +1 attack bonus for the 
next three rounds. 

10-11 One Hundred small bats appear, swarm 
around the wielder’s head for one round, 
then flit away. 

12-13 Target grows wings, arms, or tentacles. 

14-15 Cage of heavy iron bars (10'x10'x10') 
surrounds the wielder. 

16-17 Each piece of headgear within 20 feet 
(including helmets) changes to a skull- 
cap topped by a bladed device, the 
blades turning in a breeze. 

18-22  Target’s color turns to hot pink. 

23-25 All gold within 10 feet of the wielder 
turns to lead. 

26-29 Target is covered with a thick layer of 
honey. 

30-32 1n each of the next five rounds, 2d4 sp 
shoots forth from each of the wielder’s 
ears. 

33-34 Target is garbed in a beautiful, well-tai- 
lored, embroidered silk coat (2,000 gp 
value, but magical and dispellable). 

35-39 Target is polymorphed into a giant rab- 


bit (as the polymorph other spell: check 
for mental change). 


40-41 


42-43 


44-48 


49-52 


53-55 


56-57 


58-62 


63—68 


69-70 


71-75 


76-77 


78-84 


85-86 


87-90 


91-95 


96-99 
00 


Target grows a large moustache in one 
round (possibly with goatee). 
Thousands of horseflies fill the area 
within 10 feet of the wielder, interfering 
with concentration and preventing spell 
casting and combat. They remain for 
5d4 turns but will not leave the area 
except to follow honey. 

Target is affected by Otto’ irresistible 
dance for three rounds (no saving 
throw). 

Stream of acid shoots out to 10-foot 
range, inflicting 3d8 points of damage 
(as if dragon breath; save for half dam- 
age). 

Band instruments appear between the 
wielder and the target. They play loudly 
and march back and forth for 1d4+2 
rounds, as if used by invisible musi- 
cians, then vanish. Anyone trying to 
interfere takes 2d6 points of damage 
and is hurled back 10 feet. 

Tree grows under the wielder, lifting to 
the ceiling or 50-foot height, whichever 
is less. 

One hundred dead and putrid fish rain 
down within 30 feet of the wielder. 
Target glows for five rounds (as if dou- 
ble-intensity faerie fire), but thereafter 
the wielder vanishes (invisible, not dis- 
pellable) for 1d4+1 rounds. 

The sound of ringing bells peals from 
the wand, drowning out all noise and 
speech for 1d4+1 rounds. 

Dispel magic effect on everything 
within 20 feet of the wand, as if an 
11th-level caster. 

Wielder is polymorphed into a mule- 
centaur. 

Monster summoning IV spell effect, as 
if cast by the wand wielder. 

Target gains 3d4 hit points that remain 
for six turns (cannot be dispelled; dam- 
age taken is first removed from added 
hit points). 

Wielder floats 10 feet up (as if feather- 
fall in reverse gravity), hovers for 
1d4+2 rounds, then drops suddenly. * 
Eight fiery spheres of different hues 
shoot forth at one-segment intervals, 
striking the target and seemingly caus- 
ing great amounts of damage (actually 
only | point from each). 

All weapons held in hand within 30 feet 
turn into bunches of flowers. 

Death magic directed at target (60-foot 
maximum range). 


Wand of Wondrousness 


of Wondrousness 


XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 10,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 48 

The wand’s effects are rarely decisive, sometimes 
helpful, and usually fun. It is best introduced 
when a hostile wizard uses it against the adven- 
turers. Each time the wand is used, the player 
rolls 1d100 to determine what happens. The wand 
often backfires, so the user rolls 1d4, and if “1” is 
rolled, the effect is reversed. Creatures conjured 
obey the user (or opponent if the effect is 
reversed); they disappear after six rounds. Inani- 
mate objects last until dispelled. Magical effects 
last for the listed duration or for six rounds. Max- 
imum range is 60’ unless noted otherwise. The 
DM is free to decide how often the wand can be 
used (no more than once a round please), whether 
it has charges, and whether it can be recharged. 


Roll Wand Effects 

01 User develops hiccups, no action next 
round (no possibility of reverse effect). 

02 Gust of wind, 60' long, from wand 
toward target creature. 

03 Fireworks; everybody with 80’ of target 
creature blinded and disoriented for two 
rounds (—4 on attack rolls and saving 
throws). 

04 Miniature snowstorm appears over tar- 
get creature. 

05 Paralysis ray at target creature (save vs. 


1502 


06 


Dexterity or be paralyzed for 20 rounds 
minus Constitution score). 

Brightly colored flashing lights cover a 
15’ radius around target; all creatures in 
the area save vs. wand or are stunned 
1d4 rounds. 

Attack dog (HD 1; hp 2; AC 6; #AT 1; 
Dmg 1; THACO 19). 

Attack cat (HD 1; hp 2; AC 6; #AT l; 
Dmg 1; THACO 19). 

Darkness spell (5' radius) on target 
creature (save vs. spell or it moves with 
creature). 

Enlarge target creature to twice normal 
size (double damage), no save. 

Slow spell on one target creature, no 
save, 

Attack rat (HD 1; hp 2; AC 6; #AT 1; 
Dmg 1; THACO 19; SA infects target 
creature with leptospirosis on an attack 
roll of 20). 

Faerie fire on one target creature, no 
save. 

Popcorn sprays from wand at target 
creature. 

Lightning bolt 10' wide and 40’ long, 2 
points of damage. 

Attack chicken (HD 1; hp 2; AC 6; #AT 
1; Dmg nil, THACO 19; SA target crea- 
ture is —4 on attack rolls and saving 
throws while chicken attacks). 
Whiskey sprays from wand at target 
creature. 

Ten fake gems shoot from wand at tar- 
get creature, no damage, each worth | 
gp. 

Reduce target creature to half normal 
size (half damage), no save. 

Magic missile at target creature (one 
missile, 1d6 damage). 

Attack viper (HD 1; hp 2; AC 6; #AT 1; 
Dmg nil; THACO 19; SA hit causes 
save vs. poison or lose | hp per round 
for four rounds). 

Confusion spell on one target creature. 
Thin ray of cold (2 points of damage). 
Meteor (automatically strikes target 
creature for 2 points of damage, then 
explodes for 2 points of fire damage in 
10’ radius). 

Swarm of attack wasps covers target 
creature, save vs. petrification or flee 
until they go away. 

Flowers shoot from wand at target 
creature. 

Acid shoots from wand in a 60’ stream 
(save vs. Dexterity or take 2 points acid 
damage). 


Wand of Wondrousness r 


28 


29 
30 


31 
32 


33 


34 
35 


36 


37 


49 


50 


Attack grizzly cub (HD 4; hp 6; AC 6; 
#AT 3; Dmg 1/1/1d6; THACO 15; SA 
hug for additional 1d6 points if both 
paws hit). 

Attack butterflies (no effective attack). 
Attack shark (HD 6; hp 12; AC 4; #AT 
1; Dmg 3d8; THACO 13; SA swallows 
human size creatures whole on an attack 
roll of 20), not much good out of water. 
Fireball (radius 20’, damage, 2 points). 
Attack skunk (HD 1; hp 1; AC 6; #AT 1; 
Dmg nil; THACO 19; SA stinking cloud 
on one creature, flees after delivering 
cloud). 

Levitate target creature (save vs. spell 
to avoid; if dropped, the target feather 
falls). 

Target creature turns a random bright 
color, 

All of target creature’s nonmagical 
equipment teleported back home (save 
vs. wand to avoid). 

Target creature’s feet covered with 
chewing gum; successful Strength 
check to move, slowed if check fails. 
Attack pugilist (HD 2; hp 10; AC 8; 
#AT 2; Dmg 1/1; THACO 16; SA hit 
causes save vs. crushing blow or be 
stunned 1d4 rounds). 

Colored candies shoot from wand at 
target creature, no damage. 

Burning hands (2 points damage). 

Oil shoots from wand (target creature 
must save vs. wand or fall). 

Scare spell at target creature. 

Target creature’s mouth fills with chew- 
ing gum, must spend one round taking 
it out prior to using verbal spells, breath 
weapon, biting. 

Phantasmal force of hideous monster 
(DM’s choice), poorly executed, doesn’t 
fool anybody. 

Mud sprays on target creature; success- 
ful Dexterity check or be blinded until 
wiped off. 

Attack canaries (no effective attack). 
Positive energy ray (basic damage two, 
—6 vs. undead or evil extraplanar crea- 
tures, save vs. spell for half damage). 
Negative energy ray (damage 2, 6 vs. 
paladins or good extraplanar creatures, 
save vs. spell for half damage). 

Arrow +1 (Range 120’, THACO 14, 
shatters whether it hits or misses). 
Shadow monster fighter (HD 1; hp 1; 
AC 10; #AT 1; Dmg 1; THACO 20; SA 
looks really dangerous). 

Fool’s gold (100 pieces) shoot from 


1503 


51 


52 


53 


54 


55 


56 


37 


58 


59 
60 


61 


62 


67 


68 


wand, no damage. 

Black pudding (HD 3; hp 6; AC 10; 
#AT 1; Dmg 1d4; THACO 16; SA dis- 
solves wood and metal; SD immune to 
cold, blow, or lightning spells, fears 
fire) shoots from wand, any target must 
make a successful Dexterity check or 
be covered. 

Gray ooze (same as black pudding, but 
immune to most spells, lightning and 
blows do full damage). 

Ochre jelly (same as black pudding but 
weapons, cold, and fire do full dam- 
age). 

Attack giant ant (HD 1; hp 1; AC 8; 
#AT 1; Dmg 1; THACO 20; SA success- 
ful bite allows sting attempt, if sting 
hits, target must save vs. poison or have 
Dexterity lowered to 3 for 20 rounds). 
Target creature’s sex changes (duration 
one day). 

Creeping bugs cover target creature (as 
creeping doom, but only four deadly 
bugs). 

Target creature polymorphed into 
berserk ogre that attacks anyone it can 
reach (save vs. spell to avoid transfor- 
mation.) 

Stream of black pepper shoots at target 
(successful Dexterity check or sneezing 
causes —4 to attack rolls and saving 
throws.). 

Improved invisibility covers target crea- 
ture. 

Target creature grows thick hair all over 
body (or loses it all if hairy, people will 
be mistaken for werewolves, duration 
one day). 

Target creature becomes intoxicated (6 
to Intelligence, Wisdom, Dexterity, and 
Charisma unless target makes a Consti- 
tution check), duration one hour. 
Attack tyrannosaurus rex (HD 2; hp 15; 
AC 6; #AT 1; Dmg 1d8; THACO 16), 
just a baby. 

Squirts ink at target creature (success- 
ful Dexterity check or be blinded until 
target washes its face). 

All magic items carried by target crea- 
ture glow a random bright color. 
Dancing lights (glowing globes of ran- 
dom color). 

Any normal fires or flames within 60' 
of target creature produce pyrotechnics 
(both smoke and fireworks). 

Miniature rain storm over target crea- 
ture 


Wet ice covers floor in a path in front of 
6126 


Wand, Yatil Wand of Zooming 


p ee NN EEE 


76-77 


81 


82 


83 


84 


85 


86 


87 


88 


89 


90 
91 


92 


the wand user 5’ wide and 25’ long. 
Everybody in the path must make a 
Dexterity check or fall down. 

Sounds of reinforcements, opponents 
check morale. 

All leather items within 60’ of target 
creature glow a random bright color. 
Grease spell, where it would do the 
most harm to target creatures. 

Dig spell (if possible) under target crea- 
ture. 

Paper-mache crown appears on target 
creature’s head (looks impressive); 
trumpet fanfare. 

All normal fires and flames within 60° 
of target creature go out. 

Attack mouse (no effective attack). 
Insane priest of target creature’s align- 
ment (HD 1; hp 8; AC 10; #AT 1; Dmg 
1d8; THACO 20; no spells) appears and 
begins preaching. 

Target creature saves vs. wand or flees 
for 1d6 rounds. 

Attack rabbit (no effective attack). 
Insane dwarf appears and attacks target 
creature (HD 2; hp 6; AC 6; #AT 1; 
Dmg battle axe; THACO 19). 
Bouncing rubber ball (AC 0, hp 1) 
attacks target creature; successful Dex- 
terity check or be stunned 1d4 rounds). 
String of entanglement binds target 
creature, successful Strength check to 
break free (try every round until suc- 
cessful). 

Reverse gravity on all within 10’ of tar- 
get creature, no save. 

Cotton balls stream from wand. 

Neon sign correctly declaring align- 
ment of target creature appears in the 
air. 

Neon sign misrepresenting alignment 
of target creature appears in air (roll 
randomly for alignment displayed). 
Blessed crossbow bolt shoots from end 
of wand and automatically hits (1 point 
of damage, kills rakshasas). 

Wall of peanut brittle appears between 
target creature and wand user. 

Attack octopus (HD 8; hp 8; AC 4; #AT 
8; Dmg | each; THACO 12; SA hit 
causes save vs. crushing blow or be 
squeezed for | point per round by each 
tentacle), not much use out of water. 
Loud waltz music plays. 

Target creature grows feathers (duration 
six turns). 

Demented cult member appears and 
solicits donations; target creature must 


make a Wisdom check or spend next 
round driving away the cultist. 

93 Target creature makes a successful 
Charisma check or goes insane for 
1d12 turns. 

94 Target creature covered with polka dots 
(random bright color, no save). 

95 Sheriff appears and serves subpoena on 
target creature. 

96 All metal items within 60’ of target 
creature glow a random bright color. 

97 Attack lowlifes (1d4+1 appear, HD 1; 
hp | each; AC 10; #AT 1; Dmg 1d4; 
THACO 20; AL lawful evil). 

98 Attack lowlifes (1d4+1 appear, HD 1; 
hp 1 each; AC 10; #AT 1; Dmg 1d4; 
THACO 20; AL; neutral evil). 

99 Attack lowlifes (1d4+1 appear, HD 1; 
hp 1 each; AC 10; #AT 1; Dmg 1d4; 
THACO 20; AL; chaotic evil). 

00 User is transformed into a fighter (only 
if a wizard); double hit points, strength 
18/01, AC 0, attacks twice a round for 
1d4+5, THACO 20 minus level, dura- 
tion one day. In any case, the wand 
becomes a dagger +2 for the rest of the 
day. 


Yatil Wand of Zooming 

XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,500 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This item was created by mountaineers of the 
Yatils to ease their travels between the jagged 
slopes and ledges. However, the wand has since 
become a device of mischief, and the cause of 
many deaths. 

The wand can affect one object or creature at a 
time, zooming up to 200 pounds weight per 
charge expended, to a maximum weight of 600 
pounds. Zooming movement is in a straight line, 
and any creature moved in this fashion is respon- 
sible for its own landing. The maximum distance 
is 100 feet, though a shorter distance can be spec- 
ified by the wand’s user. An unwilling creature 
can save vs. wand to avoid the effect. 

An object or creature can be hurled horizon- 
tally through the air and accelerated as if falling 
vertically if twice the normal number of charges 
are expended. A creature that hits an obstacle 
takes 1d6 points of damage for every 10 feet trav- 
eled; items save vs. fall. A 30-foot zoom, for 
example, inflicts a total of 3d6 points of damage 
upon a character striking a solid surface. Note 
that a creature hurled over the edge of a cliff takes 
no damage from the zoom, but does suffer normal 
falling damage. If insufficient charges are 
expended, the results will be correspondingly 


slight. 


6127 


= 1504 ` 


E ee ——h 


E 


Wax of Fabrication 


Water 
Magical water usually maintains its magical 
properties until imbibed, or splashed on a target. 
If magical water is polluted, it may have to roll a 
saving throw in order to retain its magical proper- 
ties, 


Blessed 
XP Value: 5 GP Value: 25 
DRAGON Quest Game 

This is a small glass bottle filled with water that 
has been specially prepared for use against 
undead monsters, If it is splashed on any undead 
creatures (like ghouls, mummies, skeletons, vam- 
pires, wights, wraiths, or zombies), it causes 1d6 
points of damage. 


Golden 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
City of Delights 
Golden water is a special type of liquid that can 
actually create a tiny rift into the Elemental Plane 
of Water. Placing even a single drop of golden 
water somewhere creates a small, permanent 
fountain. 

Golden water is normally found only in springs 
that are connected to the Elemental Plane of 
Water, and those places are carefully monitored 
by marids. If it is placed in a bowl made of pre- 
cious metal, it maintains its properties. For exam- 
ple, if a maid put golden water into a silver bowl 
and carried it to her home, the bowl would create 
a perpetual fountain, and the water inside the 
bowl would still be golden water. If, however, 
golden water is placed somewhere else, such as a 
rock, it will shoot a fountain into the air, but the 
water in it will no longer be golden water. 

Ifa very small drop is placed within a waterskin, 
it will continually fill the waterskin (even to over- 
flowing). In Huzuz, there are several drinking 
fountains created using golden water. 


Holy 
XP Value: 5 GP Value: 25 
The Complete Priest’s Handbook 
Holy water, that bane of vampires and many other 
monsters, is created in the following way: In a tem- 
ple of the god, three priests of at least 2nd level 
stand over an empty water-basin and perform a rit- 
ual of prayer. They pray for the god’s blessing and 
protection for an entire hour. At the end of that 
time, they each cast a spell, and do so simultane- 
ously: One casts create water, the second casts 
protection from evil, and the third casts purify food 
and drink. Half a gallon of holy water is created. 
(The create water spell can create up to four gal- 
lons of water, but the protection from evil and 


purify food and drink used this way can only create 
half a gallon of holy water. Therefore, for every 
two extra priests, one to cast each of those two 
spells, an extra half-gallon can be created. Nine 
priests together can create four gallons.) 

The tremendous expenditure of magic and the 
time involved are the reasons a single dose of 
holy water costs 25 gp to the adventurer. Obvi- 
ously, any three priests can create holy water “for 
free” so long as they are 2nd level or higher, 
priests of the same god. 


Waterskin of Pouring 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Maztica Campaign Set 
This is a feathered waterskin that is always full. It 
can be used to pour water at one gallon per round. 


Wax 
If pure, costly wax is mixed with powdered gems, 
it may be of sufficient quality to be made magi- 
cal, It may be found in any size, shape, or color 
but has a glitter to it. Freshly made magical wax 
is formed into bricks, each 4 inches long, 2 
inches wide, and | inch thick. 


of Careful Hearing 

XP Value: 450 GP Value: 1,250 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

When rolled into small balls and placed in the 
ears, this wax adds a +4 bonus to saving throws 
against magical sounds; hearing is otherwise nor- 
mal. It confers the same bonus against all charm 
spells. One brick of wax may be rolled into 10 
balls (for five creatures with two ears each). Its 
protection lasts for one week. Nonmagical wax 
used in the same way confers a +1 bonus to mag- 
ical sounds but also prevents normal hearing and 
increases chances of being surprised. 


Ceiling 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This wax appears to be sealing wax but when 
used indoors it causes the ceiling to fall, as if 
from an earthquake. The falling stone or earth 
inflicts at least 3d10 points of damage to all 
within 30 feet of the ceiling wax, and may be 
severe enough to bury the victims. The wax is 
destroyed when the ceiling falls. 


of Fabrication 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This wax may be molded into the form of any 
other item of the same approximate size. To 
obtain an exact duplicate, the original must be 


copied and the command given. The duplicate 
6134 


i mE 


1505 


rr a E 


Wax of Hearing 


[, 


appears to be made of the same material as the 
original and may be magical if the original pos- 
sessed some dweomer. The duplicate has no spe- 
cial powers, but gains the same resistances as the 
original. A dispel magic spell may return the 
duplicate to a lump of wax (treat as 30th-level 
magic). 


of Hearing 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This wax appears to be wax of careful hearing but 
confers a —4 penalty to the saving throws applica- 
ble. Once in place, it cannot be removed until a 
remove curse spell is applied by a caster of 15th 
or higher level; this destroys the wax. 


Sealing 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This wax can be placed in any crack or hole. 
Afterward it can neither be removed except by 
magical weapons nor melted except by magical 
fire. One brick can fill any hole of the same vol- 
ume or a thin crack up to 20 feet long. (It is ideal 
for sealing a vampire’s coffin when used with 
wizard lock.) 


of Waning 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This wax appears and functions as wax of careful 
hearing in all respects. However, wax of waning 
also shrinks the user at the rate of 1 inch per day. 
It cannot be removed until remove curse is 
applied by a caster of at least 15th level; this 
destroys the wax. The shrinking is permanent 
until dispelled (treat as 30th-level magic) and 
cannot be affected until the wax is removed. Any 
victim vanishing entirely from the effect is tele- 
ported to an Outer Plane in normal form. The 
immortals may then decide the victim’s fate. 


Weapon Enhancements 
All the enchantments that can be added to almost 
any weapon, are to be found here. There are 
exceptions, however, but the DM should reroll 
these. 

Light Generation: As a general rule, magical 
weapons, armor, or items should not shed light 
when drawn or being used. This makes it too easy 
for the players to determine if a weapon is magi- 
cal, unless the item’s description states that it 
sheds light. However, if the DM chooses, he or 
she can rule that magical weapons (particularly 
swords, daggers, and +3 or greater items) shed 
light and can’t be concealed when drawn. In this 
case, a magical weapon should never glow until 


the wielder is aware of its magical properties— 
the light property of a weapon should never be 
used as an excuse to identify a magical item, 
Note that the flame tongue, frost brand, holy 
avenger, life stealing, and sharpness swords have 
special properties with regard to light. These are 
dealt with in the individual weapon descriptions. 

When the Random Tables in the back of this 
volume are used, the DM should roll on the table 
below in order to determine which enchantment 
is gained for the weapon. Once rolled, refer to the 
specific entry below for full details. 


Roll Enhancement Gained 
01 of Adaptation* 
02 Agoraphobic* 
03 Antistoneskin* 
04 Anything 
05 Aquatic* 
06 Aquatic with Free Action* 
07 of Balance* 
08 Bloodfearer* 
09 Boneiron* 
10 Bonewood* 
11 with Bonus vs. Opponent* 
12 of Breathing* 
13 Brittleblade* 
14 of Charming* 
15 of Clairaudience* 
16 of Clairvoyance* 
17 Claustrophobic* 
18 of Concealed Wizardry* 
19 of Deceiving* 
20 of Defending* 
21 of Deflecting* 
22 of Detect Evil/Good* 
23 of Detect Gems* 
24 of Detect Magic* 
25 of Detect Metal* 
26 of Detect Shifting Walls & Rooms* 
27 of Detect Slopes* 
28 of Detection* 
29 of Disruption* 
30 of Draining* 
31 of Enchantment* 
32 of ESP* 
33 of Extinguishing* 
34 of Extra Damage* 
35 of Find Secret Doors* 
36 of Find Traps* 
37 of Finding* 
38 of Flame* 
39 of Flaming* 
40 of Flying* 
41 of Flying II* 
42 of Forgetfulness* 
43 Fossilized* 


44 of Healing* 
6137 


1506 


—— ee CT 


Weapon of Adaptation 


inte 


45 of Healing II* Roll Construction Material 

46 of Hiding* 01 Adamantite 

47 with Hilt of Conjuring* 02-10 Bone 

48 of Holding* 11-20 Copper 

49 of Illumination* 21-60 Iron 

50 of Illusion* 61-70 Obsidian 

51 Intelligent* 71-75 Silver 

52 Intelligent II* 76-85 Steel 

53 Invisible* 86-95 Stone 

54 of Levitation* 96-00 Wood 

55 of Lighting* 

56 Lightweight* of Adaptation* 

57 Living* XP Value GP Value 

58 Miniature* Cursed -2: — +1,000 

59 Narcissistic* Normal +1: +900 +5,400 

60 Petrified* Normal +2: +1,500 +9,000 

61 Polymorphed* Normal +3: +2,100 +12,600 

62 of Proficiency* Normal +4: +3,200 +19,200 

63 Purple-Leaf* POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

64 Quirk* These magical weapons, which initially appears 
65-67 Racial* to be short walking sticks, are prized by fighters, 

68 of Returning* although they can be used by any class. When 

69 of See Invisible* d and the name of a weapon spoken, such 

70 Shivering* as “bardiche,” the stick transforms into that 

71 of Silence* weapon. The wielder can change melee weapons 

72 of Silencing* merely by uttering the name of a different item. 

73 of Slaying* Weapons of adaptation cannot assume the form 

74 of Slicing* of missile weapons or bows, nor do they grant 

75 of Slowing* weapon proficiencies to their wielders. The 

76 of Specialization* wielders suffer nonproficiency penalties if they 

77 Spectral* use weapons with which they are not familiar. All 
78-80 of Speed weapons of adaptation have magical pluses 

81 of Speed II* except those cursed. To determine the type of 

82 of Speeding* adaptation found, consult the chart below. 

83 Stoneiron* 

84 of Surrender* Roll Bonus 

85 of Telekinesis* 01-50 +I 

86 of Telepathy* 51-75 +2 

87 of Teleportation* 76-90 +3 

88 of Translating* 91-96 +4 

89 Unbreakable* 96-00 Cursed, -2 

90 Uncharged* 

91 of Venom* Agoraphobic* 

92 of Watching* XP Value: — GP Value: +100 

93 Weightless* IMAGINE Magazine 14 

94 of Wishing* This weapon is the exact opposite of the claustro- 

95 Woodiron* phobic weapon. \t must be talked or forced out of 

96 of X-Ray Vision* its scabbard. Once it is out, it fights like a normal 
97-99 Roll twice, ignoring 97-00 results magical item but causes double damage in order 

00 Roll three times, ignoring 97-00 results to get back into its scabbard as quickly as pos- 


As an added feature, DMs may choose to roll 
on the table below to determine the construction 
material of a weapon. Often, the weapon’s 
description states what the weapon is made of, 
but this can be superseded by choosing a material 
or rolling on the table below. 


sible. If its wielder is struck in combat, there is a 
percentage chance equal to the number of points 
of damage sustained that the weapon will take 
advantage of the situation and escape into the 
security of the scabbard. 

If the wielder does not fight during a round, he 
or she must do nothing but concentrate on keep- 


ing the weapon out of its scabbard, otherwise it 
6139 


1507 


a a ae 


Weapon, Antistoneskin 


let i N 


will return to where it feels safe. Note that con- 
centration does not preclude using the weapon’s 
special abilities. 

When the agoraphobic weapon result is rolled 
on the Random Item Chart, the DM should roll 
another effect and combine the results. 


Antistoneskin* 
XP Value: — GP Value: +1,000 
New Item 
Tired of having his warriors fighting his enemies 
(who were, consequently, protected by stoneskin 
spells), King Damien of Islemaine offered Pris- 
mal a great sum of money to provide an enchant- 
ment for edged weapons and those with pommels 
that would ignore the stoneskin's defenses. At 
first, Prismal pondered the worth of such an 
undertaking, wondering what his wizard friends 
would think of him should he succeed. Realizing 
his monarch is the type to perform some rather 
chaotic edicts against those that do not serve him 
without reserve, Prismal agreed. After all, he 
would be in rather deep trouble if he were found 
dead or worse: without his property where he 
stored all his annals and equipment. Damien 
asked for results within the week, but Prismal, 
knowing that this was impossible, asked for an 
additional month. He was given two weeks. 

In order to have peace and quiet (and a total lack 
of interruption from fledgling wizards looking for a 
master to teach them the arcane arts), he transferred 
himself and his laboratory to a friend’s house on 
Kodiak Island and began work. Seventeen days and 
the loss of most of his facial hair later (eyebrows 
included), his work was completed. He teleported 
his lab back to his house in time to hear an inces- 
sant banging on his front door. 

Speaking a command word as he walked down 
the spiral staircase, the door swung open to the 
amazement of a page. Stuttering in nervousness 
(partially due to the wizard’s unusual appear- 
ance), he informed Prismal that Damien of Isle- 
maine wanted an audience immediately. After 
what seemed like a lifetime of Damien's snarling 
and spit-ridden accusations, Prismal informed the 
monarch that his work was finished. Damien was 
happy that the work was fulfilled, but he felt it 
necessary to notify Prismal that he was foregoing 
the mandatory flogging for delay. Prismal half 
smiled, knowing full well that Damien feared 
him, and shuddered at the horrid vengeance for 
which Prismal was known. 

The work that Prismal labored over allows a 
blade to ignore the defenses of the stoneskin 
spell. Oddly enough, the potency of the spell (the 
number of hits that the stoneskin will protect 
against) does not diminish with repeated, suc- 
cessful strikes. 


Anything 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
Unearthed Arcana 

An anything weapon appears to be a weapon of 
+1 enchantment. Upon command, however, it can 
change into any desired type of magic weapon of 
any power (for instance, from a short sword +1 to 
a whip +5). The weapon remains as commanded 
for one day (24 hours) or until it performs a spe- 
cial, highly powerful function such as draining a 
level or severing some body part. The weapon 
can be commanded to assume another form no 
more than three times, and each form is singular 
and may not be repeated—the weapon can be a 
dancing sword only once, a mattock of the titans 
but once, or a vorpal blade just once. 

After changing upon command for a third time 
and then reverting to its original form, the any- 
thing weapon loses all of its dweomer and is 
thereafter an ordinary sword. This type of weapon 
can never have intelligence, ego, communication 
power, or any other sort of special ability. 


Aquatic* 
See Enchanted Enhancements in Volume 1 


Aquatic with Free Action* 
See Enchanted Enhancements in Volume 1 


of Balance* 

GP Value: +800 
Oriental Adventures 
When carried, this weapon gives the character 
exceptional balance. Ninjas and thieves gain a 
bonus of 10% to their tightrope walking ability. 
In other situations where balance is important 
(teetering on the edge of a pit, for example) the 
character is automatically allowed a saving throw 
vs. death magic to regain his balance. If success- 
ful, the weapon shifts its weight or pulls the char- 
acter the fraction of an inch needed to regain sure 
footing. If the saving throw fails, the character 
suffers the normal consequences. 


XP Value: +80 


Bloodfearer* 

GP Value: +100 
IMAGINE Magazine 14 
Bloodfearing or haemophobic weapons will 
scream (those that have the power of speech) and 
faint upon drawing blood. The scream attracts 
any wandering monsters that happen to be nearby. 
The faint lasts 1d4 rounds and strips the weapon 
of any bonuses that it may possess while it is 
unconscious. In extreme cases (5%), the weapon 
ceases to be a rigid object, becoming completely 
flexible (and useless as a weapon) until it regains 
consciousness. 


These weapons are unafraid in combat against 
6143 


XP Value: — 


1508 


x Weapon with Bonus vs, Opponent y- 


creatures that have no blood (undead or sham- 
bling mounds, for example), or when fighting in 
the dark (they cannot see the blood). Hardier 
weapons of this type (15%) are thanophobic and 
only faint upon seeing a dead creature. 

When the bloodfearer weapon result is rolled 
on the Random Item Chart, the DM should roll 
another effect and combine the results. 


Boneiron* 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DRAGON Magazine 197 

These weapons are similar to woodiron weapons, 
except that they are made of bone. Chitin weap- 
ons are also covered in this category. As with the 
other two classes of weaponry, these weapons act 
as ordinary metallic weapons, having no penalties 
in battle, and they are unbreakable. Since bone is 
the best of the nonmetallic substances used in 
weapons creation, a wizard does not need to 
expend so much magical energy in its transfor- 
mation. Thus, the experience point value in mak- 
ing a boneiron weapon is only 15 times the 
gold-piece value of a regular metal weapon. A 
boneiron trident is thus worth 225 XP while a 
boneiron battle axe is valued at 75 XP. 


Bonewood* 

XP Value: — GP Value: — 

DRAGON Magazine 197 
These wooden weapons have been enchanted to 
have the properties of those of bone. Apart from 
being fireproof, there are no additional benefits 
to weapons normally made of wood, such as 
clubs and quarterstaves, but all other weapons 
have their attack and damage penalties reduced 
from —3 and —2, respectively, to —1 in both cases. 
These weapons still break when a 20 is rolled. As 
with petrified weapons, bonewood weapons are 
more common than their effectiveness would 
seem to warrant, due to the relative ease of their 
construction and the practice they provide for 
magical apprentices. These weapons are worth 10 
times as many experience points as the gold- 
piece cost of a normal iron weapon (a bonewood 
glaive-guisarme is worth 100 XP). 


with Bonus vs. Opponent* 

XP Value: +200/plus GP Value: +1,000/plus 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

This weapon modifier is an additional attack and 
damage bonus when the weapon is used against a 
specific opponent (for example, a sword +//+2 vs. 
enchanted monsters). The amount of the bonus may 
be from +1 to +5 greater than the normal magical 
bonus of the weapon, according to the table below. 
(A sword +1 with a +3 bonus against lycanthropes 
would be a sword +1/+4 vs. lycanthropes.) 


Roll Additional Modifier 


01-57 +1 
58-73 +2 
74-82 +3 
83-85 +4 
86-00 +5 


The DM should feel free to add more cate- 
gories of opponents as appropriate, taking care 
not to upset the balance of the game. Opponent 
categories are listed on the table below. 


Roll Opponent Roll Opponent 
01-06 Bugs 59-67 Reptiles and 
07-09 Constructs dinosaurs 
10-15 Dragonkind 68-70 Spell-immune 
16-24 Enchanted monsters 
Monsters 71-76 Spellcasters 
25-36 Giantkind 77-88 Undead 
37-48 Lycanthropes 89-94 Water-breathing 
49-52 Planar Beings monsters 
53-58 Regenerating 95-00 Weapon-using 
monsters monsters 


* Bugs include all normal and giant size forms 
of arachnids (spider, tick, scorpion), insects 
(ant, beetle, fly), and chilopods (centipedes). 

* Constructs include all created monsters such 
as living statues or golems. Gargoyles are also 
included in this category. 

* Dragonkind includes all dragons of all colors 
and sizes plus draconian monsters such as the 
chimera, hydra (all types), salamander, and 
wyvern. 

* Enchanted monsters include those creatures 
that cannot be hit by normal or silver weapons. 

* Giantkind includes all giants and all giant- 
type creatures such as ogres, cyclopes, and 
other humanoids that are larger than human- 
size (including characters who have consumed 
a potion of growth). 

* Lycanthropes include all types of werecrea- 
tures, whether in animal form or not. This 
includes all characters afflicted with lycan- 


+ Planar monsters include those creatures that 
come from the Elemental, Ethereal, Astral, or 
Outer Planes. All types are included, but 
Immortals do not count as planar monsters. 

* Regenerating monsters include all creatures 
that regain more than | point per day by rest 
or other means. This includes any creature 
wearing a ring of regeneration. 

+ Reptiles and dinosaurs include all normal 
and giant size forms of lizards, snakes, turtles, 
crocodiles, and dinosaurs. 

+ Spell-immune monsters include those crea- 
tures that are immune to | or more spell lev- 

6146 


1509 


Weapon of Breathing 


yd on S 


els, as specified in the monster descriptions 
(such as drakes). This does not include crea- 
tures that are immune merely to certain spe- 
cific spells (such as the undead immunity to 
sleep, charm, and hold). 

* Spellcasters include all priests, elves, wiz- 
ards, and other creatures able to use spells 
(such as paladins or spirits, for example). 

* Undead includes all types of undead creatures, 
both land and water, from skeleton to lich. 

Water-breathing monsters include those crea- 
tures able to breathe water, including characters 
under the influence of a potion or ring of water 
breathing. Note that aquatic mammals (whale, 
dolphin, and so on) breathe air and are not 
included in this category. 

* Weapon-using monsters include those crea- 
tures that have weapons in hand (not claws) at 
the time of a melee. For example, a wererat 
wielding a sword would be affected by this 
additional bonus, but the wererat would not be 
affected if it were attacking only with its bite. 


of Breathing* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & DRaGons Rules Cyclopedia 
The weapon with this talent can create either one 
water breathing spell effect per day or one air 
breathing effect per day. Air breathing supplies 
only the user with pure air for 1 turn, and it can be 
used to counter the effects of airlessness, poisoned 


air (such as a gas trap), and so forth; however, it 
cannot negate the effects of any breath weapon. 


Brittleblade* 

GP Value: +100 
IMAGINE Magazine 14 
An affliction of ancient weapons, due to their fear 
of hurting themselves, manifests itself as an 
adjustment of the attack roll bonus of the weapon 
depending upon the Armor Class of the oppo- 
nent. Against opponents with an AC of 7 or 
worse, the blade gains a +1 over its normal attack 
bonuses. Between Armor Classes 4 and 6, the 
weapon gains its normal attack bonuses. For 
every one Armor Class lower than 4, a progress- 
ing —1 attack roll penalty is accrued. 

Dexterity bonuses or adjustments due to items 
that are not pieces of armor (such as rings of pro- 
tection or a cloak of displacement) are not 
included in determining the effective Armor 
Class of the opponent. 

When the brittleblade weapon result is rolled 
on the random item chart, the DM should roll 
another effect and combine the results. 


XP Value: — 


of Charming* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The talent can create one charm person spell 
effect per day to a 120-foot range (as the Ist level 
wizard spell). 


of Clairaudience* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
As with the potion, the user may hear all noises in 
one area within 60 feet through the ears of a crea- 
ture in that area. 


of Clairvoyance* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
As with the potion, the user may see any area up 
to 60 feet away through the eyes of a creature 
there. 


Claustrophobic* 

GP Value: +100 

IMAGINE Magazine 14 

This magical weapon is normal except that it 
refuses to enter its scabbard. A character attempting 
to sheath the weapon must talk it into the idea of 
going into a closed space (see Morale in the DMG). 
The character can force the weapon into the scab- 
bard, but the PC’s Strength must be greater than the 
weapon’s Ego. Failure means that the weapon must 
be carried in the open, which can be inconvenient 


when a peaceful appearance is required. Putting the 
6152 


XP Value: — 


1510 


Weapon of Detection g- 


weapon down does not solve the problem, because 
itmay not like being left on its own. 

When the claustrophobic weapon result is 
rolled on the random item chart, the DM should 
roll another effect and combine the results. 


of Concealed Wizardry* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
Land of Fate 

This weapon’s magical nature is concealed by 
enchantments designed to cloak its true nature. 
The weapon does not respond to detect magic or 
similar spells, but a legend lore or identify spell, 
or the legend lore ability of the rawun or barber, 
can reveal some of its magical nature. Any type 
of weapon may be a weapon of concealed wiz- 
ardry, including special weapons. If, in rolling, 
the DM gets the weapon of concealed wizardry a 
second time, any special weapon may be chosen. 


of Deceiving* 
XP Value: +400 GP Value: +2,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

The weapon with this talent can be commanded 
to change the appearance of the user. The size 
cannot be changed, but facial features, equipment 
carried, and other details can all be modified. 
This is only an illusion; the user remains intact. 
The weapon must be held to create the disguise 
(unsheathed in the case of edged weapons), and it 
cannot disguise itself. 


of Defending* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The Strength of the weapon may be used normally 
(applying to attack and damage rolls) with this tal- 
ent or as a bonus to the armor class of the user. A 
missile weapon cannot have this talent (roll again). 


of Deflecting* 

XP Value: +1,000 GP Value: +5,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

If the user is hit by a blow that would cause an 
energy drain, the ability of these weapons can 
automatically deflect the blow. After the opponent 
hits, the user may decide whether to deflect the 
blow. If used for deflecting, the weapon absorbs 
the effect of the energy drain but at the cost of 
one magical bonus, which is drained from the 
weapon for each energy drain negated. If an 
energy drain deflected reduces the bonuses to 
below 0 (such as a sword +7 deflecting a specter’s 
attack, which causes a double energy drain), the 
weapon disintegrates; the extra drain does not 
affect the user. If a missile weapon has this talent, 
it must be held in hand to deflect the blow (and 
cannot be used at combat range). 


1511 


of Detect Evil/Good* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The sword is able to detect one of these intentions 
up to a 20-foot range. No sword can do both; the 
DM must determine which alignment the sword 
possesses, it cannot then detect the opposite 


alignment. 


of Detect Gems* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The sword can detect all types of gems and the 
amount of each within a 60-foot range, pointing 
itself in that direction. 


of Detect Magic* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The sword can cause all magic within 20 feet to 
glow (as the spell effect) up to three times a day. 


of Detect Metal* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The sword can detect metal of any type requested 
up to a range of 60 feet. It will point in the direc- 
tion of the material, but it cannot detect the 
amount. 


of Detect Shifting Walls & Rooms* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The sword can find these items if within 10 feet. 


of Detect Slopes* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The sword can locate all sloping passages within 
a 10-foot range. 


of Detection* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
Oriental Adventures 
This weapon is able to detect one type of thing or 
situation, selected from the table below. 


Roll Detects 
0l Evil, 10-foot radius. 
02 Good, 10-foot radius. 
03 Poison, touch. 
04 Lifeforms, 10-foot radius. 
05 Back attacks, one-foot range. 
06 Invisible creatures and objects, 10-foot 
radius. 
07 Traps, 5-foot radius. 
08 Secret doors, 10-foot radius. 


6163 


~ Weapon of Disruption 


For the power to function, the character must 
hold the weapon and utter the command word. 
Should the result be positive, the weapon indi- 
cates this by a gentle tug in the direction of the 
thing detected. 


of Disruption* 
XP Value: +1,000 GP Value: +6,000 
Oriental Adventures 
The weapon functions identically to the mace of 
disruption. 


of Draining* 
XP Value: +2,000 GP Value: +10,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

Upon command, the weapon with this talent can 
drain one level or Hit Die when it strikes an 
opponent (as if a wraith), in addition to normal 
damage. The command may be spoken after the 
attack roll is made. The weapon can drain 1d4+4 
levels or Hit Dice in all; it then loses this ability 
forever. Energy drain cannot affect any creatures 
that have energy drain powers (wight, wraith, 
spectre, and so on). If a missile weapon has this 
talent, it may be applied to any missile shot, but 
each level drained also drains one magical bonus 
from the weapon. If the weapon becomes non- 
magical because of this loss, it loses the ability to 
energy drain as well, 


Drow 
See Drow Treasure in Enchanted Enhancements, 
Volume 1. 


of Enchantment* 

XP Value: +1,000 GP Value: +5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 181 
These magical weapons possess a dweomer that 
allows them to penetrate the magical defenses of 
creatures that can be struck only by enchanted 
weapons. No bonuses for attacks or damage 
occur; such a weapon has the same chance to suc- 
cessfully attack a highly magical monster as an 
ordinary weapon has to strike a plain, flesh-and- 
blood creature, doing damage as a normal 
weapon. 

Missile weapons are a bit different. While 
actual missiles of enchantment (bolts, arrows, 
sling bullets, etc.) are the same as combat weap- 
ons, bows, crossbows, and slings of enchantment 
cast a magical aura on any mundane ammunition 
with which they are loaded (no bonuses for using 
missiles and bows of enchantment together). 

For all weapons of enchantment, the XP cost is 
that of a regular +1 version of that weapon type, 
or whatever other official magical weapon exists 
of that type that is of low value. These weapons 
do not lose their abilities when taken to other 


planes, and the missile launchers can provide 
their owners with a virtually unlimited supply of 
“magical” missiles. Just remember that the dam- 
age done is the same as for ordinary weapons. 
The magic doesn’t add to the weapon’s attack 
capabilities; it negates the monster's defensive 
capabilities. 


of ESP* 
XP Value: +400 GP Value: +2,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
As with the potion, the user may listen to the 
thoughts of any one living creature within 60 feet. 


of Extinguishing* 

XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
A weapon with this talent is cool to the touch. 
When used against a fire-using creature (such as 
a red dragon or fire elemental, for example) the 
magical bonus of the weapon is doubled. In addi- 
tion, the weapon will douse a normal fire if thrust 
into it. It has no effect on magical fire. If a mis- 
sile weapon has this talent, it applies to all mis- 
siles fired. 


of Extra Damage* 

XP Value: +500 GP Value: +2,500 
Dunceons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
This power lasts for 1d10 rounds when com- 
manded. The user may inflict four times the nor- 
mal damage on each successful hit. This power 
may be generated more than once; each duplicate 
roll increases the multiplier by 1 (to 5 times, 6 
times, and so on). 


of Find Secret Doors* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The weapon can locate all secret doors within a 
10-foot range up to three times a day. 


of Find Traps* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
The weapon can detect traps of all types within 
10 feet up to three times a day. 


of Finding* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The talent can create one locate object spell 
effect a day to a 120-foot range (as the 2nd-level 
wizard spell). 


6172 


1512 


+ Weapon of Hiding s- 


of Flame* 

XP Value: +200 GP Value: +1,000 
Oriental Adventures 
Upon uttering the command word, the weapon 
bursts into magical flame. This flame causes 2d4 
points of additional damage on a successful hit. It 
ignites combustible items 40% of the time. It 
casts light out to a 15-foot radius. The weapon 
remains flaming until the character utters the 
command word again. The flame does no damage 
to the weapon, regardless of the weapon’s mater- 
ial. 


of Flaming* 

XP Value: +200 GP Value: +1,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The point or edge of a weapon that has this talent 
will blaze with flames upon command. The 
flames do not harm the weapon or the user, but 
they will add a +2 bonus to attack rolls against 
hippogriffs, pegasi, rocs, and trolls and a +3 
bonus against treants and undead monsters. The 
bonus applies to both attack and damage rolls. 
The flames may easily be used to light a torch, 
lantern, or other flammable item. If a missile 
weapon has this talent, it applies to all missiles 
fired. 


of Flying* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
As with the potion, the user may fly in the air for 
a maximum of three turns per use. 


of Flying II* 
XP Value: +1,000 GP Value: +5,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

The weapon with this talent can fly in the air and 
attack by itself. In battle, it must first be used nor- 
mally at least once. If then commanded to fly, it 
will continue to attack the same opponent for 
three more rounds, returning to its master after 
that time (or when commanded to return). Its 
attack rolls are made as if it were wielded nor- 
mally, based on the class and level of the user. If a 
missile weapon has this talent, it creates normal 
missiles as it shoots; the owner does not have to 
supply it with new missiles, and cannot supply it 
with magic missiles to shoot. 


of Forgetfulness* 
XP Value: +1,000 GP Value: +5,000 
Assassin Mountain 
These weapons vary in size from scimitars to 
jambiya and katar. They give the wielder no 
bonus on attack or damage rolls, but anyone who 
weaves the blade in a figure-eight pattern can 
induce amnesia in those who view it. Amnesic 


forgetfulness includes everything the viewer has 
seen in the past three rounds, the round of use, 
and the following three rounds. The viewer may 
make a saving throw vs. spell at a —3 penalty to 
avoid the effect. 

An attack with such a blade entitles the victim 
to another saving throw with a +3 bonus to shake 
the effect entirely. These blades are very useful 
for bypassing guards, bodyguards, servants, and 
sentries. 


Fossilized* 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DRAGON Magazine 197 
Technically speaking, these should be called 
“reverse fossilization” weapons, but fossilized is a 
much shorter term. The weapons are made of 
stone, whether flint, obsidian, or some other rock, 
that has been permanently enchanted to have the 
properties of bone weaponry. This gives them an 
attack penalty of only —1, instead of their original 
—2; damage is the same for both bone and stone 
weapons. These weapons, unfortunately, still 
break in battle if a 20 is rolled, but at least they 
give aspiring young wizards some defense until 
they are ready to handle serious enchantments. 
The experience point value for fossilized weapons 
is five times the gold piece value of a normal 
metal weapon; a fossilized footman s mace is thus 


worth 40 XP. 


of Healing* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

A weapon with this power can heal up to a total 
of 6 points of damage per day, at the rate of | hit 
point per round. This power may be generated 
more than once; duplicate rolls increase the 
amount of healing by 6 points each (to 12, 18, 
and so on, per day), but the rate of healing 
remains the same. 


of Healing II* 
XP Value: +400 GP Value: +2,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
This ability can create one cure serious wounds 
spell effect per day, curing the user only of 2d6+2 
points of damage (as the 4th-level priest spell). 


of Hiding* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
A weapon with this talent can create one invisibil- 
ity spell effect on only the user when commanded 
to do so. In addition, the weapon can itself 
become invisible three times per day. 


6181 


1513 


~ Weapon with Hilt of Conjuring f 


with Hilt of Conjuring* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
DRAGON Magazine 181 

These are plain weapon hilts, axe or mace han- 
dles, or polearm hafts without their bladed heads. 
When the appropriate command word is spoken, 
the head or blade of the desired weapon will mag- 
ically appear from the hilt, handle, or haft, doing 
the same amount of damage as a regular weapon 
of its type. No magical bonuses attack or damage 
rolls are granted, though the weapon counts as 
magical for attack purposes against certain mon- 
sters. Weapon hilts can project any type of 
weapon blade requested; handles can be used for 
hand axes, horseman’s weapons like small maces, 
or for battle axes and footman’s weapons; any 
type of polearm head can appear on a haft of con- 
juring. Each type of item of this sort may be used 
three times a day. If not “turned off” by another 
command word, any item that appears lasts for a 
full 24-hour day. 


of Holding* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DunGeons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
This talent can create one hold person spell effect 
a day to a 180-foot range (as the 2nd-level priest 
spell). 


of Illumination* 
XP Value P Value 
Alternating: +2,000 +10,000 
Lesser: +500 +2,500 
Greater: +1,000 +5,000 


DRAGON Magazine 181 

These items come in three basic versions: Lesser 
weapons of illumination operate using a fixed 
number of charges, like wands. When a charge is 
expended, the weapon glows with a 5-foot radius 
for the same length of time as a wand of illumina- 
tion but has no combat bonuses. These weapons 
have 1d8+8 charges and cannot be recharged. 

Greater weapons of illumination need no 
charges. They glow on command, just as their 
lesser counterparts do, but this power may be 
used indefinitely. Again, they have no combat 
bonuses. 

Alternating weapons of illumination can 
serve as either weapons +1 or glowing weap- 
ons, but not both at the same time. A simple 
command word switches dweomers instantly, 
presenting many owners with a cruel dilemma. 
If the weapon is a PC’s only means of light in a 
dungeon fight, a choice may have to be made 
between seeing what is to be fought and having 
greater combat ability. If a creature that can be 
struck only by +1 or better weapons attacks a 
character who does not have the blind fighting 


proficiency, that character is in serious trouble. 
The weapon’s dweomer is permanent. All melee 
weapon types are eligible to become all types of 
weapons of illumination. 


of Illusion* 
XP Value: +400 GP Value: +2,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The user may create a phantasmal force, as the 
wizard spell. 


Intelligent* 

XP Value: Varies GP Value: Varies 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
One of the rarer and more significant properties 
of a magical weapon is the chance that it is intel- 
ligent. The feature is most common among 
swords, but there are occasional instances of 
other weapons possessing intelligence. The 
chance of intelligence varies according to the 
type of weapon. Swords have a 25% chance of 
some form of intelligence. Other melee weapons 
(axes, spears, polearms, and the like) have a 5% 
chance of intelligence, provided they do not 
already possess special powers, Missile weapons 
(including bows, crossbows, arrows, and bolts) 
never possess intelligence. Single-use items and 
those items that do not have an attack bonus 
(such as a magical nef) never possess intelli- 
gence. If you determine that a weapon is intelli- 
gent, it will have one or more special powers. It 
may also have a special purpose or limitations on 
its use. 

The following tables should be used to deter- 
mine the properties of an intelligent weapon: the 
number of powers, unusual properties, alignment, 
and special purpose of the item (if any). Such 
weapons are useful to give higher-level fighters 
some additional tactical options and limited-use 
special abilities. 

The DM is encouraged to design unusual 
magical weapons along special themes and for 
specific campaign purposes, using the tables 
as guidelines and for inspiration. Just because 
a power is rolled doesn’t mean it must be 
given. If the DM feels a combination is too 
bizarre or powerful, it can simply be changed 
or ignored, 

The first step in creating an intelligent weapon 
is to determine its general capabilities. These are 
found by rolling 1d100 on the first table. Then, 
move onto the other tables until all the capabili- 
ties of the weapon have been specified. 


6188 


1514 


Weapon, Intelligent .- 


Weapon Intelligence and 

Capabilities Table 

Roll Int Communicates Capabilities 

01-34 12 Semi-empathic' 1 primary ability 

35-59 13  Empathic 2 primary abilities 

60-79 14 Speech’ 2 primary abilities 

80-91 15 Speech? 3 primary abilities* 

92-97 16 Speech? 3 primary abilities‘ 

98-00 17 Speech & 3 primary abilities, 1 
Telepathy’ extraordinary power 


‘The owner will receive some signal (a throb, tin- 
gle, or other sensation) and feels compelling 
urges when its ability functions. 

‘The weapon speaks the character's native tongue 
plus one or more other tongues as indicated on 
Spoken Languages Table below. 

‘The weapon can use either communication mode 
at will; with language use as any speaking 
weapon. 

‘The weapon can also read languages/maps of 
any nonmagical type. 

‘The weapon can read languages as well as magi- 
cal writings. 


Intelligent Weapon Alignment; Any weapon 
with intelligence has an alignment. Note that holy 
avengers have alignment restrictions. All cursed 
weapons are absolutely neutral. 


Weapon Alignment Table 
Roll Alignment of Weapon 
01-05 Chaotic good 
06-15 Chaotic neutral’ 
16-20 Chaotic evil 

21-25 Neutral evil! 

26-30 Lawful evil 

31-55 Lawful good 

56-60 Lawful neutral' 
61-80 Neutral (absolute) 
81-00 Neutral good! 


'The item can also be used by any character 
whose alignment corresponds to the nonneutral 
alignment portion of the weapon’s alignment 
(chaotic, evil, good, or lawful). Thus any chaotic 
character can use a weapon with chaotic neutral 


alignment. 


Any character whose alignment does not corre- 
spond to that of the weapon, except as noted in 
footnote #1 above, sustains points of damage 
equal to the number of ego points (see Table 119 
in the DMG) of the weapon. The damage is suf- 
fered every time (or for every round) the charac- 
ter touches any portion of the weapon unless the 
weapon is in the grasp or possession of a charac- 
ter whose alignment is compatible with the 


weapon. 

Weapon Abilities: Using the number of capa- 
bilities determined by the roll on the Weapon 
Intelligence and Capabilities Table, the 
weapon’s specific abilities are determined by 
rolling on the appropriate tables below. 


Weapon Primary Abilities 
Roll Ability 


01-11 Detect “elevator”/shifting rooms/walls 
in a 10’ radius. 


12-22 Detect sloping passages in a 10' radius 

23-33 Detect traps of large size in a 10' 
radius/. 

34-44 Detect evil/good in a 10' radius 

45-55 Detect precious metals, kind, and 
amount in a 20’ radius 

56-66 Detect gems, kind, and number in a 5' 
radius. 

67-77 Detect magic in a 10' radius. 

78-82 Detect secret doors in a 5' radius. 

83-87 Detect invisible objects in a 10’ radius. 

88-92 Locate object in a 120’ radius. 

93-98 Roll twice on this table ignoring scores 
of 93 to 00. 

99-00 Roll on the Weapon Extraordinary 
Powers Table instead. 


If the same ability is rolled twice or more, the 
range of the power is doubled, tripled, and so on. 
All abilities function only when the weapon is 
held, drawn, and the owner is concentrating on 
the desired result. A weapon can perform only 
one function at a time, and thus can fight or 
detect but one thing at a time. Other abilities can 
be created by the DM. 


Weapon Extraordinary Powers 


Roll Power* 

01-07 Charm person on contact, 3 times/day 
08-15 Clairaudience 30-yard range—three 
times/day, one round per use. 

16-22 Clairvoyance 30-yard range—three 
times/day, one round per use. 

23-28 Determine direction and depth, 2 
times/day. 

29-34 ESP 30-yard range— three times/day, 
one round per use. 

35-41 Flying 120 feet/turn—one hour/day. 

42-47 Heal—One time/day. 

48-54 Illusion 120 yards range—2 times/day, 
as the wand. 

55-61 Levitation one turn duration—3 
times/day, at 6th level of ability. 

62-67 Strength one time/day (upon wielder 


only). 
6188 


~ Weapon, Intelligent r 


68-75 Telekinesis 250 pounds maximum—2 
times/day, 1 round each use. 

76-81 Telepathy 60 yards range—2 times/day, 

82-88 Teleportation one time/day, 600 pounds 
maximum, casting time 2. 

89-94 X-ray vision 40 yards range—2 
times/day, one turn per use. 

95-97 Roll twice on this table ignoring scores 
of 95-97. 

98-99 Character may choose one power from 
this table. 


00 Character may choose one power from 
this table, and then roll on the Special 
Purpose Weapons Table. 
*Saving throws apply as usual. 


If the same power is rolled twice, the uses per 
day are doubled, etc. Powers function only when 
the weapon is drawn and held and the possessor is 
concentrating upon the desired effect. Most pow- 
ers require that the character stop and concentrate 
for a full round. 


Special Purpose Weapons 

A: Purpose: A weapon’s purpose must suit the 
alignment and type of the weapon in question. 
Killing is always restricted to evil victims when 
the weapon is of good alignment. Weapons dedi- 
cated to slaying monsters are either good and slay 
neutral or evil monsters, or evil and slay neutral 
or good monsters. 


Roll Purpose 

01-10 Defeat/slay diametrically opposed 
alignment’. 

11-20 Defeat priests (of a particular type). 

21-30 Defeat fighters. 

31-40 Defeat wizards. 

41-50 Defeat thieves. 

51-55 Defeat bards. 

56-65 Overthrow law and/or chaos. 

66-75 Defeat good and/or evil. 

76-95 Defeat nonhuman monsters. 

96-00 Other. 


'The purpose of the true neutral version of this 
weapon is to preserve balance (see Alignment in 
the DMG) by defeating/slaying powerful beings 
of the extreme alignments (lawful good, lawful 
evil, chaotic good, chaotic evil). 


B: Special Purpose Power: These specific pow- 
ers operate only in pursuit of the special purpose. 


Roll Power 


01-10 Blindness for 2d6 rounds'. 
11-20 Confusion for 2d6 rounds'. 
21-25 Disintegrate!. 

26-55 Fear for 144 rounds!. 


56-65 Insanity for 1d4 rounds!. 

66-80 Paralysis for 1d4 rounds!. 

81-00 +2 to all saving throws, —1 to each die 
of damage sustained. 

‘Upon scoring a hit with the weapon, unless the 

opponent succeeds with a saving throw vs. spell. 


Languages Spoken by Weapon: The DM should 
determine languages spoken by the weapon based 
on his campaign and the history of the weapon. 
Thus, an intelligent warhammer fashioned by the 
dwarves would certainly understand Dwarf. 


Roll Languages 
1 


01-40 

41-70 2 

71-85 3 

86-95 4 

96-99 5 
00 6' 


'Or the total of two additional rolls ignoring a 
score of 00, whichever is the greater. 


Weapon Ego 

Only after all aspects of a weapon have been 
determined and recorded can the ego rating ofa 
weapon be found. Ego, along with intelligence, is 
a factor with regard to the dominance of weapon 
over character, as detailed on the Weapon Ego 
Table below: 


Weapon Ego Table 


Attribute of Weapon 
Each + of weapon' 

Each primary ability’ 
Each extraordinary power 
Special purpose 

Each language spoken 
Telepathic ability 

Reading languages ability 
Reading magic ability 

'A sword +1 has one ego point, but if it has 
another (higher) plus, these are also counted. For 
example, a flame tongue +1 has a maximum plus 
of 4, so it is +1/+4 for five ego points. In addi- 
tion, weapons that have no extra pluses but extra 
powers (like a holy avenger, of sharpness) add 
double their + rating for ego. 

*If double ability, double ego points. 


Ego Points 


NRK NK NN — 


Weapons vs. Characters 

When a weapon possesses unusual characteris- 
tics, it has a personality, which is rated by com- 
bining its intelligence and ego scores. The weapon 
is, of course, absolutely true to its alignment, and 


if the character who possesses the weapon is not, 
6188 


ra" OO 


1516 


Weapon, Intelligent II 


personality conflict—weapon vs. character— 
results. 

Similarly, any weapon with an ego of 19 or 
higher always considers itself superior to any 
character, and a personality conflict will result if 
the possessor does not always agree with the 
weapon. 


The personality score of a character is: 

Intelligence + Charisma + Experience Level 
Note that the personality score is reduced by 

one for every group of points of damage taken 

equal to the character’s average number of points 
per level. Divide the character’s total hit points by 
his or her level (round up). For example, a fighter 
of 7th-level has 53 hit points: 53x7 = 7.6. Thus 
for every 8 points of damage, the fighter’s per- 

sonality score is reduced by 1. 

Whenever personality conflict occurs, the 
weapon will resist the character’s desires and 
demand concessions such as: 

* Removal of associates, henchmen, hirelings, 
or creatures of alignment or personality dis- 
tasteful to the weapon. 

* The character is divested of all other magical 
weapons, 

* Obedience from the character so weapon can 
lead the expedition for its own purposes. 

* Immediate seeking and slaying of creatures 
hateful to the weapon. 

* Encrustation of pommel, hilt, scabbard, 
baldric, or belt with gems and a special con- 
tainer made of precious substances for its 
safekeeping. 

* Magical protection and devices to protect it 
from molestation when not in use. 

* That the character pay it handsomely for all 
abilities and power the weapon is called upon 
to exercise in behalf of its possessor. 

* That the character carries it on all occasions. 

* That the character relinquishes the weapon in 
favor of a more suitable person due to align- 
ment differences or conduct. 


Any time the personality score of a weapon 
exceeds the personality score of the character 
who possesses it, the weapon will dominate its 
possessor, and it can force any or all of the above 
demands or actually cause any of the following 
actions: 

* Force its possessor into combat. 
Refuse to strike opponents. 
* Strike at its wielder or his associates. 
* Force its possessor to surrender to an opponent. 
* Cause itself to drop from the character’s grasp. 


Naturally, such actions are unlikely where the 
character-weapon alignment and purposes are 


harmonious. However, the weapon might wish to 
have a lesser character possess it so as to easily 
command him, or a higher level possessor so as 
to better accomplish its goals. All magical weap- 
ons with personalities desire to play an important 
role in the success of activities, particularly com- 
bat. Such weapons are rivals of each other, even if 
of the same alignment. They will be aware of the 
presence of any similar weapon within 60 feet, 
and try their best to lead a possessor into missing 
or destroying the rival unless this is totally inimi- 
cal to its nature—a holy avenger, for example, 
would certainly not allow destruction of any other 
lawful good weapon and might encourage their 
discovery, even at the risk of grim odds. 

Weapons of this nature can never be totally 
controlled or silenced by the characters who pos- 
sess them, even though they may be heavily out- 
weighed by personality force. They may be 
powerless to enforce their demands, but they will 
be in there plugging. Even a humble +1 weapon 
of unusual nature can be a vocal martyr, denigrat- 
ing its own abilities and asking only that the char- 
acter only give it the chance to shatter itself 
against some hated enemy. 

DM’s Note: Most players will be unwilling to 
play weapons with personalities they way the per- 
sonalities dictate. It is up to the DM to ensure that 
the role of the weapon is played to the hilt (so to 
speak) with the DM assuming the persona of the 
weapon if necessary. 

In Ravenloft: The ego of an evil, intelligent 
weapon rises 5 points in Ravenloft. (Weapons of 
good or neutral alignment not affected.) If an evil 
weapon dominates its bearer, the weapon has a 
50% chance of delivering itself to the lord of that 
domain. Each week a character wields an evil, 
intelligent sword, a Ravenloft powers check must 
be made. 

In Kara-Tur: The weapon has Intelligence 
and capabilities as if it were an Intelligent sword, 
although it can never have communication ability 
beyond semi-empathy. Intelligence is 1d6+11. 


Intelligent II* 
XP Value: Varies GP Value: Varies 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Expert Set 

Certain magical weapons may be intelligent and 
have other special abilities, as well. The DM can 
create special intelligent magic weapons or roll 
them randomly, using the following procedure. 
An intelligent weapon should be played by the 
DM, just like an NPC. 


Rolling up an intelligent weapon: 
1. Find out if the weapon has a special purpose 
(Optional 1d20). 


2. Determine Intelligence score (1d20). 
6189 


1517 


| Se = ee 


Weapon, Intelligent II 


N a 


. Find languages known (1d100). 

. Determine weapon’s alignment (1d20). 

. Find primary power (1d100). 

. Roll extraordinary power, if any (1d100). 
. Roll ego score (1d12). 


SDUNLwW 


Special Purpose 

A weapon will have a special purpose if a roll of 

20 on 1d20 is made (the DM may choose to omit 

this roll, carefully placing all special purpose 

weapons, as they are both very powerful and very 
rare). Any weapon with a special purpose has 

Intelligence and Ego scores of 12, as well as one 

special purpose. 

Special purpose is given to some rare weapons 
by their creator. The following list gives some 
special purposes that may be used, or the DM 
may invent others. Only one special purpose may 
be given to any one magic weapon 

Slay wizards (or elves). 

Slay priests. 

Slay fighters (or dwarves or halflings). 
Slay monster (roll for one type randomly). 

Defeat law (or chaos). 

Defeat good (or evil). 

When used for its special purpose, the weapon 

gains one added ability, according to its alignment. 

* Lawful weapons paralyze chaotic opponents 
unless the victim saves vs. spell. 

* Neutral weapons add +1 to all of the user’s 
saving throws. 

* Chaotic weapons turn to stone a lawful oppo- 
nent upon a hit unless the victim saves vs. 
spell. 

Example: A lawful weapon with a special pur- 
pose to slay wizards will paralyze only chaotic 
wizards, and only if the saving throw is failed. 


Intelligence 

Each intelligent weapon has an Intelligence 
score, one or more primary powers, possibly an 
extraordinary power, and a method of communi- 
cation Empathy means that the user of the weapon 
somehow knows what the weapon’s powers are 
and how to use them. 


Die Int Method of 
Roll Score Powers Communication 
01-14 None None None 
15 7 ‘1 Primary Empathy 
16 8 2 Primary Empathy 
17 9 3 Primary Empathy 
18 10 3 Primary Speech 
19 11 3Primary+ Speech 
Read Magic 
20 12 3Primary+ Speech 
Read Magic + 1 
Extraordinary 


Languages 

Speaking weapons talk aloud, usually telling the 
user what is desired. Any weapon that can read 
magic can read written information in any lan- 
guage it can speak. A talking weapon always 
knows the number of languages rolled. The DM 
has to choose which languages are known. 


Roll Number of Languages 
01-50 1 
51-70 2 
71-85 3 
86-95 4 
96-99 5 


00 Roll again twice and add the results 
Alignment 
Determine the alignment of the intelligent 
weapon (roll 1d20): 


Roll Alignment 


01-13 Lawful 
14-18 Neutral 
19-20 Chaotic 


A weapon’s alignment cannot be detected until 
it is handled. If the creature handling the weapon 
is of the same alignment, there are no adverse 
effects. However, if the alignment is different, the 
user takes some damage in each round in which 
the weapon is touched or held, according to the 
following chart. 


User’s Weapon’s Damage 
Alignment Alignment per Round 
Lawful Neutral 1d6 
Chaotic 2d6 
Neutral Lawful 1d6 
Chaotic 1d6 
Chaotic Lawful 2d6 
Neutral 1d6 


Primary Powers 

Roll 1d100 to find any primary powers a weapon 
might have. The number of primary powers 
depends on the weapon’s Intelligence score. 
Duplicate results should be rerolled. 


Roll Primary Power 


01-15 Detect shifting walls and rooms 
16-30 Detect sloping passages 

31-40 Find secret doors 

41-50 Find traps 

51-60 See invisible objects 

61-70 Detect evil/good 

71-80 Detect metal 

81-90 Detect magic 

91-95 Detect gems 


6189 


= 1518 


Weapon, Intelligent II 


EN eee a 


96-99 Roll for one extraordinary power (see 
Extraordinary Powers below) 

00 Roll twice more on this table 

Unless otherwise noted, one primary power may 
be used each round, once per round. The user must 
have the weapon in hand and be concentrating on 
the power in order to use it. Duplicate results 
should be rolled again unless noted otherwise. 

Detect shifting walls and rooms: The weapon 
can find shifting walls and rooms within a range 
of 10 feet. 

Detect sloping passages: The weapon can 
locate sloping passages within a 10-foot range. 

Find secret doors: The weapon can locate all 
secret doors within a 10-foot range. This power 
can only be used three times per day. 

Detect traps: The weapon can detect traps of any 
type within 10 feet, but only three times per day. 

See invisible objects: The weapon can see 
invisible and hidden objects (but not secret doors) 
within 20 feet, 

Detect evil (good): The weapon is able to detect 
one of these intentions up to a range of 20 feet. 
(Animals and traps are neither evil nor good.) 

Detect metal: The weapon can detect metal of 
any type requested up to a range of 60 feet (unless 
blocked by lead), It points in the direction of the 
material. 

Detect magic: The weapon can detect any 
magic spell or item within 20 feet, and causes the 
magic item (when commanded) to glow. This 
power can only be used three times per day. 

Detect gems: The weapon can detect any type 
of gems (and tells their number) within a range of 
60 feet (unless blocked by lead). The weapon 
points in the direction of the gems. 


Extraordinary Powers 

If the intelligent weapon has an extraordinary power, 
roll 1d100 on the table below. Duplicate results 
should be rolled again unless noted otherwise. 


Roll Extraordinary Powers 

01-10 Clairaudience 

11-20 Clairvoyance 

21-30 ESP 

31-40 Telepathy 

4150 Telekinesis 

51-59  Teleportation 

60-68 X-ray vision 

69-77 Illusion 

78-82 Levitation 

83-87 Flying 

88-92 Healing (duplicate allowed) 

93-97 Extra damage (duplicate allowed) 

98-99 Make two more rolls on this table 
00 Make three more rolls on this table 


As with primary powers, the user must have 
the weapon in hand and be concentrating on the 
power. Any extraordinary power is only usable 
three times a day unless specially noted other- 
wise. 

Clairaudience: This power allows the user to 
hear noises (including speech) in an area up to a 
range of 60 feet through the ears of a creature in 
that area (unless blocked by lead). The user must 
concentrate for one turn in order to hear what the 
creature hears. 

Clairvoyance: This power allows the user to see 
an area up to 60 feet away through the eyes of a 
creature in that area, unless blocked by lead. The 
user must concentrate for one turn in order to “see.” 

ESP: The user of the weapon may listen to any 
one living creature’s thoughts. The user must con- 
centrate in one direction, and can only “hear” 
thoughts within 60 feet (unless blocked by lead). 
The user can understand any thoughts “heard.” 

Telepathy: This power allows the user to per- 
form the same powers as ESP (above), but also 
gives the ability to “send” thoughts to the crea- 
ture contacted (as a helm of telepathy). Of course, 
the creature may refuse to answer. 

Telekinesis: The user of the weapon may move 
up to 200 pounds of weight by concentration 
alone. See the wizard spell of the same name for 
more information. 

Teleportation: This power allows the user of 
the weapon to teleport (as the wizard spell). 

X-ray vision: This power produces the same 
effect as a ring of X-ray vision (the ability to see 
through anything, except gold or lead). 

Illusion: This power allows the user to create 
one phantasmal force spell (as the wizard spell). 

Levitation: The user of the weapon may evi- 
tate as if using the wizard spell of the same name, 
for a maximum of three turns. 

Flying: The user of the weapon may fly as if 
using the wizard spell of the same name, for a 
maximum of three turns. 

Healing: The weapon can heal up to 6 points 
of damage at the rate of | point per round. This 
power may only be used once per day. Duplicate 
ability rolls increase the amount of healing and 
the time required by six. 

Extra damage: This power increases the user’s 
Strength when striking for 1d10 rounds. During 
this time, the user inflicts four times the normal 
damage on each successful hit (but has no better 
chances to hit). Each duplicate roll of this power 
increases the multiplier by one (to five times, six 
times, etc.). 


Ego 
To determine the ego score of an intelligent (non- 


special purpose) weapon, roll 1d12. The ego of 
6189 


A <a 


1 


519 


BOO ‘ié‘OCOCOCSCSsSs*stSC*tCiS 


Weapon, Invisible 


fi, Meee 


the weapon is a measure of the force of its per- 

sonality. A weapon with high intelligence and ego 

may try to control its user. The DM should make 

a control check at certain times. 

Control checks: An intelligent weapon must 
be checked to see if it is controlling its user in 
five different situations: 

* When the character first handles the weapon. 

+ When the character is wounded to a point 
where half of his or her original hit points are 
gone. 

* When the character acquires any other magic 
weapon. 

* When a character of a different alignment tries 
to use it. 

* When a situation arises where the special pur- 
pose of the weapon (if applicable) can be 
used. 

To make the control check, the DM must find 
the will score of the user and of the weapon. 
When the will scores are found, the being with 
the higher total score, either character or weapon, 
controls the actions of the character. 


Will Score 

An intelligent weapon’s will score is found by 

adding the weapon’s Intelligence, ego, and 

bonuses. The weapon gets a bonus of +1 to the 
will score for each extraordinary power it has, 
plus 1d10 points if the weapon is of a different 
alignment than the user. A character’s will score 
is found by adding the character’s Strength and 

Wisdom scores and subtracting any adjustments 

due to wounds, as follows: 

+ Ifthe character is damaged, but has lost no 
more than % the original hit points, 1d4 points 
are subtracted. 

* Ifthe character has lost more than 4 of the 
original hit points, 2d4 points are subtracted 
from the will score. 


Weapons in Control 

If a weapon controls a character, the DM must 

decide on the actions of the weapon in certain sit- 

uations. These may include: 

* Leading the user past other magic weapons 
found, or to discard other weapons. 

* Forcing the user to charge into combat to win 
glory for itself. 

* Forcing the user to surrender to an oppo- 
nent—either one more worthy of the weapon 
or one easier to control. 

* Forcing the user to spend most of his or her 
money on items for the weapon (jeweled fit- 
tings, fancy scabbards, special magical pro- 
tection, etc.). 

The control lasts until the weapon is satisfied 


or until the situation that caused the control check 
has passed. 


Invisible* 
XP Value: +1,000 GP Value: +5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 169 

This weapon does normal damage but appears 
only as a hilt; its blade cannot be seen. Blood or 
dirt can outline or betray the location of its blade, 
but even striking a creature does not make the 
metal itself appear. An invisible blade can there- 
fore be concealed in a person’s grasp and carried 
where weapons are not permitted. An invisible 
weapon is always silent when striking, even if it 
falls or is thrust against stone or metal. It never 
reflects light, but it can be normally affected by 
heat metal and similar spells, and it can be read- 
ily seen by creatures able to see invisible objects. 
When grasped (it need not be drawn), an invisible 
weapon allows its wielder to see as if using a 
detect invisibility spell. 

Detect invisibility, invisibility, gaze reflection, 
and some form of magical silence are required 
for the enchantment of such a weapon. The magic 
must be worked on the weapon as it is forged and 
tempered. 


of Lefthandedness* 
XP Value: — GP Value: 50 
New Item 

A variety of these weapons were created by the 
wizard/warrior Sleedak the Curmudgeon. 
Sleedak was left-handed, and he grew tired of the 
barbs and slights of “righties.” Weapons of left- 
handedness may be found with any conceivable 
enchantment, and the enchantments do work— 
but only when the weapon is in the left hand. If 
held in the right hand, the enchantment either 
works against the would-be user or reverses with 
double effect. If, for example, a right-handed 
fighter uses an invisible axe of lefthandedness, 
the axe shines with a brilliant white light and can- 
not be concealed. 


of Levitation* 
XP Value: +400 GP Value: +2,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
As with the potion, the user may float in the air 
for a maximum of three turns per use. 


of Lighting* 
XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
Dunceons & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
A weapon that has this talent can create one light 
spell effect per day to a 120-foot range and last- 
ing for 6 turns (similar to the Ist-level wizard 
spell). 


6193 


a 


Weapon, Narcissistic 


ae ee ee eee erence i 


Lightweight* 
XP Value: +10 GP Value: +100 
DRAGON Magazine 181 

For thieves, mountain climbers, fast scouts, and 
others on the go, these items are extremely use- 
ful. Weight and encumbrance may be reduced by 
half (rounding down) when these weapons and 
armor are used instead of ordinary ones. No addi- 
tional advantages are given in combat, though 
they do count as magical for attack purposes 
against certain monsters. 


Living* 

GP Value: +5,000 
Wild Elves 
Living weapons are conjured spirits that are bound 
into weapons by powerful magicians. They are 
highly evil creatures, capable of animating these 
weapons and attacking with them. They are typically 
used as guardians by the wizards who made them. 

Living weapons are swift in combat. They fly 
through the air hitting targets with a +4 bonus to 
their attack and damage rolls. The weapons they 
inhabit are otherwise normal; once the living 
weapon has suffered full damage, the bound spirit 
is dispersed, and a normal weapon falls harm- 
lessly to the ground. 

Living weapons are usually swords, but they 
can be any melee weapons. In any form they 
inflict the base damage of the weapon, with a +4 
attack and damage roll bonus. Living weapons 


XP Value: +1,000 


1521 


may be turned as undead, with the same chance 
as of turning vampires. 

Living weapons are guardians. They have an 
attack range of 120 feet from the spot where they 
were bound. They are of low intelligence and 
obey simple commands from their masters. 

These weapons are highly evil; they prefer to 
feed on the blood of sentient creatures, but they 
attack anything that gets within their attack 
range. 


Living Weapon 
Climate/Terrain: Any/Subterranean 
Frequency: Rare 
Organization: Solitary 
Activity Cycle: Any 

Diet: Blood 

Intelligence: Low (5-7) 
Treasure: None 

Alignment: Chaotic evil 

No. Appearing: | 

Armor Class: —| 

Movement: F| 18 

Hit Dice: 6 

THACO: 15 

No. of Attacks: 2 
Damage/Attack: By weapon +4 
Special Attacks: None 
Special Defenses: +1 or better 
Magic Resistance: 20% 

Size: M (5' long) 

Morale: Elite (13-14) 

XP Value: 2,000 


Miniature* 
See Enchanted Enhancements in Volume 1 


Narcissistic* 

GP Value: +100 
IMAGINE Magazine 14 
This weapon believes it has a magnetic personal- 
ity. As a result, once the weapon’s ego has been 
calculated normally, it is increased by 50%, Natu- 
rally, because it is so lovely, the blade has a mag- 
netic effect on any metal near it. The wielder 
must have a Strength of 18 or the weapon sticks 
to any metal elements of his or her armor, and no 
attack or damage bonuses are applied. 

Against foes in metal armor, the weapon acts 
as a normal magical weapon, but causes double 
damage. However, the wielder must spend one 
round unsticking the weapon from the target, dur- 
ing that time she or he can do nothing else. 

The weapon is not magnetic, it just likes metal— 
especially when it can see its own reflection. 

When the narcissistic weapon result is rolled 
on the Random Item Chart, the DM should roll 
another effect and combine the results. 


XP Value: — 


6196 


Weapon, Petrified 


jE 


Petrified* 

XP Value: +100 GP Value: +500 
DRAGON Magazine 197 
These items are wooden weapons that have been 
permanently enchanted with petrification spells, 
making them equivalent to weapons made of 
stone (flint, obsidian, etc.) instead of wood. The 
weapons may still break in battle, but until they 
do, they strike with attack and damage penalties 
of —1 and —2 instead of the —2 and —3 penalties of 
normal wooden weapons. These weapons are also 
fireproof. Wooden weapons such as clubs or 
quarterstaves are also limited to being fireproof 
as a benefit. These weapons hardly seem worth 
the trouble of enchanting, but the process is good 
practice for apprentice wizards, so petrified 
weapons are fairly common. Besides, when fight- 
ing an opponent with a torch—a common event 
in the arenas of Athas—it’s a comfort to know 
that a wooden weapon won’t be burned into use- 
lessness. It is also possible to bury petrified items 
for use as hidden markers, as they do radiate a 
dweomer that can be located by a detect magic 
spell. 


Polymorphed* 
See Polymorphed Gear in Enchanted 
Enhancements, Volume 1. 


of Proficiency* 
XP Value: +50 GP Value: +500 
DRAGON Magazine 181 

In order to use something properly, whether a 
weapon or a tool, one has to learn how to use it. 
However, a clever wizard can get around this by 
creating magical weapons and enchanted items 
that magically impart skill in their use to the 
owner, but only when using those specific items. 
If a poor fighter doesn’t know how to use any 
weapon but a short weapon (the only type he or 
she could afford at the start), a broad weapon of 
proficiency found by the character is perfectly 
usable, just as if he of she had trained in broad 
weapons. However, if another broad weapon is 
found (whether magical or mundane) and the 
fighter tries to use it, fighting takes place with the 
standard nonproficiency penalty. Note that in the 
case of weapons of proficiency, there are no 
attack or damage bonuses; a fighter can merely 
use them competently in battle even though he or 
she has no training with that weapon type. 

These weapons are mainly useful for increas- 
ing a character’s combat ability, but all standard 
weapon restrictions still apply (a wizard cannot 
use a broad weapon of proficiency). Since so 
many people complain about how helpless a 1st- 
level wizard is; for instance, a staff or dagger of 
proficiency would effectively double the number 


of weapons he could use. If a fighter discovers 
too late that he or she should have invested ina 
missile weapon instead of specializing in melee 
weapons (or if a bow was simply too expensive), 
a bow of proficiency would give the missile capa- 
bility of an ordinary fighter who was trained as 
an archer. Naturally, the owners of such weapons 
would have to take very good care of them; once 
those magical items are gone, so go the PCs’ abil- 
ities to use such weapons, at least until training 
time comes around. The same goes with noncom- 
bat gear such as thieves’ tools, musical instru- 
ments, and riding gear, unless such skills are 
assumed to come with the class. 


Purple-Leaf* 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DRAGON Magazine 197 

These magical knives, daggers, and swords are 
created from the razor-sharp blades of the purple 
grass that grows in the Athasian wilderness. Each 
weapon is made from an individual blade of grass 
that has had one or more plant growth spells cast 
upon it. The type of weapon gained depends on 
how many castings were used in the process of 
enchantment: A knife rates one casting; a dagger 
two; a short sword three; a long sword, broad 
sword (the latter created by trimming off the tip a 
bit), or bastard sword four; and a two-handed 
sword five. Because of the shape of the grass 
blades, only straight-bladed swords may be cre- 
ated in this manner; no curved weapons such as 
khopeshes or scimitars are possible. 

A purple-leaf blade does the same damage as 
its regular steel counterpart. It does not break in 
combat, but if a natural 20 is rolled upon hitting 
an opponent, the blade bends out of line. It takes 
one round of effort to straighten the blade out, 
after which it may be used as before. These weap- 
ons are both fireproof and rustproof. They are 
worth 10 XP per casting of a plant growth spell 
required in their creation; a knife is worth 10, a 
dagger 20, a short sword 30, etc. 


Quirks* 

XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DRAGON Magazine 163 

The quirks of magical weapons are detailed in 

most of the major entries. We include a generic 

weapons’ quirk list here for those entries, such as 

Blowgun, that do not have these optional tables. 


Roll Quirks Present 
01-86 No quirks 
87-94 One quirk 
95-98 Two quirks 
99-00 Three quirks 


6199 


1522 


Weapon of See Invisible y 


19-23 
24-28 


55-59 


60-63 


64-68 


69-72 


73-75 


— i ° °° °»=<- ~~ ————— 


LLC 


Result 

Weapon glows (as per faerie fire) in 
normal darkness. 

Weapon is lighter than normal. The 
wielder has a —1 bonus on any reaction 
or initiative rolls using the weapon. 
Weapon is unable to harm 1d4 types of 
creatures. 

Weapon must be used two-handed in 
order to gain its magical bonus. If the 
weapon is very short (a dagger or 
knife), is already a two-handed weapon, 
or this result does not otherwise apply, 
disregard this result and the roll. 
Weapon’s finish cannot be marred, 
stained, or scratched in any way. 
Weapon hums whenever enemies come 
within 30 feet (and the sound negates 
any chance of surprise). 

Weapon must be baptized in flame after 
combat, or it loses its magical bonus 
until it is placed within a fire for at least 
one hour (weapon is immune to the 
effects of normal fire). 

Weapon is twice as heavy as normal. 
The wielder suffers a +1 penalty to all 
reaction and initiative rolls. 

Weapon appears beat up, notched, 
scratched, stained, and dented. No 
amount of polishing can alter its 
appearance. 

Weapon’s magic functions only at night. 
Also, the weapon is evilly aligned and 
radiates this alignment. 

Weapon’s magic functions only during 
the day. The weapon is good aligned 
and radiates this alignment. 

Weapon has a command word on it that 
shrinks it as would an item spell. To 
return the weapon to normal size, speak 
the command word backwards. 

Weapon exhibits no magical properties 
until a certain condition is met (a bless 
spell is cast upon it, a certain type of 
creature is killed with it, etc.). 

Weapon conducts electricity. As a 
result, the wielder suffers a —1 penalty 
on all saves vs. electricity or lightning 
and takes +1 point per die of damage. 
Weapon radiates nondetection; thus a 
detect magic spell cannot register it. 
Weapon is silent; it makes no noise 
when dropped or struck. 

Weapon’s magic makes it dangerous to 
wield in combat. If the wielder misses 
an attack against an intended opponent, 
he or she must roll under his or her 
Dexterity score on 1d20 or the weapon 


slips. An attack roll must be made 
against any ally in a 5-foot radius (or 
against the wielder, if no allies are 
near). A successful hit on oneself or a 
friend does half damage. 

Weapon is not affected by acid. 
Weapon cannot be broken by any means 
short of divine power or a near irre- 
sistible force (such as having 10 tons of 
rock dropped on it). 

Weapon is immune to the effects of rust 
(including the attack of a rust monster). 
Weapon is invisible whenever drawn or 
wielded in combat. 

Weapon’s blade or head exists in the 
Ethereal or Astral Plane (50% chance 
of either), and is able to hit creatures 
that can “phase out,” become ethereal, 
and so forth when in an alternate plane. 
Weapon is intelligent—twice, with 
vastly differing personalities and align- 
ments. The DM should roll twice on the 
Sword Intelligence Table (see Sword, 
Special) and disregard any result of no 
intelligence. The weapon has two egos. 
Though it tells its owner of the powers 
it offers, it never discloses the number 
of charges it possesses. Note that an 
intelligent weapon never willingly uses 
its last few charges. These weapons can 
always be recharged, regardless of type. 
The weapon switches personalties every 
1d4 days. 


76-79 
80-85 


98-00 


Racial* 
See Racial Enhancements in Enchanted 
Enhancements, Volume 1. 


of Returning* 
XP Value: +1,000 GP Value: +5,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

This type of hand-hurled missile weapon returns 
to the user if it misses its target; it is sometimes 
called a “boomerang” weapon. If it misses, it 
returns at the end of the same round and may 
automatically be safely caught by the character 
throwing it (unless the user is paralyzed, con- 
fused, immobile, or incapacitated). If it hits a tar- 
get, the weapon does not return. 


of See Invisible* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
This item can find all invisible and hidden objects 
or creatures (but not secret doors) in a 20-foot 
radius. 


6201 


1523 


Weapon, Shivering 


jj ce E 


Shivering* 

XP Value: — GP Value: +100 
IMAGINE Magazine 14 
This magical weapon is so afraid of fighting that 
it shivers with fright during melees. This causes it 
to have 12 attacks per round instead of its normal 
allowance, but all the attacks are at —1 instead of 
its normal bonus. An attack or Strength bonus 
due to the wielder only applies to the first attack. 
Any other abilities the weapon possesses are 
unaffected. Each attack only causes | point of 
damage. 

When the shivering weapon result is rolled on 
the random item chart, the DM should roll 
another effect and combine the results. 


of Silence* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
Oriental Adventures 

When held, this weapon cloaks the character in a 
muffling field, deadening but not totally stopping 
all sound emanating from the character. The char- 
acter can still hear all sounds normally. This field 
improves the ninja’s and thief’s chance of moving 
silently by 15% and increasing the chances of hid- 
ing in shadows by 20%. Sonic-based attacks are 
reduced to half or no damage (depending upon the 
success of a saving throw). The field extends over 
the wielder and all carried possessions only, Should 
something be dropped or if an object is knocked 
over, it makes the normal noise. Thus the weapon 
does not protect against clumsiness. 


of Silencing* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
This talent can create one silence, 15’ radius spell 
effect a day to 180-foot range (as the 2nd-level 
priests spell). 


of Slaying* 
XP Value: +1,000 GP Value: +5,000 
Oriental Adventures 

This is a weapon +3, marked or made in some 
distinctive way found in the lands of Kara-Tur. Its 
appearance makes it easy to pick out froma 
group of similar weapons. Its markings also serve 
to identify the type of creature affected by the 
weapon. If the weapon is used against the type of 
creature identified by the markings, it slays the 
creature instantly on a successful hit (saving 
throws applicable). Once successfully used, the 
weapon loses all its magical properties. Below is 
a list of some of the creatures that might be 
affected by the slaying power (roll 2d12). Obvi- 
ously, many other creatures could be included on 
this list. The DM should create, modify, or limit 
weapons of slaying as best fits the campaign. 


Roll Creature Roll Creature 
02 Bajang 13 Ninja 
03 Bushi 14 Ogre Magi 
04 Dragons 15 Ogres 
05 Elementals 16 Oni 
06 Giants 17 P’oh 
07 Hengeyokai 18 Samurai 
08 Hu hsien 19 Shukenja 
09 Kalau 20 Sohei 
10 Korobokuru 21 Spiders 
11 Kuei 22 Spirit folk 
12 Nats 23 Wu Jen 

24 Yakuza 

of Slicing* 

XP Value: +500 GP Value: +2,500 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

This talent applies only to edged weapons (swords, 
daggers, and knives, though axes may qualify). If 
any other weapon type indicates this talent, roll 
again. If the edged weapon’s attack roll is 19 or 20 
counting the weapon’s magical bonus but no other 
bonuses, the opponent struck must make a saving 
throw vs. death magic or be struck dead with one 
blow. If the saving throw is successful, the victim 
still takes triple normal damage. These special 
damage bonuses do not apply when the weapon is 
used against constructs or undead. 


of Slowing* 

XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
When a successful hit is made, a weapon with 
this talent can cause the opponent struck to 
become s/owed (as the reverse of the 3rd-level 
wizard spell haste) for | turn (no saving throw). 
The user may decide whether or not to use this 

effect after the swing hits. 


of Specialization* 

XP Value: +100 GP Value: +1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 181 

Items of specialization behave the same as those 
of proficiency, but they act in the owner’s hand as 
if the user had training in weapon specialization, 
as opposed to mere proficiency. Unlike items of 
proficiency, only weapons may be enchanted for 
specialization. Only single-class fighters can use 
weapons of specialization. Unlike weapons of 
proficiency, these weapons do give attack and 
damage bonuses, but the bonuses are granted to 
the user and are not inherent in the weapon; thus 
they are not effective against creatures that can be 
struck only by enchanted weaponry. 

Remember, too, that the specialization bonus only 
comes with that particular weapon; skill in using all 
weapons of the type in the specialization mode does 
not come from mere use of that one item. 

6208 


oe ee nn ee ee ee 


1524 


Weapon, Stoneiron r 


Spectral* 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 6,000 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 

These eerie weapons were once very popular. 
Fashioned from the bones of creatures who died 
violently, they appear only as hilts carved of 
bone. When grasped by a living or undead being, 
a weapon of glowing white corpselight appears 
from the hilt. 

The spectral weapon is insubstantial, and 
passes through solid objects: consider targets to 
be whatever Armor Class they naturally possess 
(counting Dexterity bonuses and magical protec- 
tion but not physical armor, unless it is magical). 
For example, a knight of average Dexterity in 
nonmagical full plate armor is AC 10 to this 
blade, not AC 1. 

Whenever a spectral weapon hits living flesh, 
it affects it as a chill touch spell does (the victim 
must save vs. spell or suffer 1d4 points of damage 
and loses | point of Strength for an hour, or if not 
rated for Strength, loses | on its attack rolls for 
every second successful attack of a spectral 
weapon). 

If this sort of weapon is wielded by an undead 
creature, it automatically does 2d4 points of dam- 
age. (Strength loss still occurs only if the victim’s 
save fails), Undead creatures cannot be harmed in 
any way by this weapon. 


of Speed 
XP Value GP Value 
+1: 2,500 9,000 
+2: 3,000 12,000 
+3: 3,500 15,000 
+4: 4,000 18,000 
+5: 4,500 21,000 
Unearthed Arcana 


A weapon of speed is a magical weapon, usually 
+2, that enables its wielder to always make the 
first attack in a melee round, even though some 
magical effect might have otherwise slowed his 
or her speed and reaction time. This initial attack 
comes in the first segment of the round, ahead of 
any other action that may also take place in that 
segment. The weapon of speed also allows more 
than one strike in some rounds; it increases the 
wielder’s figure for attack per melee round by 
one place, so that if one attack is normal, the 
improved figure is 3/2, and if 3/2 is normal, then 
the improvement is to two attacks per round. This 
increase in attacks is cumulative with any other 
bonus attacks (such as those provided by a haste 
spell). The order of attacks in the round is deter- 
mined normally after the wielder of the weapon 
of speed has made his or her first attack to begin 
activity in the round. It is possible, for instance, 
that a wielder entitled to three attacks in the 


round will attack once before any other action 
takes place, and then (because of poor initiative 
rolls or other factors) takes his or her remaining 
two attacks at the very end of the round, 

There is a 25% chance that the weapon will 
have a bonus of something other than +2; if this 
occurs, roll percentile dice and refer to the fol- 
lowing table to determine the appropriate bonus: 


Roll Type 
01-50 +I 
51-75 +3 
76-90 +4 
91-00 +5 
of Speed II* 
XP Value: +1,000 GP Value: +5,000 


Oriental Adventures 

If the weapon is a bow (including crossbows and 
pellet bows), the weapon allows the user to fire at 
double the normal fire rate. Furthermore the 
weapon automatically nocks or cocks itself, 
allowing the user to automatically fire one shot 
first in the melee round. If surprised, the charac- 
ter is unable to react quickly enough. However, in 
situations of complete surprise, the character is 
able to fire one shot with an initiative of two. 

If the weapon is a throwing weapon, it virtually 
leaps from the character's hand and darts toward 
the target at incredible speed. At the beginning of 
any round that the character has the weapon in 
hand, he or she may automatically make the first 
attack, provided the weapon is thrown. 

For martial arts weapons, a weapon of speed 
allows the character to make twice the normal 
number of attacks allowed by the martial arts 
style when fighting with the magical weapon. 
The character must know a martial art style that 
teaches the use of the weapon to gain this benefit. 


of Speeding* 

XP Value: +1,000 GP Value: +5,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The talent will, on command, create a haste spell 
effect on the user only, The user may then move at 
double normal speed and attack twice per round 
for one turn (similar to the 3rd-level wizard 
spell). 


Stoneiron* 
XP Value: +0 GP Value: +0 
DRAGON Magazine 197 
These weapons are similar to woodiron weapons, 
in that they have the strength and normal combat 
abilities of regular iron weapons. However, these 
weapons are made of stone. Effectively unbreak- 
able, they are another means of giving selected 


Athasian warriors weapons as good as steel arms 
6213 


a Eee 


1525 


Weapon of Surrender 


without cutting into the world’s scanty supplies of 
iron. Because stone is a better beginning material 
than wood, stoneiron weaponry is less valuable in 
experience points as are woodiron weapons, the 
experience point total being 20 times the price of 
a normal iron weapon in gold pieces. For exam- 
ple, a stoneiron warhammer is worth 40 XP. 


of Surrender* 
GP Value: +150 
IMAGINE Magazine 19 
This weapon was made for a once-powerful king 
by his court magician. It is a powerful weapon 
with sundry interesting characteristics, whatever 
is suitable for a particular campaign. Unfortu- 
nately, the magician was a traitor, and was bribed 
to make the weapon turn against his master. The 
day came when the king faced his enemies in a 
battle he was sure to win. A soldier, not knowing 
what harm he did, delivered a message to the king 
containing a strange word. This was the com- 
mand word for the king to become aware of the 
geas upon the weapon; he was to surrender to his 
enemies. His advisors watched in horror as he 
crossed the field to yield to the leader of the 
opposing host. His army began to lay down its 
arms and shuffle, broken, from the field, behind 
them, the king suddenly recovered his wits, and 
found himself ringed by spearmen. Only then did 
he realize what befell him. 
When this weapon is used in combat, the user 


XP Value: — 


must roll a saving throw vs. spell or immediately 
surrender to the forces of the enemy, whether it is 
one meek kobold, or the complete denizens of the 
Abyss. If the saving throw is successful, the 
weapon reacts as a normal magical weapon. 

When the surrendering weapon result is rolled 
on the random item chart, the DM should roll 
another effect and combine the results. 


of Telekinesis* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
A user carrying one of these weapons may move 
up to 200 pounds of weight by mere concentra- 
tion, like a ring of telekinesis. 


of Telepathy* 
XP Value: +400 GP Value: +2,000 
DUNGEONS & DraGons Rules Cyclopedia 
This is the same as ESP, but with the ability to 
“send” thoughts to the creature contacted (as a 
helm of telepathy). 


of Teleportation* 
XP Value: +500 GP Value: +2,500 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
The user may teleport once a day as the wizard 
spell. 


of Translating* 
XP Value: +400 GP Value: +2,000 
DUNGEONS & DraGons Rules Cyclopedia 
The weapon that has this talent can, on command, 
enable the user to understand any and all lan- 
guages heard. The ability lasts for 6 turns. 


Unbreakable* 
XP Value: +1,000 GP Value: +5,000 
Oriental Adventures 
This weapon cannot be broken by the weapon 
breaker martial arts special maneuver, There is a 
75% chance that the opponent’s weapon is broken 
instead, should he or she attempt this maneuver. If 
the weapon ever has to make a saving throw against 
breakage or crushing blow, it fails only on a 20. 


Uncharged* 
XP Value: 4 GP Value: 4 
New Item 
Let’s face it. With the tragedies that can occur 
when using permanency spells, not every wizard 
is willing to make a sacrifice for someone else. 
To counter this, many wizards just “forget” to 
cast the much needed permanency when they cre- 
ate a weapon. 
In this case, the weapon literally becomes a 
charged item. When a wizard does not cast this 


vital spell on a weapon, it is assumed to have 
6220 


1526 


Weed of theWitch 


mmm 


1d100 charges. Luckily, these charges are not 
used whenever the weapon misses its intended 
target. Whenever the warrior (or whoever is using 
the weapon) strikes a target, one charge is used 
up, whether the weapon caused maximum dam- 
age or just | point of damage. Once the last 
charge is used, the weapon becomes nonmagical. 


of Venom* 
XP Value: +2,000 GP Value: +10,000 
Oriental Adventures 
These weapons are identical to daggers of venom. 


of Watching* 
XP Value: +200 GP Value: +1,000 
DunGeons & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

A weapon with this talent may be commanded to 
watch for any one monster type or race. The 
weapon can then sense the presence of the crea- 
tures specified, and it will vibrate slightly if one 
or more of the named creatures come within 60 
feet of it, The vibration silently alerts the user. A 
specific creature cannot be named, only a race or 
monster type, and the weapon can only sense one 
race or type per day, even if none are sensed. 


Weightless* 
See Weightless Item in Enchanted 
Enhancements, 
Volume 1. 


of Wishing* 
XP Value: +900 GP Value: +4,500 
DunGEons & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
This talent will grant 1d3 wishes to the user 
(identical to the 9th-level wizard spell). 


Woodiron* 
XP Value: +0 GP Value: +0 
DRAGON Magazine 197 
These are wooden weapons which have been 
given the properties of metallic weaponry through 
enchantment, thus eliminating all penalties for 
attacking and damage. They are also fireproof 
and unbreakable. Weapons normally made of 
wood, such as the club and quarterstaff, are now 
+1 on attack and damage rolls; they do not have 
this bonus otherwise and cannot hit creatures that 
can only be harmed by weapons of +1 or better. 
Multiply the gold piece value of a normal weapon 
or shield by 25, and that is the experience point 
value of these weapons for the wizard creating 
them—for example, a woodiron short sword is 
worth 250 XP. These weapons are invaluable on 
Athas, though they would no doubt be disdain- 
fully sniffed at elsewhere, as they give fighters 
good weapons without cutting into Athas’s woe- 
fully small supply of iron. 


of X-Ray Vision* 
XP Value: +300 GP Value: +1,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The user may see through objects as though wear- 
ing a ring of x-ray vision. 


Weed 


Magical weeds are wild plants that have magical 
or quasimagical effects. A saving throw vs. spell 
is allowed to negate the weed’s effects unless oth- 
erwise stated in the accompanying text. 


Rapture 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 900 
The Final Enemy 
Also known as submarinum intoxicatus morbido or 
rapture weed is an uncommon variety of seaweed 
found only at ocean depths of 200 feet or more. It is 
a pale green color and has fronds edged in pale 
gold. Rapture weed is virtually unknown to land 
dwellers though well known to marine races who 
use it as land dwellers would use wine. 

Its taste is extremely pleasant and its effects on 
marine peoples are mildly euphoric; it produces 
in them a slight inebriation and a feeling of well 
being. However, when it is chewed by land- 
dwellers, the inebriation soon gives way to drunk- 
enness which is followed rapidly by 
unconsciousness, a state lasting 1d2 hours. 

Furthermore, any land dweller who chews 
three or more fronds of the weed within a 24-hour 
period becomes hopelessly addicted and exhibits 
all the horrible symptoms of addiction to strong 
narcotics. The addict will sell every last posses- 
sion in order to purchase more of the plant; he or 
she will lie, cheat, steal, and even murder to 
obtain it, regardless of alignment or profession. 
The addict’s death will occur in 1d4+2 months. 
The only known cures for this terrible condition 
are neutralize poison followed by exorcise, heal, 
limited wish, wish, or alter reality. 

Unfortunately these facts are as little known to 
land dwellers as is the nature of the plant itself, 
while the marine races are equally ignorant of the 
plant’s effects on land dwellers and of the remedy 
for addiction to it; the plant simply does not 
affect them this way. However a few human sages 
do have knowledge of the plant, its properties and 
the remedy against addiction, as do a few 
alchemists and high-level assassins. The latter 
gentlemen have been known to pay as much as 
500 gp for a single frond. 


of the Witch 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Old Empires 
The foul fumes of this weed (also known as 


witchweed) affect all wizards. When burned, it 
6227 


1527 


Well of All Heals 


Se 


produces a vaporous cloud, 30 feet in radius. Any 
wizard within its vapors begins to cough vio- 
lently, is unable to cast spells, and suffers two 
points of damage per round. The weed burns for 
1d6+10 rounds. This long, green weed is grown 
and used frequently in Luthchegq, a city in 
Chessenta where wizards are forbidden. When 
burned, it produces a foul stench similar to burn- 
ing tobacco. Witchweed is typically bundled in 
shipments of 13 stalks. 


Well 


Normal wells are nothing more than stone-lined 
holes in the ground. They penetrate the water 
table and create a place where water can be drawn 
out with a bucket or pump. Magical wells can be 
as simple as a stone-lined hole or as elaborate as 
a piece of cloth that can be folded and placed in a 
pocket. 


of All Heals 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Treasures of GREYHAWK 
As the golden door opened, we beheld a wonder- 
ful sight—a room ringed with ornate spouts that 
shot a splendid aqua-colored water that caught 
the light in a thousand rainbow hues. A beautiful 
swan floated upon the water. 

Upon our entrance into the room, the swan 
beckoned us to come swim with her. We com- 
pletely submerged, one a minute and we found all 
our wounds began healing. After 10 minutes, the 
healing was complete. 

The well’s powers are strong—even the dead 
can be brought back to life (system shock roll is 
voided in this case). Even those who have been 
reincarnated return to their original form. Unfor- 
tunately, the well also inflicts a form of total 
amnesia that erases all of the memories of the 
past 24 hours. In this way, the well is able to pro- 
tect itself from people who would continually 
abuse its powers. 


of Dreams 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 69 
Deep within an elven glade, in the shade of a par- 
ticularly large, stringy bark tree, rests a stone 
well. An old wooden sign propped up against it 
reads: “This be the Well of Dreams. One gold, one 
silver, or one Copper. Fate awaits.” 

The well is an ancient magic item of great 
power. It grants an ability, disability, or boon to a 
player character who tosses a coin into its depths. 
A character can make use of the well but once a 
year. 

To make the well operate, a character must toss 
a coin into it. If a character tosses in more than 


one coin, the one of the highest value counts, If 
any characters enter the well, they discover the 
walls are smooth and algae-covered. The well’s 
water begins about 30 feet down from the rim, 
and the water is 200 feet deep. Characters who 
are submersed in or drink from the water gain no 
benefits. 

Effects caused by the coins are instant and per- 
manent. Characters tossing a coin should roll 1d8 
and 1d12, total the numbers, and refer to the 
tables below, 


Platinum and Gold Coins 


Roll Effect 

02 Raise ability score of choice by 1. 

03 Lower ability score of choice by 1. 

04 Advance to | XP below the next level. 

05 Small, insect wings grow from the 
character’s back. The insect wings 
allow leaps upward of 5 feet and for- 
ward 15 feet once every three turns. 

06 A third eye appears on the character’s 
forehead. The third eye lowers the char- 
acter’s Charisma score by 1. It has no 
beneficial effects. 

07 Two-foot-long beard grows from the 
character’s chin. The beard is always 2 
feet long; it does not grow. If the char- 
acter already had a beard, the beard is 


now 2 feet longer. If the character is 
6229 


1528 


Well of Many Worlds 


SE a 


female, Charisma is lowered by 2 until 
she shaves. 

08 New, brown leather boots appear on the 
character’s feet. 

09 Three gold pieces pop out of the well. 

10 A pouch filled with 14 gold pieces 
drops on the character’s head (1 point of 
damage). 

11 A purse filled with 30 platinum pieces 
appears at his or her feet. 

12 A loud burp comes from the well. 

13 The character’s coin flies out of the 
well, with a bite out of it. 

14 Two-foot-long beard grows from the 
chin. The beard is always 2 feet long; it 
does not grow. If the character already 
had a beard, the beard is now 2 feet 
longer. If the character is female, Cha- 
risma is lowered by 2 until she shaves. 

15 The handle of his or her weapon 
becomes coated with honey. 

16 Gain one nonweapon proficiency of the 
character’s choice. 

17 Character is struck by a miniature light- 
ning bolt, 1d8 damage. 

18 He or she becomes invisible—perma- 
nently. The character and all gear are 
invisible, per the 2nd-level wizard spell. 
The invisibility lasts until broken (see 
spell description) or dispelled (treat the 
well as a 20th-level caster). 

19 The character’s primary edged weapon 
is now vorpal, or his or her blunt 
weapon will now return when thrown. 
An edged weapon is now the same as a 
vorpal sword +3; a blunt weapon acts 
like a boomerang, returning on the 
round following each throw. 

20 The character is cursed with lycan- 
thropy: 1-2, werebear; 3—4, weretiger; 
5—6, werewolf. 


Silver and Copper Coins 


Roll Effect 

02 Character turns into a drow. 

03 The skin turns green, hair turns black. 
Charisma drops by 2. 

04 The character gains maximum points 
for the level. 

05 A weapon of choice becomes +1. 

06 There is an instant of darkness, then 
everything is as it was before. 

07 Hands and feet become webbed. Char- 
acter automatically gains the swimming 
proficiency, swimming movement rate 
is 18. 

08 A trumpet blares, then a lone swan 


takes flight from the well. 

09 Some of the character’s gold disap- 
pears. One half of all carried gold 
pieces vanish. 

10 Nothing happens. 

11 A pouch, with the thrown coin in it, 
appears in your hand. 

12 Five coins, of the same kind thrown in, 
come back out of the well. 

13 Nothing happens. 

14 A pile of 15 platinum pieces falls at the 
character’s feet. 

15 Character gets younger. Humans 
regress 1d20 years; elves 10d10 years; 
dwarves 10d6 years; halflings 1d20 
years; and gnomes 10d6 years. 

16 Hands and feet become webbed. Char- 
acter automatically gains the swimming 
proficiency, swimming movement rate 
is 18. 

17 One saving throw number of the char- 
acter’s choice increases by 1, while 
another decreases by 1. 

18 For the next 24 hours, the coin tosser is 
a colorless, odorless gas. This acts the 
same as a potion of gaseous form except 
that the character cannot reform for 24 
hours. 

19 A voice from the well says, “A wish 
will come your way when you least 
expect it.” Sometime in the future, 
when the character desires something, 
the wish will be granted. 

20 Nothing happens. 


The well should prove to be a popular locale 
for PCs, once they learn its secrets. Of course, 
various ferocious monsters probably will grow 
fond of the well, too. 


of Many Worlds 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 12,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This strange interdimensional device looks just 
like a portable hole. Anything placed within it is 
immediately cast to another world—another 
planet, a different campaign setting, or a different 
plane at the DM’s option or by random determi- 
nation. If the well is moved, the random factor 
again comes into play. It can be picked up, folded, 
and functions, just like a portable hole. Things 
from the world the well touches can come through 
the opening, just as easily as from the initiating 
place. 
In Ravenloft: In Ravenloft, this item looks like 
a simple, seamless piece of black cloth. It radiates 
strong magic, but does not function in the demi- 


plane. 
6230 


1529 


ee ee 


Well, Sumbar Oracle 


j i 


Sumbar Oracle 

XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 60,000 
Pirates of the Fallen Stars 
“I visited that oracle once. Asked what my life's 
callin' was. Got some mumbo-jumbo about ‘man 5 
greatest failing’ and ‘weeping and wailing. It’s all 
hooey, if’n yer ask me, and I knows ya didn't but 
I'm a'tellin’ ya anyways. Threw my best throwin’ 
dagger down that slimy ol’ well, too, I did, and 
couldn't get it back neither. Shoulda tossed ol’ 
Teldar in there—maybe then I'd ‘a got an 
answer!” 


The island of Sumbar is the contact point for a 
powerful and mysterious oracle. This being, 
known as the Sumbar Oracle or the Oracle of 
Nasmen, will answer a single question for each 
questioner who comes to it. Often, the answer 
will be unclear, but no one has ever found the 
oracle to lie, once the prophecy was understood. 

To use the oracle, one must first reach Sumbar. 
This is more difficult than it would first appear, 
as the island is surrounded by treacherous reefs 
that move between visits so that no one has ever 
been able to plot a permanent safe course through 
them. Once ashore, the seeker must make his or 
her way to the ridge from which the oracle (that 
takes the form of a large well) may be addressed. 

Before addressing the oracle, it is customary to 
toss a valued item down the well as a sacrifice. 
The more valuable the item, the more accurate 
and clear the reading, according to legend; no one 
has ever confirmed or denied it. After the sacri- 
fice, the questioner simply calls the question 
down into the well; a voice drifts up from below, 
conveying the response. 

The oracle tends to respond in riddles and 
poetry that are not clear until after the fact. It also 
tends to mislead, providing answers with two pos- 
sible interpretations—at least initially. 

For game purposes, treat the oracle as a con- 
tact other plane spell for an Outer Plane entity 
with an Intelligence of 20. If the oracle does not 
know, it will give a misleading or ambiguous 
answer. Only if the knowledge and veracity rolls 
are both made will the oracular prediction be at 
all clear. 

The chance of insanity has a very special 
meaning for this oracle. Rather than giving the 
chance that the character will go insane after the 
reading, instead it gives the chance that the char- 
acter will act as a result of the prophecy in pre- 
cisely the way to bring himself the greatest doom. 
The oracle will word its prediction in such a fash- 
ion that the seeker will respond with an action 
that fulfills the most horrible interpretation of the 
prophecy. Regarding the sacrifice, any of the fol- 
lowing may be true at the GM’s discretion: 


* The sacrifice is irrelevant; the oracle will 
answer the question regardless of whether or 
not a sacrifice is made. 

* The sacrifice is required, but its value is irrel- 
evant; if the supplicant asks a question with- 
out sacrificing something, even if it is a single 
copper piece, an imp flies up from the well to 
attack the questioner. 

* As above, but the value of the sacrifice is sig- 
nificant. For each 1,000 gp value of the sacri- 
fice, the Intelligence of the entity is increased 
by one. Thus, a 2,000 gp sacrifice is treated as 
if the entity had an Intelligence of 22. (For 
magic-heavy campaigns, the DM may wish to 
begin the oracle’s Intelligence at 0.) 


Wheel 


A wheel is normally mounted to turn on an axle, 
a rod connected to the wheel’s center. Magical 
wheels are no different and may be found 
mounted on devices of various sorts, The turning 
of the wheel causes any number of effects— 
noise, light, heat, the movement of other parts, 
and so forth. Wheel sizes vary according to use; a 
magical wagon wheel, for example, would appear 
identical to an ordinary one. 


of Burning 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This wheel appears and functions as a wheel of 
lighting. However, if any creature enters the 
lighted area ahead of the wagon, the light disap- 
pears and reappears on the wagon. In addition, 
the light becomes quite warm and inflicts 1 point 
of heat damage per round to all within the area of 
effect, which is 30 feet in diameter. Oddly, the 
heat cannot damage objects; only creatures are 
affected. The hot light cannot be extinguished by 
command once it has begun to heat, but a remove 
curse or dispel magic spell (treat as 1 Sth-level 
magic use) makes the light and heat disappear, 


Faerie’s 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This small, ornamental wheel enables the user to 
levitate, but in an odd fashion. When held in hand 
and the command word spoken, the wheel lifts 
the user upward and forward, as if it were attached 
to the rim of a wheel 120 yards in diameter. The 
user reaches the highest point, 120 yards directly 
above the starting position, in three rounds and 
returns in another three rounds. A second com- 
mand causes the wheel to stop functioning and 
drop the user. Obstructions in the wheel’s path 
may damage the user. If the wheel is used indoors, 
the user hits the ceiling as if falling upwards, tak- 

6233 


. oe ee OO 


1530 


| Qnn, 


Wheel of Fortune 


ing 1d4 points of damage per 10 feet traveled, and 
remains there until the wheel is commanded to 
cease functioning. The user then falls from the 
ceiling and again takes damage unless protected 
by other means. The wheel can be activated three 
times a day, 


of Fire 
XP Value: 1,800 GP Value: 9,000 
Oriental Adventures 

These magical items are always found in pairs and 
look like large, ornately decorated chariot wheels. 
When mounted on a chariot and the command 
word spoken, they burst into magical flame. The 
flame does not hinder the movement of the chariot, 
nor does it harm the vehicle, animals, or occu- 
pants. However, all creatures within 30 feet of the 
chariot suffer 2d6 points of damage from the 
intense heat (unless immune to fire). Furthermore, 
the chariot leaves flaming tracks behind it wher- 
ever it goes. Saying the command word a second 
time causes the flames to disappear. 


of Floating 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 

This item is identical to a normal wagon wheel, 
but it enables any wagon upon which it is 
mounted to float on water. One wheel of floating 
allows a wagon to be towed across a river or 
stream, carrying up to 1,000 pounds weight with- 
out sinking. Each additional wheel of floating 
allows 500 pounds more weight to be carried, to 
the normal maximum for the wagon of 2,500 
pounds. Swamp travel is also possible, but at a 
very slow movement rate unless some kind of 
water draft animal is available. 

A cursed wheel of floating will, when reaching 
the center of any river or stream, become stuck at 
that point and cannot be moved until a remove 
curse is applied by a |5th-level caster. This 
allows progress to continue, but the curse will 
return again at next use until the wheel is 
destroyed. 


of Fortune 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
This strange device is 10 feet in diameter, mounted 
on a stand or wall fixture, and easily rotated. It is 
decorated with a black-and-white pattern of 
wedges, all intersecting at the center where a green 
arrow is mounted; the arrow does not turn with the 
wheel. Near the rim, each black wedge is adorned 
by a white skull and each white wedge by a red 
heart. If the wheel is spun (easily done by any crea- 
ture of 3 Strength or greater), it rotates for 3 rounds 
and then comes to rest, with the green arrow point- 


ing at one of the wedges (either black or white with 
equal chances for cach). However, a charmed crea- 
ture cannot move the wheel, and each user can spin 
the wheel only once a day. 

If the wheel has spun freely for three rounds, 
not touched or interfered with in any way, a mag- 
ical effect occurs, determined by the result of the 
spin. The wheel cannot be affected by magic of 
any kind, including telekinesis, and it cannot be 
damaged in any way. A wish used to affect the 
wheel will cause the wheel to vanish, regardless 
of the wish. The wheel cannot be moved except 
by a creature of 26 or more levels (or Hit Dice). 
The wheel weighs 2,000 pounds. For each white 
or black wedge that appears, roll 1d6 and consult 
the following. 


White Wedge 

1,000 gold pieces appear. 

10 garnets appear. 

1 brooch appears. 

1 miscellaneous magical item appears. 

l ability score rises by 1 point (maximum 
score 18). 

Prime Requisite or Constitution rises by 1 
point (maximum score 18). 


veU N= 


a 


Black Wedge 
l 1 ability score drops by | point (minimum 
score 3). 
2 Prime Requisite drops by 1 point. 
6237 


1531 


——= ee ee A. $ 


~ Wheel, Hasty r 


3 Constitution drops by 1 point. 

4 Least valuable magical item carried disinte- 
grates. 

5 All nonmagical items, except for normal 
clothing, disintegrate. 

6 Die (no saving throw). 


The DM may select or randomly determine the 
results of the spin. If desired, the wedges may be 
numbered from 1-20, 1-100, or some other con- 
veniently determined number, and a chart may be 
made with more varied results. 


Hasty 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This wheel appears to be and functions like an 
ordinary wagon wheel and must be mounted nor- 
mally on a vehicle with other wheels for proper 
functioning. One hasty wheel increases the move- 
ment rate of the vehicle by 50% and may be used 
for any length of time. There is a 20% chance that 
a hasty wheel will also function as a wheel of 
floating. 


of Keening 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 50 

This enchanted sharpening wheel makes a pleas- 
ant, almost musical sound when used. Any blade 
sharpened on this device gains a +1 bonus to 
attack rolls and damage for one round when next 
used in battle. The magic lasts one day or until 
the blade is used for normal cutting or carving. 
The blade itself does not radiate magic, not even 
while the bonus is in effect. 


of Lighting 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This wheel looks exactly like a normal wagon 
wheel and must be mounted for proper use. When 
commanded to function, it projects a light spell 
effect 30 yards ahead which moves along at the 
same rate as the wagon. The wagon itself is not 
lighted, only the path ahead is clearly seen. If 
those traveling with or near the wagon avoid the 
light, creatures attracted to the light may be sur- 
prised (—1 to surprise rolls). 


of Misfortune 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item looks and functions like a wheel of for- 
tune but with one major difference: a black 
wedge is the result of the spin 80% of the time, 
and a white wedge only 20%. The wheel of mis- 
fortune is otherwise identical in all respects. 


Square 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
This odd “wheel,” the size of a normal wagon 
wheel, is useless on roads and other flat terrain 
because it is perfectly square. However, when 
mounted properly on a wagon, it magically 
allows movement through mountain and desert 
terrain where there is no road. A wagon with one 
square wheel can be pulled by two horses and can 
move at 20 feet per turn with two wheels, 30 feet 
per turn; with three, 40 feet per turn; and with 
four, the normal rate of 60 feet per turn is pos- 
sible. 


Wind Fire 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
There are 25 of these wheels and they shoot fire 
and wind at the same time as a staff of wizardry, 
whenever turned. 


Wheel of Maneuverability 
See Ship’s Wheel of Maneuverability 


Whip 

A whip is a ropelike device, often with several 
leather tails or thongs. The tails on some whips 
have metal barbs, knots, broken glass or crystal, 
or other sharp object attached to their ends; these 
whips are commonly called scourges. The com- 
mon whip is not so much an effective weapon for 
combat as it is a means of inflicting great pain. 


Roll Whip Type 


01-08 Bullwhip 

09-15 Chain 

16-23 Cord 

24-31 Crescent Whip 

32-38  Garotte 

39-46 Kau-sin-ke 

47-54 Lasso 

55-62 = Manriki-gusari 

63-69 Master’s Whip 

70-77 Rante 

78-85 Scourge 

86-92 Tailrazor 

93-00 Whip 
of Amatar 

XP Value GP Value 

Normal: 650 6500 

Rare: 950 9500 
Dwarves Deep 


Named for the famous dwarf smith who first 
devised them, these rare weapons are long, 
coiled, flexible whips of lovingly crafted metal, 


usually adamantine. They look like giant metallic 
6245 


1532 


centipedes, with ringlike segments. In battle, they 
do damage as a normal drover’s whip (1d4+1 plus 
the victim must make a Strength check or be 
knocked down, dropping held items or weapons), 
but they have several additional useful properties. 

The metal whip resists being cut or broken (it 
will suffer up to 36 points of damage on a single 
round before parting—if it does, its magic is 
lost). Moreover, its touch can act as a stone to 
flesh spell by utterance of a secret command 
word, affecting both petrified things and natural 
stone (creating a fleshy cylinder, as the spell) as 
though the whip was a 12th-level wizard. Thus, 
108 cubic feet of stone can be affected per touch. 
This special power can only be called upon once 
a turn, and only three times in all a day (any con- 
tinuous 144-turn period, even underground). 

Some 10% of these whips can function as a 
flesh to stone as well, if the command word is 
known. 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

Outer Planes MC Appendix 
The true tanar’ri known as balor use a great whip 
with many “tails.” These whips inflict but 1d4 
points of damage per hit. However, they magi- 
cally wrap around the victim, allowing the balor 
to draw the victim into its fiery body of flames. 
Once dragged into the flames, the victim suffers 
4d6 points of damage per round. Escaping the 
whip requires a successful 4 Strength check. 
While one victim is held in the whip, it cannot be 
used in other attacks. 


of Feathers 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 3,000 
Mordenkainen’s Fantastic Adventure 
This 6-foot-long whip is fashioned from many 
cockatrice feathers. Upon each successful hit, the 
victim must make a saving throw vs. petrification 
or be turned to stone. The whip is made from a 
rare technique of preserving cockatrice feathers, 
thus making it usable as a weapon. 


of Frost, Fire, and Fear 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Shadowdale 

This wand is a powerful rechargeable item 
favored by evil priests in the Realms. Nine 4- 
foot-long flexible electrum tentacles are attached 
to a foot long steel shaft. Whenever grasped and 
unsheathed, it is active. Any strikes on an oppo- 
nent drain it of charges and confer damage. 

Roll 1d10 to determine strike effects, if a suc- 
cessful hit occurs. 


Whip, Moloch’s 


— a 


Roll Effect 

01 Target suffers (no save) a frost result, or 
lash of cold of 3d6 damage. 

02 Fire burns the target (no save) for 3d6 
damage. 

03 The victim suffers fear as a wand of 
fear (save negates). 

04 Target suffers (no save) a frost result, or 
lash of cold of 3d6 damage. 

05 Fire burns the target (no save) for 3d6 
damage. 

06 The victim suffers fear as a wand of 
fear (save negates). 

07 Target suffers (no save) a frost result, or 
lash of cold of 3d6 damage. 

08 Fire burns the target (no save) for 3d6 
damage. 

09 The victim suffers fear as a wand of 
fear (save negates). 

10 Two tentacles (determine types ran- 
domly) strike a single target; both deal 
their usual damage. 

of the Furies 
XP Value GP Value 
Alecto’s: 4,000 20,000 
Megarea’s: 4,000 20,000 
Tisiphone’s: 4,000 20,000 
Legends & Lore 


The whips of the furies strip away attribute 

points: 

* A hit by Alecto’s whip, the persevering anger 
(on a priest), strips away 1d4 points of Wis- 
dom 

* A hit by Megarea’s whip, the jealous (ona 
wizard), strips away 1d4 points of Intelligence 

* A hit by Tisiphone’s whip, the blood avenger 
(on a warrior), strips away 1d4 points of 
Strength 


Khurgorbaeyag’s 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Monster Mythology 

The avatar’s whip +3 can fly up to 30 feet as a 
rope of entanglement and a blow from it acts as a 
symbol of hopelessness, the effect lasting for a 
number of days equal to 20 minus the Wisdom of 
the creature struck. 


Moloch’s 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Monster Manual II 

Moloch carries a six-tailed whip made of 
unknown, pliable metal. This device delivers 1, 2, 
or 4 points of damage per tail striking, depending 
on the charges Moloch expends. He may expend 
up to 20 charges per turn (10 rounds). Damage is 
electrical in nature and so greatly feared by less 

6253 


ee ee ee EE —— 


533 


Whip, Purpose 


|, a 


powerful fiends. The whip itself has no charges. 
When the whip strikes an opponent, 1d4+2 tails 
will strike an opponent whenever a successful 
attack roll is made. 


Purpose 
XP Value GP Value 
Slay fiend: 4,500 22,500 
Slay avatar: 9,000 45,000 
Slay lawfully aligned: 900 4,500 
Slay evilly aligned: 900 4,500 


Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
There are four purpose whips. When they strike the 
specified type of opponent on an attack roll of 19 
or 20, the victim must roll a save vs. spell or die. 


Roll Whip Type 


01-25 Slay fiend 
26-50 Slay avatar 
51-75 Slay lawfully aligned 
76-00 Slay evilly aligned 
of Summoning 


XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 

This whip, when cracked, summons a superhero 
dwarf in mithral armor with a hammer +3. He 
appears in a puff of smoke and serves the wielder 
of the whip until his mission is considered com- 
pleted or he is killed. He may polymorph himself 
and if he dies the whip is no longer functional. 


Tar’s Chaotic Creature 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 302 
Tar’s magical whip is normally a +2 weapon, but 
against any creature with a chaotic alignment, it 
functions as a +3 weapon. 


of Zeif 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 5,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

When wielded by a character proficient with the 
whip, this weapon strikes with a +3 bonus to 
attack and damage. It can also be cracked in the 
air to produce a deafening sound, causing all 
creatures under 8 Hit Dice (except the wielder) in 
a 20-foot radius to save vs. spell or be deafened 
for 1d4+1 turns, The sound can be heard up to 
1,000 feet away. 


Wife of Ilmarinen 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
The legendary Immortal craftsman Ilmarinen 
once used his great skills to create a companion 
entirely of gold and silver. However, the result 
was too cold to even be approached. Appearing as 


a metallic golem, it was 
given special powers when freed, and is said to 
reside in far northern reaches, either alone or 
with its current master. 

The wife appears to be a metal statue of an 
extremely attractive human female clad in robes. 
The entire statue is made of a sparkling mixture 
of gold and silver. 

The wife is always active. The powers of the 
wife of Ilmarinen are used by the artifact alone, 
not granted to the user. The wife can speak any 
language it hears, and will explain its powers to 
any who ask (unless ordered not to). However, the 
artifact cannot be controlled until a special com- 
mand word is uttered. Once the command is spo- 
ken, the wife obeys either mental or verbal 
commands from the user. 

The command word can only be obtained from 
Ilmarinen himself (by using a commune or con- 
tact other plane spell), from a previous user of 
the artifact, or by a wish. 

Suggested Powers: (All magical abilities are 
cast at 20th level.) Zce breath (Effect 30'x10') 
damage is equal to the user’s current hit points 
with saving throw applicable; /ce storm. 

Suggested Handicap: When control is gained, 
the user becomes aware that the wife cannot 
recharge itself. It can eat gold or silver. Each time 
a power is used, the user must feed the device 
5,000 gold pieces. 

Suggested Penalty: (1 in 6 chance of occur- 

6258 


1534 


rence whenever a power is used.) Instead of 
attacking as directed, the wife aims her attack at 
the user; normal saving throws apply, but the user 
gains a +4 bonus for the second and subsequent 
appearances of this effect. 


Wife of Ilmarinen: AC —20; hp 100; #AT 1 power; 
Dmg by power; MV 24; AL N. The wife will not 
attack by any means other than its powers. 


Winch of Power 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 32,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
An intricate mechanical device 3 inches high 
with a loading capacity of 200 pounds. It includes 
100 feet of unbreakable thread and can be wound 
and unwound with thumb and forefinger, no mat- 
ter how much weight is at the other end. The 
winch is set in place with a command word, and 
the command word is needed to remove the 
winch from its place. 


Wind Howdah 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 44 

Using Mindlink and other telepathic sciences and 
devotions, the Chanth taught their slaves how to 
construct wind howdah. Each wind howdah is 
constructed from a stiff, weed mesh carefully and 
intricately woven around a polished frame of 
erdlu bone. The weed used is akin to stiff bamboo 
but grows in several shades of brown from very 
light tan to almost black. The weeds for each 
wind howdah have been carefully chosen and 
woven into complex geometric designs, man- 
dalas, and even artistic scenes depicting the 
island’s daily life. The erdlu bones around which 
the weed is woven are chosen for their whiteness 
and flawlessness. They are then rubbed and pol- 
ished with sand until they literally gleam. 

The Chanth then empowers the wind howdahs 
with the ability to /evitate. Each wind howdah has 
an Intelligence score of 12 and communicates by 
semi-empathy. (See pages 93-94 of the Com- 
PLETE PSIONICS HANDBOOK for details concerning 
empowered items.) 

A wind howdah is controlled by the pilot who 
handles the sail. Semi-empathic, the wind how- 
dah gains or loses altitude (maximum 1 foot per 
second or 60 feet per round) as the pilot desires. 
Semi-empathy is slow and does not allow for 
urgency. The wind howdah takes one round to 
comprehend a command (either gain altitude or 
lose altitude) and another round to act on a com- 
mand. If a pilot must gain 60’ of altitude to avoid 
crashing into a cliff, he must give the command 
to the wind howdah at least three rounds before 
getting to the cliff (one for the wind howdah to 


Wind Howdah 


ES 


comprehend, one for it to act on the information, 
and one to gain the necessary 60 feet of altitude). 
When not in use, a wind howdah hovers 12-18 
inches off the ground, waiting to be boarded by a 
pilot and loaded with cargo. 

Though extremely lightweight, each wind how- 
dah can safely carry 1,500 Ibs. Weight over the 
1,500-pound limit is likely to rip the weed matting 
free of its frame or break the erdlu bones during 
flight. If this occurs, it suddenly loses altitude and 
disappears into the silt or crashes to the ground. 
There is a 1% chance per 5 Ibs. of weight over 
1,500 Ibs. of crashing a wind howdah. (For exam- 
ple, a wind howdah is loaded with the maximum 
1,500 Ibs. of goods. Therefore, a 50 pound halfling 
pilot has a 10% chance of crashing, a 450 pound 
thri-kreen has a 90% chance of crashing, and any- 
one weighing more than 500 pounds has a 100% 
chance of crashing.) Roll for crashes once per 
flight. If a wind howdah can handle the load, no fur- 
ther rolls are necessary until more weight is added. 
Ifa crash is indicated, it occurs 1d6 rounds after the 
wind howdah is loaded with the excess weight. 

Wind howdahs are not graceful fliers and have 
been designed more for handling weight than 
aerodynamic stability. Therefore, wind howdahs 
are limited in speed. Because they /evitate, they 
move at the speed of the wind when the sail is 
raised. Daily wind direction is left to the DM’s 
discretion. Average daily wind speed is deter- 
mined by rolling 2d20, but the DM should allow 
for calm periods (0 wind speed) and storms (wind 
speeds of 2d20 + 30). 

The maximum safe speed of a wind howdah is 
25 miles per hour. Speeds in excess of the maxi- 
mum cause the wind howdah to pitch and buck, 
tossing cargo, passengers, and even the pilot 
overboard. For every | mph over the maximum, 
the howdah has a 5% chance to pitch or yaw so 
much that the pilot and passengers must make 
Dexterity checks or be tossed overboard. Passen- 
gers make Dexterity checks at —2. The pilot, who 
is holding the sail, makes his at —4. Falling dam- 
age is determined normally, but PCs falling into 
the Sea of Silt must be quickly rescued or die of 
suffocation. The fate of the cargo is left to the 
DM's discretion. Unsecured lightweight objects 
are easily lost if a wind howdah begins to pitch 
and roll, while a heavy box of weapons might not 
shift an inch, even in the wildest of barrel-rolls. 

Aerial combat is difficult using wind howdahs, 
because they are not maneuverable enough for 
action, even against ground-based targets. Mis- 
sile fire is possible, but considering the difficulty 
and number of penalties incurred, it is virtually 
useless except at point-blank range. Magical and 
psionic combat are still possible between wind 


howdahs, so long as they are within range. 
6260 


1535 


B o o u n a O 


Wind Instrument, Bagpipes of Confusion 


lee eae 


Wind Instruments 
This category of musical instrument concerns 
those that make music from the movement of 
wind over reeds, tubes, or pipes. Refer to Percus- 
sion and Stringed Instrument sections for other 
musical instruments. 


Roll Wind Instrument Types 
01 Alphorn 
02-03 Animal Horn 
04 Atrakha (flute) 


05-06 Aulos 
07 Bagpipes 
08-09 Bamboo pipe 
10 Bugle 


11-12 Clarinet 
13 Coiled Horn 
14-15 Conch Shell 
16 Cornet Flute 
17-18 Coronet 


19 Crumhorn 
20-21 Curtall 

22 Double fipple 
23-24 Dudy 


25 Fanfare horn 
26-27 Fipple flute 
28 Flageolet 


29-30 Flute 

31 Gemshorn 
32-33 Harmonica 

34 Hautboy 
35-36 Heralding horn 

37 Horn 


38-39 Hunting horns 
40 Hydraulis 
41-42 _ Jiccal (gourd horn) 


43 Kazoo 
44-45 Khen 
46 Lur 


47-48 Mijayrah (recorder) 
49 Mitbiq (double-clarinet) 
50-51 Mizwid (bagpipes) 
52 Nafir (trumpet) 
53-54 Nay (flute) 
55 Nightingale 
56-57 Nose flute 


58 Oboe 
59-60 Ocarina 
61 Organ 


62—63 Panpipes 

64 Penny flute 
65-66 Pipe flute 

67 Pipe organ 
68-69 Pipes 

70 Positive organ 
71-72 Posthorn 

73 Rackett 


74-75 Recorder 
76 Sackbut 
77-78 Serpent 
79 Shakuhaci (flute) 
80-81 Shawm 
82 Sheng 
83-84 Side horn 
85 Slide horn 
86-87 Straight horn 


88 Syrinx 
89-90 Tibia 

91 Transverse flute 
92-93 Trombone 

94 Trumpet 


95-96 Whistle 

97 Whistle flute 
98-99 Zampogna 

00 Zulkoon (organ) 


Bagpipes of Confusion 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
These bagpipes cause every creature within 60 
feet to make a saving throw vs. spell with a -4 
penalty to the roll, or immediately attack the bag- 
pipes, believing them to be a creature hostile to 
their user. If the bagpipes are not dropped, the 
user is the target of half of the attacks. All attacks 
continue until the bagpipes are destroyed. 


Cymboli’s Pipes of Sounding 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
1993 Collector Card 354 
Cymboli’s pipes of sounding function much like a 
typical set of bagpipes. Many different sounds 
can be created, from running water to the cry ofa 
baby to the footsteps of marching soldiers. Once 
a week these pipes can also produce the sounds of 
creatures’ calls that have a magical effect on 
those who hear it. For example, the pipes can be 
made to sound like the cry of a harpy, with the 
accompanying charm affecting all within range. 
The piper is immune to any effects. 


of Doom 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 28 
These bagpipes are a minor artifact of evil cre- 
ated by Grintharke’s former master. Anyone pro- 
ficient in the use of bagpipes or who has innate 
musical ability is able to use these pipes in two 
different ways. First, the pipes enhance musical 
abilities or skills, such as a bard’s ability to influ- 
ence reactions or the korred ability to make 
people dance. This function of the pipes results in 
doubled areas of effect and a —2 penalty to any 
applicable saving throws. But there is a second 


and much more destructive use for the pipes. 
6263 


1536 


Wind Instrument, Bagpipes of Feline Attraction 


RAE SUES 


When the pipes of doom are played properly (the 
musician knows instinctively what tones and tem- 
pos are necessary), they cause the listener to suf- 
fer severe mental anguish and terror. 

For normal gaming purposes, the pipes’ area of 
effect is a 360-foot-long cone that widens from 10 
to 180 feet. (For BATTLESYSTEM® rules purposes, 
the area of effect is a cone 12” long and 6” wide at 
the end.) All creatures in this area of effect must 
save vs. spell or suffer insanity so severe as to per- 
manently incapacitate them, causing them to col- 
lapse and mumble incoherently, unable to attack or 
defend. The piper rolls 5d12 attack dice (against 
which armor has no effect), and all surviving 
enemy units in the area of effect must make a 
morale check or rout. Units that succumb to the 
effects of the pipes may be easily slain. 

The pipes become more powerful when the 
piper becomes more proficient or powerful. Each 
level or Hit Die of the user above 10 subtracts one 
from the saving throws of affected individuals 
when used to cause mass insanity. In addition, at 
16th level and above, the pipes can be made to 
destroy nonliving structures by increasing the 
entropy in each structure so that it simply falls 
apart into its component pieces. Thus, a wall or a 
building—or even a person’s clothing or weap- 
ons—could be brought to ruin, but a living crea- 
ture, a plant, or a natural stone hill would not be 
affected. Magical items receive a normal saving 
throw vs. disintegration. 


The final power of this artifact is to control 
weather, as the 7th-level priest spell. The pipes 
give this ability at full power, so it is possible to 
adjust the weather by two steps as indicated by 
the spell description. 

If any good or neutrally aligned person who is 
not a bard or a creature with innate musical abili- 
ties (such as a satyr or korred) attempts to use the 
pipes of doom, his or her alignment begins to 
shift toward evil. Each shift takes one week to 
complete, so it takes two weeks for a good char- 
acter or creature to become irrevocably evil. The 
strength and evil of this artifact can be deter- 
mined by any appropriate divination spell, and 
the casting of such a spell should also instill a 
strong desire to destroy the pipes. 

The pipes of doom may be destroyed by drop- 
ping them into molten rock of any kind, by sub- 
jecting them to red dragon flame doing a 
minimum of 90 points of damage, or by sending 
them to the Elemental Plane of Fire. 


of Droning 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 22,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
These bagpipes cause each creature within 60 
feet to make a saving throw vs. spell or fall 
asleep, lulled by the constant, unvarying sound. 
Sleeping creatures may be easily awakened by 
physical means but do not wake to any noise and 
continue to sleep for three turns at most. 


Dugal’s Bagpipes of Fear 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
New Item 

Dugal created these silver pipes of fear shortly 
after his conversion to pacifism. When properly 
played, the bass drone instills confusion, and the 
two tenor drones issue tones of fear and dispel 
magic, as the spells, affecting all creatures 
smaller than L size. The piper cannot be attacked 
while the pipes are being played. 


of Fear 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

When these bagpipes are played, each creature 
within 60 feet must make a saving throw vs. spell 
or run away in terror for one turn. All characters 
(PCs and NPCs) gain a +1 bonus to the roll for 
each level of experience. 


of Feline Attraction 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 17,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
These bagpipes attract the attention of all cats 
and catlike monsters within 120 feet. They 


approach but do not attack. The felines sit within 
6267 


rE a 


1537 


O E -E 


Wind Instruments, Bagpipes of Headaches 


N 


30 feet of the instrument and wail in concert for 
as long as the magical playing continues (one 
turn maximum). They are merely distracted and 
suffer no penalty to surprise rolls. If attacked, 
they can ignore the pipes’ effect. If a charm mon- 
ster spell is cast at any feline thus attracted, it suf- 
fers a —4 penalty to its saving throw, along with 
any other applicable bonuses or penalties. 


of Headaches 

XP Value: 5,500 GP Value: 60,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
These bagpipes cause each creature within 60 
feet to make a saving throw vs. spell or suffer a 
headache and double vision (inflicting a —4 
penalty to Wisdom, Intelligence, and all attack 
rolls). The effects last for three turns. The user is 
not affected. 


of Shattering 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
These bagpipes cause all nonmagical glass and 
ceramic objects within 30 feet to break. Although 
potions are magical, their ceramic containers nor- 
mally are not and can be affected. There is no 
effect on magical objects such as magical mirrors. 


Bugle of Collapsing 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This horn appears to be a normal musical instru- 
ment, a bugle of some unusual sort. If it is 
sounded improperly (without first speaking the 
proper command word) or 10% of the time in any 
event, the following will result: 

Out-of-doors: A torrent of fist size rocks will 
strike the individual sounding the bugle, 2d6 in 
number, each causing 1d6 points of damage. 

Indoors: The ceiling overhead will collapse 
when the device is blown, The character suffers 
3d12 points of damage. 

Underground: The area immediately above the 
character sounding the bugle will fall on top of the 
bugle blower. The damage is 5d4 points base per 
each 10 feet of height that the material above drops 
(twice damage if a 20-foot ceiling, three times 
damage if a 30-foot ceiling, and so on). 

Proper use of a bugle of collapsing enables the 
character to sound it while it is pointed at the roof 
overhead from 30 feet to 60 feet beyond the user. 
The effect is to collapse a section of roof up to 20 
feet wide and 20 feet long (a 10-foot radius from 
the central aiming point) that inflicts damage as 
noted above if indoors or underground only. 

Bards have only a 5% chance of sounding the 
bugle improperly. Dwarven chanters (a bard kit) 
never use this instrument improperly once they 


know the command word. 


of Reviving 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This bugle is used as a bugle of waking. However, 
all dead creatures within 120 feet are also wak- 
ened, rising as skeletons or zombies as though 
animate dead spells were used and attacking the 
person commanding the bugle. The undead may 
be the remains of any once-living creatures. 


of Sleeping 

XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This metal bugle can be played normally. When 
commanded, it will play Taps softly, by itself. The 
tune takes 3 rounds to finish and, if interrupted 
has no effect. At the tune’s conclusion, every liv- 
ing creature within 60 feet must make a saving 
throw vs. spell or fall asleep. The bugle can be 
interrupted only by a dispel magic or silence 
spell, but its effect may be negated by some other 
magic item, such as a choirbell. 


of Waking 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This metal bugle has no magical effect if played 
normally. When commanded, it plays “Reveille,” 
loudly, by itself. As soon as the song begins, all 
creatures within 30 feet awaken (unless cursed), 
even if magically asleep. However, the bugle con- 
tinues to play for 3 rounds, attracting the atten- 
tion of all creatures with 120 feet, who probably 
dislike the noise (—3 penalty to reaction rolls). 
The bugle of waking can be interrupted only by a 
dispel magic or silence spell. 


Dugal’s Musical Instruments 


XP Value GP Value 
Alter self: 300 3,000 
Blur: 300 3,000 
Change self: 250 2,500 
Comprehend languages: 250 2,500 
Continual light: 300 3,000 
Detect invisibility: 300 3,000 
Detect magic: 250 2,500 
Dispel magic: 350 3,500 
Gust of wind: 350 3,500 
Knock: 300 3,000 
Tongues: 350 3,500 
Whispering wind: 300 3,000 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 56 
Myriads of tiny runes are etched into the wood of 
these instruments. Most customers see the runes 
only as decorative additions to already finely 


crafted instruments. However, wizards who 
6274 


1538 


ee ES lr eee 


x Wind Instruments, Djinn Nay y- 


examine them immediately notice a similarity 
between these runes and ones found on magical 
scrolls. 

The runes are part of a unique process to enchant 
musical instruments without using high level 
spells. Each special instrument is endowed with 
one magical spell of 1st through 3rd level that can 
be cast up to three times a day by playing a melody 
to which the instrument’s runes are attuned. 

The enchantments require only verbal and 
somatic components. The runes on the instrument 
are inscribed versions of a particular spell, and the 
melody is a repetitive musical rendition of the ver- 
bal component. When the melody is played, which 
takes a full turn, the instrument resonates and acti- 
vates the runes, thus serving as the somatic compo- 
nent and in effect casting the spell. 

Dugal’s enchantments are limited to those spells 
in his spell book. Of these, he uses only defensive 
or benign spells. A devout individualist and recent 
pacifist, he never uses a spell such as charm that 
infringes on the freedom of another, or a spell like 
magic missile that causes harm to others. 

The spell on an enchanted instrument can be 
invoked by any musician who plays the appropri- 
ate melody. Dugal teaches the melody to the 
buyer at the time of purchase. He also explains to 
customers that, except for casting time, the capa- 
bilities of a spell cast using one of the instru- 
ments are as if Dugal cast it—so all spells are 
cast at Sth level. 


Bone Flute 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This unusual flute is entirely made of carefully 
carved bone. When the command is spoken and 
the flute played, its music can be heard by all 
within 60 feet. This music is of quite an unusual 
sort. The musical tones form airy words, because 
the bone flute speaks with the voice of the crea- 
ture from whose bone it was made, telling its 
name and the story of its death. Its tale is always a 
sad one of greed, treachery, or reckless acts; only 
by those means can a bone flute be made. With a 
second command the flute is silent, but if it is 
allowed to finish its tale, the bone flute describes 
the location of the rest of the creature’s remains. 
These remains are inhabited by a neutral ghost 
seeking aid. If the bone flute is interred with the 
other remains, the ghost is put to rest. The flute 
carries no charges. 


of Courage 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This flute produces a high, shrill note. It has no 
magical effect unless used outdoors. When prop- 


erly played and commanded, those within 60 feet 
who hear the music gain a +2 bonus to saving 
throws against fear and may make a standard sav- 
ing throw vs. spell even when the fear would nor- 
mally permit none. NPCs affected gain a +2 
bonus to morale. The flute of courage may be 
used once a day, for up to four hours. Its effects 
last for as long as it is played. 


Damh’s 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Monster Mythology 
This flute belongs to the avatar and can summon 
2d4 korreds or satyrs if within a mile or create a 
forcecage (each effect three times a day). Damh 
must spend one full round playing the instrument 
to generate the effect. 


HY y 
) 
my, 4 


13 


Djinn Nay 


XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 

DRAGON Magazine 190 
The nay provided by the djinn of the Plane of 
Elemental Air looks like any other reed flute. 
However, the reeds are metallic, the perfect speci- 
mens of a gold-bearing plant that only survives in 
the terrible mountains of the yak-men. Many 
brave djinn (and many more of their mortal 
agents) lost their lives recovering these wondrous 
metallic plants, called golden wands in the ver- 
nacular. 


The nay of the djinn allows the player to cast 
6278 


1539 


1540 


Wind Instruments, Flute of Luck 


ee E 


an enthrall spell, as the 2nd-level priest spell of 
the same name. Duration is as long as the nay is 
played, but the spell ends when the player stops or 
is interrupted. The nay may be used in this man- 
ner once per day, twice a day if the user is a bard. 

A bard also may use the nay to “whistle up the 
wind”: or to summon an air elemental of 8 HD, as 
the Sth-level spell conjure elemental, once per 
week. The elemental is under the control of the 
user for as long as the nay is played, but if the 
music is interrupted, the elemental returns to its 
home plane without attacking its former con- 
troller. 


of Danger 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This flute looks exactly like a faerie flute. How- 
ever, the woodland beings it attracts are of the 
more dangerous sort and are hostile. The flute 
summons 1d8 creatures, which arrive after one 
turn. They all attack immediately (no reaction 
roll), by surprise if possible. The flute of danger 
may summon more than one race of dangerous 
woodland beings, such as basilisks, cockatrices, 
owl bears, trolls, will o° wisps, or wyverns. Crea- 
tures appearing may be individually selected or 
determined randomly, but basilisks should not be 
freely mixed with othcrs, as their gaze attacks can 
be dangerous to all. The flute may be played mag- 
ically only once a week at most; however, if the 
user is slain or turned to stone by the creatures 
summoned, the flute disintegrates. 


of Dismissing 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DRAGON Magazine 47 

The flute of dismissing possesses the power to 
disrupt the magic that binds conjured or sum- 
moned monsters in their enchanted states. Thus, 
such creatures will simply disappear when certain 
special tunes are played on the flute. The device 
can also send creatures from other planes back to 
the plane they came from. It is usable by all 
classes of characters. The magic items, spells and 
creatures the flute affects are as follows: 

Magic items: Bag of tricks, bowl commanding 
water elementals, brazier commanding fire ele- 
mentals, censer controlling air elementals, efreeti 
bottle, horn of valhalla, iron flask, pipes of the 
sewers, ring of djinni summoning, stone of con- 
trolling earth elementals, wand of conjuration. 

Monsters: Aerial servant, djinni, efreet, ele- 
mental, fiend, ghost, hell hound, invisible stalker, 
night hag, nightmare, salamander, shadow, spec- 
tre, thought eater, triton, umber hulk, vampire, 
water weird, wight, wind walker, wraith, xorn. 

Spells: Aerial servant, animal summoning, 


call woodland beings, conjure animals, creeping 
doom, insect plague, monster summoning, Mor- 
denkainen 5 faithful hound, summon insects, sum- 
mon shadow, 

A different melody is required for each item, 
monster, or spell to be affected by the flute. The 
first time the owner of a flute attempts to dismiss 
a certain object or spell, a poor rendition of the 
melody is necessarily produced—even assuming 
that the user of the flute knows which melody to 
use in a given situation. Any user’s first try at a 
certain melody takes four rounds to play and has 
a 25% chance of being successfully reproduced. 
The second try (regardless of the outcome of the 
first try) takes two rounds to play and has a 50% 
chance of success. On the third and subsequent 
attempts, a fair amount of expertise is achieved, 
so much so that the melody takes one round to 
play and is always successful. 

Even when a melody is successfully played, the 
object of the melody is allowed a saving throw (if 
applicable) vs. paralyzation. A check against 
magic resistance must also be made in cases 
where the object of the flute playing has such 
protection. The flute operates at 10th level for 
purposes of determining the magic resistance 
saving roll. It is suggested that a side record of a 
character’s attempts with the flute be kept. The 
flute can be played an unlimited number of times. 


Faerie 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 6,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This flute has no magical effect unless played in 
woodlands. It summons 1d8 woodland creatures, 
which arrive after one turn of playing. The wood 
folk are not hostile but are cautious and may 
choose not to reveal themselves. Further friendly 
actions or offers are needed to assure them of 
their safety. Any attack causes them to summon 
others of their kind, perhaps hundreds if the dan- 
ger is great: but if properly entreated, and if there 
is need, they might help the user. The faerie flute 
may summon more than one race of woodland 
beings, such as centaurs, dryads, elves, halflings, 
pixies, sprites, and treants. One or more races 
might appear, and those responding should be 
selected, depending on the area. The flute plays 
once a week. 


of Luck 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This flute may be used only once a week. When 
played for one turn, it confers upon the user the 
benefits bestowed by a /uck potion; the player 
may declare any one die roll (such as an attack 
roll, saving throw, initiative roll, or any other) to 
: 6282 


y 1541 à 


Wind Instruments, Flute of Playing 


SC 


have the best possible result. The flute’s effect is 
not counted as a potion for combination pur- 
poses. If not used, its exceptional effect vanishes 
one hour after playing. The flute’s melody can be 
heard by all within 120 feet, regardless of obstruc- 
tions, and may attract monsters. 


of Playing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
An ebony flute. When a magic word is spoken, 
the flute plays a haunting tune (something like 
Greensleeves) for five minutes, without human 
participation. 


of Puppies’ 
New Item 

XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
When played by any character, this flute immedi- 
ately polymorphs 1d4 attacking creatures, of 4th 
level or less, into neutral puppies, When a bard 
performs with this flute, 1d10 attacking creatures 
(4th level and below) are polymorphed into neu- 
tral puppies. 

‘This item was created by William Moots, who has since 
passed from the Prime Material Plane. We were asked to 
include it as a tribute to him—and so we have. Ed. 


Shakuhaci of Peace 


XP Value GP Value 
+5 Bonus: 2,000 14,000 
+10 Bonus: 2,500 17,500 
+15 Bonus: 3,000 21,000 
+20 Bonus: 3,500 24,500 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

Many centuries ago, Chujenko, a flute-maker on 
the island nation of Wa, showed extraordinary 
hospitality to a wandering priestess. The priestess 
was in reality a local greater nature spirit, and she 
was so impressed with Chujenko’s kindness that 
she taught him to create shakuhaci filled with the 
peace of the woods. Chujenko produced a num- 
ber of these flutes for the priests of the sect of 
Eight Million Gods. The flutes can be found 
throughout Wa, and more rarely in Kozakura. In 
all respects, these shakuhaci look like any other 
oriental bamboo flute; there are four sound-holes 
on the top and one on the bottom, and it is played 
held vertically down from the mouth. Anyone 
holding the flute can play it as if he had the 
appropriate proficiency. Characters with the 
musical instrument proficiency gain a +2 bonus 
when playing the flute. 

The magical abilities of the flute can only be 
invoked by those who revere peace and nature. 
Each ability corresponds to a different tune. 

* Calm, as a shukenja of 6th-level, once a day. 
* Protection from spirits, 15’ radius 2/day. 


+ Pacify, as if cast by a 12th-level shukenja. 
In the hands of a shukenja, the flute provides a 
bonus to purification rituals, as follows, depend- 


ing upon the type of flute found: 
Roll Bonus 
01-09 +5% 
10-15 +10% 
16-19 +15% 
20 +20% 
Silver 


XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When the command word is spoken, this flute 
plays itself and is easily heard by all within 60 
feet. It causes all normal weapons within range to 
change to silver and makes them usable against 
lycanthropes and certain other creatures. Unfor- 
tunately, it also causes slings, bows, and other 
flexible weapons to turn to silver, making them 
unusable (a silver bow cannot bend to fire 
arrows). The items remain silver as long as the 
flute plays and return to normal when taken out 
of the 60-foot range or when the music stops. The 
flute may be used once a day for up to one hour 
per use; it stops playing on command. 


of Wind Dancing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dragons of Triumph 

This item can only be used by a character who 
knows how to play a flute or other type of similar 
wind instrument. While playing this flute, the 
user summons and controls small breezes. After 
two rounds of playing, the user can create a 
zephyr and after three rounds, a gust of wind. If 
an entire turn is spent playing the flute, a dust 
devil can be created in a 30-foot-diameter area, 
blowing up dust and leaves and acting as an 
obscure spell. The dust devil dissipates gas and 
mist in the area of effect. The winds created start 
at the player and move outward (at 10 feet per 
round) up to 60 feet away. They die down the 
round after the playing stops. 


Airolis’s Shinin 
of Ten Thousand Winds 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 12,000 
The Book of Lairs II 
Airolis's Shining Horn of Ten Thousand Winds is a 
unique magical item aligned with the forces of 
chaos and good. Once a week the horn can sum- 
mon up a permanent storm until the storm is dis- 
pelled with dispel magic or by the horn’s user. On 
command the horn grants the power of feather- 
fall, and allows the bearer to wind walk once a 
day. The horn prevents some changes in the = 
628 


Horn 


ee) ee ee a e 


1542 


Bee =~ SFe OL l O eee eee 


Wind Instrument, Horn of the Barrier Peaks 


ae SN 


The possessor can neither age nor improve abili- 
ties (rise in level). Even learning new spells is 
prohibited. The dead do not decay in the area of 
effect of the horn. The possessor only can part 
with the horn when a remove curse spell is cast. 


of Amplification 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Complete Bard’s Handbook 
This horn is not hollow as one would expect. 
Rather, it is solid and resembles the horn of a rhi- 
noceros, It is used by touching its base to the 
forehead. It magically attaches and conveys its 
special power. At this time, the one wearing the 
horn has his or her voice amplified from two to 
ten times in volume. The exact increase is up to 
the character using the horn. The horn has no 
other function. It can be removed by anyone who 
lightly pulls on it. 

This horn increases the range of all songs, 
jokes, rhymes, and other forms of verbal commu- 
nication proportionately (an amplification of five 
increases the range by five times the normal dis- 
tance). 

The character can also yell. A yell causes 2d10 
points of damage to everyone except the user 
within a range of 5 feet times the amplification 
(setting two has a 10-foot range, setting five has a 
25-foot range, and so on). A successful saving 
throw vs. petrification reduces damage by half. 
Only one yell per encounter can be attempted. 

Each time the horn is used, there is a 1% 
chance that it permanently affixes to the user’s 
forehead and loses all magical ability. It can then 
be used as a weapon for head butts, causing 1d3 
points of damage. However, the oddity of having 
a horn growing from the character’s head results 
in a —2 Charisma penalty. A wish must be used to 
remove the horn. 


of Animal Calls 

XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Complete Ranger’s Handbook 
This wooden instrument, painted bright red with 
tiny silhouettes of various animals along the 
sides, resembles a recorder about 6 inches long. 
The instrument can duplicate the cries and calls 
of any animal. With closed eyes, the user men- 
tally pictures an animal, then blows into the 
instrument. The sound is indistinguishable from 
the cry of the actual animal. The instrument can 
be used to call particular animals or frighten 
them away. The DM determines the effect of any 
particular use of the horn; for example, sum- 
moning 2d4 animals might be 80% likely in an 
animal’s home terrain, with an arrival time of 
1d4 rounds. 


of the Azure Sea 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 5,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This magical horn was created by an evil high 
priest who sought a source of undead to befriend 
and control. The mention of this item causes all 
sailors and ocean-faring merchants great distress, 
and they refuse to sail with a character whom 
they suspect of owning the horn. 

Once a week, only at night on the open sea, the 
horn can summon a ghost ship. The ship appears 
in 1d4+1 rounds, materializing from the Ethereal 
Plane into the Border Ethereal, where it can be 
seen from the Prime Material Plane. The vessel is 
usually large and multidecked, with two or three 
masts and tattered sails. It is white and transpar- 
ent, and it makes no sound. For 10 turns, it floats 
beside the ship upon which the summoner stands, 
then vanishes back into the Deep Ethereal. 

Any character who sees the ghost ship must 
save vs. spell or be struck with fear for one turn. 
The summoner himself is immune from this 
effect. The ghost ship appears to be deserted, but 
is actually haunted by the following types of 
undead: 


Roll Undead 

1-2 1d4 apparitions 
344 1 ghost 

6-7 3d4 shadows 
8-0 1d4 spectres 


These undead do not normally make them- 
selves known, but there is a 75% chance that one 
of them will transfer to the summoner’s ship. 
Thereafter it reluctantly obeys the orders of the 
summoner for the rest of the summoner’s life or 
until it is destroyed. 


of the Barrier Peaks 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 18,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This iron instrument was enchanted by a dwarf 
smith to cement the friendship between demihu- 
mans and giant eagles. It is not used often out of 
respect to the great birds, but has found occa- 
sional use in desperate times. 

The horn is usable only once a week. In areas 
where giant eagles dwell, it can summon 1d6+6 
giant eagles, and they arrive in 1d4+3 rounds. If 
dwarves, elves, or halflings are in danger, the 
eagles will attack whatever is threatening them or 
carry the demihumans (and their companions) to 
safety. The eagles do not fight to the death or risk 
their lives uselessly, but can call reinforcements if 
more humans or demihumans need to be rescued. 

To ensure that the eagles continue to answer to 


the horn’s call, all those rescued must accept a 
6292 


1543 


Ee- oo l o a Ml O a L 


Wind Instruments, Horn of Baubles 


ecient ani ee a 


geas to perform some service for the eagles. Fail- 
ure for all those rescued to do so breaks the 
ancient pact and causes the horn to shatter. 


of Baubles 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
The Complete Bard’s Handbook 
When this instrument is blown, 25 cubic feet of 
useless baubles spew out of it per level of the 
blower. Although this is usually rather comical, it 
can be dangerous in a limited space. The instru- 
ment can be safely blown once every hour. If 
blown more frequently, there is a 10% cumulative 
chance that the horn backfires, sucking the 
blower into it and spewing the character out as a 
collection of useless baubles. It is impossible to 
resurrect or reincarnate a creature in this state, 
although a wish can be used to recover the victim. 


Black Ivory 
XP Value: — GP Value: 20 
Black Courser 
When blown, this horn makes no sound audible 
to human ears. Ten rounds later, however, an 
ancient bronze dragonne arrives, searching for its 
long lost master. When it finds whoever blew the 
horn instead, it attacks. 


of Blasting 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 55,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This magical horn appears to be a normal trum- 
pet, but it radiates magic if detect magic is cast 
upon it. It can be sounded as a normal horn, but if 
the correct word is spoken and the instrument is 
then played, it has the following effects, both of 
which happen at once: 
«A cone of sound, 120 feet long and 3 feet wide 
at the end, issues from the horn. All within this 
area must roll a successful saving throw vs. spell. 
Those who successfully save are stunned for one 
round and deafened for two. Those who fail the 
saving throw sustain 1d10 points of damage, are 
stunned for two rounds, and deafened for four. 
* A wave of ultrasonic sound |-foot wide and 100 
feet long issues from the horn. This causes a 
weakening of materials such as metal, stone, and 
wood. The weakening is equal to the damage 
caused by a hit from a missile hurled by a large or 
heavy catapult. (See Siege Damage in the 
DMG—victims suffer an additional —2 penalty to 
the die roll described there). 

If a horn of blasting is used magically more 
than once a day, there is a 10% cumulative chance 
that it explodes and inflicts 5d10 points of dam- 
age upon the person sounding it. 

There are no charges on a horn, but the device 
is subject to stresses as noted above, and each 


time it is used to magical effect there is a 2% 
cumulative chance of the instrument self-destruc- 
ting. In the latter case, no damage is inflicted on 
the character blowing it. 

Bards are better able to play this instrument, so 
that there is only a 5% cumulative chance per day 
that the horn explodes. Furthermore, the 2% 
cumulative chance of the instrument self-destruc- 
ting is reduced to 1%. 


of Bubbles 

XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This cursed musical instrument radiates magic if 
detect magic is used. It appears as a normal horn, 
or possibly any of the magical ones. It will sound 
a note and call forth a mass of bubbles that com- 
pletely surround and blind the individual who 
blew the horn for 2d10 rounds, but these bubbles 
appear only in the presence of a creature actively 
seeking to slay the character who played the horn, 
so their appearance might be delayed for a time. 

Bards are actually able to use this cursed magi- 
cal item to their advantage (once they determine 
what the horn is). When properly blown by a 
bard, the horn emits a cone of bubbles 30 feet 
long with a 30-foot diameter end. Anyone caught 
in the bubbles is effectively blinded for 2d10 
rounds unless he rolls a successful saving throw 
vs. breath weapon, However, there is a 5% chance 
that the horn backfires and sucks the bard through 
it, emitting the hapless minstrel as a mass of bub- 
bles. Once all of the bubbles pop (taking 2d10 
rounds), the bard is irrevocably dead. Jesters (a 
bard kit) have only a 1% chance of being turned 
to bubbles. 


of Change 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
The horn of change is quite ordinary looking, as 
far as artifacts go, so much so that it is indistin- 
guishable from other magical horns. The horn is 
made of polished brass and is shaped like a curv- 
ing ram’s horn. Sigils are stamped along its rim 
and a chain of golden links is the carrying strap. 
The origins of the horn of change are quite 
clear and can easily be learned by those who ask. 
Several hundred years ago (give or take a few 
decades), a rogue named Eustos was spending an 
evening at the gaming tables. He had been suc- 
cessful in the market that day, and his luck con- 
tinued with the dice; he won throw after throw. As 
the evening wore on and Eustos drank and 
thought less, he foolishly bragged that he must 
surely have won the favor of the gods of luck, for 
no odds were too impossible for him that night. 
Well, such a boast cannot go unheard and in a 
; 


1544 


x Wind Instruments, Horn, Fog Horn Il y- 


short time a charismatic stranger came to the 
table. Suddenly no throw did the stranger miss, 
nor any could Eustos make. Finally Eustos 
offered the greatest and only treasure he had 
remaining—his very soul. Against this, the 
stranger put up a plain brass horn. Eustos made 
the cast—and won. 

It is said that the stranger smiled and told the 
rogue that the horn could bestow great power or 
immense woe, for each sounding was a roll of 
chance. Perhaps this is true, for after gaining a 
reputation for wonders, Eustos vanished one day 
and was never seen again. 

The horn of change is a purely chaotic artifact. 
Thus, it is a wonderful item to give to the player 
characters. While there is no predicting the bal- 
ance of its powers, the horn will provide many 
opportunities for role-playing, as its unpre- 
dictable powers come into play. 

Constant Powers: Any character who picks up 
the horn is instantly aware of its possibilities. 
Show or explain the table below to that player. 

Invoked Powers: When the horn is sounded, 
toll on the table below to find the result. The roll 
cannot be influenced in any way. Roll on the 
appropriate Artifact Table in Volume 1 to deter- 
mine what power immediately takes effect. 


Roll Power 

01-10 Table 1-02: Combat 

11-25 Table 1-11: Enchantment/Charm 
2640 Table 1-03: Conjuration 

41-50 Table 1-00: Abjuration 

51-75 Table 1-15: Major Powers 

76-95 Table 1-04: Cursed 

96-00 Table 1-01: Cataclysm 


Curse: Each day that a character owns the 
horn, there is a 1% (cumulative) chance that the 
character will be seized by a gambling fever so 
intense that no honest wager can be resisted, 
regardless of the odds. This only passes when the 
character gives up or loses the horn. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* The powers of luck must be gambled with to 
destroy the horn. 

* The gods of justice must be cheated, an ulti- 
mate gamble. 


of Command 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Old Empires 
This horn amplifies the sound of one’s voice so that 
it can be heard three times farther than normal. 

The greatest ability of this item, however, is its 
suggestion power. Once each day, a person using 
the horn can issue a suggestion to all within a 60- 
foot radius. A successful saving throw vs. spell 


negates this effect (but only for that individual). 
The person using the horn may direct the com- 
mand at a single being (giving a penalty of -3 to 
the saving throw) or at all of the beings within the 
radius (each gets a saving throw). The suggestion 
must be in a language the affected beings under- 
stand. 


Death’s Head 
XP Value: 1,400 GP Value: 7,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 58 
This magical horn can be sounded once a day, 
and acts as a symbol of hopelessness when used 
in battle against goblinkind. 


of Dolphins 

GP Value: 3,250 

Otherlands 

This conch shell can be blown as a horn. It sends 
out a deep booming thrum that can be heard in a 
ten-mile radius. All dolphins in its range will 
swim at top speed toward the user, anxious to 
heed the summons. The horn cannot command 
the dolphins to obey the summoner’s orders. 
Whether the dolphins obey or not depends on the 
merits of the horn’s owner. The horn can be 
winded nine times a week. 


Fog 


XP Value: 750 


XP Value: 400 GP Value: 4,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This small device allows its possessor to blow 
forth a thick cloud of heavy fog equal to that of a 
fog cloud spell. Each round spent blowing it cre- 
ates a 10-cubic-foot fog cloud. The cloud lasts for 
2d4 rounds after the last round of blowing the 
instrument. Note that should it stop being 
sounded for a round, a new fog cloud will have 
begun, as the initial one has a life expectancy of 
but 2d4 more minutes, and will have drifted away 
from the individual sounding it. The device 
makes a deep, hornlike noise, the note dropping 
abruptly to a lower register at the end. 

When this horn is blown, bards are able to 
create the typical fog, or they can create a 
region of magical rain. Rain can be very useful 
as a source of water, to put out fires, or to fill 
the bottom of a room with water. The rain accu- 
mulates at the rate of | inch of water per round 
in a 10-foot square. 


Fog II 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 4,000 
CARDMASTER Adventure Design Deck 
When blown, this instrument allows the party to 
escape from a monster. It can be used once a day. 


6302 


1545 


Wind Instruments, Horn of Goodness/Evil 


A 


of Goodness/Evil 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This magical instrument adapts itself to the align- 
ment of its possessor, so it produces either a good 
or an evil effect depending on the alignment of its 
owner. If the possessor is absolutely neutral, the 
horn has no power whatever, If the owner is good, 
then blowing the horn has the effect of a protec- 
tion from evil spell in a 10-foot radius, which 
lasts for 10 rounds. Each friendly or allied crea- 
ture within this area is affected as if granted the 
spell. If the horn is of evil alignment, then the 
reverse of the noted spell occurs within the area 
of effect. The horn can be blown once a day. 

Unfortunately for many bards, sounding this 
instrument might produce an alignment change. 
There is a 50% chance that the bard becomes 
neutral evil, otherwise he becomes neutral good. 
If the bard is already one of these two alignments, 
the horn functions normally. 


Gjaller 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 

Heimdall’s horn, Gjaller, is the alert system for 
Asgard as much as Heimdall is the alerter. Heim- 
dall’s avatar will blow a blast upon it to announce 
the coming of the Frost Giants and the gods, and 
their hosts will issue out to fight the last battle at 
Ragnarok, This horn also is blown to proclaim 
visitors. When blown, all creatures within 1,000 
miles, regardless of mundane and/or magical lim- 
itations, can hear the horn. 


of the Gray Waste 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 28 

This magical horn, which looks like any other, 
calls bring forth 1d4 lesser tanar’ri or one greater 
tanar’ri, when sounded, The tanar’ri will obey the 
commands of the horn holder for 1d6 hours but 
have free will if attacked or if asked to give over 
any treasure they may carry. For a good priest or a 
paladin to command a tanar’ri to service requires 
an atonement, though they may give the horn to 
the tanar’ri and command it to be gone. The 
tanar’ri will bear the holder no ill will and will per- 
form the required task—though it may require a 
cut of the profits (60% likely for a lesser tanar’ri, 
90% likely for a greater tanar’ri). The horn can 
only be sounded once by any one character. 


of Hard Hearts 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This horn appears and functions as a horn of 
blasting. However, the user instantly becomes 


unforgiving and cruel. Subsequently, the user 
will never accept an opponent’s surrender, 
donate money or items for any cause, nor agree 
to any favors requested. If any loans made by 
the user are as yet unpaid, the user will, if law- 
fully possible, demand their immediate repay- 
ment. The effect may be removed by a remove 
curse spell from a caster of 26th level. The horn 
of hard hearts can be used only once a day at 
most, 


of Plenty 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When properly commanded and played, this horn 
produces enough food to feed 120 humans and 
120 horses. The horn of plenty cannot produce 
liquids. It may be used once a day. 


of the Sacred Grove 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Castles Forlorn 

This druidic artifact is true neutral in alignment. 

Created by Gregory (who worshiped Daghdha) 

and Dorinna (who worshiped Belenus), it draws 

upon the powers of each god. Many of these pow- 
ers can only be used by a person who knows the 
correct sequence of notes to play, Other powers 

are only effective if the horn is in the hands of a 

druid. 

Major Powers 

* Once a week, at night only, the horn can be 
used by a druid (or a priest of either Daghdha 
or Belenus) to summon the Wild Hunt. 

* Every other day, the horn can be used to cast 
the 7th-level priest spell sunray. A beam of 
sunlight up to 200 feet long and 10 feet in 
diameter at its far end emerges from the 
mouth of the horn. 

* Every other day (alternates with the sunray 
power), the horn can be used to create a 
heroes’ feast (as the 6th-level priest spell) that 
will feed 12 people. 

Minor Powers 

* The bearer of the horn is completely immune 
to normal fires and gains a +4 bonus to saving 
throws vs. magical fire. 

* Once a day, for three rounds, the horn may be 
used as a listening device (the mouthpiece is 
held against the bearer’s ear) to understand the 
speech of a single animal or plant, like the 
4th-level priests’ spell speak with plants or the 
2nd-level priests’ spell speak with animals. 

* Once a week, the horn may be used to control 
winds, per the Sth-level priests’ spell. 

* Four times a day, kissing the horn in the hands 
of a druid results in the benefits of the Ist- 


level priests’ spell cure light wounds. 
6308 


1546 


x Wind Instruments, Horn of the Tritons s- 


Corrupting Effects 
* The first time the horn is blown, the sounder 
must successfully save vs. spell or suffer an 
alignment change to true neutral. 
* Ifthe bearer of the horn is a nondruid and blows 
the horn at night, there is a cumulative 5% chance 
per sounding that the horn will call the Ravenloft 
Wild Hunt. The bearer of the horn automatically 
becomes the prey. The Pack simply seeks to sur- 
round or tree the sounder, whereupon the Master 
silently steps forth and holds out his hand, expect- 
ing the bearer to give him the horn. If refused, the 
Wild Hunt attacks. 

Weaknesses: The horn of the sacred grove was 
created by powerful magic, and it cannot be 
destroyed by ordinary means, despite the fact that 
it appears fragile. Normally, the horn would be 
destroyed only if removed to a plane where the 
Celtic gods have no influence. Because the gods’ 
connection with the Domain of Forlorn is so ten- 
uous, though, the horn loses power if all of the 
groves are destroyed or defiled. 


September 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This horn appears and functions as a horn of 
plenty. However, except for the horn itself, it also 
causes all magical items worn or carried to van- 
ish. The items are not destroyed, but merely 
return to the user’s home. The September horn 
can be used once a day. 


Shoo 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

When properly commanded and played, this horn 
creates a magical cone of sound 60 feet long and 
10 feet wide at the far end. Each victim within the 
cone must make a saving throw vs. spell or be 
knocked over and pushed away until out of range 
or until stopped by an obstruction. Those affected 
but stopped take damage as if they fell the dis- 
tance; so a creature blown over by the horn and 
pushed 30 feet before hitting a wall would take 
3d6 points of damage. The cone of sound must be 
heard to have effect, and can be negated or 
blocked by a silence spell. The horn can be used 
three times a day. 


of Signaling 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This normal size horn only functions outdoors. 
When properly commanded and played, it can be 
heard at a distance of eight miles. If used from atop 
a mountain, its range increases to 24 miles. The 
horn of signaling may be used as often as desired. 


of the Tritons 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 17,500 


DUNGEON Master Guide 

This device is a conch-shell horn that can be blown 

once a day (except for tritons, who can sound it 

three times daily). A horn of the tritons can perform 
one of the following functions when blown: 

* Calm rough waters in a one mile radius. (This 
has the effect of dispelling a water elemental 
or water weird.) 

+ Ifthe character is in a body of water in which 
such creatures dwell, it summons: 


Roll Number Creature 

1-2 5d4 Hippocampi 

3-5 5d6 Giant sea horses 
06 1d10 Sea lions 


The creatures summoned are friendly and 
obey, to the best of their understanding, the char- 
acter who sounded the horn. 

* Panic marine creatures with animal or lower 
Intelligence, causing them to flee unless each 
saves vs. spell. Those who do save must take a 
—5 penalty on their attack rolls for 3d6 turns 
(30-180 rounds). 

Any sounding of a horn of the tritons can be 
heard by all tritons within a three-mile radius. 

Bards are able to sound this horn even though 
it isn’t normally usable by rogues. Meistersingers 
and halfling whistlers (bard kits) are able to use 


this magical horn twice a day. 
6312 


a aa ara: 


1547 


eee a 


Wind Instruments, Horn of Uncontrollable Striding and Springing 


j SS a aA 


of Uncontrollable Striding 
and Springing 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 

DUNGEON Magazine 30 
This magical wind instrument looks like a normal 
hunting horn but radiates abjuration magic. Its 
effects become apparent as soon as it is sounded, 
as everyone except the person using it must save 
vs. spell or jump madly about the place for one 
full round. Jumps are magically lengthened to let 
someone leap up to 20 feet from a standing start, 
or 30 feet if running or walking. The direction of 
the jump is determined at random by the DM and 
may be vertical, horizontal, diagonal, or any other 
direction, as circumstances dictate. 

The area of effect of the horn is a circle, 60 
feet in radius, centered on the horn. Those 
within the circle who save vs. spell are immune 
to the effects of the horn until it is again winded. 
Due to the quickness of movement of a victim, 
Armor Class actually improves by | (for exam- 
ple, a character with AC 10 becomes AC 9 
while affected by a horn of uncontrollable strid- 
ing and springing), but attacks made by a vic- 
tim are at—1 to —10, based on a roll made by the 
DM on 1d10. 

The horn holds five charges, one of which is 
expended each time the horn is blown. It may be 
recharged at a cost of 1,000 gp per charge, by any 
wizard of 11th level or greater using a jump spell. 


of Valhalla 
XP Value GP Value 
Brass: 1,000 15,000 
Bronze: 2,000 30,000 
Iron: 3,000 45,000 
Silver: 1,000 15,000 


DUNGEON MAsTER Guide 

There are four varieties of this magical device. 
Each appears to be a normal instrument until its 
command word is spoken. Then, each summons a 
number of berserkers from Valhalla to fight for the 
character who summoned them by blowing the 
horn. Each variety of horn can be blown just once 
every seven days. The type of horn, its powers, and 
who is able to employ it are determined by making 
a percentile roll and consulting the table below. 


Horn Berserk Fighters 

Roll Type Summoned Usable by 

01-08 Silver 2d4+22nd-level Any 

09-15 Brass 2d4+1 3rd-level Priest, 
wizard, 
rogue 

16-18 Bronze 2d4 4th-level Priest, 
warrior 

19-20 Iron 1d4+1 Sth-level Warrior 


Any character whose group is unable to employ 
a particular horn of Valhalla will be attacked by 
the berserk fighters summoned when the charac- 
ter blows the horn. 

Summoned fighters are Armor Class 4, have 6 
hit points per die, and are armed with sword and 
spear (50%) or battle axe and spear (50%). They 
gladly attack anyone the possessor of the horn 
commands them to, until they or their opponents 
are slain, or six turns have elapsed, whichever 
occurs first. 

Fully 50% of these horns are aligned and sum- 
mon only fighters of the horn’s alignment. A rad- 
ical alignment difference will cause the horn 
blower to be attacked by the fighters. 

At 5th level, bards can sound the brass horn, at 
10th level the bronze horn, and at 15th level the 
iron horn. Skalds (a bard kit) can play any of 
these horns without penalty. 

In a DRAGONLANCE Campaign: The horn of 
Valhalla is called the horn of Kiri-Jolith on Ansa- 
lon. All warriors summoned by the horn are 
chaotic good. 

In Ravenloft: As usual, the hornblower sum- 
mons berserkers from Valhalla, who fight. In 
Ravenloft, however, the berserkers break free of 
the enchantment after six turns. They cannot 
return to Valhalla unless they find a normal 
escape. The berserkers are never pleased about 
the summons, But if they have battled for a “wor- 
thy” cause, the newly freed fighters do not attack 
the hornblower or his or her companions. Instead, 
they simply leave as a group, in search of a route 
home. If they have been ill used, or forced to act 
in a manner they find distasteful, the berserkers 
attack the group. 

When the hornblower and all companions 
leave Ravenloft, they still may have to answer 
for their actions. For each berserker summoned, 
there is a 1% cumulative chance that a greater 
power from Valhalla will appear before them— 
that power demands they justify their actions. 
The power condemns them for manipulating the 
berserkers and causing their entrapment in 
Ravenloft. The characters must make repara- 
tions to the greater power, or suffer the conse- 
quences. 

For every 25 fighters called, there is a 1% 
cumulative chance that the greater power appears 
to the wielder in Ravenloft. The greater powers 
are not bound by the laws of Ravenloft. It claims 
its fighters, takes the horn and vanishes back to 
Valhalla. If the fighters were ill used, it may even 
punish the wielder of the horn. 


6314 


548 


Wind Instruments, Horn of War y- 


of Valor 

GP Value: 25,000 
Tome of Magic 
This golden horn is indistinguishable from any 
other magical horn until it is sounded. When 
sounded, each unit hearing it, that is allied with or 
loyal to the character sounding the horn gains the 
following benefits. First, the unit gains a +2 
bonus to its morale for 1d4 BATTLESYSTEM rules 
turns. Second, any routed friendly unit who hears 
itimmediately makes a rally check with a bonus 
of 2 to its morale (for that check only). The check 
is made when the horn is sounded—during the 
magic phase—rather than in the rally phase. If 
this additional check fails, the unit is entitled to a 
second check in the rally phase, as normal. 
Enemy units who hear the horn are also affected: 
they suffer a —1 penalty to morale for 1d2 BAr- 
TLESYSTEM rules’ turns. 

Under normal conditions, the sound of the 
horn can be heard at a range of 240 feet. Unusual 
conditions, such as a raging storm, can decrease 
this range, but the horn can always be heard at a 
range of 90 feet (unless the character blowing the 
horn is within an area of magical silence, of 
course), 

The horn of valor can be sounded only once 
per BATTLESYSTEM rules turn, and no more than 
three times in any 12-hour period. If blown a 
fourth time within this period, it becomes totally 
nonmagical for 1d6 days, and any effects remain- 
ing from earlier soundings immediately termi- 
nate. Effects from multiple soundings are not 
cumulative, (Instantaneous effects such as the 
automatic rally check for friendly units take place 
each time the horn is sounded.) 

In Ravenloft: In Ravenloft, this item functions 
as described for mobs and crowds of villagers. 
They receive a +2 bonus to their morale for 
1d4x10 rounds. Hearing it also enables a fleeing 
mob to roll a new morale check. If successful, the 
mob rallies and may once again approach mon- 
sters and the like. If used for a group that stands 
opposed to the mob, it lowers the mob’s morale 
by 1 for 1d10+10 rounds. 


XP Value: 5,000 


of the Vast Swamp 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,500 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This conch shell was enchanted by a renegade 
wizard who was banished by the Count of Sun- 
ndi for criminal behavior. The wizard sought to 
gain power over the inhabitants of his new 
home, though he paid a heavy price for it. The 
horn summons 1d6+6 giant toads. Any sum- 
moner can command the toads for a number of 
rounds equal to twice his or her level. A nonevil 
summoner must make a saving throw vs. spell 


or lose control of the toads and be attacked by 
them. Each use of the horn causes the sum- 
moner to save vs. spell or permanently lose 
three Wisdom points. The summoner will not 
notice the change until the Wisdom score drops 
to 0, when he or she becomes a giant toad. The 
cumulative changes are: 


Total Wisdom 
Points Lost Effect 
03 Glassy eyes, warts 
06 Light green hair 
09 Froglike facial features, 
croaking voice 
12 Dark green skin 
15 Bloated body, hunched back 
of Voices 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Realmspace 


This item is used by the various cultures on the 
planet Coliar as a way to project the voice to a 
large area without the necessity of screaming to 
be heard. Everyone capable of hearing is able to 
hear the speaker from a distance up to one mile. 
The voice is not overbearingly loud to those near- 
est to the horn. In fact, they hear the voice with 
the same clarity and the same volume as those 
one mile away. The horn needs only to be placed 
to the lips and spoken through. There are no com- 
mand words to activate the item. The only prob- 
lem is that unless the horn is kept in an airtight 
sack or box, it projects all noises to a distance of 
one mile without the owner’s realizing it, making 
it impossible to surprise anything. Horns are 
priced at 1,250 gp on Coliar, and 5,250 gp every- 
where else. 


of War 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 41,000 
DRAGON Magazine 145 
A horn of war is over 5 feet long, made of 
roughly carved, gold-colored stone, weighing 
120 pounds, and covered with thousands of 
magical symbols and glyphs related to the arts 
of summoning. Only a nonelf fighter of the 9th 
level or higher (or a ranger of the 11th level) 
with Constitution and Charisma scores of 14 or 
higher may sound a horn of war; a fighter of 
substandard level or with less than 14 Constitu- 
tion passes out from the strain of attempting to 
sound it, and an elf or a fighter with substan- 
dard Charisma is unable to command the crea- 
tures the horn summons. The great call of a 
horn of war carries for 5d4 miles in any weather 
conditions. It magically summons an army of 
10d20 quaggoths, with 10 hp each, in 1d6 turns. 


The frenzied, battle-crazed mob may be com- 
6318 


1549 
a 


á 


~ Wind Instrument, Kantele r 


manded only to attack, which the monsters do 
until destroyed. If not slain in battle, the quag- 
goths serve for one hour per level of their sum- 
moner before disappearing. Quaggoths 
summoned but not controlled run amok for 2d6 
turns, attacking everyone, before leaving. Three 
years must pass between each sounding of a 
horn of war. Regardless of whether the quag- 
goths are commanded or not, they will slay all 
elves they see while carrying out their other 
tasks. 


Kantele 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 

This instrument, when played by Vainamoinen’s 
avatar, will summon to him all those lawful in 
nature within hearing distance. Let it be noted 
that the music will travel throughout Lapland in a 
period from 2d4 days and any hearing it have to 
come (save vs. spell applicable). Also, all evils 
that hear the music automatically fall asleep for 
1d4 days (save vs. spell applicable). Only in spe- 
cial situations will the avatar play his kantele. 


Heward’s Mystical Organ 

XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
Heward'’s Mystical Organ is a massive musical 
instrument fashioned to look like a particularly 
sublime pipe organ. The cabinet is a great horse- 
shoe arc with three full sets of keys; one of ivory 
and obsidian, one of jade and lapis, and the third 
of steel and brass. Arranged in three banks, one to 
each side and another across the front, are the 
organ’s ivory stops, nine to a bank, 27 in all. Nine 
rosewood pedals sound the deepest of the bass 
notes. 

The organ is more than just the cabinet though, 
for without the pipes it would have no voice. 
Each pipe is sounded by an elemental spirit. 
Made of gold and silver, some pipes are only 
inches in height while others stretch three stories 
high, almost to the ceiling. 

Because the organ cannot be exposed to the 
elements (and it is in no way portable), it is 
always found housed in a cathedral-like building, 
not necessarily the same one each time. Some- 
times the organ is discovered in the ruined shell 
of a temple, other times in a soaring cavern deep 
beneath the earth. Just how this occurs is one of 
the mystical properties of the device. 

In a time long ago, when the Age of Elves was 
fading and the new Age of Man was just being 
born, Heward, Patron of Bards, despaired. 
Heward was a man more than a man, barely less 
than a demigod, for it was a time when men could 
rise to such greatness, For centuries Heward had 


listened to and learned with joy the songs of the 
elves. His fellow humans, though, had no time or 
interest in such graceful skills. Determined to 
teach humankind the genteel arts of composition 
and song, the great Heward spent his years build- 
ing a device that would bring joy and wonder to 
the world. At last he finished his great creation— 
Heward’s Mystical Organ. 

It is said that the music Heward played on the 
organ was stolen from the voices of nightingales 
and that no man or woman who heard his airs 
could remain unmoved. Even the reclusive elves 
and the dour dwarves were lured from their hid- 
den dens when Heward’s fingers bent to the keys. 
Of those who came to hear, some among them 
were inspired to spread the wonder they had 
heard. From Heward they learned the arts of har- 
mony, composition, and more—all the skills to 
make beautiful music. These men and women 
went out among the people and so Heward 
inspired the first bards. It is even said that when 
Heward played, blighted soil blossomed, rain fell 
upon command, and even the sun lingered a little 
longer in the sky. 

Heward’s work did not pass unnoticed in the 
heavens, and among the divine powers some 
grew jealous of his skill. These gods spoke to 
the mice of Heward’s hall, saying “Great 
Heward will some day call you vermin and use 
his music to drive you from this place. Go and 
gnaw on his organ before this can happen,” and 
the mice with their foolish little brains did as 
the gods suggested. Perhaps, as some say, it was 
the elven gods who, fearful that their own songs 
would vanish, sent the mice—perhaps it was 
another. And so the songs of the organ changed 
and as the soured notes were keyed, evil things 
stole their tones. Thus the harpies found their 
voice and the sirens gained their power to lure, 
Enraged at the treachery of the mice, Heward 
played one last song on his organ that forever 
cursed them to be lowly and meek. Then every- 
thing disappeared without a trace. Or so the 
story goes. 

Heward’s Mystical Organ is one of those arti- 
facts best suited to a multipart adventure, since 
several elements must be brought together before 
the organ can be used. Because it is not a particu- 
larly practical device (being impossible to trans- 
port and difficult to use), most characters are not 
likely to seek out the organ of their own accord. 
Therefore, the DM must provide them witha 
strong enough reason, a threat that can only be 
foiled by the correct use of the device. 

Given the history and musical nature of the 
artifact, a peril such as the loss of all bardic lore 
or the evaporation of music throughout the world 


is particularly appropriate. Once faced with the 
6320 


1550 


“Ge ee ee a e a LUU 


x Wind Instruments, Heward’s Mystical Organ 


problem, the characters must learn how the Organ 
can help, find the correct tune to play on it, prac- 
tice that tune (for it must be flawless), discover 
the location of the organ, and finally, get there. 
Of course, the agent or agencies behind this plot 
are not going to leave the characters unhindered. 
Ever-increasing efforts will be made by the 
enemy to stop them. Of course, along the way the 
characters gain hints to a few songs that just 
might be useful to them. 

At the end of the adventure, the characters 
could experiment with the organ, although this 
would be most foolish. Alternatively, if the DM 
wants to remove the artifact, it can simply vanish 
as soon as a song is poorly played. 

Invoked Powers: To use the organ properly, 
characters must know two things; the exact song 
to be played and the settings for the stops of the 
organ. Only specific combinations of a particular 
song and exact stop settings have any effect. 
There are at least 23 powers of the organ, requir- 
ing 23 different songs. (More can exist if the DM 
desires.) DMs can create their own list of tunes 
based on their own tastes in music. (It can be par- 
ticularly effective to choose classical organ works 
and then play them on a stereo just as the PCs 
attempt the same.) It is generally a good idea to 
mix up the selections so that players cannot guess 
correctly, based on their knowledge of the DM. A 
form is provided at the end of this entry for the 
DM to record the settings. 


Ni Es 


The stops are noted by a coded sequence. 
There are 27 stops lettered A-Z and one more 
labeled “!.” Each stop has eight settings (1 
through 8). The settings are noted as a combina- 
tion of letter and number. For convenience, any 
stop all the way in (set to 1) is ignored. Thus the 
stop setting for a particular song might be A7, 
G2, H3, I5, R6, S6, V2, and !3. The last setting (!) 
is important for, if set incorrectly, the organ’s 
curse is automatically triggered. Once all the 
stops have been set, the song can be played. A 
successful proficiency check must be made by 
one skilled in playing such an instrument. If it 
fails, the character has erred during the course of 
playing, potentially triggering a bad effect. 

The effects of the organ’s 23 songs are quite 
varied. A suggested breakdown is given here, or 
the DM can create an effect that matches the goal 
of the adventure. The tables referred to are found 
in the Artifact Tables in Volume 1. Roll on each 
of the tables listed below to find the abilities of 
the 23 songs: 


5 abilities from Table 1-21: Personal 
Enhancements Roll 5x 

6 abilities from Table 1-00: Abjuration Roll 6x 

6 abilities from Table 1-11: 
Enchantment/Charm Roll 6x 

3 abilities from Table 1-01: Cataclysm Roll 3x 

3 abilities from Table 1-03: Conjuration Roll3x 


Wind Instruments, Heward's Mystical Organ II 


p a E 


If the song or setting is incorrect or if the play- 
ing is poor, the DM should roll on the table 
below, Bad Reviews, for a result, 


Bad Reviews 
Roll Result 
01-07 No result 
08-09 Curse 
10 Random effect 


Curse: It is said that only Heward could play 
the organ without fail. Should any character 
trigger the curse, all those within the hall must 
roll a successful saving throw vs. death with a 
—4 penalty or be stricken mad, tortured by the 
screeching tones of the pipes. Those driven mad 
forever wander the world, unable to bear the 
slightest sound, yet unable to tolerate silence 
either. Mad characters lose all class abilities 
except saving throws and hit points and are con- 
trolled by the referee. The madness can only be 
cured by a wish spell. 

There is also the risk that a character will 
play the organ too well. Should the proficiency 
check be a 1 (or less), the keyboardist has 
played with near divine inspiration, worthy of 
Heward himself. At the end of the piece, the 
musician is instantly struck with melancholia, 
knowing that this performance is never likely to 
be matched. Those listening must roll checks 
against their Wisdom, with those who fail com- 
ing to the same conclusion. (Wiser characters 
are able to rouse themselves from depression.) 
Stricken characters take no joy in life, for they 
have heard the most sublime beauty and gradu- 
ally waste away, unable to even motivate them- 
selves to eat or drink. 


Suggested Powers 


P# Power or Table (Table #) 
l Divination 1-06 
2 Minor Powers 1-16 
3 Conjure elemental (1/week) 
4 Divination 1-06 
5 Conjuration 1-03 
6 Personal Enhancements 1-21 
7 Personal Enhancements 1-21 
8  Shapechange (1/week) 
9 True seeing 
10 Major Powers 1-15 
11 Minor Powers 1-16 
12 Divination 1-06 
13 Personal Enhancements 1-21 
14 Abjuration 1-00 
15 Offensive Powers 1-18 
16 Offensive Powers 1—18 
17 Divination 1-06 


18 Create food/water (1/day) 
19 Planar 1-22 

20 Movement 1-17 

21 Death spell (1/week) 

22 Power word, stun (1/day) 
23 Enchantment/Charm 1-11 
24 Symbol of fear (1/day) 

25 Enchantment/Charm 1-11 
26 Power word, blind (1/week) 
27 Portrait of Magus 


Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* The King of the Mice must be convinced to 
lead his people in an attack on the organ, for 
only they can destroy the instrument’s inner 
workings. 

* The worst composer in the entire world must be 
found to play the instrument. The cacophony 
that results causes such a titanic explosion that 
the organ, its hall, and the surrounding area for 
a half-mile radius are destroyed. 

* The organ must be burned in a fire kindled 
with a copy of every work that Heward ever 
composed. 


XP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 29 

As an answer to the limited information that 

Eldritch Wizardry gave on this wondrous artifact, 

a reader designed his own way of determining the 


effects and the songs of Heward’s Mystical 
6321 


GP Value: 125,000 


= 1552 


x Wind Instruments, Heward’s Mystical Organ II r 


Organ, His design is unique enough to warrant a 
separate entry: 

He designed the organ with 7 usable stops and 
65 working keys (15 black keys and 50 white 
keys). For the stops he used a simple binary code. 
Each stop represents a number, the number of 
possible combinations for stop positioning is 128. 
This range is from zero to 127. See the example 
given below 

I =the stop is in 

O = the stop is out 


64 32 16 8 4 2 l 
CoO OD O D~ O 0=0 
O Q ‘O17 °C: rOgQ T=] 
Om I I I Q> Q I =57 
WAO (Or Qw QrQ I=65 
a I I I I I=127 


Once the stops have been set, find out what the 
results are. If the player sets the stops at: I O O O 
10 O, the result is 68. Referring to the stop result 
table indicates that 68 is a random Sth-level priest 
spell. 


Stop Results Table 
Attacked by five tanar’ri 
Sth-level priest spell 
User killed instantly 
3rd-level wizard spell 
Ist-level wizard spell 
Organ plays itself 
7th-level wizard spell reversed* 
Ist-level priest spell 
6th-level druid spell 
Table 4 monster* 

10 2nd-level druid spell 

11 Power recharge’ 

12 3rd-level priest spell 

13 7th-level priest spell reversed’ 
14 3rd-level illusionist spell 
15 Organ plays itself 

16 Table 6 monster’ 

17 Sth-level illusionist spell 
18 User loses one level 

19 Ist-level wizard spell 

20 6th-level priest spell 

21 Table 3 monster* 

22 Power recharge’ 

23 Table 2 monster* 

24 4th-level illusionist spell 
25 Ist-level priest spell 

26 Table | monster* 

27 5th-level wizard spell reversed? 
28 7th-level illusionist spell 
29 Table 5 monster* 

30 Organ plays itself 

31 3rd-level wizard spell 


wo eAIDUHhwWwWN— Oo 


1553 


32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 


6th-level priest spell reversed? 
2nd-level priest spell 
6th-level wizard spell 

User shrinks 12 inches 
3rd-level druid spell 
2nd-level wizard spell 

User polymorphed 

4th-level wizard spell 
1st-level priest spell reversed’ 
Table 4 monster 

7th-level priest spell 

Power recharge' 

Ist-level wizard spell 

Organ plays itself 

4th-level illusionist spell 
3rd-level wizard spell reversed’ 
User’s charisma -10 

2nd-level priest spell 
8th-level wizard spell reversed’ 
7th-level wizard spell 

User teleported’ 

10-80% users money gone 
4th-level priest spell 

Ist-level illusionist spell 
Power recharge’ 

5th-level wizard spell 
6th-level wizard spell reversed? 
Table 4 monster* 

2nd-level illusionist spell 

Gas cloud (roll type) 
6th-level wizard spell 
Ist-level priest spell 

Table 3 monster* 

4th-level wizard spell 
Teleport to other plane’ 

Organ plays itself 

5th-level priest spell 

Random teleport’ 

3rd-level priest spell reverse? 
2nd-level druid spell 

Table 4 monster’ 

5th-level wizard spell 

Power recharge! 

Creates | magic item (1/wk) 
3rd-level wizard spell reversed’ 
4th-level druid spell 

User takes 3d12 damage 
2nd-level wizard spell 
3rd-level priest spell 

Table 5 monster* 

6th-level illusionist spell 
User takes 3-24 shock 
9th-level wizard spell reversed? 
9th-level wizard spell 
Ist-level druid spell 

User gets 1d8 jewels (1/week) 
Table 6 monster’ 

7th-level druid spell 


6321 


~ Wind Instrument, Pipes of Animal Attraction r 


90 Organ plays itself 
91 User takes 6d12 damage 
92 3rd-level druid spell 
93  Sth-level wizard spell 
94 2nd-level priest spell reversed’ 
95 Table 3 monster* 
96 2nd-level wizard spell 
97 Table 2 monster* 
98  Ist-level wizard spell 
99 7th-level wizard spell 
100 Organ plays itself 
101 — Ist-level druid spell 
102 4th-level priest spell reversed? 
103 User gets 1d8 jewels (1/wk) 
104 4th level wizard spell 
105 Table 5 monster* 
107 6th-level priest spell 
108 Organ teleports’ 
109  3rd-level illusionist spell 
110 4th-level wizard spell reversed? 
111  Sth-level priest spell 
112 User teleported’ 
113 3rd-level wizard spell 
114 User loses 2d3 —1 hp permanently 
115 Power recharge’ 
116 4th-level priest spell 
117 Table 7 monster 
118 Organ plays itself 
119 8th-level wizard spell 
120 1st-level illusionist 
121 6th-level wizard spell reversed? 
122 2nd-level wizard spell 
123 Sth-level druid 
124 loses | statistic point 
125 6th-level wizard spell 
126 Sth-level priest spell reversed’ 
127 Attacked by five baatezu 
‘Power recharge means the organ draws in all 
magical and priestly force within 100 feet of it. 
All learned spells are lost (no saving throw). 
*Reversed spells are to be used as if a hostile 
caster was directing them at the user. 
‘The stops that produce teleport are to specific 
places in the campaign. The DM should adjust 
these as he or she sees fit. 
‘Where a table monster is indicated, use the 
dungeon monster tables. The attack is with sur- 
prise from behind. 


Pipes of Animal Attraction 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
A short hollow wooden tube with a slot cut out of 
it. This whistle attracts all animals of a given 
type, usually some herd animal, within hearing. 


Copper 

XP Value: 200 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
These pipes appear identical to pipes of pan. 
However, when played, all metals within 10 feet 
turn into copper. Magical items are not affected, 
but all nonmagical coins, weapons, and other 
forms of metal are immediately changed. They 
are nonmagical in their new copper forms, and 
cannot be restored. The copper pipes are usable 
once a day. 


Damh’s 
XP Value: 1,900 GP Value: 9,500 
Monster Mythology 
These magical pipes can cast charm person or 
mammal, fear, or sleep in a 60-foot radius (at 
will). The avatar must spend one full round play- 
ing the instrument to generate the effect. 


Gas 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

These look and function like sewer pipes. How- 
ever, when the creatures arrive, a green gas pours 
out of the pipes. The user must make a saving 
throw vs. poison with a —4 penalty to the roll; ifit 
fails, 1d10 points of damage are inflicted, and the 
summoned creatures attack the user. Otherwise, 
the creatures may be ordered about normally. The 
pipes may be used once a week. 


of Haunting 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 4,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

These magical pipes appear to be a small set of 
pan pipes. If checked, it faintly radiates magic. 
When played by a person skilled in music, the 
pipes create an eerie, spellbinding tune. A listener 
will think the source of the music is somewhere 
within 30 feet of the musician. Those hearing the 
tune and not aware of the piper must make a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell. Those who fail become ner- 
vous and scared, All morale checks are made 
with a —2 penalty and the listeners suffer a -1 
penalty to all surprise rolls. 

When these powerful pipes are blown by a 
bard, those who fail their saving throws vs. spell 
are affected as if subject to a fear spell. Those 
who succeed on the roll still suffer the -2 
penalty to morale checks and a —1 penalty to 
surprise rolls. The bard can choose to use the 
pipes normally. 


6326 


1554 


Wind Instrument, Pipes of Sounding 


ee NSE EPRI 


of Pain 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,250 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
These appear to be like any other standard or 
magical set of pipes with nothing to reveal their 
true nature. When played by a character profi- 
cient in music, the pipes create a wondrous 
melody, surpassing any sound ever heard. All 
within 30 feet, including the piper, must save vs. 
spell or be enchanted by the sound. So long as the 
pipes are played, no one will attack or attempt 
any action if affected. 

As soon as the piping stops, all those affected 
are stricken by intense pain at even the slightest 
noise, causing 1d4 points of damage per round. 
The pain lasts for 2d4 rounds. After that, the least 
noise causes the victim to wince, reducing the 
character’s attack and saving throw rolls by —2. 
The effect can be negated only by a forget or 
remove curse spell. 

Because of the musical skills of bards, all within 
60 feet are subject to the magic of these pipes when 
played by a bard. Saving throws are rolled with a —1 
penalty per three levels of the bard. 


Pan 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This rare item summons 3d6 woodland creatures of 
various types, both humanoid and otherwise—cen- 
taurs, elves, and the like—who appear after one 
turn of playing. If the command word is spoken, the 
pipes may be played again to produce one charm 
monster spell per round, directed as the user 
desires. Up to three spells may be cast per sum- 
moning. The pipes may be used once a day. 


of Panic 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Tall Tales of the Wee Folk 
These appear to be a normal set of shepherd 
pipes. But when properly played (requiring a 
music skill check, if the skills system is used), 
they may be used to the same effect as a wand of 
fear, except everyone within 120 feet of the musi- 
cian is prey to the effect, if they fail their saving 
throw—it is not selective between friends and 
foes. 

A faun using pipes of panic need not use them 
solely for the evocation of fear, and can direct the 
pipes’ effects at specific individuals (within 
tange), The magic of the pipes combines with the 
faun’s ability so that targets must save at —2 
(cumulative with any other positive or negative 
adjustments) to avoid the intended effect. 


Sewer 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 8,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

These wooden pipes appear ordinary, but if the 
possessor learns the proper tune, he or she can 
attract 1d6x10 giant rats (80%) or 3d6x10 nor- 
mal rats (20%) if either or both are within 400 
feet. For each 50 feet distance the rats have to 
travel, there is a one-round delay. The piper must 
continue playing until the rats appear, and when 
they do so, they are 95% likely to obey the piper 
so long as he or she continues to play. If for any 
reason the piper ceases playing, the summoned 
rats leave immediately. If they are called again, it 
is 70% probable that they come and obey, 30% 
that they turn upon the piper. 

If the rats are under control of a creature such 
as a vampire, the piper’s chance of taking over 
control is 30% per round of piping. Once control 
is assumed, there is a 70% chance of maintaining 
it if the other creature is actively seeking to 
reassert its control. 

When played by bards, these pipes actually tele- 
port the rats from some unknown location. Thus, a 
bard can summon rats even if located in an area 
completely devoid of rats, Meistersingers (a bard 
kit) can select whether giant or normal rats arrive, 
and have a +10% bonus to any control rolls. 


Sewer II 
XP Value: 1,800 GP Value: 8,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

These pipes have no effect unless played within 
120 feet of a cave entrance or ruins and cannot 
function in daylight. Their music summons 2d10 
giant rats, 2d4 giant bats, and 1d4 giant vampire 
bats, which arrive after one turn of playing. The 
creatures understand and obey the user of the 
sewer pipes and will travel far if so ordered. They 
serve for three hours at most and then return to 
the cave, vanishing utterly when within its con- 
fines. The creatures vanish before that time if 
slain or if struck by sunlight. The pipes function 
once a week. 


of Sounding 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

When played by a character proficient in music, 
these pipes can be used to create a variety of 
sounds. To a listener, the source of the sound 
seems to be anywhere within 60 feet of the piper. 
The possible sounds that can be created are: wind 
blowing, laughter, whistling, bird calls, moaning, 
footsteps, crying, mumbled voices, screams, run- 
ning water, or creaking. (Note: The DM can rule 
that other, similar sounds are possible.) 


Bards are able to generate any sound with 
6332 


1555 


Wind Instruments, Pipes of Speaking 


N 


these pipes, up to and including the volume of 
eight yelling men. The only limit is that the sound 
can’t imitate any form of understandable, verbal 
communication. Charlatans (a bard kit), however, 
can generate clear speech. 


of Speaking 
XP Value: 320 GP Value: 3,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

These pipes enable the user to speak to and 
understand the speech of all normal animals 
within 30 feet. Giant size and magical animals 
are not affected, but all others within range are 
calmed if hostile, and attracted if friendly. They 
can speak with the user of the pipes for up to one 
turn, offering what information they can. They 
suffer no penalty to surprise rolls, however, and 
are free to ignore the pipes if attacked or threat- 
ened in any way. The pipes may be used three 
times a day outdoors, or once a day indoors 
(whichever comes first). 


Water 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

These appear identical to pipes of pan and sum- 
mon |d10 of the same creatures. However, they 
also summon rain, which arrives at the same 
time, suddenly drenching the user and all within 
30 feet. The rain clogs the pipes, which cannot be 
used for one turn thereafter. The creatures 
responding may be hostile (—1 penalty to reaction 
rolls). The water pipes may be used once a day. 


Recorder of Recording 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Complete Bard’s Handbook 
This recorder has two magical functions. If, after 
a melody is played, the bard says, “Play it again 
when X happens,” the recorder will magically 
play the entire song over again any time condition 
X occurs (“When Tarnak comes within 20 feet,” 
for example). 

The other magical function is activated by 
speaking the word, “record,” before playing a 
tune. At any later time, the bard can say, “play 
back,” and the recorder produces all sounds that it 
recorded within 30 feet during the song. Further- 
more, these sounds are played back as if the 
recorder hadn’t been making any noise at the 
time. The recorder does not reproduce special 
sound-based attacks of any sort. 


Ye’Cind’s 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
The Recorder of Ye'Cind is a musical instrument 


made from an 18-inch piece of hollowed-out lake 


reed with 10 holes drilled into it. Unlike a flute, it 
is held vertically and played by blowing into the 
open end. 

Over a century ago, there lived an elf named 
Ye’Cind. During the course of his life he traveled 
throughout the country, compiling and creating 
ballads and songs to tell the rich history of his 
beloved land. In time he became renowned in all 
of the lands. During a festival in one small king- 
dom, Ye’Cind was returning to his bed late at 
night when he witnessed the brutal slaying of the 
king in the courtyard below. Though he had seen 
the crime, he could not identify the assailant. By 
morning, Ye’Cind had vanished, leaving behind 
only blood on his sheets. 

Twenty years later, at the annual Festival of 
Life, Ye’Cind reappeared in the fateful kingdom 
with a recorder in hand. He played strains of 
music to amuse and please the crowd. Lovers 
held each other dearer when tender melodies 
were played. For a crying child, Ye’Cind played a 
tune that brought laughter to its lips. Making his 
way to the center platform, Ye’Cind came face to 
face with the king and began to play for him. A 
look of astonishment crossed the king’s face as 20 
years melted away, and the king saw himself 
standing in the courtyard over his brother’s dead 
body, a bloody knife in hand. A smile crossed 
Ye'Cind’s face as he watched the guards drag 
away the struggling king. 

This artifact can be used by all character 
classes. A possible adventure might revolve 
around a band of prophets taking the recorder toa 
monarch for delicate negotiations with a neigh- 
boring kingdom. En route, the caravan is attacked 
and the recorder stolen. 

Constant Powers: The recorder emits an ear- 
piercing note anytime anything of the PC’s (includ- 
ing the recorder) is stolen within 30 feet of it. 

Invoked Powers: The recorder can be com- 
manded to play complicated melodies upon itself. 
Playing a sustained G reveals a single and impor- 
tant truth about a subject of the user’s choosing. 
This truth is revealed in the form of a shimmering 
image, complete with visual and audible effects. 
The truth is usually something of profound sig- 
nificance in the subject’s life, although the 
recorder does not reveal the same image more 
than once for a single subject (1/day). 

Random Powers: Three from Table 1-11: 
Enchantment/Charm (notes A, C, and E), 
three from Table 1-16: Minor Powers (notes B, 
D, and F). 

Curse: The music is so beautiful that the user 
becomes unable to hear anything except the 
recorder within 2d4 weeks. All of the standard 
penalties for deafness are suffered. 


6336 


1556 


x Wind Instruments, Whistle, Dragon Whistle __ 


Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* It must be bathed in the liquid essence of 100 
windchimes, 

* The holes must be plugged with sovereign 
glue. 

* It must be cast back into the lake where the 
reed from which it is made originally grew. 


Doom Trumpet 

GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
This item is a magical horn, similar in appearance 
to a horn of Valhalla. Some specimens of this 
item appear to be battered, a few seemingly about 
to fall apart: If the doom trumpet is blown all 
human, demihuman, and humanoid skeletons and 
corpses within a 60-foot radius about the horn are 
brought into unlife, as the spell animate dead. All 
of the undead will obey the bearer of the horn 
without question, to the utmost of their ability. 
The greater the number of undead animated, 
however, the shorter the time that they remain 
active. If only one skeleton or zombie is ani- 
mated, it remains active for 60 hours under the 
horn blower’s control. If two are animated, they 
are active for 30 hours, three are active for 20 
hours, and if 4 or more skeletons or zombies are 
activated, they are animated for only 10 hours 
before they collapse again. The undead created by 
the doom trumpet may be commanded to “go 
down!” (at which they disintegrate into dust) if 
the user of the horn wishes it; otherwise, the 
undead serve until destroyed, dispelled, or their 
time runs out. Use of a doom trumpet is not con- 
sidered to be a good act, though sounding it to 
test its properties is not evil. The doom trumpet 
may only be sounded once per month. Using it 
more often will produce no results. 


Axewood Whistle 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 32,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This silver instrument was created by elf wizards 
for use by young human and elf maidens. Anyone 
who successfully uses the whistle gains the 
respect of the demihumans of Axewood, while 
any rumor of its misuse will draw the wrath of 
many angry elves, gnomes, and halflings. 
Once a month the whistle can summon 1d4+1 
unicorns. The unicorns make a reaction check 
with the following cumulative modifiers: 


XP Value: 900 


The summoner is good-aligned +10% 
The summoner is human or elf +10% 
The summoner is a sprite, dryad, etc, +30% 


If a summoner or companions are evil or if the 
reaction is poor, the unicorns leave immediately. 


If they stay, a good-aligned human or elf maiden 
of pure heart can attempt to tame one of them for 
use as a steed, To the base 25% chance, add 2% 
for each point of the character's Intelligence, Wis- 
dom, and Charisma over 15. Also, add the follow- 
ing cumulative modifiers: 


The maiden is a ranger or priest +10% 
She is not alone -5% per companion 
She was once evil-aligned -20% 


Thus, a maiden ranger with an 18 Charisma 
and one companion would have a 36% chance to 
tame a unicorn (25 + 6 + 10 — 5 = 36). 


of Deafness 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item appears as a whistle of training in all 
respects. However, there is a 30% chance that it 
also makes the user deaf. This affliction results in a 
—1 penalty to surprise rolls and difficulty in com- 
munication. Hearing can be restored by a remove 
curse spell applied by a caster of 26th level. 


Dragon 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 2,000 
Dragon Dawn 
A dragon whistle is used by dragon knights to 
summon their mounts and give flight and forma- 


tion cues in aerial battle, where the wind might 
6340 


= 1557 = 


a O E S 


-~ Wind Instruments, Whistle, Gateway Whistle r 


whip verbal commands away unheard. The device 
is a mundane whistle, enchanted with a dweomer 
that lets its sound carry for exceptionally long 
distances. The pitch of a dragon whistle cannot be 
heard by human ears, although sympathetic 
vibrations can be felt by anyone who is also car- 
rying one. Each dragon knight has one or two 
such whistles. They are not essential for the 
knight to work with his dragon, but are a consid- 
erable help. 

A dragon whistle is carved of bone. It does not 
compel any dragon to answer, although a particu- 
lar dragon might appear when its knight’s whistle 
is sounded. Such whistles have only curiosity 
value to persons who are not dragon knights. 


Gateway 

GP Value: 40,000 
Dragon Dawn 
The gateway whistle is a dragon whistle crafted 
of crystal and enchanted with a special power. 
When this device is blown, a dragon in flight, 
with its rider, can pass between planes. The 
whistle must be blown by the knight for one full 
round preceding transition to another plane. At 
the end of that time, a shimmering gateway 
appears in the air before the flying dragon. Only 
one dragon and knight can pass through the 
portal opened by a gateway whistle. If the pair 
does not fly through immediately, the gateway 
closes after one round. 

The whistle functions as an amulet of the 
planes, giving random access to the Outer Planes 
until the person blowing it experiments long 
enough to know what notes open which gateways. 
A person with a musical proficiency can figure out 
the logic of this after three random results. Other 
characters must get 3d4 random results before they 
can control the gateway whistle. 


XP Value: 6,000 


of Herding 

GP Value: 3,500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
A hollow wooden tube, closed at one end, with a 
slot in the side. This is a herding whistle. Each type 
attracts a different herd animal and has a distinctive 
note. When an animal of the appropriate species 
hears the whistle (which is quite loud), it moves to 
within 25 feet of the whistler and maintains that 
position, following him or her if necessary. 


Rat 


XP Value: 700 


XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Northern Reaches 

This item originally was used to summon pet rats, 
but now summons wild rats (50% chance of 1d10 


giant rats). 


of Stopping 
XP Value: 950 GP Value: 7,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This whistle can be heard to 120 feet. If any mov- 
ing vehicles are within range, they stop for three 
rounds before resuming their original course and 
speed. Both magical and nonmagical vehicles can 
be affected (cart, wagon, flying carpet, and so 
on). Mounts cannot be affected but may be forced 
to make the “whistle stop” if pulling a vehicle. 
The whistle can produce its magical effect once a 
day and only on command. 


of Summoning 

XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
The sound produced by this whistle cannot be 
heard by human or demihuman ears. It summons 
one animal of a specific type, if the animal is 
within a one-mile range. The creature summoned 
appears as soon as possible, approaching to 
within 50 yards; reactions are then determined 
normally. Fantastic creatures are not affected. The 
type of animal affected is different for each whis- 
tle (bat, bear, boar, camel, great cat, crocodile, 
elephant, horse, rat, or wolf), The whistle may be 
used once a day. 


of Training 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
The sound produced by this whistle cannot be 
heard by human or demihuman ears. It enables 
the user to train a charmed animal. The animal 
affected must be within 10 feet and must be 
charmed before training is possible. Once acti- 
vated by the command word, the whistle is 
blown and a one-word instruction given; the ani- 
mal understands and remembers the instruction, 
obeying each time the word is spoken or when- 
ever the whistle is heard thereafter. The whistle 
can be heard for a range of 60 feet. If the whistle 
can produce more than one note, the animal can 
be trained to respond to as many as five simple, 
one-word commands, such as attack, defend, 
fetch, threaten; one command is keyed to each 
note or word. 


Window 


A magical window is simply a small square or 
rectangular wooden frame lacking glass, which 
appears identical to a normal window frame 
except for its size. It may be as small as 1 inch 
square or as large as 2 feet across. All magical 
windows enlarge on command to a maximum of 
5 feet square and shrink back to original size with 
a second command word. A window may be held 


in place for up to one hour per use. A window 
6346 


2 1558 


a E Moll a — 


Wine of Eternity 


Í 


cannot be removed for at least one round after use 
or it will vanish. Windows have no effect on mag- 
ical doors or walls. 


Display 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This window appears to be and functions as a 
window of peeping in all respects. However, if 
used to gaze upon a nonhuman creature hostile to 
the user (predetermined by a reaction roll), the 
user becomes paralyzed (no saving throw) and 
stands holding the window. The paralyzed victim 
does not fall over or let go. Once the window has 
trapped a victim, it cannot be damaged or moved 
but will release its victim one turn later. The 
paralysis cannot be removed unless a remove 
curse is applied to the window (not the victim) by 
a caster of 15th level. 


of Dressing 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This odd window allows the user to put on armor, 
equipment, and other possessions in only two 
rounds. When enlarged and viewed, the window 
reveals a small, other-dimensional cubicle. The 
user may step through while carrying equipment, 
take the time to put on the equipment (armor, 
shield, weapons) and step back out of the cubicle, 
fully clad, one round later—regardless of the 
actual time needed to dress. Magic items do not 
function within the cubicle, and spells cannot be 
studied or cast. The window can be very useful 
during outdoor travel, as a character does not 
wear armor while sleeping. 


of Opacity 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This window does not permit viewing, instead 
producing the opposite effect. When held to any 
normal or magical window or mirror, it causes 
part of the other window’s transparent or reflec- 
tive surface to become misty and unusable. Only 
the part covered by the window of opacity is 
affected, and only whilc the two windows touch. 
The window may be used only once a day. 


of Peeping 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This window looks like and functions as a win- 
dow of spying, but both the window and the user 
can easily be seen by those in the room. 


of Spying 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

When held to the surface of a wall or door, this 
window allows the user to see through the barrier 
into the area on the other side. It has no effect on 
magical walls or doors, can be blocked by any 
metal, and can see through up to 2 feet of wood 
or stone at most. It reveals no sign of its use to 
those on the other side. The window of spying can 
be used three times a day. 


of Visiting 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This window functions like a window of peeping 
in all respects. However, if used to gaze upon a 
nonhuman creature hostile to the user (predeter- 
mined by a reaction roll), the user and the win- 
dow are drawn through the wall or door and 
appear in the midst of the creatures seen (no sav- 
ing throw). Only the user is affected. 


Wine of Eternity 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 10,000 
The Ruins of Undermountain 
This extremely rare, fell vintage was devised by a 
cabal of renegade illithid wizards an age ago. 
They are all dead now; the secrets of enchanting 
this drink are thought to have died with them. The 
values given above are for a single quart flask. 

The wine tastes fruity, like fermented cherries. 
If even the slightest drop of this fine, dark-red 
wine passes the lips (or is spilled into a wound, so 
that it mixes with the blood) of a living creature, 
that creature falls instantly asleep. 

Seven days after imbibing the wine, an affected 
being is allowed a special saving throw. If it suc- 
ceeds, the being awakens and is forever after 
immune to the effects of the wine of eternity. If it 
fails, the next saving throw is allowed a year (to 
the minute!) later. If that fails, another year must 
pass, and so on. This cycle can theoretically con- 
tinue for ages and beyond. 

The saving throw is a special one, calculated 
as follows: add the victim’s current Strength, 
Constitution, Intelligence, and Wisdom ability 
points. Roll percentile dice; if the roll is equal 
to or less than the ability point total, the sleeper 
awakens. 

No known means short of a limited wish can 
end the slumber early. The sleeping being does 
not age, or even require food, water, or air— 
although breathing (and snoring) continues, Hair 
continues to grow, but nails do not, and most 
other bodily processes (except healing) also seem 
to cease. Certain sleepers have even been known 


to regenerate lost limbs and the like, without the 
6353 


a ee ee ee a ae 


1559 


O Se 


Wings, Dragon 


jj aea E E 


use of a spell—something normally beyond the 
powers of mere rest! 

This vintage is believed the cause of many sleep- 
ing knights found in tombs throughout the Realms. 
Allegedly, the illithids tried to dose many of their 
foes—and after a time, sold the vintage to humans, 
to use against rivals; the victims were eventually 
laid to rest by those helpless to awaken them. 

Mind flayers, beholders, and drow are known 
to be immune to the slumber-causing agents of 
this magical wine, as are all undead. To drow, it 
functions merely as an intoxicant; to mind flayers 
and beholders, it functions as a powerful, regen- 
erative healing draft, yielding 1d12 restored hit 
points per cup. 

No known written instructions exist of its mak- 
ing, and, according to Elminster, many powerful 
wizards searched long and hard for any mention 
or clue of it in all the libraries of the Realms. 


Wings 
Wings are magical devices that generally allow the 
wearer to fly just like a bird. The user often cannot 
levitate or hover (unless specified in the text), but 
must flap and move forward to stay aloft. Some 
wings graft themselves to the shoulders while 
others must be strapped on like a backpack. 


Dragon 

GP Value: 50,000 
Dragon Keep 
Just prior to the Age of Might, a band of magic- 
using silver dragons created dragon wings to 
share the gift of flight with their human friends. 
Dragon wings look like miniature silver dragon 
wings about 2 inches long. 

To activate the dragon wings, the owner must 
be in close physical contact with a silver dragon 
of the same sex (traditionally, the dragon 
embraces the owner while pressing the wings 
against the owner’s back.) The owner feels a 
burning sensation that spreads from the neck 
through the shoulders and down the spine as the 
dragon wings are absorbed into the body. 

The burning sensation continues for a full 
minute, then a wracking pain shoots through the 
owner’s body. A Constitution check must then be 
made. If the check fails, the owner suffers 1d6 
points of damage. If the check succeeds, he or 
she takes one point of damage. 

The pain subsides in 1d4 minutes, after which 
a pair of glittering silver dragon wings blossoms 
from the owner’s shoulders, spanning 12 feet 
when fully extended. The wings are totally func- 
tional; with them, the owner can fly at the same 
speed as a silver dragon. The wings remain in 
place for 24 hours. They can be used only once. 


XP Value: 10,000 


of Flying 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

A pair of these magical wings looks like nothing 
more than a plain cloak of old, black cloth. If the 
wearer speaks a command word, the cloak turns 
into a pair of gigantic bat wings (20-foot span) 
and empower the wearer to fly as follows: 
* 2 turns at speed 32 
* 3 turns at speed 25 
* 4turns at speed 18 
* 6 turns at speed 15 
* 8 turns at speed 12 

After the maximum number of possible turns 
flying, the wearer must rest for one hour—sit- 
ting, lying down, or sleeping. Shorter periods of 
flight do not require full rest, but only relative 
quiet such as slow walking for one hour. Any 
flight of less than one turn’s duration does not 
require any rest. Wings of flying can be used 
just once per day regardless of the length of 
time spent flying. They can support up to 500 
pounds weight. 


Sigh Danovitche’s Wings of Flying 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 7,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 27 
These magical wings are able to support up to 
500 pounds of weight. The character who wears 
them may continue to fly as long as he or she 
likes without tiring. Their movement rate is a 
constant 9. Sigh Danovitche's wings of flying are 
not effective in combat situations—the wearer 
can do nothing but concentrate on flying while 
wearing them. If the flyer’s train of thought is in 
any way interrupted, the wings convert back into 


a cape and the flyer falls. 
Wo-ha Ui-jung 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Kara-Tur 


The Wo-ha Ui-jung are 10 magical vessels that 
were fashioned with arcane powers by the Han, 
Each is carved in the shape of a different ani- 
mal, and their powers have played a major role 
in Koryo’s past and present. There is a legend 
that the man who gathers all the Wo-ha Ui-jung 
together again will be the first emperor of the 
world! Here are the statistics and status of 
each: 

Standing Monkey: This vessel cures blind- 
ness, allows commune with lesser spirit to the 
unskilled, and handling it causes the spell of face 
to be cast on the holder, as if it rubs off on the 
wielder. Its magic is called by filling the deep cup 
with rose petals. The king now possesses the 
standing monkey, and he led an expedition to col- 


lect three of these vessels. 
6357 


< 1560 > 


ae 


World-Shield Ore 


EEE a, 


Squatting Toad: This one calls creeping dark- 
ness, makes the user grow 1d4 inches taller, adds 
+1 to Strength, +1 Dexterity and —1 Charisma, 
and permanently bestows the ability to swim on 
the wielder. It happens upon drinking anything 
from the cup. This only happens once, no matter 
how long the wielder attempts to recreate the cer- 
emony. The king possesses this vessel, a gift from 
the people of Saishu. 

Sitting Monkey: The user must follow a regi- 
ment of nightly ceremonies to keep the powers of 
this vessel. Incense must be burned in its cup at 
midnight, and a peculiar chant is required. It 
raises the user’s level +2, adds +20% to all char- 
acters’ ability to climb walls, and allows the han- 
dler true seeing, the Sth-level shukenja spell, 
once per day. If the ceremony is continued over 
six months, the manipulator’s toes become pre- 
hensile, making shoes uncomfortable, but allow- 
ing the character to hold on to ledges, ropes, and 
branches like a monkey. This change is the only 
permanent one. The sitting monkey is in the trea- 
sure rooms of the king. 

Sitting Bull: This cup instills sure/ife in any 
drinker of the cup, as in the 8th-level wu jen 
spell, and a blanket protection from all disasters 
except physical blows from another character, 
The effect lasts one hour. The king possesses this 
object, and many believe he uses it. It can only be 
used once a day. 

Sitting Dog: This vessel is lost, last used by 


the hero Niofu Sangto, who defeated the Koza- 
kuran navy in the Battle of Wui Eyong (Koryo 
812). Obscure records list its powers, but there 
are confusing accounts; it might cause baldness 
and cure stricken crops or it could give the abil- 
ities to start fires with a gaze and sing a hyp- 
notic song. The hero Niofu Sangto had a fortress 
on the coast somewhere east of Tu Pe, but it is 
lost as well. 

Standing Bear: This vessel too, is lost. It was 
held for years by a powerful yakuza clan in T’o 
na’Chee, the Yio Dufong. It gave any drinker 
from the chalice the strength of a bear (19) for 
three hours and a flushed, excitable nature. The 
Yio Dufong would all drink from it before a bat- 
tle, and to this day, they are still known as the 
“bears.” The treasure was stolen and has not 
resurfaced, 

Leaping Fish: This one was last used by the 
shukenja, Pitalla, when he cured mo’Ki of the 
ivory plague infestation. It is thought he carried 
it to Su’un and left it there. When this vessel, 
the fish’s mouth, is filled with fine oil and lit, it 
glows pale blue and the user can ask for one 
wish to be fulfilled, as in the 9th-level wu jen 
spell. 

Laughing Hare: This is actually a cup. It must 
be filled with saki and drunk to initiate the 
magic. The wielder’s hearing increases, and he or 
she can see objects twice as far away for half a 
day. The drinker can also conjure one earth ele- 
mental during that time. This cup only works dur- 
ing the full moon. 

Dancing Hart: This figure holds a cup with its 
antlers. It is a lost relic and its powers are 
unknown, but certain arcane records call for fill- 
ing it with the blood of an enemy. Some believe it 
is in the treasures of Toranu Gang-po. 

Coiled Dragon: A dragon surrounds this huge 
vessel | foot in diameter, wide and shallow. It 
must be filled with liquid silver (mercury) and 
one drop of blood from the user. Then that person 
can use the little pool as a mirror to view any 
scene in Kara-Tur or the Heavens above. As long 
as the viewer concentrates, the little window may 
be moved anywhere on the world the user wants 
to see, spying or searching. This relic was last 
carried by the Chinhan people, but it has been 
lost for 2,000 years. 


World-Shield Ore 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Nightrage 
This ore is not magical, rather it is strongly 
antimagical. Still, its properties merit discussion 
here. The metal forged from this ore can absorb 
magical energy harmlessly. Furthermore, it holds 


the magic intact on its surface, affecting those 
6367 


, 1561 = 


World-Shield Ore 


j, aiana 


“ Wy 
"% 


who touch it. 

The ore’s unique properties derive from its 
source—the world-shield at the center of Mys- 
tara’s crust, which is impenetrable by any magic, 
even that of the Immortals. The world-shield may 
be a “zone of influence” as opposed to an actual 
barrier of rock; this remains unclear, for the evi- 
dence is conflicting. Perhaps its eons in the zone 
of influence have bestowed on the ore its strange 
powers. 

The world-shield ore, once forged, exceeds all 
other minerals in strength and hardness. It is 
essentially indestructible. Though conventional 
hard materials are also brittle, this ore is not. Few 
blows can shatter it. However, its strength makes 
the ore extremely hard to forge. Nothing but the 
heat of the planet itself, as in a live volcano, can 
melt it. 

For game purposes, assume armor forged from 
this ore gives the wearer AC —2. Yet because of its 
lightness, it weighs no more than ordinary banded 
mail. 

The ore, and items made from it, completely 
blocks, negates, and neutralizes all magical 
effects. (This includes magical liquids poured 
through cracks in the armor; the liquid simply 
refuses to work.) The armor totally seals the 
wearer from the effects of any magic, for better or 
worse. For instance, the wearer cannot become 
invisible, be lifted by telekinesis, travel through a 
gate, be teleported or charmed. Bless spells, 


healing magic, magical rings, and girdles are all 
similarly futile. Scrying and communication 
magic such as contact outer plane, legend lore, 
and clairvoyance also don’t work. The wearer 
cannot cast magic from within the armor, though 
he or she can use magical items held outside of 
the armor. 

In theory this armor should even protect 
against Immortal magic, since the world-shield 
itself resists the Immortals. However, this could 
easily prove too powerful for a campaign, so the 
DM has the final ruling on the effects of Immor- 
tal magic on world-shield ore. (Note: If the armor 
were built by an Immortal, it would be effectively 
an artifact, and would protect against Immortal 
magic.) 

When the armor is attacked magically, the 
attack’s magical power “collects” on the ore’s 
surface, suspended. This power automatically 
attacks the next person or object that the armor 
touches. This target is affected just as if the 
spell had been cast directly on it. If the armor 
touches nothing for six minutes (six rounds), 
the suspended power dissipates harmlessly, If 
the armor collects and suspends magic from an 
area-effect attack, it still only inflicts its dam- 
age on a single target, by touch, and only as 
much damage as the armor’s wearer would have 
taken from the spell. 

Note that world-shield armor is unstable 
(unless an artifact). A month or so after forging, 
its properties wear off, and the metal crumbles. 
So even if they manage to fit into the armor suits, 
the PCs can’t be permanently invincible. 

Apparently only one factor governs the armor's 
instability—the presence of a living wearer. The 
act of being worn apparently saps the armor’s 
power. Armor forged and stored unworn may last 
indefinitely, until worn. After one wearing, the 
armor inevitably decays within a month. (At the 
DM's discretion, other factors can also make the 
armor unstable, such as exposure to light or cor- 
rosive acids.) 


6367 


562 


S 


“arg 


X \ Neu 
eases tset ri wearer titre «=v 
EP. 


9 


al 


A | 


Xylograph 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This is a wooden slab, l-inch thick and a foot 
square. Upon command, it transcribes the words 
of the user, carving them backwards as grooves in 
the wood. Upon a second command, the words 
fill with ink and the xylograph can then be 
pressed against a wall, parchment, or any recep- 
tive substance, printing its message on the sur- 
face. Once the words are printed, the xy/ograph 
returns to its original featureless state. After the 
initial command word, the user may also inscribe 
a drawing of some sort simply by using one fin- 
ger to trace the lines desired. The xylograph func- 
tions only once per day, and can become 
nonmagical if damaged by fire or if anything is 
carved or written on its surface without the use of 
the first command word. 


Yoke 
Yokes are devices that are used to harness large 
draft animals to the will of the owner. A yoke is 
often attached to a plow, farm implement, or 
vehicle to harness a team of animals for labor. 


1 


Yoke of Obedience 


of Boar Harnessing 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Moonshae 

These rare devices are of druidic design and can 
be used to harness a pair of boars or giant boars 
to the will of the user. The boars can be harnessed 
to a chariot, cart, plow, or carriage. Alternatively, 
the harness can be separated into two pieces, 
mastering two boars for riding purposes. Crea- 
tures larger than dwarves or elves can ride only 
giant boars. 

The harnessed boar responds to all of the com- 
mands of the user, but it does not receive any 
magical increase in Intelligence. Thus tasks that 
could normally be learned by the creature can 
automatically be performed while under the har- 
ness, but the boar cannot perform unusually com- 
plicated tasks. 


of Flight 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
Moonshae 
This large yoke can be used to harness a pair of 
horses. When in use, the horses have the power of 
flight and can pull a chariot through the air at a 
speed of 36. 

To take off, the chariot must race in a straight 
line at a speed of at least 12. When the command 
word is spoken, the vehicle lifts off the ground 
and soars into the air. It must travel at least 12 per 
turn to remain airborne; at a slower speed it auto- 
matically crashes. The chariot flies with Maneu- 
verability Class E. 

Landing requires a straight path at least 60 
yards long. It takes two rounds to slow down 
enough to maneuver freely on the ground. 


of Irritation 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This item is placed on a beast’s neck. Rather than 
controlling the animal, however, the yoke enrages 
it and it attacks the user as best it can. The crea- 
ture is nearly invulnerable while wearing the 
yoke; only damage to the yoke is counted (treat as 
AC 2, hp 20), and only magical damage applies. 
When the yoke is destroyed, the beast returns to 
normal. A remove curse does not affect the yoke, 
but a wish makes it disappear. 


of Obedience 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When this yoke is placed on a creature’s neck, the 
victim is charmed and thereafter obeys the user’s 
spoken commands for as long as the yoke is 


worn. The yoke disintegrates 30 days after its 
6372 


563 


Yoke, Practical 


bp, SEE Ce knee enn ee a Se en 


first use. Only the user can remove the yoke 
while the creature is alive. 


Practical 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 


This item is used in the same manner as a yoke of 


obedience. However, the user soon discovers the 
curse that comes with it. Anything the user sits 
upon makes noise; the user’s teeth turn black after 
drinking liquids; and other similar effects may 
occur (as created and applied by the DM). When 
the yoke is removed, the curse departs, but it 
returns each time the yoke is used. 


of Underwater Action 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Moonshae 

This yoke, like the yoke of flight, enables a pair of 
horses to carry a chariot through a medium it 
could not normally enter. In this case, the envi- 
ronment is water. The horses can pull the chariot 
at normal movement rates. The horses have no 
difficulty breathing, nor do any riders who 
remain in the chariot. 


Yo-Yo of Fate 


XP Value GP Value 
3 inch: 1,500 18,000 
5 inch: 2,500 30,000 
9 inch: 4,500 54,000 
13 inch: 6,500 78,000 
17 inch: 8,500 102,000 
20 inch: 10,000 120,000 


DRAGON Magazine 134 

This yo-yo looks like any normal yo-yo; it is a 
bright cherry-red color, and its string glows 
faintly yellow. The yo-yo of fate, however, adds a 
+1 to all of a jester’s (bard kit) saving throws and 
+2% to all normal jester abilities when carried. 
Most of the time, it functions as a normal yo-yo. 
However, when the jester desires, the yo-yo 
allows its owner to alter fate during the course of 
a day. A particular 1d20 die roll, made for that 
jester’s combat or saving throw purposes, is cho- 
sen and altered (but only before the roll is made). 
The jester then uses his yo-yo to “get lucky” 
When used to alter fate, the yo-yo’s string perma- 
nently shortens by | inch for every +1 bonus 
added to the die roll to be altered. Note that the 
yo-yo of fate does not guarantee that a die roll 
will succeed; it merely adds to the chance 
involved. The yo-yos come with strings of vari- 
ous lengths. When such a yo-yo is found, roll on 
this chart: 


Roll String length 


01-60 3 inches 
61-80 5 inches 
81-90 9 inches 
91-95 13 inches 
96-98 17 inches 
99-00 20 inches 


If a yo yo’s string is too short to permit the size 
of the die-roll bonus asked for (a 2-inch string 
cannot allow a +5 bonus on a die roll), then the 
yo-yo grants the maximum bonus it can allow (in 
the above case, a +2 bonus) and vanishes forever. 
No jester can use or own more than one of these 
yo-yos at a time. 


Zwieback of Zymurgy 

XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This dry, crusty bread is magically useful in wine 
production. If dipped into a wineskin filled with 
inferior wine, the liquid changes to an excellent 
beverage, which can be sold for 10 times the orig- 
inal price. The piece of zwieback disintegrates 
when used. Each package of zwieback contains 
2d10 pieces when found, which will keep indefi- 
nitely unless moistened. 


6376 


564 


ji EE? 


The Lastword 


And here we are, four volumes, sixteen hundred and sixty-four 
pages, and 4,032, 306, 375* magical items later. We hope you 
have enjoyed reading and using the Encyclopedia Magcia™ vol- 
umes as much as we have enjoyed bringing them to you. A few 
words need to be said in conclusion, so if you'll bear with us, 
mysteries will be unveiled, 
* This figure, give or take a few hundred thousand, is slade’s esti- 
mate of the total number of items that exist or can be created 
by using the tables and alternatives. 


Those Curious Asterisks 

Throughout the encyclopedia there are items marked with aster- 
isks, and many have written and called to ask what arcane truth is 
contained within them. Quite simply, they are “everything items.” 
Any item so marked can be translated into any other item. For 
example, a ring of folly could become a dagger of folly, a pair of 
slippers, a brooch, a gem, or anything else a DM cares to make of 
it. This was done to enable the DM to customize items specific to 
a campaign in which a listed item may not be appropriate. 


Unpublished Works 

TSR, Inc. works on a two-year lead-time. Occasionally adven- 
tures and accessories are written only to be canceled when the 
needs of a specific product line change. Those who were very 
alert may have spotted items from a 1994 SPELLIJAMMER accessory 
called Infinity Sphere. Don't look for it at your local store, /nfinty 
Sphere was dropped from the schedule—but its magical items are 
within these pages. 


Errata 

Glen Orbik was inadvertently left off the list of color plate artists 
in volume II. John and Laura Lakey were listed in volume II to 
correct the fact that they should have been listed in volume I. We 
apologize for any confusion this may have caused. 


Not Errata 

Please note that the fact that an item appears in more than one 
place in these volumes is not an error. In order to make this pro- 
ject more user friendly, certain items were duplicated. For exam- 
ple, Equus items appear as everything from earrings to ankle 
bracelets. A single listing would have been more difficult to find, 
so we listed Equus under each applicable type. A few items were 
judged to be important enough to warrant listing them singly and 
in categories, and some, like Quirks, were redesigned to make 
them fit specific categories. 


Special Thanks 

To Lorraine Williams for the format concept, which is a vast 
improvement on the one slade and I had envisioned; to Tim 
Brown, Roger Moore, Steve Winter, and Bruce Heard for aid 
under fire; to Arnie Swekel for his wonderful illustrations of the 
items and scenes in all four volumes; to the AD&D Product 
Group for proofreading on short notice with even shorter dead- 
lines; to Peggy Cooper for ferreting out obscure and ancient color 
art; to Bob Gibson, whose critique of slade’s DRAGON Magazine 
article helped make the following tables better than they were; 
and to all of you who have written and called to express your 
appreciation for this project, we thank you. Your kindness made 
an impossible project merely difficult. 


1 


5 


An Abbreviated Bibliography 


Unearthed Mundana ..........6060s-000--005 Dragon 191 
Nonmagical items of value 
A Magical Personality .........0:00se0eeeeee Dragon 191 


Roleplaying hints and ideas for specialist mages 
Sorcery: & Strategy <6.0i0 6 oe cy vcieeee seats Dragon 181 
Magical tactics on the fantasy-game battlefield 


Magic Mangling Made Easy ................-- Dragon 173 
Don't get mad at spellcasters ... get even 
Treasures More Real ......00.0scccscesececcies Dragon 168 


Do away with boring dragon hoards and make players think 

LE OT The Complete Wizards Handbook 
Magical Item Creation Tome of Magic 
The ins, outs, and personal sacrifices of making magical items 


Hodge Wises cae a a ASSAN Dragon 163 
The low-level mages who make things work 

Magic Gone Haywire. .........0ccsseceseeees Dragon 163 
Magical item misfirings in the AD&D game 

Magic for Beginners ........cescsseeeveenes Dragon 149 
Create all-new weapons—for I st-level characters 

The Deck of Many Things... .. 6.6... .000e0005 Dragon 148 

A card-stock insert of the deck to be used by players. 

Variety, The Spice of Magic.................-- Dragon 147 
Alternate spell components 

Gaze Into My Crystal Ball. ..........-----.+-- Dragon 147 
A look at magical scrying devices and spells 

WES WHET ODORS 10-5.5)0.5, tre; vis satay peices Dragon 139 
Mageholm: A Wizards’ Guild 

Treasures of the Wild. .............+0+50-505- Dragon 137 
Natural treasures in the AD&D game 

The GoleiS CHAR neasa aa Dragon 136 


The expense and risks involved in golem-making 
Better Living Through Alchemy Dragon 130 
Alchemists and their magical trade, from potions to poisons 
The Mystic College oceni i a a Dragon 123 
Magical academies for AD&D game sorcerers 


Fie EBR siiri s EES Dragon 123 
Magical fires are a lot hotter than you'd think 

Good Stuff, for a Spell. ... 2.0... cece eeeeeees Dragon 111 
Magic-focusing items 

Welcome to Malach iessen ias Dragon 111 
A game city designed with magic in mind 

Blades with Personality... .........66s6s-0005 Dragon 109 
Magical swords should have more than just statistics 

The Well-Equipped Victim .........6-000e0e05 Dragon 105 


A random treasure system for 0-level encounters 


Charging Isn't Cheap, s.s 6... .s000seeeeeee eee Dragon 101 
Ideas for creating and fixing magical items 

Tailor-Made Treasure. ........0-00seeeeeeceees Dragon 98 
A dragon's hoard of valuables should be variable 

Creative Magic Items. .......6+seeeeeeeeeeecee Dragon 98 
Enchanted objects don't have to come from a book 

The Legacy of Horas ss sins ccivcin ea tcacnsecests Dragon 87 
A harvest of unusual plants 

The Many Facets of Gems. . ......---- 04000055 Dragon 83 
Fact and folklore about snazzy stones 

Taking the Sting Out of Poison ..........---.++. Dragon 81 


A new poison system 


66 


J < 


Appendix 


Magical Item Random Determination Tables 


Whenever possible, experienced DMs 
select the magical items that are to be used 
in their campaigns. There are times, how- 
ever, when random charts can be of 
tremendous help, especially when consid- 
ering the fact that this encyclopedia con- 
tains more than four billion items, 
including all of the variant items, weapons, 
and gear listed in the pages and on the 
tables of its four volumes. 

Many of the items listed below are in 
bold type, These are unique items and arti- 
facts that fit no specific category—and so, 
we inserted them under some unusual clas- 
sifications, This system not only allowed 
us to include every item, but also adds a 
factor of true randomness—be careful 
what you wish for, you might not like what 
you get, For example, under Decanters 
you will find Disintegration Chamber, and 
Horn of Plenty is listed under Potions, Of 
course the DM is always free to throw out 
any result he or she feels would inflict 
more harm than good to the campaign. 

To randomly select a magical item, roll 
on Table | below. Table 1 directs the DM to 
the specific categories listed in Tables A 
through T. 

Table 1 is almost identical to Table 88 
in the DMG, except that it includes entries 
for humorous items, artifacts, and relics. 

Please note that Table T, which contains 
the complete list of artifacts, is excluded 
from Table 1 due to the unique nature and 
power of artifacts. Artifacts should never 
be given as random treasure. Table T is 
included in order to give you a list of the 
artifacts available in the ENCYCLOPEDIA 
MAGICA accessory. We do not recommend 
its use as a random table. 


Table 1: Magical Items 


F 


Wands 

46 Miscellaneous: Books 
Miscellaneous: Gems & Jewelry 
Miscellaneous: Clothing 
Miscellaneous: Boots & Gloves 
53 Miscellaneous: Girdles & Helms 
Miscellaneous: Bags & Bottles 

56 Miscellaneous: Dust & Stones 

57 Miscellaneous: Household Items 
$8  Miscellancous: Music Instruments 
Miscellaneous: Weird Stuff 

61 Miscellaneous: Humorous Items! 
Armor and Shields 

Weapons 

‘This result may be rerolled if the DM has no 
sense of humor. 


Once the general category is determined, 
choose a specific item from the reference 
tables given below, Each item on the refer- 
ence tables is given a die roll number so that 
the DM can select items randomly. 

The die rolls for these tables are 41000, 
This means the DM must roll three 10- 


aAPOcwOZEer Ai TOamone> 


sided dice, collating the results together, 
and coming up with a number from 001 
(one) to 000 (one thousand). It is sug- 
gested that three different colored dice be 
used to make the rolling easier. 

Many items listed on the reference tables 
have an asterisk after the name. If this result 
is rolled, the DM is encouraged to roll again 
on that table, combining the entries into a 
unique item, This can be done any number 
of times, but the DM may wish to limit the 


number of rerolls to three. 
Table A: Magical Liquids 
Roll Item Discovered 
ol Enchanted Enhancements* 
02-03 Arcane Formulae for a 
Dracolich 
04-05 Arcane Formulae for a Lich 
06-07 Cordial of the Dryad Elixirs 
08-09 — of Additional Weaponry 
10-11 of All-Purpose Healing 
12 Distillate of Wolfsbane 
13-14 Glitz & Klax’s 
15-16 of Health 
17-18 of Heroic Action 
19-20 of Kindness 
21-22 of Life 
23 of Luck 
24-25 of Madness 
26-27 Nerve Tonic 
28-29 Nodozze 
30-31 of Obscurement 
32-33 of Photosynthesis 
34 Physical Enhancement 
35-36 = Quirks* 
37-38 Rainbow Bridge 
39-40 of Reduction 
41-42 of Revivication 
43-44 of Sanity 
45-46 = Skunk Water 
47 of Sunlight Resistance 
48-49 of Weakness 
50-51 of Youth 
52-53 of Zorbo Fingers 
54-55 Essence of Darkness 
56-57 Ichor of Intoxication 
58 Liquid Iron 
59-60 Liquid Road 
61-62 Mist of Rapture 
Oils 
63-64 Absinthe 
65-66 of Acid Resistance 
67-68 = African Ju Ju 
69 of Agelessness 
70-71 Allspice 
72-73 Allspice II 
74-75 Anger 
76-77 Animation 
78-79 Anise 
80 Aphrodisia 
81-82 Arabian Nights 
83-84 of Aries 
85-86 of Armor 
87-88 of Armor Il 
89-90 Attraction 
91-92 Attractiveness 
93 Bard's Aphrodisiac Inspiration 
94-95 Bats’ Blood 
96-97 of Beauty 
98-99 Bendover's 
100-101 Bergamot's 


102-103 
104 
105-106 
107-108 
109-110 
111-112 
113-114 
115 
116-117 
118-119 
120-121 
122-123 
124-125 
126 
127-128 
129-130 
131-132 
133-134 
135-136 
137-138 
139 
140-141 
142-143 
144-145 
146-147 
148-149 
150 
151-152 
153-154 
155-156 
157-158 
159-160 
161 
162-163 
164-165 
166-167 
168-169 
170-171 
172 
173-174 
175-176 
177-178 
179-180 
181-182 
183-184 
185 
186-187 
188-189 
190-191 
192-193 
194-195 
196 
197-198 
199-200 
201-202 
203-204 
205-206 
207 
208-209 
210-211 
212-213 
214-215 
216-217 
218 
219-220 
221-222 
223-224 
225-226 
227-228 
229-230 
231 
232-233 
234-235 


of the Black Arts 
Bottom #20 
Bruno’s Curse 
Buddha Type I 
Buddha Type Il 
Buddha Type Ill 
of Bug Repellence 
Bull's 

of Buoyancy 
Caloric Shield 
Carnation 
Chocolate 
Cintronella 

Civit 

Cleo May 

of Cloaking 

of Commanding 
of Concentration 
of Confusion 

of Conquering Glory 
Controlling 


of Dexterity 

of Disenchantment 
Doas Isay’s 
Double Cross 

of Dragon’s Blood 
of Dream 

of the Dryad 

of Elasticity 

of Elemental Invulnerability 
of Enchantment 
of Enchantment II 
of Eternal Fire 

of Etherealness 
Eucalyptus 

of Eve 

of the Evil Eye 
Excisement 

of Exodus 

of the Feasts 

of Feather Falling 
of Fiery Burning 
of Fire Stilling 
Five Finger Grass 
Frangi Pani 

of Fumbling 
Galangale'’s 
Gardenia 


of Great Devotion 

of Hair Replacement 

of High Conquering 

of High John the Conqueror 

Hindu Grass 

Honeysuckle 

of Horridness 

Hypnotic 

Hysspo 

of Immovability 

of Impact 

Invisibility 

of Invulnerability 

Jamaica 

Jannis’s Aroma of Nightmares 

Jazper’s of Permanent 
Etherealness 


n ae aE. 


1567 


| MM 


Na 


Oils 
236-237 
238-239 
240-241 
242 
243-244 
245-246 


Jezebel 

of Jinx Removing 
Jo’s Liquid Road 
Kludde 

Lavender 

of Life 


Magical Liquids 


247-248 
249-250 
251-252 
253 
254-255 
256-257 
258-259 
260-261 
262-263 
264 
265-266 
267-268 
269-270 
271-272 
273-274 
275-276 
277 
278-279 
280-281 
282-283 
284-285 
286-287 
288 
289-290 
291-292 
293-294 
295-296 
297-298 
299 
300-301 
302-303 
304-305 
306-307 
308-309 
310 
311-312 
313-314 
315-316 
317-318 
319-320 
321-322 
323 
324-325 
326-327 
328-329 
330-331 
332-333 
334 
335-336 
337-338 
339-340 
341-342 
343-344 
345 
346-347 
348-349 
350-351 
352-353 
354-355 
356 
357-358 
359-360 
361-362 
363-364 
365-366 
Ointments 
367-368 
369 
370-371 
372-373 


of Lighting 

of Lightning Bolts 
Lily of the Valley 
of Lorn 

of Luminescence 
Magnolia 

of Manpower 
Maybel’s Insect Charm 
of Mercury 

of Metal Fatigue 
Mojo 

of Monster Repulsion 
Moon 

Musk 

Narcissus 

of Neutral Scent 
of New life 

Nine Mystery 
Obeah 

of Obedience 
Olibanum 

of Permanent Disenchantment 
of Petrification 
of Phosphorescence 
of Phosphorus 
of the Pickpocket 
of Power 

of Preservation 
Primrose 
Reptilla’s Curdled Death 
of Reversibility 
of Romance 
Rosemary 

Rue 

of Rust Proofing 
Sandalwood 

of Scents 

of Scribes 

of Scrying 

of Sharpness 

of Slipperiness 
Snake 

Solomon's 
Spikenard 

Spirit 

of Stillness 

of Stone Passage 
of Sulfur 

of Time 

of Timelessness 
Trinity 

of Unlocking 
Verbena 

of Vibration 
Virgin Olive 

of Vision 

of Voodoo 

of Will Power 
Wintergreen 

of Wishing 
Witch's 

Xyz 

Ylang Ylang 
Zodiac 

Zula Zula 


of Blessing 
Courtesan’s Cream 

of Far Seeing (Ashen) 
of Far Seeing (Black) 


374-375 
376-377 
378-379 
380 
381-382 
383-384 
385-386 
387-388 
389-390 
391 
392-393 
394-395 
396-397 
398-399 
400-401 
402 
403-404 
405-406 
407—408 
409-410 
411-412 
Perfumes 
413-414 
415 
416-417 
418-419 
420-421 
422-423 
Philters 
424-425 
426 
427-428 
429-430 
431-432 
433-434 


of Far Seeing (Blue) 
of Far Seeing (Bluish) 
of Far Seeing (Clear) 
of Far Seeing (Copper) 
of Far Seeing (Golden) 
of Far Seeing (Gray) 
of Far Seeing (Silver) 
of Far Seeing (White) 
of Flying 

of Healing 

of Healing II 
Keoghtom’s 

of Mage Smeiling 
Poison 

of Recovery 

of Scar Removal 

of Scarring 

of Second Sight 

of Soothing 

Tanning 

Padriac’s Portable Purveyor 


Aroma of Dreams 
Curdled Death 

Elyas 

Essence of Darkness 
Murdock’s Insect Ward 
Starella’s Aphrodisiac 


Aleese’s of Overwhelming Love 
of Beauty 

of Drunkenness 

of Drunkenness II 

Durimal’s Merry Blend 
Durimal’s Potent Draft 
Durimal’s Sovereign Tonic 

of Glibness 

of Love 

of Persuasiveness 

Quirks* 

of Stammering and Stuttering 


Pigments (Paints) 


446-447 
448 
449-450 
451-452 
453-454 
455-456 
457-458 


468-469 
470-471 
472 
473-474 
475-476 
477-478 
479-480 
481-482 
483 
484-485 
486-487 
88-489 
90-491 
92-493 
494 
495-496 
497-498 
499-500 
501-502 
503-504 
505-506 
507 
508-509 


Bell's Palette of Identity 
of Blackmoor (Red) 

of Blackmoor (Blue) 

of Blackmoor (Green) 
of Blackmoor (Black) 
of Blackmoor (White) 
of Blackmoor (Brown) 
of Longevity 

Nolzur’s Marvelous 
Yellow Kohl 


of Absorption 

of Advanced Meditation 
of Agility 

of Ageing 

of Alternate Profession 
of Ambrosia 
Amalgamous Type I 
Amalgamous Type IT 
Amalgamous Type III 
of Animal Control 
Antidote 

of Anti-Magic 
Anti-Sleep 

of Arcane Comprehension 
of Archmagedom 

of Black Sight 

of Blending 

of Blindness 

of Bouncing 

of Bubbles 

of Chameleon Power 
of Childishness 

of Clairaudience 

of Clairvoyance 

of Clarity 


510-511 
512-513 
514-515 
516-517 
518 
519-520 
521-522 
523-524 
525-526 
527-528 
529 
530-531 
532-533 
534-535 
536-537 


538-539 
540 
541-542 
543-544 
545-546 
547-548 
549-550 
551-552 
553 
554-555 
556-557 
558-559 
560-561 
562-563 
564 
565-566 
567-568 
569-570 
571-572 
573-574 
575 
576-577 
578-579 
580-581 
582-583 
584-585 
586 
587-588 
589-590 
591-592 
593-594 
595-596 
597-598 
599 
600-601 
602-603 
604-605 
606-607 
608-609 
610 
611-612 
613-614 
615-616 
617-618 
619-620 
621 
622-623 
624-625 
626-627 
628-629 
630-631 
632 
633-636 
637-638 


650-651 
652-653 


Clay 

Clean and Dry 
Clearwater 

of Climbing 

of Controlling Damage 
of Cold Resistance 

of Confusion 

of Contact Disruption 

of the Corrosive Touch 
of Craftsmanship 

of Creation 

of Cure Disease 

of Curing Lycanthropy 
of Danger Detection 
Dark Draft of the Voodoo 
Masters 

of Deafness 

of Defense 

of Deftness (Dex 17) 

of Deftness (Dex 18) 

of Deftness (Dex 19) 

of Deftness (Dex 20) 

of Deftness (Dex 21) 

of Delusion 

of Digestion 

of Digging 

of Diminution 

of Direction 

of the Dracolich 

of Dragon Breath 

of Amethyst Dragon Breath 
of Black Dragon Breath 
of Blue Dragon Breath 
of Brass Dragon Breath 
of Bronze Dragon Breath 
of Brown Dragon Breath 
of Cloud Dragon Breath 
of Copper Dragon Breath 
of Crystal Dragon Breath 
of Deep Dragon Breath 
of Emerald Dragon Breath 
of Gold Dragon Breath 
of Green Dragon Breath 
of Mercury Dragon Breath 
of Mist Dragon Breath 
of Red Dragon Breath 
of Sapphire Dragon Breath 
of Shadow Dragon Breath 
of Silver Dragon Breath 
of Steel Dragon Breath 
of Topaz Dragon Breath 
of White Dragon Breath 
of Yellow Dragon Breath 
of Dragon Control 

of Dragon Control Il 

of Dragon Control II 

of Dragon Sight 
Dragon's Blood 

of Dreaming 

of Dreamspeech 

of Drunkenness 

of Elasticity 

of Elasticity II 

of Elemental Control 

of Elemental Form 

of Enlightenment 

of ESP 

of Ethereality 

of Explosions 

Vial of Explosions 

of Extra-Healing 

of Fire Breath 

of Fire Resistance 

of Fire Vulnerability 

of Fluidness 

of Flying 

of Forewarning 

of Forgetfulness 


ie ee eee ee ee era A 


1568 


a a a ee 


ee 


Potions 
654-655 
656 
657-658 
659-660 
661-662 


707-708 
709-710 
711-712 
713 
714-715 
716-717 
718-719 
720-721 
722-723 
724 
725-726 
727-728 
729-730 
7131-732 
733-734 
735-736 
737 
738-739 
740-741 
742-743 
744-745 
746-747 
748 
749-750 
751-752 
753-754 
755-756 
757-758 
759 
760-761 
762-763 
764-765 
766-767 
768-769 
770 
771-772 
173-774 
775-776 
777-778 
779-780 
781-782 
783 
784-785 
786-787 
788-789 
790-791 
792-793 


7 1569 i 


of Forgetfulness Il 
of Fortitude 

Foul Water 

of Freedom 

of Fresh Air 

of Fright 

of Frost Resistance 
of Fur Growth 

of Gaseous Form 

of Genius 

of Ghostliness 

of Giant Control 

of Giant Control II 
of Giant Strength 
Glitz & Klax's* 

of Gluttony 

of Golden Silence 
of Good Humor 
Gray Slumber 

of Greensprouting 
of Growth 

of Healing 

of Heroism 

Horn of Plenty 

of Housecat Control 
of Human Control 
Hummingbird Nectar 
of Immunity 

of Immunization From 
Lycanthropes 

of Infravision 

of Inner Strength 
of Insulation 

of Intensity 

of Invisibility 

of Invulnerability 
of Iron Handedness 


of Lichdom 

of Life Stealing 
of Life Suspension 
of Lightning Form 
of Longevity 

Love 


of Luck 

of Lycanthropy 

Mage Wine 

of Magic Blocking 

of Magic Enhancement 
of Magic Peas 

of Magic Resistance 
of Magic Resistance II 
of Magic Shielding 

of Magnetism 


of Metal Immunity 

of the Midas Touch 

of Mind Dampening 
of Mind Focusing 

of Mind Restoration 
Mirage 

of Mirrored Eyes 

of Missile Protection 
of Monster Creation 
of Neutralization 

of Noxious Resistance 
of Nutrition 

Odrovir 

of Open Mind 

of Opposite Alignment 


i 


794 
795-796 
797-798 
799-800 
801-802 
803-804 

805 
806-807 
808-809 
810-811 
812-813 
814-815 

816 
817-818 
819-820 
821-822 
823-824 
825-826 
827-828 

829 
830-831 
832-833 
834-835 
836-837 
838-839 


851 
852-853 
854-855 
856-857 
858-859 
860-861 

862 


928-929 
930-931 
932 
933-934 
935-936 


of Pain Suppression 

of Perception 

of Pestilence 

of Petrification 

Phase 

of Plant Control 

of Plant Growth 

of Poison 

of Poison Negation 

of Polymorph Self 

of Wizard Power 

of Priest Power 

of Rogue Power 

of Warrior Power 

Pox 

of Protection from Immiscibility 
of the Pseudo Treant 

of Psionic Ability 
Psionics Boosting (Gray) 
Psionics Boosting (Green) 
Psionics Boosting (Red) 
Psionics Boosting (Silver) 
Psionics Boosting (Violet) 
Psionics Boosting (White) 
Psionics Boosting (Yellow) 
of the Psychotic Killer 

of Pursuit 

Quirks* 

of Rage 

of Rainbow Hues 

of Recall 

of Reflection 

of Regeneration 

of Regeneration II 

of Rejuvenation 

of Rest 

of Restoration 

of Resuscitation 


of Sensory Enhancement 
of Shadow 

of Sharp Eyes 

of Sight 

Singing 

Skeletal 

of Sleep Bestowing 
of Sleep Breathing 
Sleepi 


leeping 
of Sleepy Breath 
of Snake Crawling 
of Sobriety 
of Soul-Chilling 
of Speech 
of Speed 
of Spelljamming 
of Spirit Binding 
of Spirit Flight 
of Stone Form 
of Strength 
of Superhealing 
of Superheroism 
of Superheroism II 
of Superior Animal Control 
of Superior Healing 
of Sustenance 


of Tongues 
of Toughening 


937-938 
939-940 
941-942 
943 
944-945 
946-947 
948-949 
950-951 
952-953 
954 
955-956 
957-958 
959-960 
961-962 


976-977 
978 
979-980 
981-982 

Salves 
983-984 
985-986 
987-988 
989 
990-991 
992-993 
Water 
994-995 
996-997 
998-999 
000 


of Tragic Heroism 

of Treasure Finding 

of Truth 

Truth Drug 

of Ugliness 

of the Undead 

of Undead Control 

of Underground Awareness 


of Ventriloquism 

of Visions 

of Vitality 

Wallac’s of Speedeasting 
of Water Adventuring 
of Water Breathing 

of Water Breathing II 
of Water Breathing III 
of Water Movement 

of Wizardry 

of Worm Calling 

Zak’s of Invulnerability 
Zombie Blood 

Zombie Broth 


of Far Seeing 

of Healing 

of Scar Removal 
Sea Dew 
Sovereign Glue 
Universal Solvent 


Blessed 

Golden 

Holy 

Wine of Eternity 


Sas SATs 
Table B: Scrolls 


Roll 
01-10 
Papers 
11-20 
21-30 


Item Discovered 
Enchanted Enhancements* 


of Forms 
of Writing 


Parchments 


31-40 
41-50 
51-60 
61-70 
71-80 
Scrolls 
81-90 
91-100 
101-110 
111-120 
121-130 
131-140 
141-150 
151-160 
161-170 
171-180 
181-190 
191-200 
201-210 
211-220 
221-230 
231-240 
241-250 
251-260 
261-270 
271-280 
281-290 
291-300 
301-310 
311-320 
321-330 


of Looping 

of Monster Holding 
of Selective Reading 
Self-Protecting 

of Spell Stealing 


of Animal Growth 
Ballant’s 

of Communication 
of Creation 


of Erasing 

of Five Priest Spells 

of Five Priest Spells Il 
of Five Wizard Spells 
of Flame Magic 

of Four Illusionist Spells 
Glyph 

of Ha Rahni 

of Illumination 

of Mapping. 

of Mapping II 

of Mixed Priest Spheres Spells 


Scrolls 04-07 Admundfort of Leadership 285-287 of Feather Falling 
331-340 Mondasso’s Automated Spell 08-11 of Affliction 288-291 of Fire Resistance 
341-350 Nether 12-14 of Amasis 292-295 of Fire Starting 
351-360 of Portals 15-18 of Animal Control 296-298 of Flying 
361-370 Priest of Mixed Spheres 19-22 Animal Friendship 299-302 Flynn's of Fire 
371-380 Priest of Mixed Spheres II 23-25 Animal Magnetism 303-306 of Folly 
381-390 of Priest Spells 26-29 = Annulment 307-309 of Fortitude 
391-400 of Protection from Acid 30-33 Anything 310-313 of Free Action 
401-410 of Protection from Air 34-36 of Apathy 314-317 of Freedom 
411-420 of Protection from Baatezu 37-40 of Appearance 318-321 of Gargoyles 
421-430 of Protection from Cold 41-44 — of Aquatic Depth Location 322-324 of Genie Summoning 
431-440 of Protection from Divination 45-47 of Arachnid Control 325-328 of Glyphs i 
441-450 of Protection from Dragon 48-51 Armor of Eelix 329-332 Gold Seal of Al-Kalim 
Breath 52-55 of i 333-335 Golden of Healing 
451-460 of Protection from Earth 56-59 of Avian Control 336-339 Gordon's Magic 
461-470 of Protection from Electricity 60-62 Awareness 340-343 of the Grasshopper 
471-480 of Protection from Elementals 63-66 Bard's 344-346 Halaster’s Teleportation 
481-490 of Protection from Felines 67-70 of 347-350 of Harmlessness 
491-500 of Protection from Fire 71-73 Berronar Truesilver's Silver 351-354 of Health 
501-510 of Protection from Gas 74-77 of Detect Lies 355-357 ofthe Hierophant 
511-520 of Protection from Genies 78-81 of Thief Negation 358-361 ofthe Earth Hierophant 
521-530 of Protection from Heat 82-84 — Bladeturning 362-365 ofthe Air Hierophant 
531-540 of Protection from Illusions 85-88 Blink 366-369 ofthe Fire Hierophant 
541-550 of Protection from Lycanthropes 89-92 Blinking 370-372 ofthe Water Hierophant 
551-560 of Protection from Magic 93-95 of Boccob 373-376 Hoinbee's of Truth 
561-570 of Magical Weapons Protection 96-99 Bone 377-380 of Holiness 
571-580 of Nonmagical Weapons 100-103 Browdow’s of Weapon Harm 381-383 ofthe Holy Slayer 
Protection 104-107 B 384-387 Horned 
581-590 of Protection from Paralyzation 108-110 of Bureaucratic Wizardry 388-391 of Human Control 
591-600 of Protection from Petrification 111-114 of Cantrips 392-394 of Human Influence 
601-610 of Protection from Plants 115-118 Cat's Eye 395-398 of Hunan Influence 
611-620 of Protection from Poison 119-121 of Chameleon Power 399-402 of ice 
621-630 of Protection from Possession 122-125 of Cirulon 403-405 of Icebolts 
631-640 of Protection from 126-129  Cilidarius’s of Wizardry 406-409 of Immunity 
Shapechangers 130-132 of Clairaudience 410-413 of Impersonation 
641-650 of Protection from Spirits 133-136 of Clear Thought 414-416 of Infravision 
651-660 of Protection from Tanar'ri 137-140 of Cloaked Wizardry and 417-420 of Infravision Negation 
661-670 of Protection from Traps Invisibility 421-424 _ Intier’s of Shooting Stars 
671-680 of Protection from Mechanical 141-143 of Clumsiness 425-428 of Invisibility 
Traps 144-147 ofthe Comet 429-431 of Invisibility Negation 
681-690 of Protection from Magical Traps 148-151 Command 432-435 of Invulnerability 
691-700 of Protection from All Traps 152-154 of Continual Churning 436-439 of Izmur 
701-710 of Protection from Undead 155-158 of Contrariness 440-442 of Jasmine Odor 
711-720 of Protection from Water 159-162 of Coolness 443-446 Shessail’s Silver 
721-730 of Questioning 163-166 Corkitron’s of Human 447-450 of Jolting 
731-740 Quirks* Influence 451-453 of Jumping 
741-750 of Recovery 167-169 of Courtly Etiquette 454-457 of Keys 
751-760 of Repetition 170-173 Crius 458-461 of Kings 
761-770 of Return 174-177 Cursed of the Great Kingdom 462-464 Laduguer's 
771-780 Rhialle’s 178-180 of Curses 465-468 of 
781-790 Sand 181-184 Dalamar's of Healing 469-472 Lanolin’s of Power 
791-800 Sea 185-188 Dart 473-476 Lantern 
801-810 of Seeing 189-191 of Delusion 477-479 of Life 
811-820 of Seven Druid Spells 192-195 of Depetrification 480-483 of Life Protection 
821-830 of Seven Wizard Spells 196-199 of Disguise 484-487 of Light 
831-840 of Shelter 200-202 of Distraction 488-490 of Lighting 
841-850 of Six Priest Spells 203-206 of Dizziness 491-494 of Lighting Resistance 
851-860 of Six Illusionist Spells 207-210 of Djinni Summoning 495-498 of Limited Telepathy 
861-870 of Six Wizard Spells 211-214 Draupnir 499-501 of Liquid Identification 
871-880 of Six Wizard Spells II 215-217 Draupnir II 502-505 ofthe Little People 
881-890 Sorcerer's 218-221 of the Drow 506-509 of Lolth 
891-900 of Spell Catching 222-225 ofthe Eagle 510-512 of Lore 
901-910 ofthe Stellar Path 226-228 ofthe Ear 513-516 Lucky of the Wild Coust 
911-920 ofthe Stellar Path II 229-232 of Eelix 517-520 of Lycanthropy 
921-930 Suggestion 233-236 of Eelix Il 521-523 of Magic Detection | 
931-940 Tattoo 237-239 of Elemental Adaptation 524-527 of Magic Resistance 
941-950 of Transmutation 240-243 of Elemental Command 528-531 of Mammal Control 
951-960 of Trapping 244-247 of Earth Command 532-535 of Many Wi 
961-970 of Truth 248-250 of Air Command 536-538 of Marking 
971-980 of Wind Magic 251-254 of Fire Command 539-542 of Materialization 
981-990 Wizard 255-258 of Water Command 543-546 of Memory 
991-000 of Wizards 259-261 of Elemental Metamorphosis 547-549 Message 
262-265 of Energy 550-553 of Mind Shielding 
266-269 of ESP 554-557 Moodarvian of Sight 
Table C; Rings 270-273 of Faerie 558-560 Moodarvian of Smell 
274-276 Famulus 561-564 Moodarvian of Sound 
Roll Item Discovered 277-280 of Fashion 565-568 Moodarvian of Taste 
01-03 Enchanted Enhancements* 281-284 of Fearlessness 
1570 


a a — ES, l S.C es 


ee ee 


Rings 798-800 Samander’s 228-242 of Death 
69-571 | Moodarvian of Touch 801-804 Saurian 243-257 Diplomacy of Furyondy 
572-575 Mordmorgan’s of Warmth 805-808 of Seeing 258-272 of Distortion 
576-579 of Movement 809-811 Serten’s Spell Immunity 273-287 Diviner of Life 
580-583 Mud 812-815 of Servitude 288-303 of Divining 
584-586 of Multiple Wishes 816-822 of Shapechanging 304-318 of Dominion 
587-590 of Nature's Love 823-826 Sherry’s, of Animal Friendship 319-333 of Electrification 
591-594 of the Necromancer 827-830 Shield 334-348 of Elemental Fire 
595-597 of Neutralization 831-833 of Shocking Grasp 349-363 of Entrapment 
598-601 of the Nibelungen 834-837 of Shooting Stars 364-378 of Equestrians 
602-605 of Night 838-841 of Silence 379-393 Excellent of Engineering 
606-608 Noora’s of Djinn Summoning 842-845 of Silence Il 394-409 of Expeditious Transport 
609-612 Nuggin’s Cursed of Armoring 846-848 of Spellbattle 410-424 Extendable Hand of Enjoyment 
613-616 of Oak 849-852 of Spell Eating 425-439 of Flailing 
617-619 Onyx of Negative Plane 853-856 of Spell Holding 440-454 of Generalship 
Protection 857-859 of Spell Storing 455-469 of Glyph Creation 
620-623 of Opposition 860-863 of Spell Turning 470-484 of Health 
624-627 Orbus +1 864-867 of Stone 485-499 of Indestructibility 
628-630 Orbus +2 868-870 of Strength 500-515 of Inertia 
631-634 Orbus +3 871-874 of Survival 516-530 Iron of Parn 
635-638 of Plant Control 875-878 of Sustenance 531-545 of Justice 
639-642 of Plant Control II 879-881 of Sustenance II 546-560 of Leadership 
643-645 of Plant Control II 882-885 of Swimming 561-575 Lightning 
646-649 of Ice Paraclemental Command 886-889 Tassichoff's Magic Mouse 576-590 of Lordly Might 
650-653 of Ooze Paraelemental 890-892 of Telekinesis 591-606 Malice’s of Reincarnation 
Command 893-896 of Teleportation 607-621 of Many Things 
654-656 of Magma Paraclemental 897-900 Thal’s of Mind Shielding 622-636 of Melting 
Command 901-904 of Three Wishes 637-651 Monadic Deva 
657-660 of Smoke Paraelemental 905-907 of Three Witches 652-666 of the Monolith 
Command 908-911 of Thunder 667-681 of Onnwal 
661-664 of Phantom Form 912-915 Tika’s 682-696 of Orbs 
665-667 of the Phoenix 916-918 of Tongues 697-712 of Parrying 
668-671 of the Pomarj 919-922 of Trobriand 713-727 of Passage 
672-675 of Projection 923-926 Throbriand’s Master of the 728-742 Quirks* 
676-678 of Projection II Scaladar 743-757 Ranike 
679-682 of Protection 927-929 of Truth 758-772 of Rastinon 
683-686 of Protection from Charming 930-933 of Truth Il 773-787 of Resurrection 
687-690 of Protection from the Elements 934-937 of Truthfulness 788-802 of Rulership 
691-693 of Protection from Stone 938-940 of Truthlessness 803-818 of Security 
Guardians 941-944 ofthe Valiant 819-833 Segojan Earthcaller’s 
694-697 of Protection From Undead 945-948 of Vapors 834-848 of Singing 
698-701 — Pyros’s of Spell Storing 949-952  Varlo’s of Feather Falling 849-863 of Smiting 
702-704 of Ash, Quasiclemental 953-955 of the Vizier 864-878 of Smiting Il 
Command 956-959 of Warding 879-893 of Splendor 
705-708 of Dust, Quasielemental 960-963 of Stoneskin 894-909 of Terror 
Command 964-966 of Warmth 910-924 of Victory 
709-712 of Lightning, Quasielemtal 967-970 of Water Adaptation 925-939 of Wi 
Command 971-974 of Water Walking 940-954 of Welkwood 
713-715 of Mineral, Quasielemtal 975-977 of Water Walking II 955-969 | Whisper’s Lesser of 
Command 978-981 of Weakness Transportation 
716-719 of Radiance, Quasielemtal 982-985 White Copper of Fire 970-984 Whisper’s Greater of 
Command 986-988 of Windwarding Transportation 
720-723 of Salts, Quasielemental 989-992 of Winter $ 985-000 ofthe Wyrm 
Command 993-996 Wizzo's of Compulsions 
724-726 of Steam, Quasielemental 997-000 of X-Ray Vision 
Command Table E: Staves 
727-730 of Vacuum, Quasielemtal eS ee ee 
Command Table D: Rods Roll Item Discovered 
731-734 Ring of Quick Action 01-07 Enchanted Enhancements* 
735-738 of Quickness Roll Item Discovered Canes 
739-741 Quirks* 01-15 Enchanted Enhancements* 08-14 of Age 
742-745 ofthe Ram Moto Moto Rods 15-21 of Armament 
746-749 of Randomness 16-30 of Beguiling 22-28 of Blindness 
750-752 of Range Extension 31-45 of Concealment 29-35 of Detection 
753-756 of Rapid Regeneration 46-60 of Strength 36-43 of Stiffness 
757-760 of Readiness 61-75 ofThundering Compliance 44-50  Wemick'’s of Striking 
761-763 of Regeneration Rods Gaffs 
764-767 of Remedies 76-90 of Absorption 51-57 of Docking 
768-771 of Resistance 91-106 ofthe Aerdi Sea 58-64 of Gaffes 
772-774 of Resistance to Breath 107-121 of Alertness 65-71 Gnomewrecker 
Weapons 122-136 Bample’s of Distortion 72-79 Pharaoh's Crook 
775-778 of Reversion 137-151 of Beguiling Staves 
779-782 of Reversion II 152-166 Blackstick 80-86 — of Air and Water 
783-785 of Reversion III 167-181 of Blind Walking 87-93 Alar Ch’Aranol’s 
786-789 of Rhyming 182-188 of Building 94-100 of Aquatic Wizardry 
790-793 Rocckoe's, of Bureaucratic 189-197 of Cancellation 101-107 Arctor’s of Swarming Insects 
Wizardry 198-212 of Cancellation II 108-115 Aric’s of Power 
794-797 of Safety 213-227 of Climbing 116-122 of Battle 
1571 


| S 


Staves 
123-129 
130-136 
137-143 
144-150 
151-158 
159-165 
166-172 
173-179 
180-186 
187-194 
195-201 
202-208 
209-215 
216-222 
223-230 
231-237 
238-244 
245-251 
252-258 
259-266 
267-273 
274-280 
281-287 
288-294 
295-301 
302-309 
310-316 
317-325 
326-334 
335-343 
344-352 
353-361 
362-373 
374-381 
382-388 
389-395 
396-402 
403-409 
410-417 
418-424 
425-431 
432-438 
439-445 
446-452 
453-460 
461-467 
468-474 
475-481 
482-488 
489-496 
497-503 
504-510 
511-517 
518-524 
525-532 
533-539 
540-546 
547-553 
554-560 
561-568 
569-575 
576-582 
583-589 
590-596 
597-603 
604-611 
612-618 
619-625 
626-632 
633-639 
640-647 
648-654 
655-661 
662-668 
669-675 
676-683 
684-690 


of Battle {1 
Blackstaff 
Caduceus 

of Caracanomnos 
Catstaff 

Catstaff II 
Centeotl’s 

of Cirulon 

of Human influence 
of Mammal/Animal Control 
of Plant Control 

of Commanding 

of Conjuration 


Dionysus’s 

of Disjoining 

of Dispelling 

of Displacement 

of Divergence 
Diviner of Life 
Dolmar’s of Withering 
Druid 

of the Druids 

of an Element 

of the Elements:Earth 
of the Elements: Air 
of the Elements: Fire 
of the Elements: Water 
of Ethereal Action 

of the Fates 

Fiend 

of Flames 
Fraz-Urb-luu's 

of Fury 

Geb's Quarterstaff 

of Glyphs 

of Gnatmarsh 

of Harming 

of Healing 

of Hornwood 

Iduns 

Ixtlilton’s 


Ky Trencha Ukang 

Lao Tzu's 

of the Magi 

Magical Quarterstaff 
of Magius 

of Magius II 

of the Magius 
Meriadar’s Quarterstaff 
of Miracles 

Mirandos’s of Insect Command 
of Mishakal 

of Mishakal II 
Monkey's 

of the Moonglow 

of the Necromancer 

of Night 

of the Ninja 

Oberon’s 

of Oceans 
O-Kuni-Nushi's 

of Osiris 

Osmal’s of the Woodlands 
Panzuriel’s Quarterstaff 
Pharaoh's Ruling 

of Power 


691-697 
698-704 
705-711 
712-719 
720-726 
727-733 
734-740 
741-747 
748-754 
755-762 
763-769 
770-776 
777-783 
784-790 
791-798 
799-805 
806-812 
813-819 
820-826 
827-834 
835-841 
842-848 
849-855 
856-862 
863-869 
870-877 
878-884 
885-891 
892-898 
899-905 
906-913 
914-920 
921-927 
928-934 
935-941 
942-949 
950-956 
957-963 
964-970 
971-977 
978-985 
986-992 
993-000 


of Recording 

Reptilla’s of the Serpent 
Rheddrian’s 

Rilantaver’s 

Rohalan 

of the Sands 

of Savona 

of Scrivening 

of the Sea 

of the Serpent 
Shang-ti’s 

Lesser of Shock 
Greater of Shock 

Shou Hsing’s Walking Stick 
of Silence 

of Skulls 

Skull-Staff of Hepmonaland 
of Slinging 

Snake 

Snake II 

of Spell Focusing 

of Spheres 

Staff-Mace 

Staff-Spear 

of Strking 

of Strking and Curing 
of Stunning 

of Surprises 

of Swarming Insects 
Thoth'’s 

of Thunder & Lightning 
Ushas’s 

of Vision 

War of Nyrond 

of the White Well 

of the Winds 

of Withering 


of Wizardry 
of the Woodlands 


Table F: Wands 


Roll 
01-08 
09-17 
18-25 
26-34 
35-42 
43-51 
52-59 
60-68 
69-76 
77-85 
86-93 
94-102 
103-111 
112-119 
120-128 
129-136 
137-145 
146-153 
154-162 
163-170 
171-179 
180-187 
188-196 
197-204 
205-213 
214-222 
223-230 
231-239 
240-247 
248-256 


Item Discovered 
Enchanted Enhancements* 
Almen’s of Illumination 
of Animal Location 

of Animation 

Anything 

of Are Lightning 

of Armory 

of Armory I 

of Banishment 

of Beauty and Ugliness 
Bisselite of Peace 


of Conjuration 

of Continual Light 

of Corridors 

Dalamar'’s of Lightning 

Dark of the Sulhaut Mountains 
of Darkness 

of Death 

of Defoliation 

of Displacement 

of Earth and Stone 

of Element Transmogrification 
of Enemy Detection 

of Eyes 


257-264 
265-273 
274-281 
282-290 
291-298 
299-307 
308-315 
316-324 
325-333 
334-341 
342-350 
351-358 
359-367 
368-375 
376-384 
385-392 
393-401 
402-409 
410-418 
419-427 
428-435 
436-444 
445-452 
453-461 
462-469 
470-478 
479-486 
487-495 
496-503 
504-512 
$13-520 
521-529 
530-538 
539-546 
547-555 
556-563 
564-572 
573-580 
581-589 
590-597 
598-606 
607-614 
615-623 
624-631 
632-640 
641-649 
650-657 
658-666 
667-674 
675-683 
684-691 
692-700 
701-708 
709-717 
718-725 
726-734 
735-742 
743-751 
752-760 
761-768 
769-777 
778-785 
786-794 
795-802 


803-811 
812-819 
820-828 
829-836 
837-845 
846-854 
855-862 
863-871 
872-879 
880-888 
889-896 
897-905 
906-913 


of Fear 

of Feathers 

Fire of Suloise 

of Fire 

of Fireballs 

of Fireballs Ii 

of Flame Extinguishing 
of Fog 

of Fog Control 

of Force 


of Highfolk 

of Ice Storms 

of Illumination 

of Illusion 

Iron 

Karelia’s of Illusion 
of Knock 

of Light 

of Lightening 

of Lightning 

of Lightning Bolts 


of Magical Mirrors 

of Magic Missiles 
Meriadar's of Size Alteration 
of Metal Command 

of Metal Detection . 

of Metal and Mineral Detection 
Mirynda’s of Polymorphing 
of Misplaced Objects 
Mistletoe 

Mystic 

Nabil’s of Magic Missiles 
of Negation 

Nidus’ of Endless Repetition 
of Obliteration 

of Ochalor’s Eye 

Odin's Rune 


of Prime Material Pocket 
of Revealing 

Robin Goodfellow’s 
Runestick 

Rust 

of Salt 

Sathallarin’s of Wonder 
Scant of Storms 

of Secret Door Detection 
of Secret Door & Trap Detection 
of Secret Door and Trap 
Location 

of Size Alteration 

of Sleep 

of the Squid 

of Steam and Vapor 

of the Sun 

of Teeth 

Thithion’s of Fire 
Titania’s 

of Trap Detection 

of the Underdark 

of Viscid Globs 

of Warding 

of Water-Finding 


, a a O 


1572 


N 


O CE 


Wands 

914-922 
923-930 
931-939 
940-947 
948-956 
957-965 
966-973 
974-982 
983-990 
991-000 


of Whips 

Witch 

of Wonder 

of Wonder II 

of Wonder II 

of Wonder IV 

of Wonder V (Alternate) 
of a Wonder 

of Wondrousness 

Yatil of Zooming 


BLA Ge, SS eee 
Table G: Books 


A fewof the names in this section are 
shortened to fit the format. These titles 
may easily be found by using the index or 
searching the section applying to that par- 
ticular type book. 


Roll 
01-03 
Books 
04-07 
08-10 
11-14 
15-18 
19-21 
22-25 
26-29 
30-32 
43-36 
37-40 
41-43 
44-47 
48-50 
Librams 
$1-54 
55-58 
59-61 
62-65 
66-69 
70-72 
73-76 
77-80 
81-83 
84-87 
88-91 
92-94 
95-98 
99-101 
102-105 
106-109 
10-112 
113-116 
117-120 
121-123 
124-127 
128-131 
132-134 
135-138 
139-141 
142-145 
146-149 
150-152 
153-156 
157-160 
161-163 
164-167 
168-171 
172-174 
175-178 


Item Discovered 
Enchanted Enhancements* 


of Binding Souls 

Disks of Mishakal 
Disks of Mishakal II 

of the Enlightened Gods 
of Exalted Deeds 

of Golems 

of Mystical Equations 
of the Planes 

Ravenloft Golem 
Thuba’s of Vile Darkness 
of Twelve Seals 

of Vile Darkness 
Contracts of Nepthas 


Analect of Magic 

of the Black Heart 
Boccob’s Blessed Book 
Codex of the Infinite Planes 
of Constructs 

of Destruction 

of Evaluation 

of Gainful Conjuration 

of Golems 

Cursed of Golems 

Gollum Construckzion 
Grimoire of Archaic Alchemy 
of Identification 

of Ineffable Damnation 

of Keeping 

of Lawful Good Legends 
of Lawful Neutral Legends 
of Lawful Evil Legends 

of Neutral Good Legends 
of Neutral Legends 

of Neutral Evil Legends 
of Chaotic Good Legends 
of Chaotic Neutral Legends 
of Chaotic Evil Legends 
Libram of the Planes 
Mhzentul’s Runes 

of Ravenloft Golems 

of Recording 

of Silver Magic 

of Study (Charisma) 

of Study (Constitution) 

of Study (Dexterity) 

of Study (Intelligence) 

of Study (Strength) 

of Study (Wisdom) 
179-182 of Tedium 

183-185 of Teleportation Arches 
186-189 of Thoth 

190-192 of Translation 

193-196 of Twelve Seals 


ps 
212-214 
215-218 
219-222 
223-225 
226-229 
230-232 
233-236 
237-240 
241-243 
244-247 
248-251 
252-254 
255-258 
259-262 
263-265 
266-269 
270-273 
274-276 
277-280 


Spellboo! 
281-283 
284-287 
288-291 


292-294 
295-298 
299-302 
303-305 
306-309 


310-313 
314-316 
317-320 
321-323 


324-327 
328-331 
332-334 
335-338 
339-342 
343-345 
346-349 
350-353 
354-356 
357-360 
361-364 
365-367 
368-371 


372-374 
375-378 
379-382 


383-385 


386-389 
390-393 
394-396 
397-400 
401-404 
405-407 
408-411 
412-414 
415-418 


419-422 
423-425 
426-429 
430-433 
434-436 
437-440 
441-444 


ks 


Grim Grimoire 

of Puissant Skill at Arms 
of Stealthy Pilfering 

of Stratagems 


Dane's Version 

of Distortion 

of Illusions 

of Illusions and Secret Doors 
of Illusions and Traps 

of Magic 

of Magic and Illusions 

of Magic and Secret Doors 
of Magic and Traps 

of Mapping 

of Mapping and Illusions 

of Mapping and Magic 

of Mapping and Secret Doors 
of Mapping and Traps 

of Misleading 

of Navigation 

of Secret Doors 

of Secret Doors and Traps 

of Traps 


The Alcaister 

Alokkair's 

Alterations of the Intrinsic 
Absolutes 

Alterations of Tangibles 
Ancient Cryptomancy 
Anishta’s 

Arcanabula of Jume 

Arcane Manipulations of 
Entourage 

Arcane Puissance of Memory 
Arcane Resistance of Dwarves 
Architecture 

Art of Communications and 


Bigby’s 

Book of Black Circles 
Blessed Book of Cures 
Book of the Blind 

Bosero the Drunkard’s 
Bowgentle’s Book 

Bricks of the Spiritual 
Fortification 

Briel’s Book of Shadows 
Book of the Bright Ages 
Brother Richard the Flying 
Monk's 

Spellbook of Cabalistic Pro- 


tections 

Caddelyn’s Workbook 
Chambeeleon 

Chief Shaman’s Spellbook 
Book of Clouds and Fog 
Collapsing Spellbook 
Components of Phosphorus 


Book of the Dark Ages 
Dark Sides of the Memory 


Deep Fears of Humanity 
Detho's Libram 


445-447 
448-451 
452-455 


456-458 
459-462 
463-465 


466-469 
470-473 
474-476 
477-480 
481484 
485-487 


488-491 
492-495 
496-498 
499-502 
503-505 
506-509 
510-513 
514-516 
517-520 


521-524 


525-527 
528-531 
532-535 
536-538 
539-542 
543-546 


547-549 
550-553 
554-556 
557-560 
561-564 


565-567 
568-571 
572-575 
576-578 


579-582 
583-586 
587-589 
590-593 
594-596 
597-600 
601-604 
605-607 
608-611 
612-615 
616-618 
619-622 
623-626 


627-629 
630-633 
634-637 


638-640 


641-644 
645-647 
648-651 
652-655 
656-658 
659-662 
663-666 
667-669 
670-673 


674-677 
678-680 


Displacements and Modeling 
Dissimulation and Obscuration 
Doors and Passages Parallel 
Worlds 

Dylan Longbranch’s Spellbook 
Echo & Resonance of Great Void 
Epic Saga of the Great 
Conjurers 

Evolution of Arcane Will 
Exalted Book of Ethnic Humor 
Extreme Powers of Observation 
Eyes Vision and Arcane Sight 
Fiendomicon of Iggwilv 
Forgotten Arts Oratory 
Magnetism 

Foundations of Secret Authority 
Galadaster’s Orizon 

Gazette of the Norse Climates 
Glandar’s Grimoire 

Glanvyl's Workbook 

Glyph Spellbooks 

Great Paravisual Emanations 
Hand of Helm 

History of Evil Mages 
Apprentices 

History of Good Mages 
Apprentices 

Book of Hopeful Deeds 
Idioms & Rare Cryptographs 
Inexplicable Reflections 
Influence on Solid Corpus 
Influences and Suggestions 
Intelligence Intuitive 
Domination 

Irid Newleaf's 

Jaluster’s Orizon 

Korr's Book of Infinite Spells 
Laeral’s Libram 

Laeyndr’s Book of 
Metamorphoses 

Lareth’s 

of Lathintel 

Legendary of Great Arms 
Legendary of Phantoms and 
Ghosts 


Lexicon of Spirits 

Life of Nature Its Secrets 
Lord Yaras's 

Lore of Fiendkind 

Lore of Subtle Communication 
Luminescence and Coloration 
Mad Dog of the Desert’s 

of a Magic-User 

The Magister 

Magnetic and Electric Waves 
Manor's Manual of Sight 
Manual of Powers Beyond Life 
Mental Impressions of the 
Retina 

Minds of The Unknown 
Mordenkainen’s Spellbook 
Multiple Application 


Mylsibis's Codex of 
Contention 

Nathlum 

Nchaser’s Elyromancia 
Nonsubstance Encyclopaedia 
Book of Num the Mad 
Oerthmagik 

Occult Magnetism 

Occult Observations on Fluids 
Ordinary Necromancy 
Origins of Hour Glass 
Symbology 

Orjalun’s Arbatel 

Peregrin’s Treatise on Fixed 
Portals 


- 1573 X 
Í SEE L T ÄÄ —*="8= ns, ee 


Spellbooks 


681-684 
685-687 
688-691 
692-695 
696-698 
699-702 
703-706 
707-709 
710-713 
714-717 


718-720 
721-724 
725-728 
729-731 
732-735 
736-738 
739-742 
743-746 
747-149 
750-753 
754-757 
758-760 
761-764 
765-768 
769-771 
772-775 


776-7178 
779-782 
783-786 
787-789 
790-793 
794-797 
798-800 


801-804 


805-808 
809-811 
812-815 
816-819 
820-822 
823-826 
827-829 
830-833 


834-837 
838-840 
841-844 
845-848 
849-851 
852-855 
856-859 
860-862 
863-866 


867-869 
870-873 
874-877 
878-880 


881-884 


885-888 
889-891 


892-895 
896-899 
900-902 
903-906 
Tomes 

907-910 
911-913 
914-917 
918-920 
921-924 


Planes of Antįmatter 

Poison Pages 

Powers of the Spiritual Will 
Raistlin’s 

Raistlin’s I 

of Rathdaen 

Red Book of War 

Repertoire of Illustrious 
Repertoire of Subconscious 
Representations of Sentient 
Plane 

Riggby’s 

Runes of Norzahk 

Runes of Possession 
Sabirine’s Specular 
Scalamagdrion 

Science of Metaenchantment 1 
Science of Metaenchantment II 
Selvar’s Ineffable Conjurations 
Sakatha’s 

Serpin Lexicon 

Senshock’s 

Serinda’s 

Seven Skies of The Universe 
Shadowtome 

Shandaril’s Workbook 
Spellbook of Shangalar the 
Black 

Book of the Sighted 

Book of the Silver Talon 

Sir Celedon Kierney’s 

Sir Olwyn Forestfriend’s 
Slack’s Seamless * 
Spells Written in Code 
Spherogenesis of the 
Multiverses 

Studies on the Fourth 
Dimension 

Subconscious Repercussions 
Sublimated Oneiromancy 
Sulphur Influence and Actions 
Talel el Hareidhin’s 

Tasso’s Arcanabula 
Tharadodus’s 

Thesis on Conditional Ruptures 
Theories on Converging 
Transitions 

Theory of the Invisible Forces 
Theory of Occult Visual Shock 
Theories on Perception 

Book of Thorns 

Book of Time 

Tomorast’s 

Trance of the Intellect 
Transcendental Impenetrabilities 
Tymessul’s Enchiridion of 
Travel 

Book of Unicorns 

Unique Mageries 

Universal Astronomy 
Unknown Movements of 
Universe 

Vaerendroon’s Ineffable 
Enchants 

Vampire Book* 

Variations on the Visual 
Perception 

Weapons of the Ether 

White's Codicil 

Wizard's Workbook 
Wyvernwater Circle 


of Bodily Health 
Canon of Changes 
Canon of Changes II 
of Clear Thought 

of Dogmatic Methods 


925-928 
929-931 
932-935 
936-939 
940-942 
943-946 
947-950 
951-953 
954-957 
958-960 
961-964 
965-968 
969-971 
972-975 
976-979 
980-982 
983-986 
987-991 
992-995 
996-000 


of Dogmatic Methods IT 
E’soa Ho-chi 

of the Fool 

of Gainful Exercise 

of Garden Flowers 

of Glowing Pages 

of Hopeful Deeds 

of Hopeless Deeds 

of Humorous Perspective 
of Immoral Sanity 

of Infinite Spells 

Juia Lo’tanu 

of Leadership and Influence 
of Psionic Interaction 
of Quickness of Action 
of Saintly Sanity 

of Seven Fingers 

of Understanding 
Vacuous Grimoire 
Trimia’s Catalogue of 
Artifacts 


Table H: Gems and Jewelry 


Roll Item Discovered 
ol Enchanted Enhancements* 
Amulets 
02-03 ofthe Abyss 
04-05 Against ESP & Crystal Balls 
06-07 Against Disease 
08-09 — of Amiability 
10-11 of Arachnid Control 
12-13 Silver of the Beast 
14-15 Ivory of the Beast 
16-17 ofthe Cairn Hills 
18-19  Cartographer’s 
20-21 of Caterpillar Control 
22-23 of Charm Resistance 
24-25 of Charming 
26-27 of Cheetah Speed 
28-29 of Communication 
30-31 of Dragon Warding 
32-33 of Dramatic Death 
34-35 Draskilion’s of Life 
36-37 of Elemental Command 
38-39 of Emotions 
40-41 of Extension 
42-43 of Far Reaching 
44-45 Fiend 
46-47 of Finding 
48-49 — Furyondy’s 
50 of the Golden Collar 

51-52 Greenstone 
53-54 Hands of the Healing Spirit 
55-56 Hardwater 
57-58 Health 
59-60 Cursed Health 
61-62 ofthe Hero 
63-64 of Holy Turning 
65-66 of Hunting 
67-68 Cursed of Hunting 
69-70 of Immunity to Charm 
71-72 of Inescapable Location 
73-74 of Insect Repellency 
75-76 Kaleen’s Undead Stone 
77-78 of Lathander 
79-80 of Leadership 
81-82 of Life Protection 
83-84 of Magic Resistance 
85-86 of Metaspell Influence 
87-88 of Neutrality 
89-90 Noseeum 
91-92 Orcish 
93-94 Cursed Orcish 
95-96 Palm Sign 
97-98 of the Papyrus Scepter 


99 of Perpetual Youth 


100-101 


102-103 
104-105 
106-107 
108-109 


110-111 
112-113 


114-115 
116-117 
118-119 
120-121 
122-123 
124-125 
126-127 
128-129 
130-131 
132-133 


134-135 
136-137 
138-139 
140-141 
142-143 
144-145 
146-147 
148 
149-150 
151-152 
153-154 
155-156 
Ankhs 
157-158 
159-160 
161-162 
163-164 
165-166 
167-168 
169-170 
171-172 
173-174 
Badges 
175-176 
177-178 
Bracelets 
79-180 
181-182 
183-184 
185-186 
187-188 
189-190 
191-192 
193-194 
195-196 
Brooches 
197 
198-199 
200-201 
202-203 
204-205 
206-207 
208-209 
210-211 
212-213 
214-215 
216-217 
218-219 
Cameos 
220-221 
222-223 
224-225 
Charms 
226-227 
228-229 
230-231 
232-233 


of Perpetual Youth and 
Inexperience 

Phelthong’s 

of the Planes 

of Power 

of Proof vs. Detection and 
Location 

of Protection 

of Protection vs. Alignment 
Change 

of Protection vs, Crystal Balls 
of Protection from Good 
of Protection from Sleep 
of Protection from Turning 
of Psionic Interference 
of Psionic Reflection 

of Psychic Protection 

of Recall 

Shakti 

Shell of Protection from 
Sharks 

Shield 

of Sleeplessness 

of Spinecastle 

of the Spirit 

Thet of Ptah 

of Timekeeping 

of Transformation 

Two Fingers 

of Undersea Friendship 
of Vadarin 

Vulture 

of Weakening 


of Life 

Nithian (Ixion) 
Nithian (Kagyar) 
Nithian (Pflarr) 
Nithian (Rathanos) 
Nithian (Valerias) 
of Power 

Ra's 

True 


of Freedom 
of Monster Control 


of Charms 
Copper 
Dalamar’s 
Equus 

of Hog-Tying 
Ivy 

Medegian of Lost Ships 
Ivy of Scaly Command 
Ivy of Wishes 


Abbor Alz’s of Warning 
of Begoing 

of Bones 

Equus 

of Falling 

of Imog 

of Imog II 

Lunar 

of Number Numbing 
of Obsidian Shattering 
Pin of Communication 
of Shielding 


of Appearance 
Equus 
of Incompetence 


of Boot Restoration 
of Distraction 

of Favor 

Hunting 


= 1574 i 


ee 


308-309 
310-311 
312-313 
314-315 
316-317 


Earrings 


318-319 
320-321 
322-323 
324-325 
326-327 
328-329 
330-331 
332-333 
334-335 
336-337 
Eyes 
38-339 
340-341 
342-343 
344 

345-346 
347-348 
349-350 
351-352 
353-354 
355-356 
357-358 
359-360 
361-362 
363-364 
365-366 
367-368 
369-370 
371-372 
373-374 
375-376 


e 1575 = 


See ee 


Luck 

of Open Doors 

of Pest Protection 

of Protection from Disease 
of Protection from Fire 
of Protection from Spirits 
of Protection from Theft 
Rabbit's Foot 

of Resource 

of Sympathetic Heating 
Tree Climbing 

Wolfspaw 


Black of Aerdy 
of Blackmoor 


of Imperium 

Iron of the Bandit Kingdom 
of Leadership 

Normal Naga 

Altering Naga 

Teleporting Naga 

of Rulership 

Scorpion 

Silver of Veluna 


of Souls 

of Souls I 

of Stars 

of the Stars 

of Summation 
of the Unicorns 
Velvet 

of the Void 

of Yarus 


Abelaat 

of Awareness 

of Death Scrying 

of the Ebon Flame 
Phasing 

Signaling 

of Alignment Detection 
of Burrowing 

of Defense 

Equus 

of Paralysis 

of Protection 

of the Sea 

of Seamanship 

of Understanding 
Eidolon of Khalk’Ru 


Opal 
Black Opal II 


of Infravision 

of Leviathan 

of the Leviathan 
Magical 

Mellifleur’s Left Gem 
Mellifleur’s Right Gem 
of Minute Seeing 

of Night 


377-378 
379-380 
381-382 
383-384 
E; 

385-386 
387-388 
389-390 
391-392 

393 

394-395 


422-423 
424-425 
426-427 
428-429 
430-431 
432-433 
434-435 
436-437 
438-439 
440-441 


442 
443-444 
445-446 
447-448 
449-450 
451-452 
453-454 
455-456 
457-458 
459-460 
461-462 
463-464 


508-509 
510-511 
512-513 
514-515 
516-517 


of Petrification 
of Traldar 

of Vecna 
Winking 


of Arcanist 

of Arcanist II 

of Arcanist IIT 

of Enhanced Vision 
of Sight 

of True Seeing 
Eyepatch of Tenh 


Violet Cindergem 

Yellow Cindergem 

of Curing 

of Delusion 

Clear of Detection 

Deep Red of Detection 

Pale Blue of Detection 

Pale Green of Detection 
Pale Lavender of Detection 
Pearly White of Detection 
Pink and Green of Detection 
Pink of Detection 

Scarlet and Blue of Detection 
Vibrant Purple Prism of 
Detection 


Fire 

of Foresight 

Gamalon’s of Infravision 
of Ideas 

of Income 

of Insight 

Ionian Master 

Ionian Normal 

Jewel of Attacks 

Jewel of Attacks Upon the 
Owner 

Jewel of Flawlessness 
Jewel of Neverwinter 
Jewel of Obsession 
Karathoth’s Jewel 

Karma 

of Life 

of Magic Missile Protection 
of Musing 

Nightjewel 

Opa! of Olfactory Illusion 
of Protection 

Purple of the Vesve Forest 
of Retaliation 

of Returning 

of Scroll Reading 

of Seeing 

of Shielding 

Soul 


Khan-Pelar Star 
Mo-Pelar Star 
Shah-Pelar Star 
of Wishes 


Enlarging 

of Distant Vision 

Joal’s of Preserved Words 
Loupe of Cormac 

of Preserved Words 


Goggles 
518-519 
520-521 
Hearts 
522-523 
524-525 Chicken 
526-527 of Hearing 
528-529 Iron 
530-531 of Kazgaroth 
532-533 Lion 
534-535 Royal 
536-537 Shekinester's Crystalline 
538-539 of Stone 
Holy Symbols 
540 of Greyhawk 
541-542 Larmacian 
543-544 Celestian’s 
545-546 Fharlanghn’s 
547-548 Lathander’s 
549-550 Paladine’s 
551-552 Silvanus’s 
553-554 of Ravenkind 
555-556 of Ravenkind II 
Icons 
557-558 
559-560 
561-562 
563-564 
565-566 
567-568 


of Underwater Sight 
Troppenribb’s 


Beating 


of Chemosh 

of the Raven 

of Truth 

of Truth II 

Iron Pin of the Icy Sea 
Jacinth of Inestimable 
Beauty 

Kura the Darkness 


Book 
of Colors 
of Crumbling 
Enchanted 
of Convik Tree 
of His Tree 
of Kemis Tree 
585-586 of Mis Tree 
587-588 of Pajon Tree 

589 of Falling 
590-591 New 
592-593 
Lenses 
594-595 
596-597 
598-599 
600-601 
602-603 
604-605 
606-607 
608-609 
610-611 
612-613 
614-615 
616-617 
618-619 
620-621 
622-623 
624-625 
626-027 
628-629 
630-631 
632-633 
Lockets 
634-635 ofthe Great Kingdom 
636-637 of Love 

638 of Natasha 
Medallions 
639-640 
641-642 
643-644 
645-646 
647-648 
649-650 
651-652 


569-570 
Leaves 

571-572 
573-574 
575-576 
577-578 
579-580 
581-582 
583-584 


of Warmth 


of Activity Detection 
of Blinding 

of Charming 

of Detection 

of the Eagle 

Eye of the Eagle 
Evelyn's of Speedreading 
of Far Seeing 

of Lighting 

of Minute Seeing 

of Petrification 

of Petrification II 

of Reflection 

of Remote Viewing 
of Seeing 

of Speed Reading 
of Subtitles 

of Transformation 
of Ultravision 

of Valuation 


of the Arctic 
of Defense 


a 


Medallions Periapts 926-927 of Elemental Travel 
653-654 Holy of Almor 792-793 of Foul Rotting 928-929 ofthe Faerie 
655-656 Locke's of Thought Projection 794-795 of Health 930-931 Fiend 
657-658 of Malog 796-797 of Proof Against Poison 932 Fiend Il 
659-660 ofthe Mirror 798-799 of Proof Against Sound 933-934 Fire Pepper 
661-662 of Missile Attraction 800-801 of Prophecy Protection 935-936 of the Amber Golem 
663-664 Pax’s of Spell Exchange 802-803 of Protection vs. Vampiric 937-938 of the Bone Golem 
665-066 of Projection Ixitxachitl 939-940 of the Bronze Golem 
667-668  Soulsearcher 804-805 of Wound Closure 941-942 ofthe Obsidian Golem 
669-670 Soulsearcher II Phylacteries 943-944 of the Wood Golem 
671-672 Species Enemy 806-807 of Bravery 945-946 of the Griffon 
673-674 of Spell Exchange 808-809 of Faithfulness 947-948 Hwesta’s of Memorization 
675-676 Star of Celene 810-811 Haroistem’s of Faithfulness 949-950 of Lawfulness 
677-678 of Steadiness 12-813 of Long Years 951-952 Medicine Bundle 
679-680 of Thought Projection 814-815 of Monstrous Attention 953-954 of Memorization 
681-682 of Time 816-817 of Righteousness 955-956 Mire 
683-684 Tusmit’s Battle Crescent Prisms 957-958 Modified of Zagy 
685-686 Medicine Bundle 818-819 of Distraction 959-960 Monkey Head 
Monocles 820-821 of Greyhawk 961-962 of Orcus 

687 Fire-Eye 822-823 of Kushk 963-964 of Pure Good 
688-689 of Magic 824-825 of Light Splitting 965-966 of Rahasia 
Necklaces 826-827 Sim's of Light Splitting 967-968 Sacred Bundle 
690-691 of Adaptation 828-829 Psychometron of Nerad 969-970 of the Sphere 
692-693 of Air Breathing Scarabs 971-972 ofthe Crystal Statue 
694-695 of Almor 830-831 Benson's of Uncertain 973-974 of the Iron Statue 
696-697 of Alteration Friendship 975-976 of the Rock Statue 
698-699 of Bad Taste 832-833 of Death 977-978 of Tongues 
700-701 Cosette’s 834 of Deception 979-980 of Ultimate Evil 
702-703 of Elegance 835-836 of Enraging Enemies 981 of Zagy 
704-705 Frigga’s Black Opal 837-838 Equus Tores 
706-707 Glittering 839-840 of Golem Protection 982-983 Belenus’s 
708-709 of Greed 841-842 of Insanity 984-985 of Craftsmanship 
710-711 of Harmonia 843-844 of Life 986-987 ofthe Goddess 
712-713 of Lilith 845-846 Mark's of Protection 988-989 ofthe Gods 
714-715 Marv’s of Memory 847-848 Mazrikoth’s of Death 990-991 of the Gods II 

Displacement 849-850 Mortos’s Golem 992-993 ofthe Gods III 
716-717 of Memory Enhancement 851-852 of Pest Protection 994-995 of the Gods at the Tor 
718-719 of Missiles 853-854 of Protection 996-997 of Stability 
720-721 of Mystic Eidolons 855-856 of Protection II 998-000 Vainamoinen’s Tear 
722-723 of Night Seeing 857-858 Cursed of Protection II 
724-725 Noj’s of Not-so-Smart 859-860 of Uncertainty EL ELAS NS EE EE, 
Missiles 861-862 of Venom Table I: Clothing 

726-727 of Petrification Scepters Roll Item Discovered 
728-729 of Prayer Beads 863-864 Blast 01-06 Enchanted Enhancements* 
730-731 of Protection +1 865-866 of Defense Capes 
732-733 of Protection +2 867-868 of Entrapment 07-12 of Disguise 
734-735 of Protection Against Charm 869-870 of the Forgotten City 13-18 of Good Hope 

736 Snake 871-872 Jade of Defending 19-24 ofthe Hornet 
737-738 of Strangling 873-874 Jade of Defending Il 25-30 of Horns 
739-740 of Strangulation 875-876 of Life 31-36 Iuz’s 
741-742  Syranita’s Opal 877-878 of Light 37-42 of Protection 
743-744 of Ugliness 879-880 Plague 43-48 of Recking 
745-746 Vergadain’s 881-882 of Power 49-54 Shadow 
747-748 of Water Breathing 883 of Truth 55-60 Chaplet of Creature 
Pearls Scopes Recognition 
749-750 Black 884-885 of Celestial Analysis Cloaks 
751-752 Dragon 886-887 Red Air Quality Lens 61-66 — of Appearance 
753-754 of the Ebbing Tide 888-889 Yellow Ambient Temperature 67-73 of Arachnida 
755-756 of Entrancement Lens 74-79 = Artemus's of Displacement 
757-758 of Flying 890-891 Blue Sentient Life Lens 80-85 A ic 
759-760 Giant Black 892-893 of Seeing 86-91 Baravar Cloakshadow's 
761-762 Gold 894-895 Shard of Shielding 92-97 ofthe Bat 
763-764 Kathena’s of Wisdom 896-897 Spyglass 98-103 Battle 
765-766 of Power 898-899 Star of the Bright Desert 104-109 Bear of the Sulhaut Mountains 
767-768 of Power Il Talismans 110-115 ofthe Beguiler 
769-770 of Protection from Fire 900-901 Badger Beast 116-121 of Blackflame 
771-772 Red 902-903 Brown Bear Beast 122-127 Bolder’s of the Rogue 
773-774 ofthe Rising Tide 904-905 Deer Beast 128-133 Chameleon 
775-776 Serpent Spirit 906-907 Eagle Beast 134-140 Changeling 
777-778 ofthe Sirines 908-909 Lynx Beast 141-146 Cheetah of Amedio 
779-780 Storm Rider's 910-911 Porcupine Beast 147-152 of the Clouds 
781-782 Traveler's 912-913 Skunk Beast 153-158 of Comfort 
783-784 of Ultimate Wisdom 914-915 Wolf Beast 159-164 of Delight 

785 of Wisdom 916-917 of the Beast 165-170 Displacer 
786-787 Cursed of Wisdom 918-919 of Chaos Supreme 171-176 of Displacement 
Pendants 920-921 of the Chimera 177-182 Black Dragon 
788-789 Equus 922-923 of the Cockatrice 183-188 Blue Dragon 
790-791 Rahasia’s 924-925 of Dreams 189-194 Brass Dragon 


1576 


Ee eS 


Cloaks 
195-200 
201-207 
208-213 
214-219 
220-225 
226-231 
232-237 
238-243 
244-249 
250-255 
256-261 
262-267 
268-274 
275-280 
281-286 
287-292 
293-298 
299-304 
305-310 
311-316 
317-322 
323-328 
329-334 
335-341 
342-347 
348-353 
354-359 
360-365 
366-371 
372-377 
378-383 
384-389 
390-395 
396-401 
402-408 
409-414 
415-420 
421-426 
427-432 
433-438 
439-444 
445-450 
451-456 
457-462 
463-468 
469-475 
476-481 
482-487 
488-493 
494-499 
500-505 
506-511 
512-517 
518-523 
524-529 
530-535 
Cloth 
536-542 
543-548 
549-554 
555-560 
561-566 
567-572 
573-578 
Coats 
579-584 
585-590 
591-596 
597-602 
Dresses 
603-609 
610-615 
Furs 
616-621 
622-627 
628-633 
634-639 


Bronze Dragon 
Copper Dragon 
Gold Dragon 
Green Dragon 

Red Dragon 

Silver Dragon 
White Dragon 

of Echoes 

Elven 

Elven II 

of Elvenkind 

of Etherealness 
Fangs 

Firebane 

of Flame 

Gargoyle 

Guarding 

of Healing 

of the Hellfurnaces 
Kaldair Swiftfoot’s 
KalnaKaa’s Black 
of Lathandar 

of Lordliness 

of the Manta Ray 
of the Manta Ray II 
Mantle of Celestian 
Mantle of Mist 
Mantle of the Mundane 
of Many Colors 
Midnight Slasher's 
Mummy's Cloak 
of the One Plume 
of Passage 

of Plenty 

of Poisonousness 
of Protection 

of Reflection 
Rhun’s Horned 
Shadowcloak 
Shaman’s Mantle 
of the Shield 

of Stars Type I 

of Stars Type Il 

of Stars Type III 

of Strength 
Sumpko’s Mantle 
of Survival 

of Symbiotic Protection 
Tiger of Chalyik 
Theodolus’s of Arachnida 
of Warmth 

of Weather 

Wings of the Rakers 
White of Charming 
Wolf of Wegwiur 
Zinzerena’s 


of Cleanliness 
Merchant's 

of Perfect Fit 
of Polishing 
of Polishing II 
Shekinester’s 
Steel 


Fare’s of Protection 
Invulnerable of Arn 
Invulnerable of Arnd 
of the Seas 


of Amazement 
of Protection 


Anagakok 

of Elsewhere 

of Warmth 
Zambi’s of Warmth 


Gowns 
640-645 
646-651 
652-657 
Robes 
658-663 
664-669 
670-675 
676-682 
683-688 
689-694 
695-700 
701-706 
707-712 
713-718 
719-724 
725-730 
731-736 
737-742 
743-749 
750-755 
756-761 
762-767 
768-773 
774-779 
780-785 


Loriell’s 
Sehanine’s 
Nemean Lion Skin 


Aba of the Desert 
Aba of Displacement 
Aba of Protection 

Evil of the Archmagi 
Good of the Archmagi 
Neutral of the Archmagi 
of Blending III 

Caftan of Protection 
Diirinka’s 

of Drying 

of Eyes 

Ghastrobe 

of Holding 

H’Veyk’s of Immediate Access 
Jellaba of Concealment 
Jellaba of Eyes 
Jellaba of Scintillating Colors 
Kaftan of Ogrishness 
Marion’s of Blending 
Mellifleur’s of Stars 
of Powerlessness 
786-791 of Protection 
792-797 of Repetition 
798-803 Rock 

804-809 of Scintillating Color 
810-816 of Scintillating Colors 
817-822 of Serration 

823-828 of Stars 

829-834 Stone 

835-840 Sulmish of Magical 
Enhancement 
Tvashtri’s Golden 

of Useful Items 

of Useful Items II 

of Useless Items 

of Vanishing 

of Veluna 

of Vermin 

of Warmth 

Wizard's 

Yama’s 


841-846 
847-852 
853-858 
859-864 
865-870 
871-876 
877-883 
884-889 
890-895 
896-901 
Shirts 
902-907 
908-913 
914-919 
920-925 
926-931 
932-937 
Stockings 
938-943 
944-950 
951-956 
Tunics 
957-962 
963-968 
969-974 
Vests 
975-980 
981-986 
Vestments 
987-992 Greater of Power 
993-000 Lesser of Power 


War (AC 1) 
War (AC 2) 
War (AC 3) 
War (AC 4) 
War (AC 5) 
War (AC 6) 


of Elf Summoning 

of Mystery 

Tabard of the Mystics 
of Glory 

Wizard's 

Veil of X-ray Vision 


of Attraction 
of Missile Protection 


Table J: Boots, Gloves, and Accessories 


Roll Item Discovered 


01-05 Enchanted Enhancements* 
Anklets 

06-11 Equus 

12-17 of Growth 

18-23 of Hobbling 

24-29 of Levitation 


30-35 
36-41 
42-47 
Armbands 
48-52 
53-58 
59-64 
65-70 
71-76 
77-82 
83-88 
89-94 
Bands 
95-99 
100-105 
106-111 
112-117 


of Sinking 
of Sure Footing 
of Walking 


of Comfort of Sleep 
of Death 

of Healing 

of Salutation 

of Snake Changing 
of Strength 
Trueheart’s Warding 
of Variable Strength 


of the Arachnid 

of Bird Restraint 
of Denial 

Familiar Protection 
Enhancement 

Iron of Bilarro 

of Might 

of the Serpent 


118-123 
124-129 
130-135 
Boots 

136-141 
142-147 
148-152 
153-158 
159-164 
165-170 
171-176 
177-182 


of Attraction 

of Balance 

of Carrying 

of Cleanliness 

of Cloudwalking 

of Comfort 

of Concealing 

Cyria’s Winged 

183-188 of Dancing 

189-194 Deceptor's 

195-199 Elven 

200-205 Elven II 

206-211 of Elvenkind 

212-217 of Feather Falling 

218-223 Featherweight 

224-229 of Gentle Thievery 
230-235 of Gentle Thievery II 
236-241 of Jogging 

242-246 of Levitation 

247-252 Loki’s 

253-258 Midnight Slasher’s 

259-264 Moccasins of Free Movement 
265-270 ofthe North 

271-276 of Pinching 

277-282 Runjoye’s Winged 
283-288 Shalandain’s of Starstriding 
289-294 of Speed 

295-299 Spider's of Stealth 

300-305 of Star Striding 

306-311 of Stomping 

312-317 of Striding and Springing 
318-323 of Tracks 

324-329 of Traveling and Leaping 
330-335 of Varied Tracks 

336-341 Winged 

Bracers 
342-346 
347-352 
353-358 
359-364 
365-370 
371-376 
377-382 
383-388 
389-393 
394-399 
400-405 
406-411 
412-417 
418-423 
Claws 
424-429 
430-435 
436-441 
442-446 
447-452 


of Archery 

of Attraction 

of Blasting 

of the Blinding Strike 
of Brachiation 

of Brandishing 

of Cleanliness 

of Defense 

of Defenselessness 
of Deflection 

of Invulnerability 

of the Mermen 
Noj’s of Brandishing 
Phandoorl’s 


of Magic Stealing 

of Nezram 

Noj’s of Magic Exchange 
Talon of the Danse Macabre 
Talon of Zaltec 


nd eae: 


1577 


SO ee 


Claws 
453-458 
459-464 
Collars 
465-470 
471-476 
477-482 
483-488 
489-493 
494-499 
500-505 
506-511 
Gauntlets 
§12-517 
518-523 
524-529 
530-535 
536-540 
541-546 
547-552 
553-558 
559-564 
565-570 
571-576 
577-582 
583-588 
589-593 
594-599 
600-605 
606-611 
612-617 
618-623 
624-629 
630-635 
636-640 
641-646 
647-652 
653-658 
659-664 
665-670 
Gloves 
671-676 
677-682 
683-687 
688-693 
694-699 
700-705 
706-711 
712-717 
718-723 
724-729 
730-735 
736-740 
741-746 
747-752 
753-758 
759-764 
765-770 
771-776 
777-782 
783-787 
788-793 
794-799 


800-805 
806-811 
Hands 

812-817 
818-823 
824-829 
830-834 
835-840 
841-846 
847-852 
853-858 
859-864 


Peglegs 
865-870 


Twisted 
Cleats of Gripping 


of Change 
of Charisma 
of Disguise 
of Protection 
of Stiffness 
of Strangling 
of Tusmit 
Wolf 


Claw of the Bear 
Clawed 

Climbing 

of Dexterity 

of Dexterity II 

of Entrapment 

Fire Claws 

Fjalar's 

of Fumbling 
Glim-Gauntlet 

Hand of Remote Action 
of Heat 

of Holding 

Iron of Urnst 

of Might 

of Moander 

of Ogre Power 

of Ogre Power II 

of Polishing 

of Proficiency 

Razor Claws of Chakyik 
of Specialization 

of Sticking 

of Super Strength 

of Swimming and Climbing 
of Tamus 

of the Valorous 


Black Hand 

Claws of Raking 
Cosmetology 

of Evasion 

of the Feline (LG) 
of the Feline (LN) 
of the Feline (LE) 
of the Feline (NG) 
of the Feline (N) 

of the Feline (NE) 
of the Feline (CG) 
of the Feline (CN) 
of the Feline (CE) 
Fist 

Golden 

Helping Hand 

of Interception 

of Lightning 

of Missile Snaring 
of the 

Reglar’s of Freedom 
Reglar’s of Freedom From 
Magic 

of Thievery 

Thor's Magical of Power 


Balacer's 

of Harrowing 
Helping 

Holy of Bane 
Tomorast’s Left 
Tomorast’s Right 
of Vecna 
Wonderful 

Heel of Reunion 


of Immurk the Invincible 


871-876 
Shoes 

877-882 
883-887 
888-893 
894-899 
900-905 
906-911 
Slippers 
912-917 
918-923 
924-929 
930-934 
935-940 
941-946 
947-952 
953-958 
959-964 
965-970 
971-976 
977-981 
982-987 


Socks 
988-993 
994-000 


of Walking 


of Fharlanghn 
Hefiz’s Superb Shiny 
Iron of Vidar 
Sandals of Speed 

of White Bronze 
Woodland 


Bahija’s of Spider Climbing 
of Dancing 

Dragon 

of Drinking 

Ebomara's of Spider Climbing 


of Spider Climbing 
Snowshoes of Speed and 
Traveling 


of Dryness 
of Sweating 


Table K: Girdles and Helmets 


99-104 
105-110 
Buckles 
111-116 
117-122 
123-127 
128-133 
134-139 
140-145 
Caps 
146-151 
152-156 
157-162 
163-168 
169-174 
175-180 
181-185 
186-191 
192-197 
198-203 
204-209 
Circlets 
210-214 
215-220 
221-226 
227-232 
233-238 
239-244 
245-249 


Item Discovered 
Enchanted Enhancements* 


Arcane 

Black Elk Clan Ceremonial 
Blue Elk Clan Ceremonial 
Golden Elk Clan Ceremonial 
Green Elk Clan Ceremonial 
Red Elk Clan Ceremonial 
White Elk Clan Ceremonial 
of Goblinoid Protection 
Golden Serpent 
Lemmikainen’s 
Meginjarder 

Serpé's of Swimming 
Serpent 

Snake 

Udo's of Flying 
Vainamoinen's 

Zoster of Zeal 

Zoster of Zoophobia 


of Armor 

of Faulty Lockpicks 
of Lockpicks 

of Opening 

of Protection 

of Weaponry 


of the Beguiler 
Cursed School 
Dream of Veluna 
of Evil 

Healing of Veluna 
Nightcap of Sleep 
Nightcap of Vision 
School 

of Sleep 

of Teleportation 
of Vision 


of the Adder 

Coronet of Communication 
Dalvan’s 

Diadem of Disenchantment 
Diadem of Doom 

Golden 

Golden of Greyhawk 


250-255 
256-261 
262-267 
268-273 
Girdles 
274-278 
279-284 
285-290 
291-296 
297-302 
303-307 
308-313 
314-319 
320-325 
326-331 
332-336 
Hats 
337-342 
343-348 
349-354 
355-360 
361-366 
367-371 
372-377 
378-383 


of Psionic Enhancement 
of Underwater Speech 
of the Wyrm 

Cowl of Warding 


of Back Defense 

of Dwarvenkind 

of Femininity/Masculinity 
of Freshness 

of Gender Alteration 
of Giant Strength 
Golden of Urnst 
Kerisis’s of Femininity 
of the Lions 

of Many Pouches 

of Priestly Might 


of Disguise 

of Disguise II 

of Disguise III 
Fez of Disguise 
of Fools 
Gnaash’s of Stupidity 
of Hairiness 

of Hairlessness 
of Headlessness 
of Holding 

of Imprisonment 
of Occupation 
of Stupidity 


Headbands 


436-441 
442-447 
448-453 
Helmets 
454-458 
459-464 
465-470 
471-476 
477-482 
483-488 
489-493 
494-499 
500-505 
506-511 
512-517 
518-522 
523-528 
529-534 
535-540 
541-546 
547-551 
552-557 
558-563 


of the Corusk Mountains 

of the Jotens 

Headdress of Peaceful Contact 
of Alignment Change 
Athena's 

of Blonding 

of Brilliance 

of Cirulon 

of Comprehending Languages 
of Creation 

of Darkness 

of Disguises 

of Dragons 

Dragonhelm 

Enlil’s 

Golo’s of Telepathy 

Griffon Mane 


Joukahainen’s Golden 
of Liaison 

of Light Seeing 

of Opposite Alignment 
of Reading 


Skull of Death 
of Subterranean Sagacity 
of Telepathy 
of Teleportation 
of Underwater Action 
of Underwater Vision 
of Valor 
of Wi 
of 40 Watt Brilliance 
of Weaponry 

im 
Hood of Servitude 


= 1578 ` 


a S S E 


_ a ee 


Masks 

674-679 
680-685 
686-691 
692-697 
698-703 
704-708 
109-714 
715-720 
721-726 
727-732 
733-737 


738-743 
744-749 


750-755 
756-761 
762-766 
167-772 
173-778 
779-784 
785-790 
791-795 
796-801 
802-807 
808-813 
814-819 
820-825 
826-830 
831-836 
837-842 
843-848 
849-854 
855-859 
860-865 
866-871 
872-877 
878-883 
884-888 
889-894 
895-900 
901-906 
907-912 
913-917 
918-923 
924-929 
930-935 
936-941 
942-947 
Sashes 

948-952 
953-958 
959-964 
965-970 
971-976 
Turbans 
977-981 
982-987 
988-993 
994-000 


ee eae 
Table L: Bags, Barrels, Bottles, and Basins 


Roll 
01-03 
Bags 
04-07 
08-11 
12-15 
16-19 
20-23 
24-27 
28-31 
32-35 
36-39 


"a ae 


Te ee ee ee 


Air 

of Attractiveness 
of Combat 

of Comedy 

Death 

Death of Ptah 

of Disguise 

of Disguise II 
Faceless 

Fanged 
Greenmask with Eyes of 
Charming 
Greenmask with Eyes of the 
Eagle 

Greenmask with Gaze 
Reflection 

Normal Greenmask 
Horned 

of Jealousy 
Johydee’s 

of Knowledge 
Kyrie’s of Disguise 
of Light 

of Lycanthus 
Magemask 

of Magic 

Magical 

of Memory 

Mirror 

Monster 

of Night 

of Protection 

of Scowling 

of Silence 

of Silence II 

Skull 

Skull II 

of Smiling 

Spirit 

of Stealth 

of Stealth II 

of Tragedy 

of Trickery 

of Twilight 

Veil 

of Winds 

of Winds II 
Winged 

Winged II 

of the Wraith 


of Fire Resistance 

of Heat Endurance 

of Immolation 
Shimmering 

Scarf of the Dry Steppes 


Feather 

of Multiplication 
of Silence 

of Tusmit 


Item Discovered 
Enchanted Enhancements* 


Backpack of Holding 

of Beans 

of Beans II 

Beltpouch of Disappearance 
of Bones 

Bucknard’s Everfull Purse 
of Devouring 

Devouring Pouch 

of Duplication 


40-43 
44-47 
48-51 
52-55 
56-58 
59-62 
63-66 
67-70 
71-74 


75-78 
79-82 
83-86 
87-90 
91-94 
95-98 
99-102 
103-106 
107-110 
111-113 
114-117 
118-121 
122-125 
126-129 
130-133 
134-137 


138-141 
142-145 
146-149 
150-153 
154-157 
158-161 
162-165 
166-168 
169-172 
173-176 
177-180 


Barrels 
181-184 
185-188 
189-192 
193-196 
197-200 
201-204 
Basins 
205-208 
209-212 
213-216 
217-220 
221-224 
Beakers 
225-227 
28-231 
232-235 
Bottles 
236-239 
240-243 
244-247 
248-251 
252-255 
256-259 
260-263 
264-267 
268-271 
272-275 
276-279 
280-282 
283-286 


303-306 
307-310 


Ever-Full of Seeds 

of Eyes 

Feedbag of Plenty 

Food Pouch 

Henry’s Carpetbag of Holding 
Heward’s Handy Haversack 
of Holding 

of Infinite Wealth 

Jasper Thunderhand’s 
Haversack 

Kangaroo Pouch 

Khalid’s Pouch of Accessibility 
of Many Bags 

Nithian Saddlebags 

Noj’s of Misplacing 

Pictish of Fiends 

of Plenty 

Protection Pouch 

Pouch of Accessibility 
Pouch of Holding 

of Returning 

Pouch of Security 

Seed Satchel 

Silent Purse 

Skain’s Satchel 

Sleeping Bag of Armor 
Nullification 

of Teleportation 

of Transmuting 

of Traveling 

of Tricks 

of Useful Items 

of Vanishing 

of Wind 

Wind Pouch 

of the Woodlands 

Zadron’s Pouch of Wonders 
Zagyg’s Spell Component 
Pouch 


of Hiding 

Itzpixe’s Collapsible 
Neverending of Grog 
Neverending of Salt Pork 


of Poverty 
of Rolling 


of the CG Angel 

of the LG Angel 

of the NG Angel 

of Hidden Dangers 
Basket of Devouring 


of Cures 
of Plentiful Potions 
Bedroll of Dryness 


Brazen 

of Containment 
Efreeti 

of Evaporation 
Eversmoking 
of Fireflies 
Graffiti 

of Pleasant Odors 
of Preservation 
of Refreshment 
Safety 
Temperature 
Thought 
Thuba’s Efreeti 
of Trapping 
Undead 


of Blood 

Calabash of Plenty 

of Commanding Water 
Elementals 


1579 


311-314 
315-318 
319-322 
Boxes 

323-326 
327-330 
331-334 
335-337 
338-341 
342-345 
346-349 


of Delicacies 
of Ship Sinking 
of Watery Death 


Burglar Detection 
Dead 


of Delightful Transports 
Dido's Flatbox 

Face of Xenous 

Flatbox 

Goerl’s Tackle and Portable 
Canoe 

350-353 of Heating 

354-357 Ice 

358-361 of Many Holdings (1x1x1) 
362-365 of Many Holdings (2x2x2) 
366-369 of Many Holdings (3x3x3) 
370-373 of Many Holdings (4x4x4) 
374-377 of Many Holdings (5x5x5) 
378-381 of Message Sending 
382-385 Money Changer 

386-389 Mystical Brown Coating 
390-393 Ohm's Black 

394-396 of Preservation 

397-400 of Preservation II 
401-404 Rudra’s of Cloning 
405-408 — Strongbox of Immobility 
409-412 Tamate-Bako 

Braziers 
413-416 of Commanding Fire 
Elementals 

Hu’i Wing 

of Sleep Smoke 

Bucket of Fire Snuffing 


417-420 
421-424 
425-428 
Cabinets 
429-432 
433-436 
437-440 
441-444 
Cages 
445-448 
449-451 
452-455 
456—459 
Cans 
460—463 
464—467 
468-471 
472-475 
476-479 
480-483 
484-487 
Canisters 
488-491 
492-495 
Canteens 
496-499 
500-503 
504-506 
Cases 
507-510 
511-514 
515-518 
519-522 
523-526 


of Air Restoration 
H’ Veyk’s Cavernous 
of Ministering 

of Security 


of Carrying 
of Entrapment 
of Shelter 
String 


of Cant 

of Moonlight 

of Preserving 

of Spinach 

of Worms 
Zwann'’s Irrigation 
Zwann’s Watering 


of Condiments 
of Curses 


of Coolness 
Erdlu 
of Purification 


of Compression 

Exalted Component 

of Document Transmission 
of Scroll Holding 

Tenser’s Portmanteau of 
Frugality 

Casks 
527-530 
531-534 
Cauldrons 
535-538 
539-542 
543-546 
547-550 
551-554 
555-558 
559-561 
562-565 


Everfull 
of the Wind Spy 


of Ambrosia 
Archdruid 

of Blindness 

of Creatures 

of Doom 

of Entrancement 
of Foretelling 
of Fresh Water 


Se 


Cauldrons 
566-569 
570-573 
574-577 
578-581 
582-585 
586-589 
590-593 
594-597 
598-601 
Censers 
602-605 
606-609 
610-613 
614-617 


of Healing 
of Heating 


of Restoring Freshness 
Warming 
Cegilune’s Iron Pot 


of Conduct 

of Controlling Air Elementals 
of Controlling Air Elementals Il 
of Summoning Hostile 
Elementals 

618-620 of Thaumaturgy 
Chatices 
621-624 
625-628 
629-632 
633-636 
637-640 
641-644 
645-648 
649-652 
653-656 
657-660 
661-664 
665-668 
Chests 
669-672 
673-675 
676-679 
680-683 
684-687 
688-691 
692-695 
Coffins 
696-699 
700-703 
704-707 
Containers 
708-711 
712-715 
716-719 
720-723 
Decanters 
724-727 
728-730 
731-734 
735-738 
739-742 


of Colors 

of Continual Water 
of Detection 
Eucharistic 

Holy Grail 

of Identification 
of Irreversibility 
of Liquid Food 

of Planar Travel 

of Poison 

of the Shield Lands 
Silver 


of Drawers 

Foot Stool 
Oyster 
Quartermaster’s 
of Sieges 
Cursed of Sieges 
of Zorathus 


Casket of Furyondy 
of Creation ` 
Crystal 


Fireproof 

Watertight 

Crucible of Melting 
Cup of Wine 


Carrague's of Endless Steam 
of Endless Water 

of Endless Water II 
Disintegration Chamber 
Extradimensional Safe 


of Dragons 
of Dimunition 
Zagyg's Flowing 


Flagons 
743-746 
747-750 
751-754 
Flasks 
755-758 
759-762 
763-766 
767-770 
771-774 
Goblets 
775-778 
779-782 
783-786 
787-789 
790-793 
794-797 
798-801 
Horns 
802-805 
806-809 
810-813 
814-817 
Jars 
818-821 


Copper 
of Curses 
Iron 


Iron of Tuerny the Merciless 
Vapor 


of Glory 

of the Great Kingdom 
Leomund’s 

Manas of Sleep 
Manas of Death 
Manas of Fixation 
Hold of Holding 


Cornucopia 

Ngona of Fire Resistance 
Ngona of Silent Moving 
Ngona of Underwater Breathing 


Borieflin’s of Steam 


ee ee ee 


822-825 
826-829 
Jugs 
830-833 
834-837 
838-841 
842-844 
845-848 
849-852 
853-856 
Kettles 
857-860 
861-864 
865-868 
869-872 
873-876 
877-880 
Mugs 
881-884 
885-888 
889-892 
Pitchers 
893-896 
897-899 
900-903 
Prisons 
904-907 
908-911 
912-915 
916-919 
Scabbards 
920-923 
924-927 
Sheaths 
928-931 
932-935 
936-939 
940-943 


tubs 

944-947 
948-951 
952-954 
955-958 
959-962 
963-966 
Urns 

967-970 
971-974 
975-978 
979-982 
983-986 
987-990 
991-994 
995-000 


of Comprehension 
of Preserving 


Alchemy 
Amorpha — 
Red of Dyeing 
Blue of Dyeing 
of Jade 


of Jesting 
Louie Dulama’s Alchemy 


of Breathing 

of Drumming 

Everbountiful Soup 

of Fish 

Mithryl’s Everbountiful Soup 
Leomund’s Labile Locker 


Leomund’s 


of Plenty 
of Warming 


of Blending 
of Continuous Water 
Portable Hole 


Castellan’s Magical 
Genie 

of Zagig 

of Zagyg 


of Holding 
of Poison 


of Frogs 
of Smaliness 
Zadore’s Poison 


Sleeping Bag of Armor 
Nullification 


of Fat 

of Lard 
Bathtub 

of Sailing 
Taryn's 

of Washing 


of Ashes 

of Awakening 

of Curses 

of Hindsight 

of Water Purification 
Vampire Sheath 

Vial of Durance 
Waterskin of Pouring 


Table M: Dust and Stones 


Roll 
01-02 
Air Spores 
03-04 
05-06 
Apples 
07-09 
10-11 
Beads 
12-13 
14-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-25 
26-27 
28-29 
30-32 
33-34 


Item Discovered 
Enchanted Enhancements* 


Glass 
of Oblivion 
Pearl 


of Atonement 


of Damnation 
of Hindrance 


1581 


78-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-87 
88-89 
90-91 
Candles 
92-93 
94-96 
97-98 
99-100 
101-103 
104-105 
106-107 
108-109 
110-112 
113-114 
115-116 
117-119 
120-121 
122-123 
124-125 
126-128 
129-130 
131-132 
133-135 
136-137 
138-139 
140-141 
142-144 
145-146 
147-148 
149-151 
152-153 
154-155 
156-158 
159-160 
161-162 
163-164 
165-167 
168-169 
170-171 
172-174 
175-176 
177-178 
179-180 
Cheeses 
181-183 
184-185 
186-187 
Dust 
188-190 
191-192 
193-194 
195-196 
197-199 
200-201 


of Karma 

of Response 

of Succor 

of Prayer I 

Bean of Ooze Slime and Jelly 


Fireberries 
Magical 


of Animation 
of Bruising 


Clapper 

Hatchling Dragon 
Very Young Dragon 
Young Dragon 
Juvenile Dragon 
Young Adult Dragon 
Adult Dragon 
Mature Adult Dragon 
Old Dragon 

Very Old Dragon 
Venerable Dragon 
Wyrm Dragon 

Great Wyrm Dragon 
of Slaying 

of Turning 
Buttercup's Bouquet 


Black 
Blinking 
Blue 

of Brilliance 


Exploding 
Fireball 

Flame 

Flame Arrow 
Flame Blade 
Gold 

of Invocation 
Methven 

Noora's of Propitiousness 
of Powerlessness 
of Propitiousness 
of Protection 

of Protection II 


Pyrotechnic 
Red 
Reflection 


Sanctuary 
Shielding 
Smoke Detection 
of Spells 
Survival 

of Transference 
Unfailing Light 
of Vapors 
Visibility 
Yellow 

of Odors 


of Vile Odors 
Coal of Warmth 


Dust 

202-203 
204-206 
207-208 
209-210 
211-212 
213-215 
216-217 
218-219 
220-222 
223-224 
225-226 
227-229 
230-231 
232-233 
234-235 
236-238 
239-240 
241-242 
243-245 
246-247 
248-249 
250-251 
252-254 
255-256 
257-258 
259-261 
262-263 
264-265 


Eggs 

266-267 
268-270 
271-272 
273-274 
275-277 
278-279 
280-281 
282-283 
284-286 
287-288 
289-290 
291-293 
294-295 
296-297 
298-299 
300-302 
303-304 
305-306 
307-309 
310-311 
312-313 
314-316 
317-318 
319-320 
321-322 
323-325 
326-327 
328-329 
330-332 
333-334 
335-336 
337-338 
339-341 
342-343 
344-345 
346-348 
349-350 
351-352 
353-354 
355-357 
358-359 
360-361 
362-364 
365-366 
367-368 
369-370 
371-373 


of Blending 


Green Sleeping 

of Illusion 

Leech 

Malto’s of Mind Dulling 
of Mind Dulling 


jeep 

Small Bird Repulsion Dust 
Sneezing 

Sneezing II 


Cloudkill 

of Desire (Black) 
of Desire (Bone) 
of Desire (Crystal) 
of Desire (Golden) 


of Hatchling Dragon Breath 
of Very young Dragon Breath 
of Young Dragon Breath 

of Juvenile Dragon Breath 

of Young adult Dragon Breath 
of Adult Dragon Breath 

of Mature adult Dragon Breath 
of Old Dragon Breath 

of Very Old Dragon Breath 
of Venerable Dragon Breath 
of Wyrm Dragon Breath 

of Great Wyrm Dragon Breath 
Dreamhold 

Egg of Fascination 

Flame 

Fog Cloud 

Golden 

Gold of Ghastar 

Obsidian of Ghastar 

Gold of Ghastar 

Silver of Ghastar 


Gray 

Guardian 
Hard-Boiled 
Imprisonment 
Incubalum 
Khenel’s Philosopher's 
Mishakal’s Token 
Multicolor 
Philosopher's 

of the Phoenix I 
Pink 

of Reason 

Rotten 

of Shattering 
Shell of Protection 


374-375 
376-377 


378-380 
381-382 
383-384 
385-387 


388-389 
390-391 


392-393 
394-396 


397-398 


415-416 
417-419 
420-421 
Fingers 
422-423 
424-425 
426-428 
429-430 
431-432 
433-435 
436-437 
Incense 
438-439 
440-441 
442 444 


454-455 


507-508 
509-510 
511-512 
513-515 
516-517 
518-519 
520-522 
523-524 
525-526 
527-528 
529-531 
532-533 


Shell of Protection vs. Birds 
Shell of Protection vs. 

ons 
Shell of Protection vs. Evil 
Shell of Protection vs. Fiends 
Shell of Protection vs. Good 
Shell of Protection vs. 
Humanoids 
Shell of Protection vs. Humans 
Shell of Protection vs. 
Ly 
Shell of Protection vs. Planars 
Shell of Protection vs. 
Scalekind 
Shell of Protection vs, Undead 


Feathertoken 

Lapland 

Plumalitter 

Quaal’s Tokens 

Quaal’s Mystical Token 


of Commanding 

of the Master Thief 
Thumb of the Master Thief 
Fingernail of Rending 
Four-Leaf Clover 

Gas of Dreadful Sleep 
Grains of Discomfort 


Balian’s Yellow 
Blue-Green Spindle 
Brass Lozenge 

Bright Silver Cylinder 
Bright White Rectangle 
Brown Rhomboid 
Cerulean Blue Rhomboid 
Clear Pink Sphere 

Clear Prism 


Sphere 
Flickering White Snowflake 
Gold Ellipsoid 
Green Sphere 
Incandescent Blue Sphere 
Light Blue Prism 
Maroon Star 


Pink Ellipsoid 

Pink & Green Ellipsoid 
Puce Cube 

Pulsing Red Star 

Pure White Octahedron 


Soft Black Rectangle 
Yellow Sphere 
Kulver-Tam’s Fruit of Healing 


Marbles 
534-535 
536-538 
539-540 
541-542 
543-545 
546-547 
Pies 

548-549 
550-551 
552-554 
555-556 
Powders 
557-558 
559-561 
562-563 
564-565 
566-567 
568-570 
571-572 
573-574 
575-577 
578-579 
580-581 
582-583 
584-586 
587-588 
589-590 
591-593 
594-595 
596-597 
598-599 
600-602 
603-604 
605-606 
607-609 
610-611 
612-613 
614-616 
617-618 
619-620 
621-622 
623-625 
626-627 
628-629 
630-632 
633-634 
635-636 
637-638 
639-641 
642-643 
644-645 
646-648 
649-650 
651-652 
653-654 
655-657 
658-659 
660-661 
662-664 
665-666 
667-668 
669-670 
671-673 
674-675 


Cat's Eye 
of Cleanliness 
Granite 


of Four-and-Twenty Blackbirds 
of Raspberries 

Rhubarb 

Plumastone 


Absinthe 
African Ju Ju 
Allspice 
Allspice II 


of the Black Veil 
Bottom #20 
Bruno's Curse 
Buddha Type 1 
Buddha Type II 
Buddha Type III 
Bull's 
Carnation 
Chocolate 
Citronella 

Civet 


Confusion 
Conquering Glory 
Controlling 


Dragon's Blood 


Dream 
Dypshez’s of the Black Veil 
Elixir 


Five Finger Grass 
Frangi Pani 
Galangale’s 
Gardenia 
Getaway’s 

Good Taste 


Grape 

Powder of the Hero's Heart 
High Conquering 

High John the Conqueror's 
Hindu Grass 

Honeysuckle 

Hypnotic 


Hysspo 
Powder of Images 


-- a_i 


1582 


SEE _ ee 


Powders 
706-707 
708-709 
710-712 
713-714 
715-716 
717-719 
720-721 
722-723 
724-725 
726-728 
729-730 
731-732 
733-735 
736-737 
738-739 
740-741 
742-744 
745-746 
747-748 
749-751 
752-753 
154-755 
756-757 
758-760 
761-762 
763-764 
765-767 
768-769 
770-771 
172-774 
775-776 
777-778 
779-780 
781-783 
784-785 
786-787 
788-790 
791-792 
793-794 
795-796 
797-799 
800-801 
802-803 
804-806 
807-808 
809-810 
811-812 


827-828 
829-831 
832-833 
Roses 

834-835 
836-838 


852-854 
855-856 
857-858 
859-861 
862-863 
864-865 
866-867 
868-870 


Jamaica 

Jezebel 

Jinx Removing 
Kludde 

Lavender 

Life 

Lily of the Valley 
of Magic Detection 
Magnolia 


New life 


Primrose 

Purification 

Puchezma’s of Edible Objects 

Purwuvok's of the Hero's Heart 
irk’ 


yz 
Ylang Ylang 
Zodiac 


Zula Zula 
Puppy Putty 
Rakasta Tea 


Death of the Darad S'tin 
Kereenyaga 
Pet 


of Eternal Slumber 

Wreath of Roses of Eternal 
Slumber 

Bush of Roses of Eternal 
Slumber 

of Ravenloft 

of Forgetfulness 

Sand of Truth 


Dragon Lily 

Enchanted Cherry Pits (Brown) 
Enchanted Cherry Pits (Gold) 
Enchanted Cherry Pits (Red) 
Fireseed 

of Growth 

Damage Curing 

Disease Curing 

Normal 

Sun 


871-872 
873-874 
Smoke 
875-877 
878-879 
Soaps 
880-881 
882-883 
Stones 
884-886 
887-888 
889-890 
891-893 
894-895 
896-897 
898-899 
900-902 
903-904 
905-906 
907-909 
910-911 
912-913 
914-916 
917-918 
919-920 
921-922 
923-925 
926-927 
928-929 
930-932 
933-934 
935-936 


Trollflower 
of Wealth 


of Fire Quenching 
Sleep 


of Abrasion 
of Washing 


Beauregard's Beautiful Bauble 
Bimbomushi 

Bloodstone of Fistandantilus 
Chardalyn 

of Cold Immunity 

of Continual Light 

of Controlling Earth Elementals 
Coruskian 


of Good Luck 

of Gul and Thiondar 
Honing 

Myste’s of Mixed Luck 
of Mysterious Sounds 
Nanorion 

Oval of Tzolo’s Guardian 
Philosopher's 
Philosopher's II 

of Sampling 

937-938 of Shielding 

939-941 of Silence 

942-943 Spongestone 

944-945 Travel 

946-948 Wardstone 

949-950 Warfu 

951-952 of Warmth 

953-954 of Weight 

955-957 of the Well 

958-959 
960-961 
Tarts 
962-964 
965-966 
967-968 
969-970 
Tooth 
971-973 
974-975 
976-977 
Waxes 
978-980 
981-982 
983-984 
985-986 
987-989 
990-991 
Weeds 
992-993 
994-996 
997-000 


of a Summer's Day 
Thorn of Sleep 


of Dahlver-nar 


Dragon 
Sweet 


of Careful Hearing 
Ceiling 

of Fabrication 

of Hearing 
Sealing 

of Waning 


Rapture : 
of the Witch 
Zwicback of Zymurgy 


ee a 
Table N: Household Items 
Roll 


Item Discovered 
ol Enchanted Enhancements* 

02-03 Abacus of Calculation 
Anvils 

04-05 High of the Dwarves 

06-07 Iron of the Armies 

08-09 ofthe Lortmil Mountains 
Aprons 

10-11 of Comfort 

12-13 Flandal Steelskin’s 

14-15 Leather 

16-17 Arabel’s Huggable Bear 


18-19 Armor Bath 
Art 
20-21 Blue on Bronze 
22-23 Dragonnel-by-the-Cliff 
24 The Gladiators 
25-26 Glorindel's Gates 
27-28 — Glorindel’s Living Painting 
29-30 — Igraine’s Portrait 
31-32 —_ Norval's Timely Portrait 
33-34 Pigments of Longevity 
35-36 Portraiture by Magic 
37-38 The Watchers 
39-40 Widow's Walk 
Awls 
41-42 Full 
43-44 of Hole Punching 
45-46 Inn 
47-48 Mess 
Balance Scales 
49 of Conversion 
50-51 of Harmony 
52-53 of Judgment 
54-55 _ of Power 
Banners 
56-57 of Attraction 
58-59 of Bravery 
60-61 Cursed 
62-63 Dragon Flag 
64-65 of Ferocity 
66-67 Flag of Untrue Colors 
68-69 Flying 
70-71 of Friendship 
72 Holy 
73-74 of Insults 
75-76 Law's 
77-78 Magic Shield 
79-80 Pennant of Bravery 
81-82 of Privacy 
83-84 of Protection 
85-86 of Protection II 
87-88 of Renown 
89-90 of Terror 
91-92 Zen's 
Beholder Mouthpicks 
93-94 Fangpick 
95-96 Absorbing 
Bellows 
97 of Breath 
98-99 of Breezes 
100-101 of Roaring 
Benches 
102-103 of Encumbrance 
104-105 of Levitation 
106-107 of Ramming 
108-109 Black Wall 
Blankets 
110-111 of Comfort 
112-113 of Devouring 
114-115 of Protection 
116-117 Silk Coverlet of Warmth 
118-119 of Sleeping 
Brooms 
120 of Animated Attack 
121-122 of Blindness 
123-124 of Flying 
125-126 of Serving 
127-128 of Sweeping 
129-130 of Sweeping Il 
Brushes 
131-132 of Colors 
133-134 of Detangling 
135-136 of Grooming 
137-138 Vladium’s Fabulous Equine 
Buttons 
139-140 of Blasting 
141-142 of Confusion 
143-144 Discus 
145 of Fastening 


Ce a a. O a R R 


1583 


| -A 


j eT 


Buttons 
146-147 


of Rosy Vision 


Candle Snuffers 


148-149 
150-151 
1$2-153 
154-155 
156-157 
Carpets 
158-159 
160-161 
162-163 
164-165 
166-167 
168 
169-170 
171-172 
173-174 
175-176 
177-178 
179-180 
Chairs 
181-182 
183-184 
185-186 
187-188 
189-190 
191-192 
193 
194-195 
196-197 
198-199 
200-201 
Cords 
202-203 
204-205 
206-207 
208-209 
Cots 
210-211 
212-213 
214-215 
Curtains 
216 
217-218 
219-220 


235-236 
237-238 
239-240 
241 
242-243 
244-245 
246-247 
248-249 
250-251 
252-253 
254-255 
256-257 
258-259 
260-261 
262-263 
264 
Fans 
265-266 
i 267-268 
269-270 
271-272 
273-274 


of Death 

of Dousing 
of Exploding 
Remote 

of Serving 


Accursed 

of Diving 

of Fighting 

of Flying 

of Frying 
Leonardo’s of Flying 
Rug of Mothering 
Rug of Smothering 
Rug of Welcome 
Self Cleaning 
Solomon's Magic 
Carving of Restful Sleep 


of Amnesia 

of the Ancestors 

of Extra Seating 

of Helplessness 

of Relaxing 

of Retrieval 

of Seeing 

of Travel 

of Ugliness 

Couch of Comfortable Seating 
Cloak Clasp of Holding 


of Binding 
of Ekbir 
Faithful Knot 
Kybal’s 


of Entrapment 
of Restlessness 
of Suspension 


of Death 

of Scenery 

of Spying 

Cushion of Regeneration 


of Restudying 

of Studying 

Dicerion of Light and 
Darkness 


Magical 

Aruthir’s Living 

Back 

Black Crystal 

of Disappearance 

of Displacement 

Front 

of Guarding 

Revolving 

Lesser of Teleportation 
Greater of Teleportation 
of Terror 

Trick 

Drawer of Easy Retrieval 
Ema of Wishes 

Epox’s Iron Rations 
Everclean Towel 


Everdamp Sponge 
Faithful Knot 


of Charming 
Club 
Cooling 

of Dancing 
Fanfare 


275-276 
277-278 
279-280 
281-282 


Fanning 

Five Fire 
Wind 
Fishing Lure 


Fishing Poles 


283-284 
285-286 
287-288 
289 
290-291 
292-293 
294-295 
Forks 
296-297 
298-299 
300-301 
Gavels 
302-303 
304-305 
306-307 
308-309 


of Angling 

of i 

of Levitation 

of Monster Fishing 

of Rescue 

of Treasure Fishing 

Forge of Metal Protection 


Planar 
of Travel 


Gauze of Appearance 


of Auctions 

of Authority 

of Order 

Gem Cutter’s Tools of Sunndi 


Grappling Irons 


310-311 
312 


Enchanted 
Gargoyle 


313-314  Griffon’s Claw 

315-316 of Luckless Returning 

Hammocks 

317-318 of Entrapment 

319-320 Layne's 

321-322 of Protection 

Handkerchiefs 

323-324 of Length 

325-326 of Sneezing 

Harnesses 

327-328 

329-330 

Hasps 

331-332 

333-334 

Hinges 

335-336 
337 of Shricking 

338-339 

Hourglasses 

340-341 Auquhol’s Type I 

342-343 Auquhol’s Type II 

344-345 Auquhol’s Type III 

346-347 _ Brindletople’s Time Bomb 

348-349 of Fire and Ice 

350-351 Obedient 

352-353 of Seeing 

354-355 Timeglass of the Wizard 


356-357 of Timekeeping 


Inkwells 

358-359 of Concealment 
360 Evefull 
361-362 of Scollmaking 
Irons 
363-364 
365-366 
367-368 
369-370 
371 372 
373-374 


of Seker 
Spider 


of Imprisonment 

of Opening 

of Steam 

Throwing 

of Transference 
Kaylan’s Wooden Tray 
Keys | 
375-376 Courier 
377-378 
379-380 
381-382 
383-384 
Maps 
385-387 
388-389 of 
390-391 
392-393 
394-395 
396-397 Rogue's 
398-399 


411-412 
413-414 
415-416 
417-418 
419-420 
Ladders 
421-422 
423-424 
425-426 
427-428 
Ladles 

429-430 
431-432 

433 

434-435 
Lamps 

436-437 
438-439 
440-441 


450-451 
452-453 
454-455 
456 
457-458 
459-460 
461-462 
463-464 
465-466 
467-468 
469-470 
471-472 
473-474 
475-476 
477-478 
479-480 
481 
482-483 


Log 

500-501 
502-503 

504 
505-506 
507-508 
509-510 
511-512 
Matches 
513-514 
515-516 
Mirrors 
517-518 
519-520 
521-522 
523-524 
525-526 
527-528 
529 

530-531 
532-533 
534-535 


Shapeshifter 
of Silence 
Silver of Portals 
of Sirdan 
Skeleton 
Skeleton II 
Spider 

of Storage 
of Translation 
of Unlocking 
Wizard's 


of Balance 

Benhi’s Express 

of Climbing 

of Inestimable Length 


of Candlemaking 
of Curing 

of Drinking 

of Duplication 


Bashal’s Tendrilight 
Byubo's of Audacity 

of Continual Light 
Shuttered of Continual Light 
of Darkness 

Dragon 

Floor 

of the Four Winds 

of the Genies 

Goldmane’s Dazzler 

of Greyhawk 

of Honesty 

Hurricane 

of Ignition 

Illag’s Abominable Beacon 
of Infinite Burning 
Krillus’s Blazer 

of Lighting 

of Long Burning 

of Long Burning I 


Magic 

Malthrox’s Shadowcaster 
Messakk’s Eye 

of Multichromaticism 
of Plant Growth 
Shadow 

of Spying 

of Summoning 
Thessall’s Wayguider 
of Timed Lighting 
Lizardskin Bed 


Nolte’s Locks and Bolts 
Skie’s Locks and Bolts 


of Burning 
Combination 


of Repetitive Burning 
of Rolling 
of Snoring 


Magical 
of Many Lights 


Baltron’s Hand 
Barlithian's Mystical 
Black 


of Duplication 

Emperor's 

of Enlightenment 

Evem’s of Enviable Image 


í 1584 ` 


Å- RT ______ _ eee 


DŘ 


Mirrors 
536-537 
538-539 
540-541 
542-543 
544-545 
546-547 
548-549 
550-551 
552 
553-554 
555-556 
557-558 
559-560 
561-562 
563-564 
565-566 
567-568 
569-570 
571-572 
573-574 
575-576 
577 
578-579 
580-581 
582-583 
584-585 
586-587 
588-589 
590-591 
592-593 
594-595 
596-597 
598-599 
600 


of Fear 


Flaming of Tenh 
of Flattery 


Hsssthak’s of Sight and Sound 


of 

of Improved Travel 

of Lakes 

of Life Saving 

of Life Trapping 

Malto’s of Retention 

of Mental Prowess 
Murky 

Not-So-Funny Funhouse 


Nura D’Agor’s of Life Trapping 


of Opposition 
of the Past 

of Portals 
Reading 

of Recall 

Red 

of Reflecting 
of Retention 

of Reversal 

of Seeing 

of Sending 

of Simple Order 
of Sophistication 


of Vanity 
Yefar's Magic 
Yin-Yang 


Mortars and Pestles 


601-602 
603-604 
605-606 
Muzzles 
607-608 
609-610 
611-612 
Nails 
613-614 
615-616 
617-618 
619-620 
621-622 
623-624 
625 

626-627 
Needles 


655-656 
657-658 
Pills 


Everproducing Rice 
Lorloveim’s Obsidian 
Music Box 


of Lycanthrope Control 
of Mauling 
of Training 


Blast Spike 
of Building 
Death 
Finger 

of Pointing 
of Securing 
of Silence 


Ten-Penny 


of Death 

of Lively Tattoos 
Magical Darning 

of Repair 

of Sewing 

of Sewing II 
Nefradina’s Identifier 
Nefradina’s Improved 
Identifier 

Oven of Heating 


of Cooking 
of Spicing 


of Excellence 
of Swift Writing 
of Truth 


of Earth Parting 
Cursed of Earth Parting 


Desalination Tablet 

of Hangover Relief 

of Plentiful Water 
Pillow of Regeneration 


682-683 
684-685 
686-687 
688-689 


Pipe of Heated Wind 


Book 
of Counterfeiting 
Dinner 


Leomund's 
Platter of Purity 
Platter of Purity II 


Draw 

of Fire Control 

of Searing 

of Summoning 

Pot of Plant Protection 


Prismal’s Useful Enchanted Gear 


690-691 
692-693 
694-695 
696 
697-698 
699-700 
701-702 
703-704 
Quill Pens 
705-706 
707-708 
709-710 
711-712 
713-714 
715-716 
717-718 
719-720 
721 
722-723 
724-725 
726-727 
728-729 
730-731 
732-733 
734-735 
736-737 
738-739 
Rakes 
740-741 
742-743 
744 
745-746 
747-748 
749-750 
Razors 
751-752 
753-754 
755-756 


Ropes 
757-758 
759-760 
761-762 
763-764 
765-766 
767-768 
769 
Saws 
770-771 
772-773 
774-775 
776-777 
Seals 
778-779 
780-781 
782-783 


Block and Tackle 
Fish Hooks 

Flint 

Grappling Hook 
Musical Minstrel 
Piton 


Whetstone 


of Copying 
of Erasing 


of Pyrophilius 

of Scribbling 

of Scroll Creation 

of Swift Writing 

of Transcription 

of Truth 

Windscribe 
Wondrous Writing Set 
Zellot’s of Law 

Rag of Drying 


of Climbing 
of Iron 

of Retrieval 
Ship 

of Smoothing 
of Tracking 


Baltron’s 
of Close Shaving 
of Truth 


of Climbing 

of Constriction 

of Entanglement 
Hrulgin’s of Entanglement 
Infinite 

Tallin’s Tightrope 

Salver of Growth 


of Cutting 
of Mighty Cutting 
of Snoring 


Scale of Weighing 


of Deception 
of Vigor 
Seat of Bane 


Eternal Salt 
Hugrin’s Spice 


of Animation 

of Digging 
Cursed of Digging 
of Gravedigging 


795-796 of Internment 
797-798 Spade of Colossal Excavation 
799-800 Slate of Identification 
Smoking Pipes 
801-802 Aromatic 
803-804 Bubble 
805-806 Charged Eversmoking 
807-808 Elminster’s Eversmoking 
809-810 Permanent Eversmoking 
811-812 Halfling 
813-814 Lasting 
815-816 of Puckering 

817 Self-Lighting 
818-819 of Smoke Rings 
820-821 of Smoking 
822-823 of Snake Summoning 
Spinning Wheels 
824-825 
826-827 
Spoons 
828-829 Birth 
830-831 of Eating 
832-833 of Medication 
834-835 of Mixing 
836-837 Murlynd’s 
838-839 Musical 

840 of Sticking 
of Stirring 
of Stirring II 
of Sugar 


of Ascending 
of Breaking 
851-852 Cold 

853-854 of Descending 
855-856 Endless 


857-858 of Judgment 
of Slipping 


of Attachment 

of Lashing 

865 of Pearls 

of Shackles 
Tangle of 

of Warding 

Stylus of Scribing 


of Direction 
of Timekeeping 


of Banquets 

of Contents 

of the Elements 
of Plenty 

886-887 Writing 
Tablecloths 

888 Augricrone's 
889-890 of Feasting 
Tablets 

891-892 Myrkul’s of Fate 
893-894 of Spirit Summoning 
Tapestries 
895-896 
897-898 


of Disease Warding 
of Ekbir 

of Folded Existence 
of Rooms 


Magical Rakastan 
Zhakar 
Teaset of Skill and Grace 


909-910 
911-912 
Tents 
913 of Captivity 
914-915 Dew 
916-917 of Luxury 
918-919 Mist 


of Fantastic Vision 
of True Vision 


= 1585 = 


B ee ll = ee 


ja E 


Tents 109-113 Chime of Interruption 469-473 Doss Lute 
920-921 Polychromatic 114-118 Chime of Opening 474-477 Lute of Loot 
922-923 Poor 119-122 Sebastian’s Chime of Opening 478-482 Singalong Lute 
924-925 of Shelter 123-127 Chime of Time 483-487 Skywalker Lute 
926-927 of Standing 128-132 Chime of Visitors 488-491 Woodwalking Lute 
928-929 of Warning 133-137 Chime of Warning 492-496 Building Lyre 
930-931 X 138-141 Cymbal of Crashing 497-501 Canaith Lyre 
Threads 142-146 Cymbal of Symbols 502-506 Cli Lyre 
932-933 of Aging 147-151 Bass Drum 507-510 Dorus’s Lyre 
934-935 of Commands 152-156 Drum of Deafening 511-515 Doss Lyre 
936 of Embroidery 157-160 Lei Kung’s Drum 516-520 Fu Hsing’s Lyre 
Thrones 161-165 Drum of Menace 521-525 Loquacious Lyre 
937-938 of Death 166-170 Native Drum 526-529 Lyre of the Spheres 
939-940 Hlidskialf 171-175 Drum of Panic 530-534 Lyre of Wounding 
941-942 of Incineration 176-179 Drum of Silence 535-539 Canaith Mandolin 
943-944 of Power 180-184 Snare Drum 540-543 Cli Mandolin 
945-946 of Summoning 185-189 Tabele 544-548 Pick of Propitiousness 
947-948 of Transformation 190-193 Drum of Thunder 549-553 Pick of Strumming 
Tool Sets 194-198 Dughal’s Percussion Instruments 554-558 Qanum of Quiet 
949-950 Gemcutter’s of Sunndi 199-203 Butler Summoning Gong 559-562 Qanum of the Spirits 
951-952 Thieves’ of Stealth 204-208 Chain Gong 563-567 Rababah of the Dao 
953-954 Woodworker's of Dyvers 209-212 Gong of Dispelling 568-572 ‘Ud of the Marids 
Torches 213-217 Gong of Earthquakes 573-577 Extreme Violin 
955-956 of Continual Fire 218-222 Gong of Fishing 578-581 Game Violin 
957-958 Continual 223-227 Ricking Gong 582-586 Saxon Violin 
959-960 of Control 228-231 Gong of Stunning 587-591 Unnecessary Violin 
961 Gruumsh’s Everburning 232-236 Gong of Summoning 592-595 Violin Rack 
Utensils 237-241 Gong of the Whirlwind 596-600 Zither of Speed 
962-963 of Cleanliness 242-245 Gourd of Travel 601-605 Zither of Zombie Control 
964-965 of the Cultured Palate 246-250 Rattle of Death 606-610 Zither of Zombie Protection 
966-967 of Etiquette 251-255 Rattle of Exorcism 611-614 Takht of the Jann 
Vanes 256-260 Rattle of Shaking and Rolling Wind Instruments 
968-969 Greater of Location 261-264 Rattle of Summoning 615-619  Airolis’s Shining Horn 
970-971 Lesser of Location 265-269 Rattle of Youth 620-624 Amplification Horn 
Windows 270-274 Riqq of the Efreet 625-629 Animal Attraction Pipe 
972-973 Display Stringed Instruments 630-633 Animal Calls Horn 
974-975 of Dressing 275-279 Fochlucan Bandore 634-638 Axewood Whistle 
976-977 of Opacity 280-283 Biwa of Calming 639-643 Azure Sea Horn 
978-979 of Peeping 284-288 Biwa of Charming 644-648 Barrier Peaks Horn 
980-981 of Spying 289-293 Biwa of Discord 649-652 Baubles Horn 
982-983 _ of Visiting 294-297 MacFuirmidh Cittern 653-657 Black Ivory Horn 
984-985 Xylograph 298-302 Dughal’s Musical Instrument 658-662 Blasting Horn 
Yokes 303-307 Anstruth Harp 663-666 Bone Flute 
986-987 of Boar Harnessing 308-312 Azler’s Harp 667-671 Bubbles Horn 
988-990 of Flight 313-316 Bragi’s Harp 672-676 Collapsing Horn 
991-993 of Irritation 317-321 Bragi’s Harp of Calm 677-681 Command Horn 
994-996 of Obedience 322-326 Broken Harp 682-685 Confusion Bagpipes 
997-998 Practical 327-331 Harp of Charming 686-690 Copper Pipes 
999-000 of Underwater Action 332-335 Harp of Charming II 691-695 Courage Flute 
336-340 Harp of Charming III 696-700 Cymboli’s Pipes of Sounding 
ee =— 34 )-345 Damh’s Harp 701-704 Damh’s Flute 
Table O: Musical Instruments 346-350 Defender’s Harp 705-709 Dambh’s Pipes 
351-354 Harp of Discord 710-714 Danger Flute 
Roll Item Discovered 355-359 Dove's Harp 715-718 Deafness Whistle 
01-04 Enchanted Enhancements* 360-364 Esheen’s Harp 719-723 Death’s Head Horn 
05-09 Eartrumpet 365-368 Harp of Fingerbreaking 724-728 Dismissing Flute 
10-14 Larynx of Deafening 369-373 Fochlucan Harp 729-733 Djinn Nay 
Percussion Instruments 374-378 Harp of Gold 734-737 Dolphins Horn 
15-18 Bellof Alarm 379-383 Handharp 738-742 Doom Pipes 
19-23 Bell of the Ball 384-387 Harp of Healing 743-747 Doom Trumpet 
24-28 Bell of Calling 388-392 Jhantra’s Harp 748-752 Dragon Whistle 
29-33 Choir Bell 393-397 MacFuirmidh Harp 753-756 Droning Bagpipes 
34-37 Church Bell 398-402 Marks Harp 757-761 Dughal’s Bagpipes of Fear 
38-42 Cow Bell 403-406 Methild’s Harp 762-766 Dugal’s Musical Instrument 
43-47 Bell of Discord 407-411 Murlyn’s Harp of Charming 767-770 Faerie Flute 
48-52 Bell of Doom 412-416 Nithanalor’s Harp 771-775 Fear Bagpipes 
53-56 Bell of Freedom 417-420 Ollamh Harp 776-780 Feline Attraction Bagpipes 
57-61 Golden Bell of Blasting 421-425 Questing Harp 781-785 Fog Horn 
62-66 Bell of Lament 426-430 Rhingalade’s Harp 786-789 Fog Horn Il 
67-70  Pavlov’s Bell 431-435 Harp of Spirit Restoration 790-794 Gas Pipes 
71-75 Bell of Protection 436-439 Storm's Harp of Methild 795-799 Gateway Whistle 
76-80 Bell of Ringing 440-444 Throbbing Harp 800-804 Gjaller 
81-85 Bell of Treachery 445-449 Valarde’s Harp 805-808 Goodness/Evil Horn 
86-89 Bell of Warning 450-454 Zunzalor’s Harp 809-813 Hard Hearts Horn 
90-94 Bell of Warning II 455-458 Lyron’s Harpsichord of 814-818 Haunting Pipes 
95-99 Alexander's Chime of Opening Commanding 819-823 Headaches Bagpipes 
100-104 Featherchime 459-463 Building Liar 824-827 Herding Whistle 
105-108 Chime of Hunger 464-468 Cool Hand Lute 828-832 Horn of the Gray Waste 
< 1586 


Be ll ee 


i 


Ee ————— 


Wind Instruments 

833-837 Kantele 

838-841 Luck Flute 
842-846 Pain Pipes 
847-851 
852-856 
857-860 
861-865 
866-870 
871-875 
876-879 
880-884 
885-889 
890-893 
894-898 
899-903 
904-908 
909-912 
913-917 
918-922 
923-927 
928-931 
932-936 
937-941 
942-946 
947-950 
951-955 


Recording Recorder 
Reviving Bugle 
Sacred Grove Horn 
September Horn 
Sewer Pipes 


Stopping Whistle 
Summoning Whistle 
Training Whistle 
Tritons’ Horn 
Uncontrollable Striding Horn 
Valhalla Horn 

Valor Horn 

Vast Swamp Horn 
Voices Horn 
Waking Bugle 

War Horn 

Water Pipes 

Wind Dancing Flute 


Table P: Weird Stuff 


Item Discovered 
Enchanted Enhancements* 


Aerial 

Aerial II 

Fishing 

Hold Fast 

Man 

Seafaring 

Cursed of Staying 
Greater of Staying 
Lesser of Staying 

of Weight 

Antennae of Triangulation 
Apparatus of Kwalish 


of Doom 
Silver of Ergoth 
Silver of Ergoth Il 


of Cosmetology 
Cue 

Elemental (Earth) 
Elemental (Air) 
Elemental (Fire) 
Elemental (Water) 
of Endless String 
Foot 


71-72 Air 


73-74 
75-77 
78-79 
80-81 
82-83 
84-86 
87-88 
89-90 
Beacons 
91-93 
94-95 


Thayv 
Bison Skull Totem 


96-97 

98-99 
Boats 
100-102 
103-104 
105-106 
107-108 
109-111 
112-113 
114-115 
116-118 
119-120 


121-122 
123-124 
125-127 
128-129 
130-131 
132-133 
134-136 
137-138 
Token 
139-140 
141-143 
144-145 
146-147 
148-149 
150-152 
153-154 
155-156 
157-158 
159-161 
Bridles 
162-163 
164-165 
166-167 
168-170 
171-172 
173-174 
175-177 
178-179 
180-181 
182-183 
184-186 
Carts 
187-188 
189-190 
191-192 
Castles 
193-195 
196-197 
198-199 
Chains 
200-202 
203-204 
205-206 
Chariots 
207-208 
209-211 
212-213 
214-215 
216-217 
218-220 
221-222 


23-224 


Carnivorous 
of Containment 
Hot Air 

Poison 

Rust 

Soap 

of Traveling 


Arcane 


Bison Skull Totem 
Kolkis's Evil 


Airboat 

Canoe of Portage 
Canoe of Travel 
Desert 


Small Folding 


Large Folding 
Folding Coracle 


Frog 

Goerl's Portable Canoe/Tackle 
Box 

Hasty Barge of Nyr Dyv 
House 


Portable Canoe 
Quaal’s Mystical Feather 


Semekhtet Barge 

Smuggler’s 

Storm Rider of the Gearnat Sea 
Theon’s Folding 

Tub of Sailing 

Undersea 

Underwater 

Vainamoinen's 

Xiphoid Xebec 

Brass Horseman 


of Acquiesce 
of Control 
of Control II 


Carrague’s Iron Golem 


of Convenience 
of Decks 
Mouse 


Cloud 
Cloud II 
Celestial Planisphere 


Daisy 
Danleor's Dungeon 
of Transport 


of Flames 
Franklyn’s Incredible 


Fextree 


225-227 
228-229 
230-231 
232-233 
Coins 

234-236 
237-238 
239-240 
241-242 
243-245 
246-247 
248-249 
250-251 
252-254 
255-256 
257-258 
259-261 
262-263 
264-265 
266-267 
268-270 
271-272 


282-283 
284-286 
287-288 
289-290 
291-292 


Khas 

Magical 
Marbol’s 
Chilling Snare 


of Almor 
Bloodcoin 
Copper 
Cursed Copper Piece 
Eight Diagram 
Electrum 

Equus 

Gold 

of Luck 

Penny of Luck 
Platinum 


Cone of Communication 
Continual Light Reflector 
Control Doll 


avec Clairaudience 
Hypnosis 

Eye of the Gods 
Moredlin’s 
Crystal Parrot 


Crystal Warriors 


293-295 
296-297 
298-299 
300-301 
302-304 
Cubes 

305-306 
307-308 
309-310 
311-313 
314-315 
316-317 
318-320 
321-322 
323-324 
325-326 
327-329 
330-331 
332-333 
334-335 
336-338 
339-340 
341-342 
343-345 


Diamond 
Glass 
Jade 
Porcelain 


Ruby 


of Abilities 

Bullion 

of Calling 

Cubic Foot 

Cubic Gate 

Cubic Yard 

Daern’s Instant Fortress 
of Disabilities 

of Farce 

of Force 

of Force I 

of Frost Resistance 
Glow 

Ice 

Khurgorbacyag’s Copper 
of Liquid Cooling 

of Luck 

of Sweetness 


Decks of Cards 


346-347 
348-349 
350-351 
352-354 
355-356 
357-358 
359-360 
361-363 
364-365 
366-367 
368-370 
371-372 
373-374 
375-376 
Devices 
377-379 
380-381 
Dice 
382-383 
384-385 


Fortune Telling 

of Illusions 

of Illusions Il 

Janean’s of Many Things 
of Many Things 

of Many Things II 
Quarter 


Sun 

Tarot Deck of Many Things 
Tracer 

of Wondrous Power 


Passage 
Time Journeying 


of Certain Wagering 
of Chancelessness 


1587 i 


< O O O 


j OG —————————e——— 


Disks 

386-388 
389-390 
391-392 


407-408 


of the Azure Sea 

Displacer 

of History 

Tenser’s Tantalus 

Dome of Shapes 
Dragonisle’s Harbor Chains 
Dunhill’s Spelljamming 
Apparatus 


Dynamo of Flying 
Edu’sascar 


Elemental Compass 


Figureheads 


409-410 
411-413 
414-415 
416-417 
418-419 
420-422 
423-424 
Figurines 
425-426 
427-429 
430-431 
432-433 
434-435 
436-438 
439-440 
441-442 
443-444 
445-447 
448—449 
450-451 
452-454 
Fire 
455-456 
457-458 
459-460 


Fountains 
466-467 


of Blessing 

Cursed 

of Protection 

of Protection II 

of Wondrous Power (Attacks) 
of Wondrous Power (Disguise) 
of Wondrous Power (Speed) 


Alabaster Griffon 
Amber Monkeys 
Cat of Felkovic 
Coral Dragon 
Dori’s Obsidian Steed 
Emerald Frog 

Jade Snake 
Moonstone Rabbit 
Onyx Panther 

Opal Cats 

Silver Carp 
Tourmaline Turtle 
of Wondrous Power 


Cold 

Dark 

Gyregam 

Folding Moat 

Flying Rockinghorse 


Lasko’s Magical 


Alternate World Gates 


468-469 
470-472 
473-474 
475-476 
477-478 
479-481 
482-483 
484-485 
486-488 


489-490 


Globes 

491-492 
493-494 
495-497 
498-499 
500-501 
502-503 
504-506 
507-508 
509-510 
511-513 
514-515 
516-517 
518-519 
520-522 


Violin Case 

Gateway of Symmetry 
Ginzani’s Riding Tack of 
Flight 

Glitterlode’s Blessed 
Skyhooks 


of Battleshroud Gas 
of Cirulon 

Glowing 

Glowing II 

Mervic’s Gaseous 

of Purification 
Samzinna’s of Putrification 
of Serenity 

Vision 

of Wisdom 

Goldbug 

Golden Floor 
Guardian Tail 
Gravitic Stabilizer 


Spelljamming Helms 


523-524 
525-526 
527-528 
529-531 
532-533 
534-535 
536-537 


Bardic 
Alarm Beacon 


Gnomish 


538-540 
541-542 
543-544 
545-547 
548-549 
550-551 
552-553 
554-556 
557-558 
559-560 
561-562 


Grand 
Ki- 
Lifejammer 


Horseshoes 


563-565 
566-567 
568-569 
570-572 
573-574 
575-576 
577-578 
579-581 
Huts 

582-583 
584-585 
Idols 

586-587 
588-590 
591-592 
593-594 
595-597 


609-610 
611-612 
Locators 
613-615 
616-617 
618-619 
620-621 
622-624 
Masts 
625-626 
627-628 
629-631 
Mice 
632-633 
634-635 


657-658 
659 660 
Oars 

661-662 
663-665 
Oracles 
666-667 
668-669 
670-671 
672-674 
675-676 
677-678 
679-681 
Orbs 

682-683 
684-685 
686-687 


of Fleetness 

of Flying 

of the Gray Waste 
of Luck 

Obsidian 

of Petrification 
of Speed 

of a Zephyr 


Baba Yaga's 
Spirit 


Carnelian 

of Lolth 

Quentin's 

Internal Conjuration Engine 
Ipsissimo’s Black Goose 


of Lightning 
of Reconnaissance 


Larder of Holding 
Lighthouse 
Lithocentric Pendulum 


Portal 
Planetary 
Machine of Lum the Mad 


Magestar 
Magic Missile Device 
Half 


Portable 
Masthead of Durability 


Amazing 

Magic 

Mighty Servant of Leuk-O 
Mill of Sampo 

Minyan 


Diamond and Silver 
Onyx and Steel 
Ruby Turquoise and Emerald 


of Eyes 

of Invulnerability 
of Life 

Nithian Monolith 
Nithian Standard 


Ether 
of Rowing 


Blue of Greyhawk 
Brown of Greyhawk 
Green of Greyhawk 
Orange of Greyhawk 
Red of Greyhawk 
Violet of Greyhawk 
Yellow of Greyhawk 


of Alignment 
of the Black Swamp 
Crystal 


688-690 
691-692 
693-694 
695-696 
697-699 
700-701 
702-703 
704-705 
706-708 
709-710 
711-712 
713-715 
716-717 
718-719 
720-721 
722-724 
725-726 
727-728 
Pedestals 
729-730 
731-733 
734-735 
736-737 
Pools 
738-740 
741-742 
743-744 
745-746 
747-749 
750-751 
752-753 
754-755 
Rudders 
756-758 
759-760 
761-762 
763-764 
765-767 
768-769 
770-771 
Saddles 
772-774 
775-776 
777-778 
779-780 
781-783 
784-785 
Sails 
786-787 
788-789 
790-792 
793-794 
795-796 
Ships 
797-799 
800-801 
802-803 
804-805 
806-808 
809-810 
811-812 
813-814 


Skulls 
815-817 
818-819 
820-821 
822-824 
825-826 
Sledges 
827-828 
829-830 
831-833 
834-835 
Spheres 
836-837 
838-839 
840-842 


of Distant Viewing 

of Draconic Influence 
Dragon 

of Dragonkind (Hatchling) 
of i ) 


of Dragonkind (Eldest Worm) 
of Golden Death (Smoky) 
of Golden Death (Carnelian) 
of Golden Death (Garnet) 


of Holiness 

of Law 

of Radiance 

of Remote Action 

of the Silver Dragon 
Orrery of the Inner Planes 


Diamond of Blyphian 
Gold of Blyphian 
Plank 

Plumalitter 


Dimensional 
Golden 
Mellenea’s Portal 
of Tears 

Portable Bridge 
Portable Shadow 
Portable Spring 
Prosthesis 


of Guidance 

of Guidance II 

of Maneuverability 
of Maneuverability II 
of Propulsion 

of Propulsion II 

of Speed 


of Flying 

of Secure Riding 

of the Spirit Horse 

of Stability 

of Taming 

Torloch’s of Comforts 


Black of Schnai 
Invisible 

of Maneuverability 
Sargasso Detector 
Shade of the Shadow 


Earth and Sea 

Frey's 

Galley of the Gods 

Halruan Skyship 

of Pearl 

Phaseship 

Ship-in-a-Bottle 

Ship’s Wheel of Maneuver- 
ability 


Ebon 

Mezin’s 

Singing 

Spirit 

Talking 

Joukahainen's Golden 
Vainamoinen’s 
Sounder 
Spelljammer Detector 


of Annihilation 
of Darkness 
of False Calling 


ie 1588 7 


I ġŤğŤOűümamamaaaaa sa M 


a 


Spheres 
843-844 
845-846 
847-848 
849-851 
852-853 
854-855 
856-858 
859-860 
861-862 
Statues 
863-864 
865-867 
868-869 
870-871 
872-873 
874-876 
877-878 
879-880 
881-883 
884-885 
886-887 
888-889 
l 890-892 
893-894 


Gax's of Annihilation 
Glain’s Crystal 
Karnrohb’s Airy 
Mierest's Starlit 
Thaddigren’s Glowglobes 
of Warning 
Spiderwalker 
Springerie 

Standing Stone 


Boli 

Corellon’s Crystal 
Golden 

Old Salt of Power 
Scorpion Ward 

Singing 

Singing II 

Stone Horse (Courser) 
Stone Horse (Destrier) 
of Substitution 
Xanthippe of Annoyance 
Stick of Standing 
Stirrups of Horsemanship 
Timberbane’s Chopper- 
Ripper 


Transportation 


895-896 
897-898 
899-901 
902-903 
Trees 
904-905 
906-908 
909-910 
911-912 
913-914 
Turrets 
915-917 
918-919 
920-921 
922-923 
924-926 
927-928 
Wells 
929-930 
931-932 
933-935 
Wheels 
936-937 
938-939 
940-942 
943-944 
945-946 
947-948 
949-951 
952-953 
954-955 
956-957 
958-960 
961-962 
963-964 
965-967 
Wings 
968-969 
970-971 
972-973 


Chemcheaux Teleport Pad 
Teleportation Chamber 
Transporter Pad 
Trap-Springer 


Great 

of Malice 

of the Ravenous 

of Unending Lamentation 
of Venom 


Light 

Medium 

Heavy 

Tvashtri’s Pinwheel 
Tzolo’s Guardian 
Unseen Ship Crew 


of Dreams 
of Many Worlds 
Sumbar Oracle 


of Burning 
Fairy's 

of Fire 

of Floating 

of Fortune 

Hasty 

of Keening 

of Lighting 

of Maneuverability 
of Misfortune 
Square 

Wind Fire 
Winch of Power 
Wind Howdah 


Dragon 
of Flying 
Sigh Danovitche’s of Flying 


Wo-ha Ui-jung 


974-976 
977-978 
979-980 
981-982 
983-985 
986-988 
989-991 
992-994 
995-997 
998-000 


Standing Monkey 
Squatting Toad 
Sitting Monkey 
Sitting Bull 
Sitting Dog 
Standing Bear 
Leaping Fish 
Laughing Hare 
Dancing Hart 
Coiled Dragon 


Table Q: Humorous Items 


Roll Item Discovered 
01-20 Enchanted Enhancements* 
21-40 Apparatus of Spikey Owns 
41-61 Ardraken’s Refresh. 
Simulacrum 
Armband of Music 
Arrow of Sleighing 
Awl of the Above 
Awl Out 
Bowling Ball 
Barrel of Monkeys 
184-204 Blowgun of Wild Emotions 
205-224 Bottle of Boos 
Blashphor’s Baby Care Products 
225-244 Magical Diapers 
245-265 Crib of Pushing 
266-285 Blashphor’s Cradle 
286-306 Blashphor’s Diapers 
307-326 Blashphor’s Nursery 
327-346 Brassier of Defense 
347-367 Batting Cage 
368-387 Handkerchief of Flirting 
388-408 Holy Terror Hockey Stick 
409-428 Hoop of the Roller Hoopers 
429-448 Liar of Building 
Merty’s Marvelous Marketplace 
449-469 Magical Markers 
470-489 Magnificent Mattress 
490-510 Marvelous Marble 
511-530 Masculine Macho-Musk 
531-550 Masterful Muffler 
551-571 Miraculous Mistmaker 
572-591 Mud Masque 
592-612 Multiplanar Mushroom 
613-632 Munificent Match 
633-652 Musical Menagerie 
653-673 Mysterious Mug 
674-693 Mystic Mustard 
694-714 Mythic Muskmelon 
715-734 Omelet of the Planes 
735-754 Minionions of Set 
755-775 Ring of Spell “Turning” 
776-795 Robe of Blending II 
796-816 Robe of Blending 
817-836 Rod of Cancellation 
837-856 Hill Seed 
857-877 Mountain Seed 
878-897 Skates of the Roller Hoopers 
898-918 Staff of Striking H 
919-938 Sweatsuit 
939-958 Sword of Babette Maelstrom 
959-979 Sword of Underwear 
Snatching 
Yo-Yo of Fate 


62-81 
82-102 
103-122 
123-142 
143-163 
164-183 


980-000 


Table R: Armor and Shields 

To randomly armor, roll on first on Table 
RI to determine the type. If the result is 
Special, roll on Table R3; for any other 
outcome, roll on Table R2 to find the 
bonus or penalty, In many cases, the 
description of a special piece of armor 
rolled on Table R3 gives the item a prede- 
termined bonus. If this is not the case, the 
DM should roll on Table R2 to find the 
magical bonus or penalty of the item when 
used in defense. Even ifthe item has a 
predetermined bonus or penalty, the DM 
may roll on Table R2 in order to achieve 
true randomness, 

Whether the armor is generic or special, 
DMs are encouraged to turn to the section 
in the ENCYCLOPEDIA MAGICA detailing 
that specific item. Each weapon and armor 


section contains random charts that detail 
other types of equipment. For instance, if 
404 was rolled on Table RI and 14 on 
Table R2, armor +2 is the result. Now, if 
you turn to page 69 and roll again, a 
player could be given a lorica segmenta 
+2, plate mail +2, or any number of other 
possibilities rather than generic armor +2. 


Table R1: Generic Magical Armor 


001-491 
492-527 
528-539 
540-576 
577-952 
953-000 


Armor 

Barding 

Bonnet 

Caparison 

Shield 

Special (Roll on Table R3) 


Table R2: AC Adjustment for Armor 


Roll ACAdj XP Value GP Value 
01-02 -1 - +0 


03-10 +1 +500 +5,000 
11-14 +2 +1,000  +10,000 
15-17 +3 +1,500  +15,000 
18-19 +4 +2,000  +20,000 

20 +5 +3,000  +30,000 


Table R3: Special Magical Armor 


Roll Item Discovered 
01-06 Enchanted Enhancements* 
of Valor 
07-12 
13-18 
19-24 
25-30 
31-36 
37-42 
43-48 
Armor 
49-54 
55-60 
61-66 
67-72 
73-78 
79-84 
85-90 
91-96 
97-103 
104-109 
110-115 
116-121 


Gauntlet of Valor 
Vambrace of Valor 
Couter of Valor 
Rerebrace of Valor 
Pauldron of Valor 
Rerebrace of Valor 
Vambrace of Valor 


Abbathor’s 

of Absorption* 

of Acidic Secretion* 
Anything 

Aquatic* 

Aquatic With Free Action*® 
Arcane 

Arvoreen’s Chain 
Aslyferund’s 

of Blackflame 

of Blending* 

Blue of the Crystalmist 
Mountains 

Bradlie’s Leather 
Callarduran Smoothhands's 
Chain 

of Charm* 

of Comfort* 

of Command* 

of Concealed Wizardry* 
of Continual Cleanliness* 
of Coolness* 

of Cure Wounds* 

of the Desert Evening 
Dragonarmor 

Eastern Wooden 

of Eelix 

of Electricity 

Elven Chain 

of Energy Drain* 

of Ethereality* 

of Ethereainess 

of Etherealness II 

White Dragon 

Black Dragon 

Green Dragon 

Blue Dragon 


122-127 
128-133 


134-139 
140-145 
146-151 
152-157 
158-163 
164-169 
170-175 
176-181 
182-187 
188-193 
194-199 
200-206 
207-212 
213-218 
219-224 
225-230 
231-236 
237-242 
243-248 
249-254 
255-260 


ee 


—EEEEEEE eee eee OOO O 


1589 


Armor 

261-266 
267-272 
273-278 
279-284 
285-290 
291-296 
297-303 
304-309 
310-315 
316-321 
322-327 
328-333 
334-339 
340-345 
346-351 
352-357 
358-363 
364-369 
370-375 
376-381 
382-387 
388-393 
394-399 
400-406 
407-412 
413-418 
419-424 
425-430 
431-436 
437-442 
443-448 
449-454 
455-460 
461-466 
467-472 
473-478 
479-484 
485-490 
491-496 
497-502 
503-509 
510-515 
516-521 
522-527 
528-533 
534-539 
Barding 
540-545 
546-551 
552-557 
558-563 
564-569 
570-575 
Bonnets 
576-581 
582-587 


631-636 
637-642 
643-648 
649-654 
655-660 
661-666 
667-672 
673-678 
679-684 
685-690 
691-696 
697-702 


Red Dragon 

of Fear* 

of Fear I 

of Flight* 

of Gaseous Form* 
Gnarldan's 

of Haste* 

of Healing* 

Heimdall’s 

Heimdall’s White 

of Horus 

Iineval’s Red Chain 
Indra’s Golden 

of Invisibility* 

Keolish Plate of the Seas 
Kumakawa 

Laeral’s Storm 
Lemmikainen's 

of Missile Attraction* 
Mourner's 

Oyori of the Unknown Warrior 
Plate of Solamnus 

of Possession* 

of Presence 

Quirk* 

of Rage 

Rainbow 

Raji’s of the Desert Evening 
Red of the Hellfurnaces 
Red Dragon Scale 

of Reflection* 

Remove Curse* 

Scale of Horus 
Skoriaan’s Drow Chain 
of Solamnia 

Surtr’s Iron 

of Swimming* 

of Temperature Control* 
Tulen’s Plate of Etherealness 
of the Undead 

of Underwater Action* 
Voice of Heroes 

of Vulnerability* 

of Vulnerability II* 

of Warmth* 

White of the Griff Mountains 


of Deceptive Travel 
of Easy Travel 
of Flight 


of Missile Protection 
Morgan's Horse 


of Silence 
of Sustenance 


Abbathor's 
of Absorption 
Acgis 


Acgis Il 

Athena's 

of Blow Turning 

of Charm 

of Concealed Wizardry 
Copper 

of Cure Wounds 

Death Watch Beetle 
Discus 

of Dragon Protection 


703-709 
710-715 
716-721 
722-727 
728-733 
734-739 
740-745 
746-751 
752-757 
758-763 
764-769 
770-775 
776-781 
782-787 
788-793 
794-799 
800-805 
806-812 
813-818 
819-824 
825-830 
831-836 
837-842 
843-848 
849-854 
855-860 
861-866 
867-872 
873-878 
879-884 
885-890 
891-896 
897-902 
903-909 
910-915 
916-921 
922-927 
928-933 
934 939 
940-945 
946-951 
952-957 
958-963 
964-969 
970-975 
976-981 
982-987 
988-993 
994-000 


Hastsezini's 
Hawkstone’s Bulwark 
Holy 

of the Holy 

of Huma 

of Invisibility 
Kirith-Kanoi 
Laduguer’s 

Laeral’s Spell 

of Lorin 

Magical Defense 
Medicine 

of Medusae 

Missile Attractor 
Missile Deflector 
Noj's Missile Attractor 
of Olynthos 
Petrified* 

of Proof Against. . . . 
of Proof against Cold 
of Proof against Electricity 
of Proof against Fire 
Quirks 


Raji’s of the Holy 
of Reflection 
of Remove Curse 
Reptar’s Wall 


Thillonrian of Berserking 
White 

Wood-Iron* 

Yondalla’s 


SSS ee eee 
Table S: Weapons 

To select a at random, roll on 
Table S1. If Special is not the result, roll 
on Table S2 to find the bonus or penalty, 
If Table S1, Special, is the result, roll on 
Table S3. In many cases, the description 
of a special weapon on Table S3 has a pre- 
determined bonus. If this is not the case, 
or you wish a truly unique result, roll on 
Table S2 to find the magical bonus or 
penalty for the item. 

Always turn to the section of the encyclo- 
pedia that details that type of weapon. At 
the beginning of each major entry is a ran- 
dom chart that names other varieties of that 

i weapon. For instance, if you 
rolled 352 on Table S1 and 15 on Table S2, 
a hammer +2 was the result. If you turn to 
page 551 and roll again, you could give the 
player a mallet +2 or a spiked-back zagnal 
+2. There are any number of possibilities. 


Table S1: Generic Magical Weapons 
Roll Generic Magic Weapon 


01-97 Arrow 
98-100 Quarrel (Bolt) 


101-102 
103-143 
144-146 
147-148 
149-151 
152 
153-206 
207-213 
214-216 
217-223 
224-302 
303-332 
333-343 
344-372 
373 
374-380 
381-387 
388-404 
405-440 
441-442 
443-473 
474-505 
506-513 
514-522 
523-526 
527 
528 
529-555 
556-559 
560-958 
959-960 
961-974 
975-000 


Sling Bullet 
Slingstone 
Spear 


Spelljamming Ram 

Sword 

Throwing Stars 

Whip 

Special (Roll on the Table $3) 


Table S2: Attack Adjustments for 


Roll 
01-02 -I 
03-10 +1 
11-14 
15-17 
18-19 


+2 +800 + 
+3 +1,400 +2 
+4 +2,000 +2 
20 +5 +3,000 +3 


Weapons 


Sword XP 
Adj Val 


Wpn XP GP 
Adj Val Val 
- -l - +0 
+400 +1 +500 +5,000 
+500 +5,000 
+1,000 +10,000 
+1,000 +10,000 
+2,000 +20,000 


Table S3: Special Magic Weapons 


Roll 
ol 
02 
03 

Arrows 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
ll 


Item Discovered 
Enchanted Enhancements* 
Weapon Enhancements* 
Accelerator 


Abaris’s 

Acid 

of Aggravation 
Antimagic 
Apollo's 

of Attraction 

of Biting 

Black of luz 

of Blinding 

of Blinking 

Bolt of Lightning 
of Bow-Breaking 


of Climbing 

of Connection 
of Curing 

of Darkness 

of Detonation 
of Direction 

of Disarming 

of Disintegration 


ee eee 


a 


1590 


= 


imental a 7; 


30 of Dispelling 
31 of Distance 
32 of Draconian Slaying 


33 Elven 

34 of Enchantment 
35-36 of Explosions 

37 of Extended Range 

38 Faerie Fire 

39 of Fire 

40 Fire Seed 

41 Fire Trap 

42 Flaming 

43 of Flying 

44 of Force 

45 of Harm 


46 of Holding 
47 of Holding II 


48 of Ice 

49 of Illumination 

50 Illusory Missile 

51 of Justice 
52-53 of Law 

54 of Light 


55 of Lighting 

56 of Lightning 

57 Lycanthrope Slayer 

58 Maglubiyet’s Wounding 

59 of Misdirection 

60 Missile Weapon of Accuracy 
61 Missile Weapon of Distance* 
62 of Multiplicity 

63 Nilbog 

64 Oberon’s of Subduing 

65 Oberon’s of Slaying 

66 of Paralyzation 

67 of Penetrating 

68 of Penetration 

69 of Perseverance 


70-71 of Piercing 
72 of Polymorphing 
73 of Pursuit 


74 Quarrel of Biting (Acid) 

75 Quarrel of Biting (Normal) 

76 Quarrel of Biting (Poison) 
Red 


78 of Refilling 
79 of Returning 
80 of Rock Piercing 


81 of Roping 
82 of Scent Detection 
83 of Screaming 


84 of Screaming II 

85 of Seeking 

86 of Seeking II 

87 of Set 

of Signaling 

90 of Silence 

91 of Sinking 

92 of Slaying 

93 of Slaying II 

94 of Slaying III 

95 of Slaying IV 
Snake 


97 of Speaking 

98 Stun Bolt 

99 of Stunning 
100 Stirge’s Bite 
101 of Teleporting 
102 of Transporting 


103 Wooden 

104 of Wounding 
105-106 Arrowhead of Marking 
Axes 


107 Agni’s Red 

108 Ama-Tsu-Mara’s Vorpal 
109 Arumdina 

110 Azuredge 


11] Brihaspati’s 

112 of Brotherhood 

113 Callarduran Smoothhands'’s 
114 Cursed Battle 

115 of Cutting 

116 Deathstriker 

117 of the Dwarvish Lords 
118 of Enchantment 

119 Frostreaver 

120 Garl Glittergold’s Battle 
121 Gnarldan’s Battle 

122 Hastseltsi’s Hand 
Hastsezini’s Hand 

125 of Hurling 

126 Lortz’s Battle 

127 Maglubiyet's 

128 Might of Heroes 

129 Molydeus’s 

130 Motopua 

131 Nanna Sin’s Black 

132 Nomog-Geaya’s Hand 
133 Pickaxe of Piercing 
134 Rocksplitter 

135 Sampsa’s Golden 

136 Shag’s Battle 


137 Sulward’s 

138 Thor’s Kiss 

139 Throwing 

140 Thumb Height Man’s 
141-142 Torshorak 


143 Tunnelrunner’s 

144 Withering Pickaxe 
145 of the Woodsman 
146 Zebulon’s of Leaving 
147 Zzzzzz’s of Snoring 


148 Heavy 
149 Light 
150 Medium 
Battering Rams 
151 Bigby’s Demanding 
152 Magical 
Blowguns 


153 of Accuracy 
154 of Distance 


155 Hawk 

156 Bombard 
Bows 

157 Aasimon 
158-159 of Accuracy 

160 Ajagava 

161 of Anshan 

162 Black 


163 Brihaspati’s 

164 of the Centaurs 

165 Corellon’s Long 

166 Crossbow of Accuracy 
167 Crossbow of Angling 

168 Crossbow of Distance 

169 Crossbow of Enchantment 
170 Crossbow of Klee 

171 Crossbow of Multiplication 
172 Crossbow of Speed 

173 Crossbow of Speed II 


174 Cursed 

175 of Distance 
176-177 of Doubling 

178 Eagle 

179 of Enchantment 

180 Firebow 

181 Fire Teeth 

182 of the Forest 

183 Gem 


184 Goblins’ Bane 
185 Hastsezini’s 

186 Hawk 

187 Heartseeker 
188 of Heartseeking 


of Vampire Slaying 
Heracles’s 

Hiatea’s Long 

Ice Fang 

Illusory 

Indra’s 

Iron of Gesen 
Joukahainen’s Crossbow 
Last Shot 

of Levitation 

of Lir 

of Marksmanship 

of Neverending Arrows 
Oberon’s 

Odin’s 

Phantom 

Rudra’s 

Sarnge 

Shichi’s Daikyu 
Solonor Thelandira’s 
of Speed 

Underwater Crossbow 
of the Unicorn 

Valis’s 

of Vampire Slaying 

of Warning With Curse 
of Warning Without Curse 


Light 
Medium 
Heavy 


Aegir's 

Bronzewood Cudgel 
Daghdha’s 

Druid’s Cudgel 

Fire’s 

Great Stone 
Grolantor’s 

Crutch of Lightning 


Abbathor'’s 
Alignment Detection 
Aphrodite’s 

Armor Piercing 
Baravar Cloakshadow’s 
of Blackflame 

Blade of Banishing 
Bladestar 
Brandobaris’s 
Buckle Knife 
Buckler Knife 
Ceremonial 
Chih-Nii’s 

Chill Blade 

of Concealment 

of Defiance 
Dolphins’ Bane 

of Doomwarding 
Dragon Fang 
Dragonfang 

Elven 

of the Evil Eye 
Eviscerator 

Fang 

Fang of the Nosferatu 
Flying 

Flying II 

Freya’s Fiery 
Frigga’s 
Golemblight 
Grimwald’s 
Guardian Blade 
Hastseltsi’s Throwing 
Hecate’s 

Hornblade (Knife size) 
Hornblade (Dagger size) 
of Illusory Metal 


* aT a 


1591 


— rr lll 


j E. 


Daggers 

269 of Impaling 

270 lyarim’s Flying 

271 Jump 

272 Kiaransalee’s 

273 Knife of Continual Sharpness* 

274 Knife of Sharpness 

275 Koalinth Slayer 

276 Loki’s Envenomed 

277 Longtooth 

278 Mageslayer 

279 of the Magius 

280 Mervic’s 

281 Nut’s Black 
282-283 of Quickness 

284 Rabbitslayer 

285 Random Target 

286 Resource 

287 Rust Blade 

288 Rutterkin Sling Blade 

289 Sahuagin Dolphin 

290 of Set 

291 Soma’s 

292 of Sounding 

293 Speaking 

294 Spider Fang 

295 Sung Chiang’s 

296 of Throwing 

297 of Throwing II 

298 Throwing of Returning 

299 Tooth of Torm 
300-301 of Truth 

302 Tufala’s Jambiya 

303 Tvashtri’s 

304 of Vengeance 

305 of Venom 

306 Werebane 

307 Xochiquetzal’s 

308 Yama's 
Darts 

309 of Biting 

310 of Blinking 

311 of Branding 

312 of Charming 

313 of Climbing 

314 of Curing 

315 Death 

316 Death II 
317-318 of Disarming 

319 of Dispelling 

320 of Flying 

321 of Homing 

322 of the Hornets’ Nest 

323 Illusory Missiles 

324 of Light 

325 of Lighting 

326 of Penetrating 

327 of Refilling 

328 of Screaming 

329 of Seeking 

330 of Sinking 

331 of Slaying 

332 of Speaking 

333 of Stunning 

334 Svirfnebli 
335-336 of Teleporting 

337 of Transporting 

338 of Wounding 

339 Discus of Disenchantment 
Explosive Devices 

340 Dimensional Mine 

341 Dimensional! Mine II 

342 Ellister’s Dimensional Mine 

343 Helm Bomb 

344 Spelljamming Mine 

345 Wethilion’s Time Bomb 
Flail Weapons 

346 Bael’s Morning Star 


347 Bargrivyek’s 

348 Battle Star 

349 of the Desert Kings 

350 Dragonflail 

351 Fleeting 

352 Morning Star of Detection 
353-354 Multiple Rod of Dancing 

355 Osiris’s Royal 

356 Pharaoh's 

357 Gnomish Sweeper 
Hammers 

358 Aegis-Fang 

359 Air 

360 Colgomere’s of Thunderbolts 

361 Delzoun’s Fist 

362 Dwarf Thrower 

363 Dwarf Thrower II 

364 Flandal Steelskin’s 

365 Gaerdal Ironhand’s 

366 Goibhniu’s War 

367 Hephaestus’s 

368 Kostchtchie’s 

369 Kostchtchie’s II 
370-371 of Life 

372 Mallet of Luck 

373 Maul of the Titans 

374 Mjolnir I 

375 of Nailing 

376 Nai No Kami’s 

377 of Penetration 

378 Runehammer 

379 of Silence 

380 Storm 

381 Stronmaus’s of Thunderbolts 

382 of Thunderbolts 

383 of Vengence 

384 of Vitroin 

385 Whelm 

386 Winged 
Harpoon 

387 Magical 
Helmseekers 
388-389 Accelerator 

390 Ballista 

391 Bombard 

392 Catapult 

393 Great Bombard 

394 Greek Fire 

395 Jettison Medium 
Javelins 

396 Cursed 

397 of Distance 

398 Hruggek’s of Lightning 

399 Huitzilopochtli’s 

400 of Lightning 

401 of Piercing 

402 Sunbolt 
Jettisons 

403 Light Magical 

404 Medium Magical 

405 Heavy Magical 
406-407 Light Magical II 

408 Medium Magical I 

409 Heavy Magical II 
Lances 

410 Anhur’s 

411 Copper 

412 Death 

413 Footman Dragonlance 

414 Mounted Dragonlance 

415 of Fire 

416 Hastsezini’s Lance of 

417 Izanagi's 

418 Lesser Footman’s Dragonlance 

419 Lesser Mounted Dragonlance 

420 of Piercing 

421 Puchan’s Golden 

422 Tribal 


1592 


423-424 True Dragonlance 
425 Venom 
426 Wind’s 
Maces 
427 Astral Deva 
428 Bael’s Morning Star 
429 Berronar Truesilver’s 
430 Black 
431 of Crushing 
432 of Darkness 
433 Diamond 
434 of Disruption 
435 Driver 
436 Expeller 
437 Great Golden of the North 
438 Great Holy Icon 
439 Hruggek’s Morning Star 
440 Tronstar 
441-442 Mace-Wand 
443 Memnor's Morning Star 
444 Muamman Duathal’s 
445 Nebelun’s 
446 Nightbringer 
447 of Pain 
448 Raiden’s 
449 Shadowcaster 
450 Skull 
451 of Spellwarding 
452 of St. Cuthbert 
453 of St. Cuthbert IT 
454 of St. Cuthbert III 
455 Staff-Mace 
456 Storm Star 
457 Tadrond’s 
458 Undeadbane 
459-460 Undeadbane II 
461 Varuna's 
462 Warstar of the Manticore 
Mattocks 
463 Dumathoin’s 
464 of the Titans 
Nets 
465 Ashley's of Entrapment 
466 Drag 
467 of Entrapment 
468 of Fishing 
469 Hare 
470 Hiatea’s of Weakness 
471 Hiatea’s of Feeblemind 
472 Hiatea’s of Petrification 
473 of Landing 
474 Loyal of Restraint 
475 of Plenty 
476-477 of Profit 
478 Safety 
479 of Snaring 
480 of Snaring II 
481 of Sneering 
482 of Spirit Snaring 
483 Webnet 
484 Webnet II 
485 of Worth 
486 Noisesome Spirit Chaser 
Paddleboard 
487 Magical l 
488 of Wondrous Transformation 
Pellets 
489 Flash 
490 Flash II 
Polearms 
491 Baphomet’s Bardiche 
492 Belial’s Military Fork 
493 Blessed Trident 
494-495 of Commanding Water 
Creatures 
496 Fisher's Trident of Fish 
Command 
497 Fork of Jabbing 


DE ———— 


ee ee ee 


Fork of Travel 
Lacedonbane 


Mephistopheles’s Fork 
Niord’s Great Trident 
O-Wata-Tsu-Mi's Jade Trident 
Persana's Trident 
Pitchfork of Penetration 
Poseidon’s Trident 
Reptilebane 

Rutterkin Polearm 
Saw-Toothed Glaive 
Trident of Elemental Death 
Trident of Fish Command 
Trident of Fish Control 
Trident/Military Fork 
Trident of the Oljatt Sea 
Trident of the Phlogiston 
Trident of Submission 
Trident of Warning 
Trident of Yearning 
Uluth’gak’s Gythka 
Water Elemental Slayer 
Wave 

Zezen Washio’s Trident 


of Arrow Storing 
Black 

of Ehlonna 

Frief's Magical 

Never Empty 

of Returning 

of Wrong Returning 
Rutterkin Snap-Tong 


Elmarin Cannon Call (Dust) 
Elmarin Cannon Call (Ring) 
Elmarin Cannon Call (Snow) 
Elmarin Cannon Cail II (Shatter) 
Elmarin Cannon Call II (Skunk) 


Elmarin Cannon Call Ill (Warp) 
Elmarin Cannon Call I 
(Shrapnel) 


of Lycanthropy 
Scythe of Pain 


Blacksling 

Bolas of Sunlight 
Finniginn’s 

of Seeking 

Sling Bullet of Impact 
Slingstone of Pulverizing 


of Accuracy 
Ares’s 
Athena's 
Backbiter 
Black Kumade 
Demeter's 
Gae Bolg 
Goibhniu’s 
Gruumsh’s 
Gungnir 
Gungnir II 
Hadrion’s 


572 
573 
574 
575 
576 
577 
578 
579 
580 
581 
Spellj 
582-583 
584 
585 
Swords 


of Obliteration 
of Panic 


Aasimon 
of Abhorrence of Shape 


Caps: 
Adjatha the Drinker 
Albruin 
Amatsu-Mikaboshi’s 


The Answerer II (Rebutter) 
The Answerer III (Scather) 
The Answerer IV (Replier) 
The Answerer V (Retorter) 
The Answerer VI (Squeicher) 
The Answerer VII (Backtalker) 
Anton's Vorpal Blade 

of Arak 

Arbane's of Agility 

Ar’ondight 


of Assassination 


Barnus’s Gnomebane 
of Bast 

Belenus's 

of the Believer 

Benn Griff's 


Black Flame 
Blackflame 

of Blackflame 
Blackjammer’s Cutlass 
Blackrazor 

Blade of Black Ice 


Captain’s 
Casterbane 
Celestial Fury 
Chainsword 


of Charm Person 


Chopping 


1593 


688-689 
690 


691 
692 
693 
694 
695 
696 
697 


Clamorour 
of Cleaving 
Colada 

of Cold 
Companion 
Corellon’s 
Corthalis 
Courtain 

of Cowardice 


Cutter 

of Cymrych Hugh 
Cyric’s 

Dale 

of Dancing 

Dancing of Bronze 
Dancing of Lightning 
Darius’s 
Death-to-Monsters 
Deep Sashelas’s 
Defender 

Desert Blade 
Dragonbait’s Holy Avenger 
Dragon Claw 

Dragon Crippler 
Dragon Slayer 
Dragonslayer Il 

of Dragon Slaying 
Drain Life Energy 
Draxalon Defender of 
Feminine Virtue 
Dreamsinger 
Dugmaren Brightmantle’s 
Broad sword 
Durandan 

Dyerwaen 

of the Ebon Flame 
Ebonbane 


The Edge 

of Efreeti Slaying 
Elkhorn’s 

Elqillar 

Elven 

Elven II 

Emperor's 

Enchanted of Sylaire 
Equalizer of Gran March 
Everstriking 

Evil Wyrmslayer 
Evithyan’s Blade 
Excalibur 

Excalibur II 

Excalibur Il 

Farrinae 

Fate’s Promise 
Fiendbane 

Final Word (Answerer) 
Final Word (Back-talker) 
Final Word (Concluder) 
Final Word (Lastquip) 
Final Word (Rebutter) 
Final Word (Replier) 
Final Word (Retorter) 
Final Word (Scather) 
Final Word (Squelcher) 
Finder 

Fionnghuala’s 

Fist of Odin 
Flamberge 

Flame Blade 

Flame of the North 
Flame Tongue 

Flames on Command 


9 OQ ST 


Flaming 

Flaming I 

Floating Blade of Shin Lu 
Flying Scimitar of Tusmit 
Foebane 


Foefinder 

Forseti's 

Frey's 

Frey’s Il 

Frey's Two-Handed 
Frey's Two-Handed II 
Freya's Frost Brand 
of Friendship 


Genie Slayer 

Genies’ Bane 

Genies’ Bane (Dao) II 
Genies’ Bane (Djinn) II 
Genies’ Bane (Efreet) II 
Genies’ Bane (Marid) II 
Genieblight 
Geniescourge 

Giant Slayer 

of Giant Slaying 

of the Giants 

Githyanki Knight's Silver 
Githyanki Leader's Silver 
Glorius 

Goblinvolent 

of the Golden Gulf 


Gregory's Holy Avenger 
Grinthane 

Guardian Blade 
Hachiman’s 

Hades's 

Harmonizer 

Harpo's Orcslayer 
Hawksblade 

Heart of Stone 
Heartseeker 
Heimdall’s 

Hel’s 

Ho Masubi’s 

Hofud 

Holy 

Holy Avenger 

Holy Revenger 

of Honor 

Hornblade 

of Horus 

Ice Claw 

Iibratha (Mistress of Battle) 
IIneval’s Broad sword 


Ilyana 

Indra’s Flaming 

of Insanity 

of Intercession 
Tronfang 

Jaysen’s Magebane 
Joyeuse 

Justicer 

Kabal 

Kaldair Swiftfoot's 
Kali’s 

Karali’s Silver 
Kirren’s Frostbrand 
Kullervo's 

Kura (The Darkness) 
Kusunogi no Tsurugi (Grass 
Quelling) 


812-813 Lafarallinn’s 
814 Lancelin's 
815 Laprov 
816 Lassiviren’s 
817 Lemmikainen’s 


818 Life Saver 
819 Life Stealing 
820 Life Taker 
821 of Light 


822 Lightning Blade 
823 Locate Object 

824 Elven of Luck 

825 Luck Blade 

826 Lydia’s Broad sword 


827 of Lyons 
828 Malign 
829 Madoc's 
830-831 Mamluk of Obedience 
832 of Mammal Slaying 
833 Mantooth 
834 Mantooth II 
835 


Maroon 
836 Mayonaka's Silver Katana 
837 Melior 
838 Meredin’s Luck Blade 
839 Mimung 
840 Mitra’s of Light 
841 Monster Slayer 
842 Moon Blade 
843 Morglay 
844 Movanic Deva 
845 Naesowen (Ghost Blade) 


846 Nagelring 
847-848 Namara Neversleep 
849 Neekar 
850 Nepanth 
851 of Night 


852 Nightwatcher 

R53 Nightwind 

854 Nine Lives Stealer 

855 Nine Steps Draining 

856 Nomog-Geaya’s Broad sword 
857 Oberon's 


858 of Odin 

859 Odin's 

860 of Olynthos 

861 Owen's 

862 Paramel 

863 Partisan 

864 Peacemaker 
865-866 Peregrine’s 

867 

868 Philippan 

869 Piercer 

870 Plak’s 


874 Purta Blue's 

875 of Quickness 

876 Ratri's 

877 Red Death 

878 Red Robin 

879 Red Sabre 

880 Redeemer 

881 Rel Astran of Enmity 
882 Ren's of Dancing 
Reptilian Legionnaire 
885 Retaliator 

886 Retaliator II 

887 Rutterkin Flatchet 
888 of the Sands 

889 Sauvagine 

890 Savitri’s 

891 Scale Cleaver 

892 Scales of Justice 


Scimitar of Speed 
Scorbane 


Scourge of Regencrators 
Slicer 

Sess’ innek’s Two-Handed 

Sess’innek’s One-Handed 

Seventh Blade 


Shock Blade 


Surtr’s Flaming 

Surya’s of Light 
Susanoo’s Blue 

Susk 

Sylabra 

Syrar’s Silver 


Taragarth 
Tarl Vanovitch’s Sun Blade 


Vainamoinen’s II 
Vampiric Regeneration 
Vanya’s Wrath 


Vasgo 

Vergadain’s Broad sword 
Vhaeraun's 

Vorpal 

Vorpal II 


Warbringer 
Warlord Blade of the Shield 
Lands 


ee E o 


Swords 
976 Wyrmcleaver 
977 Wyrmsbane 
978 Wyrmsbane II 
979 Wyrmslayer 
980 Wyrmsvenin 


981 Xiphoid Xebec 
982 Yondalla’s 
983 Zenchoo Katana 


984 Zinzerena’s 
Throwing Stars 
985 of Ojy-do 
986 of Returning 
Whips 
987 of Amatar 
988 Balor 
989-990 of Feathers 
991 of Frost Fire and Fear 
992 Furies’s (Alecto’s) 
993 Furies’s (Megarea’s) 
994 Furies’s (Tisiphone’s) 
995 Khurgorbaeyag’s 
996 Moloch’s 
997 Purpose 
998 of Summoning 
999 Tar’s Chaotic Creature 
000 of Zeif 
Table T: Artifacts 


The following is a list of the artifacts 
available in the ENCYCLOPEDIA MAGICA 
Volumes. While they are presented in a 
table format, they are not designed to be 
given out as random treasure, Their power 
and corruption are far too great. A careless 
introduction of these items into an ongo- 
ing campaign is practically guaranteed to 
destroy it. 


Roll Artifact Name 
01-05 Acorn of Wo Mai 
06-11  Al-Azid’s Ghostly Palace 
12-17 Alchemist’s Apparatus 
18-23 All-Knowing Eye of Yasmin 
Sira 
24-29 Apparatus of Dreadful 
Construction 
30-35 Armet by Wayland 
36-41  Artifurnace 
42-47 Asmodeus’s Ruby Rod 
48-52 Axe of the Dwarf Lords 
53-58 Axe of the Emperors 
59-64 Baba Yaga’s Hut II 
65-70  Blackjammer’s Cutlass 
71-76 Book of Amon 
77-82 Book of Zargos 
83-88 Book With No End 
89-94 Bringer of Doom 
95-99 Calvan’s Bell 
100-105 Carven Oak 
106-111 Claw of Mighty Simurgh 
112-117 Codex of the Infinite Planes 
n 
118-123 Coin of Jisan the Bountiful 
124-129 Comb of the Korrigans 
Crowns 
130-135 of Chaotic Evil 
136-141 of Chaotic Good 
142-147 of Chaotic Neutral 
148-152 of Lawful Evil 
153-158 of Lawful Good 
159-164 of Lawful Neutral 
165-170 of Neutral 
171-176 of Neutral Evil 
177-182 of Neutral Good 
183-188 Crystal of Light 
189-194 Crystal of the Ebon Flame II 


195-199 
200-205 
206-211 
212-217 
218-223 
224-229 
230-235 
236-241 
242-246 
247-252 
253-258 
259-264 
265-270 
271-276 
277-282 
283-288 
289-294 
295-299 
300-305 
306-311 
312-317 
318-323 
324-329 
330-335 
336-341 
342-346 
347-352 
353-358 
359-364 
365-370 
371-376 
377-382 
383-388 


389-393 


412-417 
418-423 
424-429 
430-435 
436-441 
442-446 
447-452 
453-458 
459-464 
465-470 
471-476 
Orbs 

477-482 
483-488 
489-493 
494-499 
500-505 
506-511 
512-517 
518-523 
524-529 
530-535 
536-540 
541-546 
547-552 
553-558 
559-564 
565-570 
571-576 
577-582 
583-588 
589-593 
594-599 
600-605 
606-611 
612-617 
618-623 
624-629 
630-635 
636-640 


Cup of A?’ Akbar 

Daoud’s Wondrous Lanthron 
Death Rock 

Diamond Orb of Tyche 
Ebonbane II 

Egg of the Phoenix II 

Eye of Veena II 

Fiery Brand of Masauwu 
Fountain of Time 

Fountain of Tomorrow 
Girdle of Armida 

Girdle of De ‘Rah 

Golden Circlet IT 

Hammer of Gesen 

Hammer of Kharas 

Hand of Vecna II 

Helmet of Halav 

Helmet of Petra 

Herald of Mei Lung 
Heward’s Mystical Organ 
Heward's Mystical Organ II 
Holy Grail I 

Horn of Change 
Humbaba’s Glaring Eye 
Hymir’s Steaming Cauldron 
Icon of Halav 

Icon of Petra 

Invulnerable Coat of Arnd II 
Iron Bow of Gesen II 

Iron Flask of Tuerny I 
Ivory Chain of Pao 

Ivory Plume of Maat 
Jacinth of Inestimable 
Beauty Il 

Johydee’s Mask II 

Kuroth’s Quill II 

Libram of Zargos 

Mace of St. Cuthbert IV 
Machine of Lum the Mad II 
Mask of Bachraeus 

Master Plan 

Mighty Servant of Leuk-O II 
Milenian Scepter 
Mirror-Shield of Rheddrian 
Mjolnir 

Monkey Fist of Ha’chao 
Monocle of Bagthalos 
Necklace of Ulutiu 
Obsidian Man of Urik 


of Chaotic Evil 

of Chaotic Good 

of Chaotic Neutral 
of Dragonkind II 

of the Dragon 

of the Dragonette 
of the Drake 

of the Elder Wyrm 
of the Eternal Dragon 
of the Firedrake 

of the Gold-Hoarder 
of the Great Serpent 
of the Hatchling 

of the Scaled 

of the Serpent 

of the Wyrmkin 

of Lawful Evil 


of Lawful Good 

of Lawful Neutral 

of Neutral 

of Neutral Evil 

of Neutral Good 
Ortnit’s Lance of Doom 
Peaceful Periapt of Pax 
Pileus 


Porpherio’s Garden Pool 
Pyramid Energy 
Queen Ehlissa’s Nightingale 


641-646 


647-655 
656-662 
663-669 
670-676 


Queen Ehlissa’s Nightingale 
Ir 

Queen’s Eye 

Rainbow Scarf of Sinbad 
Red Chariot of Agni 
Regalia of Might 


Regalia of Might Il 


677-682 
683-687 
688-693 
694-699 
700-705 
706-711 

712-717 
718-723 
724-729 
730-735 
736-740 
741-746 
747-752 
753-758 
759-764 
765-770 
Scepters 
771-776 
777-782 
783-787 
788-793 
794-799 
800-805 
806-811 

812-817 
818-823 
824-829 
830-834 
835-840 
841-846 
847-852 
853-858 
859-864 
865-870 
871-876 
877-882 
883-887 
888-893 

894-899 
900-905 
906-911 

912-917 
918-923 
924-929 
930-934 
935-940 
941-946 
947-952 


Crown of Evil 
Crown of Good 
Crown of Neutrality 
Orb of Evil 

Orb of Good 

Orb of Neutrality 
Scepter of Evil 
Scepter of Good 
Scepter of Neutrality 
Rift Spanner 

Ring of Gax 

Ring of Gaxx 

Rod of Seven Parts 
Rod of Seven Parts II 
Rod of Teeth 
Sacred Grove Horn 


of Chaotic Evil 

of Chaotic Good 

of Chaotic Neutral 
of Lawful Evil 

of Lawful Good 

of Lawful Neutral 
of Neutral 

of Neutral Evil 

of Neutral Good 

of the Sorcerer-King 
Seal of Jafar al-Samal 
Shadow Belt 


Silencer of Bodash 
Stone Scepter of Shih 
Surya’s Chariot 
Sword of Kas 

Sword of Kas II 
Talisman of Al’Akbar 
The Apparatus 

The Gauntiet 

The Sentinel 

Throne of the Gods 
Throne of the Gods II 
Timepiece of Klorr 
Tome of Ssu-Ma 
Tooth of Dalhvar-nar II 
Tree of Life 

Tree of Life I 


Triad of Betrayal 


953-958 
959-964 
965-970 
971-976 


977-981 
982-987 
988-993 
994-000 


Circlet of Betrayal 
Coin of Betrayal 
Dagger of Betrayal 
Verthandi’s Invincible 
Hourglass 

Well of All Heals 
Wife of Ilmarinen 
World-Shield Ore 
Ye’Cind’s Recorder 


J TTT ee 


1595 


_ == o 


This index is as complete, user friendly, and 
cross referenced as we could make it. If an 
item has more than one term in its name, the 
item will normally be found under each of 


them. For example, The Ghostly Palace of Al- 


Azid is listed under Al-Azid, Ghostly, and 
Palace Many items have subheadings—nor- 
mal, cursed; red, black—and these are also 
included, Furthermore, some items, particu- 
larly those from DRAGONLANCE products, 
have alternate names and these are also 


encompassed. Spells contained in the various 


spellbooks have not been listed—there is only 
$o much room, 
A 

Aasimon Bow, ..........0-s0s0005- 202 
Aasimon Sword ..........-.++-+05 1336 
Aba 

WEAPON, vcr pecccswenmrseee 1009 

of Displacement .............-.- 1009 

CR ETOROOHION» 5 0.0100 a A Si 1009 
Abacus of Calculation ............... 25 
POD AION E E PEE i 84 
Abbathor’s 

DERE PTR tere N NRN 69 

LE T AT TET 356 

SNE EER ETE 1093 
Abbor Alz’s Brooch of Warning. .. . . . - 225 
Abelaat Crystal. .........-..0.--0-- 341 
Abhorrence of Shape Changers, 

BWME Se octe bude esis CT 1336 
Ability, Potion of Psionic ............ 883 
Able, BK aR ssi E TELS 1192 
Abishai, Green ...............2-4- 1192 
Abjuration 

Affliction, Ring of .............0. 947 

Cursed, School Cap of ............ 250 

Resistance, Ring of. ...........05 994 

School Capon: seer is soais 251 
Abominable Beacon Lamp, Illag’s. .... 642 
Above, Awl of the, ............05008 110 
Abrasion, Soap of................. 1126 
a cc V sede conaiswsneat 763, 899 
Absolutes, Alterations of the 

DRG iy sie seco soe wslvas 1137 
Absorbing Beholder Mouthpick. . .... . 166 
Al 

PROT Oba aa eas raran Een NR 69 
DOR Oo iioa aa 414 
POH OF sac siwacanaswiaaceeralees 853 
PROOF DROELL 1021 
SOOO naasna 1093 
Abyss, Amulet of the ..........000006 27 
POCORN, o.s'c:6 a LOISTO 25, 596 
ARONNE: SWORE: e oo sies4 seine nians 1336 
Access, H’Veyk's Robe of Immediate. . . 1011 
Accessibility, Khalids Pouch of. ...... 136 
Accessibility, Pouch of .............. 137 
Accuracy 
PRIOWVESON OF i. ooien di ean 92 
E ATO T T OT AERA 163 
n a C T E E E 176 
A I EAT EE S 202 
COVOR O85 0:6: piae saaien E 203 
A AET TE EIERE ES 451 
Missile Weapon of ..........-..... 92 
PAM is a cincivcenvnesiexeeeett 1129 
Adcuaied Carpet... se cnese sve gat 256 
Accusation, Tart Of... esses eroe 1428 
Acid 
Resistance, Oil of ......,.......4- 763 
Scroll of Protection from ......... 1076 
Shield of Proof Against... ........ 1101 
Acorn of Wo Mai .........-----+++-- 25 


ie ee a ee A 


Acorn Powder, Oak-in-............-. 906 
Acquiesce, Bridle of. ...........--.. 223 
Action 
Hiir Otol pose taes sasra 442 
Hand of Remote ...............6- 505 
Helmet, of Underwater............ 594 
Orb of Remote vo. ..ccse eee ess 798 
Ring of Free... 0.46. 4s. cece es 953, 964 
Rite OF Quick so aaas 990 
Staff of Ethereal ..............-- 1280 
Tome of Quickness of. ........... 1444 
Yoke of Underwater ............. 1564 
Actions, Sulphur Influence and .. .. . . 1244 
Activity Detection, Lens of ........ -- 653 
Adamantite Sickle ..........,...-- 1115 
Adaptation 
NOMIC Os 50 cna ee EE S E, 746 
Ring of Elemental. ............... 959 
ORDON Os o rges n Eaa 1507 
Adder, Circlet of the, ....... o...n 289 
Adder, Staff of the ..........-..+5- 1293 
Additional Weaponry, Elixir of ....... 441 
Adherence, Hook of... .. 46666665 599 
Adhering, Dust of.....5...0c00seeees 414 
Adjatha (The Drinker) .......,..... 1336 
Admundfort Ring of Leadership ...... 947 
Advanced Meditation, Potion of. ... . . . 854 
Adventuring, Potion of Water. ........ 897 
SIND 555 Heh SST ISR GREN 314 
Raa A vances is coaches 1093 
Salts, vscoack E net 551 
P N T ETOT TTT 139 
Aerdi Sea, Rod of the.............. 1022 
Aerdy, Black Crown of... ......... 332 
Aerial Anchor... ........... EE 45 
Affliction, Ring of ....... 00-0000 947 
Affican Ju riii elet eens 763, 899 
Age; Cane asus ccccveacnaany 247 
Aging 
POOR AEEA ESPES TTS 854 
Potion of Immunity to... a.oa 873 
Tea onse inicia aret 1431 
Agelessness, Oil of... ........0.0065 763 
Ages, Book of the Bright ........... 1154 


Ages, Book of the Dark ............ 


Agoraphobic Weapon, ...........-- 1507 

E EE A E 1114 

Air 
Adaptation, Ring of ............4. 959 
BMD e sansir dieveas 151 
Breathing, Necklace of. ........... 746 
Command, Ring of ........66.6655 960 
Control, Potion of Elemental ....., . 866 
Elemental Ball. oeeo inot ees es 149 


Elementals, Censer of Controlling . . . 270 
Elementals, Censer 


Hierophant, Ring of the ........... 969 
Invulnerability, Oil of Elemental .. . . 768 
Lesser Talisman of .............. 1421 
WR ihasensranncoetwadess tyes 697 
Metamorphosis, Ring of........... 961 
Mordom’s Cauldron of ............ 268 
Pockets, Cloak of .. 0.2... 6. 0.0006 296 
Potion of Fresh ........-++-2.2+e0- 869 
Quality (AQ) Lens, Red. ......... 1067 
Restoration, Cabinet of....,....... 233 
Scroll of Protection from ......... 1077 
T Do So JANE EENAA eee 26 
Staff of the Elements: ............ 1279 
MANGE iss te ddvsliies 1278, 1279, 1280 
Summoning Hostile Elementals . . . . . 270 


1597 


and Water Adaptation, Ring of . .. . . . 959 
and Water, Staffof ......... 1272, 1278 
ANO isa a adine via eowteneeaele 177 
Airolis’s Shining Horn of 
Ten Thousand Winds. .......... 1542 
Airy Sphere, Karnrohb’s............ 1270 
PSGBRVB TEOSE O E 202 
Al'Akbar, Cup of i sss/tcsiis pasos se 352 
Al’Akbar, Talisman of ...........44 1419 
Al-Azid's Ghostly Palace ............. 26 
Al-Kalim, Gold Seal Ring of ........, 967 
Al-Samal, Seal of Jafar. ...........- 1087 
Alabaster Griffon Figurine. ,......... 473 
Alar Ch’ Aranol's Staff... .......... 1272 
Alarm Beacon Spelljamming Helm . . . . 574 
Alsen BEE <eo:56.0 v0neccevicttvey 812 
Albruin, Sword... saraso eirs 1337 
OME: TUR L weer deeccens 1133 
Alchemists Apparatus ..........-.... 53 
Alchemy, Grimoire of Archaic........ 663 
Alchemy Jug...........++--++- 624, 626 
Alsto's A PI E 1533 
Aleese’s Philter of Overwhelming 
LEl esso presrsosonreorssere 827 
Alertness, Rod of . 0.0... 066 66s 1022 
Alexander's Chime of Opening ....... 816 
Alicorns, Uses of sies ias in 1153 
Alignment 
Change, Amulet Protection from 
Change, Helmet of 
Detection Dagger 
Detection, Earring of 
Helmet of Opposite. . . 
Intelligent Weapon . 
RB OE EOT 
Potion of Opposite . 
SWONE vice ONS. 
Alignments, Combining 
Regalia of Various... ......6...45 944 
All-Knowing Eye of Yasmin Sira...... 451 


Allergy Dust 


Alteration 

Affliction, Ring of ........-..-.5. 947 

Cursed School Cap of. Brey) 

Girdle of Gender, ...........+-055 534 

Necklace of, ...... <.. TAT 

Resistance, Ring of. 994 

School Cap Olas tossa aaa 251 

Winn OF Ies s osonni onanan 1494 
Alterations of Tangibles 

and Intangibles .............-. 1137 
Alterations of the Intrinsic 
ADIONIUOS':s . v s-ren 0 sca oira 1137 

Altering Naga Crown. .........-.... 334 
Alternate 

Profession, Potion of. 

Wand of Wonder V 

WOS Gate... snr ccccecccshotes 
Alternating Illumination, Weapon of , . 1514 
Alz’s Brooch of Warning, Abbor ... . - . 225 
Ama-Tsu-Mara’s Vorpal Axe ......... 112 
Amalgamous Potion, .............++ 854 
Amasis, Ring OF 60.6.0 e aer EEA 947 
Amatar, Whip of. .....-.-25-<00++ 1532 
Amatsu-Mikaboshi’s Sword. ........ 1339 
Amazement, Dress of .......-..---++ 413 
Aniatitig MIOG A T 719 


ťĪ- C L Eee | 


Amber 
CERASTO OF eenia 1072 
Golems, Libram of ...... 0.a ae 662 
Golem, Talisman of the........... 1422 
Monkeys Figurine. ...........-... 473 
Ambient Temperature (AT) 

Lans, YOW, a: s:9:54)¢:6:0 csenarten'e 1067 
Ambrosia, Cauldron of.............. 267 
Ambrosia, Potion of ..........+--+++ 854 
Amedio, Cheetah Cloak of.....-..... 298 
Amethyst of Neverwinter. ........... $23 
Amethyst Dragon Slayer, Sword ..... 1357 
Amiability, Amulet of. ............... 27 
Amnesia, Chair of .......... sses 273 
PINEAL, EN 
Amon, Book of. 

Amorpha Jug 
Amphibian Control, Potion of 

PIII nes ssc te PORS 855 
Amphibian/Fish Control, 

Potion of Reptile/ ............55 855 
Amphibian Incubalum .............- 435 
of Amplification, Hom. ............ 1543 
Amulet 

Of the Alias: seis sec citeess tices 27 
Against Crystal Balls & ESP ........ 27 
Against Disease ........-..0. 00005 27 
Of AMMBI YG: cinscatscacnsaess 27 
of Arachnid Control ..............- 28 
Of the Beasts so. ia ee aa es 28 
of the Cairn Hills 22.00.0205 200 ee 28 
Cartographer sil ae Ae 28 
of Caterpillar Control .......... 00.. 29 
of Charm Resistance. .............4 29 
of Charming iis e aii E 29 
of Cheetah Speed ........-.0...064 29 
of Communication ................ 29 
of Dragon Warding................ 29 
of Dramatic Death ................ 29 
Draskillion’s, of Life............... 31 
of Elemental Command ............ 31 
OL EMOMONE sisia nS 31 
of Extension 

of Far Reaching. 

PRG ois ta sings T edness 

of Finding 

PUPyONGY B acces ctinessescaten 32 
of the Golden Collar... ............ 32 
Greenstone 

Hands of the Healing Spirit 

ee ee ee Sees 
Health ..... 

of the Hero 

of Holy Turning. 

Greenstone 

AE RAN EPRE PE TE 
Greenstone 

of Immunity to Charm ............. 35 
of Inescapable Location ............ 35 
of Insect Repellency ............... 35 
Kaleen’s Undead Stone. ............ 35 
OF LAthander .... «05:00 00 c0.ccees cess 
AT occ asioscipeniseenernmscoe 

OF Life PROCTOR s eose ecrcccess 

of Magic Resistance ............... 

of Metaspell Influence 

Of Neutrality... anara 
OMAN «alsin wes wins cao oases 
a EAEN OET 
LA. RORE 

of the Papyrus Scepter a 

of Perpetual Youth.............-... 

of Perpetual Youth & Inexperience . 
Phelthong’s > 
WES PAWS ois oreo newaeh Sia 
CERO ACOTIT TANIRA E Gries 


of Proof vs. Detection and 


of Protection Against 


of Protection from Turning . 
of Psionic Interference . . .. 
of Psionic Reflection 
of Psychic Protection 
EPAI ene 


of Spinecastle ....... 
of the Spirit......... 
Thet of Ptah ........ 
of Timekeeping. ..... 
of Transformation, . . . 


Velen 2/0 vis ose 0.0.05 


Anagak 
Analysis, Scope of Celestial... ...... 1067 
Analect of Magic ...... 


Angel, Basin of the 
Alger ONL: <cssswia aka 


Arrow of Polymorphing Small ....... 93 
Attraction Pipes 
Cate, Hott OF aaea 
Comprehension, Jar of . 
Control, Potion of... . 
Control, Ring of . .. 
Friendship Ring .. . 
Friendship, Sherry’s Ring of. ....... 998 
Growth, Scroll of .........0.2006 1070 
Location, Wand of. . 
Magnetism Ring 
Magnetism Ring, Cursed .......... 948 
Animals, Potion of Speak with........ 893 
Animated Attack, Broom of.......... 228 


Harp 
Answerer, The, Sword ........ 1340, 1341 
Antennae of Triangulation ............ 50 
Anti-Magic, Potion of............... 855 
Anti-Sleep Potion 
Antidote Potion. ............62s0008 
Antimagic Arrow 
Antimagic Egg .......5+++s2+rs0e0+ 
Antimatter, Planes of 
Anti-Stoneskin Weapon ............ 1508 
Anton's Vorpal Blade .............. 1341 
Anvil 
of the Armies, Iron... ...........-. 52 
of the Dwarves, High .............. 51 
of the Lortmil Mountains, .......... 52 


Apparitions, Repertoire of 
Subconscious ...........60005 1220 


Ring of 


WAI E E dors easels 1197 
Apprentice’s Egg -irori siet eision 430 
Apron 

PECOT a esis rege cees 58 
Flandal Steelskin’s ..........-..-.. 58 
PONE EEEE EON EERE 58 
ISSIR R 1067 
Aquatic 
PRUE AE VEIENE PENE E ENNA 70 
Armor with Free Action ............ 70 
Depth Location, Ring of........... 948 
Item with Free Action. ............. 21 
WORMS xb bs rink a OAE TATAE 21 
Wizardry, Staff of ..............- 1272 
AVNER AIAI AITEN 1342 


Se E y o- 


Arabel's Huggable Bear.............+ 58 
Arabian Nights Oil............. 764, 899 
Arachnid 
PELOD. naaa 152 
Control, Amulet of .......... ...28 
Gonttol, Ring Of)... oesecesnstisc . 949 
E OA T „435 


Arachnida, Cloak of ...........+ . 295 
Arachnida, Theodolus’s Cloak of ,.....311 
AE SWOTG OF i igini o o 1341 
Arbane’s Spellbook. ..... noses eee 1244 
Arbane’s Sword of Agility .......... 1342 
Arbatel, Orjalun’s.......... 00005 s 1211 
Arbor Feather Token............ 5 

Arc Lightning, Wand of s 
Arcanabula of Jume..........2..64 
Arcanabula, Tasso’s ............... 
Arcane (n.) 


Arcane (adj.) 

of the Entourage.............008 1140 

Comprehension, Potion of . . . . 856 

Formula for a Dracolich ..... Fin d 

Formula fora Lich .............006 60 

Manipulations 

Puissance of Memory .......... 1140 
Resistance, Dwarves 
& Haflingers 1140 

Sight, Eyes and Vision ...... .. 1166 

Will, Evolution of.......... . 1165 
Arcanist, Eyeglasses of........ - 462 
Archaic Alchemy, Grimoire of . . -663 
Archdruid Cauldron . ......... 2+. 267 
Archery, Bracer of ........... snein 220 
Arches, Libram of Teleportation ...... 668 
ran Enna t- ARA AEE E 8 1140 
Archmagedom, Potion of ...... . 856 
Archmagi, Robe of the........ . 1009 
Archveult’s Spellbook ........ .. 1247 
Arctic, Medallion of the............. 710 


Arctor’s Staff of Swarming Insects. . . . 1272 
Ardraken’s Refreshment Simulacrum .. . 62 
Ares’s Spear 


Aries, Oil of 
Arik, Eye of 


of Ergoth, Silver ......... 

THUNB Right: nvs oea 80.050 

MVE A EE A 
Armament, Cane of 
Armband 

Comfort of Sleep seara 

EEN Fi, 208 420,995.84 8 


CENNER esos 


of Snake Changing Jae 

E MM APATO TIET, 

Trueheart’s Warding .............04 

of Variable Strength .... ‘ 
Armet by Wayland ....... 
Armida, Girdle of,....... 
Armies, Iron Anvil of the. ............ 
Armor 

ADDO REELE CALE AEREE EES 

of Absorption ......... 

of Acidic Secretion 


Avoreen’s Chain Mail . 
Agly ferns isc aivisiais sie bavi sis 


of Blackflame PX 
OF BINGE nena 
Blue, of the Crystalmist Mountains . . . 72 
Bradlies Leather. oenas 72 
BBUCKIG OF omni herons A 230 
Callarduran Smoothhand’s 


of Concealed Wizardry 
of Continual Cleanliness............ 73 
of Coolness. .......+55 

of Cure Wounds 


of Electricity.......... 
Elven Chain Mail 
of Energy Drain ....... 
of Ethereality ......... 
of Etherealness ........ 


OE PUBS nig cigs saan 
of Gaseous Form. . . i 


of Healing........ 
Heimdall’s,....... 


of Horus ......... 
Indra’s Golden... .. ues 
of Invisibility ©... 20... 6.40. eevee 77 
Kweolish Plate Mail of the Seas...... 77 
Kumakawa 


Laeral’s Storm..... saned8 
Lemmikainen'’s . . 
of Missile Attraction. . 


Oyori of the Unknown Warrior. ..... . 78 
OU OF EA EAA 764 
Piercing Dagger... .4...c0rseceees 357 
Plate of Solamnus........4..-+0005 79 
GR POMESSION rni oiea 79 
GEPRE cieri heane 79 
CHEEK... Ace PEREO EEA TE T 79 
GERADO eecion tatari oeni nna 81 
a o526:6 0515p d:90 i caren sloan wins 81 
Raji’s, of the Desert Evening ........ 81 
Red, of the Hellfires ...........4-55 81 
Red Dragon Scale. ........+..0+006 81 
OL RETAIN AT NEE 81 
ROMOVE CUTE.» oenn enpas 82 
Scale Mail of Horus ............055 82 
Skoriaan’s Drow Chain Mail. ........ 82 
Sleeping Bag of 
Nullification ..,,.,....+5+ 138, 1119 
DROIR.. ia ono Irne 82 
SUS RON os ise O EE Hie 82 
OF Sweltering: E T 82 
of Temperature Control... .......... 82 
Tulen’s Plate Mail of Etherealness . . . . 82 
OP ee Wri PRENA paid OTN 83 
of Underwater Action.............. 83 
Volos of Herota irren ini 83 
of Vulnerability... ................. 83 
OF Warmth iio nan nai nade es 83 
Armored Caparison ..........0.0.004 252 
Armoring, Nuggin’s Cursed Ring of . . . 984 
Armoring, Ring of ...........6.0066 949 
Armory, Wand oos niasin s 1474 
Arms and Fabulous Heroes, 
Legendary of Great......,....... 1191 
Arms, Manual of Puissant Skill at... . . 688 


Arms, My Brother of ........-...55 1352 
Arnd, Invulnerable Coat of........... 315 


Aroma of Nightmares, Jannis’s ....... 772 
Aromatic Smoking Pipe.,.........- 1122 
Arrow 


an E T E N 84 


D a EE ARE E 85 
BE OEE ra n aN 85 
OAL i O PE 86 
of Blinking Ro 
Bolts of Lightning. .......-........ 86 
of Bow-Breaking ..............0.. 86 


of Charming ............5. 
of Clairaudience 
of Clairvoyance. ......... 

of Climbing. ............ 

of Connection........... $ 
E aT ST ESNEA 
OF Darkness oE 


o TATE ETTET 


of Explosions ........... 
of Extended Range 
Faerie Fio eeose 


CE A E REEE TI 


Illusory Missiles... , , 
OF Justice... posse ee 


e ET ARETE 
of Lighting ......... 
of Lightning ...... 


Missile Weapon of Accuracy . 
Missile Weapon of Distance . . 


MIOR ares vad 
Oberon’s, of Subduing ............. 
Oberon’s, of Slaying . . . . 
Paralyzation ...... 
of Penetrating . .. 
of Penetration ... 
of Perseverance . . 


of Refilling... . . 
of Returning ... . 
of Rock Piercing. 
OF ROPING! eaaa AT 


Arrow 
of Scent Detection 


of Signaling............+-+-- 
CERIO DAE N 
E o «..4.--.0:000.0:00.0 0 
of Slaying 
Daae TI r O 
bea 


of Stunning.....-.-....-55 
of Teleporting ............. 
of Transporting ............ 
WOURGE ACET OOT 
of Wounding .........-..-- 
Arrowhead of Marking. ....... 
Arrows, Bow of Neverending 
Art of Communications and 


Dragonnel-by-the-Cliff. . . . 
Glorindel’s Gates ........ 
Glorindel's Living Painting. 
Igraine’s Portrait .............0.+% 105 
Norval's Timely Portrait ........... 106 
Pigments of Longevity ............ 106 


Portraiture by Magic.........-.... 106 
The Gladiators s:5 5s esccsacscsnare 102 


Ar k Swot): coc ccsispeswewscs 1366 
Artifacts, Trimia's Catalugue of 
Oter Plant sprske 1460 
ASHAUIAOE 05.5: e 574 
Arts of Oratory Magnetism, 
Forgotten. .......5.5 

ASR BIOR ssi casno 
Arumdina, Axe... +... -s 
Arunson’s Spellbook ..... 
Aruthir’s Living Door... ............ 
Arvoreen, Sword of the 
Arvoreen’s Chain Mail.............-- 71 
Arvoreen’s Sword. .....-.-..+0000+ 1342 
Ascending, Stair of... n.se onneen 1301 
Ash Command, Ring of ............. 989 
Ash Golem Libram. ........--. +. 645 662 
Ashakar’s Spellbook........-.....- 1140 
Ro SO Oe ree 1465 
Ashley’s Net of Entrapment, ......... 755 
Aslyferund’s Armor .......--.----++- 71 
Asmiak’s Spellbook .......... 1205, 1239 
Asmodeus’s Ruby Rod... . 2.2.22... 1022 
Asp, Charm of Resource ............ 283 
Aspects of Spellbooks, Physical. . .. . . 1133 
ASSMAN BEE 600s sien cece vibnteeer 
Assassination, Sword of. 
Astral Deva Mace..........-.....-- 
Astran Sword of Enmity, Rel ........ 1388 
Astrolabe 

Celestial 

of Entrapment 

of Henrik 
Astronomy, Universal 
AT Lens 
Athena's Helmet.............0.0008 585 
Athena’s Shield... 0202200006000 1093 
Athena Spear wovswas oversee ss 1129 
Atmospheric Cloak. ..... 2.5... 66-65 296 
Atonement, Gem of ,..........05055 517 
Attachment, String of. .........-... 1319 


Attack, Broom of Animated.......... 228 
Attacks, Jewel Of .............cccseeee 522 
Attacks, Shield of Proof 

Against Sound. ...........-...+- 1101 
Attacks Upon the Owner, Jewel of... . . 522 


Bagpipes, of Feline............-- 


Ball of Avian... . 


Attractor, Missile ..............44. 1099 
Attractor, Noj’s Missile ............ 1100 
Aubaerus, 

The Ravenmaster's Spellbook. . . . 1251 
Aubavreer’s Workbook............. 1141 
Auctions, Gavel of ..............+5- 512 
Audacity, Byubo’s Lamp of .......... 637 
Audience, Chair of..............++ 1088 
Augricrone’s Tablecloth ............ 1418 
Auquhol’s Hourglass .............-- 601 
Authority, Foundations of Secret... . . 1171 
Authority, Gavel of. ............000. 512 
Automated Spell Scroll, Mondasso's . . 1075 
Avenger 

HOY DETST, 1351, 1353, 1356, 1366, 
1373, 1375, 1376, 1391 
Sword, Diagonbait'’s Holy. ........ 1356 
Sword, Gregory's Holy ........... 1373 
Sword, Holy os saiae 1375 
Sword, Shalandain’s Holy......... 1391 
Avian 
Attraction, Ball of...............- 148 
Control, Potion of .............065 855 
Control, Potion of Mammal/..... . . . 855 
Control, Ring of .........-.600005 949 
Avran Greenstrider’s Spellbook ..... . 1143 
Awakening, Urn of ............6++ 1465 
Awareness 
CRIS OF EEE LE I E 341 
Potion of Underground. ........... 895 
> LARS ER ers See 949 
Awl 
ORE ALE... 52: scenanescos seen 110 
BOL E 111 


S PNA Peer TTT. 
Ama-Tsu-Mara’s Vorpal 
AB aaien vine Sale seeeicnes 


Gnarldan’s Battle ...........-..-- 118 
Hastseltsi’s Hand...........---+-+ 118 


Throwing. 
Thumb Height Man’s ............. 120 
Jorshorale- 55, cast sare tates 120 
Tunnelrunner’s ..........6¢265555 120 
Withering Pickaxe. ........-...+-+ 122 
of the Woodsman .........-.....- 122 
Zebulon's, of Leaving. ............ 122 
Zzzzzz's, of Snoring .........-..++ 122 
Axewood Whistle... 2.0.0 ...60065 1557 
Aziza’s Scimitar of Dancing. ........ 1342 
Adler's pean cise 1322 
Azor’alq, Sword of... .....665s05 1343 
Azure Sea, Disk of the .............. 408 
of the Azure Sea, Horn... .......+55 1543 
Azuredge, ARE ssiri oiiwei esses 112 
B 
Baatezu, Arrow of Harming........... 90 
Baatezu, Scroll of Protection from. . . . 1077 
Baba Yaga’ Hut ...........++5+ 604, 605 
Babette Maelstrom, Sword of........ 1343 
Bachraeus, Mask of .............+ 697 
Back Attack Detection, Weapon of. .. . 1511 
Back Defense, Girdle of. 
i e Anae CANTE TATE TTT 
BRODIE E 
Backpack of Holding ........ 
Backstabbing, Sword of 
Backtalker............. 
Bad Taste, Necklace of.............+ 
Badge of Freedom .......... 
Badge of Monster Control . , . . j 
Badger Talisman. ........... 1420 
Bael’s Morning Star.........--- 485, 675 
Bag 
a APTT EL OO. 139 
of Armor Nullification, 

Sleeping ............ . 138, 1119 
A ROTIA ATENT - 123, 124 
Beltpouch of Disappearance. . . - . . - . 132 
OF BONE PRESNA TN -132 
m P T TO 139 
Bucknard’s Everfull Purse ......... 133 
of Devouring........... .. 133 
Devouring Pouch ..... #133 
of Duplication... ..... 134 
Tee Ser eee yes 139 
Everfull, of Seeds . . . 134 
C83. Ceres 134 
Feedbag of Plenty... 134 
Foodipouchh cassia seats ove 134 
Henry's Carpetbag of Holding ... . . . 134 
Heward’s Handy Haversack ........ 135 
DC HOMING ATE IENA 135 
of Infinite Wealth ................ 135 
Jasper Thunderhand’s 

Handy Haversack ..........4+++ 135 


Balian’s Yellow loun Stone. 
Ball 


Inert Onyx 


Baravar Cloakshadow’s Dagger ....... 357 
Barber AII FET soa’ 1192 
Bard's Aphrodisiac Inspiration. ...... . 764 
DOU RING: 5 sa sisiis jaseaciasicnesss 949 
Bardic Spelljamming Helm .......... 575 
Bardiche, Baphomet'’s............... 841 
Barding 
of Deceptive Travel, sussies 158 
OF ERY DNL naina a 158 
E O E T 158 
WBE TEN T E T 159 
of Missile Protection. ............. 159 


Morgan's Horse. .........--.-.06 159 
Barge of Nyr Dyv, Hasty 179 
Barge, Semekhtet ...... . .. 180 
enn Flail. .. 485 
Barlithian’s Mystical Mirror. R > 
Barnus’'s Gnomebane .............. 1344 
Barrel 
of Grog, Neverending. ............ 160 
of Hiding. ........... «+. 159 
Itzpixe’s Collapsible . ep >) 
of Monkeys,....... -» 160 
of Poverty ... + 160 
of Rolling ........... - 160 
of Salt Pork, Neverending. -+ 160 
of the Barrier Peaks, Horn . . . 1543 
Barrik’s Spellbook ...... 1143 
Bascom Ungulian’s Sword . . .. 1388 
Base Ball ......-...... ... 149 
Bashal's Spellbook 1143 
Bashal’s Tendrilight ... . . 636, 1143 
Basilisk Travel, Barding of. .......... 157 
Basin of the Angel ............-.... 161 
Basin of Hidden Dangers 161 
Basket of Devouring. . .. . 161 
Bass Drum ........ .. B18 
Bast, Sword of . . . 1344 
Bat, Cloak of the. . $ 


Bath, Armor . . 


Asm, Cureeg orsi 114 
Axe, Gari Glittergoid’s -.. 118 
Axe, Gnaridan’s ..... ..- 118 
Axe, Lortz’s. ... . -118 
Axe, Shag'’s . 119 
Cloak. ....... 297 
Crescent, Tusmit's. . -715 
Mistress of (IIbratha) .. 1376 
Ring of Spell...... 6. 999 
Staffof...... «1273 
DOR AE ETIT OT 485 
Battleshroud Gas, Globe o 537 
Bauble, Beauregard’s Beautiful 1307 
of Baubles, Horn .......-.. 5.50055 1544 
Beacon 
AED: v gwe p earo sA 163 
Sasi Illags Abominable. ......... 642 
o'6¥ 4 6-5 beast ayak (See Lamp) 
spear Helm, Alarm ........ 574 
TROVIR » saer nsaan angone Esee 163 
Bead 
E n o 0.0.00. E E TS 163 
Atonement .. .- 751 
Beady Eye. . ‘163, 453 
of Blessing .. 751 
of Curing. .... aa -751 
of Dew ...... + 164 
of Force........ «164 
CER 164 
| a EE 751 


Bead 


Necklace of Prayer ....-.....+..45 751 
ONE wii aE 164 
INR I ST, 164 
Ete PRE ENTE S 165 
OF E iian Naaa 751 
of Wind Walking. ................ 751 
A AEL EO E 165 
Beaker of Plentiful Potions. .......... 165 
Bean of Ooze, Slime, & Jelly. ........ 165 
Beans, Bag of .......-.-. 60656 123, 124 
Bear 
Arabel's Huggable. ...............- 58 
E A ECE TE 503 
Cloak of the Sulhaut Mountains... . . . 297 
UME sv «0:00.00: vin 93002 e004 1561 
Beast, Amulet of the. . 0.0.0.6 656604- 28 
Beast, Talisman of the ..........6.45 1420 
Beating Heart... ...<s000cscenscens 573 
Beauregard’s Beautiful Bauble..... . . 1307 
Jacinth of Inestimable............- 621 
RMR ERARE Kasei tien 765 
PONR viaio.o n a AE 828 
Dra io AEREE E E S. 949 
and Ugliness, Wand of ........... 1475 
Bec De Corbin . 0.5 -.screscereveree 840 
Beh TOR, «<5 cerca veinvneess 670 
Bedroll of Dryness... ... 6... 6 0000 166 
Beetle Shield, Death Watch ......... 1094 
Begoing, Brooch of ......... 6.6.44 225 
Beguiler, Cap of the ..............+. 250 
Beguiler, Cloak of the. ............+. 297 
Beguiling, Moto Moto Rod of ........ 742 
Beguiling, Rod of................. 1023 
Beholder Fangpick ................. 166 
Beholder Mouthpick..............-. 166 
Beings, Bane of Enchanted ......... 1343 
Belenus’s Sword . ........2...0008- 1344 
Dolens W000. 6650 dicts wcsasvese 1451 
Belial’s Military Fork ............... 841 
Believer, Sword of the ............. 1344 
Bell 
OL ALM 0a see A TI EPR. 812 
od) VTIP T 812 
of Blasting, Golden. .............. 815 
Ck PALA AIR AT 812 
a T 812 
nn na N A 814 
CRUMB ivicine aE casters 815 
LE T O TOT EET E TT 815 
ONG isis cecisresecevetus 815 
Aa KORCIE T 815 
E LEITET TITTIS OT gis 
COLAO ETILE TTI TIT TE 815 
PROB ATT T 815 
OF PHOWCHION sosse iioa 816 
OF RINGS ios AE ET 816 
ETOD sccar cas ccncceees 816 
OF NID P E L EA 816 
Bell's Palette of Identity... ......... 836 
OF BLOM: 0: eeoa cv cecceeveseeee 167 
CBE so rones 167 
eee ere 167 
Deke CMsCe) 0256s erseeseeey 1200 
PEGE ian tic towns inenite ster 167 
Elk Clan Ceremonial ...,......... 168 
of Goblinoid Protection ., ......... 168 
Golden Serpent, .....60scecreeces 169 
ee) eee ere 169 
Magar oo ccs cccsvevevvestes 169 
Serpé's of Swimming ............- 169 
Poa povcpernnceteousete tae 169 
SRA esis acieevasabeaesobenes 169 
S 5 in'¢ vecawbsescne beeeserpe 170 


Blashphor’s Crib of Pushing. 
Blashphor’s Magical Diapers 


Blasting 
nO OTT) Pere 
Button of, 
Golden Bell of 
Horn of ........... 
Blazer, Krillus’s, Lamp. . . MG JAn ninnan of Cures, Blessed . . 
Blend, Durimal's Merry ....... 2... 828 Canoe of Portage ...........0600- 178 Dark Ages........ 
Disks of Mishakal............ 185, 187 
of the Enlightened Gods. .......... 187 
of Ethnic Humor, Exalted... .... . . 1165 


Armorofthe = = j=  — BOR Horn ......-seseseeeee+++- 184  Remorstion, Charm........ $ 

Crystalmist Mountains ........... 72 Runjoye's Winged. ........ « «196 
OR BIOMNE . vic csr crower ecwedion 101 Shalandain’s, of Starstriding . .. 196 
Dragon Bane..... 66.0600 sees 1348 eee ee . 196 
Dragon Slayer, Sword............ 1357 Spider's, of Stealth ...... . 196 
Dying, JUG OL, o:<:0:0 9:00 s0:00.000 v0 626 of Star Striding ......... . 197 
n TE T 726 of Stomping ........... -197 
Sword, Susanoo’ ............--+ 1407 of Striding and Springing ........ -~ 197 


Boot 
i RRC 5 05 RR 198 
of Traveling and Leaping .......... 198 
OC Vitied THBCES RDE PE 198 
i ee eee 198 
BGrdhs, BOG OF T 139 
Borieflin’s Jar of Steam ............- 622 
Bosero the Drunkard’s Spellbook. . . . . 1150 
Bottle 
OP BOUS FELIEA S IPO TT 198 
o ADAFE EE A E 199 
of Containment... .. 2... 666664555 199 
PR s.as! pedisaie dace dceces sees 917 
a IPOE POTITO TIT 917 
la AAE SREE A SAA A 199 
of Evaporation ....s.ssssssessess 199 
r TEIR TOO T 199 
Of Eplik: csao 867 
OP PRONG. 6:05 EEEN 199 
CM is sees. cicnessaurinvnne 200 
of Pleasant Odors ....... seess 200 
Of Preservation ........sseeceeyes 200 
of Refreshment. ..........s00s006 200 
BOTY AIPORT TETAN 200 
SDi ranas oann SRE 1109 
Temperature ... ssc II TOL 200 
TNR LOEIT ETA TE 200 
Thuba’s a OPRET T 201 
A EO T AOT 201 
CONE A TT 202 
T T TEE 765, 900 
Bouncing, Potion of .......ssssssss 856 
Bountiful, Coin of Jisan the .......... 322 
Bouquet, Buttercup’ .....ssssssssso 231 


Solonor Thelandira’s.............. 210 
fg SET T ET, 210 
OF Ue URIODER. T T AT 210 
NEO TEARRE OE AE T 210 
of Vampire Slaying ........-...... 210 
FVE 05055 oasscccvccsscvess 210 
Bow-Breaking, Arrow of ............. 86 
Bowgentle’s Book. ..............+ 1150 
Bowl 
OME SL A OT, 210 
Calabash of Plenty ............... 211 
of Commanding 
Water Elementals .............. 211 
Of Delicacies PPIE TAE 211 
of Ship Sinking. au 
of Watery Death ...........-....- 211 
Bowl-lid Size Magical Eye........... 457 
Bowling Dili... risista 149 
Box 
Bringer of Doom. .............++. 212 
Burglar Detection ..............4+ 212 
DONE Sac TAIE 212 
of Delightful Transports ........... 212 
Dido's Flatbox, ........-.0s00000+ 213 
Face of Xenous.....-...-..e+e00s 213 
POEs ives cencoustsaacesveens 213 
Goerl’s Portable Canoe 
TRIG PE T SORENE 179, 214 
na a m <6 ascii ceciescxsewans 214 
MOB no seve cwcnvewerceccssnss cone 214 
of Many Holdings. ............... 214 
of Message Sending .............. 215 
Money Changer ...........s0e006 215 
PG vc nan ners AIEEE 743 
Mystical Brown Coating. .......... 215 
S A A EET 215 
of Preservation ..........+esesee- 216 
Rudras’s, of Cloning.............. 216 
Strongbox of Immobility .......... 216 
Tamate-Bako (Box)............... 216 
Boy with Rope, Sails’. ............. 1304 
Bracelet 
A a TTTS 216 
E ee 217 
a EE N cub 217 
WE. TOPLE ETE 217 
A n EATA N 218 
s a AR A 219 
of Lost Ships, Medegian........... 219 
of Scaly Command ........-..-... 219 
i ee ee eee 219 
Bracer 
CL ERTL ee 220 
of Attraction... 6.6.6.6 cee eeeees 220 
of Blasting. . ..... 6... eceeeeeeeee 220 
of the Blinding Strike ............. 220 
of Brachiation,...........6.50005 220 
of Brandishing .............. 221,222 
of Cleanliness ...........02..204+ 221 
ADOT ARITA T A 221 
of Defenselessness ............... 221 
Of Deflection. TITTET TOSS 221 
of Invulnerability ................ 221 
of the Mermen ......-....-.0s008 222 
Noj’s, of Brandishing ............. 222 
Wi cucave jini cerasers 222 
Bradlie’s Leather Armor, ..........505 72 
Bragi, Apple Of E TL 58 
i. Teer rete rion 1322 
Bragi’s Harp of Calm.............. 1322 
Brain Shield Gem, ........-.......- $28 
Branchala’s Paint .........-....+-++ 837 
Brand 
Freya's Frost, Sword ............. 1370 
Pete, DRE esso irasai 1370 
Kirren’s Frost, Sword ............ 1379 
of Masauwu, Fiery .............. 1453 


Brandishing, Noj’s Bracers of . . s 
Brandobaris’s Dagger.......-...+-+- 
Brass 


Bugle Callarduran Smoothhands’s 

E A A AT: 1538 CN MEE ease eessen AN 72 

an T IEEE 1538 Calling 

Ce eee 1538 BRIN aise sins vncwesadscveer eet 812 

a T ee 1538 o T P T 349 
Potion of Worm. ........-------+ 897 

Laat UL yt0). ETET 1329 Sphere of False. ................ 1269 

EQTOs oc teedisccsevereccereaged 1330 Calls, of Animal, Horn. .....-...... 1543 


Calm, Bragi’s Harp of. ............. 


bile wtieee a mand Zwann’s Irrigation... 
Burglar Detection Box .............. 212 Zwann’s Watering ............ 0.65 237 
Burner, Spirit, Sword .............. 1404 Can Use Scroll Spells, Who......... 1070 


Cabalistic Protections, Spellbook of . . 1155 
Cabinet 


TOPS Sweet Smell .. idaseece thee 
Calabash of Plenty ..............-.. 211 of Transference... ... 6.5.0.0 5eee 245 
Calathangas, Sword ............... 1349 Unfailing Light... ...........6.5 245 


orteses snaa WMDs nne 245 

caccecevenscopecwot G VOR n 246 

p igarde’s Sookael Maniana 246 
Bug Repellence, Oil of. IN ITA 765 Call, Elmarin Cannon... ........... 1112 
Callarduran Smoothhands’s Axe... .. . . 114 


Candle Snuffer ON in sine dbs ican TAT 381 of Scroll Holding ...........+-++. 261 

SDR EA A 246 a OEE PO IEEE TES: 388 Casimur’s Spellbook. . 

CCIE TIE AE 246 POE ONIRE T EEREN PRETT PENS 380 Cask, Everfull...... 

of oe ESA, 247 WO EE E 381, 382 Cask of the Wind Spy. 

A EOE" 247 GOW ccccvccsvccccdnescicsstiedsn see Casket of Furyondy .... 

prea aie OEI O IPT 247 Hanged Man ..........-.-..s6005 387 Castellan’s Magical Prison . 
Candlemaking, Ladle of. ..........5. 635 TBI POPOARE A OE: 385 Casterbane:......06007+ 
Cane eR 384 Casting Scroll Effects. 

CERRO ies 5 a Ficestinescestantes 247 WEDD nceccctecceesceotcueneast 381 Castle, Cloud .. . 

Ce ee Oe eee 247 SONI 455, «60-2 5:00.94 5.905 855,009 381 Cat Mother, apir 

OL BRAGNNSG. .owserecesessctsece 247 PAAGMOM, 0.0 seveveerscscessess 390 Cat of Felkovic . . 

Of Detection TT 247 NEE oso scovceysesussicveesys 386 Cat's Eye Marble . a 

OP SUC oes ce cis T T sence 248 Key vevicsccsvercuspececenceeses 380 Cat's Eye Ring .... 066-6 e eee cee eee 

of Striking, Wemick’s ............. 248 RMR cocci ncccycccencesysveet 380 Catalogue of Outer Plane 
Canister of Condiments .. ........... 248 LOWE 2 2c cceccsscncccisaicssiens c's 384 Artifacts, Trimia’s . . ETET 1460 
Canister of Curses .......20..2.0... 249 Mabie a5 Sade siss<pea sages mo Catapult ............. . 266 
Cannon Call, Elmarin.............. 1112 Major Arcana, Tarot .............. 382 Catapult Helmseeker . . . <. 596 
Canoe = = ~~ Minor Arcana, TO Catching, Scroll of Spell .... à 

Poriblo ernus n a 


EE icasi n 


Canopa’s Sword .........--..0-00 


RENI. ccccnessopcsienecesvesves 


PUOUE so nonce-pevqerievaewedeet 


CE BURINOREE -c siey 69800 onevsews i Celestian’s Holy Symbol ...........- 
i Censer 


of Disguise sep esenscoveweesesbon i of Controlling Air Elementals, . . .. . . 270 
of Good Hope... 66.666 e cece ceene i of Summoning Hostile 
OU Me HOU AT T N Air Elementals 


Captain's Sword»... cosso oon. Bs: i Ch'Aranol’s Staff, Alar... s... 
Captivity, Tent of ; ic 


Chains, Dragonisle’s Harbor. ....... . . 413 
OEE. « 57s ponceeee-veenne 1350 
Chair 
POE SOTTISE L IT 273 
Of the Ancestors .......6.5+-0000 273 
ORANGE ost ctcap E 1088 
of Extra Seating -ossi aoras 274 
of Helplessness..........6.60.005 274 
GEREN cicecssnevanssedebe 274 
CCR aa LOTITO ITI 274 
Siting E IE T E 274 
Py) VAERT SE T POUR 274 
Of Ugliness .....-....cccescesees 274 
Chakyik, Razor Claws of ...........- 507 
Chalice 
PE Coors ies aw cin are esau 275 
of Continual Water... ............ 275 
OF Detection PEAP IOE SEA 275 
A T AEAT 275 
Moly essiant 275 
of Identification <... uisi neee 276 
of Irreversibility ........ soas 276 
of Liquid Food s ssisississis sasi 276 
Of Planar Travoless sissano 276 
OPP AOT OTE TEOT ET. 276 
of the Shield Lands. .............. 277 
PNG A EEL EE PNE TIES 277 
Chalyik, Tiger Cloak of ............. 3 
SSSLETS Va HO RCH RES 1156 
Chamber, Disintegration ............ 407 
Chamber, Teleportation ............ 1454 
Chameleon Cloak... sess sseesssesos 298 
Chameleon Power, Potion of ......... 857 
Chameleon Power, Ring of,.......... 952 
Chance, Deck of .........+2000+-2005 377 
Chancelessness, Dice of ............- 406 
Chandrasakar’s Air Spores ..........-- 26 
Change, Collar of ........-.+0500+5> 325 
CEAD OON A FOR. 00-0 cieine: 0:0 eceetes 1544 
Changeling Cloak.......... Konsan 298 
Changer Box, Money ..........-..++ 21S 
Changes, Canon of ..........-.00+5 1439 
Changing, Armband of Snake ......... 66 
Changing Girdle of 
ininity/Masculinity.......... 533 
Changing, Ring of Shape ...........- 997 
CORON ADDIE OF. E EEEE: 58 
Chaos Supreme, Talisman of ,....... 1421 
Chaotic 
Creature Whip, Tar’s............. 1534 
CNL, GR OF ESTS TTE 937 
I; OR ME. TETT E 937 
Evil, Scepter of. . 2... 6.660. eeeee 937 
Good Angel, Basin of the... ....... 161 
Good, Crown as eeo esdas spaas 937 
Good Holy Shield... ... saasaa 1098 
Gool OGO saosna ee s SUST 937 


of Pest Protection . . . 
of Protection from . . . 


MDT A ios ccdcvessenedisvecse 286 
Chest 
ODN. 45 bine soc gsis 287 
Feather Token .......-.6.eeeeees 466 
FOO BIO Ss iricccsinrecietwcs scenes 287 
a E A O CAS T 287 
Quartermaster E: soosse essas 288 
SM AOAN OTT AS 288 
OZONE I rI A 288 
Chiang’s Dagger, Sung.............. 369 
Ciddokiets Heart. oeiee oy gossins 573 
Chief Shaman’s Spellbook .......... 1157 
Chih-Nii’s Dagger... 0.600666 6606s 359 
Child, Lightming’s. .............464 1019 
Childishness, Potion of.............. 857 
CODING civ cocitatevaesesiavecen 359 
Chilling, Potion of Soul- ............ 890 
Chilling Snare. ...... 2... .6...0205- 288 
Chime 
Featherchimes........0.scssceceees 816 
OCG 5 E A C 817 
of Interruption, EIT EILEAS 817 
of Opening o naai 816, 817 
a E PSE E T 818 
OF VIGNE L TORO 818 
d ITA T, 818 


Circle, Book of the Wyvernwater. . .. . 
Circles, Book of Black............. 


Clan Ceremonial Belt, Elk. . . . 


Clapper, Bont. ss sss 6. -++esreeseee 
Clarifier Ring of Invisibility 

NGQMIOR ETTITA 971 
Clarity, Potion of ........... se 
Clasp of Holding, Cloak 
Claustrophobic Weapon 
Claw 


Cleanliness 
Armor of Continual ............... 73 


Bracer of. 

Cloth of... . 

Marble of .. <a 

Utensil of ....... . 1466 
Clear Thought, Ring of. . 
Clear Thought, Tome of . 
Clearwater ........... <2 
Cleats of Gripping .........-.-....- 295 
Cleaver 


Scale, Sword . . 


Spelt ss 30 505s 
Wyrm, Sword .., 
Cleaving, Sword of. 


Charm of Tree........ 
DRICOR, 60s oe T Hasire’ 


Gauntlet (Claws) Silver. 

Gauntlet of Swimming and Climbing. . 508 Cloakshadow's Cloak, Baravar........296 Colada, Sword .........--.6.0s005 
LSAGEE OF. Ricci sowie seiguredees sea 635 
Potion of.. 
Rake of , 
Rod of . . . 


Bear, of the Sulhaut Mountains .... . 

of the Beguiler ..........-.2+0005 297 o T, 
of Blackflame s. o es sesio isoina 297 COSC cece cvcscesinscncecs 263269 OFCharismas.isisssscisoinei nn 
Bolder’s Cloak of the Rogue........ 298 sorcecncceccvcese ISS? OF Disguise... .cseveseccoresaeee 
Chameleon AR A NT T 298 i 
e AYTTA TTE 298 

OF the Cudi, asosa sesasine inoaas 299 

OP COMMA anise ad evaeeincticee'as 299 

WENN ONEIN 299 

SEPP ESTE LTT EE TES ey 299 

of Displacement ........-..--6465 299 

ee ry eT OEE eae 300 

OL BCHOEE Edie este ovncevcemsves 300 

r A viewatourinnacaied 300 

F EE ra sianie eE 300 

of Etherealness ...........--+-55+ 301 

a ETE TE AE T 301 

Firebane EIE IEEE T 301 

A TE O OT 302 

ra a E E A 302 

a A O 303 

n PAIET E AOA 303 

of the Hellfurnaces ............... 303 

Kaldair Swiftfoot’s ............... 303 

KalnaKaa’s Black ................ 304 

LAINE O T ARTT 304 

EC BONTE AET 304 

of the Manta Ray ssassn 304 

Mantle of Celestan ......... 65.005 304 

Mantle of Mist ...........-0ee008 305 

Mantle of Mundane .............. 305 

ERGY: COIS LEETE EE 305 

Midnight Slasher’s ............... 306 


i 1608 + 


Se 


CHORE e aici vic awed S, TE, 299 
of Sleep, Armband .........6.6.045 65 
Comfortable Seating, Couch of ....... 274 
Comforts, Torloch’s Saddle of ....... 1050 
Command 
Amulet of Elemental. .............- 31 
TONNE OB 66 865i Sessa E 73 
Bracelet of Scaly..........-++-+++ 219 
Fisher's Trident of Fish............ 841 
BME TSP E E 569 
FIORE. PA T 1545 
Mirandos's Staff of Insect. ........ 1285 
Shp Rs sAN aati patenctuabon es 954 
Ring of Elemental.. .............- 960 
Ring of Paraclemental ............ 985 
Ring of Quasiclemental ........... 988 
CONE OE Fis vie'an's E T AR 1275 
Sword, Flames on ...........6506 1369 
Trident of Fish ..........0055 841, 844 
Wand of Metal ..........60.0005 1487 
Words 
(Optional Rule), Staff.......... 1271 
Commanding 
TIE cic vasinvnevxccasiesece 480 
Fire Elementals, 

TL PEPE eee 223 
Lyron’s Harpsichord of ........... 1328 
Oil/Powder of ......... 6.6545 766, 901 
DUT GE: E EA E EAREN 1275 
Water Elementals, 

aE DTE LSE 211 

Commands, Thread of ............. 1432 
Communication 
PUR TOTT S E 29 
ORO OR O E AIEN 327 
C osse craris 289 
Lore of Ds oa sivas aisn 1192 
T E TNT E TETA 228 
WOON PETERR TRENAS 1071 
ions and Sigils, Art of ... 1140 
Companion, Sword... ..........+-- 1352 
Comparison, Caparison of ........... 252 
Compass, Elemental. ............... 440 
Compliance, Moto Moto Rod of 
r oo 0.0cccccescedess 742 
Component Case, Exalted ........... 261 
Component Pouch, Zagyg’s 
GOR ocr covstecsa ei Tews 147 
Components & Reactions 
of Phosphorus ...........++..+ 1157 
Comprehend Languages mee iara 1241 
Comprehending La 


Jellaba of......... 


Moto Moto Rod of ..... .. 742 
Concentration Oil/Powder . < 766, 901 
Concluder, Sword. ........... 1367-1368 


.. 1247 


Confusion, Oil/Powder of... ..... 766, 901 
Confusion, Potion of. .............++ 858 
CODAL HAR sasata unano kN 569 
Conjuration 
Engine, Internal REE a FEE 612 
Libram of Gainful................ 662 
AOR sona a tas ah 1275 
t PE EET e A 1476 
Conjurations Magic and Phantasms, 
Selvar's Ineffable.............. 1227 
Conjurations, Repertoire of 
Iustrious ...........--66.65- 1220 
Conjurer Puppet Libram. ............ 660 
Conjurers, Epic Saga of the Great 1165 
Conjuring Elementals, Staff of... . . . . 1272 
Conjuring, Weapon with Hilt of... . . . 1514 
Connection, Arrow of............-.-. 87 
Conquering Glory Powder ..........- 901 
Conquering, Oil/Powder 
2) WADA errr earth 770, 904 
Constitution, Libram of (Study)... ... . 668 


Containment, Balloon of ............ 
Containment, Bottle of... ......-.-55 199 
Contemplation, Opal Kitten of. ....... 477 
Contention, Mylsibis’s Codex of ...., 1197 
Contents, Table Of... 66.6666 005s 1417 
Continual 
Churning, Ring of. ..........-.056 954 
Cleanliness, Armor of........-..... 3 
FRG, TOP OF sse orep rosera 1452 
Light, LARD OF TON 637 
ROMO: no's cinsennmepoweyn 329 
Light, Stone of ............++2+- 1309 
EINE, WH OF TEE E 1477 
Sharpness, Knife of .............. 365 
POD ie tien senssyhoa ER 1453 
Water, Chalice of .........+0+0005 275 
Continuous Water, Pitcher of ......... 838 
Contracts of Nepthas ............005 329 
Contrariness, Ring Of ..........+0005 955 
Control 
Amulet of Arachnid ..........-+.-- 28 
Amulet of Caterpillar .............. 29 
Armor of Temperature ........-.... 82 
Badge of Monster...............- 123 
BORO csuiccccctiecsvcceqote 223 
o S ORTON T PULTE TT TT TON 1520 
ARA E TTT TIA YSTA 329 
Day Es a asee 848 
BROAN EATE terval STT 848 
Muzzle of Lycanthrope............ 743 
of PCs, Weapons in.............. 1520 
Pok had PRE ee 840 
Potion of ...... 855, 858, 864, 866, 870, 
872, 882, 891, 895 
Ring of ........ 947, 949, 970, 978, 985 
TOR OG ii) acdsee 1453 
Trident df Pihos iea 844 
Wand of Fog -oaeee 1482 
Zither of Zombie. ..........--+-+ 1334 
Controllable Glowing Globe ......... 538 
Controllable Scent 


OMPOWEET Sta asaran 766, 901 
Convenience, Cart of .......-..-..-+ 259 
Converging Transitions, 

a A E E 1251 
Conversion, Balance Scale of. ....... . 148 
Convik Tree, Leaf of (Enchanted) .. . . . 652 
Convocation Candle ........---..-.. 241 
Cooking, Pan of ............-...-.. 802 
Cool Hand Lute ............---... 1328 
Cooling, Cube of Liquid. ............ 351 
Cooling Fan ..............-.02.005 465 
Coolness, Armor of ..........-.....- 73 
Coolness, Canteen of ............... 249 
Coolness, Ring of......-...-.-..++. 955 
Copper 

a T AAE 217 
n WEA I T 321 
Cube, Khurgorbaeyag’s............ 351 
Dragon Cloak ,.........500s0000+ 300 
a Slayer, Sword. ........... 1357 


Cormac, pat Poy et rs: 537 
Cornucopia Horn . 599 
Cornugon ......... 1192 
Coronet of Communication 289 

Influence on Solid 1181 
Corridors, Wand of. ..,..... 1477 
Corrosive Touch, Potion of the. . 858 
Corruption, Crown of.,,.,.., . 332 
Corthalis, Sword. ....... .- 1352 
Corusk, Blade of, Sword ........... 1347 


Corusk Mountains, Headband of the . . . 572 


Coruskian Stone. . -1309 
Cosette’s Necklace . A . 748 
Cosmetology, Ball of Á . 149 
Cosmetology, Glove of... . . . . $42 


of Suspension . . . 
Couatl, Staff of the è 
Couch of Comfortable Seating. -.... 274 
Counterfeiting, Plate of ............. 839 
of Courage, Flute wa 


Covenant, Book of the .......6.4665 1157 
Coverlet of Warmth, Silk . 6.6... 6555 173 
COM EEE ESTATE, 815 
Cowardice, Sword of ..... asss: 1352 
Cowl of Warding .......s.sssssssss 331 
CGAI, arana aki gane 767, 901 
Cradle, Blashphor’s .... 2... 00.06... 173 
Craftsmanship, Potion of ............ 859 
Craftsmanship, Tore of... ......... 1451 
Crashing, Cymbal of ... auaa sasia 818 
Crawling, Potion of Snake ...... 60.4. 889 
Cream Ointment, Courtesan’s ........ 780 
Creation and Modification of Matter.. 1160 
Creation, Coffin of... 6.6 6e eer eeee 317 
Creation, Helmet of ..... 2... 6666006 586 
Creation, Homunculus ............. 1154 
Creation, Potion of ............. 859, 880 
Creation, Quill of Scroll... ......... 927 
Creation, Rod of Glyph ............ 1028 
Creation, Scroll of .......6.s00005 1071 
Crescent, Tusmit’s Battle... .......5. 715 
Crew, Unseen Ship. .......secereee 1465 
Crib of Pushing, Blashphor’s ......... 173 
Crippler Sword, Dragon ............ 1357 
GHEE RI eretas 955 
Cronmns Sickla... 0osccsneeseewes 1115 
Crook, Pharaohs ........snissrse 827 
Cross Oil/Powder, Double ....... 768, 902 
Crossbow 
D o ey AT 203 
PAM AEE E ts 203 
E ATA TTA T ET 203 
of Enchantment. ....... 5 oiaoi 203 
ENO 5d pahiote anne yeh 203 
FOUKAHAINEN'S EPITEET TTE 208 
of Multiplication. .............005 203 
ONG sono scinccsnesesnintrinsess 204 
a STEE TETT T EEO 210 
Crossing, Oil/Powder of... .... . . 767, 901 
Crow's NOSE AETI 755 
Crown 
of Ardy, Black. ... 6.666666 66 00s 332 
Altering Naga... 0.6.6.6. seeceeee 334 
of the Bandit Kingdom, Iron. ...,... 334 
Of BIAMO i einans aapea 332 
OL CRINGE ETERS O T TS A 937 
A s EPITETT 332 
DO TNTE T PEE PENAN 333 
BUDNO PUPS OT CSR TCT T LT 333 
Co. PEIER TIT eo . 943 
Feather Token ........ . 466 
of a a AIS PIN 941 
Hooded....... 333 
of Imperium 334 
of Lawful ..... 933, 934 
of Leadership . . s.. 334 
Naga -334 
of Neutral .. , 935, 937 
of ey 4 .942 
of ere: 336 
eel . 337 
.337 
pre Souls. . 337, 338 
of Stars . sean 
of the Stars j4 à ‘339 
of Summation. . . . ,.339 
Teleporting Naga . 334 
of the Unicorns. . . ..339 
of Veluna, Silver . . ..337 
VW ccs utsa ..340 
of the Void ..340 
of Yarus . . ..340 
Crucible of Melting M1 
Crumbling, Leaf of. . 652 
CU BWONG Sass Soeur aaa 1353 
Crushing, Mace Of, . 3. pit 675 


Crutch of Lightning .............666 341 
Cryptographs, Idioms & Rare ....... 1181 
Cryptomancy, Ancient ............. 1137 
Crysomer, Sword ...... 66565005006 1353 
Crystal 
ROE ics ise Asis 341 
Of AWBTENESS. «0... cece cee e eae 341 
BOR T SOE EE ET 344 
po ED | EA Tet 346 
BAR Verip a 347 
Balls & ESP, Amulets Against .. . . 27, 39 
avec Clairaudience ..........-.... 347 
CoRank aaa 317 
of Death Scrying........---..5555 341 
Dragon Slayer, Sword... ..-...... 1357 
Doon TRA. s sasiscwenssivassnvs és 4il 
of the Ebon Flame. ........-...... 342 
Egg Of Desire DOTT 430 
Eye of the Gods, Ball ............. 347 
YRC PEE 347 
GAMES sence se vinwessvsesscuns 343 
DEMO vic ned T I E 726 
Moredlin's, Ball e sessir eiee 348 
e AATTEET TIET, 783 
a ne ATEO T O EET 348 
m OLE T OET 343 
Shard of Sakkrad .......-..-...4+ 343 
GENIE, conan ENEA 344 
Sphere, Glain’s ............0-065 1269 
Statue, Talisman of the ........... 1426 
Statuette, Corellon’s ............. 1303 
WEE COND P AE SAS 1318 
e ETTITA 349 
Crystalline Heart, Shekinesters....... 574 
Crystalmist Mountains, 
Blue Armor ofthe... ... 00sen 72 
Cube 
ARD 9 vid sisri bSaRes 349 
Bula 50 Crvccsved viccceveeve 349 
HOMIE MERTE ITELT 349 
Dacrn's Instant Fortress ........... 350 
of Disabilities ...... neneeese 350 
E ETI S ES 350 
CH a OETA T 350 
of Frost Resistance .........6.0005 351 
ROWS T E E S 351 
o TOITA AT T 351 
Khurgorbacyag's Copper .......... 351 
of Liquid Cooling. ............... 351 
EB OTTON E ETT 351 
E os 60 TOSET TIIT 352 
Cubic 
Obio Foot sss ssii iE 349 
O Gate ai iesiisiececicnsuares 349 
CRG sicsindicewaaaiansasacs 349 
Cudgel, Bronzewood ,....... 6666666 314 
Chik HONE. «50. a 314 
Cudzu's Spellbook .....sssssesss 1160 
CO BN EPE E A 
Cultured Palate, Utensil of the hae 
Cretan S008 MONTEL 


Cup of Al’Akbar......... 

Cup of Wine .........- ‘ 
Cuprumbane, Sword 1354 
Cups, Suit... .esees «395 
Curate’s Scroll uuas . 1071 
Curdled Death, Perfume of. . . . 823 
Curdled Death, Reptilla’s Oil. .. 776 
Cure Disease, Potion of ... .. . 859 
Cure Wounds, Armor of , . . ves 02 
Cure Wounds, Shield of . . . . 1094 
Cures, Blessed Book of ............ 1149 


Scroll of Amber... 66656600005 

Shovel of Digging 

Spinning Wheel .........6565005 

BWR. 2 <s:cc cose emspenenssye 

TONG ac5-045es carn venarereennne 

WR BIE, a o:0 vc cccccescossvens 

Wired BGO. noc vcccvoccvesks 
Curses 

Cantisior Of, ... -cccsccerccevenioesie 249 

PR cia vets earannan 488 

RUN REE T 956 

LR aT ETAIT ATT 5 1465 
Curtain 

A A T 353 

Ed PEETI TTO T 353 

OGRE. EEIT E A 353 
Curtal (Glyph) -sesso sssrsssssr> 1202 
Cushion of Regeneration ............ 353 
Cuthbert, Mace of St... ......... 679, 680 
Cutlass, Blackjammer’s ............ 1345 
Cutter Sword. 4). cies so eison oesi 1354 
Cotter, Flame oessa ooie waa 1368 
Cutter’s Tools of Sunndi, Gem, ....... 530 
Cutting 

YL PAROS TPCT E PET 115 

| LOOT TTT ror eee: 1054 

Saw of Mighty ...............05 1054 
Cyclooanes a Gace caeseecesseutess 569 
Cymbal of Crashing ................ 818 
Cymbal of Symbols ...........--... 818 
Cymbelline’s Sword ............... 1368 
Cymboli’s Pipes of Sounding........ 1536 
Cymrych Hugh, Sword of .......... 1355 
Cypress Seed issada 767, 902 
Cyria’s Winged Boot. ........5..0555 194 
Cpe Bernd OTO T S 1355 


D'Agor’s Mirror of Life 
Trapping, Nura WR EAEI 732 
Dacrn’s Instant Fortress ...........+5 350 
Daern’s Spellbook ... 04.66.66 scene 1157 
DOP DEE. seunes nein 377 
Dagger 
ABBO 0 saesneg 356 
Alignment Detection. ............- 356 
ADEN 50 cc cacsonncevestse 356 
Arete PENG, 00000000 asccesics 356 
Baravar Cloakshadow'’s...........- 357 
PIES OET E 1458 
A V TT 357 
Banishing, Blade of .,,.........++ 357 
IES EE ENE 357 


á 1610 “= 


l 


Chih-Nii’s . , 
Chill Blade ... 


Guardian Blade, Sword. . 
Hastseltsi's Throwing . . 


.. 1373 Swords of...... 1336, 1342, 1344, 1355, ef oandig ce 


Done Sa. See es a Bowl of Watery... ... 
. 366 Bane: a VENIET LTE LEN 1371 Candle Snuffer of... . 


Sung CHAREE... o osoase 369 Sides of the Memory ...........- 1162 
i AE ad UN TRE 369 Wand of the Sulhaut Mountains . . . . 1477 
Throwing, of Returning ........... 369 Darkness 
bs eee 369 GRE cic conpanenconstesnstas 87 
PAIN Ss cosccniteccenean conte dat 370 BOOK A AO 192 
Tufala’s Jambiya...........-....- 370 Evan AAE EA PERTTI ENE TITA 241 
TOT saae starn ri nN 370 ee PE E 446, 824 
A n ArT E 370 N ene 586 
of Venom. .... 366, 371, 1375 STON eae von crsteyreee 634, 1379 
Werebane ALETI TTT O 371 E A I A EE SE EERE 640 
ATA T 371 and Light, Dicerion of ............ 406 
WOMEB. cis sccrvocusevevivevesss 371 WIIG OT AVTO E 675 
Daghdha’s Club ..............-..-- 314 Oriow’s Sphere of ...........---+ 1269 
Dahlver-Nar, Tooth of.............. 1446 Sphere of... ..........+ -- 1269 
Dahlver-Nar's Spellbook ........... 1157 Thuba's Book of Vile ... . - 192 
Daikyu, BBIE saiodia oaa 209 a T ETEA 1477 
Daimos’s Spellbook ..............- 1160 Darkstar, Sword ........ A .. 1382 
AE PPTA T AON S 271 Darning Needle, Magical . . o l DE SATA 754 
Dalamar's Bracelet ................. 217 of Endless WEES inci eset 376, 377 
Dalamar's Ring of Healing........... 956 od 
Dalamar's Wand of Lightning. .. .. .. . 1477 
Dale Geel EITI OLT CONI AN 1355 
Dalvan's Circlet isiin 290 


Deck 


Gf Cairne 377 
OF CHANCE REAA TEE EE EE 377 
PE oeenn e saials 377 
OF DOCKING rosos irass 377 
Fortune Telling sisusse sasaosan 377 
of Illusions .,...... ++ «e377, 378 
Janean’s, of Many Things.......... 378 
of Many Things. .......-......4+- 379 
of Many Things, Tarot. ...........- 381 
QUATIEE corns EAEE TEE FEE pares 381 
SUN DEPENAS ETE NT 381 
TRACER ONID E seine E EE 404 
of Wondrous Power... ...ssssesss 404 
io Ek nit a 259 
DROW AE T A EE O. 419 
Deeds 
PORE: ann rna 188 
Tome of Hopeful. . . . 
Tome of Hopeless 
Deep 
Dragon Slayer, Sword. ........... 1357 
Fears of Humanity ...........55+ 1162 
Sashelas’s Sword,...........-.+- 1356 
Deer Talismans. icvastiovees en 1420 


Defender of Feminine Virtue, 


Defending, Weapon of ............. ISH 
Defense 

BERG OF E WE ELETT E E EAT 221 

r a ENOT PDE EO ITT, 222 

Cindia perne E 241 

BONE OE EEE AEU CIEE EE 425 

Girdle of Back i500. cc ansi $32 

Modallion Of 5:5 pias as 710 

Potion OF sc paina 860 

SOOT OF ODPETE EEN DE 1060 

Shield, Magical.............60.+ 1099 
Defenselessness, Bracer of........... 221 
Defiance, Dagger of............0455 359 
Deflecting, Weapon of ............. 1511 
Deflection, Bracer of ..........5.005 221 
Deflector, Missiles.. soseo 1100 
Defoliation, Wand of .............. 1478 
Definess, Potion Of: icies sensacia 860 
Delay, Sram 8 o ic.v-picieesievisiny sciee 1073 
Delicacies, Bowl of ..........5-0055 211 
Delight, Cloak of- ss sssssereoseesre 299 
Delightful Transports, Box of......... 212 
Delusion 

SORT OF srein nce 

PORN: ETT 

RUDE. OFr 
Delusional Insanity. . 
DOR E Eunan 010s onitan 
Demanding Battering Ram, Bigby’s. . . . 162 
Dementia Praécox. eooo sieo aoso nieo 40 
Demeter’s Spear s.s. esssserssssss 1129 
Demron’s Bant.. ......ssssssssss 1369 
Dries Oll, <ko gonar vorab is aleve 767 
Denial, Band of suss oeosso neuen tsan 152 
Depetrification, Ring of............- 957 
Depth Location, Ring of Aquatic... ... 948 
Depth Underground, Potion of 

Determining ...............-.. 895 

Desalination Tablet..............-.. 837 
Descending, Stair of. .............. 1301 
Desert 


Evening, Armor of the .......... 73, 81 
Holy Star of the Bright........... 1303 


Kings, Flail of the. .....5.......5 485 
Design Notes sos ciawaaiwwesesccesiees 4 
Desire; Baw of. 0 sais essutaveeseses 430 
Desiré Eme’s Oil/Powder ........ 767, 902 
Desk of Restudying ..............0 405 
Desk of Studying .........06c0..s000 405 
Destrier Statue, Stone............-- 1305 
Destroyer, Ring of 

Invisibility Negation ............ 971 
Destruction, Libram of, ............. 662 
Detangling, Brush of ............... 230 
Detect 

Evil/Good, Weapon of............ 1511 

Gems, Weapon of ........-..000 1511 

E A ATY, AOAO TETTEST 949 

Magic, Gem of Infravision and 

Magic, Gamalon’s..............- 521 

Magic Recipe A T 1242 

Magic, Weapon of... sssr ereere 1511 

Metal, Weapon of .,.....,.-++++> 1511 

Shifting Walls/Rooms, Weapon of . . 1511 

Slopes, Weapon of ........-....- 1511 
Detection 

of Alignment Dagger .....,......- 356 

Arrow Of Scent........scerererrees 96 

BOK DONE os eis tess Te aosa 212 

Candle, Smoke... 60. eeceseees 245 

COBO MARETE TNI CEEA II TTEA 247 

Chalice OF AOPA ALEAT 275 

Clear SPAIK OE e ie anina 519 

Deep Red Sphere of ............4. 519 

Earring of Alignment ............. 425 

Gom OF issn aa a ia 519 

of Grade or Slope, Potion of........ 895 

Lens of Activity ....0.00...000006 653 

AG! Sa TEE eee ETET 654 

& Location, Amulet Proof vs.,....... 39 

Morning Star of .......6.0.050005 488 

of New Tunnels/Passages Potion. .. . . 895 

Pale Blue Rhomboid of. ........... 519 

Pale Green Prism of ..........455+ 519 

Pale Lavender Ellipsoid of ......... 519 

Pearly White Spindle of ........... 519 

Pink Rhomboid of................ 519 

Pink and Green Sphere of.......... 519 

Potion of Danger, .........-...465 859 

Powder of Magic. ..........0s0005 905 

Ring of Magic. nose rsio asies 977 

Scarlet and Blue Sphere of......... 519 

of Shifting Walls/Rooms Potion... .. 895 

of Stonework Traps/Pits Potion... .. . 895 

of Unsafe Constructions Potion ... . . 895 

Vibrant Purple Prism of ........... 519 

WEN O ois iaoea 1511 
Detection Wands 

OEE seesi aa 1480 

GE MAGIC: OA A E E 1486 

OEM a6) <:ecsreracns vayen 1487 

of Metal and Mineral ............ 1487 

OF Sectet DOOF. ...:0:5:0:s.:0/9 9.01014 910-0" 1493 

of Secret Door and Trap .......... 1493 

OPTED. cic'a A Hoeven dow 1495 
Detector, Sargasso ,..-...--..++++- 1052 
Detector, Spelljammer ............. 1268 
Determining Depth Underground 

POUOD ISN EEA TO 895 
Determining Direction of Travel 

POOR. 6 6. cinio:s clneedidiiciesiscscies 895 
DethoS Libram... .....ic0ceseveeee 1162 
Detonation, Arrow of ...-........-.55 88 
Deuschechen’s Spellbook........... 1171 
Deva 

Bama Abal giars aanraai 675 

Rod, Monadic ...............004 1033 

Sword, Movanic ..............+-. 1383 
Device 

Explosives 2. 6ukiceetisdeesstey 447 


1612 


Magic Missile... ... 0:n cscs eosed 687 
FAOn 405 
Time Journeying. .......+--sss045 405 
Devotion, Oil of Great... .........65 770 
Devotion, Staff of .......... 66.0065 1276 


Dexterity 
Gauntlet of 
Libram of 
Oil of. 
Ring of 
Diadem of Disenchantment 
Diadem of Doom 
Diagram Coin, Eight 
Diamond 
lEn AEAEE EAA TA OONO 205 
aae ASOREI PEP AEE NE Ne 676 
of Neverwinter .....,-.+000seee0% 523 
OND OL TY Ch DISAAT ETE 784 
Pedestal of Blyphian.............. 808 
and Silver Mobile... ............. 737 
e L SA EIE ETEY 348 
Diapers, Blashphor’s Magical. ........ 173 
Dice of Certain Wagering. ........... 406 
Dice of Chancelessness ...........-. 406 
Dicerion of Light and Darkness... .... 406 
Dido's Flatbox ........0....0000.005 213 
Difference, Hat of... seeiis 570 
Digestion, Potion of ...............5 860 
Digging 
Cursed Shovel of. .........0.0055 1113 
POUONO N r E 860 
Shovel Oireesi To es 1113 
Diirinka’s Robe, sousse soise. 1010 
Diirinka’s Strand. ...............-- 1010 
Dimension, Studies on, The Fourth . . . 1244 
Dimensional Mine ............05005 447 
Dimensional Pool... osease 847 
Diminution, Potion of... assess. 860 
Dimunition, Flagon of .............. 484 
Dindower's Dust of Disappearance, 

VAD cians E R 423 
Dinner PIE snanar Ra 839 
Dinosaurs, Weapon with Bonus vs. . . . 1509 
Dionysus’s Staff IE EE EE 1276 
Diplomacy Rod of Furyondy........ 1025 
Direction 

ATTOW:OF ora scemracsieeenare ioaea 88 


of Travel, Potion of Determining ... . 895 
POON OF PETO PEIEE A E 


Disabilities, Cube of. 
Disappearance 
n asn ELTETE 


Violet Dindower's Dust of . . . 
Disarming, Arrow of ......... 
Disarming, Dart of........... 
Discomfort, Grains of. ...... s.s.. 450 549 

rd 


eS ET 


a e 


Disease 
Charm of Protection from.......... 282 
Curitig Seed). eiiscccsivastcenins 
Elixir of Health. 


Potion of Immunity to............. 873 

Warding, Tapestry of............. 1427 
Disenchantment 

Diadem of . 


Disguises, Helmet of ............... 586 


Disintegration, Arrow of ............. 88 
Disintegration Chamber............. 407 
Disintegration Egg ..... 6.66666 e00e 431 
Disjoining, Staff of... .......6.6065 1276 
Disk 
Of the Azure Sea.......ccseeeeees 408 
2 noe SEE oe 408 
OF NEY LETN ETT 408 
Disks of Mishakal.............. 185, 187 
Dismissing Flute. ................. 5141 
Dispelling 
ANONO SS a a r rA 88 
DERO is ianea N o Weve 373 
GONE O86 E 821 
ART OE Aa ARE SE E AOT A, 1277 
Dispersion, Dust of Trail ............ 423 
Displacement 
Vl. (ee ere cae: 1009 
CORR OF ss ces ccs 50s rev heaeae es 299 
a TEE E sees cesaw seeder 411 
Marv's Necklace of Memory ....... 750 
DT vce OTTEET ET 1277 
Wand of. ......-0.-seesees 1277, 1479 
Displacements and Modeling 
the Miliev APPEN STE T F 1165 
Displacer Cloak ........ 060.60 seen 299 
Displacer Disk .........06s.0000ees 408 
Display Window... .. 2... 664666006 1559 
Disruption 
C raii 241 
MN OF, TNTA N TON TA 676 
Potion of Contact ............0046 858 
ER DY RT TN 1512 
Dissimulation and Obscuration .... . . 1165 
Distance 
ASTOWIBON OF. sesila iaia 88 
BROW BU ofcrenn 176 
ROW OE AEE ELEAN E TATT 204 
OOD a 203 
MONROE: RII SIEA TT 623 
Missile Weapon of ..........4.6555 92 
Distant Viewing, Orb of ............. 784 
Distant Vision, Glass of ............. 536 
Distillate of Wolfsbane.............. 442 
Distortion, Bample’s Rod of, ........ 1022 
Distortion, Map of .... 2.6.6.6. eee e8 690 
Distortion, Rod of... -n,o 1025 
Distraction 
CORO 50.5 aa prensnsigins 281 
Cursed Ring of .. 0. ..ssrccceenens 957 
ROG so vaavavupant-rednennennnte 431 
PHO ATT A AT 912 
RINGO EERE I TT 957 
Divergence, Staff of ..............- 1277 
Divination Candle. ..........-064655 241 
Divination, Scroll of Protection from. . 1077 
Diviner of Life... ........ 600. 1026, 1278 
Diving, Carpet of ss osa eso osiot Se eens 256 


E a n 


Divining, Rod of. . 60... eseese 1026 
Dizziness, Ring of iiiaae 957 


Summoning, Ring of... 
Summoning, Turban of. 
Doas Isay's Oil/Powder, . . 


Domination, Intelligence and Intuitive . . 1182 
Domination, Scroll 
Donjon Card....... 


Revolving “412 
of Teleportation. 412 
OPTS OTLET AENA ASEE, 413 


& Trap Detection, Wand of Secret , . 1493 
& Trap Location, Wand of Secret. . . 1493 


VER IT bas Savin ve ETSA 413 
Doors 

Charm of Open. ............----- 282 

Map of Illusions and Secret . - 692 

Map of Magic and Secret . - . 692 

Map of Secret and Traps, . 695 

of Mapping and Secret ............ 693 


and Passages of Parallel Worlds .... 1165 
of Secret eR 


Dori’s Obsidian Steed 


Doubling, Bow of 
Dousing, Candle Snuffer of .......... 246 


1613 


Dowsing Key 2.0.6.6 60s ceeees . 628 
Dracolich, Arcane Formulae fora ...... 59 
Dracolich, Potion of the ....... . 861 
Draconian Slaying, Arrow of . .- 88 
Draconic Influence, Orb of. . . . 784 
Draft, Durimal’s Potent. ............. 828 
Draft of the Voodoo Masters, Dark .... 859 
Doe NOs prain N Se 756 
Dragon 
Ammon Eici 75 
Bane; Bhesta isna 1348 
BONG PERAS LLLE AE 183 
Breath, Egg of... 5.06... 0s ese cves 431 
Breath, Potion of. 6.6 ee ee 862 
Breath, Scroll of Protection from .. . 1077 
Claws, SW sissors wesss 1356 
CRON EEE E OEE N 300 
CNG PRE ERIOPN ERI EES 1561 
Control, Potion of... ssis esses 864 
Crippler Sword... .ssssssssssss 1357 
n U ATA E A 360 
Figurine, Coral sesoses sin 475 
a A E EAEE A TE UO 155 
L iar AA 640 
LW AERP E STRN 1089 
AB EE REE PP 785, 786, 799 
1 OERIP ET E 804 
Protection, Shield of ............. 1094 
Scale Mail, Red... . 2.2... csee seen 81 
Sight, Potion of... .. 6.6.6 .66ss0005 865 
Slayer, Bronze. ...,.:...4s00 0000009 1354 
Slayer Sword. -se s.o e o 0:0:0 sivi. 9/0 1357 
Slaying, Sword of.. sses sesser 1357 
Slaying, Weapon of... ss sss eserse 1524 
EDEN A A EE PER ET 1120 
E ISAIA EIIN 1448 
Warding, Amulet of ...... sssr 29 
WONG TAE eevee reernet 1557 
a SATEET E 1560 
Dragonkind 
Arrow of Slaying .......- 55.555 97-99 
Dart of Slaying ..........6.6.0055 375 
BOF DOPISE OTTA T 785, 786-795 
Weapon with Bonus vs, sss 6... 4+ 1509 
Dragonlance, Lesser... ..sssssssssss 648 
Dragonlance, True ......sssssssssss 649 


Drag 

Dragonbait’s Holy Avenger Sword... . 
Dragonette, Orb of the 
Dragonfangs:s ic icsccuike wae ees 
Dragonflail ..........0cecces T 
Dragonfly Control ........... 


Shell of Protection vs. 

Shield +2/+3 vs. ....4+6+5 
Dragonscale Shield... ..,.., 
Dragonshield ............4.. 


Life Energy, Sword... .........4.+ 1357 
Shield of Energy... essees 1095 
Draining Sword, Nine Steps. ,....... 1386 
Draining, Weapon Of. .....6 56665005 1512 


a, ee, ee ee 


j e 


Drake, OOTO ie oesainie cee cee sigs 794 
Dramatic Death, Amulet of ........... 29 
Draskilion’s Amulet of Life ........... 31 
DHL OOREEN T EEIE 958 
Diaw PONE oer ceiean aires narea 840 
Drawer of Easy Retrieval ............ 413 
Drawers, Chest Ofisas. eas 287 
Drawmij’s Spellbook ..........60.. 1220 
Draxalon Defender of 
Feminine Virtue, ............++ 1357 
Dreadful Construction, Apparatus of. . . . 56 
Dreadful Sleep, Gas of ............. 501 
Dream 
Cap of Veluna.........-eseereeee 250 


Maligtnai OF REESEN 1421 
WE OE icp ia ae NEUV OAS ES 1528 
Dreamsinger, Sword... ............ 1357 
Dreamspecch, Potion of ............. 865 
Dress of Amazement ..........0..045 413 
Dress of Protection.............0005 414 
Dressing, Window of ............4. 1559 
Dik Kare a2 cee 874 
Drinker, Blood, Sword ..........5.. 1347 
Drinker, The (Adjatha), Sword. ...... 1336 
Drinking, Ladle of ................4 635 
Drinking, Slippers of .............. 1121 
Driven, Mace ionisasi 676 
Dioma cn pss tances wet 177 
Droning, Bagpipes of .............. 1537 
Drow 
Chain Mail, Skoriaan’s............. 82 
RingeOE the REET SET 958 
e n ETT TE TEE ITTE 21 
Drog Muhsin 895 
Spells, Scroll of Seven ..........- 1083 
GOR ecacxintecasoenveniiees 1278 


OF Deafening «0:00:00 00 ieri 819 
ENAT a ANAI En 819 
EMNE: denie perane 819 


Drumming, Kettle of .........-2+55+ 627 
Drunkard’s Spellbook, Bosero The. . . . 1150 
Drunkenness, Philterof ...........-. 828 
Drunkenness, Potion of ...-......... 865 
Drusion, Gem 0f.....04¢sescevesecess 520 
Dry Potion, Clean and .............. 857 
Dry Steppes, Scarf of the........... 1059 
Diya Oori i insis taspa roon 330 
Dryad, Oil of the. .........---.e0055 768 
Drying, T R APERE E N S 931 
Drying, Robe of I ETET 1010 
Dryness 
Bedrit ian sone aa 166 
DOR OE BEIO NIIA TEET 419 
Sai araea aan eS 1126 
Duathal’s Mace, Muamman .......... 677 
Dugal’s Bagpipes of Fear ........... 1537 
Dugal’s Musical 
Instruments ......... 820, 1320, 1538 


Dugmaren Brightmantle’s 

Broad Sword. .........se-0005 1358 
Dulama’s Alchemy Jug, Louie ........ 626 
Dulling, Dust of Mind ........-..... 421 
Dulling, Malto’s Dust of Mind,....... 421 
Duliness, Dust Of sees eesseeeeeesse 419 
Dumathoin’s Mattock... ......-....+. 709 
Dungeon Chain, Danleor's.........-. 271 
Dunhill’s Spelljamming 

Apparatus of Kwalish........... 414 
Duplication, Bag of ..............-+ 134 
Duplication, Ladle of .,............. 635 
Duplication, Mirror of ,,.........655 726 
Durability, Masthead of .......,....+ 709 
Durance, Vial OF. ...:065s/s 000 cee scy 1472 
Durandal, Sword. E E 1358 
Durandan, Sword ..........-+s+9099 1358 
Durandana, Sword ...........--..- 1358 
Duration, Potion. .............+.5.- 853 
Durimal’s Philters..............0066 828 
Dust 

of Absorption 
of Adhering, sssr 506.0 iia 
4 a OER EU SAC) 
of Appearance 
of Blandness .........0..000. A 
of Blending isi cannuccia 
Quasielemental Command, 

Ringof icici onal 
Decoy a cise Raa 
of Disappearance ............ 
OF DYNES Fie RATER EN 
of Dullness isasi 
Feather ain 
Fertilization. ...........65 
Foddet iss eae 
of Forgetfulness .......... 
Green Sleeping........... 
of Hearing Dullness ....... 
OF M <a essere snes 
EGG METEISSA 
Mage Shot. ....66.20055 006 
Malto’s, of Mind Dulling 
of Mind Dulling ...........- 
of Opposition ............ 
Paralyzation ............ 
of Piquantness............ 
Revealing ........++++ 
RU ico: sisseinspiniaieeieiesee 
of Sight Dullness ....... 
of Sixth Sense Dullness . . es 
NB a5 P ET O A ENTE 422 
a OE POPE 422 
Small Bird Repulsion . . . . E y 
of Smell Dullness ....... E AND 
of Sneezing...........- ... 423 
of Sneezing and Choking . 423 
SOKA, RATE Are TE 423 
of Taste Dullness, ......, 419 
of Touch Dullness..... ore AID 
OF TracelessNess« s o eso i one soona 423 
of Trail Dispersion .........-..... 423 
Violet Dindower's of 

Disappearance...............+. 423 
Dwarf Control, Potion of ...........5 872 
Dir THOWEL 30's ois: eis opoo asies 552 
Dwarfbane (Poison) ............065 1201 
Dwarvenkind, Girdle of ........,...- $33 
Dwarves and Halflings, 

Arcane Resistance of. .......... 1140 
Dwarves, High Anvil of the ........... 51 
Dyeing, Jug of ..............0.0008 626 
Dyerwaen, Sword .........6..00006 1358 
Dylan Longbranch’s Spellbook ..... . 1165 
Dynamo of Flying .............-..5 423 
Dypshez's Powder of the 

Black Vetbiie2iiuliomatseSes 902 


Dyvers, Woodworker's Tools of ...... 1446 
Dzance’s Guardian ............-+-. 1095 


Eagle 


Ear, Ring Of the ........s.ccyeerereres 959 
Earring 


EQUUS. cvsvsvevsvese sata: 


of Protection. ..........65 


of Understanding ..........--.... 
Earth 
Adaptation, Ring of .........0..04 
Command, Ring of .......... i 
Control, Potion of Elemental ‘ 
Elemental Ball... 0.):000es8 coavene 
Elementals Scroll of Protection . ... 1077 
Elementals Stone of Controlling. .. . 1309 


and Fire, Staff of............ «1278 
and Fire Adaptation, Ring of . 959 
Hierophant, Ring of the ..... . 969 
Invulnerability, Oil of Elemental . . . . 768 
Lesser Talisman of ....,.......-+ 1421 
Metamorphosis, Ring of. . 961 
Parting, Pick of......... 835 
Parting, Cursed Pick of. . . . 835 
Passage, Orgel’'s Wand of . . 1491 
Salt of i E T EEE . -248 
Scroll of Protection from . . 1077 
ann Sea Ship o ss nseni sasoe 1105 
SUE A) SETEN T SE 
and Stone, Wand of... . . 
Earthcaller's Rod, Segojan . . 
Earthquakes, Gong of. ... . . 
Eartrumpet.........+5- 
Eastern Wooden Armor 
Easy Retrieval, Drawer of. 
Easy Travel, Barding of . . 
Eating, Ring of Spell .............+ 
Eating, Spoon of... ese eese o sesos 
Ebbing Tide, Pearl of the 
Ebomara’s Slippers of 
Spider Climbing .............+ 
Ebon Flame, Crystal of the 
Ebon Flame, Sword of the 
Ebon Skull ...........+ 
Ebonbane, Sword , , . R 
nA ee TE a 
Echo & Resonance of the Great Void. . 
Echoes, Cloak of .........5+0++0005 
Edge, The, Sword........;06050005 
Edible Objects, Puchezma’s 
POWOBEOL IROTO SETET ee 907 
a TGs; é0s:0:civs celeb ET 428 
Eelix, Armor Of, 0.050 :00sr00ese00%5 4 
Balik, a A PEREAT ZITA A EOS 959 
Effects 
Casting Solis iis n iaat 1068 
Protection Scroll... .. a...an 1068 
or Uses, Gem Type vs. ........--65 5i4 
Efreet 
Bane Sword. i... 2.8.2 E 1371 
BOM PEP AA E 917 


Wizard, Arrow of Slaying 
Elementals 


Bais TE ENAN 1403 


El Hareidhin’s Spellbook, Talel ...... 
Elasticity, Oil of... ansees 


/Lightning Protection, Banner 


Shield of Proof Against........... 
Electrification, Rod of ........6.54« 
a cccsevsinescetcceses 


1615 


Travel, Talisman of .......... 


Elyas, Perfume .......... 
Elyromancia, Nchaser's . , . 


Of Neverwinter... .ssscsceesdiess 523 
Emotion, Moodarvian Ring of ...,.... 979 
Emotions, Amulet of ........ 5.65.56: 3 
Emotions, Blowgun of Wild... ....... 176 
Empathy, Medallion of .............. 710 
Emperor Card.......sceccceescaces 383 
Emperor's 

ASD ORE. 5 ccceeducsacoustancas 116 

CROW oss aca canaecaeeswcteere 332 

MOR cov ceeresteesvedesaeeties 727 

DRG er cvesxownnesesnecssuten 1365 

RO COE OORE ESAT 383 
Empty Flask (Iron)... sss 566666000. 489 
Empty Quiver, Never s.s. sesse 929 
Enchanted 

Beings, Bane of... ...........665 1343 

CRY FIG: W 0 <vscecccesecuucons 1089 

Enhancements... ..... 56. - ese nees 2I 

Gear, Prismal’s Useful ............ 913 

Grappling from T 549 

eo 652 

Monsters, Arrow of Slaying ......... 97 

Monsters, Dart of Slaying,......... 375 

Monsters, Weapon Bonus vs. ..... . 1509 

Sword of Sylaire.... 0... 5050505 1365 
Enchantment 

PIII OF Sess eseeesiwelewes evi 89 

yt Pee ene rey Peer 117 

DOO REPERE TTT 89, 204 

CRONBOW OF. ois sisccvesevedes 203 

Missile OF... vecisesseveccssecees 89 

ON EAH ARF AYET 768 

at op MELEE ERTL OEE EN: 902 

Shing OF 06 sai cle Sie eliceww eens 89 

WEOPOA OF. oc NT 1512 
Enchantments, Vaerendroon's 

OT Peery 1259 
Enchiridion of Travel, Tymessul’s. . . . . 1253 
Encumbrance, Bench of ............. 171 
Encyclopaedia, Nonsubstance ....... 1205 
End, Book with No... . 2... 0.006005 1149 
Endless 

Repetition, Nidus* Wand of ....... 1488 

DUNE ois ara TEENE, 1301 

Steam, Carrague’s Decanter of... .. 375 

String, Ball of ..........s00se000+ 149 

Water, Decanter of ..........5 376, 377 
Endurance, Sash of Heat ........... 1053 
Enemies, Scarab of Enraging........ 1056 
Enemy Detection, Wand of.......... 1480 
Fnemy Medallion, Species 714 
Energy 

Drain, Armor of .......6600005050+ 74 


Necklace of Memory ............. 750 


Weapon... ., 

Enjoyment, Extendable Hand of. . . . . 
Enlarging Glass ..... 2... 66-20 0005 
Enlightened Being, Arrow of Slaying .. . 99 
Enlightened Gods, Book of the ....... 187 
Enlightenment, Mirror of... . . 727 
Enlightenment, Potion of . . . . 866 
Enlil’s Helmet............ . 589 


Enmity, Rel Astran Sword of . . 
Enraging Enemies, Scarab of. . 


Equations, Book of Mystical . . . 


Equestrians, Rod of 

Equine Brush, Viadium's Fabulous .. . . 230 

Equipment, Lightweight. ........ 22, 1521 

Equipment, Scroll of .............. 1073 

Equus 
Anklet, . «48 
Bracelet. . . ..217 
Brooch ... . «225 
Cameo. . ..235 
Coin ... ..321 
Earring ... .. 425 
Medallion . A 


Evelyn's Lens of Speedreading. . ..... . 
Evem's Mirror of Enviable Image . 


Evening, Armor of the Desert ......... 
Evening, Raji's Armor of the Desert ... . 81 
Ever-Full Bag of Seeds. . . . a. 
Everbountiful Soup Kettle ........... 


Everbountiful Soup Kettle, Mithryl’s . . . 627 


Ewdun, Mighty Gauntlet of 


Colonel Tamus .........6..65005 508 
Bwen Mate eaaet 917 
Exaggeration, Fishing Pole of ........ 482 

Book of Ethnic Humor........... 1165 
Component Case... ... naseer 261 
Deeds, Book Of. sis sssaaa 188 
SORE APARER ETT 1366, 1367 
Excavation, Spade of Colossal... 1114 
Excellence, Pen of... sereoo oora 809 
Excellent Rod of Engineering ....... 1027 
Medallion of Spell ............6.. 74 
Noj’s Claw of Magic. ...........+. 294 
Pax’s Medallion of Spell........... m 
Excisement Oil/Powder ......... 769, 903 
Exercise, Tome of Gainful .......... 144) 
Existence, Tapestry of Folded. ....... 1427 
Exodus, Oil/Powder of .......... 769, 903 
Exorcism, Rattle of... .... 6.260600 0s 822 
Expeditious Transport, Rod of ...... . 1027 
sere evga ERT eee 676 
Experimenting with Planar Forks. .... . 491 
Exploding Candie... s oen: sat 242 
Exploding, Candle Snuffer of........, 247 
Explosions 
Oe A PEC OCR TTS Oy 89 


Extraordinary Powers, Sword. ....... 1401 


Eye 
MOIS, CIS. -ep eria ven vs 696 
Mellifleur’s Gem... ...... 5.0445 458 
Messakk’s (Lamp). .............-- 644 
of Minute Seeing .............--- 458 
BEEN E 458 
OR OF Hie Byles ssid 94.45 0.0088 769 
OF POteifiCation 0.0.0 6 ree rresr cer ve 458 
Laa Ai A PEETRE ee 903 
a E TETT A EN ORE 458 
L S y DR ee 952 
DEMOED P EE E 459 
OED «0.0 ans atarra 460 
Wand of Ochalor’s ........-.5+- 1490 
WOT TOREPE OE TOO 461 

Eyeglasses 
O RRT TET TAT 462 
of Enhanced Vision. ............-. 463 
OME ERTO OREERT 463 
an E EN A 463 

Eyepatch of Tenh ................5 463 

Eyes 
POSES Le DEEP SEED Sr 134 
lla Sane rary Woe ti 1011 
NOR OR 6g civ ioae s ae 755 
Potion of Mirrored ............... 879 
Potion of Sharp... .........-+++-- 888 
RMN cs i cisiesctesdartasees 1010 
Vision and Arcane Sight... ....... 1166 
Wate Ole AN RE TA E 1480 

F 
Fabrication, Wax of ............... 1505 


Legendry Great Arms &........ 1191 
A E n PR ders wine E 213 
F MEK i nn iss 699 
Faerie 

r TAN 89 
DUD OEP E A IE 1541 
PSE AL T I 961 
Talisman of the ..........6..5055 1422 
Failure, Spall, 5550550 Konesessserees 1068 
Reorie’s Wheel saena asasena 1530 
Faith, Medallion of... .6.66.6.s065 712 
Faithful Knot... 06.6506 eee 330, 465 
Faithfulness, Phylactery of........... 830 
Falling 
Boot of Feather. ..........-.0.05 195 
BROOCH ON ssenveasir sine samengenne 226 
COE OE sci anesise T R 653 
TOK FASE scsi genous AT 769 
Ring of Feather... .......5006 952, 963 
Varlo's Ring of Feather, ..,....... 1005 
Falrik Moondance’s Sword. ......... 1339 
False Calling, Sphere of ............ 1269 


Dagger, Spider .........-..0--+05 369 , 
Ekia rarr Niar EELNES 360 
WOR TE E 1377 
of the Nosferatu ..........-...-+5 361 
TE IE OEI EN 699 
Fangpick, Beholder... .........-..+ 165 
PAGE CIO SEIO TETTEI 301 
Fanning, Fan of.........2++0+0+000+ 465 
Fantastic Vision, Telescope of ....... 1429 
Far 
Reaching, Amulet of............... 31 
O D T E E T 654 
Co fee ee 780 
Seeing, Salve of ssi snorren 1052 
Farce, Cube of - 350 
Fare’s Coat of Protection ............ 314 
Farrinae, Sword ..........+.-+++++ 1367 
Fascination, Egg of................. 432 
Fashion, Ring of ................... 963 
Fastening, Button of ................ 232 
tL SPP eT or ret 1462 
Fate, Myrkul’s Tablet of ............ 1418 
Fate NOVO Eespere ain 1564 
Fate's Promise, Sword. ..........+.+ 1367 
oR ree ears 381 
Fates, Staff of the ...........++2+4+ 1280 
Fatigue, Oil of Metal ............... 773 
Faulty Lockpicks, Buckle of... ....... 230 
Favor, Charm Of «0000. ocseetscccas 281 
Fear 
ATMO OF 5.00 cae wewttcesiwst eens 76 
Bagpipes Of .....0.0.000ccrereeevas 1537 
Dugal’s Bagpipes of ............+ 1537 
WENO A AET EES N 728 
WR OR. se TEVOET REI 1480 
Whip of Frost Fire, and Fear. . ... . 1533 
Fearlessness, Ring of ............... 963 
Fears of Humanity, Deep ........... 1162 
Feasting, Tablecloth of ............. 1418 
Feasts, Oil Of the... 00s sescivesennee 769 
Feather 
WM ROAT eadcnckinganrnd 420 
Falling, Boot of............---+++ 195 
Pee, COE PTI TENT 769 
Falling, Ring of.............. 952, 963 
Falling, Varlo’s Ring of........... 1005 
Featherchime,...5.200cceereceres 816 
Feathertoken .....scsccsessesvves 466 
Featherweight Boot... .........-.+ 195 
EINE 6on «63.09 acownvccrececacs 466 
PORE coose cs co cevsrpceseces 466 
> ara Mystical Tokens. . . 180, 466-469 
send se 5 T eer ae ene 1463 
sak WORE Os ahaa ba ar 1480 
Feathers, Whip of ...............5- 1533 
Feeblemind, Hiatea’s Net of .......... 756 
Feeblemindedness, Elixir of Healing . . . 442 
Feedbag of Plenty. ...-....-..---0+5 134 
Feline Attraction, Bagpipes of ..... . . 1537 
Feline, Glove of the ...............- 2 
Felines, Scroll of Protection from 1078 
FOI COR OE 5 5 6.05: 69:085 506 sient 474 
Feminine Virtue, Draxalon 
Defender of ......0s0e00sesees 1357 
Femininity, Kerisis’s Girdle of ........ 535 
Femininity/Masculinity, Girdle of . .. . . $33 
Fennec, Charm of Resource .......... 283 
Ferocity, Banner of .............--.. 155 
Fertilization Dust .................. 420 
Fextree Chess Game Set............. 284 
Fez of Disguise. .........c000s.0008 570 
Fharlanghn, Shoe of ............... Mil 
Fharlanghn’s Holy Symbol. .......... 597 
Field Plate, Magical .......-...--.... 159 
Fiend 
REE os oo concancewstouteroness 32 
COD eaan ve becadenusastcemene 388 


PRR PS EE TT ry cecvoxves 1192 
ETO ee, 1280 
TOMAR Vn na ncareerswenasctsey 1422 
NS TO. o sc ohacncacseetskane 389 
n N T T T 1367 
Fiendkind, Lore of ................ 1192 
Fiendomicon of Iggwilv............ 1166 
Fiends, Pictish Bag of............445 136 
Fiends, Shell of Protection vs, ........ 439 
Fiery 
Brand of Masauwu.............. 1453 
oer TR 769 
Dagger, Freya’s.....-..++-+-+++s- 363 
Fighter Book ............- (See ase 
Fighters, Arrow of Slaying ......... 64+ 
Fighting, Carpet of, ...........66545 256 
Figurehead 
OCDE DITIT ORTS 469 
a EPP CTYPE TENT P 471 
OF Protection. ......26asei eee cde 471 
of Wondrous Power. ..... 43.5.4: 472 
Alabaster Griffon ............64605 473 
Amber Monkeys. .....6.55.s.0005 473 
Cot of Pelkovic.. irr ardini 474 
Coral Dragon croth siris EN 475 
Dori’s Obsidian Steed of 
Wondrous Power... .. 2... .. 6... 475 
Boner Frog WZI TITL IOLI 475 
E A S T 476 
Moonstone Rabbit. ......... 50.405 476 
OOVK PE iss csseeeanirescaces 477 
OPCS ciepicsvivvarencanene 477 
SVE CUD oc eins csv N TET 477 
Tourmaline Turtle ....... 6... 6.055 477 
of Wondrous Power (Various)... .... 478 
Final Word, Sword ... assesses sano 1367 
Find Secret Doors, Weapon of ....... 1512 
Find Traps, Weapon of ......... 0.6. 1512 
Finder, Sword.....4.. ESETT + 1368 


Adaptation, Ring of .-.._-- 959 
Adaptation, Ring of Earth and ...,. . 959 
Arrow, Faerie 


Fire 
Elementals, Spear +4 vs. ......... 1132 
Fath a ciate ATN 
and Fear, Whip of Frost 
Flynn’s Ring of ............04 
Gem i yore ie Ra 
GVPOBAM PRENEO AETA 


Helmseeker, Greek ........... 
Hierophant, Ring of the 
and Ice, Hourglass of ............. 
Invulnerability, Oil of Elemental ... . 768 
Lesser Talisman of ...........++- 
Metamorphosis, Ring of 
Oil of Bternal Tissa 
Opal of Neverwinter. ......... 
Pearl of Protection from 
Pepper Talisman ............. 
Phandore’s Wand of ............. 
Quenching, Smoke of............ 
Resistance, Apron of. ....... r; 
Resistance, Glass Bead of. . . . 
Resistance, Ngona Horn of. . . 
Resistance, Potion of ....... 
Resistance, Ring of......... 
Resistance, Sash of.,....... 
Rod of Elemental .......... 


Shield of Proof Against ? 
Snuffing, Bucket of .............. 
SADE esaa 3-06 wisi 


Starting, Ring of........... 
Stilling, Oil of............. 
Strength, Potion of ......... 


White Copper Ring of....... 
FHOB CID) co carcauesseners 


PHB WG 5 iis EP OTTS ET ae 
Fireballs, Candle. .............--+.- 
Fireballs, Wand of.............-... 1481 
Firebane Cloak.. s piieis -..301 
Pre) ep § 
... 204 
EET bo | 
-.. 785 
Prey be] 
...328 
Fireseed 373s iaaa 1089 
Fish 
Command, Fisher's Trident of. ..... . 841 
Command, Trident of a 
Control, Potion of ..........6.0565 
Control, Potion of Reptile 
‘Amphibian/ .............0.5+5 
Control, Trident of 


Firedrake, Orb of the ......... 
Firedrake’s Orb, Great ........ 
Fireflies, Bottle of............ 


oe EEIT ORES Maen S 


Fishing Pole of 


OF Odin cesses eee Pees 1368 
Stone, Sword sii sosirea ati 1405 
Fistandantilus, Bloodstone of. 
Fit, Cloth of Perfect icsse nt 313 
Five 
Finger Oi o 770, 903 
BIG RRS os Firs ATATA EES 
Priest Spells, Scroll of ..... . 1073, 1074 
Wizard Spells, Scroll of .......... 1074 
Fixation, Goblet of; -sss sisisi 547 
Fixation, Manas of .........5...2065 547 


Fixed Portals, Peregrin’s Treatise on. . . 1214 
Fjalar’s Gauntlet 


Flail Weapons 
Bael’s Morning Star 
Bargrivyek’s ........ 


Feather Token ...........s0es0c0s 
Magic, Scroll of ..... 
of the North, Sword . . 
Sword, Black. ....... 
Sword of the Ebon . 


1618 


Flandal Steelskin’s Hammer. ....,.... 553 
Flash Pellet 


Flatchet, Rutterkin, Sword .......... 1389 
Flattery, Mirror of. ...........000005 728 
Flawlessness, Jewel of .............4 522 
Fleeting Flail i...0.050040cc3.cceveu’ 487 
Fleetness, Horseshoe of ............. 600 
Flesh Golem Libram. ........... 662, 665 
Flesh Golem Protection, Scarab of. . . . 1057 
Flight 


Barding of. . 
Ginzani’s Riding Tack of .......... 530 
Potion of Spirit 
Yoke:0f «20s 
Flint, Prismal’s ...5...0.cssasseiesess 
Flirting, Handkerchief of ............ 566 
Floating 
Blade of Shin Lu, Sword ......... 1369 


Flower, Troll 
Flowers, Tome of Garden........... 1441 
Flowing Flagon, Zagyg’s .........,.. 484 
Fluidness, Potion of ................ 868 
Fluids, Cosmogony of Magnetic ..... 1157 
Fluids, Occult Observations on ...... 1211 
Flute 


eee ee =e l I UUU 


CO  — 


UGGS DUE L EIRT, 170 
WOOK OR: « PI TEF 1513 
MAAS KOREO A 1560 
Flynn's Ring of Fire . s e se-s5 100.0000 964 
Fochlucan Bandore................ 1320 
Fochlucan Harp vosie ood teresa ovise 1324 
Focusing, Potion of Mind............ 879 
Focusing, Staff of Spell ............ 1296 
POUUOE DUST <5 she vu ccweticincces sts 420 
TOON 555s h0 tins voteckeseeseics 1369 
Foefinder, Sword ..............+.. 1370 
Fog 
Book of Clouds and ............- 1157 
GUUS BG: E EENET ONA 433 
Control, Wand of... ............. 1482 
EURO ci sccivevcidetctecetdess9 1545 
MVM G8: ciuicd va vdanccessessecs 1482 
Folded Existence, Tapestry of... .. . . - 1427 
Folding 
DO avis css teeswesess coos sels 178 
[ee EETL YTE TTI EASTEN 178 
MOto i N 490 
Tined Grappling Iron .... 2.20.0... 549 
Folly, Ring Of oii eis sess scwiaiees 964 
Food, Chalice of Liquid ............. 276 
a o TEYAT nse 134 
Fool 
a ATTESA NE 381, 382 
PEETLA NEL AT 1382 
i TOLTA T 1441 
FRG SUR OF, cen cvaccsscscscestuce 570 
Foot 
1. EITA COT eee erreh es 150 
Lo RENEE OTE ee ee eT 349 
ROOD NT OE OTET 283, 930 
MOON; CONE aganna 287 
Footing, Anklet of Sure ............-. 50 
Footman Dragonlance .............- 648 
BSIOW OES coat sansa se TETEE 90 
a LETT POT ET 164 
En A EROTTI T SS 350 
RINT Olivas daniels A TESTE 1482 
Forces, Theory of the Invisible... .... 1251 
Foresight, Gem of. ............-+.+- 521 
Forest, Bow of the ............-..-- 205 
Forest, Purple Gem of the Vesve .. .. . . 527 
Forester’s Friend... .,....-..+-+0+- 1358 
Forestfriend’s Spellbook, Sir Olwyn. . . 1244 
Foretelling, Cauldron of............. 268 
Forewarning, Potion of,............. 869 
oe 6 ARE Ry, eer 576 
Forge of Metal Protection. ........... 491 
FOrMery, QUT OE R 924 
Forgetfulness 
Dust of ...... dauipileasdaceneas +4 420 
POUCH ORs. 5 ose n:si6:0.4:0:08 TENTAT 869 
RRO OF. ETT TT EEY 1046 
n a A TATE T T TTE 1513 
Forgotten Arts of Oratory Magnetism . 1171 
Forgotten City, Scepter of the... . . .. . 1062 
Fork 
(For Table Fork see Utensil) 
Belial’s Military ................. $41 
Mephistopheles’s. ................ 842 
CE IIR CEIT ky cakes TS ET 841 
Cm) a NATA trey ys 493, 841 
a sisi sGscisascdstasesere 491 
Trident/Military ................. 844 
Forks Experimenting with Planar... . .. 491 
Form, Armor of Gaseous ............. 77 
Forms, Paper of ........00eeesc005 803 
Formula for a Dracolich, Arcane ...... . 59 
Formula for a Lich, Arcane ........... 60 
Forseti's Sword IET OEE 1370 
Fortification, Bricks of the 


nas 1152 
Fortitude, Potion of. . -869 
Fortitude, Ring of.. .... . 963 
Fortress, Daern’s Instant 350 
Fortune Telling Deck . . . SESI 
Fortune, Wheel of. . . . . 153) 
Fossilized Weapon .,, . . 1513 
Foul Rotting, Periapt of . 825 
Fottl Water o e sio, 100 piova . 869 
Foundations of Secret Authority... . . . 1171 


Fountain 


Four Winds, Lamp of the 


a IAEN AT 770, 903 
Franklyn% Incredible Chariot 
Fraz-Urb-luu's Staff... 00000002. 
Free 
Action, Aquatic Armor with......... 70 
Action, Aquatic Item with ....... 


from Magic, Reglar’s Gloves of .. .. . 
POOR OF 6 raana 


Reglar’s Gloves of. .. 544 

Ring of ......... .. 965 
Fresh Air, Potion of. . . . . -869 
Fresh Water, Cauldron of ...........- 268 
Freshness 

Cauldron of Restoring ............ 269 

GROG AE EAL 533 

Wand of. . . .. 1482 
Frey's Ship .. - 1106 
Frey's Sword....... 1370 
Freya's Fiery Dagger . . 363 
Freya's Frost Brand, Sword. 1370 
Frief’s Magical Quiver...........-.. 929 
Friend, Foresters. ..............--- 1358 


SWE t AEDE t ce O 1370 
Frigga’s Black Opal Necklace ........ 749 
Frigga’s Dagger ...........+0000-0+ 363 
Fright, Potion of .........0.0-e00008 869 
PORDO ois pe rsiacsngsss'sievinemeies 179 
Frog Figurine, Emerald ............. 475 
Frogs, Sheath of .......-+ +0005 eee 1092 
FROM DOG ss cvcevcsecccessrscses 412 
Frost 

Brand, Sword ............0-000- 1370 

Brand Sword, Freya's ............ 1370 

Fire and Fear, Whip of ........... 1533 

Resistance, Cube of .............. 351 

Resistance, Potion of ............. 869 

Strength, Potion of ............... 871 

Wand 8) escent 1482 
Frostbrand Sword, Kirren's.......... 1379 
FrOetreaver ss ois iyi eek iia ciated ie 117 
Frugality, Tenser’s Portmanteau of... . . 261 
Fruit of Extra Healing, Kulver-Tam’s. . . 634 
Frying, Carpet of < i..s0060 008 ees 257 
Fu Hsing’s Lyre................... 1331 


MRAN os 0 ac copes ssuesmnasiesnts 
Full Wishes, Ring of Three. . . . 
Fumbling, Gauntlet of ..... .. 
Fumbling, Oil of.............. A 

Funhouse Mirror, Not-So-Funny ....., 730 


Gaerdal Ironhand’s Hammer ......... 


Gainful Conjuration, Libram of. . 
Gainful Exercise, Tome of 
Gajin Control, Potion of... .... . . 
Galadaster’s Orizon 


Galley of the Gods .......-...0.-.. 


Garl Glittergold's Battle Axe . . 


Garnet Orb of Golden Death ......... 795 
Gas 
Candle, Insanity so-s vove oea saose 246 
Globe of Battleshroud............. 537 
of Dreadful Sleep ........ 06.0605 501 
PR PEN PEE T 1554 
Scroll of Protection from ......... 1078 
Shield of Proof Against Poison. .. . , 1101 
Gaseous Form 
T a EE EPES E F A 77 
a C AT T 855, 870 
BINNS OF AOE TE r 1096 
Gascous Globe, Mervics ...........- 539 
Gate 
Alternate World. T TTO AT, 501 
BIG NRD TIET A TETO 349 
SEDAAN AIN EaD A DSSS 1136 
a a AON ITAS S 502 
Gates, Glorindel’s. .... oaae 103 
Gateway Whistle.. ............0.2. 1558 
Gauntlet 
Claw of the Bear................. 503 
a ETLAT T 503 
Climbing Claws ............-.... 503 
Of Den. oii esses E 503 


Gauntlet 
of Entrapment... 0.00000... e eae 504 
Fire Claws 


OF Fea iene as oes a Wien eee 


of Might ........-..- 
Iron, of Urnst 
OP Might AEOS AE AETAT eee 
OF Monier es iE 


of Specialization. ....-........6+5 
OF SG AAEN T E TEE 
of Super Strength 
of Swimming and Climbing . . . . . . 508 
OCTANE neia 508 


Gauze of Appearance 
Gavel 


Gaxx’s Spellbook 
Gazette of the Norse Climates ....... 1174 
Gear 

HAIG cuss atmo ENERET E, 22 


Gearnat Sea, Storm Rider of the . . 
Geaya’s, Nomog- Broad Sword, 


GeBOR os oss: ce I PEES O ES 1192 
Gem 
OF Atonement o. 2065.6 A T 
Bimbomushi . . . 


Brain Shield ... 
of Brightness. .. . . 
Bupu’s Emerald. 
Cea 
Cindengem ocido iras 

Color vs. Meaning or Significance. . . 514 
Era a a ries sae 

Cutter’s Tools of Sunndi 


FRO AIIE E EEE IAA 
of Foresight 
Gamalon’s, of Infravision and 

Detect’ Mapio: cs iiesauavncemsar 521 
OE en aa 
of Income ... 
of Insight... . 
TORI EEEE E ES PENI EE E 
Gem, Jewel 
EA isim A 522 
of Attacks Upon the Owner .....-. 
of Flawlessness........-..+ vewSa2 
of Neverwinter . . 


Nightjewel 
Gem (cont.) 


) a eae ere arg gee Cr et oo 524 
cog 8 NETSE TE N NT IEEE 524 
of Magic Missile Protection........ 525 
Mellifleur's, Eye 

OF MUSING. isi ses skeen ais 
Opal of Olfactory Illusion ......... 526 
Of Poterio sinana 527 
Purple, of the Vesve Forest......... 527 
of Retaliation ...... 

of Returning ....... 

of Scroll Reading . . . 

CP SBING A ATT cere 

OF Shielding: . wisi iiicweascccceiee 
SOU aA 

Sar AA T 

Stone Types. scisso oeras via 

SWON EEEE AILES TETTE 1371 
Type vs. Effects or Uses ........... 514 
OER vort cnar 530 


Gemcutter’s Tools of Sunndi ., . . 530, 1446 
Gems, Reputed Magical Properties of . . 514 


Gems, Weapon of Detect ........... 1511 
Gender Alteration, Girdle of. ......... 534 
Generalship, Rod of .............5+ 1028 
Generation Rules for Weapons, 
TABS NERE EN EEA 1506 

Genie 

Arrow of Slaying ............-+++ 

PrOD e ssooioramr 

Prison, Noble .... ` 

SI TUE. oio o orane 

Summoning, Ring of.............- 967 
Genieblight Sword ..........-....- 1372 
Genies’ 

Bane Sword, . 1371 

LAO OE IG E . 640 

Scroll of Protection from .. . . . 1078 
Geniescourge Sword - 1372 
Genius, Potion of ............ . 870 


. 195 
+917 
553 
207 
Getaway’s Oil/Powder. .......... 770, 903 
Ghast Control, Potion of............. 895 
Ghastrobe (Robe) ............ 1010 
Ghastar, Golden Egg of ...........-. 433 
Ghasts, Scroll of Protection from. .. . . 1080 
Ghost 
Blade, Naesowen, Sword 
Bottle, Undead ............ 
Coffin of Creation. ......... i 
Control, Potion of .............065 
Ghostliness, Potion of... ..........44 870 
Ghostly Palace, Al-Azid'’s............. 26 
Ghosts, Legendary of Phantoms and . . 1191 
Ghosts, Scroll of Protection from. .. . . 1081 
Ghoul Control, Potion of ............ 895 


Ghouls, Scroll of Protection from .... 1081 
Giant 
Arrow of Harming ...........+..++ 
Arrow of Slaying ......-- 
Black Pearls: .s\..<:cieisciace 


Slayer Sword. ........... 

Slaying, Sword of ........ ‘ 

Slaying, Weapon of.........-..-+ 

Strength, Girdle of ..............- 

Strength, Potion of ..... 

Sword ofthe... sesser 
Giantkind, Dart of Slaying 
Giantkind, Weapon with Bonus vs. ... 1509 
Giants, Sword of the............... 1372 
Gilidarius’s Ring of Wizardry. ........ 952 
Ginsen, Shimmering Blade 

a E EE T E. 1394 


Ginzani’s Riding Tack of Flight ....... 530 
Girdle 

of Armida 

of Back Defense .. . . 

of De ‘Rah 

of Dwarvenkind ...........0.0005 533 

of Femininity/Masculinity ......... 533 

Of Freshness’ cuissin saa etwas 533 

of Gender Alteration. ............+ 534 

of Giant Strength ........6....055 534 

of Holy Might, ............055 oi GS 

Golden, Of Urnst ics: :s-s:cxsieisseneion 535 

Kerisis’s, of Femininity. ........... 535 

OFC LON OCTET AT 535 

of Many Pouches ..........40004+ 535 

of Priestly Might... ......6+s0009% 535 
Githyanki Silver Sword ..........++ 1372 
SAE OED: oaaae 1546 
Gladineore THe serae 102 
Glain’s Crystal Sphere ............+ 1269 
Glaive, Saw-Toothed ......-.. 6.5.55 844 
Glandar’s Grimoire... ..... 266.6545 1174 
Glanvyl’s Workbook... ..........++ 1176 
Glaring Eye, Humbaba’s..........-.. 455 
Glass 
Arrow of Polymorphing.............. 93 

Glass Bead 

of Fire Resistance............+++++ 164 

ofFlying........ 

of Healing 

POET DE 164 

RE POMBO. a SENEE 164 

NE HOON csv sien on ainipninicigia/e stale 164 
Glass (cont.) 

Crystal War»#ior., ... - 5.09 0.900988 348 

of Distant Vision. . z -936 

Bnlarginy ETETEA TEE 536 

Joal’s of Preserved Words 537 

Loupe of Cormac . 

SUDDEES, 5 5.s'0cs so5p 5s aden ae 


Symbology, Origins of the Hour. 
Glibness, Philter of. ............ 
Glim-Gauntlet. .............. 
Glittergold’s Battle Axe, Garl. . . 
Glittering Necklace .........- 
Glitterlode’s Blessed Skyhooks ....... 537 
Glitz & Klax’s Potion............... 871 


Glowing .... 
Magten ais 

Mervic’s Gaseous ........ 100 539 
of Purification 
Samzinna’s, of Putrification . . 


Globs, Wand of Viscid 
Glorindel’s Gates .......... fs 
Glorindel’s Living Painting .......... 104 
Ons SWIG sees nenio 
Glory, Goblet of W 
Ol Disse 
Glove 
Bloch Hand arenira 
Claws of Raking 
of Cosmetology. ....... 
of Evasion............ 


COAG ieena anaa 
Helping Hand... ...........00005 
of Interception. ...... 
of Lightning ........ 
of Missile Snaring. . . . 
Of the OCtOpUns. EEEIEE TEET 


Glove 


Reglar’s of Freedom ..........--.- 544 
Reglar’s, of Freedom from Magic .. . 544 
be eee 544 
At aat ee 545 
Thor's Magical, of Power (See also 
Belt, Meginjarder p. 169) ....... 545 
A EI EETIKA 
Glowglobes, Thaddigren’s 
Glowing Globe 
Glowing Pages, Tome of. 
Glowstone............- 
Glue, Sovereign 
Gluttony, Potion of 
Glyph 
Creation, Rod of ................ 1028 
CO is Aenea ican aaeusacs 1202 
ANO Ar Er aE 1202 
E TITL TILAS 1074 
Spellbooks OO OEEO 1178 
E: 6153 sAr Sere cine wane 1202 
PMO IAEN NST 1202 
Glyphs 
of the Nathlum ..............266 1202 
MUNDO Aso viaeccavenessaomecsies 967 
de SOS ESIC Yee 1281 
Gnaash’s Hat of Stupidity. .........-. 570 
Gnarldan’s Armor...........---.+++- 77 
Gnaridan’s Battle Axe. ........--...- 118 
Gnatmarsh, Staff of .......-...-... 1281 
NN CU ILE TE EA 302 
Gnolls, Orcs, and Goblins 
Control, Potion of ........-..... 872 
Gnome 
Control, Potion of ..........-....- 872 
Bane, Barnus’s, Sword ........... 1344 
Spelljamming Helm .............. 577 
Sweeper $46 
WERCNINY 6 Wiis dclp's'p'cla'se sivie'n o's E 546 
SOAR TICE sco shisiscweseeewedece 479 
Goblet 
ae a ATICO T E TA 546 
of the Great Kingdom ............ 547 
EOMMIS Es 2 occ secscccreveucebes 547 
DOMES SS os cosvetayerestageses ck 547 
Goblin Shield of the Pomarj....-.... 1096 
Goblinoid Protection, Belt of... ... - . 168 
Goblins, Gnolls, Ores, Control, . . ........ 
BORON OE os cies ccssecsscsn ts 872 
Goblins’ Bane, Bow ..........-...-- 205 
Goblinvolent. ssis eaa susreo 1372 
Goddess, Torc of the. ........---.-. 1451 
Gods 
BOCK OF RO iis tvs seadigses sive 1439 
Book of the Enlightened. .......... 187 
HYG OPH AI ceases eects 347 
Galley Of AIAT TITIES 1106 
Throne OF the ES TILLOT 1432 
a IRTIOTON EED 1452 
Torc of the, at Tor ..........--.-. 1452 
Goerl's Portable Canoe 
and Tackle Box ............ 179, 214 
Goggles of Underwater Sight... ... . . 547 
Goggles Troppenribb’s .............. $47 
Goibhniu’s Spear .............-... 1129 
Goibhniu'’s Warhammer ............. 554 
Gold 
E AEE A. 547 
C i in A 242 
Cherry Pits, Enchanted. .......... 1089 
COME E E sats 322 
Dragon Slayer, Sword,......-.... 1357 
Hepar Ae ELA AASE 1324 
a E E TREI. o] 
‘al Ring of Al-Kalim ............ 967 
Golden 
Armor, Indra’. ............----.-- 77 


Gollum Construckzion Libram 


Asm, Semnpea T EET A E 119 
Bell of Blasting. ..815 
a A O E 224 
Cts assar 291, 292 
Circlet of Greyhawk .........----. 292 
Collar, Amulet of the . . -32 
Death, Orb of . 795 
BOS’. 5.505 aise 433 
Egg of Desire .. . 430 
Egg of Ghastar ......... . 433 
Elk Clan Ceremonial Belt 168 
PPP OTT TEL: . 548 
Girdle of Urnst . 535 
CAVES AE 543 
Gulf, Sword of the ... 1372 
Helmet, Joukahainen’s . 591 
Lance, Puchan’s ...... 649 
E IT EE ANNO RN cess 478 
Mace of the North, Great .......... 677 
a EI AT A TETS -847 
Ring of Healing .. . 967 
Robe, Tvashtri's . . 1017 
Serpent Belt . . . . 169 
Sickle .... 1115 
Silence, Potion of . . . . 871 


Golo’s Helm of Telepathy... ........- 589 
Gong 
Butler Summoning 
Chain 
of Dispelling 
of 
of Fishing 
Ricking 
of Stunning 
of Summoning 
of the Whirlwind 
Good 
Aligned Hand of oe 
Amulet of Protection from . 
Candle of Invocation. . . . . . . - 
CeO OF OCIO SS C 
Crown of Chaotic ................ 
Crown of Lawful. ................ 
Crown of Neutral ................ 
Detect, Weapon of. ...........-.- i511 
Holy Shield issi sooni 1098 
Hope; Cane offi sauces Srii 253 
Humor, Potion of ............-..- 871 
Lack; Stone PENET IEEE 1311 
Mages and Apprentices, History of ... 1181 
Re ES ET 941 
On OF CHOOG inneas 937 
Orb of Holiness, ...........-..--5 796 
Orb of Lawful ..........5.052005- 933 
Orb of NOE: ccosvcscearcsl ees 935 
Opens R E A 938 
Robe of the Archmagi........... . 1009 


Spr oE. irasi Stri E 941 
Scepter of Chaotic .....-.....-.-- 937 
Scepter of Lawful . . ..933 
Scepter of Neutral. . . . 935 
Shell of Protection vs.. . 439 
Talisman of Pure. .. . . . 1425 
Taste Powder. ...... 903 
Weapon of Detect Evil . . SS IGEL 
Goodfellow's Wand, Robin. . 1492 
of Goodness/Evil, Horn . . . .. 1846 
Goose, Ipsissimo’s Black . - -. 619 
Gordon's Magic Ring . . . . - -967 
Gourd of Travel ......... . 822 
Gown, Loriell’s........ 2... 548 
Gown, Sehanine’s.......... 549 
Grace, Teaset of Skill TEST 1428 


Graffiti Bottle. zi sssrini 


Gram, Sword ..........-..5 
Gran March, Equalizer of... .. . 
Grand Spelljamming Helm. 
Granite Marble .............. 


Grass Quelling Sword ...... 


Gravedigging, Shovel of... . . $ 
Gravitic Stabilizer... .......--..-.-+ 


Conjurers, Epic Saga of the 
Devotion, Oil of ...........- 
Kingdom, Cursed Ring of the. - 


Greenstone Amulet 


Gregor's Sword AT E 


Gremlin Wand o.oo 1483 
Greyhawk 
Golden Circlet of ion. tieses 292 
Holy Symbol of... asais 597 
pT We OR cone ae AP rary code a 641 
Oracle af acs aan 782 
PHS OL a Mai TENSES 912 
Shivld of ie visnwrwa wien 1096 
Grief Sword renaire i 1373 
Griff Mountains, White Armor of the . . . 83 
Griff’s Sword, Benn ........ 6.66005 1344 
Griffon 
Figurine, Alabaster ............... 473 
Mane Helmet .)icsis65ss:e0d eves 589 
Talisman of the ......0...20.0.005 1423 
CRG s o a T ANAN R 550 
Grim Grimoire... 00... cece cues 688 
ORN ii ENESA RESTEREN 1096 
Grimoire 
of Archaic Alchemy .........-.4+- 663 
E Ta PPR ANT 1174 
GEM rasaire oni 688 
VA ann dorms 1445 
GENIN NE I APE TE mre YE} 
Grimwald’s Dagger... .......-+ <. 363 
Gripping, Cleats of............ 295 


Groaning Spirit Bottle, Undead . . 
Grog, Neverending Barrel of . . . . 
Grolantor’s Club. ........... 


Grooming, Brush of ......... . 230 
Grove, Horn of the Sacred .......... 1546 
Growth 

BAN CE GE DRNOA EE E S ET ESTE T 

Lamp of Plant.............. 

POU OF aaeeea 

Potion OF Fur, ..........0:06s0-0:00 

Potion of Plant ..........++. 

E UR noan 

Scroll of Animal .......... 

he A ENE 
Gruumsh’s Everburning Torch . . . 
Gruumsh’s Spear ............. 
Guard Material, Sword Hand- ... . . . 
Guard Shape, Sword Hand-......... 
Guardian 

a RRIETA TTET ILT ee 

Dzance’s, Shield 

BOE EPEE A EEA 

Golem Libram 

Oval Stone of Tzolo’s 

WW saa ca ceaoeee saeco 

OUI seit S443 ae Se VE eer 

of the Tome, Scalamagdrion 

ELONO LEE EERE TOTEI 
Guardians, Ring of Protection 

om: S aN 988 
Guarding Cloak .......... site aOS 
Guarding, Door of .......... sone hl2 
Guidance, Rudder of ........ .. 1046 
Gul and Thiondar, Stone of ......... 1311 
Gulf, Sword of the Golden.......... 1372 
GON BNE o a 1129 
Cygana FEE; isinna sien Eaa 481 
Gythka, Uluth’gak’s .......-. 6666055 846 
H 

H'Veyk’s Cavernous Cabinet ......... 233 
H'Veyk’s Robe of Immediate Access. . 1011 
Ha Rahni, Scroll of. .........+05005 1074 
Ha’chao, Monkey Fist of ............ 737 
Hachiman’s Sword ............++5+ 1374 
HEGET SUOG nirea crew sepeas 1374 
Hadrian t Spear’. ss s:s 0a 1130 
Haemophobic Weapon ............+ 1508 
Hag, Eye of Cegilune’s.............. 453 


e 1622 i 


S a a 


Hair Replacement, Oil of ............ 770 
Hairiness, Hat of.......... i 
Hairlessness, Hat oficia i 
Hajama, Book of .........-...0000 
Hakiyah, Book of......... 

Haku, Book of ............. 


Hall Maat iiia 


Halfling Smoking Pipe 
Halflings, Arcane Resistance 


Hallone’s Spellbook ...........5455 1162 
Hallucinatory Insanity .. . 
Halruan Skyship..........6....+++ 1108 
Hammer 


DEON SF IM cp rrr ra 


Gaerdal Ironhand’s ... 
of GESER....«:....0556 05-5 
Goibhniu’s War. . . 


Leo ea ates ie Rete et 


Nai No Kami’s ... 


of Vengence. 
of Vitroin........ 


WEES Sonica ESER INT ANE 
Hammerblows, Wand of. ........... 1483 
Hammock 


Axe, Hastsezini Bii ini 118 
Axe, Nomog-Geaya’s ..........-.- 119 
og AE eRe SCC Peer 560 


of Enjoyment, Extendable. ........ 1028 
Guard Shape, Sword. ...........+ 1336 
Guard Material, Sword........... 1336 


Helping...... 
Holy, of Bane 
AS Ne AIN O A sone 


Handedness, Potion of Iron .......... 874 
Handkerchief 


Handle Shape and Feature, Sword . . . . 1336 


Hands of the Healing Spirit ........... 33 
Hands Recipe, Burning ............ 1241 
Handy Haversack, Heward's.......... 135 
Handy Haversack, 

Jasper Thunderhand’s ........... 135 
Hanged Man Card ............0.005 387 
Hangover Relief, Pill of ............. 837 
Harbor Chains, Dragonisle’s. ......... 413 
of Hard Hearts, Horn ...........++- 1546 
Hard-Boiled Egg ..... 6... -s0s0 0005 434 
Hardstone Types ...........060e0008 516 
Hardwater Amulet .......... 6.200005 34 
Hare, Laughing. ose aaia 1561 
OL AIOE AAE 756 
Hareidhin’s Spellbook, Talel El ...... 1245 
Harm, Arrow Of 5 «iw ssa ini rvan 90 
Harm, Browdow's Ring of 

Utmost Weapon. .........2+06+5 950 
Harming, Staff of .............0605 1282 
Harmlessness, Ring of ............0+ 968 
Harmonia, Necklace of............++ 749 
Harmonizer, Sword, .......-..++++5 1374 
Harmony, Balance Scale of .........+ 148 
Harness of Seker.........44.0¢29000¢e0% 567 
Harness Spider TEE IO 567 
Harnessing, Yoke of Boar........... 1563 


Haroistem’s Phylactery of Faithfulness . . . 830 


BRON 4 5-5: 09:00:09 E bese TO 1322 


FOOWWGEE Scion seg T TT 1324 
CPG a5 eean canes 304 eee 1324 
Bandhiarp 0605-0 ce NEATA 1324 
OE HOAING ROBOTS EEI SE ET II 1324 
WEN IARAA geKses 1326 
MacFuirmidh ..........0.0.0005 1326 
MOUS PAMTE vata OT TEIT LE 1326 
ModE siara ra 1326 
Murlyn's, of Charming ........... 1326 
Niland bss ccs. 25 £002 205e0% 1326 
CUM as ARA 1327 
Questing ELTETE E P T 1327 
RhtagaladeS iss aian aa 1327 
of Spirit Restoration ............. 1327 
Storm's of Methild .............4 1328 
OP THROODING PELETE ET 1328 
Valido biso rras ni n 1328 
Pe ss See EE CEEA 1328 
Harpo's Oreslayer Sword ........... 1374 
Harpoon Magical ...............065 568 
Harpoon, Whaler with ,.........++. 1304 
Harpsichord of Commanding, Lyron’s . 1328 
Harnowhetm s 5.0:s/0:4:s:e:v0id0 vod ewes s 589 
Harrowing, Hand of 
Hart, Dancing.............046+ 
Harvest, Sickle of the 5 
Hasp of Locking IO LEELEE ATARE 
Hasp of Reloading 
Haste 
ASIN A IEE A T AE 
Ink Preparation. ........... 
Sd OF... sanasa 
Hastseltsi’s Hand Axe 
Hastseltsi’s Throwing Dagger. 
Hastsezini’s 


Hasty WIM sesa esiin iann 1532 


an a 6:56-0:06 ce T EEE 


Skipper with sewi sro i aaa 1304 
of Stupidity.............005- 570, 572 
Hatchling, Orb of the ........... 785, 794 


Haunt Coffin of Creation............ 


Head, Death's, Horn...........-.-- 1545 
Head Talisman, Monkey............ 1424 
Headaches, Bagpipes of............ 1538 


Headband of the Corusk Mountains. . . . 
Headband of the Jotens ............. 
Headdress of Peaceful Contact... ... . . 


CR OF ASIER LTA ST 
Dalamar’ Ring of................ 
Deafness, Elixir of ............... 
Disease, Elixir of ..............4 
Elixir, All-Purpose ..............5 
Feeblemindedness, Elixir of........ 
Glass Rea OF ariasi 


Insanity, Elixir of... ............. 


Oletset OF AT O T 780 


SATE E ETT E ates 1282 
er m ALTTA E ET 1513 


Health 


Powder of the Hero's. 
Purwuvok's Powder of the Hero's. . . . 907 


Height Man’s Axe, Thumb 


Hellfurnaces, Cloak of the 


Diadem of Doom) 


of Comprehending Languages 

and Reading Magic............. 586 
Cree ooo si sax ccceuaeapen 586 
EDEN EEE ETY 586 
Of Disguises TERE 586 
OF DERGONE ETA EAN T. 586 
e ITET ETT AES 588 
d ARFS ee A T 589 
Golo's, of Telepathy .............. 589 
Griffon M: eepos siss 589 
TEER ee > 589 
aa n ET E T. 589 
OERI o asinos E 590 
Joukahainen’s Golden. ............ 591 
AE o OTO AE o 591 
of Light Seeing ..........+0+.+0+08 59) 
of Opposite Alignment............ 591 


Helplessness, Chair of .......... 
Hengeyokai Control, Potion of. . . 


of Herding, Whistle 
Hermit Card ..........-.4.. 
Hero, Amulet of the tae 
Hero's Heart, Powder of the ..... . 903, 907 
Heroes, Legendry Great Arms & 

a TEPERT 
Heroes, Voice of ............ 4 


Heroism, Potion of Tragic .... 
Heucuva Coffin of Creation. . . 


Hiding, Weapon of 
Hierarchy Priest, Arrow of Slaying ..... 99 
Hierophant Card... soso oeoa: 384 
Hierophant, Ring of the ............. 969 
Hi 
Anvil of the Dwarves .............. si 
Conquering, Oil/Powder of. . . . . 770, 904 


High 

John the Conqueror, 

Oil/Powder of .........+... 771, 904 

Pritstess Cats. ciranean 383 
Highfolk, Wand of ................ 1483 
PSO sroin aTa EES 1090 
Hilt of Conjuring, Weapon with... . . . 1514 
Hindsight, Urn of... o.o. eeen 1465 
Hindu Grass ......... wees 771, 904 
Hinge of Opening. ..........---.+-+ 596 
Hinge of Shrieking................. 596 
FAs Tyee; LOA OF E eoio p anias o lA 652 
History 

DEUE is carn rmn a 408 

of Evil Mages and Apprentices... . . 1180 

of Good Mages and Apprentices ... 1181 
Hlack (Glyph). .........-..-00+05+ 1202 
Hlidskialf, Throne. ...........-...- 1434 
Ho Masubi’s Sword ..... 2.26.2... 1375 
Ho-chi, E’soa, Tome. ....... 2.2... 1440 
Hoarder, Orb of the Gold- ........... 794 
Hobbling, Anklet of ...............-- 49 
Hockey Stick, Holy Terror... ........ 598 
Hofud, Sword i 0.020.020.2020 008 1375 
Hog-Tying, Bracelet of... 02... ...0.. 218 
Hoinbee’s Ring of Truth... .......... 969 
Hold Fast Anchor ............6.05005 45 
Hold of Holding ...............0066 596 
Holding 

Ame OF ory ics ae ees 90 

Backpackiof-scsiciisawet inate 123 

Bagot ccna see 135 

Case of Scrolls saias 261 

Cloak Clasp of iiss isecscuseves oe 312 

CAANE OD crisis 506 


Holiness, Orb of .......-.-2.2000005 7% 
Holiness, Ring of ......-..0s-0s0005 969 
Holy 
Avenger ....... 1351, 1353, 1356, 1366, 
1373, 1375, 1376, 1391 
Avenger Sword, Dragonbait’s . +... . 1356 
Avenger Sword, Gregory's ........ 1373 
Avenger Sword, Shalandain’s . ... . . 1391 
BODIE. ET EITE T E 155 
CRE AAEE AE E T 275 
Hand of BENS anatapi 562 
Mace Icon, Great .............4-- 
Medallion of Almor . 
Might, Girdle of .... 2... .-.e00005 
Raji’s Shield of the .............. 1102 
Revenger, Sword. .........--.-.+ 1375 
SHINS: is acy ce sectvreresvavess 1098 
Shield of the ...........--.60065 1098 
Slayer, Ring of the ............... 970 
Star of the Bright Desert... ....... 1303 
DOG as ossednciscontep ees kees 1375 
Holy Symbol 
Celestian’s 
Fharlanghn’s . . . 


OF RAVODMING: orain EN 598 

PUVEDNSR sss mina R 597 
Holy (cont.) 

Terror Hockey Stick ,,.-........05 598 

Turning, Amulet of .,.......-...... 34 


Prismal’s Grappling .............. 914 
Hoop of the Roller Hoopers......... 599 
Hoopers, Skates of the Roller. ....... 1116 
Hopeful Deeds, Tome of. ........... 1442 
Hopeless Deeds, Tome of........... 1442 
Horn 

Airolis’s Shinning, of Ten 

Thousand Winds .............. 1542 

of Amplification ................ 1543 

of Animal Calls. ...............5 1543 

of the Azure Sea... .........05.5 1543 

of the Barrier Peaks ............. 1543 

on ECCT REET) 1544 

Black osain 1544 

OF Bianting A E 1544 

BONG, einser teens 184 

OF BUN iis eee NTN ERS 1544 

OM Changes eae rrari SS 1544 

of Comm ssaka 1545 

COEOpiR ss asi nna 599 

Deatlils Head coason 1545 

ODOR 665503546 5 eS 1545 

of Fire Resistance, Ngona.......... 600 

SHIPS RAAT LLT A 1545 

of Goodness/Evil ...........-.-5 1546 

Gl Pe ne Tee 1546 

of the Gray Waste ............505 1546 

Hard Hearts... terai ees 1546 

NQORR eines separ sens N, 600 

of Plenty, Potion ..............005 872 

OE POMS o aaae Deen an 546 

of the Sacred Grove ............. 1546 

Sopleneer oso. AEE T E 1547 

Shobe eenaa 

of Signaling. ..... raseda 

of Silent Moving, Ngona ss 

OF Hie THIONY ELT ATE 

of Uncontrollable 

Striding/Springing............. 1548 

of Underwater Breathing, Ngona . . . . 600 

NUE o osoena 1548 

NA E T TOE E 1549 

of the Vast Swamp .... eseese esos 1549 

VON 2560, <n poi TE Hee dome 1549 

OWN AEE 1549 
er ETITI TITAL TT EEN 364, 1375 
Horned 

Cloak, Rhun’s .......-....---0055 308 

MAE ceases navtiicsebensiees 701 

RING cass A NA TAT . 970 
Hornet, Cape of the .....-.... . 253 
Hornets’ Nest, Dart of the .... . Re iE | 
Horns, Cape of .........-.+-- 253 
Horns for Rhun’s Horned Cloak. . 308 
Hornwood, Staff of........... 1282 
Horridness, Oil of............ PAP YH 
Horror, Hebi OF 53 coi cosets casa 290 
Horse 


Barding, Morgan’s ..........-..-. 159 
Saddle of the Spirit.............- 1049 
Statue, SIONC: 0.26 6s css eeeesees 1305 
Horseman, Brass. .............+0055 222 
Horsemanship, Stirrups of .,........ 1306 
Horsemen's Lance -oee oranie ansa 648 
Horseshoe 
u EET E 600 
E AE ATAA vienna ees 600 
of the Gray Waste .............05+ 600 
CFIC.» cnie seas weave n sores 600 
QUIN s ias aaraa Spine Howes 600 
of Petrification ............0000e+ 600 
GED, siea soina i o 601 
OFS CORE So <:6:5 arano vo setae atin 601 
Horus 
PIR sis rni a cant 77 
SCalé Mall OF. srs otrese 82 
SWORD ARO RNE E eee 1376 
Hostile Air Elementals, Censer 
of Summoning. .. ss. ssesie sims 270 
Hot Air Balloon .............+50005 151 
Hourglass 
AlE 55.6 Stat Ss Nal 601 
Brindletople’s Time Bomb ......... 601 
Of Fire'and lee mmni cece 602 
Obid. 2. Seis ees 602 
OF Seeing ainsi pe sae T 602 
Timeglass of the Wizard........... 602 
of Timekeeping. ..............4+5 604 
Symbology, Origins of the 
(Spellbook)... ssia 1211 
Verthandi’s Invincible. ........ . -604 
Honea Boats pausa ie eats 179 
Housecat Control, Potion of... . . 872 
Hover Chariot... iscrisse 278 
How to Use These Books........ vues 
Howdah, Wind ............0655- 1535 
Hruggek’s Javelins of Lightning. .... . . 623 
Hruggek’s Morning Star. ............ 677 
Hrulgin’s Rope of Entanglement . . . . . 1044 
Hsing’s 
DOA T a E ees 
Sai Cuei. srei 
Walking Stick, Shou 
Hsssthak’s Mirror of Sight and Sound . . 728 
Hu Hsien Slaying, Weapon of ....... 1524 
ER cast OESIE 
Hues, Potion of Rainbow 
Huggable Bear, Arabel’s....... 
Hugh, Sword of Cymrych 
Hugrin’s Spice Shaker ........ 
Huitzilopochtli’s Javelin... ... 
Huld (Poison) ............. 
Huma, Shield of... 00s sseeseves 
Human 
Comprehension, Jar of ...,........ 
Control, Potion of ...... 
Control, Ring of ........... F 
Influence, Corkitron’s Ring of ...... 
Influence, Ring of.......... 
Influence, Staff of... . 


Humanity, Deep Fears of . , A 
Humanoids, Shell of Protection vs. .. . . 
Humans, Shell of Protection vs... ..... 
Humbaba’'s Glaring Eye... . . 
Hummingbird Nectar... .. . 
Humor, Exalted Book of Ethnic . 
Humor, Potion of Good ....... 
Humorous Perspective, Tome of. 
Hunan Influence, Ring of. . . . è 
Hunger, Chime of: ... oseese osese 
Hunting 

n S A OPO C T 35 


Cursed Amulet of «2.0.0.0... 000005 35 
Hurling Axe of. 65 ois asal 118 


CAN WOE 0002 ccpesvetevedes 1376 
Command, Ring of ............... 984 
REN PER DEEE T A 351 
fk EER ATS 206 
Hourglass of Fire and............. 602 
Necklace of Enchanted (Ulutiu)... ., 752 
REO ATTAT husdedeies 970 
Storms, Wand of ................ 1483 
Icebolts, Ring of ..............--.-- 971 
Ichor of Intoxication... ............. 607 
Icon 
OF Chomosh APITO ST 607 
Great Holy Mace. .............246 677 
UN os iss Sccasieidsccsace 607 
OLPORR 535.2 cane ITS AT 608 
Of the ROW 65255 cio <0 he O 609 
A EINA AA TITEI T 609 
Icy Sea, Iron Pin of the... ........... 619 
a ge C LTT EAE $21 
Identification 
Sila TOTENS 276 
Libram oliin sais aa 663 
Ring of Liquid .................. 975 
Sie OF SIAN A TOT. 1118 
Identifier, Nefradina’s............... 754 
Identify Recipe... 2.5.0.5. 06s ees 1243 
Identifying Potions... ............45 852 
Identity, Bell's Palette of............. 836 
Idioms & Rare Cryptographs .. . . .. .. 1181 
Idiot Osses: I E ee 381 
Idol 
a A T 610 
MENG a taaan 610 
Quentin's (Spelljamming). ........ . óli 
R iaaa 1282 
Iggwilv, Fiendomicon of. ........... 1166 
Ignition, Lamp of... sesser eseese 641 
Igraine’s Portrait. ..........eseeeees 105 
Ibratha (Mistress of Battle), ........ 1376 
Illag’s Abominable Beacon Lamp ... .. 642 
FOCI EO 302 
Mumination 
Almen’s Wand of... .. 0... 6.66605 1485 
ARGV orias aE 91 
BOON a ccrererseeaacensnses 1075 
WRG OG po xecevesapaesrencesss 1483 
WOR A N SA. 1514 
Illusion 
emg School Cap of..........+++ 250 
POTEST R 420 
canny SL Fae 1484 
Opal of Olfactory ................ 526 
TOR OCND ons retesasvocerss 251 
LS ETEA, 1484 


AOO TTIE e O 


Immediate Access, H'Veyk's Robe of... 1011 
Immiscibility, Potion of 
Protection 


. 883 


... 216 
.. 1053 
1442 
Batsin 455 
SAE aA 71 
Deerns ovnosN 873 
OAS 35 
to Death Magic, Potion of.......... 873 
SOR OF. ATIT TTT 873 
SETA 873 
to Poison, Potion of... ............ 873 
E T, 879 
AA TOET T 873 
TCE 971 
PREI T AINE EEE 997 
1309 
EL POE OIE O T 873 
iaasa 808 
HAREE PE NRA 226 
ATILO TTEA EE: m 
1120 
AAPPO RES 364 
1253 
PETET TONENE, 334 
SOSITE TNES: 971 
1196 
a SETET 435 
E OTE $71 
ENEIT T TIN TEE PTT 619 
Improved Identifier, Nefradina’s ...... 755 
Improved Travel, Mirror of... ...... .. 728 
In Control of PCs, Weapons......... 1520 
Incense 
Of Meditation ......6..essseeeee- 611 
(OF CONNOR 0.55 00-6 on ev e'esasceds éll 
Shahpesh’s Incense of Obsession 611 
Incineration, Throne of............. 1434 
Encore, Gem OF soyi. p s:0'6 sss eines $21 
Incompetence, Cameo of ............ 236 
Incredible Chariot, Franklyn ....... . 278 
a n ITEA ENTF 435 
Indestructibility, Rod of ............ 1029 
Indra's 
BOW: cvisiels dap Piewse bene E 206 
Flaming Sword ...........-..... 1377 
CS n E I ree 77 
Ineffable 
Conjuration Magic & 


1625 


Inescapable Location, Amulet of ...... . 


Inestimable Beauty, Jacinth of .....,.. 621 
Inestimable Length, Ladder of .,...... 635 
Inexperience, Amulet of 
Perpetual Youth and. ............. 38 
Inexplicable Reflections... ....... „181 
Infection and Infestation, 
Elixir of Healing. saou 442 
Infinite 
Buming. Lamp of esas kep ORR 
Planes, Codex of the... .. 2... 6655+ 659 
E A EIAN EE nena 1044 
Spells, Book/Tome OR ABAAA 1184, 1442 
Wealth, Bag of ... 6... 2.26. -s0ees 135 
Influence 
Amulet of Metaspell............... 36 
and Actions, Sulphur. ........... 1244 
Corkitron’s Ring of Human ........ 955 
On OF DORE. o oo sc:0o neces e vst 784 
RINE OF MUIR os sae aoa yaioa 970 
on Solid Corpus ...... 6... .605+ 1181 
Staff of Human... ......-....... 1275 
Tome of Leadership and.......... 1444 
Influences and Suggestions ......... 1181 
Infravision 
and Detect Magic, Gamalon’s Gem . . 521 
ee 455 
Negation, Ring of ......-..---+-++ 971 
POUR. OF. - in T 873 
RING OE cas ve cencesvivacomvennes 971 
Ink Preparation: Haste ............. 1178 
Ink Preparation: Lightning Bolt... . . 1178 
Inkwell 
a coccautenesisasasitce 612 
of Concealment, ..... 6.22.66 655 55 612 
of Scrollmaking ..............45. 612 
WA, AU naa ccscccscssescsesege il 
Inner Planes, Orrery of the. .......... 800 
Inner Strength, Potion of ........... 873 
Inquiry, Key Of... ssvcsevcasceuea 628 
Insanity 
Doeluslonal. «0 sevisevacsvscccuees 40 
Elixir of Healing. ................ 442 
Ges Candies. oo. a TD 246 
Seared OF oii os sew AE 1057 
Swordob EIEE is valde esate 1377 
Insect 
Charm Oil, Maybel’s. ............. m3 
Command, Mirandos’s Staff of. . . . . 1285 
Helmet of theo... ccc ccccieeseen 590 


Insects Arctor’s Staff of Swarming, . . . 1272 
Insects Staff of Swarming .. ots 

Insight Gem of... . 6.6.66. --505 +. $22 
Inspiration, Bard's Aphrodisiac .. . 
Instant Fortress, Daern’s 


Intangibles, Alterations 
of Tangibles and s.s.s seese 1137 
Intellect, Trance of the ......- 5.055 1252 
Intelligence 
and Intuitive Domination ......... 1182 
Tibet OF... sco 5 0dSs nn ise 668 


Intelligence 
and Capabilities, Sword .......... 1399 
of Weapon.......-.+++ . 1515, 1518 
Intelligent Weapon . . 1514, 1517 
Intensity, Potion of .........-.60055> 873 


Interception, Glove of. . . .. 543 
Intercession, Sword of ... . . . 1377 
Interference, Amulet of Psionic . .. .... . 42 
Internment, Shovel of. ....... .. 1114 
Interruption, Chime of . . . . . 817 


Intier’s Ring of Shooting Stars . . 


RING OF 'o.s:s.eis'eaicarcinsiev secon 953, 971 


Tk LOOT ET OR 848 


Invulnerable Coat of Arn . 314 
Invulnerable Coat of Amd 315 
LEST” HEA E A Reais 522 
loun Stone .......... 613-618 
Ipsissimo’s Black Goose. ............ 619 
Irid Newleaf’s Spellbook ........... 1182 
Iriphar of Cormyr’s Spellbook, 
Khamlautas DP PETTITT 1251 
Iron 
Anvil of the Armies -.............- S1 


Armor, Surtr’s. ... 


Crown of the Bandit Kingdom . .. . . . 334 
Enchanted Grappling “9 
WWE sab vevennaccssce 

Flask of Tuerny the Merciless. 

Gargoyle Grappling .............- 
Gauntlet of Urnst .... 0.2.2 ...265 
Golem, Carrague’s ............0.. 
Golem Protection, Scarab of... ... . 1057 
n ITOE ASAT 549 
Handedness, Potion of ............ 874 
OM ETOP EIO OEN E 573 
Horn of Valhalla . . . 1548 
TIGRE PIOPPO TI N 670 
of Luckless Returning, Grappling . .. 550 
Pin of the Icy Sea... 0.00.6 sees 619 
Pot, Cogihine®S oi... .sseceeeccee 269 
1 SOO Ce ar 931 
Rations, Epos... csc ewecsese 446 
ROC OF PRE: ow cccoxionsindewieeeas 1029 
SNE ETT E A ETO 1092 
Shield, Wood- s aanas naa 1105 
B66 OLVION ss orrs sacossasstde uL 


Ixitxachitl and Lacedons, Periapt of PPOWERE OE... 0 so csnscveree 771, 904 
PIEGO VE. oicocecscessvccnse 827 Johydee's Mask... .. 6... eee eeeeee 701 


a 


K 
K'uei Hsing’s Staff... ............. 1283 
K'ung Fu-tzu's Staff... ..........-. 1283 
Rabel, Sword csias rania a 1378 
Kaftan of Ogrishness .............. 1013 
Kalau Slaying, Weapon of .......... 1524 
Kaldair Swiftfoot’s Cloak. ........... 303 
Kaldair Swiftfoot’s Sword .......... 1378 
Kaleen’s Undead Stone. .............- 35 
Kalb Sword i noss uiios 1378 
KalnaKaa’s Black Cloak. . .......... 304 
Kami's Hammer, Nai No ............ 557 
Kangaroo Pouch .................-- 136 
Kanoi, Kirith-.... 2.2... ...0ese-00- 1098 
E S ETTA T 1550 
a UOT T a 874 
Karali’s Silver Sword .............- 1378 
Karathoth’s Jewel ...........0-000- $24 
Karelia Wand of Illusion .......... 1484 
Karma, Bead of ............... 164, 751 
KAT OOM AETIA E 524 
Karnrohb’s Airy Sphere ............ 1270 
Ree Std OP EIO 1378 
Kas Spellbook TETEPI T, 1191 
Katana 
Mayonaka’s Silver.. ............. 1381 
SOD ena cose serene 1393 
ANN RUTEN ese T eres 1415 
Kathena's Pearl of Wisdom. ......... . 805 
VaveaiceveNssweasaaemenhsits 177 
Kaylan’s Wooden Tray ...........-.. 627 
Kazgaroth, Heart of ............+.++ $73 
Keening, Wheel of ................ 1532 
Keeping, Libram of .............-.. 663 
REGION 0:60:55) eve p eng hansen <t 302 
Kemis Tree, Leaf of .............--- 652 
SB OMIM... R 780 
Keolish Plate Mail of the Seas . na 77 
DENEAN ATT Sef 1020 
Kerisis’s Girdle of Femininity ........ 535 
Ketchup of Slowness ........... 248, 249 
Kettle 
of Breathing .......- 6-6 srr 627 
of Drumming .............5.-555 627 
Everbountiful Soup. .............. 627 
OEP vispecsuasecsasbesduccse 627 
Mithryl’s Everbountiful Soup... ... . 627 
Key 
LO irre We ESS VINEE TESS 380 
COME 4 Sse cen dia cewesasesae an 628 
OWS OTTIS ORAT AAT T 628 
AIII 628 
Feather O sasina aak 468 
Ooni ty Per i ere 628 
rd. POE yy Pree Pree 628 
iving Saes~ esse E ia tases 629 
OF Oneming iiciin 629 
of Quinarost sis sive cecesesivses 629 
OR aaa a 629 
ROUND E AARO 631 
BOOMS EE E AOE 631 
Shapeshifiel s sinia 631 
A A ANET 631 
Silver, of Portals ..............--5 631 
MSRM CA E IPEE TA 631 
ME eisai ai 632 
SHOE AOTAN ETE ONEN 632 
E ALETE I EE 633 
of Translation ciaras oswa 633 
Of Unka saninin 633 
ME AL DL OS T T 633 
GYR INGE E OT 972 
Khalid’s Pouch of Accessibility ....... 136 
Khalk’Ru, Eidolon of............... 440 
Khan-pelar, Star of .......... 04.6.4 529 


Kharas, Hammer of .........--...-++ 554 
Khas Chess Game. +... sss 6. .---6005 286 
Khenel’s Philosopher's Egg .......... 436 
Khurgorbacyag’s Copper Cube. ....... 351 
Khurgorbacyag’s Whip............. 1533 
Ki-Helm, Spelljamming............. 578 
Kiaransalee’s Dagger .........--.-.. 365 
Kicking, Slippers of ..........-..45 1121 
Kierney’s Spellbook, Sir Celedon ... . 1243 
Killer, Potion of the Psychotic ...... . . 884 
Killer Ring of Invisibility Negation . . . . 971 
Kindness Elixir. OTTERS 442 
Ring Cas ie aaiviedabbinnvisveeesc 286 
King, Scepter of the Sorcerer- ....... 1064 
Cursed Ring of the Great .......... 956 
Goblet of the Great. .........-.... $47 
Iron Crown of the Bandit .......... 334 
Locket of the Great, ..........0005 672 
Flail of the Desert... ............. 485 
RING OF ETELE LTE EEN 972 
Staff of the Priest .............45 1289 
Kirito Kanik: icici cessicvresvews 1098 
Kirren’s Frostbrand Sword .......... 1379 
Wee THO Bis oa wince scence EOT 120 
Kite 
of Lightning SETT T 633 
of Reconnaissance ,..........5445 633 
OF Sigral ings EL 633 
Kitsyrral, Staff of ...............4- 1282 
Kitten of Caterwauling..........-... 477 
Kitten of Contemplation, ............ 477 
Klax’s Potion, Glitz & ............. 871 
Klee, Crossbow of ......6 5506602005 203 
Klorr, Timepiece of ..........-.... 1436 
Kludde Oil/Powder............. 772, 905 
Knife 
Dalik.. sce ct sense sscpecresesas 358 
RIOR orien aden IET: 358 
of Continual Sharpness, ........... 365 
GEC n < 5.05 snp 5508949505: 366 
ONES ica Patten eu EE ERE 356 
ee ee 285, 286 
Knight CW, 0.000056 T 380 
Knight's Silver Sword, Githyanki. .. . . 1372 
Knock, Wand of... 26... ..6.6--055 1484 
Knot, Faithful ..............-.- 330, 465 
Knowledge, Mask of .,.......-..... 702 
Koalinth Slayer... spea oaos oeoo ss 366 
Khk WRON; s saines swe ceviceess 837 
Kolkis's Evil Skull Totem. ........... 172 
Koorz’s Spellbook ..........-.--.5 1211 
Korobokuru Control, Potion of. ....... 872 
Korobokuru Slaying, Weapon of ..... 1524 
Korr’s Book of Infinite Spells ....... 1184 
Korrigans, Comb of the ............. 326 
Kostchtchie’s Hammer .............. 556 
Krest’s Spellbook . ... 2... 65.6065 1155 
Krillus’s Blazer... . 2.6.6.6 26-6 e sees 642 
Kuan Yin’ Quarterstaff ............ 1283 
Kuci Slaying, Weapon of ..........+ 1524 
Kullervo’s Sword AEL NTT 1379 
Kulver-Tam’s Fruit of Extra Healing . . . 634 
Kumade, Black... .........--.++++ 1129 
Kumakawa Armor, ....... 6.66.56 60 05 77 
Kung’s Drum, Lei... 6.4.66... 6 0008 819 
EAE ANE is alaa a 874 
Kura, Okami’s Staff ............... 1283 
Kura, The Darkness ........... 634, 1379 
KAONE Qui. roo in nsrivd sonas 925 
Kuroth’s Spellbook..........---055 1251 
Kishk, Prism Of. 0:0:5 aasde sainia 912 
Kusunogi No Tsurugi, Sword........ 1380 
Kwalish, Apparatus of ............... 57 
Kwalish, Dunhill’s Apparatus of. .... . . 414 
Kwalish’s Spellbook.............4. 1166 


Ky Trencha Ukang .........----... 1283 
Kybal’s Cord. ...... APAA verdes 330 
Kyric's Mask of Disguise ............ 702 
L 
Labile Locker, Leomund’s ........... 657 
hina oul vl¥dy anesu saul N 842 
Lacedons and Ixitxachitl, Periapt of 
Protection from... . 2.0... 66605 827 
Ladder 
OF Balss aAa 635 
Benhi's Express. ..........6660565 635 
OF ChE a5 550 LTT 635 
of Inestimable Length. ............ 635 
Ladle 
of Candlemaking. ,.........650605 635 
COMING 55 a 635 
CONE os ccs ciwesscecuvees 635 
of Duplication... .........6--.065 635 
RING EIET 973 
Laduguer's Shield, ............465- 1099 
Laeral's 
EM ik cciswiwaeceracasswcess 1184 
Spell Shield... i... cccssscosevnse 1099 
WOOO ATIII ITOT AOTRET 1197 
Storm APMOF..... 0 scr ceecereneee 78 
Laeyndr's Book of Metamorphoses . . . 1187 
Lafarallinn’s, Sword ............... 1380 


ignition 
Illag’s Abominable Beacon. ........ 641 


of Infinite Burning 


3 1627 = 


ee ee 


Lancelin’s Sword ............-+.-. 1380 


Landing, Net of .......:.50+seseeees 757 
Lands, Warlord Blade of the Shield . . . 1412 


Ring DAEN, 973 


Ct LEVEE ETITI 1403 


Lashing, String of........ 
Lasko’s Magical Fountain. . 5 
Lassiviren’s Sword ..........6.-455 


Lasting Smoking Pipe ............. 1125 


Holy igre 


Quill of 


a EEEN E E eric 653 
E oae tas ahis 653 
Weapon, Purple-.,....-....-.005 1522 
Leaping, Boot of Traveling and ...... . 198 
Leaping Fish... .........--+-.-005 1561 
Learning, Potion of Language ........ 874 
Leather Apron. ........66--sseeeeeee 58 
Leather Armor, Bradlie’s ............. 72 
Leaving, Zebulon’s Axe of ........... 122 
E OREA TN STOE 421 
Left Eye, Mellifieur’s ............... 458 
Left Hand, Tomorast's. .............. 563 
Lefthandedness, Weapon of ......... 1520 
Legendry Great Arms 
& Fabulous Heroes ............ 1191 
Legendry of Phantoms and Ghosts. . . . 1191 
Legends, Libram of ................ 664 
Legionnaire, Reptilian, Sword ...... . 1389 
Lei Kung’s Drum ........-.-..06065 819 
Lemmikainen’s 
YS LETTE ET CET eT Pe Te 78 
ANER I L IOPE 169 
E A E NIS, 231 
pon ALEA SATE TNT 1380 
Length, Handkerchief of ............ 566 
Length, Ladder of Inestimable ..... . . . 635 
Lens 
of Activity Detection. ............. 653 
ee SERRE ERE OEN 653 
Blue Sentient, Life (SL).......... 1067 
OC CRATMIAG T LISS 653 
ADMIN 6 sii cncacsccsvesossns 654 
OF tht O «3s asccsesecevesncees 654 
Evelyn's, of Speed Reading ........ 655 
dn 4 SEPT E E, 654 
Ce ee E 654 
of Minute Seeing .......-........ 654 
n a ALI IITTI 654 
Red Air, Quality (AQ)............ 1067 
ERMC n PENT 655 
of Remote Viewing. .............+ 655 
i AA EA S 655 
en E T 655 
of Transformation ..............++ 656 
r a «0.0.0 v0.0si00cuse esses 656 
OVNI cases ccxcccteasn’ 657 
Yellow Ambient, 
Temperature (AT) ............. 1067 
Leomund's 
CN. ETE SE E 547 
a E TS 657 
PO S E 742 
ly EEO rr. 839 
PPRC ETT 1140, 1171, 1215 
Leonardo's Carpet of Flying.......... 257 
Lethargy, Potion of........-. 5.060006 874 
Lethchauntos’s Spellbook. .......... 1165 
Rater, Biase a. once E AI cease 1347 
Leuk-O, Mighty Servant of .......... 720 
Leviathan, Eye of .............. 455, 456 
Levitation 
a A AEII A A A 50 
DOGO RTT ATT 171 
E TEET ANP TN TN 195 
k LEPOTI IPEPE ET 208 
Fishing Pole of .................. 483 


Boccob’s Blessed Book. ........... 659 
Codex of the Infinite Panes ........ 660 
ECOMMENE. 5 ses cciceiccertorny 660 
FDU, 6 556 o coc ced so cass 662 
DODO css ceesicecscHcsavaves 1162 
of Evaluation. ...........6..00555 662 
of Gainful Conjuration ............ 662 
OL GONG svecvceseciscssstvenee 662 
Gollum Construckzion ............ 663 
Grimoire of Archaic Alchemy ...... 663 
of Identification ................. 663 
of Ineffable Damnation. ........... 663 
OP KCUE SIE EIT, 663 
LORE AOOO 1184 
AE TTET RE 664 
A ay 6. ci ETIA T S 664 
Mhzentul’s Runes ..... 2.2.0.0... 664 
of Ravenloft Golems.............. 665 
Of Recording... ........sseseecees 668 
of Silver Magic. ......... 6.000005 668 
Df. errr yy ee pert erry 668 
OPEL OP TTS EET EEL YS re 668 
of Teleportation Arches. ........... 668 
TWA ETIA S, 668 
of Translation ...........6.0s0005 669 
Of Twelve Seals... 22... 5.cceecees 669 
ORME ANONA R I AN. 669 
Lich, Arcane Formulace fora........... 60 
Lichdom, Potion of... ...6.4.650006 874 
Lies, Ring of Detect. ..........6.006 949 
AUER OFS LOETI CITAT. 47 
DWE OF aise eecsccccvcvncess 1026 
Draskilion’s Amulet of ............+ 31 
nn Ao EET E I T 442 
Energy Sword, Drain............- 1357 
GREE PEEPI E E 524 
na LE TORERE 556 
Manual of Powers Beyond ........ 1196 
of Nature Its Secrets ........ 00655 1192 
DRO TEE E 755 
OiVPowder of ....... 6.66655 772, 905 
Oil/Powder of New. .......... 774, 906 
Protection, Amulet of .............- 36 
Protection, Ring of... 974 
RINE OE cians ccincepoccesage T 974 
aien LETETT 1380 
Saving, Mirror of .............++- 729 
WON Mes Nis AARTI 1057 
WEE LT T TONA 1063 
(SL) Lens, Blue Sentient ......... 1067 
Stealing, Potion of .............++ 876 
Stealing Sword ...,.....2.s2es009 1380 
Suspension, Potion of............. 876 
WONG 5 ONE ss cxvaceete hyve 1381 
of Throstag, Tomo... s.. 6.666555 1444 
Trapping, Mirror of........... 729, 732 
TRB OF. cos scavcscecsvses 1455, 1456 
Lifejemmer. .......60-ccseescvencs 578 
and Darkness, Dicerion of ......... 407 
Anni Boolsens anassen 91 
Candle, Unfailing .............-.. 245 
e A TOPTA. 343 
DM ET TINON 374 


Generation Rules for Weapons... .. 1506 


Light 
Surya’s Sword of. ..........5--5- 1407 


Ring OF; aens or enee are ee 974 
Smoking Pipe, Self- ............. 1126 
WEIN OE a anesse veslsmiaens 1520 
Wheel Of ARTO OA 1532 
Lightening, Wand of.........-.-.-- 1485 
AOW OF 5 cia) 5 cratp rate stein: = sie siete stele 92 
Blade, SWOON: 66:0 ecoin erario oroso 1381 
Bolt Ink Preparation ............. 1178 
BONGOE ANOO bons A 86 
BOUSS OIE: irae ee no aN 772 
Bolts, Wand of ...........-20005 1485 
Command, Ring of ........-.-..++ 989 
CUO OAA ARERO 341 
Dalamar’s Wand of ...........+.+ 1477 
Dancing Sword of............+-+ 1356 
Form, Potion of. ..........+..0055 876 
Glove of 
TNE OL esc 5 Fons cae ULCER 623 
Hruggek's Javelins of 
1S 10) HDC EO DROLET SIONS 
Mace-Wand of 
ROMA ovat A EAE T ANOT 
Shield of Proof Against,.......... 1101 
Staff of Thunder and............. 1299 
Wid OF. AAO OAAS 1485 
Wand of AIG: ss icewiegv os iiaa 
Lights, Match of Many..........-..+ 
a AE ETEO 
Lightweight Equipment ......... 
Lilith, Necklace ofai iceren 
Lily, DRMgON REONE E ACOTA S 
Lily of the Valley Oil/Powder. . . . . 
Limited Telepathy, Ring of........... 
Limited Wishes, Ring of Three . . . 
Lion Heart sisi: eioi ar 
Lion Skin, Nemean. ............ 
Lions, Girdle of the ............ sé 
LIOS, GO a s y's wiela'e) piv dierm aero 
Liquid 
Cooling, Cube of... suseso saos 
Food, Chalice of ............. 
Identification, Ring of : 
ae E E AA pieces # 
ROG sin, neeamsiasuele piaioneesre 670, 772 
LEBON O eerren «s. 208 
Listening, Bridle of .......... ..224 
Lithocentric Pendulum ........ ... 670 
Little People, Ring of the...... +». 975 
Lively Tattoos, Needle of ,..........- 753 
Lives Stealer, Nine <s s sieo siess 6010 4:8 1386 
Living 
Door, Aruthir’s ........6600500055 
Painting, Glorindel's 
WOGRION 5 552 A OT 
Lizard Man Cloak.......... 
Lizardskin Bed.......... 
Lloth, Wand of .......... 
Lo'tanu, Tome, Juia ...... 
Loaf, Philter of .......... 
Locate Object Sword 


Location 
Amulet of Inescapable ....5........ 35 
Wane OF EEE EA AT 1469 
Wand of Animal .............-+. 1485 
Wand of Secret Door and Trap... . . 1493 
LOCO PAEA OASTE NSA 671 
LOGS AIE O E A 672 
Locke’s Medallion of 
Thought Projection............. 
Locker, Leomund’s Labile 
Locket 
of the Great Kingdom. .......-.... 
OR A san arcs TATA 
of Natasha... ........2000 
Locking, Hasp of ............-- 
Lockpicks, Buckle of........... 
Lockpicks, Buckle of Faulty. . . . 
Locks and Bolts, Nolte’s....... see 
Locks and Bolts, Skie’s ............. 
OR PUTTIN 5 oct s xle ints ois wsa.nieiweinces 673 
Combination È 
OE EIE tea ss st tty deen Kale ses 
of Ramming ..........-++. TFR A 
of Repetitive Burning. ... . -. 673 
of Rolling ........6.5055 673 
Of SMOFING 0... yc ese ces . 673 
Logs; Sant OF PAETA 248, 249 
LORS BOO Sra ANNEE 195 
Loki’s Envenomed Dagger. . . --- 366 
Lolth Itona ron ores --- 610 
Lolth; Ring Of: yerr ene erie eSis 975 
Long 
Bow, Corellom’s. -ss sses ostie 203 
Bow, Hiatea’s ......... . . 206 
Burning, Lamp of... . . - 643 
TAREE COE OI 1128 
Years, Phylactery of ...... 831 
Longbranch’s Spellbook, Dylan . 
Longevity, Pigments of.......... 106, 837 


LOMQtOO E PATATA IE a/oleesd 366 
Longwriting, Quillof............... 927 
Looping, Parchment of,............. 803 
Loot, Lute of.......... TW yd 
Loquacious Lyre sss sesoonse riss 1331 
Lord Yaras's Spellbook............. 1192 
Lordliness, Cloak of.............5+5 304 
Lordly Might, Rod of .............6 1030 
Lords, Axe of the Dwarf............. 115 
Lords, Axe of the Dwarvish.......... 115 
Lore 
of Fiendkind s sico esaia 1192 
of Subtle Communication. .... 1192 
E OR noid once O ;eqriatens acts 976 
Loriell § Gown sy O esis osismie hates 548 
Lorin, Shield off: i. s:0000005.060 1099 
Lorloveim’s Obsidian Mortar and 
POR sos E A easier nieve 741 
Lom, Oil of... .. A ATE 773 
Lortmil Mountains, Anvil of the........ 52 
Lortz’s Battle Axe... 2.2.6... scenes 118 
Lost Rings of Mhzentul, Seven ....... 664 
Lost Ships, Medegian Bracelet of ..... 219 
Louie Dulama’s Alchemy Jug......... 626 
Loupe of Cormac . e. se. oo soree es 537 
Love 


Alcese’s Philter of Overwhelming . . . 827 


Luck 
Binde, ne eee ck FR eS 1381 
GHANA «os scene OHTA RTRs POE 282 


COME OF re ia scotia sean eas eae 323 

a A P L N EE 351 

are PRT A E A OO 443 

Elven Sword of... ....sss essene 1381 

a Ae AT E S 1541 

Horseshoe Of- neeite osoren 600 

Malet OF A E O even ees 556 

Myste’s Stone of Mixed .......... 1313 

a AAE O NN 324 

en aE A E S E EA, 877 

Stone of Good. ..... s.. ses sens 1311 

SWO DE s'<.coecscnses vevpiee ney 1381 
Luckless Returning, Grappling 

FROM OF EEA A ence bd 550 

Lucky Ring of the Wild Coast ........ 976 
Lum the Mad, Machine of 
Lum's Spellbook....-........ 
Luminescence and Coloration . . -1192 
Luminescence, Oil of....... .. m3 
Lunar Brooch.........-+.- ees a 
Lung, Herald of Mei........ +». 1441 
Lunitari, Talisman of ..... 1426-1427 
Loupe of Cormac oe rs e ase EA 673 
PATO, a n e RAREORI TI TO OTT 482 
Lute 

Alternate World Gate .........---- 

Cool Hand. ess cuns 

ORS R T TS 

ELOR eo aE AS 

Singalong ............ 

Skywalker.. .........> 

Woodwalking ......... 
Luxury, Tent of,.......+...- 
Lycanthrope Control, Muzzle of ..... 
Lycanthrope Slayer, Arrow ........... 
Lycanthropes 

Arrow of Harming ................ 90 

Arrow of Slaying .............00-5 98 

Dart of Slaying ... 2... 0.6. 0se 500s 375 

Potion of Immunization vs.........- 873 

Scroll of Protection from ......... 1079 

Shell of Protection vs. 

Weapon with Bonus vs. .......... 1509 
Lycanthropy 

Potion of Curing ..........-.-.555 859 

Ring OF TO E O A 977 

RA T PETAEN O 1115 
Lycanthus, Mask of ...........5.055 703 
Lydia's Broad Sword .............- 1381 
LB OO stew E O OA (See Soap) 
Lynx Talisman oa saisies onsi 1423 
Lyons, Sword Of -soais oaoa sma 1381 
Lyre 

Building 

Canaith 

SOM S's dice L A A EA YAS 

Dorus’s 

Doss ...... 


of the Spheres . 
of Wounding 
Lyron’s Harpsichord of 
Commanding............+-+++ 1328 
M 
Maat, Ivory Plume of ............55+ 227 
Macabre, Talon of the Danse ...,..... 294 
Mace 
PEL TIGR Lo 3) ow NEO 675 
Bael’s Morning Star .........-...- 675 
Berronar Truesilver’s ...........-. 675 
BACK, ENO OO TEC 675 
PRO T TAA OOS OR 675 
OF Darkness OE O OA 675 


Mace 
PHO ONENI TI OE A 676 
n. O A E 676 
n AOTT OTETI AE, 676 
BRD AIE E A A 676 
a T ITEE E T TEE 675, 681 
Icon, Great HON. s. s e.st eosa oon 677 
Hruggek’s Morning Star, .......... 677 
r EEEE TIA TOT 677 
Memnor’s Morning Star........... 677 
Muamman Duathal’s.............- 677 
UAE So cecueeesigeeinecsees 677 
Nightbringer . 2... ..6.+0sesse-eses 678 
of the North, Great Golden... ...... 677 
OPM ade vaccviccgsvassetandaae's 678 
Rada. OT E ONIN 678 
Shadowcaster ...........0...2004 678 
SMR S E A 678 
of Spellwarding. ................. 678 
of St. Cuthbert ..........6045 679, 670 
tera sree rere os 681 
Srm Hers n na 681 
r E IEE TT 681 
Undeadbane sisson 681 
VUA i ean Ea 682 
S a EATE wis SA 677 
Warstar of the Manticore .......... 682 
MacFuirmidh Cittern . ............. 1321 
MacFuirmidh Harp. ............... 1326 
Machine of Lum the Mad. ....... 682, 684 
Macho-Musk, Merty’s Masculine ..... 717 
Mad 
Book of Num the ............... 1205 
Dog of the Desert's Spellbook .. ... 1192 
Machine of Lum the.......... 684 
Madness, Elixir of ................. 443 
Madoc'’s Sword. ....... 65.60.0000 1381 
Maelstrom, Sword of Babette....... . 1343 
Mage 
Mss spied NI E TT 1112 
Sang Ointment of .........-.. 781 
SRO Ria pee ebveeweaesiee 877 
Nagehan Sword, Jaysen’s.......... 1377 
MRR: 5 bd cssienes samsereroare 1382 
rene TELE E LE 703 
Mageries, Unique..........-...... 1255 
Mages and Apprentices, 
OF vxcccsovuacte 1180, 1181 
Mages, Arrow of Slaying ............. 99 
A LENIS PET 366 
E T A E 687 
Magi, Staff ofthe... nsen 1283 
PAI EIEN E TAE. 657 
and Illusions, Map of ..........-.+ 692 
& Phantasms, Selvar's Conjuration. . . 1227 
and Secret Doors, Map of.......... 692 
and Traps, Map of, ...........+... 693 
Blocking, Potion of............... 877 
Carpet, Solomon’s,....,.....---++ 259 
Detection, Powder of ..........-.- 905 
Detection, Ring of 977 
Detection, Wand of ............-. 1486 
Enhancement, Potion of ........... 877 
Exchange, Noj’s Claw of .......... 294 
Gem of Infravision and Detect, 
Ganalondiisi seca foc ins $21 
Helm of Comprehending 
and Reading ....... 586 
E NIALAIS 643 
Libram of Silver ............60055 668 
MOD POS ROR eT ey Fre: 692 
Map of and Traps ..............4. 693 
Map of Mapping and .. -693 
Makon, nn ioi . 703 
MEE ET - 720 
Mirror, Yefar's........ ssa 736 


Missile Devied ... .. AET 687 
Missile Protection, Gem of... . . .. . . 525 
Missiles, Wand of .......... 1487, 1488 
MOON Os cies ccurndenesasewae 741 
Mouse Ring, Tasslehoff ......... 1002 
n ATINAE TAE AS 878 
Portraiture bY A O ESIE 106 
FOGG OLADI eie esaeo ones 855 
a n A A AAE 1242 
A SA E ENES 1241 
Reglar's Gloves of Freedom from. . . . 544 
Resistance, Amulet of.............. 36 
Resistance, Potion of ............. 878 
Resistance, Ring of............... 977 
Ring, Gordon% .............0.+-5 967 
Scroll of Flame ...............-- 1074 
Scroll of Protection from ......... 1079 
Scroll of Wind. .............2.2. 1086 
Sid Dan oii ccs ces. 156 
Shielding, Potion of .............. 878 
Stealing, Claw of ..............-- 293 
User Book isisi 8000.05 (See Libram) 
User, Spellbook ofa ............ 1192 
Weapon of Detect ............... 1511 
Magician Card ........ 22000000005 383 
Magical Quarterstaff .............. 1284 
Magical Mirrors, Wand of .......... 1486 
Magister, The .........:.0.s00e005 1193 
Magius, Dagger of the .............. 366 
Magius, Staffof ............. 1284, 1285 
Maglubiyet’s Axe ..........--...-.. 118 
Maglubiyet's Wounding Arrow. ........ 92 
Magma Command, Ring of ....... . . . 985 
Magnetic and Electric Waves ..... . . . 1194 
Magnetic Fluids, Cosmogony of . - . . - 1157 
Forgotten Arts of Oratory ......... 1171 
oe AEP COLEUS eee 1211 
POUOROT PIOC AS 878 
Ring, Animal, 6.600050 csewrenes ssa 948 
Magnification, Potion of ............ 878 
Magnificent Mattress, Merty’s........ N17 
Magnolia Oil/Powder........... 773, 905 
Mail 
Arvoreen'’s Chain .......-.-...+555 71 
Callarduran Smoothhands's Chain 72 
EVE CHO VETEEN T 74 
of Etherealness, Tulen’s Plate ........ 82 
of Horus, Scale. .......--.----00-+ 82 
Ineval’s Red Chain. ............... 7 
Red Dragon Scale.........-.-..-.. 81 
of the Seas, Keolish Plate........... 77 
Skoriaan’s Drow Chain. ............ 82 
Major Arcana Cards (Tarot).......... 382 
Major Spelljamming Helm. .......... 580 
MaNCS, TYG OF 6.0-0.5:0.0-00:802 60-00-0059 1458 
Malice’s Rod of Reincarnation... . . . . 1031 
Malign, Sword ,..........-+++5++- 1381 
Malet TRE 5 oo o's inns sessercyas 556 
Malog, Medallion of................ 713 
Malthrox's Shadowcaster ............ pid 
Malto% Dust of Mind Dulling .-.......- 421 
Malto’s Mirror of Retention .......... 729 
Mamluk Sword of Obedience. .. . . . . . 1381 
Mammal 
Arrow of Slaying .............-.-- 9 
/Avian Control, Potion of .......... 855 
Control, Ring of ..............225 978 
Control, Staffof ......... i.oa 1275 
Slaying, Sword of ............... 1382 
Man 
AROE o o ENE EA ERR 45 
Card, Hanged sciis ssni 387 
of Urik, Obsidian ................ 761 
Manas 
PDN A TTO 547 
a AET 547 


Grim Grimoire ssis asarre 688 
of Powers Beyond Life ........... 1196 
of Puissant Skill at Arms .......... 688 
of Sight, Manors ............... 
of Stealthy Pilfering . . 
of Stratagems ........ 0452-00000. 
Many 
Bags BAG OF EL T 136 
Colors, Cloak of ..........-...... 305 
Faces, Sword of..................<- 1364 
Holdings, Box of.........--. ++... 214 
Lights, Match of... s.. eierens 709 
Pouches, Girdle of .......-....... 535 
Things, Deck of .........0 66.0006 379 
Things, Janean’ Deck of .......... 378 
Things, Rod of .........0esseees 1031 
Things, Tarot Deck of............. 381 
Wishes, Ring of ............00005 978 
I oe Oh Le DEORE EOC 1529 


of Magic and Illusions . . . . 
of Magic and Secret Doors. 
of Magic and Traps. 


of Mapping and Secret Doors. +a 
of Mapping and Traps............. 694 
694 


Margoyle, Ring of ..........-.....- 964 


Marid 
Bane IWORA. s ero mie iosian 1371 
Desert Blade, Sword............. 1356 
a TEETE TOT IEE AT 917 
Scroll of Protection from ......... 1078 
D SW EAEE SS 1078 
Summoning, Ring of.............. 967 
Summoning, Turban of. es. 1463 
Marids, ‘Ud ofthe ........ s» 1333 
Marion's Robe of Blending ......... 1013 
Mark Antony's Sword. ............. 1387 
Mark's Scarab of Protection . . .. 1058 
Markers, Merty’s Magical ...... E, 
Marketplace, Merty’s Marvelous . -717 
Marking, Ring of ........... . 978 
Marks Harp. ........- 1326 
Marksmanship, Bow of ............. 209 
Maroon, Sword. .........--++-++++ 1382 
Marv’s Necklace of 
Memory Displacement .......... 750 
Marvelous 
Marble, Merty’s...............055 
Marketplace, Merty’s 
Nightingale, Queen Ehlissa’s .... . . . 923 
Pigment, Nolzur's...........--... 837 
Masauwu, Fiery Brand of........... 1453 
Masculine Macho-Musk, Merty’s .... . 717 
Masculinity, Girdle of Femininity/... . . 533 
Mask 
E EEEN EOT VAT ON nt 697 
of Attractiveness... a...an 697 
Of Bechneus riisi 697 
Of OOT 698 
OC Comey Misi 698 
DOs E Enn aE 698 
Death, of Plah siina 
of Disguise ............5 698, 699, 702 
Me, VERE PREC Corre ee 699 
ict RAL COERS Peres torte 699 
GHD EEE ERE SA EA 699 
ROWAN MAALLE 701 
a o A iaaiesceereee eee 701 
a AS L ETA 701 
of Knowledge EEE 702 
Kyric’s, of Disguise... ........-... 702 
OTA INT AS ETECO 702 
Ol LJOS ieissa 703 
M ire s sssrds EKES 703 
OMA ETAT ENE PRR 703 
a LILETO E PEELA 703 
E e AESA T CIE 703 
RIE A T T ECE A 704 
MO sesa 704 
ENE v0 v.00 nnne 704 
OF PHOLOCHON 10.0 vie sve ii 704 
CES OOWENE E Fees ance 704 
OF B ADEO TIRES 704, 705 
BI PORE EE LOE EE 705 


An o PRENE EIRT 709 
Master 
GRU JONI OPT EATA A ESS 522 
a RAEI AET IAES 694 
Ring of Scaladar, Trobriand’s . . .. . . 1004 
Thief, Finger ofthe. .............. 480 
Thief, Thumb of the .............. 480 


Thievery, Potion of 
Masterful Muffler, Merty’s 
Masters, Dark Draft of the Voodoo 
Masthead of Durability 
Masubi's Sword, Ho .. . 
Meat, Ivory Plume of 
Match 
PARRA yo 0:0 neq ve dee EE 700 
Merty’s Munificent............... 718 
of Many Lights ..............0.05 710 
Material Pocket, Wand of Prime... .. . . 1491 
Materialization, Ringof............. 978 
Math’s Spellbook .............-... 1137 
Matter, Creation and Modification of . . . 1160 
Mattock, Dumathoin’s .............. 709 
Mattock of the Titans ............... 710 
Mattress, Merty’s Magnificent........ 17 
n TETEE TEF 556 
Mauling, Muzzle of .............-.- 743 
May Oil/Powder, Cleo .......... 766, 900 
Maybel’s Insect Charm Oil. .......... 773 
Mayonaka’s Silver Katana . . 1382 
Mazrikoth’s Scarab of Death . . 1058 
Meal Seed, Square-. .......0.0.0004 1090 
Meaning or Significance, 
Goth Colot a ATIE A 514 
Mechanical Traps, Scroll 
of Protection vs. ........-..... 1080 
Medallion 
i F BOOTIE TT 710 
of Defense. . . 710 
of Empathy . . .710 
Equus .... -70 
of ESP.. -m 
of EST.. -712 
of Faith ....... 712 


Holy, of Almor ........... 
Locke's, of Thought Projection. 


OE NMG LA E ET -713 
of the Mirror, ........ 713 
of Missile Attraction. . . 713 
Pax's, of Spell Exchange. . 713 
of Projection ......... -713 
Soulsearcher . . -714 
Species Enemy . . +..714 
of Spell Exchange. . 713, 714 
Star of Celene. ... ise 715 
of Steadiness....... zan 71S 
of Thought Projection - 713, 715 
OF TWUG SOSTNIET TRA] 
Tusmit's Battle Crescent... . . . 
Medegian Bracelet of Lost Ships . $ 
Medic with Bag, Statue of Power... .. 
Medication, Spoon of. ...........4. 
Medicine Bundle .... . 
Medicine Shield... .. 
Meditation, Incense of ....... 
Meditation, Potion of Advanced. . 
Medusa, Arrow of Pelymorphing . 
Medusae, Shield of. .......... 
Megarea’s Whip ..... . 1533 
Meginjarder, Belt -. 169 
Mei Lung, Herald of. . 1441 
Melior, Sword. ....... . 1383 
Mellenea’s Pool Portal . 847 
Mellifleur’s Gem Eye . . . . - 458 
Mellifleur’s Robe of Stars. . 1013 
Melting, Crucible of. . . 341 
Melting, Rod of ...... . 1033 
Memnor’s Morning Star.........-... 677 
Memorization, Hwesta’s Talisman of. . .. 1423 
Memorization, Talisman of.......... 1424 
Memory 
Arcane Puissance of 
Dae BRN ITI O 
Displacement, Marv's Necklace of. . . 
Enhancement, Necklace of. 


WOE POTAE OEN IAT T 703 
Mirror, Wibes sesin 736 
RUE OE POTTE EERE II E TEN 978 
Menace, Drum of................+. 819 
Menagerie, Merty’s Musical. ......... 718 
Mental Impressions of the Retina. .. . . 1196 
Mental Prowess, Mirror of........... 730 
Montor% Spollbook. . ngi 
Mephistopheles’s Fork ...........+++ 842 
Merchant's Cloth ......-..-.+0<s0++ 312 
Merciless, Iron Flask of Tuerny the .. . . 489 
Mercury, Oil/Powder of ......... 773, 905 
Mercury Dragon Slayer, Sword . .... . 1357 
Meredin’s Luck Blade, Sword ....... 1383 
Merging, Potion of ..........-..+..+ 879 
Meriadar’s Quarterstaff. ............ 1285 
Meriadar’s Wand. .........-.---+++ 1487 
Mermen, Bracer of the ...-.......... 222 
Merry Blend, Durimal’s ............. 828 
Merty’s Marvelous Marketplace. . . 717-719 
Mervic’s Dagger..........0-sereveee 366 
Mervic's Gaseous Globe. ............ 539 
Mant AW 65.3 veers cnes dieses darra 111 
Message 
ee PATAN LEE TST, 1243 
TETE LL E 978 
Sending, Box of .......i. essees 215 
S Bye NETA O 


Command, Wand of ............. 1487 
Detection, Wand of .............. 1487 
Fatigue, Oil of............0...04. 733 
Immunity, Potion of .............. 879 
and Mineral Detection, Wand of. . . . 1487 
Protection, Forge of .............. 491 
DOE LETTS IE TEAST, 517 
Weapon of Detect ............... isl 


Metamorphoses, Laeyndr’s Book of. . . 1187 
Metamorphosis, Ring of Elemental .. . . 961 


Metaspell Influence, Amulet of ........ 36 
Methild’s Harp .........-..-. 1326, 1328 
Methods, Tome of Dogmatic ........ 1439 
Methven Candle ........---.-++-4+5 243 
Dea S Si sas TINT 1117 
Mhzentul’s RUBOB.. i ooieoe rni 664 
Mhzentul, Seven Lost Rings of ....... 664 
Mice, Amazing . ........---++--++++ 719 
Mot MAGNE 5 i005 6x 0cs554s350 08 no 
Midas Touch, Potion ofthe. .......... 879 


B58 LA coreana 1030 
Mighty 
Cutting, Saw of. ........--.-.+-. 1054 


Dampening, Potion of. . . . 879 
Dulling, Dust of ..... . 421 
Focusing, Potion of. . 879 
Potion of Open iii 2... 6... e cues 880 


: 


Restoration, Potion of............. 879 

Shielding, Ring of........... 979, 1003 
Minds of the Unknown,............ 1196 
Mine 

Dimensional .............000505- 447 

Ellister’s Dimensional............. 447 

Spelljamming ...............6.4. 448 
Mineral Command, Ring of .......... 989 
Mineral Detection, 

Wand of Metal and ............ 1487 
Miniature Geet eses zo iseanan EE 22 
Midionion OF Sels oresar as 782 
Ministering, Cabinet of ............. 233 
Minor Arcana Cards (Tarot).......... 391 
Minor Spelljamming Helm........... 580 
Minstrel, Prismal’s Musical .......... 914 
Minute Seeing, Eye of ...........5.. 458 
Minute Seeing, Lens of ............. 654 
WAY OE EIEEE VEEE sl 722 
Miracles, Staff of. ao osaan eni 1285 
Miraculous Mistmaker, Merty’s....... 717 
Mirage POG 6 soera iode 879 
Mirandos's Staff of Insect 

TINIE RA AETAT 1285 
PMS TU MAIN EE T 1424 
Mirror 

Baltron’s Hand 
Barlithian’s Mystical 
Black 
Blue... . 
Crystal. . 
of Curing 
of Duplication 
Emperor's 
of Enlightenment 
Evem's, of Enviable Image 
of Fear 
Flaming, of Tenh 
of Flattery 
Hsssthak’s, of Sight and Sound. ... . . 728 
OMAN EA ESTETICE 728 
of Improved Travel ............... 728 
OF Lakes pisces n 729 
Of Life Savings isrann a 729 
of Life Trapping ............. 729, 731 
Malto’s of Retention.............. 729 
i Sen TEOMA S ECO PT TEE Oe 704 
Medallion of the... ...........005 713 
of Mental Prowess ...........0005 730 
PED IELAS A oie’ 730 
Not-So-Funny Funhouse. .......... 730 
Nura D’Agor’s, of Life Trapping .. . . 732 
OO PPOSHIOR siasa 732 
MGR inaa a 732 
OE PONE. a aa aea 732 
nn A E S OISE SEET, 733 
OF RA ni E A 733 
ROG OE EPA A EA 733 
l EIEE E O 733 
Of Retention: asss sisas 729, 733 
Of a TEO TENT 733 
OF SONG OAE NEA TETE 734 
a n o BERETE E 734 
-Shield of Rheddrian............. 1100 
of Simple Order.. > seses sisare 734 
of Sophistication ...... sesse 734 
Mc NE A T 
of Spirit Seeing 
of Travel 
of Truth 
of Vanity 
Yefar’s Magic 
Yin-Yang 
Mirrored Eyes, Potion of 
Mirrors, Wand of Magical .......... 1486 
Mirynda’s Wand of Polymorphing . . . . 1487 
DS Tree LEME  .o504c¢220-000 ese 652 


Misdirection, Arrow of... ...........+ 92 
Misfortune, Wheel of .............. 1532 
Mishakal 
Dike o AEA EE IEE 185, 187 
RUG EAEE E O, -.. 1286 


ssa 781 


Misplaced Objects, Wand of........ 
Misplacing, Noj’s Bag of............ 136 
Missile 
Attraction, Armor of. ............65 
Attraction, Medallion of 
a a A A IE IETT 


a EAI TAE E ls 


Potion of 


Missile (cont.) 
Snaring, Glove of ~... oasa sasro ane 544 
Weapon of Accuracy. .. a.a... esses 92 
Weapon of Distance ......-.......5 92 
Missiles 
PROGR Gia oin a EAA 
Nabil’s Wand of Magic........ 
ran A NE ENRERE 
Noj’s Necklace of Not-so-Smart 
Wand of Magic............ 1487, 1488 
Mist 


Dragon Slayer, Sword......... . 1357 
Maile OF. 5 5.5.6 5.5:¢.4 rpa 


Mistmaker, Merty’s Miraculous... .... . 717 
Mistress of Battle, Ilbratha.......... 1376 
Mithryl’s Everbountiful Soup Kettle . . . 627 
Mitra’s Sword of Light............. 
Mixed Luck, Myste’s Stone of 
Mixing, Spoon of ............-. 
Mjolnir (Hammer) ............. 
Mo-pelar, Star of .............- ii 
Moander, Gauntlet of ............... 
Moat, Folding. .............0000008 
og IR RTE Oe SLT LEE 
Moccasins of Free Movement ...... . 
Modeling, Displacements and ....... 1165 
Modification of Matter, Creation and . 1160 
Modified Talisman of Zagy ......... 1424 
Mojo Oil/Powder ...........4.. 774, 906 
Moloch’s Whip... ..........000005 1533 
Molydeuss Axe .....5....0seeeeeus 118 


Mondasso's Automated Spell Scroll. . . 1075 
Monetary System Conversion .......... 5 
Money Changer Box ........... 215 
Money, Raistlin’s Cursed ........ . -324 


Monkey 
Fist of HKO nsei 


SRI AE L L AE 
Monkeys Staff ................ 
Monkeys, Barrel of........... 


Monkeys Figurine, Amber ........... 
Monocle 


Monster 
Arrow of Polymorphing............ 93 
Control, Badge of .............005 123 
Creation, Potion of .............05 880 
Fishing, Fishing Pole of ........... 483 
Holding, Parchment of ............ 803 
Malik: EN AE sea 704 
Repulsion, Oil of. ..............55 774 
Slayer Sword. ....-..0.s0seeeeus 1383 
Monsters 
Arrow of Slaying ...........0.0005 98 
Death-to-, Sword. ........0....04 1356 
Potion of Speak with.............. 893 
Weapon with Bonus vs........... 1509 
Monstrous Attention, Phylactery of. . . . 831 
Moodarvian Ring of Emotion ........ 979 
Moon 
Blade; Sword nanten 1383 
RD onions ELLE pace ew 380, 390 
OMB oranie 774, 906 
Moondance’s Sword, Falrik ......... 1339 
Moonglow, Staff of the. ..........05 1286 
Moonlight, Can of .............0065 237 
Moonstone Rabbit Figurine .......... 476 
Mordenkainen’s Spellbook ......... 1140, 
1157, 1162, 1165, 1196 
Mordmorgan’s Ring of Warmth ....... 981 
Mordom’s Cauldron of Air........... 268 
Moredlin’s Crystal Ball ............. 348 
Morgan's Horse Barding............. 159 
Morglay, Sword ........60es0se005 1383 
Morning Star 
ana 485, 675 
5 eee T L 677 
WOOT SS EE 677 
GE FRR 55:5 sie aces Soin ee 488 
Mortar and Pestle, Everproducing 

ae ee ee 32 741 
Mortar and Pestle, Lorloveim’s 

Opi Son E A TETT, 741 
Mortos’s Golem Scarab .,.......... 1058 
MOE CR PORATA A LYTE OCET 477 
Mothering, Rug of ......-........55 257 
Moto Moto Rod 

Of Deguiling is an an a 742 

of Concealment.: inas i a 742 

E EEPE A TT 742 

of Thundering Compliance... ...... 742 
MOP n an aa n ss A 119 
Mountain Seed... .......0.00s0008 1090 
Mountain, Snow on the, Sword ..... 1396 
Mountains 

Bear Cloak of the Sulhaut.......... 297 

Dark Wand of the Sulhaut......... 1477 

Headband of the Corusk........... 572 
Mourner's Armor sesso idres ts 78 
Mouse Ct nie setae. 259 
Mouse Chariot, Myl’s............655 280 
Mouse Ring, Tasslehoff’s Magic .... . 1002 
Mouthpick, Beholder ..............5 166 
Movanic Deva Sword. sasso sa 1383 
Movement 

Moccasins of Free 

Potion of Water... ........555 š 

a OE TT A E AT: 
Movements of the Universe, 

URNO ara akea 1259 
Moving, Ngona Horn of Silent. ....... 599 
Muamman Duathal’s Mace 
Mud Masque, Merty’s .......... 

Mda RIRE 55 a5 eci iag 
RUIN AIEN ETE E 
Muffler, Merty’s Masterful 
Mug 

Leomund’s. 

Merty’s Mysterious 

of Plenty 


Mug 

OF Warming: Eo TERE 743 
Multichromaticism, Lamp of ......... 645 
Multicolor Eggs .4c.ci's.sccica yeas 436 


Multiplanar Mushrooms, Merty’s. ... . . 718 
Multiple 
Applications of Perceptomancy . .. . 1197 


Rod of Dancing................. 488 
Wishes, Ring of .............004 981 
Multiplication, Crossbow of.......... 203 
Multiplication, Turban of ..........5 1463 
Multiplicity, Arrow of. <... osoosu 92 
Multiverses, Spherogenesis of the .... 1244 
Mummy Coffin of Creation .......... 317 
Mummy's Cloak... ........0. 0000005 306 
Mundane, Mantle of the. ............ 305 
Munificent Match, Merty’s .......... 718 
Murdock’s Insect Ward... .........-5 825 
Mitrky Mitr 0r ORRE ADETI PEENE 730 
Murlyn’s Harp of Charming, ........ 1326 
Murlynd’s Spoon .,.......6.0.0005 1467 
Mushrooms, Merty’s Multiplanar, ... . . 718 
Music, Armband of................55 66 
R APE A E T ET 743 
Musical 
Instruments, Dugal’s.. . . 820, 1321, 1538 
Menagerie, Merty’s............++5 718 
Minstrel, Prismal’s ..............5 914 
SBOE, EOE AE EN T more ss 1467 
a Aa K OREP ATT 525 
Musk Oil/Powder .............+ 774, 906 
Muskmelon, Merty’s Mythic ....,.... 719 
Mustard, Merty’s Mystic ............ 719 
Mustard of Success............. 248, 249 
Muzzle 
of Lycanthrope Control......,..-.. 743 
OF RING POEPEN 019,8 0 743 
OF THANG 0.55.3 sae a Ennis eve 743 
My Brother of Arms..............- 1352 
Myl’s Mouse Chariot ..........-.... 280 
Mylsibis’s Codex of Contention. .... . 1197 
Myrkul’s Tablet of Fate. ............ 1418 
Myste’s Stone of Mixed Luck. ....... 1313 
Mysterious Mug, Merty’s............ 718 
Mysterious Sounds, Stone of ........ 1313 
Mystery 
Oil/Powder, Nine ............ 774, 906 
Rok PARIDA AIEE CET 1020 
Stocking Ezaa 1306 
Mystic 
Eidolons, Necklace of............. 750 
Mustard, Merty’s...........00.00 719 
Ma PEA ET EE E MENASA EE CET 1488 
Mystical 
Brown Coating Box ............4. 215 
Equations, Book of............... 189 
Feather Token, Quaal’s ........ 180, 469 
Mirror, Barlithian’s............... 723 
Organ, Heward’s........... 1550, 1552 
Mystics, Tabard of the ............. 1417 
Mythic Muskmelon, Merty’s ......... 719 
N 
Nabil’s Wand of Magic Missiles... . . . 1488 
Naesowen, Ghost Blade, Sword... .. . 1384 
NAGS CHOW esd P E TE 334 
Nagelring, Sword.. sse oesie soies sisis 1384 
Nai No Kami's Hammer,............ 557 
Nail 
E IE TOE T 745 
DEBE -aee s iaria onun Ea 745 
BROT 0.6 aa iaaa 745 
PIDDE sapai nanahan RSEN 745 
OE POA jerien E hana 745 
SING SWIG 0 0:0:9.4-0:0:0.0:0)0 dicet 1384 


Of Secusing SOPP NEE 746 

of Silence A 

Ten- 
Nailing, Hammer of .............45 
Najm, Book of .............-. 
Namara Neversleep, Sword 
Nanna Sin’s Black Axe... ...... 
Nanorion Stone. ........5.05+5 
Narcissistic Weapon......... 
Narcissus Oil/Powder 
Nat Slaying, Weapon of ...... 
Natasha, Locket of .......... 


Nature Its Secrets, Life of .... 
Nature’s Love, Ring of ....... 
Navigation, Map of.......... 
Nay (Flute), Djinn .......... 
Nchaser’s Elyromancia......... . . 1202 
Nchaser’s & Tulrun’s Spellbook . . 
Nebelun’s Mace ........0+ereseeues 677 
Necklace 

Of Adaptation .........ecceeseeees 

of Air Breathing ‘ 

OP ALON 00:5: e's 34.8 00's 0:04 


of Elegance... .......... 
Frigga’s Black Opal 
GRATE. o is nea ae 
DR a ENEE EEIT 


Marv’s, of Memory Displacement. - 750 
of Memory Enhancement......,.. 

Of Missiles. ..... 0.64.00: 
of Mystic Eidolons . |.. , “Os 
Of Night Seeing. ...,..--.-eeereee 
Noj's, of Not-so-Smart Missiles . . . . . 751 
of Petrification ......-..........- 751 


of Protection Against Charm 

SAk sca wees 

of Strangling. ........ 

of Strangulation 

Syranita’s Opal ee 

Of Ugliness ian aa 

a A EE DA CE 

Vergadain’s.......... 

of Water Breathing .... 
Necromancer, Ring of the. 
Necromancer, Staff of the. . 
Necromancy, Ordinary . . . 
Necromancy, Quill of... . w 
Nectar, Hummingbird. .............. 
Needle 

of Death 


Nefradina’s Improved Identifier. ...... 755 
Negation 
Potion of Poison ,.. . 
Ring of Infravision . , 
Ring of Invisibility 4 


Wand of, ........ 
Negative Plane Protection, 
Ony RING OE iss :n: coir ein sie.taereja 984 
Nemean Lion Skin . . 
Nepanth, Sword ...... 


Nerad, Psychometron of ............. 918 
Nerve Tonic, Elixir): oneic cis 443 
Nest 

Dart of the Hornets’ .......-....5- 374 


OP Ti EEK TENN 755 
Net 
Ashley's, of Entrapment. .......... 755 
Drag 


of Plenty 


of Sneering 


Webnet 


Netherborn, Azuredge, 
Slayer OF MO saso wis singa 112 
Neutering Girdle of 
Femininity/Masculinity.......... 533 
Neutral 


BL OWE ES “935 
Lvil, Soepeer Of sk AT EE 935 
Good, Crown of ae +935 


Good, Orb of, ...... 


Orb of Chaotic ..... 3 
Orb of Holiness. . . . . -- 196 
Orb of Lawful... ... 
Robe of the Archmagi. . oe 
Scent, Oil of ......... wee 774 
Seepter of sic. sce 


Regalia of 
Scepter of 


Ring of ......... 
Never Empty Quiver. 
Neverending 

ASTOWS; BOW sacian aaas 209 

Barrel of Grog. . . . 

Barrel of Salt Pork ........-5+55+5 160 
Neversleep, Namara, Sword. ........ 1384 
Neverwinter, Jewel of. .........6.265 523 
New 


Life, Oil/Powder of. . 
Tunnels/Passages, Potion to 


Newleaf’s Spellbook, Irid........... 1182 
Nezrami, Claw An RA A EE 294 


wee ee ee 


1634 


Nibelungen, Ring of the............. 983 
Nidus’ s Wand of Endless 


1) ROE 
oi DE aiae ao 


Nightbringer........... 
Nightcap of Sleep, .... 
Nightcap of Vision 
Nightingale, Queen Ehlissa’s 
MAPVOIOUE EANES P TETA 


Nightwind, Sword. 
Nilbog AOW eis cine e nS aoatra 
Nine 

Lives Stealer, Sword............. 1386 

Mystery Oil/Powder . . . : 

Steps Draining Sword............ 1386 
Ninggulfim, Guardian ............. 1226 
Ninja Slaying, Weapon of........... 1524 
Ninja, Staff of the. ............0.54 1287 
Niord’s Great Trident ............... 842 
Nithanalor's Harp.............0056 1326 
Nithian 


NOIRE aia 
Noisesome Spirit Chasers. 
Noj’s 


Bag of Misplacing .............4. 136 
Bracers of Brandishing............ 222 
Claw of Magic Exchange .......... 294 
Missile Attractor. ..........-.005 1100 
Necklace of Not-so-Smart Missiles . . 751 
Nolte’s Locks and Bolts ............. 672 
Noizur’s Marvelous Pigment ......... 837 
Nolzur's Spellbook .............0.44 1211 
Nomog-Geaya’s Broad Sword ....... 1386 
Nomog-Geaya's Hand Axe........... 119 
Nonsubstance Encyclopaedia. ....... 1205 
Noora’s Candle of Propitiousness. ... . . 243 
Noora’s Ring of Djinn Summoning . . . . 984 
Norse Climates, Gazette of the....... 1174 
North 
Bane of the, Sword... ..........5 1344 
BC ORCI ANER E E T T A 196 
Flame of the, Sword ............. 1368 
Great Golden Mace of the ......... 677 
Norval’s Timely Portrait. ............ 106 
Norzahk, Runes of .........5.5.0+ 1221 
INOSOOUN 55:9 aieis- apie A a 37 
Not-So-Funny Funhouse Mirror. ,.... . 730 
Not-so-Smart Missiles, 
Noj’s Necklace of 
OMG I An AAR RATOA 
Noxious Resistance, Potion of ........ 880 
Nuggin’s Cursed Ring of Armoring . . . . 984 
Nulathoe’s Spellbook .............. 1211 
Nullification, Sleeping Bag 
En sais sess eesti 138, 1119 
Num the Mad, Book of............. 1205 
Number Numbing, Brooch of......... 227 
Number Twenty Oil 
/Powder, Bottom . . 765, 900 
A T TAE ETE OA 485 


Nura D’Agor’s Mirror of Life Trapping. 732 
Nursery, Blashphor's 
Nut's Black Dagger ... 
Nutrition, Potion of... ............4 880 


Nyr Dyv, Hasty Barge of .,........., 179 
Nyrond, War Staff of ...........4.. 1299 
Nystul’s Spellbook .............4+. 1178 


Obedient Hourglass ...............- 602 
Oberon’s 
Arrow of Slaying ..........-...... 93 
Arrow of Subduing................ 92 
BOW siaiecsicsavecedneuseraeces 209 
WOME PILT ETAST YIS 1288 
Sword A IELAS LT 1386 
Object Sword, Locate.............. 1381 
Objects, Wand of Misplaced. ........ 1487 
Obliteration, Spear of.............. 1131 
Obliteration, Wand of.............. 1488 
Oblivion, Bead of. ..............005 164 
Obscuration, Dissimulation and, .... . 1165 
Obscurement Elixir s.s. cossens 443 
Observation, Extreme Powers of ..... 1166 
Observations on Fluids, Occult ...... 1211 


Mortar and Pestle, Lorloveim's. ..... 741 
Shattering, Brooch of ............. 228 
SOG PAAPA ETE 478 


Steed of Wondrous Power, Dori’s . . . . 475 
Occult 


L a WORP OENE ETT AS 1211 

Observations on Fluids........... 1211 

Visual Shock, Theory of.......... 1251 
Occupation, Hat of ............s0055 572 
Oceans, Staff of <.. essea saiid 1288 
Ochalor’s Eye, Wand of ............ 1490 
Octopus, Glove of the. .......-...-55 544 
Odin, Fist of, Sword . ............5+ 1368 
Odin SWORN. Of: sep 0:0:0:0.0:0 9,0:04:9.90.0:0 1386 
Odin’s 

BOW E 

Rune Wand 

Spear....... 

aa ATOSE T S 
Odor, Ring of Jasmine .............. 972 
Odors 

Bottle of Pleasant ................ 200 

Cn EERE ye PEAT 284 

Chetee of Viles arate cee sntes 284 
Sn eer eS Ee ge ete er er esa 880 
Otima ossessi eds vase 1207 

Arrow of Polymorphing ............ 93 

Magi Slaying, Weapon of ......... 1524 

Power, Gauntlet of ..............+ 507 

Slaying, Weapon of. ............. 1524 


Ogrishness, Kaftan of.............. 1013 
Ohm's Black Box .,.......6.0s00005 215 
Oil 
ASIN E E E IA 763 
of Acid Resistance ........5-4+545 763 
ALICIA IO arnan 763 
OF Agrleseness: EESTILE T 763 
AMINE) eaire seriei 763 
BEGET TAPTE IER E EA 763 
Aphrodisia. oseo reenen 764 
Arabian Nights ..... . 764 
Co eee . 764 
a A . 164 
Attraction ...,..... . 764 
Attractiveness ............ 764 
Bard's Aphrodisiac Inspiration . -764 
a eS en «. 765 
of Beauty. ......... . 765 
Bendover’s......... . 765 
Bergamot’s ........ . 765 
of the Black Arts... . - 765 
Bottom #20........ - 765 
Brmo¥ Carne... .xicisedsenesuve 765 
BM CETTE TELTET 765 
of Bug Repellence . . paisa TOS 
lh ITTENI cine 6S 
of Buoyancy . 765 
Caloric Shield... . +++. 766 
Carnation ....... see 166 
Chocolate ......... 766 
Cintronella ........ ee. 766 
INI 5c secs AN aA 766 
Clo Mininiai s 766 
of Cloaking. ....... . 766 
of Commanding .... . 766 
of Concentration. . . . . 766 
of Confusion....... . 766 
of Conquering Glory. 
Controlling ........ 
Crab Apple ...... 
OC CRORING LA A T 
Cumin Sadana 
Cypress Seed. .... 
of Damnation .... 
Dendan......... 
Desiré Eme’s..... 
of Dexterity........ 
of Disenchantment . . 
Doas Isay’s ........ 
Double Cross .... 
of Dragon's Blood. 
of Dream........ 
of the Dryad..... 
OL EIORICHY LAEE E, 
of Elemental Invulnerability 
of Enchantment. ...........6.0005 
of Eternal Fire. . 
of Etherealness . 
Eucalyptus. ... . 


of the Evil Eye . 
Excisement . .. . 
of Exodus ..... 
of the Feasts ... 
of Feather Falling ..........4.0005 
of Fiery Burning. . 
Of Fire Stilling. 0.260.000 sess Eon 
Five Finger Grass . 
Fuses PORN sits a5 anode asececayee 
OPPumbling icant sees 
Galangale’s . . 


ee ee 


1635 


-C“( t..l ëy: y 


oil 
of Hair Replacement. ............. 770 
of High Conquering ............-. 770 
of High John the Conqueror... ..... mi 
n AE MEO TT 77 
Honeysuckle... 00. .cieetevoeses 771 
of Horridness 6.0.0.6 .6000e scenes 771 
HYPNONC ios uicestescvcesanrexesas 771 
O i ciassccaeaaneesesnscei's m 
of Immovability ................. 771 
OTR AE TE m 
DTI TT EEEE m 
of invulnerability ..............-. m 
n E E A AEF EEE m 
Jannis’s, of Nightmares. ........... m 
Jazper’s, of Permanent Ethrealness. . . 772 
J oo wenssnccipagessvnvewes 772 
of Jinx Removing ............-... 772 
Jo's Liquid Road. ........-...-..- m2 
i EEE. 772 
ERVCROE o o v60 4:04. 0:90 nesiviewsincncie 772 
aT ARIA T OT 772 
ETON EO DE 772 
of Lightning Bolts,............... 772 
Lily of the Valley... 000s eccees 773 
Lo. Rn reer t ny 773 
of Luminescence, + 0:4 +4,0 0.0.2 6200s 773 
MONO MON e 773 
a n TE EPA 773 
Maybel’s Insect Charm............ 773 
CO NOUET 6.0900 geod verccyeeyer 773 
of Metal Fatigue ............-..-- 773 
MEO TE E E 774 
of Monster Repulsion . ............ 774 
MOGBi a ccccccsedetcatbnccsbuess 774 
MR OEIT IA SONION TTT 774 
aa ATAI TA 774 
of Neutral Scent ............65555 774 
Of New lifes ieee ii 774 
Nine Mystery ........s..seee0eue 774 
Cenk eli ee 774 
Of Obedience.. seisuses 775 
OOM iss irii sss 775 
of Permanent Disenchantment . . . . . . 775 
of Petrification ............0..54- 775 
of Phosphorescence .............. 775 
A a STEETS IEE STTS 775 
of the Pickpocket ................ 775 
CRN DOTTIN 776 
of Preservation ...............0- 776 
PHM ALLIES AIEE TEIR 776 
Reptilla’s Curdled Death. .......... 776 
of Reversibility... iuiuo 776 
PERO Si sica pacvisiascecssae 776 
RODY avai sin sca awsinrewsisseaiesie 776 
ROG ccisiasvrewadsasaeuwaarwasas 776 
of Rust Proofing .............6065 776 
Sandalwood, TEPEE E T 776 
ena ALTECO OET 777 
ne OTETTA R 777 
an REETA TEE E 777 
OF DE oiai sepreseceseoee m 
of Slipperiness ........-..-.+++-- m 
PAN san oe rann enan EERS 777 
SOURORY SETTI TTN EE T 777 
BORE AEETI ETS AOIS 777 
ET T T OSTA NTP 778 
CERNE T EPES 778 
of Stone Passage. ..........----+« 778 
EE A TT I EEEIEE 778 
SOE VAN E A N EEE 778 
Of Timelessness............see00es 778 
E Brac victaneves vaste pen R 778 
CEU AAR e 779 
NN E NE 779 
NIN OE 779 
WUBIN OP ce aintinn aye 779 


OR VINOR PT O CERT 779 
OE NG AOTT ELAT 779 
OC WH POWEE ILASTE IE 779 
V n EI TOEI TE 779 
OWN CE TE OE EE 779 
WHY TE EET. 779 
VB TEAN T IAEA TAEA 779 
Ying YUNE sasso eiiseencyaussas 779 
TOMES POONA ASE NIIE S EAE 779 
A Va OE ET EA A 780 
Ointment 
R E A S 780 
Courtesan’s Cream ........-....++- 780 
Of Par Soving. ...........2ses0008 780 
BTN oe ot ERRER 780 
COP ORAETES OE 780 
TOTEE I 780 
of Mage Smelling ................ 781 
POOR PETO TE TEOT, 781 
RONTE, ooer cies sv9:c505:cares 781 
of Scar Removal ............--655 781 
n « ONE A T ET AS 781 
of Second Sight... .sssseseeeneess 781 
OES VA EEIE 782 
NN TET A coetaesee 782 
Ojy-do, Throwing Stars of .......... 1435 
O-Kuni-Nushi's Staff .............. 1288 
Old 
Captain with Pipe, Statue 
OL PONE SEET T e 1303 
Salt Statues of Power ............ 1303 
Salty with Raincoat, Statue 
OPOWET TETT E TIT, 1304 
Olfactory Illusion, Opal of. .........- 526 
Olibanum Oil/Powder. .......... 775, 907 
Olive Oil/Powder, Virgin ....... . 779, 910 
Oliver's Sword . . 6.0... .00csceeees 1372 
Oljatt Sea, Trident of the ............ 844 
Ollamh Harp. E 1327 
Olwyn Forestfriend's Spellbook, Sir... 1244 
Olynthos, Shield of... aaia 1100 
Olynthos, Sword of. ...........5.04. 1386 
Omelet of the Planes .. onnon 782 
One Plume, Cloak of the ............ 306 
Onciromancy, Sublimated .......... 1244 
Oni Slaying, Weapon of ............ 1524 
Onion, Minionions of Set... ......... 782 
a a AEST OS ETT 782 
Onnwal, Rod of ..............-.4. 1034 
ATTA SEA AT 150 
ENP EPE EE E O 478 
Of Neverwinter osiinsa ii 523 
Panther Figurine... ... 0.a 477 
Ring of Negative Plane Protection . . . 984 
and Steel Mobile... ........600005 737 
owe; Been OF. isos oieee 165 
Ooze Command, Ring of ............ 985 
Opacity, Window of ............... 1559 
Opal 
Cats FEL 6s cv cescesnvecanscnis 477 
BO, BE. ccd sccevacvessaveeus 453 
Necklace, Frigga’s Black .......... 749 
Necklace, Syranita’s .............. 752 
of Neverwinter, Fire .............. $23 
of Olfactory Illusion. ............. 526 
Open Doors, Charm of.............. 282 
Open Mind, Potion of............... 880 
Alexander's Chime of ............. 816 
BORO OF. E IT TT E 231 
CE Eo or TEE 817 
E ae a ae 596 
a, PEE PO eee 619 
A OE T T E 629 
Sebastian's Chime of. ............. 817 
Opponent Weapon with Bonus vs. . . . . 1509 


Opposite Alignment, Helmet of . . .. . . . 591 


Orcas, Talisman of ...... + 1425 
Orcus’ s Wand. . . . 1490 
Order, Gavel of.. ..... 52 
Order, Mirror of Simple . . 74 
Ordinary Necromancy .. . 1211 
Ore, World-Shield. ........ «++. 1561 
Organ, Heward's Mystical .. . . . 1550, 1552 
Orgel’s Wand of Earth Passage... ... . 1491 
Origins of the Hour Glass 

e ATEO 1211 
Orizon, Galadaster’s . 1172 
Orizon, Jaluster’5s ... 1182 
Orjalun’s Arbatel. . . . . . 1211 
Ornamental Stone Types. . 515 
Orrery of the Inner Planes . . 800 
Ortnit's Lance of Doom . - 648 
Orvas (Poison) ...... .. 1201 
Osiris, Staff of .. +s 1288 
Osiris’s Royal Flail.......... 488 


Osmal's Staff of the Woodlands . . 1288 
Ostrich Standard, Nithian, . . . oes 760 
COWEN e cess 1192 
Otiluke's Spellbook 1174, 1244 
Otto's Spellbook. ... 2.6.0.6 cece e es 1140 
COA on case secures E EETA Mt 
Outer Plane Artifacts, 

Trimia’s Catalogue of .......... 1460 
Oval Stone of Tzolo’s Guardian . 1314, 1464 
Oven of Heating. ........-.-..-0-++ 
Overwhelming Love, 

Aleese’s Philter of 
Owen's Sword....... 

Owl, Serpentine 

Owlbear, Arrow of Polymorphing . 
Owlbear Chak: 5. isurian 
Owner, Jewel of Attacks Upon the . 
Oyori of the Unknown Warrior ........ 
OPE CHR E E R 


| 
ue 


P 
P'oh Slaying, Weapon of ........... 1524 
Pad 
Chemcheaux Teleport... ......... 1453 
Cowi Nowe see iets 1073 
My ECE TTT EK TT 1454 
Paddicboard, Magical............... 801 
Paddleboard of Wondrous 
Transformation ..... a...se 801 
Padriac’s Portable Purveyor of Potions. . 802 
A ATO ET TTET. 1136 
Pages, Polion i650 vaca divetete 1215 
Pages, Tome of Glowing. .......... 1441 
Pain 
reais ERE REECE EEE 678 
Perae a 1555 
Dye ET TOEL O ILLT 1116 
Potion of ............ 881 
VOB OR ica) casssoreracscones 1471 
POU ois ccsissicveverneses (See Pigment) 
Painting, Glorindel’s Living.......... 104 
Pajon Tree, Leaf of.. osioon oia 652 
Palace, Al-Azid’s Ghostly............. 26 
Paladins, Arrow of Slaying............ 99 
Paladine’s Holy Symbol ............. 597 
Palate, Utensil of the Cultured... .. . . 1466 
Palette of Identity, Bell’s............. 836 
Palm Sign Amulet. ........-0000se008 37 
Pan 
kann EIET 802 
OC BONG EE I E He'eens 802 
n IENE ETE 1555 
Patti DUN Ofis 66.00: sere os oeeo t vine 819 
GEPEM PIR: cees s.s.s sineas a 1555 
N e SONNENT 1131 
Panther Figurine, onyx .............. 477 
| Panther Standard, Nithian. ........... 760 
Panzuriel’s Quarterstaff ............ 1288 
Pao, Ivory Chain of ................ 272 
Arrow of Polymorphing ............ 93 
Co orn ae eee nee 803 
OP WEE die Fi nase «sans nnesos 803 
Papyrus Scepter, Amulet of the ,....... 38 
Paraclemental Command, Ring of . .. . . 985 
Parallel Worlds, Doors 
and Passages of... ........-.++ 1165 
Paralysis, Earring of ...............- 426 
Paralysis, Spear of ..............+ 1131 
ALOA OST 93 
|b i NERY OS RTT IK ETO TTY 421 
Protection, Banner of ............. 156 
Scroll of Protection from ......... 1079 
A AAR ee a 1491 
o e ANETT AEEA I TOAT 1387 
Paranoia: o un ia ses g aS 40 
Paravisual Emanations, Great....... . 1178 
Parchment 
ALONG Fixes Sie Sess 803 
of Monster Holding .............. 803 
of Selective Reading.............. 804 
Self-Protecting .........se0eeeeee 804 
of Spell Stealing ...........650005 804 
Parfait Potions, Padriac’s 
Portable Purveyor of............ 802 
Parn, Iron Rod of ..... 66.66.6660 1028 
Partot, Crystal oa: caincaserevciedneree 348 
Parrying, Rod of. ..- 2... ....605005 1034 
Parting, Cursed Pick of Earth......... 835 
Parting, Pick of Earth............... 835 
Partisan, Sword. os iesse o enose 1387 
Parts, Rod of Seven .......... 1038, 1039 
Passage 
Cika a rsen 306 


an A cic EE T E EE 
Oil of Stone,...... 
Orgel’s Wand of Earth 
WES ios vaccines cies 
Past, Mirror of the 
Path, Scroll of the Stellar 
Pauldron of Valor 
Paviov’s Bell. ....... 
aa EEA II IT ATST 
Pax's Medallion of Spell Exchange .... 713 
Peace, Bisselite Wand of ........... 1475 
Peace, Shakuhaci (Flute) of ......... 1542 
Peaceful Contact, Headdress of ....... 572 
Peaceful Periapt of Pax... ........... 825 
a BEIE IENEI ETIT 1387 
Peaks, Barrier, Horn of the.......... 1543 
Potaiet, Bice TETIT EIES 447 
Peart 
EGOS ove ceeeeebeceresccsecseses 164 
BOR. 6s cb aacensacwadasciuatpeos 804 
i WET CCLIT TELE NTS 804 
of the Ebbing Tide ............... 805 
of Entrancement ,............50.5 805 
0) PON ee RCO. fice Die 805 
SEN E 09:90:05,508 805 
SOON EP ET NE S tide Sans 805 
Kathena’s, of Wisdom............. 805 
Of Power .....+0.. 805, 806, 1086, 1108 
of Protection from Fire............ 807 
| OST KON PE ROTTS STEEL 807 
of the Rising Tide. ............... 807 
Serpent Spigit ..............-.000- 807 
SEES Stone ucuer ners 1086, 1108 
OF the SHINES, 6. vo ssveccsvesecsas 807 
SHO RIAD: 5 0-050 5.000 aaacveceiboe 807 
DTG ac ve cn ccpccces secteur 807 
of Ultimate Wisdom ..........-... 808 
GWE, 0285 bd le wens sues 805, 808 
Pearls, String of ...............--- 1319 
Peas Potion, Magic............-...- 878 
Pedestal of Blyphian............-... 808 
Peeping, Window of ............... 1559 
of Immurk the Invincible .......... 808 
A a AEL ER E 809 
Pirate with, Statue of Power ....... 1304 
A ooo 0555540 6555050054 809 
Pen 
of Excellence ........- 200-2500 809 
of Swift Writing ........-..-....- 809 
al OTT E RET 810 
CO Sasa pun E AT 924 
Pendant, Equus.............2--200s 810 
Pendant, Rahasia’s ..........-....+5 811 
Pendulum, Lithocentric ............5 670 
Penetrating, Arrow of ..........6+556+ 93 
Penetrating, Dart of ...........-.-.. 374 
Penetration 
ARO OE isis kb eeele T PANA: 93 
Hemmer 08 AETA ETT 557 
Pb ss iic 843 
Pennant of Bravery................. 154 
NOE De onsi d ee 746 
A A E N es 324 
nhan AIII ALALELE 325 
Pentacles (Tarot, Suit of) ..........4. 401 
People, Ring of the Little, ........... 975 
Pepper of Sncezing............. 248, 249 
Pepper Talisman, Fire.............- 1422 
nL CO Lee 881 
TRIMS ON TIT LOEIT 1251 
Variations on The Visual. ......... 1261 
Perceptomancy, Multiple 
Applications of ............4.6 1197 
Percussion Instrument .......-.-.+++ 811 


Percussion Instruments, Dugal’s, ..... . 820 
Peregrin’s Treatise on Fixed Portals .. . 1214 
Peregrine’s Sword 
Perfect Fit, Cloth of 
Perfume 
Aroma of Dreams... .... 6.666055 823 
Curdied Death. .......0-ccsseeees 823 
RA LIYE IOS ILE 824 
Essence of Darkness... ........... 824 
Murdock’s Insect Ward. ........... 825 
Starella’s Aphrodisiac ............. 825 
Periapt 
of Foul Rotting ...... 0.6.66 ...005 825 
CE aa 2S ere aa aE 825 
Of Pax, Peacefill: in iaa sci ani 825 
of Proof Against... one essaia 826 
of Prophecy Protection. ........... 827 
of Protection from Ixitxachit! 
a ASL LTOS, 827 
of Wound Closure. .............45 827 
Permanent Disenchantment, Oil of ....775 
Permanent Etherealness, Jazper'’s Oil of . . 772 
Perpetual Youth, Amulet of,........... 38 
Perpetual Youth and 
Inexperience Amulet of. ,......... 38 
Persana’s Trident... ........5.0scsee8 842 
Perseverance, Arrow of. ............-+ 93 
Persevering Anger, The, Whip ....... 1533 
Person, Sword of Charm. ........... 1349 
Perspective, Tome of Humorous, . .. . . 1442 
Persuasiveness, Philter of............ 829 
Pest Protection, Charm of............ 282 
Pest Protection, Scarab of........... 1058 
Pestilence, Potion of... 881 
Pestle, Everproducing Rice 
Mortar and, Lorloveim's ......... 741 
Pestle, Obsidian Mortar and.. ........ 741 
is gp PORE E S 102f 
Potra, Helmet of ...............5+++ 591 
Palin Tone OF 6s os ec E E 608 
Petrification 
BUCO SPOT ET OEIT E 458 
i AA IA TENTE. 756 
O E a os 8 600 
ORE OE poaa a a 654 
NORO O ssania 751 
o E ET EP T 775 
Roden Of |. ssi sseseitesvvessces 881 
Protection, Banner of ............. 156 
Scroll of Protection from ......... 1079 
Shield of Proof Against... ........ 1100 
Petrified Shield. ............660005 1100 
Petrified Weapon .... 26... 66666606 1522 
Phandal’s Spellbook ............... 1137 
Phandoorl’s Bracer... 6.666460 05005 222 
Phandore’s Wand of Fire. ......... 1491 
Phantasmal Apple. ....... 66.6. 660065 58 
Phantom 
EEE N ON 


Form, Ring of . 
Sword 


Phantoms and Ghosts, Legendary of . . 1191 
Pharaoh's 


Phaseship 


Philter 
Darina ys PAISTOI IT 828 
ANE OOPER TOE A 828 
LS VEETEE NO TAT 848 
a ANN TTE 828 
of Persuasiveness .............645 829 
AS IEO I EPITO 829 
of Stammering and Stuttering. ... .. . 830 
Phiogiston, Trident of the............ 846 
Bg TOG PTT 436, 437 
BG OCG icc cab TITTET TT 
Standard, Nithian ...............- 760 
Phosphorescence, Oil of............. 775 
Phosphorus, 
and Reactions of .............. 1157 
Phosphorus, Oil of ...... 6.2.4 .66065 775 
Photosynthesis Elixir... ......6..466 443 
Phrandjas’s Spellbook. ............. 1215 
ONY ETEC ANT T 830 
of Faithfulness. EEEE STET 830 
Haroistem's, of Faithfulness ........ 830 
OF LONG YOME erosen cee ow eeerion 831 
of Monstrous Attention... ........ 831 
of Righteousness. ............+++-+ 831 
Physical Aspects of Spellbooks . .... . 1133 
Enhancement Elixir. ........ 443 
Pick 
of Earth Parting, à... 2-66 s0eceees 835 


Pictish Bag of Fiends ae 
Pie of Four-and-Twenty Blackbirds . 


Pilfering, Manual of Stealthy . . 
Pill, Desalination Tablet... . 
Pill of Hangover Relief. . . 


Pill of-Plentiful Water. . - 837 
PUR LTAT EE . 1049 
Pillow of Regeneration. . 838 
Pin of Communication . . . 228 
Pin of the Icy Sea, Iron. .- 619 
Pinching, Boot of . . . 196 
Pink Egg........ 
Pinwheel, Tvashtri’s ........... 6... 
Pipe 

Aromatic Smoking 

Bubble Smoking . . 

Charged Smoking... 


of Puckering, Smoking. .......... 1125 
Self-Lighting, Smoking .......... 1126 
of Smoke Rings, Smoking ........ 1126 
of Smoking, Smoking. ........... 1126 
GOK PE NTAN 1122 
of Snake Summoning, Smoking 1126 
of Animal Attraction... .......... 1554 
COMIN 5 cies kctcesccccassoeiee 1554 
DOES AI A N 1554 
GAB rans E 1554 
SE OCC Ree 1554 
CEPR NE IT EOI EEE 1555 
VR NOIES ATTO ES 1555 
MPG EI SNI ENTITE 1555 
an ME OOP TS T 1555 
Of Sounding. oo 00000 esesceesie’ 1555 
anaua ALIIE LT 1556 
TT A TLEN IA ETE 1556 
Piquantness, Dust of................ 415 
A e T O A TAT, 1304 
Pirate with Pegleg. ...... 0... 1304 
Pistol Alternate World Gate, Laser. .. . . 501 
PRG 0 kasd inks EET 1192 
Pitcher of Blending. .......-......++ 838 
Pitcher of Continuous Water ......... 838 
Pitchfork of Penetration ............. 843 
Pitan, Prise, osar sisina 914 
Pits, Cherry, Enchanted ............ 1089 


Artifacts, Trimia’s Catalogue 
deed EE E EA T 1460 
Beings, Arrow of Slaying ........... 97 
WR 0 scr css AOPE ELE, 491 
Monsters, Dart of Slaying. ......... 375 
Monsters, Weapon with Bonus vs. . . 1509 
Travel, Chalice of .......-.-.....+ 276 
Planars, Shell of Protection vs... ...... 439 
Plane 


Shifter Bridle ETTA ATT 224 
Planes 
AREER SA AL L cee 38 
D ITSE TT T 1215 
| TTA TENES 189 
Codex of the Infinite. ............. 659 
LION A TTT 664 
o L A EC 782 
Orrery of the inner .............. 800 
s AITTITTA ET 1387 
Planetary Locator................+.+ 671 
Planisphere, Celestial. .............. 270 
PN odd COTL OR I TEIA NE 838 
Plant 
Control, Potion Olis co acocooscssss 882 


Plants, Potion of Speak with. ......... 893 
Plants, Scroll of Protection from .... . 


Polymorphing 
ARON OE o s1555- 7:50:04 sven ESRR 93 
Mirynda’s Wand of .............. 1487 
Shield of Proof Against. .......... 1101 
WHEE OF. ocr snccvsnesesencvacss 1491 

Pomarj, Goblin Shield of the 

Pomarj, Ring of the 

Pool 
Dimensional ..........- 6.6 6s0055 
Golden ........... 
Portal, Mellenca’s 
Spelljamming Helm .............. 579 
OO TOR AET 847 


TTA TELLS UT 851 


Giren arrns neman na 857 
Clean EAn a AO E E 857 
T 857 
A a TEET 857 
of Cold Resistance ........-.....- 858 


GOAN TOET T 859 
of Cure Disease. eiria 859 
of Curing Lycanthropy ............ 859 
of Danger Detection. ............. 859 
Dark Draft of the Voodoo Masters. . . 859 
ON NNR EEEE I ETE 859 
AD riis t 860 
CDG I ET TT 860 
an ETIE TTT 860 
of Detect Unsafe Constructions . .. . . 895 
of Detect New Tunnels/Passages ... . 895 
of Detect Shifting Walls/Rooms.. . . . 895 
of Detect Stonework Traps/Pits ..... 895 
of Detect Grade or Slope .......... 895 


of Determine Direction of Travel . . . . 895 


of Avian/Mammal Control . . 

of Black Sight........... . 856 
of Blending. . . sa -856 
of Blindness . . . 856 


of Bouncing 
of Bubbles. . 


of Dragon Breath ...............- 862 
of Dragon Control, ..,......---+5+ 864 
of Dragon Sight .........-..---.5 865 
Dragon's Blood. ...............55 865 
og Tee 865 
of Dreamspeech ..........-.0055 865 
EDR: « .. 2. cee cccecces 865 
a con cnc A EET 853 
of Dwarf Control. ................ 872 
Cg, eee 865, 866 
of Elemental Control ............. 866 
of Elemental Form ..........-...+ 866 
RR ra PE E T aT" 872 
of Enlightenment ,........-.-.--. 866 
Lo ee ere eer re. 867 
of Ethereality .... 2250s cccvceeeee 867 
of Explosions ...........----++-- 867 
of Extra-Healing............-..-- 868 
of Fire Breath ...........+--+--+5 868 
of Fire Resistance ................ 868 
of Fire Vulnerability .............. 868 
of Fish Control .............06005 855 
CEFN TOITS ET 868 
a u. IAA O ET 868 
of Forewarning ...........----+++ 869 
of Forgetfulness ............-...- 869 
OPO ia si vivavcaeceveccceed 869 
A ARAT E A EIST 869 
PMN EICO T 
OPA IEI LET 
SI L L ATTEN 

of Frost Resistance 

OF Far Osnon 

of Gajin Control 

of Gaseous Form, . . 

of Genius......... 

of Ghast Control . . . 

of Ghost Control . 

of Ghostliness . . . 

of Ghoul Control. 

of Giant Control . . . 

of Giant Strength .. 

Glitz & Kiax’s... 

of Gluttony ..... 

of Gnoll Control 


of Gnome Control. ......-. 5.56555 872 
of Goblin Control ...............- 872 
of Golden Silence. ............-.5 871 
of Good Humor. .........6.6555-+ 871 
Gray Slumber ..............20-5 871 
of Greensprouting...............- 871 
OCG sc ITI TT 871 
of Half-Elf Control. .............. 872 
of Half-Orc Control .............. 872 
of Halfling Control. ............-. 872 
rf” BO reer yey ey 872 
of Hengeyokai Control............ 872 
CCH aici seine iaeie reer 872 
Horn of Phowly sis oisie/s es cnit 872 
of Housecat Control .............. 872 


of Intensity . . 
of Invisibility . 


of Mind Dampening .............. 879. 
of Mind Focusing ...............: 879 
of Mind Restoration .............. 879 
MEARS Ee Na vedenncetes 879 


of Mirrored Eyes. . . 


of Open Mind.<<.ccsscussccseseo880 


of Plant Control 
of Plant Growth 


of Poison Negation......... 
of Polymorph Self.......... 
MIE IED EA 


of Protection from Immiscibility , . . . 
of the Pseudo Treant 


of Regeneration. ........... 4 
of Rejuvenation, siso ission isi 
of Reptile/Amphibian/Fish Control , . 855 


of Safe Consumption ..... 
of Scent Neutralization... . 


of Shadow... ........4+- 


OF Sharp Lys s ce censinsvesiessevs 
GE SIDE e iieaeoe as 
SINES ssi siea eine as nieisjere 

SRO s s eo is annan 


of Sleep Bestowing...... - 
of Sleep Breathing ....... 
SIOPE ssia aa 
of Sleepy Breath......... 
of Snake Crawling ..... 
of Sobriety ........... 
of Soul-Chilling ......... 
of Speak with Animals . . . . “v/s 
of Speak with Dead....... 893 
of Speak with Monsters . . . 
of Speak with Plants... . we 
of Spectre Control. .......2+..000% 895 
GESIOOINT APE E a A T T 890 
IN io E E E eeNe 890 
of Speedcasting, Wallac’s.......... 896 
of Spelljamming..........-+++++ 890 
of Spirit Binding. .............+.- 890 
of Spirit Folk Control ............. 872 
of Spirit Flight... 60... 6.6. ccs eue 890 
Of Stone FORM PEORES R E T 891 
a AETS CN 891 
of Superhealing. ....-.....-6.5-55 891 
of Superheroism...............5- 891 
of Superior Animal Control R91 
of Superior Healing ...........54 891 
of Sustenance 
Sweet Water es a SS 


of Tongues. ......... 
of Toughening....... 
of Tragic Heroism... assas 
of Treasure Finding 
of Truth 


of Ugliness ......... 

of the Undead 

of Undead Control 

of Underground Awareness. 

of Useful Appendages 

of Vampire Control 

of Vampirism. ... .. 

of Venom....... 

of Ventriloquism ...,............- 

OL VIRIONS EEEE OOE 896 
OB VIE ASALE ET ETOT 896 
of Warrior Power... ........0++++ 882 
of Water Adventuring ............. 897 
of Water Breathing ..............- 897 
of Water Movement .........-..-- 897 
of Wight Control... ............. 895 
of Wizard Power ............0.006 882 
OC WIRE kiwi ecacsa semen 897 
of Worm Calling, siise cisien 897 
of Wraith Control ..,.. asees 895 
of Zombie Control ..............- 895 
Zak's of Invulnerability............ 898 
Zombie Blood: sssini 898 
Zombie Broth ........ n.s sssaes 898 


Padriac’s Portable Purveyor of ...... 802 
Pouch 


of Wonders, Zadron’s 

Zagyg's Spell Component. ......... 147 
Pouches, Girdle of Many ............ 535 
Pouring, Waterskin of. 
Poverty, Barrel of .... 
Powder 


African Ju Ju. . 
Allspice...... 
PERO vines 


Cleo May 
of Coagulation 
of Comeliness . . 
Commanding .. 


Concentration . . 


Controlling 


DEBS EOE E T A, 902 
E n TO ENESE EEN 902 
DOI COES s «0:00:00: Ent E 902 
Dragon's Blood... ...........00008 902 
NNT irate nasi siosen atineem ante 902 
Dypshez’s, of the Black Veil. ....... 902 
of Edible Objects, Puchezma'’s...... 907 
BES tye cesoxeshawesvesyen tne 902 
Enchantment. .........-0+s000ees 902 
Bacaly pais EELT 903 
EWG EES TT O ace 903 
Bil Bye ROSY O 903 
Excisament OT T S TTO, 903 
nn ATOAN PEESI SAVETE 903 
Five Finger Grass ......-...6.055 903 
Frangi Pn isis N 903 
e a ETETE ISTAT EN 903 
Cida aaun nn Se 903 
Getaways ATES ASALET 903 
OF Good Tanl ieren 903 
DG 5 i855 8's ark TRIS 903 
of the Hero's Heart ........... 903, 907 
High Conquering ............0045 904 
High John the Conqueror's......... 904 


Ni MYSEY sie vine six cipineese ses 906 


Olibanum 


Puchezma's of Edible Objects. .... .. 907 
Purwuvok'’s of the Hero Heart ...... 907 


A A N A: 911 


Of Distraction ......csseccssecese 912 

END onc cde des na nicnsstt 912 

SIGIR vnc Soe ae N 912 

of Light Splitting ................ 913 
Prismal’s Enchanted Gear. ...... . 913-915 
Prismal’s Holy Symbols ............. 597 
Prison 

Castellans Magical............... 915 

GE EEE AE A ETE 917 


from Ixitxachit! and Lacedons, 

a a TE 827 
from Lycanthropes, Scroll of . . . . . . 1079 
from Magical Traps, Scroll of . . . . . 1080 
Mark's Scarab of E T 1058 
OL TERT POT Oe os 704 
FOG WE inn ctr TATA 751 
Onyx Ring of Negative Plane ...... 984 
Periapt of Prophecy ,........--.++ 827 


a Aa INI AN E 851 
Potion of Missile ................ 880 
l nso lacntcduscerccettawses 136 
BONG OF OPEET EEEE 988 
RONG LENIEN ced N! 1014 
SaD oss oi oncts ccsctcwcses 1058 
Scroll BMC «<5 occ cece ccvcee 1068 
from Sharks, Shell of.............. 42 
GN OE. TOT O. 439 
Shield of Dragon ............... 1094 
from Sleep, Amulet of ...........-. 40 
from Spirits, Charm of............ 283 
Standard Shell of ., ....-.....5005 439 
from Stone Guardians, Ring of . . . . . 988 
from The Elements, Ring of ....... 988 
from Theft, Charm of, ..-........- 283 
from Turning, Amulet of ........... 4l 

from Undead, Ring of ............ 988 
from Undead, Scroll of .......... 1081 

e TTA 1467 
R C EEFE T O 439 
from Water, Scroll of ............ 1081 

Zither of Zombie . ...-........-- 1334 

Protections, Spelibook of Cabalistic .. 1155 
Protector, Thurbrand’s ............. 1105 


Interaction, Tome of. . . . . 
Interference, Amulet ôf . . 


Psychic oo 
Psychometron of Nerad ...........++ 


i E ATLEET “1125 


Purveyor of Potions, Padriac’s Portable . 802 
Purwuvok's Powder of the Hero's Heart. 907 
Putrification, Samzinna’s Globe of .. . . 539 


i a 


E YESTE IINE TENET 
Q R Rathanos............ 
Rathdaen, Spellbook of . . 
Qanun Ba; Chathet of PENE A NT 280 Rations, Epox’s Iron . . 
of Charming ...........00ee0ees 1332 REWARDS 03 ais eaisiee na veaaesdsi eh eee 48 Ratri’s Sword 
CP NGO 5 NE A T 1332 Rababah of the Dao ............... 1333 Rattle 
OPO ITOTA TT 1332 Rabbit Figuring, Moonstone. ......... 476 OP Dhin 822 
OE TR DORE LISTI IETT TE, 1332 Rabbit's Foot............-..-.. 283, 930 of Exorcism. ....... - 822 
Quaal's Feather Token... ... . 180, 466, 469 RITE LESE TT. 367 of Shaking and Rolling. - 823 
Quaal’s Spellbook.... 2... 6.056.505 1244 Racial Enhancements, ............... 24 of Summoning . - 823 
Quality (AQ) Lens, Red Air......... 1067 Racial Weapon... ss oieee siise sinais 1523 ofYouth....... - 823 
Quarrel of Biting ...... 06.666 cceeees 95 RAR NIORT 6.0 4 iaaa o aE 1334 Raven, Icon of the......... «609 
Quarry, Marble of... ossessi 696 Radiance Command, Ring of ......... 989 Ravenkind, Holy Symbol of.......... 598 
Quarter Decks. srein 381 Radiance, Orb of e noioa 797 Ravenloft { 
Quartermaster’s Chest .............. 288 Radiant Golem Libram. ............. 662 Golem Book ? 
Quarterstaff Radiant Spelljamming Helm ......... 579 Golems, Libram of 
E A L O 1281 Rag of Drying. EEE ET TT 931 ROCCE TELTET ECN 
Rua Tas E E T 1283 Ravenmaster’s Spellbook, 
LET CT NRTA 1284 WERE OR L E EEE PONES 81 Aubserus the... .....ese0vceres 
WORE LLES TETTE 1285 S, DOPE E OEE EPS 886 Ravenous, Tree of the... 
mA ETETETT TITIS 1288 SWE T EO 1405 Ray, Cloak of the Manta. ...........- } 
Quasielemental Command, Ring of . . . . 989 Rah, Girdle of De... 60s. ecececeeen 532 Razor 
Queen CaM E T 285, 286 Rahasia, Talisman of. .............. 1425 BAO E EE E 932 
Queen Ehlissa’s Marvelous Nightingale, 923 AT Mn Al s RR gll Black, Sword. ... 1346 
QP BUG tars saen end 458 Rahni, Scroll of Ha... ... 06.66.0065 1074 Claws of Chakyik . 507 
Quenching, Smoke of Fire .......... 1121 Raiden’s Mace ,........-000seeeees 678 of Close Shaving. .. 933 
QUS iol. siasio 611 Rainbow of Truth.......... . -933 
C E E 1327 Sn POE OTS ore CRO 81 { 
Questioning, Scroll of ............. 1081 CAA Bittle. csi. cacd vadoensics 445 | 
Quick Action, Ring of .............. 990 Hues, Potion of ........--.+.s0s05 886 i 
Quickness Scarf of Sinbad... .......... 931, 1059 
DOGG ces n cas coesisernewsars 366 a PR Te S 1116 
of Action, Tome of. ..... 6.6.5.5. 1444 Raincoat, Old Salty with ........... 1304 
Ring of ...... APITO 990 Raindrop Charm of Resource. ....,... 283 
SWOM Of DESETI E 1388 Raistlin’s Cursed Money,............ 324 i 
Quiet, Qanum of. >is cece eens 1332 Raistlin’s Spellbook ............... 1215 Lens of Speed 
Quill Raji’s Armor of the Desert Evening... . 81 
n T APEAREN AT 924 Raji Shield of the Holy............ 1102 
CUBR. 6 occ rcéenscanvas beads 924 ROAMA TR ci sccessdecsicsboceye 931 
SPONGY s cccncdencssicccueuae 924 Rake 
| nn PEROT OPN TTS PCT 925 BOWMNING, PAETI ET «++ 932 
LEW EEEIEE OT 926, 928 E ATOTO O OS 932 | 
of Longwriting. ... 2.06... 66 6.006 927 CERO PETAT OT 932 
of Necromancy sesana a ain 927 a EONI PE AE EN 932 
PORCINE i a a aa 927 of Smoothing .......6... 66600055 932 
of Pyrophilius 22.0.0 .6 06066 e eee 927 OE TIMOMING RET EEE TE 932 
Of Seribbling MERERI T 927 Rakers, Wings of the ...........000. 311 
of Scroll Creation. ........666 5606 927 Raket, Stall ofiser sesido 1291 
of Swift Writing. scssi osas sones 928 Raking, Claws of ...........0.00005 $42 i 
of Transcription ... s.. ssssssseses 928 Rakshasa Cloak scuis iioii sisas 302 
DOT BEIE SEI TTE 928 Ran Fiiss sissit 489 
Vs i caaan 928 Ram 
Wondrous Writing Set ............ 928 BOING AYEYE TEALA 162 
Quinarost, Key Ofo saisis saaiiosos 629 Bigby’s Demanding Battering. ...... 162 agic 
Quirks PIG OE GE EET ANT 991 SG A PEON AT 1243 I 
Spelljamming . ss esee 1268 Shocking Grasp... essscs rri os: 1243 | 
Ramming, Bench of ........6..50006 171 Witte A TATANTA TENET 1242 l 
Ramming, Log of .............60005 673 Recognition, Chaplet of Creature. .. . . . 277 
Random Target Dagger.............. 367 Reconnaissance, Kite of............- 633 
Randomness, Ring of............... 992 Recorder of Recording............- 1556 
Range Recorder, Ye'Cind’s ..........-.4-- 1556 
Arrow of Extended. .............., Recording 
Extension, Ring of . . LAN OF ss oan cu. SAEN 668 
Scroll Spell Level... 0.020008 t a sv 0c views evse cade neae ve 1556 
Rangers, Arrow of Slaying OEP PERRET 1291 
ATI ROA 0195910; 93010:910.9:4¥ NA Recovery, Ointment of .,..........65 781 
RAMEE DONE or ceeeceueaunarensens Recovery, Scroll of... sessio 1082 
Rapid Regeneration, Ring of ......... 992 Red 
Rapier, Pirate Mate with, Air Quality (AQ) Lens ........... 1067 
a TL ARE ON 929 Statue of Power. ....-.-.. 2-065 1304 A a 5:s:es10cip-vesieewesiesiaikgngses 95 
Da A r A Aes ee 929 Rapture, Mistof................... 736 Pitt NO, E ce ndes MW | 
PS MAIO U TT 929 RIO NONE 65.050 esse EA 1527 BOOK GE WEE. vccvcccvceveceeces 1218 
ONE BID: 5 ar a a A 929 Rare Cryptographs, Idioms & ....... 1181 Chain Mail, Ilneval’s............... 77 
a 3.955 505059 1S CESS, 929 EYS Spam. ... .4.0205.00050:04: 1140 AUER OF AGN on csc cdiesinaiee dey 280 
of Wrong Returning. ............. 929 Raspberries, Pie of... ...........005 835 Cherry Pits, Enchanted........... 1089 
Rastinon, Rod of...........0-0s005 1036 DER, FANG, raean 1388 
Rat BAG ATTE EE T T T 1349 CR COUR nanea 300 


= 1642 T 


be o OO mmmlm yÜ 


Red 
Dragon Scale Mail ................ 81 
Dragon Slayer, Sword. ........... 1357 
Mirror 
Pearl 


Reduction, Elixir of 
Reeking, Cape of .......... ite 
Raf iaat 
Refilling 
Arrow of... . 
Dart of. ..... 


Reflections, Inexplicable .,......... 
Reflector, Continual Light . . . ve 
Refreshment, Bottle of ............-.. 
Refreshment Simulacrum, Ardraken’s . . . 62 
Regalia of Might............... 933, 938 
Regeneration 
t Te AO ANTATTE ETNOS 353 
Pillow of.. 
Potion of.. 
AnS Ae PRET ON 


Vampiric, Sword... 2... 0.6.60. 08 
Regenerators, Scourge of . . 
Reglar’s Gloves of Freedom 
Reglar's Gloves of Freedom 

from Magic i naaa 544 

Reincarnation, Malice’s Rod of ...... 1031 
Rejuvenation, Potion of ....... -887 
Rel Astran Sword of Enmity ........ 1388 
Relaxing, Chairof sssaaa 274 
Relief, Pill of Hangover ............. 837 
Reloading, Hasp of... ..........0.05 569 
Remedies, Ring of .............0005 994 
Remote 

Action, Hand of .........0..e0005 505 

Action, Oboissa n 798 

Candle Snuffer sosise 247 

Viewing, Lens of...........5. ve 655 
Removal, Ointment of Scar .......... 781 
Removal, Salve of Scar ..... see. 1052 
Remove Curse Armor.........6.0s055 82 
Remove Curse, Shield of 1103 


Removing, Oil/Powder of Jinx . . . . 772, 905 


Ren’s Sword of Dancing............ 1388 
Rending, Fingernail of .............. 481 
Renown, Banner of.......--6..-0005 157 
Repair, Needle Of... sc0eessienies 754 
Repellence, Oil of Bug... ........565 765 
Repellency, Amulet of Insect.......... 35 
Repercussions of Pyromancy, 

Subconscious soie esae 1244 
Repertoire of Illustrious Conjurations . , . 1220 
Repertoire of Subconscious 

D ETIR P ART 1220 
Repetition 

Nidus’ Wand of Endless .,,....... 148 
RODE n ARRAPA E AS ET S EE 1014 
BODE e oi e esaa +++ 1082 
Repetitive Burning, Log of. +s... 673 
Replacement, Oil of Hair............ 770 
RODHGE Hoi. coasts cee seme alanis 1341 
Representations of the Sentient Plane .. , 1220 
Renta Wel ions eases bic sive 1103 


Reptile 
/Amphibian Control, Potion of... .. 855 
/Amphibian/Fish Control, Potion of. . 855 
Bane EE TAA AS ETT, 843 


Reptiles 
& Dinosaurs, Weapon Bonus vs. ... 1509 
Arrow of Slaying ..........2...055 
Weapon with Bonus vs. ..... 
Reptilian Legionnaire Sword . . . 
Reptilla’s Curdled Death ...... 
Reptilla’s Staff of the Serpent. . . 
Repulsion Dust, Small Bird ,. . . P 
Repulsion, Oil of Monster ........... 
Reputed Magical Properties of Gems . . 514 
Rerebrace of Valor... ......-6s0s0s05 64 
Rescue, Fishing Pole of ............. 483 
Resistance, General 
Amulet of Charm ..........6s.0005 29 
Amulet of Magic a 
ADOL OPKO: s.o eaten a E 
to Breath Weapons, Ring of ........ 
Cube of Frost ...........65 ne 
Dwarves & Halflings, Arcane. ... . 
Bhixir SONNE, ...»,0.0ihsjeishh A E 
Glass Bead of Fire 
Ngona Horn of Fire. 
Oil of Acid 
Sash of Fire 
Resistance, Potions 
GEO A ETES, A 


OMAE raS 


[ot AEE AAN T TOLTO 

of Lighting . . BS 

DE Mago e erain aola 
Resonance of the Great Void, Echo & ... 1165 
Resource, Charm of ..........0.0.005 
Resource Dagger .......... 
Respite, Sweet Tooth of ..... 
Response, Bead of ......... 
Rest, Potion of ...........5 
Restful Sleep, Carving of... . i 
Restlessness, Cot of i anona nos 
Restoration 


Restoring Freshness, Cauldron of ..... 269 


Restraint, Band of Bird,,............ 152 
Restraint, Loyal Net of. ...........65 757 
Restudying, Desk of. ...........0.005 405 
Resurrection, Rod of .........66.66 1037 
Resuscitation, Potion of ............. 887 
Retaliation, Gem of ..... 660.00 sees 527 
Retaliator, Sword .......... i 1389 
Retention, Malto'’s Mirror of ......... 729 
Retention, Mirror of.....4 6.6600 eeo 733 
Retina, Mental Impressions of the... . 1196 
Retorter, Sword... ......+ 1341, 1367-1368 
Retrieval, Chair af... s. s sessies neiss 274 
Retrieval, Drawer of Easy..........4. 413 
Retrieval; Rake OE. seirer etate 932 
Return, Scroll of, .....,....0+5 vee 1083 
Returning 


FS) a See Tea OSC EO RIPEN 
Throwing Dagger of 
Throwing Stars of 
Weapon of...,..... 
Reunion, Heel of ..... 
Reunion, Key of ,,.... 
Revealing Dust of..... 
Revealing, Wand of 
Revenant Coffin of Creation ......... 317 
Revenger Sword, Holy , 
Reversal, Mirror of. .........+000005 
Reverse Ventriloquism, Potion of...... 887 
Reversibility, Oil/Powder of...... 776, 909 
Reversion, Ring of ...........4. 994, 995 
Revivication Elixir... ..... 2. +. 445 
Reviving Bugle. ..........00ceenees 1538 
Revolving Door -sss e aies 412 
Rheddrian, Mirror-Shield of. ........ 1100 
Rheddrian’s Staff ..... 0.06664 ce eee 1291 
Rhialle’s Scroll 1083 
Rhingalade’s Harp ..........050066 1327 
RUA BIE es:tas teon 0na 835 
Rhun’s Horned Cloak... naassen 308 
Rhyming, Ring Ee AR S, 994 
Rialissom’s Spellbook ,,,....,..... 1220 
Rice Mortar and Pestle, 
Everproducing........+.+:005 741 
Richard the Monk's 
Spellbook, Brother ............ 1154 
BGK Gone ss es renas tonnes oleae 822 
Rider of the Gearnat Sea, Storm ...... 181 
Rider’s Pearl, Storm |... soea 6.64. 807 
Riding, Saddle of Secure ,.......... 1049 
Riding Tack of Flight, Ginzani’s.. ... . . 530 
Rit Spanier si. etei AAE 
Riggby's Spellbook................ 
Right Arm, Truth’s poieni ena 


Right Eye, Mellifleur’s . 
Right Hand, Tomorast’s 


Righteousness, Phylactery of......... 831 
Rilantaver’s Staff ..........2.2.4.. 1291 
Ring 
OFAMMCtions: simi iss ate 947 
of Al-Kalim, Gold Seal... ......... 967 
Alarm Beacon Spelljamming Helm . . 574 
OLA MASE iis aks e aN 947 
of Animal Control. .........000005 947 
of Animal Friendship ..,...... 947, 998 
Animal Magnetism, ...........54. 948 
Annulment .,..... 
Anything...... 
of Apathy ..... 
of Appearance 
of Aquatic Depth Location...,..... 948 
of Arachnid Control .......4..55. 949 
of Armoring, Nuggin’s Cursed ...... 983 
OP ASMOFNG: sose seisoi 949 
of Ash Command ........5.5000 65 989 
of Avian Control oss eee ceee 949 
Awareness 
Bard’s ...... 
of Beauty, 
Berronar Truesilver's Silver 
of Berserk Strength. ...........65 1006 
a SORR 
a AEEA TE COAT meee 
BIRDE «39 c-o:0, ene o EORR 
of Boccob ... 
EON E P RE RE 3: 950 
Browdrow, of Utmost 
An oan OEE 950 
BUD PE A etait na RIES 951 
of Bureaucratic Wizardry ...,.. 952, 995 
ONCEDE >. 26's vine vied SNOT 952 
CE Berdas rigen na aAA 952 
of Chameleon Power. .,. ass seresa 952 
Cilidarius’s of Wizardry ........... 952 


= 1643 = 


of Compulsions, Wizzo'’s ......... 


of Continual Churning ...........- 954 
of Contrariness POLLITT EATI 955 
COORG ONI AOE TTT 955 
Corkitron’s of Human Influence. . . . . 955 
of Courtly Etiquette .............. 955 
COOGR EEE TETT 955 
Cursed Animal Magnetism. .. . .. . . . 948 
Cursed of the Great Kingdom. . .. .. . 956 
COMM A T OER 956 
Dalamar’ of Healing ............. 956 
AES ALTTA PT. 957 
a p05 ca T EE EERE 957 
of Depetrification s.s.s eseese rose 957 
BEL E R A 964 
ae DEE T AT 957 
Of Distraction... .seresececccese 957 
of Distraction, Cursed. ...........- 957 
De RTO E nE ES 957 
of Djinni Summoning. . . . . 958, 967, 2 
DED o e 0000 sio 00 r0 606 osoan 
TOW OPEO TOTE OPE OTETO PE on 
GEOR. PA 959 
OPN AEO 959 
PI TEE E E E R 959 
of Elemental Adaptation. .......... 959 
of Elemental Command ........... 960 
of Elemental Metamorphosis . . .. . . . 961 
of Emotion, Moodarvian .......... 979 
CPB ois ccastvses calccene’ 962 
OSPR iiisccrececvowsweceventens 962 
CEPRMIG .. wr A T S OST A 962 
FONE ANIE O OTE ON 962 
a a TETOR IE TE 963 
of Fearleseness AIN TII ANN 963 
of Feather Falling ....... 953, 963, 1005 
of Fire Resistance... ............. 963 
of Fire Starting .............2.... 964 
of Fire, White Copper. ........... 1007 
Di Sear tere rere a Serr 964 
Of Fire, Flynn’ . i .......200020008 964 
CGO iiss 964 
Of Fortitude. EETAS I T ST 964 
of Free Action. .............. 953, 964 
OR MOR iias a 965 
A Gm iai a 965 
CEG AET 965 
POM: a egexcesar 966 
of Genie Summoning ........-..-- 967 
T E E E OTT 967 
Gold Seal, of Al-Kalim. ........... 967 
Golden, of Healing. .............. 967 
Gordon's Magic .............-.5- 967 
of the Grasshopper ..............- 967 
Halaster’s Teleportation. ........... 968 
of Harmilessness ............--.-- 968 
CPI aiiins vie sakiceccwarcuaus® 969 
of the Hierophant ...............- 969 
Hoinbee's, of Truth ............... 969 
CIN LEATA 969 
of the Holy Slayer...............+ 970 
APP OET yp MATS 970 
of Human Control, .............-. 970. 
of Human Influence .......... 954, 970 
of Hunan Influence............... 970 
En PN esos ose EER 970 
WENN R vi kis Wawsicives 971 
OND AE A TOEP, 971 


e ATI TTE 
of Lighting Resistance 
of Limited Telepathy... ........... 
of Liquid Identification 


Noora's, of Djinn Summoning .. .. . . 
Nuggin's Cursed, of Armoring ...... 984 
OP OM anc EATA nara E TON. 983 


of Ooze Command ............... ` 985 


Charming 
of Protection from The Elements . . . . 988 


of Protection from Undead......... 988 
Oyros’s, of Spell Storing. .......... 988 
of Quasielemental Command... .. . . 989 
of Quick Action .........-...065- 990 
On RR are 990 


Ring 

OE WIRED, ons so srana 952, 1007 

Wizzo's, of Compulsion .......... 1007 

of X-Ray Vision ........ - +. 1008 
Ringing, Bellof............ +++ 816 
Rings of Mhzentul, Seven Lost ....... 664 
Rings, Smoking Pipe of Smoke ...... 1126 
Rigg of the Efreet........... 823 
Rising Tide, Pearl of the... . . 807 
Road, Jo's Liquid ......... 772 
Road, Liquid............. -...670 
Roaring, Bellows of ................ 167 
Robe 

Agitator iiss 

of the Archmagi 

of Blending 

Dibrinhka wii sarren 

of Drying 

A ALASTE EN 

Ghastrobe 

of Holding 


of Immediate Access, H'Veyk’s .... 1011 
of Magical Enhancement, Sulmish. . 1016 


of Powerlessness 1014 
of Protection........... -». 1014 
of Repetition........... .. 1014 
BOCK ARE ISS ... 1015 
of Scintillating Color .... -». LOIS 
Of Serration, . o6:0:6665 60% -»» 1016 
A t AOP E «.. 1016 
of Stars, Mellifleur’s ++» 1013 
Ean. DA EAE -» 1016 
Tvashtri’s Golden 1017 
Of Useful Items. asesina nosne 1017 
of Useless Items ........ -» 1017 
of Vanishing ........... -.. 1018 
DEVON sarea «+. 1018 
EMORY oasis eisein sa «+ 1018 
GEE it reri ... 1018 
WAE seisoa ser e+» 1018 
pie E OENE EE -» 1018 
Robin Goodfellow’s Wand .......... 1492 
RO RO scsrviness Saen nel 1388 
Rocckoe's Ring of 
Bureaucratic Wizardry ..........++ 995 
Rock (See also: Stone) 


Statue, Talisman of the . . . 
Rockinghorse, Flying. .... . we 
E n E E a V E 
Rod 

OLABE. siea 

of the Aerdi Sea 


Asmodeus’s Ruby ...........++++ 1022 
of Beguiling..:........00+re0ees 1023 
of Beguiling, Moto Moto à 742 
BBM re MERIT A ETA 

of Blind Walking k 
T DOAA O 
of Cancellation seoses 
of Climbing. ...........64 
of Concealment, Moto Moto 
of Dancing, Multiple. 
OF Death irese osa 


of Divining ............ 
of Dominion ........... 


Of Equestrians........6 6s eresasvees 1027 
of Engineering, Excellent......... 1027 
of Expeditious Transport ......... 1027 
Extendable Hand of Enjoyment. , . . 1028 
N asa e sven tr siapccetehevecavery mui 1028 
of Furyondy, Diplomacy.......... 1025 
AE T T APAE A bony 1028 
of Glyph Creation, .............5 1028 


of Health........ 
of Indestructibility . . 


of Leadership .... 
Lightning 
of Lordly Might . . 
of Many Things. . . 
of Melting 
Monadic Deva. .. . 


Segojan Earthcaller’s ............ 1037 

of Seven Parts ; 

of Singing....... 

of Smiting..... 

OF Splendor. esos screens sosis 

of Strength, Moto Moto ........... 742 

of Teeth 

of Terror 

Three-Piece 

of Thundering Compliance, 

Moto Moto 

of Transportation, Whisper's 

OE E a DRET POTEET T 

of Weaponry ..... 

of Welkwood..... 

EE TIN ARARE A T 
Rogue 

Bolder’s Cloak of the ...........55 298 

OE ENa ents 381 

aa Alane Ao ORE 882 

Wisdom, Potion of .........0...45 887 
RODES R eea Sareroiscieisnn espera 631 
Rohalan, SWE vs s eera saen coios 1292 
Roland's Sword. . s., osae 1358 
Roller Hoopers, Hoop of the ......... 599 
Roller Hoopers, Skates of the........ 1116 
Rolling 

An AATE OET COEN 160 

Log of _. 673 

Rattle of Shaking and............. 823 
Romance, Oil of 
ROOK IATE TT 
Rooms, Tapestry of. ...........0005 1428 
Rooms, Weapon of Detect 

Shifting Walls and............. 1511 

Root, Tanglevine: i s sossen 1427 


Rooting Potion of Greensprouting . .. . . 871 
Rope 


of Climbing 

of Constriction .. . 

of Entanglement........... 1043, 1044 

PAGING Gasaisass aida ewes 1044 

Sails’ Boy with, Statue of Power. .. . 1304 
Roping, Arrow Of ...... 0.6.0 sin evens 96 


Rose of Eternal Slumber ........... 1045 
Rose of Ravenloft....... . 1045 
Rosemary Oil/Powder . 776, 909 
Rosy Vision, Button of. +. 232 
Rot, Elixir of Healing... ............ 442 
BOON BRD. an 438 
Rotting, Periapt of Foul . 825 
Rowing, Oar of.,..... .. 761 
Royal Flail, Osiris’s . . 488 
Royal Heart... ccseveseseess ET 574 
Ruby 
BOW e e ee dans poten amarante 205 
of Neverwinter . . . - 523 
Rod, Asmodeus'’s. . . 1022 
Slippers........ - 1121 
SWORE MESAPI T E 1342 
Turquoise and Emerald Mobile ... . . 737 
a e ATOPEN EUSLAN 348 
Rudder 
aana PEE EEEN S, 
of Maneuverability . . 
of Propulsion, 
of Speed ...... 
Rudra’s Bow... . ; 
Rudra's Box of Cloning 
Rue Oil/Powder 
Rug 
Of Mothering... onesna anes 257 
of Smothering.......... PEE a A 


Ruin Card......... . 381 
Rulership, Crown of. 336 
Rulership, Rod of ..... 1037 
Ruling Staff, Pharaoh's. 1288 
Rune Wand, Odin's... . 


Sling BIBIE. ...0.06:s00e-c0can eee 
BRD TONG. 4-0, 0:9:9-5:0.5-959,0 T. 1048 
S 
ee ee Se 
S'tin, Death Rock of the Darad ,..... 1020 
Sabirine’s Specular... ..,. 665.5556 1222 
Sabre, Red .... ive g . 138R 
Sacred Bundle Talisman. ........... 1425 
Sacred Grove, Horn of the .......... 1546 
Saddle 
of Comforts, Torloch’s ..........+ 1050 
Of Flying. PAE . 1049 
|< eS Cao ee .. 631 
of Secure Riding. ....... . 1049 
of the Spirit Horse. ...... +. 1049 
of Stability ...........4 «1050 
of Taming ..........+ «+ 1050 
Saddlebags, Nithian....... . 136 
Safe Consumption, Potion of eee B87 
Safe, Extradimensional...........+4. 449 


de OC Ear ee ee 995 
Saga of the Great Conjurers, Epic . .. . 1165 
Sagacity, Helmet of Subterranean .... . 593 
SAI CINE, 6 soe nanon sacra’ 303 
Sahuagin Dolphin. .........-----+++ 368 
Sail 


Sailing, Tub of 


Salts Command, Ring of. . 
Salty with Raincoat, Old ... ‘ 
Salutation, Armband of .............. 66 


Golem Libram. .......+.00ese0005 
Magic Wizard Scroll, 


Santarian Keltander’s Sword ....... . 1339 
Sapphire 

BON, essorer syss 

Dragon Slayer, Sword 

of Neverwinter o opstao o songes sody 
Sarelk’s Spellbook .......-.--...4+ 
Sargasso Detector..........--..-.+. 
Sarnge BOW... secs cesseeescscncs 
Sash 

of Fire Resistance... ..........44 1053 

of Heat Endurance .............. 1053 

of Immolation,... 66.6666 e seca 1053 

GRIRGROTAS ERITI ETT 1053 
Sashelas’s Sword, Deep ............ 1356 
Satchel, S008 icvisieesccescccsndiviccs 137 
Satchel, Ska Y: TETT eseccesee'cee 138 
Sathallarin’s Wand of Wonder .... . . . 1493 
Saurian Ring... 0 0.ssesseceevecess 996 
Sauvagine, Sword. ............+.45 1389 
Saver, Life, Sword .....0.0.0.0s005 1380 
Saving, Mirror of Life ............4. 729 
Savitri's Sword .... ssassn ss 1389 
Severe; Staff OF ET 1292 
Saw 

ONIN oo xs O ATE 1054 


of Mighty Cutting. .............. 1054 

SMO: EATE POTT 1054 

OE GRRE Sa 844 
Den VICI 4 6a dives eseedp ewes 1334 
pee 1054 
Scabbard of Holding............... 1054 
Scabbard of Poison..............++ 1055 
Scaladar, Throbriand’s (Trobriand’s) 

Master Ring of the ............ 1004 
Scalamagdrion .............. 1225, 1226 
Scale 

Balance, of Conversion. ........... 147 
Balance, of Harmony ............. 147 
Balance, of Judgment. ............ 147 
Cleaver, Sword ieee ssie siioni 1389 
Mail, Red Dragon... s.s. sesei 81 
DE OF TUE oeaiei iias 82 
ia aa KOTIA I IEEE 148 
Shield, Dragon .6.500.0<.0s0050. 1095 
A a oo. cc ccsvcaceseceies 1055 
Scalebane, Sword... .........6..465 1390 
Scaled, Orb of the. .... 6.0.6.6 cece 794 
Scalekind, Shell of Protection vs....... 439 
Scales of Justice, Sword. ........... 1389 
Scaly Command, Bracelet of ......... 219 
Scant Wand of Storms ............. 1493 


of Protection ‘1058 
of Uncertain Friendship, Benson's . . 1055 


of Chaotic Neutral , . 937 
of Chaotic Evil... . . 937 
of Chaotic Good .......-- 6. eee see 937 
of Defending, Jade . 1062, 1063 
DOIG IATE 1060 
of Entrapment. .......--. 2.06064 1062 
Pi a re IO IS 944 
of the Forgotten City. .......546 1062 
OR OOG I AE AS ELI 941 
of Lawful Neutral... .......6.60005 934 
E BV. cc eosicssicatice oth 


of Neutral Good . 2.0... 66666 eae 935 
of Neutral EVil sinar ae 935 
an MEPL TET 935 
OEN ca a ainia 942 
P riaa En 1064 
GEPON sassa naan ys S 1064 
N EEEE ASE 1066 


of the Sorcerer-King............. 1064 
GENO cs sien aea N 1066 
SONA as bic cine SEEE SE E 1390 
i EEESTIS 40 
Schnai, Black Sail of .............. 1051 
School Cap, Cursed ...-.....-5-0555 251 
Schiool Gap isvvivrss disettevtaevons 250 
Science of Metaenchantment ....... . 1227 
Scimitar 
Aziza’s, of Dancing. ............. 1342 
BAMBOO. ce iccccccccmsescctses 1343 
Flying, of Tusmit................ 1369 
at HOTEL eet 1396 
OF Smad sivas ices save sent 1390 
Scintillating Colors, Jellaba of,...... 1013 
Scintillating Colors, Robe of ........ 1015 
Scope of Celestial Analysis ......... 1067 
Scope of Seeing .......---..-.s555 1067 
Scorbane, Sword. ......-- 2.600500 1390 
SOM W iincwccacecssaaaseas 1520 
Scorpion 
Scorpion Crown .. 6.625650 se cee ees 337 
Scorpion Ward Statue... 6.6.6.6. 006 1304 
Scourge of Regenerators, Sword .... . 1391 
Scowling, Mask of ....-.....6.60005 704 
Screaming, Arrow of ..........6.6565 96 
Screaming, Dart of ...... 2.66. 00005 374 
Scribbling, Quill of... -naase 927 
SWE OUE vin oicneccnsscusescees 777 
Scribing, Stylus of aoaaa 1335 
Scrivening, Staff of... 0. aaao 1292 
Scroll 
of Amber, Cursed ..... 6.5 5500055 1072 
of Animal Growth, .........-..++ 1070 
BANE onc veverscsckisvisees 1070 
of Communication .............. 1071 
Cromtion; Quill... 5 ssasecevexes 927 
RO e oo veciesesesacon genes 1071 
CEG criiesassexydaxer vena 1071 
GSE aroaren 1071, 1072 
of the Death Servant............. 1072 
ATI O S 1073 
Domination. ......----+.ssseee+ 1073 
i er 1073 
Effects, Casting. ......-..-+.2e00s 1068 
Effects, Protection. .....:.....00¢ 1068 
OF BA a 6.55 <5 cin sine secs gae 1073 
CGIAR CERERE OET, 1073 
of Five Priest Spells ........ 1073, 1074 
of Five Wizard Spells ............ 1074 
Flame Magic Wizard ............ 1086 
of Flame Magic. ........-..--++++ 1074 
of Four Illusionist Spells. ......... 1074 
Sa EOIS 1074 
of Ha Rahti ses ssisecesesooo en? 1074 
Holding, Case ......cssccscsceens 261 
of Illumination s... osos essas 1075 
of Mapping ..........--+ssse0es 1075 
of Mixed Spheres, Priest.......... 1076 
of Mixed Priest Spheres Spelis... . 1075 
Mondasso's Automated Spell... . . . 1075 
TOT EAS . 1075 
of Portals...... . . 1076 
Of Priest Spells . sises 60000000. 1076 
Scroll of Protection from 


Scroll of Protection from Seal 
COMA. i 5.55 655,054 cayeeres=as 1078 Of Deception .... 0.5 -sceeeccevess 1086 
a APETO OTE E T T 1078 of Jafar Al-Samal . .. . . 1087 
TRGIONS 5: 299.693 03.5008 vehe0209 1078 Ring of Al-Kalim, Gold . -967 
Lycanthropes, ........--.-+++-+- 1079 of Vigor. ........-+55 .. 1088 
a ATLEET 1079 Sealing Wax ......... 1506 
Magical Weapons ............... 1079 Seals, Book of Twelve ... +. 192 Dart of. ........ 
RTA as A TE EO A 1078 Seals, Libram of Twelve. . - 669 Slitig Of POTATO TOS 
Nonmagical Weapons. ........... 1079 Seamanship, Earring of . . . . 428 Segojan Earthcaller's Rod 
Paralyzation . 6... .cseseasecases 1079 Seamless Spellbook, Slack’s. 1244 Sehanine's Gown 
Petrification ............-..+++- 1079 Searing, Poker of .... . .840  Seigfried’'s Sword ... . 
FH VOORPOST TPI OYETAN 1079 Seas, Coat of the............ -315 Seik’s Spellbook. . . 
PMO POPPIS TE ANN ELETE 1080 Seas, Keolish Plate Mail of the Eel Seker, Harness of 
POO a issii 1080 Seat of Bane............... 1088 Selective Reading, Parchment of 
Shapechangers ...............-- 1080 Seating. Chair of Extra... .... 274 Self 
pS as ncnceccsacsapers eves 1080 Seating, Couch of Comfortable . . 274 Cleaning Carpet ...........--:-.- 
Tenet VPE 1080 Sebastian's Chime of Opening . . -817 Potion of Polymorph. . 
Yi PORE U EEE Cone ee ee 1080 Second Sight, Ointment of ..........- 781 -Lighting Smoking sa 
Reitionl oii E E 1080 Secret -Protecting Parchment . ac 
Mu SERIE Ee ie ENE 1081 Authority, Foundations of ........ 1171 Selnor, Helmet of ...........-+...55 
Scroll (cont,) Door Detection, Wand of ......... 1493 Selvar'’s Ineffable Conjurations 
of Questioning ............60565 1081 Door Detection, Weapon of .. ISH Magic and Phantasms.......... 1227 
QUANG OAOT AEE TANIE 1081 Doors, Map of ......... - 695 Semekhtet Barge. ...... «+ 180 
Reading, Gem............00s0045 527 Doors, Map of Illusions, and . . - 692. Semiprecious Stones ...........665 1307 
OT ROWE eina 1082 Doors, Map of Magic and .... - 692 Sending 
Of Repetition. .....060secceesees 1082 Doors, Map of Mapping and ....... 693 Box of Message ...-.....-.s00005 
ORO erea S 1083 Door and Trap Detection, Wand of... 1493 DARTOE E w 
RMON MOTTL ORES 1082 Door and Trap Location, Wand of. .., 1493 Dullness, Dust of Sixth. . 
GME sp cccrcencacsvesenase 1083, 1086 Doors and Traps, Map of . . .- 695 Senshock’s Spellbook.............. 
RCO 1083, 1086 Doors, Weapon of Find . t511 Sensory Enhancement, Potion of | 
in OPEP S N 1083 Secrets, Life of Nature Its .. 1192 Sensory Protection, Helmet of 
of Seven Druid Spells. ........... 1083 Secure Riding, Saddle of . . . --. 1049 Sentient Life (SL) Lens, Blue 
of Seven Wizard Spells. .......... 1083 Securing, Nail of .........-...+.-++ 746 Sentient Plane, Representations of the. . . 
OF SPAN vv eins cciesvecwveisice ses 1083 Sopnbiael, The. ss,» 0000000 a322 E PASA 
of Six Illusionist Spells........... 1083 September Horn ........ 
of Six Priest Spells .......-.....+ 1083 Serenity, Globe of. ....... 
of Six Wizard Spells........ 1083, 1084 Series Spelljamming Helm. . 
BOGOTY. asistene o siose c-oe:neesie 1084 Serinda’s Spellbook ....... BP 
Spell Level Range. ..........-.++ 1070 Seed Serpé’s Belt of Swimming ........... 
of Spell Catching .........-.005+ 1084 Arrow, Fire Serpent 
Spells, Who Can Use ............ 1070 Dragon Lilly . , Band of the 
Spells, LOW PR A ANAA 1068 Damage Curing. . s33 sss a eee 
MIE IRs. e aain ra Sie 1068 Disease Curing Orb of the ........ 
of the Stellar Path. ...........++- 1084 Enchanted Cherry Pits Golden, Belt 
Of Suggestion ........+0sese0e8 1085 BUS FNS t Ra atA Slicer, Sword | 
RMN $5 nAn aes rT 1085 of Growth... esee Spirit Pearl | 
of Transmutation...........--... 1085 BD) io anannns woeesayeon Staff of the 
OTE cw vvcvcesercsseverse 1085 MOUMBED, oc cvevocvevssedeuber Serpentine Ow! 
MT EET TOE, 1086 Oil/Powder, Cumin Serpin Lexicon 
of Wind Magic ...........-+..-. 1086 Oil/Powder, Cypress Serration, Robe of .. . 
WHEE, TITIS TOT OOT 1086 SH TITA OET Serten’s Spell Immunity ...-......... 
OR WHE. TTT SON PTT: 1086 Square-Meal Serten’s Spellbook ................ 
Scrollcase of Document Transmission . . 261 WS Beas scl deen OIEI ET, Servant of Leuk-O, Mighty 
Scrollmaking, Inkwell of ............ 612 Trollflower Servant, Scroll of the Death 
Serying CO WON WAPPEN Serving, Broom of ............ 
Crystal of Death ...............05 341 Seeds, Ever-Full Bag of Serving, Candle, Snuffer of 
Tih ised P O ENSA 777 Seeing Serving Spoon ...... 6.066.666 
POUCH OF LEET ASIS 888 A LAETTEN 274 Servitude, Hood of............ 
Scythe of Pain..........00c0c00000 1116 Eye of Minute. ...........2..0.4. 458 Servitude, Ring of . tans 
Sea Eyeglasses of True ............... 463 Sess'innek’s Sword 
Creature, Arrow of Slaying. ......... 99 C ATE ET A 528 Set 
E EE 1086 Helmet of Light ..... 000000000 591 Dagger of P E 
Earring of the .............------ 426 Hourglass of ............--.---0 602 Fextree Chess Game . cian owes 
Horn of the Azure... ............ 1543 SRO os cawiccesasnstieceioekes 655 inioni 
Iron Pin of the Icy. ..............- 619 Jee OF Fae PELIE EIT SLET 654 
Magic Wizard Scroll............. 1086 Lens of Minute ...............--5 654 
Monsters, Arrow of Slaying .......-. 99 A ETTO REES 734 
Rod of the Aerdi................ 1022 Mirror of Spirit. ....... 2.00.04 735 
SOI scasso irinna nn 1083 Necklace of Night..........-..... 750 
Ship, Earth and................. 1106 Ointment of Far.............-.-. 780 
Stal OF Osis oe aioiniecisieswaetew esis 1292 BONO olcson iin 888 
Trident of the Oljatt ............4. 844 RUS OF ces ennir na 997 
Zombie Coffin of Creation. ........ 317 SOG OF Fats .5:6 00 c00is nasia 1052 Wizard Spells, Scroll of . . «+ 1083 
Seabreathing, Helmet of...........-. 592 BOON OE META EO TA T 1067 Seventh Blade. ........... +» 1391 
Seafaring Anchor ,........<5-.0-5006 46 SOM OF esnan 1083 Sewer Pipes .... 1555 
Sewing, Needle of . .. 754 
Sh'arien, Sun Blade ..........--+.- 1391 


J 


1647 


Sha’ ir, Arrow of Slaying see 
Shackles, String of ...........-.-.. 


Shadowtome 

Shag’s Battle Axe ......---.+00e0e05 119 
Shah-pelar, Star of ss so soas sesoses 529 
Shahpesh’s Incense of Obsession. .... . 612 
Shaker, Eternal Salt ............... 1091 
Shaker, Hugrin’s Spice. ............ 1092 
Shaking and Rolling, Rattle of... ..... 823 
Shakti Amulet.........0000sseseesss 42 
Shakuhaci of Peace (Flute). ......... 1542 
Shalandain’s Boots of Starstriding . .. . . 196 
Shalandain'’s Holy Avenger Sword . . . . 1391 
Shaman'’s Mantle .......-..-...-.-.. 308 
Shaman's Spellbook, Chief. ......... 1157 
Shame, Sword of T TOITE E 1391 
Shandaril's Workbook. ............. 1233 


Shangalar the Black, Spellbook of. . . . 1236 
Shape 
Changers, Sword of Abhorrence. . . . 1336 


Changing, Ring of................ 997 

Sword Hand-Guard. ............. 1336 
Shapechangers 

Protection Scroll ......... 1079, 1080 

Shapechanging, Ring of............. 997 
Shapes, Dome of ..........-...-64- 410 
Shapeshifter Key .............-205 631 
Shard 

Kura the Darkness. ............... 634 

Ch SPY EL PLONE RE 343 

Of Shielding. ...........0.02200% 1092 
Sharks, Shell of Protection from ....... 42 
Sea ais 6s pone s sees sins ieee 1131 
Sharp Eyes, Potion of............... 888 
Sharpness 

Rn a E AIEEE ESEA 366 

(oE PECEL TELTAN EAT 177 

Swords i. ERE 060% 1341, 1343, 1365 


1366, 1367, 1370, 1372, 1374, 1380, 


1387, 1392, 1409, 1411 


Shatter Mage Shot .... s.. seess 1112 
Shattering 

P e esena 1538 

Brooch of Obsidian............... 228 

Fb OOS S 439 
Shaving, Razor of Close... .......... 933 
Shazzellim, Sword .........-.-.... 1392 
Sheath 

a TEALA T 1092 

a nT POTTE T 1092 

EE AE EN BO 1469 

Zadore'’s Poison... .........-.655 1092 
Shekinester’s Cloth. ............0545 313 
Shekinester's Crystalline Heart ....... 574 
Shell 

CE PION < eii eaer ea inne 439 

of Protection from Sharks. .......... 42 

Disvinedacecdnshemauots eens 517 

Shelter, Cage of TT TTT TS 234 


Shelter, Scroll of. . ... 1083 

Shelter, DROE iyis v0.00 seas 1431 

Sherry’s Ring of Animal Friendship. . . . 998 

Shichi’s Daikyu. i... ooon aiaa 209 

Shichi's Katana, Sword. ............ 1393 
Shield 

+1/+4 vs, Missiles. .............. 1100 

+2/+3 vs. Dragons .... .. . 1095 

+3 vs. Dragons, Medium . .. 1098 

+3/+5 vs. Dragons ...... . . - 1094 

. . 1093 

. 1093 

. 1093 

„43 

. 1093 

-156 

1105 

. 1103 

. 1093 

. - 1093 

.. 309 

. 1094 

n A T . 1094 

of Cure Wounds 1094 

Death Watch Beetle 1094 


Mirror, of Rheddrian............. 1100 
Missile Attractor. ...........0005 1100 
Missile Deflector ............... 1100 
e Eo EEEIEE EE A TE, 766 
O snn 1100 
ONG WIGS cianisccncsnssiccsciys 1561 
POUT, ics ccovesevssieneees 1101 
of Proof Against..............-. 1101 
of Proof Against Electricity ....... 1101 
of Proof Against Fire ............ 1101 
MES aac cinicistviey.veavies wend’ 1101 
Raj’s Shield of the Holy .......... 1102 
N 4a Nie Sek EE D IET 1243 

Of Reflection... ..00eseceneses 1102 
of Remove Curse .........005055 1103 
A a AEN A pinnae 1103 
RIG OPPP E TET, 997 
Shoon's Buckler .... eseese esere 1103 
Ee TN 1104 
Thillonrian, of Berserking ........ 1105 
Thurbrand’s Protector............ 1105 


FOUN 6 sides ea sesesv es vases 1105 
WM POTET AO T AER 1105 
a PIPETA NTN 1105 
e EOT NER 1106 
POO OF EA EAN AT 228 
CORTE. AEI O a 244 
Geno ce A 528 
Potion of Magic ...... essan 878 
Ring Of Mind isi0'6 05 sissies Scenes 977 
ek MOET PET et ee" 1092 
WOR OE EA E A T 1315 
Thal's Ring of Mind ............. 1003 
Shifter Bridle, Plane. ..............4 224 
Shifting Walls/Rooms, 
Weapon of Detect ............. 1511 
Shifting Walls/Rooms 
Detection Potion ............... 
Shih, Stone Scepter of 
Shimmering Blade of Shin Ginsen. . 
Shimmering Sash ........-...-005 
Shin Ginsen, Shimmering Blade of . . . 1394 
Shin Lu, Floating Blade of. 
Shina-Tsu-Hiko’s Sword.......... : 
Shining Horn of Ten Thousand 


Wheel of Maneuverability ... .. “1110 
Ships, Medegian Bracelet of Lost . 


of Vidar, Iron. 
of White Bronze . 


Shrinking Powder. ............00005 906 
SOE BEG OEE ede ty 1394 
Shukenja Helmet .............06005 592 
prong Slaying, Weapon of........ 1524 

Ca EPER A 1435 
eaoin Lamp of Continual Light... . 637 
ee RR eae 355 


Sibylline Book DOPPIETTA T 1239 
Sickle 
NOD AT OLONE E. 1114 
a ET EEO EE 1114 
ROME a asiro e sae aaae 1115 
RE BR si onos eiae E 1115 
a T P AEE AE 1115 
a A a i AOT E. 1115 
of Lycanthropy s aois o.o: eao Eai 1115 
Sides of the Memory, Dark ......... 1162 
o No I PORE 288 
Siegfried's Sword ..............--- 1373 
EE aaae sna seerd T 1394 
Sigh Danovitche's Wings of Flying 1560 
Dullness, Dust of ...............- 419 
Eyeglasses of ..... 22... 6s0ecsees 463 
Eyes Vision and Arcane .......... 1166 
Goggles of Underwater............ 547 
Manor's Manual of .............- 1194 
Ointment of Second ...........-.. 781 
Potion of Black. ..............204 856 
Potion of Dragon. ..........0.0004 865 
Ring of ciai ee ina 979 
and Sound, Hsssthak’s Mirror of. . . . . 728 
Sighted, Book of the... i... aasan 1239 
Sigils, Art of Communications and . . . 1140 
Sign Amulet, Palm ................5- 37 
Signaling 
ANOR caine inrsin 97 
Oers 344 
ORR. OF OET ENT T 1547 
EME inabiri IEn 634 
Significance, Gem Color 
vs. Meaning. ESTI ELIAS 514 
Silence 
AR O saasa ikasa e 97 
Capatieen Of ice sasn csswsareever 253 
e EEEIEE IE 819 
Hammer OF) soia suaniaseenis 558 
WAY EEEE E nies 631 
MOK OF si csisienasoraaacave’s 704, 705 
NOLO, sossarna EASA 746 
Potion of Golden... ............... 871 
Rusen 999 
RE OR LIII ESON ex 1294 
TOs issn 1315 
WORE E O TETT. 1463 
WOR N TIE 1524 
Silencer of Bodash...............- 1394 
Silencing, Weapon of ..........-.-- 1524 
Silent 
— Ngona Horn of.......-... 599 
Cee KMD AHA MW T O AA NS 137 
Por The, Sword .... 0100000000 1407 
Silk Coverlet of Warmth. ............ 173 
Silvanus'’s Holy Symbol ............. 597 
Silver 
Arm of Ergoth, O S EE 64 
RANE 0.6 ¢ vdieo p sevarss anes 277 
IK 6 wiih E T, 325 
Crowd a i. 0:56. 459000 veces9 337 
Dragon Cloak ........-..----++5- 300 
Dragon Slayer, Sword... .....-... 1357 
Golem Libram. R E 662 
Horn of Valhalla ................ 1548 
Karali’s Sword. ... 0... ....-.04-. 1378 
Katana, Mayonaka’s ............. 1382 
Key of Portals.........0:.0ee000% 631 
Magic, Libram of ............-... 668 
Mobile, Diamond and.......-..... 737 
Ring, Berronar Truesilver's......... 949 
Ring, Jhessail ............00.0008 972 
Sword, Githyanki ............... 1372 
Sword, Syrar's........c..s.c0002 1407 
Talon, Book of the .............. 1239 
Sim's Prism of Light Splitting ...... . . 913 


Simple Order, Mirror of ..........-.- 734 
Simulacrum, Ardraken’s Refreshment . . . 62 
Simurgh, Claw of Mighty. 
Sin's Black Axe, Nanna ... .. 


Spoon 
Sir Celedon Kierney’s Spellbook . . . . . 1243 
Sir Olwyn Forestfriend’s Spellbook . . . 1244 
Sira, All-Knowing Eye of Yasmin .... . 451 
Sirdan, Key of. ........ 205. N E 631 
Sirines, Pearl of the ............0.04 807 
Sitting Ball. cscincsautiean 1561 
Sittitg Dog eiivecsievessvecsy 1561 
Sitting Monkey. ................4. 1561 
Sivas Somir ssn 1396 
Sixth Sense Dullness, Dust of ........ 419 
Size Alteration, Wand of... ........ 1494 
Skain¥ Satchel . 0.24. 6.26222 22505 138 
Skates of the Roller Hoopers ..... . . . 1116 
Skeletal Potion ...........2..5200205 888 
Skeleton 
Coffin of Creation. ............... 317 
Control, Potion of ........-.-- +... 895 
A A N EEN E ET 632 
Skeletons, Scroll of Protection from . . 1081 
Skewering, Sword of ............++ 1396 
Skie’s Locks and Bolts.............5 672 
Skies of the Universe, Seven ........ 1231 
Skill and Grace, Teaset of........... 1428 
Skill at Arms, Manual of Puissant . .. . . 688 
Skin Nemean Lion .............--++ 755 
Skin Potion, Toad .................5 892 
Skipper with Hat, Statue of Power . . . . 1304 
Skoriaan’s Drow Chain Mail .......... 82 
Skull 
a waco NFER A E A 380 
ODOM ENEAS TEIR E 593 
OE Sib we lov TE EREE 1116 
MARR is con ny ste wenensesestieskiee 678 
EEE E E r E 705 
MONE Or Era A 1117 
a AEE E RT 1117 
n V E 1117 
-Staff of Hepmonaland........... 1295 
S A DPT ITS 1118 
Totem Kolkis’s Evil..........-.... 172 
T We Peretti 172 
Selle, DEE PT EIEE TESE FATA 1294 
Skunk 
TRAN 0 PEEPI A E ze€ 1112 
Loopy PETTI E E 1420 
LT OT OE TRT 445 
eas Glitterlode’s Blessed... .. . . 537 
Skyship, Halruan ...............+. 1108 
Skywalker Lute. .405 5. ec vcce.ceese 1329 
A AEEA AOLE ROST 1067 
Slack's Seamless Spellbook ......... 1244 
Slasher's Boots, Midnight. ........... 195 
Slasher’s Cloak, Midnight ........... 306 
Slate of Identification. ............. 1118 
Slay 
Avatar, Whip... 200.000 c cece 1534 
Evil Aligned, Whip.............. 1534 
Pind Wilpusa 1534 


Dragons, Sword of ...... 2... 6.665 1357 
Efreeti, Sword of ............... 1371 
Giant, Sword of. ...............5 1372 
Mammals, Sword of ............. 1382 
Wepons Of oars var dines Qube 1524 
Siod isahara iaeia (See Sledge) 
Sledge Joukahainen’s Golden. . .. 1118 
Sledge Vainamoinen’s. ............. 1119 
Amulet of Protection from .......... 40 
Bestowing, Potion of. ............. 889 
Breathing, Potion of .............. 889 
COND LITT LAT ESITE IATE 246 
o E EEE E EEN iy 251 
Carving of Restful ............... 261 


Sleeping 
Bag of Armor Nullification . . . 137, 1119 


Sleeplessness, Amulet of ............. 43 
Sleepy Breath, Potion of............+ 889 
Sleighing, Arrow of 

Slicer, SOTPORE ETET T y 
Slicing, Weapon of , 


"N 


Slippers 
of Kicking 1121 
Ruby...... 1121 
of Slowness 1122 
of Soft Movement 1122 
of Spider Climbing......... 1121, 1122 


Slipping, Stair of . . 
Slope, Potion of Detection of Grade or . . . 895 


Slopes, Weapon of Detect. .......... 1511 
Slowing, Weapon of ............... 1524 
Slowness, Ketchup of........... 248, 249 
Slowness, Slippers of .............. 1121 
Slumber Potion, Gray. .............. 871 
Slumber, Rose of Eternal........... 1045 
Small Bird Repulsion Dust. .......... 422 
Smallness, Sheath of ...........0... 1092 
Smell 

Candle; Sweet vss secikssniiies 

Dullness, Dust of 

Rite of irer iar 
Smelling, Ointment of Mage ......... 781 
Smiling, Mask of siiis intuir 706 
Smiting, Rod of .............00005 1040 
Smoke 

Brazier.of Sleep <. sonses ia 223 

CE aii E S 246 

Command, Ring of ............... 985 

Detection Candle .............405 245 

of Fire Quenching. .............4 1122 


POWUES uiia 909 


AAE A AUE EAEL IE 1122 
Swinkespeas roor rreta 1131 


AOMC cosia vats 


Self-Lighting. . . . 

of Smoke Rings . 

ONIN a5:6- ire tivo srons nies uel 

of Snake Summoning ............ 1126 
Smoky Orb of Golden Death ......... 795 
Smoothhands'’s Axe, Callarduran .... . . 114 
Smoothhands’s Chain Mail, 


Smoothing, Rake of 
Smothering, Rug of 
Smugglers Boat... .s0scevircesere 
Snake 


Changing, Armband of ............. 66 
Crawling, Potion of, .............+ 889 
Necklace 


Summoning, Smoking Pipe of .. . . . 1126 
Snakes Figurine, Jade............... 476 
Snap-Tong, Rutterkin.............. 1048 
Snare, Chilling sainn onsa 288 
POMS a AAS E VEAL ECE 820 
Snaring 
Glove of Missile sinnon 


Snow Mage Shot ............. 
Snow on the Mountain 


Snuffing, Bucket of Fire... .......... 230 
Soap 
OF Abrasion SSS seek eae eae 1126 
BONG SC VEE s13 
A, ANSIA . 1126 
Soaring, Bridle of............. . 224 
Sobriety, Potion of ............ . 889 
Socks of Dryness ............4 . 1126 


Socks of Sweating ............ - 1126 
Soft-Boiled Egg .............. . 
Sohei Slaying, Weapon of....... 
Solamnia, Armor of ........... 
Solamnus, Plate of ............ 
Solid Corpus, Influence on... ... 
Solomon's Magic Carpet ............ 
Solomon's Oil/Powder .......... 
Solonor Thelandira’s Bow ........... 
Solvent, Universal ............ 
Soma’s Dagger. .........-.+4- 
Soothing, Ointment of ......... 
Sophistication, Mirror of ....... 
Sorcerers, Arrow of Slaying 
Sorcerer's Scroll 


Sorona, Crown 
Sol Get ana E 


SOUUD AE: 0:2: on ciseaserwansige’s 


Soulseeker 
Sound 
Attacks, Shield of Proof Against ... 1101 
Hsssthak’s Mirror of Sight and... ... 728 
Periapt of Proof Against ..... . . 826 
Ok eee : 
IE ip sare eos clk OEE. 1128 
Sounding 


Sounds, Stone of Mysterious . . 
Soup Kettle, Everbountiful. . . . at 
Soup Kettle, Mithryl’s Everbountiful . . . 627 
Sovereign Glue... ........600-0005 1128 
Sovereign Tonic, Durimal’s . . . ‘ 

Spade of Colossal Excavation . 


Spanner, Rift..........-.+.+ - 945 
Sparkling Dust ............. . 423 
Sparkling Spear ............ 1132 
Speak with ..., Potion of........... 893 
Speaking 

ALTO OL: ahs a's e'dains'e cal eeeu vin 

Beg OB sist vistas veccwe en's 

a o AE LLI T, 


n ARENES hice de 1129 

Black Kumade 1129 

Demeter’s 1129 

G BAR. srera 1129 

Goibhniu’s 1129 

Gruumsh’s 1129 

CE ARONA .. 1129, 1130 

Hadrion’s.......... 1130 

Heartseeker 1130 

Heartwood 1131 

TON nt Aa Agri tines’ LT 1131 

of Obliteration 1131 

OF PANIC i. c0 T 1131 

of Paralysis 1131 

Returning 1131 

Sharksbane 1131 

Smokespear. 1131 

Sparkling.......... 1132 

PL SRA TT 1291 

n A ATITEA TY, 1132 

OF YANG PRONTE 1132 

ND 5s NTE as eae we 1132 
Special, Sword i260 secs ean oe 1398 
Special Purpose, Sword ...........5 1402 
Specialization, Gauntlet of........... 507 
Specialization, Weapon of .......... 1524 
Species Enemy Medallion 
Spectral Sword......... 
Spectral Weapon. cosa rossiia iis 
Spectre 

Bottle; Undead aniani 

Coffin of Creation. . . 

Control, Potion of 
Spectres, Scroll of Protection from .. , 1081 
Specular, Sabirine’s .............-4 1222 
Speech, Circlet of Underwater........ 292 
Speech, Potion of scossa cinis 890 
S 

Amulet of Cheetah 

BOR Ofa 

Bwat 

Crossbow of ....... 

Glass Bead of ...... 

Horseshoe of....... 

Mirror, Yefar’s...... 

Potion of ........ 

Reading, Lens of. . 

Rudder of .....,. 

Sandals of ....... 

Scimitar of ...... 

IMME CE ss. 0:5 L T 

and Traveling, Snowshoes of 

i T AEN, esl vedios 1525 

yA EE 1334 
Speedcasting, Wallac’s Potion of ...... 896 
Speeding, Weapon of ...........45. 1525 
Speedreading, Evelyn’s Lens of ....... 654 
Spell 

Catching, Scroll of ........+.++55 1084 

Component Pouch, Zagyg’s ........ 147 

Eating, Ring of ...........000055 1000 

Exchange, Medallion of ....... 713, 714 

POE ease ERS AEE PAIO 1068 

Focusing, Staff of ...........0505 1296 

Holding, Ring of............5.+5 1000 

Immunity, Serten’s ...........+55+ 997 

Level Range, Scrolls...........+, 1070 

MENON irs ieis E AS 734 

Protection, Banner of ............. 156 

Scroll, Mondasso’s Automated . . . . . 1075 

Sled Taal sn sae oon gas 1099 

Stealing, Parchment of ............ 804 

Storing, Ring of 

Turning, Ring of 

“Turning,” Ring of .............. 1001 
Spelibattle, Ring of................. 999 
Spalihinder pote ncatas 1403 


Chief Shaman’s..........+.-+0++ 
of Clouds and Fog. s. essee esos 
Collapsing....... TEA 
Components & Reactions of 


WUE APOE E EN 
Dissimulation and Obscuration .... 
Doors & Passages of Parallel ...... 


Epic Saga of the Great Conjurers. . - 
Evolution of Arcane Will Power... . 
Exalted Book of Ethnic Humor . . . . 
Extreme Powers of Observation . . . . 
Eyes Vision, and Arcane Sight . . . . . 
Fiendomicon of Iggwilv.......... 


Galdaster's Orizon ........000006 


Glanvyl's Workbook . 0.0.6 0..644 
RID AA rete ennewawaes 
Great Paravisual Emanations ...... 


History of Evil Mages 

and OT Le 1180 
History of Good Mages 

and Apprentices. ..........-..- 1181 
CHONG oc cccccesicerssessecs 1181 
Idioms & Rare Cryptographs .. . . . . 1181 
Inexplicable Reflections .......... 1181 
Influence on Solid Corpus ........ 1181 
Influences and Suggestions ....... 1181 


Intelligence and Intuitive 
Dominati 


of a Magic-User (Spellcaster), ..... 1192 
Magister, The ‘ 


Multiple Applications 
of 


Nathlum, The 


Powers of the Spiritual Will ee 
Raistlin’s.............4- +++ 1215 


Ce Per E. 1231 
Shandaril'’s Workbook... .... . . 1233 
of Shangalar the Black ...... . 1236 
Sibylline Book ...........00000. 1239 
Of the Sighted. EE 1239 
of the Silver Talon... ....... 0... 1239 
Sir Celedon Kierney’s............ 1243 
Sir Olwyn Forestfriend’s oe 1244 
Slack's Seamless........... + 1244 
Spells Written in Code ........... 1244 


Spherogenesis of the Multiverses . . . 1244 


Theory of the Invisible Forces ..... 1251 
Theory of Occult Visual Shock ..., 1251 
Thesis on Conditional Ruptures . .. . 1247 


Spelljamming 
Apparatus of Kwalish, Dunhill’s, . . . . 414 
HENS AOT A AT O S 574-584 
IAAT TT 448 
a AEE eet TAY 890 
ROM IA AN AT 1268 
Spellmaster’s Blessing .............. 659 


Scalamagdrion 
Science of Metaenchantment. . . 1226, 1127 


Selvar's Ineffable Conjurations, 

Magic, and Phantasms ......... 1227 
|) WORE aE ere rhs 1230 
Serpin Lexicon sssaaa saar 1230 
Sento hi L 1231 
T AT IOE AT 1231 
Seven Skies of the Universe ....... 1231 


1651 


n NITORE RE 1269 
of False Calling. ssassn 1269 
Glain Y Cryman vera 1269 
Karnrohb’s Airy osse ssssrrroe 1270 
Micrest's Starlit...........0s0006 1270 
Talisman of the ,...........60005 1425 
Thaddigren Dentiata’s............ 1270 
Of WHNG OASE E 1270 


” A E 


Sphere 
Spheres, Lyre of thess siis osuisi 1331 
Spheres, Staff of... sussen 1296 
Spherogenesis of the Multiverses.. . . . 1244 
Spice Shaker, Hugrin’s............. 1092 
Splicing, Pan Of... 'sis'sis:sncetexasoay 802 
Spider 
Climbing, Slippers of ............ 1121 
Fang Dagger couinent 369 
Harness PEETELI EIIE EIE 567 
Oe EIA ALESI LI CN 632 
Slaying, Weapon of............65 1524 
Spider's Boots of Stealth ............ 196 
Spiderwalker..........0.0s020e0ee 1271 
Spike; Bterram aE 745 
Spikenard Oil/Powder. ,......... 777,910 
Spikey Owns, Apparatus of ........... 57 
Spinach) Can OF. ygan aae 237 
Spinecastle, Amulet of ............... 43 
Spinning Wheel ......-.......2065 1271 
Spirit 
AMUSE OF AA. oireena 43 
Binding, Potion of................ 890 
Bottle, Undead Groaning .......... 202 
Burner, Sword. ..........0++00+5 1404 
Chasers, Noisesome .............. 760 
Flight, Potion of ...-......++..05+ 890 
Folk Control, Potion of............ 872 
Folk Slaying, Weapon of.......... 1524 
Hands of the Healing .............. 33 
Horse, Saddle of the ............. 1049 
(IEEE NT a 1 606 
Ne or a AE eE 706 
ANEO ie nni ern 778, 910 
Pearl, SEn sy rana noeh 807 
Restoration, Harp of............. 1327 
Seeing, Mirror of ................ 735 
EIN os cacwe pe batoes dae eta 1117 
Snaring, Net of .............2.02. 758 
Summoning, Tablet of............ 1418 
Spirits 
Charm of Protection from. ......... 283 
Eae Ne EOE VETETT 1191 
A TAr TETIT 1332 
Scroll of Protection from ......... 1080 
Spiritual Fortification, Bricks of the .. 1152 
Spiritual Will, Powers of the... ..... . 1215 
Splendor, Rod of................45 1041 
Splitting, Prism of Light............. 913 
Splitting, Sim’s Prism of Light........ 913 
Sponge, Everdamp...............4. 447 
Spomgestone si 1315 
Spoon 
BE ia a aA 1466 
OC RaDa soian 1466 
Feather TOB is gonos dini 468 
of Medication . aoe 1466 
OR MGI eissaia 1466 
MUO iasa iL 1467 
Maal oitieiaexk sie Bios. cceislewioiare 1467 
CR SHANG 6/0 anol 1467 
ORGU iis aer 1467 
OE SAGAN AE E S 1467 
RAEE T nn N aS 26 
Spores, Chandrasakar’s Air............ 26 
Spring, Portable ............0+00005 851 
Springer, Trap-.............. seve 1454 
SCN GOT osie cieie yar aD 1271 
Springing, Boot of Striding and... ... . 197 
Springing, Horn Uncontrollable 
SPINE Bo. .0::0:0:0 EAE E ST 1548 
GUE uaina 848 
Spy, Cask of the Wind .............4 262 
VIER o a eros eanan nthe 1271 
Spying, Curtain of erisa ater na 353 
Spy athe Larry OF AARE AE P EE 645 
Spying, Window of.............44. 1559 


Square Wheel oss. ESE 
Square-Meal Seed “ 
Squatting Toad .......... 
Squelcher, Sword 
Squid, Wand of the ............0005 1494 
Ssu-Ma, Tome of ........ ose. 1445 
St. Cuthbert, Mace of . 679, 680 
Stability, Saddle of ....... -... 1050 
Stability, Torc of......... E i ay 
Stabilizer, Gravitic ... 43o. 550 
Staff 
of Air and Water ........... 1272, 1278 
of Alar Ch’Aranol’s. ...........4.5 1272 
Alar Ch’Aranol’s. ...... RITA D272 
of Aquatic Wizardry 1272 
Actor's, of Swarming Insects ...... 1272 
AS yE) 
FRA H: 
TEER F 
.. 1274 
1274 
1274 
«+++ 1274 
oven d 205 
Salen PA 
of Commanding excels 
of Conjuration. ...... EREA r 
OE ea roga 1275 
Command Words 
(Optional Rule) 1271 
GEOG 3 Perae 1276 
Oe PERRY, ry 
of Devotion. ........ PPO o, 
Dionysus’s.......... «049 i, 
of Disjoining........ PP EIO 
of Dispelling ........ E oi 
of Displacement sane MEET 
of Divergence .....,. E S 
of Diviner of Life PAA A 
Dolmaria’s of Withering . +++. 1278 
DTN heeds caine .... 1278 
of the Druids........ +++, 1278 
ofan Element ....... +++- 1278 
of the Elements: . 2.0.0.2... 6.28% 1279 
of the Elements: Air... .......... 1280 
of the Elements: Fire. . .... 1280 
of Ethereal Action... . .... 1280 
of the Fates ......... .... 1280 
Pent rc iscsi +. 1280 
Of Flames 50365590. «++. 1280 
Fraz-Urb-luu’s....... see 1281 
OF POY sisson «se. 1281 
Geb’s Quarterstaff. ..... -0000 1281 
E ATEI IAEE EELIS 1281 
of Gnatmarsh 1281 
of Harming 1282 
of Healing.......... «+++ 1282 
of Hornwood. +++ 1282 
SUN EA EEE ENS naati 1282 
ran OP AEAT 1282 
TBO R E O wns 1282 
of Kitsyrral 1282 
Kuan Yin’s, Quarterstaff.......... 1283 
K'uei Hsing’s 1283 
K'ung Fu-tzu’s 1283 
Kura Okami's 1283 
Ky Trencha Ukang ... 1283 
140 Tinana 1283 
of the Magi. ........ 1283 
Magical Quarterstaff. . 1284 
of Magius.......... . 1284, 1285 
of the Magius 1285 
of Meriadar’s Quarterstaff......... 1285 
OF MIRAE. os o:0:9:4:s:ace-o'e oreiaioieie 1285 


Oberon's 


piateregieie 1288 


of Power ....... 
of the Priest Kings .............. 1289 
Protection from, Banner of......... 156 


Reptilla’s of the Serpent . 
of Rheddrian’s....... 
of Rilantaver's, . . 


a e SAIA TTA TE 

OE SIAN o oai nst 
Skull-Staff of Hepmonaland....... 1295 
of Slinging 
Snake 


... 1278, 1300 


of Wiretdty iisa 1300 

of the Woodlands .......... 1288, 1301 
Stair 

of Ascending 

of Breaking. . . 

Cad asin EA 

of Descending 

Endless ...... 

of Judgment 

of Slipping 
Stalker Flask, Invisible.............5 489 
Stalker, Sword .......s0ssdeesees 1405 
Stamina, Sweet Tooth of............ 1451 
Stammering and Stuttering, 

Phat E E a E E T 830 

Standard 

Heh Amin Ra 34 

NUMAN AA IREEE ERES AS STOTE TT 760 

Shell of Protection ..........-.+++ 439 
Standing 

a VRE I E E E 1561 


MON cose igaran ia 1560 
SHO OF EE AEE A EEC 1306 
PRIOR LITEA ENE A S 1302 


p  — 


Standing 
TONE OF ETA S leer 1431 
Star 
Patle ann ict iar warare se 485 
of the Bright Desert, Holy ........ 1303 
Card EV EE EOT tees 380, 389 
OPCE aaea wine 715 
of Detection, Morning ............ 488 
RFID E C OE N TIE 529 
of Khan-pelar osissa aini sai 529 
En a VSEE EAE E 529 
MONE 5 vicevnsaaies eea 485, 675 
OF CHANDA: ss torenta vox ot 529 
PRON arna er IE EAT 681 
Striding, Boot of........... Sree 196 
Starella’s Aphrodisiac. .............6 825 
Starfall, Sword... 0.6.06. cceeeeeee 1405 
Starlit Sphere, Mierest’s............ 1270 
Stars 
L N An EAEE OTTE 309 
CONN OE 0:50 arinean 338 
CHOWN OFTHE 0.559 6 O A 339 
Intier’s Ring of Shooting. .......... 971 
Mellifleur’s Robe of ............. 1013 
of Ojy-do, Throwing...........+. 1435 
of Returning, Throwing .......... 1435 
Ring of Shooting. ..............05 998 


8 
Starstriding, Shalandain’s Boots of .... 196 
Starting, Ring of Fire ............... 962 
Statue 


Xanthippe of Annoyance ......... 1306 
Statuette, Corellon’s Crystal......... 1303 
Staying, Anchor of .............0..05 46 
Steadiness, Medallion of ............ 715 
Stealer, Nine Lives... sseni 1386 
Stealing 

Claw of Magion rancan sini 

Parchment of Spell... . 

Potion of Life ,....... 

Sword, Life.......... 

Sword OFLC. aa 
Stealth 

Mask Ossia irie E 

Spider's Boots of. ...... 

Thieves’ Tools of. .........0.0005 1446 
Stealthy Pilfering, Manual of......... 688 
Steam 

Bono RiNS Jae OF aseissa 622 

Carrague’s, Decanter of Endless. |... 375 

Command, Ring of ..............5 989 

ODE OF ETETEA E E, 620 

and Vapor, Wand of. ............. 1494 
Steaming Cauldron, Hymir’s ......... 268 
Steed, Obsidian... 00s ccc eevee 478 
Steed of Wondrous Power, 

Dori’s Obsidian. .............+5 475 
DCI ere egion aa 313 
Steel Dragon Slayer, Sword ......... 1357 
Steel Mobile, Onyx and............5 737 
Steelskin’s Apron, Flandal ............ 58 
Steelskin’s Hammer, Flandal .,....... 553 
Stellar Path, Scroll of the ........... 1084 
Steppes, Scarf of the Dry........... 1059 
Steps Draining Sword, Nine...,..... 1386 
Stick 

ENON aAa th Pwinedien eo EA 1023 


Holy Terror Hockey ............55 
Shou Hsing’s Walking. . 
of Standing.......... 


Sticking, Gauntlet of ...........0..0. 

Sticking, Spoon of 

Sticky Shield .......... 

Stiffhess, Cane of. ssnsd IE bases 

Stiffness, Collar of .............505. 

Stilling, Oil of Fire 

Stillness, Oil of......... 

Sting of Xerastos ..........6..0555 

Stinging Cloud wisi sian seanoa 

Stirge'’s Bite ......4..6« 

Stirring, Spoon of. ...... 

Stirrups of Horsemanship. . 

Stocking of Elf Summoning......... 1306 

Stocking of Mystery...........0008 1306 

Stomping, Boot of .............0505 197 

Stone (See also: Rock) 
Arrow of Polymorphing ............ 93 
Beauregard’s Beautiful Bauble..... 1307 
Bimbomushi............... 517, 1308 
Bloodstone of Fistandantilus ...... 1308 
CHIRN o iesnas ESA 1308 
CB GA siian aaa 314 
of Cold Immunity 1309 
of Continual Light 1309 


of Controlling Earth Elementals. . . . 1309 


ROSIE AE A 1309 
Cursed Well. -o s seiso ose 1309 
n OE AERE A AEN E: 356 
Lr AA AA 1309 
of Everburning 1310 
Fetter TOKEN eoa LEa a 468 
hy Se ee 1310 
Form, Potion Of)... diis eeaeee ooa 891 
OWE ea anac ons Tee eer 1310 
Golem Protection, Scarab of....... 1057 
Golem Libram. .............- 662, 665 
OF Good Enc sai east o sesasi 1311 
Guardians, Ring of Protection from . . 988 
of Gul and Thiondar............. 1311 
Hentoff inan . 574, 1374 
Honing aaa aa iT 1313 
Hore Sátt nra 1305 
MOU EA ASEA A OELE 613 
Kaleen’s Undead: siiin a 35 
of Mixed Luck, Myste’s .......... 1313 
of Mysterious Sounds. ........... 1313 
NANOTION 934 sissy ses Feo Odea Tee 1314 
Oval of Tzolo’s Guardian ......... 1314 
Passage, Oil of ..........645 Rg it) 
Philosophet'Seisisiiicaaiwweeed 
PUM ee oa OT 

of Pulverizing, Sling. . . 

of Refilling, Sling. .... 

Ring OF |. oiai 

ROWS isane 

of Sampling. ......... 

Scepter of Shih....... 

of Shielding.......... 

OF SENOS goss. 5:4 :si0%0 oe 

Spongestone .........60¢sveesees 
Strength, Potion of ............... 
Travel 

Wand of Earth and .... 

Wardstone 

Warfu 

of Warmth 


of Weight 

of the Well, eseon es 
Stonefist, Sword........ 
Stoneiron Weapon 
Stones 


Semiprecious .......0 500000000 1307 
Standing i e cena 1302 
Stonework Traps/Pits, 

Potion of Detection of,.......... 895 
Stool Chest, Foot seier re 287 
Stool, Extradimension Foot .......... 287 
of Stopping, Whistle... .. 2.0.0.0... 1558 
Storage; Key of. cos ccr oinei 633 
Storing, Pyros’s Ring of Spell ........ 988 
Storing, Quiver of Arrow ...........5 929 
Storing, Ring of Spell.............. 1000 
Storm 

Armor, Larai oa ais a 78 

r AKETE I AN 558 

Rider of the Gearnat Sea,.......... 181 

Riders Ponti sissies cores 807 

AT E IE CUR NAISSO 681 

Strength, Potion of .......... 00.64 871 
Storm’s Harp of Methild............ 1328 
Stormbringer, Sword .............. 1405 
Storms, Scant Wand of..,.......... 1493 
Storms, Wand of Ice... n.. 5... 56005 1483 
Strand, Diirinka’s sess peere 1010 
Strangling, Collar of..............45 326 
Strangling, Necklace of ............. 752 
Strangulation, Necklace of........... 752 
Stratagems, Manual of.............. 689 
Stream of Anguish ..............45 1339 
Strength 

ACME Ofre oessa meee oe 66 

Armband of Variable 

CR sigs a: derenin A 

er a TE Ls Pte AOE ore 

Gauntletiof Super’ -oa p s oiriin 

Gis K AT PA A 

Lehr a Eo Zoe REE TRER T>: -7 

Moto Moto Rod of ............... 

POM GE y s aodare meine 

Potion of Giant 

Potion of Inner 

RENE OF RFEA TEAT E AS 

Ring of Berserk. i: sasse 35. cece 
Striding 

Dov of Sara ecs ia aE 

and Springing, Boot of 

and Springing, Horn of 

Uncontrollable.............045 1548 
Strike, Bracer of the Blinding ........ 220 
Striking 

and Curing, Staffof ............. 1297 
r A ESOSI EIEC N A 1297 
Wemicks Caneiof ie sairaiarsi 248 
String 
of Attachment........6.0.000005 1319 
Ball of Badlessy si 5 siissisis iroa 150 
Cage of A E IEE AE, 235 
GEEAE sns ras ea a 1319 
OF Pearle To eiri a E S 1319 
OF SHACKLES s osin Ee am cde 1319 
OF TRAGIC Ofisas aana 1319 
E WENMINE eis ra iea A 1319 
Stringed Instruments ... s. oaeee 1320 
Strongbox of Immobility ............ 216 
Stronmaus’s Hammer of Thunderbolts. . 558 
Strumming, Pick of nnua 1332 
Studies on The Fourth Dimension , ., . 1244 
Study, Libram of. sisses sienna 668 
Studying, Desk of. .........0.000006 405 
Shaan BONS. 5/2/59) sn yee ea ear cher 100 
Stun Puppet Libram...............5 661 
Stunning 
AROW OF 5 ose y-5craisereeeneg ogins te iu 100 
DAC E EE E nee 375 
GONG A EE peels 822 
aU OE RPEN T E i n a 1298 
Stupidity, Hat of... o.ae 570,572 


Stuttering, Philter of Stammering and . . 830 


Stylus of Scribing. ...............4 1335 
Subconscious Apparitions, 


Subterranean Sagacity, Helmet of ..... 593 
Subtitles Lens ofrisson tnn wie 655 
Subtle Communication, Lore of... ... 


Success, Mustard of 
Succor, Bead of ....... 

Sugar, Spoon of ....... 

Suggestion Scroll..........0.5.005 
Suggestions, Influences and......... 1181 
Suit, Sweatsuit .........+ss0ceseees 1335 
SME OL asa ao aa 778 
Sulhaut Mountains, Bear Cloak of the. . . . 297 
Sulhaut Mountains, Dark Wand of the. . . 1477 


Sulmish Robe of Magical 
Enhancement so sises e seguine 1015 

Suloise; Fire Wand of .............. 1480 
Sulphur Influence and Actions... .. 1244 
SulWard ARG «0:0 E NT 119 
Sumbar Oracle ehre udea y 1530 
Summation, Crown of ...........0+5 339 
Summer's Day, Tart ofa............ 1428 
Summoning 

GOR BUNGE. ais:t onise iinoa sario 821 

POND ONTTO 822 

Hostile Air Elementals Censer . . . . . . 270 

A RE ES eee 646 

Noora’s Ring of Djinn............. 984 

FORGE s+ 0:49.93, 209-107 89m 910.0-:918,58 840 

RANG GE AOAO A ses uss 823 

Ring OF Genie POROTCE TET: 967 

Smoking Pipe of Snake. .......... 1126 

Stocking of. EMG ac osae ssa pahis 1306 

aA Aa a. ANAE TE ETIA 1418 

PRONG OF OTEP EEE TT 1435 

aa Ae PES ET ETIT 1534 

WISE OR Sau AAE TTT, 1558 
Summons, Bead of ...............44 751 
Sumpko's Mantle ...............205 310 
Sun 

Blade; Swords iid sv cssie esas 

Blade, Sh'arien, Sword 

Blade, Tarl Vanovitch’s, Sword 

[cx BA Arar eee nr hear Fue Bere 

Deck ewvciewsn 

Booth A EE 

aa RETER NETE ETE 

Wand OF O os o ENSE 
Sunbolt Javelin... . 
Sundial of Direction... ...........64 1335 
Sundial of Timekeeping ............ 1335 
Sunng Chiang's Dagger ............. 369 
Sunlight, Bolas of... .......2.0.056 1119 
Sunlight Resistance Elixir ........... 445 
Sunndi, Gemeutter’s Tools of , . . . 530, 1446 
Super Strength, Gauntlet of .,........ 507 
Superb Shiny Shoe, Hefiz’s ......... 1111 
Superhealing, Potion of ............. 891 
Superheroism, Potion of............. 891 
Superior Animal Control, Potion of . . . . 891 
Superior Healing, Potion of .......... 891 
Suppression, Potion of Pain.......... 881 
Supreme, Talisman of Chaos ........ 1421 
Sure Footing, Anklet of ...........00 50 
Surprises, Staff of...........+0e0e0e0 1298 
Surrender, Weapon of. ..........065 1526 
Surtr’s Flaming Sword ............. 1406 
Surtr’s Iron Armor AP ER S ON AT 82 
Survival 

Cier enera oes 245 


Susk, the Silent, Sword. ............ 1407 
Suspension, Cot of ..............55. 331 
Suspension, Potion of Life........... 876 
Sustarre’s Chariot ...........s000008 277 
Sustenance 

Caparison of 


Swamp, Vast, Horn of the........... 1549 
Swamp, Orb of the Black............ 783 
Swan Boat Feather Token............ 469 
Swarming Insects, Arctor’s Staff of .. . 1272 
Swarming Insects, Staffof.......... 1298 
SWS WHEE, AEE oie ciniaece TT 848 


OWIE 16:4 .00:5.9:5:0s-4 519: oe sence 1335 


SRM EEEL LEE Sate nes 782 


Swift Writing, Pen of .............45 809 
Swift Writing, Quill of. ,............ 928 
Swiftfoot's Cloak, Kaldair........... 303 
Swiftfoot's Sword, Kaldair.......... 1378 
Swimming and Climbing, Gauntlet of . . 508 


Swimming, Ring of ........... 953, 1002 
Swimming, Serpé’s Belt of........... 169 
Sword 
WON EPN TTT. 
AEE E EI E EN 


i TA E ASAE 
r PETELE TETI A 


Arnd a 


OEA i ct eee es 


of Babette Maelstrom, ....... 


Balida -siccis singin’ 


Bane of Enchanted Beings 
Bane of the North...,..... 


Benn Griff’s ............- 


Blackflame .............. 


Blade Shape and Feature. . . . 
Blade Material ........... 


Blue Dragon Bane 
Brightblade............ 
of Bronze, Dancing. 


of Dancing .......... 
Dancing, of Lightning. . 
e a i MEPA ag eo 
Death-to-Monsters . . 


Dragon Cimin na a 


Draxalon, Defender 
of Feminine Virtue ............ 1357 
Dreamsinger 4c vicina ces cases 1357 


rwacn 


Ebonbane 
Edge, The 


Elven 


Sword 

EVSTI 5:05:55: ip Es 1365 
Evil Wyrmslayer., ET O A ye 1366 
Evithyan’s Blade. .............45 1366 
Excalibur: yesir . 1366, 1367 
Extraordinary Powers ............ 1401 
FE AE EAT TO ETO 1367 
FOROS PLOUHIC 6-5 :0:6:0:0-sscio nasi aese 1367 
Feather Token... cso: ses vass 469 
n AIPE T TO 1367 
P eee er rc 1367 
anoal. AE R AEAN EE E erent 1368 
Lin T T SARP E AR 1368 
POTO A i paN an A 1368 
T A E E T T A 1368 
Flame Tongus. .. ss ossos osse ssso 1368 
Flame of the North ,...........45 1368 
Flame Tongue .....-...6.ese0005 1369 
Flames on Command ...........- 1369 
PGI REEE seat tear 1369 
Floating Blade of Shin Lu ........ 1369 
Flying Scimitar of Tusmit 

a AEA slik ea dais signi 
Fodhitidots kiea iha kaet 
Forester’s Friend ... . . . . (See Dyerwaen) 
| O N ry en oS 1370 
Fragarach.......... (See The Answerer) 
PROVE ena aims a en aE 1370 
Frey's Two-Handed .............. 1370 
Freya’s Frost Brand.............. 1370 
Of Friendships. raii 1370 
Pret Brand: sii ii 1370 
ee TREE ERE ea) 1371 
Geman TA E AE EEIEIE 1371 
Genie Slayer.. ocos 1371 
Gents B:s iiia 1371 
Genietlignt senica 1372 
Geniescourge 0.60465 ss ceee ces 1372 
GI SE sinara 1372 
of Giant Slaying .... s... seser 1372 
of the Giants... anasi 1372 
Githyanki Silver ............6065 1372 
HOTS aana aN 1372 
Goblinvolent:.. eseis ia 1372 
of the Golden Gulf .............. 1372 
GOLOM: cnin ano 1372 
Er a SEERE E A E T 1373 
GOKE Ea sis r o 1373 
CB BY ces pa E 1373 
e RITE EA 1373 
Gregory's Holy Avenger .......... 1373 
E a AREORA EA 1373 


Handle Shape and Feature ........ 1336 
Handle Material 


BONY iia 5's aie 


Hornblade. . . 
of Horus .... 
AO REO E OA 

Ilbratha, Mistress of Battle........ 1376 
Iineval’s Broad irs 1377 


UR scene np NA 
Indra’s Flaming . 

of Insanity 

Intelligence and Capabilities ..... . 1399 
Of Intercession. ......,..0.06e2 000 1377 
SROGIONG coo EE ET 1377 


Kusunogi No Tsurugi............ 1380 
E a e OEA TILSAT 1380 


1380 


1380 


Life Siligo nnas 1380 
Life r REOS 1381 
E R EEEN RE 1381 


a iiss we AILA TELAS 1383 
Meredin’s Luck Blade............ 1383 
MNT ES S A A 1383 
Mitra’s, of Light ..... s.es 1383 
Monster Slayer .....56..-s0eeee 1383 
Moon Blade: sos. savesccescces 1383 
MORO o sicensset wees 1383 
Movanic Deva.........s+0e0005 1383 
Naesowen, Ghost Blade .......... 1384 
NORI votro anino osas 1384 
Namara Neversleep.........-.+.. 1384 
DOCKET A T AS TEN 1384 
a E EE T S TERS 1385 
DENR o iaoea enanat 1385 
Nightwatcher. ........,..0ss0005 1385 
NBR WIN 5 Stei cine every: aaa 1386 
Nine Lives Stealer............06 1386 
Nine Steps Draining............. 1386 
ERB fink o430,0 019 E crs oii be 1386 
OB OUI o ac-00'0 visi A T OT. 1386 
MRT IEAA TENE IEE TT 1386 
AO r RAEN TATT 1386 
OWE Sas tise AAE A IS 1387 
l PORAN TIA EENT S 1387 
n PAREA O E 1387 
r PATTA T E TT 1387 
PRES, PITIA OTETI 1387 
UII VIAE ANNIN re 1387 
Vera PONY O ANE 1387 
Pian ri ian ea 1387 
PRB Seid eins easter es 1387 
Of the Planes. rssi sii cau iies 1387 
POBONSWONE na nEss 1388 
Pommel Material ..............5 1336 


ROG BIC aare td 1388 
OCONEE Sere sipnoracence recur nenee 1388 
Rel Astran, of Enmity............ 1388 
Ren, of Dancing ss sesers eeoa 1388 
Reptilian Legionnaire...........+ 1389 
RERUN E E AS 1389 
Rutterkin Flatchet.... 0na 1389 
GWG GONE EAR AE 1389 
T EEE A A TT, 1389 
SNE ese ieoor hia tie 1389 
n ROO CEEE E 1054 
Scoble CIEE. o 5 i.cso.¢scseeegees 1389 
Scales of Justice .........+. 5000+ 1389 
SOMMOENE ARYE A LECT 1390 
SORA AAE E ET 1390 
Scimitar of Speed ............... 1390 
BOGHIANG sole nu wining hse sss x AN 1390 
Scourge of Regenerators.......... 1391 
Serpent Slicer. >. cscs seats 1391 
AA ES, 1391 
Seventh Blade: Siinses is 1391 
Shadowsword s.s sse eoar 1391 
Shalandain’s Holy Avenger... ..... 1391 
OF Shame saar a a A 1391 
Sh'arien, Sun Blade ............. 1391 
Of Sharpness: oisi 1392 
Skezzalhm inanin 1392 
Shichi’s Katana; sses sasi 1393 
Shimmering Blade of Shin 

a E A E E 1394 
Shina-Tsu-Hiko’s ..... 0.a 1394 
Shock Bladé isi cissarsei stona 1394 
pt See epee roy VETETT, 1394 
SOBs er aa needed 1394 
Silencer of Bodash .............5 1394 
SUING ENEE O 1396 
Siva’s Scimitar .........6..0¢505 1396 
Of Skewering. 2.00.0. sce sense 1396 
en SOR A T E 1396 
a E A S a varies 1396 
a ELOLE E E aa 1396 
Snow on The Mountain. . s.a 1396 
Soulblade s.. sesine piin 1397 
OL SOUS. LT E E, 1397 
SOEKE, osna eA 1397 
Special Touches ....... sesers 1335 
n O A A E 1398 
Special Purpote. se: so s-e ssaa soie 1402 
Ea RSS OE O TE T 1403 
Spellbinder ... 5) ....00 52 Sede een 1403 
SPM esoe paroon nnaman 1404 
SpiritDurner,.,.....0¢.0000 r, 1404 
TTET T: 1405 
Sar AA) EEE ET i, 1405 


Surtr’s Flaming . essee seeen 1406 
Suryas, of LIBBE: .........+5+005 1408 
Susanoo’s Blue ...,........ ... 1408 


As WAAL AS coat 
Syrar’s Silver............ .. 1407 
Taragarth, The Bloodbrand . .. 1408 
Tarl Vanovitch’s Sun Blade. 


Sword 

WORM: Pacsaip n A 1409 
DEF sce cvescepstiebutes¥s 1409 
pe eee ee ee 1411 
a TOPPA 1411 
Tyr’s, of Sharpness .............. 1411 
Undead Slayer. ...... o.oo oeenn 1411 
of Underwear Snatching .......... 1411 
UEB ss sseeeosoisoosstese i411 
Vainamoinen’s. .... 6.66666 eee es 411 
Vampiric Regeneration, .,........ 1412 
Vanya's Wrath... 5.0.65 sesceeen 1412 
VRBO EAN ae ators 1412 
Vegadain’s Broad Sword... ....... 1412 
OTEP TA IAA 1412 

ki a. PINSEL IIIN T N. 1412 
rN eee 1412 
Warlord Blade of the Shield Lands. . 1412 
a EITE I TET DIEN 1413 
Whirlwind Blade. ............... 1413 
WANG: irasra ces a 1413 
of the Wild Coast ...... 2.665005 1413 
Willow Wand «0.2.6... TE, 1413 
OE WIGKES <6 cicocascrneneaeeuesy 1413 
WoOdhold E EAT E. 1413 
of Wounding IIEL TLES 1414 
Wyrmeleaver. ... 2.6.66 e ce ceeee 1414 


Sylaire, Enchanted Sword of .. . 

Symbiotic Protection, Cloak of 

Symbol 
of Greyhawk, Holy ........++++505 597 
Larmacian Holy . ., . 597 
Prismal's Holy. ... . . 597 
of Ravenkind, Holy, .............+ 598 


$ 

Tabard of the Mystics... ........... 1417 
pe BRU ys OR Ae rer rr 820 
Table 

Machine of Lum 

the Mad, Failure .............4. 687 

of Banquets... .. . . . 1417 

of Contents . . . . 1417 

of the Elements . 1417 

of Plenty .... . 1417 

Writing .... . 1418 
Tablecloth Augricrone’s ......,..... 1418 
Tablecloth of Feasting ............. 1418 
‘Tables, Magical Item Random ....... 1567 
Tablet 

Desalination i550 accesscesives 

of Fate, Myrkul's 

of Spirit Summoning ...........- 1418 
Tack of Flight, Ginzani’s Riding ...... 530 


Tackle Box & Portable Canoe, Goerl's. . 214 


Tackle, Prismal’s Block and .......... 913 
Tadrond’s Mace si si rnanan 681 
Tal Guardin, sis icsse 550 
Tail, for Rhun’s Horned Cloak ....... . 308 
Taker Sword, Life. .......-..--.--+ 1381 
Takht of the Jann ........... TITR] 
Talel El Hareidhin’s Spellbook... . . . . 1244 
GAVAGE 0 si Sisco sees 1419 
of the Beast.............-. 1420, 1421 
of Chaos Supreme. .......-..-+++ 1421 
of the Chimera ......2.-.-.0000 1421 
of the Cockatrice. ............0.5 1421 
ie OET ETA 1421 
of Elemental Travel. ............. 1421 
OE Gre FOO OTE EET 1422 
WE III II I EE OLETA TEE 1422 
Penson 1422 
A A I SETE 1422 
of the Gina osassa 1423 
Hwesta's, of Memorization. ....... 1423 
Of Lawfulness iesnas 1423 
Medicine Bundle. ............... 1423 
of Memorization. ..... 2.0.65 6665 1424 
DEBBY A E Roewierudawentis rea 1424 
Modified, of Zagy............55+ 1424 
Monkey Head. .............++++ 1424 


Tam's Fruit of Extra Healing, Kulver- . . 634 


Tamate-Bako (Box) ......-....05005 216 
Taming, Bridle of ....... . 224 
Taming, Saddle of... .... 1050 
Tamus, Gauntlet of ........ . 508 
Tanar'ri, Arrow of Harming -.. . . 90 
Tanar'ri, Scroll of Protection from . . . . 1080 
Tangibles and Intangibles, 

Alterations of ............... 1137 


Tangle of String . . . . 
Tanglevine Root . . . . 


Tanning Ointment. . 782 
Tantalus, Tenser's .. 2... 6. eee eee eee 409 
Tapestry 
Disease Warding.............-.-- 
OF EKG. oesesssee 
of Folded Existence 
CT ROME. COSPI 
Tar’s Chaotic Creature Whip 
Ti The Bloodbrand, Sword. 
Tarl Vanovitch'’s Sun Blade 
Tarot Deck of Many Things . > 
Tarot, Fiend of the.. co.ee 
Tart 
of a Summer's Day ..... 2... 66556 1428 
of Accusation .. . . 1428 
of Enticement . . . 1428 
Taryn’s Tub... . . 1462 
Tasogare ........ - +» 1382 
Tasirin’s Spellbook ................ 1244 
Tasked Genies, Scroll of Protection vs, 1078 
Tasslehoff'’s Magic Mouse Ring 
Tasso’s Arcanabula,.......... 
Taste Dullness, Dust of.............5 419 


Taste, Necklace of Bad.........-.++5 748 
Taste Powder, Good .......55 6050055 903 
SR Ritig OF 505045055 000908 ewes 979 
THK... 5 i cinscctenqasquseesvire 1428 
Tattoo Scroll... .- 6.6 csc eee ee cree 1085 
Tattoos, Needle of Lively ............ 753 
Tea 
ROMA SIATT ESTIN 931 
Set of Skill and Grace... ....... 1428 
a AEST I E ESRT 1428 
n I a AR E ATT 848 
Tears, Vainamoinen’s .............. 1469 
Tedium, Libram of .......6.. 6.600005 668 
Teeth (See also: Tooth) 
BOW, Piss errer eyed isra 205 
n E REATO D AAEN EEA 1041 
WHINE SPENT EEI AERE 1495 
E Sword SENENI TT. 1409 
Telekinesis, Ring of .............-- 1003 
Telekinesis, Weapon of...........-. 1526 
Golos Helm of... .... 6.60 soes 589 
SORIA OE. ovia reverses 593 
Ring of Limited ....,.....5.00506 974 
eh ane disse ps O A 1526 
Teleport Pad, Chemcheaux.......... 1453 


Temperance Card ZEEE TTE 388 
Temperature 

(AT) Lens, Yellow Ambient ....... 1067 

a ee Poet ee ene 200 

Control, Armor of... 2... ....655+5+ 82 
Ten Thousand Winds, Airolis's 

Shining Horn of .............- 1542 

Ten-Penny Nail. ............-+6.+5- 746 
Tendrilight, Bashal’s........... 636, 1143 
Tengu Control, Potion of ............ 872 
Tenh, Eyepatch of... ......66s0000ee 463 
Tenh, Flaming Mirror of. ,,.........- 728 
Tenser’s 

Portmanteau of Frugality .......... 261 

Ibook 


Thaddigren’s Glowglobes........... 1270 
Thal’s Ring of Mind Shielding... . . . 1003 
Tharadodus'’s Spellbook............ 1247 
Thaumaturgy, Censer of... .......... 270 
Thayvian Beacon ...........-.-.455 163 
Theft, Charm of Protection from ...... 283 
Thelandira’s Bow, Solonor........... 210 
Theodolus’s Cloak of Arachnida ...... 311 
Theon’s Folding Boat. ...........5+5 181 
Theories on Converging 
E o 56.5 0:59 5 cre T 1251 

Theories on Perception... ......... 1251 
Theory of Occult Visual Shock ...... 1251 
Theory of the Invisible Forces ....... 1251 
Thesis on Conditional Ruptures. . . . . . 1247 
Thessall’s Wayguider ........... . 646 
TAOS PRD O N TT 43 
Thief 

BOM. ainnean naon 

Finger of the Master.........-.... 

Thief Negation, Ring of e: 

Thumb of the Master ............. 
T 


Thieves 

Arrow of Slaying ....-.---+--+++++ 99 

Cant, Ring of the s% 

Tools of Stealth...............-- 
Thillonrian Shield of Berserking ..... 1105 
Things, Rod of Many.............- 1031 
Thinness, Potion of......... .. . 892 
Thiondar, Stone of Gul and -. .. 1311 
Thithion’s Wand of Fire ... . . .. 1495 
Thee Kaew soe aaas 120 
Thor’s Magical Gloves of Power . 545 
Thorn of Sleep ............-- . 1431 
Thorns, Book of (Spellbook) . . 1251 
Thoth, Libram of .......... .. -668 
TOY SA oie tae eee. 1298 
Thought 

a A en Sagas AITITA 200 

Projection, Locke's Medallion of . . . . 713 

Projection, Medallion of. 

Ring of Clear ........... 

Fome OF Clete iroonia 
Thread 

WPASOING RIIT IAE LTS 

of Commands. ........ 

of Embroidery. ........ 
Thrivaenstel, Sword .............. 
Throbbing, Harp of...........-.... 
Throbriand’s Master Ring 

of the Scaladar............+-++ 1004 

Throne 

COME Ea E Rr 380 

CORN i Etne 1432 

A GONE. eo shee EAE 1432 

Hlidakinlf > 9:6:sin:si0rcicn-ecniecdeetea 1434 

e r PRASAT 1434 

EEE ceos wiathingisiainiesiocene® 1434 

of Summoning .. s sess essees oses 1435 

of Transformation.............+. 1435 
P N PEETER, 552 
Throwing 

1 SENE PORE T I EE 120 

OTA ERSEN 369 

Dagger, Hastseltsi’s..........-++++ 364 

Dagger of Returning.......-....+- 369 

1 eae eee 620 

Star Of Ojy-d0...., 0+ senceseescce 1435 

Star of Returning .....-......... 1435 
Thuba’s Book of Vile Darkness ....... 192 
Thuba's Efreeti Bottle. .............. 201 
Thumb Height Man’s Axe ........... 120 


, naan aaa as 


Thumb of the Master Thief. .......... 480 
Thunder 
D OF TESTOS OTE 820 
and Lightning, Staffof........... 1299 
| OTe Ree CO 1003 
Thunderbolts 
Colgomere’s Hammer of.....,..... 551 


Moto Moto Rod ............-++ 
Thurbrand’s Protector.............. 
Thurl's Spellbook ............ 

Tide, Pearl of the Ebbing 
Tide, Pearl of the Rising... .. 


Bomb, Brindletople’s .......-.-..- 601 
Bomb, Wethilion’s . 


Timelessness, Oil Of... .....- 2.6.66 778 
Timely Portrait, Norval’s ..........-. 106 
Timepiece of Klorr..... -... 1436 
Timesweep, Sword . . . 
Tisiphone’s Whip . .. . 
Titania's Wand 52552 se ccsiacansines 1495 
Titans 

Arrow of Slaying . . 


of Gainful Exercise.............. 1441 
of Garden Flowers .........--++- 1441 
of Glowing Pages ........-..-.+ 1441 
CHIEN VENNE ais sina teas dace 1182 
Guardian of the............+2+55 1226 
Herald of Mei Lung .....,......- 1441 
of Hopeful Deeds ..........---.- 1442 
of Hopeless Deeds ......,.--...- 1442 
of Humorous Perspective ......... 1442 
of Immoral Sanity. .........-...- 1442 
of Infinite Spells. ............... 1442 
FOE EO a AA EA 1442 
of Leadership and Influence... . . . . 1444 
of Psionic Interaction ..........-- 1444 
of Quickness of Action..........- 1444 


1657 


of Saintly Sanity ...............5 1444 

of Seven Fingers...........-.+++ 1444 

A EA I E A T 1445 

of Understanding .........-....5 1444 

Vacuous Grimoire. sses seroso 1445 
A TTE 563 
Tomorast’s Spellbook.............. 1252 
Tomorrow, Fountain of.............. 498 
Tong, Rutterkin Snap- ...-......... 1048 
Tongue, Flame, Sword............. 1369 
Tongue, Ring of the Druidic.......... 973 
Tongues 

FORO OF 5 i). 5-05.00 Mia I OE 893 

PNG OF cos aaa wens ETEN sone 1004 

SWE: Olhisssaincicvinemascise Soper 1384 
Mi ke ee eer TES mT) 1426 
Tonic, Durimal’s Sovereign .......... 828 
TORUG, aa a EREET ETET 443 
Tool, Alternate World Gate, Pocket .. . . 501 
gino OTN steele 1445 
Tools 

Gemcutter's, of Sunndi...... . 530, 1446 

Thieves, of Stealth.............- 1446 

Woodworker's, of Dyvers ........ 1446 
Tooth (See also; Teeth) 

of Dahlver-nar. 


Toothed Glaive, Saw-.. .. . 


Topaz Dragon Slayer, Sword . 
Topaz of Neverwinter. . . 


Tor, Torc of the Gods at ............4 1452 
Tore 

Betemis esis sess ee 1451 

of Craftsmanship. ..............- 1451 

of the Goddess ............25055 1451 

of the Gods ....... 1452 

of the Gods at Tor . . - 1452 

OF Stabilty T pace Co ET 1452 
Torch 

Contre RESELE S 

of Continual Fire. 

of Control ...........+ 

Fiery Brand of Masauwu 

Gruumsh’s Everburning . . . 
Torloch’s Saddle of Comforts. 
Torm, Tooth of 
Torshorak ...... 
Tortoise Shield 
Totem, Bison Skull. ...........-+-+. 172 
Totem, Kolkis’s Evil Skull ........... 172 
Touch 

Dullness, Dust of ............0555 419 

Potion of the Corrosive. . -858 

Potion of the Midas. . . 879 

Ring OE te .979 
Toughening, Potion of . - 893 
Tourmaline Turtle Figurine. -..477 
Towel, Everclean ..... «447 
Tower Card........ 389 
Tracelessness, Dust of . +423 
Tracer Deck ....... +404 
Tracking, Rake of. -932 
Tracks, Boot of... .. 198 
Tracks, Boot of Varied . . 198 
Tragedy, Mask of ....... . 706 
Tragic Heroism, Potion of 893 
Trail Dispersion, Dust of . - 423 
Training, Muzzle of . . . . 743 
Training, Whistle of . 1558 
Traldar, Eye of ..... . 459 
Trance of the Intellect. ............. 1252 
Transmorgrification, Wand 

OBENEM: senaren eaaa tae 1479 

Transcendental Impenetrabilities . . . . . 1253 
Transcription, Quill of ............-- 928 


a le rt“ (Nw. UY 


a 


Transference, Candle of ..........0++ 245 Tree GEM NE METEORER T. | 
Transference, Irons of............... 620 Climbing Charm..........-.....+ 283 e « v 69:0 42549458 
‘Transformation Feather Token ........--.--<++0++ 469 ae 

PRR OF a s50 ce bie n 43 Galak Sine ES E OTTER 1455 Aa CETE 

E L ARP COE DEAN 656 EAD soos ces nieres 1455, 1456 Tuerny the Merciless, Iron Flask of . . . 

Paddleboard of Wondrous. ..... .. . . 801 FME; s esus i os panistas 1458 Tufala’s Jambiya 

TRE OE osoo asa casana 1435 of the Ravenous .........-...-++ 1458 Tulen’s Plate Mail of Etherealness / 
Transitions, Theories of Unending Lamentation. ........ 1458 Tulrun’s & Nchaser's Spellbook . . 

on Converging. ... 6.6.66 6.00065 1251 EVEN a 6)p 0's. EEE 1458 Tunic of Glory ........-.-5+ 

Translating, Weapon of............. 1526  Tri-Entity, Sword .........-.....05 1409 Tunic, Wizard’s............. 5 
Translation, Key of, ..............4. 633 Triad of Betrayal. ...............5 1458 Tunnelrunner’s Axe... ..-..-- 66.000 
Translation, Libram of ..........-.... 669 Triangulation, Antennae of............ 50 Tunnels/Passages, Potion 
Transmission, Scrolicase of Document . . . 261 TE RE o PITA T REN, 649 of Detect NON issia 895 
Transmogrification, Wand of Element. . . 1479 TR DIE ss sce ciccieswetessisiees 413 Turban | 
Transmutation, Scroll of............ 1085 Trickery, Mask of... .......0-00006 706 Feather is oa i a 
‘Transmuting, Bag Of, s.s s asss 137 TA DEE Ea 138 of Genie Summoning i 
Transport, Chain of... s.s.s 6.665005 273 Trident of Multiplication.......... 
Transport, Rod of Expeditious ....... 1027 Bisa or A T EIEE, Ss Mfr 
Transportation, Whisper’s Rod of. . . . . 1042 of Elemental Death. .............. 844 i 
Transporter Pad EA TSE 1454 of Fish Command ............ 841, 844 
Transporting, Arrow of.............. 101 gg eee S44 | 
Transporting, Dart of ............... 375 Niord’s Great...............0.00 842 
Transports, Box of Delightful ........ 212 O-Wata-Tsu-Mi's Jade ..... 2.6... 842 
Trap of the Oljatt Sea ........6...00 50s 844 


SEO RT E E E 1085 Planar Artifacts............... 1460 
Trinity Oil/Powder ............. 778, 910 
Detection, Weapon of .........-.. 1511 Tristan g Sword. 0.0.0 cccccescocses 1355 
oo OEE ene Eee 695 of the Tritons, Horn... ............. 1547 Dagger 
Map of Illusions and.............. 692 Trobriand (Throbriand), Ring of ..... 1004 Golden Robe. ......s.0sceeeeees 1017 
Map of Magic and,,.............. 693 Troll, Arrow of Polymorphing ......... 93 PEA PE nd scot 1464 
Map of Mapping and ............. 694 Troll’s Bane Sword, .........-+.++5 1411 Twelve Seals, Book of ...........045 192 
Map of Secret Doors and ........., 695 ROU ATAT A TT S 1091 Twelve Seals, Libram of... .... sss 669 
/Pits, Potion of Detect Stonework. . . . 895 Troppenribb’s Goggles .............. 547 Twenty Oil/Powder, 
Scroll of Protection from ......... 1080 True Böli B e o ect ecevcscesas 765, 900 
Weapon of Find. ................ 1511 AME EPET TEEL LEIEN 48 Twilight, Mask of. .......n aaisan 707 
Travel Dragonlance TE OEE EREET 649 Twrithkle, Dd ossai 1411 
Barding of Deceptive ............. 158 Seeing, Eyeglasses of ............. 463 Twited Caw ono esc eeneectinnian 294 
Barding of Easy ‘ Vision, Telescope of ...........4. 1429 Two Fingers Amulet... o. oses 44 
Canoe of Trucheart's Warding ............6.06+ 66 Two-Handed Sword, Frey’s.......... 1370 
C ssiri sinisa rnan Truesilver’'s Mace, Berronar.......... 675 Two-Handed Sword, Sess'innek’s. . . . . 1391 
Chalice of Planar Truesilver's Silver Ring, Berronar .. . . . 949 Tyche, Diamond Orb of ............. 784 
ot PE ETS re eee Trumpet, Doom ........-.---..055 1557 Tymessul'’s Enchiridion of Travel . . . . . 1253 
Gourd of E eegneeeset eins 287 Tyr’s Sword of Sharpness... ........ 1411 
Greater Talisman of Elemental Truth Tzolo’s Guardian .......-.-..2.045 1464 
Mirror of. od SPCR EEE Perey srr 370 Tzolo’s Guardian, Oval Stone of ..... 1314 
Mirror of Improved. .............. 728 DINE ORAN aceweveees pune 895 Teas Stall, Lao is oe see TE 1283 
Potion of Determining Hoinbee's Ring of... ............55 969 Tzunk'’s Spellbook .........6..6665 1165 
DCO OF. EITT 895 WOR RRN SEN TS 609 
E IAAT 874 U 
aA ISTIL 735 
Mirror of Glimmering. . ........... 727 "Ud of the Marids.......-.....0555 1333 
WO cosh acivoceavedestctieans $10 Udo's Belt of Flying..............-. 170 
POU OF es icic T sie ces ase 893 Ugliness 
e i OF ALELOS AT 928 E e NETTA NS Te 274 
a OF ETET 934 a A OTET 752 
BaF NORET PEA 1004 PON OE PEE a 895 
L LATT OTT FAE 1052 Wand of Beauty and............. 1475 
D OES tisian ira 1066 CET Da EEEE 1560 
TERESA SOON T FT E E Ulcrun (Poison) .................. 1202 
Treachery, Bell of......... Truth’s Right Arm............--... 1373 Ultimate 
Treant, Potion of the Pseudo. Truthfulness, Ring of ............45 1004 Evil, Talisman of. ...........6055 1426 
Treasure Truthlessness, Ring of ............. 1005 Spelljamming Helm ...........5++ 581 
SOF ANATA T TAT OEE 21 Tsurugi, Kusunogi No, Sword ....... 1380 Wisdom, Pearl of ......-. ao 808 
Finding Potion. ...........---+005 893 Tub Ultravision, Lens of ...... 2.66.6 655+ 656 
Fishing, Fishing Pole of ........... 483 FURS caddy II L TO PAEA 1462 Uluth’gak’s Gythka. .... o.oo 6.06555 846 
Treatise on Fixed Portals, Peregrin’s . . 1214 GER AE E F 1462 Ulutiu, Necklace of ..............++ 752 
1658 t 


Umber Hulk Cloak. ...........25655 302 
Unbreakable Weapon ......-....... 1526 
Uncertain Friendship, Benson's 
a Ae i ARNT tire 1055 
Uncertainty, Scarab of ............. 1058 
Uncharged Weapon............+.++ 1526 
of Uncontrollable Striding & 
Springing, Horn .............. 1548 
Undead 
E WB iain PA een ats 35 
Armor of the........... 0.05 82 
Arrow of Harming .......... $5090 
Arrow of Slaying ......... 97,99 
BANG 66 as: s:areore9. 00 26.9:5,98-89 .- 681 
TROT onan EN He .- 201 
Control, Potion of......... . 895 
Dart of Slaying ........... ..375 
Groaning Spirit Bottle ... . . . - 202 
Potion of the’. ssis senes irs . - 895 


Ring of Protection from .. . . 
Scroll of Protection from ......, 
Shell of Protection vs. ...... ... 439 
Slayer, Sword .......... 
Stone, Kaleen’s..........- 
Weapon with Bonus vs, .. . vee 
Underdark, Wand of the............ 1496 
Underground Awareness, Potion of . . . . 895 
Underground, Potion of 
Determining Depth............. 
Undersea Boat .............. a 
Undersea Friendship, Amulet of. 
Understanding, Earring of 
Understanding, Tome of............ 
Underwater 
Action, Armor of ..........+650005 


Chit iit rte scenes ee 
Crossbow .......-..+ 

Sight, Goggles of 
Speech, Circlet of 
Vision, Helmet of 


Unending Lamentation, Tree of... . . . 
Unenlightened Being, Arrow of 

SYNE EUREC IEEE TSL 99 
Unfailing Light Candle.............. 245 
Ungulian’s Sword, Bascom. ......... 1388 


Universe, Seven Skies of the ........ 1231 
Universe, Unknown 
Movements of the ...........56 1259 

Unknown 

n Ea A Y EERE AEE LIII 1196 

Movements of the Universe ....... 1259 

Warrior, Oyori of the ...........455 78 
Unlocking, Key of ..........-20-06 633 
Unlocking, Oil of 


Unnecessary Violin. ........2....05 1334 
Unsafe Construction, Potion of Detect. . 895 


of Hindsight ............. 

of Water Purification ...... 
Urnst, Golden Girdle of ..... . 
Urnst, Iron Gauntlet of... ... . 
Uroth, Caeren-Uroth Sword 
Useful 

Appendages, Potion of ............ 895 

Enchanted Gear, Prismal’s . . 


VEER n AET 210 


Vampire 


Bottle, Undead sososasser rcii 202 
Coffin of Creation. .... sses sees 317 
Control, Potion of... ...... sss 854 


Slaying, Bow of ...........+- 206, 210 
Vampires, Scroll of Protection from. . . 1081 
Vampiric 

Bow of Heartseeking ............. 206 

Ixitxachitl and Lacedons 

Protection Periapt .........-.... 827 


Regeneration, Ring of............. 993 

Regeneration Sword ...........-. 1412 
Vampirism, Potion of ............605 895 
Vainamoinen’s Sword. ............+ 1411 
Vane of Location ..........2.2.0++ 1469 
Vangerdahast's Ring... ....-.....++5 978 
Vanishing, Bag of.........-...0-+0+ 139 
Vanishing, Robe of............6005 1018 
Vanity, Mirror of. .......6..0.0e0 00s 735 
Vanovitch’s Sun Blade, Tarl .,....... 1409 
Vanya’s Wrath, Sword .........-... 1412 
Vapor Flask- i oc ssn Wie 490 
Vapor, Wand of Steam and.......... 1494 
Vapors, Candle of............6..006 245 
Vapors, Ring of. .....-.........5.. 1005 
Variable Strength, Armband of........- 67 
Variations on the Visual Perception . . . 1261 
Varied Tracks, Boot of .............. 198 
Varlo’s Ring of Feather Falling. . « 1005 
Varrakas (Poison) ......... .. 1202 
Varuna’s Mace ... 2.60. eee cere eeeee 682 
a 0 535, ese sasviecen vices sales 1412 
Vast Swamp, Horn of the ........... 1549 
Vecna 


Powder of the Black . Pe 
of X-Ray Vision .............6+5 


Velvet Crown ...... 


Vengeance, Dagger of . 
Vengence, Hammer of . . . 


Venom 
Dagger of... 2.201005. 366, 371, 1375 
R r E AE T NT 650 
Potion IEEE TTI AT 896 
Scars R AERES AET NONE 1059 
Tree of. . 1458 
Weapon of........ . 1527 
Ventriloquism, Potion of. a.. B96 
Ventriloquism, Potion of Reverse. ... . 887 
Verbena Oil/Powder .........+-+ 779, 910 
Vergadain’s Broad Sword ... 1412 
Vergadain’s Necklace . .. .. 753 
Vermin, Robe of. . . .. 1018 
Version, Dane’s.........++++ 690 
Verthandi’s Invincible Hourglass . 604 
Vest of Attraction ...........+ 1470 
Vest of Missile Protection 1470 
Vestment of Power .......-.+ 1470 
Vesve Forest, Purple Gem of the . $27 
Vhaeraun’s Sword......-...+ . 1412 
Vial of Durance t471 
Vial of Explosions ......... . 867 
Vibrant Purple Prism of Detection. . . . . 519 
Vibration, Oil/Powder of ........ 779,910 
Victory, Rod of... sse as 1042 
Vidar, Iron Shoe of... . 1111 
Viewing, Lens of Remote -655 
Viewing, Orb of Distant. ...... see 184 
Vigor, Seal AE O 1088 
Vile -` 
Darkness, Book of ..........66005 192 
Darkness, Thuba’s Book of......... 192 
Odors, Cheese of. sssaaa 284 
Violets Of Pain ciosan c0s-00 wean’ 1471 


Violin 

Case Alternate World Gate ,........ 501 

Extreme 

Game...... 

RICK: assas 

Saxon ..,....... 

Unnecessary 
Viper Standard, Nithian ............. 760 
Virgin Olive Oil/Powder......... 779, 910 
Virtue, Draxalon Defender 

OF FOMMING POTETE 1357 
Viscid Globs, Wand of ............+ 1496 
Visibility Candle. «ss eooo orin 246 
Vision 

and Arcane Sight, Eyes. asthe 1166 

Button of Rosy 

O Ae OPEET sensu sees 

Eyeglasses of Enhanced 

Glass of Distant 

Globe 

Helmet of Underwater 

MMOD ORo siosaia 

Oil/Powder of . 

Ring of X-Ray. ......0...000s 005 

BA OP EENE TAREE NEA E 1299 

Telescope of Fantastic............ 1429 

Telescope of True ...........2005 1429 

Veil of X-Ray ohoin 1469 

Weapon of X-Ray... ..........5. 1527 
Visions; Potion of. coc sic Siac 896 
Visiting, Window of ............... 1559 
Visitors, Chime of .........5.2s20+5 818 
Visor for Rhun’s Horned Cloak ...... . 308 
Visual Perception, 

Variations on The .......,..... 1261 
Visual Shock, Theory of Occult... .. . 1251 
Vitality, Potion of ss oes paresse iarr 896 
Vitroin, Hammer of .........+,+-++5 558 
Mik? GURL irnn a e 281 
EN, TT i E E 1132 
T ASAI AA EE S OE, 381 
Vizier, Ring of the ............0005 1005 
Viadium’s Fabulous Equine Brush... . . 


Voice of Heroes . 


Voodoo Masters, Dark Draft of the .... 


Voodoo, Oil/Powder of.......... 779, 911 
Vorpal isis aie siejcis'sia 112, 1336, 1341, 1369, 
1374, 1375, 1376, 1412, 1414 
Vorpal Axe, Ama-Tsu-Mara’s......... 112 
Vorpal Blade, Anton’s.............. 1341 
Vulnerability, Armor of ........ 2.2... 83 
Vulnerability, Potion of Fire... ....... 868 
Vulture Amulet... .6.....0...0 000 eae 44 
W 

Wagering, Dice of Certain ........... 406 
Waking Bagla: aaas aes 1538 
Wakizashi of Honor, Sword . ........ 1375 
WOIE We Wis aa ne cann Naade 108 
Walker Flask, Wind ....s.s sio b osio s.o 489 
Walker, Spiderwalker.............. 1271 
Walking 

Anklet ofsa vo scccnn ts trivessenetie ss 

Bead of Wind . 

Pegleg of..... 

Ring of Water . 

Rod of Blind 

Stick, Shou Hsing’s 


Wallac’s Potion of Speedcasting....... 896 
A EET D 168 
Wand 
Almen’s, of Illumination. ......... 1473 
of Animal Location. ............. 1473 
OB ARIARION rra a 1473 
Anything 


OR ALIVE DONT T Sine ma AET 


of Beauty and Ugliness ze 
Bisselite, of Peace.............05 
Rone 


POW iis cases wuss 
AE EEE EO OTT 
SE OOR sist ENa 
of Conjuration............ 
of Continual Light ........ 
of Corridors ............. 
Dalamar's, of Lightning 
Dark, of the Sulhaut Mountains . . . . 1477 


of Displacement .......... 
of Earth and Stone 


of Light nA 
of Lightening ..............0.00 
of Lightning .....655..0000c0088 
of Lightning Bolts 
Lightwand............... 


WES caspase tpesseseess 
of Magic Detection 
of Magical Mirrors 
of Magic Missiles 
Meriadar’s............. 


of Metal and Mineral Detection . . . . 1487 
Mirynda’s, of Polymorphing 
of Misplaced Objects ..... . 
E D AESAAT 


Nidus’s, of Endless Repetition ..... 
of Obliteration 
Of Ochalor’s Bye ...6s.0sceeevees 1490 


j TT 


Orgel’s, of Earth Passage ......... 1491 
of Paralyzation ..........0-0s005 
Phandore’s, of Fire 


of Prime Material Pocket ......... 1491 
Protection, Banner of 


Trap Location sssi vies ciiase owes 


of Size Alteration ............... 1494 
ÖL Sopir cites 1494 
of the Sguid aisa 1494 
of Steam and Vapor.............. 1494 
Of he Sun isso O esas 1494 
ORTON Fis Sis ietane neti 1495 
Thithion’s, of Fire............... 1495 
a ERTEILT 1495 
of Trap Detection ...........++++ 1495 
of the Underdark... ...........45 1496 
of Viscid Globs..............5+5 1496 
Of Warding ........-0 see reeere 1496 
of Water Finding..............+- 1496 
aA 5s opin 45056 T digs 1496 
WIN OW, SWORD. E 1413 
ag NO ee 1497 
of Wonder ...... 1497, 1498,1499, 1500 


Ward Statue, Scorpion ............. 
Warding 


Trucheart’s 


Warhammer, Goibhniu’s............. 554 
Warlord Blade of the Shield 


Warmth 


RING OF esane 953, 1006 


1661 


Warmth Watering Can, Zwann’s.............+ 237 Harm, Ring of Utmost, Browdow's . . 950 
|e A) GOAT REE Re Ete po ear 1018 Waterskin of Pouring . . . <... 1505 Of Healing eines EAR P SE 1513 
Silk Coverlet of. 00... sneis 173 Watertight. s cassie asi 329 OF RGINgs Fie EE A teen 1513 
Stone Of Missin enara a 1318 Watery Death, Bowl of.............. 211 with Hilt of Conjuring 1514 
Zambiw Fur oina 499 WE Sees iia a res 847 of Holding................ 1514 

Warning Waves, Magnetic and Electric ....... 1194 of Illumination .........-.....45 1514 
Abbor Alz’s Brooch of Wax Of Mlusion esheets 1514 
EaR SEAE ANAYA CENTET Céili a a S E i 1505 Intelligent in ai 1514, 1517 
Lk. REAO T EE of Careful Hearing .............. 1505 Eevisible i aa 1520 
Chine OF 5). eenah of Fabrication .........-.-0-++++ 1505 of Lefthandedness............... 1520 
SpheeGE OETI OENE TNE GE Heating PEREO TOIT 1506 Of Levitation iasi ia 1520 
MERE ss not OE EE E tite Fe 1431 n aT REA ETSN T O 1506 of Lighting iraa naa 1520 
T O rannat OF WADING TEREE ORT TTT 1506 Lightweight... isse esso e sie 1521 

Warp Mage Shot À Wayguider, Thessall’s,......,.+;+++- 646 LIVING 0 vivccacscivewpeanesees 1521 

NVAKS DAMEN C ssp 0:03 E E Wayland, Armet by... .......000005 584 Master, Statue of Power .......... 1304 

Warrior Weakening, Amulet of ............+++ 44 n E E 22 
E UO ETS (See Manual) Weakness NACINRIC, osio c.cnpepesincviemnad 1521 
HVS raas 348, 1116 NE aanrennen ENEA 446 PRI, MOARRE ETE y 1522 
Oyori of the Unknown ............. 78 FRSA NICOL ooo onneen 756 POR MOP PINE: 4:0; c0:si9:ss mer 0:0 PATS 22 
POrcalnin . 5(..6:is- ose ssaniecenee 348, 1094 RIDE G0 EOE EE TE E TE 1006 Primary Powers of..........+-+4: 1518 
Power, Potion of .......-..+ oes 882 Of Proficiency... 2... cececaverieee 1522 
Skeleton Coffin of Creation. ....... 317 PUOLET n soeieto iinis 1522 

Warstar of the Manticore ..........+.- 682 Weapon lre PEE ENESE ines 1522 

Washing, Soap of ...........+0.005 1126 AOS 5 rive comnnataca veneer 1515 MODE ic oinsa won E. 1523 

Washing, Tub of ......... .. 1462 Alignment... ... .. 1515, 1518 OF Returning... 54:04:05 vesawerged 1523 

Washio’s Trident, Zezen . . . -847 of Accuracy, Missile... .. esaea 92 of See Invisible... osporene esu 1523 

Waste, Horn of the Gray,........... 1546 of Adaptation .........4...00005 1507 SHiVetInG Sc se sic PATET ET 1524 

Waste, Horseshoe of the Gray ........ 600 Agoraphobic..........+-.+-.065 1507 OF Silene DEVIO IIE SN, 1524 

Watch Beetle Shield, Death . . -. 1094 Anti-Stoneskin ...........0..05. 1508 OF Silencing. s oo. i:0s05 cas eae'eieinn 1524 

Watcher, Night ...........5 .. 1385 Anything E nL PETTEE IESE 1524 

Watchers; The. sia aa 106 Aquatic OSN oenen 1524 

Watching, Weapon of .............. 1527 of Balance Of SIgn ees 1524 

Water Bloodfearer Special Purpose of ......... 1516, 1518 
Adaptation, Ring of ......... 959, 1006 Boneiron of Specialization. ..............5 1524 
Adaptation, Ring of Airand........ 959 Bonewood Spectral e2iciswicasenetnn 1525 
Adventuring, Potion of ............ 897 with Bonus vs. Opponent OF Speed eiia n Eana 1525 
Bisgedi RAS E 1505 of Breathing T REE 1525 
-Breathing Creatures Slaying Dart . . . 375 Brittleblade . . . Stemmons si sisses vx 1325 
-Breathing Monsters Slaying Arrow. . . 97 of Charming Of Surrendef oui ae 1525 
Breathing Monster Weapon Bonus. . 1509 of Clairaudience of Telekinesis y ois 1525 
Breathing, Necklace of of Clairvoyance. . of Telepathy. .\.2cv sos a 1525 
Breathing, Potion of .. . . Claustrophobic of Teleportation. .............505 1525 
Cauldron of Fresh... 2... 0.5... of Concealed Wizardry,.......... 1511 of Translating ..............2... 1525 
Chalice of Continual.............. Of Deceiving ........60..ccceesees 1511 TAAIE a s sso y aaa 1525 
Command, Ring of Elemental ...., . 959 of Defending............see¢ssees 1510 Urichargeds ases RAAR 1525 
Control, Potion of Elemental ...... . 866 EDONG: s ass sereset rras 1510 -Using Monsters, Arrow of Slaying . . . 97 
Decanter of Endless ........., 376, 377 Of Detect BVil |... 0.05 cinsceecveices 1511 Aar e MEERE PE EOIS 
Water Elemental of Detect Gems... .....00ceeees 1511 of Watching. ....-.....---- 

of Detect Good ......--..+00++0+ 1511 Weightless. OE EE 

of Detect Magic .......-.+++-+0+ 1511 OF WASTING: soio oran 

of Detect Metal...........020005 1511 WODE oeaio a na EEEO 
SHIGE EAAS AE ER 847 of Detect Shifting Walls of X-Ray Vision ......... 
Protection Scroll... .......0-0405 1077 ROOMS PORPORA E 1511 Weaponblack, Prismal’s 

Water (cont.) of Detect Slopes Weaponry 
Finding, Wand of ............55. DEDORCHOE  wiawpcuessnnienesed 1511 a A, APENE r EE E 231 
aa n EALE A AE AE of Disruption. ,........-++0+++5+ 1512 Elixir of Additional 
Hierophant, Ring of the . of Distance, Missile ...........+++5 92 Helmet of sses 00% 

BOW: A O IELAI LIETE OF Draining ANEETA T 1512 ROG A REINAERT 
Invulnerability, Oil of Elemental .. . . 768 DOW Sts cs anh Naan Ea 21 Weapons 
Lesser Talisman of ...........45+ 1421 Bitia enine 1516, 1519 vs. Characters ..... 
Metamorphosis, Ring of..........- 961 of Enchantment. ..........4-...5 1512 in Control of PCs 
Movement, Potion of ............- 897 Ephancemienté: «sisses sasas 1506 Ring of Resistance to Breath ....... 994 
Pill of Pentil sissi 837 OERS Pata as 1512 Scroll of Protection from 
Pipeta Ea 1556 of Extinguishing................ 1512 Nonmagical 
Pitcher of Continuous............. 838 of Extra Damage............-++5 1512 Weasel, Sword 
Purification, Urn of ............. 1466 of Find Secret Doors... .......... 1512 Weather, Cloak of. . 
Scroll of Protection from ......... 108: = OF Find Trapa.c. co ceesuaenaass 1512 Webnet 
Shane: aaaea anaa OS: Erkam ssaa a 1512 Webster's Spellbook 
Staffof ........ A sa) a || ae eas dae ae ry 485 Wedge, White 
1272;1278 = of Plame visa ec scandens 1513 Weed, Rapture. 
Nesp bie pip E EEIE TES 848 AANEEN AN A Weed of the Witch 
NEER PE EOR O T 892 EN DAE AS TE YOTO S] E Wegwiur, Wolf Cloak of.............312 
AENT, 1006 EA NEAL TOD FAE Weighing, Scale of ................ 1055 
RAI PRA Sere 594 E I AAR y Weight, Anchor of ..................47 
ees 1384 with Free Action, Aquatic...........21 Weight, Stone of.................- 1318 


Welcome, Rug of 
Welkwood, Rod of 


Wemick’s Cane of Striking 
Werebadger, Potion of the 


Whelm, Hammer ENESA 
Whetstone, Prismal’s 


Whirlwind Blade, Sword 
Whirlwind, Gong of the 
Whisper Jaanis’s Spellbook 
Whisper’'s Rod of Transportation 


Dragon Slayer, Sword 
Plate Armor, Heimdall’s . . . 


Wedge 
Well, Staff of the. 
White's Codicil... . 


Wife of Ilmarinen, s osos ereen 1534 
Wild 


Coast, Lucky Ring of the .......... 976 
Coast, Sword of the.........-.04+ 1413 
Emotions, Blowgun of ............ 176 
will 
Evolution of Arcane Will ......... 1165 
Power, Oil/Powder of ......... 779,911 
Powers of the Spiritual ........... 1215 
LE ELTI N A 1520 
Willow Wand Sword. ............++ 1413 
Winch of Power oo oasa assan 1535 
Wind 
BEG Ob POTEZI a LA ENS 139 
Dancing Flute, ese serssoreeoese 1542 
FUL O EIEE P A LEI 466 
FUR WRG COTAT OTOT ET 1532 
PO 605650 ssai 1535 
a EET IE ETTITA II] 1536 
Magic, Scroll of ...... 0.o 1086 
Magic Wizard Seroll............. 1086 
NUR 505i Sd ainn are er ANa 1386 
Pipe of Hotted . 0.45 .cse vee ccces 838 
POU A ECO T 140 
Spy, Cask of the sses roni 262 
Walker Plath iss isisisi iii 489 
Walking, Bead of ...........2...4 751 
Wdy LE erosi 650 
Window 
Ditis 1559 
of Dressing EA E 1559 
E 6 'o:0'5 0,6 oes vine cetie oui 1559 
OF POCPING OLA AE 1559 
OL SPYING. vic scrcsnseessyeedyes 1559 
Fs a ae 1559 
Winds 
Airolis’s Shining Horn of Ten 
TROUT, 90:6 ne cNvireseeeeees 1542 
Lamp of the Four .....-.......05+ 640 
PROM C8 sed casyvevscacivwcrevstes 707 
WROTE AOON E 1300 
WITS. « oor saorane oa 928 
Windwarding, Ring of ....... 2.5.45 1007 
Wine 
ET PONOT ENT 353 
n AETA 1559 
MAGE VETITE TOEI TTE 877 
Wing 
Kaasa Gio sosna 1560 
Al ALTITEN 469 
TEE NERE 1560 
Sigh Danovitche’s, of Flying. . 1560 
Wo-ha-Ui-jung ..... 066666650005 1560 
EOS oss Ged IR D ele 223 
Winged 
BOs aaie 0 iasidle S NS 198 
Boot, Oats n 194 
Boot, Runjoye's. ...........0s0005 196 
FOAM 0s Savcicsvesitiscsavibicecs 559 
HOUR casi cbiscesegevencoseses 594 
Miikse shs heia io 707, 708 
BGI OF PN SPEEA EEN 224 
of Flying, Sigh Danovitche’s. .... . . 1560 
of the Raker8,.......csssssevseee 311 
Winking a RAAT Eer E N E 461 
Whatter, Ring OF. cesov esis ee eeeses 
Wintergreen Oil/Powder 
Wisdom 
COU E S PO E de 
Kathena’s Pearl of. 
EE OF o e maa sananta nanasan 
POM EPOE 
Pearl of Ultimate 
Potion of Rogue 


Wishes 


Wizard’s 


Gilidarius's Ring of, .....4++.00500982 
and Invisibility, Ring of Cloaked .. .. 953 
ion of 


Rocckoe’s Ring of Bureaucratic . , .. . 995 
Shield of Concealed . . . 1094 
WO GE, . cassicesnesgis . 1300 
Staff of Aquatic........ - 1272 
Weapon of Concealed „A511 
Wizards, Scroll of. .....,. . 1086 
Wizzo's Ring of Compulsions . 1007 
Wo Mai, Acorn of. ..... 555055 $ 


Wand i AET TO 1497-1500 
Wand of asian ana ET 1501 
Wonderful Hand... assessoria 565 
Wonders, Zadron’s Pouch of. ......... 141 
Wondrous 
Lamp, Daoud’s nss 637 
Power, Deck OF 2.4.20 sence ioii 404 
Power, Dori’s Obsidian Steed of . . . . . 475 
Power, Figurehead of .........,..- 472 
Power, Figurine of. . .....65+5s06+ 478 
Transformation, Paddleboard of... . . 801 
WAUN SEE... cn vervvenscurtheos 928 


— ~~ — 


Woodlands 
REN OF a = TEE CEAR OAS EAA. 141 
Osmal’s Staff of the.............. 1288 
Staffofthe ........ 1288, 1301 
Woodsman, Axe of the ...........445 122 
Woodwalking Lute......... «++ 1329 
Woodworker's Tools of Dyvers. . 1446 
Wool, Lapland ..........4.5 . 650 
Word Balloon... . - 152 
Word Sword, Final ...... . 1367 
Words, Glass of Preserved ........... 537 
Workbook 
AOO rnai 1141 
Caddelyn’s. . 1155 
Glanvyl's. . 1176 
Shandaril's. 1233 
Wizard's .. 1261 
World Card........ 391 
World Gate, Alternate. . .. 501 
World-Shield Ore... ........-.6065 1561 
Worlds, Doors and 
Passages of Parallel............ 1165 
Worlds, Well of Many. . . . wa 1§28 
Worm Calling, Potion of, . 897 
Worm, Orb of the Eldest............. 785 


Wounds, Armor of Cure . 


Wounds, Shield of Cure ...........- 1094 
Wraith 
Bottle, Undead: sioti 202 
Coffin of Creation, ..........6.065 317 
Control, Potion of... i... 895 
Mask Of Msasani 708 
Wraiths, Scroll of Protection from. .. . 1081 
Wrath, Vanya's, Sword ............. 1412 


Written in Code, Spells ............ 1244 
Wrong Returning, Quiver of ......... 929 
Wu Jen Slaying, Weapon of ......... 1524 
Wyrm, Circlet of the... 0.0.60. c ee 292 
RINNE 0 5.5 oiensaran sna eneirs 1414 
WINER TAREE E E E 595 
Wyrmkin, Orb of the ..........0.05 794 
TOTTE: 1388, 1414 
VETERE, vo a ciccnsasveceusvees 1414 
Wyrmsvenin, Sword. .............. 1415 
Wyvernwater Circle, Book of the... .. 1265 
X 
r t SREE S 1431 
X-Ray Vision 
RINE OF asescar S 1008 
NOM OE erra aia TAN OR 1469 
a A AAA LE EN 1527 
Xanthippe of Annoyance ........... 1306 
Kaa Cot issiria 302 
Xebec, Xiphoid. .............. 182, 1415 


Xebec, Zosh’s, of Doom. ......-.... 1415 
Xenous, Face of .........---+eeees> 213 
Xerastos, Sting of............-..+- 1349 
Xiphoid Xebec ............045 182, 1415 
Xochiquetzal's Dagger .............5 371 
PORTER sissa a 489 
A an a OORTREE E 1563 
Xyz Oil/Powder ..... 6666500005 779, 911 
Y 
Yaga's Hut, Baba .............-..+ 604 
Yagrax's Spellbook................ 1137 
Yakuza Slaying, Weapon of ......... 1524 
Yama's Dagger ............--.--+++ 371 
Vanes Robe eos sss. Sec aee ee 1018 
Yammas (Glyph). .............-... 1202 
Yang, Spear of ..........c0eseeeee 1132 
Yaras's Spellbook, Lord ............ 1192 
a Non yo aces bed sce vested anes 349 
Tarus, CrOWR OF es ci cde cess cde odd 340 
Yasmin Sira, All-Knowing Eye of ..... 451 
Yatil Wand of Zooming ............ 1504 
Ye’ Clnd's Recorder .. sse.. sseessss 1556 
Yearning, Trident of... s.. .ee seen os 846 
Yefar's Magic Mirror .............55 736 
Yellow 
Ambient Temperature (AT) Lens .. . 1067 
Dragon Slayer, Sword 
eee ee 
Yellowskull 
Yeti Cloak 
Yin-Yang Mirror 
Ylang Ylang Oil/Powder. 
Yodeling 
Yoke 
of Boar Harnessing. ............+ 1563 
of Flight .......4. +s 1563 
of Irritation . . . 1563 
of Obedience. , 1563 
Practical ......... 1564 
of Underwater Action . 1564 
Yo-Yo of Fate ......... 1564 
Yondalla’s Shield . . . 1106 
Yondalla’s Sword ........ . 1415 
Youth, Amulet of Perpetual ........... 38 
Youth & Inexperience, Amulet of 
Porpoise 38 
Youth, Elixir of. . .. 446 
Youth, Rattle of.......... „823 
Yugoloth, Arrow of Harming.......... 90 
Z 
Zadore’s Poison Sheath. ............ 1092 
Zadron Pouch of Wonders . . 141 
ROME T O 917 
Zagy, Talisman of ............ 1424,1426 
Zagy’s Spellbook .......--.-.-.0+5 1182 
Zagyg, Prison of... .... 918 
Zagyg’s Flowing Flagon....... . -484 
Zagyg'’s Spell Component Pouch .... . . 147 
Zak's Potion of invulnerability... . . . . . 898 
Zaltec, Talon of.........-.. 294 
Zambi's Fur of Warmth . 499 
Zann, Book of. ........ ... 187 
Zargos, Book of ........6.5 50554065 1267 
Zargos, Libram of. .........-...6665 669 
Zeal, Zoster of ........ . 170 
Zebulon's Axe of Leaving. . 122 
Zeif, Whip of ........ 1534 
Zellot’s Quill of Law .............4. 928 
Zand De iss SEE TT 157 


Zephynrus, Bag of ..... 
Zephyr, Horseshoe of A . 
Zeus'’s Spear .......... 
Zezen Washio’s Trident. 
Zhakar Tea ..... 
Zinzerena’s Cloak. . . De 
Zinzerena’s Sword s... eeo 
Zither 
OE DOG isinsi sasssa 
of Zombie Control .... 


Zoophobia, Zoster of . . . . 

Zorathus, Chest of ...... 

Zorbo Fingers Elixir... .. g 
Zosh's Xebec of Doom. ........--.. 
ZOMG OF ZAM sssi asoga 
Zoster of Zoophobia 


Zunzalor's Harp ........ és 
Zuth (Glyph). sssi iesit eens 
Zwann’s Irrigation Can. ............. 
Zwann's Watering Can . . . 

Zwieback of Zymurgy . .. 


1664 


pg dete Segre ee 


~ 


stand ot 
a tog AE SA” : ok 
A AA Aa oe Oe h A SN 
(aos IWA 
n meng 


