The 
Complete 


Thief’s 


Handbook 


Advanced 
Dungeons ragons) 
Player’s Handbook Rules Supplement 


The 
Complete 


Thief’s 


Handbook 


The Complete Thief’s Handbook 


Introduction ..........0 cece eeeeeenes 4 TRUR arpo TES EAE NEREA SENA 43 Centralitas enoaan saeni 64 
The Purpose of the Complete Thief's Troubleshooter sisavvescs vaseases erna 44 CORESIVG siiceae sane TE A 64 
HGnAbOGK zeranean 4 Recording Kits on the Character Sheet ..44 | Fractionated....................00. 64 
The Role of the Thief .................- 4 Thief Types and Multi-Class Characters.45 Oppositional .................00005 65 
Thieves and the Law................--- 4 Thief Types and Dual-Class Characters .45 Anarchicwescicas E EAE 65 
: Creating New Kits ..................- 45 Complex? Mix aranan cere we cease 65 
he oe AS Es SEE TESS 2 v0 : The Thief Kit Creation Sheet .......... 46 | Guild Leaders .................2.2005 65 
S t ‘al B i getes 4 SRR SSE SLAB CS RE RLS 7 The “Lone Wolf”: Unique Thieves ...... 46 Court rn aster 5.550) a else 65 
Spee SEIN. FFF CHO SERRE ERA 8 Thief Kit Creation Sheet ..........000 47 C aono i IARNA 65 
Sample y a aal aaia eniageeee 10 “Bluehand” Ajathar, Lone Wolf ........ 48 DENT eronsa 65 
aut... Adventure Suggestion ................ 48 DACP NESS uua ERNEA 65 
Daa at alae Reres EAEE Y Glossary of Thief Slang.............. 50 Complex MIX xs eancanwemeavwnenncd 65 
Demihumans, Cities, and Guilds ....... 14 | Chapter 4: Thieves’ Guild ......... 51 Pare B HEE EE eens ES SHORES RAS Z 
Code of the Professional ...........045 15 | What isa Thieves’ Guild Anyway...... 51 Biss SEOSE EGRET O RE 
Ch oo 16 Developing the Thieves’ Guild......... 51 oar AAA PENA EEEN A P 
apter 2: Proficiencies .......... Benefits of Guild Membership vaso oo: 51 just 60s sees eee e eee e ee eee es 
New Proficiencies ...........-000e0005 16 Traini Despotic/Populist.................. 66 
Al TADING ise eewaw E E E 51 Se hi Guild 
PEEN =. AEEA EEE AE T T 16 to tock 52 Designing a Thieves’ Guild ............ 67 
ANALNO EE oins enarew wenreerciec 16 I a ae ation PRE Aalto oN nis aoe AA 52 Using the Tables ................... 67 
N. A 17 Fe EE E i Guild Background .............000. 67 
Boating POTTS A TO E E T 17 Specialist Help aG ai 53 Social Alignment................24. 67 
Endurance eRe SSS SIRS Were ete Sainte aI die 17 Responsibilities of Guild Membership . . .53 Special Social Factors ERETTE, 68 
Fast- Talking sinnen aana os 17 Searecy 54 Size of Community................. 68 
Fortune TEME. serana neonas 18 2 A O E Wealth of Community .............. 68 
Plepalai aar 18 Pi oviding Informanon Rete et fa i Attitudes of the Law.............-.-- 68 
Hunti Limited Territory................04. 54 ltonhow h 
ENE ise eoa 18 Other Duties 55 Relationship with Merchants ........ 69 
Information Gathering...............- 18 The Recalcitrant PC Thief SEENTE RIE 55 Relationships with other Guilds...... 69 
himi nnana 19 Activities of Thieves’ Guilds 55 Guild Rulership..................4. 70 
Locksiithing ».ccsanccawassewewewe vee 19 Pe cae alae Guildmembers and the Rest ......... 71 
e Protection Rackets ..............--- 56 z A 
LOGON esaesa e EREA ER 19 È Experience Levels of Thieves......... 71 
Naviaation 19 SITAR SENS onea RA 56 Niuleiclassad Thiewes 72 
g E AES SIGE, E EAR Forgery and Coin Clipping EES. 56 x a A 
Dbeas naaa 19 Bufertaiaviertts 56 Non-Thief Guildmembers ........... 73 
Reading/Writing... 0.5..,0.s:oeci0s/ese0ese 19 anta O erations said aaa cas 56 Fleshing out Guildmembers.......... 73 
SALEM eaaa DiSMoeTala 19 : a S apeme ieee AAT. Pom en ts aena a a 73 
Tracki 19 Thieves’ Guilds in the Campaign World .57 Prime Requisite 73 
ar ey PE EAEN Ae EEES O VPORT = Sire and Wealthok Comittee ccs 57 ibe poe ree ree bs 
Vore Mimi GP es ssscaseiae aerators sna 21 ages Ẹ lignment AE ES TIENES PUA a Junior Thieves.................2005 74 
F pecial Social Factors............... 59 : 
Demihumans and Nonweapon Divided Alignments 59 A. Final Ree@0rd. x. cccesisierece sisversimasreeine 74 
ProticienCleS sac cascascusswes saesess 21 Š S IRR onseie sacs eammne este 8 Guild) Dihu ara sasnunes ewrennneeaond 74 
Racial Divisions ................... 59 Normal Roures 74 
Chapter 3: Thief Kits............. 22 Religious Factors...............++-: 59 Recital attend, oea aaae 74 
Kits and Thief Types ..........000000: 22 Historical Factors ..........2...0005 59 a De ne REET ve 
Kits and the Thief Classes............. 23 Thieves’ Guilds and Other Groups ..... 59 Th 7 ET T 75 
Kits and Character Creation........... 23 Thieves and the Law ..............05. 59 ; aT TA Ree ORERE 
RAAE è Thieves’ Guild of Mallain ............. 76 
The Thiet Kits serae aa a 23 PErseCUliON nseni moea 59 Unusual Guilds es, 
Thief Kits and Thieving Skills.......... 24 Hassle Pee 60 The Traveling Guild «00. ccosrnsscons 78 
Pro att scean na EEA 24 Oppasse na aA 60 EE A E s oooooooerocvccceceeee 78 
Adventurer PEI EEE E P A E 25 Tolerance T E TT TNN: 60 The Guild of Honorable Gentlemen -78 
Assassin T R O EEAS 26 Corruption. . = (ahaha opalban ORA 60 The Gued Abana Güild.secsccsi se: 79 
— EN EEEE een ake ese OveRaTe = mate om A man PENE EAE AE- Player:Character Guildimasters orsi: 79 
cae ume PAE ee PA E= mA A p Determining Guildmembers -= s.. 79 
E E ema A (eee a... 
Eanes ae p ERIRE RO REER a Copeman REE ANEN TGE LINEATA KAN a a e A 80 
arning the Ropes... .. ISIS HORSES andoff |... The Long Amuak the Lawan, 80 
Losing and Regaining Balance ....... 32 Submis onsas naases E Ea aed 61 : 
; A 2 : Gillid: MORAG opao IE 81 
Optional Rule: Dodging ............ 32 Inflation ssena aaa 61 New: Followers 81 
BASIE AI PAANAN AA AN NAE: 33 Complex/Mix .............0000000e 62 E eer a eaa A S S 
: ; Special Events and Occurrences . .... . 81 
C Een 34 Thieves and Other Guilds ............. 62 ; k 
5 Blueprint Profiles ................0005 82 
BOC normuna 36 CEA GES eramana 62 Guild Septien Selfarei h 
Investigator 37 Adventuring Guilds i62 Ur C tries commen SERATEmEntNEe 
BAUR nosines ramanea ; See eee e eee es “White Lily”... aooo onoono. 82 
Seer A TORRA 37 Thieves and Assassins .............. 62 Guildmaster Tul Zit Bh 
Smuggler soe ccswcasvsees a NA 39 Thieves and Beggars................ 64 o> uae iam 
Be Ml, sean enar contents 41 Thieves and Bards 64 Cruelty's:Mashe", srana 84 
Swashbuckler |... o 41 | Guildmasters and Guild Structures .....64 | Quartermaster Marmel Raveiz ....…. „85 
es 43 Guild Organizations. coccscsaceaiaasa: 64 Durdlan Silverpalm, Master Fence. . . .87 


The Complete Thief’s Handbook 


Chapter 5: Tools of the Trade ...... 90 
Equipment for the Thief's Skills ........ 90 
SIU MOCITERS  oanswapsrwecasrovasiarne merase 90 
Picking: Fokel, eco:cscccsrsarecorsuacoraveaveraverers 91 
Arn SUNG: casncananeavaeasves acne 91 
Mini-Blade ies. s:ccorissias occcearesviewwce d 91 
Openitig LOCKS asseris iaren 91 
Improvised Lockpicks ..........-+++ 91 
BAG eraann aoaaa ERE EW RAA 92 
CRISES: oc. Sch since paca AA 92 
Cutters, Files and hacksaws ......... 92 
Magnifying Glass/Lens ............. 92 
Oland Fune ereinen 92 
ine SA aaaea Y.a..93 
Finding and Removing Traps .......... 93 
LockpitkS ccossrosssa yenerse sairi 93 
Moving Silently sc: sewscsies ioasccewaae 93 
Silenced Armor..............2---+- 93 
SPER DDE aena enersimveeneesureets 93 
Hiding in Shadows................000- 94 
Camouflage Clothing............... 94 
Charcoal scvicsssccnwancw.canccaisrenez 94 
PRE DYES vussi errrrcne anveamcn ver 94 
Weaponblack sc: ccsiswaies coco sae 94 
Detecting Noisessccss ease ccussacs see 94 
Climbing: Walls: sises rse 69 caw’ ee 94 
Climbing Daggers.........-.....--- 95 
RSPAD DIOS oaao 95 
Special Function Arrows...........- 96 
Spikesiand LINO :...sosc:a ssc oawiwierwre nus 97 
Miscellaneous Equipment ............. 97 
Burglary and Theft................085 97 
Glass Cuter scscascvesen cass sea ware 97 
Housebreaker's Harness...........-- 97 
Keymaking Set annann eee esis 97 
Limewood Strips...............2055 98 
SITAR MSIE cz accunsncrare: oa a 98 
Skelton Key cusieiaze-scaarscexmrern eaea 98 
Tat PAB ERs, crscccenacein sumana a aa 98 
WeKP ad escorts acct smwnnciaien 99 
EVaSIONS uas syrene sae veers EE 99 
Aneides uane axe@gsiots eae 99 
Caltropsics cra ansiss avin cae aes 99 
REAPSTSTAK, .cssexeisrassssusvesninimseseiatenesneaseesinsoures 99 
Dg REDDER cx ccasssanssiranncessrmresioneresevarass 100 
Hami Lamp o rernacesencesswernacaoerereiee 100 
Hallow BOOS). neraca 100 
Marbles os :esca coapiwew eaccanmae eau 100 
Self-Protection and Combat .......... 100 
Blinding Powder .............--..- 100 
Death Kiiler raaa signe 100 
Folding: Bows sisiswis. sings. scores ses 101 
PR oss anaveiseasnins a a 101 
Sword Sk. ersun ama aae 101 
Wost Sheath mie inareccenisatanenemeneon 101 
The Joy of SACKS: ccse-wcessrnwencrenarercrens 101 
Blade PONG wvissnsvscorsrecerasssavarerarniens-wiancers 101 
Blade! Policie scceserea we sqpreesareine oss 101 
Climbing Pole scissors sasen awed 101 
Hooked Poles sia:s:siviersis sisisisisione’s sistas 101 
Mirror Pole 43 ass sia snasensaes leek 101 
Meran o nce doe cect Sinan ges apie 102 
False: Scabbard; « »..ie:0:sveiye;stsina sia mdacess 102 
Hand Warming Lamp.............- 102 


Marked Cards and Biased Dice ..... 102 
Water Shoes.......-.....eee eee eee 102 
Cost and Availability of Equipment . . .102 
Magical Items for Thieves............ 103 
Detection Resistance...............-- 104 
Description of Magical Items ......... 104 
Misc. Magic: Clothing and Jewelry . . . .105 
Misc. Magic: Other Sneaky Stuff...... 106 
Weapons ss:s5 cise isind oes ova eeaiie ne 107 
Chapter 6: The Arts of Deception: 
E TRL R EENET 109 
Short-Change Swindles .............. 109 
Gambling cass cise cis eos a 109 
COUR CR OIY oop sera: AEE E E 109 
Forgery and Counterfeiting........... 110 
Jewelry Swindles.................44. 110 
Robbing the Robbers ................- 110 
Chapter 7: New Rules for Thieves . .111 
Advanced Locks and Traps........... 111 
Modifying Checks .............-4 111 
Building Better Locks.............. 111 
Multiple Locks is<a:csaninmenuannieon 112 
Lockpicking/Trap Removing Noise . .112 
Animal Assistants coeseva eanna 112 
The: Thief’s Fetchi...:...55 ccc cusses 112 
Poison and Sedatives ............... 112 
Poison Antidotes ................- 113 
Campaigns without Nonweapon 
PRORGENCES: oc:emmnaewarceawmaniere 113 
Healing Proficiency and Poison... .. 113 
Antidote Elects escsccacoxcewee soss 113 
Producing Antidotes .............. 113 
Mugging—the Thief's KO ............ 114 
Armor and Acrobatic Proficiencies .. . .114 
Armor and Thief Skills .............. 115 
Chapter 8: The Thief Campaign... .116 
Cultural Considerations.............. 117 
Social Campaign Environment........ 117 
Social Overview of Thieves .......... 117 
Detailed and Varied NPCs............ 118 
Unique Buildings and Structures ...... 119 
A Well-Defined Economic System ..... 119 
Interesting Objects D'Art and Other 
TiGasnres) ccs .asawanas aa 120 
Well-Defined Legal System ........... 120 
Counter-Thief Tactics................ 120 


Background of Interesting Conflicts . ..121 
Challenges to Thief Character Class 


PAD ER? EPEE D EAE E 121 
The Thieves’ Guild.................. 121 
Basic Storylines for Thief Campaigns . .122 

The Great Artifact ................ 122 
The Mysterious Client ............. 122 
Role Reversal................00005 122 
Foul Betrayal oasis caves ceases. 124 
The: SPY ne pianoxecerssend erea Aane s 124 
Playing In and Running the Thief 
Campak nisar rans teesimerniewn 124 
Wizards Working With Thieves ..... 124 
Levels of Magic in the Thieves’ 
Campioana camcad 125 
Multi- or Dual classed Thieves...... 125 


Henchmen and Hirelings of Thieves .125 


Dens and Hideouts................ 125 
Selected Tables..............0005 127-128 


List of Tables 


1: Nonweapon Proficiencies-Thieves . . .16 
2: Suggested Begging Modifiers........ 17 
3: Fast-Talking Modifiers ............. 17 
4: Thieving Skill, Thief Kit Modifiers. . .24 
5: Urlar's Skill Adjustments ........... 25 
6: Aljahar’s Experience Table and Spells.48 


7-27: Thieves’ Guild Creation Tables.68-82 
28: Silenced Armor (Elfin Chain) Effect 


On Skil. csccamasccas sesseaosesd 93 
29: Grappling Success...............- 95 
30: Special Function Arrows .......... 96 
31: Purchasing Thief Equipment ...... 103 
32: Magical Items for Thieves ........ 103 
33: Foton and Oils)... «cmcareesesieraaavs 104 
34: Misc. Magic: Clothing and Jewelry 104 
35: Other Sneaky Stuff.............. 104 
36: Magic Weapons................. 104 
37: Effects of Armor on 

Acrobatic Proficiencies .......... 114 


38: Effects of Armor on Thief Skills . . .115 


Written by John Nephew, Carl Sargent and 
Douglas Niles 

Edited by Scott Haring, TSR staff 

Black and White Art by George Barr 

Color Art by Larry Elmore, John and Laura 
Lakey, Robin Wood 

Typography by Gaye O'Keefe 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, 
AD&D, PRODUCTS OF YOUR 
IMAGINATION, WORLD OF GREYHAWK 
and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by 
TSR Inc. 


©1989 TSR Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
Printed in the U.S.A. 


Distributed to the book trade in the United 
States by Random House Inc. and in Canada by 
Random House of Canada, Ltd. Distributed to 
the toy and hobby trade by regional distribu- 
tors. Distributed in the United Kingdom by TSR 
UK Ltd. 


This product is protected under the copyright 
laws of the United States of America. Any 
reproduction or other unauthorized use of the 
material or artwork contained herein is prohib- 
ited without the express written permission of 


TSR Inc. 


TSR Inc. TSR Ltd. 
POB 756 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton 
Lake Geneva, Cambridge CB1 3LB 
WI 53147 U.S.A. United Kingdom 


The world of the thief is a world of 
darkness and stealth, hidden from the 
eyes of respectable folk, yet often under 
the scrutiny of the zealous enforcers of 
the law. It is a world of courage and 
fear, of bravado and cowardice, of vio- 
lence and treachery. 

Yet it is also a world of color and 
laughter, lively parties and bustling 
markets. The thief, more than any 
other character class, practices his arts 
among his fellow men (or halflings, or 
elves, or whatever). He seeks the gath- 
erings of population, the confluence of 
wealth and avarice, where treasures are 
there for the taking. 

To be sure, many a thief has proven 
his worth time and again in the darkest 
reaches of a forgotten dungeon, among 
the snowy peaks of the bleakest of wild 
vistas, or within the halls of a fortress 
or military camp. Quests into the wild 
contain as much appeal for the thief as 
they do for other characters. In fact, 
should the prospect of treasure appear 
significant enough, many a thief will 
lead the way in encouraging his com- 
panions to embark on such a mission. 

But when the adventurers return to 
the sheltering walls of their homes, 
wherever these may be, and rejoin the 
population, the thief is best equipped to 
find adventure there. And when such 
adventure is discovered, it is thiefly 
skills that are most often called into 


play. 


The Purpose of the 
Complete Thief’s Handbook 


This book pro- 
vides information of use to players of 
thief characters, and to DMs running 
campaigns including thieves. The em- 
phasis lies heavily upon a campaign 
where many PCs are thieves, but there 
is no reason provisions in this book 
cannot be employed by groups with but 
a single thief among them. 

None of the information here 
changes any existing AD&D® 2nd Edi- 
tion rule. Instead, the idea is to amplify 
and detail those rules for players who 
are interested in playing thief charac- 


ters. Indeed, it is possible and in fact 
quite easy to play a thief character 
without the information herein. 

However, the player who wishes to 
develop his player character thief in a 
unique fashion, or who seeks aid in 
deepening and broadening the charac- 
ter’s personality, goals, and motiva- 
tions, will find helpful suggestions and 
ideas in the Complete Thief Hand- 
book. 

But the book is a guide for DMs as 
well. Information on organizing 
thieves’ guilds, for example, is essential 
to any ongoing thief campaign. If no 
guild is present, consistent information 
on other societal sanctions needs to be 
determined by the DM—and the infor- 
mation must be available to players as 
well. 

Consequently, no portion of this 
book is prohibited to player viewing, 
nor is any part of it irrelevant to the ac- 
tivities of a good DM. 

New rules and procedures only be- 
come official campaign rules in a cam- 
paign where the DM so declares. 
Players who wish to employ some of 
these materials can certainly ask the 
DM to use them, but as always, the 
Dungeon Master has the last word. 


The Role of the Thief 


The © skulking 
burglar pilfering through the night is 
perhaps the most common picture of 
the thief. Neither players nor Dungeon 
Masters should blind themselves to 
other possibilities, some of them more 
useful (and socially acceptable) than 
common theft. 

The thief character kits introduced in 
Chapter 3 provide a variety of thief 
types. These are not new character 
classes by any means, but the kits can 
help players define thieves in one of 
several areas of specialty. Some of these 
include: 

The Spy, long a noble practitioner of 
the thiefly skills. Indeed, lockpicking, 
moving silently, hiding in shadows, and 
the like are all skills of prime impor- 
tance to the Spy. 


The Scout can do for an adventuring 
party what skirmishing troops do for 
an army: he isa fast, lightly armored in- 
dividual who can utilize stealth and 
speed to study terrain and watch for 
ambush. Thief-scouts and rangers in 
combination make splendid reconnais- 
sance bands. 


Other kits include the Trouble- 
shooter (the dungeon-crawling thief), 
Acrobats, Beggars, Bounty Hunters, 
Swindlers, and many more. 

Typical thiefly personalities are also 
provided, allowing players to create de- 
tailed PCs based upon these arche- 
types, but also providing useful pieces 
of imaginative roleplaying information 
for many long-lived, high-level PCs. 

Chapter 2 describes additional non- 
weapon proficiencies of particular use 
to thief characters. New equipment 
types, both magical and mundane, are 
introduced in later chapters. And a few 
new rules cover areas of concern to 
thieves—lethal and non-lethal poisons, 
for example, and how to determine the 
quality of workmanship used to build a 
lock or trap. 

A section on running a thief cam- 
paign provides players, and most par- 
ticularly DMs, with suggestions and 
guidelines on ways to tailor the cam- 
paign toward the thief PCs’ areas of in- 
terest and expertise. 

Whatever area of the book yields the 
most use, players and DMs alike who 
wish to expand the domain of the thief 
in their campaign world should find 
many things of interest between these 
covers. 


Thieves and the Law 


Geraldor slipped 
through the alley, his black cloak mask- 
ing his progress through the filthy pas- 
sage. Reassuring himself that he was 
not pursued, he stepped boldly onto the 
Golden Way. With a nervous gesture he 
smoothed his oily black hair and at- 
tempted to stroke his wispy mustache. 

Sighing, Geraldor realized that any 
attempt to look like a gentleman was 


doomed to failure. He hoped his guild- 
master's plan was intact. 

And there before him was the 
Highgate! Geraldor's heart pounded as 
he examined the brawny men at arms, 
four in number, manning the post. As 
the only public route into the city's 
Golden Quarter—home of all the 
wealthiest merchants, most powerful 
lords, and influential ambassadors in 
all the land—the Highgate was usually 
guarded well. 

But not tonight. Geraldor recognized 
the giant, hulking form of Morto, 
sergeant-at-arms of the city watch. As 
Geraldor had expected—nay, hoped— 
Morto commanded the detachment at 
the Highgate. 

With a barely concealed nod of rec- 
ognition, Geraldor stalked to the gate 
and stood impatiently as Morto made a 
pretense of examining his “pass.” In re- 
ality, this crudely forged slip would 
fool no one with any capacity for com- 
prehending script. 

But Morto’'s reading ability was not 
the issue tonight. Instead, the guard's 
loyalty to the guildmaster was the force 
behind Morto’s curt nod and his gesture 
ushering Geraldor through the 
Highgate. Geraldor fairly skipped 
through the great stone arch. He had 
entered the Golden Quarter! 

Now his movements took on the 
shadowy aspect of the master thief at 
work. Though he remained alert, he 
knew that the major obstacle had been 
passed at the gate. The hefty bribes of- 
fered to Morto and his associates had 
paved the way to riches. It only re- 
mained for Geraldor to haul those 
riches away. 

The wiry thief found the mansion 
that had been selected by the guildmas- 
ter. Family and servants all slept, and 
they had no dog. Ina matter of minutes 
Geraldor had collected the lady's gems. 
He spent several more minutes seeking 
the strongbox, finally discovering it ina 
small, luxurious sitting room. He 
picked the lock and pulled out only the 
most valuable coinage, platinum and 
gold, before soundlessly slipping to- 
ward the exit. 

In the house he saw magnificent sil- 


ver candleabra, a huge and obviously 
enchanted sword, and other wonders. 
All of these he disdained as too bulky 
for his current mission. After all, 
Geraldor was a professional! 

Scarcely suppressing an urge to whis- 
tle, Geraldor sauntered back along the 
Golden Way. He would pass through 
the Highgate again and immediately 
disappear into the clustered neighbor- 
hoods that crowded both banks of the 
muddy river. 

He saw Morto at the guardpost and 
nodded casually, passing under the 
great stone arch again on his way out of 
the Golden Quarter. Only then did he 
notice something wrong: Morto stood 
mute, with his hands shackled before 
him. 

At that same instant a heavy gauntlet 
fell upon Geraldor’s shoulder and a 
massive arm propelled him into the 
stone wall of the gatehouse. 

“What have we here?” growled an 
unfamiliar voice. Terrified, Geraldor 
saw that it issued from beneath the 
shiny cap of a watch captain. 

“J-just going home, m-my lord!” he 
stammered, wriggling in a futile at- 
tempt to break away. 

The captain laughed, having already 
found and discarded Geraldor's fake 
pass. The man’s gloved hands contin- 
ued to poke through Geraldor's clothes 
and pouches, retrieving object after ob- 
ject, often with a low chuckle. 

“The lady Allorana's diadem, I see— 
perhaps she loaned it to you!” The cap- 
tain roared with hilarity, joined by the 
guffaws of a full company of guards- 
men that Geraldor now saw in the 
shadows. 

Then the captain's voice lowered as 
his hand tightened around Geraldor's 
throat. “Now, thief, you will find out 
what the laws are in our town. And you 
will have time to learn them while you 
rot in gaol!” 


From even before the time, thou- 
sands of years ago, when the Code of 
Hammurabi first defined the legal sys- 
tem of a body of government, and ex- 
tending to the present day, societies 
have created procedures for defining 


personal possessions. An inherent part 
of this definition includes the penalties 
due those who violate these proce- 
dures. Odd as it may sound, thieves 
cannot exist without some kind of legal 
framework. l 

And from the time in any culture 
when personal possessions come into 
being, there have been those who seek 
to remove the possessions of others and 
make them their own. It is for players of 
characters who attempt this perilous 
exchange of wealth, and to their 
Dungeon Masters, that this tome is in- 
tended. 

Of course, some thievery occurs un- 
der the guise of authority, and as such 
falls beyond the scope of this book. Tax 
collectors, for example, may steal from 
those who regard such claims as thiev- 
ery. So do conquerors. But these are not 
AD&D® thieves. While they may ap- 
proach the category of bandits, their 
“theft” demands more fighting skill and 
aggression than stealth. 

By far the more common type of 
thievery, and the one that generally 
comes to mind when discussing the 
character type, is the furtive pilfering 
described in the incident above. Poor 
Geraldor has suffered the fate known to 
many of these wrongdoers as he is 
taken by the long arm of the law. But if 
that law did not exist, then Geraldor’s 
task would become meaningless. 

This point is one that should be well 
remembered by those who play thieves 
as well as those who run the campaigns. 
Regardless of how chaotic the setting, a 
structure at least vaguely approximat- 
ing a legal system is necessary before 
the thief can really begin to ply his 
trade. 


Thieves are perhaps the most fasci- 
nating and diverse class of player- 
characters in the AD&D® game—or at 
least they can be, if played properly. 
The thief has a certain innate, charming 
flair, which the Player's Handbook de- 
scribes: “Thieves are people who feel 
that the world (and everyone in it) 
somehow owes them a living. They get 
by day by day, living in the highest style 
they can afford and doing as little work 
as possible . . ” 

This is an accurate description of 
many thieves, but not all; and there are 
many exceptions. You will find that the 
character—that is, the personality—of 
your thief character will be very impor- 
tant, vital to making the thief a living, 
breathing person. It makes them more 
fun to play, too. 

Personality, then, is the topic of this 
chapter. It comes before the chapters of 
technical information on kits, new abil- 
ities and so forth, because we believe 
that when you are designing a thief 
character, perhaps even more so than 
with other classes, personality consid- 
erations should come first. Who is this 
character? Where is he from? Why is he 
a thief—has he stolen bread crumbs all 
his life just to survive, or is he an idle 
fop who moonlights as a burglar just 
for thrills? 

After asking yourself such questions, 
and answering them, you will then be 
better able to proceed into the technical 
details. Your character will exist in your 
mind, and the task will then be just a 
matter of translating that vision into 
working game terms. 

There are three basic things to con- 
sider when putting together your thief's 
background and personality: setting, 
social background, and motivations, 


Setting 


Where is the 
character from? This will have an effect 
on what sorts of skills the thief may 
have picked up. City, countryside, and 
wilderness are all possible settings; or 
the thief may have been a wanderer all 


of his life. 


City: Any place where people gather 
in large numbers, there will be those 
who live off the sweat and toil of oth- 
ers. Besides politicians, thieves are of- 
ten among this group. A city 
background will open many possibili- 
ties of specialization for your thief. Be- 
cause a city is a complicated web of 
many people, each person tends to have 
more specialized functions. This is true 
for thieves as well as normal, respect- 
able citizens. 

Note that thieves in cities, especially 
those who have very specialized skills 
and abilities, are most likely connected 
with a thieves’ guild; or, if they are not, 
they will surely run afoul of one sooner 
or later. If your thief hails from an ur- 
ban center, be sure to figure out what 
his relationship to the local thieves’ 
guild (or, in some places, guilds) is. 

Countryside: A few thieves are able 
to make a living in a single populated, 
rural area. They tend to be quite differ- 
ent from their city-dwelling cousins— 
pickpocketing, for instance, is 
probably not going to be practiced 
much without the shelter and anonym- 
ity of the urban crowds. Extortion, 
banditry, burglary, and various similar 
thefts are more typical means of mak- 
ing a living from the peasants and their 
rulers in the countryside. Fences also 
may work the countryside, selling 
wares that may have been stolen in dis- 
tant cities. 

Thieves’ guilds often have an active 
hand in populated rural regions, 
though it is not as firm as in the cities. 

Wilderness: Thieves are, by defini- 
tion, those who garner their living from 
others, so few are to be found making 
their permanent abode in the wilder- 
ness, far from human settlement. Those 
who do are usually bandits, with a 
stronghold set up somewhere secure, 
from which they can make raids on 
nearby settlements or trade routes. In 
AD&D fantasy settings, there are also 
innumberable possibilities for thieves 
who survive by taking liberties in their 
relationships with the local non- 
humans. 

While few thieves’ guilds would 


Chapter 1: Role-Playing Thieves 


claim any wilderness as “territory,” 
thieves from these regions are typically 
affiliated with one or another organized 
band of miscreants. These bandit 
groups don’t have the organization or 
sophistication of the urban guilds, but 
they are still formidable, and their ri- 
valries may run as deep as any among 
the big city guilds. 

A great many demihuman thieves 
originally hail from a wilderness set- 
ting, although they do not necessarily 
fit the “bandit” mold common among 
humans. (See the section on demihu- 
mans, below, for more information.) 

Wandering: Finally, some thieves 
have never called any place “home.” 
They travel town and village, city and 
wilderness, wherever they think for- 
tune might grant them better opportu- 
nities. Charlatans, those who make 
their living by duping others with all 
sorts of fraud, are often wanderers: 
They will stay in one place as long as 
there's money to be made, but they 
hope to be long gone, preying on oth- 
ers’ gullibility, before their scams are 
uncovered. 


Social Background 


After you have 
chosen a setting for your character, you 
should decide his social background. 
At the start this need only be done in a 
general way: select a poor (or un- 
known), middle, wealthy or noble class 
background. This background will 
have important effects on what re- 
sources are available to the character. 
Also be sure to consider how it relates 
to the thief's motivation (below). 

Poor/unknown: Most thieves are 
from a poor background. Most people 
would just as well make an honest liv- 
ing, if they can. For some in the lower 
classes, however, there is simply no 
such opportunity, and so crime be- 
comes a means of survival. The vast 
majority of such criminals spend their 
lives as petty thieves, picking pockets, 
mugging people foolish enough to walk 
the streets at night alone, perhaps even 
planning and executing a burglary. 


Role-Playing Thieves 


These poverty-born thieves form the 
backbone of most thieves’ guilds. The 
guild regulates their activities as well as 
it can, and uses it as a pool, from which 
are drawn the most talented and prom- 
ising. Because skill and cunning are the 
ultimate determining factors, many a 
famous thief—whether in esteem or 
power among guild comrades, or out- 
side of the underworld—rose from the 
most humble beginnings. 

An “unknown” background usually 
fits in with the poorer classes. This 
means the character was an orphan, 
and does not know his ancestry; his 
parents may have been criminals, 
middle-class artisans, or even wealthy 
merchants or nobles. Dickens’ Oliver 
Twist is a classic example of a thief of 
unknown ancestry. For all practical 
purposes, the character is one of the 
poor people, like everyone with whom 
he grew up. However, a hook in the 
campaign may be the search for, or ac- 
cidental discovery of, a character's an- 
cestry. 

Player characters from a poor back- 
ground may, at the DM's option, havea 
smaller amount of starting money than 
they would otherwise (perhaps 2d4 x 10 
gp). If a player character is part of a 
guild, however, he has probably been 
accepted as someone who shows prom- 
ise, and the guild may provide standard 
equipment and money for its 
apprentice—the equivalent of the usual 
2d6 x 10 gp. 

Middle: A few thieves may hail from 
the middle classes, perhaps from fami- 
lies of artisans and petty merchants. 
Such characters are less likely to be 
stealing for survival, though desperate 
financial straits may bring people to 
seek illegal solutions, which could tie 
into a whole net of crime. 

Imagine, for instance, a locksmith 
who needs money to support his ailing 
mother. The landlord threatens evic- 
tion, and so forth; in desperation, the 
locksmith turns to the thieves’ guild for 
a quick, easy, high-interest loan. As the 
family gets more and more entangled 
by their debts, the guild decides to ac- 
cept as partial payment the locksmith’s 


daughter (and apprentice), to become 
an apprentice thief. 

But greed is a more typical motiva- 
tion, Many swindlers come from the 
middle class; they decided that there 
are better profits to be made through 
dishonesty than hard work. 

Thieves of middle-class origin usu- 
ally have standard initial funds. 

Wealthy/Noble: Still fewer thieves 
are from affluent families. This is part- 
ly because people with ample funds 
have little motivation to pick pockets; 
but even more, it is because thievery is 
very much socially unacceptable at this 
level. There are exceptions, of course. 
Wealthy privateers, raiding the trade 
lanes of rival nations for glory and 
plunder, may enjoy a high and respect- 
ed profile for a time. And wealthy fam- 
ilies of crime lords are a different 
matter entirely. 

In any case, a thief from a wealthy 
family is expected to distinguish him- 
self in some way or other— 
flamboyance, daring, audacity, 
charm—even if he hides his identity 
during his roguish endeavors. Other- 
wise, what is the point of risking life 
and reputation? 

This question might be asked of any 
character, of course. And so we turn to 
the topic of motivations. 


Motivation 


Why is the thief 
what he is? You can ask this question 
even before you know specifically what 
his area of expertise or technical inter- 
est is. A person primarily motivated by 
greed could be a troubleshooter or a cat 
burglar, for instance, provided the job 
pays well. 

We suggest six basic motivations: 
fame (or infamy), greed, justice, loyal- 
ty, survival, and whim. These are of 
course generalizations, and any partic- 
ular character probably has motiva- 
tions more complex than one of these 
simple descriptions, Also, characters 
often have more than one motivation, 
and different motivations can apply to 
different situations. 


This may sound so convoluted that 
you may wonder why we should even 
approach the issue. It is useful to 
choose a basic motivation, however, as 
the basis for role-playing. As you play 
the character, more motivations will 
arise—and old ones may vanish. In this 
way a character may come to life. 

A character who starts with the greed 
motivation may, in the course of his ad- 
ventures, encounter a great deal of injus- 
tice wrought by the rulers of the land. He 
may even trace his own selfishness to the © 
perverted values of the rulers. As he or- 
ganizes his activities to oppose the rulers, 
then, his motivation may subtly swing 
towards justice. It is unlikely, however, 
that he would be so “converted” as to lose 
entirely the greed that drove him for so 
long. New conflicts and role-playing op- 
portunities may arise within the charac- 
ter between his greed and his new-found 
sense of justice. 

Be sure to keep your character's moti- 
vations in mind when you select his 
alignment. The description below of each 
general motivation includes a word on 
appropriate, related alignments. Note al- 
so that as the character develops in play 
and motivation shifts, alignment too 
may undergo change. (For a thorough 
discussion of alignment changes, see the 
AD&D® 2nd Edition Player's Handbook, 
p. 49, and the DUNGEON MASTER® 
Guide, pp. 28-29.) 

The motivation description may also 
include suggestions on thief kits appro- 
priate to this motivation. The thief kits 
are fully detailed in Chapter 3. 

Fame/Infamy: The fabled charm of a 
thief's life attracts many an adventurer 
in search of glory. In our own real 
world, many thieves have achieved 
great fame, and in literature even more 
such figures abound. Infamy surely ac- 
companies the career of many a suc- 
cessful thief; for some it may even be 
their ultimate goal. If this is the case 
with your character, you must be cer- 
tain to bring it out while role-playing. 
Every action should be considered in 
terms of how it may increase the 
world’s knowledge of the thief's 
amazing exploits. 


Greed: The simplest and perhaps 
most stereotypical motive behind the 
thief’s life is greed. Combining greed 
with sloth, the thief shuns “real” work, 
and lightens his load by lightening oth- 
ers’ purses. Or, the character simply 
loves wealth, but is unable to get it 
through acceptable channels. 

Characters with greed as their pri- 
mary motivation surely would not be 
of good alignment. Although even 
good thieves may have a certain ele- 
ment of greed, it would not be the big- 
gest factor shaping their lives. 

Justice: This is a rare and peculiar 
motivation, since thieves are generally 
considered to be anything but good. 
The classic example of the thief moti- 
vated by justice is Robin Hood—at 
least as popularly portrayed, if not in 
historical reality. Such a character must 
arise in a region or nation where injus- 
tice rules, though it need not do so offi- 
cially. For instance, in one town the 
rulers may be blatantly evil and cor- 
rupt; a thief motivated by justice may 
devote himself to fighting those rulers. 

Characters motivated by justice will 
probably be of good, lawful neutral, or 
true neutral alignments. Remember 
that each alignment has its own idea of 
what constitutes “justice”; to a true neu- 
tral thief, for instance, justice means 
maintaining the balances between good 
and evil, law and chaos. 

Loyalty: Some connection in the 
character's past has drawn him onto the 
road of the thief, and he follows it faith- 
fully out of loyalty or debt to that past. 
For instance, one character might have 
been born into a family of crimelords; 
he became a thief as a matter of family 
loyalty. Another thief may have been 
an orphan, sheltered and raised by the 
thieves’ guild. Even though his moral 
sensibilities may lead him to question 
his benefactors’ and even his own be- 
havior, his loyalty and gratitude for the 
life and opportunity they gave him may 
(at least for the moment) outweigh his 
doubts. 

Loyalty is most appropriate as the 
primary motivation of lawful charac- 
ters. The conflicts of loyalty versus 


; 


AOR, 


ae 


lene on 


Role-Playing Thieves 


other moral imperatives may lead to 
some very interesting role-playing. 

Survival: Many thieves from the 
lower strata of society engage in theft 
and the like for the simple purpose of 
survival. Player-character adventurers 
are prone to garner more wealth than 
they need for mere survival, so (unless 
the Dungeon Master works diligently to 
keep them poor) they might need a new 
motivation after a few successful adven- 
tures. Probably a secondary motivation 
(such as greed, or even justice) would 
come to the fore and become primary. 

Thieves who steal for survival usu- 
ally don’t have lawful alignments, 
though lawful evil is possible. 

Whim: Some thieves engage in their 
activities for the sheer thrill of it. They 
can survive (materially) without it, 
they don’t need or desire the money as 
such, and they are indifferent to fame. 
They simply desire to steal, to deceive 
people, to pull off the most impossible 
heist or scam—this grants them su- 
preme pleasure. Whim-motivated 
thieves range from the ennui-stricken 
rich man’s son to the compulsive shop- 
lifter whose desire to steal may push 
him to the very edge of sanity. 

This motivation is most appropriate 
for chaotic alignments. 


Sample Archetypes 


By combining as- 
sorted settings, social backgrounds and 
motivations, you can create a worldful 
of distinct thieves. Another way of 
making a character is to start with a 
whole concept of what sort of thief he 
is, rather than building him from the in- 
dividual blocks we described above. 

But where do you get such a concept? 
History, folklore and literature all pro- 
vide colorful examples of thieves. From 
these you can abstract a model, an ar- 
chetype, on which you base your begin- 
ning character. Like the elements we 
described above, these archetypes are 
rough and general. Through effective 
role-playing you will expand your thief 
into a more detailed, interesting, and 
believable character. 


Below are a number of sample arche- 
types that you may have encountered 
in books, movies, and so forth. Experi- 
enced role-players will probably find 
that thieves they've played in the past 
are similar to one of these archetypes, 
or are a fusion of two or more. 

Remember that these archetypes, like 
the background options presented 
above, are meant to inspire role- 
playing, not to limit it. The personality 
you create should provide the basis of 
your character, but it would be wrong 
to define every possible choice before- 
hand. Part of the pleasure of role- 
playing is seeing your characters 
change and grow; like real people, they 
should be full of surprises, ready to 
adapt and change with new situations. 

The Artist: This thief is searching for 
“the perfect crime.” He chooses jobs for 
their challenge and aesthetic pleasure, 
not strictly for their payoff in wealth. 

A drunken duke who is stumbling 
down an alley late at night, heavily 
laden with jewels and gold, would be of 
little interest as a target for the Artist. In 
fact, the Artist would be offended if 
someone were to suggest that he per- 
form such a ludicrously easy theft, 
since it would be so far “below” the Art- 
ist's caliber. 

However, the Artist might take ad- 
vantage of the situation if it might play 
into a bigger, grander scheme. For in- 
stance, he might play the part of a 
“Good Samaritan,” escorting the foolish 
noble to his residence, and thereby 
gaining the duke'’s confidence. This 
gives the Artist special privileges, not 
the least of which is the duke’s unques- 
tioning trust. (After all, how could the 
Artist have been a thief if he escorted 
the duke safely home, rather than mug- 
ging him?) From this position, then, the 
Artist may plan a truly exceptional 
theft, the sort that would stir up an ex- 
traordinary amount of public interest, 
but could go unsolved for decades. 

The Artist is usually found in an ur- 
ban setting or, less frequently, wander- 
ing. His family was surely above the 
poverty level, and probably even 
wealthy; theft for the Artist is chiefly a 


10 


pastime, though it may have also be- 
come a source of livelihood. He is ego- 
tistical, motivated by whim or a desire 
for fame—if not fame for himself, than 
for his crimes, since he probably will re- 
main anonymous. 

Desperado: For some reason or an- 
other, this character is running from the 
law—or, perhaps even worse, the un- 
written law of the underworld. In any 
case, he is ready and willing to do what- 
ever is necessary, however drastic, to 
preserve his life—he knows all too well 
how soon its end may be. Delicacy and 
rational forethought are not the forte of 
the Desperado. This is the sort of char- 
acter that, when discovered pickpock- 
eting, might knife his target, lest his 
face be identified. 

The Desperado character may be of 
any social background, although poor 
is most likely. His motivation is simple 
survival, and he may be found in any 
setting. You must be certain that you 
know what circumstances have led to 
his desperation. Desperadoes are often 
short-lived; either whatever's chasing 
them catches up and gets them, or 
(rarely) they eliminate the threat and 
are able to shift to a less high-strung 
lifestyle. The Desperado either dies or 
changes to something else . . . though 
surely his old habits die hard. 

Folk Hero: When the system itself is 
unjust, those labeled “criminals” are 
sometimes in fact the good guys. The 
Folk Hero will not sit idly by while ty- 
rants rule, He musters all his charisma 
and roguish skills, and leads the fight to 
right wrongs and, if he can, topple the 
evil regime. Robin Hood is a Folk Hero 
of great fame. According to legend he 
stole from the wealthy nobles and 
clergy, and gave the money to the poor, 
overtaxed peasants. 

Robin Hood was of noble lineage, 
and his band did their work in the coun- 
tryside, but a Folk Hero could operate 
in any setting and be of any social back- 
ground. Imagine, for instance, a thief 
from the lower classes who lives in a 
city ruled by an evil tyrant. He and his 
compatriots devote themselves to the 
freeing of maltreated slaves and falsely 


convicted prisoners, smuggling them to 
safety beyond the evil kingdom's bor- 
‘ders. The chief motivation of the Folk 
(Hero is, of course, justice (or at least so 
‘it must appear to the public eye). 

| Kleptomaniac: The kleptomaniac is a 
character with a compulsion, perhaps 
entirely uncontrollable, to steal. This 
compulsion might be at odds with the 
‘rest of the character's personality; inter- 


‘character has an internal conflict be- 
‘tween his driving desire to steal and a 
‘guilty conscience that never stops tell- 
ling him how wrong and evil his actions 
are. This character may be of any back- 
ground and setting. His motivation 
might be classified (very loosely) as 
whim, since it lacks a rational reason. 
Mobster: This character was literally 
raised in crime. Perhaps he hails from a 
‘family of elite criminals, leaders of or- 
ganized crime. Over the years they 
Ihave developed their own codes of be- 
havior and a twisted sense of honor. A 
“mobster is found in the city, and may be 
‘of any background. (Crime families 
may have considerable wealth, but if 
their illegal activities are well known, 
lor at least the topic for common ru- 
‘mors, they may have considerably 
lower esteem in the eyes of good citi- 
zens than those of comparable yet 
‘honestly-earned wealth.) His primary 
‘motivation is usually greed or loyalty, 
‘and his alignment is most often lawful 
neutral or lawful evil, Characters of 
this sort often make up the backbone of 
the more powerful thieves’ guilds. 

The Professional: Thievery is simply 
ʻa job for this character. He is often aloof 
‘from other, “lesser” thieves: He has lit- 
‘tle tolerance for flamboyant fools, like 
the Artist and Trickster; Desperadoes 
‘and Kleptomaniacs, desperate and ob- 
‘sessed, are sloppy and crude in compar- 
‘ison to his refined talents and balanced 
‘temperament; Folk Heroes are just silly. 
|The Vigilante is a dangerous foe for the 
‘Professional, in part because he is in- 
‘comprehensible to him. The Mobster 
‘would seem to be the Professional's kin- 
dred spirit, but they are too tightly 
‘bound (in the Professional's opinion) 


Role-Playing Thieves l 


by honor and family loyalty and such 
trash. The Professional is bound to no 
absolute codes, except perhaps a con- 
tract and a clean, efficient theft. He has 
honor and honesty inasmuch as it is 
necessary to maintain his reputation for 
dependability. 

The Professional's motivation is hard 
to pinpoint. Clearly it is neither justice 
nor loyalty; and he knows that greed, 
whim and the lust for fame can cloud 
judgement and lead to fatal sloppiness. 
Perhaps then “survival” would be the 
best description of the Professional's 
motive; though any Professional worth 
his salt does better than merely survive. 
Of all the archetypes, he is perhaps 
most likely to have a businesslike, 
middle-class background, though any 
of the others is possible. The Profes- 
sional is usually based in a city, or wan- 
ders, and his services are usually for 
hire. He may be associated with a guild, 
but would prefer to be as independent 
as possible—other people's involve- 
ment in his work is more often hin- 
drance than help. 

Street Urchin/Victim of Circum- 
stances: This thief grew up in an impov- 
erished, harsh environment. There he 
learned that if you need something you 
have to take it, because no one will give 
it to you. People may tell him that steal- 
ing is wrong, but he cannot believe it— 
to him, stealing has always meant 
survival. He long ago lost any sense of 
regret for his actions. He was driven to 
a life of crime so long ago that it seems 
to him the only life possible. 

This character invariably knows his 
setting (typically a city) inside and out, 
and probably has many useful connec- 
tions. His social background is always 
lower class or unknown. Street Urchins 
that continue the thief’s life may de- 
velop into a different archetype as they 
grow older; the Professional, for in- 
stance, may blossom from such a soli- 
tary young thief. 

Trickster: This is a thrillseeker, a 
character who delights in pulling off the 
most outrageous and amazing scams. 
Deception and pranks are his food and 
drink; flirting with danger grants him 


an incomparable thrill. Thieves, such 
as Reynard the Fox, are often portrayed 
this way in fairy and folk tales. 

In role-playing, you may wish to 
make a Trickster thief more compli- 
cated. Why does he seem so light and 
frivolous? Does he hide something be- 
neath it all? Is he in fact driven, ob- 
sessed with proving himself the most 
clever of all? Such a character could 
even become dangerous to those 
around him if his insecurities were 
brought out and played upon. What if 
people are impressed by his antics? 
What if they manage to outwit his 
pranks, or don't find them amusing? 
Does he need attention, or is the thrill 
alone enough to satisfy him? Might the 
trickster be cowed into quiet humility, 
or pushed into rage or frustration? 

Vigilante: The Vigilante is a loner, a 
curious sort of thief whose life is preoc- 
cupied with defeating the schemes of 
criminals. He finds the law too restric- 
tive, or unenforced, and so he goes out- 
side it to bring about his vision of 
justice. Ironically, the Vigilante trains 
himself in the very skills of the thieves 
he opposes; he comes to know their 
ways and their minds as though he were 
one of them. 

Though he fights on the side of law, 
the law does not often appreciate the 
Vigilante. He is unsupervised, 
unpredictable—and therefore danger- 
ous. This is especially true in the case of 
locales where the leadership is a bit on 
the shady side itself, perhaps riddled 
with bribery, graft, connections with 
crime, and other such corruption. The 
Vigilante leads a dangerous life, for he 
can have many powerful enemies. 

On the other hand, the Vigilante may 
attain a revered status similar to that of 
a Folk Hero, if his successes become 
popular knowledge. Popularity might 
do little to ward off a powerful thieves’ 
guild, but it can cow the more fearful of 
public officials into tacit approval of his 
extralega! exploits. 

A Vigilante will, of course, not be 
part of a thieves’ guild—that is his an- 
tithesis. He may, however, be part of 
some secret society devoted to justice. 


Role-Playing Thieves 


Such a society may consist entirely of 
Vigilante-type thieves, or it could in- 
clude adventurers of many diverse 
classes. 

The Vigilante may be of any social 
background. He might work in any set- 
ting, but the city is most common. His 
primary motivation is usually justice, 
but one could imagine it being fame, 
loyalty (perhaps to comrades or rela- 
tives killed or ruined by criminals), or 
possibly even whim. 

Some comic books do a great job of 
illustrating the complex psychologies 
found in characters of the Vigilante ar- 
chetype. They make excellent inspira- 
tional reading. 


Demihumans 


Another factor 
to consider when you create the person- 
ality of your thief is race. Thieves are 
one of the two AD&D® game classes 
that are open to any race (the other is 
fighter), so there's a great deal of racial 
diversity among the ranks. 

Humans are assumed to be the norm 
throughout this book, but we'll include 
the occasional note when special condi- 
tions or rules apply to nonhuman 
thieves, 

Below, for instance, we have some 
observations on the behavior of thieves 
of the various demihuman races. These 
suggestions are mere guidelines, gener- 
alizations; it is by no means required 
that PC thieves should conform to these 
models. PCs are exceptional in many 
ways, after all, not the least of which is 
personality. These predispositions, as 
you might call them, may nonetheless 
be useful as a starting point for concep- 
tualizing your demihuman thief. 

Reference is made below to the types 
of “thief kits” that the various races are 
likely to take; thief kits are fully ex- 
plained in Chapter 3, starting on p. 22. 


Dwarf 


Many dwarven 
thieves are not stealers, as such; but 
rather experts in mechanical things, 
such as locks, traps and so on, that are 


used to thwart thieves. The dwarven 
thief, then, is often an installer of such 
items, or an advisor on security mat- 
ters. And, naturally, knowledge of how 
to put something together is also useful 
for taking it apart . . . 

The kit most favored by dwarven 
thieves is, naturally, the trouble- 
shooter. Here he can make use of his 
knowledge and skills without engaging 
in the dishonorable activity of genuine 
theft. If you want to check how secure 
your jewels actually are, or whether 
your prison is in fact inescapable, a 
dwarven troubleshooter is probably the 
best way to find out. 

Bounty hunters also are found in the 
ranks of dwarven thieves. They may 
serve the kings under the mountains, 
bringing back scoundrels and criminals 
who have somehow escaped dwarven 
justice—and such characters are the 
only bounty hunters permitted to be of 
lawful alignment. Other dwarven 
bounty hunters specialize as reposses- 
sors. They use the full range of thieves’ 
skills to recover stolen items; and they 
are careful to take nothing else, thereby 
keeping their honor and reputation im- 
peccable. 

It may be dangerous to call either of 
these sorts of dwarves a thief—a grave 
insult in dwarven culture, in which tra- 
dition absolutely prohibits one dwarf 
from stealing from another. Theft 
within a dwarven community is pun- 
ishable by banishment at the very least, 
and sometimes death. 

The prohibition does not extend to 
stealing from other races, however (es- 
pecially goblins), but stealing is still less 
than honorable and a known thief is 
usually viewed with caution and suspi- 
cion by his neighbors. 

Dwarven thieves living outside the 
dwarven world either became tired of 
that suspicion, or were expelled from 
their homes for theft or another trans- 
gression. They still tend to retain a 
great deal of honor and the professional 
attitude characteristic of their race; a 
former criminal may even have learned 
from his crimes and youthful excesses, 
and could be a very reliable compan- 


12 


ion. A very dangerous few, however, 
have abandoned their racial legacy, and 
become treacherous and unpredictable. 

Any dwarf found in a thieves’ guild 
can be assumed to be an outcast from 
dwarven society. 


Elven thieves are 
sometimes characterized as eavesdrop- 
pers or spies. Elven culture has shown 
relatively little interest in personal, ma- 
terial property; with their incredibly “ 
long lifespans, they are more aware 
than most of the transitory nature of 
things. 

But while material things come and 
go, knowledge is eternal, and it is what 
the elven thief covets above all. With 
their higher chances for finding secret 
doors, and superior senses in general, 
elves are excellent at gathering informa- 
tion. Of the various thief kits, they are 
most likely to become spies. An elf 
raised in a larger human community 
might be inclined to take the investiga- 
tor kit, but this is a rare situation. The 
adventurer kit is also popular, espe- 
cially for the elven thief who wishes to 
traverse the world in search of exotic 
knowledge. (Note that multi-class 
thieves cannot take a kit, however.) 

Elves are careful with preparations; 
they can have patience that amazes 
other races. They like to do research be- 
fore a mission is undertaken, whether it 
be a relatively simple burglary or a dive 
into a deep dungeon to track some pre- 
cious artifact. 

Because of their heritage, elves are 
more likely than other thieves to recog- 
nize the value of archaic or obscure 
items, such as books and artwork. (If 
you are using the nonweapon profi- 
ciency system, you might let an elf 
check information gathering or a simi- 
lar proficiency to identify or estimate 
the value of such an object.) An elf is 
also more likely to know where to fence 
the item—although he would probably 
want to keep it for himself. 

When elves do desire material goods, 
they are sure to be beautiful and inno- 


vative ones. Elves take a special interest 


in items that are long-lasting and of in- 


tellectual value (art, rare books, etc.). 

Though enthralled by knowledge, 
elves are not overly secretive. They find 
information exciting, and may delight 
in sharing it with their friends. 

Finally, elves are dependable. You 
can usually expect an elf to behave as a 
professional (though he might not be 
recognized as such) or a reliable guilds- 
man (though elves prefer to be indepen- 
dent of such organizations). 


Gnome 


“Prankster” and 
*thrillseeker” are words that best de- 
scribe the gnomish thief. He takes de- 
light in stealing, not out of greed but 
because it is like an exciting game—a 
trial of puzzles and challenges, with a 
valuable prize if you succeed. Thievery 
is recreation rather than a profession— 
but the reader knows well how devoted 
and involved people can become with 
their games and recreation! 

Gnomes are fond of burglary, though 
wall-climbing is difficult on account of 
their small stature. They may be infalli- 
ble “box-men” (experts at lock-opening 
and trap-disarmament), having techni- 
cal expertise comparable to dwarves’, 
but being more willing to put it to larce- 
nous use. 

Some have compared gnomish 
thieves to pack rats: Show one some- 
thing shiny and interesting, and he'll 
likely be so overcome by curiosity that 
he'll drop everything in eagerness to 
discover a way to put the object of in- 
terest in his own little paws. 

Bulky treasures, such as coins or 
awkward items that must be fenced, are 
avoided by gnomes. They are collec- 
tors, hobbyists who like to admire their 
trophies: gems, jewelry and (perhaps 
favorite of all) fascinating magical de- 
vices. 

Also, gnomes love to put their magic 
items to clever use. They delight more 
than any other race in practical jokes. 
They may make themselves a nuisance 
to fellow adventurers and thieving 


13 


Role-Playing Thieves 


X 
Fr 


Role-Playing Thieves 


partners; but, though embarrassing or 
amusing, such pranks are harmless. 
And at heart, a gnome, well-treated, is 
a most loyal and reliable adventuring 
companion. 


Half-elf 


Half-elves live 
between two worlds—and perhaps this 
gives them a special affinity for thievery, 
taking the best that both have to offer. 

Some half-elves favor the world of 
one parent or the other, if raised and ac- 
cepted by that parent's society. But 
many more are wanderers, never quite 
feeling at home or accepted in either so- 
ciety. 

By seeing and understanding two di- 
verse cultural viewpoints, half-elves are 
acutely aware of peoples’ differences in 
point of view—and how to capitalize 
on those differences. This helps develop 
a well-honed ability to shade the truth 
and, combined with the elven affinity 
for knowledge, makes half-elves excel- 
lent swindlers. Targets are sometimes 
further impressed by a half-elf’s exotic 
appearance (pointed ears, lithe build, 
and so forth). 

It is very easy, for instance, for a half- 
elf to enter a new town, find a likely tar- 
get, discover what that person needs or 
desires, and then appear at the target's 
doorstep with a fake for sale. A half-elf 
swindler will milk a town or area for 
however much it's worth, and move on 
when things get a little too hot. Between 
towns he may link up with adventurers 
for protection (and perhaps con them, 
too), but eventually he'll move on when 
he has found new territory. 

Many half-elves are loners and wan- 
derers, which is not conducive to guild 
affiliation. The ties of a half-elf thief to 
a guild are loose, at best, unless the 
character has been raised in the guild 
structure and well-indoctrinated into its 
mentality. 


Sometimes por- 
trayed as consummate burglars, half- 
ling thieves are really motivated by 


curiosity. The average halfling is con- 
tent to lead a simple, safe, comfortable 
life. But the thief longs to see and expe- 
rience the world beyond the hills and 
burrows of his home shire. 

“Adventurer” is probably still too 
strong a word, for even halfling thieves 
have their race’s characteristic shy cau- 
tion, plus a healthy dislike for danger, 
discomfort, and uncertainty. Halflings 
make careful preparations whenever 
possible, and use their skills of self- 
concealment liberally. Careful scouting 
is always a must, and frontal assaults 
(whether in combat or robbery) anath- 
ema. 

Many halflings have remarkably lit- 
tle interest in money, which can be bur- 
densome (especially for a small 
person). They'll take a good amount of 
loot, certainly—at least enough for a 
pleasant period of ease and comfort be- 
fore work is made mandatory—but 
they are hardly motivated by greed. 

Of great puzzlement to sages is the 
question: Where do halflings get their 
extraordinary talent for thieves’ skills? 
There is precious little locksmithing or 
metalwork found in their culture, and 
thievery amongst the halflings them- 
selves is virtually unheard of —yet the 
halfling thief has an amazing knack for 
almost all thieves’ skills. 

Coupling this knack and the attitudes 
just described, plus a fierce loyalty for 
their friends, the halfling thief is under- 
standably in high demand for adven- 
turing expeditions. 


Other Nonhuman Races 


As the Dungeon 
Master's Guide mentions (p. 15), it is 
possible to design new character races 
for your campaign. Some of these char- 
acters likely will end up joining the thief 
class. 

The races most commonly adapted 
for characters are humanoid—ogres, 
orcs, and half-breeds of those races; 
goblins, kobolds, and possibly even 
hobgoblins or bugbears. As thieves, 
these characters favor the kits of 
highwaymen (that is, bandits) and 


thugs—they prefer armed robbery, 
where no great deal of finesse, delicacy, 
or dexterity is required. 


Demihumans, Cities and 
Guilds 


The entries above 
describe demihumans who were raised 
among their own kind, and have picked 
up most of their race's cultural trap- 
pings. Some demihumans, however, are 
found in other settings, such as human 
cities. Most such demihumans still origi- 
nally lived among their own people, but 
some campaigns may include second- or 
even third-generation displaced demihu- 
mans. This particularly happens in large 
cities, where there may be ghettoes of 
demihumans, or where thieves’ guilds 
have purposely raised demihumans in 
their midst to take advantage of their 
races’ special abilities and benefits, while 
suppressing natural and cultural inclina- 
tions (dwarven honor, halfling peaceful- 
ness, half-elven wanderlust, and so on). 

Ghetto-born demihumans undoubt- 
edly still exhibit some stamp of their 
“homeland,” but the tendencies are 
weaker. In fact, a guild-raised demihu- 
man’s personality might hardly be rec- 
ognized for what it is, if the 
conditioning was done well. (There 
could even be such oddities as a claus- 
trophobic dwarf or a repressed elf.) 

Interesting role-playing could arise 
from an alienated, city-born demihu- 
man thief breaking away from the guild 
that was the only parent he knew, and 
trying to find himself in the unfamiliar 
lands of his ancestors. 


Code of the Professional 


Do you think that a city, an army, or 
bandits, or thieves, or any other 
group that attempted any action in 
common, could accomplish anything 
if they wronged one another? 


—Plato's Republic, Book 1 


One of the things that distinguishes a 
“professional” thief from the more com- 
mon, vulgar variety is his understand- 
ing, like Plato’s, of the delicate balance 
of justice that even thieves must main- 
tain among themselves to be successful. 

Many thieves wish to be regarded as 
professionals. It is a privileged status, 
indicating success and the respect of the 
underworld. It can be an asset for busi- 
ness, bringing more and more lucrative 
jobs. Even in places not claimed as terri- 
tory by guilds, there are circles of pro- 
fessional thieves, forming the elite of 
the underworld. 

The most basic qualification of a pro- 
fessional is that he is recognized as such 
by other professionals. This recogni- 
tion is not easy to gain. A thief must 
build a reputation for excellence—for 
competence, reliability, and honor 
among his business partners. 

A would-be professional also needs 
to hang out in the “right spots.” taverns 
and such establishments, particular 
places where the professional clique 
gathers. There they relax, share infor- 
mation, and make contacts and ar- 
rangements for professional 
cooperation with other thieves. 

Attitude is the first element to be 
adopted by the aspiring professional. 
The professional attitude says thieving 
is a business, and should be conducted 
as neither more nor less than one. The 
professional is not contemptuous of his 
victims; they simply failed to protect 
their property adequately, and suffered 
the economic consequences. 

Professionals develop an unwritten 
code of conduct, guidelines for behav- 
ior. Its exact contents vary from place 
to place; the only universal rule seems 
to be the prohibition of “squealing.” A 
typical “code” is as follows, with its ele- 
ments listed in order of importance: 


1. A professional thief does not 
“squeal”: If captured by authorities in 
the course or as a consequence of a job, 
he must not reveal the identities of his 
partners, fences, informants, or other 
professional contacts. 


2. A professional thief will honestly 
report how much money or valuables 
are taken in a job; he will not “burn” his 
partners. 


3. A mob of professional thieves will 
share their score equally among them- 
selves, or according to the contribution 
of each to the job, arranged and agreed 
upon beforehand. 


4. A professional thief will share 
some of his earnings with other profes- 
sional thieves who have been incarcer- 
ated (to help pay fines, bribe officials, 
etc.). 


5. If a professional thief has valuable 
information (e.g., attractive targets, lo- 
cation of traps, and the activities of the 
town watch), he will share it with other 
professionals. 


6. Professional thieves will help one 
another, even in spite of personal differ- 
ences or enmity between them. 


As stated above, not all of these rules 
are recognized in each circle of profes- 
sional thieves; but some sense of honor 
is vital to the attitude and behavior that 
mark a professional and gain him rec- 
ognition as a “good burglar.’ The pen- 
alty for breaking the professional code 
can be at least as severe as breaking the 
law. A few transgressions may be over- 
looked by the criminal community, but 
a pattern of consistent disregard for the 
code will cause a character's reputation 
to deteriorate. Other thieves will not in- 
vite the character to be a partner in 
jobs; silence and cold stares will greet 
him at his favorite social establish- 
ments; and fences may even refuse to 
purchase the goods he acquires. He also 
runs the risk of former associates 
squealing on him. 

In the worst situation—say, a thief 


15 


burns his partners, squeals on them, 
and then skips town for some foreign 
port—the offending thief could not 
only expect his professional reputation 
to be ruined, but he had better keep an 
eye over his shoulder, watching for as- 
sassins and bounty hunters hired by his 
former associates, or by their friends or 
families. 

On the other hand, there are consid- 
erable benefits for the thief who adheres 
to the code. He will gain the respect and 
trust of his associates. He is not immune 
from dishonorable thieves, who may 
try to burn him or squeal on him; but he 
will have the support and approval of 
others in exacting revenge on those who 
wrong him. Also, if he is captured and 
imprisoned by authorities, he can ex- 
pect the privilege of the fix: the guild 
contacts (or less formal contacts) may 
arrange his release through bribes or fa- 
vors. Even if the professional does not 
have access to the money needed, other 
thieves, knowing that he'd do the same 
for them, will pitch in until the neces- 
sary amount has been gathered. 


D aí CHAPTER 2: Proficiencies 


The use of nonweapon proficiencies 
in your campaign is highly recom- 
mended, especially if you are going to 
make use of the thief kits that we 
present in this book. Proficiencies are 
the best way to quantify the various 
talents that distinguish one thief kit 
from another. 

This chapter is entirely devoted to 
nonweapon proficiencies. It includes a 
reference table with a complete list of 
proficiencies available to thieves, in- 
cluding several that are new. The new 
proficiencies are described below. 


New Proficiencies 


Each description 
below starts with the following infor- 
mation: the name of the proficiency, 
the number of slots required for its se- 
lection, the relevant character statistic 
(e.g., Intelligence), the check modifier 
for using the proficiency, and the thief 
kit(s) for which this proficiency is ap- 
propriate (i.e., required or recom- 
mended). 

Thieves of any kit may choose any of 
these new proficiencies. However, if 
the kit is not listed as appropriate in the 
proficiency’s description, then an addi- 
tional proficiency slot beyond the num- 
ber listed is required, just as if the 
proficiency were restricted to another 
class (cf. Player's Handbook, p. 54). 
This is why a “# of slots required” is al- 
ways listed, even though a given profi- 
ciency may not cost any slots to thieves 
who take certain kits. 


Alertness 


1 slot, Wisdom, +1 modifier. 
Required: Burglar. 
Recommended: All. 


A character with this proficiency is 
able to instinctively notice and recog- 
nize signs of a disturbance in the imme- 
diate vicinity, reducing by 1 in 10 the 
character's chance of being surprised 
whenever he makes a successful profi- 
ciency check. 


Table 1: NONWEAPON PROFICIENCIES—THIEVES 


GENERAL THIEF NEW THIEF 
PROFICIENCIES* PROFICIENCIES* PROFICIENCIES** 
Agriculture Ancient History Alertness*** 
Animal Handling Appraising Animal Noise 
Animal Training Blind-fighting Astrology 
Artistic Ability Disguise Begging 
Blacksmithing Forgery Boating*** 
Brewing Gaming Endurance 
Carpentry Gem Cutting Fast-talking 
Cobbling Juggling Fortune Telling 
Cooking Jumping Herbalism 
Dancing Local History Hunting 
Direction Sense Musical Instrument Information Gathering 
Etiquette Reading Lips Intimidation 
Fire-building Set Snares Locksmithing 
Fishing Tightrope Walking Looting 
Heraldry Tumbling Navigation 
Languages, Modern Ventriloquism Observation*** 
Leatherworking Reading/Writing 

Mining Religion 

Pottery Survival 

Riding, Airborne Tracking 

Riding, Land-based Trailing 

Rope Use Voice Mimicry 

Seamanship 

Seamstress/ Tailor 

Singing 

Stonemasonry 

Swimming 

Weather Sense 

Weaving 


*Proficiencies listed in this column are fully described in the AD&D® 2nd Edition 
Player's Handbook, pp. 56-65. 


**These new proficiencies for thieves are described in the text of this chapter. 


***If the DM so wishes, these may be considered general proficiencies, available 
to characters of any class without additional nonweapon proficiency slot cost. 


Animal Noise 


1 slot, Wisdom, -1 modifier. 
Recommended: Bandit, 
Hunter, Smuggler. 


Bounty 


A character with this proficiency is 
capable of imitating noises made by 
various animals. A successful profi- 
ciency check means that only magic 


can distinguish the noise from that of 
the actual animal being imitated. A 
failed die roll means that the sound var- 
ies from the correct noise in some slight 
Way. 

If the die roll fails, this does not mean 
that all creatures hearing the noise 
know that the sound is fake. While 
creatures and humanoids that are very 
familiar with the noise know this auto- 


Proficiencies 


matically, other creatures or characters 
in earshot may require Wisdom checks 
to determine if they detect the fake. 

Bandits and Smugglers often use this 
ability for communication on the job, 
almost as a variant dialect of thieves’ 
cant. 


Begging 


1 slot, Charisma, special modifiers. 
Required: Beggar. 

Recommended: Assassin, Bounty 
Hunter, Burglar, Cutpurse, Spy. 


This proficiency serves two functions. 
First, it allows the character to pose con- 
vincingly as a beggar; success is auto- 
matic, so no proficiency check needs to 
be made. This function is used most by 
Assassins, Bounty Hunters and Spies in 
the pursuit of their assignments. 

A character can also use begging to 
procure a very minimal daily income. 
(Many Cutpurses are in fact beggars 
who aren't getting enough—and vice 
versa.) Success requires first that there 
be people to beg from—people with 
money to give. A character in an aban- 
doned castle or a recently pillaged vil- 
lage are virtually assured of failure. 

The following modifiers are sug- 
gested to the DM as guidelines. They do 
not consider the wealth of a locale, just 
the population density. Impoverished 
regions might have greater negative 
modifiers—but then, so might affluent 
areas with traditions of stinginess. 


Table 2: SUGGESTED BEGGING 


MODIFIERS 
Locale Modifier 
Uninhabited / 
Wilderness Automatic Failure 
Countryside =7 
Hamlet, Village =o 
Town -2 
City 0 


If a proficiency check is successful, 
then a character is able to panhandle 
enough money, goods or services that 
day to meet his basic needs (a little food 
and drink, a place to sleep). 


The DM may also use the proficiency 
check for specific single actions—e.g., a 
character in disguise as a beggar accosts 
a specific NPC. 

The begging proficiency may not be 
used to force player characters to give 
money away; players are always free to 
decide if and how generous their char- 
acters are in response to supplications. 


Boating 


1 slot, Wisdom, +1 modifier. 
Recommended: Adventurer, Bounty 
Hunter, Smuggler. 


A character with boating proficiency 
is needed to guide a boat down a rapid 
stream or to reduce the dangers of cap- 
sizing a canoe or kayak. In addition, a 
character with boating proficiency can 
insure that a boat is propelled at its 
maximum speed. 

Note that this proficiency is distinct 
from Navigation and Seamanship, 
which apply to ships on oceans, seas, or 
at least large lakes, rather than small 
craft on smaller lakes and rivers. 


Endurance 


2 slots, Constitution, 0 modifier. 
Recommended: Thug. 


This proficiency is normally re- 
stricted to warriors. Its description is on 
p. 58 of the Player's Handbook. 


Fast-Talking 


1 slot, Charisma, special modifier. 
Required: Swindler. 

Recommended: Acrobat, Adventurer, 
Fence, Investigator, Smuggler, Trouble- 
shooter. 


Fast-talk is the art of distraction and 
conning. If a successful proficiency 
check is made, the fast-talker is able to 
get away with whatever scam he is at- 
tempting. Modifiers are based on the 
Intelligence and Wisdom of the target, 
as shown on Table 3. The DM may also 
introduce modifiers according to the 


17 


difficulty or plausibility of what the 
character is attempting. 


Table 3: FAST TALKING MODIFIERS 


Target's Target's 

Intel. Modifier Wisdom Modifier 
3 or less n/a 3 =5 
4-5 =s 4-5 =3 
6-8 =g 6-8 = 
9-12 0 9-12 0 
13-15 +1 13-15 +1 
16-17 +2 16-17 +3 
18 +3 18 +5 
19 +5 19+ n/a 
20 n/a 


Modifiers are cumulative. Targets of 
Intelligence 3 or less are so dim that at- 
tempts to fast-talk them fail automati- 
cally because they can’t follow what's 
being said. (Creatures that are so stupid 
are easy to fool in other ways, how- 
ever.) Targets with Intelligence of 20 or 
more or Wisdom of 19 or more are im- 
pervious to fast-talking. 

Example: Julina the Silent, spy ex- 
traordinaire, is discovered by guards as 
she sneaks around the emperor's pal- 
ace. She quickly decides to fast-talk 
them into believing that she is the mis- 
tress of the Steward of the palace and 
she just got lost in the labyrinthine 
halls. Unknown to Julina, the Steward 
is an elderly, faithfully and happily- 
married gentleman; and it is possible 
that the guards know of this reputation. 
The DM assumes the guards to have av- 
erage Intelligence and Wisdom (no 
modifier), but he adds a —3 modifier 
because Julina’s story contradicts the 
Steward's reputation. A 1d20 roll of 7 is 
less than 10 (Julina’s Charisma of 13, 
with the -3 modifier), so she succeeds. 
The guards buy her story, and suggest 
that she go where she belongs immedi- 
ately. If she failed they would call her 
bluff—and perhaps escort her straight 
to the door of the Steward and his wife! 


Fortune Telling 


2 slots, Charisma, +2 modifier (see be- 
low). 
Recommended: Swindler. 


This nonweapon proficiency covers 
knowledge of a variety of methods of 
divination—all of them fake. The thief 
with Fortune Telling is familiar with nu- 
merous devices and methods, such as ta- 
rot cards, palm reading, interpreting the 
flight of sparrows or the arrangement of 
a sacrificed animal's entrails, and so 
forth—or at least the thief is familiar 
enough with these practices to make it 
appear that he's an authentic soothsayer. 
(If fortune telling can make accurate pre- 
dictions in the DM's campaign, this profi- 
ciency does not necessarily enable the 
thief to do so; it confers no magical 
powers.) The thief makes up the predic- 
tion he wishes to tell. 

A successful proficiency check indi- 
cates that the thief’s customer or client 
believes the fortune he was told to be 
authentic. If the check fails, the sham is 
discovered in some way, or the predic- 
tion is simply not believed. If the DM 
wishes, the same modifiers described 
for fast-talking (above) may be used, 
based on the Intelligence and Wisdom 
of the subject and the believability of 
the fortune predicted. 

Optional Rule: If a natural 1 (or an- 
other number secretly chosen by the 
Dungeon Master before the die is 
rolled) comes up, the event that the 
thief predicted actually comes true! 


Herbalism 


2 slots, Intelligence, -2 modifier. 
Recommended: Assassin, Bounty 
Hunter. 


A knowledge of herbs, particularly 
those with poisonous qualities, is of val- 
ue to Assassins and Bounty Hunters. 
And Scouts often learn the types and 
properties of plants in their wilderness 
journeys. This proficiency is normally re- 
stricted to priests and wizards. Its de- 
scription is on p. 59 of the Player's 


Handbook. See also p. 26 of this book 
for information on the use of this profi- 
ciency with the assassin thief kit. 


Hunting 


1 slot, Wisdom, -1 modifier. 
Recommended: Bounty Hunter. 


This proficiency is normally restrict- 
ed to warriors. Its description is on p. 
59 of the Player's Handbook. 


Information Gathering 


1 slot, Intelligence, special modifiers. 
Required: Beggar, Fence, Investigator, 
Spy. 

Recommended: Adventurer, Assassin, 
Bounty Hunter, Burglar, Cutpurse, 
Smuggler, Troubleshooter. 


This proficiency represents the abili- 
ty to gather information from the un- 
derworld, most commonly about 
roguish “jobs” and characters. A char- 
acter with this proficiency, in appropri- 
ate circumstances, will be aware of any 
major rumors circulating among the 
lowlife of an area; and with a successful 
proficiency check, specific information 
about a person or place can be gath- 
ered. (The DM must decide how spe- 
cific the information is.) 

The following modifiers may adjust 
the proficiency check: 

Characters’ reaction adjustments 
(based on Charisma) should benefit or 
penalize the roll, assuming contact with 
people is involved in the search. 

Thieves’ guild members receive a bo- 
nus of +2, because they are assumed to 
have more and better-informed con- 
tacts than freelancers. Also, their “terri- 
tory” (below) is considered to be that of 
the guild, not just their own area of op- 
eration. 

Since this proficiency depends on a 
network of informants and contacts, 
the thief will be at a disadvantage try- 
ing to use it in an area other than his 
own territory. “Territory” refers to his 
regular base of operations—a town, 
one neighborhood of a city, or even a 
whole province or countryside. Out- 


side this territory the thief does not 
hear rumors automatically (a normal 
proficiency roll is required), and gath- 
ering specific information suffers a pen- 
alty of at least -3. The DM may make 
it greater in truly foreign areas (e.g., a 
thief of Waterdeep trying to gather in- 
formation in Calimshan), due to great 
differences in language, culture or race. 

Finally, any time a proficiency check 
is required for information gathering, a 
small investment of money for drinks, 
bribes, and so forth must be made, or 
an additional penalty of —3 is im- 
posed, A total of 1d10 gp is typical, and 
it is lost whether or not the desired in- 
formation is found. (If the information 
is still unknown, the character can con- 
tinue his search the next day, spending 
more money and making another profi- 
ciency check.) The DM is free to in- 
crease the cost of using this proficiency 
if it suits the campaign. 

Examples: 

1. Urlar is hanging around the local 
tavern in his neighborhood when he 
hears rumors of a dragon to the north, 
recently slain as it raided a village. The 
dragon's cave and treasures are as yet 
undiscovered. But some bragging ad- 
venturers are said to have found a map 
to them. Urlar’s contacts provide this 
information to him automatically, 
while another PC would need to ap- 
proach people, talk with them, and 
probably buy them several drinks in 
order to Jearn of the map and treasure. 

2. His greed sparked, Urlar wants to 
know who these adventurers are, so 
that he can steal their map and find the 
dragon's hoard for himself. This re- 
quires a couple of drinks (a 2 gp invest- 
ment); and the proficiency check has a 
— 1 penalty because of Urlar’'s low Cha- 
risma (7). Urlar’s Intelligence is 10, so 
he needs to roll a 9 or lower to find out 
who the adventurers are. If they are not 
very well known, he may need to make 
additional checks to track them down 
(find where they are staying, what tem- 
ples they visit, or whatever). 

3. Julina the Silent is hired as a spy to 
infiltrate the emperor's palace. She needs 


to find an easy way in—a sewer, service 
exit, or the like. She has an expense ac- 
count from her employers for bribes. Her 
Intelligence is 14 and her modifiers are: 
+1 (for Charisma 13 reaction adjust- 
ment), +2 (thieves’ guild member), and 
—3 (for this not being her home terri- 
tory); so she must roll 14 or lower on 
1d20 to get the information she needs. 

It's best to role-play information 
searches whenever possible. 


Intimidation 


1 slot, ability special, special modifier. 
Required: Thug. 
Recommended: 
Hunter, Buccaneer. 


Bandit, Bounty 


This is a talent for bending people to 
your will by scaring the living daylights 
out of them. NPCs who are intimidated 
are quite likely to do what they're told, 
out of fear. On the negative side, they 
are also very likely to harbor much re- 
sentment against the character that in- 
timidates them. The NPCs will keep 
their resentment hidden—until the first 
chance to avenge their pride arises. 

Intimidation may be attempted with 
one of two abilities: Strength or Cha- 
risma. If Strength is used, the thief is 
threatening immediate, personal bodily 
harm. If Charisma is used, the intimida- 
tion consists of more subtle threats, 
which need not be physical. If success- 
ful, the NPC is convinced that the thief 
is ready and capable of making his life 
miserable—if not immediately, then in 
the near future. 

Player characters are never forced to 
submit to intimidation, as this would 
detract from the players’ freedom to 
role-play. 


Locksmithing 


1 slot, Dexterity, 0 modifier. 
Recommended: Troubleshooter, dwarf 
and gnome thieves. 


This is the specialized skill of making 
locks. It is treated like other “craft” pro- 
ficiencies when checking for success. 
Also, thieves with this proficiency gain 


a 10% bonus to their lockpicking skill, 
because they are intimately familiar 
with the internal structure and working 
of so many locks. 

Besides troubleshooters, dwarf and 
gnome thieves of any kit can take the 
locksmithing proficiency to fill one 
slot, because of the tradition of crafts- 
manship and mechanical things in their 
cultural heritages. 


Looting 


1 slot, Dexterity, 0 modifier. 

Required: Burglar. 

Recommended: Adventurer, Bandit, 
Buccaneer, Thug. 


This proficiency represents a knack 
for grabbing the best loot in the shortest 
time. For instance, a cat burglar breaks 
into a room in a wealthy mansion. He 
has about two minutes to fill his back- 
pack, so that he can escape before 
guards are summoned by magical 
alarms. If his proficiency check suc- 
ceeds, he is able to recognize and stuff 
into his pack the most valuable combi- 
nation of items that is feasible, given his 
limitations of time and space. 


Navigation 


1 slot, Intelligence, -2 modifier. 
Required: Buccaneer. 
Recommended: Smuggler. 


This proficiency is normally re- 
stricted to priests, warriors, and wiz- 
ards. Its description is on p. 61 of the 
Players Handbook. 


Observation 


1 slot, Intelligence, 0 modifier. 
Required: Beggar, Cutpurse, Investiga- 
tor, Spy, Swindler, Troubleshooter. 
Recommended: Assassin, Bounty 
Hunter, Burgler, Fence, Smuggler. 


Characters with this proficiency have 
cultivated exceptionally acute powers 
of observation. The DM may ask for a 
proficiency check (or secretly roll it 
himself) anytime there is something 


subtly askew; he may also allow char- 
acters with observation to increase 
their chance of finding secret or con- 
cealed doors by 1 in 6. The proficiency 
covers all the senses. 

Example: Julina is questioning a man 
who claims to be a craftsman who has 
worked on the palace; she is searching 
for the most discreet entrance. The DM 
secretly rolls an observation profi- 
ciency check; it is successful. “You no- 
tice,” he tells her, “that his hands are in 
beautiful condition, entirely lacking 
callouses.” From this observation, Ju- 
lina may deduce that the man is actu- 
ally just posing as a craftsman; he may 
be a con man taking advantage of a few 
free drinks or coins, or he could even be 
a spy for her enemies. 


Reading/Writing 


1 slot, Intelligence, +1 modifier. 
Recommended: Investigator, Spy. 


This proficiency is normally re- 
stricted to priests and wizards. Its de- 
scription is on p. 61 of the Players 
Handbook. 


Survival 


2 slots, Intelligence, 0 modifier. 
Required: Bandit. 
Recommended: Bounty Hunter. 


This proficiency is normally re- 
stricted to warriors. Its description is on 
p- 63 of the Player's Handbook. 


Tracking 


2 slots, Wisdom, 0 modifier. 
Required: Bounty Hunter. 
Recommended: Assassin. 


This proficiency is normally re- 
stricted to warriors. Its description is on 
p. 64 of the Player's Handbook. 


Trailing 


1 slot, Dexterity, special modifiers. 
Required: Assassin, Cutpurse. 


Recommended: Beggar, Bounty 


Proficiencies 


Hunter, Investigator, Spy, Thug, Trou- 
bleshooter. 


Trailing resembles tracking, except 
tracking is associated chiefly with the 
wilderness, and trailing typically is 
used in major urban centers (i.e., cities 
and large towns). It is the talent of tail- 
ing someone—of keeping a certain dis- 
tance or even catching up to them, 
though they may be attempting to 
blend into a crowd, or at least get lost in 
the confusion of a street full of people. 

A proficiency check is first made to 
see if the thief is able to trail without be- 
ing noticed. If the person followed has 
the alertness proficiency, then the thief 
suffers a —5 penalty. 

If the thief is noticed, the person be- 
ing followed may attempt to evade. To 
keep from losing the trail, the thief must 
make another proficiency check. A 
modifier from —3 to +3 (varying from 
first time in a foreign city to the thief's 
home neighborhood) may be used, if 
the DM so chooses, to reflect how well 
the thief knows the area. Warn the 


player beforehand if you will apply 
modifiers (though you needn't tell ex- 
actly what they are). 

The DM should feel free to use situa- 
tional modifiers on these rolls. For ex- 
ample, if a street is relatively clear, the 
thief should get -1 or -2 on an at- 
tempt to follow unnoticed, but +1 or 
+2 if he has been seen and is chasing af- 
ter his subject. The opposite numbers 
could be used for exceptionally 
crowded situations, or at night. 

For any Trailing proficiency roll, a 
—3 penalty applies if the person fol- 
lowed has the Trailing proficiency as 
well (and, presumably, knows better 
how to foil the tricks of his own trade). 

Example: Julina is trailing an NPC 
through the Imperial capital, because 
she suspects that he is spying for a rival 
employer and has information that 
would be valuable for her. It is night- 
time, on a nearly deserted street. The 
DM informs Julina of this, and says that 
she'll have trouble going unnoticed (—2 
modifier on her first roll, he rules, but 
does not tell her); but if her quarry does 


20 


spot her, he'll be easier to chase (+2). 
The DM also decides that Julina has 
been in the capital on this job long 
enough that she’s fairly familiar with 
the streets and alleys, so she will not 
suffer a penalty on that account. How- 
ever, unbeknownst to Julina, the spy 
she follows has both alertness (-5 modi- 
fier) and trailing proficiencies (-3 modi- 
fier). This means that her first roll has 
an adjustment of -10; if it fails, the sec- 
ond will have an adjustment of -6. Ju- 
lina's Dexterity is 17. She needs to roll 7 
or lower on her first roll, but gets a 13 
and fails. “The man has spotted you,” 
says the Dungeon Master. “He speeds 
up and ducks around a corner, into an 
alley.” Julina follows; to keep from los- 
ing him, she needs to get an 11 or lower, 
She rolls an 11, just barely making it. 
“The alley is empty—you are about to 
rush through to the next street, but 
through a window you spot a flash of 
red, like the man’s coat, and hear foot- 
steps up a staircase in the building to 
your right.” 


Proficiencies 


Voice Mimicry 


2 slots, Charisma, special modifiers. 
Recommended: Assassin, Spy. 


Voice mimicry is the art of convinc- 
ingly imitating the voices of other people. 
It is a very demanding skill, needing in- 
tense training of and practice with the vo- 
cal cords, For this reason it requires two 
nonweapon proficiency slots. 

A character with voice mimicry is 
able to imitate any accent he has heard. 
Success is automatic unless people who 
themselves speak in that accent are his 
listeners; in such a case, a proficiency 
roll is required (with a +2 modifier). 

More difficult is the imitation of a spe- 
cific person's voice. To do this, the thief 
must, of course, be familiar with the 
voice. A proficiency check is needed to 
determine if the imitation is detected; 
modifiers depend on how well the listen- 
ers know the voice that is being mim- 
icked. Success is of course certain if the 
listener is a stranger, someone who has 
never heard the original voice. To fool 
an acquaintance, there is no modifier; 
while fooling a friend of the subject is at 
—2, a close friend —5, and someone ex- 
tremely close (e.g., parent or spouse— 
someone who has had close contact with 
the person for years) is at —7. 

This ability is often used in conjunc- 
tion with the disguise proficiency. 
Which proficiency must be checked 
first depends on whether the character 
is seen or heard. If the disguise first is 
successful, there isa +5 modifier to the 
voice mimicry—the listeners have al- 
ready accepted the appearance, so they 
are less likely to doubt the voice. If the 
disguise fails, it doesn’t matter how 
good the voice imitation is. If the voice 
is successfully mimicked first, it gives a 
+1 modifier to the disguise check. 


Demihumans and 
-Nonweapon Proficiencies 


Each demihuman 
race has its own culture and crafts, and 
these may be quantified by nonweapon 
proficiencies. Below is listed each non- 


human AD&D® character race, along 
with the nonweapon proficiencies that 
are most highly recommended because 
they reflect the demihumans’ heritage. 

Note that these proficiencies are 
merely recommended, for the sake of 
characterization. Players are not re- 
quired to choose from these lists for 
their demihuman thieves; nor do they 
receive any as bonus nonweapon profi- 
ciencies. If a proficiency is not recom- 
mended for the demihuman thief's kit 
or class, it costs another proficiency 
slot, just as it would for any other char- 
acter. 

Optional Rule: A demihuman using a 
recommended proficiency may get a 
bonus of +1 on any proficiency check 
he may be required to roll. 

Nonweapon proficiency recommen- 
dations are listed by category (General, 
Thief, etc.). 


Dwarves 


General: Artistic Ability, Black- 
smithing, Brewing, Direction Sense, 
Fire-Building, Mining, Pottery, Rope 
Use, Stonemasonry. 

Thief: Ancient History, Appraising, 
Blind-fighting, Gem Cutting, Set 


Snares. 

Priest: Engineering. 

Warrior: Armorer, Endurance, 
Mountaineering, Survival (Hills, 


Mountains), Weaponsmith. 
New: Intimidation, Locksmithing. 


Elves and Half-Elves 


General: Animal Handling, Artistic 
Ability, Dancing, Direction Sense, Eti- 
quette, Leatherworking, Rope Use, 
Seamstress/Tailor, Singing, Weather 
Sense, Weaving. 

Thief: Ancient History, Gaming, 
Jumping, Local History, Musical Instru- 
ment, Set Snares, Tightrope Walking, 
Tumbling. 

Priest: Healing. 

Warrior: Animal Lore, Bowyer/ 
Fletcher, Hunting, Survival (Wood- 
land), Tracking. 


21 


Wizard: Ancient Languages, Astrol- 
ogy, Herbalism, Reading/Writing, 
Spellcraft. 

New: Alertness, Animal Noise, Ob- 
servation. 


Because of their mixed heritage, half- 
elves may have the full diversity of their 
human parent, or they may be inclined 
to take proficiencies like those of other 
elves (above). It probably depends on 
who raised the half-elf thief and where. 
If the optional demi-human proficiency 
bonus for recommended proficiencies is 
used, half-elves should receive it when 
they use the elven-recommended profi- 
ciencies listed above, regardless of 
where they were raised. 


Gnomes 


General: Artistic Ability, Black- 
smithing, Brewing, Carpentry, Cob- 
bling, Mining, Pottery, Rope Use, 
Stonemasonry. 

Thief: Ancient History, Appraising, 
Disguise, Forgery, Gaming, Gem Cut- 
ting, Juggling, Local History, Set 
Snares, Ventriloquism. 

Priest: Ancient Languages, Engineer- 
ing, Herbalism. 

Warrior: Survival (hills, wood- 
lands), 

Wizard: Spellcraft. 

New: Animal Noise, Locksmithing. 


Halflings 


General: Agriculture, Brewing, Car- 
pentry, Cobbling, Cooking, Leather- 
working, Pottery, Seamstress/Tailor, 
Weaving. 

Thief: Forgery, Gaming, Juggling, 
Local History, Musical Instrument, Set 
Snares, Tumbling. 

Priest: Healing, Herbalism. 

Warrior: Bowyer/Fletcher. 

New: Alertness, Animal Noise, Beg- 
ging, Fast-Talking, Fortune Telling, Ob- 
servation, Trailing, 


Are you tired of playing plain, old, 
pick-a-few-pockets-and-open-a-few- 
locks thieves, even if AD&D® 2nd Edi- 


tion makes them slightly more 
interesting than their predecessors? Do 
you want still more interest, more 
variety—but don’t want to worry 
about working out all the details your- 
self? Then the thief kits may be just the 
thing for you. 

Here we will show you how to create 
and play all sorts of thieves. They are 
presented in kits. Each kit defines a par- 
ticular type of thief—his characteris- 
tics, abilities, and limitations. You are 
also invited to design your own kits, 
and we include suggestions on how you 
might do this. 


Kits and Thief Types 


Each type of thief 
described in this chapter is defined by 
means of a kit. A kit is made up of the 
following elements, following the style 
of the warrior kits in the AD&D 2nd 
Edition Complete Fighter's Manual: 


Description: The kit explains the 
thief type, describing the typical ap- 
pearance, manner, cultural back- 
ground, and use of the character in a 
campaign. It also lists any requirements 
necessary for a character to take the kit. 


Role: Many of these thief types arise 
in particular social contexts. A Fence, 
for instance, exists because other 
thieves need to market stolen goods. 
The kit will therefore describe the role 
of the Fence in his society, and may sug- 
gest how he might function in relation 
to the rest of the fantasy adventure 
campaign. 

Under “Role” you will also find notes 
on the personalities or backgrounds typi- 
cal for thieves of this kit. This reflects our 
earlier discussion of “role-playing 
thieves,” where we examined setting, so- 
cial background and motivations, and 
presented a few thief archetypes. 


Secondary Skills: If you have chosen 
to use the Secondary Skills rules from 
AD&D 2nd Edition (see Player's Hand- 


CHAPTER 3: Thief Kits 


book, p. 53), then your kit may require 
your thief to take a specific skill, or 
choose from a limited range of choices. 
You might not be able to choose or roll 
randomly from among all the second- 
ary skills listed in the Players Hand- 
book. 


Weapon Proficiencies: If you're using 
the weapon proficiency rules from 
AD&D 2nd Edition, then your kit could 
require your thief to take specific 
weapon proficiencies. Or, he might 
have to choose one from a limited 
range; the Bandit, for instance, is re- 
quired to take one bludgeoning 
weapon. 

Some kits (Assassins, for example) 
are permitted a wider range of weapons 
than normal thieves. This, too, is noted 
under weapon proficiencies. 

Unlike nonweapon proficiencies, be- 
low, weapon proficiencies required for 
a thief kit are NOT bonuses unless oth- 
erwise specified. They must be taken to 
fill the weapon proficiency slots nor- 
mally given to a first level thief. 


Nonweapon Proficiencies: If you 
have chosen to use the nonweapon pro- 
ficiency rules from AD&D 2nd Edition, 
then you will find useful the informa- 
tion in each kit on what proficiencies 
are required or recommended for that 
sort of thief. The Bounty Hunter, for in- 
stance, is required to take the tracking 
proficiency; and a number of other pro- 
ficiencies related to wilderness survival 
and tracking down people are recom- 
mended. 

Note that required proficiencies are 
bonuses, given in addition to the non- 
weapon proficiency choices that you 
may make as usual. Sometimes a bonus 
proficiency will come from a group 
other than the General or Thief groups, 
but (since it is a bonus anyway) it 
doesn’t matter how many extra slots it 
would otherwise be required to occupy. 

When a proficiency is only recom- 
mended in a thief kit, it is not given au- 
tomatically to the character. If the 
character decides to take a recom- 
mended nonweapon proficiency, it is 


22 


chosen to fill one of the thiefs open 
slots. Beginning thieves should have no 
more than one nonweapon proficiency 
that is not among those recommended 
or required for their kit. 

So let us suppose we have a bounty 
hunter named Baltrin. As a first level 
thief, Baltrin starts with three non- 
weapon proficiency slots. In addition, 
for choosing the Bounty Hunter kit, he 
gets Tracking as a bonus proficiency. 
Two of his three nonweapon profi- 
ciency slots must be spent on proficien- 
cies that are recommended for his kit; 
he chooses alertness and riding (land- 
based). His final slot may be filled with 
any one-slot proficiency that he desires. 
The player chooses carpentry, deciding 
that Baltrin came from a family of car- 
penters. 

A number of new nonweapon profi- 
ciencies are mentioned in these kits. See 
Chapter 2, “Proficiencies;’ for a com- 
plete listing of thief nonweapon profi- 
ciencies and complete descriptions of 
those which are new. 

It is not recommended that you use 
both secondary skills and nonweapon 
proficiencies. We strongly recommend 
that you use the nonweapon profi- 
ciency rules if you are going to use these 
new guidelines for thief types; they give 
the thieves much more color and defini- 
tion, and make for a more interesting 
and versatile campaign. 


Skill Progression: This section of 
each thief kit suggests which of the tra- 
ditional thieves’ skills (picking pockets, 
etc.) are most valuable to that sort of 
thief, It is recommended that characters 
rise fastest in those skills, since they are 
the ones that are likely to get the most 
practice. These are meant as 
suggestions—the choice of how to allot 
skill improvements ought to remain in 
the hands of the player. 


Equipment: Some thief types tend to 
make use of certain forms of equip- 
ment, either from preference or need; 
or they may be limited in what equip- 
ment they can carry. We will note such 
situations. A Beggar, for instance, can't 


beg very well if he's dressed in resplen- 
dent finery, with guilded armor and be- 
jeweled weapons. 

These equipment listings aren't really 
restrictions. Rather, they reflect what 
time and trial have proven to be most 
advantageous for a thief of this or that 
variety. If the character is fulfilling his 
role, the equipment will make sense; 
and the DM is encouraged to assist in 
pointing out the value of the suggested 
equipment when a character experi- 
ments with other things. 


Special Benefits: Most thief types 
have some special benefits that the oth- 
ers don't. These may be straightfor- 
ward special abilities. Often, however, 
they reflect the thief’s relationship to his 
society; they may be defined as special 
reaction bonuses, special privileges in 
certain cultures or regions, and so 
forth. A Fence, for instance, gets better 
reactions from other thieves (especially 
if they want him as a business partner), 
and also has less trouble than other 
characters in finding thieves willing to 
hire out their skills. 


Special Hindrances: Similarly, each 
thief type has certain disadvantages 
which hinder him, such as the reaction 
penalties of Beggars. 


Races: In the previous chapter we dis- 
cussed nonhuman thieves in general. 
Each kit was written with the human 
character in mind. In a sense, demi- 
human thieves of each race are a kit unto 
themselves, because of their nonhuman 
heritage. However, it is certainly possible 
for demihumans to take one of these kits 
(pending the Dungeon Master's approv- 
al, of course). Before putting too much 
effort into a non-human character, be 
sure to approve the race/kit mix with 
your DM. He might not appreciate dwarf 
pirates, for instance. 

Under the heading “Races”, we note in 
each kit special considerations for non- 
human thieves: races recommended (or 
the opposite) for that kit, and any special 
modifications that might apply if a non- 
human character is used. 


An Important Note 


In the following 
sections, several thief kits include reac- 
tion bonuses and penalties as part of 
their special benefits and special hin- 
drances. A word of caution needs to ac- 
company them. 

In the AD&D® game, when a charac- 
ter is very charismatic, he gets what is 
called a “reaction adjustment.” (See the 
Player's Handbook, p. 18.) When the 
character has a high Charisma and re- 
ceives a bonus, it's expressed as a plus; 
+2, for instance. When he has a low 
Charisma and receives a penalty, it’s ex- 
pressed as a minus; —3, for example. 

However, when you roll the 2d10 for 
encounter reactions (see the 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, p. 103), 
don’t add the bonus ( +) or subtract the 
penalty (—) from the die roll. Do it the 
other way around. If the character has 
a Charisma of 16, and thus gets a +5 
reaction adjustment, you subtract that 
number from the 2d10 roll. (Otherwise 
the NPCs would be reacting even more 
badly because the character was charis- 
matic!) 


Kits and the Thief Classes 


These thief kits 
are designed to accompany the thief 
class; although, as you will see, they 
stretch the definition of what a “thief” 
is. They are not appropriate for bards. 


Kits and Character Creation 


There are three 
rules governing the thief kits: 


1. A character may only take one thief 
kit. 


2. You can only take a thief kit for your 
character when you first create that 
character. 


(This rule has one exception: If DM and 
players decide to integrate these rules 
with an existing campaign, and both 
DM and players can agree on which 
thief kit would be appropriate for each 
existing character, then you may use 


23 


these rules to add a thief kit to existing 
characters.) 


3. Once you've selected a thief kit, you 
cannot change it. 


(Note, however, that with the flexible 
way that thieves advance, you can doa 
lot to make your thief look as if its kit 
has been changed. For instance, a Fence 
may be stuck in the wilderness and not 
be able to follow his “vocation” for 
years. But even so, he could not switch 
to a new kit, such as Scout.) 


Before choosing a thief kit, you will 
already have determined the charac- 
ter's: ability scores (AD&D Player's 
Handbook, Chapter 1), race (Chapter 
2), class (presumably thief), and align- 
ment (Chapter 4). You might also have 
decided upon a host of background fac- 
tors, as discussed elsewhere in this 
book, 

You are then ready to choose your 
thief kit. In fleshing your character out 
along with the thief kit, you will proba- 
bly encounter the various other stages 
of character creation, such as proficien- 
cies (Chapter 5 of the Player's Hand- 
book, and Chapter 2 of this volume), 
money and equipment (Player's Hand- 
book, Chapter 6), and so forth. 


The Thief Kits 


Following are 
several types of thieves represented by 
thief kits. Before allowing his players to 
choose kits for their characters, the DM 
should review each kit and make notes 
for himself about them. 

For each thief kit, the DM must de- 
termine: 


1. If he will even allow this kit in his 
campaign. 

2. What additional information he 
needs to give the players about each 
kit. 

3. What changes he might wish to 
make to each kit. 


Let's take the Beggar kit as an exam- 
ple. In most fantasy campaigns this kit 


Table 4: THIEVING SKILL THIEF KIT ADJUSTMENTS 


Ability 

Pick Open FR 
Thief Kit Pockets Locks Traps 
Acrobat +5% -5% -5% 
Adventurer — = — 
Assassin = = +5% 
Bandit -5% = +10% 

+10% -5% -5% 
Bounty Hunter _ — +5% 
Buccaneer -5% — — 
Burglar -5% +5% — 
Cutpurse +10% — = 
Fence — +5% +5% 
Investigator -5% — — 
Scout -5% -5% — 
Smuggler -5% -5% -— 
Spy — = = 
Swashbuckler — — -10% 
Swindler = -5% — 
Thug = = — 
Troubleshooter -10% +5% +5% 


Move Hidein Detect Climb Read 
Sil. Shadows Noise Walls Lang 
+5% — — +5% — 
— — — — -5% 
— +5% — -5% -5% 
— +5% — =- -5% 
= os = 5% he 
= = = = +5% 
=i = — +5% -5% 
= = — -5% -5% 
-5% -5% -= -5% +5% 
= = +5% = ze 
+5% +5% — = — 
+5% +5% t5% -5% — 
— — — +5% +5% 
ae == = — +5% 


would be acceptable, at least in con- 
cept; although it is not inconceivable 
that one state might be so benign as to 
provide for all its needy—or so harsh as 
to keep them off the streets forcibly. 

Assuming the DM says that yes, the 
Beggar kit will exist in his campaign, he 
needs to decide which details are spe- 
cific to the Beggars of his world. What 
causes people to be Beggars? In a pre- 
dominantly lawful evil society, for ex- 
ample, there may be a class of people 
that is systematically oppressed. (This 
sort of society, by the way, is a perfect 
setting for thief player characters, 
whose campaign goal can be to over- 
throw the oppresive system.) The DM 
should inform the players of all these 
details specific to his campaign. 

Finally, after the DM has decided on 
all the details, he should go back 
through the thief kits as they are pre- 
sented here and adjust them as he sees 
fit. 


Thief Kits and Thieving Skills 
(Optional Rules) 


Because of their 
specializations, thieves of the various 
kits differ in their aptitudes for various 
standard thieves’ skills. A Spy, for in- 


stance, would need to be better (or at 
least would have more practice) at de- 
tecting noise than a Fence. To reflect the 
predispositions of the various kits, use 
Table 4 for beginning thieves. This ta- 
ble is just like Tables 27 and 28 (Thiev- 
ing Skill Racial Adjustments and 
Thieving Skill Dexterity Adjustments) 
on page 39 of the Players Handbook, 
and is cumulative with any bonuses or 
penalties derived from those tables. 

After the adjustments have been to- 
talled, the thief may distribute his dis- 
cretionary points. There normally are 
60 discretionary points to distribute 
(see Players Handbook, p. 38). Some 
thief kits may not have as many discre- 
tionary points to distribute as begin- 
ning characters. The Assassin, for 
instance, gets only 40 points instead of 
60. 


NOTES TO TABLE 4 

1. Includes similar feats of manual 
dexterity, such as legerdemain and slip- 
ping poison (see also note 3, below). 

2. This ability may also be used in 
the placement of traps. 

3. Assassins and Bounty Hunters are 
adept at slipping foreign substances 
(poison, sedative, etc.) into the food or 
drink of their targets. Success in such a 


24 


feat of manual dexterity is determined 
by a pick pockets roll, and the Assassin 
or Bounty Hunter gets +5% on the 
roll. This special bonus does not apply, 
however, to pickpocketing or other 
tasks covered by this ability. 

4. In the wilderness, the bandit gets 
+5% to this ability. 


Example: Urlar is a beginning gnome 
thief with a Dexterity of 17. He decides 
to adopt the Burglar kit. Using Tables 
26, 27 and 28 from page 39 of the Play- 
ers Handbook and Table 4, above, 
Urlar computes his skills as shown in 
Table 5. 


Urlar now may distribute an addi- 
tional 60 discretionary percentage 
points among the total base scores, 
with no more than 30 such points being 
assigned to any single skill, as ex- 
plained in the Player's Handbook, page 
38. 


Acrobat 


Description: Acrobats are related to 
bards, as both ostensibly have the pro- 
fession of entertaining others. Some 
would say they do this to avoid “real” 
work. And both characters are wont to 
support themselves by unorthodox 
means when there's a slump in their 
“regular” business. 

Because of the physical demands of 
their vocation, Acrobats must have 
minimum scores of 12 in Strength and 
14 in Dexterity. 

Role: Even Acrobats who are not in- 
clined toward larcenous behavior are 
rarely looked up to by the rest of their 
society. People who become Acrobats 
or actors often were born into the mid- 
dle class, though their status actually 
becomes lower. The middle class de- 
lights most in the entertainments. The 
lower classes are usually too busy 
struggling to survive, and may be tied 
to their land or profession in the man- 
ner of serfs. The nobility and wealthy 
people are “above” the crude entertain- 
ment of the crowd; and even if they 
might see a circus on occasion, it would 
be socially impermissible to join it. 


Except in unusual circumstances, 
then, Acrobats will come from the mid- 
dle class. A player character might be 
different, if a player wishes, but he will 
need a plausible explanation of the situ- 
ation. Because of the social disgrace, it 
is likely that any entertainer from 


_ wealthy or noble class will be dis- 


owned. 
But then, many people who seek em- 
ployment as entertainers didn’t leave 


_ their previous lives out of choice, any- 


way. A noble-born Acrobat was proba- 
bly disowned (or worse) before he took 
up that profession, and might even 
have assumed a new identity. Acrobats 
from other backgrounds may have his- 
tories, too —things to hide, and ene- 
mies to fear. One thing they like about 
the circus is that nobody presumes to 
remove anyone else's mask or make-up. 

The circus may indeed get its own 
history. Run by a competent swindler, a 
circus may make piles of money from 
gullible spectators. It could bring in 
even more by having its own Cut- 
purses, who are permitted to work the 
crowds so long as they give a percent- 
age of their take to the circus manage- 
ment. 

Acrobats are almost always wander- 
ers. A small town quickly tires of its en- 
tertainers, so they must move on to the 
next, where their tricks and displays 
may be considered new and impressive. 

Secondary Skills: Any. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Acrobats may 
use any weapon normally permitted to 
thieves. Note, however, that they will 
usually avoid those that are heavy and 
cumbersome (see “Equipment” below). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 


_ None. Recommended: Alertness, Dis- 


guise, Fast-Talking, Juggling, Musical 
Instrument, Riding, Rope Use, Ventril- 
oquism. 

Skill Progression: Among the basic 
thieves’ skills, climbing walls is the one 
most applicable to the Acrobat's overt 
profession. Their lightness of step leads 
to excellence in moving silently, so this 
skill also is likely to improve rapidly. Fi- 
nally, many an Acrobat supplements 
his circus income by picking the pock- 


Table 5: URLAR’S SKILL ADJUSTMENTS 


TOTAL 

Base Racial Dexterity Kit BASE 
Skill Score Adj. Adj. Adj. SKILL 
Pick Pockets 15% +5% -5% 15% 
Open Locks 10% +5% +10% +5% 30% 
Find/Remove Traps 5% +10% 0% 0% 15% 
Move Silently 10% +5% +5% 0% 20% 
Hide in Shadows 5% +5% +5% 0% 15% 
Detect Noise 15% +10% 0% 0% 25% 
Climb Walls 60% -15% 0% +5% 50% 
Read Languages 0% 0% -5% -5% 


ets of the audience when he is not actu- 


ally performing. 

Equipment: In order to make use of 
their Acrobatic skills, Acrobats favor 
the least and lightest equipment possi- 
ble. If the optional encumbrance rules 
(Players Handbook, pp. 76-79) are 
used, Acrobats should not be permitted 
more than light encumbrance. Acro- 
bats may encumber themselves more in 
special situations (e.g., carrying a 
wounded comrade to safety, hauling a 
great hoard of treasure) but they will 
invariably seek to divest themselves of 
the excess weight at the first opportu- 
nity. 

Special Benefits: The abilities of 
jumping, tumbling, and tightrope 
walking are so crucial to this kit that the 
Acrobat should be able to have them as 
special abilities even if the DM has cho- 
sen not to use the nonweapon profi- 
ciency system. Further, because of their 
intense training with these skills, Acro- 
bats should get a bonus of +1 when- 
ever a proficiency check is required. 
This bonus is +2 if the Acrobat is wear- 
ing no armor (and, under the optional 
encumbrance rules, is unencumbered). 

Special Hindrances: None. 

Races: The shorter races—halflings, 
gnomes, and particularly dwarves— 
often have difficulty with Acrobatic 
feats, on account of their body size and 
build. Dwarves, in addition, rarely 
have a temperament that would endear 
them to a circus show; though one can 
easily imagine cheerful halflings and 


25 


mischievous gnomes entertaining a 
crowd. 

Dwarf characters, then, ought not to 
take this kit. Halflings and gnomes 
may, if they so desire, but they do not 
gain the bonuses listed under “Special 
Benefits” for jumping and tightrope 
walking. (They do receive the tumbling 
bonus.) 


Adventurer 


Description: The Adventurer is the 
jack-of-all-trades, the prototypical 
dungeon-delving thief. The Adventurer 
is not so much a thief as a character 
who takes advantage of the general 
thiefly skills on professional adventures 
into dungeon and wilderness. The Ad- 
venturer thief kit has no requirements 
beyond those of the thief class itself. 

Role: Adventurer-kit thieves usually 
serve in parties of brave adventurers of 
various classes, Their specia] skills are 
vital in supporting any successful expe- 
dition into wilderness or dungeon. The 
professional Adventurer is, further- 
more, preferred by many adventuring 
parties, because he is much less likely 
than other thieves to betray or steal 
from his own companions. The success- 
ful Adventurer knows the value of trust 
and cooperation, while many a “street 
thief” has been raised on duplicity and 
(sometimes literal) backstabbing. 

Many Adventurers are neutral or 
lawful. Few are evil, and almost none 
that is chaotic evil can survive for long, 


let alone prosper in his ways. 

Adventurers may be part of a 
thieves’ guild for easy access to equip- 
ment and training. They tend to be in- 
dependent, however, and dislike guilds 
that have demands beyond a simple 
membership fee. 

Secondary Skills: Any. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
None. Recommended: Player's choice; 
among those that may be selected are 
Alertness, Boating, Fast-talking, Infor- 
mation Gathering, and Looting. 

Skill Progression: Adventurer 
thieves tend to spread their skill im- 
provements as evenly as possible, to al- 
low them to deal with the many 
different challenges the adventuring life 
presents. If there is any concentration, 
it is usually on opening locks or finding 
and removing traps, since these skills 
are probably used most often. 

Equipment: Adventurers are typi- 
cally very gadget-oriented, delighting 
in new ways to bypass monsters and 
raid their lairs. They also may have a 
good bit of money, from successful ven- 
tures, to reinvest in equipment. 

Special Benefits: None. 

Special Hindrances: None. 

Races: Any. 


Assassin 


Description: In any reasonably cor- 
rupt culture, there are those who wish 
to eliminate someone whose very exist- 
ence stands in the way of their plans. To 
serve them there are Assassins: trained 
killers whose services are for hire. 

In the AD&D® 2nd Edition Players’ 
Handbook, the idea of an assassin, a 
hired killer, has been divorced from 
any particular character class. Indeed, 
a character can be any class and still be 
an assassin; this thief kit simply shows 
how a thief can be converted into an ef- 
ficient, discreet killer. Characters of 
other classes still can (and often will) be 
assassins, so it would be best not to let 
down one's guard... 

Assassins must have the following 
minimum ability scores: Strength 12, 


Dexterity 12, and Intelligence 11. 

Role: Thugs and Bounty Hunters 
may be seen as close relatives of the As- 
sassin. It is important, then, to under- 
stand their differences, and what makes 
their roles distinct. Thugs typically 
serve as crude muscle, using bullying 
and intimidation. The Assassin, on the 
other hand, thrives on anonymity, on 
surprise—on his victim not even realiz- 
ing that he is a target until it is much 
too late. A clever Assassin might never 
be seen by his victim. Here, too, the 
Assassin differs from the Bounty 
Hunter, for the hunter often seeks his 
quarry alive, and typically must bring 
back his prey (or the corpse thereof) as 
proof of his project's success. 

Most Assassins are of evil alignment. 
However, it is conceivable that one 
might be of a neutral (but not good) 
alignment. Player-character Assassins, 
if they are permitted in the campaign, 
best fit this rare neutral description. A 
PC might be the agent of some mon- 
arch, paid to arrange the discreet de- 
mise of those who threaten the 
kingdom's safety. While this certainly is 
not good (in the moral sense), the char- 
acter might regard it as a justifiable evil 
because of the deaths the action pre- 
vents by obstructing rebellion, inva- 
sion, or whatever. 

Many Assassin thieves belong to 
guilds. The guilds use them to serve 
their own needs, and act as an interme- 
diary for outsiders who wish to take 
out a contract on someone's life. 

Secondary Skills: Any. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Because of their 
specialization in the art of killing, Assas- 
sins, unlike thieves of other kits, are per- 
mitted the use of any weapon. An 
Assassin often selects one favored weap- 
on, such as a garotte or serrated dagger 
(or even something exotic, such as blow- 
gun darts with an exotic insect poison 
from a distant jungle), to use for his kill- 
ings. lf the Assassin achieves infamy, the 
marks of this weapon may become 
known as a sort of “calling card.” 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Trailing, Disguise. Recommended: Al- 
ertness, Begging, Information Gather- 


26 


ing, Herbalism, Land-Based Riding, 
Observation, Tracking, Voice Mimicry. 

Skill Progression: Assassins favor 
the skills of move silently, hide in 
shadows, detect noise and climb walls. 
They also make occasional use of the 
pick pockets skill—not for lifting 
purses, but for similarly delicate tasks, 
such as slipping poison unnoticed into 
a target's goblet of wine. 

Equipment: Assassins are familiar 
with and make frequent use of a wide 
array of deadly devices. See Chapter 5 
(page 90) for details on all sorts of spe- 
cial items, such as blade boots, death 
knives, folding bows, and so forth. 
Equipment to help their preferred skills 
(see “Skill Progression” above), such as 
clawed shoes and gloves and camou- 
flaged clothing, is also popular. 

If the DM permits, poison is also 
available and frequently used by the 
Assassin. The Assassin may purchase 
poison (expensive and usually illegal), 
or attempt to manufacture or extract it 
himself (which can be dangerous as 
well; see the special section on poison 
in Chapter 7 for more information). 

Special Benefits: Because of their 
training and experience with the use of 
poisons, Assassins also can identify 
poisons used by others. The base 
chance of doing so is the Assassin's 
level multiplied by 5%. 

Assassins with intelligence of 13-15 
get a +5% bonus on the attempt; 16- 
17, a +10% bonus; and 18, +15%. 
Further adjustments depend on how the 
Assassin attempts the identification: 
sight, smell, taste, or symptoms. 

Sight means examination of the poi- 
son or poisoned article. Many poisons 
have a distinctive appearance, or they 
may have a corrosive or discoloring ef- 
fect on metals, foods, etc. Identifica- 
tion by sight has a —20% modifier. Its 
advantage is that the Assassin needn't 
worry about poisoning himself in the 
process. 

A poison may also be identified by its 
odor. This carries a — 15% penalty. Fur- 
thermore, if it is an ingested or contact 
poison, there is a 10% chance that the 
Assassin will be affected by the poison, 


though at half strength (i.e., no effect if 
the saving throw is successful, and if it's 
not, normal save damage is applied—see 
the Dungeon Master's Guide, p. 73). 

Taste is a fairly reliable, if dangerous, 
method of identifying a poison. It car- 
ries a —5% penalty. After dabbing a 
tiny bit on his tongue, the Assassin spits 
it out. There is still a chance that the 
poison will affect the Assassin: 25% for 
injected poison, 75% for ingested, and 
100% for contact. The poison’s effects, 
if any, are half strength (see above). 

The most certain way of identifying a 
poison is by its symptom (no penalty on 
the attempt). The drawback of this 
‘method is of course that you need a poi- 
soned character to examine. 

An Assassin with herbalism profi- 
ciency gets a +5% identification bonus 
because of his knowledge of toxins ex- 
tracted from plants. An Assassin with 
healing proficiency gets a +10% bonus 
in any case. These bonuses are not cu- 
mulative. 

An attempt to identify a poison takes 
one round; be sure to keep track of time 
elapsed and the onset time of the poi- 
son. If one method of identification 
fails, the next may be tried. If none of 
the four produce an answer then the 
poison will remain a mystery to that 
Assassin. (The Assassin could attempt 
identification again after he’s gained an 
experience level, but this is not nor- 
mally of any help.) 

Identification of a poison also means 
knowledge of its antidote (if one exists); 
it does not mean that the antidote is 
available, however. An Assassin with 
herbalism proficiency may attempt to 
make an antidote from scratch (see spe- 
cial rules, p. 113), 

Special Hindrances: Because of the 
time they spend on weapons and poi- 
sons, Assassins advance more slowly in 
thieves’ skills than thieves of other kits. 
They start with only 40 discretionary 
points to allocate at Ist level, and with 
each level gained they receive only 20 
points to distribute among the skills. 

Assassins are generally feared and 
shunned. Therefore an Assassin suffers 
a —4 reaction penalty with non-evil 


NPCs who are aware of his profession. 
Races: In theory, any race could have 
Assassins. The DM may wish to forbid 
elven, gnome and halfling Assassins, 
however, since this profession is quite 
antithetical to their cultures. 


Bandit 


Description: Travel is rarely a safe af- 
fair in the medieval fantasy setting, 
whether one traverses the forbidding 
wilderness or the pastoral countryside. 
Beside the dangers of nature and 
fantastic menaces, such as dragons and 
giants, there are humans who prey on 
their journeying kin. Almost every 
stretch of road near civilization is 
claimed by one or more bands of 
highwaymen, and even the far wilder- 
ness may hide the strongholds of rob- 
bers. 

Bandits must be strong and hardy to 
withstand the harsh forces of nature, 
the people who seek their destruction, 
and even each other. Thieves must have 
minimum scores of 10, then, in both 
Strength and Constitution to be eligible 
for the Bandit kit. 

Role: Bandits are often vicious charac- 
ters, desperate, cunning, and cruel. They 
are prone to fight or even betray each 
other, but two things keep them bound in 
groups: the utter necessity of cooperation 
in order to survive the perils of the wil- 
derness (let alone to be successful rob- 
bers), and the strength of whoever has 
established himself as leader among them 
by force and cunning. 

Some leaders manage to weld to- 
gether very large groups of Bandits. In 
some AD&D® worlds, such as the 
WORLD OF GREYHAWK® Fantasy 
Setting, there are even kingdoms of 
Bandits. Such things are rare, however, 
since few leaders have the Strength or 
Charisma to bind many of these 
thieves: or even if they do, the mob will 
rarely stay together beyond the leader's 
demise. 

Bandits do not belong to guilds, as 
such. A large group of them, or a net- 
work of cooperating groups, may be 
considered analogous to a guild, 


27 


however—providing some training, in- 
timidating nonmembers who operate in 
their “territory” (including humanoids 
and the like), and so forth. A few Ban- 
dit groups may actually have connec- 
tions to a big city guild, though such 
ties would probably be very loose (per- 
haps occasional cooperation, rather 
than subservience). 

Bandits rarely have pleasant reasons 
for pursuing their lifestyles. Most have 
a history better left behind, and many 
have a price (or three) on their heads in 
some place or another. The average 
Bandit would be better off outside the 
wilderness, but with enemies and au- 
thorities elsewhere, it is the closest 
available thing to a sanctuary. 

Bandits can expect less than mercy at 
the hands of the law. As if Banditry it- 
self wasn't punishable, most of these 
thieves already have a few major crimes 
under their belt. But, like a city guild, 
Bandits can work out arrangements 
with local military and civilian authori- 
ties. In exchange for bribes and a cut of 
the take, Bandits may garner informa- 
tion on rich targets and how best to 
avoid the punitive expeditions that may 
periodically be sent against them. 

Secondary Skills: Bowyer/Fletcher, 
Farmer, Fisher, Forester, Gambler, 
Groom, Hunter, Leather worker, 
Tailor/Weaver, Teamster/Freighter, 


Trader/Barterer, Trapper/Furrier, 
Weaponsmith, Woodworker/Car- 
penter. 


Skill Progression: The skills favored 
by Bandits are those useful for scouting 
and preparing ambushes—specifically, 
climb walls (for tree-climbing), move 
silently, and hide in shadows. Find/ 
remove traps also tends to develop with 
a Bandit’s knowledge of snares, pits and 
so forth, which may be employed on 
occasion to waylay travelers. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Bandits are 
particularly partial to heavy, brutal, 
bludgeoning weapons. For this reason 
they may use the following cudgel-like 
weapons in addition to those normally 
permitted to thieves: flail, mace, morn- 
ing star and warhammer. At least one 
of the Bandit’s initial weapon profi- 


ciency slots must be filled by a bludg- 
eoning weapon. Bandits must also take 
proficiency in the knife. They not only 
use this for fighting (some among them 
regard knife-fighting as a spectator 
sport), but as practical equipment for 
wilderness survival. Since this fills the 
two weapon proficiencies open to a 
thief, the Bandit is granted a third initial 
weapon proficiency slot, to fill with the 
weapon of his choice (from among 
those permitted to thieves). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Survival (choose appropriate terrain). 
Recommended: Alertness, Animal 
Handling/Training, Animal Noise, Fire- 
building, Intimidation, Looting, Riding, 
Rope Use, Set Snares, Swimming. 

Equipment: A Bandit should be well- 
equipped for wilderness survival. Vital 
items include provisions, backpack and 
pouches, flint and steel (which are more 
reliable than a magnifying glass for 
starting fires—especially at night!), tin- 
der, a blanket, and a knife. 

Less vital, but often of use, are climb- 
ing equipment (crampons, pitons, etc.), 
fishing gear (hooks, line, net), light 
sources (candle, lantern, torch), rope, 
sewing needle and thread, sacks for 
loot, a signal whistle, spyglass, small 
tent, thieves’ picks, and a whetstone (so 
you can sharpen your knife when 
there's nothing else to do). 

Some Bandits, finally, like to have 
trained animals (dogs, falcons, pigeons) 
for hunting or message-carrying. To 
make effective use of such an animal, 
animal handling proficiency is needed. 

Special Benefits: Because of their 
adeptness at ambushing, Bandits gain 
+1 on their attempt to surprise in a wil- 
derness setting. 

Special Hindrances: Bandits are gen- 
erally despised by other characters: 
Normal people hate and fear highway- 
men, and other types of thieves tend to 
look at them with scorn, as outcasts 
and crude robbers. For this reason, any 
Bandit who is recognized as such suffers 
a —2 reaction penalty among non- 
Bandit NPCs. 

Races: Bandits are a motley group, 
and any race may be found among 


them—even races with a tradition of 
antipathy, although such characters are 
likely to fight each other as much as the 
band's targets. Humanoid and part- 
humanoid characters in particular fa- 
vor the Bandit kit. Demihuman 
characters who join Bandit groups with 
other races are probably outcasts from 
among their own people. 


Beggar 


Description: Circumstances have re- 
duced some unfortunates to such a level 
of poverty and helplessness that the 
only possible way that they can survive 
is by imploring their fellow beings to 
give them whatever meager scraps can 
be spared. At least, so the Beggar would 
wish it to appear. 

For a great many Beggars this is the 
truth; misfortune or disability have 
dealt them sore blows, and they must 
rely on the charity of individuals and a 
few institutions, such as beneficent 
churches, for subsistence. 

But there is another class of Beggar, 
which is really a particularly insidious 
variety of swindler or con artist. This 
character is usually perfectly able- 
bodied, but has taken up begging as a 
career, supplemented by minor theft 
(pickpocketing and the like) and the 
gathering and selling of information to 
interested parties. It is with this sort of 
Beggar that this kit is chiefly concerned. 

The Beggar has no requirements be- 
yond those of the thief class. 

Role: Thieves of this kit, professional 
Beggars, were usually raised into their 
role. This of course means a lower (in- 
deed, lowest in many places!) class 
background, and meager financial re- 
sources at best. The Beggar has other 
resources, however: connections, street 
smarts, a sharp eye, and diverse skills 
for cajoling passers-by out of their 
spare cash. 

Effective begging requires consum- 
mate skills of acting and disguise, so 
that the Beggar can present himself in 
the manner most likely to garner the 
sympathy and cash of the people he ac- 
costs, 


28 


As a matter of survival, the Beggar 
needs diverse sources of income. Few 
can avoid starvation solely by the char- 
ity of strangers in the street. They are 
also dealers in gossip and information 
(such as the movement and activities of 
wealthy personnages), with ears ever 
open for any tidbit of knowledge that 
may help fill their stomachs with food. 
Beggars will also gladly hire themselves 
out as messengers or spies. 

Beggars also are known to cooperate 
with other varieties of thieves, espe- 
cially Cutpurses. A favorite ruse is for 
one or more Beggars to accost a 
wealthy-looking person. While they 
distract him with their pitiful (and more 
often than not, futile) pleas for assist- 
ance, a slick Cutpurse relieves the vic- 
tim of his purse. Shares of the score are 
divided among Beggars and Cutpurse. 

Many Beggars are affiliates of the lo- 
cal thieves’ guild, surprisingly enough. 
The guild makes use of them as messen- 
gers and informants, It also may have a 
sort of protection racket going with 
them: Beggars must share their score 
with the local guild in exchange for pro- 
tection from thieves of the guild itself, 
as well as “freelancers” and rival guilds- 
men. Guild-affiliated Beggars also may 
gain some measure of protection from 
the local constabulary—a useful thing 
if local law prohibits panhandling. 

Secondary Skills: Usually (90%) 
none; begging itself is assumed to have 
been the character's trade or profession. 
If a Beggar does have any secondary 
skills, it should be assumed that for some 
reason or other he lost his means of em- 
ployment. He may have been thrown 
out of his trade guild, for instance: or 
could have been maimed so that he 
could no longer perform tasks as he did 
in the past. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Beggars begin 
with familiarity only with simple, inex- 
pensive weapons. The knife is a favorite, 
being inexpensive, easy to use, and easy 
to conceal. Beginning thieves with the 
Beggar kit should select their two profi- 
cient weapons from among the follow- 
ing: club, dagger, dart, knife, sling, or 
staff. 


Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Begging, Disguise, Information Gather- 
ing, Observation. Recommended: Al- 
ertness, Singing, Trailing. As 
mentioned under Secondary Skills, 
above, a Beggar with marketable skills 
(e.g., crafts or trades) should have 
some reason in his background why he 
is no longer able to support himself 
through them. 

Skill Progression: Beggars become 
most proficient in picking pockets (to 
supplement begging income), and mov- 
ing silently, hiding in shadows, and de- 
tecting noise (useful for gathering 
information and tailing people). They 
tend to be worst at opening locks and 
finding or removing traps, since these 
skills require technical training that is 
not easily available. 

Equipment: The basic equipment of a 
Beggar is a wooden bowl or cup in 
which passers-by may place alms. 
More sophisticated Beggars have false 
crutches, make-up and the like to make 
themselves seem as desperate and 
poverty-stricken as possible. 

Some Beggars have children with 
them (rented from the true parents, or 
borrowed in return for a share of the 
day's income, if they are not the Beg- 
gar’s own) to arouse still more sympa- 
thy. 

A more sophisticated sort of Beggar 
offers a service of some kind—singing a 
song, or playing a simple instrument— 
in exchange for food, drink, or a few 
coins. 

Few Beggars can afford to purchase 
armor; and even if they could, they 
would not want to wear it, since it 
would suggest that they are wealthier 
than they would like to appear. 

Beggars who rise above their circum- 
stances may of course equip themselves 
as they see fit, although then they will 
no longer be accepted by other Beggars 
as one of their kind. A Beggar who ap- 
pears well-off could suffer penalties, at 
the DM's discretion, at the following 
proficiencies: begging (because the 
character doesn’t look impoverished), 
information gathering (because other 
Beggars will distrust him), and even 


trailing (because the thief might not 
blend in as well with the city’s masses). 

Special Benefits: The most valuable 
benefits of the Beggar kit are the large 
number of bonus nonweapon proficien- 
cies. These should be granted to a char- 
acter even if the campaign at large does 
not make use of nonweapon profi- 
ciency rules. 

Special Hindrances: Beggars are 
scorned by most of society. Even char- 
acters who share their wealth with Beg- 
gars tend to feel a sort of disgust or 
condescension, though they may try to 
hide it. Other thieves, however, recog- 
nize the talents and value of Beggars. 
For this reason, Beggars suffer -2 on re- 
action rolls with NPCs who aren't 
thieves. 

Furthermore, because of their impov- 
erished background, Beggars start the 
game with only 3d4 gold pieces. 

Races: Beggars may be of any race. In 
regions with a lot of bigotry, where de- 
mihumans have difficulty finding legiti- 
mate employment, Beggars are 
commonly demihuman. Most nonhu- 
man Beggars were forced into their po- 
sition by unfortunate circum- 
stances—they were not born into it. 


Bounty Hunter 


Description: The Bounty Hunter is a 
ruthless mercenary, worshipping little 
besides the price on his target's head, 
recognizing few laws save the contrac- 
tual distinction between “kill” and “cap- 
ture” He may be found serving the 
state, capturing criminals and bringing 
them to justice; or he may serve the 
shadowy lords of the underworld, 
avenging the twisted honor found 
among thieves and criminals. Pursuit of 
his quarry may take him through a 
thousand hostile environments, to for- 
eign lands, even to alien planes. He is a 
hunter of men. 

The Bounty Hunter's vocation is rig- 
orous and demanding at every level: 
physical, psychological, even moral. It 
requires a sure hand and a stable mind. 
To be a Bounty Hunter, a thief must 


29 


have minimum scores of 11 in every 
ability except Charisma. One thing that 
doesn't really matter to a tough, inde- 
pendent thief like this is whether or not 
people like him. 

A further requirement is that the 
Bounty Hunter be of a nonlawful align- 
ment. The reasons for this are discussed 
below. 

Role: It is important to draw a dis- 
tinction between the Bounty Hunter 
and the Assassin, for their vocations 
are similar. 

The Assassin is most often part of a 
larger network or organization—either 
a society of Assassins for hire, ora guild 
or crime family, or even a government. 
The Assassin is retained by that organi- 
zation to discreetly eliminate its ene- 
mies; he is strictly a killer. The Assassin 
also is a predominantly urban figure, 
though his missions may take him out 
of that setting on occasion. Most orga- 
nizations that have Assassins would 
deny their existence, because of the 
highly illegal and unpopular nature of 
their activities. 

The Bounty Hunter, by contrast, is a 
loner. He may be solicited directly by 
an employer, but more often he simply 
learns of a price offered for the body 
(living or dead) of some person and 
goes after him. 

While the Assassin requires secrecy 
and anonymity, the Bounty Hunter 
thrives on infamy. Fear leads his prey to 
make mistakes, and each such mistake 
brings the Bounty Hunter one step 
closer to success. While an Assassin is 
often hired to kill relatively normal, of- 
ten unsuspecting people, the Bounty 
Hunter is tracking fugitives—people 
who know who's after them, and are 
therefore exceptionally desperate and 
dangerous. 

Pursuit of such people may lead the 
Bounty Hunter to literally any place, 
even to other planes of existence (if the 
prospective reward will make the ven- 
ture worthwhile), and so the Bounty 
Hunter becomes adept at survival and 
tracking in all manner of hostile envi- 
ronments. 

Bounty Hunters do not track only 


fugitives. They may be hired to per- 
form such tasks as kidnapping, freeing 
kidnapped persons, or (especially at 
lower levels, when they are still devel- 
oping their skills) recovering stolen 
property. 

The law and authorities do not always 
look kindly upon Bounty Hunters, 
though they will permit their existence so 
that they, too, may benefit from the 
manhunters’ expertise. For the same rea- 
son, thieves’ guilds tolerate the Bounty 
Hunters, despite the fact that almost no 
Hunter would ever join their ranks. 

Secondary Skills: Any. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Bounty 
Hunter is permitted the use of any 
weapon. As part of his persona and 
fearsome public image, a Bounty 
Hunter will often gain proficiency in a 
rare or bizarre weapon, such as the 
khopesh sword or man-catcher. Non- 
thief weapons take up two of the Boun- 
ty Hunter's weapon proficiency slots, 
but he is granted a bonus slot at 1st 
level. 

Example: Borg Tartan takes the 
Bounty Hunter thief kit. This means he 
has 3 initial weapon proficiency slots. 
Two he fills with a nonthief weapon, 
two-handed sword, and in the third he 
takes the hand crossbow. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Tracking. Recommended: Alertness, 
Animal Handling/Training, Animal 
Noise, Boating, Direction Sense, Fire- 
building, Information Gathering, Her- 
balism, Hunting, Intimidation, 
Observation, Riding, Set Snares, Sur- 
vival, Trailing. 

Skill Progression: Bounty Hunters 
make frequent use of almost all thief 
skills, except perhaps pick pockets. 

Note that “pick pockets” includes all 
sorts of delicate feats of manual dexter- 
ity, such as slipping poison or a “mick- 
ey” into a drink. Deadly poisoning is 
more frequently the province of the As- 
sassin, but a carefully placed, powerful 
sedative may save a Bounty Hunter a 
great deal of trouble. (To have access to 
sedatives or understand their use, a 
Bounty Hunter must have herbalism 
proficiency.) 


30 


Thief Kits 


Equipment: Besides the usual range 
of thiefly equipment, Bounty Hunters 
take interest in items for killing and 
capturing their prey. Special items from 
the equipment chapter, such as blade 
boots, death knives, folding bows, and 
the like, are sometimes taken as favor- 
ite weapons. A rope for holding live 
prisoners is, of course, vital, and it may 
also be used for setting snares. Blinding 
powder and incapacitating poisons 
(paralytic ones or those that make their 
victim ill and helpless) may also have 
value. 

Bounty Hunters make little use of 
deadly poisons—that is more the prov- 
ince of the stealthy Assassin. If a 
Bounty Hunter is out to kill a fugitive. 
he probably won't be worrying about 
how messy it will be. 

Special Benefits: None. 

Special Hindrances: None. 

Races: Members of any race could be- 
come Bounty Hunters. Among the non- 
humans, however, those of mixed blood 
(e.g., half-elves) favor it most, since they 
are often outsiders, loners not accepted 
by either side of their ancestry. 


Buccaneer 


Description: Buccaneers are thieves 
of the high seas, plying the trade lanes 
in search of prey. They intermix with 
and complement their piratical warrior 
cousins —to the extent that any of these 
scoundrels can be said to complement 
anything. 

A hardy Constitution (no less than 
10) is required to survive long months 
at sea and be a Buccaneer. 

Role: Buccaneers closely resemble 
their land-dwelling cousins, Bandits. 
They, too, are desperate and cruel, 
fiendishly cunning, and likely to have a 
lot of internal squabbles. 

Like Bandits, Buccaneers cooperate 
for survival and success. They also 
have sordid pasts—pasts which will of- 
ten bind them together. Many a pirate 
ship used to be put to legitimate use, but 
its crew rose in mutiny, took the ship, 
killed everyone not party to the act. 
and turned to piracy. 


Mutiny and piracy are both punish- 
able by death, and on the high seas the 
warship or merchantman of any state 
will gladly carry out that sentence, if 
given a chance. Buccaneers will there- 
fore tight to the death, against all odds, 
rather than face capture and inevitable 
summary execution. 

Buccaneers do not belong to guilds: 
although. like Bandits, a ship of them 
may be considered a nonstandard guild 
of sorts. Sometimes groups of pirate 
and Buccaneer ships will even make al- 
liances, and cooperate to raid richly- 
laden (and therefore well-defended) 
merchantment. There may also be ri- 
valry among pirate groups—especially 
when one of them carries a healthy 
cargo of booty that has not yet been 
hidden in a safe sanctuary. 

Buccaneers like to have secret sanctu- 
aries, probably in a secret cove or ona 
tiny island. There they rest between 
raids, store treasure and provisions. 
and plan their activities. Such sanctu- 
aries will have the best protection avail- 
able to the Buccaneers, possibly 
including magical defenses. 

Related to but distinct from Bucca- 
neers are Privateers. These are “legiti- 
mate” Buccaneers. Privateers have 
received the sanction of some nation to 
practice piracy on the merchantmen of 
another nation. Well known historical 
examples of this include the Privateers 
of Elizabethan England, captained by 
such illustrious personages as Sir Fran- 
cis Drake. These daring “sea dogs” 
raided gold-laden Spanish galleons as 
they returned from the New World. 

While Privateers are sanctioned by 
one nation, those on whom they prey 
certainly regard them as pirates and 
will treat them as such if they are cap- 
tured. 

A group of NPC Buccaneers should 
include not just thieves but a healthy 
number of warriors with the pirate kit. 
and perhaps a swashbuckler or two as 
well. Even a renegade mage might be 
found among them. (Privateers are 
even more likely to have the services of 
a wizard, especially one with talents in 
the manipulation of water and wind.) 


31 


Secondary Skills: Gambler, Limner/ 
Painter, Navigator, Sailor, Shipwright, 
Tailor/Weaver, Teamster/Freighter, 
Trader/Barterer, Woodworker/Car- 
penter. 

Skill Progression: Buccaneers make 
much less use of the traditional thiet 
skills than thieves of other kits. Climb- 
ing around the rigging of their ships re- 
quires some wall-climbing skill, and the 
delicate step needed to work high above 
the deck may carry over into excellence 
at moving silently. Finally. Buccaneers 
favor the read languages skill—they 
like to be extraordinarily adept at deci- 
phering the strange. secret codes adorn- 
ing maps, codes that may tell a sly 
captain the location of a rival's buried 
treasure, 

Weapon Proficiencies: The DM may 
wish to make classic Buccaneer weap- 
ons, such as the cutlass, available to 
thieves of this kit. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Navigation. Seamanship, Swimming. 
Recommended: Alertness, Direction 
Sense, Fishing. Gambling, Intimida- 
tion, Looting, Rope Use, Tightrope 
Walking. Weather Sense. 

Equipment: Buccaneers dress them- 
selves as sailors (with weapons, of 
course), and carry about the same 
equipment when at sea. Also, like sail- 
ors, they will avoid armor—it gets in 
the way of climbing around the rigging 
(double penalties on climbing rolls), 
and also presents a problem for some- 
one unfortunate enough to find himselt 
overboard. 

Special Benefits: Because of their fa- 
miliarity with ropes. much used in the 
nautical arts, Buccaneers gain a bonus 
of +5% on climbing rolls if ropes are 
involved— + 10% if they are ropes ona 
ship. (Note that the total chance of suc- 
cess with a thief skill, including all posi- 
tive and negative modifiers, cannot 
exceed 95% .) 

Always be sure to consider the vari- 
ous climbing modifiers. explained on 
pp. 122-123 of the Plavers Handbook. 

Buccaneers also can fight trom a rope 
(usually on a ship), so long as the teet 
and one hand can grasp it, and they are 


much better at this than other types of 
characters. They get +1 on attack and 
saving throw rolls in rope combat, +2 
on such rolls in shipboard rope combat. 
Note that these adjustments should be 
added to all the other modifiers—which 
are usually negative. For instance, a 
climbing character would normally get 
a —2 penalty on attacks; so the Bucca- 
neers +2 bonus merely negates this. 

Use common sense when applying 
the saving throw bonus for a Buccaneer 
in rope combat; while it would apply to 
dodging a lightning bolt, it would not 
apply to saving against a charm or hold 
spell. 

For more information on shipboard 
combat, see “Learning the Ropes” be- 
low. 

Special Hindrances: As their exper- 
tise lies in rope-climbing, Buccaneers 
suffer a penalty of — 10% when they at- 
tempt to climb without one. 

Races: Almost all Buccaneers are hu- 
man, since few demihumans and hu- 
manoids are known as seafarers. The 
occasional half-elf might be found 
among a Buccaneer crew, or, even more 
rarely, a half-breed or full-blooded 
aquatic elf, For such an elf to leave his 
own people would indicate a turbulent 
past indeed, 


Learning the Ropes 
(Optional Rules) 


Buccaneers often 
find themselves fighting among the 
ropes and masts of their ships. This sec- 
tion of optional rules is intended to help 
simulate the difficulty and excitement 
of such a scenario. It may also be used 
in other situations of rope combat. 

The basic modifiers in climbing com- 
bat are as follows: 

* A climbing character loses all Ar- 
mor Class bonuses for Dexterity and 
shield. 

* A climbing character suffers a —2 
penalty on attack, damage, and saving 
throw rolls. 

* A character attacking from above 
gains a +2 bonus on his attack roll. 

* A character attacking from below 


suffers a —2 penalty on his attack roll. 

Other modifiers that often come into 
play are: 

* An off-balance defender is attacked 
with a bonus of +2. See below for more 
information on balance and rope com- 
bat. 

* A rear attack (e.g., against a char- 
acter trying to climb up a rope—but 
NOT a Buccaneer climbing and dodg- 
ing at the same time, as explained be- 
low) gains a +2 bonus. 

Buccaneers additionally gain a +1 
on rope combat attacks (+2 if ship- 
board), and may be given the option of 
dodging (explained below), thanks to 
their facility and frequent practice with 
rope climbing. 

NPC sailors, also familiar with sea- 
borne rope climbing, should, for the 
purpose of these rules, have a base 
climbing percentage of 65%. This per- 
centage does NOT apply to other sorts 
of climbing (walls, mountains, etc.); in 
such areas a sailor is assumed to be un- 
trained and should be treated as such. 

Remember that modifiers are cumu- 
lative! 


Losing and Regaining Balance 


Any character engaged in combat on 
ropes runs the risk of losing his balance. 

A character who is struck by a 
weapon, or attempts to climb in the 
course of combat, must make a climb- 
ing check or lose his balance. 

Lost balance means that the next 
round the character must either fall vol- 
untarily or attempt to regain his bal- 
ance. In either case. the character can 
perform no other action. A successful 
climbing check means that the charac- 
ter has regained his balance. A failure 
means the character has fallen (and, of 
course, may suffer falling damage). 
Don’t forget, all attacks against an oft- 
balance character are at +2. 


Optional Rule: Dodging 


Thieves with the Buccaneer kit may 
choose to spend a round in rope combat 
dodging. When doing so, the thief may 


32 


not attack, but he may move at halt his 
normal rope-climbing speed. If a suc- 
cesstul climbing check is made, the Buc- 
caneer is able to add his Dexterity 
bonus to his Armor Class for that 
round of combat. If unsuccesstul, the 
thief will be off-balance the next round: 
he must spend it regaining his balance 
(see below), and attacks against him are 
at +2. 

Example: While plying the sea lanes. 
a ship carrying the Buccaneer Daljo as- 
saults a merchantman whose crew 
retuses the Buccaneers’ demand for 
their cargo and puts up a surprising 
amount of resistance. Daljo and his 
men board the vessel. and he finds him- 
self fighting high above the deck, facing 
an ugly sailor armed with a long, 
curved dagger. Daljo himself wields a 
cutlass. Neither combatant is wearing 
armor. 

The modifiers tor this melee are as 
follows: Neither gets a Dexterity bo- 
nus; since they are both unarmored, 
they both have AC 10. The sailor's at- 
tack modifiers are —2 for climbing. but 
+2 for attacking from above, so they 
balance out to zero. Daljo has —2 for 
climbing. +3 for being a Buccaneer 
climbing ropes ona ship, and —2 for at- 
tacking from below. for a total penalty 
of =l. 

In one round of combat, suppose 
Daljo is struck by the sailor's knife. He 
must roll his climbing percentage to 
avoid losing his balance. His base per- 
centage is 75%; but thanks to his kit 
and the situation he gets a +10% bo- 
nus. lf an 85 or lower is rolled. Daljo 
hangs on in spite of the situation, 

But suppose he is unsuccessful: Daljo 
has lost his balance. The next round his 
action is to attempt to regain it (the only 
alternative is to drop to the deck), 
which he succeeds in doing, while the 
sailor strikes with a +2 bonus. If Daljo 
is struck again, he will have to make an- 
other climbing check lest he lose an- 
other round of attacks or even plummet 
to the deck below. 

lf the combat continues to go poorly, 
Daljo should probably dodge blows 
while retreating down the rope. The 


Se ee ee 


sailor has the advantage when above 
him, but once Daljo has returned safely 
to the deck, he can fight on an even 
footing again. If the sailor does not fol- 
low him down, however, he should not 
go too far—lest the sailor try to cut the 
rope above him! 


Burglar 


Description: The consummate Bur- 
glar is an expert at breaking and enter- 
ing the most difficult buildings, 
bypassing walls, locks, traps and 
guardians, grabbing the best loot, and 
escaping unnoticed as stealthily as he 
arrived. 

The cat Burglar requires a minimum 
Strength of 10 and Dexterity of 13. 

Role: In many ways, the cat Burglar 
is the stereotypical professional thief. 
He probably uses more of the tradition- 
al thief skills, and more frequently, 
than any other kit. 

Even within the ranks of Burglars, 
thieves often specialize even further. 
Some specialize by skills. A “box-man,” 
for instance, is an expert at opening 
locks, especially safes and well- 
protected chests. A cat Burglar or 
second-story thief specializes in climb- 
ing walls (which can be a remarkably 
effective protection, especially if 
ground-level entrances have people 
around them). Teams of Burglars who 
specialize by skill often find the most 
success. 

Other Burglars specialize by target. 
Jewel thieves in particular are the elite 
among Burglars; the protection found 
around the objects of their attention de- 
mands that their skills and cleverness 
be honed to perfection. 

Burglars of any background may be 
found. Even thrillseekers of the privi- 
leged classes may take up jewel Bur- 
glary as a challenging, profitable, and 
exciting pastime. 

Almost all successful Burglars have 
some sort of guild affiliation. In order 
to get rid of the loot they take, they of 
course need a fence (especially if their 
score is distinctive—e.g., fabulous 
gems, valuable artwork). Guilds pro- 


vide the Burglar with innummerable 
benefits: fencing of even the most dis- 
tinctive items, connections with poten- 
tial “business” partners, access to 
specialized equipment, and, not least of 
all, protection. A guild can arrange the 
fix (to free an imprisoned Burglar), and 
provide deterrence, protecting its Bur- 
glars from other guilds and powerful 
criminals—people who don't take kind- 
ly to being robbed themselves, and are 
more likely to make hasty decisions 
about a suspect character's guilt or in- 
nocence. 

Secondary Skills: Any. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Better Bur- 
glars do not bring weapons with them 
on a job; it only means more serious 
penalties if they are caught—either le- 
gal penalties, or more immediate ones 
like a jumpy victim panicking and at- 
tacking them. On some jobs, however 
(e.g., stealing from dangerous crimi- 
nals) a Burglar is wise to have means of 
self-defense. Small, quiet, concealable 
weapons are naturally favored, though 
a Burglar may choose proficiency in 
any weapon among those normally 
permitted to thieves. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Alertness, Looting. Recommended: 
Begging, Information Gathering, 
Jumping, Observation, Rope Use, 
Tightrope Walking, Tumbling. 

Skill Progression: The vital skills of a 
Burglar are open locks, find/remove 
traps, move silently, hide in shadows, de- 
tect noise and climb walls. As mentioned 
before, a Burglar may concentrate partic- 
ularly on one of these, but he would 
probably then want to be as evenly excel- 
lent as possible in the others. 

Equipment: Burglars love to use spe- 
cialized hardware to increase their 
chances of success. For a thorough ex- 
amination of some specialty items 
available, and their effects on thief 
skills, consult the equipment chapter 
later in this book. 

Special Benefits: None. 

Special Hindrances: None. 

Races: Members of any race may be 
Burglars, and it is a favorite kit. Non- 
human thieves often specialize in areas 


33 


that offer excellent racial bonuses. For 
instance, dwarves may specialize in 
lockpicking and trap detection. And 
elves may specialize in reconnaissance 
(they sneak around and report on the 
presence and nature of obstacles). 


The Specialist Burglar 


A broad, general range of skills is of- 
ten what adventurers choose, but for 
the urban Burglar, specialization is the 
way to go. There are a number of rea- 
sons for this. 

A specialized thief is simply more 
marketable. People in the underworld 
want someone excellent for a job. That 
may mean a high-level generalized 
thief, one who has been in the business 
long enough to be good at everything. 
But it's not easy for a thief to reach that 
level. Therefore, by concentrating on 
one skill, a relatively low-level thief 
may compete with a thief many levels 
higher for jobs of a certain type. 

Suppose, for instance, we have a 
“box-man”—actually a woman— 
named Annelise. By concentrating as 
many points as possible in her open 
locks skill, she can have a score of 85% 
at only 4th level (this does not include 
modifiers for race, Dexterity, armor or 
kit). Since she can put no more than 
half of what she earns at each level into 
any one skill, she distributes her re- 
maining points more or less evenly 
among the other skills. She would 
probably neglect pick pockets and read 
languages, however, since they usually 
are not useful to a Burglar. 

Compare this to a “generalist” thief, 
which adventurers tend to be: On Table 
19 of the DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
(Thief Average Ability Table), you can 
see that Annelise’s level of lockpicking 
skill would not be attained before 14th 
level. 

Now imagine that a mob of jewel 
thieves is preparing for a job. They 
have diverse skills—except that they 
are lousy at lock-picking. They need to 
bring a box-man into their mob. Who 
would they choose? Well, first off, a 
14th-level thief is pretty bloody rare. 


And even if one were available and 
willing to work with less-experienced 
thieves, he would probably demand a 
larger share of the take. Otherwise it 
would not be worth his time: He has 
uniformly good skills, and could prob- 
ably commit this robbery on his own. 
A job with which he would need assist- 
ance is probably well out of the range 
of these thieves. 

Annelise, then, is a pretty attractive 
option. She might be able to climb little 
better than a fish, but that's the cat Bur- 
glar’s expertise; after he’s mounted the 
building, he can lower a rope for the 
less sure-footed. By offering Annelise a 
reasonable share of the loot, the other 
Burglars are almost assured that their 
difficult lock will be opened. 


Cutpurse 


Description: This is probably the 
most common sort of thief—the pick- 
pocket or shoplifter who engages in 
small-time larceny, usually at a level of 
meager subsistence. He often supple- 
ments his income by working as an in- 
formant for the powerful figures of the 
underworld (or anyone else who's will- 
ing to pay). 

The Cutpurse has no requirements 
beyond those of the thief class. 

Role: The Cutpurse is near the bot- 
tom of the underworld heirarchy. His 
activities are not as risky as those of 
other thieves, but are they are not as 
profitable either. 

Many Cutpurses are “freelancers,” 
not associated with any thieves’ guild. 
Guilds, normally harsh on non- 
member thieves who operate in their 
territory, pay little attention to Cut- 
purses. The profit and benefits that 
would accrue from their membership 
would not outweigh the trouble of try- 
ing to bring them into line. For this rea- 
son many chaotic thieves, who may 
dislike the structure and limitations of 
guild membership, choose the Cutpurse 
kit. 

Cutpurses are not always uncoopera- 
tive, however. Some do join guilds, 
which they serve primarily as inform- 


ants and tipsters, ears on the streets, 
catching gossip and scoping out pro- 
spective targets that can then be as- 
signed to other thieves. 

Cutpurses who don’t belong to a 
guild often form their own little mob. 
Such a small mob usually develops a 
standard modus operandi (way of op- 
erating), and they use the same scam on 
every target. They may also design spe- 
cial, elaborate plans for lifting a partic- 
ularly heavy purse. Cutpurses also may 
enlist the assistance of thieves of other 
kits in their operations (see the Beggar 
kit, above, for an example). 

Suppose, for instance, that one thief 
has the job of accosting an affluent- 
looking stranger, whom the Cutpurses 
have guessed to be an out-of-town mer- 
chant. This first thief presents himself 
as a street-vendor. While he tries to sell 
the merchant a hot pastry, a second 
thief comes by carrying a large load 
(perhaps a basket full of dirty sheets), 
which he “accidentally” drops on or 
around the merchant. In the chaos that 
ensues, the first two thieves appear to 
help the merchant, picking up the fallen 
items and apologizing profusely; while 
a third Cutpurse does the actual job of 
relieving the merchant of his cash. 

Like beggars, most Cutpurses are of 
lower-class background and are born 
into their station. 

Secondary Skills: Usually (90%) 
none. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Small, con- 
cealable weapons are ideal for Cut- 
purses, though they are not formally 
restricted any more than thieves in gen- 
eral. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Observation, Trailing, Recommended: 
Alertness, Begging, Information Gath- 
ering, Trailing. 

Skill Progression: Cutpurses natu- 
rally specialize in picking pockets. Be- 
yond this, they typically favor moving 
silently and hiding in shadows, as these 
may increase their pickpocketing tal- 
ents. 

Equipment: A few special items to 
aid in picking pockets are noted in the 
equipment chapter (p. 90). If thieves 


34 


have connections, they may be able to 
purchase such items. 

Special Benefits: The effective pick- 
pocket is one who can choose his target 
carefully. He must learn to ascertain the 
nature of a prospective victim. How 
dangerous will the attempt be? What 
could the target do in response? And 
does the chance of financial reward out 
weigh the risks involved? 

In game terms, this means that the 
Cutpurse has the ability to guess the 
class and level of another character. If 
the pickpocket makes a successful ob- 
servation proficiency check, he can ac- 
curately determine the target's 
character class. 

Another proficiency check can be 
made to determine the approximate 
level of the character. The DM should 
roll this check secretly. If the check 
fails, the difference between the num- 
ber rolled and the number needed for 
success is how far off the character's es- 
timate is. 

Sometimes a Cutpurse will “check 
out” a character who is in disguise. 
When this happens, the Cutpurse suf- 
fers a penalty of —5 on his proficiency 
check. 

Example: Gorgar the Cutpurse is 
eyeing an opulent-looking foreigner. 
Gorgar succeeds in his first observation 
check, and determines that the man is a 
wizard. This could be dangerous, he 
thinks, and he tries to guess how pow- 
erful the wizard is. 

Gorgar needs to roll a 13 or lower for 
a successful observation check. The 
DM rolls the dice secretly for him, and 
gets a 16. This means that Gorgar's esti- 
mate will be 3 levels off. 

The wizard is in fact 4th level. The 
DM decides that, because of the mage’s 
rich dress, Gorgar overestimates the 
character's level. “You guess that the 
wizard is around 7th level,” says the 
DM. (Note that characters don’t speak 
in terms of character levels; the thief 
would have information in less precise 
terms; but speaking about levels is clear- 
er for communication among players.) 

If the DM wished, he could have de- 
termined randomly if Gorgar over- or 


D 
ie) 
D 
' 
x 
4 
40 
ine} 


35 


underestimated (e.g., roll 1d6; 1-3: 
over, 4-6 under). 

Special Hindrances: The main hin- 
drance to Cutpurses is that thieves of 
other kits look down on them, consid- 
ering them small-time thieves, just half 
a step above Beggars. This is something 
the DM should bring out in role- 
playing—Cutpurse thieves will have 
difficulty commanding a lot of respect 
in the underworld. 

Races: Cutpurses may come from 
any race. Half-elves and halfings par- 
ticularly favor this kit; as do, to a lesser 
extent, elves. 


Fence 


Description: The Fence is a black 
marketeer, a seller of stolen or other- 
wise illegal goods. He is almost always 
found in a city setting, where there are 
large numbers of people to serve as cus- 
tomers as well as prey for the thieves 
who supply him. 

A good Fence needs a sharp mind to 
appraise people as well as goods, and to 
stay ahead of the law. To take this kit, 
therefore, a thief needs a minimum In- 
telligence of 12. 

Role: The Fence is the lynchpin in the 
complicated web of the black market. 
Thieves sell their illicit acquisitions to the 
Fence, for some amount of money below 
their actual value. The Fence then resells 
the “hot” goods on the black market. If 
the city in which he operates is large and 
the goods are minor enough (not the 
crown jewels of the local royalty), they 
may be sold directly to local buyers. If 
the Fence thinks they're “too hot,” 
though, he will probably arrange to have 
them smuggled and sold elsewhere. 

Power for Fences is rarely measured 
in terms of character level. Instead, it is 
a matter of the breadth of the Fence's 
network and the reliability of his con- 
tacts. Of course, to acquire or retain an 
extensive network, a Fence needs much 
cunning and experience—which may 
coincidentally result in a high character 
level. 

The most powerful Fences keep their 
identities secret, and may never see 


their clients, neither thieves nor buyers. 
They coordinate things from behind 
the scenes, and have minor Fences to 
serve as intermediaries. Even a close 
contact may never have seen the face of 
a great Fence—at least, not knowingly. 
A Fence may secretly play the role of an 
underling in his own network—or even 
that of a rival or freelancer! 

This may all start to sound familiar 
to those who know something about 
thieves’ guilds. The networks of a pow- 
erful Fence look increasingly like the 
structure of a thieves’ guild. This is no 
coincidence. Those who are knowl- 
edgeable in these matters speculate that 
the thieves’ guild was originally, and in 
many respects still is, a black market 
network made into a formal entity. 

Fences may be of any social back- 
ground, though wealthy and noble 
Fences are rare. Certainly those that do 
exist diligently keep their identities 
well-hidden, for obvious reasons. The 
stakes must be high to claim the atten- 
tion of the socially and financially ele- 
vated. 

For example, a rich merchant may 
deal with stolen jewelry on the side. Or 
a baron may be the secret mastermind 
behind a network of thieves smuggling 
and selling contraband. The real world 
offers other examples—such as petty 
dictators who do not only accept bribes 
and turn a blind eye to drug smugglers 
but are in fact a drug lord themselves! 

The black market network transfers 
information as well as goods. Fences 
are probably the best-informed figures 
of the underworld. For this reason they 
gain “gather intelligence” as a bonus 
nonweapon proficiency. (They also re- 
ceive “appraising” as a bonus proficien- 
cy, since it is vital to their vocation.) 

Secondary Skills: Gambler, Jeweler, 
Scribe, Teamster/Freighter, Trader/ 
Barterer. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Appraising, Information Gathering. 
Recommended: Alertness, Fast-talking, 
Forgery, Gem Cutting, Local History, 
Observation. 

Skill Progression: Less powerful 


36 


Fences (that is, those lower in the net- 
work heirarchy, with fewer contacts) 
may need to make use of thiefly skills. 
Picking pockets may provide a little in- 
come when business is slow; its use for 
sleight-of-hand may also have value 
(though it is dangerous to cheat cli- 
ents). Opening locks and finding and 
removing traps are useful skills for in- 
specting merchandise. It is not un- 
known for Burglars, unable to open a 
strongbox, to simply cart off the whole 
thing and hope their Fence can get it 
open. Read languages is also sometimes 
useful in examining merchandise. The 
stealth skills (move silently, etc.) have 
some value on the street; Fences who 
have direct contact with their clients 
may put some time into cultivating 
them, but more powerful Fences often 
neglect them. 

Equipment: Most Fences own equip- 
ment for examining merchandise, to 
determine if the goods are counterfeit 
or what their value might be. A magni- 
fying lens, for instance, may be of use 
here. 

Special Benefits: Because of his con- 
tacts, a Fence is probably the best per- 
son for locating and hiring thieves and 
smugglers, especially in territory not 
claimed by a guild. 

Also, Fences generally command a 
lot of respect from the underworld in 
their home territory. Unless a thief has 
a serious vendetta, he will probably 
court a Fence's favor for business rea- 
sons. Fences receive a bonus of +3 on 
reactions with NPC thieves if their pro- 
fession is recognized. 

Special Hindrances: Fences are rela- 
tively prominent in the underworld. 
And, unlike freelance burglars and 
smugglers who can move from place to 
place, the Fences’ black market net- 
work requires a stable home locale, so 
that they can stay in touch with their 
contacts. (The DM may wish to keep 
PCs from being active Fences because 
of this; the Fence’s life is much more 
business than adventure.) This also 
means that the local authorities may be 
aware of a Fence's identity and activi- 


ties. These authorities may periodically 
harass a minor Fence, or demand 
bribes, or may shake him up for infor- 
mation every once in a while, 

Races: Fences may be of any race. 
Some demihuman Fences prefer to deal 
only in certain goods. Dwarf and 
gnome Fences, for instance, are known 
as shrewd appraisers of stolen gems and 
jewelry. 


Investigator 


Description: Though Investigators 
are listed as thieves, they are usually in 
fact the antithesis of criminals. Investi- 
gators are enforcers of law and order, 
the people who know the skills of the 
thief intimately so that they can combat 
him. 

Role: Investigators can play a number 
of roles. They may be private, their 
services for sale. Or they may be em- 
ployed by a government or organiza- 
tion. In each case their skills and 
activities are similar, but their roles and 
attitudes may be divergent. 

An Investigator may be a vigilante, 
obsessed with uncovering crime wher- 
ever it may be hiding, and stopping it. 
Or he may be the “private eye,” a merce- 
nary sort, or retained by an individual 
or organization, and may be willing to 
sidestep laws to better serve his client. 

Some Investigators are of course in 
the employ of some government. This 
does not necessarily identify them as 
good, however. An Investigator may be 
portrayed as a sort of “good guy cop,” if 
it suits the campaign. But if the players 
are running thieves (especially folk 
hero types), the Investigator could be 
sinister and evil, a perfect foil to the PC 
thieves’ capers. 

The relationship between Investiga- 
tor thieves and guilds is not usually that 
of allies. An Investigator might be em- 
ployed by a guild, however; though 
usually a Spy, or perhaps a Trouble- 
shooter, would do the guild's “investi- 
gating.” 

In fact, an Investigator might not 
even realize that he is employed by a 
guild, if his ostensible employer is a 


“front” business. Interesting cloak-and- 
dagger-style adventures could be built 
around an Investigator discovering, in 
the course of his work, that the shadow 
he is following actually lurks behind his 
own employer. 

And of course, Investigators ostensi- 
bly employed by the government, like 
other magistrates and officials, some- 
times “go bad,” and are bought off by a 
guild, either for information, or in ex- 
change for a blind eye turned toward 
guild activities. 

Secondary Skills: Any are possible, 
though it is not unusual for an Investi- 
gator to have spent his entire adult life 
in this profession. Among the most use- 
ful secondary skills for this kit are ar- 


morer, gambler, jeweler, limner/ 
painter, scribe, trader/barterer, and 
weaponsmith. 


Weapon Proficiencies: Investigators 
are permitted the normal range of 
weapons open to thieves. They will 
normally carry two weapons, at least 
one of them concealed (knife, dagger, 
or something similarly small, perhaps 
in a wrist sheath). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Information Gathering, Observation. 
Recommended: Alertness, Appraising, 
Disguise, Fast-Talking, Heraldry, In- 
timidation, Local History, Modern Lan- 
guages, Reading Lips. Religion, 
Trailing. 

Skill Progression: A balance of gen- 
eralized skills serves Investigators well. 
Picking pockets is less important, of 
course, although you must remember 
that it may be useful for sleight-of- 
hand, which may serve an Investigator. 
Read language skills are a must for deci- 
phering clues; some criminals write im- 
portant information in obscure 
languages or secret codes, and being 
able to decipher it may mean success or 
failure for the Investigator. Other skills 
(lockpicking, trap detection and dis- 
armament, and so on) are useful for 
penetrating and examining the hideouts 
and houses of suspects. 

Equipment: A lot of the technologi- 
cal devices available to the modern In- 
vestigator (such as fingerprinting 


37 


techniques, searches of computer data- 
bases for information, and so forth) 
would of course not be available in the 
medieval fantasy setting. Still, it may 
be possible to duplicate some of the ef- 
fects of such devices with magical 
items; or the DM can make liberal use 
of anachronism. Suppose Investigators 
are able to dust for fingerprints, for ex- 
ample. A magical device that identifies 
fingerprints might also exist, allowing 
the Investigator to learn whose prints 
he has dusted. 

Special Benefits: None. 

Special Hindrances: None. 

Races: Investigators may be of any 
race, though they probably should be 
of the dominant race in their area of op- 
eration. A dwarf would probably be 
best at doing investigative work in the 
dwart-dominated quarter of a large 
city, for instance. This means that most 
Investigators would be human (a rea- 
sonable enough assumption, since hu- 
man governments would be the ones to 
use them most frequently). Operations 
that investigate guilds with many non- 
human members could of course make 
much use of nonhuman Investigators. 


Scout 


Description: A Scout is a thief, usu- 
ally solitary, who operates in a wilder- 
ness setting. Besides working as a 
guide, spy, or saboteur for hire in the 
wilderness, many Scouts are involved 
in such illicit activities as poaching. 

The Scout kit has no requirements 
beyond those of the thief class. 

Role: One might say that Scouts are 
to thieves as rangers are to tighters— 
but they avoid the strict “silly ethics” of 
the ranger class. Scouts are not prohib- 
ited from being good—and in fact they 
are, on the whole, a good deal more de- 
pendable than thieves in general—but 
they have a cutthroat streak that can be 
dangerous and unpredictable. How- 
ever, their rugged individualism and 
harsh practical judgement often en- 
dears them to adventurers, and many 
are found among such steadfast, daring 
companions. 


Thief Kits 


Unlike Bandits (who also operate 
chiefly in the wilderness), the Scout 
usually shuns the company of other 
thieves, including guilds. The guilds, in 
turn, care little about Scouts. Their 
poaching and small-time thievery is 
seen as insignificant in the eyes of the 
great crime figures, especially when 
compared to the trouble and expense 
that would be required to identify and 
to track down the elusive Scouts, to 
punish them or force them to join guild 
ranks. If a Scout is a guild member, ei- 
ther it is a voluntary arrangement 
(whereby the Scout benefits from ac- 
cess to special equipment and training) 
or he has spent enough “professional 
time” in the city or other explicitly 
guild-controlled territory that he was 
“persuaded” to join, 

Of the many Scouts not belonging to 
a guild, some have a single, consistent 
employer. The rest are freelance or mer- 
cenary, serving themselves or whatever 
employers may come along, taking the 
best pay they can find. Or, if there's 
nothing else, they steal and poach to 
support themselves. 

Several organizations employ Scouts 
regularly, sometimes on a permanent 
basis. The military, in particular, does 
so; reliable Scouts, trained for recon- 
naissance and sabotage, are vital to any 
successful military operation. And the 
key to having reliable Scouts is to have 
well-trained and (most of all) happy 
Scouts. A common grunt soldier can be 
bullied into line and, if need be, forced 
out into battle by the spearheads of the 
rank behind him—but the Scout's mo- 
dus operandi is to explore alone. Mal- 
treated Scouts have more opportunities 
to desert or, worse yet, betray vital in- 
formation to the enemy than anyone 
else in an army. 

Military Scouts are carefully nur- 
tured and well-nourished. They get de- 
cent pay, excellent equipment, and the 
best training available for their special 
and important activities. The training 
of military Scouts is at least as intense 
and comprehensive as that of a thieves’ 
guild. (Sometimes, after retiring from 
the army, military Scouts go on to be- 


38 


aS 


come the most illustrious and prosper- 
ous burglars and assassins of the under- 
world.) 

A few other groups that may employ 
Scouts are secret societies and other 
paramilitary groups, thieves’ guilds 
that have operations across the wilder- 
ness (Scouts may bolster the ranks of a 
smuggling party, for example), and 
agencies that are set up to connect cli- 
ents with guides. Such agencies are nor- 
mally found on the edge of vast 
wilderness areas that are being colo- 
nized; such areas, with frequent explo- 
ration by people unfamiliar with the 
region, have enough demand for guides 
that an agency can prosper on its per- 
centage of the guide's fee, 

As mentioned before, poaching is al- 
so an activity typical of the Scout. Ani- 
mals may be protected by royal decree, 
written law, or the monopoly of a 
hunters’ or furriers’ guild. In medieval 
times, for instance, hunting was typi- 
cally reserved for the noble classes. A 
commoner caught slaying one of “the 
king's deer” could be punished by 
death. 

But when demand exceeds supply, 
there may be great incentive for the 
criminal killing and capture of animals. 
They may be sought for their meat, 
valuable pelts, ivory, feathers, magical 
purposes (e.g., eye of newt), or other 
esoteric ends. Thousands of animals in 
our world have been killed because 
some body part was believed to be an 
aphrodisiac. In the fantasy milieu, 
there may be real magical qualities, and 
the hunter or poacher’s quarry may be 
fantastic. The horn of the unicorns, for 
instance, may be ground into powder 
and administered with liquid as a poi- 
son antidote, 

Secondary Skills: Bowyer/Fletcher, 
Farmer, Fisher, Forester, Gambler, 
Groom, Hunter, Teamster/Freighter, 
Trader/Barterer, Trapper/Furrier, 
Woodworker/Carpenter. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Scouts have 
the normal range of weapon proficien- 
cies permitted to thieves. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Direction Sense, Tracking. Recom- 


mended: Alertness, Animal Handling/ 
Training, Animal Lore, Animal Noise, 
Boating, Fire-building, Fishing, Herald- 
ry, Herbalism, Hunting, Mountaineer- 
ing, Observation, Riding, Rope Use, 
Set Snares, Survival, Swimming, 
Weather Sense. 

Skill Progression: Stealth skills are 
those favored most by the Scout, and 
members of this kit have highly trained 
senses. Therefore it would make sense 
for these skills to improve most rap- 
idly: move silenty, hide in shadows, 
and hear noise. Climb walls also may 
see considerable use (though not from 
climbing walls, per se, but trees, cliffs, 
and so forth). 

Equipment: No self-respecting Scout 
will permit himself to go without a ba- 
sic assortment of wilderness survival 
gear: adequate clothing, rations, fire- 
starting materials, etc. Special gear to 
assist climbing, hiding, and moving un- 
detected are also favored, as well as de- 
vices for hindering or diverting 
pursuers. (What worth is a Scout's 
knowledge if he never reports back to 
his employer?) For a full array of items, 
refer to Chapter 5, “Tools of the Trade.” 

Special Benefits: Due to their exten- 
sive wilderness experience and exper- 
tise, Scouts gain +10% on two thief 
skills when in the wilderness: silent 
movement and hiding in shadows. 
Scouts also have an increased chance (1 
in 6 better) to surprise opponents in the 
wilderness, because of their stealthiness 
and careful attunement with their envi- 
ronment. 

Special Hindrances: While Scouts are 
intimately familiar with the wilderness, 
they are not so comfortable in urban 
settings. In the city, consequently, the 
Scout suffers a -5% penalty on all 
thieves’ skills. 

Races: The Scout kit is a good choice 
for many demihuman rogues, since 
those races often already have an apti- 
tude for wilderness adventuring. You 
may wish to give demihuman Scouts a 
particular orientation according to 
their race. Elves for instance, as natural 
forest dwellers, may have +15% when 
hiding in shadows and moving silently 


39 


in forested wilderness, and +5% in 
other wilderness settings. For a dwarf, 
the special bonus may apply to hills or 
mountains, and so forth. 


Smuggler 


Description: A Smuggler is a special- 
ist in the illicit movement of goods, ei- 
ther goods that are themselves illegal 
(e.g., stolen) or whose movement is il- 
legal (in some countries, for example, it 
may be illegal to move gold boullion; 
or a Smuggler might secretly move car- 
go to avoid paying taxes on it). The 
Smuggler needs a host of practical skills 
to evade authorities, as well as connec- 
tions in diverse places to acquire and 
unload his merchandise on the black 
market. 

Role: The Smuggler plays a vital role 
in the underworld, moving goods from 
place to place. Without the Smuggler, 
Fences could only sell to local buyers, 
which would mean they couldn't deal 
in exceptionally valuable goods. This 
would greatly cut the profitability of 
theft. Guilds themselves might not even 
be able to function, at least not on a 
large scale. 

There are two general methods of 
protecting contraband from discovery: 
Either you hide the goods within the 
transportation, or you hide the means 
of transportation itself. An example of 
the former would be a wagon or boat 
built with a false floor, beneath which 
the cargo is hidden. Hidden transporta- 
tion would include sneaking oneself 
over the city wall late at night, with a 
pack full of stolen loot to be taken to a 
distant Fence; or, perhaps, a simple 
boat traveling late at night. 

Plans for hidden transportation may 
become elaborate. The trick is to be 
small and fast. Small makes it more dif- 
ficult to find you; fast makes it likely 
that you can get through or, at least, 
get away, even if you are discovered. 
Sometimes the best smuggling routes 
go through treacherous territory or dif- 
ficult terrain. This means that a Smug- 
gler must be flexible. For instance, he 
may arrange to bring a canoe or even 


smaller craft to traverse a swamp or ar- 
ea of many small lakes and streams, 
portaging when necessary and leaving 
the canoe behind (and hidden, of 
course) when he has passed the natural 
obstacles. 

If the Smugglers will pass through 
dangerous territory (plagued by ban- 
dits, humanoids or monsters, for in- 
stance), it is best to work out some 
means of protection: Either bring along 
a couple of thugs or mercenaries for the 
difficult parts, or pay “protection 
money” to the dangerous parties. Most 
bandits or humanoids, and even intelli- 
gent monsters, would be perfectly hap- 
py to let Smugglers through in return 
for a cut of their merchandise. 

Or they may tell the Smugglers that 
they can pass safely through, and then 
renege on the deal. 

For such a situation, it is best for the 
Smuggler to have some powerful mus- 
cle behind him—like a guild. A great 
many Smugglers are part of guilds. 
Guilds that operate in more than one 
urban center, or in the countryside, 


PAA 


p a ee 


usually employ a number of Smugglers 
just to move people and items within 
their own networks. They may also 
have Smugglers who specialize in deal- 
ing with other guilds; such Smugglers 
should have a high Charisma, because 
they must serve as diplomats as well as 
businessmen. Finally, there are 
freelance Smugglers. They may operate 
between guilds, between guilds and 
freelance fences, or, on rare occasion, 
solely among freelance fences. 

Remember that a Smuggler operates 
between fences; he rarely, if ever, deals 
directly with thieves or non- 
“wholesale” customers. The fence or 
guild works out deals with prospective 
buyer fences, and then hires the Smug- 
gler to make the delivery. 


Secondary Skills: Farmer, Fisher, 


Forester, Gambler, Groom, Hunter, 
Jeweler, Navigator, Sailor, Teamster 
Freighter, Trader/Barterer, Trapper 
Furrier, 


Weapon Proficiencies: Smugglers have 
the normal range of weapons open to 
thieves, and are not required to take pro- 


40 


ficiences with any in particular. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
None. Recommended: Alertness, Animal 
Handling/ Training, Animal Noise, Ap- 
praising, Boating, Direction Sense, Dis- 
guise, Fast-talking, Forgery, Information 
Gathering, Navigation, Observation, 
Rope Use, Seamanship, Swimming. 

Skill Progression: Detecting noise is 
probably the most useful of the tradi- 
tional thieves’ skills for the Smuggler. 
After that, hiding in shadows and silent 
movement probably see a lot of use. 
Pickpocketing would be least utilized in 
smuggling. 

Equipment: Two items are essential 
to the Smuggler's vocation: means of 
transportation, and means of protect- 
ing the contraband from discovery. 

Transportation is usually very basic: 
wagon or horse for land, boat for wa- 
ter, and so forth. More elaborate smug- 
gling plans in the fantasy setting may 
include air transportation—imagine a 
Smuggler who secrets stolen gems out 
of a city, late on moonless nights, by 
griffon! 


Items from the “Evasions” section of 
the chapter on equipment (p. 90) are of 
great use to the Smuggler. Marbles (if 
the surface is right) or caltrops can do 
much to hamper pursuers, and aniseed 
or dog pepper can throw dogs off the 
trail. 

Special Benefits: Smugglers must be 
exceptionally alert; they therefore get a 
+1 bonus to their surprise roll. 

Special Hindrances: None. 

Races: While demihumans are not 
prohibited from being smugglers, there 
are few that have any reason to be. 
Any player who wishes to have a demi- 
human smuggler should be sure to de- 
tail his character background so as to 
justify the kit. 


Spy 


Description: The Spy is a gatherer of 
information. At the lowest level, he is a 
common informant, an eavesdropper 
with his ears open for salable informa- 
tion. The expert Spy is hired by guilds 
and governments to infiltrate oppo- 
nents’ buildings and ranks to find vital, 
secret knowledge. 

To take the Spy kit, a thief must have 
a minimum Intelligence of 11. 

Role: Spies are vital in supporting 
any large organization such as a guild 
or government. Information is the key 
to success, whether thieves are prepar- 
ing for a burglary or a nation is prepar- 
ing for war, and the Spy’s role is to 
provide that information. 

Most Spies are in the permanent 
service of one such organization. A 
small number may be double (or triple) 
agents, but that is very risky. A few are 
freelance, and their main problem is 
this: to find employment, they must be 
known; but if they're known, they 
have difficulty being successful. 

Spies may come from any back- 
ground. A large percentage, in fact, are 
from the lower classes, close in touch 
with the word on the street and all the 
secret channels of society. A smaller 
number of elite Spies exist, either in 
permanent positions (e.g., a count who 
reports word on his liege's troop mov- 


emements to a rival kingdom, or a 
treacherous castle steward). Most of 
these characters would not be of the 
Spy rogue kit, since spying is second- 
ary; the focus of their life is (or at least 
was) something else. 

But there are also talented individ- 
uals ready to go anywhere, risk any 
danger, and encounter a lot of excite- 
ment on the way to finding the knowl- 
edge they seek. They excel at 
infiltration, in finding information, not 
just in selling what they know. Exciting 
Spies, and player characters, are usu- 
ally of this sort. 

The standard penalty for spying (if 
the crime is beyond the low levels of 
spreading rumors, eavesdropping, and 
scoping out potential burglary targets) 
is death, and Spies from one nation to 
another can hardly expect anything in 
the line of “diplomatic immunity.’ 

Secondary Skills: Any. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The normal 
range of weapons open for thieves’ pro- 
ficiencies applies to Spies as well, and 
they are not required to take any in 
particular. A Spy can use nonthief 
weapons (for the purpose of disguises), 
but cannot take proficiency in them. 

Example: To help impersonate a cas- 
tle guard, a Spy carries a halberd. He 
could use it combat, but he would suf- 
fer a nonproficiency penalty. To in- 
crease his chances of success, he would 
probably switch to a different, familiar 
weapon—even a dagger or knife— 
unless circumstances prohibit it (e.g., 
people around him would be surprised 
to see him not using the halberd, and 
might thereby see through the dis- 
guise). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Disguise, Information Gathering, Ob- 
servation. Recommended: Alertness, 
Begging, Etiquette, Forgery, Heraldry, 
Local History, Reading/Writing, Read- 
ing Lips, Trailing. 

Skill Progression; An effective Spy 
usually needs a fairly even distribution 
of thief skills, since his vocation can 
bring him into any number of diverse 
situations. 

Equipment: Spies in the medieval set- 


41 


ting don’t have all the fancy gadgetry of 
their modern counterparts. They may 
equip themselves liberally with what is 
available, however, such as boots with 
hidden compartments in the soles, 
thieves’ equipment, and so forth. See 
the later chapter on equipment for a 
host of ideas. 

Special Benefits: None. 

Special Hindrances: None. 

Races: Elves and half-elves, with 
their love for knowledge, are especially 
predisposed toward this kit. However, 
the problem that all demihuman Spies 
face is the difficulty of appearing dis- 
guised as a member of another race. 
They therefore risk having a rather lim- 
ited range of professional assignments. 


Swashbuckler 


Description: Part acrobat, part 
swordsman, part wit, and entirely ro- 
guish —this is the Swashbuckler. He is 
a sophisticated city-dweller, the epit- 
ome of charm and grace. 

Both the warrior and thief classes 
have Swashbucklers (see the Complete 
Fighter's Handbook for details on the 
warrior Swashbuckler), but they have 
certain differences. These differences 
serve, among other purposes, as an ex- 
ample of how the Dungeon Master may 
modify appropriate kits from one class 
and apply them to another. 

To be a Swashbuckler, a thief must 
have minimum scores of 13 in Strength, 
Dexterity, Intelligence and Charisma. 

Role: This is a happy-go-lucky thief, 
with ready wit and flashing rapier. His 
home is the city, where he can shine 
amidst the squalor. He is generally less 
interested than his warrior counterpart 
in poking people with his rapier, and is 
more involved and concerned with his 
wild theatrics and amazing displays of 
acrobatic skills. More often than not he 
also finds himself, justly or not, on the 
wrong side of the law. 

The Swashbuckler is almost never 
aligned with thieves’ guilds; he prefers 
to be “freelance.” Swashbucklers who 
journey outside the cities may align 
themselves with bandits or pirates, 


however, and with their charisma and 
skill, they frequently assume leader- 
ship. Such responsibility ill suits the 
Swashbuckler, however; the details of 
organizing and leading a large group 
will invariably set him packing in short 
order. 

Most Swashbucklers come from a 
wealthy or aristocratic background. 
Their skills of stealth and acrobatics 
came not from survival needs, but 
whim. This motivation typically re- 
mains the driving force behind the 
Swashbuckler’s career. Most of these 
young rakes retire when they get older 
and must assume responsibilities in the 
communities (family, noble title, busi- 
ness, and so forth). Many a Swash- 
buckler has kept up his activities, 
however, in secret; his moonlighting 
may even be developed (usually pur- 
posely) to a point of distinguishable 
alter-egos. The daytime character may 
be a foppish dandy, gruff businessman, 
or airheaded noblewoman. At night the 
Swashbuckler emerges: a cunning, 
dashing, adventurous character. 

What are the goals of the Swash- 
buckler? For the young ones, it is usu- 
ally just thrills: a chance to break into 
the impenetrable castle, to replace the 
Queen's necklace with a fake, to outwit 
the guildmaster of thieves .. . A few 
have more serious goals (and these are 
the ones who tend to keep up their 
habit). A Swashbuckler may be a vigi- 
lante, charming and witty, but driven 
by an obsession for justice. His enemies 
may be criminals or, in an unjust socie- 
ty (where the aristocratic Swashbuck- 
ler's alter-ego may be an unwilling part 
of the apparatus of oppression), the au- 
thorities themselves. 

Secondary Skills: Most often (80% 
of the time, say) a Swashbuckler has no 
secondary skills, since he usually is 
from a rich, foppish background, Per- 
haps he has the skills of gambler or 
groom (aristocratic animals, of course), 
or hunter (again, aristocratic hunting, 
not survival; a Swashbuckler may 
know a great deal about fox hunting, 
for instance, but not how to catch a 
rabbit, let alone skin one). Scribe 


would also be possible as a secondary 
skill—to indicate literacy and some 
general education, not a profession. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Swash- 
buckler receives an extra weapon profi- 
ciency slot which must be devoted to a 
weapon among the following: stiletto, 
main-gauche, rapier, and sabre. With 
this, the Swashbuckler’s “weapon of 
choice,” the thief is able to fight with the 
THACO of a fighter of his experience 
level. Throughout his career, he must 
devote half of his weapon proficiencies 
to these weapons, until he has mastered 
the use of (i.e., gained proficiency in) 
every one. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Etiquette, Tumbling. Recommended: 
Alertness, Blind-fighting, Disguise, 
Fast-talking, Intimidation, Jumping, 
Navigation (if seaborne; costs 2 slots), 
Riding, Tightrope walking, Trailing. 

Skill Progression: Swashbucklers 
would tend to have fairly balanced 
thief skills. This includes pickpocket- 
ing, though that talent is more often 
utilized in the form of sleight of hand. 

Equipment: The Swashbuckler must 
buy his weapon of choice, but other 
than that may spend his gold however 
he pleases. 

Special Benefits: The Swashbuckler 
is permitted a special combat maneuver 
when using his weapon of choice: dis- 
armament. To disarm an opponent, the 
Swashbuckler must declare his inten- 
tion to do so before initiative is rolled. 
He then suffers a +1 penalty to his ini- 
tiative roll, and a —4 penalty on his roll 
to hit. 

If the Swashbuckler's attack is suc- 
cessful, he will (normally) cause his en- 
emy’s weapon to go flying out of his 
hand. 

Roll 2d6. The number rolled is the 
number of feet away the weapon land- 
ed. Another roll of 1d6 determines the 
direction the weapon goes, relative to 
the disarmed character: 


42 


1—Straight ahead 
2—Ahead, right 
3—Behind, right 
4—Straight behind 
5—Behind, left 
6—Behind, right 


Besides weapons, disarmament can 
be attempted against magic wands or 
other such devices held in one hand. 

Items worn (like jewelry) or held in 
two hands (including two-handed weap- 
ons) may not be affected by a thief 
Swashbuckler with the disarm maneu- 
ver. 

Finally, being such a romantic figure, 
the Swashbuckler gains, as an addition- 
al special benefit, a +2 reaction adjust- 
ment with members of the opposite sex. 

Special Hindrances: Trouble seeks 
out the Swashbuckler. This is some- 
thing that the DM will have to play 
very carefully if the Swashbuckler is to 
be balanced with the other thief kits. 
When there’s another Swashbuckler 
around—thief or warrior—intent on 
proving that he is the finest swordsman 
in the world, it’s the PC Swashbuckler 
he seeks out and challenges (often in the 
middle of some illicit activities). When 
there is a lovely lady (or handsome 
young man, as appropriate) in distress, 
she or he will naturally cross the 
Swashbuckler’s path, and pull him into 
the tangle. When the thief is practicing 
burglary on his uncle's mansion, the 
old man decides to return early from 
his journey. Life conspires to make 
things difficult for the Swashbuckler, 
and the DM should always throw just a 
little more good-natured bad luck at 
this thief type than at any other. 

Races: Any demihuman who'd look 
elegant in foppish dress, wielding a nar- 
row blade, will work fine as a Swash- 
buckler, especially elves, half-elves and 
halflings (half-elves most of all). 
Dwarves and gnomes are not entirely 
inappropriate, but are likely to have to 
defend their honor (with duels) in the 
face of numerous jokes about their cu- 
rious looks. 


Swindler 


Description: This is the master of de- 
ception; while burglars and pickpockets 
profit through stealth, and bandits and 
thugs garner their earnings through force, 
the Swindler relies on his wits. Other 
thieves take their booty; the Swindler 
cons his victim into giving it freely. 

A minimum Charisma of 12 is re- 
quired of a thief to take this kit. 

Role: There are numerous names for 
the Swindler—confidence artist, con 
man, mountebanke, quack, etc.—and 
the scams he employs are even greater 
in number. 

Each con artist is unique, and de- 
velops his own mode of operation. One 
will specialize in selling bogus items, 
like medicines; while another may pre- 
pare long, elaborate scams to net the 
wealth of the affluent. 

Swindlers must either operate in a 
large city, where there are many poten- 
tial victims (and even then they usually 
target visitors to the city, especially for- 
eigners); or they must be wanderers, 
_ ready to move on to a new place when 
they've made too many enemies or too 
much of the local populous has gotten 
wise to their devices. 

For this and other reasons, Swindlers 
do not usually join thieves’ guilds on a 
permanent basis, Out of wise deference 
to the “local boys,” however, a Swindler 
that begins to operate in guild territory 
will make friendly overtures to it, and 
perhaps offer a share in his take. A most 
daring Swindler may even try to con 
the guild... 

Secondary Skills: Any. Most often 
Gambler or Trader/Barterer. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Swindler 
is permitted the normal range of weap- 
ons open to thieves. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Fast-talking. Recommended: Alertness, 
Appraising, Artistic Ability, Dancing, 
Disguise, Etiquette, Forgery, Fortune 
Telling, Gaming, Local History, Obser- 
vation, Singing, Ventriloquism. 

Skill Progression: The thieves’ skills 
of a Swindler usually are used in prepa- 
ration for a con. It is often handy for 


the Swindler to do some secret scout- 
ing, for instance, to observe his victim's 
habits. For all of this, the stealth skills 
(move silently, etc.) are invaluable. 
Reading languages is also of more use to 
the Swindler than to thieves of many 
other kits. 

Equipment: A Swindler may use spe- 
cial equipment as props for his scams 
(e.g., tarot cards for a sham fortune 
teller; pen, ink and paper for forgery; 
and so forth), but the specific needs 
vary among characters, according to 
their plans and objectives. 

Special Benefits: None. 

Special Hindrances: None. 

Races: Half-elves make particularly 
good Swindlers. Other demi-humans 
may be Swindlers as well, though they 
are not found as frequently. 


Thug 


Description: The Thug is the most vi- 
olent sort of thief. Assassins are killers, 
certainly, but they depend on refine- 
ment and subtlety. Bounty hunters also 
are willing to use violence, but are rela- 
tively restrained as well. The Thug, on 
the other hand, comes as close to the 
warrior class as any Thief Kit. 

Because of the kit's emphasis on phy- 
sique and physical prowess, a Thug 
must have a minimum ability scores of 
12 in strength and constitution. In de- 
signing the character's description, a 
Thug should be as physically imposing 
as possible. Furthermore, his intelli- 
gence may be no higher than 12. 

Thugs are usually male, but this may 
be otherwise in your campaign (partic- 
ularly if your world sports an Amazon 
tradition). 

Role: Historically, the “Thugee” were 
actually a cultish group of murderers 
found in India. The term “Thug” has 
come to mean, however, any brutal 
sort of thief, such as an armed robber, 
hijacker, or goon (the latter specifically 
indicating a guild-associated Thug, an 
enforcer), or perhaps a kidnapper 
(though bounty hunters are probably 
better at that activity). 

If one compared a guild to the human 


43 


body, surely Thugs would be the 
muscle—the large, powerful muscles. 
Thugs function as enforcers, intimidat- 
ing common people (especially in rack- 
eteering schemes), bodyguarding 
important guildsmen, and carrying out 
the guild's threats of violence often 
enough to keep people suitably afraid. 

In fact, outside of the thieves’ guild, 
the Thug really does not have a place. 
Most Thugs haven't the wit to become 
accomplished burglars or even pick- 
pockets on their own, let alone swin- 
dlers, spies or fences. Even begging 
might be denied them on account of 
their imposing physique: A plea for 
alms from a huge, muscular man tends 
to look more like a demand backed up 
by a thinly-veiled threat. The guild 
pays them well and gives them a satisfy- 
ing job: They usually need just to scare 
the living daylights out of people, and 
not even face real combat. 

The few Thugs who are not guild- 
affiliated will be found as armed rob- 
bers or (if they are more intelligent) 
kidnappers or hijackers. 

Secondary skills; Most often none 
(the ultimate “unskilled” labor. . .), or 
perhaps Sailor. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Thugs are per- 
mitted an extra weapon proficiency slot 
at first level. They may choose non- 
thief weapons, but to gain proficiency 
in one requires an extra slot. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Intimidation. Recommended: Player's 
choice; among those that may be se- 
lected are Alertness, Endurance, Loot- 
ing and Trailing. 

Skill Progression: There is no uni- 
form preference among Thugs for the 
distribution of points among their 
thieves’ skills. Note, however, that they 
start out with fewer points to distribute 
than other rogues (see Special Hin- 
drances, below). 

Equipment: The Thugs equipment 
usually consists of the biggest, most in- 
timidating weapon available. Other- 
wise, its a matter of common sense 
according to the job. A kidnapper, for 
example, could make good use of a rope 
to bind his victim. 


Special Benefits: Because they are 
better trained in combat than other 
thieves, Thugs receive +1 on their “to 
hit” rolls. Special Hindrances: Thugs 
spend much of their early career learn- 
ing about weapons and their use, and 
their initial training in the traditional 
thief skills suffers as a consequence. To 
compensate for the extra weapon profi- 
ciency slot and combat bonus, a thief of 
the Thug kit has only 40 points to dis- 
tribute initially among his thief skills 
(although he can still put up to 30 of 
them in a single ability, if he so 
chooses), 

Races: Humanoids and half- 
humanoids are particularly fond of this 
kit, as it emphasizes force over stealth. 
One has more difficulty imagining 
demi-human Thugs; dwarves might 
have the temperament, but the Thug 
personality doesn’t suit their culture, 
and their small stature would might 
make them look somewhat silly as 
guild enforcers (which is not to say that 
they would be ineffective—they'd sim- 
ply bash anyone who made thoughtless 
or snide comments about their height). 


Troubleshooter 


Description: The Troubleshooter, 
like the investigator, is often aligned 
against other thieves. He has all the 
skills of the thief, but puts them to a dif- 
ferent use: He works chiefly as a secu- 
rity consultant, playing the part of the 
thief in order to test the worthiness of 
his clients’ defenses. 

Role: The Troubleshooters profes- 
sional role is rather narrowly defined, 
but this is to the rogues’ liking. More 
than one has been known to moonlight 
in other, possibly illicit activities. They 
may range from legitimate recovery of 
stolen goods through genuine burglary. 

As a “security consultant,’ a thief of 
this sort has a legitimate reason for his 
thieving skills and equipment; and the 
temptation for many is to use them. For 
this reason, officials often keep a suspi- 
cious eye on well-known Trouble- 
shooters. More sophisticated govern- 
ments may even require that they have 


some sort of license. 

Troubleshooters are rarely guild 
members, naturally enough, unless 
they have been bought off in exchange 
for information on the clients they've 
served. Of course, few such Trouble- 
shooters will survive long; if they give a 
place's security their “seal of approval,” 
and then it is broken into with ease, the 
Troubleshooter’s reputation will be 
shot, and he can expect to have more 
than a little suspicion placed on his 
shoulders. 

Secondary Skills: Any. Often has 
technical or engineering-type skills, 
however, such as Armorer, Mason, 
Miner, Navigator, Weaponsmith, or 
Woodworker/ Carpenter. 

Weapon Proficiencies; Trouble- 
shooters are permitted the normal 
weapons open to thieves. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: 
Observation. Recommended: Player's 
choice; among those that may be select- 
ed are Alertness, Fast-talking, Informa- 
tion Gathering, Locksmithing, and 
Trailing. 

Skill Progression: Picking pockets 
and reading languages are not of much 
value to the Troubleshooter, but he will 
probably seek a fairly even distribution 
among the other thief skills. 

Equipment: Any Troubleshooter 
worth his wages will augment his 
thiefly talents with the best available 
equipment. Remember, he wants to try 
his absolute best to break down his cli- 
ents defense—as does his client—so 
he'll use whatever devices will increase 
his chances. Also, a wealthy client 
could even be persuaded to help the 
Troubleshooter acquire hard-to-find 
thief equipment. 

Special Benefits and Hindrances: 
Troubleshooters have an uncanny 
knack for . . . Well, for troubleshoot- 
ing. If there's a glitch somewhere in a 
security system, the Troubleshooter al- 
ways seems to run into it. 

In a way, the Troubleshooter is a liv- 
ing manifestation of “Murphy's Law”: 
“If anything can go wrong, it will.” The 
Troubleshooter thief, of course, capi- 
talizes on this professionally. His job is 


44 


to find everything that can go wrong, 
so it can be fixed. 

While everything going wrong has its 
ironic professional advantage, the 
downside is of course that the things 
that go wrong often do so to the Trou- 
bleshooter’s personal disadvantage. 

This is difficult to quantify, to define 
as a game mechanic. Instead, the DM is 
encouraged to bring it in at his discre- 
tion during play, for maximum excite- 
ment and role-playing fun. Fill the 
character's life with astronomically im- 
probable events and bizarre coinci- 
dences. 

The DM is by and large left on his 
own to “wing it” with this special 
benefit/hindrance, but there are two 
questions for him to ask himself before 
he brings it into play: Would this fur- 
ther the plot of the adventure? Would it 
be fun? At least the second question 
should be answered “yes,” and it is best 
if both are. 

Furthermore, the rule to follow in de- 
ciding the specifics is: Everything 
should be balanced. For every freakish 
mishap that works in the Trouble- 
shooter's favor, there should be a com- 
plementary one that works to his 
disadvantage. 

Races: Dwarves, with their affinity 
for the mechanical and their lawful ten- 
dencies (and their dour stoicism in the 
face of all misfortune, however ludi- 
crous), are the demi-humans most in- 
clined to take this kit. 

Some gnomes also may be found as 
Troubleshooters; the special benefit/ 
hindrance of this kit suits the pranksters 
well—but their employers would best be 
on guard for practical jokes perpetrated 
in the course of the assignment, The goal 
of any gnome Troubleshooter should be 
to turn all his mishaps into assets or 
amusement, if not both. 


Recording Kits on the 
Character Sheet 


Its really no 
problem to record your Thief Kit on 
your character record sheet. Where you 
normally write down the character's 


class, add also his Thief Kit name. For 
instance, if your thief takes the cut- 
purse kit, you would write “Thief/ 
Cutpurse.” 

Where you normally write his non- 
weapon proficiencies, add the ones (if 
any) you got free from the Thief Kit, and 
designate them with asterisks to indicate 
their bonus status. Wherever you have 
space for notes, mark down the charac- 
ter’s special benefits, hindrances, and 
other facts you want to remember. 


Thief Types and 
Multi-Class Characters 


The Advanced 
Thief Types options are designed to 
add depth to a thief character. But if the 
character is already multi-classed (as 
are many demi-humans; e.g., a halfling 
fighter/thief), he doesn’t really need 
any more depth. Therefore only single- 
class thieves can take one of the Thief 
Kits described above. 

However, with the flexibility availa- 
ble to thieves in the AD&D® 2nd Edi- 
tion game, especially with nonweapon 
proficiency rules, you can very closely 
simulate a kit by carefully choosing 
proficiencies and allotting points 
among thief skills. The character won't 
get the special benefits of the kit (e.g., 
the bonus nonweapon proficiencies), 
but to outward appearances, the char- 
acter will be that type of thief. 

For instance, suppose a halfling 
fighter/thief wishes to be a fence. If the 
Secondary Skills system is being used, 
he should take one of those listed in the 
fence kit—Trader/Barterer, let’s say. 

As a first level thief, he receives 4 
nonweapon proficiencies (if they are 
used) and selects them from the re- 
quired and recommended proficiencies 
of the kit. The required ones are Ap- 
praising and Information Gathering. 
Note that these proficiencies are NOT 
bonuses, because the halfling is not ac- 
tually taking the kit. His other two slots 
should be filled from the recommended 
list; fast-talking and observation profi- 
ciencies, perhaps. 

If you do all this, and have your 


DM'’s permission, within the context of 
your campaign this halfling will be con- 
sidered a fence, That is, he fills the role 
of a fence in the campaign world, and is 
regarded as such by other figures of the 
underworld. Only you and the DM 
know that he doesn’t have all the bene- 
fits of a true fence. 


Thief Types and 
Dual-Class Characters 


The same is not 
true of dual-class characters. 

If a human character starts off as a 
thief, he may take any of the Thief Kits 
above. If, later, he decides to change 
classes according to the normal Dual- 
Class Benefits and Restrictions rules, he 
doesn’t lose any of the benefits or hin- 
drances of the kit he chose; he is still 
that sort of thief. 

If a character starts off as some other 
character class and then, later, switches 
to one of the thief classes, he can chose a 
Thief Kit at that time, though the DM 
may insist that certain campaign events 
take place in order to allow him to do 
this. 

For instance, let us suppose that a hu- 
man fighter decides, later in life, to be- 
come a thief, and he wants to be an 
Acrobat. There's nothing wrong with 
that, but the DM should insist that the 
next several adventures deal with the 
transformation. The character could 
join a circus, perhaps, where he could 
be taught the tricks of the trade. Ad- 
ventures should be built around this 
setting, and should somehow involve 
other player-characters in the cam- 
paign as well. 

To better simulate the wait involved 
for the character to learn his new trade, 
the DM is within his rights to insist that 
the character not receive his Thief Kit 
until he’s reached second experience 
level in his new class. 


Creating New Kits 


If there's a special 
type of thief that the DM would like to 
have in his world, he can design a new 


Thief Kit for that thief-type. 

To design a Thief Kit, you must an- 
swer the following questions about this 
sort of thief and its role in your cam- 
paign. 

Description: What is this thief type? 
What literary, mythological or histori- 
cal source is he drawn from? What spe- 
cial requirements are there if a 
character wishes to be one? 

Role: What is this thief type to be in 
the campaign? How does his culture re- 
gard him? How does his subculture, the 
underworld, regard him? Is there a spe- 
cial sort of outlook he needs to have to 
belong to this thief type? And what 
does this thief tend to do in a cam- 
paign? Reading the earlier chapter on 
role-playing thieves may give you some 
more ideas for this section. 

Legal Issues: What legal penalties, if 
any, are there in your campaign for the 
activities with which this sort of thief is 
involved? A little bit of historical or lit- 
erary research may help you get ideas, 
or you can just make things up to suit 
your campaign. 

Secondary Skills: If you're using the 
Secondary Skills system, you need to 
determine if this thief type requires 
such a skill. If no one secondary skill, 
or limited range of secondary skills, 
should be common to all thieves of this 
type, then don't require a secondary 
skill. But if all members of a thief type 
seem to have a particular skill or one of 
a small number of skills, then you 
should limit the choice of characters 
who select the kit to that skill or skills, 

Weapon Proficiencies: Some thief 
types gravitate toward specific weapon 
types, or are more open-ended than 
other thieves in the range of weapons 
that they may choose. If this is the case 
with the thief type you are simulating, 
then make note of it in the kit. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Most 
thief types seem to have certain skills in 
common. It would be silly to have an 
Acrobat without jumping, tumbling 
and tightrope walking, for example. So 
you may assign up to two proficiency 
slots to be given free to the character. If 
it's appropriate, the proficiencies may 


come from listings not appropriate to 
thieves (the Priest, Warrior and Wizard 
listings). Though normally the cost in 
slots for non-thief proficiencies would 
be higher, it doesn’t matter if the profi- 
ciencies are being given for free. See the 
chapter on Proficiencies for more infor- 
mation and new proficiencies from 
which to choose. 

Skill Progression: Which of the tradi- 
tional thieves’ skills are most important 
to this sort of character, such that the 
character should concentrate his experi- 
ence on them? 

Equipment: If a thief type is known 
for having specific types of equipment, 
require of the thief that he have such 
equipment when he enters the cam- 
paign. If a thief seems to prefer a spe- 
cific type of equipment, but it's not so 
widespread a choice that you don't feel 
like requiring it of the character, simply 
list the types of equipment that the thief 
prefers and recommend the character 
take them. 

Special Benefits: Every thief type 
could have some special benefit, but it’s 
not absolutely necessary. It’s up to you 
to choose what that benefit is, but it 
should fit in with the way this thief ap- 
pears to function in fiction, folklore, or 
wherever he comes from. Types of ben- 
efits include: Bonuses to reaction rolls 
(especially from certain categories of 
people), bonuses on thief skill use (espe- 
cially in certain situation), and special 
abilities. 

Special Hindrances: You should also 
provide a special hindrance (or hin- 
drances) which limit the character 
about as much as his benefits help him, 
especially if you have given him a Spe- 
cial Benefit. Such hindrances can in- 
clude: Penalties to reaction rolls 
(especially from certain categories of 
people), inability to learn specific 
weapon or nonweapon proficiencies; 
special vulnerabilities in combat or to 
certain magic; or special restrictions in 
the culture in which the character nor- 
mally lives. 

Races: If there are variations to the 
kit based on the character's race, note 
them here. Some races can’t take a spe- 


cific kit; some will have different profi- 
ciencies, benefits and hindrances 
attached to them. 

Notes: If you have any additional 
notes about the Thief Kits pertinent to 
your campaign (such as which players 
you'd prefer for specific kits, for exam- 
ple), put them here. 


The Thief Kit Creation 
Sheet 


Following is the 
Thief Kit Creation Sheet. If you wish to 
design a new thief kit, just photocopy 
the sheet and design your new kit upon 
it. When you're showing the Thief Kits 
above to your players, also include the 
new kits that you have designed your- 
self. 


The ‘‘Lone Wolf”: 
Unique Thieves 


Most thieves go 
through a period of training and ap- 
prenticeship, as do legitimate trades- 
men. They are taught by an 
established, experienced thief, who was 
taught by a thief before him. This goes 
back untold generations, to the earliest 
thieves who developed skills on their 
own and then shared them with part- 
ners and apprentices. Over the years 
the skills and techniques have been for- 
malized and perfected, especially under 
the normalizing influence of the large 
and powerful guilds that have arisen. 

But not every thief is molded in this 
way. There are always others, known 
as “lone wolves,” who developed out- 
side the “system” of the established un- 
derworld. They discovered and 
developed their larcenous abilities 
without the aid of a mentor. 

Many lone wolves resemble normal 
thieves so closely that they may be 
treated as the very same thing, as far as 
class, abilities and restrictions go. 

However, in some cases a lone wolf 
may turn out very different—perhaps 
different enough to be considered a 
class unto himself. To design such a 
character, you may use the optional 


46 


rules, “Creating a New Class,” on pages 
22-23 of the Dungeon Master's Guide. 

The emphasis of such a character 
should still be on thieve's skills, but it 
may be that not all of the traditional 
skills are present. And the character 
may have other unusual abilities as 
well, cultivated to assist in his roguish 
endeavors. 

Imagine, for instance, a self-taught 
pickpocket. He may have Pick Pockets, 
Move Silently and Hide in Shadows, 
and perhaps Climb Walls (to help get 
himself over fences or whatever when 
he is pursued by an observant and an- 
gry victim). But he could have no other 
thief skills; for his thieving lifestyle 
there was no need for them. 

Note how this would be different 
from a traditional thief specialized in 
pickpocketing (as in, for example, the 
cutpurse kit): Even though he special- 
izes in the course of his career, the cut- 
purse received a core training that 
included all the thief traditional skills— 
a liberal arts education in larceny, if 
you will. 

Lone wolves often lead dangerous 
lives. They must be very self-reliant, 
and they have to find their own con- 
tacts for scoping out jobs and fencing 
stolen goods. As “freelancers” they run 
a constant and most serious risk of run- 
ning afoul of monopolistic thieves’ 
guilds. 

Guilds are often wary of lone wolves, 
who are more likely than “established” 
thieves, with trusted contacts and reli- 
able references, to be spies for authori- 
ties or rival guilds. The lone wolf is also 
regarded by guildsmen with a mix of 
curiosity and contempt—and some- 
times even admiration, if his odd mix of 
abilities proves particularly useful “in 
the field.” 

A lone wolf, as we said, may be a 
character class unto himself. Most such 
classes never have more than one mem- 
ber, and when he dies his unique combi- 
nation of skills is forgotten; the class 
ceases to be. On rare occasion a lone 
wolf may take an apprentice or two, 
and the class may be perpetuated in this 
manner. (If you are using the Ist edition 


Thief Kit Creation Sheet 


Thief Type Campaigi, ee ee ll 
Player i == — 
Description: 
THIEF SKILL BONUSES/PENALTIES: Role: 
Pick Pockets Open Locks 
Find/Remove Traps Move Silently 
Hide in Shadows Hear Noise Legal Issues: 
Climb Walls Read Languages 
WEAPON PROFICIENCIES: 
Special Benefits: 
NON-WEAPON PROFICIENCIES 
Required 
Recommended 
Special Hindrances 


SECONDARY SKILLS (if proficiencies are not used): 


EQUIPMENT: 


a 
a 
8899S et 


By permission of TSR, Inc., may photocopy for personal use- 
©1989 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 


Variations Due to Race: 


AD&D® game, you may suppose that 
the Assassin class arose in this manner.) 

Guilds who have accepted lone 
wolves into their ranks may ask the 
thief to take on apprentices—but two 
things usually prevent this: One, con- 
servative guildmembers typically see 
the lone wolf's unorthodox methods as 
a threat (because they are not under- 
stood), or as inferior to the traditional 
way of doing things; and two, lone 
wolves, used to doing things by them- 
selves, are reluctant to share their se- 
crets. An example follows: 


“Bluehand” Ajathar, Lone Wolf 


This is an example of a “lone wolf” 
thief, created with the character crea- 
tion system on pgs. 22-23 of the 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide. 

Ajathar was originally apprenticed 
to an illusionist. He never completed 
his formal training, however. His mas- 
ter, Zalabom the Magnificent, was out- 
spoken on a number of religious and 
political issues. One day his words 
went too far against the popular grain, 
and a mob dragged him from his tower, 
stoned him to death, and set fire to the 
building after looting it. Young Ajathar 
narrowly escaped with his life and a 


couple of texts of illusion magic. 

Homeless and hungry, Ajathar had 
to steal for a living. Assisted by what 
few illusions he could muster, he be- 
came a burglar—and a surprisingly 
proficient one, considering that he was 
self-taught. As his burglary skills im- 
proved, so did his understanding of the 
magical arts of deception. 

He took as his symbol, his trademark 
to be left at each “job,” an illusionary 
blue hand. The illusion would fade af- 
ter a few days—but its discovery came 
to invariably bring panic to the heart of 
anyone who discovered it in his house. 
Sometimes Ajathar would not take a 
thing, but only leave the hand as a 
warning, a taunt, a mockery of a 
house's easily-penetrated defenses. 

Eventually Ajathar moved on. His 
native town, where Zalabom was 
killed, was neither affluent nor an ex- 
citing place for a daring young entre- 
preneur. “Bluehand” may therefore be 
found anywhere that the DM should 
wish to relocate him. 

One peculiarity of Ajathar’s charac- 
ter is his strict adherence to the align- 
ment of True Neutrality. The lesson he 
gained from Zalabom’s death is that ex- 


Table 6: AJATHAR’S EXPERIENCE TABLE & SPELLS 


Illusion/Phantasm Spells 
Level Experience HitDice 1 
2 1,500 2d4 2 
3 3,000 3d4 2 
a 6,000 4d4 2 
5 15,000 5d4 3 
6 30,000 6d4 3 
7 60,000 7d4 3 
8 112,500 8d4 3 
9 210,000 9d4 3 
10 435,000 9d4 +1 3 
11 660,000 9d4+2 3 
12 885,000 9d4+3 3 


+225,000 XP per level thereafter 
+1 hp per level thereafter 


w GEED w: 0) IES N E N 


v GY N A | 


Spell progression continues with the same pattern, up to a maximum of three 
spells per level, up to 9th level (if the character's intelligence permits it). 


48 


tremism and fanaticism in any form are 
dangerous and to be avoided. Both the 
illusionist and the bloodthirsty crowd 
are, to Ajathar's mind in hindsight, re- 
pulsive. Any apprentice that Bluehand 
might train would have to be True Neu- 
tral as well. 

Following are the elements of unique 
class, along with the multiplier of each 
(see DMG pgs. 22-23): Fight as thief (- 
1); Saving throws as thief (0); 1d4 hit 
dice type (+0.5); No armor 
permitted—interferes with spellcasting 
as well as thief skills (-1); Weapons: any 
(0); +1 hp per level beyond 9th ( +0.5); 
6 initial proficiency slots (+1.5), select 
as if a normal thief of the cat burglar 
kit; Climb walls (+1); Find/remove 
traps (+1); Open locks (+1); Move si- 
lently (+1); Hide in shadows ( +1); Use 
Illusion/Phantasm mage spells (+3); 
Must be of True Neutral alignment (-1); 
TOTAL MODIFIER: +7.5. 


Thief Skills: Bluehand has the skills 
Climb Walls, Find/Remove Traps, 
Open Locks, Move Silently and Hide in 
Shadows. His base chance of success 
with any of these abilities is determined 
by Table 19, Thief Average Ability Ta- 
ble, in the Dungeon Master’s Guide 
(pg. 23). 

Spell Casting: Without a regular 
mentor, Bluehand’s development of his 
illusionist talent was stunted, He ad- 
vances in spell use much more slowly 
than a true mage of comparable level, 
and may only use spells from the 
Illusion/Phantasm school of magic. He 
must check to see if he can learn a spell, 
and must study spells in order to cast 
them, just like a mage. He does not re- 
ceive spells automatically when he 
gains a new level; he must find or steal 
books or scrolls with new spells, or 
must hire an illusionist to share them 
with him. 

Adventure Suggestion 
A mysterious 
lone wolf, freelance thief has struck the 


characters’ neighborhood, leaving his 
trademark blue hand symbol] at the 


htt Ite 
heh E, 
ne 


scene of each crime. He is very success- 
ful, and has overshadowed many of the 
local guild's best thieves, on their own 
territory. The player characters (pre- 
sumably connected with the guild) are 
commanded by their guildmaster to 
track down this unauthorized thief, ei- 
ther to coerce him to join the guild or to 
leave the city, or if necessary, eliminate 
him. 

The thief is, of course, “Bluehand” 
Ajathar. The characters may be very 
surprised to find themselves up against 
this strange, illusion-casting thief. Aja- 
thar’s description and level should be 
fleshed out suitably to challenge the 
character party, 


Glossary of Thief Slang 

Box-Man: Strictly speaking, a thief 
specialized in cracking safes. 

Burn: To underreport the take in a 
job to one’s partners. “Luigi burned us. 
He told us there were only three dia- 
monds, and kept two for himself." 

Cannon: Pickpocket, cutpurse. 


Contraband: Illegal goods (stolen or 
prohibited by local law). 

Fencing: Selling stolen goods. “We 
stole the duke's jewels and fenced them 
later the same night.” 

The Fix: Ties with corrupt officials to 
have criminal charges “fixed’—that is, 
thrown out. This will usually require 
bribes or favors. 

General Subscription: Money col- 
lected from the local underworld to free 
a captured thief by bribing officials. 

Hit Man: Assassin; an “executioner” 
for crime bosses, paid to kill their ene- 
mies. 

Lone Wolf: A solitary, independent 
thief. He is probably self-taught and 
not allied with a guild. 

Made-Guy; A burglar who is in good 
standing with the local thieves’ guild; a 
guildsman. 

Mark: The target of a confidence 
game. “We have to bring the mark to 
the Burnt Goose Tavern.” 

Mob: A group of thieves. 

Pennyweighter: a thief who operates 


50 


by replacing valuable items (especially 
jewelry) with worthless ones. 

Piece Man: Someone who trades 
knowledge on where stolen property 
can be sold. 

Pigeon: Victim of a con or swindle. 

Pigeon Plucker: swindler, con artist. 

Racket: Any sort of larceny, from 
pickpocketing and burglary through 
embezzlement. 

Rootin’: Committing crimes. 

Roper: Someone who pulls in a mark 
for a con. 

Rounder: A good, professional bur- 
glar. 

Score: Loot from a theft. “We got a 
good score from the duke” 

Squeal: To identify one’s partners to 
the local authorities, usually in return 
for a lighter penalty for one’s own 
crimes. 

Tipster; Someone who has knowl- 
edge to share with burglars about good 
targets. 


What is a Thieves’ 
Guild anyway? 


This is going to 
be answered in heaps of useful detail in 
this section. But it's useful to have a ba- 
sic working idea to start with. A 
thieves’ guild is a grouping of thieves 
who agree to work together, in at least 
some ways. Often because of external 
threat and danger, it makes better sense 
for them to cooperate a little. This 
group typically has a leader—a 
guildmaster—or maybe a small ruling 
council. It has laws by which members 
must abide; there can be many of these, 
or few. A guild will usually only exist 
in a reasonably-sized town or city, 
where there is enough work for thieves. 
It will usually also have a central 
meeting-place, almost always secret; 
this is usually referred to as the guild 
house. Finally, it’s also usually true that 
the large majority of these thieves are 
not of good alignment—they tend to- 
wards neutrality at least, if not towards 
actual evil, 


Developing the Thieves’ Guild 


This chapter sets 

out to understand first what benefits a 
PC thief will derive from membership in 
a thieves’ guild, and what responsibilities 
and duties he will have in return. This is a 
good place to start, for two reasons. 
First, it briefs the DM on luring the PC 
into guild membership so that instead of 
being onerous, it becomes interesting and 
rewarding. Dragooning a PC thief into 
guild membership isn’t as good as the 
lure of the carrot (with the threat of the 
stick in the background . . .). Second, in 
looking at the “rights and responsibili- 
ties” guild members have, many of the 
functions of the thieves’ guild—its rai- 
sons detre—become clear in the process. 
This helps to show why such guilds exist. 
This matter—what thieves’ guilds 
do—is developed further in the next 
major section. The activities of the 
guild are divided into core functions— 
what almost all guilds will do—and 
secondary ones. Secondary functions 


may be carried out or wholly avoided, 
depending on the guild in question. 
These various activities are laid out for 
the DM here to make guild-designing 
easier later on. Players may also get 
ideas for sneaky and nefarious beha- 
viours for their PCs here. Many “sec- 
ondary functions” will relate to the 
specialized thief kits presented earlier. 
This section does not make explicit use 
of these kits, since different DMs will 
wish to handle these differently. How- 
ever, developing specialist NPCs to ful- 
fill these specialized activities is greatly 
facilitated by using the kits. 

Next, the relation of a thieves’ guild 
with other groups is considered. These 
can vary from minimal to very highly 
organized indeed. The DM is briefed on 
major associations (with merchants, 
the Jaw, other guilds) and the general 
social background to thief activities. 

Immediately before the section on 
designing guilds, there is the crucial is- 
sue of the power at the top of the guild. 
This is usually the Guildmaster—or 
maybe a small group of dominant 
thieves, a ruling council. The personali- 
ties involved here will have a major ef- 
fect on the personality of the guild, and 
need careful design by the DM. 

An extensive design section, com- 
plete with play-aid record sheets, is 
then provided to enable the DM to de- 
velop a thieves’ guild for the major ur- 
ban setting{s) in his campaign. This 
section uses a flexible approach to guild 
design. That is, there are tables which 
can be used for random determination 
of aspects of guilds, and dice-rolling 
alone will generate workable guild 
structures. However, the DM is encour- 
aged to use a guided-semirandom ap- 
proach, tailoring or omitting certain 
dice rolls and choosing design options 
which produce the most suitable and 
pleasing overall picture. This also cov- 
ers the possibility that there is no for- 
mal thieves’ guild, with design options 
for very loose affiliations or even rela- 
tive anarchy! 

An example, the thieves’ guild of Mal- 
lain, shows how to use the design system. 
This example takes an apparently contra- 


51 


CHAPTER 4: Thieves’ Guilds 


dictory set of dice rolls, and shows how 
to resolve them; the result is that the in- 
trigues and tensions in the resulting Guild 
structure can be a focus for adventures 
for any PCs. The Guild becomes far 
more than just an anonymous body a 
thief PC pays dues to! 

A short section on unusual thieves’ 
guilds (travellers on the road and oth- 
ers such) is followed by a valuable DM 
resource, a section on handling PC 
Guildmasters. The straightforward sys- 
tem laid out here handles guild income, 
hassles, arrests, trials and tribulations, 
followers arriving and leaving, morale, 
and the day-to-day business of running 
a thieves’ guild. This should make life a 
lot easier for the DM! 

A small number of selected “blue- 
print profiles” for major NPCs within a 
guild follow; the DM can use these un- 
changed in game play or modify them 
as he wishes. 


Benefits of 
Guild Membership 


“What do I get 
out of it?” is a reasonable enough query 
from a player with a PC thief when told 
his character must join a guild, or if it is 
strongly suggested as a wise option by 
the DM. By answering the question, 
many of the functions of the thieves’ 
guild which benefit its members be- 
come clear. Below are detailed the most 
common benefits gained, although 
these will vary from guild to guild, with 
an example of one additional benefit 
typical only of membership in a certain 
kind of guild—a highly organized and 
resourceful one! 

It is not the case that every guild will 
provide all the benefits listed below, 
but certainly almost all guilds will pro- 
vide training, access to necessary 
equipment, and the like. 


Training 


The DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
(pg. 49) gives training (to gain experi- 
ence levels as an option for DMs. There 
is much to recommend training as a ne- 


cessity for level gains. Having a PC 
train with a master, mentor, or tutor— 
probably with others of his profession 
around—allows many, many things to 
happen naturally without their obvi- 
ously being spoonfed by the DM. Ru- 
mours and news can be caught up on. 
Hints and tips (e.g., concerning the use- 
fulness of some of the new equipment 
items reviewed elsewhere) can be ex- 
changed. New friends and contacts can 
be made. Intrigues and scams can be 
plotted, gossiped about, and initiated; 
employment can be offered; schisms 
and factions within the guild can be- 
come a focus for adventuring. All this 
is just for starters. Training is a natural 
way for the DM to enrich the game in 
all sorts of ways. 

Second, while certain skill gains can 
be seen as the result of practice, this 
does not apply to all the advances expe- 
rience brings. New weapon and non- 
weapon proficiencies are the most 
obvious example. How can a thief who 
has never used a short sword, for exam- 
ple (because he has not previously been 
proficient with it), suddenly develop a 
proficiency in its use without training? 
This is obviously wholly unrealistic. 
How can a thief learn an Etiquette pro- 
ficiency, enabling him to pull scams on 
the rich and haughty more easily, with- 
out a tutor to coach him in upper-crust, 
high society ways? He sure can’t learn 
Etiquette from a dungeon crawl or wil- 
derness hike! Likewise, if the player 
chooses to pile most of the 30 “skill 
points” gained for a level into one or 
two skills only, the PC could well need 
a specialist tutor to coach him in these 
skills—a good way to bring in one or 
two of the specialist thief kits as NPCs, 
too, 

So, training is an important element 
of the game, and the thieves’ guild is the 
place where the PC thief will have the 
best chance of finding a tutor to train 
him. He may have to wait a week or 
two, or maybe a little longer if the DM 
wishes this, but by and large the guild 
will go to some lengths to make tutors 
available. 


Equipment 


This is a major advantage for a 
thieves’ guild member. It goes without 
saying that many items of use to a thief 
are hardly available on the open mar- 
ket in almost any society! Armor and 
weapons can be had, and likewise 
straightforward items such as ropes, 
iron spikes, crowbars, and the like. But 
where does the thief get lockpicks, ti- 
ger’s claws, razor rings, silenced ar- 
mour, and suchlike? From the thieves’ 
guild, of course. 

In addition to being a source of equip- 
ment for sale (and possibly even for 
loan), here is an obvious chance for role- 
playing possibilities, The “blueprint pro- 
file” for the Thieves Quartermaster (later 
in this chapter) shows how a simple trip 
to buy some new lockpicks at the guild 
can be turned into an encounter with a 
very resourceful and entertaining NPC, 
one the player of the thief PC won't for- 
get! 

In some powerful guilds, magical 
items may be available for exchange 
(for other magical items, obviously 
ones of superior value!) or even possi- 
bly for loan (with a fat deposit securing 
the item). Loaning allows thief PCs to 
enjoy having a magical item without 
the DM letting them have it perma- 
nently! lt should go without saying that 
absconding with the item will lead to 
relentless and murderous pursuits until 
the item is returned. 


Information 


The thieves’ guild will make it its 
business to know about many things 
which are of interest to its members, 
and that can mean just about anything, 
so a few examples are given here: 


Security: The blueprints for sewer 
networks (allowing ingress and egress 
through manhole covers), times of 
changing guards at major guarded 
buildings (the Treasury, the Mint, etc.), 
times of watch patrols (in rich residen- 
tial areas), the nature and positions of 
guards (warriors, dogs, etc.) and traps 


52 


in key buildings, and the like. 

Commercial: Who is richer than he 
looks (and why and how), arrivals and 
departures of valuable cargoes and 
items, where certain valuables are 
cached, hidden, disguised; and more in 
this vein. 

Friends and Enemies: This will de- 
pend in a big way on the relationship of 
the guild with other associations, dealt 
with later. Sometimes such information 
will be given to a novice thief for obvi- 
ous reasons; “do not rob merchants X, 
Y, Z or else. Understand?” (reasons—X 
and Y pay protection money and Z is 
actually Deputy Guildmaster; the novi- 
ce might be told some of this). But oth- 
er possibilities include which corrupt 
officers of the law are in the pockets of 
the guild (and therefore should not be 
dealt with too harshly during a rob- 
bery), which servants of the rich are 
very happy to talk for what magnitude 
of bribe, which barmen in the rough 
taverns in the docks will help thieves 
(e.g., by putting a little something in 
someone's drink so they can be “helped 
home” by the thief later), and so on. 

General Information: This is a catch- 
all category. To take but one possible il- 
lustrative example: a guild might keep 
records of legal punishments for vari- 
ous thiefly crimes in neighboring (may- 
be even distant) locations (“Over there? 
Not if you value your hands, broth- 
er!”). These may not always be accu- 
rate and up-to-date, of course. 


What the guild knows, who within the 
guild knows it, and whether they will tell 
what they know obviously depends on 
how “hot” the information is, the senior- 
ity of the person inquiring, and other fac- 
tors. These complications don’t need our 
attention now; the important thing is the 
basic idea here, that the guild is a vital 
information source. And, to anticipate 
the responsibilities guild members have 
to the guild, this is a two-way process. 
The thief will be expected to report cer- 
tain information to the guild seniors! 
This is dealt with later. 


Fencing 


This is an often-overlooked aspect of 
the thieves’ guild. A PC thief may steal 
all kinds of things which he hasn't any 
idea about, so far as their price goes. He 
didn’t find the hidden safe in the mer- 
chant’s house, so out he comes with a 
bag containing a jade statuette of a cat 
(actually imitation jade so it's mostly 
worthless), a crystal vase (exceptional 
elfin work, worth a fair sum), a crude 
wooden idol (an antique, and thus 
worth far more than the thief thinks), 
and more. .. . Indeed, in the absence 
of any special nonweapon proficiencies 
(such as Gem-cutting and the like) the 
thief may often have little idea how 
much nonmonetary treasures he has 
stolen are worth. Even with the Ap- 
praising proficiency, the thief's esti- 
mates may often be wrong, and a fair 
proportion of items too unusual or sin- 
gular for the thief to be sure anyway. 
This is one area where the fence can 
help the thief. 

A resourceful thieves’ guild will have 
members who can accurately value dif- 
ferent sorts of items, and will also have 
contacts with certain specialists who 
aren't actually thieves but who also 
aren't terribly ethical either, They can 
handle real rarities. The Fence thief kit 
gives a basic design option for fences, 
and the blueprint profile section (later 
in this chapter) also details a highly ex- 
perienced and versatile fence who can 
be used straight off the page (as it were) 
or developed by the DM for use in his 
campaign. 

A special case is that of magical trea- 
sure. A simple detect magic spell from a 
mage-thief specialist in the guild, work- 
ing with the fence, can tell a thief that 
the nice gold signet ring he filched from 
the drunk fighter is a magic item, worth 
far, far more than its value as gold. The 
same NPC can tell the thief (from an 
identify spell) that the ring is a ring of 
protection +2, worth thousands. This 
only needs a 1st-level magic-user with 
the fence, but it's a priceless service for 
the thief! 

The other role for the fence, obvi- 


ously, is that the thief gets “hot” prop- 
erty off his hands quickly. It will 
probably be out of town very fast, to be 
sold in some distant location where its 
illicit nature will not be suspected. Ob- 
viously, fences never pay more than a 
fraction of the market price for goods; 
but a fraction may still be a fair sum, 
and the thief runs no risk of being ap- 
prehended. 


Specialist Help 


Obviously, the fence is a form of spe- 
cialist help, but the guild can also act to 
put members in touch with specialists 
to help them with certain ventures in 
more direct ways. 

First, certain guild members will be 
specialists in themselves—expert lock- 
pickers with exceptional Open Locks 
skill levels and others such. Multi-class 
thieves are also important people for 
many jobs—a mage-thief with such 
spells as invisibility, levitate, and 
knock (to consider but second-level 
spells) is of obvious value. Having one 
accompany a thief on a robbery in- 
creases the chances for success consid- 
erably, but even if this isn't possible, a 
simple invisibility spell precast on the 
hopeful robber gives an important edge 
for sneaking past guards and the like. 

Then again, other adventurers might 
be called upon. Depending on the 
guild's relations with other bodies, a 
cleric (with find traps, among other 
spells) would be a most useful accom- 
plice for many tasks. If the DM's cam- 
paign world has a deity which is an 
obvious patron for thieves (such as Oli- 
dammara of Oerth, or Mask of the 
Forgotten Realms), clerics of such a de- 
ity might well have very cordial rela- 
tions with a thieves’ guild. This is 
considered in more detail below. 

The guild can thus act as a clearing- 
house, with names and meeting places 
to assist a PC thief hoping to pull a job 
but needing help. Again, whether these 
contacts actually agree to help will de- 
pend on many things—notably the rep- 
utation of the PC thief! However, the 
fact that they are there at all can be 


53 


helpful for the PC thief, possibly for his 
friends as well, and can be very useful 
indeed if the thief PC wants to pull 
some job away from the rest of his usual 
adventuring group, when he must have 
some such extra help for success. 

Of course, a thief may simply need 
the assistance of others of his own kind 
for some job he has planned. This may 
be a simple decoy person to help with 
pickpocketing in the streets, or an 
eagle-eyed lookout for a warehouse 
job. Either way, the guildhouse may be 
a better bet than hanging around dubi- 
ous taverns and hostelries. The flipside 
of this, of course, is that an impover- 
ished PC can hang around the 
guildhouse touting for offers of work 
himself! 

Finally, a well-organized guild will 
even be able to help its members if they 
get into serious difficulties. A jailer may 
be bribed, a magistrate bribed or black- 
mailed, a man of law paid to plead the 
thief’s case in the courts (if the judge or 
magistrate cannot be bribed). If the 
captured thief is very senior in the 
Guild, even a commando-style “libera- 
tion” may be possible! Such actions will 
leave the thief indebted to his guild for 
some time to come. . . . 

So, these are the main functions of 
the thieves’ guild, as far as a PC thief 
entering the guild can see them. There 
are certainly other things the guild will 
do, and we'll look at them in due 
course. Before that, let's look at the 
other side of the coin—the responsibili- 
ties the thief has to the guild. For all the 
advantages, what does the guildmem- 
ber have to pay one way or another? 


Responsibilities of 
Guild Membership 


Guild Dues 


The most obvious responsibility is 
that the guild member must pay dues to 
the guild. These will be variable. One 
guild may include training costs in the 
basic dues, which will then be fairly 
high; another guild might not, charging 
for training as and when the guild mem- 


ber needs it, so their basic dues will be 
that much lower. Of course, if the DM 
doesn't use training rules in his game 
then this element will be absent. When 
the DM comes to design a thieves’ guild 
using the system outlined later, this is a 
important element to consider! 

In addition to a basic membership 
due, the guild may insist on taking a 
certain percentage cut of the rewards 
the guild member gains from his thiev- 
ing activities. Here, it is likely that there 
will be a “basic rate” for normal opera- 
tions, with guild seniors considering 
special cases individually. For example, 
if the guild provided the thief with cer- 
tain important information which 
made a big difference (and indeed with- 
out which a robbery would have been 
unsuccessful), the guild may take a 
larger slice of the goodies than normal. 
What cut the guild takes will again be 
variable. Some guilds may discount the 
yearly dues (possibly in part) from later 
cuts from income. 


Secrecy 


This is just as important as paying 
dues. The guild member will be ex- 
pected to keep the identity of the guild- 
master (if he knows it), the guildhouse, 
and planned guild activities secret from 
outsiders. He must never inform on a 
guild member. 

In a guild dominated by a lawfully- 
aligned guildmaster or group, secrecy 
may be the most important of all com- 
mitments the guildmember has to 
make. Some form of oath of loyalty is 
very likely to be demanded of the nov- 
ice in almost any thieves’ guild. 


Providing Information 


There are two quite specific ways in 
which a thief will be expected to supply 
his seniors within the guild with infor- 
mation. First, information concerning 
his own plans; second, general informa- 
tion possibly of value to guild members. 

A thief will be expected to keep the 
guild informed about important ven- 
tures he has planned. This does not in- 


clude dungeon-bashing, wilderness 
adventures, and the like! Rather, rob- 
beries and break-ins which may net 
particularly good rewards or strike at 
“sensitive” targets (such as a temple, or 
the warehouse of a notable merchant), 
particularly nefarious crimes such as 
kidnapping, and major scams are ex- 
amples of crimes which a thief will al- 
ways be expected to notify the guild 
seniors or guildmaster of. Many guilds 
will insist that such major crimes can 
only be committed with the guildmas- 
ter's permission. This is especially likely 
to be true with a strong guild, and in a 
lawful or repressive society where such 
actions may stir up a hornet’s nest of 
trouble for the guild. 

Feeding back general information to 
the guild will also keep a thief in good 
standing with his fellows. A thief casing 
a joint for a later break-in might see an 
unusual number of guards around in 
the courtyard of an adjacent building as 
some crates are being taken inside from 
a wagon, and one crate splits slightly at 
the top revealing the glint of gold or 
ivory in the bright sun . . . The thief 
knows that he cannot organize a rob- 
bery over there as well as in the place 
he’s casing already, so he reports the 
pleasant view to the guild. Doing so 
will certainly keep the thief in good fa- 
vor. The thief will be expected to pro- 
vide such information should he come 
across it, but the guildmaster might 
well reward particularly helpful guild 
members, mark them for promotion, 
give them a sinecure role in some other 
guild job, pay a small percentage of the 
guild take to the helpful informant, and 
the like, 

Snitches; These can be of special im- 
portance to a thieves’ guild. Basically, a 
snitch is someone paid to provide “in- 
side information.” A snitch can bea cor- 
rupt officer of the law, a valet or 
servant of a rich man (or at a club of 
some kind), a nightwatchman, and so 
on. 
A few guilds might insist that only 
the very senior guild members can have 
their own snitches; juniors must turn 
over promising contacts who could be 


54 


developed into snitches to the guild. 
More likely, though, is that individual 
members can have their own snitches 
who are regarded as sacrosanct by 
other guild members. A guildsman does 
not tamper with another thief’s pet 
snitch! This is obviously going to be 
easiest if the identities of the snitches 
are actually commonly known within 
the guild—how can you not poach a 
snitch if you don’t know who is one, af- 
ter all? But, because some thieves may 
be very nervous about this, the identity 
of certain really important snitches 
may be kept secret. The guild will pro- 
tect them by warning thieves away 
from the key snitches indirectly (e.g., 
with an edict that no one is to try to 
“make friends” with the staff of such- 
and-such an establishment). This does 
not make the identity of the snitch 
known, but serves to warn other 
thieves away. 


Limited Territory 


The thief will almost certainly be told 
that certain areas and activities are de- 
finitely off-limits. This is likeliest to ap- 
ply to major crimes and big heists when 
junior thieves are the hopeful plotters 
(the guild is unlikely to allow such inex- 
perienced people the chance to bring 
the wrath of the law down on every- 
one’s head). But territorial restrictions 
may be just as important. 

The simplest form of this is that cer- 
tain thieves will have their “own 
patch”. Pickpockets are the most clear- 
cut example. A notably busy thorough- 
fare, one where merchants and 
(especially) foreigners throng, is a 
patch which a skilled group of pick- 
pockets will fight determinedly to keep 
as their own, exclusive territory. Pro- 
tection rackets are another obvious 
case of a demarcated territory where 
other guild members do not stick their 
noses in. These will include warehouses 
and offices and homes which are off- 
limits to burglars, because their owners 
pay a sum to the guild to avoid being 
robbed. 


A more complex example of this is 


Thieves’ Guilds 


where sub-guilds control definite sec- 
tions of a city and expect that only their 
own people are usually allowed any ac- 
tivity at all within that section. Excep- 
tions are allowed only after careful 
consideration by the leader(s) of this 
group. This situation may happen if a 
guildmaster is weak and the second- 
rankers start carving out territory for 
themselves, but it might arise for simple 
reasons of historical accident (in a 
walled city with major internal divi- 
sions, gates between town quarters, 
and so on—the City of Greyhawk is an 
example). At its most extreme, a city 
might in effect (if not in name) have sev- 
eral thieves’ guilds, each controlling 
one section or quarter of the city, with 
the boss of each splinter faction meeting 
with the others at regular times to try to 
co-ordinate efforts and defuse tensions. 


Other Duties 


Depending on the individual guild, 
the thief may have other responsibili- 
ties. These can vary considerably, but 
some of the more common cases are de- 
tailed here. 

Training: The thief may only be al- 
lowed to train apprentices of his own 
with the knowledge and permission of 
the guild, and the guild will probably 
want a cut of the training fee. Some 
guilds will regulate the allocating of ap- 
prentices to trainers. In busy times 
when the guild is expanding, middling- 
level thieves may have to give up a cer- 
tain amount of time, demanded by the 
guild, to train new apprentices. 

Legwork: Especially with apprentices 
and low-level thieves, the guild may re- 
quire them to do some of the tedious 
day-to-day legwork, at least as backup 
reserves. This can involve collecting 
money from the victims of protection 
rackets, collecting and carrying bags of 
small change from illegal street gam- 
bling, acting as a messenger boy, keep- 
ing a part-watch on a warehouse, and 
so on. This shouldn't be too oppressive, 
but a sudden need for extra help on the 
part of the guild is a nice plot device for 
keeping a thief PC in town and maybe 


having him see things, and meet people, 
that widen the scope of his future ad- 
venturing. 


The Recalcitrant PC Thief 


A player may decide that he doesn’t 
want to have his thief PC join any 
guild; this may be especially likely with 
Chaotic characters (and Chaotic play- 
ers!). It's best not to pressure the player 
in this case, but as his thief PC gains ex- 
perience he will inevitably tread on the 
toes of the thieves’ guild (e.g., by rob- 
bing someone they have an “under- 
standing” with). The guild will sooner 
or later have to take action against the 
PC thief. They will warn him first, and 
stress the benefits of joining (as ex- 
plained above). Eventually he will have 
to join up, or ship out. There is also the 
matter of training, of course; if he 
doesn’t get this from the guild, where 
else can he come by it? 

Some players may worry that their 
thief PCs may have their freedom of 
action massively curtailed, or their 
alignment may be compromised (espe- 
cially if the PC is of Good alignment), 
or their PC may simply be ripped off. 
These are legitimate worries, and some 
players may want to be reassured about 
them. The DM should be able to lure all 
but the most uncooperative player into 
guild membership without any strong- 
arm tactics, and then the full plethora 
of the guild's nefarious activities can be 
unfolded. . . . 


Activities of Thieves’ 
Guilds 


There are certain 
obvious core activities of thieves which 
will always be a staple of guild goings- 
on, but there are also more uncommon 
activities which not all guilds will have 
dealings with, Looking at the range of 
possible guild activities is done here for 
two reasons. First, it is a useful precur- 
sor to guild design, to come later. Sec- 
ond, it is a natural lead-in to the issue of 
relations which exist between thieves’ 
guilds and other groups. Since these are 


55 


often based on mutual interests and 
spheres of activity. it makes sense to 
consider these interests and activities 
first, to make sense of the associations 
to be reviewed later! 

Importantly, the activities reviewed 
here do not involve all the thieves of the 
Guild. If PC Guildmembers find some 
activities run by a guild objectionable 
(e.g., because they are good-aligned), 
they shouldn't be forced to do so. The 
idea here is simply to give an idea of the 
range of activities which guilds may be 
involved with on more than an occa- 
sional basis. 


Core Activities 


These are the bread-and-butter activ- 
ities of thieves. Virtually any guild will 
have these as everyday activities. That 
is, guild members will regularly indulge 
in them and they will provide much of 
the “bread and butter” income for most 
thieves (especially lower-level thieves). 

Pickpocketing, burglary, robbery, 
street theft, street gambling, and mug- 
ging are the most obvious core activi- 
ties. There's little need to say much 
more about them here. Almost all play- 
ers will have had their thieves indulge in 
such behaviors, and will be familiar 
with them. Standard AD&D® game 
rules, and many equipment items and 
Thief Kits presented in this volume, 
give exhaustive detail about them. 


Other Activities 


The DM can look upon the listing 
here as a menu from which choices can 
be made later on when designing a 
thieves’ guild. The list isn’t exhaustive; 
devious DMs can no doubt add to it for 
unusual guilds in a campaign setting. 
The activities here are ones which will 
involve the guild as a body, or many of 
its members, on a systematic basis. In 
turn, this will affect the nature of the 
guild significantly. Obviously, many of 
the activities listed below may involve 
specialists, and the thieves’ kits out- 
lined earlier can be very useful in many 
cases. 


Protection Rackets 


Thieves and merchants may possibly 
come to some negotiated understand- 
ing, in certain cities and towns. The 
thieves will agree not to burgle particu- 
lar establishments (warehouses and pri- 
vate homes)—that is, those which 
belong to the merchants who pay a fee 
for this privilege. Merchants who don't 
pay will be fair game for future rob- 
bery, and may be specifically targeted. 

This kind of agreement will always 
be negotiated by the guild seniors, and 
guild members will be told in no uncer- 
tain terms that certain places are strictly 
off-limits in the future. Such agree- 
ments are most likely in places where 
the thieves’ guild is strong, the rule of 
law is fairly weak (or corrupt), and 
where the guildmaster is a lawful- 
aligned individual. 

A notable consequence of such agree- 
ments is that if a freelance thief burgles 
a property which is owned by a mer- 
chant who pays the local thieves‘ guild, 
that thief can expect the thieves’ guild of 
the town to make determined efforts to 
find him and administer summary jus- 
tice. This may be harsher than the pen- 
alties prescribed by the law! Also, the 
traditional meaning of the term “pro- 
tection racket”—“pay up or we break 
your legs”—is not exactly what is im- 
plied here, although thieves denied 
payment by a merchant might resort to 
the threat of violence to drive away the 
merchant's customers, staff, and the 
like. Only a guild dominated by eyil 
and top-heavy with thugs will be likely 
to use actual violence, in most cases. 


Smuggling 


This is most likely to be an organized 
activity in a port, or possibly in a major 
inland trade city built on a nexus of trade 
roads. In the case of a port, there is a pos- 
sibility that thieves might also be allied 
with pirates, both through smuggling and 
through getting messages to the pirates 
regarding the sailing times, cargoes, and 
protections of sailing vessels leaving the 
port. The smuggling can be of any pro- 


hibited item or items, and in troubled 
lands the smuggling of weapons can be 
particularly lucrative. 

Subtle variants on this theme are pos- 
sible. Consider a thieves’ guild which 
has good connections with the rulers, in 
a weak country ruled by evil. The coun- 
try might officially outlaw slavery (for 
fear of offending neighbouring coun- 
tries which are not ruled by evil), while 
the thieves actually carry this on as a 
subterfuge activity, smuggling slaves 
into and perhaps through the country. 
This is done with the full knowledge 
and connivance of the rulers, who take 
a percentage of the profits. Selling the 
slaves to another, more distant, evil 
land could raise plenty of funds for the 
thieves and the rulers. In time, this evil 
land could flourish and become strong 
on the profits of its wicked trade. 


Forgery and Coin Clipping 


A strong thieves’ guild may regulate 
the activities of forgers and “clippers”, 
to keep the proportion of forgeries and 
clippings within reasonable limits. If 
there are too many forgeries floating 
around, the value of coin will sharply 
deteriorate, to no one's benefit (includ- 
ing the thieves). Clipping is simply the 
art of shaving fine slivers from the 
edges of coins and using the salvaged 
metal for subsequent coin-forging or 
for other purposes. A shaved-off mar- 
gin of some 5% from the original is usu- 
ally fairly undetectable, but coins may 
be clipped several times during their 
lifetime! In advanced societies in the 
campaign world, the dies used to make 
coins may have milled or marked edges 
to prevent clipping. 


Entertainments 


This is a catchall term for a fairly 
wide range of dubious behaviour, Some 
examples of systematic operations 
which a thieves’ guild might run are 
listed below. 

Gambling: Thieves might well run 
casinos and similar establishments. 
These provide a source of income, a 


56 


good meeting-place for underworld 
people, and the opportunity to rip off 
large sums of money from patrons who 
are rich, drunk, stupid or usually all 
three. Organized crime will be strongly 
involved in these operations. 

Good Time Girls: Nothing much 
needs to be said about this, save that 
thieves often act as the “gentleman 
companions” of these girls. There is a 
much shorter word to describe this, of 
course. 

Bawds: A bawd is a character who 
knows the seamier side of life, and 
makes an in-demand “tourist guide” for 
the rich and bored (or the foreigner) 
who seek to stimulate their jaded appe- 
tites in the seedy parts of town. Bawds 
will often be freelancers, but they may 
hand over a certain percentage of their 
clients to muggers and other thieves. 
This type of activity might well involve 
the thieves’ guild, even though the 
bawds themselves do their own work 
independently, and will frequently be 
Chaotic Evil in alignment. 


Lawful Operations 


A thieves’ guild might actually turn 
to actions which do not conflict with 
the rule of law for several reasons. First, 
it might have many lawful members 
(this is implausible except in a very law- 
ful society). Second, it might have 
strong contacts with some outside 
group which makes some lawful opera- 
tion a special case—having good rela- 
tions with merchants could lead to the 
protection scenario detailed below. 
Third, it might just be good public rela- 
tions. The guild does some “legal work” 
to maintain a veneer of public respecta- 
bility while blaming its really nefarious 
activities (kidnapping, drug smuggling, 
etc.) on rogue elements outside the 
guild. It might also be a temporary di- 
version to keep the heat off when the 
guild has over-reached itself or been 
blamed for some particularly spectacu- 
lar heist or wicked crime. Surprisingly, 
there are lots of reasons why poachers 
may turn gamekeeper for a while. Two 
examples are: 


Security testing: Thieves might be em- 
ployed to test defenses of a secure area. 
Who better, after all? Gemcutters and jew- 
ellers, pawnbrokers, and rich merchants 
who keep a lot of money around are obvi- 
ous potential customers. Equally obvious- 
ly, they won't approach the thieves’ guild 
unless they already have some under- 
standing with them. They will also top up 
the defenses after the thieves have tested 
the first set, even if the thieves say the de- 
fenses are very sound (or maybe especial- 
ly if they claim this!). 

Of course, if freelance good-aligned 
(or lawful-aligned) specialists in such 
work are available as independents, they 
will be the most likely to carry out this 
work. A thieves’ guild is likely to go to 
great lengths to get these people to join 
the guild, or else to eliminate them! 

Transportation: Sometimes, some- 
one wishes to move something (a fabu- 
lously valuable gem, a religious icon, 
etc.) from one place to another by nor- 
mal means (e.g., not teleporting) and is 
fearful that it may be stolen en route. 
Thieves are employed to create decoys 
and diversions and to smuggle the ob- 
ject in secrecy. Since thieves are masters 
of concealment, and also know a thing 
or two about stealing things in transit, 
their skills will be put to good use here. 
In the case of a really important item 
being transported, a thief might be 
asked to submit to a spell such as 
quest/geas to ensure his cooperation. 


Thieves’ Guilds in the 
Campaign World 


A thieves’ guild 
doesn’t exist in a vacuum. It will be 
strongly influenced by the society which 
it is part of. Considering this is an impor- 
tant backdrop to the more specific matter 
of how a thieves’ guild gets on with other 
associations and groups. 


Size and Wealth of 
Communities 


A first simple 
point is that a thieves’ guild has to have 
enough work to support it! A small 


hamlet of 50 or so peasant farmers, 
most of whom are desperately poor, 
wouldn't support a single cutpurse, let 
alone a thieves’ guild. A busy working 
town along a trade route, though, 
might well attract several thieves, even 
if the actual population was fairly low. 
If the village relied on monies passing 
through the place (coaching inns, hos- 
pitality, markets, etc.), it would be 
much richer in terms of money availa- 
ble for the thieves to filch than a place 
with the same population but depen- 
dent on the turnip harvest! In the de- 
sign process, some specific rules for 
determining how many thieves various 
communities can support are given. 


Social Alignment 


The other factor 
which will always be of importance in 
determining the nature of a thieves’ 
guild is the dominant social alignment 
(see the DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 
pgs. 25-26). Usually this will be reflect- 
ed in the alignment of the rulers too, 
but this may not always be so: the pos- 
sibility of a “divided alignment” society 
is discussed after the social alignments 
have been considered. Also, the follow- 
ing descriptions are tendencies, not ab- 
solutes. The final paragraphs on 
Special Social Factors shows how, for 
example, two Lawful Good societies 
dominated by different religions could 
have a very different view on thieves! 


Lawful Good 


Thievery will be strongly disap- 
proved of—thieving is by definition 
unlawful, and few thieves are good. 
The penalties for thievery will be 
harsh, but will usually involve banish- 
ment, confiscation of goods, and long 
sentences of socially useful labor rather 
than death, mutilation (e.g., amputa- 
tion of a hand) or such other cruel 
treatment. Lawful good rulers may go 
to some lengths to extirpate thieves’ 
guilds, and lawful good people will cer- 
tainly inform on thieves. There will be 
a strong sense of civic duty among such 
people to report any observations sug- 


57 


Thieves’ Guilds 


gestive of thievery to the authorities. 
Tip for thieves: Find somewhere else. 


Neutral Good 


Thievery will not be disapproved of 
in the same way as in a lawful society, 
but thieves are rarely good, and neutral 
good societies are unlikely to have 
much regard for them. However, pun- 
ishment for thievery may not be so se- 
vere, and the rulers may feel there are 
better things to do, and more impor- 
tant social priorities, than persecuting 
thieves. Assassins, for example, will be 
rated a much more important target for 
the authorities. 

However, while the authorities (and 
society generally) may tolerate a cer- 
tain level of thievery, there is likely to 
be a “threshold level” above which 
thieving will no longer be tolerated. 
Over-powerful thieves may be deemed 
a major social evil, and neutral good 
societies may be less fussy about the 
means (neutral) taken to achieve the 
ends (good). Do not forget that a viable 
interpretation of the neutral good phi- 
losophy is “war on evil without remit- 
tance or mercy,” such that only direly 
evil ends will be eschewed in the prose- 
cution of good! Certainly, plants, spies, 
moles within guilds—all may be used 
by the authorities against over- 
powerful thieves. Tip for thieves: Keep 
a low profile and you can get away 
with it, but otherwise—watch out! 


Chaotic Good 


Such societies do not often have ef- 
fective, strong law enforcement, be- 
cause the people prize personal 
freedom as a primary virtue. For this 
reason, thieves’ guilds can grow strong 
in a Chaotic Good society. Even if the 
will is there to do something about the 
thieves, the means may not be ade- 
quate to the task. 

The attitudes of ordinary people will 
be complex here. Some may regard 
thieves in a heroic light, as individual- 
ists and nonconformists, and be posi- 
tively disposed to them. Others will 


Thieves’ Guilds 


regard thieves as taking the fruits of the 
labors of others away, and that this cur- 
tails personal freedoms—the unde- 
servedly poor have not the freedom 
they should have. Reactions will tend 
to be individualistic (as with most Cha- 
otic societies) and somewhat unpredict- 
able. Tip for thieves: Stick around! 


Lawful Neutral 


This may be the most intolerant of all 
societies. Thievery is the very antithesis 
of law, and punishments for transgres- 
sion are likely to be harsher and more 
cruel and unforgiving (e.g., amputation 
of a hand, a long sentence of forced la- 
bor) than in a Lawful Good society. 
Lawful Neutral rulers are likely to be 
rather stern, and worst of all, law en- 
forcers are likely to be as numerous and 
unbribeable here as anywhere. The 
only bonus for the thief is that Lawful 
Neutral societies are appallingly bu- 
reaucratic and its civil servants lacking 
in imagination and initiative. 

Lawful Neutral citizens will snitch on 
a thief at the drop of a hat and, more- 
over, will do so out of a sense of real 
civic duty. Tip for the thief: Very dan- 
gerous, but definitely outsmartable. 
Faked papers and the like go a long 
way, and fast talking helps a great deal. 


Neutral 


Absolute Neutral rulers tend to be 
rare, except in countries which border 
on extreme alignment societies. Here, 
performing some kind of balancing act 
may be the only way to survive. Such 
rulers will probably ignore thievery un- 
less it gets out of hand; they will have 
too much else to worry about. When it 
does get out of hand, their instinct will 
be to take whatever steps are necessary 
to restore the balance—more militia, 
more watch, more nightwatchmen and 
lamplighters in the streets, and so on. 
They will be highly pragmatic in their 
response. 

While pure Neutral rulers may be 
rare, ordinary people will often be of 
this alignment. This reflects the fact 


that they aren't clearly of any other 
alignment: They're just pragmatic, do- 
ing what they need to get by day to day. 
Most medieval societies were hardly 
rich; even the “middle class” (until the 
15th century in Europe) had a standard 
of living which could barely be termed 
comfortable. Survival is the name of 
the game, and clearly demarcated prin- 
ciples often go to the wall under such 
circumstances, The resulting blurred 
alignment can often be summarized as 
Neutral. Neutrals will tend to regard 
thievery as something they can't do a 
great deal about; thieves are mysteri- 
ous, dangerous people with secret orga- 
nizations. Neutrals look the other way; 
they don’t want to get involved. Cor- 
ruption can operate on a wide scale—it 
can even become a staple of commercial 
exchange. Tip for thieves: Good pick- 
ings! 


Chaotic Neutral 


Almost no societies, save for disor- 
ganized anarchies and some frontier 
lands, are dominated by this alignment. 
A Chaotic Neutral ruler is unlikely to 
survive for any time at all—ruled by 
whim and caprice, his subjects will 
likely rise up to put an end to such arbi- 
tary rule. 

Such societies, or ones comprised of 
Chaotic Neutral people, will likely not 
care a fig about thievery. Gambling, 
corruption, bawdery, muggings, and 
lowlife are likely to flourish in such so- 
cieties, and thieves may grow very 
strong organizing such activities. Tip 
for thieves: Excellent pickings, and a 
strong guild can effectively rule such a 
society behind the scenes. 


Lawful Evil 


While, like all Lawful societies, Law- 
ful Evil will not care for unlawful acts, 
Lawful Evil accepts what is necessary to 
maintain the strong in power. Fear rules 
here. If a Lawful Evil ruler uses thieves 
to backstab (literally!) his enemies, so 
be it. The ordinary people will cower if 
a thief swaggers around—providing 


58 


that thief has the muscle to back any 
threats he makes. Thieves’ guilds in 
such lands may be very strong, but they 
must have an emphasis on the brutal 
and thuggish to survive. Assassins will 
be stronger than thieves here, and the 
two may work closely together. Tip for 
thieves: Walk loudly and carry a big 
stick. 


Neutral Evil 


Neutral Evil is uncaring and uncon- 
cerned. Such people—rulers or ordi- 
nary folk—are out for what they can 
get. How one gets what one has in life 
doesn't matter at all. Neutral Evil folk 
are often cleverer than Lawful Evil 
ones, being more flexible and less re- 
specting of a dumb “superior” just be- 
cause he is in a position to push people 
around, They are also better organized 
by far than Chaotic Evil people. Neu- 
tral Evil is a flexible, smart, highly dan- 
gerous alignment. 

Thieves have excellent chances here, 
but they will have to watch their own 
backs more than in any other society. 
Rival thieves’ guilds may be particu- 
larly likely here. Since there is no stric- 
ture other than “don't get caught”, 
competing guilds and gang wars are 
highly likely. Tip for thieves: Good 
prospects for the pragmatic amoralist. 


Chaotic Evil 


Such societies are likely always to be 
in ferment, since the arbitary cruelty of 
the rulers will drive even a passive pop- 
ulation to revolt before long. Only 
Chaotic Evil societies with a powerful 
clerical group, demonic presence, etc., 
will have the sheer force needed to tyr- 
annize for any length of time. 

At all levels of a Chaotic Evil society, 
backstabbing and intrigue, treachery 
and betrayal, is the basic coin of ex- 
change. The strong take what they 
want however they like, and the rest are 
ground into the dirt. Since organization 
and cooperation are minimal, a thieves’ 
guild where the members don’t spend 
all their time backstabbing each other 


can grow to dominate behind the scenes 
very swiftly. Tip for thieves: Trust no- 
body, sell your granny into slavery, and 
have magic items allowing a fast exit. 


Special Social Factors 


There are many 
possible unusual social factors which 
will be an important backdrop to the 
role of thieves and their guilds in soci- 
ety. A few examples only are given 
here, since the possibilities are almost 
infinite. 


Divided Alignments 


Some societies exist where the align- 
ment of the ruler(s) is sharply different 
from the general social alignment. For 
example, a lawful evil dictator might 
rule over a society mostly comprised of 
freedom-loving chaotics, enslaved by 
military might. Here, while the agents 
of law enforcement would have a very 
punitive attitude towards thieves, the 
common population might regard them 
as heroes, possibly giving shelter to a 
thief on the run, or at the least not giv- 
ing the thief away. 


Racial Divisions 


Possibly the strongest antipathy be- 
tween the races in many AD&D® cam- 
paigns is between elves and dwarves. 
This can strongly affect guild struc- 
tures. In the worst case, a city might 
have an elven guild and a dwarven 
guild, both vying for humans to join 
their side, and with other races tending 
to ally one way or the other (gnomes 
might join dwarves, and halflings side 
with elves, for example). The antipathy 
of the two might override even align- 
ment factors. This could break out into 
open warfare between the factions, ora 
long-running guerilla war could be the 
result. 


Religious Factors 


Not all societies with the same domi- 
nant alignment need have the same atti- 
tude toward thieves. One Lawful Good 


society might be dominated by priests 
of a god stressing mercy, forgiveness, 
and humility; another might be domi- 
nated by priests of a stern warrior god 
stressing protection, strength, and the 
need for justice to prevail in al] circum- 
stances. Their attitudes to thieves 
would be significantly different, to say 
the least! 


Historical Factors 


Thieves may be especially notorious 
(or maybe especially famous!) in a soci- 
ety for some unique historical reason. 
The people may speak of how brave 
Edrain the master thief backstabbed the 
wicked tyrant Baron Higsel and 
brought about the downfall of an evil 
tyranny. Hence thieves are somewhat 
better tolerated than elsewhere. Or 
they may speak of how evil Edrain the 
treacherous backstabber foully slew the 
greatly loved and wise Baron Higsel, 
the best ruler in the history of the land, 
and since this time thieves are deemed 
especially wicked, base, treacherous 
fellows and death is an automatic pun- 
ishment for them! These are extremes, 
but the DM can easily envisage many 
variants on this kind of unique back- 
ground. 

All these general social backgrounds 
can easily merge into personal obses- 
sions or idiosyncracies of rulers, in dic- 
tatorial countries. There are many 
idiosyncratic reasons why a particular 
leader might have an especially puni- 
tive or lenient (less likely!) attitude to 
thieves than the general social align- 
ment might suggest, but there should 
always be a good reason why. For ex- 
ample, a paladin ruler of a city-state 
might be unusually lenient toward 
thieves because a (Neutral Good) thief 
companion saved his life more than 
once in their adventuring days. Un- 
likely, admittedly. but possible! Such 
oddities should be thought up individu- 
ally by the DM so that they fit with the 
campaign setting and history. 


59 


Thieves’ Guilds 


Thieves’ Guilds and 
Other Groups 


Here, we'll look 
at the general pattern of relationships 
which can hold between the thieves’ 
guild and other social groups of 
importance—the law, merchants and 
their fellows, other guilds, and the like. 
The important word is “general.” The 
broad patterns outlined will be used 
later in the guild design section. They 
are presented now for the DM to think 
about in advance. 

The two most important relation- 
ships thieves’ guilds have will be with 
the people they steal most from (mer- 
chants) and the people doing their best 
to stop them (the officers of the law). 
Several possible types of relationships 
are outlined with each group. These are 
dominating themes only; checking the 
Complex/Mix entry at the end of each 
group will suggest many variations on 
the dominant themes. 


Thieves and the Law 


The alignment of 
the rulers of society will have a domi- 
nating effect on this relationship. How- 
ever, there will be other factors of 
importance, too. Here is a simple exam- 
ple: A lawful good state is at war with a 
powerful, evil neighbor. Almost all of 
the country’s resources will go into the 
war effort—and able-bodied men and 
women who might otherwise be law en- 
forcers putting down thieves will be 
fighting in battles instead. Thus, 
thieves will find life much easier than 
usual in such a land. From the patterns 
below, some will obviously tend to 
align with certain alignments, and this 
will be reflected in the guild design 
process later. But nothing is ever cut 
and dried, and 100% predictable! 


Persecution 


Typical of lawful and non-good soci- 
eties, officers of the law are vigilant 
against thieves and their guilds. They 
are nat easily bribeable, and there may 
be rewards (money, medals, etc.) for 


Thieves’ Guilds 


vatch officers arresting many thieves 
r busting a guild. Penalties for thiev- 
ry are usually harsh. There will be 
‘ery few corrupt officers of the law, 
susting a captured thief from prison 
vill be very difficult—prisons and 
aols will be strongly built, heavily 
uarded, and tough to get into (cue for 
n exciting adventure here!). 


lassle 


The law comes down fairly heavily 
n thieves, and penalties for thievery 
re moderately harsh. However, offi- 
ers of the law may feel they have better 
hings to do than deal with thieves 
e.g., in a rough-and-tumble port city), 
nd with petty thievery in particular, a 
hief may get away with handing over 
he spoils, paying a spot fine, and get- 
ing a gauntleted hand across the back 
f the head. In an odd way, the thieves 
nay even have a sneaking regard for 
he law: the law is firm, but fair and not 
rbitary or excessively harsh, and the 
hieves feel they are up against an en- 
my worthy of their skills. 


Ipposition 


This is perhaps the commonest state 
f affairs. The officers of the law do 
heir best to prosecute the law. How- 
ver, a small number are corrupt, they 
ion't have enough manpower, they 
now their chances of recovering stolen 
roperty are very low and this ad- 
ersely affects morale and motivation, 
ind so on. The lawmen aren't uncaring, 
hey're just somewhat disillusioned and 
heir morale isn't so good. They will 
erk up and make a determined effort 
o find out who has pulled a big heist 
vhen one takes place, and if thieves re- 
ort to real violence they will really 
ome looking for them. Otherwise, 
hey just go through the motions. One 
yr two bright and enthusiastic younger 
yfficers may resent the cynicism and 
vorld-weariness of their elders, but not 
or long; they soon capitulate to the 
revailing attitudes. 

Many thieves with experience in such 


places have a proverb which (there are 
several versions) runs along the lines of, 
“if you get round the corner you're a 
free man” —that is, get away from any 
watch officer in the street with your pil- 
fered gains and you won't exactly be 
chased with real determination. 


Tolerance 


The picture here might seem to be 
similar to opposition, but the law is still 
weaker in dealing with thieves. This 
may be for a variety of reasons. Under- 
funding and under-manning may be es- 
pecially important. Significant 
corruption may be present (especially 
higher up the scale). The society may be 
chaotic or anarchic. There may be a 
reason why thievery is not a major 
worry (a weak thieves’ guild, major ex- 
ternal threats to a city-state so that 
most able-bodied men are in a fighting 
militia, a very rough port where serious 
assaults and worse are a much bigger 
headache than thieves, etc.). 

In such situations, the law not only 
doesn’t do anything about all but the 
most serious thiefly crimes, but officers 
of the law may even get testy and irri- 
tated with people who complain about 
them too much, especially if they are 
foreigners! 


Corruption 


Here, bribes and backhanders are 
paid to officers of the law on a regular 
and major basis. Not all lawmen may 
be corrupt, but a thief with serious fi- 
nancial resources can manage to avoid 
being charged with almost anything. If 
somehow he ends up in prison, he will 
be smuggled out somehow. Law offi- 
cers may actually be members of the 
thieves’ guild, cooperating with smug- 
gling, protection rackets, and the like. 

There is a tendency to overplay this, 
and to make it too obvious to PCs. Cor- 
rupt law enforcers aren't going to ad- 
vertise the fact, even in a corrupt 
society, save for the most stupidly soci- 
opathic. Corruption may be extensive, 
but will still be significantly behind the 


scenes, making it more deadly for the 
unfortunate outsider who blunders into 
it. Lawfully-aligned PCs can arouse the 
ire (and even the violent attentions) of 
corrupt officers of the law they attempt 
to “assist” with their work! 


Complex/Mix 


This covers a variety of more detailed 
or subtle relationships. An obvious ex- 
ample is an opposition within the forces 
of law, which can be exploited by thief 
PCs (or by a DM with lawful PCs too). 
For example, in one city the dominant re- 
lationship between thieves and law offi- 
cers is corruption. Senior officers, and 
many of the watchmen, are corrupt, and 
readily take bribes. A small number of 
decent but disillusioned juniors have tried 
to get firm evidence to nail their superiors 
and try to eradicate the corruption, but 
they haven't been able to manage this 
yet. Objective evidence hasn't been accu- 
mulated, and witnesses are too scared to 
talk. There is concern that even some of 
the judges and magistrates are in the 
pockets of criminal bosses or the Guild- 
master of thieves. Cue for lawful and/or 
good PCs to help out in a dangerous ur- 
ban jungle of intrigue and treachery. . . . 

Relationships may also be mixed. 
Thus, in one city ward, the commander 
of the ward watch may be an iron- 
willed, ultra-lawful, dominating man 
who drills his men to persecute thieves 
night and day. In another, richer ward 
at the far end of the city, the inexperi- 
enced new junior leader is a follower of 
a kindly, somewhat impractical faith, 
and does not think that crime deserves 
stern punishment unless violence is in- 
volved. His men don't respect him, 
though, because of his inexperience. 
Morale is falling, and an increasing 
number of watchmen leave public serv- 
ice or else just don’t care about enforc- 
ing the law any more. One city, two 
radically different sets of possibilities 
for thieves. There may be major ten- 
sions within a guild, as the thieves from 
the “tough end” of town start trying 
their luck uptown! 

Many possibilities exist in the 


Complex/Mix end of the spectrum. The 
other themes can be mixed and varied 
to create many possibilities themselves. 
The only limit is the DM's imagination. 


Thieves and Merchants 


The overall 
wealth of a society will have an impor- 
tant influence on this relationship. In a 
poor society, merchants will not be likely 
to be rich, and they will not be able to af- 
ford any regular thievery. They will not 
be able to bear such losses without going 
bankrupt. Here, merchants will fight 
tooth and nail to minimize the depreda- 
tions of thieves. In richer lands, a little 
“stock loss" (among other things) can be 
tolerated rather better. 

Alignment will somewhat modify this. 
In chaotic and/or evil societies which are 
rich, merchants may be very greedy, and 
may take many measures against thieves 
out of a love of money, not out of a need 
to survive. There may also be an impor- 
tant element of pride in a society which 
stresses individualism (chaotic) rather 
than one where merchants form groups, 
ally with each other, and try to regulate 
business practices (lawful). Over-proud 
merchants may resent monies or goods 
being stolen not primarily because of the 
loss of value—it may be negligible—but 
because of the loss of face. This can be an 
important factor in merchants putting 
pressure on authorities to suppress 
thieves, and in their hiring PCs for sums 
which exceed the value of their stolen 
goods! 


Warfare 


The merchants hate and fear the 
thieves. They go to extreme lengths to 
protect their property, and many able- 
bodied folk get jobs as nightwatchmen. 
Even ordinary warehouses have traps 
and many secret hidey-holes, wall safes 
and the like, and some have magical 
traps as well. Merchants often have 
bodyguards, and they won't pay pro- 
tection monies. They may even band 
together to form mutual “insurance pol- 
icies” to help each other. The merchants 
exert all their political clout to get the 


authorities to suppress thieves. Even 
small-scale pilferage will result in an of- 
fender being dragged off to face the 
sternest justice the merchant's advocate 
can plead for. 

Under these circumstances, the 
thieves’ guild may react in a number of 
ways. It may turn to other forms of 
crime. It may turn to imported help to 
crack the merchants (more thugs for 
protection racketeering, more thieves 
for daring robberies recruited from a 
friendly guild from a nearby town). It 
may use methods such as abductions 
and blackmail to force its way back into 
a position of strength. A really power- 
ful guild will effectively “declare war” 
on the merchants if it thinks that forc- 
ing a few to cave in will lead to other 
merchants giving in also. Many options 
exist. This situation is a real struggle of 
wills, and the life of a thief will be 
dangerous—but never dull. 


Opposition 


Somewhat like the state of affairs de- 
scribed above, but the merchants don't 
go to such lengths to protect themselves 
or keep thieves off their backs. They 
don’t like thieves, they don’t accept 
them as a part of society or a tolerable 
evil, but they don’t go overboard about 
them either. Such merchants are fairly 
stoutly resistant to any attempt at coer- 
cion or blackmail, and they use their in- 
fluence with the powers-that-be to keep 
life tough for thieves. 


Standoff 


This is a fairly common state of af- 
fairs. The merchants don't like thieves, 
but they are somewhat fatalistic about 
them. A strong element of pragmatism 
influences their attitudes. If it loses 
them less to pay protection money than 
to suffer the thievery they would other- 
wise have to tolerate, they will pay up. 
This is a major difference from the op- 
positional state, where merchants will 
actually suffer extra loss rather than 
connive with thieves. 

Merchants in a standoff will do what 


GI 


Thieves’ Guilds 


they can to get by. Unless thievery gets 
wildly out of hand, they won't get up in 
arms, and they will pay off thieves, or 
accept a certain level of theft, as they 
must. 


Submission 


This is a rare case. Here, the mer- 
chants are running scared. Coercion is 
rife; merchants pay a lot of money to 
avoid being robbed or having their 
homes burned down. Their profits may 
be almost all eaten away by this. The 
law is of little help, usually because it is 
corrupt, maybe because it is ineffec- 
tual. Thieves will have many spies in 
the midst of the merchants. This is an 
unstable state of affairs; it cannot per- 
sist long. Either the commercial life of 
the society falls apart, or the picture 
changes—often to Infiltration as de- 
scribed below. 


Infiltration 


Here, thieves have so many dealings 
with merchants that they actually start 
to get involved in commerce directly. 
This often happens as a natural evolu- 
tion from either a standoff or a submis- 
sion relationship. Thieves start to 
become merchants. They may have 
been spies in merchants employ before, 
they may “take over” the businesses of 
merchants they have bankrupted or 
driven off, or they may enter businesses 
their talents suit them for (e.g., as lock- 
smiths, gem-cutters, moneylenders, 
pawnbrokers, and the like). 

This has several attractions for the 
thief. First, additional income can be 
produced. Second, the business can be 
a simple exploitation of a skill or profi- 
ciency the thief already has. Third, it 
can provide a good cover for a thief. 
Fourth, there may be a more nefarious 
motive or two (Ah, sir wants a combi- 
nation lock which will be absolutely 
thief-proof! I have just the thing. . . .”); 
why shouldn't a locksmith have the 
best lockpicks in town when appre- 
hended by the constables down a dark 
alleyway at night? 


Thieves’ Guilds 


Atits most extreme, thieves can actu- 
ally come to dominate commercial life, 
or at least to play a major role in it. Or- 
ganized crime becomes big business. 
The thieves may even become impor- 
tant figures in society, and have politi- 
cal power, The City of Greyhawk is one 
notable example of this. 


Complex/Mix 


Again, examples of complicated or 
tense, oppositional relationships can 
easily be developed by the DM from the 
examples above. One group of mer- 
chants could be trying desperately to 
fend off thievery, while a second faction 
argues for accommodating thieves and 
paying them off. This leads to a major 
schism, with the more principled mer- 
chants accusing the pragmatists of col- 
lusion with crime; insults start to fly, 
then a few fists, then somebody's ware- 
house suffers a small fire. . . . Involv- 
ing the PCs in what will fast become a 
triangular conflict (two sets of mer- 
chants at each other's throats with the 
thieves gleefully picking up the spoils 
from anyone they can get at) leads to 
endless adventure possibilities. 


Thieves and Other Guilds 


There are two 
guilds which are most important here: 
Assassins and beggars. These are dealt 
with separately below, as are bards. All 
the other guilds are dealt with in 
groups, below. 


Craft Guilds 


These are the myriad guilds of gem- 
cutters, barbers and dentists, butchers 
and bakers, and so on. Thieves will not 
have dealings of note with many of 
them, but there are one or two excep- 
tions. Pawnbrokers are an obvious pos- 
sible “front” for thieves and fences, 
likewise moneylenders (with their sates 
and secure chests and the like). Thieves 
may thus cooperate with many such, 
and minimize robberies of the rest! 
Guilds which take young apprentices 
may be paid small sums for handing 


over to the thieves youngsters who 
seem to be highly dextrous and capable 
of developing into thieves, given suit- 
able training. In special instances (e.g., 
thieves allied with seafaring smug- 
glers), other alliances (e.g., with the 
seamen’s guild) may be of note. 

If there are unusual thief-craftsmen 
alliances (or oppositions), the DM 
should script them individually; they 
will need individual rationales, which 
should be explained and noted! 


Adventuring Guilds 


In some cases there may be an unu- 
sual reason why thieves are strongly 
opposed to (or allied with) an adventur- 
ing guild (including temples, etc.) in a 
city. The most notable example is a cor- 
dial alliance with clerics of a deity fa- 
voring thieves (e.g., Erevan Ilesere for 
half-elven and elven thieves, or Olida- 
marra, in Oerth; or Mask in Faerun). If 
some particular type of multi-class thief 
is common in a city for some reason, 
then there will obviously tend to be a 
stronger link between the two relevant 
guilds than usual. For example, if mage- 
thieves are common, then the Guild of 
Wizardry will take a definite interest in 
the activities of thieves. Under such 
conditions, the mages will probably not 
attract unwanted attention from light- 
fingered thieves (although few sane 
thieves try stealing from mages any- 
way). 

But other possibilities exist. Consider 
a burgeoning frontier town, which is 
close to wild hills and forests with 
bountiful resources. Furs, gold from 
prospectors, meat from hunted ani- 
mals, even some gems from a small 
mine; all these and more pour into the 
town, which grows rich and attracts 
many new settlers. Unfortunately, it at- 
tracts humanoids and bandits (as exter- 
nal threats) and many thugs and foreign 
cut-throats and evil thieves (as opposed 
to the neutral-aligned indigenous 
thieves). The rulers of the town grow 
fearful... 

A twin alliance springs up to defend 
the town by stealth and cunning. Rang- 


62 


ers patrol the distant countryside to 
give advance warning of marauding 
humanoids or bandits. Within the city, 
the thieves use their skills to tip off the 
powers-that-be about unsavory types 
arriving from outside, conspiring rob- 
bers and thugs, and the like (and may 
deal with a few of them themselves). 
Bandits beyond the town have spies in- 
side it; the thieves tip the rangers off 
about this, and pass on intercepted 
messages. The thieves trade a magical 
shield (which they cannot use) they got 
from one of the thugs they dealt with to 
the rangers (who can use it). The rang- 
ers hand over a magical shortsword 
they took from a hobgoblin leader in re- 
turn. Half-elven thieves and rangers 
share a drink together in an elven tav- 
ern, sharing the latest dwarf jokes. The 
two groups then save money by a joint 
bulk purchase of leather armor, and so 
it goes on. ... 

Having an unusual, unexpected alli- 
ance like this spices up any adventure 
locale. It's well worth a DM's time to de- 
vise such a backdrop, to make a town 
or city unusual and particularly memo- 
rable. 


Thieves and Assassins 


Assassins are not a separate charac- 
ter class (in AD&D® 2nd Edition rules). 
They are simply people who are aw- 
fully good at killing other people. But 
the skills of the thief are valuable for 
this, above the natural skills of any 
other character class, because they are 
skills of stealth and sneaking about un- 
detected. Many assassins will be 
thieves, multi-class thieves, or charac- 
ters who began their adventuring life as 
thieves but then changed to another 
character class. 

The assassin kit earlier in this volume 
adds detail to this natural affinity. Go- 
ing further, the multi-class thief is prob- 
ably the strongest option for assassins. 
Combining the skills of the thief with 
spells such as invisibility, jump, knock, 
levitate, rope trick, and sleep, just to 
consider a few low-level spells, makes 
for a potent assassin indeed. The 


ee 


Dris 


ys 
RNS 


E ES 


= 


Y 


3 


ANN 
Brat 
Sh 


63 


Thieves’ Guilds 


fighter/mage/thief has all these advan- 
tages, of course, plus the bonus of addi- 
tional hit points, and is thus an 
especially attractive option, although 
progress is slow. 

So, given that many assassins are 
likely to be thieves, there will always be 
a fairly strong link between the two 
guilds. Cool relationships are possible 
if the thieves have “gone respectable” 
(become merchants themselves, etc.), 
or if the assassins are especially evil, 
ruthless sorts under a truly heinous 
guildmaster. Not unusually, though, 
the two will have at least moderately 
friendly relations. Information is quite 
likely to be exchanged between the two 
guilds, the guild seniors may meet occa- 
sionally to fraternize and discuss pros- 
pects, thieves may be paid to do spying 
groundwork for an assassin setting up a 
kill, apprentices of one guild who may 
be suited better to the tasks of the other 
may be exchanged; there are many 
ways the guilds can cooperate, 


Thieves and Beggars 


Beggars can be excellent spies. Their 
presence anywhere outside of the 
higher-class areas of cities and towns 
will go unmentioned, if they are seen at 
all. Beggars ply their trade everywhere, 
and some of them may just be sleeping 
off the effects of drink. If one is 
hunched up against packing boxes by a 
warehouse, so what? Anyway, no one 
wants to get too close to beggars. They 
have an unpleasant range of startlingly 
contagious diseases, and approaching 
them is an open invitation to lice to in- 
fest your person—just for starters. 
And, of course, beggars are harmless 
(in the sense that they are too feeble, 
dim-witted, drunk, etc., to cause any- 
one any harm). For all these reasons, 
well-trained beggars are a real boon to 
the enterprising thief. They can get into 
places where other people would look 
suspicious, they often go unnoticed, 
and they don’t have a lot to do apart 
from keep their eyes peeled. Just the 
people to have hanging around the 
places a thief intends to rob. After the 


job, the grateful beggars can be given a 
little percentage of the take. 

Beggary can even be semi- 
professional, in large cities in particular. 
Dominant beggars control lucrative 
patches of territory, where they know 
that pickings are richest, Fit and able- 
bodied people, their senses undulled by 
illness or drink, can pose as beggars for a 
better living (in a rich city) than they can 
make by honest means (e.g., as farm la- 
borers). Such people would make excel- 
lent spies. A Guild of Beggars is by no 
means unlikely in many city settings. 
And, since children make very appealing 
beggars as they look soulfully up from 
their sad little eyes and beg for a penny 
for a poor orphan, such a guild will find 
and train such rapscallions. The more tal- 
ented (dextrous and/or intelligent) ones 
may well be sold on to the thieves’ guild, 
for a consideration, to become apprentice 
thieves. 


Thieves and Bards 


Although thieves and bards are both 
rogues, they have no need of extensive 
contacts. While bardic colleges train 
bards in some rogue skills which thieves 
also possess, this is really to be seen as 
part of the jack-of-all-trades range of 
talents the bard possesses. Bards don’t 
think like thieves, and they don't be- 
have like them. Perhaps the closest 
these two groups come to direct deal- 
ings is when a neutral evil bard becomes 
an assassin and the assassins’ guild has 
good relations with the thieves’ guild! 


Guildmasters and 
Guild Structures 


How a thieves’ 
guild is organized, and how it is led, is 
crucial to the success of thieves in any 
town or city. Usually, unless there is at 
least some honor among thieves, life 
will be very hard for them! 


Guild Organizations 


Five basic pat- 
terns are suggested here. These will be 
used in later guild design. They aren't 


exhaustive, and some clearly shade into 
others. But these patterns are perhaps 
the commonest, and any DM can de- 
velop them to suit his campaign. One 
factor which isn’t considered here, but 
which will be looked at in guild design, 
is how many solo operators, non-guild 
members, are around. This will affect 
the strength of the guild, but won't af- 
fect its style of organization so much. 

How a guild is actually led will be 
dealt with straight after this section, but 
for now we'll assume that all guilds are 
led/ruled by a guildmaster. This won't 
always be so, but using this convention 
saves a lot of tediously repeated qualifi- 
ers. 


Centralist 


This is a strongly organized guild, 
where all guild members have a power- 
ful primary loyalty to the guildmaster. 
Loyalty is mostly high, the guildmaster 
is usually a powerful and dominant fig- 
ure, and the guild house is a major 
meeting place. Thieves from such a 
guild will work with a notable degree of 
co-ordination. 


Cohesive 


Again, there is a fairly strong central 
organization and authority. The guild is 
a unified body and its rules are readily 
accepted by all. However, there is room 
for some “local latitude.” This may take 
the form of senior thieves below the 
guildmaster being able to make a few 
important decisions about affairs on 
their own patch (own quarter of the 
city, etc.), or the central rulership delib- 
erately restricting the use of its author- 
ity in some cases, and so on. 


Fractionated 


In this case, there is a central thieves’ 
guild still. However, individual figures 
within the guild have taken power unto 
themselves in important ways. Local 
thief leaders may insist on almost com- 
plete discretion to do what they want in 
their areas, while agreeing not to intrude 
on other local leaders’ territory. Power 


Thieves’ Guilds 


struggles within the guild will be com- 


monplace under these circumstances. 
Oppositional: 


The guild has been burst asunder by 
tensions within it, and there may well be 
several competing guilds in the same 
town or city. This can happen because the 
guildmaster is weak, because of ambi- 
tious young Turks seceding from the 
guild, or for special reasons of many sorts 
(e.g., racial enmity between a guild of 
dwarven thieves, and one of elven and 
half-elven thieves, in the same town). 

Relations between the different sub- 
guilds can vary considerably. If there is 
still the shell of a central guild, then the 
different guilds may be on fair terms still. 
However, at another extreme, the ten- 
sions and oppositions can degenerate into 
street warfare and gang assaults. 

If there are, in effect, several guilds, 
then the DM will have to determine the 
organization and leadership of each one 
separately. 


Anarchic 


There is no guild organization to 
speak of, although there may be the 
remnants of a once-strong guild or per- 
haps a young, slowly developing guild. 
However, the large majority of thieves 
work as unregulated individuals. This 
may lead to a dog-eat-dog outlook with 
lots of backstabbing, both metaphori- 
cal and literal. However, it’s equally 
possible that thieves get by with indi- 
vidual one-to-one agreements, helping 
each other out as and when the need 
arises (this may be especially likely in a 
Chaotic Good society with an anarchic 
guild, for example). Anarchy doesn’t 
preclude enlightened self-interest and 
cooperation; it just tends to preclude 
this happening on a systematic and or- 
ganized basis. 


Complex/Mix 


As usual, this covers a range of op- 
tions. There may be a facade of one or- 
ganization, whereas behind the scenes a 
quite different organization presides. It 


may seem that anarchy rules among the 
thieves of one town, but many are se- 
cretly organized behind the scenes. Or, 
a guild might seem to be centralist 
whereas in fact local leaders are hiding 
much of their activity from others, so 
that the guild is in reality fractionated. 
A complex situation could exist 
whereby the guild looks centralist at 
first sight, then looks fractionated (as 
above), and then is seen to be part of 
each (a couple of the strongest local 
leaders are secretly allied to carve up 
more territory while other leaders are 
fractionated)—a really complex op- 
tion. Ample scope for DMs to develop 
intrigues and onion-skin puzzles here! 


Guild Leaders 


Clearly, how a 
guild is organized will influence how it 
is ruled (and vice versa). This is taken 
into account in the rules for designing 
and developing guilds. At this stage, 
we'll just consider the commonest pat- 
terns of leadership, which again can be 
developed by the DM as he wishes. 


Guildmaster 


This is by far the commonest style of 
leadership; the single leader, His style 
of leadership may vary considerably, of 
course. He may be a stern, harsh des- 
pot, ruling by force and fear. He can 
also be a kindly despot, a firm but wise 
ruler. He might also be a weak, queru- 
lous, but kindly leader—rather ineffec- 
tual, having lost his old strength and 
daring, but still smart enough to elimi- 
nate young pretenders to his rulership 
when he sees them preparing a bid for 
power. Styles of leadership will be 
looked at right after this section. 


Council 


The guild is ruled by a number of in- 
dividuals, usually fairly small, who act 
as a central conclave, Praesidium, rul- 
ing council, or under any one of a vari- 
ety of titles. This is often the equivalent 
of an oligarchy in government—a self- 
perpetuating elite, who appoint re- 


65 


placements from senior ranks as and 
when necessary to maintain or expand 
their number. 


Democracy 


Rather unusually, the rulers of the 
guild are elected by the guild members. 
This does not mean that these rulers 
need be weaklings, or afraid of using 
their powers sternly and firmly when 
they need to (imagine a ruler elected for 
a 10-year term for example!). The “elec- 
tions” may be the source of notable cor- 
ruption, bribery, fixing, and 
vote-rigging of all sorts. The devious 
DM can imagine dozens of ways of em- 
broiling PCs in the kind of scandals and 
scams such a state of affairs will throw 
up! 


Leaderless 


This is mostly a temporary state of 
affairs, when the guildmaster has just 
died, the ruling council been arrested, 
and the like. However, in a very few 
guilds this may be a permanent state of 
affairs. Here, the guild will carry on 
only a few of the usual functions, and 
will primarily act only as a practical re- 
source, Thus, the guild house will be 
somewhere to find a trainer, buy equip- 
ment, and gossip with fellow thieves. 
Guild dues will not be excessive, and 
they will be paid for reasons of pragma- 
tism. However, regulation of thiefly ac- 
tivities will be minimal or non-existent. 

A leaderless guild is ripe for a coup, 
of course, and again this be a good op- 
tion for the DM! 


Complex/Mix 


In this context, this means some kind 
of power struggle in most cases. A 
guildmaster may have had an ultima- 
tum put to him by powerful seniors 
within the guild—accept a ruling coun- 
cil or else. Likewise, an ambitious and 
smart thief may be trying to take overa 
democratic guild and install himself as 
the undisputed leader. 


Thieves’ Guilds 


Special 


Because the ruler(s) of the guild are of 
such major importance, many DMs 
will be prepared to put some extra ef- 
fort into designing them in some detail. 
For those who don’t want to have to go 
to the trouble, the blueprint profiles 
(later in this chapter) can be used for 
guildmasters. For the more industrious, 
why settle for the usual option of (say) a 
human or half-elf guildmaster with the 
usual high skills and appropriate magic 
items, or the sourpuss old dwarf with 
his smelly leather armor who is the se- 
cret behind-the-scenes master thief? 
Guild design does include such natural 
racial possibilities, but there are other, 
more exotic, options. 

The DM will always want to design 
these cases individually, but a few ex- 
amples won't go amiss—these can be 
ripped off with or without DM devel- 
opment, or used as a spur to DM 
imagination, 

Dragon: A dragon makes an excel- 
lent guildmaster. Some can polymorph 
self into human (half-elf, etc.) formas a 
natural ability, others can use the spell 
of the same name, others still might 
have a magical item permitting this 
change of appearance. Dragons are 
vain and love treasure, so what more 
natural than a stream of junior thieves 
bringing pretty treasures to the “guild- 
master” as a tithe? The guildmaster can 
also, of course, have many charmed 
servants from charm person spells. 

Deepearth Creature: Drow and Il- 
lithid are the best candidates. Appear- 
ance can be disguised with an illusion 
spell, the use of a mask (imagine cow- 
led, masked thieves protecting their 
identities in a council meeting—a very 
sensible set of precautions), a hat of dis- 
guise, or in other ways. The guildmas- 
ter could aim at gaining wealth, power, 
information, all for nefarious purposes 
which PCs should want to stop. Com- 
batting such a guildmaster (or even a 
ruling council) is an excellent introduc- 
tion to deepearthing, a pleasure no 
player should be denied. 


Extraplanar Creature: Denizens from 
evil planes make excellent guildmas- 
ters. They like having power, gaining 
information, and wealth isn't some- 
thing they are wholly indifferent to. 
Plus they have lots of time on their 
hands to indulge themselves by being a 
thieves’ guildmaster. Their powers of 
disguise and concealment make it easy 
to maintain the pretense of humanoid 
form. 

Intelligent Monster: A troll as guild- 
master is not terribly likely. But how 
about a beholder? efreet? rakshasa (a 
particularly good choice)? a faerie 
dragon using its many spells? There are 
many possibilities! 

If the DM decides on a special guild 
ruler, there are several questions which 
he needs to consider: 


* Can the ruler pass itself off as a nor- 
mal race? This will usually be impor- 
tant for retaining the loyalties of 
guildmembers. A spell, magical item, 
innate power, or plausible reason for 
seclusion will be needed. 

* How did the creature get to the top? 
Either it must have thief skills, or be 
able to simulate these (with spells, mag- 
ical items such as gauntlets of dexterity, 
etc.), if it has worked its way up 
through the ranks. Or, it must have 
been able to replace someone at the top 
of the guild (through assassination, 
etc.). 

* Why does this creature want to be 
guildmaster? The possible reasons are 
money (tithes), information (thief spy 
reports), power, amusing itself (a faerie 
dragon, or an evil denizen with a few 
decades to kill), and the like. 

If the DM is prepared to think 
through such issues, then a special ruler 
type can be great fun. 


Guild Rulership 


It's vital to know 
what style of rulership the guildmaster 
brings to the guild. This section covers 
styles of rulership, and can be applied 
to guilds which are ruled in other ways 
(by councils, etc.). 


66 


Weak/Strong 


This is an obvious distinction, A 
guildmaster can be strong and authori- 
tative, so that his commands and rules 
are obeyed (willingly or otherwise). Or 
he may be weak, with his edicts increas- 
ingly challenged by his underlings. Fac- 
tors such as Charisma, experience level, 
notable achievements, age, and the like 
will affect the guildmaster's perceived 
strength. The most important, how- 
ever, is likely to be the general percep- 
tion of the force the guildmaster has up 
his sleeve. 


Cruel/Just 


This is of most importance within the 
guild. The guildmaster may be cruel, 
handing down stiff (and sometimes ar- 
bitary) punishments for infringements 
of guild rules. He may punish any signs 
of over-ambition among juniors very 
sternly. A cruel guildmaster rules his 
guild by fear of what he does—this is 
crucially different from a strong guild- 
master, who may rule in part by fear of 
what he could do if opposed. A just 
guildmaster is the opposite of this, but 
is not weak. That is, he is known to act 
swiftly and decisively to oppose any en- 
emies within the guild, and to enforce 
important guild rules and rulings. 
However, his punishments are seen as 
fair and justified (“he's harsh but he’s 
fair”). While the opposite of cruel 
would, strictly, be “kindly,” nice guys 
do not get to be guildmasters. 


Despotic/Populist 


This is a rather high-sounding term 
for a simple dichotomy. A despotic 
guildmaster is one who decides on 
rules, punishments, policies, and im- 
portant guild matters for himself. He 
does not consult others (much), and 
while he may listen to advice from his 
juniors he doesn’t take any notice of 
it—he listens, he does not attend. How- 
ever, this does not mean that the guild- 
master is a tyrant, nor that he is cruel or 


Thieves’ Guilds 


even necessarily strong (a weak despot 
is in real trouble, however). It means 
that the guildmaster thinks that he 
knows best, and this doesn’t imply 
wickedness or cruelty. The guildmaster 
may be very intelligent, wise, and far- 
seeing. Also, just because the guildmas- 
ter is a despot doesn’t mean that the 
guildmembers don't like this state of 
affairs—a truly smart guildmaster will 
gain the loyalty of the guildmembers 
through his wisdom and the way his 
rulings clearly benefit the guild. 

A populist guildmaster is one who 
goes to some lengths to listen to all (or 
most) opinions within the guild. He is 
ready to listen to advice, and may dele- 
gate some of his authority and decision- 
making to others within the guild. 
Again, this need not necessarily make 
the guildmaster popular. A common 
problem for a populist guildmaster is 
that he will be perceived as weak, espe- 
cially if the affairs of the guild are not in 
good order, He may leave himself wide 
open to backstabbing (quite literally). 

These styles of guildmaster rulership 
can be combined to generate individual 
styles, such as strong-cruel-despotic 
and (at the other extreme) weak-fair- 
populist, and all points inbetween. 
Combining these should be fairly 
straightforward for the DM, but the de- 
veloped case of The Thieves’ Guild of 
Mallain (pg. 76) gives an example of 
how to combine these different ele- 
ments into an overall picture for a 
guildmaster’s style of leadership. 


Designing a 
Thieves’ Guild 


Introduction 


This section cov- 
ers the design of a thieves’ guild. As you 
flesh out the details of your own guild, 
you'll want to record them on paper for 
reference during play. Following the de- 
tails of the system, a worked-out exam- 
ple is given to show how to build up a 
well-detailed, atmospheric guild from 
the bare bones of the tables. 


This section is also not just for the 
DM. Players can be asked by a DM to 
do some work for him! A player can 
roll up a guild for the DM to use in some 
other setting, or some distant city 
(which the PCs will visit some time later 
after the DM has tweaked the players’ 
dice rolls a little!). Also, a DM can al- 
low a player to roll up details of a guild 
which the PC is about to take over as 
guildmaster, if he trusts the player 
enough! There is also a special section 
on PC guildmasters later on. 


Using the Tables 


There are quite a 
lot of tables on the following pages. 
This shouldn't be intimidating; the sys- 
tem is detailed, not overly complicated. 

Using the tables which follow can be 
done in more than one way. Random 
dice-rolling is OK, and will not give 
silly combinations of results. Some- 
times odd-appearing combinations re- 
sult, but these can often be a spur to 
DM creativity and generate the most in- 
teresting guilds! The DM may also ig- 
nore the dice-rolling and deliberately 
select results from the tables which he 
feels will fit his campaign needs. 

The system which follows is detailed, 
as noted. This for DMs who like Jots of 
detail! For those who don't, the best bet 
may be to combine the dice-roll and 
deliberate-design approaches; use dice 
rolls, and alter one or two when the DM 
especially wants some result or wants 
to maximize consistency. Or can't be 
bothered to do all the dice-rolling! 
Also, a few sections of design do not use 
tables. 

Lastly, the tables mostly have sug- 
gested modifiers for basic d20 rolls. For 
example, the attitude of the law is deter- 
mined on a d20 roll which is modified 
by social alignment (more hostile for 
Lawful societies, etc.). It is quite impos- 
sible to list all the possible modifiers for 
each table. This would eat up masses of 
space and no system can foresee all pos- 
sible modifiers anyway, so only the key 
modifiers have been listed in each in- 
stance. The DM can easily add further 


67 


modifiers as he sees fit, to reflect special 
circumstances. 


What Isn’t Covered 


Some of the idio- 
syncratic guild details aren't covered 
here. For example, any oaths of fealty 
the thief may have to pledge, and the 
exact rules and constitution (if one ex- 
ists) of the guild isn’t covered here, If a 
DM wants this kind of depth of detail, 
he will surely want to write such details 
for himself. 

Also, infrequent reference is made to 
any of the kits, proficiencies, or magic 
items introduced in this book. This is 
deliberate, ensuring that DMs who 
wish to be cautious about introducing 
such new elements are not prevented 
from being able to use the design sys- 
tem. 

In summary, all the really important 
stuff you are going to need is here, and 
for any frills you want to add—go 
ahead! 


Guild Background 


First, we need to 
establish the background of the guild. 
Such details of the guild as size, ruler- 
ship, and the like will be affected by so- 
cial factors, alignment, and so on. 
Therefore, this background is devel- 
oped first. In this way, later dice rolls 
for aspects of the guild can be given 
modifiers for previously established 
background. 

Many of the tables to follow will re- 
fer to background elements already de- 
tailed in the previous section, so the 
DM will know what brief entries mean. 
This obviously aids the process of DM 
selection, if dice-rolling is not being 
used. 


Social Alignment 


This is an optional step. In some 
game settings, communities will have 
definite dominant social alignments 
(see WORLD OF GREYHAWK® Fan- 
tasy Game Settting). Sometimes, while 


Thieves’ Guilds 


a specific alignment cannot be stated, a 
general trend (for example, to good 
rather than evil) can be given. Social 
alignment along the good-neutral-evil, 
and lawful-neutral-chaotic axes, should 
be recorded if the DM is happy that he 
knows them. 

If the alignment is divided, the align- 
ment of the rulers should be used for 
later dice roll modifiers, but the fact 
that the common people are different 
should also be noted. 


Special Social Factors 


These include racial divisions, reli- 
gious persecution of thieves, unique 
historical factors, and the like. The DM 
should note any of these which are im- 
portant. Since such factors will always 
be unique, there is no way the design 
system here can accommodate them. 
The DM will have to ascribe modifiers 
to certain dice rolls for these factors as 
he sees fit! 


Size of Community 


The DM should have a reasonable 
idea of how many people live in the 
town or city where the thieves’ guild is 
located. Most sourcepacks give such 
figures, and if the DM has designed his 
own campaign world then he should as- 
cribe a suitable figure. For DMs uncer- 
tain about this, in medieval times only 
capital cities in Europe had a six-figure 
total of inhabitants, and many villages 
and hamlets had but a few score. Pros- 
perous major towns would have in the 
order of 4-10,000 or so, and important 
cities perhaps 20-60,000 (depending on 
which century is taken for reference). 
There is no need for the DM to be ultra- 
accurate, but population will greatly 
affect the number of thieves in the 
guild, so the DM should record this. 


Wealth of Community 


No absolute figures are given here, 
because different DMs will work on dif- 
ferent absolute scales—some cam- 


Table 10: 
THIEVES AND OTHER GUILDS 
d20 
Roll Relationship of Thieves Guild with 
Assassins Beggars Bards 
1-2 Hostile Hostile Hostile 
3-4 Indifferent Hostile Indifferent 
5-6 Indifferent Indifferent Indifferent 
7-8 Indifferent Neutral Indifferent 
9-10 Neutral Neutral indifferent 
11-12 Neutral Favorable Neutral 
13-14 Neutral Favorable Neutral 
15-16 Favorable Co-operative Neutral 
17-18 Favorable Co-operative Neutral 
19 Co-operative Close Favorable 
20 Close Close Co-operative 
Modifiers to d20 Rolls: 


Law attitude is persecutory or hassling: +1 to assassins/beggars 
Social alignment is good: —2 to assassins, +1 to beggars 


Social alignment is evil: +2 to assassins 


paigns are money-poor, others almost 
swim in gold. So, Table 7 uses relative 
divisions of wealth. A simple d20 roll 
on this table will determine the effective 
wealth of the community the guild is lo- 
cated in, There are many modifiers to 
this dice roll, and these are shown di- 
rectly below the table. 


Table 7: 
WEALTH OF COMMUNITY 
WITH THIEVES’ GUILD 


d20 Realtive Wealth 
of Community 
1 Very Poor (subsistence)* 
2-5 Poor 
6-9 Fair 
10-14 Average 
15-17 Comfortable 
18-19 Wealthy 
Rich 


* Maximum population around 1,000. 


Modifiers to d20 Roll: 

Capital City: +5, never less than 
Average 

Major Town: +3 


Port: +3 

On Major Inland Trade Route: +2 
Purely Agricultural Economy: —2 
Population of 500 or Below: —1 


What is important to remember here 
is that this dice roll does not actually in- 
dicate how wealthy the average citizen 
is. What the dice roll indicates is how 
much money is whizzing about which is 
up for grabs (literally). Thus, in a port a 
lot of trade passes through, much 
money changes hands, and the passing- 
through trade (and wealthy merchants) 
makes the city much richer in effect 
than the average income would sug- 
gest. The effective wealth level is an- 
other important factor in determining 
how many thieves will be guildmem- 
bers in the city. 


Attitudes of the Law 


This is a major factor affecting any 
thieves’ guild. Roll d20 on Table 8 to de- 
termine the attitude of the militia, 
watch, police force, etc., in the city or 
town where the thieves’ guild is located. 
Modifiers to this d20 roll are listed be- 
low the table as before. 


Table 8: 
LEGAL ATTITUDES 


d20 Attitudes of 
Roll the Law 

1-3 Persecution 
4-7 Hassle 

8-11 Opposition 
12-13 Complex/Mix 
14-17 Tolerance 
18-20 Corruption 


Modifiers to d20 Roll: 

Lawful social alignment: —2 

Chaotic social alignment: +2 

Good social alignment: Reroll 1s and 
20s 

Evil social alignment: —1 


Table 9: 
MERCHANTS’ ATTITUDES 
TOWARD THIEVES 


d20 
Roll Merchants’ dominant 
attitude to thieves 
1-2 Warfare 
3-6 Opposition 
Standoff 
Complex/Mix 

16 Submission 

17-19 Infiltration 

20 Submission 
Modifers to d20 Roll: 
Lawful social alignment: —2 
Chaotic social alignment: +1 
Society is Poor (or worse): —4 
Society is Wealthy: +1 


Population 

Very Poor Poor 
Up to 500 0 1d2-1 (1) 
501-1000 1d2-1 (1) 1d3-1 (1) 
1001-2000 n/a 1d3(2) 
2001-5000 n/a 1d4 +1 (4) 
5001-10,000 n/a 1d6 +2 (6) 
Per extra 
5,000* n/a 1d4 +1 (4) 


Society is Rich: +2 (but a roll of 1 still 
means Warfare!) 

Law is tolerant of thieves: +1 

Law is corrupt: +2 


Relationship with Merchants 


This will also have a slight effect on 
the number of thieves in the guild; the 
easier it is to extort the goodies from 
merchants, the more light-fingered 
thugs will sign up to be part of the orga- 
nization responsible for extracting the 
shiny gold stuff from them! Roll on Ta- 
ble 9 to determine the relationship the 
thieves have with the merchants. 


Relationships with other Guilds 


Table 10 is provided for DMs who 
need for some reason to determine, at 
random, the relationship between 
thieves and the guilds they are most 
likely to cooperate with: assassins, beg- 
gars, and bards. It is strongly suggested 
to the DM that these relationships 
should be scripted, rather than dice- 
rolled, but if a DM needs to develop a 
guild and its background quickly a dice 
roll will do the job. Separate d20 rolls 
should be used for each guild. 


A Hostile result doesn’t mean open 
aggression unless the DM wants a run- 
ning feud as a storyline! For example, if 
hostility exists between thieves and as- 
sassins this is most unlikely to explode 
into open aggression (unless, say, an as- 


Table 11: 
THIEVES IN TOWNS AND CITIES 


Economic Level 


Thieves’ Guilds 


sassin has slain the thieves’ guildmas- 
ter). Indifferent means the groups have 
few dealings; Neutral differs in that the 
two groups have more dealings, maybe 
for practical reasons, although they 
have neither fondness nor enmity for 
each other. Favorable means that the 
two guilds get on well enough, though 
they may not always trust each other 
too well! Cooperative means that the 
groups enjoy a good relationship, may 
plan together, and that a fair level of 
trust exists between guildmembers. 
Close means that the two guilds work 
closely together, exchanging informa- 
tion, helping with common-interest 
tasks, with one guild even prepared to 
help the other if it is under threat or at- 
tack (at least until the bodies start to 
drop!). 


Details of the Guild 


Having estab- 
lished these background details, it's 
down to the nitty-gritty. The first, cru- 
cial, determination is how many 
thieves there are in the city or town 
where the guild is. This is not necessar- 
ily the same number as are in the guild, 
but working out how many light- 
fingered gents (or ladies) are about 
town is a necessary precursor to that. 

Table 11 does not use a d20 roll. In- 
stead, it is a matrix from which the DM 
only needs to read off one figure. If the 
DM knows the population of the town/ 
city, and the wealth level, a single read- 


Fair Average Comfortable Wealthy Rich 

1d2-1 (1) 1d2-1 (1) 1d3-1(1) 1d3-1 1d3 

1d3-1 (1) 1d3(2) 1d3 (2) 1d4(3)1d4 +1(4) 
1d4(3) 1d3 +1 (3) 1d4 +1(4) 1d3 +2(4) 1d4+1(5) 
1d6+1(5) 1d6+2 (6) 1d6 +3(7) 1d8 + 3(8) 2d6 +2(9) 
1d10+2(8) 2d6+2 (9) 2d8 +2(11) 2d10 + 2(13) 4d6 +2(15) 
1d6+1(5) 1d6+2 (6) 1d6 +3(7) 1d8 + 3(8) 2d6 +2(9) 


Modifiers to totals rolled. Add the following percentages to the total rolled, rounding fractions over one-half upward: 


Social alignment is chaotic: +10% 


Attitude of law is tolerant or corrupt: +10% 
Merchants are infiltrated or in submission: +10% 


* Or fraction above 2,000. 


69 


off gives the range for the number of 
thieves. After each dice roll indicated in 
a column, a bracketed figure is given— 
this is a (rounded) average which the 
DM can use if he hasn't the time to roll 
dice on the table. 


Totals from Table 11 are not cumula- 
tive, save for populations of over 
10,000 (where the “per extra. . ” num- 
ber, or a multiple, is added to the 
“5,001-10,000” number). 

We now know how many thieves 
there are in the town or city, but how 
many are actually in the guild? This de- 
pends in large part on the rulership of the 
guild, which should now be determined. 


Guild Rulership 


A roll on Table 12 determines the na- 
ture of rulership of the guild. The DM 
wishing to select, rather than roll, this 
rulership might want to look through 
the following section to look at the ef- 
fects of rulership on the guild before 
making his choice. 


Table 12: GUILD RULERSHIP 


d20 
Roll Guild Leadership 
1-13 Guildmaster 
14 Complex/Mix 
15 Democracy 
16-19 Council (d3 +2 members) 
20*  Reroll on Table 13 


*Natural 20 (regardless of modifiers) 
only. 


Strong-Weak 

d20 Roll Rulership 
1-5 Strong 

6-12 Fairly Strong 
13-17 Failry Weak 
18-20 Weak 


Modifiers to dice roll 

—1 if social alignment lawful 

+1 if social alignment chaotic 
—1 if welth level poor or fair 


+1 if social alignment lawful 
—2 if social alignment eveil 
+2 if social alignment good 
—1 if rulership style weak 


Modifiers to die roll: 
Social alignment is lawful: —1 
Social alignment is chaotic: +2 


Table 13: 
UNUSUAL GUILD RULERSHIP 
d20 
Roll Guild Leadership 


1-2 Leaderless 
3-8 Complex/mix 


9-10 Special Guildmaster (dragon, 
etc.) 

11-12 Special Council (concealed 
Drow, etc.) 


At this stage, the DM can also deter- 
mine the rulership style of the ruler(s), 
Table 14 can be used for all cases in 
which the guild has a guildmaster, and 
also for council leaderships. It is not 
suitable for democratic guilds, where 
there is no real rulership as such. On 
Table 14, three d20 rolls are needed. 

The final step is to determine guild 
organization, and this is done with a 
single d20 roll on Table 15. Some of the 
results from this table may need partic- 
ularly careful thought, because some 
odd-looking results can emerge. The 
DM can crop out such oddities if he 
wishes. 


Table 15: GUILD ORGANIZATION 


Guild Organization 
1-6 Centralist 
Cohesive 

13 Complex/Mix 
Fractionated 
Oppositional 

20 = Anarchic 


Modifiers to dice roll: 

—2 if social alignment lawful 

+1 if social alignment chaotic 

+2 (+1) if Guild rulership is weak 
(fairly weak) 

—1 if Guild rulership is strong 

+2 if Guild is Leaderless 


A major shake-up of what the DM 
has rolled may be indicated if a dice roll 
indicating Oppositional or Anarchic 
guild organization is rolled on this ta- 
ble. Oppositional means there are com- 
peting, small guilds (and Fractionated 
means there are sub-guilds within the 
guild); Anarchic, that there is no real 
guild at all. The worked example later 
shows that the combination of such re- 
sults that at first seem at-odds (e.g., 
guild rulership by a single guildmaster) 
is actually workable, although the 
overall picture which emerges may be a 
strange one! 


Table 14: RULERSHIP STYLE 
Cruel-Just Despotic-Populist 
d20 Roll Rulership d20 Roll Rulership 
1-4 Cruel 1-4 Despotic 
5-11 Fairly Cruel 5-10 Fairly Despotic 
12-16 Fairly Just 11-16 Fairly Populist 
17-20 Just 17-20 Populist 
Modifiers to dice roll 
Modifiers to dice roll —1 if social alignment lawful 


+2 if social alignment chaotic 
+1 if social alignment good 
—1 if social alignment evil 

—1 if rulership style strong 


—4 (—2) if rulership style cruel (fairly 
cruel) 


70 


Some results may need re-rolling, 
however. The one notable case is the 
Oppositional structure if the absolute 
| number of thieves in town is small. You 
can't really have a plausible collection 
of competing guilds with only six 
thieves in town, for example (but 
maybe two very small gangs could ex- 
ist, after all. . .) 

The final step is to determine how 
many of the thieves in the town or city 
are actually members of the guild. 


Guildmembers and The Rest 


The base per- 
centage of thieves who will be members 
of the thieves’ guild is 75%. The follow- 
ing modifiers are applied to this num- 
ber: 


+10% if social alignment is lawful 
—20% is social alignment is chaotic 
+10% if the attitude of law is persecu- 
tory 

+10% if merchants are submissive or 
infiltrated 

+10% (+5%) if guild rulership is 
strong (fairly strong) 

—10% (-—5%) if guild rulership is weak 
(fairly weak) 


What of the other thieves (assuming 
there are any)? What is the attitude of 
the guild to the residual freelancers? Ta- 
ble 16 gives a die roll for determining 
this attitude, which may also be taken 
to reflect the guild's attitude to outsid- 
ers who stray onto its patch. Thus, a 
guild which is punitive to indigenous 
non-guildmembers (“join up or we'll cut 
your hands off”) will likely be hostile to 
outsiders as well. 


Table 16: GUILD ATTITUDES 
TOWARDS GUILDLESS THIEVES 


d20 

Roll Dominant attitude 

1-5 Hostility and persecution 
6-10 Hostility 

11-15 Neutrality 

16-18 Co-operation 

19-20 Special relationship 


Hostility means that the guildmem- 
bers will make it very clear to a non- 
guildmember working in the guild's 
territory that he isn't welcome. They 
may rough up the offender, send him 
threatening messages, play an unpleas- 
ant and only half-joking practical joke 
on him, and the like. The message is, 
join up (or get out of town), or else. If 
Persecution is added to this, the of- 
fender will be given an even starker 
choice: Join up or die. Neutrality means 
that the guildmembers may try to per- 
suade non-guildmembers to join up, 
but they will tend to stress the benefits 
to all concerned rather than using 
threats. A determined freelancer will 
probably be left to go his own way by 
such thieves, but they will certainly not 
assist him or have any fellow-feeling for 
him. The guild will not sell equipment 
or offer training to the freelancer, ex- 
cept perhaps at exorbitant prices. If a 
guild is neutral to foreign thieves, it 
may allow them to work on the guild's 
patch providing that only small-scale 
operations are involved and a fee is 
paid to the guild. 

Cooperation suggests that freelan- 
cers may work with the guildmembers, 
maybe on a special-case basis. The 
guild may take the attitude that if these 
people won't join, it’s better to keep 
them friendly. Equipment and training 
is charged at a premium, though. Spe- 
cial Relationship suggests some unusu- 


Thieves’ Guilds 


ally close link between guildmembers 
and outsiders. The example of the 
Thieves’ Guild of Mallain gives an ex- 
ample of how this can be scripted by the 
DM. 


Experience Levels of Thieves 


Table 17 below shows the experience- 
level ranges of thieves as a function of 
how many there are in a guild. More 
populous guilds, which will always 
tend to be in major cities and towns, 
and rich places, are the ones which will 
attract more experienced thieves to 
them. 

Table 17 should be used as follows. In 
the left-hand column is shown the num- 
ber of thieves (this is the total number in 
town, not just in the guild). The next 
five columns show dice rolls which 
need to be made for the five highest- 
level thieves in town. The following 
column shows numbers, and levels, for 
the middle-echelon thieves; those 
above the level of apprentice, but not 
members of the senior ranks. All re- 
maining thieves will be first-level ap- 
prentices. 


The seniors should be taken as the 
top echelon of the guild. The highest 
level rolled will be the guildmaster (if 
there is one), or the most powerful 
guild-affiliated thief. The other seniors 
can be used to make up a ruling council 


Table 17: EXPERIENCE LEVELS OF THIEVES 


No. of Seniors Middle Echelon 
Thieves A B € Ẹ 

1-5* 1d3 1d2 1d2 — n/a 

6-10 d4+1 d4 d4 == 2xd2 

11-15 d4+2 d3+1 d3+1 d2+1 d2+1 3xd2 

16-20 d4+3 d3+2 d3+2 d3+2 d2+2 2x(d2 +1), 5xd2 

21-25 d6+3 d4+2 d4+2 d4+1 d2+2 5xd3, 5xd2 

26-30 d8+3 d6+3 d4+3 d4+2 d4+1 4x(d3 +1), 4xd3, 6xd2 
31-40 d6+s d6o+4 d4+4 d6+2 d4+2 4x(d4+1), 5x(d3+1), 8xd2 
41-50 d6+6 d6+4 dó+4 d4+4 dé+2 6x(d4+1), 8x(d3 +1), 12xd2 
51-75 dó+8 dé +6 dó +5 d6+4 dé+3 8x(d4+1), 12x(d3+1), 15xd2 
76-100 d8+8 d6+7 d6+5 d6+4 d6+3 15x(d4 +1), 20xd4, 30xd3 
101+ dl0+8  d6+8 dó +6 dó +5 d6+4 10% ared6+1, 10% ared4+1 


71 


25% are d4, 25% are d3 


Thieves’ Guilds 


(if there is one), or used for key posi- 
tions such as accountant, quartermas- 
ter, deputy guildmaster, subguild- 
master (for one quarter of town), or 
others. The number of seniors can be 
slightly increased (at the lowest experi- 
ence level) for really sizeable guilds. 
Freelancers will come equally from the 
middle-echelon and apprentice levels. If 
the DM wants any middle—to high- 
level freelancers, these should be 
scripted as individualized NPCs and 
not the result of any dice roll! It is im- 
portant to separate out guildmembers 
and freelancers at this stage in the thief 
listing the DM makes. 


Experience Levels: A Note 


The levels from Table 17 will be low 
to medium, except for guildmasters of 
major guilds. This is designed to be suit- 
able for campaigns which are not top- 
heavy with over-powered, high-level 
characters. If you have PCs running 
around at 15th level, or even higher, 
and you want a thieves’ guild as a 
source of enemies, you will need to up 
the levels somewhat. You could always 
consider resting these PCs and playing 
at more reasonable levels, of course. 


Multi-classed thieves 


Table 17 will do for determining 
single-classed thieves, but dwarves and 
elves in particular may be likely to be 
multi-classed. To determine this, the 
DM needs to know how many thieves 
are nonhuman. 

Rolling on Table 18 will determine 
the race of each thief in the guild. One 
roll is made for each thief (freelancers 
can be determined at this stage too). 
This table is a generic one, and assumes 
a definite human dominance (which 
most campaign locations will have). 
However, this is obviously unsuitable 
for determining, say, the composition 
of the thieves’ guild of the core commu- 
nity of an elven heartland, where virtu- 
ally all the thieves will be elves or 
half-elves. In such cases, the DM can 
bypass Table 18 and just decide race on 


Table 18: THIEF RACES 


d100 
Rol! Thief Race 
01-06 Elf 
07-14 Half-elf 
15-44 Human 
45-50 Gnome 
51-58 Halfling 
59-62 Human, dual-class 
63-93 Human 
94-99 Dwarf 
00 Special (natural 00 only)* 


a per-capita basis. For example, if 70% 
of the inhabitants are elves, then for 
each thief a roll of 1-7 on d10 will indi- 
cate that he is an elf. Modifiers can also 
be used; for example, if elves dominate 
dwarves in a mixed society, a dice roll 
modifier of —5 could be applied to the 
dice roll on Table 18. 

Table 19 contains sub-tables which 
can be used to determine whether the 
thief is multi-classed (nonhuman) or if 
the thief is dual-classed (human). 

Given the race and possible multi- 
class nature of each thief, the final step 
is to adjust the levels from Table 17 for 
multi-and dual-class thieves. 

For multi-classed nonhuman thieves, 
reduce the thief level by 1d2 from the 
original dice roll from Table 17 if the 
character has two classes, and by 
1d2 +1 levels if the character is a triple- 
classed fighter/mage/thief. No reduc- 
tions can take an NPC below 1st level, 
of course. The character will have the 
same level in his other classes, if this is 
possible (in some cases it may not be; 
e.g., a multi-class character cannot usu- 
ally be a 2nd-level thief/2nd-level 
mage. Check the EPs needed for prog- 
ress in each class!). 

With dual-class human characters, 
experience gained in the “old” class will 
be 1d4 levels lower than that gained as a 
thief (but never below 2nd level). The 
thief level rolled from Table 17 is not 
adjusted in this case. 

This all looks fairly horrendous. In 
fact, it is fairly simple, albeit a little 
time-consuming (but if you want a 


72 


complete picture of a guild, it does take 
time). The example of the Thieves’ 
Guild of Mallain (later in this chapter) 
shows that rolling up thieves is a fairly 
simple business, despite all these tables! 


Table 19: THIEF CLASSES 

Dwarves 

d20 

Roll Character Classes 

1-8 Fighter/thief 

9-20 Thief only 
Elves 

d20 

Roll Character Classes 


1-6 Mage/thief 

7-8 Fighter/thief 
Fighter/mage/ thief 
Thief only 


Half-elves 

d20 
Character Classes 
1-4 Mage/thief 
5-7 Fighter/thief 
Fighter/mage/thief 
Thief only 


Character Classes 
1-4 Fighter/thief 

5-8  Illusionist/thief 
Thief only 


Halflings 
d20 
Roll Character Classes 
1-5 Fighter/thief 
6-20 Thief only 


Humans 

d20 
Previous Character Class 
Fighter 

13 Ranger 
14-15 Mage 

16 Specialist wizard 
17-18 Cleric 
19-20 Bard 


For humans, some classes are not in- 
cluded as options for previous experi- 
ence. It is invonceivable that a fallen 


paladin could demean himself to thiev- 
ery, likewise that an ex-druid could so 
totally alter his entire framework of 
thought. If the DM wants such an ex- 
otic possibility, there would have to be 
a truly extraordinary reason for it. 


Non-Thief Guildmembers 


The guild may well have very close 
affiliations with a small number of 
NPCs—especially tough fighters—who 
may be “honorary guildmembers.” 
These men may guard the guildhouse, 
go on planned jobs as look-outs and 
muscle, provide the muscle to enforce 
protection rackets, act as bodyguards, 
and the like. However, they will not 
usually be full members of the guild. 
The DM should design such NPCs as 
the need arises. 


Fleshing out Guildmembers 


You now have a bare-bones list of 
guildmembers and other thieves in the 
town. How far you go beyond this 
point depends on how much extra in- 
formation you need for the campaign. 


Alignment 


This is worth determining for all 
thieves in the guild, because it will have 
a powerful effect on the way the guild 
operates, on guild intrigues, and so on. 
The alignment of the guildmaster and 
the top senior thieves should always be 
selected by the DM to fit the needs of 
the campaign. The rulership style dice 
rolls should be strongly suggestive of 
certain options in any event. A fairly 
strong, cruel, and fairly despotic guild- 
master looks like a good candidate for 
neutral evil, whereas a fairly strong, 
just, and populist member of a ruling 
council would be closer to chaotic 
good. 

For other thieves (juniors and mem- 
bers of the middle echelons) a dice roll 
on Table 20 can be used to determine 
alignment. This table is biased away 
from lawfulness and towards neutral- 
ity, which is probably an accurate re- 
flection of most thieves. However, if 


the DM wants more goody-goody 
types or lawfuls then these options can 
be fudged into the table in place of (or 
via) the “Dominant social alignment” 
entry. 


Table 20; NPC THIEF ALIGNMENTS 


d20 
Roll Thief Alignment 
1 Neutral Good 
2-3 Chaotic Good 
4 Lawful Neutral 
5-10 Neutral 
11-12 Dominant social alignment 
13-14 Chaotic Neutral 
15-16 Lawful Evil 
17-19 Neutral Evil 
20 Chaotic Evil 


Modifiers to dice roll: 

+2 if social alignment is evil 

—2 if social alignment is good (But a 
natural roll of “20” still means Chaotic 
Evil) 


Note: For “dominant social align- 
ment,” if the DM is uncertain, take neu- 
tral. If dominant social alignment is 
lawful good, take neutral good (1-4 on 
1d6) or lawful neutral (5-6 on dó) in- 
stead. 


Prime Requisite 


All thieves will have Dexterity of at 
least 9. You can roll NPC thief Dexterity 
on 8+1d10, adding +1 for characters 
of 4th or higher level and +2 for char- 
acters of 8th or higher level. Elves and 
halflings gain +1 to Dexterity scores. It 
is strongly recommended that no scores 
above 18 be allowed, and certainly ab- 
surd scores like 20+ should be reduced 
to 18. Other ability scores are discussed 
below. Dexterity scores should be re- 
corded for all thieves, since it affects 
AC and their skills. 


Senior Thieves 


Such  thieves—including the 
guildmaster!—should be designed with 
a little more detail. The following 
points can be kept in mind when adding 


73 


Thieves’ Guilds 


some detail to their basic profiles: 

Physical Factors: Simple details like 
age, height, weight, and appearance 
can be determined. Senior thieves can 
be taken to be 25+1d20 years if a ran- 
dom determination is needed. Sex can 
be determined randomly also. 

Exceptional Ability Scores: Thieves 
of high or medium level should have 
fair abilities to have survived so long. 
Allow a flat 1-in-4 chance for each non- 
Dex ability to be rolled on 2d4 +10 and 
record exceptional (15+) scores. 

Magic Items: Senior thieves will cer- 
tainly have magic items suitable for 
thieves. Different campaigns vary 
hugely in the amount of magic knock- 
ing around, A good guide is to sneak a 
look at thief PCs (and NPCs) in cam- 
paigns you think are well-run, and/or 
the blueprint profiles given later, and 
take hints from these about the nature 
and number of magic items possessed. 
When in doubt, always be stingy. 
Magic can be added to a magic-weak 
campaign; it's hard to retrieve it when 
too much is floating about. 

Guild Position: Non-guildmasters 
will still likely be important and occupy 
key positions (especially if council 
members), A shrewd guildmaster, for 
example, will keep the second-rankers 
happy with important things to do. 
Quartermaster, deputy guildmaster, 
chief of blackmail, chief of espionage, 
liaison officer (with other guilds), and 
many other options can be written in 
here. 

Other Stuff: Personal idiosyncrasies 
are always a nice, characterizing touch. 
Cover identities are also important; 
what face does the thief present to the 
public? Does he have a trade, is he a 
merchant, is he perhaps the Constable 
of the Watch or a trusted tax official? 

The most important case, obviously, 
is the guildmaster himself (or the ruling 
council). Such an NPC must be individ- 
ually designed by the DM to suit the 
campaign. The blueprint profiles which 
follow the guild design section give a 
couple of examples of fully fleshed-out 
mid-to-high-level guildmasters, and 
these can be used by the DM as they are 


Thieves’ Guilds 


or as an indication of how to go about 
designing a guildmaster NPC. 


Junior Thieves 


These will not need the kind of detail- 
ing the seniors will, unless the DM is de- 
termined to have complete details of 
everything! Race, class, prime requi- 
site, and level will be sufficient to begin 
with, especially for mere 1st- or 2nd- 
level apprentice types. The addition of 
names should round off these basic de- 
tails. 


A Final Record 


Now that the initial die rolls for num- 
bers and levels of thieves have been 
rounded off (and modified) by race, 
and dual/multi-class options, the basic 
details for the guild thieves can be 
determined—summaries of guild sen- 
iors, minor magic items for juniors, the 
odd exceptional ability score, hit points 
if the DM has rolled these up, and the 
like. 


Cash and Carry 


Having popu- 
lated the guild, the final step is to take 
care of a few practical details. 


Guild Dues 


Guildmembers have to pay fees to 
belong to the guild, and they may also 
have to pay cuts of their take on jobs 
which are “licensed by” the guild. The 
DM should fix these levels to suit his 
campaign. For guild dues, a sum equal 
to about one month's living expenses 
for the thief PC is reasonable. This sum 
will increase with the gaining of experi- 
ence levels, which is reasonable. Guild- 
members get cheaper training, and 
training is longer and more expensive at 
higher levels, so higher dues reflect this. 
Fixing a cut needs to be done on a case- 
by-case basis. If the guild has tipped off 
the thief with a lot of information im- 
portant to pulling a robbery, it could 
well ask for a quarter or even a third or 
more of the take, for example. 


The dues and other payments due 
should be recorded by the DM, to- 
gether with a brief note on what the PC 
thief gets in the way of special benefits 
for his dues. 


Normal Resources 


A roll on Table 21 can be used to de- 
termine the availability of standard, 
non-magical equipment items. This re- 
flects how well the Guild is equipped 
with illegal items, or equipment which 
is of dubious legality (and which may 
be illegal in highly lawful societies). 
Add +1 to the dice roll for every 10 
thieves in the guild to a maximum of 
+4 for a guild with 40 or more thieves. 


Table 21: 
AVAILABILITY OF RESOURCES 


d20 

Roll Equipment Availability 
1-5 Poor 

6-10 Fair 

11-17 Average 

18-20 Good 


A roll indicating Poor means that il- 
legal items (as shown in Table 31) cost 
50-80% (40 +[d4x10]) more than usual, 
and are at least 50% likely not to be 
available at any given time. Items 
which are noted in Table 31 as being 
rare will be almost impossible to ob- 
tain. A thief wanting an illegal item 
which is “out of stock” can only try 
again after a gap of 2 weeks to see if 
fresh supplies have been obtained. If 
the availability of resources is Fair, the 
item costs 10-40% more than usual and 
there is a 30% chance that it is unavail- 
able, but the thief can make a weekly 
check. 

A roll indicating Average allows 
items to be had for the usual price, with 
only a 15% chance that an item is un- 
available (a check for fresh deliveries 
being made weekly). If the roll shows 
Good availability, prices are 10% be- 
low normal, and items are only 5% 
likely to be unavailable at any time 
(check for fresh deliveries weekly). 


74 


These rules, especially on availabil- 
ity, can be readily tweaked by the DM 
as desired. If the DM wishes to deny the 
thief some equipment item, then it sim- 
ply isn’t there, for example. Con- 
versely, the DM may wish to rule that 
there are always lockpicks available, 
since these are so essential for very ba- 
sic thief skills (picking locks, and 
maybe finding and removing certain 


types of traps). 
Special Resources 


No table is given for randomly deter- 
mining these special resources, because 
they require careful attention and 
thought on the part of the DM. From 
the list below, the DM should select a 
small number (or none, for a small 
guild) which will suit the campaign. 
This list is only a partial one, and the 
DM can add similar special resources: 

Tame Mage: The guild has a helpful 
mage on tap, who casts spells to help 
thieves (but doesn’t take risks). If the 
guild has a mage/thief or two, this 
mage is of higher level, and may train 
these mage/thieves. 

Tame Cleric: A rarer instance, but 
possible if the cleric is very chaotic, a 
renegade, etc. In some specific mythoi 
this might not be a rare case at all (for 
example, clerics of Mask in Faerun). 

Expert Fence: The guild works regu- 
larly with, or has, a fence with truly ex- 
ceptional knowledge, information 
networks, and/or the ability to ship hot 
goods out of the country fast. 

Government Snitch: The guild's man 
in City Hall. Very helpful in telling the 
Guild about the shipment of govern- 
ment goods, the Mint, secrets of politi- 
cal NPCs for blackmail, and lots more. 

Merchant Snitch: The guild's man in 
the warehouses, docks, etc. Not a 
nightwatchman, but someone much 
more important—a_ harbormaster, 
Commander of the Night Watch, etc. 
Can supply the guild with watch hours, 
incoming and stored cargo lists, and 
much more. 

A Friend at Court: A person with the 
ear of the King/Queen/Baron/Royal 


Physician/Courtesan/Bimbo Princess. 
Subtly different from a government 
snitch, and more suited to a swash- 
buckling rogue campaign or guild. 

Friends in other Guild(s); The guild 
has very cordial relations with the 
thieves’ guild in a major city, even the 
capital, for reasons of blood relation, 
old friendships and co-adventuring, 
etc. 

These special resources clearly open 
up all kinds of adventure possibilities. 
Getting a message to the important 
NPC is a standard option, obtaining a 
reward for them is another (e.g., the 
tame mage wants that nice wand of 
lightning his enemy has and could the 
guild steal it for him?), rescuing them 
from imprisonment is a third. Subtler 
possibilities could include finding out 
who has found out about the guild's 
Government Snitch and is blackmailing 
him for a fortune, and the like. 


Major Activities 


Here, the DM should determine and 
make a record of the secondary activi- 
ties which are important to the guild. 
These include (but aren't limited to) 
protection rackets, smuggling, kidnap- 
ping, slavery, forgery, clipping, “enter- 
tainments,’ and similar fun and games 
reviewed earlier. The DM should deter- 
mine which activities the guild is 
strongly involved with to suit the social 
alignment, the campaign, and the na- 
ture of the guild rulers. For example, a 
strong-cruel-despotic neutral evil guild- 
master is a lot more likely to get the 
guild involved with slavery and kid- 
napping than a just, populist good- 
aligned guildmaster. Some DMs may 
also wish to exclude certain activities 
such as slavery or kidnapping because 
players of good-aligned thieves might 
not want their characters part of such 
activities. However, it is up to the PCs 
to do something about such evil goings- 
on if they cannot accept them—a spur 
to their creativity and scheming. 


75 


The Guildhouse 


This is going to be of major impor- 
tance to almost all thieves’ guilds, and 
there are four important points relating 
to it: 

Location and Cover: Where is the 
guildhouse, and what does it look like 
upfront? The DM must choose a loca- 
tion and cover suitable to the town or 
city, and the nature of the guild. It could 
be a fortified large building among 
warehouses or down by the docks, an 
underground cellar complex below the 
private home of a senior thief, entered 
via the sewers, or the basements and 
cellars of a tavern in a shady part of 
town. A small guild may only meet in 
the back room of a shady tavern, of 
course, but any significant guild needs 
somewhere fairly secret and strong. 

Contents: What's in the guildhouse? 
Is equipment kept hidden there or does 
the quartermaster carry it with him (un- 
likely unless he has a bag of holding)? 
Are there hidey-holes? How many exits 
are there (there will usually be several)? 


Guards: Who 
guildhouse? Can reinforcements be 
summoned quickly? If there is a build- 
ing which is a front for the place (e.g., a 


protects the 


tavern above the cellars of the 
guildhouse below), can extra help 
(hefty fighters) be had quickly? 

Traps and Protections: The 
guildhouse will almost certainly have 
magical and mechanical traps—the en- 
trance may be a very strong door, with 
a couple of locks (and only guildmem- 
bers have keys). Down a passage, a se- 
cret door may be placed to allow 
entrance—following the passage leads 
into very unpleasant traps. Magical 
traps may have been paid for, or placed 
by mage/thieves, Mechanical traps will 
be of many kinds, but will often use 
disabling/paralyzing attacks just in 
case a novice makes a mistake and takes 
the wrong turn somewhere! 

Bearing all these points in mind, the 
DM should design the guildhouse, 
drawing floorplans and maps. 


The Thieves’ Guild 
of Mallain 


An Example of Guild Design 


Our DM is script- 
ing the thieves’ guild for the large town 
(or small city) of Mallain. The DM 
knows some basic social facts about 
this place, having placed it on the map 
in his campaign world, and records 
these facts for future reference. The is- 
sue of weak rulership is something the 
DM had decided in advance, likewise 
the fact that Mallain is in a civilized 
area of the country, and on a major in- 
land trade route. The DM determines 
the population at somewhere around 
17,000 (not too large, not too small!) 
and decides that 5% are halflings and 
5% are half-elves; there are no full 
elves, and a smattering of dwarves and 
gnomes. The DM considers that there is 
a slight tendency toward lawfulness in 
the community, but not a strong one, so 
the overall social alignment is recorded 
as neutral. 


How wealthy is Mallain? The DM 


rolls a7 on Table 7. To this is added +2, 
because the town is on a major trade 
route. The DM adds a further +2, since 
Mallain is a large town, if not a major 
one. This gives an adjusted total of 11, 
so the wealth level is average. 

The attitude of the law is resolved on 
Table 8, and a dice roll of 17 indicates 
tolerance. Why? One clear reason 
sticks out a mile: under-manning. The 
DM has already recorded that the ruler 
of the land is weak, and his militia is 
small in this safe, secure land. There 
simply isn't the manpower to go around 
chasing the thieves. 

The attitude of merchants is resolved 
on Table 9. A roll of 14, modified to 15 
by the tolerance of the law, indicates a 
complex/mix. The DM isn’t sure 
enough of how to script a complexity 
here; he isn't clear enough in his own 
mind about the details of Mallain. So he 
opts for a mix, and makes two more 
dice rolls on the same table to see what 
the mix is (adding +1 to each roll for 
the tolerance of the law). He rolls 12 
(13, with a +1), which indicates a 
standoff; his second roll is 1, and even 
with a +1 modifier this indicates war- 
fare! How to synthesize this into a 
whole? The DM reasons that most mer- 
chants are described by a standoff— 
they put up with the thieves in a fairly 
resigned way. A minority, though, are 
furious about thieving for some reason; 
maybe they have suffered particularly 
heavy losses. This place isn’t rich, after 
all. They try hard to persuade the inef- 
fectual militia to do something about 
the thieves. 

Deciding on thieves and other guilds, 
the DM does not roll on Table 10 for as- 
sassins and beggars. The DM isn’t 
happy handling assassins, so he decides 
there aren't any in town, obviating the 
need for a dice roll. With beggars, the 
DM wants to choose Close Coopera- 
tion, details of which he records. This is 
a plot element he wants to exploit later 
on. If the beggars spy on the merchants, 
facilitating robberies in a place of only 
average wealth, it could help explain 
why some of the merchants are at the 
end of their tether, too. Matters are be- 


76 


ginning to come together fairly nicely, 
but there is lots still to do. How about 
bards? The DM rolls a 1, hostility! Very 
odd, and at this stage the DM just re- 
cords this without thinking about why. 
He decides to come back to this prob- 
lem later. 

From Table 11, the DM makes an ini- 
tial recording of how many thieves live 
and work in Mallain. The population is 
17,000. The DM rolls in the “5001- 
10,000" row, and twice in the “Per extra 
5,000" row, in the Average (wealth) 
column. These rolls are 2d6+2, and 
1d6 +2 (twice) respectively—a total of 
4d6+6. This is rolled as a total of 19, 
but the DM adds 10% to this because 
the law is tolerant, for a total of 21. 
They need not all be guildmembers, of 
course; the DM needs to know about 
the guild rulership to determine this. 
Recording the figure of 21, the DM 
moves on. 

A roll of 5 on Table 12 shows that the 
guild is ruled by a guildmaster. From 
Table 14, the die rolls produce a picture 
of what this guildmaster is like. A first 
roll of 18 shows he is weak. A second 
roll of 12, reduced to 11 because of this 
weakness, makes him fairly cruel. A fi- 
nal roll of 12, reduced to 10 because of 
this cruelty, makes him fairly despotic. 
In summary: Weak, fairly cruel, fairly 
despotic. A rather pathetic creature, all 
told. This comes to the rescue of the 
DM when he rolls on Table 15 and 
comes up with a 20—Anarchy! 

The DM is taken aback. There is a 
guild here, with a guildmaster, and now 
he is plunged into a real complication. 
He is about to re-roll the dice, but 
spends a minute or two in imaginative 
reverie. Perhaps, after all, this is work- 
able. An old, feeble, weak, guildmaster 
has lost his authority. He has resorted 
to cruelty and despotism to try to hold 
on to his guildmaster status, but lacks 
the strength even to do this effectively. 
Guildmembers have drifted away in 
open contempt, but have not yet 
formed a separate guild (that would be 
Opposition, not Anarchy). They don’t 
have the heart to kill the old thief, either 
(guildmasters appoint their own succes- 


sors, the DM decides, so he'd have to be 
killed). 

The DM rolls on Table 16 before all 
this has sunk in—if there isn’t a guild, 
how can it have relations with outsiders 
and freelancers? But the roll of 19, Spe- 
cial Relationship, stimulates some fur- 
ther thoughts in the DM’s head. 

The DM decides that the guildmaster 
has managed to hang on to a small 
rump of the guild—1d6, he decides, and 
rolls just 4. Later on, he will select these 
as being primarily senior and compati- 
ble with the guildmaster's alignment. 
There is no need for the standard per- 
centile roll to determine the percentage 
in the guild, because this is a special and 
very unusual circumstance. The other 
16 thieves all work independently, 
maybe allying with each other in small 
groups for the odd job now and then. 
Perhaps a lack of coordination among 
them means that some targets are hit 
too often, which wouldn't happen if the 
guild was coordinating matters prop- 
erly. Maybe this is why some merchants 
are so desperate that they want warfare 
declared on the thieves—this makes 
very good sense. It also explains why 
the law is tolerant—they know it’s go- 
ing to be hard to track down and deal 
with any central organization which re- 
ally cuts the mustard in Mallain, and 
the DM adds this detail to his notes. 

The “Special Relationship” is that 
holding between the rump of the guild, 
and the freelancers still in town. To 
complete the picture, though, the DM 
rolls another d20—giving a result of 6, 
hostility. This is the attitude of all the 
thieves of Mallain (or most of them!) to 
outsiders from beyond the town, to 
complete the picture. 

The DM now has to determine the 
levels of the thieves in Mallain. There 
are 21 thieves in the town, and from Ta- 
ble 17 the DM determines the levels of 
the seniors as 8th, 6th, 4th (two), and 
3rd. From the 5xd3 and 5xd2 rolls, an- 
other two 3rd-level and four 2nd-level 
are added. The remaining 10 thieves 
will all be apprentices. The DM records 
these figures on some rough paper. 

From Tables 18, 19, and 20 the DM 


makes die rolls to detail these thieves. 
There are 5% half-elves and 5% half- 
lings in Mallain, but no full elves or 
gnomes, so the DM decides in advance 
to replace any elf rolled up with a half- 
elf, and any gnome with a halfling. Two 
thieves were not rolled randomly; the 
8th-level human guildmaster, and the 
6th-level half-elven thief the DM wants 
to use as a plot element to advance the 
theme of anarchy within the guild. 

The half-elf is a dashing, romantic 
rogue-figure who is the focus of the op- 
position to the ailing old guildmaster. 
He has musicianship skills, and a 
brother who is a bard—hence one rea- 
son for the guildmaster’s hostility to 
bards (this detail is added to the record 
sheet). This DM sees this character as 
very chaotic, and one who doesn't wish 
to be guildmaster. But the old guildmas- 
ter hates his charisma, youthfulness, 
and character, and has always blocked 
his progress. Now he sees him as the en- 
emy who has drawn away the other 
thieves—a special relationship indeed, 
a very tempestuous and intrigue-ridden 
state of affairs. Added to this is the fact 
that the half-elf doesn’t want to be 
guildmaster, but the juniors who have 
deserted the guild are begging him to 
lead them in a coup against the old 
guard. He alone has the experience and 
charisma to do this. The DM has been 
watching a few Errol Flynn movies of 
late. However, while Evlarel the half-elf 
is chaotic good, the old guildmaster is 
Neutral—it is too obvious and unsubtle 
to make him evil, which would sub- 
merge many of the intrigues into a sim- 
plistic good-versus-evil battle. But most 
of those staying loyal are evil—if they 
have to be eliminated, the DM prefers 
them to be evil than to encourage his 
PCs to attack and kill neutrals. 

After this flight of fancy the DM 
comes back to earth. The guild is in a 
state of uproar and anarchy, but there 
are still some practical details to attend 
to. Guild dues still have to be decided— 
these will be the old rates, which ap- 
plied when the guild was not torn 
asunder, but they are useful as a guide 
to what the reformed guild (if it does re- 


77 


Thieves’ Guilds 


form) will accept. (The DM notes them 
in brackets.) A similar consideration 
applies to normal resources, but the 
DM also notes the present availability 
(poor) by way of an update. Special re- 
sources are important—the DM deter- 
mines that the thieves’ guild has a 
government snitch, a personal friend of 
the guildmaster, and this stool-pigeon is 
used to prime the military to arrest the 
hapless half-elf, driving him further un- 
derground, and making him an even 
more elusive and mysterious figure. 
The war between old Halradur and 
Evlarel gets hotter by the moment. 

As for major activities, the DM de- 
cides that in such a fairly boring town 
as Mallain there is no scope for any- 
thing especially unusual. The declining 
guildmaster would not have had the 
strength of will to maintain any really 
nefarious activities. Individual thieves 
may kidnap, but the guild doesn’t orga- 
nize such actions. The guildhouse is lo- 
cated in the cellars of a local tavern, the 
DM decides; the Baron of Beef, run by 
one of the few thieves left who stays 
loyal to Halradur. This isn’t a particu- 
larly creative design element, but the 
DM knows that matters are likely to be 
all-change in Mallain soon, and so can’t 
be bothered to think up anything espe- 
cially unusual. The tavern will make a 
good location for a final shoot-out in 
any event. 

What began as a short exercise in 
rolling up a thieves’ guild has now 
turned into a powerful intrigue which 
could cast a long shadow over most as- 
pects of life in this town. The central 
struggle between an old guildmaster, 
with a small evil coterie, and desperate 
young thieves looking to a reluctant 
new leader is going to enmesh the un- 
wary PCs as soon as they enter the 
place! 


Unusual Guilds 


The guild design 
system gives a wealth of detail on the 
traditional (in the AD&D® game) town 
or city thieves’ guild. However, there 
are other possible guild structures 


which can be used by the DM in the 
campaign world. These are unlikely to 
be suitable for PC thieves (in most 
cases), but they add diversity and spice 
to any campaign. 


The Traveling Guild 


A group of traveling thieves, who 
work as a body and are effectively a 
guild on the road, makes an interesting 
encounter. Three variants on this 
theme include: 

Gypsy Folk: This group travels in 
horse-drawn wagons. The community is 
just that—complete with many sniffling 
children, goats, snarling dogs, a few 
chickens kept for eggs, and lots else. In 
towns, the gypsies sell dried herbs and 
pressed flowers, and the wise woman of 
the group may read fortunes (using the 
Fortune Telling/ Astrology proficiencies if 
appropriate). The gypsies will be ex- 
tremely loyal to each other, and will usu- 
ally be of Neutral (or chaotic neutral) 
alignment. If such folk are a common 
sight on the roads of the land, then the 
gypsy people may have extended clans 
related by intermarriage, so that if any 
violence is done to one of them an entire 
horde can be assembled to track down 
and punish the offender. 

River Folk: A variant on the gypsy 
theme is to have a group (or groups) of 
traveling folk who work the waterways 
of the country. These people will al- 
most certainly have merchanting inter- 
ests, or convey cargoes for others; 
thieving would not be an adequate in- 
come for them. They will supplement 
their income with thievery in and 
around the rougher ports, usually in- 
land or estuarine. They are signifi- 
cantly more likely to be of evil 
alignments than are road-travelers. In 
the campaign world of Oerth 
(Greyhawk), the Rhennee folk are a 
good example of such river folk. 

The Circus; This is a somewhat hack- 
neyed theme, but should always be used 
in a campaign at some time. Thieves can 
make up the bulk of a traveling circus, 
which comes to towns and cities and 
cheerfully robs them. If the circus has 


monsters on show, then there is a ration- 
ale for having other character classes 
along for the ride who help the thieves 
and give the NPC band some diversity. 
Thus, clerics can be on hand to snake 
charm and speak with animals while 
mages could charm monsters (if of high 
enough level; arguably a 7th-level mage 
has lots better to do than traipse around 
with a circus). Thieves with specialist 
skills such as acrobats, cat burglars, etc., 
will fit well into such a group. 

Players with any degree of gaming 
experience will have learned to keep 
well away from circuses. Old tricks 
such as having evil, high-level NPCs 
polymorphed into monsters or animals 
are well-known to such devotees of the 
game. So, it may be more enterprising 
to use some other group of entertain- 
ers, such as a traveling troupe of actors 
and musicians. They can perform the 
equivalent of passion plays, act and 
sing charming ethnic curiosities (espe- 
cially elves), sing madrigals, and the 
like. A group of light-fingered expert 
thief choir elves could make for a lot of 
fun (they look so sweet and innocent, 
how could anyone suspect them?). 


Piratical Guilds 


Also travelers in some fashion, a 
guild of thieves who spend most of 
their time engaged in piracy is a com- 
plex and shifting structure requiring 
careful thought by the DM. There will 
obviously not be any form of 
guildhouse for such thieves, although a 
small number of secret guild hidey- 
holes (caves in the cliffs, deserted 
coves, desolate gull-haunted islands) 
could exist where spare equipment and 
vital emergency supplies might be 
placed at strategic locations. guildmas- 
ters could exist, but much more likely is 
a loosely-affiliated structure where sev- 
eral senior thieves, maintaining their 
positions by force in most cases, are 
equipotent. They might well all call 
themselves guildmaster! Such a guild 
would have a very strong tendency to- 
wards chaotic alignments, and a 
nearly-equal tendency towards evil. 


78 


Some type of organization and regu- 
larity would have to be imposed to 
make this a guild at all. Meetings half- 
yearly, with a quorum for votes and de- 
cisions to have any binding quality at 
all, would be a possibility. These could 
take place in the major piratical port, 
perhaps a town or city of unparalleled 
iniquity (what a place to send some PCs 
to track down the wicked pirates and 
stop their evil trade in pressganging/ 
slavery/drug smuggling, etc.). Certain- 
ly, some mechanism for obtaining 
equipment and training (at the least) 
must exist. 

For a notably more structured and 
stable rulership of a piratical-type oper- 
ation (slaving), see the adventure mod- 
ule A1-4, Scourge of the Slavelords. 


The Guild of Honorable Gentlemen 


As a really unusual guild, which 
could exist in parallel with the estab- 
lished thieves guild in a large city, this is 
a splendid option. 

The members are aristocrats, men of 
learning, education, and exalted social 
position (preferably by birth). They are 
refined, dignified gentlemen of impec- 
cable manners and superior Charisma. 
They are a small group, and they thieve 
for the excitement of it all. They are 
bored with their life of sybaritic self- 
indulgent possibilities, easy comforts, 
and gold-digging members of the oppo- 
site sex. They steal for the thrill of it. 

What motivates these people is a chal- 
lenge to their skill. They steal things not 
because they are valuable or important, 
but because they are there to be stolen 
(which doesn't mean that they are value- 
less or banal—they usually aren't). The 
Emerald of Kummkqvaat will be stolen 
by such a thief not because it’s worth a 
fortune, but because it is believed to be 
impossible to steal it. 

Such thieves will usually be of nota- 
bly high level, and they will tend to 
have exceptional Intelligence and Cha- 
risma scores. They will very rarely be 
Evil, and will also tend away from Cha- 
otic alignment. For these reasons, they 


can become excellent mentors for a PC 
thief if this is appropriate to the 
campaign—for example, a PC thief can 
come across one of them at work, or 
find evidence of the person's true iden- 
tity as a renowned master thief. 


The Good-Aligned Guild 


This is a rarity. It has to be. Remem- 
ber the Player's Handbook definition of 
a rogue; someone who feels “that the 
world (and everyone in it) owes them a 
living.” Thieves are “the epitome of 
roguishness.” Most thieves want to do 
as little work as possible and live as 
well as possible off the efforts of others. 
This is not exactly a definition of good 
alignment. The major problem with a 
good-aligned guild is simple: The large 
majority of thieves are not of good 
alignment. If a good-aligned guild 
comes into being (e.g., a good-aligned 
guildmaster comes to power) then 
many, if not most, thieves will actively 
seek a non-good (preferably neutral) 
guild if the guildmaster seeks to impose 
the values of good on them. 

What the intelligent good-aligned 
guildmaster will do is not to impose or 
accentuate the values of good within the 
guild. Rather, he will quietly squeeze evil 
thieves out, put them at risk, and try to 
make sure that evil activities (slavery, 
etc.) are downgraded or made to fail. 
Eliminating evil is much smarter than 
trying to establish good. 

However, some good-aligned guilds 
can certainly exist in the campaign 
world. A classic example is the “free- 
dom fighter” guild, a guild which 
stresses the values of chaotic good, ina 
Lawful Evil country or state. Such a 
guild will attract thieves of CG, NG, 
and CN alignments, and pure Neutrals 
will go along as usual. Even chaotic evil 
thieves might join, hating the repres- 
sive lawfulness of the state (especially if 
the guild rulers have the sense to play 
up Chaos and freedom in their pitch). 
Such a guild is one with the classic Rob- 
in Hood (robbin’ hoods?) spirit. It 
could exist “underground” in an evil 
land such as the Scarlet Brotherhood 


lands (in Oerth) or Thay in the 
Forgotten Realms (FR6, Dreams of the 
Red Wizards), a secret urban organiza- 
tion with underground, hidden 
meeting-places and fearful helpers in 
high places—a superb setting for in- 
trigue. A rural equivalent, with scout- 
type thieves allied with tough rangers 
and others combining their skills to 
chip at the edges of a strong evil state, is 
another example, more suited to play- 
ers who like lots of combat and tactical 
skirmish gaming than political intrigues 
and tense urban chases and the like. 

Other good-aligned guild possibilities 
exist, certainly, but require more careful 
thought by the DM. They are possible in 
a fractionated or oppositional guild 
structure, in a country where the good/ 
evil division mirrors or parallels some 
other (e.g., good-aligned elves and pre- 
dominantly evil-aligned humans), and 
possibly in super-goody-goody nations 
where they exist as security consultants 
and the like (but how do they accumulate 
their experience points for practicing 
their skills in earnest?). 


Player-Character Guildmasters 


This section is 
for DMs who have a PC in a campaign 
who has become a Guildmaster of 
Thieves. Holding a similar position 
(e.g., the most powerful member of a 
ruling council) can be handled with mi- 
nor modifications of the system out- 
lined here for determining guild 
numbers, activities, economics, brush- 
es with the law, and similar events in 
the everyday story of thieving folk. 


Determining Guildmembers 


This can be done in three ways. First, 
the tables in the Player's Handbook can 
be used (with tweaking to reduce the 
proportion of non-humans if this is too 
large for your campaign), Second, you 
can use tables (17, 12, 13) earlier in this 
book (the 11-15 row is suggested from 
Table 17). Or you can use one of the 
systems, and introduce a few pet, indi- 
vidually scripted NPC thieves of your 
own into the results from the dice rolls. 


79 


In particular, you may wish to design 
the deputy (assistant) guildmaster since 
this will be an NPC the PC will need to 
lean on a lot. 


Guild Income 


Table 22 below lists economic modi- 
fiers for societies of different wealth. 
These modifiers should be applied to all 
monetary sums referred to later—guild 
dues, cuts from planned jobs, and the 
like. 


Table 22: 
MODIFIERS TO GUILD INCOME 
Social Wealth Modifier 
Very Poor x 0.25 
Poor x 0.5 
Fair x 0.75 
Average none 
Comfortable x 1.2 
Wealthy x 1.5 
Rich x 2.0 


The income the guild receives will 
come from two sources; guild dues, 
and the cut the guild takes from 
planned robberies, burglaries, heists, 
and the like. The system given here is a 
simple one for calculating month-by- 
month income; some optional extras 
are documented later. 

Dues: These will be fixed as a yearly 
sum, payable anywhere from monthly 
to semi-annually (the thieves will prefer 
the latter). A reasonable base sum to 
work from is 30 gp per level as a yearly 
due, to a maximum of around 300 gp/ 
year (for thieves of 10th or higher 
level). The guildmaster can take 5% of 
these dues as a personal fee, and his as- 
sistant will take the same (these two do 
not pay fees, nor do members of a rul- 
ing council unless democratically elect- 
ed). The guildmaster can take up to 
15%, but for every 1% above the 5% 
standard the morale of the guildmem- 
bers drops by -1. Extorting over 15% 
leads to immediate revolt! The rest of 
the income goes to the expenses of run- 
ning the guild (bribes, buying equip- 
ment, paying fines, etc.). 


Thieves’ Guilds 


Cuts: The guild is entitled to exact a 
levy on robberies and burglaries which 
it has some role in planning. The guild- 
master doesn't have to plan these activ- 
ities; his right- (and left-) hand men 
take the leading role in this. The levy 
can be taken as a base 10% (this is 
pretty much standardized. If a PC 
guildmaster wants to extort more, eve- 
ry extra 1% leads to a decline of -1 in 
morale; over -10 leads to immediate re- 
volt). Of this 10%, the guildmaster gets 
10%, as does his assistant—that is, 1% 
of the gross. 

Table 23 shows how much money is 
gained per 10 thief-levels by a guild 
from this kind of guild-guided activity. 
The standard economic multiplier is 
used. The number of dice rolls equals 
the total number of experience levels of 
guild operatives, divided by 10 (the 
guildmaster and his assistant, and any 
guildmembers not actively thieving, 
are excluded). So, a guild with six 3rd- 
level, six 2nd-level, and eight 1st-level 
thieves gets 4 dice rolls (total levels = 
18 + 12 + 8 = 38. Fractions below 
one-half are rounded down, others up). 
Table 23 gives the gross; the guild gets 
8% of this, the guildmaster and his as- 
sistant 1% each. 


Table 23: 
GUILD MONTHLY INCOME 


d20 


Roll Income per 10 Thief-levels 


12-15 2d6 x 10 gp 

16-18 3d6 x 10 gp 
19 4d6x10gp 
20 6d6x10gp 
21 6d10x10gp 
22 10d10x 10 gp 

12d12 x 10 gp 


Modifiers to Dice Roll 
—2 if the attitude of the law is persecu- 


tory 
—1 if the attitude of the law is hassling 


+1 if the law is corrupt or tolerant 


—1 if the merchants attitude is one of 
warfare 

+2 if the merchants are submissive or 
infiltrated 


Income Multipliers (see below) 
Easygoing operations: x 0.5 
Routine operations: x 0.8 
Average operations: x 1.0 
Pushy operations: x 1.5 
Aggressive operations: x 2.0 


Levels of Operations 


These are referred to in the multipli- 
ers following Table 23, above. They re- 
fer to the following instructions given 
by the guildmaster: 

Easygoing: Guildmembers take life 
very easy. No morale modifiers. 

Routine: Guildmembers take life 
fairly easy, but keep their hands in. A 
+1 modifier applies to morale for the 
first month (after this some of them get 
bored and touchy). 

Average; The standard level of oper- 
ations, no effects on morale. 

Pushy: The guildmembers are 
pushed into doing some extra jobs here 
and there, and grand, ambitious activi- 
ties are eagerly pursued. This gives +1 
to morale for the first month (excite- 
ment), but —1 per month after the first 
if sustained, cumulative to a maximum 
of —4). 

Aggressive: Guildmembers are told by 
the guildmaster to steal anything which 
isn’t bolted to the floor. This has an im- 
mediate effect on morale of —2, to which 
—1 is added per month (cumulative) to a 
maximum of — 10; at this point, a revolt 
is automatically triggered. 

The more active the guild is, the 
more likely thieves are to be appre- 
hended by the law, however! 

The sums of money gained by the 
guildmaster this way will not be great, 
unless the guild is a large one, the com- 
munity is rich, and/or the guildmaster 
uses aggressive thieving tactics. This is 
likely to be ale money for guildmaster- 
level thieves, so other activities must be 
used to generate income. These will 
need planning by the player in consul- 


80 


tation with the DM. Reference should 
be made to the Player’s Handbook 
when considering the money side— 
how much shopkeepers can afford to 
pay as protection money, for example. 
These sums are usually lower than 
most players think! Making sure the 
target one strikes at is rich is a shrewd 
step in any thiefly activity. 


The Long Arm of the Law 


A monthly roll is made on Table 24 
to determine whether there has been a 
confrontation with the law. 


Table 24: 
CONFRONTATIONS WITH 
THE LAW I 


d20 

Roll Result 

1-16 No confrontation 
17-20 Confrontation 


Modifiers to Dice Roll 

+4 if attiude of law is persecutory 

+2 if attitude of law is hassling 

—2 if attitude of law is tolerant 

—4 if attitude of law is corrupt 

—3 if activity of guild is easygoing 

—1 if activity of guild is routine 

+2 if activity of guild is pushy 

+5 if activity of guild is aggressive 

+1 for each group of 10 thieves (round 
up) past the first 10 (maximum modi- 
fier +5) 


Note that when rolling on the table 
above, a roll of natural 20 means a con- 
frontation with the law, no matter 
what the modifiers may be. 

If a confrontation arises, roll on Ta- 
ble 25 to determine the nature of the 
confrontation. Apply the same modi- 
fiers to the dice roll as for Table 24, ex- 
cept for the last one (the number of 
thieves modifier). Also, natural rolls of 
1 and 20 are not subjected to modifiers 
on Table 25. 


Table 25: 
CONFRONTATIONS WITH 
THE LAW II 


Result 
1 Arrest of 1 thief (1st-level ap- 
prentice) 

2-5 Arrest of 1 thief (level 1d2) 

6-9 Arrest of 1d2 thieves (1st-level 

apprentices) 

10-15 Arrest of 1d2 thieves (level 
1d2) 

16-18 Arrest of 1d2 +1 thieves (levels 
1d3) 

19 Arrest of 1d3 +1 thieves (levels 

1d3) 

20 Reroll, but thieves are killed 
21-23 Arrest of 1d2+3 thieves, 
rolled at random from 
the active guildmember list 
As above, but there is a 50% 
chance for each 
thief of being killed 


24+ 


Any arrest of three or more thieves 
will reduce the morale of guildmembers 
by —1. 

Clearly, it is useful if a guild can man- 
age to corrupt the law somewhere along 
the line. It is up to the player of a PC 
guildmaster to set about corrupting the 
law, if it isn't corrupt already, and up to 
the DM to determine at what point the 
corruption has gone far enough to apply 
dice modifiers in the tables above. 

Arrested Thieves: Different campaign 
worlds, and countries within the same 
campaign world, have very different le- 
gal systems and degrees of punishment. 
However, if the guildmaster wants to try 
and get his followers back by paying 
their fine, this is acceptable unless the 
DM rules otherwise (e.g., the country is 
Lawful Neutral and very punitive, the at- 
titude of the law is persecutory or has- 
sling, etc.). The fine payable is variable. 
The base fine is 30 gp, but modifiers can 
readily be applied. If the thief is of 3rd or 
higher level, double the fine (he probably 
has a record). If the guild's activity level 
was pushy, double the fine. If the guild's 
activity level was aggressive, multiply 


the fine by five. Finally, roll 1d4 and mul- 
tiply the fine by this figure to get a final 
sum. 

This is a fair shorthand rule which 
many DMs will want to detail further 
for themselves, but for an averagely ac- 
tive guild in an average sort of game 
milieu (if there is such a thing) an aver- 
age fine of 75 gp, or 150 gp for a sea- 
soned criminal, is not so much to pay. 
The guild can afford to pay half the fine 
(part of running expenses) up to 250g, 
but the guildmaster has to fork out the 
rest from his personal wealth. A guild- 
master who gets a thief out of jail by 
paying the fine, or by busting him out, 
gains the confidence of his followers, 
who add +1 to their morale for the 
next month. On the other hand, if the 
guild suffers a loss of several (3 or 
more) members there may be a morale 
drop of -1 or more (but the DM may 
waive this for large guilds). 


Guild Morale 


Unless there are special reasons to the 
contrary, the base morale for guildmem- 
bers will be 15 to begin with. If morale 
falls below this level, a morale check is 
called for. Failing the check means that 
1d2 thieves leave the guild, to become 
freelancers elsewhere. This number can 
be modified. For each 2 points that mo- 
rale falls below 14, add 1 extra deserter. If 
the 2d10 roll is 19 or 20 (natural; this is 
but a 3% chance), add an extra 1d4 de- 
serters. Do not add alignment modifiers 
(for the PC) to these morale checks; 
standard morale checks (Table 71, 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide) give bo- 
nuses for being lawful/good and this is 
extremely implausible with thieves! 

As an alternative, rather than leaving 
the guild, the thieves may put their griev- 
ances to the guildmaster, if a secret check 
against the guildmaster’s Charisma is suc- 
cessful. They may ask for lower dues or 
cuts from their income, more resources 
from the guild, or as the DM determines. 
This is a fair step, if morale has fallen due 
to ill-fortune (arrests and other problems) 
rather than to the guildmaster having 
been reckless or careless. 


If morale falls to 5 or lower, how- 
ever, the guildmaster will be the subject 
of an open revolt and attempted putsch 
(and, at the DM’s discretion, this may 
happen sooner if the PC is being cruel, 
arbitary, reckless, or otherwise abusing 
his position). 


New Followers 


New followers may arrive, and a 
monthly check should be made for this. 
The chance is 10% for each 10 (or part 
thereof) thieves already in the guild— 
for example, a guild with 27 thieves has 
a 30% chance each month of attracting 
a new follower. Modifiers to this base 
percentage chance are shown in Table 
Table 26. 


Table 26: 
MODIFIERS TO FOLLOWERS DICE 
ROLL 


Morale, per point above 15: +10% 
Morale, per point below 10: -10% 
Guildmaster’s Charisma: +2% per 
point above 12 

Society is Rich: +10% 

Society is Wealthy: +5% 

Society is Poor: -5% 

Society is Very Poor: —20% 


Whatever the final percentage 
chances, no more than two new thieves 
will arrive in any single month. New 
arrivals are 1st-level apprentices, with 
the usual chance for being nonhuman 
and possibly multi-classed. The DM 
may allow greater chances for new re- 
cruits if the guildmaster goes on a re- 
cruiting drive after the guild has been 
weakened by arrests or some similar 
misfortune. 


Special Events and Occurrences 


These are the annoying unforseen 
happenings which make life far from 
boring for any guildmaster. Allow a flat 
1 in 6 chance per month of one event 
(rolled from Table 27) to take place. The 
DM must be prepared to do some neces- 
sary work fleshing out the event, 


and may add his own occurrences to 
those in the table. If an event is irrele- 
vant, then no special event occurs that 
month. 


Table 27: 
SPECIAL EVENTS IN THIEVES’ 
GUILDS 


d20 
Roll Special Event 

1 Senior Thief from next town 
defects to your guild, asking 
for protection, brings minor 
magic item gift 

2 Randomly selected guildmem- 
ber kidnapped by evil adven- 
turers, ransom note dispatched 

3 Freak success with burglary: 
Guild gets extra income (d6 x 
100 gp) but a good fence is 
needed 

4 Junior thief manages to acquire 
a “Police Snitch” 

5 Deputy Guildmaster is 
diseased/cursed/kidnapped/ 
caught by the authorities 

6 1d3 dumb thugs offer services 
to the guild for a “retainer”; 
these fighters may be loyal, or 
are they stool-pigeons for 
some other organization? 

7 Powerful NPC (a mage, per- 


haps) commissions tough 
break-in and burglary from the 
guild 


8 Guildhouse is located by the 
authorities; 50% chance a jun- 
ior thief finds this out before 
the raid. DM must do much 
work here! 

9 Local assassins guild requests 
simple manpower help with a 
“little job” (that turns out to 
not so little . . .) 

10 NPC specialist of some kind 
(mage/thief, quartermaster, 
brilliant cat burglar) arrives 
and applies for guild member- 
ship 

11 Randomly selected junior 
guildmember suffers accident 
which leaves him unable to 
thieve 


12 guildhouse is burgled!!! Bril- 
liant NPC outsider gets away 
with valuables (as recorded)! 

13 A mid-level thief, plus an ap- 
prentice, disappear; have they 
been kidnapped (no ransom), 
murdered, eaten by alligators 
in the sewers,polymorphed, 
plane shifted or suffered some 
worse fate? 

14 Failed assassination attempt is 
made against guildmaster—by 
whom? 

15 Thieves accidentally (or in 
panic) kill guards when com- 
mitting robbery—attitude of 
the law will be persecutory 
(maybe gaining reinforce- 
ments) for next month 

16 Novice thief leaves guild (fami- 
ly moving, marries girl/boy 
from next village, etc.) 

17 Relations with Beggars’ guild 
worsen (if good) or improve (if 
bad)—actions of junior thieves 
(as determined by DM) are in- 
strumental in this 

18 Burglary turns up magic item 
unusable by any guildmaster 
(for example, a clerical item)— 
the guild needs to trade it to get 
its value (with a temple) 

19 1d3 thieves beaten up and 
robbed returning from a bur- 
glary, reduce guild income by 
25% this month 

20 PC's identity as guildmaster is 
known to an outsider, who at- 
tempts to blackmail the PC (he 
has some physical evidence to 
back his blackmailing) 


Blueprint Profiles 


It's time to meet a 
select body of august personages from 
diverse thieves’ guilds. The NPCs here 
are presented with fine-grain detail, 
and they can be used in several ways. 
They can be used by any DM as “off the 
rack” NPCs ready for play, they can be 
slightly modified to suit the DM's ongo- 
ing campaign, or they can be used as an 


82 


inspiration for the DM to devise his 
own NPCs along the same lines. These 
NPCs are also characters who will hold 
dominant positions in any thieves 
guild. 

To give these NPCs a rounded, full 
character, each has been given a history 
and location within one of TSR’s game 
worlds; Oerth, the world of 
Greyhawk, or Faerun, also known as 
the Forgotten Realms. If the DM does 
not wish to use these histories and loca- 
tions, he can change them as he wishes, 
relocating the NPCs as desired. 

Stats: Thief skill values listed include 
all bonuses from dexterity, race, non- 
use of armor, and magical items, as ap- 
propriate. 


Guildmaster Septien 
Selfareine, the 
“White Lily” 


AC 1 (cloak of 
displacement, ring of protection +3, 
boots of striding and springing); T 10/ M 
9; hp 32; #AT 1; Dmg by weapon type; 
Str 9, Int 17, Wis 16, Dex 17, Con 9, Cha 
16; THACO see below; AL CG; SA quad- 
ruple damage on backstab, thief skills, 
sword of dancing, spells; SD thief skills, 
magical items (listed below), spells. Lan- 
guages spoken: Common, no align lan- 
guages, elven, gnome, halfling, thieves 
cant. Thief skills: PP 60, OL 80, FRT 75, 
MS 85, HS 80, DN 40, CW 70, RL 30. 
Experience Point Total: 212,465 (in each 
class). 

Spells usually memorized: charm 
person, feather fall, protection from 
evil, sleep, forget, invisibility, knock, 
dispel magic, fly, spectral force, dimen- 
sion door, wizard eye, teleport. 

Weapon Proficiencies: dagger, long- 
sword, short bow, shortsword. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: artistic 
ability (Wis; composition), disguise 
(Cha; double proficiency, checks at 
+1), etiquette (Cha), musicianship 
(Dex; stringed keyboard instruments). 

Combat Stats: Melee: Base THACO 
16. Uses shortsword +2, +4 versus 
dwarves (THACO 14/12, Dmg 1d6+2 
(+4)/ 1d8 +2). Also has longsword of 


dancing, THACO 14 if hand-held, 16 if 
used in nondominant hand, 15 de- 
scending to 12 if used as a dancing 
weapon; Dmg 1d8 +1 to +4/1d12 +1 
to +4, 

Combat Stats: Missiles: Base THACO 
14. Uses shortbow +1 (THACO 13, 
ROF 2, Dmg 1d6 +1) and has 15 arrows 
+2 (THACO 11, Dmg 1d6 +3). 

Additional Magic Items: amulet of 
proof versus detection and location, 
periapt of proof versus poison +4, 
Nolzur's marvellous pigments (6 jars), 
rings of chameleon power and water 
walking, wand of secret door and trap 
location (52 charges). 

Physical Details: Age 37 (human 
equivalent approximately 28), height 
5'11” , weight 131 lbs, silver-blond hair, 
light blue eyes, very clear and some- 
what pale skin, high cheekbones, long 
and slender limbs. 

Key Idiosyncrasies: Septien has an 
infamous “ego signature,’ as explained 
below. He also has a real loathing of 
dwarves, and his shortsword is his 
most treasured magical item, He does 
not attempt to expel dwarves from his 
guild, but they do not advance easily, 
and Septien has even shopped one or 
two to the law by anonymous tip-offs. 

Cover: Septien is a well-known and 
appreciated musician who gives well- 
attended public performances of his 
playing on harpsichord-like instru- 
ments. 

Guild and Leadership: The Gryrax 
Guild has a complex/mix structure; the 
guildmaster co-rules with a ruling council 
of three. Septien’s style of guildmastering 
is slightly weak (he shares power), just, 
and fairly populist (the council attends to 
general feelings within the guild and Sep- 
tien listens to them). 

History: Septien Selfareine is Guild- 
master in Gryrax of the Principality of 
Ulek, of Oerth (in the World of 
Greyhawk). His identity as guildmaster 
is known only to the three members of 
the ruling council of this guild; he is 
known to everyone else as “White Lily.” 
This pseudonym comes from a weak- 
ness he has for leaving a fresh white lily 
at the scene of his audacious burglaries. 


Septien was born the illegitimate son 
of a minor female elven noble in Ce- 
lene, where such a birth is no stigma. 
The half-elf's quick wits and skill soon 
brought him private training in magic 
from his doting mother, and he began 
adventuring early in life. The evils of 
the Pomarj, so close to Celene, offered 
ample opportunity for a mage to gain 
experience and prosper. But Septien’s 
light-fingered talents found employ- 
ment in the tolerant, liberal capital of 
Celene as well. 

Septien made happy progress as 
mage and thief, all the while cultivating 
his social graces and musicianship, It 
took the ravages of a broken love affair 
with a haughty grey elf ballerina to 
drive Septien first to drink and then to 
exile. Septien grew lazy, fat, and de- 
pressed in the lands of Ulek, until the 
day his second love entered his life— 
the White Lily Diamond. Found in the 
Kron Hills, bought by the Prince of Ul- 
ek and exhibited at the Gryrax Palace 
of Culture, the heavily-guarded dia- 
mond was irresistible. Septien brought 
off a daring robbery, and left a flower 
behind; the origins of his name. He pri- 
vately sold the gem back to the Prince 
for 25,000 gp, a fraction of its value, 
later. Septien does not want riches. He 
does not steal for the wealth. He steals 
for the joy of being skilled and smart 
enough to get away with it. 

Septien avoided joining the thieves’ 
guild for some years, but bumped into 
the acting guildmaster when the two 
decided to rob the same place at the 
same time. Septien was just putting his 
flower in place when the second thief 
arrived! The old guildmaster had just 
died, and to have the famous White 
Lily as guildmaster was a decision 
which unified the squabbling and di- 
vided membership and ruling council. 
Septien was drafted in, and somewhat 
regrets this. In truth, there is little bur- 
den on him, since the council makes all 
the day-to-day decisions and his free- 
dom of action is little curtailed. But 
Septien regrets the day his identity was 
discovered. On the other hand, his in- 
creasing success as a musician (he is 


83 


Thieves’ Guilds 


much in demand for concerts and as an 
accompanist) brings him good fees, 
public acclaim, and a steady rate of ar- 
rival of hopeful females at his secluded 
town house. There is word of his being 
made a Court Companion, the formal 
title given to an adviser to the Prince, 
who is thought to seek his views on el- 
ven and cultural affairs. 

Septien in Game Play: As “White 
Lily,’ Septien is the classic mystery fig- 
ure, PCs may have a wild range of ad- 
ventures trying to find him, stop his 
robberies, foil his schemes, etc. Putting 
PCs up against an enemy who will only 
wish to outsmart them, and will never 
kill unless he is forced to, will make a 
nice change of atmosphere. A medium- 
level thief needing training in Ulek 
might find that only Septien can train 
him, and part of the guildmaster’s 
terms might be that the PC will have to 
find him first! Given his concerts, his 
liking for female company, and his ac- 
tivity as a mage (although he is not a 
member of the Mages guild of Ulek), 
there are several ways in which PCs can 
meet Septien while, at the same time, 
hunting the infamous White Lily! 

Tactical Notes: With his amulet, Sep- 
tien is almost impossible to scry. Add- 
ing his ring of chameleon power to his 
thief skills makes this no easier. His ma- 
jor advantage is his amazing ability to 
get into and out of places, and with 
spells such as wizard eye he does his 
best to scry places in advance. Nolzur's 
marvellous pigments are ideal for get- 
ting into places (hey presto! a door!) if 
Septien’s half-elf skill and wand don't 
find the secret doors. 

Septien does not use aggressive, dam- 
aging evocation-type spells and the like if 
at all possible. He prefers subtlety and 
guile, and a spell such as spectral force to 
cover his escapes (using teleport to his 
villa in dire necessity). Septien is not 
strong and has few hit points, and so he 
will avoid melee combat if possible. If he 
must fight, unleashing his longsword of 
dancing while he fights with his magical 
shortsword can make him quite formida- 
ble. However, his cloak of displacement 
makes it virtually certain that he will 


be able to escape at least a first blow in 
melee, and he often takes advantage of 
this to teleport (or dimension door if he 
has this spell memorized, having scried 
in advance with wizard eye) away. His 
magical boots also enable him to make 
fast escapes. 


Guildmaster Tulmara 
Zir Bharann, 
““Cruelty’s Mask” 


AC -5 (bracers 
of defense AC3, ring of protection +2, 
cloak of the bat); MV 12 (15 as bat); T 
16; hp 62; #AT 1; Dmg by weapon type 
(+6 with gauntlets of ogre power in 
melee); Str 9 (18 with gauntlets of ogre 
power), Int 16, Wis 12, Dex 18, Con 15, 
Cha 15; THACO see below; AL NE; SA 
quintuple damage on backstab, thief 
abilities, cloak of the bat; SD thief 
skills, necklace of adaptation, cloak of 
the bat, rod of alertness, ring of free 
action. Languages spoken: Common, 
Thieves Cant. Thief skills: PP 25, OL 
95, FRT 95, MS 95, HS 95, DN 90, CW 
95, RL 65. Experience Point Total: 
1,432,155. 

Weapon Proficiencies: dagger, hand 
crossbow, longsword, quarterstaff, 
short bow, short sword. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Apprais- 
ing (Int), Disguise (Cha), Jumping 
(Str), Lip Reading (Int; double profi- 
ciency, +1 to checks), Rope Use (Dex), 
Tightrope Walking (Dex). 

Combat Stats: Melee: Base THACO 
13. Usually uses gauntlets of ogre power 
together with longsword +2, +4 versus 
Good-aligned creatures in dominant 
(right) hand; gives THACO 8, 6 versus 
Good enemies; Dmg 1d8+8 (+10)/ 
1d12 +8 (+10). Also possesses dagger of 
venom used in secondary hand; THACO 
10, dmg 1d4+7 (+9)/1d3+7 (+9) plus 
special (lethal poison). 

Combat Stats: Missiles: Base THACO 
10; uses short bow +1(THACO9; ROF 
2; ranges 5/10/15; Dmg 1d6+1) and 
also has normal hand crossbow 
(THACO 10, ROF 1; ranges 2/4/ 6; 
Dmg 1d3/ 1d2). 


Additional Magic Items: Bag of hold- 
ing (250 cu. ft. capacity), censer of 
summoning hostile air elementals, oil 
of etherealness, other minor magical 
potions (ESP healing, etc.) as desired 
by the DM. 

Physical Details: Age 38, height 5'5”, 
weight 107 Ibs., short-cut curly black 
hair, very dark brown eyes, tanned ol- 
ive skin, dark complexion, ear-lobes 
virtually absent. 

Key Idiosyncrasies: Tulmara suffers 
periodic blackouts, about once a 
month, each lasting 1d8 hours. She is 
wholly amnesic for what happens dur- 
ing this time. In her conscious personal- 
ity, her most striking feature is her 
dead-eyed, emotionless mask of a face 
when listening to others. 

Cover: Tulmara is well-known as a 
merchant, dealing in staple commodi- 
ties. Cloths, foodstuffs, and livestock 
are her major business interests. She 
has many people working for her and is 
rarely seen herself; this is not unusual 
in her homeland. 

Guild and Leadership: The Zazes- 
spur thieves’ guild has a traditional 
single-guildmaster leadership. 
Tulmara’s rule is strong, cruel, and des- 
potic. 

History: Tulmara Zir Bharann is 
Guildmaster of thieves in the city of Za- 
zesspur, one of the “Big Four" cities of 
Tethyr in Faerun (see FR3, Empires of 
the Sands, for some further details on 
Zazesspur). She rules tyrannically over 
a large guild in this trade city, with 
some 140 thieves who are full-time 
members of the guild. 

Tulmara was born into opulence. 
The Bharann family is one of the older, 
more important ones in Zazesspur, and 
Tulmara received an extensive training 
in commerce and merchant life when 
young. Her naturally greedy and selfish 
temperament was exacerbated by being 
spoiled as an only child, and made 
more strident by this early coaching in 
personal greed. Her physical brutality, 
however, is something of an oddball 
characteristic, perhaps a throwback to 
her great-great-grandfather, Old Sul- 
mair Bharann suffered fits of maniacal 


84 


violence, but Tulmara’s brutishness is 
more coldly controlled. Her gauntlets 
of ogre power aid her considerably in 
this respect; if she strikes or flails some- 
one, they know they've been hit! Im- 
portantly, Tulmara has never picked a 
pocket in her life. Such vulgar street 
crime is beneath her. 

Soon after poisoning her parents to 
advance her inheritance, Tulmara be- 
gan thieving. From her commercial 
work, she learned of the activities of 
other merchants, and began to plan 
and execute robberies of their premises. 
Expanding into blackmail and kidnap- 
ping, she was recruited into the thieves’ 
guild by an early paramour, Arkail 
Rhassan. These two became rising stars 
in the guild, arranging for the old guild- 
master to have an “accident” and then 
taking over the Guild themselves. The 
Guild prospered, and became wealthy; 
the junior thieves and apprentices, sub- 
jected to harsh discipline, could accept 
it if the rewards were good. And they 
were. 

However, Arkail was killed, mur- 
dered by an assassin; Tulmara has not 
been able to find out why (it was on the 
orders of the Shadow Thieves of Amn, 
who feared the rise of the Zazesspur 
Guild), Since this time, Tulmara has be- 
come more withdrawn and harsh, more 
cruel and evil, and more paranoid; the 
killing destroyed what little humanity 
remained in her. Now she strengthens 
the guild, and indulges herself in a few 
big heists, to pass the time; her heart is 
empty, her zest for life almost wholly 
gone. Her odd nickname in certain 
quarters—“Cruelty’s Mask”—comes 
from a middling-rank guild member 
who knew of her cult sympathies (see 
below), contrasting them with the life- 
less persona and deadpan facial expres- 
sion of his Guildmaster. 

Tulmara is a devotee of Loviatar, and 
attends secret ceremonies and rituals of 
that faith. She rules her guild abso- 
lutely, and she rules it through fear. She 
respects only force and power in other 
people; intelligence, wisdom, and other 
gentler qualities are held for nothing. 
She has the force to back her cruel 


edicts, and while the Guild juniors 
suffer—and no few flee the land—the 
fear of her is so widespread that she 
stays in control of her guild, at least for 
the time being. 

In Zazesspur, there are some notable 
political intrigues involving royalists of 
various persuasion (see Empires of the 
Sands). Tulmara doesn't get involved in 
this; and allied with her guild's predom- 
inant preying on outsiders and for- 
eigners, this has allowed the Zazesspur 
guild (and Tulmara) to grow strong and 
powerful without the authorities get- 
ting too fearful. 

Tulmara in Game Play: Tulmara 
makes for excellent intrigue adven- 
tures, and is a good nemesis figure if 
crossed (paranoids always fit the bill on 
this count). It may take the PCs many 
adventures even to realize she is at the 
centre of activities they are fighting 
against. It should be very hard to find 
her, even harder to pin her down and 
overcome her. PCs might be terrorized 
by Tulmara’s servants, hired to recover 
someone kidnapped by her, paid to act 
as bodyguards or couriers who are later 
attacked by thieves instructed by 
Tulmara, and the like. Tulmara strikes 
ruthlessly at those who thwart her, and 
since the scope of her operations is very 
wide, she can be thwarted in many 
ways! 

The key element is always to make 
PCs work hard to get closer to the iden- 
tity of their nemesis. Tulmara’s identity 
as guildmaster is known to few, and the 
familiar working up the ladder from ap- 
prentices or thugs, to middle-rank peo- 
ple, and then closing in on the heart of 
the operation should be the PCs’ goal. 
Even then, gaining any proof of 
Tulmara’'s activities should be very dif- 
ficult. 

Tactical Notes: Tulmara’s own Jair is 
protected by her rod of alertness (used 
as a magical alarm) and by her censer of 
summoning hostile air elementals 
which is used as a trap (opening a cer- 
tain door causes a lever to fall, oil to 
pour along a narrow channel and be set 
alight, and then the oil runs into the 
censer, lighting it). Other magical 


alarms (magic mouths and the like) and 
numerous mechanical traps are present. 
A permanent stinking cloud in a corri- 
dor leading direct to her personal cham- 
ber can be bypassed by her with the 
magical necklace she wears, but could 
be a problem for PCs! Tulmara favors 
the use of many secret doors in her per- 
sonal lair, below her private villa. 

In combat, Tulmara always uses the 
sneak backstab when she can, but is not 
scared to slug it out toe-to-toe even 
with a plate-clad warrior. With her ar- 
mor class and her magical gauntlets, 
she is a fearsome fighter. Her escape 
routes (notably oil of etherealness and 
her magical cloak) are important, like- 
wise her protections against certain at- 
tack forms (the ring of free action 
makes her immune to hold spells, the 
necklace of adaptation protects against 
gases, and so on). Tulmara often spies 
on people in the form of a bat, and the 
powerful webs she can cast from her 
cloak of the bat don't affect her (ring of 
free action). Tulmara has a fortune 
stashed away in various business prem- 
ises, and can summon up a bunch of 
thugs to attack her enemies at very 
short notice, both guildmembers and 
hired mercenaries. 


Quartermaster 
Marme!l Raveiz 


AC 7 (unar- 
mored) or 4 (leather armor +1); MV 
12; M 4/ T 8; hp 26; #AT 1; Dmg by 
weapon type —1 (usually 1d4+1/ 
1d3 +1 with dagger +2); Str 7, Int 17, 
Wis 14, Dex 17, Con 11, Cha 10; 
THACO 18 (16 with dagger +2); AL N; 
SA triple damage on backstab, thief 
skills, spells; SD thief skills, ring of 
blinking, ring of immunity to enchant- 
ment (see below), spells. Languages 
spoken: Common, thieves cant. Thief 
skills: PP 45, OL 45, FRT 30, MS 40, HS 
40, DN 45, CW 70, RL 70 (skill values 
not adjusted for armorless state). Expe- 
rience Point Total: 12,045 (as mage), 
94,130 (as thief). 
Spell books (usually memorized 
spells in bold): cantrip, charm person, 


85 


Thieves’ Guilds 


detect magic, friends, hypnotism, 
identify, message, protection from 
evil, spider climb, unseen servant; alter 
self, detect invisibility, ESP, forget, in- 
visibility, know alignment, magic 
mouth, rope trick, scare, wizard lock. 

Weapon Proficiencies: dagger, long- 
sword, quarterstaff, one unlearned. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Apprais- 
ing (Int; triple proficiency, all checks at 
+2), forgery (Dex; DM may use Int for 
detecting other people's forgeries), her- 
aldry. 

Additional Magic Items: bags of 
holding (2 x 250 cu. ft., one of 150 cu. 
ft., one of 70 cu. ft.), wand of identifi- 
cation with 44 charges (see below). 

Physical Details: Age 41, height 5'8”, 
weight 132 lbs., long and lank stringy 
fair hair, green-blue eyes, weathered 
pale skin, slightly hooked nose, long 
fingers with knobby, large knuckles. 

Key Idiosyncrasies: Marmel has a 
paranoid belief pertaining to servants 
of a long-dead master seeking him out 
to kill him, as explained below. More 
mundanely, he has an inordinate fond- 
ness for humbugs and will cheerfully 
suck his way through a large bag of 
them given the chance. As a result, 
most of his teeth have fallen out, and 
his speech contains many breezily gum- 
less sibilants. 

Cover: None; Marmel spends his 
time in hiding; see below. 

Guild and Leadership: The Mon- 
murg thieves’ guild has a complex/mix 
structure—specifically, it has a ruling 
council (of 4) elected by allegedly dem- 
ocratic elections from the guild mem- 
bership for 7-year terms. The 
leadership style of this council is strong, 
just, and populist. Marmel isn’t much 
affected by all this, because he doesn’t 
get involved in guild politics and coun- 
cil members (of whatever persuasion) 
appreciate his loyalty and usefulness to 
the guild. 

History: Marmel Raveiz is quarter- 
master of the thieves’ guild in Mon- 
murg, capital city of the Hold of the Sea 
Princes in Oerth (see World of 
Greyhawk for some additional details). 
He keeps the magical items the guild 


possesses as a group, stocks of specialist 
thief equipment, and ledgers and ac- 
counts of the guild (membership dues 
and the like). These are all retained in 
his bags of holding. Marmel is not an 
expert fence, although he may use his 
Appraising proficiency to purchase and 
check items for the guild. 

Marmel began life as an apprentice to 
a Furyondian mage, and had to suffer 
ill-treatment as the mage developed an 
insidious form of insanity. His master 
refused to allow Marmel to make his 
own way in the world, but the unfortu- 
nate apprentice got his chance when the 
mage was forced to accompany a Fu- 
ryondian naval foray against some of 
the declining piratical force of the Sea 
Princes. Their ship was sunk, and Mar- 
mel took the opportunity to kill his 
hateful and cruel master, grab a couple 
of travelling spell books with low-level 
spells, and levitate to safety. The pirates 
decided to capture him rather than 
shoot him down, their own flying mage 
bringing down the unhappy apprentice, 
and Marmel became a reluctant pirate. 

As piracy declined in the Sea Prince's 
lands, Marmel stayed with bad com- 
pany in the form of thieves. His magic 
helped them, and they trained him. 
Marmel got safety and obscurity, stay- 
ing in the guild house, in return for 
learning the skills of the thief. Marmel 
was very fearful that his old master 
might have been raised; his mage’s guild 
might come looking for him; the old 
mage’s relatives might come for him; in 
short, obscurity suited Marmel per- 
fectly. It even overcame his fear of go- 
ing robbing by night, and Marmel 
began an adventuring life anew as a 
thief, not wanting to work further as a 
mage, lest those he feared would be 
looking for a hapless young mage 
should find him and punish him for kill- 
ing his master. 

Marmel is not now an active, adven- 
turing thief. He is too valuable to the 
guild to be allowed to risk this. Hap- 
pily, he has retired to a life of quarter- 
mastering. He maintains and 
administers the finances of the guild, 
and shepherds supplies and magical 


86 


items for use by guild members. The 
availability of supplies is always good, 
due to Marmel’s lines of supply and me- 
ticulous checks on his stocks. He also 
evaluates items brought in to the guild 
house by thieves, who must pay a 10% 
flat tithe of all earnings to the guild. 
Marmel's tripled Appraising profi- 
ciency makes him highly valuable in 
this respect. He routinely uses detect 
magic on anything which looks even re- 
motely interesting. He can use an iden- 
tify spell, and also has a wand of 
identification (duplicates the effects of 
an identify spell, with no Con loss to 
the mage) if several items turn up at 
once and the “owner” is in a hurry for 
any reason (he is reluctant to use his 
wand, since he can’t recharge it, and 
charges 150 gp per charge for this serv- 
ice). If he is curious or suspicious about 
a guild member, or a seller to the guild, 
he will use investigative spells (or hyp- 
notism) to learn more. 

Marmel is a gentle enough soul, 
rather other-worldly at times. He likes 
a spot of haggling, although it’s almost 
impossible to get the better of him. He 
has a strange fondness for heraldry, and 
may purchase items with unusual heral- 
dic design for himself. He has a modest 
fortune from his own thieving days, 
and is paid a good salary by the guild. 
He rarely leaves the guild house, and 
when he does it is in the guise of a mer- 
chant’s clerk (often accompanied by a 
guildmember who has a cover identity 
as a merchant). 

Marmel in Game Play: Meeting Mar- 
mel is obviously easiest for guildmem- 
bers. They pay their tithes to him (10 gp 
per year for an apprentice, 50 gp per 
level per year from others to a maxi- 
mum of 500 gp), may bring items to him 
to be valued, and come to him for sup- 
plies, or even the loan of magical items. 
Non-guildmembers can meet him for 
the sale or exchange of items, come 
across him at a sale of heraldic items, in 
an antique shop, or even possibly for 
training (for thief PCs)—at a very steep 
price! 

A major role for any quartermaster is 
as a source of supplies. The DM can use 


Thieves’ Guilds 


a quartermaster to introduce new 
equipment items (the guild needs cash 
and the quartermaster is on a sales 
drive). “Hot” magic items (e.g., a sword 
with a non-erasable and unique design 
feature) can be sold to the quartermas- 
ter. New magic items could be had for 
sale (rarely), or exchange (more likely), 
or even borrowed for a security de- 
posit. The DM should arrange these 
practicalities as he sees fit. You don't 
need tables of random determinations; 
you should use a quartermaster to bring 
in pet ideas, items you think are nifty, 
as you want to. Marmel has placed a 
magic mouth on each of his bags of 
holding, of course, so that if anyone 
other than him even touches them the 
magic mouth will scream out, “Get 
your paws off!” Ofcourse, maybe af- 
ter all these years a relative of the Fu- 
ryondian mage wants to know where 
the apprentice who killed his uncle 
(say) has gone with those spell books, 
and the PCs are hired to do the job. 
Who would expect to find him in a 
thieves’ guild?? 

Tactical Notes: Marmel is protected 
against undue influence. His ring of im- 
munity to enchantment makes him im- 
mune to enchantment/charm spells of 
4th level or below. His ring of blinking 
helps to protect him. Marmel isn't 
much of a fighter, and the guild will 
usually have some bodyguards with 
him in the event of major transactions 
or trips into the outside world. Marmel 
does not take his bags of holding out- 
side the guildhouse with him! 


Durdian Silverpalm, 
Master Fence 


AC 4 (dwarf- 
sized leather armor +2); MV 9; T 5; hp 
28; #AT 1; Dmg by weapon type +1 
(usually 2d4+2/ d6+3 with broad- 
sword +1); Str 16, Int 15, Wis 11, Dex 
16, Con 16, Cha 11; THACO 18 (17 with 
magical sword); AL N; SA triple dam- 
age on backstab, thief skills; SD thief 
skills, 60’ infravision, rings of mind 
shielding and invisibility. Languages 
spoken: Common, dwarf, gnome. 


Thief skills: PP 40, OL 40, FRT 50, MS 
15 (95+*), HS 30, DN 45, CW 50, RL 
15. Experience Point Total: 19,620. 

Weapon Proficiencies: dagger, broad 
sword, quarterstaff. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Apprais- 
ing (Int; double proficiency, checks 
made with +1 bonus), Forgery Detec- 
tion (use Int), Gather Information (Int). 

Additional Magic Item: Boots of 
elvenkind*. 

Physical Details: Age 144 (human 
equivalent 52); height 4'4"; weight 162 
lbs; long wavy black hair, thick beard 
plaited with gold threading, very large 
hands with thick, sausage-like fingers, 
strikingly bad breath. 

Key Idiosyncrasies: Durdlan has an 
amazing number of pet animals and is 
very fond of them. He does use them to 
smuggle things inside and to send mes- 
sages with, but he also simply likes ani- 
mals a great deal. In cages in his back 
yard, attic, etc., he has pigeons, ferrets, 
guinea pigs, chickens (Durdlan likes 
omelettes), hamsters, a sleek black rat 
named Nasher which does tumbling 


87 


tricks, small black rock lizards, and a 
pair of small flightless birds from 
Nesme which are brightly colored and 
awesomely stupid. Nasher is often in 
Durdlan's waistcoat pocket or in the 
kitchen hunting scraps (PCs are warned 
not to eat any of Durdlan’s omelettes or 
anything else prepared here). Durdlan 
also has a horrible collection of pottery 
and ceramic halflings in a large glass- 
fronted display cabinet. 

Cover: Durdlan has a primary cover 
and a secondary cover; this is a com- 
plex business, explained fully below. 

Guild and Leadership: The thieves’ 
guild of Mirabar is ruled by a single 
guildmaster, whose style of rulership is 
strong, moderately cruel, and moder- 
ately despotic. Durdlan operates inde- 
pendently of the guild, and is a 
consultant to them, so this doesn't un- 
duly trouble him. 

History: Durdlan Silverpalm is a 
fence who works closely with the 
thieves’ guild of Mirabar in the north- 
west of Faerun (see FR5, The Savage 
Frontier, for details). The guild here is 


Thieves’ Guilds 


small—some 25-40 thieves at any given 
time will be in this large city—but trade 
through Durdlan is brisk. Durdlan 
owns a couple of moneylender and 
pawnbroker shops, and lives in a small 
terraced house in a street of granite 
houses all occupied by dwarves (there 
are some 4,000 dwarves in Mirabar). 
His primary cover is as a moneylender, 
and his family has long been engaged in 
this trade, hence their surname. Other 
family members are moneylenders, 
pawnbrokers, and locksmiths, and 
Durdlan has a share in several of these, 
including his brother Glengar’s famous 
Rig-A-Mortice locksmith’s shop. 
Durdlan thus has a primary cover as a 
moneylending small businessman. 

Durdlan also has a secondary cover, 
a screen cover. He has been seen in dis- 
reputable company in Mirabar once 
too often in his 144 years, and the wily 
dwarf realizes that he cannot escape the 
scrutiny of the law all the time. So, 
Durdlan runs a small numbers racket 
(illegal and unlicensed gambling) bet- 
ting on various events—rat races (liter- 
ally), ship sailing rates and arrival times 
and the like. The authorities thus know 
that Durdlan is a bad sort, but believe 
that he is just a small-time gambler and 
thus don’t bother him much. Durdlan’s 
screen cover (a petty crook to cover for 
his real big-time crook identity) works 
perfectly. The thieves Durdlan meets 
now and then in back alleys (seen by the 
agents of the authorities) also see the 
dwarf in the reinforced cellars of his 
home—unseen by the authorities. 
There, they bring goods for sale and 
trade. 

Durdlan’s primary specialty is gem- 
stones and jewelery. Appraising such 
items, Durdlan is 95% likely to have an 
accurate estimate of their value. His 
secondary specialty is barbarian relics 
and icons—items of antique nature, re- 
ligious significance, or exceptional 
workmanship. With such items, from 
the Uthgardt barbarians of the north, 
Durdlan is 90% likely to estimate their 
value correctly. With all other items a 
standard Appraising test (Int+1, roll 
16 or below) is made, When he is 


wrong, allow him an Int test. If this is 
made, he knows his estimate is uncer- 
tain and he will state a value some 50% 
of his original estimate. An incorrect es- 
timate will be from 10-40% above the 
true value or 10-50% below it (per- 
ceived value= 50% of actual value, 
plus dice roll x10%. A roll of 0 is taken 
as zero). 

Durdlan offers a percentage of the 
true value of a hot item to his supplier. 
This is usually approximately 30-50%, 
depending on the “hotness” of the item, 
its absolute value (it is harder to sell 
very pricey items in many cases), the 
Charisma of the seller (no more than 
+4% for this), and the like. If the DM 
is very uncertain, simply offer 
30 +1d20%. 

Durdlan can dispose of hot property 
fast because he has connections with 
many merchant families in Mirabar 
who aren't too fussy about where their 
secret treasures come from. Indeed, the 
strongly competitive nature of these 
families means that they are often eager 
to have better relics and treasures than 
other families, or even to steal their ri- 
vals treasures and enjoy them in illicit 
secrecy. One of Durdlan’s favorite 
memories is of selling a sapphire and 
emerald brooch from Evereska to five 
different families, for ever-increasing 
profit margins, within the space of a 
single year, as each family in turn com- 
missioned thieves to steal the item from 
their neighbours. Durdlan made sure 
that when the brooch was secretly held 
by one family, the next rival along the 
social line got to hear of it. 

Durdlan has many friends in the 
dwarven merchant community who 
regularly dispatch wagon trains to 
Luskan on the coast, These caravans 
rarely get thoroughly searched; the 
guards have scruples which are 
alcohol—soluble provided a few gold 
coins are put their way. This access to a 
major coastal port (where again the 
customs guards can easily be bought 
off) gives Durdlan the chance to sell his 
goods for export, where their identity 
as stolen goods will not be known. 

Durdlan is also ready, for a fat fee, to 


trade in human cargoes. That is, he will 
conceal people in his home (locking 
them into a cellar), and smuggle them 
out of Mirabar (usually in barrels or 
boxes bound for Luskan). Durdlan is 
believed to have helped one or two as- 
sassins in this way in his time. 

Durdlan in Game Play: Durdlan has 
only a handful of contacts from the 
thieves’ guild, almost all dwarves. He 
never trusts elves (he denies vehe- 
mently that his boots of elvenkind are 
anything of the sort, claiming they are 
boots of silent dwarfcraft) and he 
avoids direct contact with almost any- 
one, working through intermediaries. 
He will try to stay invisible during a 
meeting if he can. He certainly doesn’t 
like the location of his home being 
known. 

Durdlan is a fine fence to sell many 
items to, and he rarely attempts to 
swindle his customers. He is the person 
to see for a fast escape from the city. He 
is also a moneylender, of course, and 
can be encountered in that guise. His 
love of animals or bizarre fondness for 
ceramic halflings could also be ex- 
ploited to bring him into contact with 
PCs (not necessarily as a fence). 

Durdlan also has connections; in 
wealthy merchant families, the thieves’ 
guild, other merchants, the dwarven 
community, an assassin or two, and 
amongst officers, guards, and similar 
men who will look the other way if 
enough gold is put in their pockets. If 
Durdlan can’t do something for a pay- 
ing customer, the odds are that he 
knows a man who can. This makes him 
a very versatile walking game mechanic 
for any DM. 


r- 


X 


Equipment for 
the Thief’s Skills 


Zondervan 
leaned away from the thick oaken door 
regretfully. “I can't hear a word of 
what's being said in there,” he said mis- 
erably. His mentor Raimen smiled at 
him and reached into the voluminous 
folds of his robe. Hardly the time for a 
conjuring trick, the miserable appren- 
tice thought. But Raimen swiftly flour- 
ished a polished bronze hemisphere 
topped with a cone, the open surface of 
the hemisphere wrapped about with a 
thin metal mesh. With only the hint of a 
flourish, he placed the end of the cone 
to his right ear and leaned closer to the 
door, gently placing the mesh-covered 
surface to the wood. A smile with just 
the slightest hint of smugness beamed 
from the older thief's face. “Try again,” 
Raimen urged his apprentice. Zonder- 
van craned his neck closer and placed 
the cone against his own ear. Now he 
could hear the Guildmaster’s voice— 
faintly, to be sure, but the words were 
clear enough... . 

“Just one thing, Master,’ Zondervan 
said in a newly-respectful tone on the 
way to the Footpad for an ale, “what is 
the wire mesh for?” 

“To keep the ear seekers out, of 
course.” Raimen said mildly. “The 
Guildmaster is very fond of using them 
as a defense against snoopers.” 

“But—but before you gave me the lis- 
tening cone l. . . I tried to listen any- 
way, I placed my ear against the 
door... ” cried the apprentice, sud- 
denly aghast. 

“Indeed you did," Raimen replied 
coolly. “Better nip off and see the clerics 
for a cure disease spell. ] get ten per cent 
of their fees in such cases, you know. 
See you later, I trust... .” 


A wide variety of special equipment 
items are available for thieves if they 
know where to look for them. This 
chapter details many such items. Many 
of these will be specific to particular 
thief skills and are listed for each skill. 
The use of lockpicks with the Open 


Chapter 5: Tools of the Trade 


Locks skill is an obvious example. 
However, there are also many miscella- 
neous items which thieves are particu- 
larly likely to find useful in their work, 
and there is a full listing of these items 
also. A tabular summary of likely 
prices and encumbrance values can be 
found at the end of this chapter. 

All this isn’t to say that only thieves 
should be allowed to use the items de- 
tailed here, of course. In some cases, 
other characters cannot use these items 
effectively. Lockpicks are useless for 
picking locks in the hands of anyone 
but a thief, for this skill is specifically 
(and exclusively) a thief skill. However, 
many other items do not necessarily 
have such restricted use. For example, 
the use of tar paper (see below for a full 
detailing of this) could potentially be 
useful for characters other than thieves. 
But such an item is particularly likely to 
be encountered in the subculture of 
thieves, and to be used by them when 
going about their nefarious activities. 
Also, taking a lively interest in equip- 
ment items which assist stealth, con- 
cealment, silent break-ins to places 
where you shouldn’t be, and suchlike is 
naturally part of the role-playing of 
thieves. Brave, hardy warriors and pi- 
ous priests really shouldn't be inter- 
ested in such matters! 

In the full equipment listing below, it 
is entirely for the DM to determine 
whether certain items may or may not 
be available in the campaign world. For 
example, as noted in the Player's Hand- 
book, combination locks may well not 
exist in a world based on medieval 
times, and thus the use of a small listen- 
ing cone to assist in opening such locks 
would be irrelevant in such a game 
world. Then again, certain items may 
well be available but not openly so. 
Only from shadowy, illegal sources and 
suppliers will such items as lockpicks be 
available. Availability of many items 
will depend on the nature of the society 
the thief operates within, as detailed in 
the chapter on Guilds. 

Since the items detailed below are not 
included in the Players Handbook, 
they can be introduced to PC thieves in 


different ways. Going on a job with an 
NPC thief who uses one or two spe- 
cialty items is one way of educating a 
PC thief. A second possibility is regular 
attendance at the informal “seminars” 
of the Thieves’ Guild—make that PC go 
back to high school! A third possibility 
is during training; part of a thief's train- 
ing by a higher-level thief may include 
being told about a small number of 
items relevant to thief skills. If the PC is 
allocating a large slice of his 30 percent- 
age points for improving one skill (of- 
ten the case), then information about 
1d3 items relevant to the use of that skill 
and also 1d2 miscellaneous items can be 
regarded as part of what the PC is pay- 
ing for during his training. A fourth and 
final possibility—an entertaining one— 
is that the PC hears about such items 
from popular stories and tales concern- 
ing a legendary master thief NPC in the 
campaign world, or even from over- 
hearing some officers of the law discus- 
sing such matters at the next table in the 
tavern!! 


Skill Modifiers 


Many equipment 
items detailed below will be stated to 
give a modifier to the chance for success 
for a skill check. The skill modifiers 
should be treated as suggestions only, 
although for game balance it's probably 
best not to give bonus modifiers to a 
thief much greater than those sug- 
gested. In any event, a central rule 
which always operates is that the maxi- 
mum chance for success after all modi- 
fiers are applied (for race, dexterity, 
conditions, equipment, etc.) is 95%; a 
“natural” roll of 96-00 on d100 always 
fails! 

You might also wish to allow an anal- 
ogous 1% chance for success—a natu- 
ral 01 always succeeds, regardless of 
modifiers. The poor 1st-level thief try- 
ing to pick a masterful-quality lock in 
the dark with improvised lockpicks 
rolls—0O1! He's done it! The lock clicks 
open. ... 

In some cases, different items of 
equipment may each add to some 


chance for success when climbing 
walls, opening locks, etc. In the case of 
nonmagical items, a general rule should 
be that no more than a total of +20 can 
be added to any chance for success in 
such a skill test, no matter how many 
items are employed to assist the thief’s 
natural talent. The DM may also not al- 
low additive modifiers if items have a 
similar function. An obvious case 
would be the use of climbing daggers 
and spikes for assisting the climb walls 
skill; the thief could not add the indi- 
vidual modifiers for these two equip- 
ment items together and claim an extra 
bonus, since they both do the same 
thing (although they have important, 
individual, additional uses). 


Picking Pockets 


This skill is usu- 
ally practiced by simple manual dexter- 
ity and swiftness. Even so, there is a 
small number of simple items which can 
help the thief in this art. 


Arm Sling 


This is simply a 
cloth sling; the thief wears it to appear 
as if he has a broken or injured arm, 
and speedily withdraws his hand from 
it for the pocket-picking attempt. 

This actually reduces the chances of 
picking pockets by 5%, but the payoff 
is that the chances for being discovered 
are halved (but a natural 00 on d100 al- 
ways means discovery). This reflects 
the fact that people simply do not ex- 
pect to see a man with a broken arm 
picking pockets and the expectation de- 
termines the perception. The use of this 
unusual strategy is only useful—but it 
is really useful here—when the priority 
is not to be discovered, rather than to 
be sure of success. A thief working in a 
city where he is not a guild member, or 
one where legal penalties for picking 
pockets are very harsh, might favor the 
use of this ruse. 

A thief obviously cannot use this ruse 
for an extended period of time in the 
same place (save possibly by posing as a 
beggar). There is a limit to how long an 


arm can plausibly need for healing, af- 
ter all. 


Mini-Blade 


This is a generic 
term for a very small (and usually very 
sharp) blade which can be held (with 
care!) between the fingers or in! the 
“edge of the hand”. A very sharp coin- 
edge, filed down, can be used in| this 
way, and has the advantage of being 
readily available. A more sophisticated 
(and rarer) version is the razor ring, a 
hollow signet ring with a flip-top and a 
very sharp blade within. 

The mini-blade is used to cut a| soft 
container—most obviously a purse or 
pouch—so that the thief can get at what's 
inside it. It is the most effective technique 
for getting at coins, gems, etc., inside a 
purse with drawn and tied strings. With a 
mini-blade the thief only has to make a 
simple pick pockets roll to effect the lar- 
ceny. If the thief has, instead, to try to 
open the purse strings and then extract 
what's inside because he has no mini- 


91 


P 


blade, this needs two pick pockets rolls 
for success (one to open the purse, one to 
get at the goodies)—and two rolls for be- 
ing observed, as well! 


Opening Locks 
Lockpicks 


These are essen- 
tial for the thief to use this skill at any- 
thing like his “natural” ability level. It is 
these items which are listed in the Play- 
ers Handbook as Thieves’ Picks, cost- 
ing 30 gp. They are usually short 
lengths of rigid wire and flat, narrow 
plates of iron or steel, especially de- 
signed and made for dealing with locks, 
and there will be a dozen or so to a set. 
They will be supplied either on a ring 
(like keys) or in a cloth or leather wallet 
which unrolls. These items will never 
be freely available on the open market. 


Improvised Lockpicks 


Lockpicks are 
made for the job, but it is possible for a 
resourceful thief to improvise a lock 


pick from a length of wire, a hairpin or 
hat pin, or some similar ready-to-hand 
item. Obviously, this will never be any- 
where as good as the specially-crafted 
item, but it’s better than nothing. As 
stated in the Player's Handbook, a pen- 
alty of anywhere from —5 to —60 can 
be applied to the use of such improvised 
lockpicks. The following suggestions 
are given for the DM to select within 
this range. 

To create improvised lockpicks the 
thief must make an Intelligence check, 
modified (positively!) by his experience 
level—reflecting the resourcefulness 
greater experience brings. If this check 
is successful, the improvised items can 
be used with a penalty of —5 to —30 
(1d6x5) to the open locks roll. If the 
modified Intelligence check is failed, 
the thief can bodge up something, but it 
is a feeble effort—the penalty is —35 to 
— 60 (1d6x5, +30) for the Open Locks 
attempt. Locks which are of Masterful 
quality, however, cannot be opened 
with improvised lockpicks (unless the 
DM allows the 01 = success rule here). 

Critical Failure: When opening locks, 
either with lock picks or with impro- 
vised lock picks, the DM may rule that 
on a skill check roll of 96-99 the tool 
snaps but can be wangled out of the 
lock if a Dexterity check is made; on a 
roll of 00 the snapped tool is wedged in 
the lock and cannot be removed (save 
for disassembling the whole lock!). 

Special Rule, Combination Locks: 
The DM may wish to allow the exist- 
ence of these complex locks in his cam- 
paign world. If he does, then such locks 
are always of Superior or Masterful 
quality. As an optional rule, a thief who 
makes a successful detect noise roll 
when trying to open such locks can 
halve the usual negative modifier to his 
skill for such formidable locks, as he is 
able to detect the sound of tumblers 
falling! 


Acid 


If a thief is faced 
with a lock which his best efforts can- 
not pick open, metal-eating acid is one 


alternative. Such acids will eat through 
locks if the locks fail a saving throw (for 
metal) vs. acid (this save is 13). If the 
save is made, the lock cannot be 
opened, but it will be ruined (and un- 
openable!) if a second save (metal vs. 
acid) is failed. Use of such acid is diffi- 
cult and avoided by most thieves, for 
various reasons. 

Use of metal-eating acids is difficult 
because only acids of great strength will 
do the job effectively. The DM should 
greatly restrict the availability of such 
acid; acids of the strength of black 
dragon acid and thessalhydra acid (pos- 
sibly also giant slug spittle) are among 
the few known effective metal-eaters. 
Thus, availability is very low (and cost 
very high). 

Thieves usually avoid such acids in 
any event. First, the acid is very hazard- 
ous to carry. While it may be contained 
in glass containers (and possibly ce- 
ramic), such vessels are fragile. Imagine 
falling down a pit and hearing the 
sound of breaking glass as double- 
strength acid begins to seep through 
clothing and over one’s back. . . . Sec- 
ond, if the acid does not do the job it 
may ruin the lock and any hope of 
opening it in another way, as described. 
Third, it is a calumny on the profes- 
sional reputation of a thief to have to 
resort to such means as acids! 


Chisels 


A thief may at- 
tempt to force a lock open with a lock 
chisel and a small hammer. This is not 
really a highly skilled activity, and the 
DM might consider extending this to 
non-thieves. The base chance for suc- 
cess is equal to the open doors percent- 
age (which is Strength-based, of 
course). A thief may add one-fifth of his 
open locks chance to this base chance— 
knowing something about locks does 
give a slight advantage here. Obvi- 
ously, forcing a lock is a noisy activity 
and any hope of subtlety and surprise 
evaporates with the first blow. 


92 


Cutters, Files and Hacksaws 


These instru- 
ments may have to be resorted to if a 
thief cannot pick a lock, but thinks he 
has the time to try these desperately 
slow methods for bypassing the lock. 
With a file or hacksaw blade the thief 
can try to saw through the lock appa- 
ratus; a pair of small wire cutters may 
also be useful for disabling some part of 
the internal mechanism. Usually, only 
reasonably small locks can be cut 
through in this way. It may also be pos- 
sible for the thief to cut around a lock 
with a hacksaw blade. 

Again, use of such instruments is of- 
ten fairly noisy (although nowhere near 
as noisy as using a lock chisel). The 
main drawback to cutting through or 
around locks is that it takes a very, very 
long time. However, in most cases the 
attempt will be certain to succeed, un- 
less there are special circumstances— 
e.g., the thief has only one small rusty 
file and the lock is a huge combination 
lock device! 


Magnifying Glass/Lens 


At the DM's dis- 
cretion, using such an item to inspect a 
lock may add 5% to a thief’s chance to 
open the lock. This only applies if the 
thief has some element of the lock appa- 
ratus exposed to his view —if he can see 
something of the inner workings of the 
lock. 


Oil and Funnel 


Some locks may 
grow rusty with age and disuse, and be 
harder to pick than new locks of the 
same quality of make would be. Sea- 
soned thieves know only too well that 
the locks of doors in dungeons are all 
too often of this sort. The DM may ap- 
ply modifiers (-—5, —10, etc.) to the 
open locks chance for such doors as he 
sees fit. However, rusted and even 
fairly dirty locks may have a little light 
oil applied to their insides, usually with 
the use of a long-necked funnel (and 
maybe with a short length of rubbery 


tubing on the end of that). The negative 
modifier may itself be negated, in 
whole or in part, by such lubrication. It 
takes 1 round to apply the oil and 5-10 


= (d6 +4) rounds for the oil to have its ef- 


fect on the mechanism. 

Of course, using oil to lubricate a 
lock helps the thief to open it silently. If 
the DM wants to make a silent move- 


ment check for lock-picking, it should 


be made at +10 if oil is used. Oil is also 
useful when it comes to rusty door 
hinges in this context. 


Time Scales 


Picking a lock 
takes 1d10 rounds, as stated in the Play- 


-er's Handbook. If the thief has no lock- 


picks or is using improvised lockpicks, 
this duration becomes 1d20 rounds. 
Other ways of bypassing locks take 
rather longer. Using a lock chisel and 
hammer takes one turn; metal-eating 
acid takes 3d6 rounds; cutting around a 
lock takes 2d6 turns (assuming that the 
door is a wooden one of average thick- 
ness); cutting through a lock takes 3d6 
turns. The DM may roll randomly for 
time needed, or may select a value 
within the range shown which reflects 
the quality and size of the lock. Size will 
most affect acid and cutting round a 
lock, whereas quality will affect cutting 
through a lock, as regards time needed. 


Finding and 
Removing Traps 


Because the na- 
ture of traps can vary, a wide range of 
equipment might conceivably be help- 
ful on different occasions; a magnifying 
glass, for example, might help with 
concealed traps. There are many items 
for which a DM might allow a +5% 
modifier to the find/remove traps roll. 
This needs a DM decision on a case-by- 
case basis. There is one exception: lock- 
picks, which are important in a wide 
range of cases, 


Lockpicks 


These may be 
considered as necessary for discovering 
small traps which are affixed to locks. 
Without them, the thief cannot use his 
find traps skill nor his remove traps 
skill for dealing with such traps. Impro- 
vised lockpicks have a —30 penalty to 
both skill rolls. The kind of traps in- 
volved here are small poisoned needles 
inside drawers or coffers; spring- 
triggered poison dart traps inside con- 
tainers; and so on. 


Moving Silently 
Footpads 


These _—_ useful 
equipment items have even had a type 
of robber named after them, of course. 
Footpads can be improvised from rags 
or cloth tied to the feet, or built into 
footwear—the latter obviously negates 
any risk of cloth falling off! 

Footpads are not considered stand- 
ard equipment worn by the thief be- 
cause of the disadvantage they have. 
Their advantage is that they add +5 to 
the chance for moving silently; the cor- 
responding disadvantage is that foot- 
pads reduce traction, and so their use 
adds a -5 penalty modifier to any 
climb walls roll the thief has to make 
while wearing them. Cat burglars are 
advised to use detachable footpads 
which can be donned after getting over 
the wall on the way in! | 

As an aside, the normal, unmodified 
move silently chance assumes that the 
thief is wearing normal, everyday foot- 
wear. If for some reason he is wearing 
hob-nailed boots or the like the| DM 
may readily apply a penalty modifier of 
—10, —20 or so to any attempt to move 
silently. 


Silenced Armor 


A special form of 
silenced elfin chain is available tọ the 
thief. Such armor has each individual 
link of chain armor wrapped in) thin 
leather or light cloth binding. This to 
some extent “silences” the armor, at the 


93 


F 


cost of increasing its encumbrance by 
one-third above that of normal elfin 
chain. It is also fiendishly expensive, 
costing more than plate mail. Of 
course, it is even rarer than ordinary 
elfin chain itself. Finding a craftsman 
and persuading him to make such a suit 
of armor could be a challenging adven- 
ture in itself for a thief. The total profile 
for silenced elfin chain is shown in Ta- 
ble 28 below. 


Table 28: 

SILENCED ARMOR (ELFIN CHAIN) 

EFFECT ON SKILL 
Pick Pockets =25 
Open Locks s5 
Find/Remove Traps =s 
Move Silently — 
Hide in Shadows =10 
Detect Noise — 
Climb Walls =25 
Read Languages — 


Bonuses for moving silently and 
hearing noise above those which apply 
for normal elfin chain are somewhat 
offset by penalties to picking pockets 
and climbing walls. Silenced elfin chain 
is particularly useful to a thief for 
whom subterfuge and sneaking around 
unobserved are very important, but 
who suspects that there is a high proba- 
bility of combat at some stage during 
his mission! 


Strapping 


A thief may use 
lengths of strapping—usually of stiff, 
hardened leather—to improve his 
chances of moving silently if these 
would otherwise be reduced by such 
factors as squeaky floorboards (but not 
otherwise). These straps will usually be 
30 to 36 inches or so in length, and they 
help distribute the thief's weight over a 
wider area. Their use negates any nega- 
tive modifier arising from squeaky 
floorboards, but the thief has to pick up 
the strips and move them before him as 
he walks along. This reduces his move- 
ment rate to only one-half of that which 
normally applies for attempting to 


Tools of the Trade 


move silently—i.e., one-sixth of nor- 
mal walking move rate! 


Hiding in Shadows 


As the Player's 
Handbook explains, this ability is not 
literally just the knack of hiding in areas 
of shadow while not moving. It also 
covers hiding in bushes, shrubs, behind 
drapes, in alcoves—anywhere where 
there is a chance of skulking about im- 
mobile in some location which offers 
cover and the hope of staying unseen. 
Considering appropriate equipment 
needs to be considered in this light. 


Camouflage Clothing 


There may be ex- 
ceptional variants on this—for exam- 
ple, if a thief knows that he needs to 
hide in shadows amongst the crimson 
curtains of a lady's boudoir he might 
use a crimson set of clothing. Apart 
from such singular special cases, there 
are two general types of camouflage 
clothing the thief will find useful in var- 
ious situations. 

Darksuit: This comprises black or 
very deep blue clothes, usually fairly 
voluminous robes or what might be 
termed a “utility suit” Such clothing 
will usually be lightweight so it can be 
carried about easily, and worn under 
normal clothing if needs be. It will al- 
ways include significant facial cover- 
ing. If such a suit is worn, it will add 
+5% to a hide in shadows chance in 
any area which is shadowy, has a light 
level equal to dusk or early dawn, or 
equivalent. 

Woodland Suit: This has a similar 
basic design to a darksuit but is made of 
light clothing dyed in irregular patterns 
of greens and browns, It adds +5% to 
the hide in shadows chance when the 
thief attempts to conceal himself in any 
suitable outdoors setting such as wood- 
land, a field, or the garden of a town 
house. 


Charcoal 


Even wearing a 
darksuit, the glint of moonlight on a 
pallid white face can give a thief away. 
Blacking up the face (and neck) with 
charcoal adds a further 2% to the hide 
in shadows chance for concealment in 
shadows, dim light, etc. Burnt cork and 
soot are alternatives. The thief should 
not forget to blacken the backs of his 
hands either! 


Plant Dyes 


Analogous to the 
use of charcoal in dim lighting, a thief 
can use plant dyes (crushed leaves, ber- 
ries, certain oily barks, etc.) to disguise 
his exposed face and hands and add a 
further +2% to his hide in shadows 
chance in suitable outdoor settings. 
Such plant materials are usually rather 
sticky and smelly, however! 


Weaponblack 


One common 
problem for the thief attempting to hide 
in shadows is the glint of a steel weapon 
in moonlight, torchlight, and the like. 
The way to avoid this is to use 
weaponblack, a thick, oil-based emul- 
sion. Weaponblack can be coated on to 
any metal surface and renders it almost 
completely matte black and reflection- 
free. If the DM wishes, use of 
weaponblack can give the thief a +5 
bonus to hide in shadows. A superior 
rule, though, is that use of this sub- 
stance saves the thief having to make a 
second hide in shadows roll if he draws 
a weapon while hiding, or saves him 
from any penalty modifier if he has a 
weapon already drawn when he at- 
tempts to hide in shadows initially. 

Once the weapon has actually struck 
a blow, the weaponblack will be wiped 
off. Because it is oil-based, it is also 
highly flammable. If ignited it will burn 
brightly, turning the weapon into the 
equivalent of a flametongue (although 
it does not count as a magical weapon) 
for 1d4+1 rounds. However, if the 
thief is not protected from fire (e.g., 


94 


with a ring of fire resistance) he suffers 
1d4 points of damage per round while 
holding the weapon, 


Detecting Noise 
Listening Cones 


The simplest ver- 
sions of this item are cones of bronze or 
brass or some similar material, with the 
wide end placed against the surface 
through which the thief wishes to hear 
and the narrow end placed against his 
ear. Such listening cones add +5 to the 
chances for detecting noise. A generous 
DM may allow a thief to improvise 
such an item from the humble wine 
glass. As noted, with such a hollow 
cone it is wise to use mesh over the 
broad end to exclude ear seekers! 

If such an item is used for a combina- 
tion lock (listening for tumblers falling 
to assist the open locks roll), the thief 
may well need a special miniaturized 
cone to assist him. The proto- 
stethoscope may be born here. . . . 


Climbing Walls 
Clawed Gloves and Shoes 


Clawed gloves 
will be familiar to Oriental Adventures 
players as tiger's claws, but the DM 
may allow their availability in any fan- 
tasy campaign. Clawed overshoes, sim- 
ilar in design to clawed gloves, also 
existed and may be permitted (although 
they are a lot less common). The over- 
shoes are slipped over the thief's normal 
footwear. The thief uses these clawed 
items for extra grip on small nooks and 
crannies of whatever surface he is 
climbing, so the bonus to the climb 
walls roll depends on the type of surface 
being climbed. 

On very smooth surfaces where al- 
most no nooks and crannies exist, 
clawed gloves and boots will not add 
anything to the climb walls chance for a 
thief. For smooth/cracked surfaces, 
clawed gloves add +5 to the climb 
walls chance, boots add +5 also, the 
two together add +10%. For any other 
type of surface, clawed gloves add 


+10, clawed boots add +10, and the 
combination adds +20% to the climb 
walls roll. Rates of movement are not 
altered. 

The use of clawed gloves reduces si- 
lent movement rolls by —5%, the use 
of clawed boots by —10%, and the 
combination by —15%, if the thief is 
attempting to move silently during his 
climb (e.g., trying to evade detection 
by guards atop a parapet). 

Clawed gloves can be used as a melee 
weapon—no weapon proficiency is re- 
quired for their use. A successful hit in- 
flicts 1 additional point of damage to 
that normally delivered by a fist blow. 
Clawed overshoes may similarly be 
used as a weapon, adding damage to a 
kick attack, if the DM allows such at- 
tack options in melee. 


Climbing Daggers 


Daggers have 
been used to aid climbing by thieves for 
generations, so it is to be expected that a 
more specialized form has been devel- 
oped for this task. Climbing daggers 
have relatively short blades (some 6 to 8 
inches long) which are stiff, strong, flat, 
and very sharp. This allows the dagger 
to be inserted into wood or between 
bricks with greater ease than an ordi- 
nary dagger. They can be used in all 
surfaces other than very smooth ones. 
The handle is also flat and quite broad, 
and usually bound with leather strips or 
thick string to give the hands a good 
grip, or even to allow feet easy pur- 
chase when the dagger is used as a step. 
Also, in place of a normal pommel is a 
broad, smooth iron ring. This allows a 
rope to pass through, or it can be at- 
tached to one of the straps of a house- 
breaker's harness (see Miscellaneous 
Equipment, below). 

Climbing daggers may add +10 to 
wall climbing chances at the DM's op- 
tion, although their main use is with a 
housebreaker’s harness. They may be 
used in combat, but because of their 
very different design from that of a nor- 
mal dagger a separate weapon profi- 


ciency is required for their use and 
damage caused is but 1d3/1d2. 


Grapples 


Grappling irons 
are relatively heavy iron tools, usually 
with three or four separate hooks 
branching from the end. The tool is at- 
tached to a length of rope for climbing. 
The hook is designed to be thrown and 
to catch on protrusions and thus sup- 
port the rope and climber(s). The thief 
may throw the grappling iron vertically 
up to one-third his Strength score, 
rounded up and multiplied by 10 (in 
feet). Throwing a grapple takes one 
round; reeling in the rope and retriev- 
ing the iron for another attempt after a 
failure takes 1d4 rounds. The chance 
for success when throwing a grappling 
iron (a d100 roll is used) is shown in Ta- 
ble 29 below: 


=< 
a, 


95 


Tools of the Trade 


Table 29: GRAPPLING SUCCESS 
Catch 
and 
Grapple Target Miss Slip Catch 
Stone Parapet 01-72 73-78 79-00 
Stone Wall Top 01-83 84-89 90-00 
Tree Branches 01-66 67-70 71-00 
Rocky Ledge 01-88 89-93 94-00 
Wooden Wall 01-70 71-74 75-00 


The DM can adjudicate more uncom- 
mon instances from this table. A “catch 
and slip” result means that the grapple 
seems to have caught solidly, but will 
slip free after 1d6 rounds of supporting 
any load. If the thief pulls on a grapple 
for that many rounds he can dislodge 
the grapple, whereas a “catch” result 
means the grapple is securely fastened. 
If possible, thieves should test the grap- 
ple by pulling on it for six rounds before 
climbing! 

Climbing a wall using a grappling 
hook and rope adds +40% to the nor- 
mal climb walls chance. 


Tools of the Trade 


Noise: Grapples make a moderately 
loud sound when they land. In condi- 
tions of near silence, a successful grap- 
ple landing can be heard as much as 400 
yards away (depending on the size of 
the grapple, etc.); an unsuccessful 
throw (with the clang as the grapple 
lands on the ground) up to 800 yards 
away. Obviously, these are ideal in- 
stances and in most cases the effective 
range will be considerably lower. 
Whatever range is deemed appropriate 
by the DM, a padded grapple—one 
with sacking or some similarly heavy 
but coarse cloth covering almost all of 
the surface of the iron—will reduce it 
by half. 

Surprise!: While this chapter is not 
concerned with counter-measures, one 
instance is irresistible: the cruel DM 
should be advised that shards of glass 
set into walls will sever the rope of a 
grappling line in 2d6 rounds, Broken 
glass is best set into the tops of walls, of 
course, A really brutal DM may allow a 
thief near the top of the wall a Dexterity 
check to avoid falling as the rope sev- 
ers, success meaning that his hands are 
now impaled on savagely sharp wedges 
of glass which are coated in dust and 
filth, probably giving him blood poi- 
soning if he lives long enough to worry 
about it. 


Special Function Arrows 


Throwing grap- 
ples is by no means the most efficient 
way of attaching a rope to a wall, bat- 
tlement or similar structure. Greater 
range is ensured by the use of arrows, 
and many special arrowheads have 
been developed to help the thiet’s 
chances with such operations. 

Two distinct methods are used with 
special function arrows. The first is 
known as the one-rope method. The 
rope is simply affixed to the arrow, and 
when the arrow has found its mark the 
thief merely climbs directly up the rope. 
This method is simple, but the rope at- 
tached must be strong enough to bear 
the thief's weight, and this considerably 
reduces the effective range of the bow 


(and incurs penalties of —2 to hit and 
damage rolls if the arrow is used in 
combat for any reason). It also means 
that the bow shot, being less accurate 
and powerful, is less likely to provide a 
good purchase on the target. 

The second method is the two-rope 
method. Here, a light string is threaded 
through a loop attached to the arrow, 
and both ends of the string are kept by 
the thief. The string is light enough not 
to affect the flight of the arrow. When 
the arrow has struck the target, a stout 
rope is attached to one end of the string 
and the string pulled through to play 
out the rope, thread it through the loop, 
and extend it fully in place of the string. 
This method is obviously more time 
consuming than the one-rope method; 
it takes one round to play out 20 feet of 
rope in this manner. Twice the length of 
rope is needed, of course, since the rope 
goes from the thief to the target and 
back. However, this method is more 
likely to obtain a firm fixing of the ar- 
row into the target. 

Either of these two methods can be 
used with any of the special function ar- 
rows below, with the single exception 
stated. Table 30 gives rules for their us- 
age. 

Wood Biter: This has a broad, flat 
head with backward-facing barbs. It is 
specifically designed to give a good grip 
when shot into wooden surfaces. 

Stone Biter: The stone biter has a nar- 
row, heavy head of metal, with small 
ridges rather than barbs. Careful crafts- 
manship is needed to produce these ar- 
rows, with high-quality metal being 
used and the arrow sharpened to the 
greatest possible extent. It is designed to 
give a grip when shot into stone, but 
will only work on relatively soft stone 
such as sandstone or brick. 

Stone Biter (Adamantite): This is as 
the above arrow, save that adamantite 
is used in its manufacture. This makes 
the arrow capable of biting into all but 
the hardest stone surfaces, but also 
makes it extremely expensive. 

Minor Grapple: This has a small, 
three-pointed grappling hook as its 
head, perhaps some 3 inches in total 


96 


width. This is usually shot through a 
window, over a palisade, etc., in much 
the same way as a conventional grap- 
pling iron is thrown. 

Major Grapple: The major grapple is 
a far more complex piece of apparatus 
than the minor grapple, and because of 
its method of use it can only be em- 
ployed with the one-rope method (see 
above). The head of this arrow at first 
appears to be a fairly long arrowhead of 
normal width. Its true function is shown 
only when fired. The rope must be se- 
curely fixed at one end by the thief, and 
as the major grapple arrow closes in on 
its target and reaches as far as the rope 
will allow, the sudden tension pulls at 
the head of the arrow, which opens out 
into a large three-pointed grappling 
hook. This is some 6 to 8 inches in 
width, fully the equal of most ordinary 
grappling irons. The major grapple has 
better aerodynamics than the minor 
grapple and a better chance of gripping, 
but a considerably reduced range. 

Table 30 shows modifiers to dice rolls 
on Table 29 made when using a special 
function arrow. 


Table 30: 
SPECIAL FUNCTION ARROWS 


Arrow Type Special Effects 
Wood Biter +15 for Tree Branches 
and Wooden Walls 
+10 for Stone Parapet 
and Stone Wall Top, 
+5 to Wooden Wall 
Stone Biter +20 for Stone Parapet 
(Adamantite) and Stone Wall Top, 

+5 to Wooden Wall 


Stone Biter 


Minor +10 to Stone Parapet, 

Grapple Tree Branches; +5 to 
all others 

Major +15 to Stone Parapet, 

Grapple Tree Branches; +10 to 
Rocky Ledge, Wooden 
Wall; +5 to Stone Wall 
Top 

Other Rules 


One-rope method: halve all bow 
ranges, —5 to all modifiers above save 
for major grapple. 


Spikes and Line 


To be effective, 
climbing spikes need to be used to- 
gether with a line. Hammering in a 
spike takes 1d4 rounds with a small 
hammer; spikes cannot usually be ham- 
mered into very smooth surfaces (or 
they will not take, etc,), with the excep- 
tion of an ice wall (where spikes offer 
the only hope of climbing safely). Ham- 
mering spikes into surfaces can usually 
be heard a long way away—even up to 
a mile in silent, windless, outdoor con- 
ditions. 

Usually spikes are used as an insur- 
ance policy against falls—if a character 
hammers in a spike, ropes himself to it, 
climbs 20 feet above this with the rope 
tied to his waist, and falls he will only 
fall 40 feet (20 feet down to the spike 
and a further 20 feet taking up the slack 
of the rope). A spike used to arrest a fall 
in this way has a chance of coming 
loose, though! This chance is 10% per 
character supported on the climbing 
line (15% per character for ice wall as- 
cension). 


Miscellaneous Equipment 


Many more 
equipment items are detailed here, 
which may be used by thieves going 
about their business. Virtually none of 
these are restricted to usage by thieves 
only. However, as before, thieves are 
the most likely characters to use them 
or to know where to find those that are 
not legally available. The DM can de- 
termine which items may be available 
in his campaign, how PC thieves may 
become aware of them and the like, as 
with the previously described items. 

The miscellaneous items have been 
grouped into various categories de- 
pending on their main application. This 
is sometimes just for convenience, and 
some items have several potential uses, 
so the list is worth perusing carefully. 
There is a final catchall miscellany, pre- 
ceded by a section devoted to the sev- 
eral uses thieves can find for modified 
poles and staves! 


Burglary and Theft 
Crowbar 


This is a simple 
all-purpose tool which can be used for 
forcing windows open, levering open 
chests with locks which refuse to be 
picked, and for similar purposes. At the 
DM's option, use of a crowbar adds 
+10 to any bend bars roll the thief has 
to make when trying to force open 
some portal. A crowbar is usually a 
metal rod 3 to 4 feet in length, with one 
end slightly crooked and often with a 
snake-tongue division in it. The |DM 
may allow a thief to use a crowbar as a 
weapon, although a weapon profi- 
ciency slot would have to be used to 
avoid a non-proficiency penalty in its 
usage. Damage is d6+1 versus $/M 
creatures, dó versus large opponents if 
the thief has proficiency, Otherwise, it 
inflicts damage as a club. 


Glass Cutter 


This very simple 
instrument is usually a small diamond 
set into a suitable handle, or even one 
set into a ring. The diamond must be 
cut toa fine point, and if used in a ring a 
hinged top should be used to protect the 
gem. Such a tool will cut through glass 
fairly quickly. Attempting an entry 
through a window is always superior in 
principle to attempting to force a door, 
since windows cannot be as physically 
tough as doors and are less likely to be 
locked; but if they are locked, a glass 
cutter is highly useful. 

The efficiency of this item is consid- 
erably increased if used together with 
Tar Paper (see below). 


Housebreaker’s Harness 


This is a vital 
piece of equipment for the serious cat- 
burglar or housebreaker, Known in 
thieves’ cant as a “spider,” it is made of 
linked leather straps, one around each 
thigh, one running around the waist, 
and one over each shoulder. The straps 
link together to form a tight harness, 
which can be worn over clothing or 


97 


Tools of the Trade W 


leather armor. Attached to the harness 
are up to eight or so more straps, of 
varying lengths up to 2 feet. At the ends 
of these straps are small metal rings, 
upon which many different devices can 
be affixed; tools can be hung, climbing 
daggers fixed, and suchlike. The princi- 
pal uses of the harness are as follows: 

(i) If the thief is climbing a wall using 
a rope, the rope can be run through one 
or more of the rings of the harness re- 
moving any chance of falling from let- 
ting go of the rope. 

(ii) Once the thief has reached the 
point where he hopes to effect a break- 
in, two of the straps can be fixed to ei- 
ther side of him (usually with climbing 
daggers, or perhaps with wedges in a 
window frame, etc). This provides the 
thief with a firm base and allows him 
the free use of his hands to open a lock, 
cut glass, check for traps, and for simi- 
lar actions. 

Imaginative thieves will be able to 
think up many other uses for this handy 
and versatile piece of equipment. 


Keymaking Set 


This expensive 
item allows a thief to make duplicates 
of keys he holds in his possession or 
from impressions of keys made using a 
wax pad (available as a separate item; 
see below). The keymaking set is a 
number of molds, files, small blades, 
metal-working instruments and the 
like. It also uses a small oil-burning ap- 
paratus for softening and molding 
metal, so its use is usually restricted to a 
safe, secure lair where the thief will not 
be disturbed. Duplicating a key takes 
1d4 hours, depending on the size and 
intricacy of the original. A skeleton key 
(see below) cannot be duplicated with a 
keymaking set. 

The keymaking set permits the man- 
ufacture of poor-to fair-quality soft- 
metal replicas of keys, which are rough 
in appearance and do not resemble the 
work of a professional. However, the 
duplicate key will open the same locks 
as the original if the thief makes a suc- 
cessful Dexterity test (the DM should 


roll this in secret). If the thief made his 
duplicate from a wax pad impression, 
there is a penalty of +2 to this dice roll. 
The thief always thinks his duplicate is 
a successful piece of workmanship, of 
course. Only when it is actually tried on 
the appropriate lock(s) will the thief 
find out for sure. 

The keymaking set does not preempt 
the role of locksmiths or their skill. Pro- 
fessional locksmiths will duplicate keys 
with a 99% chance of success and have 
superior tools to the keymaking set de- 
scribed here. Each locksmith’s set of 
tools are individually crafted and modi- 
fied to suit the locksmith and are too 
complex for thieves who are not them- 
selves locksmiths to employ. 


Limewood Strips 


These are strips 
of wood, usually around 4 to 6 inches 
long and an inch or so high, and very 
thin. They are also very tough, how- 
ever, being made of very resilient wood 
(like limewood, although other, similar 
woods can be used) and often coated on 
one or both sides with a very thin coat 
of toughening varnish. Limewood 
strips are slipped between a door and its 
door frame so that the thief can raise a 
latch on the other side of the door and 
open it normally (possibly after picking 
a lock). A normal latch can be opened, 
but a bar is too strong for a limewood 
strip to lift. 


Sharkskin 


Sharkskin is made 
from thick cloth, into which are sewn 
hundreds of tiny curved and barbed 
hooks, rather like miniature fishing 
hooks. These hooks are very sharply 
curved, and are all sewn with the hooks 
lying in the same direction. Thus, when 
stroked in one direction the cloth feels 
perfectly smooth, but in the other it grips 
tightly and even tears skin or cloth. 
Sharkskin is so called, fairly obviously, 
because it resembles the skin of a shark. 
which is coated in hooked scales. 

Sharkskin can be used as a form of 
hanging board; a square of the material 


affixed to a surface with hooks pointing 
downward can be used to keep tools 
and such in place. Items can simply be 
pressed down on the surface of the 
sharkskin, and they will effectively 
stick to it. This is most useful for a thief 
climbing a wall and has utility in other 
circumstances. Sharkskin-coated 
gloves can be used to assist in climbing 
walls, in which case they can be treated 
as clawed gloves (see above) in all re- 
spects. 


Skeleton Key 


These were not 
considered earlier under the pick locks 
skill because the DM will almost cer- 
tainly wish to restrict the availability of 
these items drastically, if they are al- 
lowed in the campaign world at all. 

A skeleton key is one which is capa- 
ble of opening many locks of several 
different types, in its most versatile 
form. The very best designs will open 
virtually any lock, but it is certain that 
the DM will not want any PC thief ac- 
quiring such an item! Rather, four ways 
of dealing with skeleton keys are sug- 
gested here. 

First, any individual skeleton key 
may open locks of up to a certain com- 
plexity level. Skeleton keys may be of 
good, excellent, or superior quality 
(wretched and poor don’t warrant 
them), and a skeleton key of any partic- 
ular level of quality can open all locks 
with a quality the same as, or lower 
than, that of the skeleton key itself. 

Second, a skeleton key can be treated 
as being equivalent to a thief of a cer- 
tain level; this can be determined by the 
DM to suit the level of play in the cam- 
paign world. If a purely random deter- 
mination is required, level 7-14 (6 +d8) 
may be used. The open locks chance 
can be taken as 20%, plus 5% per thief 
level. 

Third, a skeleton key can be treated 
as a “master key”—that is, it can open 
all the locks in some particular area 
(such as all the non-residential rooms in 
the east wing of the vampire’s castle). In 
this instance it is really only a glorified 


98 


substitute for a bunch of keys, although 
it saves time having just one key to use. 
A more interesting variant on this 
theme is to have a skeleton key which 
can open all the locks commissioned 
from a particular locksmith (in the last 
few years, perhaps). If the locksmith 
was well thought of and often hired, 
there could be adventures built around 
just finding out which locations he had 
built the locks for, let alone going 
around opening them all! 

Fourth, a skeleton key can be rated as 
a minor magical item, and removed 
from the realm of mundane equipment, 
if the DM wishes to restrict the avail- 
ability of such a key without banishing 
it from game play. In this case, rating 
the key as equal in skill to a high-level 
thief and/or adding major bonuses to 
pick locks skill for locks up to masterful 
quality is the best way to use the key. 

Finally, note that a skeleton key may 
open a particular lock, but it does not 
disarm any trap(s) attached to the lock 
or portal unless the original key would 
do so. 


Tar Paper 


This is simply 
any kind of heavy paper or (more usu- 
ally) cloth which has been soaked in tar, 
honey, treacle, or anything suitably 
sticky. The thief usually uses it by slap- 
ping it on a window before breaking the 
glass in a window-pane. The sticky sur- 
face keeps all the fragments together as 
the glass breaks. Noise is considerably 
reduced, both from cushioning the im- 
pact of a hammer on glass and by pre- 
venting broken glass from scattering all 
over the floor beyond the window. If 
there is someone within fairly close lis- 
tening distance, the DM may make a se- 
cret move silently roll for the thief when 
using this stratagem. 

Tar paper can also be used with a 
glass cutter (see above), being affixed to 
the center of the area of glass to be cut 
out, so that it can be simply pulled out 
when the cutter has done its work. 


Tools of the Trade 


Wax Pad 


This is a small 
block of wax usually kept in a rigid 
container to keep it in one piece—the 
equivalent of a large snuff-box will do 
nicely. The thief uses the wax to record 
an impression of a key he wants to have 
duplicated later. Obviously, the thief 
can only do this if he has access to a 
key, at least for a short time, and if he 
doesn’t wish to take a chance on bor- 
rowing the key for a while. From the 
wax impression, the thief can have a 
locksmith make a duplicate of the origi- 
nal key, or attempt to make one himself 
using a keymaking set, if he has one. 

With very soft wax, which may need 
heat-softening on the spot, the thief 
may even be able to make a wax im- 
pression of such items as heavy seals, 
which may be capable of being dupli- 
cated later—but an expert will be need- 
ed for this kind of duplication/forgery! 


Evasions 


Thieves often 
have reason to evade detection or pur- 
suit. Some of their skills (hiding in 
shadows, moving silently) are tailored 
toward this end. Equipment detailed 
here includes further aids to evasion, 
items to assist in avoiding detection, 
and even an item or two to enable the 
thief to whistle innocently if he is found 
and apprehended at the scene of the 
crime. 


Aniseed 


Aniseed is a sim- 
ple plant-derived natural flavoring. A 
small quantity of aniseed extract can be 
used by a thief to ruin any effort to 
have dogs track his scent, if blood- 
hounds (or similar) are used by pursu- 
ers. Dropping a vial of aniseed down at 
a suitable place (e.g., by the bank of a 
stream the thief crosses, by the base of 
a wall he traverses, even at a cross- 
roads) will ensure that the dogs’ sense 
of smell is utterly ruined for 1d4+1 
hours if they reach the spot where the 
aniseed has been dropped. A saving 


throw vs. poison will enable a trained 
dog to evade the aniseed to some ex- 
tent, but the sense of smell is still lost 
for 1d4+1 turns. A spell such as neu- 
tralize poison or slow poison cast on an 
affected dog will eliminate the effect 
but the dog will still have to pick up the 
trail further along, somehow, to con- 
tinue tracking. The effect of aniseed on 
any other kind of trained tracking ani- 
mal is up to the DM, but aniseed should 
have a detrimental effect on almost 
anything's sense of smell. 


Caltrops 


These actually 
come in different shapes and sizes, but 
the basic form is that of a metal ball 
with four to six spikes or prongs set in- 
to it. When a caltrop is thrown to the 
ground it always lands with one spike 
standing more or less upright. A thief 
may throw small caltrops to the ground 
to slow down pursuers. Caltrops can- 
not be used as missile weapons, how- 
ever. 

The effect of caltrops depends on 
how many are thrown down by the 
thief. The base number is 10 thrown 
down in an area of 25 square feet. Any- 
one entering the area must make a sav- 
ing throw vs. paralyzation. An 
unsuccessful save means that the char- 
acter has stepped on one, suffering 1d4 
points of damage, and must halt move- 
ment. If half the number of caltrops is 
used (only five in a 25-foot area), the 
save is made at +4; for every extra five 
dropped in such an area, the save is 
made at an additional —2 (up to —6 in 
total). A character moving at less than 
one-third his normal movement rate 
doesn’t need to make a save. A fresh 
saving throw must be made for each 5- 
foot section entered in which caltrops 
have been dropped. 

If a pursuer steps on a caltrop, it 
must be removed before the pursuer 
can continue. This takes one round. Al- 
so, the pursuer must make a second 
save vs. paralyzation to see if he is tem- 
porarily lamed. If the save is made, 
pursuit can continue normally. If the 


save is failed, the pursuer can only 
move at one-third normal rate for 24 
hours (or until the damage is magically 
healed). 

An ingenious thief can even impro- 
vise caltrops—in one infamous in- 
stance, from a sack of potatoes found 
in the kitchen of a house being burgled 
and a small bag of nails carried by the 
thief in question. Modifiers to the sav- 
ing throws of potential victims can be 
allowed for such improvised versions! 

Note: For players and DMs with Un- 
earthed Arcana, the rules above are 
based on the entry for tetsu-bishi in 
Oriental Adventures, which has some- 
what superior rules to those in the Un- 
earthed Arcana entry for caltrops. 


Catstink 


Even the best- 
trained dog (watchdog or tracking dog) 
finds it impossible to avoid being dis- 
tracted when there are cats about. This 
is exploited by the few alchemists who 
have the recipe for the manufacture of 
catstink. These few are well-paid by 
thieves’ guilds for their work, blending 
various liquids obtained from diverse 
parts of cats with a few secret ingredi- 
ents to produce a thick, foul-smelling, 
brown-yellow liquid, catstink. 

Catstink is specifically blended to 
drive any dog to distraction, allowing 
the thief to get past watchdogs as they 
frantically try to locate the cat which 
they can smell so pungently. Dogs who 
can smell catstink will not do anything 
other than try to get at the source of the 
smell, no matter how highly trained. 
Spells (slow, neutralize poison) are on- 
ly useful if the dog is wholly removed 
from the smell. Even then the effect of 
the spell will not be evident until one 
turn has elapsed and the dog returns to 
normal. 

Catstink can also be used to delay 
dogs tracking a thief as he attempts to 
make an escape, in much the same way 
as aniseed is used, albeit much more ef- 
fectively (and much more expensively). 
The smell of catstink can be picked up 
by dogs up to 200 yards away, or even 


as far as half a mile if they are down- 
wind of it. 


Dog Pepper 


This may be 
dropped on the floor, like aniseed, to 
put dogs off the scent when pursuing a 
thief. It is less effective than aniseed, 
however, the pursuing dog being al- 
lowed a saving throw vs. poison to 
avoid the effect of the dog pepper abso- 
lutely. If the save is failed, though, the 
dog is unable to continue pursuit for 
1d4 +1 turns. 

Dog pepper may more usefully be 
scattered into the air, a small packet 
holding enough to fill a 10-foot cube. 
The pepper will hang in the air for 1d4 
rounds after being flung into it. A dog 
entering the area during this time gets 
no saving throw to avoid the effect of 
the pepper. If dog pepper is thrown 
right into a dog's face, the unfortunate 
animal gets no saving throw and be- 
comes hysterical for an hour, during 
which time it is totally uncontrollable. 


Hand Lamp 


This is usually a 
small metal pot about the size of a 
night-light candle. It has a hinged flip- 
up lid with a mirror on the inside; a sil- 
ver mirror is often used, so the item is 
not cheap. The mirror directs the light, 
and the lid also works as a snuffer when 
closed. The lamp provides enough light 
for the thief to work by (e.g., when try- 
ing to pick a lock in a dark place), while 
not shedding enough to give the thief 
away (hopefully). Certainly, the dim, 
focused light is unlikely to be visible at 
all further than some 20 feet from the 
thief, and even within this range it is 
very, very dim. 


Hollow Boots 


These come in 
various forms, but a common design is 
one with swivelling heels. The heel of 
the boot is grasped and twisted firmly 
toward the inside surface. The heel 
swivels and reveals a small, hollow 
compartment within the boot. These 


Tools of the Trade 


compartments are very small, and will 
typically only hold one gem of moder- 
ate size or up to four small ones. The 
design of the boot is such that there is 
not an externally visible built-up heel, 
but nonetheless a thief wearing these 
boots suffers a —5 penalty to any move 
silently rolls he has to make. 


Marbles 


The use of these 
is an old chestnut, but perennially pop- 
ular with thieves, not least because of 
their effectiveness. A small bag of mar- 
bles (a general term for small spheres of 
glass, metal, etc.) unleashed over a 
stone floor to roll around forces any 
pursuers to slow to half normal move- 
ment rate or be forced to make a Dex- 
terity test. If this test is failed the 
pursuer slips up and has to spend a full 
round getting up again. Because mar- 
bles roll around a lot, a small bag (30 or 
so) will cover a 10’ x 30’ (or equivalent) 
area. Small stones and pebbles can only 
be substituted for marbles if they have 
been polished, filed, etc., so that they 
are almost perfectly round—a time- 
consuming business. 


Self-Protection and 
Combat 


The equipment 
detailed here offers sneaky combat op- 
tions for thieves, which any character 
with any real decency and sense of honor 
would usually eschew. Since by defini- 
tion some of these items subvert normal 
combat options, the DM should feel free 
to modify and/or restrict the availability 
of items he feels unsuited to his cam- 
paign. However, the concealed weapons 
listed, at the least, should definitely be 
made available to thieves who are mem- 
bers of Assassins’ Guilds. 


Blinding Powder 


This is a general 
term for any powder which is highly 
abrasive, irritating to the eyes, and dis- 
abling to the victim as a result. Pow- 
dered stone, pepper, dust soaked in 


100 


onion juice, and strong ammonium 
salts—blinding powder can be made 
from many ingredients. 

Blinding powder is only useful if it is 
thrown right into the eyes of a victim. 
This counts as a called shot 
(DUNGEON MASTER Guide, p.58) 
with an additional (doubled) penalty, 
for a total of -8 on the attack roll. How- 
ever, the Dexterity bonus of the person 
throwing the powder applies to the at- 
tack roll. Further, the base AC of the 
target ignores any armor or shield used, 
save for the use of a helmet or helm; 
magical protection such as bracers of de- 
fense or a ring of protection protect the 
target, as does Dexterity (unless the at- 
tack has an element of surprise). 

If blinding powder strikes a victim 
the effects are the same as those of the 
stinking cloud spell save that they last 
for 2d4 +2 rounds and no saving throw 
is allowed. If the victim can wash his 
eyes with plenty of water, the effect will 
only last for one round after the eyes 
are washed. Although blinding powder 
can contain some unpleasant ingredi- 
ents, it has no permanently damaging 
effects on the eyes. 


Death Knife 


This sinister in- 
strument can appear to be a bladeless 
knife, but it is more often disguised as 
something more innocent such as a case 
for a comb or spectacles or quill pen, a 
tool of some sort, etc. The disguise will 
not fool any close inspection, however. 
The blade of the knife is within a barrel 
inside the handle and is spring-loaded. 
The knife is triggered by pressing a 
catch on the handle; the blade shoots 
forward with considerable force. The 
weapon does the same damage as a nor- 
mal dagger, although one point of dam- 
age is added for a first strike when the 
blade is triggered. 

The obvious advantage of the death 
knife is its capacity for surprise. Since it 
doesn’t look like a weapon until the 
blade is sprung, a victim can be taken 
totally off guard by its use. If the target 
does not realize a blow is coming and 


the thief manages to get the weapon 
close to the body of the victim so that a 
lunge can be made with it, any strike is 
treated as a backstab, with standard hit 
and damage bonuses, given the surprise 
element. A backstab is not always liter- 
ally a stab in the back! 

An envenomed death knife in the 
hands of a skilled assassin is an ex- 
‘tremely dangerous weapon, and the 
DM may wish to rule that since the 
blade has to be concealed for some time 
before a strike there is a 25% (or higher) 
chance that the poison will have 
dripped from the blade before the assas- 
sin strikes with it. 


Folding Bow 


Bows are very 
useful for thieves, but are very hard to 
conceal because of their size and shape. 
A folding bow solves this problem, di- 
viding neatly in half when unstrung, 
making it a much more suitable size and 
allowing concealment—for example, in 
a thigh sheath. Only short bows have 
folding-bow equivalents. 

The joint in the middle of the bow 
weakens it, however, reducing the ef- 
fective ranges to S 4, M8, L 13, and also 
making it —1 on damage rolls (but any 
hit causes at least one point of damage). 


Pin Ring 


This simple 
weapon is a ring with a flip-up lid, be- 
low which is a needle capable of deliv- 
ering a dose of poison (or knock-out 
drug, etc.) to the target. The most prim- 
itive version of this will have the pin 
simply sitting in a small reservoir of liq- 
uid drug or toxin. Since administration 
of the poison/drug is rather haphazard 
here, the victim receives a bonus of +2 
to any saving throw against its effects. 
Subtler and more refined designs have a 
needle capable of drawing up liquid 
from a reservoir, so that only a normal 
saving throw (or even one with a —2 
penalty) applies. The DM should de- 
cide which to allow in the campaign 
(both can exist at the same time, of 
course). 


An attack with a pin ring is a called 
shot (with a —4 penalty to the attack 
roll) because it must strike exposed 
flesh—the pin will not administer poi- 
son through any significant thickness of 
clothing. A strike to the neck is the 
time-honored way of making sure the 
toxin gets into the bloodstream quickly. 
The DM may rule in unusual cases that 
no called shot is needed (e.g., the thief 
surprises a victim in his bath) or that the 
pin ring cannot be effective at all (e.g., 
the victim is clad from head to toe in 
field plate). 


Sword Stick 


This is simply a 
long, slender, rapier-like blade con- 
cealed within what appears to be a sim- 
ple walking stick or cane. The long and 
thin blade requires a weapon proficiency 
slot to be used most effectively. Swash- 
bucklers are particularly fond of this 
weapon. Damage done by the blade is as 
per a short sword. It takes one round to 
draw the blade from the sword stick and 
ready it for use. The main use of the 
weapon, obviously, is the possibility of 
smuggling it into places where weapons 
are not permitted. 

It is highly doubtful whether any- 
thing like a sword stick existed in medi- 
eval times, but this weapon definitely 
adds some style and dash to a cam- 
paign. Since it does less damage than 
most swords (and requires a weapon 
proficiency) the DM should consider al- 
lowing it in his game. 


Wrist Sheath 


This small 
leather sheath is made to hold a knife or 
dagger, and is strapped to the forearm 
(below the sleeve of a garment) so that 
the weapon can be flipped to the hand 
by an arm movement and the blade 
readied for action. A dexterous thief 
can work a blade into his hand by arm 
movements disguised in the context of 
changing posture while sitting in a 
chair, or similar, seemingly innocuous 
moves. Again, the obvious advantage 
is that of concealment. 


101 


Tools of the Trade 


Variants on this theme are drop 
sheaths, which are usually sewn into 
leather jackets or similar articles of 
clothing. Here, release of the dagger 
from the sheath can be triggered by me- 
chanical means (pressing a jacket sleeve 
stud, etc.) or by muscular stimuli trig- 
gering pressure pads (tensing the biceps 
firmly against the fist of the other arm, 
etc.). 


The Joy of Sticks 


This section de- 
tails several uses for poles, staves, or 
stout sticks, many of which can obvi- 
ously be improvised as and when neces- 
sary. PC thieves might, however, prefer 
suitably modified poles ready to hand 
in case of urgent need! 


Blade Pole 


This is a substi- 
tute for a polearm, but is not used as a 
combat weapon. Rather, a small blade 
is wedged into one end of a pole, and 
this is used for cutting objects at a dis- 
tance. The most notable use for the 
blade pole is in cutting trip wires (e.g., 
at a distance if the thief is unsure 
whether traps may be triggered). 


Climbing Pole 


This has to be a 
stout, strong pole, 10 feet long or so, to 
be of any real use. It has notches cut 
into it at regular intervals (approxi- 
mately every 2 feet) to enable the thief 
to climb using it. It must be set at a suit- 
able angle against the wall, or else it 
cannot be employed. Thieves will not 
often have use for such an item, but it 
has its uses for dealing with very slip- 
pery or smooth surfaces, walls made 
with broken glass shards in the mortar, 
and similar unusual cases. 


Hooked Pole 


A strong hook is 
set into the end of the pole, which has 
several uses. The first is to yank discov- 
ered trip wires, if this is what the thief 
wishes to do, although a blade pole is 


usually superior for dealing with such 
problems. The more common use, 
though, is to use the hook to catch on 
objects so they can be retrieved. De- 
pending on the size of the hook, any- 
thing from a key ring or small jewelry 
casket (hooked through the catch) to a 
rich man’s joint of beef can be purloined 
by the thief. At the DM's option, a skill 
check (a pick pockets roll) may be re- 
quired for success. In medieval En- 
gland, fishing through windows with 
hooked poles was so common that a 
subclass of thief who made a living in 
this way was commonly known and 
called “the hooker,” 


Mirror Pole 


This uses mirrors 
at both ends of the pole, set at a suitable 
angle so that the thief can peer, 
periscope-like, around corners using 
the instrument. 


Miscellany 
Blade Boots 


This exotic title is 
a catchall for specially modified boots 
which have concealed blades within 
them. The blades have to be small, of 
course; they are usually little bigger 
than modern-day razor blades. They 
are usually concealed in secret com- 
partments in the heels of boots (see Hol- 
low Boots above), but slender blades 
can even be hidden in the soles of boots. 
Such blades are of little use as weapons, 
but can be used to slit pouches and 
purses, to cut ropes, and for similar 
tasks. 


False Scabbard 


Thieves can em- 
ploy stout scabbards which are slightly 
longer than the swords which fit into 
them, leaving a length of scabbard at 
the end which is a separate, hollow 
compartment. Usually, this can be ac- 
cessed via a sliding panel at the end of 
the scabbard. 

This hollow compartment can be 
used to conceal a great many kinds of 


Tools of the Trade 


things, either to smuggle them in (poi- 
sons, dog pepper, blinding powder, 
etc.) or smuggle them out (gems and 
such). Some are so well-designed that 
the compartment can be entered from 
above or below, so that the thief can use 
the false scabbard as a snorkel (or, more 
correctly, as an underwater breathing 
tube) if he has to stay concealed in the 
water for any reason. 


Hand Warming Lamp 


This small lamp 
is oil-burning, with a reservoir of oil 
and a small wick sunk into an earthen- 
ware shell. It is used by the thief to 
warm his hands, by cupping them 
around it, if cold would otherwise im- 
pair his talents (try picking a lock with 
frozen fingers in a cold clime!). Virtu- 
ally no light is produced, the aim sim- 
ply being to warm the hands. The 
simplest version of this is a corked 
earthenware sphere which can be filled 
with hot oil before the thief sets off on 
his work, to be drawn from a pocket 
and held in the hands when needed. 


Marked Cards 
and Biased Dice 


These are stand- 
ard trappings for any self-respecting 
swindler. There are no rules for gam- 
bling in AD&D® 2nd Edition, however, 
so the DM has two options. First, he 
can write his own. Second, the simple 
rule-of-thumb rules suggested here can 
be used. 

If the Gaming proficiency is being 
used, use of suitably marked cards or 
biased dice allows a —1 modifier to the 
d20 check (remember that proficiencies 
work when low dice rolls are made). 

If the game is actually being played 
out and the Gaming proficiency not 
used, then the thief PC is allowed (in ef- 
fect) to replace any one card drawn or 
die thrown if he has the suitable prop 
and if a Dexterity test is made. Thus, if 
the PC is playing blackjack and has 
drawn a king and a five, the effect of us- 
ing marked cards is simulated by allow- 


102 


ing a redraw on one card, if the player 
wishes to do so (in this case, the five, in 
all likelihood). When rolling the Dex- 
terity test, if the d20 roll is 18 + the thief 
has been seen cheating (even if he 
makes the Dexterity test successfully). 
For obvious reasons, the DM should 
roll this test in secret! 


Water Shoes 


These belong 
most correctly in Kara-Tur, land of Ori- 
ental Adventures and ninja, but they 
could exist in any fantasy setting. 

Water shoes are simply large, wicker- 
work basketlike devices which are 
worn over the feet (and come to mid- 
calf height). The thief balances in an up- 
right position and propels himself 
across the water with a paddle or oar. 
The DM may insist on a move silently 
check at some stage. If anything hap- 
pens to startle the thief (such as an ar- 
row whizzing past his head or some 
monster rising up in the water), a Dex- 
terity test may be called for to avoid 
falling over into the water. 


Cost and Availability of 
Equipment 


In Table 31 be- 
low, the cost, weight, and legality of 
equipment items are listed. These are 
listed in the same order they appear in 
the preceding text. A few don’t appear; 
there are no prices for the poles (which 
can be rigged up from equipment listed 
in the Player's Handbook anyway), for 
example. Cost and weight are as per the 
Player's Handbook format and clothing 
items have weights listed for them but 
are also denoted by the letter “C.” They 
add nothing to encumbrance if worn 
normally. 

Legality of the items is important. 
Items are listed as L (legal; freely availa- 
ble on the open market), S (shady; 
available in more liberal countries and 
in dodgy back-street shops under the 
counter), and I (illegal; from a thieves’ 
guild only). Some items get a split clas- 
sification, e.g., “L/S.” This may be be- 


cause they are borderline, or because 
they are legal for some narrow, specific 
occupational usage only (and there 
may be restrictions on their sale). 

Finally, items marked with two aster- 
disks (**) may be hard to obtain even if 
not illegal, for various reasons. They 
may need rare craftsmen to make, basic 
ingredients may be hard to find (e.g., 
black dragon acid!), and such. The 
item description should make clear 
why an availability problem may exist. 
The DM should determine availability 
rather than using a random roll. 


Table 31: 
PURCHASING THIEF EQUIPMENT 


Item Legality Cost Weight 
Arm Sling L 3 cp 
Mini-Blade L Sep: £ 
Razor Ring 
(iron) S/I 2gp ©: 
Razor Ring 
(silver) S/l 10gp * 
Thieves Picks I 30gp 1 
Acid, Metal- 
eating, 1 vial** L 50gp 
(Lock) Chisels, 
‘set of 3 U 2gp 1 
Hacksaw (equiv- 
alent) L 3gp 1 
Hacksaw Blade L 6sp ° 
Metal File É 5 sp 
Wire Cutters L/S igp 
Funnel, small E 3 cp 
Footpad's Boots I 8gp 3C 
Silenced Armor** S 750 

gp+ 50 
Leather straps 
(pair) L 3sp 1 
Darksuit S 30gp 5 
Woodland Suit L/S 35gp 5 
Charcoal, bundle L 2 cp 
Plant Dye G 2gp 
Weaponblack 
(vial) S 2 gp 
Listening Cone 
(brass) L 2gp 
Clawed Gloves** I  20gp 1C 
Clawed Over- 
shoes I 1Sgp 1C 
Climbing 
Dagger L 5gp 1 


Grappling Iron 
Arrow, 

wood biter 
Arrow, stone 
biter 

Arrow, stone 
biter, adamantite 
Arrow, minor 
grapple 

Arrow, major 
grapple 
Climbing 

Spikes, iron (10) 
Crowbar 
Glass-cutter 
(handled) 
Housebreaker’s 
Harness** 
Keymaking Set 
Limewood (as 
bark strips, 10) 
Sharkskin 

(per sq. ft.) 
Skeleton Key 
Tar Paper 

Wax, block 
Aniseed, vial 
Caltrops (10) 
Catstink, vial** 
Dog Pepper, 
packet 

Hand Lamp 
(with silvered 
mirror) 

Hollow Boots 
Marbles, bag 
(30) 

Blinding Powder 
Death Knife** 
Folding Bow 

Pin Ring (iron) 
Pin Ring (silver) 
Sword Stick** 
Wrist Sheath 
Blade Boots 
False Scabbard** 
Hand-Warming 
Lamp 

Marked Cards, 
Deck* $ 

Biased Dice, 
bone, box of 4 
Biased Dice, 
ivory, box of 4 


103 


N 


Tools of the Trade 


Water Shoes, 


pair Mi: Seg 1 


Magical items for Thieves 


When possible, 
the DM should select the magical items 
he will give out in his campaign. Some- 
times, though, a fast and random selec- 
tion may be needed. In this case, if the 
DM rolls 99 or 00 on Table 88 of the 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide (p. 135), he 
should not roll for a magical weapon, but 
make a simple d20 roll on Table 32 be- 
low. 

The items shown in the later tables 
fall into three categories: 

(i) Items restricted to use by thieves 
only, These are indicated by (T) follow- 
ing the title of the item in the tables. 

(ii) Items which do not have to be re- 
stricted to thieves only, but which have 
more than one effect, with at least some 
of their effects being of value for 
thieves alone. That is, thieves will ben- 
efit far more from these items than oth- 
er characters. These are indicated by 
(T*) following the title of the item in 
the tables. The DM may well wish to 
rule that these items can only be used 
by thieves in his campaign. 

(iii) Items which can be used by non- 
thieves as well as thieves, but which are 
clearly important for such typical thief 
activities as spying, stealing, snooping, 
sneaking and such. 

As a general note, most of the items 
in this section are of relatively low 
power. This should allow DMs to intro- 
duce one or two such items into even a 
fairly low-magic campaign with no fear 


of upsetting game balance. 
Table 32: 
MAGICAL ITEMS FOR THIEVES 

d20 
Roll Category Table 
1-7 Potions and oils 33 
8-11 Miscellaneous Magic: 

Clothing and Jewelry 34 
12-15 Miscellaneous Magic: 

Other Sneaky Stuff 35 
16-19 Weapons 36 
20 Special (see below) 


For each of the later tables 33 through 
36, a simple dé roll is used to determine 
the nature of the item found. None of 
these later tables has any subtables to 
worry about. 


Detection Resistance 


Many of the 
items listed below were designed to en- 
able the thief to avoid detection, to pre- 
vent his ill-gotten gains from being 
discovered, and such. Clearly, the 
avoidance of detection by simple low- 
level magical spells is highly important 
to many thieves. As a consequence, 
some of the thief magical items are en- 
chanted with detection resistance, re- 
quiring any spellcaster using a 
divination spell (such as detect magic, 
detect invisibility in appropriate cases, 
etc.) effectively to overcome 50% 
magic resistance so far as the detection 
goes. It also protects the thief against 
discovery by creatures able to detect in- 
visible (allow a flat 50% chance of au- 
tomatic nondetection in cases where 
such creatures have no spellcaster 
level). This detection resistance does 
not give the thief any general magic re- 
sistance, of course! 

“XP Value” entries are experience 
point awards which apply for making 
the item. An entry of “U” means that 
the item is unique and cannot readily be 
magically made, since the original was 
made by unknown means. 


Table 33: POTIONS AND OILS 
dé XP 
Roll Item Value 
1 Essence of Darkness (T*) 300 
2 Oil of Slickness (T) 350 
3 Master Thievery (T) 500 
4 Perception (T*) 300 
5 Sleep Breathing 250 
6 Thievery (T) 350 


Tools of the Trade 


Table 34: 
MISCELLANEOUS MAGIC: 
CLOTHING AND JEWELRY 

dé XP 
Roll Item Value 
1 Amulet of Dramatic 

Death (T) U 
2 Boots of Balance (T”) 1,000 
3 Gloves of Evasion (T*) 1,000 
4 Mantle of the Mundane 

(T*) 1,500 
5 Robe of Vanishing (T) 2,000 
6  Shadowcloak (T*) 3,000 

Table 35: 

MISCELLANEOUS MAGIC: 

OTHER SNEAKY STUFF 
dé XP 
Roll Item Value 
1 Bag of Vanishing (T) 5,000 
2 Boxes of Delightful 

Transport 2,500 
3 Dust of Trail Dispersion 

(T*) 500 
4 Lens of Remote Viewing 

(T) 1,000 
5 Lens of Valuation (T) 1,000 
6 Tallin’s Tightrope 1,250 

Table 36: MAGIC WEAPONS 

dé XP 
Roll Item Value 
1 Crossbow of Angling 750 
2 Dagger of Impaling (T) 300 
3 Dagger of Resource (T) 500 
4 Dagger of Sounding (T) 300 
5 Scabbard of Poison 500 
6 Shortsword of Backstab- 

bing (T*) 700 


Description of 
Magical Items 


Potions and Oils 


Essence of Dark- 
ness: This pure black oily fluid must be 
kept in tough, light-proof containers, 
since it is destroyed after one turn in 
bright sunlight or one hour exposed to 
daylight. Essence of darkness is pure, 


104 


concentrated, liquefied darkness itself. 
It can be used in a number of ways: 

(i) When a dose is swallowed it makes 
the imbiber’s entire body, including 
hair, teeth, and even the whites of the 
eyes, pure matte black in color, This 
can enhance a thief's chance of hiding in 
shadows as shown below. 

(ii) Similarly, if one dose is diluted in 
a gallon or so of warm water, the es- 
sence creates a powerful black dye. A 
gallon of this diluted form can be used 
to dye clothes and even armor and 
weapons; one gallon of the dye is suffi- 
cient to treat the clothes and equipment 
of one character. The dye takes one 
turn to mix and soak into the items and 
one turn to dry. This process also af- 
fects the chances for successful hiding in 
shadows. 


Body only (wearing normal 
clothes) +5% 
Body only (wearing no clothes) +25% 
Clothes only +20% 
Both body and clothes +40% 


These bonuses only apply when the 
thief is trying to hide in darkened areas, 
obviously; that is, to “traditional” hid- 
ing in shadows. Detection resistance 
operates on a thief using essence of 
darkness to hide in this way. 

(iii) Essence of darkness is unstable 
and if a vial is struck by a crushing blow 
it will explode into darkness 15’ radius. 
A single dose of the magical essence will 
create a darkness 5’ radius if so struck. 
This property has been exploited by 
making small glass or ceramic globes 
filled with the liquid which are then 
thrown forcefully onto hard surfaces to 
create “darkness bombs.” At the DM's 
option, a thief who has ingested the es- 
sence or applied it to his clothing might 
similarly become the center of a dark- 
ness 5’ radius effect if struck a severe 
blow (50% of remaining hit points, 
with a 12 hit point minimum for the ef- 
fect to operate) with a blunt weapon. 

The effects of essence of darkness last 
for six hours plus 1d6 turns, if used ex- 
ternally; if ingested, it has the same du- 
ration as a standard potion. Each bottle 


or vial of the essence found usually con- 
tains sufficient fluid for 1d4 +4 doses. 


Oil of Slickness: The consistency of 
this magical substance is variable; 
sometimes it is found as a small vial of 
very viscous oil, sometimes as a pot of 
thin, creamy white salve. It is applied 
by rubbing into the skin of the hands 
(taking one round). When rubbed in, it 
improves the speed and coordination of 
the hands so that all manually-based 
thieving skills (pick pockets, open 
locks, find/remove traps) are improved 
by 10%. A vial or pot of this oil (or 
salve) usually contains 1d4 +4 applica- 
tions. The effect lasts for 1d4 +4 turns. 
The bonuses to the ability scores cannot 
be claimed by any thief who is wearing 
gauntlets or gloves of any kind, includ- 
ing magical ones! 


Potion of Master Thievery: This po- 
tion gives the thief a temporary increase 
in levels if he has fewer than 13 levels of 
experience. The number of levels 
gained depend on the thief's level, as 
shown below. 


Increase 
Level of Levels Added in each 
Imbiber bestowed hit dice skill 
Ist-3rd 5 5d6 +20% 
4th-6th 4 4d6+1 +16% 
7th-9th 3 3d6 +2 +12% 
10th-12th 2 2d6+3 +8% 


The thief acts as if he were at the ex- 
perience level bestowed by the magic of 
the potion. Damage sustained is taken 
first from magically gained temporary 
extra hit points. So far as thieving skills 
are concerned, the potion affects these 
all equally by the increase shown. The 
effects of this potion last for 5d6 
rounds. 


Potion of Perception: This enhances 
the senses of the imbiber to a great de- 
gree, with numerous effects: 

(i) A thief gains a 10% bonus to his 
open locks and remove traps skills. 

(ii) A thief gains a 20% bonus to his 
find traps and hear noise skills. 


(iii) A character's chance for being 
surprised is halved (usually this means 
a +1 or +2 on the die). 

(iv) A character's chance for detect- 
ing secret or concealed doors is dou- 
bled. This may also be applied to 
detecting hidden or concealed objects if 
the DM wishes to use an Intelligence 
check for this; a bonus of +4 applies to 
such an ability check. A corresponding 
bonus of —4 applies to any observation 
proficiency check. 

(v) A character has a 25% chance of 
automatically detecting invisible or de- 
tecting illusions (from spells or spell- 
like effects below 5th level) as such. 

However, this enhancement also 
makes the imbiber vulnerable to gaze 
attacks and weapons and also sound- 
based attacks (such as a shout spell or 
the roaring of an androsphinx) and all 
saving throws made against such at- 
tacks are at —2. The effects of the po- 
tion last for 1d4 +4 turns. 


Potion of Sleep Breathing: This po- 
tion allows the imbiber to breathe a col- 
orless, odorless cloud of sleep-inducing 
gas up to three times within an hour af- 
ter drinking it. This cloud is effectively 
a 20’ x 20’ x 20’ cube. Within the cloud, 
creatures are affected as if struck by a 
sleep spell, the effects of which are ex- 
actly duplicated by the cloud. If the 
thief does not breathe out a cloud in this 
way within an hour after drinking the 
potion, he must save versus spells or 
fall into a deep, comatose sleep himself 
for 1d4+4 turns. This potion is obvi- 
ously of great value for the thief in deal- 
ing with numbers of low-level and 
peripheral guards when he is trespass- 
ing, breaking and entering, etc. 


Potion of Thievery: Similar to, but 
weaker than, the potion of master 
thievery, this potion also grants the 
thief drinking it temporary increases in 
levels, hit dice, and skills, if he is of 9th 
or lower level prior to drinking it, as 
shown below. 


105 


W 


Increase 
Levelof Levels Added in each 
Imbiber bestowed hit dice skill 
Ist-3rd 3 3d6 +12% 
4th-6th 2 2d6+1 +8% 
7th-9th 1 1d6+2 +4% 


As with the potion of master thiev- 
ery, the individual acts in all respects as 
a thief of the higher level gained after 
drinking the potion, with the increase 
in thieving skills being equally spread 
across all categories by the bonus 
shown. Damage sustained is taken 
from additional temporary hit points 
gained first. The effects of the potion 
last for 1d4+4 turns. 


Miscellaneous Magic: 
Clothing and Jewelry 


Amulet of Dra- 
matic Death: Only a few of these prized 
items exist, each created for a high-level 
thief in the service of two powerful 
spellcasters, a mage and an illusionist, 
who combined their skills to create 
them. There are six amulets known, 
which differ in only one respect; all 
have the following common properties. 

The amulet is activated when the 
wearer suffers one particular attack 
form (and only that attack form) which 
would be sufficient to kill or wholly dis- 
able the wearer (e.g., by petrification). 
At this point the magic of the amulet is 
activated. Damage sustained from the 
killing attack is wholly negated, and a 
special attack (such as petrification) 
likewise negated. The thief is at once 
made invisible. Lastly, a powerful pro- 
grammed illusion is brought into opera- 
tion so that the amulet-wearer appears 
to have been slain or disabled by the at- 
tack, This programmed illusion is both 
complete and dramatic—e.g., an amu- 
let protecting against magical fire will 
show the victim of fireball attack as a 
burned corpse, complete with the smell 
of roasted flesh. Only direct, tactile 
checks or a powerful divination spell 
will reveal the illusion for what it is. 


The amulet will function only once per 
day. Roll 1d6 on the table below to de- 
termine the single attack form which is 
protected against by the amulet. 


dé Roll Specific Protection 
1 Magical fire (including red 
dragon breath, etc.) 
2 Lightning and Electrical at- 


tacks 
3 Cold-based attacks 
4 Petrification 
5 Edged Weapons 
6 Blunt Weapons 


Boots of Balance: The wearer of 
these soft, low-heeled supple leather 
boots is endowed with a magically en- 
hanced sense of balance. This has the 
following important effects: 

(i) A thief wearing the boots gains a 
+10% bonus to all move silently rolls 
and also to all climb walls rolls. 

(ii) The Dexterity of any character 
wearing the boots is increased by one 
point for all purposes where the hands 
are not involved. Thus, a thief cannot 
claim a bonus to skills such as open 
locks, but a bonus to Armor Class may 
apply, and likewise a bonus applies to 
Dexterity checks in certain situations 
(e.g., to avoid a fall). 

(iii) The wearer gains the tightrope 
walking proficiency; if this is already 
possessed, a — 4 bonus modifier applies 
to all proficiency check die rolls when 
wearing the boots. 

A wearer of boots of balance cannot 
also claim a further bonus for moving 
silently from mundane aids (such as the 
use of leather strapping to cross creaky 
floorboards). Also, the bonuses gained 
from boots of balance cannot be added 
to the bonus gained if the wearer also 
uses gauntlets of dexterity. 

Gloves of Evasion: These gloves are 
made of exceptionally supple, thin calf- 
skin, and when put on they blend with 
the skin and become virtually undetect- 
able (and are detection resistant). A 
thief wearing them gains a +10% bo- 
nus to open locks skill and can undo al- 
most any knot automatically in one 
round. Any character wearing the 


Tools of the Trade 


gloves gains a proficiency in escapolo- 
gy, being able to manipulate his hands 
in such a way that he can escape from 
manacles, chains, irons or similar re- 
straints if a Dexterity check (with a +2 
bonus if the character is a thief) is 
made, 

Mantle of the Mundane: This very 
ordinary, even shabby, brown or grey 
cloak makes its wearer appear utterly 
unmemorable. It gives a 5% bonus to 
hide in shadows in all circumstances 
and makes the wearer 80% undetect- 
able if in a crowd (detection resistance 
applies here also). It also makes the 
wearer almost impossible to recognize 
after having been seen—very useful in 
avoiding identification after a crime. 
Unless a witness (and it must be an eye 
witness) makes a check against one- 
fourth of his Intelligence the wearer of 
the mantle will have appeared so mun- 
dane and boring in appearance that the 
witness will be unable to relate him to 
the thief (regardless of whether the thief 
is wearing the mantle the next time the 
witness sees him). 

Robe of Vanishing: This simple and 
innocent-looking robe is a boon for a 
thief needing to elude pursuers quickly. 
The thief only needs to grasp the hems 
of the robe and clutch it very tightly 
about him and he will simply seem to 
vanish, although the thief will just have 
been affected as per a rope trick spell 
(no rope is visible, of course) and also 
made invisible. detection resistance ap- 
plies to the extradimensional space cre- 
ated. The rope trick effect will last for 
up to six turns but the invisibility cre- 
ated is of the normal sort (permanent 
until some offensive action is under- 
taken). Wise thieves will make sure 
that other magical aids to escape (nota- 
bly a potion of flying) are on hand to 
maximize the value of this robe. The 
robe can be used up to three times per 
day to create its magical effects. 

Shadowcloak: This large, cowled 
cloak is made from pure black velvet. 
When worn by a thief it improves hide in 
shadows chances by 25% and makes a 
thief 50% likely to be invisible in near- 
darkness (even to infravision, ultra- 


vision, etc.). It can also be used to cast 
darkness, darkness 15' radius, and con- 
tinual darkness once each per day (at 
12th level of magic use). Finally, once per 
day the wearer can actually transform in- 
to a shadow (cf. MONSTROUS 
COMPENDIUM® I) for up to 12 turns, 
becoming a shadow in all respects save 
for mental ones (thus, the wearer cannot 
be damaged by nonmagical weapons, 
undead take the wearer for a shadow and 
ignore him, etc.). Saves against light- 
based attacks (e.g., a light spell cast into 
the eyes) are always made at —2 by the 
wearer of a shadowcloak. 

If a cleric successfully makes a turn- 
ing attempt against the wearer in sha- 
dowform, the cloak wearer is permitted 
a saving throw (this is at —4 if the cleric 
is actually able to damn/destroy 
shadows). If the save fails, the wearer 
suffers 1d6 points of damage per level 
of the cleric and the shadowcloak is de- 
stroyed. If the save is made, the charac- 
ter takes half damage and must flee in 
fear from the cleric at maximum rate 
for one turn. 


Miscellaneous Magic: 
Other Sneaky Stuff 


Bag of Vanish- 
ing: This appears to be a simple pouch 
capable of carrying some 2-3 lbs. or so. 
In fact, it operates as a bag of holding 
capable of carrying up to 50 Ibs. weight 
while having an encumbrance of only 3 
lbs. Further, the bag of vanishing can 
have its drawstrings tugged tightly 
once per day and it will simply disap- 
pear for six turns; the equivalent of a 
rope trick spell will operate on the bag 
(although it will stay with its owner) 
and it will also have detection resist- 
ance operating upon it. 

This bag is invaluable for smuggling, 
as should be obvious. The only prob- 
lem is that each time the rope trick 
function is used there is a 5% chance 
that the contents will vanish into the 
Ethereal Plane and the bag will be emp- 
ty when it is checked later. 


Boxes of Delightful Transports: 
These wooden boxes are 6-inch cubes, 
and come in identical pairs (often deco- 
rated with great attention to detail). 
When a nonliving object of suitable size 
is placed in one and the lid closed and a 
command word spoken, the object will 
disappear, only to reappear (effectively 
teleported) in the matching box. This 
function operates up to three times per 
day. 

While boxes of delightful transports 
are obviously very useful, they have 
certain limitations. It is not possible for 
the object-teleport to cross any planar 
barriers. And, while the distance be- 
tween the boxes is not important in af- 
fecting the teleport range, there is 
always a 5% chance that the object dis- 
patched will not reach its destination, 
instead appearing at some random lo- 
cation 10d10 miles away. Thus, dis- 
patch of valuables is not recommended. 
The boxes are more often used to send 
messages, which can always be sent in 
duplicate (which gives very high 
chances for at least one successful dis- 
patch). 

The major limitation on use of these 
boxes, though, is that no enchanted ob- 
ject can be teleported using them. Even 
the placing of a simple Nystul’s Magic 
Aura spell on an object will prevent its 
being teleported using these boxes. 
Hence, magical items such as rings, po- 
tions, amulets and other such things, 
small enough to fit into one of these 
boxes, cannot be teleported to a distant 
location. 

Dust of Trail Dispersion: A generous 
pinch of this magical dust, when scat- 
tered over the beginning or origin of a 
trail (such as at the bottom of a wall 
surrounding a house the thief has 
burgled, at the point he reaches the 
ground) will prevent its being followed 
by all normal sensory means (rangers, 
bloodhounds, etc.). The dust is usually 
found in a small box, or packets, with 
one “find” usually being sufficient for 
1d4 +4 uses. 

Lens of Remote Viewing: These 
small, clear gems (the term “lens” is a 
slight misnomer here) appear to be 


worthless quartz, but in fact possess a 
powerful dweomer. If the owner at- 
tunes himself to a lens of remote view- 
ing (a process which takes four hours of 
meditation), he can then “see” through 
the lens whatever scene is happening in 
front of the lens and within its field of 
vision, wherever the lens may later be. 
There is no range limit, save that no 
perception across the planes is possible. 
No auditory information is detected 
through the lens, and no spells can be 
cast through it. A lens of remote view- 
ing is also detection resistant. At any 
one time, any thief may be attuned with 
a number of such lenses not exceeding 
one-half his Intelligence score (round 
fractions down). These items are usu- 
ally found singly, and are of obvious 
value in spying. 

Lens of Valuation: This highly-prized 
item consists of a lens some 3 inches in 
diameter with a handle some 6 inches 
long. The lens allows the viewer to esti- 
mate the true worth of any nonmagical 
object to within 5%, on studying it for 
five rounds or longer. Of course, this 
will be an average price, and special 
conditions of supply or demand! may 
make this valuation wildly inaccurate. 

Merchants usually go to considerable 
lengths to prevent any lens of valuation 
from being used on their goods! In the 
thieving community, it is most sought- 
after by fences, who can widen their op- 
erations in a major way if they possess 
this item. 

Tallin‘’s Tightrope: This modified 
rope of climbing will only snake for- 
ward at an angle of up to 45 degrees up- 
ward or downward, but it also enables 
its owner and up to five man-sized or 
smaller creatures touched by its owner 
to walk upon it as if they had the tight- 
rope walking proficiency, with a +4 
bonus to any proficiency checks re- 
quired. Anyone not touched by the 
rope owner attempting to walk on it 
will suffer a —4 penalty to any saves or 
checks made while on the rope. In all 
other ways, this item is identical to a 
normal rope of climbing. 


107 


$ 


Weapons 


Crossbow of An- 
gling: This appears to be a quite normal 
light crossbow, although it has a thick 
wrist strap attached which is of unusual 
design and toughness. On command it 
can fire bolts with special properties up 
to three times per day. The magical bolt 
fired counts as a +2 bolt for determina- 
tion of attack rolls (and damage if ap- 
propriate). When fired, this special bolt 
is trailed by a pencil-thin snaking line of 
faint blue light (which radiates magic 
fairly strongly) which connects it to the 
crossbow. When the bolt impacts, the 
head expands into a small claw which 
embeds itself in the target, such that the 
bolt grips ìt strongly. By the use of a sec- 
ond command word the crossbow user 
can “reel in” the target, the thin “cord” 
of magical energy shrinking to drag the 
target to the archer. 

The speed at which the target is re- 
trieved depends on its weight, friction, 
etc.; the maximum speed is 60 feet per 
round. The DM may need to exercise 
his judgement in most cases. If the tar- 
get is heavier than the archer or is im- 
movable or braced in some way, then 
the crossbowman may actually be 
dragged to the target rather than the re- 
verse applying. This can be exploited, 
of course, to pull a thief up to a ceiling 
or up a wall. The magical cord is AC 
—2and takes 15 points of damage (non- 
magical weapons do no damage) to de- 
stroy. 

Dagger of Impaling: These daggers 
are +2 to hit and damage, and on a nat- 
ural roll of 20 (and also of 19 if this is 
sufficient to score a hit) on a backstab 
attack they impale the target, inflicting 
an additional 1d4 +2/1d3 +2 points of 
damage and also staying in the wound, 
where they cause an additional 1d4 +2/ 
1d3+2 points of damage each round 
until removed. 

Dagger of Resource: These daggers 
usually have handles of ebony or ivory, 
or some similarly valuable and exotic 
substance, and have 1d3 +1 small studs 
in the cross guards. The dagger has at- 


tack and damage bonuses, but it also 
has additional tools located within it, 
and depressing one of the studs will 
cause the corresponding item to spring 
from the hilt of the dagger, ready for 
use (only one tool at a time can be 
used). These bonuses and tools depend 
on the number of studs in the weapon, 
as shown below: 


No. Hit/ 

of damage Tools Description 
studs bonus avail. of tools 

2 +4 2 Lock picks add- 


ing +5% to 
Open Locks 
rolls, plus tool for 
removing stones 


from horses 
hooves’ 

3 +3 3 As above, plus 
Lens of Detection 
(see DMG, p. 
173) 

4 +2 4 As above, plus 


Gem of Bright- 
ness with 3d10 
charges 


Dagger of Sounding: This oddly- 
designed dagger is +1 for attack and 
damage determination, but it has a pe- 
culiar, hollow bronze bulb at the end of 
its pommel. If this is gently tapped 
against a hollow surface, it gives a re- 
sounding ring quite different from the 
dull tone emitted if struck against solid 
stone. Tapping it gently against walls 
allows the thief a 5 in 6 chance for find- 
ing a secret door, rising to 11 in 12 if the 
thief is elven or half-elven. Also, the 
thief can search for secret doors at twice 
the normal rate when using this dagger. 
In other cases, the thief is 80% likely to 
be able to determine successfully the 
approximate thickness and nature of 
the material the dagger is used to 
sound. 

Scabbard of Poison: These scabbards 
have reservoirs in which poison can be 
stored, and when a blade is placed in 
the scabbard and then drawn, the 
venom will automatically and magi- 
cally be drawn from the reservoir to 


Tools of the Trade 


coat the blade. The venom will be 
wiped from the blade after one success- 
ful hit on a target, or evaporate after 
2d4 rounds in any event. Any venom 
can be used, for the dweomer gives the 
venom virulence against whatever crea- 
ture is struck. The scabbard holds 
enough poison for six doses, but must 
be manually refilled when empty. 25% 
of these scabbards are the right size for 
long swords, 25% suitable for short 
swords, and 50% for daggers. All re- 
strictions which apply to the use of poi- 
son weapons apply here, of course, and 
only evil characters would routinely 
use such a device. 

Short sword of Backstabbing: In the 
hands of any character this is a +2 
magical weapon, but in the hands of a 
thief it is especially potent. When a thief 
makes a backstab attempt with this 
short sword, it allows him to attack as if 
four levels higher than his actual experi- 
ence level, with corresponding im- 
provements in THACO, attack rolls, 
and damage multiplier on a successful 
hit. 


Special Results 


If the DM rolls a 
“Special” result from Table 32, then a 
unique item should be developed for 
the thief. This takes careful work by the 
DM to design the item, and also to de- 
termine a suitable history for it. Multi- 
property items in the listings above 
(such as the potion of perception, boots 
of balance, amulet of dramatic death, 
etc.) can be taken as inspirations. A 
specially-designed item should have 
several functions, none of exceptional 
strength, and with an emphasis on pro- 
tection and nondetection rather than 
strong offensive potential. 

A history for the item is well worth 
the effort. One obvious possibility is 
that someone, sometime, will come to 
try and get the item back! Certain NPCs 
may be hunting the previous wearer/ 
user of the item, and while they do not 
have a description of the previous user 
they know what the item looks like. 
Perhaps they have been hired to do 


away with that previous user. So, when 
they see it on the person of the PC... . 
The history of the item can have great 
potential for adventure locked within 
it, which the DM doesn't need to exploit 
immediately. Also, the player whose 
character gets the item should not be 
told the history of the item; that’s some- 
thing he will have to find out for himself 
and, again, there may be adventures 
locked within this search, This is espe- 
cially true if command words are 
needed to activate certain properties. 

Don't make too much of such items, 
or other players may feel their charac- 
ters are being put in the shade and over- 
shadowed by all the attention the thief 
is getting. But a unique item, something 
the thief knows he is the only person on 
Oerth (or Krynn or in the Forgotten 
Realms) to have, adds color and char- 
acter to any adventuring party! 


Chapter 6: The Arts of Deception: Classic Cons 


The old rogue slurped his ale noisily, 
complaining to the bartender, “The 
thieves these days, they've lost the art 
of it all. Like a bloody bunch of bandit 
half-orcs: Their idea of an elegant theft 
is a rich victim bashed neatly on the 
head, so his fancy clothes don't get 
scuffed so much and can be fenced more 
dear,” The young bartender raised his 
eyebrows, a little wary but curious 
about what the wizened old coot had to 
say. “Now, in my day, the thief we all 
looked up to was one whose only weap- 
ons were his wits and a steady, speedy 
hand. It would be hours before his vic- 
tim even knew'd he was robbed, and 
then he couldn't be sure who done it. 

“There was this one guy, Willie— 
Cool Willie, they called him, ‘cause he 
never lost his cool. He know'd ALL the 
scams..." 


Since day one, there have been peo- 
ple eager to get a free ride, to swindle 
others out of anything they can. These 
people, it has been observed, are typi- 
cally the best targets for the swindler. 
After all, how likely are you to report a 
con man, when the reason he succeeded 
was that you thought you were taking 
advantage of him? Playing off other 
peoples’ greed is the key to a successful 
swindling career, on whatever scale it is 
performed. 

An astute swindler is always on the 
lookout for opportunities for a good 
racket. Some of these situations and 
scams have been nearly immortalized, 
and are classics: Not only does it seem 
everyone knows them, but everyone 
still uses them—and they still work. An 
excellent book filled with real-life anec- 
dotes of classic cons is The Compleat 
Swindler, by Ralph Hancock with 
Henry Chafetz (New York: Macmillan, 
1968). 

What follows is a sampling of scams 
for the novice pigeon plucker. 


Short-Change Swindles 


On the simple 
level, you have the short-change swin- 
dle. This is something you do to 


merchants—or merchants do to you! 
Through fast-talk, distraction) and 
sleight-of-hand, you trick them) into 
giving you as change more money than 
you paid them. 

The story at the end of this chapter il- 
lustrates the short-change swindle. 


Gambling 


Gambling is a 
finer racket. Gambling is irresistible to 
many people, and the swindler loves to 
take advantage of this weakness. Every 
sort of gambling—dice, coin-matching, 
the shell game, races and gladiatorial 
contests (the fantasy equivalent of 
modern organized sports)—presents an 
opportunity for the swindler to make a 
load of silver. A swindler needs gam- 
bling proficiency to work any of the fol- 
lowing scams, and any other character 
who makes a gambling proficiency 
check will probably be wise to the swin- 
dler’s tricks. 

Dice Games: Dice-throwing devel- 
oped in ancient times, and has re- 
mained popular since (even into RPGs). 
An astute gambler understands the 
odds of winning in any dice game, such 
as craps, and a skilled swindler knows 
how to rig the game in his favor. 
Loaded dice (with imperceptibly 
rounded faces, or weighted pips, and so 
forth) are one way, but the true master 
can even throw dice so that they will 
land as he wishes. To do this trick, a 
swindler must make a successful pick 
pockets roll, at —40%, for each die. 

Coin Matching: Coin matching is a 
simple, age-old game, appearing in var- 
ious forms since the days of the phar- 
aohs, and is simple to run a scam 
around. 

The favorite variation for two swin- 
dlers working a sucker is “odd) man 
wins”; Three coins are tossed, or re- 
vealed simultaneously (like the rock- 
paper-scissors game). If two are heads 
or tails, and the other is the opposite, 
the holder of the odd coin wins. |If all 
three are the same, no one wins. 

To set this up as a scam, there should 
be two swindlers. One plays the steerer, 


109 


gaining the confidence of the pigeon, 
while the other pretends to be a foolish 
stranger. The steerer conspires with the 
real target, ostensibly to swindle the 
money of the stranger, his true partner. 
In the course of the game, the steerer 
winds up with all the money. 

Of course, he’s not able simply to 
share it with the pigeon, since they've 
supposedly just pulled a fast one on the 
foolish stranger. They have instead 
agreed beforehand to meet somewhere 
and share the spoils. Of course, the 
steerer never shows up to share and the 
would-be con artist is left penniless. 
Furthermore, since he was duped on ac- 
count of his own greed, trying to do 
what was done to him, he'll probably 
swallow his chagrin and never report 
the incident to the local authorities! 

The Shell Game: The shell game is 
another age-old classic. The swindler 
sets up at some event, like a circus, fair, 
or even a busy street corner, He has a 
single pea and three shells, which he re- 
arranges. It is a test of observation, he 
says: Anyone who can identify which 
shell covers the pea, after they've been 
shifted around, will win whatever he 
bet. If he guesses wrong, he loses his 
money. 

Someone takes on the challenge, and 
wins! Of course, this is an accomplice 
of the shell man (known as a “capper”). 
The crowd thinks the swindler is play- 
ing honestly. Then a real target places 
his bet. He, too, will win. The swindler 
will nurse the target's self-confidence to 
raise the stakes, and then (mysteri- 
ously!) the victim's powers of observa- 
tion will decline, and he'll fail to spot 
the right shell! This of course is done 
through sleight-of-hand. (To do it un- 
noticed, the thief needs to make a suc- 
cessful pick pockets roll.) 


Quackery 


Quackery is the 
realm of the mountebank, the seller of 
“snake oil” and all manner of exotic po- 
tions, unguents and charms, each sup- 
posed to be a medical wonder, but 
usually worthless (if not actually dan- 


gerous to its user), Even in a world 
where magic is real, quacks can make 
brisk profits from those who cannot tell 
a real potion from fake. 


Forgery and Counterfeiting 


Forgery may also 
be a swindler's calling, including coun- 
terfeiting. Interestingly, forgery was 
not a serious crime in the middle ages; 
barter took precedence above coinage 
or credit notes, and it’s hard to counter- 
feit a bushel of wheat or forge livestock. 

As the Renaissance came, however, 
and banking developed, so did the forg- 
er's art—and the punishments became 
serious. As late as the first half of the 
19th century in England, men and 
women were hanged for the crime of 
forging one-pound notes. 

The value of forgery, therefore, and 
the risks involved, will depend on the 
nature of commerce and trade in your 
campaign. 


Jewelry Swindles 


For the well- 
trained rogue, jewelry swindles can be 
both the most lucrative and the easiest, 
because it is so difficult for the un- 
trained eye to identify or to judge the 
value of a precious stone. Besides deal- 
ing in paste and glass fakes, jewelry 
swindlers may pass off a lesser stone as 
something more valuable (e.g., quartz 
for diamond), or pay someone (espe- 
cially naive but treasure-laden adven- 
turers) for a diamond as if it were 
quartz. A nimble-fingered rogue may 
also replace fake jewels for real ones, 
and the owner may never know the dif- 
ference! 

Sly NPC jewel swindlers are a great 
way for DMs to relieve characters lack- 
ing gem cutting proficiency of their 
cash and jewels (provided they don't 
spew out at the start, “The dragon's 
treasure includes 12 opals at 1,000 gp 
each”). 


“How much d'I owe ya?" asked the 
old rogue, upon finishing ale and tale. 
“Four coppers,” said the bartender. 


The Arts of Deception: Classic Cons 


The rogue fished in his pockets. 
“Hmm,” he said. “All I have is this gold 
piece, Have ya got change?" 

“Believe | do,” said the bartender, tak- 
ing the gold coin and putting out an 
electrum coin, four silvers, and six cop- 
pers in change. 

“Say, why don't you get me a slab of 
cheese for the road?” asked the rogue, 
sliding over two coppers for it. 

While the bartender retrieved the 
cheese from beneath the counter, the 
rogue opened his pouch to put the re- 
maining coppers inside. “Well look 
here! Guess I had a silver after all!” he 
declared. He moved his hand toward 
the others, palming his new-found sil- 
ver and hiding the electrum beneath the 
other coins, while appearing just to set 
the new silver coin with the rest. “Say,” 
he tells the bartender. “I'd be hatin’ to 
take all yer change like that. Why 
dontcha gimme an electrum for these 
five silvers?” 

"Sure, said the bartender, handing 
him an electrum. The old rogue turned 
toward the door. “Wait!” said the bar- 
tender. “Ye left an electrum coin here 
with the silver!" 

"So I did! Thank you. Honesty’s a 
difficult quality to find these days! 
Well, to keep you with enough change, 
why don't I just give you this silver" — 
he then produced the coin he had 
palmed—“and you give me back the 
gold piece?” 

“All right,” said the bartender. “Have 
a nice day, then!” 

As he walked down the street from 
the tavern, five silvers richer, the old 
rogue permitted himself a grin and a lit- 
tle skip of delight. All these years, and 
Cool Willie hadn't lost his touch. 


Robbing the Robbers 


Thieves as a class 
are people who enjoy toeing the line, 
when it comes to risk-taking. Some ren- 
egade thieves take it a step further, of- 
ten a step too far, and dare to steal from 
other thieves, or even thieves’ guilds. 

It's dangerous activity, but it does 
have certain advantages. Foremost, the 


110 


guilds and thieves can’t very well report 
thefts to the authorities (assuming they 
don't control those authorities through 
bribes or blackmail). 

And, of course, authorities permit 
the theft of stolen items when its pur- 
pose is recovery, to return the goods to 
the original owner, as bounty hunters 
do. 

Sanction and some degree of protec- 
tion might also be gained from a rival 
guild. Mob wars provide many oppor- 
tunities for the daring thief, willing to 
run around in the crossfire, scoring 
loot. The trick is not to be identified as 
stealing from the wrong people (i.e., 
the guild that wins in the end). 

Perhaps the biggest advantage of all, 
and the reason that thieves will brave 
the risks, is the enormous wealth that 
can be concentrated in the hands of a 
single criminal, especially an important 
officer of the guild. 

But there's no shortage of risks. First 
off, intelligent thieves understand 
themselves and, by extension, other 
thieves. Each thief needs to be a trou- 
bleshooter, in a way, designing protec- 
tion for himself and his possessions, 
and making sure that it’s proof at least 
against any thief of his skill or less. This 
means that in stealing from another 
thief, you can expect a fairly difficult 
job. 

Sometimes, however, a thief may be 
surprisingly flippant about not protect- 
ing his wealth. The people who can get 
away with this are incredibly powerful 
crime lords, with vast wealth and myr- 
iad connections, They have the re- 
sources to find anyone who dares to 
steal from them and deliver a fitting 
punishment. Among such punish- 
ments, a simple assassination is very 
mild and humane. 

Understand that the underworld is 
often harsher on thieves than the estab- 
lished authorities. The underworld 
does not presume innocence; and sweet 
revenge is more important to a 
wronged crime lord (and his ego and 
ruthless reputation) than the recovery 
of any but the most precious property. 


Chapter 7: New Rules for Thieves 


This section introduces rules of 
advanced complexity that players and 
DMs may wish to use in the campaign. 
While they are recommended for use in 
a gaming environment where thieves 
are common, they are not exclusively 
limited to the thief character. 

As an exception to this generality, 
those optional rules that modify spe- 
cific thief activities are, of course, usea- 
ble only by thieves. 

New rules are provided for lock and 
trap construction, removal, and modi- 
fication; for specific animal training, 
tricks common and useful to thieves; to 
amplify the poison rules presented in 
the AD&D® 2nd Edition DUNGON 
MASTER Guide; to allow thieves to 
possibly knock out a victim with a sur- 
prise blow from the rear; and to detail the 
encumbrance effects when armored char- 
acters attempt to perform acrobatics. 


Advanced Locks and 
Traps 


The game works 
perfectly well under the assumption 
that a lock is a lock, regardless of its 
make or mechanism. Traps generally 
earn greater detail (“a poison needle 
flicks out of the panel beside the lock,” 
for example), but even so, the actual 
workings of the device are not usually 
described. 

However, locks and traps are in fact 
found in great variety, and while many 
might provide little challenge to the 
skilled thief, some will prove daunting 
even to the most experienced veteran. 
A device can be listed with a modifier 
of + or — up to 30%, reflecting the 
ease or difficulty with which a thief 
might pick the lock or find and remove 
a trap. The modifier is applied to the 
thief's chance of success with the obsta- 
cle; a —30 lock, for example, lowers 
the thief's chances of picking it by 30%. 
If his normal percentage is 65%, then 
his chance with this lock is only 35%. 


Describing Types 


The more detail 
the DM can provide regarding the ob- 
stacle facing the thief, the greater the 
player's options in facing it. 

Locks can include simple latches, 
keyhole locks with a single or multiple 
tumblers, puzzles that involve perform- 
ing several procedures in a set sequence 
(pushing a stone, turning a handle, and 
pulling outward, for example). 

Traps have many more varieties. 
Generally a moving part, such as a 
cage, block, blade, needle, sluice gate, 
or trapdoor, is triggered by the act of a 
character—a step on a surface, or a pull 
on a handle, for example. 

A good trap design will include at 
least some vague description of how 
the two elements are connected! Le- 
vers, springs (both leaf and coil), piv- 
ots, bellows, deadweights, block and 
tackle, and hinges are all elements used 
in trap design. 


Modifying Checks 


The major con- 
siderations for determining the difficulty 
of a trap are the skill of the locksmith or 
trap maker, the materials used for the 
job, and the purpose of the lock or trap. 
Some examples for locks are listed; 


+15% Typical latch on small house, 
guest room of an inn, storage 
closet, etc. 

0 Lock on a merchant's ins, 
weapons locker, wine cellar of 

a large inn, etc. 

-15% Door to a cell or keep, security 
checkpoint within a dungeon, 
lock on a gem cutter’s shop or 
moneychanger’s house. 

—30% Lock on a major vault or most 
intricately designed cell door 


These guidelines should be aaa by 
the DM to establish a variety of chal- 
lenges in the campaign setting. The 
many varieties of traps are too great to 
list, but the same principle of modifica- 
tion applies. 


The new equipment listed in Chapter 
5 includes a variety of aids for just such 
delicate work. By utilizing greater de- 
tail in the description of a lock or trap, 
more opportunities for the use of this 
equipment will arise. 


Building Better Locks 


A character with 
locksmith proficiency can try to build a 
superior lock, but only if the proper 
materials are available. In most cases 
this means an iron or steel lock, though 
special considerations can be adjudi- 
cated by the DM. The locksmith must 
make a proficiency check for the lock. 
A roll of 1 or less indicates a lock of su- 
perior craftsmanship. Subtract 1 from 
the die roll for every proficiency slot 
beyond the first spent on the locksmith 
skill. For example, a craftsman with 
three slots of locksmith skill creates a 
superior lock on a roll of 1, 2, or 3. 

The modification for such a specific 
lock is determined by rolling 1d10, re- 
sulting in a 1-10% modifier. Each im- 
proved lock will be at least as good as 
the one before it, however, so re-roll re- 
sults that are lower than the modifier 
for a previous lock made by that same 
smith. When the locksmith makes locks 
with a 10% modifier, he is allowed to 
roll 2d10. When he reaches 20%, he re- 
ceives 3d10, but is no longer guaran- 
teed to beat his previous high roll. He 
does get to roll 3d10 until he gets a re- 
sult of 20 or greater, however. 

For example, a locksmith builds a su- 
perior lock and rolls a 7% modifier. On 
his next superior lock, he rolls and dis- 
cards a 6, 3, and 5, before rolling a 10. 
He keeps the 10, since that is the first 
roll to equal or beat his previous high 
of 7. On his next superior lock, he rolls 
2d10, using the first adjusted roll of 10 
or higher. If he eventually gets a 20, he 
rolls 3d10 until he gets a result of 20 or 
greater. All his subsequent superior 
locks, then, will gain at least 20% mod- 
ifiers, with the occasional one perhaps 
as high as 30%, 


New Rules for Thieves 


Multiple Locks 


A simpler way to 
make a room or chest more secure 
against thieves is simply to protect it 
with more than one lock. Iron-bound 
chests with two or three built-in locks 
were not uncommon in rich treasure 
vaults. Certainly a powerful and suspi- 
cious wizard would not entrust his 
spellbooks to a cabinet with only a sin- 
gle lock, 


Lockpicking/Trap 
Removing Noise 


A thief attempt- 
ing to open a lock or remove a trap with 
complete stealth can try to do so. He 
suffers a —10% chance to his ability 
rating, but will perform the task quietly 
on any roll except 01-10%. In the latter 
case the lock or trap makes a sharp 
click, snap, or other sound, audible to 
anyone within earshot. 

If a thief fails a silent attempt, he can- 
not try to open the same lock normally. 


Animal Assistants 


A thief with an 
exceptional ability at animal handling 
and training can sometimes train crea- 
tures to assist him in his profession. 
This section discusses three possible 
creature assistants: dogs, ferrets, and 
monkeys. Other types can be used 
given the approval of the DM; develop 
and define the abilities of the animal us- 
ing these three as examples. 

All animal training acts described be- 
low are useable with the standard profi- 
ciency rules. The main additions are 
specific tasks that can be learned by 
these creatures. 

When an animal learns one of the 
specific tasks below, its chance of per- 
forming the task are determined by the 
proficiency of its trainer. The profi- 
ciency check required of the animal is 
the same as for its trainer. For example, 
a ferret is trained to fetch gems by a 
character with three slots of animal 
handling proficiency and a Wisdom of 
15. He needs a proficiency check of 17 


or less to train the ferret for the task. 
The ferret, consequently, needs a roll of 
17 or less to fetch the gems properly. 

Players should record the stats for 
animals on the PC character sheet. List 
the tasks each animal has been trained 
for, recording this proficiency number 
beside the notation. 

At the DM's option, some animals 
may have such exceptional intelligence, 
or strength, or speed, that their ratings 
are granted a +1 or, rarely, a +2 modi- 
fier to specific tasks. 

Dogs can serve primarily as protec- 
tors, requiring little training before 
they become alert and aggressive 
watchdogs. 

Dogs can also be trained to track a 
character or other animal. The dog re- 
quires some scent information about 
the object being tracked and a general 
location of the trail. A proficiency 
check is made to find the trail. Another 
check must be made every 1-4 turns, 
and also whenever the trail takes an un- 
usual turn (through water, along tree 
limbs, etc). Dogs specially bred for this 
(including many hounds) gain a +1 or 
+2 to this particular ability. 

Dogs can sometimes be trained to 
perform the “Thief’s Fetch” trick, be- 
low. Generally, small and nimble dogs 
are used for this task. 

Ferrets can fit through openings as 
narrow as 2", and thus have an ability 
to go places other animals cannot. Fer- 
rets can be taught the “Thief’s Fetch” 
trick to acquire gems, coins, or other 
small objects. 

Monkeys are the most adaptable of 
these animals. A monkey can be trained 
to be selective in its fetching. Gate- 
ways, high windows, and other obsta- 
cles can easily be traversed by a 
monkey. A monkey will fight to defend 
itself if cornered or seized. 

Monkey: AC 7; MV 12(9 climbingh); 
HD1/2; THACO 20; Dmg 1-4 


The Thief’s Fetch 


Animals can be 
trained to retrieve specific types of 
items from a general area such as a 


112 


room or yard. Specific objects include 
coins, gems, jewelry such as chains or 
bracelets, or even items of food and 
drink. Additional training sessions can 
train the animal to perform its task with 
stealth. 

The animal can be sent by gesture ina 
specific direction. It will seek for some 
time in the area indicated, finally re- 
turning to its master. Generally, the ani- 
mal will spend 1d8 turns on the search. 
However, additional training sessions 
can add another 1d8 turns to this dura- 
tion. 

If an animal is discovered or fright- 
ened during this task, it will attempt to 
flee to its master. It can be trained to flee 
in a different direction, or even to at- 
tack, if a good trainer takes the time to 
do so. 


Poison and Sedatives 


The DMG pro- 
vides detailed rules on poison types and 
effects (pg. 73). The following rules add 
several types of non-lethal poisons, in- 
troduce poison gases, and describe 
some poison antidotes. 


Sedatives are ingested poisons that 
disable, rather than injure, a character. 
A sedative can be administered in food 
or drink, with different rates and ef- 
fects: 


Method Onset Weakness Duration 


Eaten 4-40 1-6 2-12 
min, min. hours 

Drunk 2-12 1-6 1-4 
min. min. hours 


Sedatives are treated as regular poi- 
sons, except that their first effect is a 
period of weakness when all ability 
scores and the character's movement 
rate are reduced to half. This lasts 1dé 
rounds, after which the character saves 
vs. poison. Failure renders him uncon- 
scious. Success means that the weak- 
ness lasts for another hour. The 
character then saves each hour, with 
the weakness remaining until a success- 
ful save is made. 


New Rules for Thieves 


Poison Gases are rare, expensive, and 
highly dangerous. A typical dose is a clay 
or glass jar weighing 5 pounds. If the jar is 
shattered or opened, gas fills a 10’ x 10’ x 
10’ cube. It disperses after one round un- 
less contained on all sides. The gas lasts 
for 2d6 turns in an enclosed room; 2d6 
rounds in a room with at least one open 
door, window, arrow slit, etc. 

It might be possible for creative play- 
ers to create larger doses of poison gas, 
but such lethal devices are left to the 
DM's discretion. 

Poison gases generally have the ef- 
fects of poison type D, taking effect af- 
ter one or two minutes, inflicting 30 
points of damage (2d6 with a successful 
save). The damage is inflicted each turn 
the character breathes the gas. 

An extremely lethal poison gas is re- 
puted to exist, similar to poison type J 
(onset in 1d4 minutes, causes death or 
20 points of damage with save). 

Unlike injected or ingested poisons, 
however, poison gas does not remain in 
a character's system after death. Thus, 
attempts to raise characters who have 
perished this way do not have to con- 
tend with the venom in the character's 
system. 


Poison Antidotes 
(Optional Rule) 


In AD&D® 2nd 
Edition rules, a character with healing 
proficiency is able to aid poisoned indi- 
viduals. This is described on pg. 59 of 
the Player's Handbook. We reproduce 
those rules here with additional op- 
tions, including ones for those cam- 
paigns that are not using nonweapon 
proficiency rules. 


Campaigns without 
Nonweapon Proficiencies 
Treat rangers, 


characters with forester secondary 
skills, and thieves with the kits assassin, 
bounty hunter, and scout as having her- 
balism proficiency; treat clerics and 
paladins as having healing proficiency; 
and treat druids as having both. 


Healing Proficiency 
and Poison 


The basic healing 
proficiency rules for poison, from the 
Player's Handbook, are as follows. 

A character with healing proficiency 
can attempt to aid a poisoned individ- 
ual, provided the poison entered 
through a wound. If the poisoned char- 
acter can be tended immediately (the 
round after the character is poisoned) 
and the care continues for the next five 
rounds, the victim gains a +2 to his 
saving throw (delay his saving throw 
until the last round of tending). No pro- 
ficiency check is required, but the poi- 
soned character must be tended to 
immediately (normally by sacrificing 
any other action by the proficient char- 
acter) and cannot do anything himself. 
If the care and rest are interrupted, the 
poisoned character must immediately 
roll a normal saving throw for the poi- 
son. This result is unalterable by nor- 
mal means (i.e., more healing doesn’t 
help). Only characters with both heal- 
ing and herbalism proficiencies can at- 
tempt the same treatment for poisons 
the victim has swallowed or touched 
(the character uses his healing to diag- 
nose the poison and his herbalist 
knowledge to prepare a purgative.) 

Note that these rules concern anti- 
dotes only obliquely, through the her- 
balism proficiency in instances of 
ingestive and contact poisoning. 


Antidote Effects 


Antidotes can be 
manufactured for most poisons. To use 
an antidote you must match it with its 
poison (see the assassin kit), or just ad- 
minister an antidote and hope that by 
chance it is the right one. (The DM may 
permit the existence of some antidotes 
that counter more than one poison, e.g., 
both types A and B injected.) An antidote 
will take effect if administered immedi- 
ately or at least before the toxin’s onset 
time. It then either negates the poison en- 
tirely (if the poisoned character made his 
saving throw in the first place) or reduces 
its effect to saving throw level. 


113 


Producing Antidotes 


Most of the time 
an antidote has not been prepared in 
advance, and a character with herbal- 
ism proficiency will attempt to produce 
an antidote from scratch. 

Doing this presupposes an assort- 
ment of herbs, mosses, and such neces- 
sary materials, already selected and 
close at hand (e.g., gathered, dried and 
stored in a pouch). If the herbalist needs 
to gather the materials as well (and 
there are materials around to be 
gathered—not the case in most 
dungeons), at least half an hour is re- 
quired to do so. When materials are 
available, putting together and admin- 
istering an antidote takes 1d6 +4 (5-10) 
minutes. 

lf time for gathering materials and 
making the antidote turns out to be 
greater than the poison’s onset time, the 
efforts are in vain. If not, a proficiency 
check must be made to determine the 
antidote’s success or failure. The check 
suffers a —10 penalty if the poison has 
not been identified. If the check is suc- 
cessful, the antidote takes effect. 

For example, the assassin Therius is 
adventuring with his companion, Or- 
lene, when she is struck by a poisoned 
blade. The opponent is swiftly dis- 
patched and Therius turns his attention 
to her wound. Orlene, meanwhile, has 
failed her saving throw. The DM 
knows that the poison is Type O, in- 
jected, with an onset time of 20 min- 
utes; he notes this information secretly. 
One minute has already gone to finish- 
ing combat. If the poison is not success- 
fully treated, Orlene will be left 
paralyzed for nine hours. 

Therius is a 7th level thief (assassin 
kit) with herbalism proficiency and In- 
telligence 14; he does have a kit of use- 
ful herbs with him just for such 
emergencies as this. 

He first sets out to identify the poi- 
son. His base chance is 35% (7th level) 
+ 5% (Int 14) = 40%. This is his 
chance of learning from Orlene’s symp- 
toms. He rolls a 48 on percentile dice 
and fails. His next attempt is by sight, 


New Rules for Thieves 


examining the slain opponent's blade, 
with a 20% chance of success. This also 
fails. Concerned about time (three min- 
utes have already ticked by), Therius 
puts a dab on his tongue. He needs to 
roll 35 or lower . . . and gets a 26! He 
spits out the poison, recognizing it as 
type O. The DM doesn't bother to see if 
the poison affects Therius, since a para- 
lytic poison at half strength would have 
no effect. 

Therius works to produce an anti- 
dote with the materials in his pouch. 
This takes him six minutes. He then 
makes a proficiency check, needing a 12 
or lower (because herbalism has a —2 
modifier—see Player's Handbook, pg. 
54) for success. He rolls a 13—failure! 
Nine minutes have ticked by. He hur- 
riedly attempts again to concoct the an- 
tidote. This time it takes a full 10 
minutes . . . Therius rolls a 9 this time, 
however, so he succeeds just in the nick 
of time. 

The antidote totally halts the para- 
lytic poison, since that is what the result 
of a successful saving throw would 
have been. 


Mugging—the Thief’s KO 


A thief can at- 
tempt to knock out a victim under cer- 
tain circumstances by striking from 
behind with a blunt instrument. In or- 
der to be eligible for a mugging attack, a 
target must be eligible for a backstab, as 
explained in the Player's Handbook, 
pg. 40. In addition to all restrictions 
governing a backstab, a thief cannot 
mug a victim more than twice as tall as 
the thief. 

The eligible thief character simply 
makes a mugging attack instead of a 
normal backstab. The thief gains his 
+4 backstab bonus and the victim loses 
shield and Dexterity bonuses. If hel- 
mets are detailed in the campaign, the 
victim has AC 10 unless the head is pro- 
tected. 

If the thief scores a hit, the victim 
must make a saving throw versus petri- 
fication or fall unconscious for 2d8 
rounds. Modify the saving throw by 
the difference in level or hit dice be- 
tween the mugger and the victim. 

For example, Pwill the thief (T9) 
sneaks up behind the ogre sentry (4 


HD). Pwill's blow is successful, so the 
ogre saves as a level 4 warrior. Nor- 
mally he would save on a 12 or better, 
but the difference in Pwill’s level (9) and 
the ogre’s HD (4) modifies his necessary 
save to 17. However, the DM rolls a 19 
for the ogre, so Pwill’s attempt only 
makes the sentry mad. And loud. 


Armor and Acrobatic 


Proficiencies 
This system of modifiers for armor 
other than the usual leather may be 
used for non-thief characters as well as 
those thieves who may be found wear- 
ing heavier protection. 


Elfin chain mail is light and thin and 
can be worn under normal clothing. All 
other types of armor except simple 
leather are stiff or bulky, and can only 
be covered by a full body cloak. 

Jumping: For an acrobat wearing ar- 
mor and attempting a jumping maneu- 
ver other than pole vaulting, compute 
the height or length of the jump as de- 
scribed in the Players Handbook, pg. 
61. Then adjust this distance according 


Table 37: 
EFFECTS OF ARMOR ON ACROBATIC PROFICIENCIES 
No Elfin Studded Ring or Brigandine Scale or Plate Plate 

Skill Armor Chain orPadded Hide Chain or Splint Banded Maiľ Armor 
Broad jump, running te! = —1/2! =g =S SZ =10' =I15' = 
High jump, running +1' =a! = i =}! —4' -8 —10' —20’' —18’ 
Broad jump, standing +1/2' — Si N =a =a =o =i] —10’ 
High jump, standing  +1/⁄4' = -1 -1' -72' -21/2 -21/2 -3' -3' 
Pole vaulting — =q = =3 =5 -8 -10 -122 =15 
Tightrope Walking = xl =i Se) =o -6 -8 —10 =12 
Tumbling 

Defensive +4 +4 +3 +1 +2 +1 0 0 0 
Attack +2 +2 +2 0 +1 +1 0 0 0 
Falling o gy ak = =o =o -8 =10 -TZ 


General Notes: Leather armor is taken to be the standard, with no positive or negative adjustment to thief skills. No dexterity 
bonuses apply to thief functions (though penalties do) when wearing armor other than simple leather. 


. This category applies when wearing bracers of defense or a cloak, but no large protective devices. 

. Includes bronze plate mail. 

. Encompasses both field plate and full plate armor. 

. (Table 38) Assumes that armor worn is covered by another garment. Elfin chain mail is light and thin, and can be worn under 
normal clothing. All other types of armor except simple leather are stiff or bulky, and can only be covered by a full body 
cloak. 


e U Ne 


114 


New Rules for Thieves 


to the armor of the character, as shown 
on Table 37. Should the resulting total 
be less than zero, the character fails the 
acrobatic feat entirely (probably by 
tripping and landing flat on his face). 

Pole vaulting is a different matter. To 
successfully get off the ground in armor 
bulkier than leather requires a profi- 
ciency check, adjusted, as indicated on 
Table 37, according to the pole vaulter’s 
armor. In addition, a pole vaulter with 
armor heavier or bulkier than studded 
or padded can vault no higher than the 
height of the pole. 

Tightrope Walking: Adjustments 
listed on Table 37 indicate the penalties 
associated with each sort of armor if it 
is worn while tightrope walking. The 
DM should also take into account how 
heavy the character and all his armor, 
weapons and equipment are, and 
whether the rope or beam or other sur- 
face on which the character walks is ca- 
pable of supporting such weight. 

Tumbling: Defensive and offensive 
tumbling maneuvers are limited by the 
use of armor. As the Player's Handbook 
states (pg. 64), a character with tum- 
bling proficiency can improve his ar- 


mor class by 4 against attacks directed 
solely at him in any round of combat, 
provided he has the initiative and for- 
goes all attacks that round. The row 
"Tumbling—Defensive” on Table 37 in- 
dicates what AC bonus, if any, the 
character can get when he is wearing 
various sorts of armor. When in un- 
armed combat, a character with tum- 
bling proficiency is also normally able 
to improve his attack roll by 2. The bo- 
nus, if any, that the character has when 
in armor is shown in the row 
“Tumbling—Attack.” 

The third function of tumbling profi- 
ciency is the ability to avoid falling 
damage. If the character makes a suc- 
cessful proficiency check, he takes only 
half damage from falls of 60 feet or less, 
and none from falls of 10 feet or less. 
Modifiers to this proficiency check are 
listed in the row “Tumbling—Falling”’” 


Armor and Thief Skills 


Rogues __ tradi- 
tionally wear no more than leather ar- 
mor, since garb any more bulky greatly 
hinders the traditional abilities of 


thieves. The Player's Handbook notes 
the benefits or penalties of wearing no 
armor, elfin chain, and studded or pad- 
ded leather armor, since these options 
are also available to thieves, In some in- 
stances thieves will be found wearing 
still other sorts of armor. Multi-classed 
demihumans and dual-classed humans, 
for instance, may have fighter or cleric 
as one of their classes, and may there- 
fore be permitted any sort of armor 
whatsoever. 

Thieves using the disguise profi- 
ciency also should be permitted to wear 
armor not normally used by their class, 
to aid the deception. (Otherwise it be- 
comes obvious that anyone in leather 
armor who refuses to don chain mail 
must be an assassin or spy.) 

For this reason we offer expanded 
rules to cover the effects of the heavier 
and bulkier armor types on thieves’ 
skills. Table 38 lists the adjustments ac- 
corded to each armor type. 


Table 38: 


EFFECTS OF ARMOR ON THIEF SKILLS 


No Elfin Studded Ring or  BrigandineScale or Plate Plate 

Skill Armor Chain orPadded Hide Chain or Splint Banded Mail Armor 
Pick Pockets +5% —20% —30% -60% —40% —40% —50% -75% -95% 
Open Locks — -5% —10% -50% —-15% =15% -20% —40 % -80% 
Find/Remove Traps — =5% -10% =50% —15% -25% -20% =40 % -80% 
Move Silently +10% —10% -20% =30% -40% -40 %  —60% -80% —95% 
Hide in Shadows’ +5% —10% —20% =20% -30% -30% =50% -75% —95% 
Hear Noise = —5% -10% -10% -20% —25% —30% -50 % —70% 
Climb Walls +10% —20% —30% —60% —40% —50% —-90% -95% —95% 
Read Languages — — — = = -o = = — 


Notes 1-4: See Table 37. 

No skill can have a chance of success (including all adjustments) 
greater than 95%. However, a character can always have a 1% 
chance of success, even when trying to pick pockets in full plate ar- 
mor. 


Option: Some DMs may permit thieves to wear any available ar- 
mor. For most thieves, however (especially at low levels), it isn't 
worthwhile to wear bulkier armor because the penalties cripple 
thiefly skills. A rogue could favor bulk anyway, but DMs should 
emphasize (a) if the player wants a fighting machine he should play 
a fighter, (b) the thief can't gain experience and increase skill in 
thieving abilities that he doesn’t use. 


115 


Terrak, the Master, looked through 
the hazy air of the hideout. The acrid 
scent of charcoal smoke mingled with 
the sweat dripping freely from his as- 
sembled thieves. Indeed, the air in the 
attic remained always fetid, for even on 
a cool night such as this they dared not 
open any passage to the outside. So pre- 
carious was their position in the city, so 
firm was the Black Duke's grip on the 
populace, that any hint of their pres- 
ence here would bring swift and brutal 
reprisal. 

For the hundredth time, Terrak ex- 
amined the members of his small band. 
They were brave men and women, and 
he trusted them all. They were bound to 
him not by any bonds of love—though 
he knew they respected him—but in- 
stead by a common, flaming hatred, He 
wondered, again, if such a ragged as- 
semblage could actually be a threat to 
one as mighty as the Duke. But then he 
sighed, knowing they had no choice. 

Straight across from him, Terrak saw 
Ardina, the weaver. The old woman 
practiced her trade skillfully during the 
day. and none suspected that her bot- 
tles of dye, or her carefully wrapped 
bundles of cloth, were used to smuggle 
the gains of the band around the city. 
and even to locations beyond the high 
wall. Even now the band gathered in 
the attic of her shop, since she had 
risked her cover and her life to provide 
them this temporary hideout. 

Wistfully. Terrak remembered the 
guildhall, built with the profits of his 
long labors, and even the sweat of his 
own brow. The building had contained 
secret passages, hidden compartments, 
deadly traps, and easily defensible 
combat stations. But it had all gone up 
in smoke when the Black Duke's enforc- 
ers had attacked. Terrak’s eyes misted 
as he thought of Serana, his beautiful. 
young Serana, calling to him with her 
last words before the flames had taken 
her, had taken so many of them. 

But the Master Thief hardened his 
mind and his plans. Indeed, it had been 
those same precautions, the secret 
doors and the hidden compartments, 
that had allowed this small remnant of 


Chapter 8: The Thief Campaign 


his band to escape. Now they gathered 
here, dry kindling awaiting the spark 
that would ignite the flames of their re- 
venge. 

Terrak turned to an old man beside 
him. “And so, Rorden, the Duke's trea- 
sury awaits us now?” 

The man nodded his balding head. 
Terrak reminded himself that the man 
was not as old as he looked. The Duke, 
however, had siezed Rorden’s wife for 
use as a concubine many years earlier. 
By threatening her with death, the ruler 
had forced the talented Rorden to keep 
his books and provide him with infor- 
mation. Now, the Duke's threat to 
claim the man’s daughter for a similar 
fate had finally driven Rorden to fight 
against his brutal lord. 

“Indeed, Master.” Rorden spread a 
piece of parchment on the floor. “You 
see here the layout of the Duke's man- 
sion. I have marked the secret passage 
to the vault, though I could not gain the 
key to the lock. I am sorry, but the 
Duke keeps it on a key around his 
neck.” 

Terrak waved away the man's apol- 
ogy. Once they found the lock, he knew 
Xeno could open it. Indeed, the lock- 
picker even now instinctively flexed his 
fingers and licked his lips. Xeno, too, 
had lost his woman in the Duke's raid. 
Terrak knew he would perform with 
skill on this night. 

“And the painting?” asked Terrak, 
carefully watching the other members 
of his band. He saw Rocko flex uncon- 
sciously, grasping the stump of his right 
arm with his left hand. Rocko had lost 
his hand as a mere boy, when the 
Duke's watchmen had caught him steal- 
ing bacon in the marketplace. Rocko 
was brave, but not terribly bright. He, 
of all of them, had expressed the most 
misgivings about the plan to steal the 
piece of art along with the Duke's trea- 
sury of gems. 

“Remember, the Duke is ruled by his 
vanity above all else,” Terrak reminded 
them, directing his measured stare at 
the unflinching Rocko, “That painting 
of himself, the work he paid thousands 
of gold pieces for that it may hang in his 


116 


great hall, serves as a symbol of his van- 
ity. It has left a bitter taste in the 
mouths of the entire city. Its theft will 
put a large dent in the Duke's armor of 
rulership!” (At least, 1 hope it will!), 
Terrak concluded silently. 

“Now, the challenges,” the Master 
Thief continued. He looked at Kyrin, to 
his left. 

“Twill have the wagon ready,” the girl 
answered solemnly. She had been just 
old enough to understand her loss when 
her parents had died in the inferno of 
the guildhouse. Terrak knew that she 
spoke the truth. 

“Here are the magic mouths.” Terrak 
gestured at the parchment as Rorden 
nodded. 

“My spell of silence will be ready,” 
nodded another thief, a thin and wiry 
man of indeterminate age. Only the 
golden sheen of his blond hair sug- 
gested his true race. The half-elf was a 
skilled thief, but at times his talents as a 
magic-user were even more valuable to 
the band. 

"These walls are oiled to prevent scal- 
ing,” explained Rorden, gesturing 
around the periphery of the courtyard. 

A snicker came from a young woman 
across the room, and Terrak allowed 
himself a slight smile of his own. The 
Black Duke would need more than slip- 
pery walls to stop Bria the acrobat and 
her grappling hook. "Just remember to 
drop a rope for the rest of us,” reminded 
the Master. 

“And finally, the guards,’ pointed 
Rorden. “They are commanded by 
Puroch, whose loyalty the Duke extorts 
by holding his family at knifepoint.” 

“The family is now safe in hiding?” 
asked Terrak, looking at the old 
weaverwoman, 

She nodded with a toothless grin. 
“Puroch will join us now." 

Terrak looked again at his small, ca- 
pable band. He knew them all, under- 
stood their strengths and their 
weaknesses. He would not betray 
them, and he knew they would not be- 
tray him. 

“We cannot hope that the theft of a 
painting and a few gems will bring the 


The Thief Campaign 


power of this duke crashing down,” he 
said softly. “But if, by this theft, we can 
force the entire city to see him for the 
madman he is—and his madness will be 
plain to all when he discovers the de- 
faced painting hanging above the outer 
gate of his mansion!—we can do him 
great harm. 

“And too, we can pave the road to 
our return. Soon, my loyal comrades, 
we will become the influential guild 
that we were once before!” 


Elements of the 
Thief Campaign 


The thief cam- 
paign resembles any other AD&D® 
game campaign in many respects: There 
must be a challenge for the PCs to face, 
the challenge must be balanced to the 
strength of the characters, and the re- 
wards must be enjoyable enough to keep 
everyone having a good time—but not 
so abundant as to drastically inflate the 
finances of your campaign world. 

But it is in the specifics of play that 
some of these campaign aspects can 
take on unique and entertaining fea- 
tures when applied to a campaign in- 
volving many thief characters. 

This section explores some of these 
features, providing detail to DMs and 
also players. 


Cultural Considerations 


The cultural 
overview of the campaign setting is an 
important consideration for the adven- 
turing careers of all PCs, none more so 
than the thief. Some cultures have a 
strong and deep-running tradition of 
thievery while others will be quite for- 
eign to the concept. 

Generally, the more primitive a civili- 
zation, the less the liklihood of a strong 
thief element within it. Savage tribes- 
men or aborigines, of course, have few 
possessions that a thief would deem 
worth stealing. While characters from 
these backgrounds might covet the pos- 
sessions of other cultures, their meth- 
ods of acquisition will be less subtle 


than those of a “civilized” thief. 

Of course, nothing prohibits a char- 
acter from a savage or barbarian back- 
ground from joining the thief class. 
Ideally, the character will have the op- 
portunity to learn a little about his cho- 
sen trade before he meets up with an 
experienced city watch patrol. 

Rural cultures, too, will be less likely 
to provide interesting settings for thief 
adventures than will urban locales. 
Thief characters can of course learn 
their trades in small town or country 
settings, but unless they have a steady 
stream of travelers passing through 
from which to select their victims, such 
thieves will have difficulty maintaining 
a career of any long duration. 

But perhaps an even more significant 
cultural consideration is the view of 
that culture towards personal property 
and an honest day's labor. It is in this 
context that a city, with a strong class of 
merchants, an important economic sys- 
tem, and a reliance upon trade, be- 
comes the ideal setting for the thief's 
activities. 

The culture of such a bustling city 
cannot help but give rise to laws and 
law enforcers, to objects of value, and 
to interesting inhabitants. All of these 
items, as they relate to the thief’s activi- 
ties and opportunities, are discussed be- 
low. 


The Social Campaign 
Environment 


Thieves, more 
than any other character class, must in- 
teract with NPCs in order to utilize the 
full capabilities of their class. Unlike the 
fighter or the magic user, who can face 
an opponent from the safety of spell or 
missile range, or in the heat of melee 
combat, the thief must often communi- 
cate with his enemies, staying alive as 
much by his wits as by his strength. 

It is incumbent upon the DM, of 
course, to provide the necessary envi- 
ronments for his players’ enjoyment. 
For thief characters, and particularly in 
a campaign with numerous thief-types, 
this means the creation of numerous 


117 


NPCs, detailed sufficiently for smooth 
interaction with the PCs, and a society 
or culture with enough features to pro- 
vide motivation and ambition to 
thieves and to allow plenty of room for 
adventure. 

Some of the significant features of 
such a campaign include: 


The Social Overview of 
Thieves 


How does this 
society view thieves? Are they vigor- 
ously exterminated wherever they can 
be found? Are they encouraged to leave 
town by the closest available gate? Or 
are they an integral part of the city’s in- 
frastructure, contributing to its eco- 
nomic life every bit as directly (if not, 
perhaps, as constructively) as the trad- 
ing of merchants? 

The answers to these questions deter- 
mine, to a great extent, what kind of 
status a thief might hold in the society. 
Of course, status is almost always en- 
hanced by wealth, but a wealthy thief, 
in many societies, is still regarded as 
mere scum, however cleansed and sani- 
tized he may be on the surface. 

In areas where thieves are vigorously 
persecuted, thief characters will have to 
operate almost entirely underground. 
Even the location of such a major estab- 
lishment of the thieves guild will be a 
carefully guarded secret. The guild 
headquarters might move around fre- 
quently, changing locations at the first 
hint of detection. 

Thieves in these types of societies will 
probably need to have several alternate 
hideouts lined up, ready for use at a 
moment's notice. The number of 
thieves working together, whether in a 
guild or a more informal band, will be 
small. Paranoia among the members 
will be common, and even the hint of 
betrayal will likely meet with gruesome 
consequences. 

Indeed, thieves in societies that strive 
to root them out will often be forced to 
resort to a cover occupation or identity, 
simply to maintain appearances with 
neighbors, casual aquaintances, and 


even curious members of the city 
watch. The development of the cover 
can involve as much time and detail as 
player and DM want to spend. In this 
type of culture, a thief's success at his 
cover can affect his fortunes every bit as 
much as his performance on the job. 

While a cover provides a thief char- 
acter with an inherent professional 
weakness, it can also provide wonder- 
ful opportunities for roleplaying. Addi- 
tionally, a thief who works to preserve 
a cover might find himself working in 
an area that is normally closed to 
thieves. This entails a corresponding in- 
crease in the likelihood of encountering 
lucrative targets for theft. Also, there 
will often be a relative lack of competi- 
tion from other thieves in such an envi- 
ronment. 

Conversely, societies where thieves 
are at least tolerated, and those where 
thieves are accorded rank of some sta- 
tus, present thief player characters with 
other challenges. Because of the notori- 
ously chaotic nature of the class, 
thieves are constantly adjusting the sta- 
tus of members within their ranks. 
Thieves who would succeed must strug- 
gle to stand out from the masses. Where 
every street has its cutpurses and every 
neighborhood its petty boss, the thief 
PC will find himself in the midst of sav- 
age competition. He will nearly always 
be forced to choose sides. Although this 
selection can include the choice of inde- 
pendent operations, of course, most 
thieves look upon those who are not de- 
clared friends as undeclared enemies. 
Competition from other thieves and 
thief organizations becomes a major 
conflict for these characters. 


Detailed and Varied 
Non-Player Characters 


Obviously, NPCs 
are a major part of any social campaign 
environment. For a campaign with ma- 
jor roles for thieves, this must be one of 
the primary areas of DM concern. 

Details are important, as always. Be- 
cause of the number of NPCs needed, 
DMs will probably want to develop a 


convenient shorthand procedure for 
keeping track of all these characters. It 
is not necessary, for example, to include 
stats and proficiencies and equipment 
for each shopowner and innkeeper in 
the player character orbit. Often a 
name for the character and a one or two 
word personality description will suf- 
fice to give the DM all he needs to role- 
play the NPC in an interesting and 
consistent manner. (Remember, if the 
innkeeper is “greedy and bigoted” the 
first time the PCs encounter him, he is 
likely to be that way next time as well.) 

Of course, NPCs who might logically 
be expected to enter combat with the 
PCs (guards, rival thieves, thugs, bul- 
lies, etc.) will need to be detailed with 
the relevant combat information. 
Other NPCs who fill the roles of the po- 
tential targets for PC thievery (mer- 
chants, nobles, dandies, caravaniers, 
fences, influential criminals and 
thieves, etc.) will need additional infor- 
mation on valuables possessed, how 
those goods are secured—including 
notes on locks, traps, secret compart- 
ments, and the like—as well as enough 
combat information to allow the DM to 
quickly adjudicate an encounter should 
matters come to blows. 

The AD&D® 2nd Edition DMG in- 
cludes valuable information on defin- 
ing the personalities of NPCs (pg. 114) 
and on creating fast, realistic characters 
when needed (pgs. 115-117). 

The DM, after working out an easy 
way of recording his NPCs, must then 
keep this information close at hand 
where it can be easily referenced. He is 
then ready for any encounters the char- 
acters might decide to find. 

A variety of NPCs is every bit as im- 
portant as the detail used to record 
them. In all campaigns, the player char- 
acters will interact with folks from all 
walks of life—in a thief campaign such 
interaction is common and expected. 

Some of the NPCs will need to be 
peers of the PCs—fellow thieves and 
rogues inhabiting the same area. These 
NPCs can serve as rivals, temporary 
helpers, sources of information, and 
even sort of a measuring scale for the 


PC's successes. 

Thieves will often develop contacts 
with NPCs even lower in status than the 
thieves themselves. These characters can 
include beggars, urchins and orphans, 
harlots, and other low-life types. A sta- 
ble of these NPCs can provide the PCs 
with a ready source of information 
(“Here's a copper, kid—go and count the 
guards outside the storehouse for me!"), 
as well as providing a touch of believa- 
bility to the campaign background. 
These low-life NPCs will, of course, 
have the same variety of personalities 
and abilities as other NPCs. Because the 
PCs represent persons of power to them, 
however, player character actions can 
have a great rebounding effect in their 
relations. For example, a thief that al- 
ways shares a (however small) portion 
of his take with the gang of urchins con- 
stantly roaming the neighborhood will 
find those urchins to be useful lookouts 
and helpful, willing sources of informa- 
tion. The thief who spends his time curs- 
ing and kicking the youngsters away 
from his abode may just find them lead- 
ing an elite unit of the city watch straight 
to his door. 

Potential targets for robbery include 
a whole vast realm of NPCs: wealthy 
merchants, powerful nobles, influential 
foreigners, even thieves and other ad- 
venturers who have enjoyed a certain 
amount of financial success in their en- 
deavors. A variety of characters is es- 
sential here because this gives the PCs 
the opportunity to determine for them- 
selves what will be the site of the next 
furtive operation. 

Here your group might try pacing the 
gaming sessions to give the players 
complete freedom of choice, while not 
burdening the DM with the task of de- 
tailing every mansion, noble house, 
and merchant shop in town. Simply use 
the expedient of closing a gaming ses- 
sion with the PC planning meeting for 
the next operation. Then, when the tar- 
get for the theft has been selected, the 
DM has the next week (or next few 
hours, depending on how often you 
play) to prepare a detailed layout of the 
setting. 


No campaign is complete without at 
least one, or ideally several, strong vil- 
lains to serve as antagonists for the 
player characters. Villains, of course, do 
not have to be criminals or other low-life 
types. They can be nobles, government 
officials, law enforcement officials or 
magistrates, foreign ambassadors, pow- 
erful wizards or sinister clerics—in 
short, all types of characters can make 
good villains in a thief campaign. And 
don't overlook the grandmaster of the 
thieves guild or some other powerful 
criminal who might be a rival of the 
PCs; these kinds of long-running feuds 
can kindle the fires of many an extended 
campaign adventure. 

Whoever the DM picks as a central 
villain for the campaign, a few general 
principles apply. The villain must be a 
powerful character—one who can in- 
spire fear, or at least grudging respect, 
in the PCs. Power can be expressed in 
financial resources (an estate, fortress, 
collection of treasures, etc.), authority 
(such as a troop of guards or command 
of the city watch), personal abilities 
(such as magic powers, magical arti- 
facts, combat skill and weaponry, or 
sheer intelligence or charisma), or, ide- 
ally, some combination of all these 
characteristics. Certainly in order to 
seem formidable, a villain’s power must 
exceed the combined power of the PCs. 

Scenes involving the villain should 
be paced and staged carefully—the PCs 
probably will not find him in a back al- 
ley rolling drunks. (If they do, that 
should tell them something about the 
drunk!) Villains, being powerful and 
influential individuals, are not stupid. 
When they are encountered, they will 
usually be surrounded by their lackeys 
and henchmen (some of these can be 
quite stupid, at the DM's option). 

In fact, the villain’s lackeys should be 
common antagonists of the player char- 
acters throughout the campaign. It is 
well worth a DM's time to develop some 
of these henchmen as detailed NPCs— 
minor villains in their own right. What is 
the Sheriff of Nottingham without his 
loyal house guards, after all? 

Any villain worth his black mustache 


will have one or two escape routes 
planned from every location where he 
is likely to be encountered. These will 
only be used in emergencies, of course, 
but can serve an important campaign 
function in that, as a villain escapes 
from near-certain death time after time, 
the players will develop their own moti- 
vation in wishing to go after him and 
end the conflict once and for all. This 
resolution, ideally occurring after 
many gaming sessions, then becomes a 
major triumph in the PCs’ careers.| Of 
course, if they blow it, the last battle 
can make a glorious final chapter in a 
PC career... 

A final category of NPCs, impossible 
to overlook in the thief campaign, are 
those characters entrusted with the en- 
forcement of law, or justice,| or 
power—whatever prevails in your 
campaign environment. Even should 
you have created an anarchistic society, 
people will take steps to protect their 
belongings and some of these steps usu- 
ally involve big, tough fighters. 

It is interesting and enjoyable to have 
several of these characters become very 
well-developed NPCs in the campaign. 
The gruff sergeant-major of the city 
watch, for example, might have a few 
stern words for the PCs each time they 
are apprehended. A villainous thug in 
charge of a platoon of mercenary 
guards might develop a personal 
grudge against the PCs that can grow 
into a major campaign storyline. Even a 
severe magistrate can be a recurring 
character, especially if PC lawbreakers 
are coerced into helping the forces of 
justice in exchange for their freedom, 
lives, or whatever. 

The DM need not go overboard on 
details for these NPCs. After all, haying 
100 NPCs in the campaign isn’t much 
use if the DM has to shuffle 100 pieces 
of paper every time a player character 
asks a question. It is best to work out to 
your own satisfaction the level of detail 
required for consistent, enjoyable play, 
while allowing a brief enough format 
that the DM does not become over- 
whelmed with recordkeeping and NPC 
creation, 


119 


Unique Buildings and 
Structures 


Whether these are 
temples, fortresses, vaults, inns, pal- 
aces, or mansions, the buildings in a 
thiefly environment should be well de- 
tailed. Determine, as much as possible, 
details such as window placement, even 
on higher floors. 

Features of construction can be im- 
portant; a brick wall may prove easier 
to climb than a surface of smooth plas- 
ter. Are there trees or clinging vines 
near the walls? Are the grounds well- 
maintained? (Many a thief has failed a 
move silently check because the leaves 
rustled beneath his feet!) 

Add entertaining features to your 
buildings such as balconies, atriums, 
wide stairways with railings, chande- 
liers, swimming pools, secret passages, 
and so on. Hanging draperies can make 
wonderful emergency transportation, 
and a wine cellar, icehouse, or other 
specialized room can also be put to in- 
teresting use. 

Experiment with unusual settings as 
well—just because your thieves adven- 
ture in a social environment doesn’t 
mean that you can't put a dungeon un- 
der a noble'’s manor, or a hidden cavern 
leading to and from the lair of a rival 
band of thieves. After the PCs have 
plundered several houses, you might 
offer a tower or a pyramid for a change 
of pace. 

Insomuch as a great portion of a 
thiefs career might be spent skulking 
about the buildings of the campaign 
world, it is well worth the DM's time to 
prepare them carefully and imagina- 
tively. 


A Well-Defined Economic 
System 


This can be as sim- 
ple as consistent observation of the 
prices and costs listed in the Players 
Handbook, or as complicated and in- 
volved as a DM cares to make it. Be- 
cause so many thieves measure their 
accomplishments in financial terms, 
however, some sort of consistent mea- 


sure of worth is extremely important. 

Another consideration within the ec- 
onomic system is the effect of theft on 
the items being re-sold. Certainly a jew- 
eled tiara can be appraised at 1,000 gp. 
However, if word of its theft has trav- 
eled far and wide, PC thieves might 
have difficulty getting someone to pay 
half the listed amount. 

Other aspects of economics often 
overlooked in a campaign can be very 
relevant for thieves. Bribes are often 
necessary in order to gain information 
or to persuade a guard to look the other 
way—keep rigorous track of this cost 
of doing business! Protection money 
might be offered by victims; con- 
versely, if a merchant is paying protec- 
tion money to someone else (a thieves 
guild, for example), those being paid 
will leave no stone unturned in seeking 
the one who has flaunted their warn- 
ings. 

All such extra costs and hidden con- 
sequences should be determined by the 
DM, at least to the extent of their im- 
pact upon the campaign environment. 
It can be left up to the PCs to discover 
for themselves how these little extras 
can impact (perhaps even shorten!) 
their illicit careers. 


Interesting Objects D’Art and 
Other Treasures 


A well-defined cul- 
tural store of valuable objects always 
gives a thief something to think about, 
and can provide some wonderful impe- 
tus for roleplaying. (“I simply must 
have that last Van Hoot original!”) 
These items add a great deal of color 
and life to a campaign, encouraging 
players and the DM alike to think in 
terms other than simply the gp value of 
a treasure. Indeed, a valuable art object 
may be worth far more than its base 
value to a collector. By the same token, 
such an object might be recognized far 
and wide as stolen property—a compli- 
cation that can make disposal of the 
goods an adventure in its own right. 

Part of this campaign aspect involves 
establishing a consistent economic sys- 


tem for the world, of course, as men- 
tioned above. But taking the time to 
specify treasures and their worth within 
that economic system carries the con- 
cept to a level of detail that greatly en- 
hances any campaign—but particularly 
one involving many thieves and their il- 
licit activities. 

Objects can be classified by type and 
artist, most obviously, but also by such 
things as materials (especially in the 
area of gems and jewelry), intricacy of 
design, and size. 

It doesn’t so much matter what you 
choose to invent and define here. It is 
more important for the DM to create 
enough detail about some area that the 
most treasured pieces are known to one 
and all, and enough other facts about 
the art to allow PC thieves to make 
proper value judgements. 

Of course, establishing an artistic 
level of a culture is an ingredient of any 
campiagn. Thieves, however, are more 
apt to become involved in the gaining 
and losing of such items than are char- 
acters of other classes, and because of 
this the thief campaign calls for a little 
extra attention to be paid here. 

Whether these objects are paintings, 
statues, jewelry or gemwork, tapestries 
or rugs, ornate crystal, or religious 
icons, a well-defined set of existing trea- 
sures helps a thief put his own aquisi- 
tions and losses into context. Dungeon 
Masters will find the time spent creating 
a detailed cultural and artistic back- 
ground for the campaign well spent. 

Player character thieves will doubt- 
less find one or two more things that 
just might cause them to lick their 
chops. 


Well-Defined Legal System 


This does not mean 
that your campaign has to have a law- 
and-order basis with plenty of tough 
penalties for thieves, and a gung-ho 
team of watchmen and sheriffs to see 
that unlawful perpetrators are quickly 
apprehended. 

Instead, a well-defined legal system 
in a campaign means that the DM must 


120 


give careful thought to the role of law 
and order in the campaign culture. It is 
far more important for penalties to be 
consistent than for them to be harsh. 

Once the DM has established a con- 
sistent legal structure for the society, a 
working knowledge of that structure 
should be communicated to the play- 
ers. 

In any event, the laws of a society 
will usually be formed to reflect the 
standards and expectations of the ma- 
jority (or at least the most influential 
portion) of the populace. 

As always, game balance is impor- 
tant here as well. Societies with harsh 
penalties for thievery tend to discour- 
age such nefarious activities. Because of 
the risk involved, potential gains 
should be correspondingly higher than 
in locations with more easy-going mag- 
istrates. 

A few words about specific penalties: 
While the death penalty for law- 
breakers is not an unrealistic sanction 
in a medieval-based society—and, in- 
deed, many a nail-biter of a rescue has 
pulled a character from the shadows of 
the gallows, headsman’s axe, or 
whatever—it is not the most enjoyable 
thing to roleplay. 

Far better to have a character who 
has gotten himself in deep trouble be 
subjected to leverage from the law, per- 
haps being coerced to betray his com- 
panions or spy upon a powerful rival 
thief in exchange for his freedom and 
pardon. This way the sanction is a de- 
vice propelling the character into an- 
other adventure instead of a one-way 
ticket out of the campaign. 


Counter-Thief Tactics 


This is an area all 
too often neglected in campaign and 
city design. It reflects the truism that 
people who have been robbed, or who 
know they are susceptible to robbery, 
will take steps to guard their belong- 
ings. 

Counter-thief tactics include struc- 
tural features such as locks, walls, traps 
and alarms; NPCs such as guards, 


judges and investigators; magical pro- 
cedures for locating lost objects or pro- 
_tecting items of value; and any other 
steps property-owners and societies 
might take to hamper the activities of 
thieves among them. 

The degree of counter-thief tactics 
employed in a campaign can be a useful 
| balancing tool for the DM, as well as a 

source of endless challenge and adven- 
ture for the PCs. As with any roleplay- 
ing game situation, the degree of 


i 


challenge should be compatible with 
the amount of reward offered. Not 


every small strongbox in a city will 
have magical locks and a full-time pa- 
trol of high-level guards. 

However, the protections employed 
by a society to counter thievery will 
also relate directly to the amount of 
thievery to be expected. In places where 


robberies are common but wealth is 
valued, those who have the wealth will 
take vigorous steps to protect it. 

Such protections do not all have to be 
of the common nature—extra guards, a 


trap built into the lock, etc. Some NPCs 
| will certainly hide their loot in unex- 


pected locations—the nightmare of 
many a cat-burglar. Another occasion- 


ally employed tactic is the substitution 


of some worthless object for the real 
thing. A nasty twist on this latter case 
has the thief actually stealing some- 
thing harmful to himself or others. For 
example, the thief who has just poi- 
soned his guildmaster with what he 
thought was a potion of eternal youth 
finds himself in a very awkward situa- 
tion indeed. 


Background of 
Interesting Conflicts 


A thief campaign 
can probably run for a long time on the 
central conflict of “Haves vs. the Have- 
nots”. Players and DMs alike will find a 
lot more flavor and depth in a setting 
with a little broader background of 
conflict, however. 

Conflicts appropriate to a thief cam- 
paign are little different from those that 
should liven up any campaign. Every 


social setting will have tension between 
the various legs of the power structure, 
whether these are ruling houses, politi- 
cal parties, or even different members 
of the same ruling family. 

Conflict between different classes or 
social strata is another common point 
of tension in society. The rich might 
seek to dominate the poorer folk, who 
strive in their own right to gain a share 
of the good life. In a mercantile society 
there might be a middle class of mer- 
chants and artisans who seek to insulate 
their privileges from those less fortu- 
nate, while at the same time striving for 
financial betterment for themselves and 
their families. 

Religious conflict is a common fea- 
ture of campaigns, particularly appro- 
priate in worlds with a wide pantheon 
of varied gods. Thieves and others can 
often be employed by the clerics of dif- 
ferent temples in order to spy upon, pil- 
fer, or sabotage the centers of rival 
religions. 

Conflicts among thieves themselves, 
and obviously between the law and 
breakers of the law, should be standard 
features of the campaign. The conflict 
between a thieves’ guild and indepen- 
dent (usually player character) thieves 
has become a cliche, but it still creates a 
tense background for a thief’s activities. 
Just try to establish that this is not the 
only conflict around which the cam- 
paign is based. 

Conflicts, as always, are most effec- 
tive when they can be personalized. Ina 
religious conflict, for example, detail 
the influential clerics on each side. If a 
thief PC encounters a challenge from an 
NPC thief working in the same terri- 
tory, give that NPC a face and a person- 
ality. When conflicts are personalized, 
player characters develop a natural mo- 
tivation and enthusiasm for their reso- 
lution. 


Challenges To Thief 
Character Class Abilities 


Finally, the thief 
campaign should ideally include a mul- 
tiplicity of opportunities for thieves to 


121 


The Thief Campaign 


employ their own unique talents. Most 
significantly, this means many opportu- 
nities to pick locks, to find and remove 
traps, to climb sheer surfaces, and so 
on. 
The DM should additionally tailor 
the challenges to the specific type of ad- 
venture suitable to the thief or thieves 
in the campaign. A character with great 
proficiency in disguise, for example, 
should have opportunities to use a 
cover identity, or to find work as a spy. 

By successfully creating challenges 
that match the particular strengths of 
the player characters (of all classes), the 
PCs have a chance to carve out a solid 
niche for themselves in the campaign 
world. 


The Thieves’ Guild 


Whether or not 
to place a guild in your campaign set- 
ting is a decision central to the gaming 
careers of your thief player characters. 
Guilds can provide many interesting 
conflicts, and also require a certain 
amount of DM commitment in order to 
exist believably in a campaign world. 

Consequently, the creation of a guild 
is not a decision to be taken lightly. Of 
course, they are more or less standard 
in many gaming environments, and if 
everyone in the campaign expects there 
to be a thieves guild, there probably 
should be a guild. 

Thieves guilds can provide many op- 
portunities for adventure, as detailed in 
Chapter 4: Thieves Guilds. Many of the 
ideas there can be used in creating a 
guild for your own campaign environ- 
ment. 

Remember also, should you decide 
not to have a guild in your own cam- 
paign world, that the absence of a guild 
does not mean there aren't plenty of 
thieves running around out there, look- 
ing for their share of the spoils and 
working actively to defend their “turf”. 


Basic Storylines For 
Thief Campaigns 


Perhaps the 
player character thieves will be content 
at the start of a campaign to plunder 
this noble mansion and that opulent 
gallery, staying one or two steps ahead 
of the city watch, Such campaigns re- 
quire little planning beyond the next 
gaming session for the DM, and work 
well with players who can only attend 
occasional gaming sessions. 

However, the repetition of objectives 
and motivations can prevent players 
from exploring the full possibilities of 
their characters and the game. Even if 
each mission involves a different set- 
ting, new monsters, and unique, chal- 
lenging traps and NPCs, players and 
DMs alike may find themselves want- 
ing more. 

The addition of a basic storyline can 
add a theme tying the campaign to- 
gether, giving the player characters a 
cause higher than mere plunder for 
their exploits. Storylines allow for 
greater development of NPCs, and also 
provide the PCs with more opportuni- 
ties for interactive roleplaying (as op- 
posed to combat and other physical 
encounters). 

Several suggested storylines are pre- 
sented here. Many dungeon masters 
prefer to create their own, and this is 
encouraged. The examples are brief 
enough that each campaign's will be 
specifically tailored for a unique fit. 


The Great Artifact 


This is the type of 
story that gets the old thieves talking 
late into the night, sipping their mugs 
and reminiscing wistfully about the big 
job that they never quite got around to. 

The great artifact is a unique object, a 
one of a kind wand or gem or statue or 
anything else of tremendous worth. It is 
famed for its power (like a magic item) or 
its symbolic value (like the crown jewels 
of a proud government) or perhaps sim- 
ply for its mindboggling worth finan- 
cially (the mint or gold repository of a 


powerful city-state, perhaps), Occasion- 
ally, an artifact will combine features of 
all these types, and more. Objects la- 
belled as “artifacts” in the AD&D® game 
system usually fall into this category. 

Whatever its nature, some generali- 
ties about the theft of the great artifact 
apply. Its worth is fabulous. Although 
it may not be sought by everyone, there 
are plenty who would give anything to 
own it. 

The great artifact’s acquisition 
should be a process requiring many 
gaming sessions. Perhaps several addi- 
tional quests are required before the 
theft of the artifact can even begin—a 
key must be obtained before the magi- 
cally warded chest can be opened, for 
example. 

The protections of the artifact should 
be many, and their effectiveness should 
increase the closer the PCs get to their 
goal. These barriers should ideally in- 
clude obstacles to the mental, as well as 
the physical, abilities of the characters. 
Often a great deal of planning and coor- 
dination can be required of a band of 
thieves, in order to pull off the theft ev- 
eryone thought was impossible. 

Indeed, there might be a body of lore 
surrounding the artifact. Player charac- 
ters willing to do their homework might 
be able to find survivors of previous ex- 
peditions, or at least hear tales handed 
down from earlier years. Such caution- 
ary tales, of course, may contain more 
fiction than fact. They may also be 
couched in obscure language (as, for ex- 
ample: “Beware the witching moon 
when the hog walks upon the water”), 
containing a meaning that only be- 
comes clear when certain conditions 
come to pass. 

The quest for the great artifact does 
not have to end with its acquisition, by 
the way. Once its removal becomes 
public knowledge, any object of such 
great value becomes the focus of atten- 
tion for bounty hunters, master 
thieves, and whoever had the object 
stolen to begin with. Especially in the 
case of potent magic, the PCs might 
find themselves holding onto a lot more 
than they bargained for. 


122 


The Mysterious Client 


The mysterious 
client is usually an NPC. He or she can 
be a player character, however, if that 
player is briefed by the DM privately 
beforehand. 

However the client is played, the role 
is that of a person (or perhaps a deity) 
who contacts the main group of PCs 
and asks them to perform some task 
worthy of their thiefly abilities. 

This storyline is easy to start because 
the client can always direct the PCs to- 
ward the first encounter. The most im- 
portant feature here is for the DM to 
surround the client with an air of mys- 
tery. Perhaps the characters never see 
the client's face, or learn his or her 
name, Maybe all of their communica- 
tions are in writing, and they are al- 
lowed no information as to where the 
client can be found. 

Mysterious clients can be drawn 
from any and all character classes, or 
even from the ranks of monsters. A 
powerful and intelligent monster that 
cannot mingle freely with humans 
might seek thieves to perform some of 
its business. In the ultimate extreme, of 
course, the client turns out to be a pow- 
erful god or other extraplanar being, 
and the PCs are involved in really big 
time trouble before they know what's 
happening. 

The task required of the thieves by 
the client can include theft, of course. 
Other possibilities include the search 
for a lost object, often requiring investi- 
gative work as well as stealth; the gain- 
ing of information by requiring the 
characters to serve as spies or scouts; or 
other even more nefarious tasks in- 
vented by the client or the DM. 


Role Reversal 


An interesting 
challenge to player characters, and par- 
ticularly thief player characters, is the 
task of protecting some object from an 
imminent theft. This story can be com- 
bined with the mysterious client 
plotline to create another twist. 


123 


The PCs can be assigned to move the 
object somewhere, guarding it on the 
way, or simply to protect it where it is. 
The challenge arises from anticipating 
the plans of whatever thieves might be 
inclined to make the attempt. 

Generally, the PCs will be tested with 
one or two easy probes before the real 
challenges occur. The guardianship role 
can easily be extended through several 
gaming sessions, as more and more vig- 
orous attempts to acquire the loot are 
mounted, 

This storyline is not as well suited for 
a longrunning campaign as are some of 
the others. However, characters who 
spend most of their time attempting to 
obtain items of value might find the 
change of perspective interesting, 


Foul Betrayal 


This storyline is 
best combined with one of the others. It 
fits well in the thief subculture and can 
be wrapped around any significant 
non-player character in the campaign. 
It provides PCs with strong motivation 
and can dramatically shake up a cam- 
paign that starts to run too smoothly. 

The NPC who betrays them should 
be an important figure in the campaign, 
and one who is fairly well known to the 
player characters. He can be their em- 
ployer, or a respected neighbor, or even 
a mentor or family member to one of 
the PCs. Ideally, in one of the latter 
cases, the NPC has a deep and compel- 
ling motivation for the betrayal. Most 
characters, even including thieves, 
would not be too likely to sell their 
brother or grandmother down the road 
for a small profit. 

The betrayal should be set up care- 
fully by the DM. Perhaps one or two 
clues might indicate the NPC's true na- 
ture, but only if the players are excep- 
tionally alert. The betrayal itself should 
not be the end of the story, however; 
the PCs should have a long and difficult 
road to follow in their quest for an ac- 
counting. 

The betrayal situation works best in 
campaigns where there are many well- 


The Thief Campaign 


detailed NPCs. If it is used capriciously 
in a setting with few NPCs, players may 
become inclined to distrust every NPC 
introduced to the game. This is frustrat- 
ing for players and DM alike. 


The Spy 


This plotline 
works most effectively for small groups 
of player characters, or even individ- 
uals. More complex evolutions can in- 
volve large groups, all cooperating on 
an intelligence-gathering mission, but 
these are harder to run and more con- 
fusing to play. 

Perhaps more than any other, a spy- 
ing storyline allows the DM to draw 
upon a vast store of novels, films, and 
other media. Plotlines involving spies, 
even when set outside the fantasy area, 
can often be converted into challenging 
roleplaying situations, Substitute a 
crystal ball for satellite reconnaisance, 
clairaudience for a phone tap, and a fly- 
ing carpet for a helicopter, and you will 
be able to reproduce many a modern 
thriller in an AD&D® game setting and 
format, 

The spy storyline offers another ad- 
vantage to many players in that it 
serves as a non-evil alternative for thief 
player characters. Of course, spies can 
be evil, but a spy may also be motivated 
by grander ambitions than perhaps the 
common thief. A character or group 
sent to infilitrate the ranks of a menac- 
ing warlord or bandit king can perform 
great service for the good of society if 
they can succeed in their mission. 


Playing In And Running 
the Thief Campaign 


One of the great 
strengths of the AD&D® game and its 
attendant campaign worlds is the diver- 
sity of character types that will be 
present, both as NPCs and generally as 
PCs. The mixture of combat, stealth, 
sorcery, and spiritual abilities all add to 
the whole in ways that can help keep 
the game fresh and imaginative even af- 
ter many years of play. 


124 


However, this should in no way in- 
hibit players with similar interests from 
creating PCs of the same class. Indeed, 
there are many situations where such 
groups make ideal adventuring 
parties—a small group of captains com- 
manding several companies of soldiers 
upon a mission of conquest, for exam- 
ple, might all be fighters. 

Nowhere does this specialization 
lend itself so well to a campaign setting 
as when a band of thieves gather to em- 
bark upon missions of stealth. The 
presence of a fighter, with his heavy 
boots and clanking armor, can be a seri- 
ous hindrance to such a group. Charac- 
ters of all other classes will find sheer 
surfaces to be serious obstacles, even as 
the thieves are already scrambling 
down the far side. And indeed, no char- 
acter can move so quietly, or remain 
hidden so effectively, as can a thief. 

The tactics discussed in this section 
do not imply that a campaign must be 
populated exclusively with player char- 
acter thieves. Players who wish to run 
characters of other classes should be 
able to do so, and the DM should be 
sure to provide appropriate challenges 
to all characters. However, if most PCs 
choose to play thief characters, a vari- 
ety of adventure opportunities beckon. 
Additionally, interesting roles and ac- 
tivities for other character classes are 
easy to generate. 


Wizards Working With 
Thieves 


Of all the other 
classes, wizards might best perform 
with a band of thieves. They have no 
metal armor or heavy weapons to make 
noise, and spells such as levitate and si- 
lence can provide cover for themselves, 
and even enhance the abilities of the 
thieves. Magic users can be found in all 
alignments, and many have no particu- 
lar moral qualms about engaging in 
theft and other illicit activities. 

Wizards can provide a variety of use- 
ful services to thieves as well. Even at 
low levels, spells such as sleep, charm 
person, spider climb, and Tenser's float- 


ing disk offer obvious possibilities on a 
mission of thievery. 

Many a thief guild has one or more 
wizards of low to medium level in its 
employ, even occasionally among its 
leadership. Of course, extremely high 
level wizards generally grow beyond 
the need for such companionship. High 
level wizards associated with thieves 
generally treat the latter as if they were 
slightly odiferous servants. 


Levels of Magic in the 
Thieves’ Campaign 


Like any good 
campaign, the level of magic in use is a 
function of the players’ and DM's de- 
sires, the cultural setting, and perhaps 
to an extent the experience levels of the 
PCs. Much of this decision should be 
based on the magical capabilities of the 
PCs (whether or not the thieves have a 
wizard working with them, for exam- 
ple) and the degree of reward to be 
gained by overcoming magical chal- 
lenges. 

In general, most challenges to thief 
PC missions should be found in forms 
the characters can cope with: mechani- 
cal traps instead of magical ones, for ex- 
ample, provide a better gaming 
obstacle to thieves. 

However, a DM can certainly em- 
ploy magical traps to protect things he 
doesn’t want the PCs to get their hands 
on. Also, such traps add an element of 
tension to a mission that helps keep ev- 
eryone on their toes. A mission of 
thievery involving an intrusion into the 
lair of some powerful wizard should al- 
ways have an air of magical, mysteri- 
ous danger. 


Multi- or Dual-Classed Thieves 


Thieves who can 
also perform the tasks of one or more 
other character classes also offer clear 
advantages when accompanying a mis- 
sion. The fighter/thief, for example, 
will find many opportunities to wield 

his sword and perhaps a shield while his 
stealthy comrades go about their work. 
However, thief characters who also 


exhibit knowledge of another character 
class will sometimes undergo the scorn 
and mistrust of their more “pure” com- 
rades. Very rarely will a thief/wizard or 
thief/cleric rise to a position of promi- 
nence in a thieves guild. Fighter/thieves 
are subject to less prejudice, perhaps 
because their abilities are clearly under- 
standable to thieves, Fighter/thieves 
are nonetheless considered by most 
thieves to be of somewhat lower status 
than themselves. 


Henchmen and Hirelings of 
Thieves 


Though thief 
characters often function as lone 
wolves, or in small, stealthy groups, 
they will often have need of the skills, 
or sometimes simply the reinforcing 
numbers, of others. Since thiefly activi- 
ties generally flourish in urban environ- 
ments, there is usually no shortage of 
NPCs for the characters to meet and use 
and henchmen or hirelings. 

Hirelings are particularly easy to 
come by, and can include craftsman 
and merchants as well as those of the 
adventuring classes. 

Hirelings, however, are not generally 
trusted with the knowledge of a guild or 
hideout. They will be contacted in their 
own place of residence or work, their 
information or services gained there, 
and then they will be left by the myste- 
rious thief who disappears into the al- 
leys and backstreets. Even when 
hirelings are used on a mission, they 
will often be joined at a rendezvous out- 
side the guild, and left there when the 
mission is over. 

This is not a hard and fast rule, how- 
ever. Particularly in cases where a guild 
location is well known, or where hire- 
lings are necessary to the functioning of 
the guild—there aren't enough PCs and 
henchmen to maintain a watch, for 
example—a hireling will be brought 
into the lair. Of course, generally some 
effort will be expended describing to the 
hireling the consequences of his betray- 
ing the great amount of trust that has 
just been shown him. Indeed, in large 


125 


The Thief Campaign 


thieves guilds it is unrealistic to assume 
that most members will be PCs or the 
henchmen of those PCs. 

Henchmen, of course, are another 
matter. They will generally be trusted 
to know almost everything the PC 
knows. As with any PC, some hench- 
men might be gained from the ranks of 
hirelings who have served loyally and 
bravely through the years. 

Ideally, however, the player and DM 
should give some thought to interesting 
backgrounds for other henchmen, 
based specifically on the player charac- 
ters background. This is especially im- 
portant if the character adventures in 
the same city or nation where he spent 
his childhood and youth. It is likely that 
some contacts would have been made 
during that period—contacts that now 
offer the potential of valuable help to 
the aggressive young thief. 

In the tangled world of the thief, such 
longrunning relationships are often the 
best way to develop a trustworthy com- 
panion. Players and DMs should com- 
bine to define a henchmen character 
drawn from a PC's background. Such a 
character should not be too powerful, 
but should be given a few useful abili- 
ties. If the henchmen is of an adventur- 
ing class, he should be of lower level 
than the player character, 


Dens and Hideouts 


Of course, the 
guildhouse is the most common type of 
thieves’ den, but nearly all thieves will 
require some sort of secret lair from 
which to conduct their illicit activities. 
Dens and guildhouses will vary by size, 
in relationship to the number of thieves 
living or working there; and by obscu- 
rity, appropriate to the level of secrecy 
the guild needs to maintain in the com- 
munity. 

Some societies expect thieves to 
flourish in their midst, and among these 
cities the guild will often be a large, per- 
haps even prominent building. Of 
course, it is not likely to have a sign 
posted, describing the building's na- 
ture, but a few discreet inquiries will 


usually allow one to discover the guild- 
hall. Its location will certainly be 
known to the city watch or other law 
enforcers. Indeed, sometimes a watch 
captain or lord-mayor might allow a 
thieves guild to function in a known lo- 
cation simply to keep better tabs on it. 

But more often the guildhall’s loca- 
tion will be a secret, guarded jealously 
and ruthlessly by the guild. Likewise, a 
den or hideout serving as a shelter for a 
small group of thieves will have a dis- 
creet and carefully protected location. 

Privacy can be found underground, 
of course. Subterranean thieves lairs of- 
fer the advantage that their presence is 
easily concealed from the outside 
world. However, many humans and 
demi-humans (excluding dwarves, of 
course) dislike the chilly, damp nature 
of underground living quarters. 
Thieves who risk their lives to gain ob- 
jects of value are not likely to hide their 
wealth and themselves away in a hole in 
the ground. 

Additionally, the underground lair 
presents problems in construction. 
Large amounts of dirt must be hauled 
away, much labor is required in order 
to create a lair of any size. Both consid- 
erations add major difficulties to the se- 
crecy of lair construction. A wizard 
with a dig spell, on the other hand, can 
make the excavtation a whole lot easier, 
but doesn’t solve the problem of dirt 
disposal. 

The easiest type of lair to set up is 
found in some already existing struc- 
ture, or perhaps group of structures. A 
long row of town houses, for example, 
might be interconnected into a single, 
convoluted guildhouse. Or the attic of 
some merchant's shop can be taken by a 
small band to use as a hideout until they 
can get something better. Of course, if 
the merchant doesn’t know about the 
thieves, chances of discovery increase 
dramatically. The best hideouts are 
buildings inhabited only by thieves, or 
by thieves and those who are in league 
with them. 

In some cities it will be necessary for 
the hideout to maintain some kind of 
cover. Perhaps it is enough that the 


The Thief Campaign 


neighbors think it abandoned. Main- 
taining this appearance requires dili- 
gence on the part of the thieves, 
however, for a pattern of noise or light 
detected from the “abandoned” house 
will be sure to arouse suspicions. 

If a cover is necessary, often a coop- 
erative merchant or craftsman will la- 
bor in part of the house, maintaining 
the pretense of a place of business. Such 
a worker might even be a thief, but un- 
less he can put forth a resonable appear- 
ance of knowing his cover occupation, 
the craftsman and the hideout can both 
be in danger. 

Guildhouses and dens may also be 
maintained as private residences. Such 
locales are not so likely to be visited by 
strangers as are cover locations in 
places of business. However, the resi- 
dents of the house will probably be 
known to the neighbors, at least by 
sight. Large numbers of strangers may 
give rise to suspicion. 

The hideout should ideally have sev- 
eral entrances, at least one of which is a 
block or two away from the actual den. 
A large guildhouse will have several 
such access points, usually connected 
via underground passages or secret cor- 
ridors passing through surrounding 
buildings. 

Thus, in a secret guild, the number of 
people entering and leaving the hall will 
not be visible to neighbors or other ob- 
servers. Indeed, if an access route is suf- 
ficeintly torturous, a visitor can be 
brought into the guild without being 
shown the building's exact location. He 
might know nothing more than that the 
guild is within several blocks of a cer- 
tain alley where he stepped through a 
secret trapdoor in the ground. 

A major guildhall will also have sev- 
eral built-in traps to deter unwelcome 
intruders. If enough thieves man the 
lair (more than a dozen or so), a full- 
time watch will be maintained. 

Only the most permanent of thieves’ 
dens will have a built-in vault or stor- 
age chamber for the loot. When such a 
chamber exists it is only used for the 
temporary storage of objects that can- 
not quickly be fenced. Thieves know 


126 


only to well that such storage sites are 
all too easily penetrated. It is much 
more likely that the thieves will main- 
tain their hoard in some other, nearby 
but secret location. Of course, thieves 
who are very brazen about their activi- 
ties, or very confident that they face no 
competition in a given locale, may well 
keep large amounts of valuables in their 
guildhall. Such a hoard might even be a 
source of pride to the guild, a sort of 
challenge to the unwary. 


TABLES 


om Item Legality Cost Weight 
able 4: 
THIEVING SKILL THIEF KIT ADJUSTMENTS Ce bondi L 2@ 
Penk Kapan aa (vial) S 2gp 
istening Cone 
Pick Open FR Move Hidein Detect Climb Read (brass) L 2gp 
Thief Kit Pockets' Locks Traps Sil. ShadowsNoise Walls Lang. Clawed Gloves** I 20gp TC 
= os = — — =- — — = Clawed Overshoes I 15gp 1C 
Acrobat +5% -5% -5% +5% — — +5% — Climbing Dagger L 5 gp 1 
theo = Rae — — = — EA Grappig e L z gp 2 
Assassin — Ea — — = — - ow, wood biter = 
Bandit -5% -= +10% —* +5% — -5% -5% Arrow, stone biter I; 1 s x 
Beggar +10% -5% -5% = +5% — — -5% Arrow, stone biter, 
Bounty Hunter —’ = +5% — — -5% -= adamantite L 7gp A 
Buccaneer -5% — = o — = — +5% Arrow, minor grap- 
Burglar -5% +5% — — — — +5% -5% ple L/S gp 
Cutpurse +10% — = — — — -5% -5% Arrow, major grap- 
Fence — +5% +5% -5% -5% — -5% +5% ple L/S 10gp 1 
lnvestigator -5% = = -— +5% — = Climbing Spikes, iron 
Smuggler -5% -5% — +5% +5% +5% -5% - | a L Ssp 4 
= 23 == = = = = — rowbar L 6sp 4 
indler — -5% = — — — = +5% Glass-cutter 
Thug = z = = = = = = (handled) LA 120 
Troubleshooter -10% +5% +5% — — — Ea — BP 1 
K 1o Housebreaker's 
OTES TO TABLE 4 Harness** I 25gp 2 
1. Includes similar feats of manual dexterity. such as legerdemain and slipping poison (see Keymaking Set I 60. sp p 
Limewood (as bark 
also note 3, below). strips, 10) L 3ep é 
2. This ability may also be used in the placement of traps. Sharkskin (persq.ft.) L/S 12¢p 1 
3. Assassins and bounty hunters are adept at slipping foreign substances (poison, sedative, Skeleton Key I var. 
etc.) into the food or drink of their targets, Success in such a feat of manual dexterity is deter- | Wax. block L 3cp 
mined by a pick pockets roll, and the assassin or bounty hunter gets +5% on the roll. This | Aniseed, vial L 2sp j 
special bonus does not apply, however, to pickpocketing or other tasks covered by this abil- Caltrops se L/S 3gp 1 
ity. Catstink, vial** S/I 40gp 
: : SEPRE Dog Pepper, packet 5 1sp y 
à + Š 
4. In the wilderness, the bandit gets +5% to this ability. Hand Lemp (ith ail? 
vered mirror) L/S 10gp 1 
Hollow Boots 1 l15gp 3C 
Marbles, bag (30) t 2cp 
3 i Blinding Powder var, var. 
Table 28: Table 31: Death Knife** S/I 
SILENCED ARMOR (ELFIN CHAIN) PURCHASING THIEF EQUIPMENT at wep 1 
EFFECT ON SKILL Folding Bow L/S 45gp 2 
Item Legality Cost Weight ~ Ring (iran) pil 2gp A 
Pick Pockets -25 ; in Ring (silver) S/I 10gp 
Open Locks `; | Arm Sling L 3ep , | Sword Stick** L/S 25gp 4 
Find/Remove Tra =9 Mini-Blade L poe Wrist Sheath S Ssp 
Move Silent! ps = Razor Ring (iron) S/l 2gp Blade Boots I l15gp 3C 
Hide in Sha cae ~10 Razor Ring (silver) S/l 10gp à False Scabbard** L/S 12gp 12 
D eat Noise — | Thieves Picks 1 30gp 1 | Hand-WarmingLamp L  2sp 
À S S Acid, Metal-eating, 1 Marked Cards, 
Climb Walls 25 vial** 50 Deck** I 5 
Read Languages = | Weck) .Chi Ep ; a gP 
ae i x x hing Dice, bone, 
set o gp ox of 4 S gp 
Hacksaw (equivalent) L 3 gp 1 Biased Dice, ivory, 
| Hacksaw Blade L ó sp S box of 4 I 20 gp 
Metal File 15 5sp Water Shoes, pair Sí 5gp 1 
Wire Cutters L/S 1gp C = Clothing. Adds nothing to encumbrance 
Funnel, small L 3 cp when worn normally. 
Footpad's Boots l agp BC | L= Legal i 
Silenced Armor** S 750 S = Shady 
gpt 50 I = Illegal 
Leather straps (pair) L 3sp yi ** Indicates hard-to-find item. 
Darksuit S 30 gp 5 * Item weighs little individually. About ten of 
Woodland Suit L/S 35 gp 5 | these items weigh one pound, 


127 


Table 32: 
MAGICAL ITEMS FOR THIEVES 
d20 
Roll Category Table 
1-7 Potions and oils 33 
8-11 Miscellaneous Magic: 
Clothing and Jewelry - 34 
12-15 Miscellaneous Magic: 
Other Sneaky Stuff 35 
16-19 Weapons 36 
20 Special (see text) 
Table 33: POTIONS AND OILS 
dé XP 
Roll Item Value 
1 Essence of Darkness (T*) 300 
2 Oil of Slickness (T) 350 
3 Master Thievery (T) 500 
4 Perception (T*) 300 
5 Sleep Breathing 250 
6 Thievery (T) 350 
Table 34: 
MISCELLANEOUS MAGIC: 
CLOTHING AND JEWELRY 
dé XP 
Roll Item Value 
1 Amulet of Dramatic Death (T) U 
2 Boots of Balance (T*) 1,000 
3 Gloves of Evasion (T*) 1,000 
4 Mantle of the Mundane (T*) 1,500 
5 Robe of Vanishing (T) 2,000 
6 Shadowcloak (T*) 3,000 
Table 35: 
MISCELLANEOUS MAGIC: 
OTHER SNEAKY STUFF 
dé XP 
Roll Item Value 
1 Bag of Vanishing (T) 5,000 
2 Boxes of Delightful Transport 2,500 
3 Dust of Trail Dispersion {T*) 500 
4 Lens of Remote Viewing (T) 1,000 
5 Lens of Valuation (T) 1,000 
6 Tallin's Tightrope 1,250 


Table 36: MAGIC WEAPONS 


XP 
Item Value 
Crossbow of Angling 750 
Dagger of Impaling (T) 300 
Dagger of Resource (T) 500 
Dagger of Sounding (T) 300 
Scabbard of Poison 500 
Shortsword of Backstabbing 
(T*) 700 


Table 37; EFFECTS OF ARMOR ON ACROBATIC PROFICIENCIES 


Studded Ring Scale 

No Elfin or or Brigandine or Plate Plate 
Skill Armor' Chain Padded Hide Chain Splint Banded Mail’ Armor 
Broad jump, 
running tE — tA = g A ah —10’ =15! =20' 
High jump, 
running tI =the) et set aa =8' =10 =20' 18! 
Broad jump, 
standing H å — FA CE a SY =a =a =10' 
High jump, 
standing HA — ca eS A —=21/2' =2t/7 -3i Bo 
Pole vaulting — oo e he E R —=10' = +35’ 
Tightrope 
Walking = sd | =] sy =S -6 -8 Silo Sg? 
Tumbling 
Defensive +4 +4 +3 TE 2 ka 0 0 0 
Attack +2 +2 +2 0 +l re | 0 0 0 
Falling — 21 i =g =$ =$ -8 -10 =12 


General Notes: Leather armor is taken to be the standard, with no positive or negative ad- 
justment to thief skills. No dexterity bonuses apply to thief functions (though penalties do) 
when wearing armor other than simple leather. 


1. This category applies when wearing bracers of defense or a cloak, but no large protective 
devices. 

2. Includes bronze plate mail. 

3. Encompasses both field plate and full plate armor. 


Table 38: EFFECTS OF ARMOR ON THIEF SKILLS 


Studded Ring Scale 

No Elfin or or Brigandine or Plate Plate 
Skill Armor' Chain Padded Hide Chain Splint Banded Mail’ Armor 
Pick Pockets t5% -20% -30% -60% -40% -40% =50%. =75% —95% 
Open Locks — -5% ~10% -50% —15% -15% .-20% —40% -80% 
Find/Remove 
Traps — -5% -10% -50% -15% -25% =20% -40% -80% 
Move Silently +10% -10% -20% -30% -40% -40 % -60% -80% -95% 
Hide in 
Shadows‘ +5% -10% -20% -20% -30% =30% =50% -75% =95% 
Hear Noise -= -5% -10% -10% -20% =25% -30% -50% -70% 
Climb Walls +10% —20% -30% -60% -40% =50% -90% -05% -95% 
Read Languages — — — = — - = — E 


1. This category applies when wearing bracers of defense or a cloak, but no large protective de- 
vices. 

2. Includes bronze plate mail. 

3. Encompasses both field plate and full plate armor. 

4. Assumes that armor worn is covered by another garment, Elfin chain mail is light and thin, and 
can be worn under normal clothing. All other types of armor except simple leather are stiff or 
bulky, and can only be covered by a full body cloak. 


128 


Players Handbook / Rules See 


The 
Complete 


Thief’s 


Handbook 


Open locks; hide in shadows; move silently; find 
traps. If you thought that was all a thief was good 
for, think again. The masters of skulking an skull- 
duggery are a force to be reckoned with. Is anyone or 
anything safe from a person who might be anywhere, 
anytime? Learn the thief’s most closely guarded se- 
crets in this devious accessory for the AD&D game. 


$15.00 U.S. 0-88038-780-7 


TSR, Inc TSR Ltd 
POB 756 F 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 Cambridge CB1 3LB 
Uu.s.A United Kingdom 
AD&D, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, 
46363 


PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION, and the TSR logo are 
(6) 21 1 1 5 trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
©1989 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the USA. 


