Z2 E 'H i : Rulebook 


. Book of Artifacts 


by David “Zeb” Cook 


FORGOTTEN REALMS® Campaign 

Well met. . . and welcome to the most popular, most detailed fantasy campaign world ever created. Here gods walk the 
earth and fantastic armies clash. Visitors explore a vast frontier filled with fascinating folk, from bold heroes and whimsical 
characters to shadowy villains and clandestine societies. This is the home of Elminster the sage and Drizzt the dark .elf—two 
heroes featured in TSR's best-selling FORGOTTEN REALMS novel line. No setting can match the grand scope of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS campaign world. 


RAVENLOFT®Campaign 

Whether you journey to Ravenloft for an occasional evening of terror or an extended nightmare, the experience will haunt 
you forever. The RAVENLOFT campaign is a horrific realm of dread and desire, rooted in the Gothic tradition. The misty 

fingers of this world can reach into any other campaign setting to draw unsuspecting travelers into its midst. Once it holds 
them in its icy embrace, it may never let them go. In a shadowy world filled with vampires, werewolves, and ghosts, only 

those who are strong of heart may survive. 


DARK SUN® Campaign 
The DARK SUN world is TSR's most savage game setting—a desert realm scorched by a relentless sun, blasted by the 
destructive magic of generations of evil wizards. It is a land of evil sorcerer-kings and powerful psionicists (characters with 
astounding paranormal powers). In this wild and brutal landscape, a single adventurer can alter the course of unfolding 
history. 


AL-QADIM™ Campaign (ahl kah-DEEM) 

Take a magic carpet ride to adventure! Behold the legendary might of Zakhara, the Land of Fate. In this realm of burning 
sands and burning passions, threads of Arabian legend are richly interwoven with the fantasy of the AD&D® game. Visit 
spired cities, lush oases, and mysterious isles set in glittering seas. Meet sultans and sheikhs. See genies and giants. Discover a 
trove of new magical treasures! Whether your character sets sail from the compatible FORGOTTEN REALMS setting or 
explores Zakhara as a native, the exotic AL-QADIM campaign will enchant role-players for a thousand and one adventures. 


GREYHAWK® Campaign 

Bigby, Tenser, Mordenkainen, Leomund ... If you've perused the spells and magical items for the AD&D game, you've 
discovered their famous names. These and other personalities hail from the GREYHAWK campaign setting, the oldest world 
created for the AD&D game line. Steeped in tradition, the GREYHAWK campaign abounds with castles and valiant knights. 
It is also a realm of free-wheeling adventure and mercenaries for hire. In the wake of a recent war, the nations live with an 
uneasy truce. Now heroes face new challenges in the endless struggle for the cause of good, from eluding the nefarious spies 
of the Scarlet Brotherhood to evading the ghoulish army of Ivid the Undying. 


oc 
DRAGONLANCE® Campaign 
Enter the world of Ansalon, a land of romance and high adventure. Discover tinker gnomes, gully dwarves, nefarious 
villains, noble heroes . . . and dark, deadly dragons. All things draconian play a starring role in this world—from the 


half-man, half-dragon thugs who patrol the streets, to the evil red dragons who fill the skies, to the beautiful creatures of 
gold and silver who do battle on the side of good. This is a world struggling to regain its lost honor and glory—a land where 
unlikely adventurers can become legendary heroes. 


WORLDS AT YOUR DOORSTEP 


accessory adventure accessory accessory 


rules supplement accessory accessory adventure adventure 


rules supplement rules supplement accessory advewture 


accessory adventure 


rules supplement 


adventure 


accessory 


accessory accessory accessory adventure adventure 


* & " designate trademarks owned by TSA, Inc. 


Incredible Magic for All Campaigns! 


Credits 


Design: David "Zeb" Cook 

Additional Artifact Design: Rich Baker, Wolfgang Baur, Steve and Glenda Burns, 
Bill Connors, Dale "Slade" Henson, Colm McComb, Thomas M. Reid, and 
David Wise 

Supervision and Development: David "Zeb" Cook 

Editing: Thomas M Reid 

Additional Editing and Proofreading: David Wise 

Cover Art: Fred Fields 

Art Coordination: Peggy Cooper 

Interior Art and Icons: Daniel Frazier 

Graphic Coordination: Sarah Feggestad 

Typesetting: Gaye O'Keefe 


TSR, Inc TSR Ltd 
FOB 756 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton 
Lake Geneva Cambridge CB1 3LB 
WI53147USA United Kingdom 


Table of Contents 


Introdüction E —Á— 3 
Acorn of Wo Mai................ essent ll 
All-Knowing Eye of Yasmin Sira ...................... 12 
Pe CUI €—HÓRÜ 13 
AQUI ACE ss eee eet retirer eene l6 
Axe of the Dwarvish Lords............................... 17 
Axe of the Emperors ............ ee 19 
BabaYagas Hut eere teme 21 
Blackjammer's Cutlass ...................... sss 24 
Book with No End........................ eese 25 
Codex of the Infinite Planes.............................. 27 
Coin of Jisan the Bountiful................................ 28 
Crystal of the Ebon Flame...............................—. 29 
Cup of Al Akbar.............. eese 30 
Talismanof Al'Akbar...................... eene 30 
DeathRock................... esee 32 
Hammer of Gesen ................. see 33 
HandofVeocna..................... esee 35 
Eyeof Vect... trs Ree ER EER IRR IR een 35 
Herald of Mei Lung .............12 e 37 
Heward's Mystical Organ................................ 39 
Horn Of Charge... enne 42 
Invulnerable Coat and Arnd ............................ 43 
Iron Bow of Gesen................... eene 44 
Iron Flask of Tuerny the Merciless................... 45 
Ivory Chain of Pao .................. esee 46 
Jacinth of Inestimable Beauty........................... 46 
Johydee'sMask................... eene 49 
Küroth s Qul... eterne 50 


MaceofCuthbert.................... eese 52 
Machine of Lum the Mad.................................. 53 
Mighty Servant of Leuk-0 ...................... sss 58 
Monocle of Bagthalos ................................. 61 
Obsidian Man.................. sese 63 
Orbs of Dragonkind........................ esses 65 
Psychometron of Nerad ....................... 77 
Queen Ehlissa's Marvelous Nightingale......... 78 
Recorder of Ye'Cind .............. eeeeeseeeeseseeesees 79 
Regalia of Good ..................... sss 80 
Regalia of Neutrality........................... sss 80 
Regalia of Evil sosisini 80 
Ring OF GaxX qu ——— 90 
Rod of Seven Parts ................. 91 
Rod of "Feethi..... entities tette 93 
Scepter of the Sorcerer-Kings........................... 95 
Seal of Jafar al-Samal ........................... sss 97 
Silencer of Bodach....................... sss 98 
Swotd OF Kas......: bec tenti eierenis 100 
Teeth of Dahlvar-Nar......................... esse 101 
Throne of the Gods ............................ 103 
Triad of Betryal ................... esses 105 
Creating Magical Items .................... 107 
Recharging Magical Items............................... 130 
Appendix A: Common Rechargeable 

Magical tems. 137 
Appendix B: Random Power Tables.............. 138 
Appendix C: Song List for Heward's 

Mystical Organ................... sse 159 


Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English language products of TSR, Inc 


Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd 
Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS AD&D, DARKSUN DRAGONLANCE, FORGOTTEN REALMS, GREYHAWK,RAVENLOFT, GAMMA WORLD, and 


SPET T JAMMER are registered trademarks owned by TSR Inc 


AL-QADIM DUNGEON MASTER, DM, BATTLES YSTEM, MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc 


All TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc 


This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America Anv reproduction or other unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained 


herein is prohibited without the express written consent of TSR, Inc 


Printedin U S A 
Copyright ©1993 TSR, Inc All Rights Reserved 
1-56076-672-7 


Introduction 


Welcome to the big Book of Artifacts! Within these 
pages is one of the most amazing, diverse, and 
colorful collections of arcane magic ever assem- 
bled for use in AD&D® campaigns. Before get- 
ting started, though, it's time to clear up a few 
misconceptions: 


"Artifacts are too powerful for a campaign." 
Not true! Artifact does not mean immensely pow- 
erful. The Herald ofMei Lung is useful, but it can't 
blast anyone to ashes the way the Axe of the 
Emperors might. It's not the power, but the his- 
tory and role-playing opportunities that really 
make the difference. 


"All artifacts have horrible curses that keep 
them from being useful." All artifacts have side 
effects that reflect their nature, but not all side 
effects are curses. The fiend trapped in the Acorn of 
Wo Mai is definitely evil, and freeing him would 
be a bad thing. The truthfulness imposed by the 
Crown of Law isn't evil, although it may create dif- 
ficulties forthe player character. These side effects 
create opportunities for role-playing as characters 
are faced with the choices, changes, and dilemmas 
that great power brings. With prudence and good 
judgement, most artifacts can be used safely by 
PCs, but only by testing their mettle. 


"Artifacts are just collections of random pow- 
ers." It used to be that artifacts had very little def- 
inition—a bit of history, one or two powers, and a 
lot of fill-in-the-blanks that relied on random 
tables. In the Book of Artifacts, there are all types. 
Some still let the DM choose powers while others 
are completely defined. The majority of artifacts 
here have their major powers defined while the 
lesser powers are leftfor the DM to pick. 


"Artifacts are all created by gods that 
shouldn't be involved in the campaign." No, 
many are the work of heroes from ages long past 
and a good number have their origins lost in 
time. The Coin ofjisan the Bountiful is tied to that 
goddess and may not be suitable for every cam- 
paign, butthe same cannot be said of the Machine 


ofLum the Mad. 'There are more than enough arti- 
facts available that are free of the troublesome 
interference of gods. 


"Artifactsarefoundonlyinthe GREYHAWK(G 
campaign." The first artifacts did appear in the 
GREYHAWK setting, and most of those are found 
in here, but the GREYHAWK world has no lock 
on artifacts. All the old favorites and many new 
ones appear in this book, suitable for any cam- 
paign. There are also artifacts designed for the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS®, DRAGONLANCE®, 
DARK SUN®, SPELLJAMMER®, RAVENLOFT®, 
and AL-QADIM" settings. 


"If the characters stumble across an artifact, 
it could ruin the campaign." Purely and simply, 
nobody ever "stumbles upon” an artifact. Arti- 
facts are special, and no one just finds them 
lying around. There are no treasure tables for 
artifacts; they do not appear in random treasure 
piles. In fact, the only time characters can find an 
artifact is when the DM wants them to. It's 
assumed that the characters won't be given an 
artifact unless the DM is ready to deal with it. 


"A character with an artifact will ruin the 
adventure." The artifact is the adventure, and is 
there because the adventure needs it. Artifacts 
are about stories, and characters find them 
because there is a special need. Throughout the 
Book of Artifacts, there are adventure suggestions 
built around the artifacts. 


"Artifacts are nothing but a headache." Of 
course they are if the DM and players don't use 
them well. Give a character Baba Yaga's Hut with- 
out a little planning and thought, and disaster will 
certainly follow. With a little preparation, how- 
ever, artifacts make for memorable adventures. 

With all these misconceptions out of the way, 
it's clear that artifacts can be used in ways that 
won't unbalance the campaign, destroy player 
characters, muck up the world, or even ruin an 
adventure. 

Now, doesn't that feel better? 


Introduction 


What’s In Here? 


The Book of Artifacts is a supplement for the 
core rules of the AD&D® 2nd Edition game. In 
other words, everything in this book is optional. 
This is not something every DM must have or a 
book every player should read. DM's who want 
to use the material here can, others don't have 
to. The Book of Artifacts is not a vital piece for 
everycampaign. 

As one might expect, the Book of Artifacts 
includes descriptions of artifacts for use in the 
game. These descriptions fill the better part of 
the book. Each description includes a history 
and advice for creating adventures that revolve 
around the artifact. 

To aid the DM in using artifacts, there is also a 
chapter of general information about artifacts. In 
it the DM can find advice on creating new arti- 
facts, building adventures around artifacts, get- 
ting artifacts out of a campaign, and how to 
repair a damaged campaign if an artifact gets 
out of hand. 

Although not directly related to artifacts, two 
chapters dealing with the creation and recharg- 
ing of magical items have also been included. 
These give detailed rules and guidelines to help 
the DM when player characters decide to make 
their own magical items. Now, when the PC 
mage wants to recharge a wand of frost or make a 
potion of spider climbing, the DM will be ready. 

After all this comes a host of appendices. 
These cover tables for artifact powers, diagrams 
of the control panels for the Machine of Lum the 
Mad and the stops of Heward's Mystical Organ, 
listings of artifacts suitable to particular AD&D 
worlds, and more. The DM can use these to cre- 
ate and integrate his own artifacts into the cam- 
paign. 

The best way to approach this material is to 
skip around. DM's are encouraged to read 
through the chapter on artifacts first. The artifact 
descriptions can be read in any order desired or 
not read at all. The information on magical items 
can be read when needed; none of the rules there 
is needed to use any artifact in a campaign. 


What is an Artifact? 


Since this book is about artifacts, it helps to 
have a clear idea of just what an artifact is and 
isn't. It's not what a lot of people expect. 

One occasional point of confusion is that there 
are two different names for the same thing— 
artifact and relic. Artifacts are powerful magical 
items that have wizard, priest, or other powers 
and are made by gods, lichs, wizards, and other 
spellcasters. Relics are powerful magical items 
that have wizard, priest, or other powers, are 
made by gods and priests, and have some holy 
importance to a particular temple. Otherwise, 
the two types are identical. Throughout this 
book, the term "artifact" refers to both artifacts 
and relics. "Relic" refers only to that group of 
artifacts that have holy significance. 

A common assumption is that an artifact is 
any ultra-powerful magical device. This is not 
true. A staff of the magi 1s considered by many to 
be an ultra-powerful device, but it is not an arti- 
fact. Indeed, many artifacts have fewer powers 
than this staff. While most artifacts are potent 
(because the DM wants them to be memorable), 
sheer power is not a defining quality. An artifact 
must have three properties: it must be unique, it 
must have a history, and it must be important to 
the adventure. 


Unique. Artifacts are one-of-a-kind items, and 
that's part of what makes them valuable. There's 
only one Talisman of Al-Akbar. If there were 
more, they wouldn't be as special. In most cam- 
paigns, this means there's only one in the entire 
world. In those campaigns that cross to different 
worlds (asaSPELLJAMMER® game would), it 
means there's only one in all the worlds and 
planes. This also means that characters who are 
brought from one DM's campaign to another 
cannot bring artifacts with them. The DM gets to 
keep those toys. 


History. One of the most important features of 
every artifact is that it has baggage. Someone or 
something made it, used it, and eventually man- 


luction 


aged to lose it. The history should explain or at 
least hint at the reason the artifact exists and 
what it was originally used for. The tale may 
also tell what has happened to the artifact since 
it was made, particularly the great or wondrous 
fates of successive owners. Histories are impor- 
tant. They provide something for the player 
characters to research and a means for the DM to 
give clues about the item's vast powers. A color- 
ful if not wholly accurate description of the terri- 
ble fate that met the last owner of the Crystal of 
the Ebon Flame is certain to make the player char- 
acters cautious, should they ever find the same 
device. 


Story. This is the most curious qualifier for an 
artifact since it doesn't really affect the powers 
of the item or any other aspect of the game rules. 
It does affect how the DM uses an artifact and 
the information players might gain. 

Purely and simply, artifacts exist to tell stories. 
Characters don't just "find" an artifact. They 


AS NAM 
OTRA t 
BSc 1)))7 27, 


discover it because the DM put it there as part of 
a specific adventure. The minute an artifact 
turns up, smart players will know the DM has a 
special adventure in mind for their characters. 

As befits the unique nature of artifacts, adven- 
tures built around them can't be ordinary ones. 
The DM should make every effort to create a 
memorable challenge for the players. With their 
histories, artifacts have the tools to make good 
stories, but it is up the DM to finish the job. 

So there it is. Artifacts are unique and colorful 
magical items that provide adventure tools for 
the DM. They don't have to be powerful items, 
although, because of their histories, most are. 

One last point—artifacts are optional! No DM 
must include artifacts in a campaign. Even if 
they are used, no DM has to use every artifact 
listed in this book. DMs can always pick and 
choose those liked best and declare that the rest 
do not exist in the campaign. 

More importantly, no player has the right to 
tell any DM that an artifact must exist in the 

Na uan N 


e 
a a 
Seien TU 


<a 


Introduction 


campaign. In a normal group, with only one 
DM, this is seldom a problem. It is important to 
remember this, however, for those groups where 
several DMs may be running the same player 
characters at different times. If Martha is DMing 
and introduces the Sword of Kas for an adven- 
ture, players should not insist that John let them 
use the Sword of Kas when he is DMing the same 
characters in a later adventure. If it is necessary, 
remember that artifacts always have an amazing 
ability to vanish unexpectedly, only to reappear 
innocently at some later date. 


Creating Artifacts 


The artifacts described in this book are not the 
only artifacts that can be used in a campaign. 
Artifacts, with their detailed histories and pow- 
erful effects, are personal things, so it makes 
sense that the DM should create artifacts unique 
to an individual campaign. In fact, that's just 
what the DM should do. Every campaign should 
have artifacts that are truly unique to it, thereby 
ensuring that the DM's world is different from 
every other campaign out there. 

Great idea, the DM may say, but how do I do 
it? 

Don't worry. It's really not that hard. By fol- 
lowing a few simple guidelines, DMs discover 
that artifacts practically create themselves. This 
section provides a step-by-step example of the 
whole process. 


Guideline #1: Artifacts Cheat 


Artifacts are about wonder—not power like 
many players think. Artifacts are the highest of 
all magic in a normal campaign, so they have to 
be surprising, awe-inspiring, and unpredictable; 
in other words, all the things that make the 
world wondrous. Artifacts can't be ho-hum 
devices bound by the standard rules of magical 
devices—the dreary realities of charges, com- 
mand words, and the like. Artifacts exist to 
break the rules. 


By the strict game rules, nobody could build 
the Machine of Lum the Mad—but Lum did. By 
the game rules, no one would make the Rod of 
Seven Parts—but it was made. The pseudo-sci- 
entific Apparatus doesn't conform to the rules 
for spells and magical devices—but it doesn't 
matter. It's the effect that is important, the feel 
of wonder and mystery that is added to the 
campaign. 

When creating an artifact, consider first the 
effect. A good idea is to choose something that is 
impossible by normal spells and magical items. 
This makes the artifact special and desirable. 
The effect doesn't have to be all-powerful, only 
impossible by the current rules. Make that the 
principal effect of the artifact. 


This artifact makes a wizard's spells permanent, so he 
never has to memorize spells. 


That's pretty powerful and impossible, and 
it's a good example for an artifact's effect. So, 
where does one go next? 


Guideline #2: 
Artifacts are born, not made 


Any wizards or priests worth half their salt 
can make a magical item. They get a bunch of 
materials, research a few spells, lock themselves 
away in a tower or cellar, and poof-bingo-bango!— 
there's a magical item. While the materials and 
steps needed may be a mystery, the process itself 
is not mysterious. Everyone knows spellcasters 
make magical items, so no one is surprised 
when Jalarko the Magnificent comes out of his 
tower waving a long sword +1. 

Artifacts, though, are not just things. They 
quickly take on a life of their own. It's better to 
imagine an artifact as being born rather than 
built. Birth implies mystery and strangeness, 
wonder beyond a mere manufacturing process. 

As much as characters might like to, nobody in 
the present history of a campaign "makes" arti- 
facts. Artifacts always come from times more dis- 
tant, a few centuries to a few millennia in the 


Introduction 


past. Sometimes the maker and the circum- 
stances of the device's creation are well known; 
more often, however, the history of who did 
what and what was done is vague and uncertain. 


It is said that this artifact, the Crown of Mem- 
ory, was a gift to the archmage Forlin from his 
grateful former apprentices, now mighty mages 
themselves. In his advanced years, their beloved 
master's memory was not all it could have been, 
and sofor his 180th birthday they sought a solu- 
tion. Their gift decided, each worked his part in 
secrecy, fashioning and adding a little more to 
the crown without yet knowing what the others 
had done. It is said that one of them even pleaded 
to the powers of magic for aid in the task. Per- 
haps his cries were heard, for the Crown was the 
result. 


Guideline #3: Every Artifact Has a Tale 


Simply saying that an artifact is, is not enough. 
Artifacts come wrapped in long chains of his- 
tory and legend that bind them to specific places 
and things. Part of this is in the mystery of their 
birth— who first made them, who first used 
them, who first died at their hands— but their 
legends reach beyond this. Artifacts are like 
proverbial bad pennies, resurfacing time and 
time again to wreak havoc, inspire tragedy, or 
save the day. Each appearance is a mini-epic in 
which the artifact plays a central role. No tale is 
ever, "Oh by the way, he used this artifact he 
found." Instead, the artifact changes the hero (or 
heroine); sometimes for the better, oft for the 
worse, and then like an actor whose part is fin- 
ished, it disappears from the stage. Imagine that 
artifacts have wills of their own. They allow 
themselves to be discovered and used and they 
leave when the time is done. 

One practical effect of coming up with a color- 
ful tale is that it provides the DM with the 
ammunition needed for adventures and so forth, 
in the form of rumors, legends, and hints for the 
campaign. Since learning the powers of any arti- 
fact is supposed to be hard, these tales (already 


prepared) may be the best sources of meager 
information for the player characters. 


When the archmage finally died, dissension rose 
among his loyal students. Some wanted to inter 
the treasure with their master, while others 
decried this ivaste. The argument was settled 
when Liras seized the Crown and claimed it as 
her own. The wrath ofall the others turned upon 
her, but, aided by the Crown, Liras slew them 
all. Ambition fueled a madness in her and so, 
with the Crown's might, she overthrew the 
rightful king and proclaimed the Sorcerous 
Dynasty. Terrible was her rule, as she crushed 
any who opposed her. At last the hero Turoc, 
aided by a bound fiend, brought an end to her 
reign. 

Alas for Turoc, thefiend tricked the warrior 
into undoing its bond. Claiming the Crown as 
its prize, it slew its former master and fled from 
this plane. Perhaps it and the Crown still 
remain in the Abyss. 


Guideline #4: Every Artifact Has Its Price 


The old maxim "with great power comes 
great responsibility" couldn't be more true in the 
case of artifacts. Nothing is free or easy about 
these devices. There are always costs, draw- 
backs, or outright curses tied to their use. 

This has two effects, both important for the 
campaign. First, an effective curse quickly dis- 
courages any potential abuse of the artifact's 
powers. Risking possession or the arrival of a 
major fiend each time a power is used generally 
promotes cautious behavior on the part of the 
player characters. Second, by giving the player 
characters an artifact fraught with its own perils 
that must be used in the adventure, the DM gen- 
erates tension. "Do I dare call upon the powers 
of the Scepter of the Sorcerer Kings, or should I 
wait and hope to get out of this alive some other 
way?" Of course, to be truly effective, the player 
characters should have some idea of what the 
curse is, preferably by learning the supposed 
fates of previous owners. 


Introduction 


From the adventure standpoint, a good curse 
adds a necessary touch of drama and pathos to 
an item's history. It is far more memorable to say 
Ethganir Heartbow used the Axe of the Emperors 
to save the city, only to have it sap his life away, 
than to just say he used it and later got killed. 
This balance between weal and woe, need and 
risk, is what makes artifacts exciting to use. 


The Crown holds trapped within it Liras's spirit. 
Once it longed for power, but centuries in the Abyss 
have driven it vengefully mad. Any who wear the 
Crown risk activating the mad spirit trapped within. 


General Artifact Powers 


In addition to the powers possessed individu- 
ally, all artifacts share certain features in com- 
mon. These properties generally conceal and 
protect the artifact, placing them outside the 
normal rules for magical items. 


* Artifacts are unique. Unless the description 
says more than one exists, there can only be one 
of each in a campaign world. 

* Artifacts radiate only dim power to a detect 
magic spell. The spell never reveals the type of 
magic involved. 

* Artifacts are immune to detect evil, identify, 
know alignment, or locate object spells. 

* Legend lore and contact other plane spells never 
reveal the location of an artifact. These spells can 
be used to learn more about an artifact's powers, 
but the answers are often highly mysterious. 

* Artifacts are immune to physical or magical 
harm, except by a few specific means. If placed 
in a situation where a magical item would be 
utterly destroyed (such as crushed under an 
immense slab) the artifact simply disappears. 
This immunity extends even to the powers of 
the gods. 

* The effects of artifacts, particularly the curses, 
are permanent unless otherwise noted. Even 
wishes or supplications to the gods cannot undo 
the harm an artifact has caused. 


Special Curses 


Although every artifact is unique, there are 
two cursed properties found in many of these 
items—artifact possession and artifact transforma- 
tion. 'The first occurs when that item imposes its 
will and goals upon the personality of its owner. 
This is a subtle and insidious change that often 
passes unremarked by others until too late. The 
second power actually changes something more 
concrete about the character— physical form, 
alignment, race, even class may be altered to 
something more desirable to the artifact. While 
the change is slow, the effect far less subtle than 
its cousin. 


Artifact Possession 


When an item is capable of artifact possession, 
the DM should note the goals and ambitions 
outlined in the Curse section of the device's 


Introduction 


description. This is what a possessed character 
will seek to do or become. A wise DM will be 
prepared to deal with this possession, should it 
occur. 

Artifacts do not instantly possess their own- 
ers—that would be no fun. Instead, the degener- 
ation of a character is a gradual process, as the 
character slides further and further out of con- 
trol. Not only does this provide the opportunity 
to build mystery and horror, but it gives the 
player ample warning of the fate that awaits. 

Possession checks are made using the same 
rules as those for intelligent magical items. 
However, one check is made every week in addi- 
tion to checks required from potential conflicts 
between the character and the artifact. (These 
are not based on alignment, but on the goals and 
history of the item.) For these checks, treat the 
artifact as if it has a personality score of 40 + 
1diO. 

Each time the character's personality is over- 
whelmed, the artifact is able to assert a little 
more control over the character. The DM must 
track how many times this occurs, for once dom- 
ination has taken place a number of times equal 
to the character's Wisdom score, the PC is per- 
manently and forever possessed. Furthermore, 
characters partially overwhelmed (say, a charac- 
ter with a Wisdom score of 12 who has been 
dominated 6 times) have greater difficulty resist- 
ing the artifact or shaking off its effects. Use the 
ratio of possessions to total Wisdom as a per- 
centage guide (50% in the above example). 

The ultimate purpose of artifact possession is 
to increase role-playing danger and excitement. 
There is no set length for the possession process. 
Instead, the DM should prolong or shorten it as 
best suits the drama of the campaign; too 
quickly and the tension of the character's grad- 
ual decay is lost, too slowly and the fear of pos- 
session is lost. It is a balancing act the DM must 
master. 


Artifact Transformation 


A more obvious case of character destruction 
is artifact transformation. As with possession, the 
artifact's curse will describe just how the charac- 
ter changes. It is then the DM's task to adjudi- 
cate this subtle shift. 

Each week that a character owns an artifact, a 
saving throw vs. polymorph (with a -4 penalty) 
must be rolled. Do not explain to players the 
purpose of this roll. If the saving throw is suc- 
cessful, nothing happens. If it is failed, then 
sometime during that week, a change occurs in 
the character and one aspect of the character 
adopts the new form. If an artifact is slowly 
changing Chekhos the Warrior into an ogre, then 
he might wake up one morning to find himself 
much bigger. His clothes and armor no longer 
fit, and he suffers larger-than-man-sized dam- 
age in combat. The next week, he might not be 
as handsome as he once was, as his Charisma 
drops to more ogrish levels. In the third week, 
Chekhos's wits dull, and so on until the process 
is complete. 

Artifact transformation is not meant to be benefi- 
cial to the character. This is important. The charac- 
ter in the process of becoming an ogre could 
benefit from ogre strength, but find himself both 
clumsy and ugly. 

The transformation is not only physical. As 
the new form becomes more final, the charac- 
ter's personality should reflect the change. The 
soon-to-be ogre starts to harbor ogrish thoughts 
and ogrish habits. When the transformation is 
complete, so is the personality change. Those 
transformed into monsters are immediately 
relinquished to the DM for use as NPCs. 


Reading the Artifact Descriptions 


The first part of every artifact description is a 
description of the item's appearance, accompa- 
nied by an illustration. In most cases this 
description can be read directly to the players 
when the artifact is discovered. Of course, all 


Introduction 


mention of the item's name should be avoided— 
that is for the players and their characters to 
learn later. 


History 


The background of every artifact is important, 
since it explains powers, builds the story, and 
provides clues for the player characters. Except 
for those items tied to specific game worlds 
(such as the Mace of Cuthbert), these histories are 
purposefully vague. This should make it easier 
for the DM to incorporate the item into an indi- 
vidual campaign. Deities are not specifically 
named, and the various wizards, warriors, 
priests, and rogues are not taken from any spe- 
cific game world (again, with the exception of 
those items specific to certain realms). 

The histories are suggestions only, because it 
is impossible to create legends and tales here 
that instantly and perfectly match every cam- 
paign. The DM can freely change any element 
desired, but should remember that the history is 
also meant to provide clues about the artifact to 
the players, should their characters have the 
sense to do any research. 


Campaign Use 


This is an important section of advice and 
adventure suggestions for the DM, since arti- 
facts are about stories. Generally, this section 
discusses whether it is a good idea for the PCs to 
use the item or whether it is something that they 
should try to keep out of the hands of others. 
There is usually a simple adventure plotline that 
may include advice on how to introduce the arti- 
fact, what to do with it, and (perhaps most 
importantly) how to remove it when the adven- 
ture is concluded. 


10 


Powers 


Every artifact has a unique set of powers that 
can be divided into five categories: constant, 
invoked, random, resonating, and curse. The most 
important powers are usually defined here. 


Constant. These powers take effect without 
the character having to do anything other than 
hold the artifact. Sample constant powers are an 
Armor Class of 5, continual true seeing (per the 
spell), or an additional experience level for the 
owner. 


Invoked. These powers require the character 
to do something, perhaps as simple as willing it, 
shouting a command word, pushing a button, or 
reading a page. Invoked powers often have limi- 
tations on their number of uses. 


Random. These powers are left for the DM to 
define. This section lists the appropriate tables 
from Appendix B: Random Power Tables and 
the number of powers from that table. The DM 
can then choose from those or create others. 


Resonating. These powers only appear when 
two or more pieces of a matched set (such as the 
Eye and Hand of Vecna) are joined. Resonating 
powers seldom occur and may be constant, 
invoked, or random. 


Curse. Every artifact has drawbacks that 
reflect its nature or history. These are not all evil, 
but can be things that force particular behaviors. 
The two special curses mentioned earlier can be 
included: artifact possession and artifact transfor- 
mation. Should either of these apply, the item's 
goals or final transformation is described here. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


This provides some colorful means by which 
the artifact can be permanently destroyed. The 
DM can create others, but none of the options 
should be easy. 


Acorn of Wo Mai 


The Acorn of Wo Mai is a large lead vessel, dull 
gray in color. As its name suggests, it is fash- 
ioned to look like an enormous acorn, almost 
three feet in height. Two golden bands, inscribed 
with arcane characters, encircle it from bottom 
to top, where they meet under a large seal of a 
dragon coiled around a sword. Although it 
appears to be tremendously heavy, the artifact 
can be carried by a strong individual with ease. 
It sometimes makes faint thumping noises, and 
is warm to the touch. 


History 


According to ancient eastern legend, the Acorn 
of Wo Mai is the prison of a powerful fiend who 
once ruled and terrorized a great empire at the 
edges of the eastern lands. The fiend was sum- 
moned by war-wizards but escaped their con- 
trol. Hearing of this fiend's cruelties, the great 
Wo Mai challenged it to battle. They fought 
long, the fiend confident, for its life force was 
hidden far away, and it could not be slain. When 
Wo Mai discovered this, he bound the fiend in 
irons that it could not break. Next, he and his 
companions shaped the Acorn, imprisoned the 
fiend inside, and brought the prize back to the 
imperial court. When the court fell to barbarian 
invaders, the Acorn was lost. 


Campaign Use 


The Acorn is best used if allowed to fall into the 
hands of the player characters, since its powers 
(and curse) will create many role-playing oppor- 
tunities. The PCs could find the Acorn as part of a 
treasure trove, or wrest it from another whom the 
fiend has gained control of. The fiend will seek to 
seduce a player character to his aid, all the time 
stressing the need for secrecy. Should he be suc- 
cessful, the fiend will manipulate the character 
and even the entire party into freeing it. Should 
any player character oppose this, the fiend will 
do its best to turn the others against its enemy. 


J 


To rid themselves of this artifact, the player 
characters should find some way to hide the 
Acorn away, preferably forever. Alternatively, 
they could carry it to the lower planes and open 
it, trapping the fiend in his own plane. 


Powers 


Invoked. The fiend within the Acorn provides 
good advice (Int 20), telepathically providing 
answers to questions posed by its owner. It also 
grants the ability to polymorph any object (1/day). 

Random. 3 from Table 26: Minor Spell-like 
Powers. 

Curse. The fiend trapped within the Acorn is 
an evil demi-god and craves its release more 
than anything else. It is aware of its surround- 
ings, particularly the life forces of creatures 
nearby, and will use its powers (and advice) to 
persuade its owner to free it from its prison. 
Once freed, of course, it will reward its former 
master with death. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The seal must be broken with a +5 weapon 
upon the throne of the Imperial Emperor. 

* The inscribed characters on the golden bands 
must be erased. 

* [t must be cast into a volcano of Tarterus. 


11 


All-Knowing Eye of Yasmin Sira 


The All-Knowing Eye of Yasmin Sira is a large, 
opalescent strip of fabric decorated with signs of 
truth, vision, and prophecy. It is always cool and 
silky to the touch. It is a veil when worn by a 
woman, a keffiyah when worn by a man. It is 
found only in Zakhara, the Land of Fate. 


History 


Legends of the jann and Al-Badia say that the 
Eye was made by Sahin Sira, the Sheikh of the 
Great Ghuls, as a gift for his stolen bride, a mor- 
tal hakima named Yasmin. He hoped that by 
having her survey all the desert and peaks he 
ruled, he would win her heart. 

In fact, Yasmin hated her husband and her 
duties. Eager to hide herself from him, she 
imbued the veil with all the power she could, 
binding the spirits of dying ghuls to it to protect 
her. But as is the way of ghul magic, the veil did 
its job too well. In time, the Eye hid her from her 
husband's sight perfectly, but it also altered her 
true sight, showing her only what she wished to 
see. 


Campaign Use 


Characters can be allowed to use the item for 
a short time, but it will unbalance a campaign. 
Any adventure built around it should require 
that the PCs uncover some great secret. It may 
be necessary to find a caliph's kidnapped son, 
thus averting a war, or to properly interpret 
mysterious omens that warn of some coming 
doom. The item's curse will complicate these 
tasks. 

The ghuls will do all they can to recover the 
Eye. This will lead to constant attacks and 
intrigues against the PCs. 


Powers 


Constant. The veil provides the wearer the 
benefits of the avert evil eye, nondetection, and true 


12 


seeing spells at will. The last of these is subject to 
the curse (explained below). 

Invoked. The owner gains the use of the 
shapechange (I/day) and alter self (2/day) spells. 
The owner also benefits from the effects of the 
invisibility spell, but only to ghuls. 

Random. 4 from Table 16: Divination, 4 from 
Table 15: Detection 

Curse. The veil gradually responds to the 
owner by providing visions that match that crea- 
ture's temperament, desires, and fears. The 
process takes 1d3 months, starting with small 
changes or additions and gradually building to 
a world of complete unreality. Once the halfway 
point of the process is reached, the owner refuses 
to remove the veil, even wearing it while eating 
and sleeping. The words of friends and relatives 
are no longer heard unless these match the char- 
acter's dream world. When the owner dies, the 
ghuls arrive to claim their treasure once more. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The Eye must be worn by a blind god. 

* It must be carried to the heart of a black cloud 
of vengeance by a willing hakima. 

* [t must be cast into the Negative Material 
plane while wrapped in a cloak of shadows. 


The Apparatus, or the Alchemist's Apparatus as it 
is sometimes known, is best described from the 
notebooks of Meister Dettrick. 


The very sight of it [the Apparatus] inspired a 
terror within me, for its very shape spoke ofthe 
unholy researches that planned it. Itfilled Herr 
Gustav's great hall, o'er-reaching even the bal- 
conies that looked upon the floor below. The 
main part consisted of a great glass sphere of 
sulphurous fumes, madly churning as the light- 
ning teased the steel receptors set atop it. The 
whole was supported in a tripod of oppressive 
wood and iron, beneath which were suspended 
two smaller globes, each still the height ofa man. 
Piping arcedfrom these to the sulphurous orb. 
Ringing these were yet smaller orbs, interwoven 
by tubes through which flowed streams of nox- 
ious yellow gas. To my trepidation, Herr Gustav 
already stood among the wires and pipes of the 
platform, priming thefoul devicefor the coming 
storm. Then I saw that each contained a beast— 
one a quiveringfawn, the other a ravening dire 
wolf. "Behold the test!" he cried to me, frantic 
with his madness as he gestured to the orbs. 
From his robes he produced a crystal rod, no 
more than twofeet long, that throbbed with 
crystal fire. "The rod!" he shouted above the 
enraged storm. "With the rod I shall—" 

No more of his madness could I bear, and so 
risking thefury of the elements Ifled the sage's 
halls and into the night.... 


History 


Itis unclear whether the Apparatus is a single 
device or a set of plans and concepts so infernal 
in their execution that the result is the diabolic 
machine known by that name. The doubt exists 
because several times this artifact is said to have 
been both invented and destroyed, and yet it 
somehow seems to recreate itself elsewhere to 
once again wreak havoc upon those who experi- 
ment with it. 

The first known construction of the Apparatus 


" 


was by one known as the Alchemist of Mor- 
dentshire, although this person is sometimes 
confused with Count Strahd Von Zarovich, 
another who figures in the tale. That tale says 
that the Alchemist created the Apparatus in order 
to divide a soul and purge it of evil or, as others 
maintain, to fuse his own incomplete soul with 
another. Whatever his goal, the Alchemist's 
ambitions became ensnared in those of Strahd 
and disaster occurred, destroying the Apparatus 
and its maker. 

The monstrous Apparatus had more of a life 
than its maker, it seems, for it has reappeared in 
other lands, sometimes as it was and sometimes 
changed and improved. Thus it is that some 
sages maintain that the true artifact is not the 
Apparatus itself but the supposed notebooks of 
the original Alchemist, and that it is from these 
plans that the physical Apparatus is built. No 
one, however, can ever testify to seeing a copy of 
these notes. 

One important feature of the Apparatus is the 
rodofRastinon. This magicalitem, although notan 
artifact in its own right, is vital to several of the 
Apparatus's powers. It must be set in place 
between the two chamber orbs and then powered 
by lightning—or so that is how the story goes. 


Campaign Use 


The Apparatus is a wonderful artifact to 
threaten player characters with because its pow- 


13 


Apparatus 


ers of transpossession and soul-splitting strike at 
the very essence of the player character. The 
thought of having one's mind and psyche trans- 
ferred into that of an orc or, perhaps worse yet, a 
goat should be enough to rouse fear in any 
player character. 

Since the Apparatus is not small, portable, or 
even quick to use, any adventure involving it 
most have a strong villain, one who can trap the 
player characters and then operate the device. A 
strong villain needs strong ambitions, too. The 
goals of this villain are certainly more than just 
tormenting the player characters. They are only 
attacked because they are useful in some made 
experiments or because they threaten, know- 
ingly or not, greater plans. 

Should the characters manage to avoid the 
threats posed by the Apparatus, they can still be 
faced with other problems. Friends and allies 
may suddenly become enemies through trans- 
possession. Innocents may need to be restored or 
transpossessed spies ferreted out. This may 
require the characters to seize and operate the 
Apparatus, all at great peril to their own selves! 

Among all of the artifacts, the Apparatus is the 
easiest to remove from any campaign, for it has 
a history of overloading, exploding, and other- 
wise destroying itself. Whenever the device's 
time has passed, it is a simple matter to demol- 
ish it in a dramatic stroke of lightning. Another 
Apparatus, should it ever be needed, can always 
conveniently appear elsewhere, for like true sci- 
ence, once released from Pandora's box, it can 
never be banished completely. 


Powers 


Unlike many other artifacts, the powers of the 
Apparatus cannot be utilized at will. Although 
magical in nature, the device operates more like 
a machine. To run, it must be energized by light- 
ning. No other electrical source will suffice, for 
the Apparatus requires not only the voltage, but 
the elemental power that the lightning provides. 
The metal receptor plate in the top must be 


14 


struck 12 times in the space of three hours for 
the device to build up the necessary charge. 
Only one charge can be held at a time and 
beyond the time limit, the stored energies fade. 
The charge is enough to feed a single power of 
the Apparatus. Which power is used is deter- 
mined by the operator, who must constantly 
supervise the machine's operation. Transposses- 
sion can be used without additional preparation, 
but the remaining powers of the Apparatus 
require the use of the rod of Rastinon, set in its 
place between the two globes. 

Invoked. The simplest power is transposses- 
sion, the complete exchange of minds between 
two creatures. The subjects are placed in the 
two globes and, amid swirls of gas and glowing 
blue sparks, the transfer is made. All mental, 
spellcasting, and psionic abilities are trans- 
ferred between the two bodies. The new form 
has the Strength, Constitution, Dexterity, and 
Charisma of the host, but the Intelligence and 
Wisdom of the transferred mind. The subjects 
are struck unconscious for 1d3 turns. Transpos- 
sessed subjects detect as neutral to all spells and 
psionics that would reveal alignment, ethos, or 
personality. 

The second power, soul-splitting, divides a sin- 
gle subject into two personalities. The split sepa- 
rates some property of the psyche into its 
opposing elements—good vs. evil, law vs. chaos, 
wisdom vs. folly, etc. The two persons are physi- 
cally similar, differing only in ways that charac- 
terize the nature of the split and the strength of 
each trait. The good personality may be fair and 
strong, if the original subject was filled with 
good, or sickly and pale if the subject was less 
than noble. Each personality has the full knowl- 
edge and abilities (within the limits of the sepa- 
ration) of the original body. 

The two forms are also utterly opposed to 
each other, so that cooperation is impossible. 
Depending on the nature of the separation, one 
will seek to destroy the other or reverse the soul- 
splitting process. An evil twin would seek its 
counterpart's death while the good tries for 
reunion. A wise twin might revel at the freedom 


from the foolish half. A foolish twin is likely to 
become wild and bestial, filled with more-than- 
animal cunning. In all cases, the two separated 
properties become concentrated and exagger- 
ated in each individual until the distilled trait 
dominates their personalities. It radiates with 
astonishing intensity to detection spells that 
reveal that trait. 

The third power is that of soul-fusing. Here, 
two personalities are joined in one body. Nor- 
mally this is done to reverse the process of soul- 
splitting, but itis possible to merge two unrelated 
personalities into a single creature. The merged 
form now has two separate minds within it. 
Each retains its own personality, including all 
class, mental, spellcasting, and psionic powers. 
One personality, however, cannot use the pow- 
ers of the other. 

The result of this fusion is seldom harmo- 
nious, for unless the two minds are in perfect 
agreement on all things, they will vie for control 
of the body. Any time there would be disagree- 
ment over a course of action, an Intelligence 
check is made for each mind. Should one suc- 
ceed and the other fail, that personality seizes 
physical control. The subject's mannerisms, 
voice, accent, likes, and dislikes are instantly 
those of the dominant personality. Should both 
fail, the subject is wracked by fearsome 
headaches so severe that any action is impossi- 
ble. If both succeed their checks, the subject's 
body is the battleground for control. Movements 
become confused and jerky, behavior erratic 
from moment to moment, as each personality 
tries to assert itself. 

Attempts to detect the mental nature of such a 
person reveal details of the current dominant 
personality. If there is no dominant force, the 
result is a confused blur that might be mistaken 
for neutrality. 

Curse. With the Apparatus there are perils both 
for those subjected to its horrible transforma- 
tions and for those who would use it upon 
themselves or others. 

For subjects, in addition to the perils described 
above, there is a chance that, unable to reconcile 


Apparatus 


oneself to the alteration, madness will occur. The 
subject (or subjects in the case of a split) must 
immediately roll a successful saving throw vs. 
death or succumb to incurable madness. There- 
after, the subject must roll a successful saving 
throw every day for a full week. Only after this 
time is the subject able to come to terms with the 
situation. Note that for those subjected to soul- 
fusing, each personality must roll a separate sav- 
ing throw and it is perfectly possible for one 
personality to be sane and the other to be utterly 
mad. 

The experimenter risks other fates each time 
the Apparatus is used. If the Apparatus is used 
within the RAVENLOFT® campaign setting 
(where the device was originally found), the 
operator must roll a Dark Powers check each 
time the device is used—even if the operator is 
the subject. Furthermore, evil "twins" created by 
the Apparatus are immediately adopted by the 
land. 

If used outside of the RAVENLOFT setting 
(where such checks do not exist), there is a 20% 
chance (noncumulative) that the energies of the 
Apparatus create a field that transfers the device 
and surrounding locale (such as the building 
housing it), along with all characters, into the 
RAVENLOFT realm. (Players familiar with this 
realm know this is a serious curse.) 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The machine itself is quite fragile and can be 
easily destroyed. However, it will recreate 
itself at some other place and time. 

* The characters must travel back in time to the 

workshops of the original Alchemist and 

there destroy him, his works, and all his 
notes. 

Mystical barriers blocking the blend of sci- 

ence and magic must be erected to protect 

each prime material world. This will not 
destroy the device, but will prevent its appear- 
ance in that world. 


15 


Artifurnace 


The Artifurnace is a magical spelljamming device 
that draws its power from magical artifacts. 
Each Artifurnace is custom-made, tailored to 
contain and siphon energy from a specific arti- 
fact. It looks like a pot-bellied cast-iron stove 
with an iron mesh door and a gnomish handle 
near the stove pipe. The stove pipe is clamped 
and hammered shut. 


History 


Icarus Straves, the fiendish leader of a mago- 
cratic planet from the Chronos crystal sphere, 
fought a long, centuries-old battle with the 
inhabitants of a world on the other side of the 
sphere. Since this war raged for nearly 300 years, 
Icarus ran out of competent, high-level spellcast- 
ers to man the helms of his fleet. 

He put his best mages—those who sat on his 
council of 30—to work to find another way to 
power spelljamming crafts. For years they 
slaved over this task until only 20 were left. 
Finally, they discovered a method, but were hor- 
rified when they realized that a life must be for- 
saken to accomplish the task. Refusing to create 
such an arrangement, the mages revolted and 
fled, but Icarus found 15 of them. 

Icarus read the mages' notes, which were very 
specific. A cast-iron pot-bellied stove lit with 
green hickory seedlings could be enchanted to 
capture the essence of an intelligent being. The 
essence would draw motive force from the 
energy of an artifact, giving a ship virtually 
unlimited power. After reading the notes, Icarus 
knew of 15 beings to use and soon had 15 Arti- 

furnaces. 


Campaign Use 


Only 15 Artifurnaces are recorded to have been 
made, and many were destroyed or hidden. 
These are obviously easy to use, although PCs 
might not realize what they have until it is too 
late. These artifacts are real prizes, so entire wars 


16 


could take place over who possesses them. PCs 
could be sent on a mission to steal one, or to 
guard against such a threat. Of course, PCs 
might be more inclined to destroy such an item. 


Powers 


Invoked: Once installed on a ship, an Artifur- 
nace provides an SR of 5 to that ship whenever it 
is activated, and it will run indefinitely, powered 
by the artifact within. The navigator activates 
the Artifurnace by lifting the handle. Pushing the 
handle down again deactivates the furnace. The 
navigator can also use any one invokable power 
possessed by the artifact within the Artifurnace. 

Curse: Whenever the Artifurnace is activated, 
it is so hot that it causes 12d6 points of damage 
to anyone who touches any part other than the 
handle. It also has the side effect of attracting the 
attention of those powers tied to the artifact 
used to power the furnace. Finally, The Artifur- 
nace shares all possible curses of the artifact used 
to power it. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The artifact used to power the Artifurnace 
must be destroyed. 

* It must be placed within a spelljamming fur- 
nace and set adrift into the phlogiston. 

* It must be crushed in the planetary gears of 
Chronos. 


Axe of the Dwarvish Lords 


This weapon is a short-handled axe backed by a 
clawed hammer head. The blade is pierced with 
intricate runes etched and plated in gold. The 
axe head seems extraordinarily flimsy until 
tested, when the cunning work of the carving 
and the temper of the steel shows the weapon's 
true strength. The hammer is made to look like 
an erupting volcano with the flames forming the 
head's jagged prongs. 


History 


Legend says that the Axe ofthe Dwarven Lords 
is the last of the Five Great Tools forged by the 
First King, after the Brutal Pick, the Earthheart 
Forge, the Anvil of Songs, and the Shaping 
Hammer. With these, Silvervein Moradinson 
crafted the Fierce Axe, the finest of the five. Sil- 
vervein passed the axe on to the Second King, 
and so it went through the generations, until it 
became known as the Axe of the Dwarven Lords, 
symbol of the One Clan. 

The One Clan was shattered and the age of the 
High Kings broken when Brassbeard slew his 
uncle, King Irontooth of Moradinson, out of 
greed for it. The dwarves fell into the chaos of 
civil war, and when all had ended the Axe of the 
Dwarven Lords was lost forever. 


Campaign Use 

The Axe's power lies as much in what it sym- 
bolizes as in its magic, for over the centuries a 
legend has sprung up that the return of the Axe 
will herald the return of the High Kings and a 
new Dwarven Age. 

Adventures involving the Axe can have the 
player characters finding the weapon. Only 
dwarven PCs should have any idea of the 
weapon's importance; to others it is merely a 
powerful weapon. From here the PCs can be 
plunged into an adventure of dwarven intrigue 
and greed as rivals attempt to take possession of 
the Axe. The duergar may even attempt to steal 
it for their own. 

The Axe should not resurface without cause, so 


during all of the intrigue the PCs should discover 
a great threat to the dwarves. The clans might 
need to be united or the shade of Silvervein sum- 
moned to lead a last battle against the foe. 


Powers 


Constant. The Axe is a +3 weapon, function- 
ing both as a sword of sharpness and as a hammer 
+3 dwarven thrower. It grants dwarven detection 
and vision abilities at double the normal chance 
or range. 

Invoked. The Axe can summon one 16-HD 
earth elemental (1/week). 

Random. 3 from Table 20: Earth Elemental 

Curse. Nondwarf characters permanently lose 
1 point of Charisma when first touching the Axe. 
There is a 20% chance that any magical item pos- 
sessed or touched by the owner is permanently 
negated. Finally, artifact transformation changes 
the owner into a dwarf, with the loss of abilities 
not allowed that race. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The Axe must be melted down within the 
flames of the Earthheart Forge. 

* It must be freely given to the deities of the 
orcs. 

* Moradin, the dwarf deity, must be wounded 
by it. 


17 


Axe of the Emperors 


The Axe of the Emperors is a double-bitted, two- 
handed war axe. The head is of the brightest 
adamantine, forged so that it looks like a rising 
phoenix, the talons wrapping around the socket 
to clutch a sizeable ruby. The bird's wing feath- 
ers form the serrated edges of the blades. The 
haft is a rod of black crystal wrapped in bands of 
silver. The crystal enlarges at its base into a carv- 
ing of a coiled dragon, a great sapphire clutched 
in the creature's mouth. The item is originally 
from Taladas on the world of Krynn. 


History 


It was in the Age of Dreams, when the ogres 
first warred among themselves, that the sedi- 
tious Irix called upon the dark gods to give him 
a weapon to subdue his fellow Irda. His vile 
supplications were heard and the dark gods 
granted unto him the means to make the Axe of 
the Emperors. 

Aided by the Axe, Irix plunged his people into 
civil war, splitting the good from the evil. The 
Axe led him to many bloodthirsty victories, but 
in the end the combined might of Irda brought 
him down. Fearful of the Axe, the greatest sor- 
cerers and sages among the ogres saw to its 
destruction. At the end of their mystical work- 
ings the Axe vanished, apparently destroyed. 

In truth, the Axe still existed, magically cast 
away from the ogres to the lands of Ansalon. 
There it was found by Ymrald, a green dragon, 
who added the treasure to her hoard. Wise 
enough to know it was a magical device, Ymrald 
spent decades trying to puzzle out its powers 
before giving up in frustration. When she died, 
it passed with the rest of her hoard to her chil- 
dren. Thus the Axe languished for thousands of 
years, a beautiful curiosity of dragonkind. 

Such a situation could not last forever, and it 
ended when the treasure hoard was ransacked 
by a minotaur of spirit and skill, Ambeoutin, 
from whom the later emperors take their name. 
His raid was no accident, for a sorcerer among 
his people had guided the minotaur hero to the 


dragon's lair. Yrmald's offspring strove to stop 
the thief's escape but was no match for the 
minotaur, now equipped with the Axe. 

It is said that upon returning to his camp, the 
minotaur and his sorcerous mentor spent the 
night performing sinister rituals over the magi- 
cal blade. Some contend that these gave the Axe 
even greater powers than it held before; others 
believe it only allowed Ambeoutin to master the 
secrets that were already there. All agree that 
with the dawn the Axe glowed with a greater 
fire than before. In Ambeoutin's hands it was an 
object of power and might. Minotaurs and ogres 
kneeled to his cause, while all others fell before 
the blade's deadly thirst. 

Like Irix before him, Ambeoutin became 
unstoppable and through bloody war quickly 
carved a kingdom for his people. Unlike Irix, the 
minotaur ruled his people harshly but justly. As 
his time to die approached, Ambeoutin, once 
more advised by his mentor, took up his Axe and 
disappeared, setting sail for his ancestral home- 
land in the east. 


Campaign Use 


The Axe of the Emperors 1s a powerful artifact, 
but because of its strictures it is not one the 
player characters are likely to use. Instead, they 
are far more likely to encounter this item either 
as part of a long-lost treasure hoard or newly 
discovered and in the hands of someone else. 


19 


Axe of the Emperors 


The Axe is an evil item and should be presented 
to the characters as something that must be 
stopped or destroyed. 

One possibility for an adventure is that the 
Axe has appeared in a relatively quiet backwater 
village and has quickly dominated the local 
lord, a weak-willed NPC. With the Axe he is 
starting a reign of terror and conquest, though 
on a small scale. For the good of the oppressed 
farmers the player characters must stop this 
overpowered petty tyrant, even if he never 
becomes a threat to the entire world. 

For a more dramatic adventure, the player 
characters can discover a minotaur kingdom in a 
lost valley, a kingdom ruled by the original 
Ambeoutin or a monstrous deathless parody of 
what he once was. The Axe has finally seized the 
mind of the great minotaur hero. The arrival of 
the characters rekindles the urge to conquer and 
now this ancient minotaur civilization is prepar- 
ing to burst forth in a wave of conquest. Natu- 
rally, it's up to the player characters to stop 
things here and now. 

Once the adventure is over, the Axe should not 
be left in the control of the player characters 
unless, of course, their only desire is to destroy it 
or hide it away forever. Irda may appear to fin- 
ish their attempts to destroy it. The minotaurs 
just might seek to enshrine it as a powerful relic 
of their history, although they are more likely to 
use it. 


Powers 


Constant. The Axe has all of the properties of 
a vorpal sword (4-3 bonus to attack and damage 
rolls, possibility of severing limbs). Against 
ogres and ogre-kin, the bonuses to attack and 
damage rolls increases to +5. 

Invoked. The Axe is a powerful symbol of 
rulership and might. As such, it has powers 
equal to a ring of human influence and is particu- 
larly effective against ogres and ogre-kin (-2 
penalty to all saving throw rolls). This power 
can be commanded at will. The Axe can also pro- 


20 


duce the effects of a causefear spell to all within 
120 feet (3/day). 

Random. 2 from Table 12: Combat, 1 from 
Table 27: Movement 

Curse. Created both for and against the ogre 
races, the Axe cannot be used fully by anyone 
without some ogre blood in their veins. Non- 
ogre characters using the weapon cannot call 
upon the Axe's command orfear powers. Further- 
more, they are struck with a degenerative dis- 
ease that drains 1 point of Constitution per week 
until the ability reaches O and they die. Once 
contracted, the disease runs its course even if 
ownership of the Axe should change. Mere han- 
dling of the Axe does not trigger this effect; the 
weapon must be used for some purpose (such as 
combat). The disease can be halted by a cure dis- 
ease, but the character will not recover any Con- 
stitution until a remove curse is also cast. 
Constitution points are regained at 1 point per 
week. 

With its hate-filled creation and bloody back- 
ground, it is not surprising that the Axe of the 
Emperors is imbued with a spirit of intense 
evil (Int 18, Ego 17). This spirit will attempt arti- 

fact possession, and once this occurs, the charac- 
ter gradually becomes a triple-strength (12 + 3 
hit dice) ogre of lawful evil alignment. Once 
the transformation is completed, the char- 
acter becomes a permanent NPC. The spirit of 
the Axe seeks nothing but to kill ogres and their 
kin. If not quenched in ogre blood at least once 
a month, the Axe refuses to use its invoked 
powers. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The Axe must be sunk into the center of the 
Burning Sea. 

* The tinker gnomes must examine it for one 
hundred years, during which time they find a 
way to dissemble it. 

* Every ogre and ogre-kin with royal blood in 
its veins must be slain by the Axe 


Baba Yaga's Hut looks like a small, hexagonal hut 
with a thatched roof that is no more than 12 feet 
high and 10 feet across. A rickety chimney juts 
from the top. At a distance it seems to be 
mounted on stilts, though closer inspection 
reveals that they are giant chicken legs, fully 
another 12 feet long. It has a single door and two 
windows. The Hut is almost always found in the 
deep woods, surrounded by a picket fence 
topped with skulls. 

The Hut is seldom still and is often seen spin- 
ning or capering about. Even when not dancing, 
the Hut bobs up and down, sways from side-to- 
side, or swivels about as if looking at things. 


History 


Baba Yaga and her Hut are unique among all 
the artifacts in that there are two histories for 
them. The first history is of Baba Yaga the fear- 
some ogress who comes straight from Slavic 
folklore. The second history presents a fantasy 
Baba Yaga for those DMs who prefer not to have 
the "real world" intrude upon their games. 

In folklore, Baba Yaga was a fearsome ogress 
(as in a hideous greater-than-human creature, 
not the AD&D® game ogre). Not only was she 
strong, but Baba Yaga also possessed great mag- 
ical power. She cooked children, caused storms, 
and traversed the country with Death at her 
side. Her appearance was horrid, with wild hair, 
a bony body, fangs, and claws and teeth of stone. 
According to some, she protected the waters of 
life, while according to others she was a spirit of 
the forest. 

Equally amazing were Baba Yaga's magical 
items. It is said that the ogress flew through the 
sky in a mortar of iron, poling it with the pestle. 
Some say that thunder was the clamor of the 
mortar and pestle as she flew. At her hand she 
always had a great club that could turn men to 
stone. Without a doubt, though, the greatest of 
her treasures was her Hut. 

For those who wish to maintain a purely fan- 
tasy explanation for this artifact, Baba Yaga was 


g ^ s Ay) 
CA ct Cl 
ITI Dele Jm 


x á 


PLA 


an evil sorceress of great skill, perhaps the greatest 
female mage who ever lived. More ruthless, far- 
sighted, and determined than most of her coun- 
terparts, male or female, Baba Yaga spent a good 
number of her last years in a single-minded effort 
to create the Hut. Although many wizards of that 
time derided her as obsessed, Baba Yaga did not 
relent and eventually finished her finest creation. 
Although she seemed ancient beyond belief, the 
sorceress lived for a good number of years after 
this, travelling the countryside in her strange con- 
veyance. Although she grew aged, Baba Yaga 
hinted that she had found a way to survive. Then, 
one day, she entered her Hut and never returned. 
Capering and dancing, the Hut disappeared from 
sight and vanished from the realm. 

Since that ancient time, the Hut has been seen 
only a few times, always dancing. The reports of 
those who tried to enter it only reveal what most 
already know—that Baba Yaga's Hut is an item of 
great power. 


21 


Baba Yaga’s Hut 


Campaign Use 


Whether based on the real folklore or a fan- 
tasy background, there is no reason Baba Yaga's 
Hut or even Baba Yaga herself cannot appear in 
a campaign. In either guise, Baba Yaga can 
inspire the peasants of the countryside with 
great terror at the mere mention of her name, for 
even though she has long been absent, the mem- 
ory of Baba Yaga and her Hut still linger on. 

Baba Yaga's Hut is more than just an artifact 
waiting to be used. It is almost a living thing, a 
monster of sorts. It can move about, fight, and do 
other things of its own accord, thus making it one 
of the most difficult artifacts to control and use. 

Generally, the player characters should only 
discover the Hut if the DM is willing to intro- 
duce Baba Yaga into the campaign. The player 
characters should always feel like trespassers 
onto her property, so it is important to keep 
players guessing as to whether Baba Yaga is 
alive, dead, or undead. If they do encounter her, 
the DM should prepare a suitable foe—certainly 
no less powerful than a lich. 

The Hut can be the source of several related 
adventures. First there is the task of finding the 
artifact. This can both easy and hard. Local 
farmers might report sightings and attacks, but 
the characters still have to hunt down the roam- 
ing device. Once found, the characters have to 
enter and explore the Hut, since it is much larger 
on the inside than it should be. The Hut—being 
quasi-alive—will do what it can to hamper and 
resist the characters. It may even have guardians 
living inside it. Whether or not the characters 
gain control of the artifact, a final adventure 
would center around the return of Baba Yaga. 
She is certainly going to take a dim view of oth- 
ers stealing her Hut! 


Powers 


Constant. The inside of Baba Yaga's Hut is a 
palace far larger than the outside. Enclosed 
within the walls are over 30 rooms, including 


indoor gardens, kitchens, a library, laboratory, 
armory, bedrooms, and even an observatory. 
Many of the rooms have windows, but they all 
give the same view; that of the two front win- 
dows of the Hut. Within the Hut, only the master 
can use summoning, interdimensional travel, or 
teleportation spells. This master functions at 
two levels greater than normal (including extra 
hit points, spells, etc.) and gains a 20% magic 
resistance. In addition, the Hut has full senses of 
its surroundings (hearing and sight, including 
infravision) shared telepathically with its 
master. 

Invoked. Before any of the Hut's invoked 
powers can be used, the character must use a 
key phrase establishing control over the Hut, 
which only recognizes one master at a time. 
Thereafter the Hut can be commanded to run 
across any surface including water (movement 
48), come when called (up to 7 miles distant), 
hop up to 500 yards in a single bound, or kick at 
any target within 10 feet (HAT 2, THACO 9, Dmg 
4d6, and pin to the ground on a roll of 18 or 
greater and causing 4d10 points the next round). 
Each leg can only be hit by +2 weapons or better, 
has an AC of 2, 48 hit points, and regenerates 1 
hit point per round. When a leg loses all hit 
points, the Hut settles to the ground, totally 
regenerated. 

Random. The master gains 2 abilities from 
Table 25: Major Spell-Like Powers. 

Curse. The curse of Baba Yaga's Hut is Baba 
Yaga herself. Sooner or later she will come to get 
it back. Since it is her home, it is likely to have 
secrets known only to her. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The interior pocket dimension must be swal- 
lowed into another one. 

* the Hut's hidden inner brain must be found 
and destroyed. 


23 


Blackjammer's Cutlass 


Blackjammer's Cutlass is a distinctive weapon of 
an outdated style. The blade is fashioned from a 
nonreflective black crystal, clearly not metal. 
The hilt is silver and fitted with an enormous 
basket depicting a sailor being keel-hauled. For 
all of its apparent size, it is far lighter than an 
ordinary cutlass. The cutlass is usually found in 
SPELLJAMMER® campaigns. 


History 


It is said that Black Jammer's Cutlass was forged 
in an old port hidden in the Tears of Selune of 
Realmspace. Its first owner was a pirate now 
known only as Captain Blackjammer, his own 
name forgotten in favor of his sword. Whatever 
his name once was, Blackjammer is still held up 
as a paragon of piratical ruthlessness and skill. 
Since Blackjammer's death (if he is dead, for 
there is some argument about this), the Cutlass 
has passed through the hands of many other 
captains and mates. The last known owner of 
the sword was Elsun of the Dragon Claw. Killed 
when her ship ran afoul of an elven man-o'-war, 
the story claims that the Cutlass fell overboard 
and is now drifting in the Flow somewhere 
between Oerth and Krynn. 


Campaign Use 


Although the Cutlass first made its appear- 
ance in the SPELLJAMMER setting, there is no 
reason that it cannot be used elsewhere. Its pow- 
ers are universal to all worlds where sailing and 
piracy occur. 

The powers of the Cutlass, while useful, are 
not such as to completely unbalance a cam- 
paign. Thus the item can remain in PC posses- 
sion for a long time. 

The DM can use rumors of Captain Blackjam- 
mer's continued existence as the motive for sev- 
eral adventures involving the sword. In 
backwater ports, NPCs may be convinced that 
the character wielding the Cutlass is Captain 


24 


Blackjammer—and there is still a price on his 
head. Another possibility is that the captain still 
lives in a lich-like state and is determined to 
regain his sword. 


Powers 


Constant. The Cutlass has +2 bonuses to attack 
and damage rolls and improves the character's 
Armor Class by 2. 

Invoked. The Cutlass can create the effects of a 
darkness 15' radius spell (at will) that does not 
affect the wielder. It also endows its owner with 
proficiency in all forms of navigation and sea- 
manship (no chance of failure). 

Random. 3 from Table 12: Combat 

Curse. The Cutlass is imbued with a strong free- 
booting personality (Int 19, Ego 20). It can speak, 
doing so often and loudly, preferring bawdy 
songs and coarse jokes. It will insult the toughest 
thug in the bar. not caring if its owner is killed; 
there is always another. The owner also risks arti- 

fact transformation, being changed into a black- 
hearted pirate always on the lookout for ships to 
plunder and saying "Arrgh, matey!" far too much. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The Cutlass must be subjected to the com- 
bined fire of the Elven Armada. 

* It must be crushed between two rushing 
meteors. 


Book with No End 


The Book with No End is modest-sized tome with 
covers bound in the hide of a hatchling red 
dragon and hinged in gold. A golden clasp seals 
the volume and illuminated sigils emblazon the 
front and back. The pages are made of thick 
parchment, smooth and uniform, and each is 
edged with gold leaf. Despite its curious name, 
the book has exactly 100 pages, weighing about 
eight pounds. All told, the book is a notably 
mundane-looking artifact. 


History 


The Book with No End was created by a wizard 
of little note or reputation known anymore only 
as Magus. No direct records of this wizard, his 
ambitions, or the means by which he created the 
book exist, but several sages who have spent 
time in the study of this item agree that, based 
on the properties of the tome, Magus was striv- 
ing to make a device of some considerable 
power—no doubt for world domination or a 
similar unattainable goal. 

Whatever the ambitions of this Magus, his 
wizardly skills were not up to the task. There is 
little doubt that he created an item of consider- 
able power, but his workmanship was flawed. 
Tales say that in his greed for power he rushed 
his work, taking shortcuts where time and 
patience would have been better rewarded. 
Blind to his own mistakes, Magus managed to 
create a device that consequently devastated the 
entire countryside the first time he attempted to 
use it. Instead of granting him the power and 
mastery he desired, The Book with No End pushed 
the already unstable wizard over the brink of 
sanity. 

Since Magus's day, the book has appeared 
several times, sometimes with beneficial effect 
and sometimes to the utter woe of all who find 
it. It supposedly provided the power needed for 
the wizard Vorst Dircson to overthrow the hated 
Lich-King of the North. It was also supposed to 
be the cause of the madness that seized the wiz- 
ard-scholars at the College of Fire in Halverston 


(a madness that ended in the explosion of that 
academy and the devastation of Halverston's 
port). It is clear from these and other incidents 
that the book is intended for wizards and even 
they must handle it at their own peril. 

The current whereabouts of the book are 
unknown. Deceitful rogues have been known to 
pass fake copies onto gullible wizards. This is 
really much simpler than it sounds, since nor- 
mal detections and magical checks are known to 
fail on items of artifact power. 


Campaign Use 


The Book with No End is an acceptable item for 
player characters to find and use, although pro- 
longed use risks the death of the entire adven- 
turing party. Because most if its effects last only 
as long as a PC has the book, it is possible for it 
to be introduced and removed with little long- 
term damage to a campaign. 

Because of the book's ordinary appearance, it 
is possible for the characters to obtain it from 
someone who does not know its true value. It is 
equally possible that the characters might have 
no idea of what they have. This process of dis- 
covery, either by accident or as a result of the 
plots and schemes of others seeking the book, 
constitutes an adventure in itself. 

Discovering and deciphering the riddle of the 
book may also be part of a greater adventure. In 
this case, there is a greater threat to the player 


25 


Book With No End 


Table 1: Suggested Powers 


P# Power or Table (Table #) 
1 Divination (16) 

Minor Spell-Like Powers (26) 
3 Conjure elemental (1/week) 
4 Divination (16) 
5 Conjuration (13) 
6 Personal Enhancement (31) 
7 Personal Enhancement (31) 
8 Shapechange (1/week) 
9 True seeing 
10 Major Spell-like Powers (25) 
11 Minor Spell-like Powers (26) 
12 Divination (16) 


13 Personal Enhancement (31) 
14 Abjurations(10) 

15 Offensive Powers (28) 

16 Offensive Powers (28) 

17 Divination (16) 

18 Elemental Water (19) 

19 Planar (32) 

20 Movement (27) 

21 Death spell (1/week) 

22 Power word, stun (1/day) 
23 Enchantment/Charm (21) 
24 Symbol offear (I/day) 

25 Enchantment/Charm (21) 
26 Power word, blind (1/week) 
21 Portrait of Magus 


characters (and the world)— possibly the appear- 
ance of an even greater and evil artifact in the 
wrong hands. The Book then becomes a desper- 
ate but useful means of defeating the foe. 

Once the Book has served its purpose, it is best 
removed from the campaign. Wise player char- 
acters may do this on their own; otherwise, it 
may have to be stolen, or worse still, the curse 
triggered. Of course, at least one player charac- 
ter will have to die to save the others in this case. 


Powers 


All the powers found in the Book with No End, 
whether constant or invoked, are found on spe- 
cific pages therein. The book has only 100 pages 
(far shorter than the infinity its title implies) and 
of these only 27 have anything on them. Reading 
any page is only possible with the use of a read 
magic spell, with one spell needed per page. 

A suggested listing of pages and powers is 
given above. The DM can freely rearrange or 
alter these pages. As player characters read 
pages, it is their responsibility to track page 
numbers for later use. 

Constant. Wizards in possession of the book 
have all their spell potencies increased by 150% 
(range, duration, area of effect, and damage). In 
addition, the Personal Enhancement powers are 


26 


in effect any time the wizard is touching the 
book. 

Invoked. The invoked powers can only be 
used when the wizard opens the book to the cor- 
rect page and reads it aloud. A read magic spell is 
not necessary for this second reading. 

Curse. PCs of classes other than wizard suffer 
5dlO points of electrical damage (a successful 
saving throw vs. spell is necessary to halve this 
damage) upon opening the book. The user also 
risks artifact possession with each page read. 
Those possessed seek to lead in all things and 
eventually to rule absolutely. 

Every time an invoked power of the book is 
used, there is a 5% chance of triggering a 
monstrous devastation as the animus of the 
book drains 1Od1O points of damage from every 
creature within 100 yards. An owner that is 
killed becomes a picture on one of the book's 
blank pages. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* When the blank pages are filled with images 
of its owners, its power is lost. 

* The spirits of those trapped by the book must 
be freed. 

* Each page must be incinerated in the fiery 
breath of a red dragon. 


Codex of the Infinite Planes 


The Codex is a massive tome, far larger than any 
book has a right to be. It is said that two strong 
men can barely lift the volume. The covers are 
made of flawless black obsidian and the pages 
therein are sheets of lead hammered so thin that 
they flex like paper. These are illuminated with 
strange writings in languages unknown and 
illustrations both beautiful and horrific. No mat- 
ter how many pages are turned, there is always 
one more. 


History 


No one knows the origin of the Codex or what 
its original purpose might have been except that 
it also known as Yagrax's Tome. The first mention 
of the Codex ties it to an unnamed wizard-priest 
who tyrannically ruled ancient lands now sunk 
beneath the waves. The source of his power, the 
book was also the force that sank his empire 
beneath the waves. Only the Codex survived; the 
secrets of its use were apparently lost with the 
wizard-priest, for now it is notorious for mad- 
ness and death. 

After a life of study, the archmage Tzunk actu- 
ally found the artifact shortly before he vanished 
from the world. Of his extensive writings only 
fragments survive, and most of these are ravings 
about a beast and how Tzunk came to rule the 
City of Brass. 


Campaign Use 


The Codex is a powerful and dangerous device 
and should only be introduced into high level 
campaigns when the DM is willing to use the 
outer planes. Because of its terrible curse, it is not 
an item characters should have long access to. 

The Codex could be introduced through a 
series of strange catastrophes—unnatural events 
of other-planar origin. A wizard, driven mad by 
the secrets of the Codex, has breached a barrier 
veil in the outer planes, unbinding a great hor- 
ror. The characters must find and safely use the 


Codex to send the creature back, perhaps even 
battling it in its own realm. 


Powers 


Invoked. All powers of the Codex are trig- 
gered by reading, if one knows where to look. 
The Codex can open a portal to any plane, demi- 
plane, or prime material world at any location. 
The book, however, has no index or table of con- 
tents. The only other known power is to sum- 
mon a greater fiend to serve for 24 hours 
(1/month). 

Random. 4 from Table 26: Minor Spell-Like 
Powers, 4 from Table 25: Major Spell-Like Pow- 
ers 

Curse. Every page read, whether useful or 
not, has a 176 cumulative chance of triggering an 
awful fate (by accidentally opening the wrong 
portal)—irreversible madness, the arrival of a 
greater tanar'ri, 10-mile radius clouds of deadly 
poison (no saving throw), or worse. No charac- 
ter can read more than 99 pages before doom 
befalls them. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* [t cannot be destroyed, only safely hidden 
where it can cause no harm. 

* Every page of its infinite pages must be read. 

* One page of the book opens a portal upon the 
book itself, wiping it out of existence. 


27 


Coin of Jisan the Bountiful 


Prized by merchants and feared by caliphs, the 
Coin of Jisan the Bountiful is a simple gold coin 
the size of a dinar, bearing the symbol of Jisan on 
both faces. It is found only in Zakhara, the Land 
of Fate. 


History 


The Coin ofJisan is as old as the goddess and 
has most frequently been found among her wor- 
shippers. It is said to be bestowed upon the wor- 
thy by Jisan or by Fate herself, giving them 
riches and wisdom, fertility and long life. The 
coin is a gift that is meant to be shared. Those 
who try to hold it longer than their appointed 
span suffer for their greed; no one is known to 
have held the Coin of Jisan for more than seven 
years. 

Caliphs fear the Coin's bounty because they 
cannot control it, and some owners of the Coin 
have grown so popular that they have led revolts 
against oppressive caliphs. Wiser caliphs have 
married their daughters to those blessed by the 
Coin, thus gaining its wealth. 


Campaign Use 


The Coin of Jisan is sometimes given by Fate to 
those who act for noble purposes, and to this 
end it may come into the possession of the PCs, 
perhaps as a reward for a mission that produced 
or restored bounty—ending a magical drought, 
reopening a major trade route, or lifting repres- 
sive taxes. Although it can be used without fear 
by the good of heart, it always attracts jealousy 
and greed in others. The dao, in particular, have 
long coveted the Coin of Jisan, and they and oth- 
ers will seek to steal it at every opportunity. If 
the holy slayers of the Gilded Palm ever decide 
it belongs to someone more worthy (such as 
themselves), they will act to threaten, extort, or 
even kill the owner to acquire it. Thus, mere pos- 
session of the Coin will create a web of adven- 
tures for the player characters. 


28 


Powers 


Constant. The owner gains the appraisal, hag- 
gling, and debate nonweapon proficiencies, or a 
+4 bonus to already-existing skills. None of the 
owner's businesses ever suffer misfortune, 
fields and palms always yield richly, and all live- 
stock gives birth to twins. 

Invoked. The owner can use the plant growth 
and suggestion spells (both at will) and the 
weather control spell (1/month). 

Random. 4 from Table 22: Fate and Fortune, 1 
from Table 31: Personal Enhancement 

Curse. Those who use the Coin to help others 
are unaffected by any curse, but help must be 
given without expectation of any reward or 
gain. Those who use the Coin to gain palaces, 
treasures, and power are stricken with 
unquenchable hunger that grows in proportion 
to their greed. Eventually the character must 
spend every waking hour devouring barrels of 
tea and coffee, bushels of grain, and whole oxen. 
To be rid of the curse, the Coin must be given to a 
stranger. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The coin must be crushed under the heel of a 
tanar'ri lord in a land stricken by famine. 

* A thief who truly desires nothing must bite 
the coin in half. 

* The coin must be dissolved in the waters of 
the river Styx. 


Crystal of the Ebon Flame 


The Crystal of the Ebon Flame is a flawless, dia- 
mond-like stone the size of a woman's hand 
cut into a faceted spire that suggests a flicker- 
ing candle flame. When touched, rays of light 
and blackness leap within the stone's heart, 
giving the illusion of real fire deep within the 
gem. 


History 


Like so many artifacts, the origins of the 
Crystal of the Ebon Flame are lost in the shrouds 
of the mysterious past. Dwarves swear that the 
stone is like no other found beneath the earth, 
although they vainly contend that only a dwar- 
ven jeweller of the greatest skill could have cut 
the stone so perfectly. Several scholars suggest 
that the stone may have a stellar origin, possi- 
bly mined from the very heart of a burnt-out 
star. 

Because of its scintillating beauty and magical 
powers, the Crystal is a powerful holy relic of an 
obscure cult of fire worshippers. Once the cult 
was powerful and influential, but so vile were 
its practices that popular outrage led to the per- 
secution of its followers. The few devout that 
escaped continued to practice in great secrecy. 
With time, knowledge of the cult has been trans- 
formed into myth and legend, until truth and 
fiction are completely blurred. 


Campaign Use 


The obscure background the Ebon Flame's cult 
allows the DM broad latitude in creating an 
adventure around this artifact. While in a 
strange city, the characters may tangle with the 
cult, eventually raiding a secret temple where 
the Flame is held. Alternatively, the PCs may dis- 
cover the Flame in the ancient ruins of a cult tem- 
ple (held by monsters or degenerate cultists). 
Naturally, the cultists want their Flame back. 
Eventually the PCs can expose the cult and the 
threat it poses to the city, kingdom, or empire. 


The artifact can then be removed by placing it 
under the protection of local officials (so it can 
come back another day). 


Powers 


Invoked. The owner of the Flame can summon 
shades (2/day). This and all powers are activated 
by gazing intently into its heart for 1d4 rounds. 

Random. 4 from Table 26: Minor Spell-Like 
Powers, 1 from Table 25: Major Spell-Like 
Powers 

Curse. All within 30 feet of the activated Crys- 
tal (including the owner) must roll a successful 
saving throw vs. spell or be affected by afire 
charm spell. Charmed characters are also subject 
to a permanent suggestion spell (a second saving 
throw is allowed) attempting to convince them 
to become devoted followers of the Flame's cult. 
The stone's sinister intelligence is determined to 
increase its power by adding more worshippers 
and slaying the followers of other gods. Fearing 
exposure, it uses stealthy means to carry out its 
goals. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* [t must be melted in the core of the earth. 

* [t must be shattered on the Para-elemental 
Plane of Ice. 

* Jt must be crushed beneath Thor's hammer. 


29 


Cup and Talisman of Al'Akbar 


The Cup of Al'Akbar is hardly an inconspicuous 
item. It is a large chalice, big enough that, were it 
filled, it would take two hands to lift. The vessel 
is made of hammered gold and chased with a 
silver filigree. Twelve great gems (each worth 
5,000 gp) are set in mounts of electrum to form a 
band around the rim. Overall, the craftsmanship 
is clearly the work of a goldsmith of extraordi- 
nary skill and artistry. Although it does not radi- 
ate magic, the cup is always bathed in a golden 
aura. 

The Talisman of Al'Akbar is an eight-pointed 
star of hammered platinum. It is small, no big- 
ger than a large pendant, and comes with a 
chain of gold and pearls so it can be worn as a 
necklace. Each point of the star is tipped with a 
diamond that sparkles in the slightest light. 
From the points to the center run elaborate pat- 
terns of golden inlay. It does not radiate magic. 


History 


The Cup and Talisman of Al'Akbar are major 
holy relics. The two artifacts are always associ- 
ated with a powerful god or goddess of healing, 
although the DM must select exactly which one 
is most appropriate from those in the campaign. 
Inthe FORGOTTEN REALMS ® setting, Lath- 
ander could be used, while in the GREYHAWK® 
campaign, Pelor would be appropriate. (Note 
that these items will not be found ina DARK 
SUN® campaign.) 

No matter what faith, according to the sect's 
dogma, the Cup and Talisman were given by the 
deity after a great disaster that brought untold 
devastation and suffering to the land. The two 
items appeared before the high priest in a dream. 
When the clergyman awoke, the Cup and Talis- 
man were there, still sparkling with the radiance 
of the deity. Blessed with the items and knowl- 
edge of their use, the holy man went out and 
cured the multitude of sick and injured. 

Unfortunately, the miraculous powers of the 
Cup and Talisman did not bring happiness to the 
people or peace to the temple. When travelers 


30 


MA ^1 KNN T 
AAAI SS 


returned to their distant homelands with tales of 
these two wonders, emperors, kings, and war- 
lords coveted the items. Driven by greed and 
fear, they marched their armies and sent their 
agents, to seize the treasures. 

Just what battles occurred and who won them 
is an answer lost with the names of those who 
warred for the artifacts. Perhaps one rose victo- 
rious over the others only to have the two trea- 
sures seized from him. Perhaps they were stolen 
by bandits in the chaos of war. All that is known 
is that when the wars finally ceased, the Cup and 
Talisman had disappeared forever. 

Even today, though, the legend of their mirac- 
ulous power lives on in expressions such as 
"cured by the cup" for any miraculous healing 
or "By the star of Akbar," an oath to ward off 
disease. 


Cup and Talisman of Al’ Akbar 


Campaign Use 


The Cup and Talisman of Al'Akbar, because of 
their powerful healing abilities, are both excel- 
lent items to let the player characters acquire 
and use, and yet unbalancing devices that are 
best taken out of player characters' grasps 
quickly in any campaign where they appear. The 
Cup and Talisman can be immensely useful items 
in an incredibly dangerous adventure where the 
characters frequently face horrible injury and 
death. These two artifacts may be vital for keep- 
ing the characters alive long enough to have a 
hope of concluding the adventure. 

At the same time, the DM should not use the 
Cup and Talisman more than once in this way. 
The powers of the Cup and Talisman allow the 
characters to flaunt death (and thus perform 
supremely heroic acts), but if this risk is removed 
from all adventures, things will grow dull very 
quickly. 

Ideally, the characters find the Cup, Talisman, 
or both as the prelude to an even more harrow- 
ing task. The characters need the life-giving 
powers of these artifacts in order to travel to the 
outer planes (where their own magic will not 
function) and defeat a great foe. The items may 
be needed to survive a perilous journey of great 
importance. 

Furthermore, the Cup and Talisman are of great 
interest to nearly everyone. Followers of the 
original deity will want their relics returned. 
Warlords will want the healing power for their 
armies. Wizards may covet the potion-making 
powers of the items. Characters must be ready 
to fight to keep the artifacts. 

Once their need has passed, the artifacts 
should be removed. Ideally, the characters 
return the relics to their proper masters, or else 
they finally fall prey to the relentless efforts to 
buy, steal, or seize the items. If absolutely neces- 
sary, the original deity can appear and claim the 
items. Woe to the characters who would at this 
point be foolish enough to refuse. 


Powers 


The Cup of Al'Akbar 


Constant. Anyone of good alignment who 
touches the Cup receives the benefits of a bless 
spell. This lasts for 24 hours. 

Invoked. The powers of the Cup are activated 
by filling it with holy water, usable once per day. 
If all of the water is drunk, it acts as a cure critical 
wounds or neutralize poison spell, or it can be 
divided into three portions that act as cure light 
wounds spells, although these fade in 12 hours. 


The Talisman of Al'Akbar 


Constant. Anyone of good alignment touch- 
ing the Talisman receives the benefit of a remove 
curse spell. 

Invoked. Once per day the Talisman can cast a 
cure disease or cure blindness spell. 

Resonating. Once per week, the Cup and Tal- 
isman can be used to create any one of the fol- 
lowing potions: Aealing (5 batches), sweet water 
(3 batches), extra-healing (2 batches), elixir of 
health (1 batch), or vitality (I batch). Further- 
more, the items gain the power of a resurrection 
spell (1/day), effective only on good or neutral 
creatures. 

Curse. These items can only be used by good 
humans and half-elves. When the powers of the 
Cup or Talisman are invoked, the owner ages 
1dlO years. This aging is irreversible! Upon attain- 
ing maximum age, the owner is transformed 
into a zombie guardian of the artifacts, 
unraiseable by any means. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The Cup must be filled with water from the 
river Styx and the Talisman dissolved in it. 

* Ten thousand curse spells must be cast upon 
the Talisman, and then it must be struck 
against the Cup. 

* They must be touched by the deity of disease 
and death. 


31 


Death Rock 


The Death Rock is an evil relic of inky black 
stone, roughly the size of a man's clenched fist. 
When touched, the rock pulsates faintly, like the 
beating of a heart, and leaves the sensation of 
warm greasy moistness on the fingertips. The 
Death Rock exudes a palpable aura of evil notice- 
able to intelligent creatures. 


History 


It is said that the Death Rock is the product of 
some far-distant eastern cult that worshipped a 
great salamander of the river. The cult was evil 
and its rites were of the foulest kinds. For years 
the cult survived openly, and although hated by 
all, no one could act against it. 

Their terror finally came to an end when a 
peasant woman whose sons had been taken by 
the cult took up a sword. Though she was old 
and scorned by her neighbors for her folly, the 
woman prayed to all the powers of justice for 
revenge. For five nights the five judges of men 
came to her, bringing courage, faith, purity, 
mercy, and might. With these she challenged the 
living god. Their battle was great but in the end 
the old woman cut the fiend's heart free and cast 
it far away. 

It is said that the heart became a stone, still 
filled with great and evil powers. Over the cen- 
turies, the Death Rock has found its way to the 
west, leaving ruin and destruction in its wake. It 
has not been seen for much time and it might 
now be finally lost forever. 


Campaign Use 


Characters should only find the Death Rock if 
the DM wants to sorely tempt and test the 
heroes. The rock grants great power, but only to 
one person and at terrible cost to the PC's com- 
panions. The DM should know the players well, 
for if the temptation succeeds, serious ill will 
could develop among the players, threatening 
the harmony of the group. 


32 


Powers 


Constant. The Death Rock gives its owner all 
the abilities of a necromancer-mage of the same 
level as the character. The character knows all 
necromancy spells appropriate to that level but 
can only memorize and use necromantic spells. 
The character gains no hit points and does not 
earn or record experience as a necromancer. 
Experience and hit dice are gained normally in 
the character's other class and each time a new 
level is gained, the character also advances as a 
necromancer. The character loses none of the 
abilities of the other class and can freely mix the 
powers of both classes. The most favorable 
adjustments to THACO, saving throws, etc. are 
used. If the character is a wizard, the selection of 
spells is doubled, although the PC is still limited 
to necromantic spells for the additional ones. 

Curse. To activate and maintain the power of 
the Rock, the character's closest companion must 
be claimed each week as a zombie slave. If this is 
not done, the Rock instantly vanishes, not to be 
seen again. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* [t must be burned in the Flames of Pure Truth. 

* [t must be used to slay a god of death. 

* [t must be given to a man who was never 
alive. 


Hammer of Gesen 


The Hammer of Gesen is a remarkably ordinary 
looking device—a large round-headed hammer 
much like a common carpenter's mallet. Its only 
noteworthy feature is that it is made entirely 
from coal-black iron. Even the handle is cast in 
iron, patterned to imitate the grain of wood that 
would normally be used. The Hammer is quite 
heavy and seems over-balanced, but once held it 
is quickly apparent that it can be handled with 
ease and grace. 


History 


The Hammer is one of the two great weapons 
of an ancient barbarian hero, Gesen Khan. (The 
other is the /ron Bow, explained elsewhere.) 
Descended from the gods, he tamed the first 
horse, taught the nomads how to ride, made the 
first spell, and shot the first bow. Gesen won the 
Hammer by defeating a manggus of the earth 
who slew travelers with her iron weapon. Since 
neither hammer nor blade could harm the mang- 
gus, the two wrestled for three days, until Gesen 
tore the other in half. Following the advice of 
Grandfather Sky, Gesen bathed the Hammer in 
the creature's blood, whereupon it acquired 
magical powers. When the hero finally died, the 
weapon vanished with him. Since that time 
many have claimed to have found it, but these 
are the tales of rogues in the marketplace who 
seek to pass off crude forgeries. 


Campaign Use 


The Hammer of Gesen is a good reward to a 
warrior player character and one that can be 
allowed in a campaign without too much risk to 
play balance. The weapon's curse will add role- 
playing difficulties for the character that should 
more than offset the advantages. 


Powers 


Constant. When gripping the Hammer, the 
character's Strength equals a cloud giant's. (Str 
23, +5 to hit, +11 damage, throw boulders 140 
yards for 1dlO damage, bend bars/lift gates 
90%). The weapon has no magical bonuses to hit 
but can strike any creature, even those that can 
only be hit by magical weapons. 

Invoked. By commanding the Hammer's might, 
the owner can cast power word, kill (1 /week) upon 
any one creature struck by the weapon. 

Curse. The Hammer can be used by any class 
or alignment, but over time the user transforms 
into a chaotic good fighter. Once a week a saving 
throw vs. polymorph is rolled, and if failed the 
character loses one class-related ability and 
acquires one that applies to fighters. Once the 
transformation is complete, the character is sub- 
ject to artifact possession, becoming unable to 
resist any adventure or good cause. Powers lost 
cannot be regained. The character may continue 
as is or change to a new character class (like a 
dual-class human). 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The manggus blood must be squeezed from 
the iron. 

* [t must be ground into a powder in a fearless 
man's mill. 

* [t must be returned to the spirit of the mang- 
gus who once owned it. 


33 


Hand and Eye of Vecna 


The Hand of Vecna appears to be a mummified 
left hand, black and claw-like. To be used, it 
must be placed on the stump of a left arm, where 
it will instantly graft into place. Once in place, it 
can be used as a normal hand, but always retains 
its horrid appearance. 

The Eye of Vecna is little more than a shriveled 
clot or small pebble, blood red in color. Like the 
Hand, it must be affixed to the owner's body (in 
an empty eye socket) before it can be used. Once 
in place, it changes appearance to that of a 
golden, slitted eye, much like a cat's. 

Once affixed, both items are permanently 
attached until the owner dies or they are forcibly 
removed. They radiate powerful magical auras 
that cannot be determined. 


History 


In his time perhaps the mightiest of all wiz- 
ards, Vecna was master of a kingdom now lost in 
the depths of the Flanaess's prehistory. Lord 
Vecna's rule was not kind and just, for he was 
filled with malevolence that, if known, would 
make even the feared Iuz the Evil tremble. As a 
great wizard, none within his realm dared 
oppose him. 

So great was Vecna's power that when his 
time to die came, he escaped even that to become 
an arch-lich more horrid than ever before, allow- 
ing him to continue his reign of horror over the 
land. In the end, though, his own lieutenant Kas 
(see Sword of Kas) treacherously attacked the lich 
and in the ensuing battle both were destroyed. 
All, that is, but the arch-lich's hand and eye. 
These dismembered bits have survived the mil- 
lennia since Vecna's passing, retaining in them 
only a small portion of Vecna's great power. 

Each time one of these artifacts has surfaced, 
disaster and ruin have followed. Paddin the 
Vain used the Hand to start the Insurrection of 
the Yaheetes, a rebellion the Emperor of the 
Malachite Throne later crushed. With the Hand's 
power, the so-called Vecna II held monstrous 
sway over Tyrus for 100 years. The Eye was 


"2^ d A 
N’ , od 
MI 
JI —_— 
` 2, 
T = wr E lí 
~ kes ey Novit" ! ^ uo 
BNR QM. 
j Withee Dies 
ee. . T E A uf M We 4 
», - 2 7: d 


instrumental in the extermination of the house 
of Hyeric, once the ruling dynasty in Nyrond, 
and Miro the Paladin-King was corrupted by the 
power of the Hand. Each time, the Hand and Eye 
have failed their owners at some crucial 
moment. 

Over the years, a cult of worshippers has 
arisen to venerate the vile Lord Vecna and work 
to pave the way for his return. For this cult, the 
Eye and the Hand are powerful relics worth 
obtaining at any cost. Their servants are always 
watchful for any reappearance of the Eye or 
Hand, eager to track down and snatch them up 
from whomever possesses them. 

The most recent of these reappearances 
occurred only a few years past, just prior to the 
great wars that engulfed the Flanaess, when 
both the Eye and Hand fell into the clutches of 
the cult. This event was marked by foreboding 


35 


Hand and Eye of Vecna 


failures of magic and evil omens across the land. 
Fortunately by all accounts, the Eye and Hand 
were cast through the dimensional portal of 
Tovag Baragu on the Dry Steppes and lost in 
some unrecorded void of the outer planes. 


Campaign Use 


Both the Hand and Eye of Vecna are so evil that 
PCs should gain little good from either artifact. 
Fill their minds with tales of the tragic deaths 
and dire fates of those foolish enough to pre- 
sume upon Vecna's power. 

The most obvious goal is to keep these arti- 
facts from falling into the clutches of the cult of 
Vecna. Both groups, player characters and 
cultists, are in a race to follow a path of rumors 
and legend to the end. Even if the characters 
succeed, they are still left with the problem of 
what to do with the artifacts. The cultists will 
not rest until the items are theirs. A variation on 
this is that the characters "accidentally" find the 
Eye or Hand and must destroy or hide the arti- 
facts before the cultists do them in. 

Anintriguing puzzle for the characters would 
be to prevent a good NPC from using the arti- 
facts, since this would doom the poor soul and 
perhaps many others. The NPC, probably a king 
or petty emperor, is in great danger of being 
overwhelmed by evil forces. Vecna's artifacts 
might have the power to destroy these ene- 
mies—but only by creating a worse evil. The 
players have to find a way to prevent this and 
still save the empire. Worse still, the ruler's advi- 
sor is urging him to take up the artifacts and 
smite the kingdom's enemies. He may be a 
secret cultist of Vecna or he might believe the 
same of the PCs. 

A greater challenge is that the player charac- 
ters must defeat a foe already using the artifacts, 
perhaps a depraved ruler within the borders of 
the former Great Kingdom. Note that the player 
characters cannot simply steal the devices—the 
enemy must be confronted and defeated before 
all is right again. 


36 


Powers 


The Eye and Hand can function separately or 
together. Both share the same curse, which is 
intensified if both items are possessed. 


The Hand of Vecna 


Constant. The user gains a 19 Strength, immu- 
nity to magic missiles, and inflicts 2d6 points of 
damage to plant-based creatures by touch. 

Invoked. The user gains an instant death 
touch (no saving throw, 1/day). 

Random. 8 from Table 26: Minor Spell-Like 
Powers, 7 from Table 25: Major Spell-Like 
Powers; There is a unique gesture for each 
power. 


The Eye of Vecna 


Constant. The user gains the abilities of a true 
seeing spell. 

Invoked. The user can cast eyebite (3/day) and 
domination(1/day)spells. 

Random. 3 from Table 16: Divination. 

Resonating. When joined with the Eye of 
Vecna, the user gains 6 random abilities (2 from 
Table 16: Detection, 2 from Table 33: Protec- 
tions, and 2 from Table 10: Abjurations) and 
70% magic resistance. 

Curse. As these were once the living tissue of 
Vecna, every use requires a saving throw vs. 
spell (-6 penalty if both Hand and Eye are owned) 
to avoid artifact domination (see Curses). The arti- 
facts' goals are to gain more magical power, 
establish an empire, destroy the Sword of Kas, 
and summon Vecna to Oerth. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* Vecna the demigod must be permanently and 
irrevocably destroyed. 

* [t must be cast into the heart of Oerth's sun. 

* Every shade of Vecna's victims must be sent 
to a peaceful rest 


Herald of Mei Lung 


The Herald ofMei Lung is a large tome, roughly 
the size of a small shield and six inches thick of 
otherwise nondescript appearance. Its pages are 
of the thinnest paper and each is covered in an 
elaborate script penned in golden ink. The lan- 
guage is unknown to any who view it, but can 
be read with the aid of a comprehend languages 
spell. 


History 


At the birth of the world, the great and wise 
dragon Mei Lung was given the task of record- 
ing all that has, is, or will transpire in the world. 
Supposedly, should the great dragon fail in his 
duties, the universe would end. To prevent this 
dire fate from occurring, Mei Lung created the 
Herald. 

Mei Lung was not merely satisfied to create 
the Herald, although many would view this as 
protection enough. Aware that disaster might 
befall not just him but his entire household (for 
dragons of that far eastern land lived in a style 
much different from the wyrms of the west), Mei 
Lung entrusted the magical volume to a sect of 
isolated and devout monks far away in the fast- 
ness of the highest mountains of the world. 
There the book has ever been, watched over by 
monks who now live only for its protection. 


Campaign Use 


The Herald of Mei Lung is one of the few truly 
beneficent artifacts, possessing no harmful pow- 
ers. As such, it can be a useful aid in a particu- 
larly difficult adventure, providing answers to 
mysteries and clues about the future. The player 
characters can never actually own the artifact. 
Instead they must go to it. This by itself is an 
adventure as the group treks across a hostile 
wilderness similar to the Himalayas to find the 
ancient monastery. Even then, dealings with the 
monks must be role-played, and the return jour- 
ney survived. 


RAAN 
~t 


RVA 
& v 
Y SZ 


Powers 


Constant. The Herald of Mei Lung is wondrous 
in that it writes by itself the history of every 
major and virtually every minor event in the 
world. Since this history starts with the creation 
of the world, finding information can take a long 
time. For every day spent reading the book, there 
is a 1% cumulative chance of finding the correct 
information. What is revealed is the truth, 
although often one-sided in its presentation. 

The book records more than just the past, 
however. Any event occurring in the present can 
also be read about. The character need only turn 
to the final penned pages and read. It is even 
possible to read about future events on the final 
pages, although since the tales are still forming 
themselves, there is only a 20% chance of gain- 
ing useful information, and even then it may be 
incomplete. 

The Herald is protected with a powerful spell 
that automatically teleports the tome back to the 
monastery if it has been absent for more than 12 
hours. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* If the universe ends, the book also ends. 

* One must go back in time and prevent Mei 
Lung from becoming the Celestial Historian. 

* Mei Lung must be convinced that knowledge 
is meaningless. 


37 


pam | 
MA 
ES 

"i \= 


“SF ui 


en — 
A A 
E: 2 23. : 


Heward’s Mystical Organ 


Heward's Mystical Organ is a massive musical 
instrument fashioned to look like a particularly 
sublime pipe organ. The cabinet is a great horse- 
shoe arc with three full sets of keys; one of ivory 
and obsidian, one of jade and lapis, and the third 
of steel and brass. Arranged in three banks, one 
to each side and another across the front, are the 
organ's ivory stops, nine to a bank, 27 in all. 
Nine rosewood pedals sound the deepest of the 
bass notes. 

The organ is more than just the cabinet 
though, for without the pipes it would have no 
voice. Each pipe is sounded by an elemental 
spirit. Made of gold and silver, some pipes are 
only inches in height while others stretch three 
stories high, almost to the ceiling. 

Because the organ cannot be exposed to the 
elements (and it is in no way portable) it is 
always discovered housed in a cathedral-like 
building, not necessarily the same one each 
time. Sometimes the organ is discovered in the 
ruined shell of a temple, other times in a soaring 
cavern deep beneath the earth. Just how this 
occurs is one of the mystical properties of the 
device. 


History 


In a time long ago when the age of elves was 
fading and the new age of man was just being 
born, Heward, Patron of Bards, despaired. 
Heward was a man more than a man, barely less 
than a demi-god, for it was a time when men 
could rise to such greatness. For centuries 
Heward had listened to and learned with joy the 
songs of the elves. His fellow humans, though, 
had no time or interest in such graceful skills. 
Determined to teach mankind the genteel arts of 
composition and song, the great Heward spent 
his years building a device that would bring joy 
and wonder to the world. At last he finished his 
great creation—Reward's Mystical Organ. 

It is said that the music Heward played on the 
Organ was stolen from the voices of nightingales 
and that no man or woman who heard his aires 


could remain unmoved. Even the reclusive elves 
and the dour dwarves were lured from their hid- 
den dens when Heward's fingers bent to the 
keys. Of those who came to hear, some among 
them were inspired to spread the wonder they 
had heard. From Heward they learned the arts 
of harmony, composition, and more—all the 
skills to make beautiful music. These men and 
women went out among the people and so 
Heward inspired the first bards. It is even said 
that when Heward played, blighted soil flow- 
ered, rain fell upon command, even the sun lin- 
gered a little longer in the sky. 

Heward's work did not pass unnoticed in the 
heavens, and among the divine powers some 
grew jealous of his skill. These gods spoke to the 
mice of Heward's hall, saying "Great Heward 
will some day call you vermin and use his music 
to drive you from this place. Go and gnaw on his 
organ before this can happen," and the mice 
with their foolish small brains did as the gods 
suggested. Perhaps, as some say, it was the elven 
gods who, fearful that their own songs would 
vanish, sent the mice—perhaps it was another. 
And so the songs of the organ changed and as 
the soured notes were keyed, evil things stole 
their tones. Thus the harpies found their voice 
and the sirens gained their power to lure. 
Enraged at the treachery of the mice, Heward 
played one last song on his organ that forever 
cursed them to be lowly and meek. Then every- 
thing disappeared without a trace. 

Or so the story goes. 


Campaign Use 


Heward's Mystical Organ is one of those arti- 
facts best suited to a multi-part adventure, since 
several elements must be brought together 
before the Organ can be used. Because it is not a 
particularly practical device (being impossible 
to transport and difficult to use), most characters 
are not likely to seek out the Organ of their own 
accord. Therefore, the DM must provide them 
with a strong enough reason, a threat that can 


39 


Heward's Mystical Organ 


only be foiled by the correct use of the device. 

Given the history and musical nature of the 
artifact, a peril such as the loss of all bardic lore 
or the evaporation of music throughout the 
world is particularly appropriate. Once faced 
with the problem, the characters must learn how 
the Organ can help, find the correct tune to play 
on it, practice that tune (for it must be flawless), 
discover the location of the Organ, and finally, 
get there. Of course, the agent or agencies behind 
this plot are not going to leave the characters 
unhindered. Ever-increasing efforts will be 
made by the enemy to stop them. Of course, 
along the way the characters gain hints to a few 
songs that just might be useful to them. 

At the end of the adventure, the characters 
could experiment with the organ, although this 
would be most foolish. Alternatively, if the DM 
wants to remove the artifact, it can simply van- 
ish as soon as a song is poorly played. 


Powers 


Invoked. To use the Organ properly, charac- 
ters must know two things; the exact song to be 
played and the settings for the stops of the 
organ. Only specific combinations of a particular 
song and exact stop settings have any effect. 
There are atleast 23 powers of the Organ, requir- 
ing 23 different songs. (More can exist ifthe DM 
desires.) DMs can create their own list of tunes 
based on their own tastes in music. (It can be 
particularly effective to choose classical organ 
works and then play them on a stereo just as the 
player characters attempt the same.) It is gener- 
ally a good idea to mix up the selections so that 
players cannot guess correctly based on their 
knowledge of the DM. A form is provided in 
Appendix C for the DM to record the settings. 

The stops are noted by a coded sequence. 
There are 27 stops lettered A-Z and one more 
labelled !. Each stop has eight settings (1 through 
8). The settings are noted as a combination of let- 
ter and number. For convenience, any stop all 
the way in (setto 1) is ignored. Thus the stop set- 


ting for a particular song might be A7, G2, H3, 
I5, R6, S6, V2, and !3. The last setting (!) is 
important for, if set incorrectly, the Organ's curse 
is automatically triggered. Once all the stops 
have been set, the song can be played. A suc- 
cessful proficiency check must be made by one 
skilled in playing such an instrument. If failed, 
the character has erred during the course of 
playing, potentially triggering a bad effect. 

The effects of the Organ's 23 songs are quite 
varied. A suggested breakdown is given here, or 
the DM can create an effect that matches the goal 
of the adventure. 


5 abilities from Table 31: Personal Enhance- 
ment 

6 abilities from Table 10: Abjurations 

6 abilities from Table 21: Enchantment/Charm 

3 abilities from Table 11: Cataclysms 

3 abilities from Table 13: Conjuration 


If the song or setting is incorrect or if the play- 
ing is poor, the DM should roll on the table 
below, Bad Reviews, for a result. 


Bad Reviews 
dlO Roll Result 
1-7 No result 
8-9 Curse 
10 Random effect 


Curse. It is said that only Heward could play 
the Organ without fail. Should any character 
trigger the curse, all those within the hall must 
roll a successful saving throw vs. death with a -4 
penalty or be stricken mad, tortured by the 
screeching tones of the pipes. Those mad forever 
wander the world, unable to bear the slightest 
sound yet unable to tolerate silence either. Mad 
characters lose all class abilities except saving 
throws and hit points and are controlled by the 
referee. The madness can only be cured by a wish 
spell. 

There is also the risk that a character will play 
the Organ too well. Should the proficiency check 


Heward's Mystical Organ 


be a 1 (or less), the keyboardist has played with 
near divine inspiration, worthy of Heward him- 
self. At the end of the piece, the musician is 
instantly struck with melancholia, knowing that 
this performance is never likely to be matched. 
Those listening must roll checks against their 
Wisdom, with those who fail coming to the same 
conclusion. (Wiser characters are able to rouse 
themselves from this depression.) Stricken char- 
acters take no joy in life, for they have heard the 
most sublime beauty and gradually waste away, 
unable to even motivate themselves to eat or 
drink. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The King of the Mice must be convinced to 
lead his people in an attack on the Organ, for 
only they can destroy the instrument's inner 
workings. 

* The worst composer in the entire world must 
be found to play the instrument. The cacoph- 
ony that results causes such a titanic explo- 
sion that the Organ, its hall, and the 
surrounding area for a half-mile radius are 
destroyed. 

* .The Organ must be burned in a fire kindled 
with a copy of every work that Heward ever 
composed. 


Heward's Mystical Organ 
Stop Setting Chart 


Horn of Change 


The Horn of Change is quite ordinary looking, as 
far as artifacts go, so much so that it is indistin- 
guishable from other magical horns. The Horn is 
made of polished brass and is shaped like a curv- 
ing ram's horn. Sigils are stamped along its rim 
and a chain of golden links is the carrying strap. 


History 


The origins of the Horn of Change are quite 
clear and can easily be learned by those who 
ask. Several hundred years ago (give or take a 
few decades), a rogue named Eustos was spend- 
ing an evening at the gaming tables. He had 
been successful in the market that day, and his 
luck continued with the dice; he won throw after 
throw. As the evening wore on and Eustos drank 
and thought less, he foolishly bragged that he 
must surely have won the favor of the gods of 
luck, for no odds were too impossible for him 
that night. 

Well, such a boast cannot go unheard and ina 
short time a charismatic stranger came to the 
table. Suddenly no throw did the stranger miss, 
nor any could Eustos make. Finally Eustos 
offered the greatest and only treasure he had 
remaining—his very soul. Against this, the 
stranger put up a plain brass horn. Eustos made 
the cast—and won. 

It is said that the stranger smiled and told the 
rogue that the horn could bestow great power or 
immense woe, for each sounding was a roll of 
chance. Perhaps this is true, for after gaining a 
reputation for wonders, Eustos vanished one 
day and was never seen again. 


Campaign Use 


The Horn of Change is a purely chaotic artifact. 
Thus, it is a wonderful item to give to the player 
characters. While there is no predicting the bal- 
ance of its powers, the Horn will provide many 
opportunities for role-playing, as its unpre- 
dictable powers come into play. 


42 


= 


Powers 


Constant. Any character who picks up the 
Horn is instantly aware of its possibilities. Show 
or explain the table below to that player. 

Invoked. When the Horn is sounded, roll on 
the table below to find the result. This roll can- 
not be influenced in any way. Roll on the appro- 
priate table to determine what power 
immediately takes effect. 


diOO Power 

1-10 Table 12: Combat 

1125 Table 21: Enchant/Charm 
26-40 Table 13: Conjuration 


41-50 Table 10: Abjurations 

51-75 Table 25: Major Spell-Like Powers 
76-95 Table 14: Curses 

96-100 Table 1I: Cataclysms 


Curse. Each day that a character owns the 
Horn, there is a 1% (cumulative) chance that the 
character will be seized by a gambling fever so 
intense that no honest wager can be resisted, 
regardless of the odds. This only passes when 
the character gives up or loses the Horn. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The powers of luck must be gambled with to 
destroy the Horn. 

* The gods of justice must be cheated, an ulti- 
mate gamble. 


Invulnerable Coat of Arnd 


The Invulnerable Coat ofArnd is a shimmering 
bright coat of chain mail made from fine chain 
links of silver that covers the wearer's upper 
arms, torso, and groin. 


History 


Only scant details still remain of the people of 
a small, ancient nation oppressed and impover- 
ished by the wizard Virtos. All of the champions 
sent by the people to free them from Virtos's 
yoke had failed. With no one else to take up their 
cause, the priests and great craftsmen combined 
forces to create a mail coat. This artifact would 
endow the wearer with the courage and strength 
to defeat Virtos. When the coat was completed, 
the priests prayed for a champion. 

One week later Arnd, a humble priest from 
the south, entered the city. Arnd's order believed 
strongly in aiding impoverished folk at any 
opportunity, and Arnd himself was a most dedi- 
cated follower. Upon learning of the people's 
plight, Arnd agreed to don the Coat and lead the 
masses into battle. The victory was a sound one, 
and Virtos was overthrown utterly. After the vic- 
tory, Arnd disappeared, taking the Coat as a gift. 


Campaign Use 


The Invulnerable Coat ofArnd is perfect for any 
classic good vs. evil epic adventure. The PCs 
could either find the Coat themselves and use it 
to swing the tide of a great war, or perhaps they 
must prevent another from claiming it for the 
other side. It is an artifact that will not unbal- 
ance a campaign, for once the quest is fulfilled, 
the Coat disappears, seeking a new wearer. 


Powers 


Constant. The Coat grows or shrinks to fit any 
humanoid character from 3 to 8 feet tall. The 
wearer is impervious to any physical attacks 


made on rolls of less than a natural 20 and gains 
a +5 bonus to all saving throw rolls. The armor 
protects against fire attacks as a ring of fire resis- 
tance and is immune to acid, cold, and electrical 
attacks. 

Invoked. A cleric wearing the armor and 
uttering a special prayer gains 3 experience lev- 
els for 4 days (1/month). The cleric gains all hit 
points, spells, attacks, and saving throws associ- 
ated with the new level. 

Curse. The spirit of Arnd still inhabits the 
armor and attempts to aid the poor whenever 
possible. While in the presence of impoverished 
or suffering people, there is a 70% chance that 
the spirit of Arnd will take possession of the 
wearer in order to aid the unfortunates. The 
wearer spends 2d4 + 1 hours roaming the area, 
seeking out the poor and helping them as a 14th 
level cleric (even if the character is not a cleric). 
When the spirit of Arnd releases the character, 
no memory of what has happened remains. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* It must be unraveled by one without con- 
science. 

* It must be fed to the father of rust monsters. 

* A deity of avarice must be forced to wear the 
coat, whereupon the magic is released vio- 
lently (roll once on Table 11: Cataclysms). 


43 


Iron Bow of Gesen 


Upon casual examination, the Iron Bow of Gesen 
appears to be an ordinary short bow of the type 
used by horse raiders, lacquered black and 
strung with a shimmering cord. Closer examina- 
tion reveals that the bow is of iron, cunningly 
wrought to seem like wood, while the string is a 
golden wire. The Bow is light and can be drawn 
back with ease, bending more than iron should 
ever allow. 


History 


The Bow is one of the two great weapons of 
Gesen Khan, a legendary chieftain among the 
horse nomads. (The other weapon is the Hammer 
of Gesen.) Gesen was supposedly the first to 
unite all the warring tribes. 

One of Gesen's treasures was the Iron Bow, 
supposedly the first bow ever made. No ordi- 
nary person, it is said, could bend it, and none 
could withstand the fearsome arrows loosed 
from its string. A single shaft from it could sun- 
der a tree or shatter stone. Furthermore, since it 
was the first bow, it was the greatest and wisest 
of all bows. No one who touched it shot poorly 
thereafter. 

Eventually Gesen died and was buried some- 
where on the steppe. It is said that the bow was 
interred with him, but since that time, many 
claim to have seen or used it. 


Campaign Use 


The Iron Bow is an excellent artifact for use by 
a warrior, especially if the adventure pits the 
party against some tremendous foe. Because of 
its seemingly normal appearance, characters 
will have to be constantly wary of fraudulent 
copies. 

Other warriors of all sorts will covet the arti- 
fact, and the group will be besieged by claimants 
based on ancestry, great need, and fitness. Most 
will try to take the Bow by force. The characters 
will find themselves in a situation not unlike a 


44 


E 


notorious gunslinger who must always face a 
new challenger. 


Powers 


Constant. Any arrow shot from the bow is 
temporarily transformed into an arrow +5, pro- 
viding THACO and damage bonuses. Arrows 
leap from the quiver to the string of their own 
accord, allowing up to four shots per round. The 
bow has twice the range of a normal short bow. 

Invoked. Three times per day, the owner can 
fire an arrow as a lightning bolt or flame arrow 
spell (each cast at 20th level). Once per day the 
owner can choose and use any arrow of slaying. 

Curse. Users of the bow risk artifact transfor- 
mation. Should this occur, the character gradu- 
ally changes in features and knowledge to a 
wild horseman of the steppes. The character 
may forget how to read or sail, instead becoming 
an expert rider. The transformation does not 
affect class abilities. Once the transformation is 
complete, the character is subject to artifact pos- 
session, becoming unable to resist any adventure 
or good cause. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* [t must be returned to the vengeful shade of 
Gesen, who is wandering the steppe. 

* It must be flattened with 1,000 blows from the 
Hammer of Gesen. 


The Iron Flask of Tuerny the Merciless is a heavy 
urn stoppered with a turnip-shaped plug. It is 
small enough to be carried in the palm of a 
hand. The urn itself is plain, but the stopper is 
engraved and embossed with runes of power. 


History 


In all human history only one man has epito- 
mized the essence of pure evil, Tuerny the Mer- 
ciless. Tuerny was a powerful mage who served 
as counselor to the king of a small country. Feel- 
ing that the king was a weak and foolish ruler, 
Tuerny and his agents murdered the royal fam- 
ily as they slept and he seized the crown for 
himself. Using his vast magical powers, Tuerny 
charmed or enslaved most of the army. He was 
able to summon foul tanar'ri and set them loose 
on the helpless people, but had little control 
over them, so Tuerny began expending vast 
amounts of energy to craft a device capable of 
bending them to his will. With all in readiness, 
he summoned forth a great tanar'ri, took control 
over the beast, and imprisoned it in the flask. 

Meanwhile, news of Tuerny's atrocities reached 
neighboring kingdoms. They raised great armies 
to crush Tuerny and his foul minions. These dev- 
astating wars lasted years but resolved nothing. 
Finally Tuerny opened the bottle—only to have 
the released creature grab him. A blood-curdling 
scream filled the air as Tuerny transformed into a 
foul and hideous monster and vanished, along 
with the flask and the creature. 


Campaign Use 


The power of the Flask is such that inexperi- 
enced PCs will quickly find themselves over- 
whelmed. A better approach is to have the PCs 
either seek out the item, or to have them prevent 
others from acquiring it. Perhaps they must find 
a way to prevent an otherwise good ruler from 
using the power of the Flask to change the tide of 
a desperate war. 


Powers 


Invoked. The user of the Flask draws upon the 
power of one of the following tanar'ri impris- 
oned inside it; a nabassu, glabrezu, marilith, or 
nalfeshnee. The actual tanar'ri contained in the 
flask can be determined randomly or selected by 
the DM. It can be released to wreak havoc upon 
any targets the user chooses for up to 8 hours. If 
itis killed, it instantly returns to the artifact. The 
fiend must otherwise be commanded to kill at 
least once before it can be ordered back into the 
Flask. If this is not done before the 8 hours 
expire, the the curse is instantly activated 
(1/day). 

Random. 2 from Table 28: Offensive Powers 

Curse. There is a cumulative 5% chance each 
time the Flask is used that the tanar'ri will be able 
to turn on the user. When this happens, the user 
is taken to the tanar'ri'S home plane to serve as a 
dretch. The artifact also afflicts the user with arti- 

fact transformation, changing the user's alignment 
to chaotic evil and instilling the desire to utterly 
conquer and destroy all known creation. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The user must imprison 99 other greater 
tanar'ri in the Flask. 

It must be filled with the tears of 1,000 
orphaned children, which melts it. 

The Flask must be filled with earth from every 
battlefield Tuerny fought on. 


45 


Ivory Chain of Pao 


This artifact is highly distinctive in appearance, 
an ivory chain whose links are carved in the 
fashion of men with arms outstretched. Each 
link is cunningly made so that the hands of one 
figure interlock with the next in line. Unlike 
metal chains, the links here are not closed loops 
and it should be possible to unhook individual 
links. However, the chain shows no indication of 
falling apart. The chain is approximately 12 feet 
long. 


History 


The Ivory Chain of Pao has a long and colorful 
history in the lands of the east, but is virtually 
unknown to western sages. This is the tale, 
highly abbreviated, as it is known to those east- 
ern scholars. Only those western sages with con- 
tact to the distant oriental lands would know 
any bits of this tale. 

The early history of the chain is very vague. 
Common tradition holds that it was fashioned in 
the Age of Red Earth by Master Pao, the Lesser 
Immortal of Mount Yei, and given to the nine 
First Emperors, who ruled the empire jointly. 
The chain, it is said, was to symbolize their unity 
and the harmony they brought to all civilized 
people (i.e. the empire). 

Unfortunately, it brought tragedy. One night 
an audacious thief slipped into the treasury and 
stole the chain in the seventh year of the Nine's 
rule (some say this thief was inspired by Mon- 
key, the Lord of Mischief; others, by an evil god). 
Shortly thereafter, turmoil grew in the southern 
realms of the empire as a new cult rose to chal- 
lenge the Emperors. 

It was at this time that the Nine Emperors 
withdrew to heaven, leaving the empire in the 
hands of the First Dynasty. As the evil cult in the 
south continued to grow, the emperor sought 
the secret of its destruction. Finally he and his 
poet-brother went south to challenge the cult. 

It was there that they discovered that Nan 
Kung Chi, the high priest of the Black Leopard 
cult, had the Ivory Chain. With it the priest had 


46 


bound the great leopard-fiend of the cult and 
forced it to his will. Guided by the wisdom of his 
brother, the Emperor Chin shattered the Chain 
with a single stroke of his spear, thus ending the 
terror of the leopard cult. 

Many would have assumed this to be the end 
of the Ivory Chain's power, but Master Pao had 
been more cunning than that. It is said that the 
Chain vanished with the parting of a single link, 
only to later reform itself. This must certainly be 
true, for the Chain figured into an another great 
event—the fall of the Copper Fiend of Tros. 

If little was known of the Black Leopard Cult, 
even less has been recorded of the Copper Fiend. 
It is known that this monster rose to great power 
in the northwestern reaches of the empire, seiz- 
ing several provinces for his own. These it ruled 
with absolute authority and terror for many 
decades. Finally the horrors of the fiend became 
too great and the emperor called for heroes to 
help regain his lands. Wo Mai and his compan- 
ions, loyal to their emperor, undertook the dan- 
gerous task. It is unknown just how they 
overthrew the Copper Fiend, but accepted sto- 
ries say the Ivory Chain of Pao was instrumental 
in binding the creature and bringing it back to 
the imperial court. There it was imprisoned in 
the Acorn of Wo Mai. 

After this great event the Chain dropped from 
all accounts of history. Some scholars say it was 
ground into dust and forged into the Acorn that 
holds the Copper Fiend. Others think it 
remained in the imperial treasuries until the fall 


Ivory Chain of Pao 


of the Hai Dynasty, when the Sixth Emperor 
went to invade a neighboring land. There it was 
supposedly lost (along with the Sixth Emperor) 
when the invasion fleet sank in a great storm. 
The story continues that the Chain was recov- 
ered by a foreign navigator named O'Rourke, 
who was in the employ of the dead emperor. It is 
quite possible that he carried it back to the lands 
of the west—or perhaps he did not. 


Campaign Use 


The Ivory Chain of Pao is not a particularly 
powerful artifact for common adventuring. Its 
powers only affect outer-planar creatures, so 
unless these figure into the campaign, the chain 
is going to be nothing more than an interesting 
curiosity. However, should a great outer-planar 
threat appear.... 

The DM should build the adventure around 
the Chain's powers. The obvious possibility is 
that something awful and of great power has 
broken into the Prime Material world and the 
Chain is necessary to overcome it. While not par- 
ticularly original, this plot-line can be quite 
exciting if well-executed. 

Of course, it doesn't have to be this way. There 
is nothing that says there has to be a threat to the 
Prime Material world. The player characters, for 
various reasons, could journey to the outer 
planes where they would need the Chain to cap- 
ture some powerful being. Perhaps it is needed 
for a powerful spell (that in turn stops a differ- 
ent threat to the safety of the campaign world). 
Perhaps the task is a geas imposed by a cunning 
lich, or payment to a high priest for services ren- 
dered. The group even might do something this 
dangerous simply to impress a powerful lord. A 
great king, caliph, or emperor would certainly 
think highly of heroes who presented a power- 
ful fiend humbled by a simple ivory chain. 

Furthermore, since the Chain can be taken 
apart, the simple business of discovering it can 
become quite complicated. The DM can intro- 
duce the artifact slowly. The group might find a 


single link as part of a treasure hoard. Later 
they could find others, never with any explana- 
tion. Only after a considerable length of chain 
is gathered might they find clues to the Chain's 
purpose. 


Powers 


Invoked. The Chain can be used in one of two 
ways, either as a whole piece or by individual 
links. When the whole Chain is wrapped around 
the wrists, neck, ankles, or waist (or the equiva- 
lent) of an outer-planar creature, that creature is 
automatically bound. Bound creatures must obey 
absolutely the commands of the owner of the 
Chain (who must hold one end of it when giving 
these commands). Although it seems extremely 
fragile, the bound creature is utterly helpless 
against the Chain's might, nor can it use its pow- 
ers except at the bidding of its master. 

If one knows the right way to twist and slide 
the figures, the links can be unlocked from each 
other. Once the whole Chain is broken (there are 
48 links), it loses all power to bind. Any individ- 
ual link can be thrown against a creature, with 
all of the effects of a holy word spell. Links hurled 
instantly vanish. 

Curse. Each day that the Chain is used to bind 
a creature, there is a 5% chance it will break and 
vanish instantly. Newly freed creatures are usu- 
ally quite eager to extract revenge on their for- 
mer masters, in horrible and imaginative ways. 
Furthermore, outer-planar creatures will send 
earthly agents against the Chain's owner. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* A secret method of joining each link so that 
the hands do not touch must be used. 

* Each link matches a living hero (or heroine). 
When all are dead, the chain crumbles. 

* [t must be given to an elephant-god, who 
shatters the ivory. 


47 


Jacinth of Inestimable Beauty 


The Jacinth of Inestimable Beauty is a crystalline, 
fist-sized flower made from orange corundum 
facets sewn together with strands of gold. 


History 


Tribal legends tell of a most exquisite corun- 
dum gem that was found by the first dwarves in 
the mountain range of their birth. The gem was of 
such unique beauty that their gods sent a vision 
to Jojonek, the first craftsman. So inspired, he 
labored for weeks cutting flawless facets from the 
fiery orange corundum gem. Minute holes were 
drilled at the base of each crystal petal and 
Jojonek carefully linked them together with fine 
gold chains. The result of his labors was a flaw- 
less, palm-sized crystal jacinth blossom. De- 
lighted with the creation, the gods gifted Jojonek 
with four tiny bottles of scented floral oils. Taking 
each bottle in turn, he thoroughly oiled the blos- 
soms until all of the scented oil was used. 

Jojonek soon found patrons coming to his 
shop to admire his work. Jojonek began to brag 
to any and all who would listen that it was his 
artistic ability that had enabled him to craft such 
a fine piece of work. Of course, the gods were lis- 
tening, and were not pleased. 

Within weeks Jojonek's family began to worry 
about him. He had become irritable, and all of 
his work of late was flawed. Jojonek had begun 
to believe his visitors were trying to steal his 
greatest creation. Finally, Jojonek fled the dwar- 
ven home with the Jacinth, muttering, "Stay 
back! It's mine, mine...." 


Campaign Use 


The Jacinth of Inestimable Beauty is a good arti- 
fact for any level campaign, for it is not too pow- 
erful, and the side effects deter characters. One 
adventure can have a PC infatuated with some- 
one using the flower, possibly disappearing with 
that person. Alternatively, the characters must 
find out why a local ruler has recently begun 
acting strangely. 


Powers 


Constant. Contact with the flower adds 5 
points to the user's Charisma (max. of 21). 

Invoked. The player character specifies a flo- 
ral scent while holding and smelling deeply of 
the crystalline Jacinth. This releases the fragrance 
along with the appropriate power. If a scent is 
named that the gem does not have or no fra- 
grance is specified, a random scent is released. 
The scents are as follows: 


Violet Charm person (2/day) 

Lavender Suggestion (3/day, cast at 20th level) 

Rose 1 from Table 25: Major Spell-Like 
Powers 

Jacinth 1 from Table 22: Fate and Fortune 


Curse. The character suffers the effects of 
chaotic sleep (no saving throw) for as long as the 
Jacinth is possessed. When the ratio of sleepless- 
ness to sleep reaches 2 to 1, the PC becomes 
incoherent and sluggish (all attributes reduced 
by 1 point). Upon reaching 3 to 1, the character 
becomes paranoid (reaction rolls are required for 
each encounter with -6 penalties). 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The Jacinth must be bathed in a mixture of 
pollen from every kind of blossom. 

* It must be consumed by someone with no 
sense of smell. 


Johydee’s Mask 


Johydee's Mask is a full-face mask made of an 
unknown opaque material shaded gray. 


History 


In a frontier region on the border of the Seven 
Kingdoms, a well-organized band of thieves 
took up residence to plunder the trade routes to 
the east. To prevent word from reaching the vis- 
count, the thieves threatened the local villagers. 
Anyone defying the guild was found dead or 
disappeared altogether. 

All seemed hopeless until Johydee, a high 
priestess, came to tend the spiritual needs of the 
village. Serving a goddess of truth and justice, 
she was horrified by the great injustices the vil- 
lagers had been forced to endure, and set about 
freeing them from this tyranny. Johydee heard of 
an old hermit, said to have once been a great 
illusionist, living in the hills nearby. She jour- 
neyed to him and convinced the hermit to help 
save the villagers. For a full month he labored, 
finally delivering a mask to the high priestess. 

After great prayer, Johydee put on the mask, 
assuming the guise of the leader of the band of 
thieves. She infiltrated them and discovered that 
two rival factions existed. Playing upon their 
ingrained suspicions, Johydee rekindled the old 
hatreds. Soon the thieves were fighting among 
themselves and disbanded, leaving the village in 
peace. Johydee and the mask disappeared after- 
wards. 


Campaign Use 


Johydee's Mask is another nice artifact for lower 
level campaigns. While of particular interest to 
thieves, it can be used by any character class. 
One possible alternative to simply allowing the 
PCs to use the mask might have the party hired 
to locate a group responsible for a rash of recent 
thefts. In reality, the thefts have been perpe- 
trated by a singular, very powerful master thief 
using the mask. At the end of the adventure the 


o 
e, é 

LI 

i 9 


mask can allow the thief to elude the party and 
finally disappear without trace. 


Powers 


Constant. The wearer of the mask is totally 
immune to all forms of gaze attacks (from 
basilisk, catoblepas, medusa, etc.). 

Invoked. The PC can assume the guise of a 
humanoid being, from gnome to hill giant size, 
by concentrating for one full round. If the PC 
has seen or heard the subject, the disguise is 
complete, including voice, mannerisms, cloth- 
ing, and equipment. It is 100% accurate to casual 
acquaintances, but there is a 596 chance per hour 
that close friends and family will detect descrep- 
ancies. This power can be used once per day but 
the disguise itself can be held for no longer than 
12 hours, after which it fails and the wearer's 
visage returns. 

Random. 1 from Table 27: Movement, 1 from 
Table 21: Enchantment/Charm 

Curse. There is a 2% cumulative chance per 
hour spent in impersonation that the wearer 
comes to believe that the identity of the subject 
is actually the wearer's own. Only a wish spell 
can restore the wearer to normal. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The Mask must be eaten by a mimic. 
* [t must be worn by one with no mind. 
* It must be merged with its reflection. 


49 


Kuroth's Quill 


Kuroth's Quill is a quill pen made from a white 
feather taken from the wing of a full-grown male 
griffon. The writing nib is made of gold. 


History 


During the Age of Veth beyond the Wasted 
Lands, an apprentice wizard named Baalice, 
possessing great potential and little discipline, 
was determined to prove his abilities to his 
master. On a day when the apprentices were 
alone, Baalice snuck into the master's study and 
used his spell book. He tried what appeared to 
be a simple summoning, but the spell went 
awry, and two dretches arrived from the Abyss. 
Baalice managed to send them back, but his right 
arm was mangled and his best friend, Julian, 
was killed. Although his arm was healed, Baal- 
ice believed it to be permanently crippled. The 
torment of his failure and his friend's death 
became overwhelming. Baalice came to believe 
that the only way to find peace was to ultimately 
right the wrongs he had inflicted, so he dedi- 
cated himself to amassing arcane knowledge. 
The drive to correct the situation became an 
obsession, though, until he was convinced that 
the only way to succeed was to achieve immor- 
tality. Baalice decided to become a lich. 

Once transformed, Baalice took up residence 
in a lonely stone tower by the sea. He strove to 
fix the damages he had done, but nothing ever 
set them completely right. Over the years the 
lich's obsession grew, until a possible solution 
formed in his mind. For three decades Baalice 
spent all his energies researching and creating a 
writing instrument capable of altering events. 
When he finished, he believed he could finally 
set the events right again. All too soon, though, 
he discovered that each change he made became 
twisted in some way and often led to even 
greater problems—even for someone of his 
powers. In sorrow and rage, Baalice planned to 
destroy the Quill. 

One afternoon Kuroth, an able thief, wan- 
dered into an inn near Baalice's tower. He hap- 


Fl 
W 4 Nd 
/ aij; 
L tA ». 
nz 3 
nU p — 
5 


pened to overhear a table of local folk discussing 
strange happenings at the tower. Upon inquiry, 
Kuroth learned that during the previous two 
months the stone tower had transformed into a 
mighty fortress, smoldering ruins, and then 
back again into its original form. Seeking the 
source of these great curiosities, the thief slipped 
into the stone tower and stole four rubies, one 
sapphire, and an engraved ebony box contain- 
ing the quill and some fine parchment paper. 
While recording the items stolen, Kuroth acci- 
dentally wrote 4 sapphires and 4 rubies. To his 
amazement, there were now four of each gem on 
the table before him. Kuroth was quick to realize 
that the pen was the source of the tower's mys- 
teries. Not wishing to attract undue attention, 
Kuroth immediately wrote, "The previous 
owner of this pen believes that the quill pen, 4 
rubies, and 1 sapphire were lost." Not certain 
that this would be clear enough he wrote, "This 
quill pen is the rightful property of Kuroth, and 
shall henceforth be known as Kuroth's quill." 
Soon Kuroth sat at the head of the local thieves 
guild and had many interests extending 
throughout the region. After his death, many of 
Kuroth's closest associates shook their heads as 
they told of the guild masters' insistence upon 
keeping the guild's books and ledgers himself. 
Over the years, the quill pen passed from 
hand to hand and ended up with a caravan dri- 
ver. He sold it to Sharmana the merchant, mum- 
bling something about how his best team had 
died from what he wrote down. Not believing 


Kuroth's Quill 


the superstitious man, Sharmana promptly 
shelved it and forgot about it. Six months later, 
his beloved daughter accidentally drowned at 
the lake. Months later, still bereaved, Sharmana 
wrote in his journal, "I wish my daughter back 
at my side." The popular folk tale tells of the 
decayed remains of Sharmana's daughter leav- 
ing the graveyard. 


Campaign Use 


Kuroth's Quill has the power to alter the course 
of a campaign—it is the equivalent of giving a 
character an unlimited number of twisted 
wishes. For this reason the player characters 
should have limited or no contact with the quill, 
and should strive to prevent anyone else from 
using it as well. 

To avoid all possible confusion the DM should 
have any players actually write down what their 
characters wish to write with the quill. If a char- 
acter does not command the pen to write infalli- 
bly, any and all errors written are subject to 
interpretation and substitution by the DM (see 
examples under Curse). It is important to 
remember that no wish is innocent; all have con- 
sequences. 

A possible adventure might have the party 
returning to a small fishing village after van- 
quishing a horde of monsters, only to find that it 
is now a massive fortress bustling with activity. 
As they unravel this mystery, more events are 
rewritten, and the one of the PCs might even 
suddenly change or shift—perhaps becoming a 
member of the king's staff or maybe a lowly sta- 
ble servant. This PC will not know the rest of the 
characters, believing in this new life completely. 
The rest of the group will have to find a way to 
rectify this, while the DM plays that character as 
an NPC for a while. Of course, anyone with an 
inkling of the pen's powers will want to possess 
it for themselves, so preventing unscrupulous 
individuals from acquiring it is an adventure in 
itself. 


Powers 


Constant. The user gains the benefits of a 
comprehend languages spell as long as the pen is 
in hand. Any illiterate gains the non-weapon 
read/write proficiency for 1d4 hours (1/day). 

Invoked. The user of the quill is able to alter 
reality by writing it down on a piece of parch- 
ment, similar to the 9th level wizard spell wish. 
The quill cannot be used more frequently than 
every 12 hours (6/week). The pen also draws 
and/or writes infallible descriptions of what the 
writer sees or speaks upon command. The 
Quill functions as a potion of treasure finding 
while held (1/month). 

Curse. While the quill will grant wishes and 
alter reality, there is always a price to be paid; 
for every boon there is a bane. Illegible or 
smudged words are omitted from the request 
entirely. Misspelled words are substituted to the 
best of the Quill's ability. For example, if a char- 
acter writes, "I wish to have a roster for all of the 
taxpayers in this county," and accidentally mis- 
pells "roster" as "rooster," that PC is going to be 
overwhelmed with crowing roosters from all 
the surrounding farms. 

Even correctly written requests have a monkey's 
paw effect. The pen does not create things; rather, 
it draws upon existing material to grant the wish. 
If a party requests a vast fortune, they could find 
themselves teleported inside the king's treasury. A 
wizard might write for desired magical spells, 
awakening in a heap of ancient tomes. At the same 
time, a nearby kingdom suffers the wrath of an 
archmage whose library has disappeared. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The words "Kuroth's Quill was never made" 
must be written with the Quill 100,000 times. 

* The lich Baalice must be located, his memory 
of the pen restored, and it must be returned to 
him. 

* The Quill must be taken back in time and 
given to the apprentice Julian at the moment 
of his death. 


51 


Mace of Cuthbert 


The Mace of Cuthbert is a short, gnarled piece of 
bronzewood in the shape of a club. 


History 


Saint Cuthbert is a lesser god bent on main- 
taining law and order, but his greatest passion 
comes from testing the faith of his flock. Follow- 
ers of Saint Cuthbert believe he travels regularly 
through the countryside in human form. Those 
lacking in faith tell how their faith was miracu- 
lously restored after a stranger hit them on the 
head with a club. 

In dire instances, Cuthbert has been known to 
grant the use of his sacred club to a follower of 
the purest faith, that it may be used to spread 
the faith against all opposition. Followers of 
Saint Cuthbert consider it a relic. 


Campaign Use 


The Mace of Cuthbert is the actual weapon of 
Saint Cuthbert of the Cudgel. As such, the likeli- 
hood of any player character obtaining or using 
it while Saint Cuthbert is alive and well is rare. 
Should this happen, it is a formidable weapon— 
even if there are no clerics of Saint Cuthbert 
within the party. The cudgel can act as a balance 
of power, allowing lower-level characters to do 
battle beyond their abilities. 

A possible adventure might begin with the cler- 
ics of Saint Cuthbert losing their spells. Worried 
that something may be seriously wrong with their 
deity's welfare, they seek to discover the problem 
and restore their god and their spells. The PCs are 
hired or volunteer to aid in this quest, with any of 
a number of leads to be tracked down. In the end, 
the club has fallen into the wrong hands and must 
be restored to Cuthbert. Perhaps a particularly 
strong cleric of Cuthbert has acquired it, but has 
grown insubordinate with the new-found power. 
Rather than retaking the club himself, Cuthbert 
waits to see if his followers restore it to him them- 
sleves, thus restoring his faith in them. 


52 


Constant. Any intelligent mortal struck on the 
head instantly becomes an enthusiastic follower 
of Saint Cuthbert for a period of 1 day. The cud- 
gel functions as a mace of disruption with +5 
bonuses to attack and damage rolls. Victims 
attacked with a natural 20 lose 1 point of Intelli- 
gence with no magic resistance or saving throw 
allowed. 

Invoked. Any cleric of Saint Cuthbert can cast 
call upon faith (3/day) and detect undead (at will). 
Cloak of bravery can also be cast (1/day), with the 
following modifications; a +3 saving throw 
bonus for all types of saves is granted to up to 
four creatures for an 8-hour period, regardless of 
the number of rolls. 

Curse. The wielder of the cudgel becomes a 
lawful good follower of Saint Cuthbert and an 
extreme zealot, trying to convert everyone. No 
one is faithful enough. As a result, the zealot's 
Charisma is reduced to 4 due to obnoxious 
behavior for as long as the Mace is possessed. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* [uz the Old must be polymorphed into a giant 
beaver and the Mace fed to him. 

It must be covered by the natural formation of 
a stalagmite, which then receives a transmute 
rock to mud spell. 

The bronzewood tree that the club came from 
must be prevented from ever growing. 


Machine of Lum the Mad 


Those few who have seen the Machine of Lum the 
Mad describe it as a black metal horseshoe- 
shaped nightmarish contraption of immense 
size. The control surfaces of the machine are 
sloped and adorned with no fewer than 60 
levers, 40 dials, and a switchboard of sockets, 
plugs, and wires. The controls are of assorted 
colors and sizes, most obviously broken. 

In the center of the Machine is a crystal box 4 
feet wide by 5 feet deep and 7 feet tall. As many 
as four man-sized creatures can stand in this 
enclosure fairly comfortably. 

The entire assembly weighs roughly 2 1/2 
tons (5,500 pounds) and fills a good-sized cham- 
ber. While appearing quite solid, the many bro- 
ken bits testify that it is really very delicate. 
Indeed, past owners of the Machine have dam- 
aged it such that no more than half of its original 
powers still function. 


History 


The Machine ofLum the Mad dates back to an 
age before recorded history. Its design and 
workmanship are quite singular, making it 
impossible to guess at its origins. There is strong 
evidence connecting the origins of this device 
with the Mighty Servant of Leuk-o, but these may 
be apocryphal. 

The recorded history of the device begins long 
ago with the infamous tyrant from whom it 
draws its name, Baron Lum. Lum was a power- 
hungry general who happened upon the device 
during one of his conquests. Prior to his acquisi- 
tion of the thing, Lum was a petty warlord 
whose legacy would certainly have been lost. 
With the aid of the Machine, however, he wrote 
himself a bloody chapter of wars and brutality 
into mankind's history. 

By all accounts, Lum was something of an 
artificer himself. While the creation of the 
machine was certainly beyond his skills, he was 
apparently able to learn more about its function- 
ing than even the wisest sage might hope to. It 
may be that the study of the basic workings of 
the machine (which combines magic and tech- 


nology in ways the two were never meant to be 
merged, by techniques and secrets long [and 
best] forgotten) drove Lum to madness. It is said 
that Lum unleashed no fewer than 50 new 
species of monsters on the world in his quest to 
master the Machine. At one point, it is said, Lum 
used the settings of the Machine to call down a 
barrage of fire that decimated an army besieging 
his stronghold. In so doing, of course, he annihi- 
lated a large number of his own troops. How- 
ever, he carried the day and, as such, he judged 
the event a great victory. 

Lum's chapter in the history of the Machine 
ends with both the warlord and his device being 
consumed by a cloud of vapor which billowed 
forth from nothing and left nothing when it 
faded. It would be easy to assume that the 
machine was forever destroyed, were it not for 
persistent though garbled reports of its existence 
in a distant and dreadful land. 


Campaign Use 


The Machine of Lum the Mad is a complex 
device whose inner workings are impossible to 
discern. The nearly infinite combination of set- 
tings possible with the levers, dials, and switches 
set into the machine makes figuring out its oper- 
ation an insurmountable task. Indeed, the cre- 
ative DM might make an entire adventure out of 
attempting to learn what one particular setting 
might do. To aid the DM, the player handout on 
the opposite page provides a useful diagram for 
those foolish enough to tinker with this device. 

Unlike many other artifacts, the Machine is 
neither good nor evil. It is utterly neutral and 
the morality of its use is based wholly upon the 
actions of its current owner. 

Players who come into possession of the 
Machine must be very careful with it. While the 
thing is not evil, it has the unfortunate side- 
effect of driving its users insane. If they 
encounter the device in the hands of another, 
that person will almost certainly be beyond rea- 
son as well. An encounter with such people 
might be very dangerous, indeed. 


53 


Machine of Lum the Mad 


Control Panel of the Machine of Lum the Mad 


Dials Switchboard 
06000000000 15:2 
D E F Co Po C P 


Do Qo p= 0,55 
OOC 900000000 Eo R^ E> RÆ 
Fo S9» F> S. 
Go To G5 Ts 
D Ho de H2 Use 
090900999 ete 
49 We J wo 


T Re X^ KS x95 
9009060000 O®@ Le 7? LÆ Yos» 


Se 


P Q R Mo Zo M. Z =~ 
—— 
if |e lA la iv ^W A A lA 
| " | 
Lu Ü U | 
VAFSPEP. " ^ "20 P. 
| lh |) | | a | | 3 


54 


xk 


Machine of Lum the Mad 


Powers 


Operating the Machine is a risky proposition at 
best. Whenever a dial is turned, a lever is pulled, 
or a switch is thrown, it is possible that a magi- 
cal effect will be triggered. When the Machine 
was new and in good repair, each and every set- 
ting produced such a result. Now the majority of 
the controls are broken, leaving only a few pow- 
ers that can still be triggered. 

The Machine itself has two types of powers; 
internal and external. The former affect those 
within the crystal chamber, leaving those out- 
side of the Machine utterly safe, while the latter 
alter the world around the machine and leave 
those within the crystal box safe. Anyone stand- 
ing within the crystal chamber at the heart of 
the Machine is protected from all outside forces 
of a physical, gaseous, magical or psionic 
nature. However, those individuals are utterly 
vulnerable to all powers of the machine, forfeit- 
ing any saving throws that they might normally 
be entitled to. 

Twenty of the internal functions remain oper- 
ational. All of these have the effect of changing 
the occupants of the crystal box in some way. Of 
the external powers, only 15 remain functional. 
When triggered, these great powers cause terri- 
ble devastation or make drastic changes in the 
world around the Machine. Of course, anyone 
inside the crystal chamber is unharmed. 

With all its levers, dials, and plugs, the 
Machine of Lum the Mad is a complicated piece of 
machinery. Each effect should require a unique 
setting, thereby making all the controls poten- 
tially meaningful. 

The DM could, of course, draw a diagram for 
each result, using the player handout. Easier and 
more convenient, however, is for the DM to cre- 
ate a unique written combination for each 
power, using the method below. 

The Machine has three different types of con- 
trols—levers which are either on or off, dials that 
must be set to the correct position, and a switch- 
board that relies on correct pairs. Each control 
has a different code in the combination. By not- 


56 


ing the needed codes for each control panel, the 
combination is created. 

Levers. Of the Machine's 60 levers, only 10 still 
work, all others being obviously broken. These 
10 levers are labeled in order, 0-9. When a lever 
is in the on position, its number is part of the 
combination; when it is in the opposition, the 
lever (and its number) is ignored. Thus, if a set- 
ting required levers 0, 6, and 7 to be on, this part 
of the combination would be noted as 067. 

Dials. Of the 40 dials on the machine, only 20 
still work, and the rest are clearly broken. Each 
dial (labeled as A through T) has settings from 0 
(off) to 6. Dials set to the off (0) position are 
ignored, while other dials are noted as 
letter/number pairs. If dial G is set to 1, dial M 
to 4, and dial R to 3, the combination for this 
control panel would read G1/M4/R3. 

Switchboard. This part of the control panel is 
similar to an old telephone switchboard, with 
plugs on wires and sockets for each. There are 26 
plugs and 26 sockets, and both sets are labelled 
A through Z. Here, the combination is formed 
by matching the correct plug to the correct 
socket. If plug A is connected to socket W, this is 
noted as AW (plug/socket). Again, only those 
plugs and sockets actually used need to be noted 
for the combination. If the setting requires plugs 
C, F, O, S, and W to be connected to sockets B, 
H, M, T, and Q the combination would read 
CB/FH/OM/ST/WQ. 

Using these combination methods, the DM 
can easily create a unique setting for each 
power—and have ample combinations left 
for explosions, useless noises, and bad things. 
After all, there are over 8,500,000,000, 
000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000, 
000,000,000 (8.5 x 10^) possible settings! 

Clearly, with this many combinations the 
chance of any character randomly choosing a 
working combination is a little less than slim 
and barely better than non-existent. This means 
that any adventure involving the Machine is 
about more than just finding and using it. It 
should also include smaller adventures to gather 
the pieces of one or more useful combinations. 


Machine of Lum the Mad 


For example, on one scroll the characters find a 
combination for the levers, in another those for 
the dials, and in a third (and separate adventure) 
the settings for the switchboard. They now have 
a complete combination—if all three parts are 
for the same power! 

After each use of the Machine, there 1s a 7096 
chance that some reaction within the mecha- 
nism alters the settings required to duplicate a 
given effect. If this happens, the combination of 
settings scrambles itself, seemingly at random. 
Users of the Machine receive no indication that 
this has occurred. Since incorrect settings could 
trigger side effects or cause explosions, dupli- 
cating a previously achieved effect is a risky 
business. 

Because of the random nature of the Machine 
and the large number of powers, there is no 
absolute list of what Lum's Machine can or should 
do. The DM is encouraged, therefore, to tailor 
the possible powers to suit the campaign. Virtu- 
ally any and all of the powers listed in the tables 
of Appendix B can be associated with the multi- 
tude of setting combinations. 

Curse. There are several risks inherent in the 
use of the Machine. The first of these is the need 
for accuracy. Any time the Machine is started 
without a correct combination entered on the 
control panels, the DM should roll for a result on 
Table 2: Machine Failure and apply the result. 


Table 2: Machine Failure 


dlO00 Results 
1-50 Nothing happens 


51-65 Sparks and noise, nothing happens 

66-70 1 control breaks 

71-75 Internal explosion, 1d4 + 1 controls 
break 

76-80 Random power triggered in crystal 
chamber 

81-85 Random power triggered in room 

86-90 Random result from Table 14: Curses 

91-95 Large explosion, all within 20 feet of 
Machine suffer 2dlO points of dam- 
age 

96-100 Machine vanishes 


Second, every time an effect is triggered, the 
operator of the Machine must roll a saving throw 
vs. spell. If failed, the character's Intelligence 
score increases 1 point while the Wisdom score 
drops by 1 point. With each transfer, the charac- 
ter's cranium increases in diameter by 10%. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The Machine is quite delicate and can be 
destroyed with repeated blows, each ruining 
1d4 controls. Each blow has an 8096 chance of 
causing an explosion, inflicting 2d12 points of 
damage on the attacker. 

* Every 100 years, the Machine loses 1d4 of its 
powers through natural entropy. 


57 


Mighty Servant of Leuk-o 


The Mighty Servant of Leuk-o is a towering 
automaton of jet black metal, shadowy crystal, 
and several mysterious fibrous materials. The 
device stands over 9 feet tall, is nearly 5 feet 
wide, and some 6 feet deep. It is rounded and 
might remind one of a cross between an overly 
stout (if gigantic) dwarf and a lumbering beetle. 
The servant has two stocky legs, on which it 
walks with a curious swaying motion, and a pair 
of dangling arms. 

An internal compartment is configured to seat 
two man-sized creatures comfortably. Exter- 
nally, as many as five others might perch safely 
upon the servant when it is in motion. As might 
be expected, this dreadful thing is quite heavy, 
weighing nearly two tons, and is hideously 
noisy when in operation. 


History 


The Mighty Servant of Leuk-o is believed to be a 
construct of the same ancient and mysterious 
race that built the dreaded Machine ofLum the 
Mad. The workmanship and materials evidenced 
by the Mighty Servant are unlike any found in 
the recorded histories of men, making it impos- 
sible to state just what their nature might have 
been. Some sages, citing the craftsmanship and 
appearance of the thing, speculate that it is the 
handiwork of a now-extinct branch of the 
dwarves. Dwarf sages note (with some reluc- 
tance, it must be said) that never in their race's 
extensive histories has anyone ever found a ref- 
erence to this machine. 

All accounts of the Mighty Servant begin with 
its discovery by the infamous General Leuk-o. 
Leuk-o was a follower of the warlord Lum, but 
turned against his master when he came into 
possession of this instrument of destruction. 

With the power of the Mighty Servant to back 
him, Leuk-o forged an army that rivalled even 
Lum's. The two forces clashed many times, 
always ending in stalemate. At last, the two 
forces met in a final battle. Lum and Leuk-o 
faced each other, their mighty artifacts unleash- 


ing powers greater than any since harnessed. It 
is said that their battle laid waste to a great king- 
dom and left a scorched desert in its wake. 

The Mighty Servant is believed by many to 
have been destroyed in this final battle, although 
others believe it plunged through a dimensional 
rift opened in that great conflict. 


Campaign Use 


The Mighty Servant of Leuk-o is a great weapon. 
With this automaton at its head, any army might 
be almost invincible. Player characters who 
encounter the device may find themselves fac- 
ing an enemy who is using it to destroy the 
forces of good. Raising an army strong enough 
to battle the Mighty Servant and its followers 
would be a task worthy of any adventurer. 

Because any person using the weapon must 
eventually become a chaotic warlord, it should 
not be allowed to remain in the hands of player 
characters. 

Because operation of the Mighty Servant 
requires knowledge of numerous magical com- 
mand phrases, adventurers may find themselves 
exploring the most ancient and deadly of ruins 
in search of lore that might reveal one or more of 
the machine's secrets. 


Powers 


Constant. The Mighty Servant has an Armor 
Class of -6 and 60 hit points. It can only be 
struck by +2 weapons or better. Bludgeoning 
weapons inflict only 1 point of damage, while 
edged weapons cause but half their normal 
damage (rounded down). It has a 90% magic 
resistance and is utterly immune to acid, cold, 
heat, normal fire, vacuum, and water. Light- 
ning, electricity, and magical fire will inflict but 
20% of their normal damage (rounded down)— 
but only if the magic resistance fails. Even if it 
is damaged, the Mighty Servant regenerates 2 
hit points per round. Anyone riding within the 


59 


Mighty Servant of Leuk-o 


servant is fully protected by its shell. 

Invoked. The Mighty Servant is inert until 
someone controls the device from its interior 
compartment. If the proper command words are 
known, the Mighty Servant can be commanded 
to open the hatch in its back. Once inside, the 
character is faced with a daunting array of ped- 
als, switches, levers, and wheels that all control 
the thing's operation. Controlling the Mighty 
Servant can be learned by trial and error (with 
appropriate random destruction) or through 
information gleaned from libraries and sages. 
The DM is encouraged to make the process diffi- 
cult and dangerous to bystanders. 

The automaton has a movement rate of 3, 
making it a slow and clumsy thing. Further- 
more, after 12 hours of operation it must cease 
all activity for 1 hour while it gathers anew the 
magical energy that powers it. 

In combat, the Mighty Servant can strike with 
its great arms once per round. It strikes as a 10- 
Hit-Die creature. Each blow landed by the 
automaton inflicts 10-60 (1d6 x 10) points of 
damage. 

The power of this weapon is so great that it 
can be used to destroy castles and shatter fortifi- 
cations—see Combat (Unusual Combat Situa- 
tions) in the DUNGEON MASTER" Guide. If 
used as a siege weapon, a blow from the Mighty 
Servant does the same damage as a screw or ram. 
If used in a BATTLESYSTEM'"" game, the Mighty 
Servant can be assumed to have the following 
statistics: AD d12 + d8, AR 4, HD 10, Hits 5, MV 
3. In addition, many of its powerful special abili- 
ties can be employed with great effectiveness on 
the field of battle. 

Random. As one of the greatest weapons ever 
to appear in the world, the Mighty Servant has 6 
abilities from Table 28: Offensive Powers and 6 
additional from Table 25: Major Spell-Like 
Powers. The Mighty Servant also has 2 abilities 
from Table 23: Healing that apply to any one 
creature in the interior compartment. Again, the 
operation of any given ability requires knowl- 
edge of which controls must be pulled, switched, 
pushed, or cranked. Each of these abilities 


drains magical energy from the Mighty Servant 
equal to 1 hour's worth of continuous operation. 

Curse. The Mighty Servant hungers endlessly 
for combat and bloodshed. With each use of the 
servant's powers, the operator must roll a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell or become filled 
with battle fury for 24 hours. During that time, 
the artifact is used in a rampage of destruction 
to any and all within reach. 

In addition, the Mighty Servant places the 
character at risk of artifact transformation. Those 
affected by this power gradually have their 
alignment shifted to chaotic neutral. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


It is possible to destroy the Mighty Servant by 
simple physical attack, assuming that enough 
damage can be inflicted. 

There might be a command phrase which 
even Leuk-o never knew that causes the 
Mighty Servant to explode. The radius of this 
fireball and the damage that it might inflict is 
unknown, but must certainly be terrible since 
it involves the release of all of the magical 
energies of the servant in one single surge. 
Ancient writings speak of a means of destroy- 
ing the Mighty Servant with the dreadful 
Machine of Lum the Mad. Lum himself is said 
to have believed that there was a setting on 
his Machine which would utterly destroy the 
automaton, but if he found such a setting he 
never used it. 


This circular clear crystal lens has an adaman- 
tine frame studded with six small loops on the 
outer rim. Colorful ribbons run through these 
loops to hold the monocle over one's eye quite 
securely, so that even mighty blows or jarring 
won't shift it free. This item originated on Toril 
in the FORGOTTEN REALMS? setting. 


History 


This unusual item was crafted in Zazesspur 
over two centuries ago by Bagthalos Deszhum- 
mer, who was then the Archpriest of Helm, the 
Guardian God. His temple was plagued by 
many thefts that he suspected were the work of 
local thieves employing magical invisibility. To 
counter them, Bagthalos set to work creating a 
detection aid for the temple guards. 

Alas for Bagthalos, Divine Helm, his lord, dis- 
approved of any attempt to substitute magical 
aid for vigilance, and warned Bagthalos of the 
price such vain research would demand—the 
life of a being dedicated to the worship of Helm. 
Helm never expressly forbade Bagthalos from 
continuing his research, he only set the cost of 
such an effort. In this the deity was implacable. 
Perhaps it was Bagthalos's years of faithful ser- 
vice that prevented the deity from stripping his 
Archpriest of all powers for even presuming to 
undertake the task. Perhaps it was Helm's way 
of testing his faithful servant—who can say the 
way of the gods? 

The archpriest was a good man, but obsessed. 
By day and night he dreamed of completing his 
creation. With every step he took forward in his 
researches, though, he remembered Helm's 
price and found himself unable to progress at 
the cost of another. Days passed into weeks and 
then months of agonized torment. The arch- 
priest's sermons fell off and his duties lay 
forgotten as Bagthalos let himself waste away 
and die. 

Little did the archpriest realize that it was his 
own death Helm had predicted, for in the final 
puffs of his failing breath, Bagthalos uttered the 


last prayers needed for his grand creation. Some 
say Helm mercifully fulfilled his faithful priest's 
desire; others tell how Bagthalos's spirit passed 
into the Monocle, the final key to its making. 
However it came to be, the Monocle of Bagthalos 
was complete. 

Unfortunately, Bagthalos also carried the 
secret of his Monocle to the grave with him. As 
was customary, his quarters were cleaned and 
fumigated and his goods placed in the temple 
treasury. Fate being what it is, thieves struck 
once more sometime later and one of the trea- 
sures they carried off was the Monocle of Bagtha- 
los. Did they know what they had taken? 
Probably not, for nothing was heard of it for a 
decade or more. 

Then, for a brief span of several years, the 
Monocle circulated in the whisper markets of 
Athkatla (in Amn) and Ithmong (in Tethyr). 
There the sinister merchants offered it for sale at 
the paltry sum of 45,000 gp. Apparently these 
black marketeers did not grasp the scope of its 
powers. Still, no buyer was willing to pay that 
price for a little-known object of no repute, and 
the shadowy brotherhood of thieves who were 
thought to be selling the item, the Skeletal Fin- 
ger, was destroyed by the venerable blue dragon, 
Iryklathagra (Sharpfangs). The dragon slaugh- 
tered the thieves in their mountain stronghold, 
hidden somewhere in the peaks of The Small 
Teeth (which mark the border between Tethyr 
and Amn). Their hideout cleared, the dragon 
took up residence there. The Monocle may still lie 


61 


Monocle of Bagthalos 


somewhere in the stronghold or may be some- 
where else. 


Campaign Use 


Because of its relatively low power and poten- 
tially harmful side effects, the Monocle is not a 
tremendously unbalancing artifact to have fall 
into the player characters' hands. The DM 
should still be cautious of giving it out, however, 
since its broadly useful true seeing power could 
unhinge the key secret of an adventure. 

Most likely, the Monocle could be introduced 
as an aid and asset to another adventure involv- 
ing a different artifact, such as Johydee's Mask or 
Queen Ehlissa's Marvelous Nightingale. In general, 
the adventure should involve a large amount of 
polymorphed, shapechanged, charmed, or 
otherwise enchanted encounters, as befits the 
power of the Monocle. To this end, Sharpfangs is 
a ready-made adventure hook to get things 
started. Any dragon powerful enough to eradi- 
cate an entire den of high-level thieves is not one 
to be taken lightly. The characters may be hired 
to eliminate the beast and then discover the 
Monocle without realizing the special purpose 
the DM intends for it. 

This a good artifact for the trial-and-error 
process of learning. Its powers are not over- 
whelming (if one is prepared), nor is its curse 
devastating. In fact, the curse gives clever DMs a 
wonderful opportunity to create amusing adven- 
tures. Imagine sending the PC off to track down 
and apologize to a long-lost childhood sweet- 
heart for some petty slight as a youth. What injus- 
tices has the PC done to kobolds in the name of 
adventuring? The potentials are nearly endless. 

Of course, few DMs will want the group to 
have a permanent (though risky) source of true 
seeing, so it is best to eventually remove the item 
from the campaign. With luck, a few rounds of 
atonement may be enough to convince the char- 
acter to give it up, but if that fails, some surviv- 
ing members of the Skeletal Finger might want 
their property back. 


62 


Powers 


Constant. Looking through the monocle gives 
the wearer the power of a true seeing spell. Fur- 
thermore, the monocle-wearer is immune to all 
gaze attacks and to effects or menaces, magical 
or psionic, that employ hypnotism, bright lights, 
shimmering colors, mesmerizing patterns or eye 
contact. 

Invoked. Three times per day, the Monocle can 
fire a bright orange ray (range 60 yards, dura- 
tion instantaneous) that immediately drains 1d8 
hp from the wearer but deals 4d8 hp damage to 
everything in its path. The beam penetrates all 
materials but lead. Targets the wearer can see are 
automatically hit, while those in the path but 
concealed by solid objects are allowed to roll a 
saving throw vs. death (+4 bonus) to avoid the 
beam. 

Random. 2 from Table 15: Detection. 

Curse. Part of Bagthalos's spirit is indeed 
trapped within the Monocle—all the sorrows and 
regrets of his being. When worn, the artifact 
whispers these feelings into the mind's eye of its 
owner. Each hour (or fraction thereof) spent 
wearing the monocle, the user must roll a saving 
throw vs. spells. If failed, the character remem- 
bers intensely every error, misstep, and fault and 
feels compelled to make amends as best as pos- 
sible. The DM should chose an incident from the 
character's past adventures that must be cor- 
rected. The character becomes obsessed with 
this quest (as per a geas spell, only the effect can- 
not be dispelled) and the Monocle ceases to func- 
tion until things have been set right. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* All of the pieces of Bagthalos's spirit must be 
found on the outer planes and reunited. 
* [t must be frozen at the heart of the Abyss. 


Obsidian Man of Urik 


Standing fully 12 feet high, the Obsidian Man is a 
perfectly carved statue of volcanic glass. Its 
limbs and features show no signs of chiseling; 
the Man's skin is as smooth as human flesh. The 
statue is perfectly proportioned, with none of 
the exaggerations that might be expected of a 
being of its height. 

The Obsidian Man wears a nobleman's kilt and 
baldric. Its clothes are made of the same glossy 
black stone as its body, and they appear to be 
one homogenous piece. However, the kilt has 
been observed to flex and rustle when the Obsid- 
ian Man animates. The Obsidian Man originated 
in the DARK SUNG setting. 


History 


Eighty-five years ago, in the year of Wind's 
Reverence, obsidian miners in the Smoking 
Crown made a startling discovery: Entombed in 
a vein of solid black glass was the titanic figure 
of a man! The miners chiselled away the sur- 
rounding stone, and on orders of the templar 
leader, the Obsidian Man was laid in a sledge and 
prepared for transport to Urik. 

The next morning, the mining camp was hor- 
rified to discover that 13 people had been grue- 
somely crushed during the night. The templars 
wanted to investigate, but they realized that 
Hamanu would brook no delay in the delivery 
of their find, so the caravan bearing the Obsidian 
Man set out for Urik. 

Each night along the way, more men were 
murdered. The templars naturally suspected the 
obsidian statue, but each morning the statue 
was found reposing lifelessly in its sledge, its 
guards among those slain. The caravan finally 
reached Urik, but not before dozens of people 
were killed. 

The Obsidian Man was then brought before the 
sorcerer-king Hamanu, who examined the fig- 
ure with intense interest and was angered by his 
inability to learn anything about it. Soon, he set 
20 half-giants to guard it and retired to his 
library to research the matter. 


In the middle of the night, the sorcerer-king 
was disturbed from his studies by the sounds of 
battle in his palace. He rushed to the scene, only 
to find half of his guards dead and others barely 
clinging to life. The Obsidian Man was gone, 
leaving a trail of rubble through the fortress as it 
smashed its way out. Hamanu caught up with it 
in the main square of Urik. There, he labored 
with all the terrible magic at his command to 
master the creature. At last, bloodied and bat- 
tered, the warrior-king defeated the Obsidian 
Man and bound it to his service with a golden cir- 
clet around its brow. 

Hamanu eventually discovered that the Man 
possessed several marvelous powers and 
strange abilities. He used the titan's strength 
and prowess for years. The only limitation he 
could find was that the Obsidian Man could not 
abide the touch of daylight. When the sun rose, 
the statue returned to the place it had risen from 
that night and became inert. 

Some seven years ago, a young templar in 
Hamanu's service made an awful mistake: He 
removed the golden circlet from the titan's brow. 
No one will ever know why he did so, for he 
was the first victim of the Obsidian Man. The 
statue walked out into the desert and vanished 
from the knowledge of mortal men. 

Two years ago, the golden circlet that con- 
trolled the Obsidian Man was stolen from 
Hamanu's palace. The thief was never caught 
and the circlet has still not surfaced, despite the 
towering rage of the sorcerer-king. 


63 


Obsidian Man of Urik 


Campaign Uses 


The Obsidian Man of Urik can be used as a ram- 
paging, unstoppable force for the heroes to 
oppose. As it wanders, the Obsidian Man is capa- 
ble of destroying whole villages or small armies. 
If used as a random force of destruction in this 
manner, a good adventure could be built out of 
finding the golden circlet that will command the 
colossus, then tracking the Man down. 

Alternatively, the heroes could find them- 
selves in a situation where they require the leg- 
endary strength of the Obsidian Man. Again, 
finding the statue in its hidden retreat and dis- 
covering a way to control the thing are adven- 
tures in and of themselves. 

If the heroes gain control of the circlet and the 
Obsidian Man, they find that that their prized 
possession is also sought by Hamanu of Urik. 
An interesting adventure could also be built 
around the exploration of the Obsidian Man's ori- 
gins and purpose. 

Heroes who try to retain control of the Obsid- 
ian Man will find that the statue has an unnat- 
ural tendency to become separated from its 
controlling circlet. When you are ready to remove 
the Man from the campaign, an assassin or thief 
could steal the circlet, or an occurrence such as a 
sandstorm or ambush may accidentally separate 
them. 


Powers 


Constant. By day, the statue is completely 
motionless. It cannot be damaged by any 
amount of physical force or any kind of magical 
or psionic abilities. By night, the statue ani- 
mates. It has 150 hit points and an Armor Class 
of -5, attacking twice per round with a THACO 
of 5 for 5dl2 damage per hit. The Obsidian Man 
can move at a rate of 15 and has an effective 
Strength score of 25 for purposes of throwing, 
breaking, or carrying things. While active, the 
statue can be damaged only by metal weapons 
of +3 or better enchantment. It is completely 


immune to all psionics except those of the psy- 
chokinetic discipline. The Obsidian Man is 
immune to all magic except the spells cone of 
cold, stone shape (which inflict 1 hp of damage 
per level of caster), and stone to flesh (which 
reduces the Man's AC to 10 for one round.) It 
makes all saving throws as a 20th level fighter. 

Whenever the Obsidian Man suffers enough 
damage to destroy it, it returns to its dormant 
stage. It will animate again the following night, 
with all its damage repaired. 

Invoked. Once per day, the Obsidian Man can 

fly (as the spell) for up to one hour. It can easily 

carry several man-sized creatures if so ordered. 
It may create a wall of fire once per day that lasts 
up to one hour. By touch, it can stone shape or 
passwall. 

The Obsidian Man may fire a thin beam of 
black fire once per turn inflicting 25 points of 
damage upon targets within a 60-yard range 
(saving throw for half damage applies). Once 
per week, it can be ordered to invoke & finger of 
death (as the 7th level priest spell). 

Curse. Unless controlled, the Obsidian Man is 
a mindless force possessing only a desire to slay 
the living. It can be controlled only through the 
use of the golden circlet, a psionic device that 
establishes a link between the wearer and the 
artifact when worn. Even then, the evil force of 
the artifact demands blood. Each night, it must 
be allowed to slay a sentient being or it will turn 
on the owner of the circlet. Further, each time the 
controller orders it to use an invoked power, the 
Obsidian Man permanently drains 1 hit point. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* Expose the Man to 24 hours of continuous 
sunlight. 

* Cut out its heart with a weapon of +5 enchant- 
ment, then throw the heart into the lava of the 
Smoking Crown. 


Orbs of Dragonkind 


The Orbs of Dragonkind, said to be 12 in number, 
are all similar in appearance. The major differ- 
ence in each is its relative size to the others. 
Unless the Orbs are compared to each other, it is 
virtually impossible to know which Orb is which. 

Each Orb appears as a sphere of finest crystal, 
perfectly smooth and lustrous. A close examina- 
tion of each shows faint lines of writing etched 
into the surface. The language is ancient, no 
longer known by any speaker alive. The writing 
on each Orb is different. 

The Orbs are usually found mounted on three- 
armed stands. Each stand is different for each 
Orb, but since the stands are not part of the arti- 
facts, they are of no help in identifying each. The 
stands are normally of precious metals and elab- 
orately done, although at least one looks like 
crudely wrought steel. 

When an Orb is used, it glows with an internal 
fire that matches the color of its dragon type. 

The Orbs of Dragonkind are not the same as 
those found inthe DRAGONLANCE® cam- 
paign. Those orbs are unique to that world. 


History 


The history of the Orbs is one that delves 
deeply into the beginnings of the worlds, so 
deeply, indeed, that the very origins of these 
great artifacts are matters of mystery and confu- 
sion. In part the tale depends on who tells it. 

In the beginning, as with all beginnings, 
everyone agrees. The age was long ago, barely 
moments beyond the great creation—although 
how and who made the world is another story 
all disagree upon. At that time, all things lived 
in their truest forms, in shapes of strength and 
power. Man had not yet been sundered into 
warrior, priest, and mage. The leader of men 
was the mightiest in all three of these. The elves 
were the greatest masters of the arts and did not 
live away from all others. Dwarves stood as tall 
as men and did not hide themselves beneath the 
earth. Each race was great in its own way. 

The greatest of them all were the dragons. 


There, at that moment at the beginning of all 
things, the dragons were the majestic rulers of 
the world. Their kind were all wise and all- 
knowing. Later they would change, forgetting 
their speech, forgetting their mysteries, forget- 
ting the goodness of their spirits, at last forget- 
ting their duties to the newly created world, but 
for now they had not fallen so. The dragons 
were great and ruled over all other things. 

This is all that the tales agree upon, though, 
for here is where each race remembers the great- 
ness of the past differently. Who can say which 
is right—if any are right? 

In the poems of the human bards, the tale con- 
tinues in treachery and woe, and it goes like this: 


Over the misty years, the dragons ruled the 
worlds and as they did, they slowly changed. 
They cared less and less for the welfare of their 
subjects and demanded more and more from 
them. The dragons grew proud—some became 
evil while the rest grew indifferent to the suffer- 
ing they caused. 

The voices of the people cried outfor relief, but 
the dragons heard them not. So the people turned 
to their gods and pleaded for guidance. The gods 
were not deafand could not stand the sorrow in 
the voices of their children. In the way of the 
gods, they called upon the least of their chil- 
dren—a swineherd in a small village at the base 
of the great mountain where the dragons dwelled. 
"Go and teach the dragons to respect the might 
of their children," they told him in a dream. 


65 


Orbs of Dragonkind 


Now the swineherd was a good man, but he 
was afraid. After all, he was only a mud-splat- 
tered peasant. The dragons—well, they were 
dragons. What could he possibly do? Terrified 
toface them, he did not go. Six times the gods 
called upon him, and six times he hid himselfin 

fear. Finally, on the seventh time the gods 

revealed themselves in their anger and the 
swineherd could no longer refuse them. Trem- 
bling with fear, he began to climb the mountain 
to confront the dragon lords. 

For 12 days and 12 nights he climbed and 
each night one of the twelve great powers came 
to him in a dream. Each whispered to him a 
secret long hidden from the dragons, a secret 
that gave the poor swineherd power over his 
inhuman masters. Perhaps it was the secret of 
their true name, for in those days true names 
held power; perhaps it was the secrets of flattery 
by which he could trick the dragons. Here even 
the human bards do not agree. It does not mat- 
ter to their tales, though. 

Needless to say, this unnamed swineherd 
reached the mountain's peak and gained an 
audience with his dragon lords. There, no one 
knows what happened. For weeks he was lost to 
the human world and his family began to 
despair. And then, one day, the swineherd 
returned at his door, as if by magic. With him 
he brought twelve crystal Orbs. 

"The dragons have given me hostages," he 
told the people who gathered. "Hide these Orbs 
and the dragons will no longer rule us." At 

first they laughed and the king of the land 
wanted to take the Orbs back to his treasury, 
until the swineherd commanded the least of the 
Orbs to strike down the greedy king and his 
knights. Then the people feared to disobey the 
swineherd and hid the Orbs as he said. 

Thereafter, the dragons ruled mankind no 
more. The swineherd prospered and became the 
king of his land. No rival would challenge him 
out offear of the Orbs, but never did the swine- 
herd-king use them again. Whatever secrets 
that they contained passed away with him. 


Of course, that's not how the elves tell it. Their 
story goes like this: 


In that time when all things lived in peace 
with each other, the noblest of the dragon-clans 
came to the courts of the elves and said, "Shin- 
ing elves, you are the light ofall races, spread- 
ing grace and beauty throughout the world. 
Great is the pleasure you bring to all things 
with your voices. It is bleak and lonely in our 
mountain fastness. Will you make for us a 
reminder of your joy so that our days will not 
be soforlorn?" 

And the elves, being elves, agreed and asked 

for nothing in return. After a hundred years 
and a day, enough time in which a man's mem- 
ory would fail in grave dust, but was little to 
the elves and even less to the dragons, the high 
folk appeared before the council of the clan and 
presented their gift—12 Orbs of perfect bril- 
liance and beauty. Each sang with a voice of 
lightest crystal and the music of the stones tore 
at the hearts of the great dragon-kin. The Orbs 
sang of gliding in the purest blue sky, of court- 
ing flights beneath the burning silver of the 
moon, of battles fought and lost by the brave, 
and of the passings that would come. 

The songs wrenched at the very souls of the 
nobles and they let their bodies waste as their 
spirits soared. At last, completely enchanted, 
each surrendered, letting their spirits be trapped 
by the Orbs, where they have remained to this 
day. 

Such is the way of elves and the gifts they 
bring. 


Now the dwarves, of course, know that the 
elves and the humans have it all wrong. This is 
their story: 


In that time, the dwarves were the greatest of 
all crafters, even greater at the forge and the 
crucible than they are today, for many secrets 
have long since been lost. AH other races knew 
of their skill, but only the dragons respected 
their craftsmanship. The humans were too fool- 


67 


Orbs of Dragonkind 


ish to know the power of iron and stone; the 
elves were too petty and vain, but the dragons, 
who dwelt in mountain homes, understood the 
might of rock and the magic it could bring. 

Thus it was that an embassy of 12 dragons 
sought out the Great Council of the Dwarves. 

"O grand and wise shapers of metal," the oldest 
of the dragons spoke, "our people are scattered 
over the globe. We cannot call our councils or 
share news of birth and woe. We come to you 
for an answer, for there are not greater artisans 
to be found on the earth or beneath it. Will you 
make us a solution?" 

"What will you pay us?" demanded the 
High Clan King of the council. 

"All the treasures from beneath the earth that 
lie in our hoards we will give to you," answered 
the eldest of the dragons. 

And the dwarves knew they could make the 
thing that the dragons wanted and the price 
was good, so they set their greatest craftsmen to 
fashion a set of 12 crystalline Orbs for the 


dragon-kin. After 12 summers and 12 winters, 
the Orbs, 12 in number, were finished, and 
once more the dragons appeared before the 
Great Council. 

"Here are the treasures you asked for," said 
the High Clan King. "Give us our payment as 
you promised." 

The dragons smiled and were pleased with 
the work. Taking the Orbs, they said, "Give us 
afortnight to prepare a feast. When the time is 
passed, send your strongest, bravest, and 
cleverest to our caverns and we willfeast them 
and honor them with our riches." 

At that time, dwarves still trusted dragons, 
who were the rulers over all, and so the High 
Clan King agreed. In afortnight, he led thefinest 
of his people to the halls of the dragons. There 
theyfound the 12 ambassadors ofthe scaled race 
waiting. Looking about, the dwarves saw no 
tables, no benches, no feast-foods, nor ale. The 
dragons crouched greedily upon their treasures, 
the dwarven Orbs clutched between their claws. 


MI 
K 


) 
uf 
P 


Orbs of Dragonkind 


"Where is our payment?" demanded the 
High Clan King. 

"Here," the eldest dragon said. At that word, 
his people set upon the dwarves who, in trust, 
came with weapons sheathed. All were slain 
until only the High Clan King remained, 
wounded and dying. 

With his fading breath, he called out, "Hear 
your doom, treacherous beasts! The treasures 
you have stolen will have my revenge." With 
that he spoke the words of power and the secret 
magicks the dwarves built into the Orbs, for 
dwarves are ever a cautious lot. "From this day 

forward, your scaled hides are cursed! Your chil- 

dren will be less than you and all beings will 
hunt you and call you dangerous. Greed and 
hatred of your own kind will fill your hearts, all 
until the price you promised is paid!" 

At that curse, the magic of the Orbs seized 
all things noble from within the 12 ambas- 
sadors and pulled these into the crystal prisons. 
The body of each beast changed colors and they 

feared each other. Screeching in rage the now- 
savage dragons fled throughout the world. 

So dragons have remained ever since, 
crouched on their hoards, keeping these trea- 
sures from their true owners—the dwarves. 


Any one of these stories might be true, or per- 
haps none of them. However they were made, 
since that time the Orbs have surfaced time and 
again throughout the world. Sometimes they 
have made kingdoms powerful, sometimes they 
have brought them down. Always dragons 
appear wherever the Orbs are to be found. The 
Orbs are rumored to grant great powers, but 
always at a terrible price. 

Itis unclear just how many Orbs were made or 
still remain. The dwarven legend says a dozen 
were fashioned— both elf and human stories are 
silent on this. There are tales of the destruction of 
three or more of these Orbs—tales of great hero- 
ism and danger. Orbs supposedly destroyed 
appear in later tales, so it is hard to be certain 
what is right. The researches of Alimead the Sage 
on this point do nothing to clear up the confu- 


sion, although his dry and scholarly work— 
found only in a few exclusive collections—is the 
best authority on the Orbs themselves. 


Campaign Use 


The Orbs of Dragonkind are among the more 
unusual artifacts of those described here. There- 
fore, special considerations must be given to 
these items. 

First, there is their number. Twelve orbs is 
more than just a single item. It is unlikely that 
most campaigns can survive having all 12 Orbs 
in play at the same time. Certainly, the player 
characters should never have all 12 (or even half 
that number!) in their possession at one time. 

Second, dragons are (and should be) unique 
to a campaign, including their personalities and 
behaviors. Since the dragon Orbs contain the 
trapped personalities of long dead dragons, the 
DM should take the time to create dragon per- 
sonalities that fit the campaign. Twelve sug- 
gested personalities are given here, but these are 
not the only possibilities. 

Finally, there is the matter of the powers them- 
selves. The Orbs are perhaps more variable than 
any other set of items. In addition to the different 
personality for each Orb (which will affect how 
the powers manifest themselves), the Orbs also 
differ from each other by age level and color. 
There is one Orb for every age category ofa 
dragon and each age category represents a differ- 
ent color of dragon. The DM must match these 
three factors—age, color, and personality—to cre- 
ate a mix of powers that best suits the campaign. 

When dealing with the number problem, the 
Orbs of Dragonkind will most commonly be used 
as individual items. The player characters find 
one, maybe two of the Orbs, and no more. This is 
the easiest solution. The DM builds a major 
adventure that climaxes in the discovery, use, 
and/or destruction of an Orb. The existence of 
other Orbs is hinted at, but the DM does not build 
adventures around these. For the adventure, the 
DM should select carefully the Orb to be used— 


69 


Orbs of Dragonkind 


both for the powers the Orb will grant to the char- 
acter and for the personality of the Orb itself. 

A number of story lines are useful for a small 
number of Orbs. An Orb may be needed to defeat 
a powerful dragon marauding the land, to give 
the noble but outnumbered forces of a good 
kingdom the edge they need to overcome an orc 
invasion, or to perform a special spell needed to 
lift the curse that has befallen a PC or NPC. 

A more difficult approach is to build a series 
of adventures that eventually uses all 12 Orbs. 
The player characters might discover one Orb, 
only to have it stolen by their evil foe. In order to 
overcome this enemy, the PCs must locate an 
Orb of even greater power. They track down and 
uncover a number of different orbs, starting 
with the least and rising in power, until the 
group at last finds the one they need. Of course, 
the task is never that easy, since their enemy, 
already in possession of one Orb, has a head 
start on them and additional power, to boot. 

The difficulty here is that almost every adven- 
ture must be greater than the last. Finding and 
using each Orb becomes more and more difficult 
and heroic—although allowances can be made to 
slow the pacing at points. Some Orbs may be mon- 
strously guarded, others cleverly hidden, and still 
others may require the players to use wits and 
role-playing instead of muscle. Unless the DM 
creates adventures with a great deal of variety, the 
players will quickly suffer from 'sequel-itis'— 
"Oh, look; yet another Orb of Dragonkind. " 

For DMs willing to go to great efforts, all 12 
Orbs could be introduced in a truly unique 
method. In this case the DM creates a special 
campaign world—from the ground up—that 
centers around eight or so powerful kingdoms 
of various races. Each kingdom has as its power 
center one of the Orbs of Dragonkind. 'The logic of 
the world—the armies, the diplomacy, the rela- 
tive strengths and weaknesses of each land— 
revolve around these Orbs. Kingdoms 
possessing lesser Orbs might have to constantly 
struggle to hold off their more powerful neigh- 
bors or band into alliances against them. Those 
with the most powerful Orbs may be empires to 


which the lesser kingdoms swear obedience. 
The possessors of the Orbs may all be evil or 
may be a mix of good and evil rulers. The DM 
will have to define all of this background before 
beginning the new campaign. 

Once these details are decided, the DM can 
center the action around the remaining Orbs. 
Recovering any of the four that are lost will 
upset the careful balance of power in the cam- 
paign. Naturally, each king or emperor wants to 
claim these lost orbs while denying the others 
their goal. Warfare, diplomacy, intrigue, and 
adventuring can all be played out against this 
background. The player characters may never 
find an Orb of Dragonkind during the course of 
the entire campaign, but the items will always 
have an influence over events. 

However the DM chooses to use the Orbs, 
player characters should not be allowed to retain 
these items. Perhaps the best solution is to con- 
struct the adventure so that the player characters 
must recover the Orb and place it in the hands of 
their king, for the protection of all. This gives the 
characters the satisfaction of success and removes 
the item from their control at the same time. 
Alternatively, dragons will naturally have a great 
interest in the Orbs and may insist that the char- 
acters surrender any that they find. The charac- 
ters may have to destroy an Orb for safety's sake. 
Finally, there are always thieves to rely on. 


Powers 


As noted above, the Orbs of Dragonkind consist 
of three separate elements—color, age, and per- 
sonality. Color will determine the choice of pow- 
ers for each Orb; age sets the level of strength for 
those powers; and personality dictates how those 
powers will be revealed and used. Personality 
also affects the exact nature of each Orb's curse. 

In addition to the powers that vary by age and 
color, the Orbs all have certain features in com- 
mon, a natural result of being powerful magical 
items. Like all artifact powers, these powers can 
be constant or invoked. 


Orbs of Dragonkind 


Common Powers 


Constant. Anyone within 10 feet of the Orb 
has the THACO, Armor Class, and saving throws 
of the dragon trapped within. This is calculated 
according to the age and color of the trapped 
dragon. These individuals are also immune to 
breath weapon attacks by dragons of the same 
type as the Orb. 

The personalities of all of the Orbs are tele- 
pathic to any creature within a 60-foot visual 
range. The trapped personalities also possess full 
awareness of their surroundings, able even to 
detect invisible or otherwise concealed creatures 
as would a normal dragon of their size. Whether 
or not this information is communicated to the 
owner depends upon the Orb's personality. 

Invoked. Each Orb functions as a crystal ball to 
any other Orb of Dragonkind, provided the iden- 
tity of the other Orb's owner is known. 

Invoking the correct command while touching 
the Orb allows the owner of the item to invoke 
any of the following powers, all figured by the 
dragon's age and color: use the dragon's breath 
weapon (3/day), radiate dragonfear (3/day), and 
cast any spells (including special powers) known 
by the dragon. 

Finally, every Orb allows the owner to use a 
domination spell against any dragon of the same 
color within 100 yards. The target creature is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell. However, 
instead of a -2 penalty and Wisdom adjustments 
as per the spell, the roll needed is increased or 
decreased by the age difference between the Orb's 
personality and the target dragon. The older the 
trapped personality, the greater the chance of suc- 
cess. If the Orb contains an old red dragon (age 
category 8) and the target is a juvenile red dragon 
(age category 4), the saving throw roll would 
have a -4 penalty. Were it the other way around, 
the roll would have a +4 bonus. 

The owner of the Orb can dominate any num- 
ber of dragons within range, but can only make 
one domination attempt per round. There is no 
limit to the number of times per day this power 
can be used. 


Color Powers 


Trapped within each Orb is a dragon of a dif- 
ferent color. The choices are: black, blue, brass, 
bronze, cloud, copper, gold, green, red, 
shadow, silver, and white. All color powers 
must be invoked and are usable according to the 
limitations given in the description. 

For convenience, the base Hit Dice of each 
dragon color is noted in parentheses below. 

Black. (12 HD) Upon command, the owner 
can create an acid storm with a radius of 100 feet. 
The storm lasts a number of rounds equal to the 
dragon's Hit Dice and inflicts 1d4 points of dam- 
age for the first 3 rounds, 1d6 through the 6th 
round, and 1d8 every round thereafter. The acid 
storm can only be conjured once per month, 
however. 

Blue. (14 HD) The owner can breathe a bolt 
that leaps from target to target, striking several 
creatures in the same manner as a chain lightning 
spell. A number of targets equal to the dragon's 
Hit Dice can be struck. However, unlike the 
spell, the number of dice of damage inflicted 
remains constant throughout. This power can be 
used once per day. 

Brass. (12 HD) Upon uttering the command, 
the owner triggers a circle of sunmotes spell from 
the Orb. The power is usable only once per 
month. 

Bronze. (14 HD) The owner of this Orb can 
use imago interrogation once per month. How- 
ever, no matter what being is contacted, this 
power can never be used to gain more informa- 
tion about the locations or powers of any other 
artifact. 

Cloud. (14 HD) By touching this Orb, the 
owner is able to summon a storm of vengeance 
spell. Unlike the spell, invoking this power only 
requires 1 round. The power is usable once per 
month. 

Copper. (13 HD) As befits the copper dragon's 
impish nature, invoking its power triggers a 
powerful version of the mass suggestion spell. 
The power centers on the Orb and has a radius 
of 30 feet. Anyone other than the owner of the 


71 


Orbs of Dragonkind 


Orb within the area of effect and possessing 
fewer Hit Dice or levels than the trapped dragon 
spirit is automatically subject. No saving throw 
is allowed. Those beings of greater level or Hit 
Dice are unaffected by the power. The sugges- 
tion given must follow all of the normal rules 
given for the spell of that name—i.e., it must be 
understandable and reasonable to those who lis- 
ten for it to have effect. This power can be used 
once per week. 

Gold. (16 HD) The Orb of the gold dragon has 
the power of command over others of its kind, 
meaning in this case all dragons. It can only be 
invoked once per year. Upon uttering the com- 
mand, the Orb summons to it a number of 
dragons equal to its Hit Dice + 1d6 additional 
dragons. These dragons are the same age as the 
possessed gold dragon and can be of any type 
determined by the DM. All must be summoned 
at the same time. The summoned dragons will 
serve the owner of the Orb faithfully for 3d6 
days. They will carry out his instructions to the 
best of their ability. However, the creatures will 
refuse any order that is clearly futile, suicidal, or 
hostile to dragons of their own color. The 
dragons could be summoned to fight at the side 
of an outnumbered army (since the creatures 
themselves might turn the tide), but would not 
slay each other upon command Gust to reduce 
the number of dragons in the world). A red 
dragon cannot be ordered to attack or harm 
another red dragon, but would have no qualms 
about tearing into a blue dragon. 

At the end of the period of service, the dragons 
are released from servitude. Unlike other sum- 
monings, those creatures called by the Orb will 
not seek revenge upon its owner. To their mind, 
whoever possesses the Orb has the right to place 
this duty upon them. However, should the being 
that called them ever fall into their clutches, lit- 
tle mercy will be offered. Evil dragons will most 
likely kill the offender outright, while good ones 
will impose some service equal to what was 
required of them. 

Green. (13 HD) The power of this Orb is only 
effective in a forest or wooded area. Upon com- 


72 


mand, a ray of vile green shoots forth, up to 100 
yards, to strike a number of trees equal to the 
dragon's Hit Dice. The trees touched are 
instantly polymorphed into shambling mounds, 
uncontrolled by anyone. The shambling mounds 
remain for 24 hours or until they are slain. This 
power is usable only once per month. 

Red. (15 HD) The power of the red dragon's 
Orb is the most devastating of all the Orbs of 
Dragonkind and is only usable once per year. 
Upon uttering the proper command, the Orb 
lances out a beam of energy straight down that 
penetrates into the very heart of the earth. 
Within 2d12 hours, the earth heaves and splits 
with the force of an earthquake spell. As the 
tremors grow, a volcano arises from the point 
where the magical beam struck. The volcano 
spews lava and ash, gradually rising into a 
mountainous cone over a process of weeks. The 
radius of the destruction is equal to the Hit 
Dice of the trapped red dragon. All normal con- 


Orbs of Dragonkind 


structions within this area—towns, roads, cas- 
tles, etc.—should be considered ruined. Magi- 
cal structures, should any exist, are allowed a 
saving throw vs. crushing blow to avoid anni- 
hilation. All temples are allowed a saving 
throw vs. magical fire to avoid ruin. Those 
buildings that survive become small islands of 
near-stability. A temple at the heart of the cone, 
for example, might be raised with the crater's 
rim and stranded on a pinnacle of rock. Further 
away, it might avoid destruction by having the 
lava flows part naturally around it. 

Shadow. (12 HD) The power of the shadow 
dragon is to draw upon the very essence of the 
Plane of Shadow, a sinister demi-plane of the 
ethereal. Once per year the owner of the Orb 
can cast a place on the Prime Material Plane 
into the Plane of Shadow. The area of effect is a 
diameter equal to the trapped dragon's Hit 
Dice _ 100 yards, with the Orb at the center. 
When the command is given, Orb, owner, and 
the surrounding area are whisked into the 
Plane of Shadow. The transported area remains 
there for 1 year and at the end of that time is 
instantly returned to its proper place. While on 
the Plane of Shadow, all transported things are 
subject to the normal risks present on that 
plane—shadow dragons, slow shadows, 
shadow mastiffs, and worse. Beings can move 
from the Prime Material to the Plane of Shadow 
by all normal means of planar travel—most 
often by passing through the ethereal. 

On the Prime Material Plane, the area trans- 
ported is replaced by an equal area of the Plane 
of Shadow—shifting veils of darkness that fill 
the area of effect. Just as Prime Material inhabi- 
tants and creatures are carried away, shadow 
beings can arrive as part of the transfer, perhaps 
to maraud the surrounding lands. 

Silver. (15 HD) The Orb of the silver dragon 
has great healing powers. Once per year it can 
be used to resurrect 2dlO x 10 bodies within 100 
yards. All bodies to be resurrected must be pre- 
sent at the same time. When attempting to resur- 
rect special characters (PCs and the like) make 
normal resurrection survival rolls; for low-level 


NPCs and common soldiers, assume the attempt 
is automatically successful. Furthermore, the 
power distinguishes between friend and foe, 
making this Orb particularly useful for restoring 
a fallen unit on the battlefield. 

White. (11 HD) Upon invoking the power of 
this Orb, all allies of the owner within 100 yards 
are seized by a savage war-frenzy. They fight 
with a blood-lust that causes them to disregard 
their own peril and wounds in their savage 
attempts to slay the enemy. Those frenzied gain 
an additional 2 dice of hit points, and +2 bonuses 
to THACO, Damage, and all saving throw rolls, 
and are immune to fear, charms, and illusions of 
all types. While perhaps not much for player 
characters, this power can render a battlefield 
unit into a terrifying force. The power is usable 
once per month. 


Age Powers 


In addition to color, the powers of the Orbs 
vary according to the age of the dragon spirit 
trapped therein. Most of the results of age are 
calculated into the other powers of the Orb— 
amount of damage done by breath weapon, 
spells and number known, even area of effect 
for special color powers. However, age also 
grants ever-increasing numbers of random 
powers. 

The age listings on the next page give the 
appropriate power tables to use and the age 
modifier needed to calculate other effects of the 
dragon Orb. 


Orb Personalities 


Trapped within each Orb of Dragonkind is a 
distinct dragon. Over the millennia, each has 
reacted to its imprisonment differently. While it 
is best if the DM devises a personality that is 
appropriate for the age and color of the trapped 
dragon, 12 suggested personalities are given 
here. 


73 


Orbs of Dragonkind 


Table 3: Powers of the Orbs 


Orb of the Hatchling. (Hatchling, -6 HD) 
Orb of the Wyrmkin. (Very Young, -4 HD) 


Orb of the Scaled. (Young, -2 HD) 
Orb of the Dragonette. (Juvenile, +O HD) 


Orb of the Drake. (Young Adult, +1) 


Orb of the Serpent. (Adult, +2) 


Orb of the Dragon. (Mature adult, +3) 


Orb of the Gold-Hoarder. (Old, +4) 


Orb of the Great Serpent. (Very Old) 


Orb of the Firedrake. (Venerable) 


Orb of the Elder Wyrm. (Wyrm) 


Orb of the Eternal Dragon. (Great Wyrm) 


1 from Table 12: Combat 

1 from Table 12: Combat 

1 from Table 17: Elemental Air 

2 from Table 12: Combat 

1 from Table 17: Elemental Air 

2 from Table 12: Combat 

2 from Table 10: Abjurations 

2 from Table 15: Detection 

2 from Table 12: Combat 

1 from Table 10: Abjurations 

2 from Table 12: Combat 

1 from Table 22: Fate and Fortune 
2 from Table 10: Abjurations 

2 from Table 12: Combat 

1 from Table 18: Elemental Fire 

1 from Table 22: Fate and Fortune 
1 from Table 15: Detection 

3 from Table 12: Combat 

1 from Table 23: Healing 

1 from Table 24: Immunities 

3 from Table 12: Combat 

2 from Table 10: Abjurations 

1 from Table 23: Healing 

1 from Table 27: Movement 

3 from Table 12: Combat 

2 from Table 10: Abjurations 

1 from Table 23: Healing 

1 from Table 27: Movement 

1 from Table 24: Immunities 

3 from Table 12: Combat 

2 from Table 24: Immunities 

1 from Table 27: Movement 

1 from Table 31: Personal Enhancement 
1 from Table 18: Elemental Fire 

4 from Table 12: Combat 

3 from Table 24: Immunities 

2 from Table 31: Personal Enhancements 
1 from Table 27: Movement 

1 from Table 18: Elemental Fire 

1 from Table 22: Fate and Fortune 


74 


Orbs of Dragonkind 


The personality of the trapped dragon is 
important to create. Unlike many artifacts, the 
Orbs do not simply work upon command; 
instead it is best if the players discover that their 
characters must interact with the trapped 
dragons—cajoling, promising, threatening, and 
bribing the dragon spirits to obtain their aid. 
The personalities also affect the nature of the 
artifact possession the owner might undergo. 


* Naive. This dragon believes in the better 
nature of beings even against all the things 
that have happened to it over the centuries. It 
always has hope that someone means to res- 
cue it from its prison. Indeed, it naturally 
assumes that its owner wants to free it, and 
uses this rationale as a justification for the 
artifact possession it causes. 

* Sullen. Trapped so long within its orb, this 
dragon knows better than to believe the lies 
of its masters. It is stubborn and recalcitrant, 
refusing its powers whenever possible. No 
one deserves its aid, since no one ever 
intends to free it. Threats and trickery are the 
best hopes of invoking this Orb's powers, 
although it will freely act if it believes the 
power commanded might actually cause its 
master woe. 

* Tricky. The dragon spirit is full of guile, con- 
stantly seeking a way to escape its prison. It 
will freely resort to lies and deceptions in 
order to obtain its goal of release. It cannot, 
however, lie if an answer is compelled of 
it—i.e., if the master demands to know if 
any invisible creatures are at hand, the Orb 
must answer truthfully. It can, and does, 
invent powers for itself—often claiming to 
know things it does not in hopes of gaining 
release. 

* Patient. This dragon has taken the long view, 
biding its time for the day it knows will 
come. Until then it slumbers and thinks, cre- 
ating elaborate philosophies and mental the- 
orems. If not actively in use, it slumbers, 
caring nothing for the world around it. When 
in use, it cannot be hurried and will insist on 


using its powers at its own pace. It does take 
a certain delight in rousing a little panic in its 
masters. 

Impatient. This dragon wants out nowl It is 
long since tired of its confinement and will do 
nothing unless convinced the act will some- 
how move it closer to freedom. Its impatience 
surfaces even in areas having nothing to do 
with its freedom and will constantly urge its 
master to stop waiting and act. 

Curious. This dragon relieves the boredom 
of imprisonment by seeking knowledge. It 
will want to know everything, especially 
when its powers are called upon. Its master 
must often explain the reason for its use, 
which may in turn lead to other explana- 
tions. Worse still, explanations will remind it 
of other things it has learned, leading it into 
long digressions. 

Bored. Sealed inside its Orb, never dying, this 
dragon feels as though it has seen everything. 
Little that happens to its master can interest it, 
nor does it care what happens to those who 
possess it. The Orb will not respond to pleas 
of urgency or need, cares little for good or 
evil, and would welcome any grotesque event 
as a new experience to relieve its tedium. Get- 
ting this Orb to use its powers requires trick- 
ery more than threats. 

Hate-filled. The dragon inside rages against 
those who trapped it, those who have used it 
over the centuries, and indeed everyone on 
the outside. It is hostile to all free things, but 
in particular the master who forces it to act. 
Whenever possible, the spirit will seek to 
bring harm to its master by perverting the 
intention of his words or luring him into dan- 
ger with bad advice. Like all of the Orbs, it 
cannot directly lie about what it knows, but 
even so, it can convince the foolish to get 
themselves killed. 

Despairing. This dragon has given up. It 
knows it will never escape from its prison and 
there is no point in trying. Promises, rewards, 
and threats mean nothing to it. All action is 
pointless and there is even the thought that 


75 


Orbs of Dragonkind 


through inaction it might gain release. Those 
wishing to use many of its major powers 
must actually convince the spirit that the out- 
come will have meaning, either to make the 
world a better or worse place. 

Stoic. This dragon spirit is resigned to its 
fate, but has not given up. Instead, it tries to 
make the best of things while searching for 
an escape. Unable to help itself, it seeks to 
help its kin by demanding payment for its 
services or considerations for others of its 
species. 

* Mad. Time has taken its toll on this dragon 
and the out-of-body confinement has driven it 
insane. There is no predicting how it will react 
to any given situation. Sometimes it will be 
bright and cooperative, while at other times it 
will rave about nonsensical enemies. It will 
debate simply to debate and will generally 
make life difficult for its master. 

Desperate. This dragon is in a state of near 
panic at the hope of ever gaining its free- 
dom. It is willing to attempt anything, no 
matter how dangerous to itself or its master, 
if the deed holds out the promise of free- 
dom. It will slip from its master's grasp to 
fall from great heights, attempt to roll into 
acid pools, or leave itself exposed to power- 
ful magical blasts, all in the hopes of shatter- 
ing its Orb. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The dragon can be released by sacrificing one- 


Curse. The Orbs have only the simplest of self with a magic jar spell, to be trapped within 
curses, but these are woefully dangerous. Since the Orb. 
each is possessed of a dragon's spirit, those who * All 12 must be ground simultaneously under 
touch the Orbs of Dragonkind are immediately the Great Millstone of the Gods. 
exposed to the risks of artifact possession and arti- * The original makers ofthe Orbs must be found 
fact transformation. In every case, the Orbs seek to at the beginning of time, and the secret of the 
remake their masters into dragons of their own Orbs' destruction must be learned from them. 


color while at the same time gaining possession 
of the bodies. If this is successful, the trapped 
dragon will be freed, while the spirit of its 
master is lost to the void forever. 


76 


Psychometron of Nerad 


The Psychometron is a small, clear gem about 1 
inch in diameter. It is mounted in a headband of 
gold and carru leather. The gem is perfectly 
round and sparkles even in complete darkness. 
It would appear to be worth a king's ransom 
simply as a piece of jewelry. This item originated 
in the DARK SUN® setting. 


History 


Six King's Ages ago, a powerful psionicist and 
preserver, Nerad the Wise, arose in the waste- 
lands along the shores of the Sea of Silt. After 
wandering the wilderness and aiding people of 
good heart, Nerad was perhaps the first to 
attempt the transformation from preserver to 
avangion. 

Nerad ultimately came to a spectacular end, 
as the Dragon hunted down and challenged 
him. The preserver was trapped and could not 
avoid the fight. Anticipating his defeat, he gave 
his most valued possession—the marvellous Psy- 
chometron—to one of his retainers and told her to 
flee with it. The woman subsequently took the 
gem to a Villichi community in the Tablelands. 
Since that time, the Psychometron has been used 
by the Villichi on occasions when they needed 
its power to defend their community. 


Campaign Uses 


The Psychometron is a psionic artifact, useful 
only in campaigns where psionics are employed. 
A DARK SUN character looking to follow in 
Nerad's or Korgunard's footsteps could be 
aided significantly by the Psychometron. Further- 
more, the gem provides heroes with powerful 
defenses that could enable a group to challenge 
a sorcerer-king or one of the great monsters of 
the wastes. However, the Villichi believe the 
gem belongs to them and will eventually ask for 
its return. 


Powers 


Constant. The Psychometron radiates a 5-foot 
radius of +2 protection to the wielder's saving 
throws and power scores in the telepathic or 
metapsionic disciplines. It also functions as a 
receptacle containing 150 PSP which can power 
the owner's psionics (PSPs regenerate at the rate 
of 25 per hour). The psychometron radiates nonde- 
tection and obscures any attempt to scry the 
wielder, either psionically or magically. 

Invoked. When the Psychometron is within the 
radius of a defiling spell, the gem protects the 
earth from defilement, sacrificing 1 PSP for each 
radial yard that would be destroyed. 

The Psychometron is an empowered item with 
the following disciplines installed: aura sight, 
aversion, awe, complete healing, contact, displace- 
ment, energy containment, mind bar, mindlink, 
radial navigation, and teleport. 

Curse. The Psychometron is imbued with the 
powerful personality of the avangion Nerad, so 
its owner is subject to artifact possession. The 
device seeks an end to slavery and oppression, 
demanding that the owner attempt to bring 
down the sorcerer-kings and the Dragon. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* Cause an earth drake to devour it. 
* Let no light touch it for 99 years. 


Queen Ehlissa's Marvelous Nightingale 


With crystal eyes, tiny golden feathers delicately 
layered over its body, and a small wind-up key 
on its underside, Queen Ehlissa's Marvelous 
Nightingale is a beautiful gold songbird mounted 
in a golden cage. 


History 


Last in a line of benevolent rulers, Queen 
Ehlissa treated everyone in her domain fairly, 
and no one lived in poverty or want. Having no 
family, Queen Ehlissa raised song birds, her 
favorite being a nightingale that she loved dearly. 
Each night she would sit and listen for hours as 
her beloved bird would sing the most beautiful 
songs. Sadly, the nightingale died, on her birth- 
day no less. Devastated, Queen Ehlissa went into 
mourning. Her subjects, fearing for their beloved 
queen, sent for their greatest artisans, bards, 
mages, and craftsmen. For one year they labored, 
and on Ehlissa's next birthday, they gave her the 
mechanical Nightingale. The music that came 
forth was so pure and lovely that it soothed the 
queen and her sorrow melted away. 


Campaign Use 


The Nightingale can be used by anyone and 
provides excellent role-playing opportunities. 

Perhaps Queen Ehlissa's land is overrun by a 
barbarian horde, which makes off with the 
beloved Nightingale. She hires a group of would- 
be heroes to retrieve her stolen songbird. 


Powers 


Invoked. A narrow groove with five notched 
slots is embedded in the bottom of the cage. By 
moving a small lever into different notches, the 
Nightingale plays five different songs each asso- 
ciated with a power. Indoors, the area of effect is 
the entire room; otherwise it is as if cast by a 
20th level character. 


Slot Power 


1 Bless (7/day). 

2 Music of the spheres (5/day). 

3 Unceasing vigilance of the holy sentinel 
(1/week). 

4 Zone of truth (1/week, no saving throw). 

5 Emotion (1/day). If the emotion is not 


chosen, one is selected randomly and 
lasts 2d4 rounds. Selected emotions last 
as long as concentration is maintained. 


Curse. Anyone possessing the Nightingale 
becomes increasingly childlike. Monsters cause 
the PC to flee in panic for 2d4 rounds. Each night 
there is a 50% chance that the owner is too fright- 
ened to sleep, preventing healing and the memo- 
rization of spells. Should sleep be lost for 3 
consecutive nights the owner is incoherent and 
sluggish, with attributes dropping by 1 point. The 
owner must always speak the complete truth. For 
each month that the Nightingale is possessed, one 
experience level is lost. Once the Nightingale is 
given up, these negative effects are gradually 
reversed over the same amount of time. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* [t must be given to the king of songbirds. 

* [t must be smashed by a tinker gnome with 
the strength of a titan. 

* It must be exposed to the most wretched 
chord playable on Heward's Mystical Organ. 


Recorder of Ye'Cind 


The Recorder of Ye'Cind is a musical instrument 
made from an 18-inch piece of hollowed-out 
lake reed with 10 holes drilled into it. Unlike a 
flute, it is held vertically and played by blowing 
into the open end. 


History 


Over a century ago, there lived an elf named 
Ye'Cind. During the course of his life he traveled 
throughout the country, compiling and creating 
ballads and songs to tell the rich history of his 
beloved land. In time he became renowned in 
all of the lands. During a festival in one small 
kingdom, Ye'Cind was returning to his bed late 
at night when he witnessed the brutal slaying of 
the king in the courtyard below. Though he had 
seen the crime, he could not identify the 
assailant. By morning, Ye'Cind had vanished, 
leaving behind only blood on his sheets. 

Twenty years later, at the annual festival of 
life, Ye'Cind reappeared in the fateful kingdom 
with a recorder in hand. He played strains of 
music to amuse and please the crowd. Lovers 
held each other dearer when tender melodies 
were played. For a crying child, Ye'Cind played 
a tune that brought laughter to its lips. Making 
his way to the center platform, Ye'Cind came 
face to face with the king and began to play for 
him. A look of astonishment crossed the king's 
face as 20 years melted away, and the king saw 
himself standing in the courtyard over his 
brother's dead body, bloody knife in hand. A 
smile crossed Ye'Cind's face as he watched the 
guards drag away the struggling king. 


Campaign Use 


This artifact is can be used by all character 
classes. A possible adventure might revolve 
around a band of prophets taking the Recorder to 
a monarch for delicate negotiations with a 
neighboring kingdom. En route, the caravan is 
attacked and the recorder stolen. 


Powers 


Constant. The Recorder emits an ear-piercing 
note anytime anything of the PC's (including the 
Recorder) is stolen within 30' of it. 

Invoked. The Recorder can be commanded to 
play complicated melodies upon itself. Playing a 
sustained G reveals a single and important truth 
about a subject of the user's choosing. This truth 
is revealed in the form of a shimmering image, 
complete with visual and audial effects. The 
truth is usually something of profound signifi- 
cance in the subject's life, although the Recorder 
does not reveal the same image more than once 
for a single subject (1/day). 

Random. 3 from Table 21: Enchantment/ 
Charm (notes A, C, and E), 3 from Table 26: 
Minor Spell-Like Powers (notes B, D, and F). 

Curse. The music is so beautiful that the user 
becomes unable to hear anything except the 
recorder within 2d4 weeks. All of the standard 
penalties for deafness are suffered. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* [t must be bathed in the liquid essence of 100 
windchimes. 

* The holes must be plugged with sovereign 
glue. 

* [t must be cast back into the lake where the 
reed from which it is made originally grew. 


79 


There are three different sets of Regalia of Might, 
one for each ethos—Good, Neutrality, and Evil. 
Each set consists of three pieces—a crown, orb, 
and scepter. All three sets are cloaked by a pow- 
erful illusion that makes them all look identical. 
In this form, the crowns are gold and red velvet, 
and studded with stones of great wealth. The 
orbs, about the size of melons, are enamelled 
blue and red and set with a ring of pearls, and 
the rods (no matter what their true size) are iron- 
shod staves with carved knobs at the top. The 
work on every piece is clearly of the best quality. 

In the hands of a like-aligned creature, the 
pieces are perceived as unique in appearance 
and there is no confusing the different Regalia. 

The descriptions below are of each item in 
"true" form, normally recognized only when the 
Regalia of Might are carried by a creature of con- 
cordant alignment and of sufficient power to 
wield the devices as explained. 

The Regalia of Good. The Crown of Good is 
thin coronet of twisted silver, decorated with 


UNS 
EN 
3 


L4 


M 


ke aU naba 


ur 


MW m F- 
TI 
Hl i 


SF T 
"> 


incredibly detailed golden leaves of laurel, so 
that the whole thing looks like a victor's wreath. 
When worn by a like-aligned creature, the crown 
radiates a brilliant light that obscures the 
wearer's face. The Orb of Good is a sphere of 
purest crystal, encased in a filigree cage of 
golden laurel leaves. As large as a cannonball, it 
is nonetheless quite light and easy to carry. The 
Scepter of Good is a slender rod of polished crys- 
tal, entwined with verdant vines of silver and 
gold and topped with a gem that blazes with 
brilliant white light. 

The Regalia of Neutrality. 'This set of Regalia 
Is the least ostentatious of the three, as befits the 
somewhat passive role of most neutral powers. 
The Crown of Neutrality is carved from a single 
piece of smoky quartz, polished dazzlingly 
smooth; when worn, the creature's face is con- 
cealed behind a shimmering smoky veil that 
radiates from the Crown. The Orb of Neutrality is 
a crystal like the Orb of Good, but it is smoky 
quartz held within a cage of green jade, carved 


Regalia of Might 


like smoke. The Scepter of Neutrality is a rod 
almost as long as a staff. It is made from smoky 
quartz and sparkles with flashes of light—some 
brilliant white, others blood red. When gripped, 
a thin wisp of smoke trails from the tip. 

The Regalia of Evil. This set, when used by a 
like-aligned creature, is easy to distinguish from 
the others. The Crown of Evil is a single piece of 
black iron, cast into the form of a flaming head- 
piece. The craftsmanship is harsh and the iron is 
filled with impurities that leave the surface 
coarse. When worn by an evil creature, the iron 
flames blaze into reddish light and magical 
flames (that cause no harm) lap and flicker over 
the head, concealing the wearer's face. The Orb 
of Evil is a iron sphere, pitted and scarred, of 
apparently crude workmanship. The sphere is 
bound in chains of iron, equally harsh and 
crude-looking. Red sparks fly from the orb at the 
slightest touch. The Rod of Evil is a staff of iron, 
draped with chains that clank and rattle. A 
flame of red fire (that radiates no heat) springs 
from the top. 


History 


The Regalia of Might are reputed to be perhaps 
the greatest of all artifacts, though this is only 
speculation, for no one can honestly claim to 
have used all of them. They are certainly the 
most ancient, having existed since before the 
time of men. It is believed the Regalia were fash- 
ioned by the gods, to spare the multiverse from 
ultimate destruction of those powers as they 
made war. 

For an eternity before recorded time began, 
the many powers struggled for ascendancy in 
the Outer Planes. But such is the way of gods 
that seldom did the powers directly attack each 
other, fighting their battles in the mortal worlds 
instead, and manipulating their creations like 
pawns on a gameboard. As the battle raged on 
distant planes, the waste and destruction was 
horrendous. 

Finally, the wisest deities agreed that this 


could no longer go on. They decreed that each 
ethos—Good, Neutrality, and Evil—should out- 
fit a champion who would in the future stand 
for that faction. Three items—objects of celestial 
might—were given to each champion: the 
crowns, orbs, and scepters. 

Just how these deities struck this agreement, 
and how they enforced their will upon the dis- 
senting powers is unknown. Nor is it even cer- 
tain just who among the gods proposed the 
idea (several deities lay claim to this achieve- 
ment). Suffice it to say that great and mysteri- 
ous are the workings of such powers, for the 
feat was accomplished. The terms set, each 
group set to the task of fashioning their Regalia 
according to its nature. Speed was essential, for 
all had agreed to finish their work in a single 
millennium. 

The gods of Good, it is said, met in a great 
council, and they chose from among their num- 
bers the three greatest craftsmen and set them to 
the task. These three worked together to create 
their three pieces of Regalia, each sharing his 
knowledge and experience with the others. 

The gods of Neutrality did not accept this 
approach, but met in council and choose the pat- 
tern desired for their Regalia. The craftsmen 
among their kind were summoned and a com- 
petition was proposed. Each craftsman-god was 
to design a single piece of the Regalia, be it crown, 
orb, or scepter, and the finest would be used by 
Neutrality's champion. 

The gods of Evil proposed a competition, too. 
Whoever among them, whether craftsman or 
not, could produce a crown, orb, and scepter 
could claim the right to outfit the champion of 
Evil. The evil deities threw themselves to their 
work with a frenzy. Not content to merely build, 
they schemed, spied, robbed, and betrayed each 
other in their struggles to win this contest. 

Finally, the deadline was reached and the 
gods reconvened to approve the results. So long 
ago did all this transpire that men and perhaps 
even the deities themselves have forgotten the 
names of those who labored for each group. But 
first came the three craftsmen of Good, who had 


81 


Regalia of Might 


labored in harmony to prepare their items. Sec- 
ond came the three victors of Neutrality, each 
bearing his contribution to the Regalia. Lastly 
came a trickster god, Evil's victor, who had cun- 
ningly stolen his prizes from the workshops of 
others. Beholding the Regalia, the wise gods 
were content and proclaimed the great wars 
ended. Henceforth, all disagreements were to 
settled by champions chosen to wear the Regalia. 

Since that time, each group has watched over 
its Regalia in its own way. By agreement, the 
deities of Good hold theirs as a group. The 
Regalia are available to any power who should 
need it. The powers of Neutrality could not be 
so amicable in their approach, however. Rather, 
they agreed that each deity should hold the 
items for a period of time and then pass them to 
another. The owner had absolute control over 
the Regalia and could use them or give them 
away as he pleased. The powers of Evil took 
their usual, direct approach to this question: 
Possession of their Regalia went to whomever 
was strong enough, devious enough, and savage 
enough to take and hold them. If a deity needed 
the Regalia, he had to take them from their cur- 
rent owner. The evil Regalia became much con- 
tested items, used as much by fiends in the 
Blood War as by Evil's champions against those 
of Good and Neutrality. Over the years, the 
three evil pieces have been separated and some- 
times even lost. This may even be the case today. 


Campaign Use 


The Regalia, no matter of what ethos, are power- 
ful artifacts and should not be used in a cam- 
paign without an expressed and a carefully 
thought-out purpose. Fortunately, several condi- 
tions on these items make it difficult, if not 
impossible, for player characters to gain full 
benefit, or in some cases any benefit, from these 
artifacts. Still, the DM should do everything pos- 
sible to limit player character use of such items. 
Introducing the Regalia into a game varies, 
depending on which set the DM intends to use. 


82 


The DM should remember that the Regalia are 
created for a specific use, so if one set appears, it 
is quite likely to be followed by one or both of 
the others. It is assumed that the sets will be 
used by a pair of champions who must fight to 
settle some celestial dispute. 

The Regalia of Good are never found purely by 
accident; Good gods don't misplace their items 
(although Evil deities might steal them). They 
are either safely stored on their own planes or 
loaned out for some purpose. Thus, the Regalia of 
Good only appear when there is a need for their 
use. The player characters might think they have 
accidentally found a great treasure, but this dis- 
covery should always be part of a greater plan. 
The Regalia of Good normally enter an adventure 
when one of the player characters is called upon 
by his (or her) deity and is is saddled with the 
awesome responsibility to act as a champion of 
cause. 

Likewise, the Regalia of Neutrality are not hap- 
hazardly left about, although the powers of Evil 
might plot to whisk them away. Their appear- 
ance should herald some purpose, but this may 
be simply to prevent conflict between the cham- 
pions of Good and Evil. 

The Regalia of Evil are another matter. With the 
constant squabbling of the evil lords, their 
Regalia have been known to slip from their grasp 
from time to time, and it is possible that one of 
the pieces could find its way to the Prime Mater- 
ial Plane. Once there, it could be discovered by 
the PCs or by an NPC. 

Of course, just stumbling across the Regalia 
does injustice to a good potential storyline. If the 
items are something the player characters could 
potentially use (most likely one or more of the 
Good or Neutral pieces), one of the group may 
find himself thrust into the role of champion of 
the ethos—at least temporarily. For whatever 
obvious or inexplicable reasons, the gods have 
chosen the player character to face another 
champion (outfitted with appropriate pieces of 
Regalia), thereby settling some celestial dispute. 
The contest need not be over some world-shat- 
tering conflict; deities squabble over all sorts of 


Regalia of Might 


petty details—they could even be vying for the 
favors of a mortal. In any case, the champion 
should be the equal of the player character 
unless it is evil, in which case the evil forces cheat 
and make their man a little tougher. The player 
character may never know of his divine role, or 
he may have to figure it out and find his foe. 

When all is said and done, whether the char- 
acter wins or loses, the piece or pieces of the 
Regalia will magically disappear—the powers 
will never leave such items behind. Any reward 
the character receives depends upon the task 
done and the nature of the deity involved. Char- 
acters should not expect much reward at all 
from evil gods! 

Of course, the player characters could just 
accidentally find a piece of the Regalia— particu- 
larly if it was stolen from or by an evil deity. 
Legends and tales of the Regalia exist in most 
faiths, and high priests can recognize the items 
for what they are. Unhappy indeed are the ser- 
vants who refuse to yield these treasures back to 


their divine masters. The gods may even take 
note and spend special messengers to claim 
what is rightfully theirs. Servants of good deities 
will first try honest and gentle approaches but 
evil deities will almost certainly punish any pos- 
sessing their Regalia, on the simple assumption 
that the current owner deserves his fate. In this 
case, even giving up the Regalia is likely to do 
the player characters little good. But they must 
find some way to do so, through clever oaths or 
the protection of others, to save their skins. 

In all cases, the Regalia should not remain in a 
campaign for very long. These are not items to 
be held by kings, great wizards, or even the 
highest of high priests. Once any part of the 
Regalia has been used for its purpose, it should 
vanish, preferably with enough pomp or terror 
to remind the player characters of just who and 
what they have been dealing with. If a piece is 
accidentally found, the player characters will be 
faced by an ever-escalating series of messengers 
until such time as the item is recovered. 


Regalia of Might 


Powers of the Regalia 


Each of the nine pieces of Regalia has a differ- 
ent collection of powers, although different 
crowns, orbs, and scepters may have some powers 
in common. Each, too, has its own perils that can 
affect the foolish and unworthy. The sets also 
have ever-increasing resonating powers, so that 
the might of the Regalia grows with each item 
acquired. 

The powers and curse for each piece of Regalia 
is described separately. After the powers for all 
three pieces of a set are given, the resonating 
powers for various combinations of that set are 
described, along with any additional curse 
effects that may occur. After this are suggested 
means for destroying the entire set of Regalia. 


The Crown of Good 


Constant. The Crown confers upon the wearer 
a Wisdom and Charisma of 21, including all ben- 
efits for bonus spells, magical defense, spell 
immunities, and reaction adjustments. 

Invoked. The Crown can create a minor globe of 
invulnerability around the wearer once per day. 

Random. The Crown possesses two abilities 
from Table 15: Detection. 

Curse. First and foremost, the Crown, like all 
the pieces of Regalia, is attuned only to its align- 
ment ethos. Neutral characters who touch the 
Crown suffer 5d6 points of damage (no saving 
throw, excepting neutral good characters, who 
are allowed a saving throw vs. spell to halve this 
effect). Evil characters who touch the Crown 
must save vs. death, and those who succeed still 
suffer 5d6 points of damage. Among good char- 
acters, only those of a lawful heart can use all 
the item's powers. For others, only the invoked 
power functions. 

Although not a curse, the Crown does have a 
drawback in that its owner (whether the Crown 
is worn or not) is no longer capable of telling a 
falsehood or performing an act that would nor- 
mally be considered evil. Note that this prevents 


the character from bluffing or making threats he 
does not intend to carry out. Even haggling in 
the marketplace can become difficult, should the 
character manage to dicker the price down to a 
"steal." 


The Scepter of Good 


Constant. While the Scepter is gripped, the 
owner is immune to all wizard spells of the 
enchantment/charm school, and to all priest 
spells of the charm sphere. 

Invoked. Upon the wielder's mental com- 
mand, anyone touched by the Scepter must save 
vs. paralyzation or be held motionless for 3d6 
rounds. The Scepter also functions as a rod of 
rulership with endless charges. 

Curse. The Scepter is sensitive to alignment. 
Neutral characters who touch the Scepter suffer 
5d6 points of damage (no saving throw). Evil 
characters who touch it must save vs. death, and 
those who succeed still suffer 5d6 points of dam- 
age. Even good characters must be lawfully so to 
benefit from the constant powers of this artifact. 

Not viewed as a curse by the powers of Good, 
the owner of the Scepter must live up to noble 
ideals. Specifically, the owner of the Scepter must 
always come to the aid of those in need, whether 
they be accused innocents in the marketplace or 
oppressed multitudes in some distant land. This 
call cannot be refused or resisted unless the 
character is already involved in another quest or 
actively battling the champion of the other pow- 
ers. The master of the Scepter becomes a true 
knight-errant, forever galloping off to right 
every wrong. 


The Orb of Good 


Invoked. All of the Orb's powers must be acti- 
vated with a command word (DM's choice). 
First, it functions as a gem of brightness with 
unlimited charges. Second, the Orb can heal 
(1/day) any creature that touches it. 


Regalia of Might 


Random. The Orb possesses one ability from 
Table 16: Divination. 

Curse. Like the Crown and Scepter, the Orb is 
selective about who handles it. Neutral charac- 
ters who touch the Orb suffer 5d6 points of dam- 
age (no saving throw). Evil characters who 
touch it must save vs. death, and those who suc- 
ceed still suffer 5d6 points of damage. Good 
characters of less than lawful purity can only use 
the healing ability of the Orb. 

Another consideration for the owner of the 
Orb is that he must give sacrifice all worldly pos- 
sessions (to charity) and forever renounce all 
titles and claims; knights forswear their lieges, 
priests leave their temples, and wizards give up 
their magical wonders. Only the other pieces of 
the Regalia (if available) and the most humble of 
dress and weapons (all nonmagical) may be 
retained. Anything given up cannot be reclaimed 
after the artifact has disappeared. 

Resonating (two items). If any two items of 
the Regalia are possessed by a single character, 
additional benefits accrue. Upon gaining the sec- 
ond item, the character immediately gains one 
level of experience, and his experience point 
total is set halfway to the next level. The charac- 
ter gains all benefits of the new level. This can 
only happen once to a character or adventuring 
party (unless the current owner dies). Even if the 
items are stolen and then returned to a different 
member of the group, the benefit will not result. 

Possessing two of the three items also adds 
one power from both Table 20: Elemental Earth 
and Table 28: Offensive Powers. 

Resonating (all items). If all three items are 
held by a single creature, all the benefits 
described above are received, plus the Regalia 
reveal another power from Table 26: Minor 
Spell-like Powers, Table 27: Movement, and 
Table 31: Personal Enhancement. These bonuses 
last only as long as the creature retains all pieces 
of the Regalia. If one is lost, stolen, or surren- 
dered, the benefits of possessing all three are 
immediately lost. 

Resonating Curse. Possession of any two 
pieces of the Regalia causes no additional harm 


(beyond those already described). However, 
once a character gains all three items, artifact 
transformation begins, and the character gradu- 
ally becomes a planetar aasimon (see the Outer 
Planes appendix of the MONSTROUS 
COMPENDIUM". If the change is completed, a 
PC is forever lost (NPC status), but if the Regalia 
is lost or removed prior to the final phase, the 
character slowly reverts to normal. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


e Smelt down the items at the forges of the 
deities who fashioned them. 

* Whisper the Ten-Thousand Secrets of Destruc- 
tion over each one. 

* The items disappear with the end of the reign 
of the gods. 


The Crown of Neutrality 


Constant. So long as this Crown is worn, the 
owner can automatically distinguish between 
truth, half-truth, and lies he hears or reads. Only 
an undetectable lie can conceal the truth. 

Random. The crown possesses two abilities 
from Table 16: Divination. 

Curse. The Crown functions best for those of 
true neutral alignment. Characters of neutral 
good or neutral evil alignment suffer 3d6 points 
of damage (no saving throw) when first touch- 
ing the items, and such characters can use only 
their invoked powers. Other-aligned characters 
who touch the artifact suffer 5d6 points of dam- 
age (no saving throw). 

True neutral characters are possessed of the 
impartial nature of the cold Neutral powers, and 
expose all lies they hear. No matter who speaks 
(even himself), the wearer must reveal false- 
hoods so fair judgements can be made. 


Regalia of Might 


The Scepter of Neutrality 


Constant. The holder of the Scepter regener- 
ates 2 hit points per round, but cannot regener- 
ate from fire, acid, (un)holy water, or death, nor 
will severed limbs regenerate. 

Invoked. Upon command, the Scepter will 
generate a thunderclap like a staff of thunder and 
lightning. The Scepter also functions as a rod of 
beguiling. 

Random. The Scepter endows the wearer with 
one power from Table 15: Detection. 

Curse. Characters of non-neutral alignment 
who touch the artifact for the first time suffer 
5d6 points of damage (no saving throw), and 
characters of neutral good or neutral evil align- 
ment suffer 3d6 points of damage (no saving 
throw). Such characters can only use the invoked 
powers of the Scepter, provided they can identify 
them. 

Desiring harmony and balance, the powers of 
Neutrality require the holder of the Scepter to 


J mM 
l: WM T 4 


i 


v | | f ^ HM 
ifr, i ee : C Á a " OF TN 
2 Wl 

«D i 


iit i ia 


seek a settlement to all disputes. The settlement 
can be a truce, surrender, payment, bribe, or 
whatever, as long as peace is attained. The char- 
acter cannot allow any dispute to remain 
unnegotiated, be it a war between two king- 
doms or a jealous lovers' duel. 


The Orb ofNeutrality 


Constant. When gazed through, the Orb func- 
tions as a gem ofseeing. 

Invoked. The Orb creates a floating fiery sym- 
bol ofpersuasion (1/day). 

Random. The orb has two powers from 
Table 33: Protections. 

Curse. Characters of non-neutral alignment 
who touch the artifact for the first time suffer 
5d6 points of damage (no saving throw). Char- 
acters of neutral good or neutral evil alignment 
suffer 3d6 points of damage (no saving throw). 
Such characters can only use the constant pow- 


DA L > E NT SRT GA 
Mii) [^ “i 3 a d Ke 3 «Wi 
v, j l i} Lu "y 


jd CN 
lee % va 


Regalia of Might 


ers of the Orb, provided they can identify them. 

The bearer of the Orb must always abide by 
the terms of any oath, deal, vow, treaty, pact, 
contract or other agreement that he makes. This 
power is in effect even when the character is not 
holding the Orb—possession of the artifact is all 
that is required. 

Resonating (two items). If any two pieces of 
the Regalia of Neutrality are possessed together, 
the character who wields them immediately 
gains one level of experience, and his experience 
point total is set halfway to the next level. The 
character immediately gains all the benefits of 
the new level. This can only happen once per 
character or adventuring party (unless the cur- 
rent owner dies). Even if the items are stolen and 
returned to a different party member, the benefit 
doesn't occur. 

The holder of two parts of the Regalia gains 
one additional power from both Table 26: Minor 
Spell-Like Powers and Table 25: Major Spell- 
like Powers. 

Resonating (all items). If all three items are 
held by a single creature, all the benefits 
described above are received, plus the Regalia 
reveal another power from Table 13: Conjura- 
tion, Table 28: Offensive Powers, and Table 31: 
Personal Enhancement. These bonuses last only 
as long as the creature retains all three pieces of 
the Regalia. If any one of them is lost, stolen, or 
surrendered, the benefits of having all three are 
lost. 

Resonating Curse. Possession of any two 
pieces of the Regalia of Neutrality causes no addi- 
tional harm (beyond those already described). 
However, once all three items are held, the process 
of artifact transformation begins. The character is 
slowly transforms into a marut (see the Outer 
Planes appendix of the MONSTROUS 
COMPENDIUM". Once the transformation is 
complete, a PC is lost forever (NPC status). Should 
the Regalia be lost or removed prior to the final 
phase, the character slowly reverts to normal. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The items vanish when Good and Evil reach a 
perfect stalemate. 

* [mmerse them for 1,000 years in the pure 
essences of the Positive and Negative Mater- 
ial Planes. 

* They lose power when someone buys them 
from the gods of Neutrality. 


The Crown of Evil 


Constant. When worn, the Crown confers fire 
giant Strength (Str 22: +4 to hit, +10 damage) 
upon its wearer. 

Invoked. By touch, the wearer of the Crown 
can animate dead (3/day). 

Random. The Crown endows the wearer with 
one power from Table 33: Protections. 

Curse. The Crown is attuned only to those of 
extremely evil alignment. Neutral characters who 
touch the crown for the first time suffer 5d6 points 
of damage (no saving throw), although neutral 
evil characters are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to halve the damage. Good characters who 
touch it for the first time must save vs. death, and 
those who succeed still suffer 5d6 points of dam- 
age. Among evil characters, only those of chaotic 
bent can use all the item's powers. For others, only 
the constant power functions correctly. 

As part of their perverse blessing on the 
Crown, the powers of Evil constructed the arti- 
fact so that, when worn, it is impossible for the 
owner to answer any question truthfully. Per- 
haps the rationale behind implementation of such 
a power was to protect their champion from 
interrogation, or perhaps it was just a whim. The 
champion can speak truthfully of his own 
accord, but any question put to him automati- 
cally results in a lie. 


87 


Regalia of Might 


The Scepter ofEvil 


Invoked. Upon command, the Scepter func- 
tions as a rod of terror (with no chance of 
Charismaloss). 

Random. The holder of the Scepter gains two 
abilities from Table 28: Offensive Powers. 

Curse. Like the all pieces of the Regalia of Evil, 
the Scepter is attuned only to those of evil align- 
ment. Characters of differing alignments who 
handle the Scepter suffer the same effects as 
given for the Crown of Evil. Among evil charac- 
ters, only those of chaotic alignment can use all 
the item's powers. For others, the Scepter func- 
tions only as a rod of terror. 

As befits the nature of Evil, the bearer of the 
Scepter quickly comes to imagine himself as 
supreme, the natural leader and ruler of all. 
Only powers of demigod or greater status are 
immune to this, since they already consider 
themselves to be (and they are) supreme beings. 
Those overcome with self-importance can no 
longer accept any settlement or compromise. 
The bearer of the Scepter must be first in all 
things. He will not relent until all those who 
stand in opposition (be they friend or foe) recog- 
nize his might, abjectly surrender, flee in terror, 
or lie crushed beneath his heel. Indeed, the 
greater the foe, the more urgent grows the desire 
to overthrow them. 


The Orb ofEvil 


Constant. When held, the Orb automatically 
allows its owner to command any nonplanar 
undead creature within 30 feet. The undead are 
controlled as long as they remain within the 
radius of effect and for 1d4 + 1 hours thereafter. 
The character need but speak his desires and 
they are unwaveringly executed by the com- 
manded undead. (Free-willed and mindless 
undead are affected equally.) 

Random. The orb possesses two abilities from 
Table 26: Minor Spell-Like Powers. 

Curse. Like all parts of the Regalia, the Orbis 


attuned only to those of evil alignment. Charac- 
ters of differing alignments who handle the Orb 
suffer the same effects as given for the Crown of 
Evil. Among evil characters, only those of chaotic 
disposition can use all the item's powers. For oth- 
ers, only the Orb's invoked powers can be used. 

Furthermore, the Orb itself covets worldly 
goods, particularly magicalitems. Before its con- 
stant power can be used, it must be activated by 
the sacrifice of a permanent magical item 
(including chargeable items). Once touched by 
the Orb, the item crumbles to dust. The wielder 
of the Orb also must own the magical item in 
question— merely touching the Orb to someone 
else's magical armor will not do, for example. 
Items destroyed by the Orb are forever lost, 
beyond even the power of deities to recover. 
Once activated, the Orb's constant powers func- 
tion for 24 hours. 

Resonating (two items). If any two pieces of 
the Regalia of Evil are possessed, the character 
immediately gains one experience level, and his 
experience point total is set halfway to the next 
level. The character immediately gains all the 
benefits of the new level. This can only happen 
once per character or party (unless the current 
owner dies). Even if the items are stolen and 
returned to a different member of the group, the 
benefit doesn't occur. 

In addition, the holder of two parts gains an 
extra power from both Table 16: Divination 
and Table 28: Offensive Powers. 

Resonating (all items). If all three items are 
held by a single creature, all the benefits 
described above are received. In addition, the 
Regalia reveal another power from Table 33: Pro- 
tections, Table 18: Elemental Fire, and Table 31: 
Personal Enhancement. These bonuses last for 
as long as all the pieces of the Regalia are 
retained. If one is lost, stolen, or surrendered, 
the benefits are lost. 

Resonating Curse. Possession of any two 
pieces of the Regalia causes no additional harm 
(beyond those already described). However, 
once a character gains all three items, the process 
of artifact transformation begins. The character is 


Regalia of Might 


gradually transformed into a bebilith, an odious 
servant of death and torture (see the Outer 
Planes appendix of the MONSTROUS 
COMPENDIUM" D, Once the transformation is 
complete, the character is forever lost, but if the 
Regalia are lost or removed prior to the final 
phase, the the character slowly reverts to normal. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The powers of Good utterly conquer the pow- 
ers of Evil. 

* The items are buried at the very heart of the 
Positive Material Plane. 

* The powers of Evil are tricked into destroying 
them. 


Combining Regalia 
of Various Alignments 


Rare though it might be, it is possible for the 
same character to come into possession of items 
of Regalia from separate ethos. For instance, a 
character holding the Crown of Good might be 
tempted (by a devious evil deity) to pick up the 
Scepter of Evil. 

The result is an explosion of charged magical 
energy which, though it can vary in intensity, 
almost certainly brings woe to the unfortunate 
at the heart of the blast. This is a very bad thing, 
at least for the character. Fortunately, battling 
another champion who is using a different piece 
of Regalia will not trigger any disasters (other 
than the fight might cause). 

Possessing any piece of Regalia allows the 
owner to see all others in their true form, and the 
differences in appearance should serve as a dire 
warning. Similarly, the character can also sense 
the ethos of any other piece of Regalia. While 
holding the Orb of Neutrality, for example, the 
priestess Livaria can feel the goodness radiating 
from the Crown of Good before her. These two 
clues should certainly inform Livaria that she 


will be attempting to combine oil and water, so 
to speak. If she fails to consider the conse- 
quences and claims the Crown, then her mistake 
will soon be clear. 

Depending upon the mix of artifacts, the 
result of one character holding them varies: 

Good and Neutral. As soon as a character 
acquires both items, an interplanar instability 
Occurs and a rift is torn to a randomly chosen 
Upper Plane. The player character is automati- 
cally sucked through the gap with wrenching 
force (which inflicts 3d1O points of damage). 
Anyone within 5 feet of the holder must make a 
saving throw vs. death or suffer the same fate. 
Those between 6 and 20 feet away suffer only 
the 3dlO points of damage (save vs. breath 
weapon for half damage). The Regalia then dis- 
appear, either returning whence they came (such 
as to where the deities of Good store their items) 
or scattering to random Prime Material worlds. 

Good and Evil. As soon as both items are pos- 
sessed, a massive blast occurs. The character at 
the heart of it is instantly vaporized (no saving 
throw). Those within 20 feet suffer IOdlO points 
of damage (save vs. breath weapon for half 
damage) and those between 21 and 40 feet away 
suffer 3dlO points of damage (same saving 
throw). The pieces of Regalia are hurled to com- 
pletely random locations on any Prime Material 
world, although they may be quickly recovered 
by servants of the deities. 

Neutral and Evil. As with good and neutral 
couplings, this pairing opens up a rift, though 
this rent leads to a Lower Plane. The effects of 
this rift are the same as those described above, 
but anyone sucked through is not likely to arrive 
in a hospitable location. 


Ring of Gaxx 


The Ring of Gaxx is a nine-sided, blue gem 
mounted in a platinum base on a plain, half-inch 
platinum band. Inside is a string of letters, with 
Gaxx the only legible word. 


History 


While wondering among the Mountains of 
Storms, a luckless fighter named Krednel dis- 
covered some old buildings. Entering to take 
shelter, Krednel discovered the remains of a 
creature unlike any he had ever seen before. 
Krednel noticed an odd ring on one of the crea- 
ture's fingers, and took for his own. 

Four days later, Krednel awoke to find that his 
skin had hardened into a natural armor. Panic- 
stricken, he raced for a pool of water, where he 
was horrified at his reflection. There in the watery 
mirror was a creature with eight-inch horns and 
scaled skin. He frantically pulled off the ring and 
ran to visit an old dwarf friend, Lorak Ironhand, 
an expert on gems. Lorak could not identify the 
ring but offered to buy it from Krednel. Krednel 
snatched the money and disappeared. 


Campaign Use 


The Ring of Gaxx is a good item for creating 
some unusual mysteries to solve. One possible 
adventure could unfold with a village seeking 
help in ridding itself of a fierce, hideous monster 
that is terrorizing the place, and at the same time 
solve the disappearance of the town's dealer in 
rare items. 


Powers 


Constant. The wearer is immune to all forms 
of disease, both normal and magical. 

Invoked. Each of the nine sides of the gem has 
its own power. The active side faces the finger tip 
and the entire ring is impossible to mark. The 
gem rotates clockwise one segment when one of 


the following occurs; it is put on, it is worn while 
sleeping, or the stone is turned. Once all nine 
powers have been discovered, the wearer can use 
the powers with 9096 accuracy. Two of the powers 
are stoneskin (2/day) and invisibility (I/day). 

Random. 2 from Table 23: Healing, 2 from 
Table 27: Movement, 2 from Table 28: Offen- 
sives, and 1 from Table 33: Protections. 

Curse. Once the ring is worn for more than 48 
continuous hours, it begins to transform the 
wearer (over the next 96 hours) into a creature of 
unknown origin. A thick pair of horns grow 2 
inches above the ears; the skin hardens into 
thick scales, providing a natural AC of 5. The 
eyes develop infravision (90 feet) and daylight 
becomes painful (-2 penalty to attack rolls). The 
lower canines extend an inch beyond the lips, 
Horn and bite attacks are possible, inflicting 
1d4/ld4/ld6 points of damage. 

To reverse an incomplete transformation, the 
ring must be removed for a number of hours 
equal to the number worn. However, once it is 
complete it is permanent, and the wearer needs 
the ring to survive; without it death occurs 
within 72 hours. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The Ring must be taken by hand to the center 
of the sun. 

* Return it to the alien culture who crafted it. 

* The creatures that created the Ring must be 
found and the ring returned to them. 


Rod of Seven Parts 


The Rod of Seven Parts is a 5-foot-long black, 
unadorned pole, broken into pieces measuring 
4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 15 inches in length. The 
parts fit together in order of ascending length; 
the 4-inch tip (which resembles a short wand) is 
the thinnest part, the 15-inch head is the widest, 
and the rest of the pieces broaden steadily from 
the tip to the head. The Rod originated in the 
GREYHAWK® world. 


History 


Eons ago, a great war was waged between the 
Wind Dukes of Aaqa (the guardians of Law) and 
the Queen of Chaos. Those polar forces each 
craved the annihilation of the other, and were so 
obsessed with enforcing their ideologies that 
they spared no thought for Good and Evil. For 
many years the balance of power shifted back 
and forth, and neither side could achieve the 
upper hand. 

Then the Queen of Chaos found and 
appointed a new commander: Miska the Wolf- 
Spider, who was so brutal and terrible to behold 
that the Queen also took him for her consort. 
With the arrival of the evil Miska, the forces of 
Chaos were bolstered and the Wind Dukes 
began to fear eventual defeat. 

Therefore, they left the Captains of Law to 
hold the line while they combined all of their 
powers and created a magnificent ebony rod. 
With the newly created artifact in hand, the 
Wind Dukes rejoined the war at the battle of 
Pesh. The Dukes gave the Rod to the Captains of 
Law and bade them vanquish Chaos. 

A fearsome battle raged for weeks, and the 
advantage shifted repeatedly between the foes. 
Finally, the Captains of Law surrounded the 
Wolf-Spider, and before the legions of Chaos 
could swarm to their leader's side, the Rod was 
driven through Miska's body. For a moment, 
every soldier stood terrified by the horrible 
scream of the general. Miska's foul blood cov- 
ered the Rod and penetrated it as he writhed on 
the ground, and the magical forces of Law that 


had been infused into the Rod were combined 
with the essence of Chaos in Miska's blood, 
which ruptured the Rod and shattered it into 
seven pieces. Meanwhile, the Wolf-Spider was 
cast through a planar rip created by the explo- 
sion, and he remains lost on an unknown plane. 
The Queen's soldiers converged upon the site in 
an attempt to capture the parts of the Rod, but 
the Wind Dukes intervened and magically scat- 
tered the pieces across the world. 

Ever since that time, agents of the Queen have 
been ordered to seek out the Rod at any cost. It is 
rumored that if she regains all the parts, she can 
use the reconstructed Rod to find the Wolf-Spi- 
der and return him to her side, whereupon the 
wars will begin anew. 


Campaign Use 


The DM may decide that the Rod of Seven Parts 
is best used by nonplayer characters, for he who 
uses the Rod suffers an immediate shift to an 
ultra-lawful alignment that would make a pal- 
adin seem unprincipled— Good and Evil become 
thoroughly irrelevant to the user, so long as Law 
is maintained. This renders most characters 
effectively unplayable, and few players will 
even want to attempt it. 

No adventure with the Rod is complete with- 
out the Queen of Chaos, who dwells upon the 
artifact. A campaign with the Rod would typi- 
cally involve a clash between the PCs and agents 


91 


Rod of Seven Parts 


of the Queen as pieces of the Rod begin to sur- 
face. Perhaps the PCs might "accidentally" find 
a piece of the Rod and then find themselves 
harassed by the soldiers of Chaos, who try to 
take it from them. 

The adventurers also might discover that 
agents of the Queen have acquired four seg- 
ments of the Rod. To prevent war and a major 
shift in the balance of power, the party must 
either steal the recovered pieces or beat the 
Queen's servants to the next part. 


Powers 


Constant. Each part of the Rod conveys an 
impression of the direction in which the next 
larger piece lies. 

Invoked. Each piece of the Rod has its own 
minor power: The 4-inch tip can cure light wounds 
(1/day), the 5-inch segment can slow (1/day, 23 
rounds), the 6-inch part will haste (1/day, 23 
rounds—owner doesn't age); the 8-inch piece can 
create a 10- by 200-yard gust of wind (5/day), the 
10-inch part affords true seeing (1/day, 20 rounds),; 
the 12-inch segment can hold monster (1/day, 20 
rounds), and the 15-inch part heals (1/day). 

Resonating. As the segments come together, 
the rod increases in power. The connected pieces 
still retain their minor powers, but a major 
power manifests with the addition of each part. 
Invoked major powers are cast at the 20th level. 

With two parts, the character canfly at will; 
three segments add 20% to the character's magic 
resistance; four segments allow the user to con- 
trol winds (2/day); five pieces grant the power to 
shape change (2/day); six segments enable the 
owner to wind walk (1/day); and with the sev- 
enth and final piece assembled, the character can 
cast restoration (1/day). 

In addition, the fully assembled Rod radiates 
an aura of fearsome, icy Law, affecting anyone 
within a 20-foot radius. All enemies (as defined 
under Curse) who fail to successfully save vs. 
spell must flee in panic. 

Curse. Created to serve order, the Rod imme- 


92 


diately changes any character possessing one or 
more of its segments to an absolute follower of 
Law, beyond the most rigid standards of lawful 
goodness. The character will feel compelled to 
intervene in all things and maintain the primacy 
of Law over Chaos, heedless of the effects for 
good or ill. Anyone, even close friends and other 
party members, not adhering to the owner's 
strict views are perceived as enemies. 

Upon assembling three pieces, the owner will 
refuse to part with the Rod at any time, under 
any circumstances. 

Assembling the rod can be a very difficult task, 
requiring extensive wards and glyphs (requiring 
a full day to inscribe) to be placed upon each seg- 
ment before they can be joined. Bringing two seg- 
ments within 1 foot of each other without first 
taking these precautions causes the newest largest 
piece of the Rod to teleport 1dIlOO miles in a ran- 
dom direction— roll 1d1O: 1) north, 2) north east, 
3) east, 4) south east, 5) south, 6) south west, 7) 
west, 8) northwest, 9) straight up [1dlO miles], 
and 10) straight down [1dlO miles]. 

Having been violently shattered, the Rod's 
new connections are very fragile, even with the 
best wards and glyphs. Anytime a major power 
is invoked, there is a 5% cumulative chance the 
rod will break apart and each individual piece 
(except the segment held) will teleport in a ran- 
dom direction as described above, but twice as 
far. When the Rod breaks apart, the teleported 
pieces lose all of their wards and glyphs. 

All effects of the Rod disappear with it. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


All seven parts are simultaneously joined 
together in the improper order, resulting in a 
7d12 x 10 explosion. 

Turn the Rod over to the Queen of Chaos, who 
will attempt to pervert its nature and neutral- 
ize it in the process. (Characters who do this 
will not be treated with respect by the Queen.) 
* Find Miska the Wolf-Spider and force both 
him and the Rod to enter the Plane of Concor- 
dant Opposition together. 


Rod of Teeth 


The Rod of Teeth is a sturdy length of bone, stud- 
ded with human teeth. It appears to have been 
carved from a human femur, and the teeth are 
sunk into the bone root-first. Strange runes and 
whorls are carved into the Rod, and inix leather 
provides its grip. 


History 


It is thought that the Rod of Teeth was origi- 
nally carved by a powerful defiler named Atlak- 
Ta, who was the fetish-keeper of Lalali-Puy over 
600 years ago and served the oba of Gulg loyally 
for more than 11 decades. When Atlak-Ta died, 
an apprentice named Habbak claimed the Rod 
and disappeared. It was last known to be in the 
possession of a defiler named Xactan, who lived 
alone in the Tablelands. Xactan was a traveler 
and explorer of ancient ruins, but seven years 
ago he vanished during one of his expeditions. 


Campaign Use 


The Rod of Teeth makes an excellent addition to 
any villainous wizard's arsenal. It is an evil 
thing, but it is not overwhelmingly powerful. It 
can exist in the campaign as a temptation to 
magic-using characters: Once they start to use it, 
it becomes hard to stop. Optionally, the Rod 
makes a great item to be sent in search of. A 
powerful wizard or sorcerer-monarch may 
demand that the PCs find the Rod and bring it to 
him in payment of some debt, or simply under 
the threat of some horrible doom. 


Powers 


Constant. The Rod of Teeth acts as a rod of 
absorption, able to store spell levels equal to the 
number of teeth in the rod. Currently, there are 
33 teeth in the Rod. Each time a charge is 
expended, there is a 10% chance one of the teeth 
will fall out. The Rod of Teeth is a +2 weapon that 


inflicts 1d8 + 2 damage per hit. The Rod of Teeth 
also provides a +2 bonus to saving throws ver- 
sus necromantic spells. 

Invoked. Any wizard struck by the Rod must 
make a saving throw vs. magic, in addition to 
the damage sustained. If the saving throw is 
failed, 1d6 spells are immediately drained from 
the victim's memory (highest-level spells first). 
These spells are transferred to the wielder, who 
can cast them as a wizard (wizards add these 
spells to those memorized). 

Curse. The user risks artifact transformation, as 
his or her alignment shifts to chaotic evil. Worse 
still, every time the spell-stealing power of the 
Rod is used, there is a 5% chance the Rod will 
transfer the victim's psyche instead, suddenly 
replacing the wielder's psyche with the intended 
victim's. (PCs are hence treated as NPCs.) Psy- 
che-displaced characters retain the physical sta- 
tistics of the host, but have the mental 
capabilities (proficiencies, spells, and psionics) 
of the victim. Meanwhile, the psyche-evacuated 
victim's body becomes a mindless husk that dies 
in 1d4 + 2 days. 

This effect can be undone by triggering the 
power in reverse or through the use of a wish. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* When all teeth fall out, the Rod is inert. 
* Return all the remaining teeth to their original 
hosts (now long since buried). 


93 


n 


n 
X, geri nt 
Sao 
Ps 


rr 


Scepter of the Sorcerer-Kings 


This seemingly innocuous Scepter is made of a 
curious blue metal. One end of it is capped by a 
hollow circlet while two curved horns project 
from the other end. Overall, the Scepter has the 
size and heft of a footman's mace. This artifact 
was originally found on Toril in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS® setting. 


History 


It is said that in long-ago Netheril there lived 
sorcerer-kings of such might that they arro- 
gantly considered themselves the equals of 
gods, and as if to prove their claim, they crafted 
items of truly reckless power. Their wanton 
destruction worried the other inhabitants of 
Faerun, and some even called on their gods to 
humble the mighty sorcerer-kings. The world 
shook with these battles, or so it is said. In their 
arrogance, the sorcerer-kings decided to rid 
themselves of these "meddling deities." 

Instrumental in this evil plan was Glaeros 
Lhaerimm, a man many sages blame for causing 
the spread of Anauroch, the Great Desert. 
Glaeros crafted the Scepter in a grim process that 
drained the lives of a dozen apprentices. Noting 
his ambition, the deities sent minions to stop 
him, but each one was destroyed by the other 
sorcerer-kings. Finally, as Glaeros began the 
final stages, the divine minions broke through 
his defenses and destroyed him. The unfinished 
Scepter was then snatched up by another of the 
Netherese sorcerer-kings, who used it to escape 
the fray. 

In the centuries since, the Scepter has turned 
up in the hands of many wizards and warlords, 
the most notable being the lich known as "the 
Harper King." Stolen from that undead ruler 
before his destruction, the Scepter disappeared 
from view for many years. A dozen years ago, a 
mysterious merchant-mage may have used it in 
Sembia, to fight free of an attack by the Red Wiz- 
ards of Thay (who presumably knew what he 
bore). The whereabouts of this mage and the 
Scepter are presently unknown. 


Campaign Use 


The Scepter of the Sorcerer-King is an immensely 
potent device that can easily wreak havoc on an 
otherwise well-balanced campaign—DMs are 
advised to think long and hard before introduc- 
ing this item into the game! Only those DMs 
ready to mercilessly hound the player characters 
with the full consequences of its use introduce 
the Scepter, for once a character wields its power, 
a celestial alarm is sounded and the powers will 
not rest until the Scepter does. 

Clearly, the finding the Scepter is an adventure 
in and of itself. One excellent way to involve the 
characters is to place the Scepter in someone 
else's hands, who then uses it to separate a PC 
priest from his god. After 10 days of silence (and 
no magic), the priest receives a vision of the 
Scepter, with instructions to seek it out. (The PC 
is likely to discover that he is not alone in this 
quest!) 

Particularly vindictive DMs might create a sit- 
uation that allows the PCs to have their cake and 
sicken on it, too: One person in the party could 
find the Scepter (and use 1t), only to have the 
group's cleric discover he must destroy it! (This 
case of double jeopardy is only recommended 
for those players able to role-play the conflict 
without lingering ill feeling.) 

Anyone who finds the Scepter is well advised 
to keep it hidden, using the powerful item only 
for the most desperate situations and then 
immediately hiding the item again. Indeed, 


95 


Scepter of the Sorcerer-Kings 


there is even the possibility that the mortal 
owner of the Scepter might, on the llth day of 
possession, receive a visit from a very irate 
avatar! 


Powers 


Constant. The Scepter automatically rebounds 
any magic or psionic power targeted specifically 
against its wielder (area effects are not included), 
and then magnifies the damage and duration 
tenfold (if possible). A magic missile curves back 
on its caster and inflicts [1d4 + 1] x 10 damage, 
forexample. 

Invoked. Nine times per day, a touch of the 
Scepter (which requires a successful attack roll 
against unwilling targets) can heal or harm, as the 
wielder wills. In either case, the gain or loss is 
2d12 points of damage; furthermore, 1 of these 
points is always a permanent gain or loss. The 
Scepter cannot alter a creature's permanent hit 
point total by more than 9 points, and when this 
number is reached, the creature is no longer 
affected by this property of the scepter, for good 
or ill. The creature's death will not change the 
Scepter's count (a resurrected being doesn't start 
over with the opportunity for another 9 weals or 
woes). 

Once per day, the Scepter can dispel magic auto- 
matically. The item to be dispelled must be 
touched by the Scepter, and a successful attack 
roll must be made if the item is held by an oppo- 
nent. Each time this power is used, there is a 2- 
in-6 chance to drain the item as per a rod of 
cancellation and to create a permanent magic- 
dead area with a 60-foot radius. Only artifacts 
are immune to the effects of this magic-dead 
zone. 

Curse. For 10 full days from the instant the 
Scepter is used, the influence of a single, ran- 
domly-chosen deity is banished from the world 
where the character resides. Note that this 
affects only a single world. If, for example, the 
deity is barred from Toril (in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS® world) it could still potentially be 


96 


active on Selune, the moon of that world. 

While banished, the deity cannot observe, 
control, contact, or influence beings and events 
on that world. The god cannot enter that world 
as an avatar, by manifestation, vision, or posses- 
sion, nor can it send any of its Outer Planar min- 
ions or items, except through the aid of others. 
Note that a gate opened from the barred world 
to the deity's plane is still possible. While the 
diety is barred, new spells cannot be gained by 
any priest or ranger of that following. One deity 
is affected per use of the Scepter, although those 
whose area of control includes magic are 
immune. 

Given the devastating effect of this item, the 
deities of those worlds where the Scepter is 
known (Toril, for instance) have carefully 
instructed their senior priests as to what the 
Scepter looks like and what should be done if it 
appears. Most often, the powers demand the 
death of the wielder. Deities themselves are 
blind to the location or presence of the Scepter, 
and must rely on the eyes of their followers. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* Destined to rid the world of meddling gods, 
the incomplete Scepter can only be destroyed 
by using it to slay a god. 

* The Scepter is destroyed when the last of the 
sorcerer-kings (now potent liches) are hunted 
down and killed. Of course, the Scepter is 
powerless against its makers. 

* The Scepter is destroyed when all the gods for- 
swear any further attempts to involve them- 
selves in the affairs of mortals. 


Seal of Jafar al-Samal 


The Seal is a 3-foot-tall golden jar containing 
four gen that correspond to the four elements. 
The vessel is sealed with lead and inscribed with 
a silver talisman bearing Jafar's name. This item 
is found only in Zakhara. 


History 


Jafar the Incomparable, first sha'ir, made the 
Seal in a distant age, when the four genie lords 
grew jealous of his power and sent an army to 
harass the people of Zakhara. While the Seal was 
in his hands, the genies obeyed all men perforce, 
much as the dao now serve all yak-men, and 
Zakhara enjoyed a golden age. After his death, 
Jafar's foolish students quarreled over the Seal. 
While they squabbled, their own gen united 
against them, stole the jar, and it has remained 
hidden ever since. 


Campaign Use 


The Seal has been hidden by the genies and is 
almost impossible to find—it is protected by 
guardian and slayer genies somewhere on the 
rim of the world. The PCs should find the Seal 
only if the DM wants them to have unprece- 
dented power over the four genie lords (to make 
them cooperate, for instance). And they should 
not be allowed to keep it, but destroying the Seal 
has terrible consequences as well. All sha'irs will 
become the enemy of the owner, as they covet 
the Seal and fear any other who has its power. 
As soon as any of its powers are invoked, all 
genies are aware that it has a new owner, though 
they do not know where it is. Characters should 
soon have their hands full just trying to hang 
onto the Seal. 

Therefore, once the need for the Seal has 
passed, it is best removed from the campaign. 
The easiest method to accomplish this is to allow 
the genies to recover the Seal. If the characters 
covet it, the task of getting the Seal away from 
them becomes an adventure in itself. And when 
the genies regain the Seal, it will be hidden far 
from mortal eyes. 


Powers 


Constant. The Seal's owner gains the abilities 
of a sha'ir at a level equal to his own in any other 
class, and sha'ir gain an additional four levels. 
The Seal functions as a protection from genies 
scroll; no genie can ever destroy the Seal or harm 
the owner of the Seal. 

Invoked. The owner can demand three ser- 
vices (not wishes) of a number of genies not to 
exceed the owner's Wisdom score. 

Random. The Seal has one power each from 
Tables 17-20: Elemental Air, Earth, Fire, and 
Water. 

Curse. Whenever the owner demands a service 
from a genie, he must roll a successful Charisma 
check or the genie is unmoved. Furthermore, suc- 
cessfully commanded genies loathe their masters, 
and although they cannot harm them, they will 
work indirectly against the mortal. Misfortune and 
woe follow the owner of the Seal—strange acci- 
dents and coincidences caused by vengeful genies. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


The Seal must be carried by a tortoise to every 
shrine in Zakhara and blessed by a Moralist 
priest at each one. 

The Seal must be cleansed with the breath of a 
soul, softened in the water of life, heated with 
a spark of the sun, and opened with a moun- 
tain's heart. 

The Seal must be placed on the brow of the 
Forgotten God. 


Silencer of Bodach 


The Silencer of Bodach is a mighty two-handed 
broadsword almost 7 feet in length. Its blade is 
long and straight, and made from an unidentifi- 
able alloy of red metal harder than enchanted 
steel. The blade is diamond-shaped in cross-sec- 
tion and is unusually wide—nearly 7 inches at 
the hilt. Its only decoration appears on the cross- 
guard: a red, glowing rune of ancient design 
whose meaning is now lost. The hilt is made of 
black, watered steel and is wrapped with braxat 
hide. The pommel is crafted in the shape of a 
serpent's skull. 

The sword appears to be too large and 
unwieldy for any warrior short of a half-giant's 
stature, but it is amazingly light and well-bal- 
anced. The massive blade is far lighter than a 
steel edge of the same size. This item is found in 
the DARK SUNG setting. 


History 


In the ancient wars that ravaged Athas, the 
city of Bodach was a great neutral power. Its 
armies and magicians jealously guarded the 
lands ofthe city-state while the rulers refused all 
offers of alliance with the warring defilers and 
preservers. Eventually, the great defiler war- 
lords decided to eliminate Bodach, and a great 
host gathered to destroy the city. 

The leader of this host was a human defiler 
and warlord named Irikos, "the left hand of 
Rajaat." It was Irikos's ancient duty to destroy 
the race of orcs, and when the last orc was no 
more, he turned to the conquest of all who did 
not stand with Rajaat's captains. 

Irikos possessed a powerful weapon named 
the Silencer. Using the weapon, he and his host 
systematically destroyed the armies of Bodach 
and sacked the city. Still, the last and most pow- 
erful sorcerers of Bodach managed to cast a 
mighty spell of destruction against the defiler 
warlord, which blasted Irikos to ashes even as 
his hordes threw down Bodach with fire and 
sword. Only the Silencer survived. 

About three Kings' Ages ago, a wandering 
adventurer named Rimmon discovered the 


98 


ancient weapon in the heart of Bodach's ruins. 
With it she led a band of heartless raiders and 
rose to great power. However, Rimmon dared 
too much. In her arrogance, she gathered a 
horde to attack Balic, but only succeeded in 
angering Andropinis himself. The sorcerer-king 
and his soldiers slaughtered Rimmon's desert 
rabble, although it is recorded that the bandit- 
queen slew a hundred half-giants with the 
Silencer before she was killed herself. The sword 
was reportedly carried away from the defeat by 
one of Rimmon's lieutenants, a wily elf who 
escaped into the wilderness. 

Over the years, the Silencer has appeared in the 
hands of a succession of slave tribes, raiders, and 
savages. Twelve years ago, it was recovered by a 
patrol of Tyrian soldiers from the lair of a fierce 
bandit and brought back to Kalak's armory. But 
with Kalak's death, the sword has disappeared 
again. It is thought that one of Kalak's templars 
took the blade and fled into the desert. 


Campaign Use 


The Silencer is a powerful and evil weapon 
that deludes its owner to dreams of glorious 
conquest and righteous destruction. In fact, its 
extremely impressive array of offensive powers 
lend a fair amount of credence to these urgings, 
and there are few more powerful weapons to be 
found anywhere in the DARK SUN campaign 
setting. However, the Silencer is, to coin a phrase, 
a "double-edged sword." 


Silencer of Bodach 


In dealing with the Silencer, the old adage of 
"He who lives by the sword, dies by the sword," 
is very accurate. If a player character gets his or 
her hands on the sword, allow him or her to 
become intoxicated with new-found power. 
With a weapon of this great power, a character 
can unite the raiders of the desert, tame the thri- 
kreen of the Hinterlands, or master the giants of 
the Silt Sea. In time, the character can shake the 
golden thrones of the sorcerer-kings themselves! 

Yet one day it will come to an end. 

Like all the petty warlords and bandit-kings 
who have previously owned the Silencer, the 
character will eventually find himself con- 
fronted by an enemy beyond his power. The 
character's empire will then collapse around his 
ears before the might of an angry sorcerer-king, 
if not the Dragon itself. 

Another campaign use for the sword could lie 
in its potential as a weapon for Good. A great 
quest in search of a weapon potent enough to 
assassinate a sorcerer-king might be built around 
the legendary blade. Tracing the weapon's 
bloody trail across the Tablelands and bringing 
it to bear against a villain could make a fine 
adventure. 

Several of the sorcerer-kings of the Tyr region 
know of this weapon and remember it from 
Irikos' days. They will recognize the potent 
threat it poses and act to take it for themselves or 
destroy it altogether. The PC who holds this 
weapon will be inviting the wrath of the sor- 
cerer-kings themselves! 


Powers 


Constant. The Silencer of Bodach is a two- 
handed sword +5 that swings like a long sword. 
The blade is incredibly sharp—it ignores any 
nonmetal armor and passes through without 
resistance. (Targets wearing nonmetal armor are 
effectively AC 10, but may count magical adjust- 
ments and Dexterity bonuses.) Tree trunks or 
stone walls can be hacked through at a rate of 10 
feet per round. The sword also provides a +2 
Armor Class bonus to its owner. 


Invoked. By swinging the weapon in great, 
horizontal sweeps, the wielder can effectively 
attack all creatures in a 10-foot radius. The 
swordsman suffers a -4 attack penalty when 
assailing multiple targets this way, unless the 
enemy is very closely packed (e.g., a shield-wall 
or pike formation). If the wielder uses the blade 
in such a reckless fashion, he must also make 
attack rolls against any allies within the 10-foot 
radius of the sword. 

Three times per day, the sword can release a 
mammoth blast of pure force at any target up to 
20 feet distant. This has the effect of a 40- 
foot-square earthquake spell. Gates are sundered, 
walls collapse, small buildings are destroyed, 
and trees uprooted. When aimed at living crea- 
tures, a normal attack roll must be made (as if 
firing a missile weapon, and without the sword's 
magical bonus). Any creature struck suffers 
5dlO points of damage. 

Three times per day, the sword can project a 
tower of iron will psionic power for up to one 
turn. 

Random. The sword possesses three abilities 
from Table 21: Enchantment/Charm, and one 
ability from Table 33: Protections. 

Curse. The sword thrives on bloodlust. Every 
week, the character must save vs. death or per- 
manently lose 1 point of Wisdom. 

The sword also inflicts artifact possession, seek- 
ing to drive its owner to deeds of conquest and 
violence. The owner will attempt to seize com- 
mand of any group, of any size (the bigger, the 
better), and then lead his forces against any foe. 
Worse still, the possessed character develops a 
fanatical hatred of those who would defy or 
imprison Rajaat. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


e Melt the Silencer in the Dragon's breath. 

* Break it on an anvil of meteoric iron. 

e Dissolve it in the foam of the sea (suitable only 
on Athas). 


Sword of Kas 


This sword has a 6-foot blade and a 2-foot hilt, 
and it can be easily wielded with two hands by 
any warrior. The blade is rippled, with a vein of 
gold running down the center. The hilt is 
wrapped in red leather flecked with gold. The 
guards are of unicorn horn and the basket is a 
leering, bearded face from pommel to guard. 


History 


The history of Kas the Bloody Handed is 
irrevocably linked to Lord Vecna, for his Sword 
was created by Vecna's own skill. Kas was 
Vecna's lieutenant, his warlord and assassin, 
and the Sword was his symbol of authority. 

The Sword was as evil as its maker, and it 
whispered dreams of treachery to Kas until 
finally, blade in hand, he confronted his dread 
master. The battle between the two was titanic, 
and both are said to have died in the end. All 
that remained behind were the Sword of Kas and 
the Hand and Eye of Vecna. 


Campaign Use 


Although the Sword is thoroughly evil, player 
characters can be allowed to use the it, though 
only for a short period of time. Any appearance 
of the Sword of Kas should be matched by the 
introduction of the Hand and Eye of Vecna as 
well, since the Sword exists to destroy Vecna. 
Any use of the artifact should be built around 
that story. 

The Sword may be discovered by the player 
characters as a prelude to an adventure involv- 
ing the Hand and Eye, as the owner of the Sword 
becomes obsessed with finding Vecna's artifacts. 
This leads the party into the DM's planned 
adventure for the Eye and Hand. 

The sword is also the bane of the Cult of Vecna, 
since the death of Vecna's followers indirectly ful- 
fills the Sword's goals. Thus, the Sword could lead 
the characters into a conflict with the cult of 
Vecna (which in turn leads to the Eye and Hand). 


100 


Powers 


The Sword of Kas is intelligent (Int 19, Ego 20) 
and communicates telepathically, revealing only 
two, random powers when first touched. 

Constant. The Sword acts as a +6 defender 
(double damage to planar beings), grants fore- 
sight, and defiles holy water within 30 feet. 

Invoked. Upon command, the Sword can 
shield (3/day) or bestow fire giant Strength (+4 
to hit, +10 damage, 1-turn duration, 3/day). 

Random. The Sword grants three abilities from 
Table 24: Immunities and two abilities from 
Table 25: Major Spell-like Powers. 

Curses. First, the Sword inflicts 2d20 damage 
the first time it's touched. Second, all powers fail 
when it's brought within 60 feet of Vecna or his 
artifacts—something the Sword is not aware of. 
Third, the wielder risks artifact domination; the 
Sword's goal is destroy Vecna and his artifacts. 
Last, it must be quenched in blood once per day 
and will try to control its owner to do so. If suc- 
cessful, the character is compelled to kill (even 
another PC). 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* The death of Vecna, now a demi-god. 

* The sword is hammered into a plowshare 
with the cudgel of St. Cuthbert. 

* All memory of Kas must be wiped from Oerth. 


Teeth of Dalhvar-Nar 


The Teeth of Dalhvar-nar are a set of 32 ancient 
red dragon teeth: four 6-inch incisors, two 18- 
inch upper fangs, two 12-inch lower fangs, four 
8-inch canines, eight 6-inch canines, four 4-inch 
bicuspids, and eight 2-inch molars. They are car- 
ried in a deep, coppery-red dragon-hide bag. 


History 


Long ago, as the ancient red dragon Incendax 
sought to increase his territory, he chanced upon 
a large group of young mages and their teacher 
gathering spell components, and he murdered 
them all. The guild's archmages were so out- 
raged that 13 of their greatest members banded 
together to kill the dragon. They tracked Incen- 
dax to his lair and collectively attacked him with 
magic so potent that a massive explosion 
resulted. When the dust settled, all that 
remained of the two forces were the teeth of the 
dragon. 

Dalhvar-nar was a young cleric of some wit 
and ability, whose path to fortune took him to 
that cave centuries later. With a bit of magical 
guidance, he found a patch of loose shale within 
and cleared it away, exposing a dark passage. 
Dalh crawled through, found a huge chamber, 
and was amazed as he looked upon the scorched 
walls and blasted boulders remaining from the 
great battle. Dalh searched through the cavern 
and eventually discovered the dragon's teeth. 
He then gathered them up and stuffed them into 
his pack, figuring a wizard might pay a hand- 
some sum for them. 

On the way back to town, Dalh heard some- 
thing heavy fall to the ground behind him. He 
turned to see what it was and found that one of 
the large dragon fangs had fallen out of his 
backpack. In amazement, Dalh watched as the 
tooth buried itself into the earth, whereupon the 
ground trembled, and up sprang a mighty mon- 
ster! Dalh quickly readied for battle, but instead 
of attacking, the beast kneeled at his feet and 
waited to be commanded. Instead of selling the 
teeth, Dalh decided to experiment with them. 


The cleric's friends thought it quite odd when 
the once-generous Dalh suddenly grew extremely 
preoccupied with his possessions, constantly 
itemizing them and angrily demanding the return 
of everything he had ever lent to another. Then 
his order disowned him, having heard reports of 
his raiding traveling caravans. At last, Dalh van- 
ished after taking up residence in a remote moun- 
tain cave. It is rumored that he was last spotted in 
the clutched talons of a giant gold dragon. 


Campaign Use 


The curse associated with the Teeth of Dalhvar- 
Nar suits it better to used by soon-to-be villain- 
ous NPCs, rather than one of the player 
characters . . . unless the DM wants an anti- 
social, treasure-hungry, miserly PC wreaking 
havoc upon the entire campaign. 

An adventure might begin when the player 
characters enter a town to rest and recuperate. 
That night, the quiet town is attacked by a group 
of monsters led by a "mad old hermit" who lives 
on a nearby mountain. 


Powers 


Constant. A character holding any of the Teeth 
is able to detect the exact number and type of all 
gems and precious metals within 60 feet. Having 
any of the Teeth on their person also allows the 
character to speak and understand the language 


101 


Teeth of Dalhvar-Nar 


of red dragons, and the tongue common to all 
evil dragons. Finally, possessing any of the Teeth 
grants a character immunity to all forms of fire. 

Invoked. These powers are released only if 
the Teeth (not including the molars) are thrust 
point-first into the ground. If the surface is any 
form of soil (clay, dirt, sand, etc.), the Teeth sink 
in and a monster emerges in 1d4 rounds. On any 
other surface, or if dropped on their sides, the 
Teeth lie there until picked up. After being used, 
they magically reappear among the rest of the 
Teeth in 1d2 1 days. 

Summoned monsters serve the owner of the 
Teeth for 30 rounds and follow all other guide- 
lines specified in Monster Summoning I. Each of 
the 18-inch upper fangs summons one 7-HD 
remorhaz or three 15-HD fire giants; the 12-inch 
lower fangs each summon three 7-HD wyverns 
or four eight-headed, 6-HD hydras; the 8-inch 
canines each summon six 4-HD fire toads; the 6- 
inch canines each summon 1dlO 2-HD lizard 
men; and the 4-inch bicuspids each create a 60- 
foot-diameter wall of fire 20 feet high and lasting 
20rounds. 

The eight molars work in the following man- 
ner: The tooth must be physically planted in a 
hole 2 inches or deeper, which takes 1d4 rounds. 
After the dirt is patted flat (one more round), a 
puff of smoke issues forth, engulfs the character, 
and endows him with its power. The DM should 
roll 1d8 and consult the following table: 


1) The user can teleport without error. 

2) The owner can invoke from his palm a 6- 
foot-long cone of magical fire, growing from 3 
inches at the base to 3 feet at the end. 

3) The owner can fly (as the spell) for 25 turns. 

4) The character can make a suggestion with a 
duration of 21 hours. 

5) The holder can invoke domination with a 200- 
yard range. 

6) The owner can transmute rock to mud (or the 
reverse) in a 100-foot cube. 

7) The wielder can invoke improved invisibility 
with a 10-round duration. 

8) The user can invoke disintegrate. 


102 


All powers of the molars have a "casting 
time" of 3, once the character is empowered. 
Spell-like abilities may be interrupted and 
wasted, just like normal spells. 

Curse. The character possessing the Teeth 
immediately becomes chaotic evil in alignment 
and cannot bear to be separated from the Teeth. 
He will immediately retrieve any Teeth that fall 
upon an impenetrable surface, ignoring any- 
thing happening around him. 

After possessing the Teeth for one week, the 
character begins to horde all his possessions, 
developing accurate lists and going so far as to 
spend vast periods of time counting them— valu- 
able or not. In the third week, the owner searches 
for a large cave extending deep within a moun- 
tain, to dwell in solitude. In the fourth week, any- 
one approaching the character or their 
possessions is perceived as a thief. The character 
receives a -5 reaction adjustment to former friends 
and will immediately attack approaching 
strangers. Once the cave is established, the char- 
acter assumes the habits and attitudes of an 
ancient red dragon. They maintain a haughty and 
condescending attitude, they enjoy surveying the 
surrounding countryside from their cave, a fierce 
hatred of gold dragons develops, and the owner 
aspires to establish and hold a large territory. 

When the teeth are no longer possessed for 
1d4 + 2 weeks, the character returns to his origi- 
nal alignment and loses the traits of the dragon 
(n reverse order) over a period of two weeks. At 
the DM's option, the side-effects of alignment 
change remain with the character. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


Allow the Teeth to soak in 32 doses of sweet 
water for 1,000 years, whereupon they will rot 
away. 

Pull all the teeth of a conscious ancient red 
dragon and replace them with the artifacts 
without explaining what you're doing. 

Bathe the Teeth in the breath of 32 different 
types of dragons within 32 days. 


Throne of the Gods 


The Throne of the Gods is an ornate chair, large 
enough to seat a storm giant. Scintillating gems 
and mosaics adorn its arms, back, and legs. The 
Throne itself protrudes from the rear wall of a 
100-yard-diameter cavern and sits upon a floor 
of billowing clouds. 


History 


When the gods created the multiverse, they 
needed a way to communicate with mortals on 
the many planes, so they merged their powers 
and created the Throne. The wondrous chair 
exists on all planes simultaneously, and it can be 
used by any god. Its existence has long since 
drifted into the legends of many planes, but it is 
the one on the Prime Material Plane that is dis- 
cussed here. 

On occasion, an individual strives to preserve 
and protect the gods' Throne, but over the years 
most of them have banded together into a small, 
fanatical cult called the Seekers. In their quest 
for the Throne, the Seekers have dispatched 
emissaries throughout the lands, seeking signs 
of the artifact in ancient religious texts. Many of 
these tomes describe a divine throne located at 
the center of a mighty mountain, but as the reli- 
gions share no common geographical location, 
the Seekers believe the Throne moves about in a 
manner that is incomprehensible to mortals. 

On rare occasions, mortals have found the 
Throne, and Randy] the Bold was one of them. In a 
mountain reputed to hold great treasure, Randyl's 
party fought many battles in twisting tunnels for 
many months. Randy! was the only one to find 
the Throne room, but he was tired, bleeding from 
many wounds, and oblivious to his surroundings. 
He rested upon the huge Throne, unaware of its 
true nature, wondering how he might be strong 
enough to escape, when he was engulfed in a 
bright blue glow. Randy! leaped from the seat and 
watched in amazement as his arms, chest, and 
legs expanded with bulging muscles. Not under- 
standing what had transpired, Randy! fled the 
room and escaped the mountain. 


Years later, the Seekers heard of Randyl's 
exploit and sent Zatar the mage to question him 
about it. Although the Seekers normally col- 
lected information about the Throne to prevent 
power-hungry despots from finding it, Randyl's 
tale sparked a flash of greed within Zatar; he 
was overwhelmed by the unlimited magical 
abilities that might be his. 

Secretly Zatar put together an expedition, and 
after many long months of searching and many 
great perils, Zatar and his company found the 
Throne. Greedily he approached it, climbed upon 
the mighty seat, and sat there, running his hands 
over the treasures that protruded through the 
ivory and gold mosaics. Suddenly, an eerie blue 
glow radiated from the throne, engulfing the 
mage and blinding his companions. When the 
light receded, the party found a crumpled, 
whimpering figure on the Throne. Zatar, now a 
babbling idiot, attacked his companions, who 
killed him in self-defense and quickly departed. 


Campaign Use 


The Throne of the Gods is an artifact designed 
for high-level parties. While any character can 
sit on the Throne, the trick lies in deciding how 
the artifact will react. If and when a character 
sits upon the Throne, the DM should instruct the 
player to declare what his character is thinking. 
The PC's response determines the invoked 
power or subsequent curse. 


103 


Throne of the Gods 


One possible adventure might find the party 
in a dying village. Approached by an elderly 
shaman, they are told of a mighty wizard who 
destroyed their holy idol. Ever since its destruc- 
tion, the village has been slowly wasting away. 

Unable to face the rigors of the journey him- 
self, the shaman gives the PCs a drawing of an 
idol. He tells the PCs that they must seek a 
mighty throne that lies deep within a nearby 
mountain, sit upon the chair while staring at the 
picture, and think only of the idol. The shaman 
warns the party that thinking of anything else 
will unleash the fury of the gods upon them all. 

Finding the chamber wherein the Throne lies is 
stuff for an excellent adventure in itself, but the 
addition of a powerful band of Seekers that zeal- 
ously attempts to prevent the party from achiev- 
ing its goal will spice up the scenario nicely. 


Powers 


Constant. An anti-magic shell radiates from the 
base of the Throne and fills the entire chamber— 
only the Throne is unaffected. 

Invoked. A character sitting upon the Throne 
with a clear, concise desire in mind has an 85% 
chance that the Throne will fulfill his request. 
The Throne reads the character's desire and 
responds to it within one round. 

A single prime attribute score can be raised up 
to 3 points—not to exceed 20 points—if a PC 
requests this. The player must speak in charac- 
ter, i.e., he cannot say "I want my Strength score 
to improve." Rather, he must say, "I wanting to 
fight with the endurance of a giant," (increasing 
Constitution) or "I want to be as strong as a 
giant" (increasing Strength). Similarly, experi- 
ence levels can be raised to within 1 point of the 
next level, but the request should center on the 
character desiring to be better in his class. 

A magical item also may be granted to a char- 
acter on the Throne. PCs requesting any item 
with variable bonuses receive a +1 magical ver- 
sion of the item. Others who desire a more 
potent version of an item they already possess 


104 


will add +1 to it (to a maximum of +3). Obvi- 

ously, the exact item should be clearly visualized 

within the character's mind. 

Curse. The gods are offended when mere 
mortals use the Throne of the Gods, even if they 
have humble intentions. Normally, the Throne 
grants 85% of reasonable requests. If the request 
is not granted, then the gods were displeased for 
some unknown reason. The character will suffer 
instead (determine randomly) a -1 cursed item, - 
1 to all prime attributes, or he'll be teleported 10 
miles away. 

Any character daring the throne for a second 
try immediately incurs the wrath that matches 
their folly (listed below). Those foolish enough 
to attempt a third try instantly find themselves 
alone, in a face to face battle with a random god 
on its home plane. 

* A character desiring godlike powers has all of 
his prime attributes reduced by 2. 

* If the character desires a magical item or 
device belonging to a god, an item buried in 
the throne, or a second magical item, the god 
grants the desire with a twist: The character 
receives a -4 version that appears to be the 
item requested if analyzed by any and all 
means. 

* Should something not specifically listed 
under the invoked powers be desired, the 
character is teleported in a random direction to 
a location 1dIOO miles away. 

* Lacking a clear, concise desire in mind will 
find the character entirely at the mercy of the 
gods. One of the three above fates should 
either be hand-selected or randomly deter- 
mined. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


* Force any major power, under pain of death, 
to unmake the Throne. 

* Wish it had never been built 1,000 times. 

* Dissolve the entire mountain currently hous- 
ing the throne, using 1,000 transmute rock to 
mud spells cast by fiends. 


Triad of Betrayal 


There are three elements in the Triad of Betrayal: a 
coin, a golden circlet, and a dagger. The Coin 
appears as a common copper piece, both sides 
depicting a fat-jowled merchant. One face smiles 
cajolingly and the other sneers scornfully. The 
Circlet is simply an unadorned circlet of beaten 
gold. There are no other identifying marks to be 
found on the circlet, not even the runes or mark- 
ing typical of other powerful magical items. The 
Dagger is double-edged, with a nasty barb at its 
tip and a blood groove that runs the length of 
the blade. The hilt of the Dagger is wrapped in 
mottled snake skin, though none can say for cer- 
tain what type of serpent it came from. The 
pommel bears a bright (some would say flam- 
ing) red garnet. 


History 


The Triad of Betrayal was created for the god 
Hiddukel by the mastersmith-god Reorx. Then, 
Hiddukel imbued each of the artifacts with his 
essence and set them free in the world, to thwart 
the will of the goddess Mishakal. The Triad of 
Betrayal was Hiddukel's answer to Mishakal's 
Circle of Love, and each of the Evil artifacts fol- 
lows its Good counterpart. 

The Triad first appeared in the Age of Might, 
when Hiddukel convinced Reorx that these 
items were necessary for the world. Trusting his 
fellow god, Reorx did as he was asked, not fore- 
seeing the other's evil intent in the matter. When 
Hiddukel enchanted the items with evil and set 
them free in the world of Krynn, he placed them 
where they would be sure to attract attention. 
The malevolent diety knew that the Triad would 
eventually end up in the hands of those who 
would use them for evil, and Hiddukel was 
ready to push them along that path. 

The three pieces of the Triad are the Coin of 
Luck (also known as the Coin of Greed), the Dag- 
ger of Vengeance, and the Golden Circlet (also 
known as the Circlet of Pride). 


Campaign Use 


Since the Triad of Betrayal was created to 
counter items created by the goddess Mishakal, 
the pieces of the Triad constantly follow in the 
path of the Circle of Love. Hence, the Triad can 
become involved in the campaign by having the 
PCs discover one or more parts of the Circle of 
Love. 


Powers 


Constant. The Coin acts as a luckstone, some- 
times adding a bonus of +2 to any die roll (roll 
1d6: even = +0; odd = 42). 

The Dagger functions as a dagger of venom, but 
secretes its own extremely potent venom (suc- 
cessfully save vs. poison with a -2 penalty or die). 

The Circlet can command up to 8 HD of crea- 
tures, once per turn. Commands must be only 
one word, spoken in a tongue that can under- 
stood, and each lasts for one round. (Alterna- 
tively, the user can focus on a single creature of 
up to 4 HD and within 60 feet, and control that 
creature as long as concentration lasts.) When this 
power is used, Hiddukel places into the mind of 
the user an offer of great power in exchange for 
an oath of service. If the person accepts, the full 
range of powers becomes available. 

Invoked. After the Coin has revealed itself as a 
tool of Hiddukel, the user can cast continual dark- 
ness 15' radius. Once per turn, the bearer also can 


105 


Triad of Betrayal 


cast suggestion on anyone, but only to sow dis- 
cord. Finally, it can cast curse and bestow curse 
(the reverse of bless and remove curse). 

If the Dagger is used for vengeance, it can 
be used to backstab at +4 to hit. It inflicts 1d4 + 
2 damage and requires a successful saving 
throw vs. poison with a -2 penalty to avoid 
death. On a roll of 18-20, the Dagger injects a 
second dose of poison, requiring a second save 
vs. poison at -4. 

The Circlet can be used at will to heat or chill 
metal and to cast modified command spells of 
seven words or less. It also adds +2 to Charisma, 
but subtracts -2 from Wisdom. 

Random. The Coin can create a 20-foot anti- 
magic shell at Hiddukel's whim, which he does 
to place the bearer at a disadvantage so that he 
must bargain even further for his life. In this 
way, Hiddukel ensures that no bearer of the Coin 
will escape his grasp. 

The Dagger and Circlet have no random pow- 
ers. 

Resonating: The Triad has no resonating pow- 
ers. True to the name of betrayal, each of these 
items works separately only. While they might 
be used by the same person, the items can never 
add their powers together, for cooperation is not 
in the nature of Evil. 

Curse. Anyone invoking the Coin of Greed's 
powers must make a successful system shock 
roll or become scarred and lose 1 point of 
Charisma. The user of the Coin eventually 
becomes more corrupt, greedy, and jealous, until 
he precipitates his own downfall or until Hid- 
dukel can betray him in a fashion befitting such 
an evil god. 

The Dagger slowly gains control over its 
wielders, especially those who harbor resent- 
ment or jealousy. With each use, the Dagger 
gradually shifts its user's alignment toward 
chaotic evil (as follows: lawful good, neutral 
good, chaotic good, lawful neutral, neutral, 
chaotic neutral, lawful evil, neutral evil, chaotic 
evil). The Dagger renders the user suspicious, 
paranoid, and temperamental. Anytime a PC or 
NPC does something the bearer might consider 


106 


a threat, the bearer must make a Wisdom check, 
minus the number of times the character has 
used the Dagger. If the check fails, the character 
flies into a rage and must attack the offender. 
Finally, the Dagger calls out to its previous own- 
ers. Any owner who has a combined Intelligence 
and Wisdom of less than 27 pursues the Dagger 
fanatically, seeking to possess it again. 

Anytime someone uses the major powers of 
the Circlet, they lose 1 hit point permanently. 
However, these hit points can be recovered by 
attacking someone with bare hands, feet, or 
teeth—a successful hit drains 2 levels from the 
target and restores 2 hit points, up to the user's 
original maximum. However, each time this 
power is used, the user must make a successful 
system shock roll or permanently lose 1d3 Con- 
stitution. If the Constitution score falls to 0, the 
user becomes a mindless spectre and the Circlet 
moves on to another owner. 

This artifact ultimately corrupts the user, leav- 
ing him conceited, arrogant, and boastful. Only 
then can the user attract minions who share his 
prejudices and hatreds. 


Suggested Means of Destruction 


Coin: Place it atop its counterpart in the Circle 
of Love, the Hands of the Healing Spirit. Dagger: 
Clash it against its counterpart in the Circle, 
the Armband of Trueheart's Warding. Circlet: 
Place the Ring of Nature's Love, the Circlet's 
opposite, within the boundaries of the Circlet. 
Return any part to the god Reorx, who wishes 
to atone for the evil his creations have 
wrought. 

* Coin: Re-mint it in the fires of the 13 volca- 
noes around Sanction. Dagger: Throw it 
through a portal into the Abyss, where Takhi- 
sis reigns and tolerates no meddling from 
Hiddukel. Circlet: Place it upon the head of a 
completely pride-free individual of lawful 
good alignment, where it shatters into 1,001 
pieces. 


Creating Magical Items 


It's one thing for a wizard to recharge a wand— 
a few spells, a little time, and poof, the work is 
done. Recharging wands, though, is small pota- 
toes. No mage will ever gain fame powering up 
items because there is far more respect for the 
mastery and skill it takes to create new spells 
and new magical devices. Certainly no mage 
will ever impress his peers with a title like 
Theobard, the Mighty Recharger; better it 
should be Theobard the Ingenious, Theobard, 
Master of Thunder and Lightning, or Theobard 
the Mystic Craftsman. At least these are impres- 
sive cognomens that reflect honorably upon the 
wizard. 

Of course, making magical items has a purely 
practical side, too. What is made can be used, 
and this is more often the motive for creating 
magical goods. Most the wizard or priest cre- 
ates for personal use, but there are reasons to 
make magical items for others. Many are made 
to be given as gifts or bribes. The gift of a long 
sword +2 won't hurt when seeking the local 
baron's permission to build a wizard's tower or 
when smoothing over that embarrassing prob- 
lem when the laboratory explodes in the center 
of town. Magical items can also be used to pay 
taxes. In fact, clever kings insist wizards pay in 
magic. Making magical items for friends and 
companions is an act of generosity and kind- 
ness. It also strengthens the adventuring party, 
especially since a spellcaster cannot do every- 
thing personally. 

Of course, a wizard also could do it for 
money—and some do. (This is unthinkable to a 
devout priest, except perhaps for those devoted 
to a deity of wealth or greed.) There are few 
customers, though, who can pay enough to 
cover the time, effort, materials, and risk 
required to create a magical item. A permanent 
magical item can take months of continuous 
effort (no adventuring allowed). Worse still (for 
mages), the permanency spell sucks away life 
and vitality. Few wizards are willing to drain 
their own lives for the sake of a few coins. 
Those who are willing are often driven by 
pathetic motives. If a wizard needs to raise 


cash, there are easier and far less debilitating 
ways to do so. 

Ultimately, there is one often overlooked 
reason for creating magical items—ego. 
Whether they like it or not, wizards and priests 
are mortal, and with death their names eventu- 
ally fade. The few who have escaped the obliv- 
ion of time did so by giving their names to 
wonders of arcane craft. Some, through their 
spells, are known only to other spellcasters; a 
satisfying, perhaps, but less than universal 
recognition. It is only by the creation of won- 
drous and great magical items that a wizard 
can hope to achieve true fame. Even the com- 
mon folk have heard of such devices as Buck- 
nard's everfull purse and Keoghtom's ointment. 


Setting Up Shop 


Before a spellcaster can even begin making 
magical items, there are a few prerequisites that 
must be met. The spellcaster must be of suffi- 
cient level and must have a place to work. With- 
out these basic needs fulfilled, it is impossible 
for the spellcaster to even hope to create any 
magical item. 


Level Requirements 


A player cannot simply announce that a PC 
wizard (or priest) intends to start making magi- 
cal items. Spellcasters have to attain specific 
levels before even the most basic fabrication 
can begin. Lower-level spellcasters are still 
working at their studies or devotions, gaining 
the skills, knowledge, and insights needed to 
master the tricky business of artificing magic. 
The level requirements are summarized on 
Table 4: Level Limits for Fabrication. 

Once a spellcaster reaches the required level, 
it is assumed the necessary skills have been 
gained through research and study to create 
the listed group of magical items. The character 
is not limited to known magical items within 


107 


Creating Magical Items 


that group but can try to create any item so 
long as it falls within that category. For exam- 
ple, Feran, a priest, is now able to make 
potions. He is not limited to the potions listed 
in the rule books—he could try to make unique 
potions, such as a potion of trap finding or an oil 
of silence. The knowledge of potion brewing 
immediately allows him to undertake his own 
experiments. 

Of course, merely being of the minimum level 
is no promise of ability. Most powerful magical 
items require high-level spells, with the levels 
needed to cast them well above the minimums 
required to create items. 


Table 4: Level Limits for Fabrication 


Magical Item Minimum Level: 


Wizard Priest 
Scroll 9 7 
Potion 9 9 
Other Item 11 11 


108 


The Wizard's Laboratory 


Integral to the process of wizardly fabrica- 
tion of magical items is the mage's laboratory. 
This is more than a mere workshop. It also 
must serve at times as a forge, study, dis- 
tillery, cloister, greenhouse, observatory, incu- 
bator, and even prison. Within its walls, the 
wizard must be able to deal with virtually any 
contingency, from quelling a rampaging ele- 
mental to dissipating the toxic fumes of 
strange orchids. 

A basic laboratory must have at least 500 
square feet of floor space—a 25-foot x 20-foot 
room. It is a good idea to have a larger space so 
that valuable equipment can be stored well out 
of the potential blast radius of one's latest 
experiment. It is best if the furnishings are sim- 
ple (several large tables, bookcases, cupboards, 
chairs and stools) and sturdy; wizards have a 
way of spilling caustic fluids or starting acci- 
dental fires. A small furnace of some sort is 
absolutely necessary, as many preparations 
require rare elements to be melted and mixed 
with other exotic ingredients. Any wizard who 
plans to make magical weaponry or armor had 
best install a forge where these larger items can 
be heated and hammered. It is possible to do 
this work in a blacksmith's shop, if the smith 
can be convinced to give up his shop for weeks 
ata time. 

With all the heat, fumes, and smoke, ventila- 
tion is important. The easiest solution is to have 
several large open windows. If these are well- 
placed, they can serve as a simple observatory, 
too. Celestial sightings are important to many 
arcane processes, a fact that helps to explain the 
tendency of wizards to build their laboratories 
in towers. 

Most wizards must assemble sizable libraries 
(books of calculations, formulae, celestial 
movements, herbals, and more), and it is com- 
mon to sequester these in a safe corner of the 
laboratory, far from flame and possible explo- 
sion. Well-to-do wizards may keep a separate 
library to lessen the risk, but they must still 


Creating Magical Items 


consult books in the midst of their work. At 
least one small bookcase is handy. 

Finally, there is always the need for a large, 
clear floor space. Elementals must be sum- 
moned and diagrams drawn. These take space, 
and doing them in the laboratory attracts less 
attention than working on the front stoop. 

A room and its furnishings are not all that the 
wizard needs. There are a large number of 
smaller tools and devices necessary to complete 
the laboratory. Each must be made with careful 
precision by skilled craftsmen, often using rare 
or unusual materials. The minimum cost of out- 
fitting a laboratory is 2,000 gp (for potions only) 
or 5,000 gp for a complete set-up. There is no 
point in spending any less, for the character will 
always discover some vital piece of equipment 
is missing, even if it is only used it once and then 
stuck on a shelf to gather dust. This cost pays for 
beakers, retorts, distilling coils, copper kettles, 
alembics, scales, weights, mortars, crucibles, 


herbs, armillary spheres, tongs, ladles, bottles, 
charts, rare earths, exotic waxes, candles, aro- 
matic oils, chalks, and more. Once these goods 
are obtained, the wizard must pay 10% of the 
original cost every month just to maintain and 
replace tools and basic materials. 


The Priest’s Altar 


Compared to wizards, the needs of priests are 
far simpler, a point most priests make with 
pride. Their efforts, unencumbered by needless 
paraphernalia, highlight the divine superiority 
of priestly power. They do not need to mix, dis- 
till, or transmute magical power; prayers and 
devotion are sufficient. 

Jealous wizards claim that priests are bound 
by needs even more rigid than their own 
researches. Where wizards can blend, distill, and 
experiment, priests must perform ceremonies 


109 


Creating Magical Items 


Table 5: Deities’ Altars 


Area of Control 
Age, time 
Agriculture 

Air 

Beauty 

Chaos 

Children 

Cold 

Courage 

Craft 

Creation 

Death, destruction 
Disease 

Earth 

Fate, fortune 
Fire, heat 

Food, hearth, home 
Friendship 
Healing 
Heavens, night 
Hunt 

Justice 

Love 

Madness 

Magic 

Mercy 

Morning 
Nature 

Oceans 

Order 

Pain 

Poetry, writing, music 
Prophesy 
Protection 
Royalty 

Sun, light 
Thieves, deception 
Trade, contracts 
Travel 

Truth 
Vengeance 

Vice 

War 

Wealth 
Weather 

Wine 

Wisdom 
Women 


110 


Suggested Altar 
Clock tower, sundial 
Field, orchard, barn 
Rooftop 

Bath 

Moveable 

Nursery, orphanage 
Glacier, snowfield 
Arena 

Workshop 

Field, spring 
Graveyard, battlefield 
Swamp 

Cave 

Gambling den 
Smithy, fire pit 
Kitchen 

Tavern 

Sickroom 
Observatory 

Forest 

Prison 

Garden 

Wasteland 
Wizard's laboratory 
Almshouse 

Facing east 

Grove 

Ship 

Royal court 

Torture chamber 
Library, theater 
Library 

Fortified tower 
Palace 

Open to the sky 
Thieves’ guild 
Marketplace 

Gates 

Maze 

Crossroads 

Den of iniquity 
Armory, castle 
Counting house, mint 
Open to the sky 
Vineyard 

Library 

Nunnery 


Po 


involving elaborate trappings and rigid rituals 
to achieve the same effect. The truth is that nei- 
ther group is as free as they claim or as hide- 
bound as the other believes. 

Before magical items can be created, a priest 
must first prepare a specially consecrated altar 
to the appropriate deity. It must be prepared by 
the same priest who will later use it—one 
priest cannot "borrow" the altar of another 
(and especially not one of another faith!) to 
make magical items. Size and space are only 
important in their relation to the deity's needs. 
Feronelle, a priestess of a god of knowledge, 
could create a personal altar in the small library 
of her house. Talafar, a druid, needs to build 
his in at least a garden, if not deep in the woods 
themselves. 

The first step in preparing an altar is select- 
ing an appropriate site. The altar can always be 
part of a larger temple or the priest can step 
up a personal altar elsewhere. This might be 
a chapel in the keep, a grove in the deep woods, 
or even a small table in one's study. For these 
personal altars, the location must reflect the 
nature of the deity. Suggested locations 
are given on Table 5: Deities' Altars. Others 
can be devised by the DM or proposed by 
characters. 

The suggested altars are not always specific 
sites. Some only require that a condition be met, 
such as the priest of a morning deity setting an 
altar at an eastern window. Others require sites 
not likely to be found in a typical priest's 
dwelling. The priest of a vengeful god is going 
to have to make special arrangements to have an 
altar at a crossroads (an ill-omened location). 
Sometimes arrangements can be made with 
owners or officials—the followers of gods ofjus- 
tice are allowed to maintain altars at local pris- 
ons in exchange for their help and services, for 
example. Owners of gambling dens are usually 
willing to rent out a small alcove that a priest 
can dedicate to the goddess of fortune. (Of 
course, the owner might become upset if the 
deity is too generous in answering her peti- 


Creating Magical Items 


tioner's pleas.) 

Whatever the site is, it does not have to be 
extraordinary. Any serviceable location that 
meets the requirements should do. Still, a 
choice location certainly reflects well on the 
priest. 

The site must be specially consecrated before 
it can be used. This requires exacting rituals to 
invoke the deity's attention. While the rituals 
vary depending on the deity beseeched, all 
require the expenditure of at least 2,000 gp. 
This money is spent on materials needed for 
the ceremony—special vestments, candles, 
chalices, and the like. The necessary rituals 
take at least one week to perform. During 
these rituals the priest cannot be called away 
to other duties. At the end of each week, a 
check is made to see if the power's favor is 
gained. The chance of success is a percentage 
equal to 5 times the character's level, plus an 
additional 5 for every consecutive week spent 
in prayer. A 7th level priest who spends 5 
weeks in devotion would have a 60% chance 
of success [(7 x 5) + (5 x 5) = 60]. The priest 
automatically knows when these prayers have 
been heard. 

Even after the prayers, the consecration is not 
complete. The deity's attention has been gained, 
but the priest's devotion must now be proven. 
The priest must surrender something of value 
or perform a special quest, whichever is 
demanded by the deity. The DM decides what 
must be given up or what quest will be under- 
taken. Effort should be taken to match the 
demand to the nature of the power. A healing 
goddess might require the priest to go among 
the poor and heal one hundred of the sick. A 
war god might instruct his priestess to go to the 
court and chastise the king for cowardice. A 
god of wealth might ask for the character's gem 
of flawlessness (assuming the character has one). 
Only after this demand has been met is the altar 
finished. 

Once the altar has been consecrated, it remains 
so unless it is defiled or the priest who created it 


dies. Just what might cause defilement is left to 
the DM's discretion. (Holy symbols of a rival 
deity are quite likely to be effective in this case.) 
The altar has an aura of the deity's blessing that 
functions as a permanent bless spell with a 
radius of 10 feet. This only benefits priests and 
devout worshippers of the deity, however. This 
aura can be temporarily broken by a dispel magic 
spell. 


Approval 


The last prerequisite of making any magical 
item applies to the player, not the player charac- 
ter. Before a player character can begin work on 
any device, the player must have the DM's 
approval. The item, with all its powers and limi- 
tations, must be described to the DM, preferably 
in writing. This gives the DM a chance to con- 
sider the item's effects and make adjustments if 
needed. Furthermore, it gives the DM a chance 
to figure out what the PC must do to create the 
desired item. 

Players seeking approval for an item must 
remember that the DM has the right to say yea 
or nay. The DM can ask for changes in the 
name of play balance or fun and can outright 
veto the project as being too powerful. DMs 
considering player requests should remember 
to be flexible. Look for ways to accommodate 
the player's desires without ruining the cam- 
paign. Be cooperative, not antagonistic. Offer 
improvements and refinements to make the 
item better. 


Standard vs. Nonstandard 
Magical Items 


Whenever a character wants to create an 
item, the DM must determine if the item is 
standard, nonstandard, or semistandard. This 
classification is important to the creation 
process since it will affect the time, resources, 


111 


Creating Magical Items 


and difficulty needed to create a magical 
device. 

Standard items are those already known in 
the campaign world. Normally this includes 
all magical items described in the DUNGEON 
MASTER" Guide and the Tome of Magic, but 
the DM can rule that seldom-found devices 
fall under the nonstandard classification. Stan- 
dard devices also include simple variations on 
an existing item. A ring of magic missiles that 
functions just like a wand of magic missiles can 
be classed as a standard item. Since the effects 
of standard items are already well known in 
most games, there is little difficulty in ap- 
proving these. In these cases, the DM needs 
to decide just how the item is made, not 
whether it is balanced. A standard magical 
item is also somewhat easier to make than a 
unique item, since there exist formulae and 
texts to advise the player character on the 
needed procedures. 

Nonstandard items lie at the other end of the 
scale. These are typically original items, magi- 
cal devices that have no counterpart in any of 
the rule books. Items that deviate greatly from 
the standard description are also nonstandard. 
For example, a wand of frost that gains charges 
by absorbing spell levels (like a staff of power) is 
a nonstandard item. The DM can also rule that 
seldom-discovered magical items are nonstan- 
dard, such as the iron bands of Bilarro. The DM 
should consider these items carefully, since 
their powers may have unforeseen conse- 
quences on the campaign. For the player char- 
acter, nonstandard items are harder to make 
since there are no guides or formula books to 
help the character. In this case the character is 
working in a void. 

In a few instances, the DM can position an 
item between standard and nonstandard. The 
item is very similar to a standard item, but has 
enough differences to make it questionable. It is 
perfectly legitimate to classify such items as 
neither fish nor fowl but somewhere in 
between. For convenience, such items are 


112 


termed semistandard. A wand of disbelief—one 
that affects illusions similar to a wand of nega- 
tion's effect on other wands—could be classed 
as a semistandard item. It would function in the 
same manner, but has enough differences that it 
cannot be called standard. For the character, 
there may be texts that help with the work, but 
only some of it. The rest must be discovered by 
the spellcaster. 


Difficulty Ratings 


Making a magical item is not an easy task. 
While most players and DMs know this, there is 
always a question of just how difficult it is. How 
much time and effort should a player character 
spend to create a potion of fire resistance? Is creat- 
ing a short sword +1 harder than making a ring of 
spell storing? 

To help the DM answer these questions, every 
magical item can be assigned a difficulty rating, 
a number that measures the comparative effort 
needed to create that device. A potion of fire resis- 
tance has a lower difficulty rating than a ring of 
spell storing. A scroll with one spell has an even 
lower difficulty rating. 

The difficulty rating is used to fix the amount 
of time needed to create the magical item, the 
cost of the components, and the chance that the 
item will be successfully created. Items with 
high difficulty ratings take longer to make, cost 
more, and, when all is said and done, are more 
likely to result in failure. On the plus side, items 
with high difficulty ratings are usually quite 
potent, as befits the powerful forces needed to 
bind the magic together. 

The difficulty rating of an item is based on 
many factors, including the number of times the 
item can be used, how many spells must be used 
to create it, what processes must be followed to 
make the item, and whether the item is standard 
or nonstandard. Every factor is assigned a 
numerical rating or multiplier, and by totaling 
these, the item's difficulty rating is calculated. 


Creating Magical Items 


Number of Uses 


All magical items can be divided into five cat- 
egories of use: single-use, limited-use, recharge- 
able, permanent, and multiple-use items. These 
classifications progressively increase the diffi- 
culty rating of the item. 

Single-use is just what it says—the device is 
consumed the instant it is used. Lacking any 
permanence once their stored magic is acti- 
vated, these items tend to be the least difficult 
to make. 

Limited-use items are those that can be acti- 
vated several times or are simply created in 
a larger quantity, thus allowing several ap- 
plications. This increases the difficulty over 
a single-use item, but since the item is eventu- 
ally consumed, it falls below the rechargeable 
category. 

Rechargeable items are those that can be used 
more than once and can have power restored to 
them. While these items technically have a fixed 
number of uses, recharging can make them near- 
permanent. Thus, they are more difficult to 
make than disposable items, but not as hard as 
truly permanent devices. 

Permanent items are those that have constant 
magic, usable over and over again. Such items 
are hard to make, not only because of their diffi- 
culty ratings (which tend be quite high), but also 
because of the need for permanency spells to bind 
the magic. 

The most difficult items of all tend to be 
multiple-use items. These are devices that 
combine several different categories of use. A 
rod of terror is both a +2 weapon (permanent 
use) and is a non-rechargeable device (limited- 
use). The rod's difficulty would be increased 
by both usages, making it even more difficult 
to create than either a permanent or limited- 
use item. 


Examples of Use 


Single-Use Items 

Potion of flying 

Oil of disenchantment 

Scroll with one spell 

Scroll of protection from cold 

Rod of cancellation 

One bean from a bag of beans 

One pinch of dust of dryness 
Limited-Use Items 

Potion of extra-healing 

Scroll with several spells 

Any ring of wishes 

Rod of resurrection 

Wand of negation 

Gem of brightness 

Necklace of missiles 
Rechargeable Items 

See Appendix A 
Permanent Items 

Ring of chameleon power 

Staff-mace 

Cloak of the bat 

Sword +1 
Multiple-Use Items 

Rod of smiting 

Rod of terror 

Beaker of plentiful potions 

Deck of many things 


Spells 


Another factor that affects the difficulty of an 
item is the spells needed to create it. Every 
spell cast, whether it be the intended final 
magic or merely part of the process to shape 
and contain that magic, increases the difficulty 
of the spell. 

The difficulty factor of a spell has nothing to 
do with any other requirements the spell might 
pose. In this respect, a magic missile is just as 
difficult as the enchant an item spell, although 


113 


Creating Magical Items 


the latter is a far more taxing and time-consum- 
ing spell for the wizard to cast. Casting times, 
material components, and the like must still be 
followed for the spell to work. 


Materials and Procedures 


The construction of every magical item 
requires physical materials and processes, be 
they hand-forging exotic steel into a blade, dis- 
tilling an infusion of herbs and fluids for a 
potion, weaving spider silk into cloth, or what- 
ever. The steps required to make a magical 
item also increase the difficulty because there 
are more chances for something to go wrong— 
and affect the materials needed—in the 
process. 

In certain instances, processes sometimes 
manage to create more processes, thus increas- 
ing the item's overall difficulty. To make a long 
sword +3 frost brand, the DM decides the wizard 
needs to mix an alloy of steel and powdered 
remorhaz blood, hand-forge the blade in a 
1,000-fold technique, quench it in polar snow, 
and etch magical runes into the surface before 
casting the spells. However, these procedures 
in turn make new difficulties, for the steel must 
be heated in a forge filled with ice that burns 
and then hammered on an anvil carved from 
glacial ice. 

The number of processes needed is calculated 
from the difficulty factors as explained in Calcu- 
lating Item Difficulty, below. The Item Particu- 
lars section lists suggestions for materials 
needed to make an item and steps a player char- 
acter might have to perform. 


Calculating Item Difficulty 


Using the categories described above, the DM 
can calculate the difficulty rating of any item. 
This is the DM's task—it is not the purview of 
the player. Players can give a suggested diffi- 


114 


culty rating when they describe the item (and 
many DMs will appreciate this thoughtfulness), 
but the DM has the final say on the matter. 

The first step is for the DM to decide what 
spells are needed to create the item. This should 
include those spells necessary to prepare the 
item, create the magical effect, contain that 
effect, and every spell used to create a charge. 
(Because each spell adds one point to the diffi- 
culty, spellcasters often make wands and other 
charged items with a minimum number of 
charges and then later add more through the 
less demanding recharging process.) Each spell 
used is 1 point of difficulty, regardless of spell 
level. 

To this is added the difficulty factor for the 
usage of the item, as listed on Table 6: Usage 
Ratings. If the item is a multiple-use device, the 
factors of all usages that apply are added 
together. The usage difficulty is added to the 
current total from spells. 


Table 6: Usage Ratings 


Usage Difficulty 
Single Use 2 

Limited Use 3 
Rechargeable 5 
Permanent 10 


Finally, if the item is nonstandard, the total is 
multiplied by 2. If it is semistandard, the diffi- 
culty increases by 10 or is multiplied by 2, 
whichever is less. There is no multiplier or 
increase in difficulty for standard items. 

This total is the base value for creating the item, 
which determines the special materials and 
processes that must be used to make the magical 
item. Dividing the base value by 10 (fractions 
rounded up) determines the number of special 
processes that must be taken to prepare the item 
before any spells are cast. 

These processes add to the difficulty factor of 
the item. Each step adds 1 point to the item's 


Creating Magical Items 


difficulty rating. In rare instances, this can cre- 
ate more processes, if the difficulty increases to 
the next decimal order. When this happens, it 
means the spellcaster must do another process, 
usually on the materials, to ready them for the 
final shaping. 

For example, a wizard wants to create a ring 
of spell storing. The DM decides that the follow- 
ing spells must be cast: contingency and Tenser's 
transformation (since wizards lack the priest's 
imbue with spell ability spell), along with enchant 
an item, permanency, and the four spells that the 
ring will store. The difficulty from spells, then, 
is 8. Since the item is rechargeable, the usage 
difficulty is 5, but the item is standard, so no 
modifier is applied for this. The item's base dif- 
ficulty is 13. Two special processes are required 
and each process adds 1 to the total difficulty 
rating, for a final difficulty score of 15. 

But what if the player had proposed a ring of 
spell storing that absorbed matching spells cast at 
it? For spells, the DM might add steal enchant- 
ment to those already listed, making the diffi- 
culty rating from spells now 9. The item is still 
technically rechargeable, so the DM does not 
change the usage and the total becomes 14, but 
it is clearly not a standard magical item. Since 
the player specifies that the ring can only absorb 
an opponent's spells of the same type that 
it can cast, the DM decides it is a semi- 
standard item. Since adding 10 is less 
than doubling, the base difficulty is now 24. 
Three special process (24/10 = 2.4, rounded up to 
3) are needed and the item's final difficulty is 27. 


Wizard Specialists 


Because they devote themselves to a particu- 
lar field of magic, wizard specialists gain a +5 
bonus to success checks for making magical 
items within their field, i.e., those magical items 
that duplicate the spells of their school. Of 
course, specialists cannot create magical items 
that duplicate the powers of opposition schools. 


Magical Materials 


One condition that changes with every magi- 
cal item is the list of materials the player charac- 
ter must use to make the item. A wizard cannot 
make a bastard sword +2 with an ordinary blade. 
The vessel for this magic must be special or the 
magic won't take. Part of the DM's job is to 
choose a list of materials the player character 
must assemble. 

The first question, of course, is how many 
items should the player character be required to 
get? Too few will make the task too easy, and too 
many will make the player frustrated and 
unhappy with the DM. In general, the number 
of separate components should reflect the com- 
plexity of the task. Therefore, as a guideline, one 
special material is required for every 5 points of 
the final difficulty, rounding fractions up. For 
the ring of spell storing in the example above, 
three different materials would need to be 
shaped into the ring before it was ready. The 
more difficult modified ring would need six spe- 
cial materials. 

Knowing how many things are needed does 
not answer the question of what they should 
be. What is needed to create a magical ring? 
Since this is magic, it could be anything, purely 
and simply. However, it is best for the atmos- 
phere of the game when these components at 
least seem logical. In making a ring of water 
walking, it hardly makes sense for the wizard to 
gather a gold ring, five cockatrice feathers, a 
pinch of vampire dust, a piece of glacial ice, 
and a hair from a living hill giant. What do 
these things have to do with walking on water? 
It would be far better if the character needed a 
silver ring, a piece of sea-green turquoise, the 
scale of a flying fish, some water touched by a 
giant water strider, and the skin of a water 
snake. These items at least have some relation 
to the desired effect—silver for the foamy 
waves, turquoise for the color of the water, and 
so on. The guidelines below will help in prepar- 
ing necessary lists. 


115 


Creating Magical Items 


* The total value of the materials needed should 
be equal to 100-1,000 gp x the difficulty rating. 
Choose some items based on the property of 
contagion. This means that anything that was 
once part of or touched by a thing retains 
some of the properties or connections to that 
thing. The scale from a medusa's snaky hair 
might be needed to create a potion of flesh to 
stone. The medusa has the power to turn men 
to stone, therefore her scale would magically 
contain some of that power. 

Choose other items based on the property of 
similarity. Here, items that look alike in form 
or have similar properties are magically con- 
nected. A ground diamond might be needed 
to make dust of stoneskin. Diamonds are hard, 
just as flesh transformed by the spell is hard. 
Choose some items that are perishable. This 
prevents the spellcaster from just stockpiling 
magical ingredients for later use. 

Select the items with adventuring in mind. A 
character needs element X to make her magi- 
cal ring. Far better to send her and her friends 
off on a daring search for element X than to let 
her find it at the market. 

For particularly difficult items, choose at least 
one item that is inherently impossible or 
nonexistent. Then, do not explain how to get 
it. The player character must discover a means 
to collect the impossible item. Most often this 
will require a special spell to bring about the 
results. A periapt of proof against poison could 
call for a gem hatched from a poisonous 

snake's egg. Clever wizards might look for a 
way to polymorph the unhatched insides of 
the egg, thus fulfilling the condition. 


When choosing these materials, there are two 
other caveats to bear in mind, both more compli- 
cated than simple guidelines. These problems 
could be called butcher shop mentality and magic 
supermarkets. 


Butcher Shop Mentality. It is easy, from the 
guidelines above— particularly the laws of con- 


116 


tagion and similarity—to justify the body parts 
of nearly every monster as useful for magical 
item creation. Making a scroll of stone toflesh? A 
cockatrice feather quill would be quite handy. 
Forging armor ofetherealness? Where did I put 
that jar of phase spider blood? This kind of 
butcher's bill could go on and on. 

Some of this is certainly appropriate. After 
all, tracking down and slaying a rare and fear- 
some monster in order to complete a magical 
item is not a bad reason to adventure. When 
player characters start treating monsters as 
things to be skinned, bottled, pickled, and 
plucked, then there is a problem; the DM has let 
the situation get out of hand. At this point, 
adventuring is a euphemism; "harvesting" is a 
better, if more callous, description for what the 
player characters do. 

There are several ways to prevent this atti- 
tude from taking root. First, the DM should 
vary the types of materials spellcasters will 
need, so that not all are plucked or drained from 
living things. A stone toflesh scroll might need a 
chip from a sculptor's waste pile. Armor of ethe- 
realness could be made just as well with a bottle 
of ethereal air taken from that plane. By build- 
ing a variety of material needs, players (and 
their characters) are never certain of what is 
necessary and what is not. 

Of course, there are those who will still solve 
this question by taking tissue samples of every- 
thing in sight. It might be useful and it might 
not, but the character is prepared. If it becomes 
necessary to foil these characters, make the 
materials needed things the adventurer cannot, 
or should not, kill—a hair plucked from the 
beard of Zylos the dwarven king, or a red 
dragon's scale, freely given. Placing conditions 
on the materials ("freely given," "plucked by a 
virtuous maiden," "by the light of the moon," 
etc.) renders randomly gathered materials all 
but useless. 


Magic Supermarkets. Another thing to 
avoid in a campaign world are magic shops— 


Creating Magical Items 


either places that sell finished magical items or 
those that sell magical supplies. The reason to 
avoid the first is relatively obvious: If charac- 
ters can buy the magical items they need, why 
make them? This effectively kills a whole 
source of potential adventures, not something 
that helps build a colorful and interesting cam- 
paign. 

What is the harm of stores that just sell the 
materials—eye of firedrake or vampire grave 
mold? Again, if a character can buy eye of fire- 
drake, there's no need to adventure for it. The 
minute a player character decides to make a 
magical item, the DM has a starting point for a 
whole host of adventures, which is what the 
game is all about. Why give these up? 

Besides, grocery shopping for magical sup- 
plies is not exactly a medieval concept. Grocery 
and general stores stocked with everyday goods 
would be a foreign idea to a medieval knight. 
Instead he would rely on local craftsmen, farm- 
ers, peddlers, market fairs, and a handful of 
merchant importers. Supplies would be haphaz- 
ard, making it impossible to buy things "off the 
shelf." 

Consider what a freeman in a small village 
has to go through just to make sausages. He 
can't go to the grocery store and buy a pound 
of sausages or even a pound of meat because 
there isn't a grocery store. First he has to raise a 
pig and fatten it up. He and his kin have to 
butcher the pig, dress it out, grind the meat, 
prepare the casings, pick the herbs for the sea- 
soning, stuff the sausages, and smoke or salt 
them for storage. Since sausage is in a lot more 
demand than esoteric materials, the spell- 
caster's job cannot be the easier one! Allowing 
characters to find everything in stores isn't fan- 
tasy adventuring, it's going to the mall in 
funny robes. 

Ultimately, creating a magical item should be 
an intimate and personal experience for the 
spellcaster. The player character needs to be 
involved in every step of the process, from find- 
ing just the right ash-wood rod to casting the 


118 


last spell that binds it all together. Getting the 
items does not have to be difficult, but the player 
character should have to make some effort for 
every piece. Perhaps only coal from that strange 
outcropping in the hills and tin from the local 
mines are needed, but the PC has to get each 
item separately. There is no one place that has 
everything that is wanted. 

The materials needed to create the item obvi- 
ously vary quite a bit. Potions and swords are 
vastly different things; even potions of water 
breathing and fire resistance would hardly use the 
same goods. Suggested components, based on 
difficulty rating, are found in the sections appro- 
priate to each magical item. 


Success and Failure 


Even if all the materials, steps, and spells are 
gathered, performed, and applied, success is 
not guaranteed. There are many chances along 
the way for the character to make some small, 
virtually unnoticeable error—a line drawn 
badly here, a syllable mispronounced there. 
Therefore, after the character has completed 
everything, the DM secretly rolls percen- 
tile dice to see if the spellcaster's efforts were 
successful. 

For every item, the chance of success starts 
with a base value. This value varies according 
to the item made and the character's class. 
Whatever the number, it is improved by adding 
the character's level and worsened by subtract- 
ing the item's difficulty rating. In some cases 
there may be additional bonuses or penalties, 
either as explained under Item Particulars or as 
set by the DM. After the final number is fig- 
ured, the roll must be equal to or less than it 
to succeed. Otherwise, the whole process is a 
failure. 

With most failures, all that is left is a lump or 
puddle of inert, nonmagical material charged 
with crude energies that render the item use- 
less. The materials used to create the item are 


Creating Magical Items 


spoiled and cannot be refashioned for another 
try. The spellcaster must start over from 
scratch. 

Should the die roll be 96 or greater, the spell- 
caster has not just failed, but has accidentally 
perverted and twisted the process to create a 
cursed magical item. The magic is there, but 
now it works in detrimental ways. An intended 
long sword +1 becomes a long sword -1, a bag of 
devouring is created instead of a bag ofholding, 
and so forth. When a cursed item is created, 
the item detects as magical and the spell- 
caster has no idea that there are any flaws. 
Only by using the device does the error become 
apparent. 


Item Particulars 


The range and nature of magical items are 
such that each has its own special needs and 
requirements. These include varying amounts 
of research time, materials, processes, and even 
chances of success. The sections that follow 
present rules and guidelines for the general 
classes of magical items. Some of this ap- 
pears in the DUNGEON MASTER’ " Guide under 
Treasure and Magical Items; it is restated here 
for clarity and convenience. In instances where 
the rules differ, those given here should take 
precedence. 

In most cases, the information applies equally 
to both wizards and priests, particularly in rela- 
tion to materials. However, the methods for cre- 
ating the same item may vary substantially 
from one class to the other. Each section pre- 
sents general information first, followed by any 
special notes that apply to only one character 
class. 


Scrolls 


Scrolls are the easiest and among the first 
magical items created by spellcasters— priests at 


seventh level, wizards when they attain ninth 
level. Creating a scroll is mostly a matter of col- 
lecting the right materials, carefully working out 
the transformations needed to transcribe the 
spell, and then doing the actual writing. Most 
scrolls require no lengthy research or compli- 
cated processes, only a knowledge of the spell to 
be transcribed. 

The character, whether wizard or priest, must 
be able to cast the spell normally, whether it is 
an existing spell or one of the character's own 
devising. For calculating difficulty, spell scrolls 
are always standard magical items. Protection 
scrolls can be standard or semistandard, depend- 
ing on the effect. 

No matter what the scroll, three distinct 
materials are always needed: a quill, paper, 
and ink. All must be special, as ordinary items 
will not do. Ideally, each component should 
reflect the nature of the spell or protection 
transcribed, although this is not an absolute 
requirement. Table 7: Scroll Materials indi- 
cates the number of unique materials and their 
complexity. 

Common goose quills will never do when 
writing a scroll. The pen must, at the very least, 
be exotic, plucked from some rare creature. The 
chance of success is greater if the quill is gath- 
ered by the spellcaster personally. Every spell 
inscribed requires a new quill. Those already 
used are tainted by lingering energies that 
would ruin any later work. 

The material written on is the least unusual 
part of any scroll. Most scrolls are of paper, the 
best of ordinary surfaces. Papyrus or parch- 
ment can also be used, though less successfully. 
Truly extraordinary scrolls are written on fanci- 
ful substances— snake skins, peeled bark, silk 
cloth, supple leather, even carved into stone 
tablets! 

Blending the ink is the most demanding part 
of any scroll. Bizarre combinations of ingredi- 
ents may be needed and everything must be 
carefully measured, mixed, and filtered. The ink 
must be brewed in single batches. Each batch 


119 


Creating Magical Items 


takes a day to brew and thereafter remains 
potent for two weeks. 

The task of calculating and inscribing the spell 
onto a scroll takes one day per spell level. Wiz- 
ards must have the appropriate spell book at 
hand, while priests must work before their altar. 
Otherwise, the process is the same for both. Pro- 
tection scrolls require 6 days of uninterrupted 
work. A single scroll holds 1d6 spells and this 
number varies each time, even if the same spells 
are inscribed. A failed success check for any 
spell automatically fills the rest of the sheet— 
usually with a large ink blot. 

When calculating the difficulty of a scroll, 
each spell inscribed is checked separately. Each 
spell counts as a standard single-use item. No 
spells are actually cast to make the scroll, but 
scrolls have a special modifier of 1 point for 
every level of the spell inscribed. This difficulty 
rating is then used to determine the number and 
types of ingredients needed. 


— 
Table 7: Scroll Materials 


Difficulty Materials 

Rating Quill Paper Ink 

3-4 Any Any 1 exotic 

5-9 1 rare Any 1 exotic 

10-14 lexotic Any 1 rare, 
1 exotic 

15+ l exotic 1lrare 2 exotic 

Typical Material Types 


Any. Quills from wild songbirds, eagle feath- 
ers, paper, papyrus, parchment 

Rare. Plumes ofjungle birds, porcupine quills, 
rice paper, silk, palm fronds, squid ink, glac- 
ier water, a woman's (or a man's) tears 
Exotic. Molted feather of baby roc, phoenix 
plume, cockatrice feather, plume from the 
feather crown of the Lord of the Birds, pow- 
dered dragon blood, the sap of Y ggdrassil 
(the World tree), a drop of nectar of the gods 


120 


The base chance of success for inscribing a 
scroll is 80% plus 1 point per level of the wizard. 
In addition, using paper gives a 596 bonus unless 
a special material is required, while papyrus 
causes a -596 penalty. 

If a 96 or greater is rolled when making the 
success check, the scroll is cursed. No more 
spells can be inscribed on the scroll. The caster 
does not know his work is flawed. The curse 
only takes affect when that spell is read, and 
any other spells on the scroll remain unaf- 
fected. 


Wizards. Wizards actually have fewer 
demands on them than priests when it comes 
to creating scrolls. The only time the wizard 
needs a laboratory is when blending the ink for 
the task. After this, the inscribing can be com- 
pleted in any quiet place, so long as there is a 
table (or something that passes for it) and 
space to lay out a spell book. A few rural- 
minded types have even gone so far as to do 
their work outdoors, making a picnic of the 
whole thing. A wizard can read personally 
written scrolls without resorting to a read magic 
spell. 


Priests. Although they are freed from the lab- 
oratory requirement, priests do not have as 
much leeway in where they do their work. After 
they have combined the ingredients for the ink, 
everything must be placed on the priest's altar. 
The priest spends a day in prayer to imbue the 
materials with the power needed to make the 
scroll, and then must do the inscribing at the 
same altar. 


Potions 


After scrolls, potions are the next most popu- 
lar choice for magical creations. The little bottles 
of fluid are relatively easy to make and can be 
given to companions. They even make good 
gifts for local knights and servitors of greater 


lords. Of course, all that hard work can go down 
the drain (literally) in the hands of one butterfin- 
gers, or up in steam too close to a dragon. 
Potions are primarily a wizard specialty, 
although some— particularly healing—can be 
created by priests. 

A spellcaster must have a formula before 
brewing can actually begin. Wizards cast contact 
other plane, spend hours poring over mildewed 
books, and perform risky experimentation to 
gain these formulae. Priests resort to commune 
spells and prayer for their knowledge. The 
process takes 1d3 + 1 weeks, but can be inter- 
rupted for other activities. Fortunately, this step 
only has to be done once because the formula is 
then set. 

Of course, the spellcaster could try to use 
someone else's formula, but like trying to copy 
a restaurant's secret recipe, the result is never 
quite the same. Just as every cook adapts recipes 
to suit their tastes, a spellcaster must personal- 


7 
: 


Ie ALL dA 


ize every potion formula. Working from some- 
one else's formula does make the job easier, 
however, reducing the number of weeks needed 
by 1. 

Not every potion can be made by every spe- 
cialist mage or priest. Table 8: Potion Schools 
lists the school or sphere needed to create a par- 
ticular potion. Specialists unable to use the par- 
ticular school of magic or priests without access 
to that sphere cannot create the potion named. 
Oils are marked by an asterisk, and those items 
that are in bold type are found in the Tome of 
Magic. 

Although no spells are cast in the process of 
brewing a potion, the level of the spell the 
potion duplicates is added to the base difficulty 
of the spell. The 3rd level fly spell matches the 
effect of a potion offlying, resulting in a difficulty 
modifier of 3. If no spell matches the desired 
effect, the difficulty modifier is equal to the 
combination of spells that best approximates 


121 


Creating Magical Items 


Table 8: Potion Schools 


Potion 

Acid resistance* 
Animal control 
Aroma ofDreams 
Clairaudience 
Clairvoyance 
Curdled death 
Diminution 
Disenchantment* 
Dragon control 
Elemental control 
Ele invulnerability* 
Ele. Plane Invulnerability 
Elixir of health 
Elixir of youth 
ESP 

Etherealness 
Extra-healing 

Fiery burning 

Fire breath 

Fire resistance 
Flying 

Gaseous form 
Giant control 

Giant. strength 
Glibness 

Growth 

Healing 

Heroism 

Human control 
Impact 

Invisibility 
Invulnerability 
Levitation 
Longevity 

Love 

Murdoch's insect ward 
Persuasiveness 
Plant control 
Polymorph | self 
Preservation* 
Rainbow hues 
Slipperiness 

Speed 

Starella's aphrodisiac 
Super-heroism 
Sweet water 
Timelessness 
Treasure finding 
Undead control 
Ventriloquism 
Vitality 

Water breathing 


School/Sphere 
Abjuration 
Enchantment /Charm 
Enchantment/Charm 
Divination 
Divination 
Necromancy 
Alteration 

Abjuration 
Enchantment / Charm 
Elemental 

Elemental 

Elemental 
Necromantic (p) 

Time (p) 

Divination 

Astral (p) 

Healing (p) 
Invocation /Evocation 
Alteration 

Protection (p) 
Alteration 

Alteration 
Enchantment / Charm 
Alteration 

Divination (p) 
Alteration 

Healing (p) 

Charm (p) 
Enchantment/Charm 
Combat (p) 

Illusion / phantasm 
Abjuration 

Alteration 
Necromancy 
Enchantment/Charm 
Abjuration 
Enchantment / Charm 
Plant (p) 

Alteration 

Time (p) 

Alteration 
Conjuration/Summoning 
Alteration 
Enchantment/Charm 
Charm (p) 

Any priest 

Time (p) 

Divination (both) 
Necromancy (both) 
Illusion / Phantasm 
Time (p) 

Elemental 


122 


Potion 

Acid resistance* 
Animal control 
Aroma of dreams 
Clairaudience 
Clairvoyance 
Curdled death 
Diminution 
Disenchantment* 


Dragon control 

Ele. control, 

ele invulnerability, 

Ele. Plane invulnerability 


Elixir of health 
Elixir of youth 
ESP 


Etherealness 
Extra-healing, healing 
Fiery burning 

Fire breath 

Fire resistance 

Flying 

Gaseous form 

Giant control 

Giant strength 
Glibness, persuasiveness 
Growth 

Heroism, super-heroism 
Human control 

Impact 

Invisibility 
Invulnerability 
Levitation 

Longevity 


Love, Starella's 
aphrodisiac 
Murdoch's insect ward 


Plant control 

Polymorph | self 
Preservation, timelessness 
Rainbow hues 


Slipperiness 
Speed 

Sweet water 
Treasure finding 
Undead control 
Ventriloquism 
Vitality 

Water breathing 


Suggested Materials 
Wax, sap of a rubber tree 
Hair of animal type 
Jackalwere spittle, musk 
Earwax 

Fragments of a crystal ball 
Poison 

Fairy wine 

Water from a nonmagical 
Prime Material world 
Dragon blood 


Material from appropriate 
Elemental Plane 

Purified unholy water 
Ginseng juice 

Thread from a mind 
flayer's robe 

Essence of ethereal plane 
Honey of giant bees 

Tar from a tar pit 

Ash made by dragonfire 
Asbestos, glacial ice 
Vapor from a cloud 
Vampire's grave earth 
Giant's fingernail clipping 
Stew cooked by a giant 

A gem freely given 

Acorn, dried sea sponge 
Lock of a great hero's hair 
A king's hair 

Iron from patriarch's mace 
Water from a mirage 

An adamantine nail 
Dandelion seeds 

Wine poured by oldest 
man in the town 


Tears of a jilted lover 
Fleabane flowers, hair of a 
flea-less dog 

Sap of a poisonous plant 
Freshly shed viper's skin 
Powdered amber 

Water exposed to a rain- 
bow 

Grease from a grease spell 
Sweat of a fast horse 
Absolutely pure water 
Dust of a diamond 
Vampire blood 

Liar's sweat 

Coffee beans 

Sahuagin wine 


——— 1 


| Table 9: Potion Materials 


Creating Magical Items 


the effect. There is no spell equivalent for a 
potion of fire breath, so the DM chooses the 3rd 
level flame arrow and 4th level shout spells as 
roughly equivalent effects, for a total difficulty 
modifier of 7. 

Potions are either single or limited use 
items. If the entire potion must be drunk, as in 
the case of a potion offlying, it is a single-use 
item. However, there are many potions that 
can be partially consumed and still provide a 
benefit, making them limited-use. A potion of 

fire breath, for example, can be used up to four 
times. 

For every 5 points of difficulty a potion pos- 
sesses, one special ingredient must be supplied 
for it. Potion ingredients can be virtually any- 
thing, although it should include at least some 
form of exotic liquid. This does not have to be 
the bodily fluids of some monster, as any liq- 
uid that is hard to get will do. Melted snow 
from the peak of the highest mountain, water 
from the depths of the ocean, or wine froma 
tyrant's cellars are all perfectly acceptable 
demands. 

Aside from fluid, at least one ingredient 
should embody the property of the potion, 
whether the material is mundane or exotic. For 
a potion of growth, a ground acorn could be 
used. ("From the little acorn grows the mighty 
oak.") A potion offire breath could require 
kerosene or red dragon's spittle. Table 9: Potion 
Materials offers suggestions as to what might 
be appropriate. These are only suggestions; the 
DM is free to decide upon what seems appro- 
priate to the individual campaign. These sug- 
gestions run the gamut from absurdly easy 
(acorns and fleabane) to near impossible (bot- 
tled essence of the Ethereal Plane). Not all of 
them involve slaughtering some creature— 
characters may have to use cunning, trickery, 
and persuasion to get some of the materials 
suggested. 


Wizards. In addition to ingredients, wizards 
must spend time in the laboratory blending and 


brewing the ingredients together for the potion. 
Every 10 points of difficulty require the comple- 
tion of one special process to create the potion. 
The DM chooses the process required, remem- 
bering to add 1 point to the base difficulty for 
this step (which may, in turn, require another 
step). Suggested steps include: 


distillation infusion 
evaporation fermentation 
extraction of vital oils separation 
leaching purification 


Whatever steps are chosen, the wizard's total 
cost for all steps is 100 gp per point of difficulty. 
This money is spent on the reagents, weird fuels 
for alembics, and other minor exotics needed to 
brew the potion. The total processing takes a 
number of days equal to the difficulty rating of 
the potion. When the time has passed, the DM 
secretly checks for success. 


Priests. Disdainful of the laboratories of 
wizards, priests are spared the arcane 
processes of potion blending that wizards 
must go through. Instead, the ingredients are 
gently mixed and placed upon the special altar 
to receive the deity's blessing. The priest must 
fast and pray. Simple liquids and 4 hours of 
rest per night are all that are allowed to the 
priest during this time. After the priest prays 
for a number of days equal to the potion's 
difficulty rating, the DM secretly checks for 
success. 


Potion Success 


Potion brewing has a base 70% chance of suc- 
cess, with a +2% bonus for every level of the 
spellcaster. Wizard specialists gain an additional 
+5% bonus to this number. The potion's diffi- 
culty is subtracted from this and the result is the 
percentage chance of success. That number or 
less must be rolled using a d1OO. If the die roll is 
96 or greater, the potion automatically fails and 


123 


Creating Magical Items 


is cursed. Cursed potions are typically deadly 
poisons, although some may result in the effects 
of a potion of delusion—in this case the caster 
believes that the desired potion has actually 
been brewed. If this is the case, the DM should 
not reveal that a cursed potion has been made. If 
the check fails but the result is not cursed, the 
spellcaster can easily tell (by color, stench, and 
so forth) that the potion has failed. 


Permanent Magical Items 


When a spellcaster decides to create a magical 
ring, wand, or other device, the chore of making 
magic is no longer a simple task that can be done 
between adventures. Making permanent magi- 
cal items requires skill, planning, and a lot of 
commitment. Given the rewards, who would 
expect it to be anything but hard? 

The first task in making a permanent magical 
item is to learn what must be done. Unlike 
potions, which are common enough for mages 
to write down, the formulae for a magical 
sword or wand of fire aren't collected in recipe 
books. Wizards view knowledge as power—not 
something they like to share with potential 
rivals. 

Researching a magical item requires that the 
character discover the materials, steps, and 
spells needed to create the device. Carefully 
posed commune and contact higher plane spells 
will bring results, and the services of a sage will 
speed up the process. The player character may 
use magic to learn what spells are needed for the 
item while a sage researches the materials (and 
where to find them) at the same time. For all 
this, the DM must have answers. 

The first step is to approve the item the char- 
acter wants to make. Characters cannot make 
magical devices of artifact strength. Intelligent 
items have their own drawbacks that rule these 
out, too (see Intelligent Magical Items, below). 
It's not that player characters cannot create intel- 
ligent items, but the costs are likely to be more 


124 


than the player is willing to pay. Even so, there is 
still a wide selection of magical items to choose 
from. Characters can make items already listed 
in the rule books, or they can experiment with 
entirely new devices. 

If the item is already described in the game, 
the DM must decide whether it is standard or 
nonstandard. If the player character has one 
already, the device is certainly standard; other- 
wise it's a matter of how rare the item is and 
whether the character has seen or used the 
device before. Trying to make a long sword +2 
luck stealer based on hearsay is a lot harder than 
actually having one on hand to use. 

If the item is brand new, the player must 
provide a complete description of what the 
item will do. Most players will add notes con- 
cerning the materials needed and propose how 
difficult the task should be. While useful, the 
DM really needs to know what the effects of 
the item will be—effects of powers, range, 
damage done (if any), duration, maximum 
number of charges, and any other pertinent 
details that apply once the item is created. The 
DM can deny or change any of these to suit the 
campaign; the player does not have the right to 
dictate the game! Ideally, DM and player 
should cooperate to create a magical item both 
think will make an interesting addition to the 
campaign. Only after the final form of the new 
item is approved does the DM worry about 
how it is made. 

With the first stage finished, the DM must 
come up with a list of spells needed to make the 
device. Permanency is automatically required, as 
is at least one enchant an item spell. If the item 
duplicates a spell, that spell is clearly needed. 
Furthermore, if the spell's power is variable (by 
level, for example), it must be cast at a level 
equal to or greater than the final effect of the 
item. A wand of fear requires the use of the 4th 
level wizard's fear spell. Although the wand 
duplicates the effect of a priest's cause fear, that 
spell does not have the range or area of effect 
needed to create the item. 


Creating Magical Items 


Some items combine several different powers 
in the same device. In this case, one spell is 
needed for each effect. For example, when mak- 
ing boots of the north, a priest would have to cast 
pass without trace (to move without leaving a 
trail), free action (for half movement on ice), and 
endure cold (to keep the wearer warm). 

Not every magical item has a spell counter- 
part, so in these cases, the DM can either choose 
a combination of spells to achieve the effect or 
can insist the player character research a new 
spell just to make the device. There is no spell 
that creates extra-dimensional spaces quite like 
a portable hole. The DM could require two spells 
to achieve the result—in this case, Leomund's 
secret chest to make the space and duo-dimension 
to make the collapsible hole. For a mirror of life 
trapping, the DM can reasonably insist that the 
character research a new spell to create the 
effect. 

Finally, there are those rare items that neither 
wizard nor priest can make alone. Such devices 
can only be made by the cooperative effort of 
two player characters or a player character and a 
devoted henchman. Normal NPC spellcasters 
simply will not spend their abundant free time 
to cast spells at the beck and call of a player 
character. 

After totalling the difficulty for spells and the 
usage (remembering to modify the result if the 
item is nonstandard), the DM can determine the 
number of special materials needed, based on 
the item's difficulty divided by 5. The total cost 
of the raw materials should range from 1,000- 
10,000 gp per point of difficulty. Suggested raw 
materials are given below, according to the form 
of the item. 

The difficulty rating also determines the steps 
needed (one step for every 10 points of diffi- 
culty). Remember to add 1 point to the difficulty 
for every step required (which may then require 
an additional step). Like materials, suggested 
steps for different types of items are listed 
below. 


Rings. The basic component of any ring is the 
band and the more mundane materials for its 
making, including gold, silver, brass, elven 
steel, dwarven iron, metal taken from a fallen 
hero's armor, hardened magma, or heartwood. 
Exotic choices include woven ivy, snake skin, or 
a live worm, all permanently polymorphed to 
steel. In addition, the metal can have materials 
added to it. Powdered ram's horn, ground gem- 
stones, feathers, hair, or scales are only a few 
possibilities. The ring need not be plain and 
unadorned (contrary to the DUNGEON 
MASTER" Guide). It can be set with gems, 
pearls, carved with runes, pierced and filigreed, 
or even colored with bright enamels made from 
the saps of tropical trees and minerals found far 
beneath the earth. 

There are many processes in making a ring. 
Typical steps include: 


making a mold melting the alloy 


casting welding 
tempering setting stones 
polishing 


Special materials may be required for these 
steps. The mold may require a perfect impres- 
sion of something—a chameleon or a phoenix 
feather. Cast rings might need forms carved 
from the wax of giant bees or ice from a frost 
giant's lair. Rings can be tempered and tested 
with all manner of substances. A ring of shock- 
ing grasp might need to be tempered by the 
jolt of an electric eel while a ring offire resis- 
tance might actually need tempering in the 
heat of molten lava. Water from distant oceans, 
rare wine, or even a diluted potion can also 
be required. Even polishing a ring might 
require special materials—a paste of powdered 
diamonds, oil scented with the juice of Under- 
dark fungi, or the scaly hide of a dangerous 
monster. 


Wands and Rods. Get past the notion that 
wands are made only of wood and rods of iron, 


125 


and a host of intriguing materials can be used. 
Anything that is basically a stick will do—iron, 
steel, silver, bone, brass, copper, or crystal. 
Even wood or iron need not be ordinary. The 
character might need the first maple sapling of 
spring, the heart of a 500-year-old oak, wood 
found only on a distant continent, pure iron ore 
from a fallen star, or the iron scepter of a dwar- 
ven king. The device may require a piece of 
steel so perfectly shaped that it rings a single 
pure note when tapped. In the most extreme 
case, the material may be a nearly impossible 
demand—an icicle for a wand of frost, a piece of 
lightning for the wand of the same name, or a 
single diamond crystal for a rod of splendor. In 
these cases, the character has to learn just how 
to collect and keep that material! 

Other materials may be needed for the steps 
taken in making the wand. These steps might 
include: 


lathing carving 
steeping polishing 
tooling enameling 
sanding mounting 


If other materials are needed beyond the 
stick, the most obvious additions are ornamen- 
tations fashioned to it. Gems, beads, pearls, and 
bands of silver or gold are common. More 
uncommon components are feathers, exotic 
leather, adamantine wire, skeletal claws, and 
the like. These may sit in, dangle, rattle, wrap, 
or point; a wand can have more than just a 
stick, too. 

The carving can be as simple as runes to as 
elaborate as pierced designs that leave the center 
of the shaft hollow. To carve the runes and 
designs, the character could use specially made 
chisels. The shafts, especially wooden ones, 
could be steeped in strange fluids to absorb their 


126 


Creating Magical Items 


essence. A wand ofillusion could be soaked in 
water from a mirage, a rod of terror in the cold 
sweat of a scared man. Like rings, exotic materi- 
als could be needed for polishing, such as giant 
wasp venom for a wand ofenemy detection. Rare 
earths would be useful for glazing the shaft with 
colorful designs, while it could be scoured in the 
blast of a sandstorm. 


Staves. Unlike wands and rods, these are 
almost always made of wood, if only because 
other materials tend to be too heavy. Thus, the 
selection of the wood has greater importance. A 
staff is a personalized item, so it is seldom 
enough just to get the right type of wood. The 
branch chosen must have character—gnarls, 
whorls, twists, and knots that match the per- 
sonality of the spellcaster. Thus, finding the 
right wood for a staff is a matter of patience 
and searching. 

Once the right piece of wood is found, the 
materials and procedures that can be used on 
staves is like that used on wands and rods. 
There is a feeling among many wizards that 
proper staves ought to be more flashy, with dan- 
gling bits, big gems, crystals, carved faces, and 
gewgaws, than the average wand or rod. Priests, 
however, opt for stark austerity or holy symbols 
topping their staves. 


Weapons. Although magical weapons are 
among the most desired items by other classes, 
wizards and priests have very little cause to 
actually make them. After all, what is a mage 
going to do with a two-handed sword +1 ? Not 
surprisingly, most magical weapons are either 
daggers and maces, made by fighter/mages 
and fighter/clerics, or are given as gifts to lords 
and kings. Generous and far-sighted wizards 
may also make weapons for their fellow adven- 
turers, both as tokens of friendship and practi- 
cal business. Fortunately, weapons last for a 
long time—centuries or more—thus accounting 
for the preponderance of enchanted blades 
found in most campaigns. 


Making a magical sword (or whatever) starts 
with the weapon. Of course, no off-the-black- 
smith's-rack-plowshare-beaten-into-sword will 
do. The weapon, whether it's a stone club, 
rapier, or Vindish punch-dagger, has to be spe- 
cially crafted. Take, for example, a typical mag- 
ical sword. Steel garnered from weird 
sources—fallen stars, ancient battlefields, or the 
sap of an ironwood tree (it's a fantasy world 
after all)—is forged in the heat of fires stoked 
by equally strange fuels (molten lava, concen- 
trated sunlight, or the breath of a captive hell- 
hound) to fashion the rough vessel for the 
magic to come. Once shaped and tempered in 
exotic fluids—running spring water, orc wine, 
or black dragon acid (without dissolving the 
item, of course)—the blade can be etched and 
the hilt, made of more expensive materials, can 
be bound to the tang. Now the sword is ready 
for enchantment. 

The processes used in most weapons include: 


forging tempering 
etching casting 
inlay piercing 
sharpening balancing 


Not all weapons are made of iron and steel, 
though. Arrows, slings, bows, javelins, and 
spears must be cut, carved, rivetted, planed, 
fletched, and more. Each of these can require 
unusual materials—feathers, sinews, woods, 
leathers, even thread. The wide variety of mate- 
rials allows the DM to specify virtually any type 
of treatment for these materials. 


Armor. In many ways, the materials and treat- 
ments needed for magical weapons can be 
applied to armor. When making plate mail, forg- 
ing, tempering, and the like are required, and 
certainly the materials must be unique in at least 
one way. However, there are additional steps 
that may be necessary. These include: 


127 


Creating Magical Items 


fitting welding 
sewing chasing 
lacing boiling 
engraving gilding 
painting rivetting 
chiselling embossing 
lacquering 


A good deal of this depends on the armor 
being made. Plate armor does not require boil- 
ing unless the DM has some arcane purpose in 
mind, but boiling is necessary to make proper 
leather armor. 


Miscellaneous Magical Items. This category 
defies any simple listing of materials and proce- 
dures. What is needed and works well for a pair 
of boots of striding and springing is hardly suitable 
for a gem ofseeing! For some items, the materials 
are obvious. A cloak ofprotection needs special 
cloth, thread, and clasps. A lyre of building needs 
just that, a lyre, although it may have silver 
strings and a frame made of carved jade. Some 
items are only a single component—a gem ofsee- 
ing is a gem. In this case, additional materials 
can be things needed to empower the device. 
The gem might need to be bathed in water from 
a magic font spell, exposed to the gaseous breath 
of a green dragon, or heated in the flames of a 
prophetess's campfire. A pearl of power might 
need to be taken from a patriarch's ring. The 
choices are as many as the types of items. 


Finishing Steps 


Once the character knows what materials 
and processes are needed (and has completed 
any adventures required to gather these), the 
actual making of the device can begin. This 
may require special arrangements, since the 
creator must stay with the work at all times. 
Others can be relied upon to provide craft skills 
the PC does not have (an armorer can hammer 
out the sword or shape the helm, for example), 


but the character must supervise every minute 
of every step. Once the process begins, it can- 
not be interrupted or set aside, or all work to 
that point is lost. 

The total time needed to create the magical 
item (i.e., all of the processes necessary) is a 
number of weeks equal to the item's difficulty 
rating, plus another 2d6 months. Making vessels 
for permanent magic is not a speedy process! 
Once everything is ready, the final step is taken: 
All other necessary spells are cast in combina- 
tion with enchant an item. 

When all of this is complete, the DM checks 
for success or failure. The base chance for the 
item is 6096, minus the item's difficulty. This 
value is improved by 1 point for every level of 
the character. If the check is successful, the 
desired item is created. If the check is failed, all 
effort has been wasted. Should a result of 96 or 
greater be rolled, a cursed magical item has been 
made. In this case, the PC can only assume that 
the effort was successful until someone actually 
attempts to use the device. 


Intelligent Magical Items 


Some characters may want to create intelli- 
gent swords or other magical items. While this is 
possible, few players, once they know the costs, 
will want to actually follow through on the 
desire, for intelligence can only be imbued into 
an inanimate object at the cost of the character's 
own life. By obsessive desire or intense prayer, 
the caster's life-force is transferred into the item. 
All that remains of the spellcaster is a lifeless 
husk. Once locked within a magical item, the PC 
is trapped. The mortal body cannot be raised in 
any fashion, nor can the caster's spirit be rein- 
carnated. 

"Great," some players may think, "I'll play a 
magical sword!" If the DM believes the player 
can master the challenge, this can be allowed. 
There are, however, several limitations that the 
"sword-character" must abide by. 


Creating Magical Items 


The character loses all statistics but Intelli- 
gence and Wisdom and loses all class and race 
abilities. Obviously, the character cannot 
move of its own accord, pick items up, or 
interact with the physical world in any way. 
The intelligent item does retain its alignment 
(with all those effects on its owner). 

The PC can only communicate by speech and 
only in previously known languages. 

The PC loses all experience points earned. It 
now earns experience points only for activi- 
ties it participates in. An intelligent sword 
only earns XPs for slaying monsters. No XPs 
are awarded for achieving story or adven- 


Dp 


— 


Y 


| ul 


~A 


o 


Iy 


a 


ANGE 
[ans 


ture goals. Note that only player-types (as 
opposed to other intelligent items) track 
experience. 

For every 100,000 experience points earned, 
the intelligent item gains one power, starting 
as if it were an Intelligence 14 magical sword. 
It then progresses through Table 113: 
Weapon Intelligence and Capabilities in the 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, gaining one 
power per 100,000 points. 

The item has an ego rating and can attempt to 
possess its owner, but only when the DM 
decides a personality conflict should occur 
(see the DUNGEON MASTER Guide). 


7 AE, 
mel 


Recharging Magical Items 


Every wizard or sorceress with any ambition 
wants to make magical items. Desire and talent 
don't always translate into time and resources, 
though, so truly wise mages often make charged 
magical items. These have the great advantage 
of needing to be made only once. Thereafter, 
charges to the item can be restored with much 
less effort and time. 

Not all magical items can be or need to be 
recharged. One-shot items—mostly potions and 
scrolls—are consumed or blanked in use and 
clearly cannot be recharged. Permanent magical 
items—swords, armor, cloaks, most rings, and 
miscellaneous magical items—never expend 
charges and thus do not need to be recharged. 
The only magical items that can be recharged are 
those with (ahem) charges—wands, rods, staves, 
and some rings. Even then, the presence of 
charges is not a guarantee; particularly powerful 
devices cannot always be recharged. A listing of 


the more common rechargeable items can be 
found in Appendix A. 

Magic is seldom logical, so most items are 
recharged according to their own unique for- 
mula. This is the type of thing that builds mem- 
ory (or bookkeeping) skills in wizards. Some 
items can be recharged only by wizards, others 
by priests, and a few require the services of both. 
Most absorb the energy of a specific spell but, 
yet again, a few absorb virtually any type of 
magic. A few particularly heinous items draw 
their charges from the life force of a being (such 
as the staffof the elements). Not only do wizards 
of good inclination view these as morally bad, 
but such items are not normally considered 
rechargeable, so the rules for recharging these 
items do not apply. Furthermore, a wizard 
wielding a staffof the elements is not going to find 
many friends among the Elemental Planes! 


HUT 
=. 


Recharging Magical Items 


General Guidelines 


There are some rules that apply to all recharge- 
able items. These rules are the proof to spellcast- 
ers that the underlying structure of magic (or 
miracles) is logical. Others consider these rules a 
sign that spellcasters have too much time on 
their hands for theorizing. These are very gen- 
eral rules, but no exceptions have yet been 
found. 


* An item being recharged must have at least 
one charge remaining. Items that do not have 
at least one charge cannot be recharged. The 
magic that binds and stores the charges is lost 
when the last charge is used. 

* An item can be recharged only by a spell- 
caster able to cast the spell and of the same 
class as the person who made the item. A 
priest could not use a priestly detect magic 
spell to recharge a wizard's wand of magic 
detection—unless, of course, the priest (or one 
of that ilk) made the wand in the first place. 

* An item can only be recharged with spells of 
equal or greater power than the greatest abil- 
ity of the device. This rule has two effects. 
First, it encourages low-level spellcasters to 
study and learn. Although 1st level mages can 
cast burning hands, recharging wands of fire is 
beyond their scope. True, such wands can be 
used to create burning hands spell effects, but 
the same wands can also be used for fireball 
and wall of fire spells. The greatest of these 
spells requires a 7th level caster. Second, it 
often forces mages to make a temporary sacri- 
fice by using a higher level spell for a lesser 
stored effect. 


In addition to these absolute rules, the 
recharging process often has special require- 
ments that must be met for the attempt to suc- 
ceed. While there is no limit to what might be 
required, some are more common than others. 


* The spellcaster must be of a specific level, 
greater than the normal minimum needed to 


cast the spell. This ensures that the spells used 
to charge the item are of appropriate power, 
particularly when the range, damage, and/or 
intensity vary by level. It also reflects the diffi- 
culty of getting the charge to hold in the 
device. 

The charge may require additional spells 
before itis complete. For wizards, the most 
common of these additions is the enchant an 
item spell, especially in the case of powerful or 
unusually charged items. This spell must be 
used whenever the stored charge does not 
match the spell used to charge it. A wand of 
illumination can create a sunburst effect not 
exactly reproduced by any spell. Therefore, 
enchant an item must be used to transform the 
other spell (continual light in this case) into a 
usable charge. 

For priests, there is no single spell that pro- 
vides this function. Instead, the priest must 
carefully choose spells that combine to create 
a logical alternative. There is no priest spell 
that matches the staff of slinging's catapult 
power. Instead, it is achieved by combining 
animate rock and shillelagh when recharging an 
item. 


These two conditions are only the most com- 
mon requirements encountered. Others can cer- 
tainly exist if the DM so chooses, ranging 
anywhere from special material components to 
tongue-twisting recitations. The demands of 
magic are not always logical. 


Recharging Wizard Items 


Wizards, with their penchant for wands and 
rods, are more often called upon to recharge 
items than any other spellcaster. Indeed, a good 
many wizards spend an indecent proportion of 
their free time in magical item maintenance. 

Before starting, the cautious wizard deter- 
mines whether recharging is needed or not. 
Filling an item with more charges than it was 
meant to contain (over-charging) has disastrous 


131 


Recharging Magical Items 


consequences. More than one sorcerer's tower 
or mage's laboratory has been devastated by 
the explosion that results from applying too 
much magical energy. Extremely cautious wiz- 
ards (some might say timid) won't even con- 
sider beginning until they have a full slate of 
protection spells on hand, just in case of an 
accident. 

The first step in actually recharging an item is 
to prepare it to receive the spell. This requires 
the use of an enchant an item spell. This provides 
a channel to shape and hold the charge. No item 
can be charged if it has not been so prepared. 
Note that since the item is already enchanted, 
the casting only requires 12d4 hours to com- 
plete. All other requirements and restrictions of 
the spell still apply, except that the spell auto- 
matically succeeds. 

Once the item is prepared, the wizard casts 
the necessary spells to create the charge. This 
may be as simple as a single common spell 
(magic missile to recharge a wand of magic missiles) 
or a combination of spells. For convenience, 
Appendix A lists the spells required for the 
more common chargeable items. If this combina- 
tion requires an enchant an item spell, a second 
one must be cast; the first prepared the item and 
the second shapes the charge. Casting a second 
enchant an item is best done from a scroll, to 
negate the lengthy casting time (otherwise, it is 
12d4 hours). Unlike other combined spells (in 
which each charge requires a separate casting of 
the spell or spells listed), the second enchant an 
item spell shapes all charging spells cast through- 
out its duration. Again, the spell is automatically 
successful. 

When the charging spells are cast, no spell 
effect occurs. Charging a wand of fire does not 
result in a fiery blast. Instead, the magic is 
absorbed by the item. While the spell's casting 
time is unchanged, it takes 1d4 hours for the 
item to absorb all of the energy. Scintillating 
motes of light and color swirl around the item 
during this time. 

At the end of the absorption process, the DM 
must secretly check to see if the process suc- 


132 


ceeded. A saving throw vs. magical fire must be 
rolled for the item (regardless of the spell cast). 
Every item being recharged gains a bonus to its 
saving throw since it is already a magical item. 
Other adjustments for the enchant an item spell 
do not apply. If the saving throw succeeds, the 
charge takes; otherwise the magic simply slips 
away. On an adjusted roll of 21 or greater the 
item actually gains 1d3 charges, as it absorbs 
residual energies in the area! Success or failure 
leaves no outward sign, and the DM should not 
reveal the results of this check. 

Once the aura has faded away, it is safe for 
the wizard to apply a new charge. After 24 
hours, the enchant an item used to prepare the 
object fades and no more charges can be applied 
until the device is prepared once more. An 
extremely fortunate character might be able to 
apply 24 spells in a single casting—at the very 
least six can be applied, and the average will be 
11-13. 


Recharging Magical Items 


Unfortunately, no wizard, regardless of level, 
can memorize more than five spells of a given 
level. Since a wizard must gain a full night's 
sleep before rememorization can take place, 
most of the charging opportunity within a 24- 
hour period is wasted. Many wizards offset this 
inefficient situation by either employing multi- 
ple scrolls with the appropriate charging spells 
(which is somewhat wasteful, too) or having a 
wizardly companion sit in on the charging 
process. Two wizards can memorize twice the 
number of the appropriate spell(s), enabling 
them to more fully utilize the 24-hour charging 
period. This doubling up reduces the number of 
times enchant an item needs to be cast, saving 
countless hours. 


Over -charging 


While charging an item may be tedious or 
even frustrating, it is not particularly dangerous. 
The greatest risk comes in accidentally over- 
charging the device. When this happens (and it 
happens only infrequently), the result is a sud- 
den release of all of the stored magical energy 
therein—in the form of a tremendous explosion. 
The amount of damage done depends upon the 
type of item. Wands inflict 50 points of damage 
(1/2 hp per charge), rods cause 100 points of 
damage (2 hp per charge), staves cause 150 
points of damage (6 points per charge), except 
for the staff of power, which causes damage as 
listed, while any other devices cause 8 points of 
damage per charge released. The blast affects all 
within a 30-foot radius, and other items within 
this area must have a saving throw vs. disinte- 
gration rolled for them. For characters, a saving 
throw vs. magic reduces the damage by half, 
although this will do little good in many 
instances. In all cases the item being charged is 
completely destroyed. 

Clearly, over-charging is a fate to be avoided. 
Thus, most wizards make use of the identify spell 
to determine the relative strength of their 
charged items. It is a good practice to wait until 


the item detects as weak before beginning the 
lengthy business of recharging. 


Example of Recharging 


In her last outing with the rest of her compan- 
ions, Ramona the Eloquent fired off 10 charges 
from her wand ofparalyzation to pull the group's 
fat out of the fire—a fire giant's hearth, to be 
exact. Having managed to survive, the wizard 
wants to be sure her wand won't go dry on their 
next outing, so she sets about the business of 
recharging it. Consulting her references, she 
finds, as she suspected, that hold monster is the 
necessary charging spell. No other spell is 
required in combination. 

Ramona has been paying careful attention to 
her wand use, so she knows that in addition to 
the last 10 charges, she has used her wand at 
least 12 other times. There are at least 22 charges 
to be replaced before there is any danger of 
over-charging. Nonetheless, the wizard 
removes all her other magical items from the 
Work area, in part because they can interfere 
with the enchant an item spell, but also because 
it is prudent. 

The day before she begins, Ramona eats well, 
sets up a cot in her workroom, gets lots of 
sleep, and then memorizes spells. At 12th level 
she can memorize four hold monster spells and 
the necessary enchant an item spell. She also has 
some hold monster scrolls but decides against 
using these. 

The next day Ramona begins casting her 
enchant an item spell. The casting time result is 32 
hours, which will take Ramona more than 3 full 
days to work through (a maximum of 8 hours 
casting each day for enchant an item). After the 
final 8 hours of casting enchant an item, Ramona 
immediately casts her first hold monster spell. 
Exhausted, she tells her apprentice to wake her 
as soon as the aura fades. 

Two hours later, the apprentice rouses the 
wizard. Ramona casts her next hold monster spell 
and then sleeps. This process repeats until all 


133 


four spells are cast. The charging takes a total of 
13 hours. 

For each spell that is cast, the DM secretly 
rolls an item saving throw, including a +3 bonus 
because the wand is a magical item. Thin wood 
(the wand's material in this case) has a saving 
throw of 11 vs. magical fire. The four adjusted 
saves are 11, 4, 19, and 21. Since the last roll is 
greater than 20, the DM rolls 1d3 and comes up 
with a 3. The wand actually gains 5 charges, one 
more than Ramona suspects. 

Since Ramona must now gain a full night's 
restful sleep before she may again memorize 
any spells, and she has chosen not to use her 
scrolls, the 24-hour duration of the enchant an 
item spell will fade. Thus, to further recharge 
the wand, Ramona must repeat the entire 
process again, spending several days casting 
enchant an item. 


134 


` 
DOCS 
M 
"^ 
‘G 


— 


by, We N Ww 
WT VA us 
WI. URP AS am 
[Up 


a it x 
* 


Recharging Priest Items 


Although the need arises less frequently, priests 
also can recharge magical items. As they lack the 
same spells as the wizard— particularly enchantan 
item—priests use entirely different methods for 
the recharging process. The general principles of 
preparing the item and shaping the spells that 
make the charge remain the same, however. 

In recharging a magical item, priests have one 
additional and obvious condition that must be 
met before any progress can be made. The power 
of the item must fall within the range of spheres 
granted by the priest's deity. For example, a 
druid, no matter what level, is unable to restore 
charges to a clerical rod of passage. This item 
requires the use of astral spell, a spell not granted 
to druids. The druid can use the item, but must 
find another priest willing to recharge it—not 
always a sure thing, given the elitist tendencies 
of some religions. 


Recharging Magical Items 


If the priest can recharge the item, it must first 
be prepared for casting. Unlike the wizard, this 
preparation does not involve the use of spells. 
Instead the priest must fast and pray to gain the 
deity's blessing in the task about to be 
attempted. For each day spent in prayer, there is 
a 10% chance the deity will respond favorably. 
During the vigil the priest cannot adventure, 
pray for spells, or take actions beyond simple 
rest and water. Both the priest and the magical 
item must be together at a site sacred to the 
deity—a temple, shrine, grove, place of power, 
or whatever. Of course, only priests who are true 
to their calling can hope for a response. A priest 
intuitively knows when the prayers are 
answered. 

Once the item has been sanctified, it remains 
so for 2d12 hours. After this, the priest must 
entreat the deity's favor once more. To actually 
charge the item, the priest must cast a bless spell 
upon the item and immediately follow this with 


the spell(s) necessary to create the charge. The 
spells needed for known magical items are listed 
in Appendix A. A new bless is required for every 
charge attempted. 

From this point onward, the process is the 
same as that for wizard items. The charge takes 
1d4 hours to be absorbed, and during that time 
it is enclosed in a sparkling aura. At the same 
time, the DM secretly rolls an item saving throw 
(vs. magical fire) to see if the charge holds, with 
a modified score of 21 or greater resulting in 1d3 
charges. 

As with wizard items, there is always the dan- 
ger of over-charging, and the resulting explosion 
follows the rules already given. Since the explo- 
sion is essentially an overwhelming wave of the 
deity's power, the priest charging the item (and 
other priests of the same faith) only suffer 1/2 
damage, reduced to JA if a successful saving 
throw vs. spell is rolled. All nonpriests that are 
in the area of effect suffer full or 2 damage as per 
the normal saving throw rules. 


Example of Priest Recharging 


Shayla, an llth level priestess of a goddess of 
medicine, was loaned a staff of curing by her 
Grand Matron with the understanding that it 
would be returned intact. Being virtuous, Shayla 
decides that this means she must restore all 
three charges used during her recent adven- 
tures. To do this, Shayla makes arrangements 
with her temple's High Priestess for use of the 
chapel. 

At dawn, Shayla begins her fasting and prayer. 
After twenty hours of prayer and a four-hour 
rest, the DM makes the first check. There is only 
a 10% chance that her prayers will be heard, so 
the die roll of 37 means that nothing happens. 
Shayla continues with her prayers—twenty 
hours of devotions followed by four hours of 
rest. With each passing day, the chance of suc- 
cess increases by 10%. Finally, after seven days 
of prayers (70%), Shayla wakes with knowledge 
that now is the time. 


135 


Recharging Magical Items 


The DM checks and finds that the item will 
remain sanctified for 14 hours, but does not tell 
this to the player. Shayla immediately casts a 
bless spell followed by a heal spell, the spell 
needed to create a charge in the staff. (Heal is 
necessary since the staff can be used to restore 
sanity.) As Shayla is llth level, she can only cast 
a single 6th level heal spell. Instead of giving up, 
however, she decides to sleep for 8 hours and 
then pray for the spell so that she can cast it 
again. She stretches out on her pallet beside the 
now-glittering staff. 

Eight hours later, the priestess wakes and 
begins her supplications for a heal spell. The 
prayers take 1 hour, so 9 have passed since she 
started. Taking a chance, Shayla casts another set 
of bless and heal spells. Should the item become 
unsanctified before the charge is absorbed, the 
spells will be lost. Fortunately, there are still 5 
hours remaining, so the second charge is also 
absorbed. Shortly afterwards, the item is no 
longer prepared. 

The work done, the DM secretly makes saving 
throws, one for each charge. The staff is a fairly 
powerful magical item, so the DM allows a +4 to 
the saving throw. The modified results are 19 
and 6. The first charge takes, but the second is a 
failure, perhaps due to some slight oversight on 
Shayla'spart. 


136 


Recharging Nonstandard Items 


Appendix A provides a list of the more com- 
mon chargeable magical items found in the 
DUNGEON MASTER" Guide and the Tome of 
Magic. The appendix does not list every charge- 
able magical item that could exist, for DMs and 
players both have the ability to devise new items 
for the game. 

New magical items are recharged according to 
the rules already given. In most cases there is lit- 
tle question concerning the spell(s) needed to 
charge the item or the maximum number of 
charges. The spell should be the one that best 
matches the effect of the magical device and is of 
equal or greater power. If no single spell exists, 
the DM can specify a combination of spells 
where each embodies a property of the device's 
effect. Normally these are the same as the spells 
needed to provide charges when the device was 
first created. 

As for the maximum number of charges, this 
is normally fixed when the item is created. 
However, if the number is unknown, decide 
what the device most closely resembles— wand, 
staff, or rod—and apply the charge limit for 
that item. 


Appendix A 


Common Rechargeable Magical Items 


The following is a list of some of the more common magical items that can be recharged. Magical items 
and spells that are in boldface are found in the Tome of Magic. 


Item 

Disintegration chamber 

Ring of the ram 

Rod of beguiling 

Rod of security 

Rod of alertness 

Rod of passage 

Staff of power 

Staff of slinging 

Staff of striking 

Staff of curing 

Staff of command 

Teleportation chamber 

Wand of elemental transmogrification 
Wand offire 

Wand of polymorphing 

Wand of conjuration 

Wand of misplaced objects 
Wand of enemy detection 

Wand of magic missiles 

Wand of paralyzation 

Wand of corridors 

Wand offrost 

Wand offear 

Wand of size alteration 

Wand of secret door & trap location 
Wand of lightning 

Wand of illumination 

Wand of illusion 

Wand of metal and mineral detection 


Spells Needed to Recharge 
Disintegrate 

Bigby's clenched fist 
Domination 

Gate and restoration 

Animate object 

Astral spell 

Globe of invulnerability 
Spike stones 

Magic missile or shillelagh 
Heal 

Changestaff and charm monster 
Teleport 

Polymorph any object 

Wall offire 

Polymorph self or polymorph other 
Prismatic spray 

There/not there 

True sight 

Magic missile 

Hold monster 

Dig 

Cone of cold 

Cause fear 

Enlarge 

Find traps 

Lightning bolt 

Light and fireball 

Improved phantasmal force 
Locate object 


137 


Appendix B 


Random Power Tables 


Although many artifacts have their powers fully 
described, there are just as many others that do 
not, and the tables for these are presented here. 
To determine the unlisted powers of an artifact, 
the DM need only find the appropriate table in 
this section and then either select a power that 
seems appropriate or roll the dice to come up 
with one. 

The multitude of tables provides broad cate- 
gories to define the various artifact powers, 
and DMs are urged to choose powers from the 
lists rather than rely on dice rolls. Blind chance 
can easily lead to curious and illogical results, 
destroying the continuity of an artifact's nature 
and history. There are only a few items where 
completely random selection is truly appropri- 
ate. This method works well for the Horn of 
Change and possibly a device like the Machine of 
Lum the Mad, where randomness is a basic 
theme of the item, but it is applicable to few 
others. 

In addition to selecting powers, the DM must 
also decide how the power is applied. A sug- 
gested use is given for most powers, but this 
can hardly account for all of the different possi- 
ble shapes and uses. A character can strike an 
enemy with the Sword of Kas, but it would be 
quite a trick with Heward's Mystical Organ. As a 
guideline, hand-held items (swords, scepters, 
etc.) should touch the target to activate a power, 
while those items that are worn are activated 
by thought or a spoken command. The large, 
immobile items (like the Machine of Lum the 
Mad) either have immediate effects on charac- 
ters or charge them with powers that can be 
released later. The Machine could, for example, 
immediately increase prime requisite ability 
scores or lock in a character's mind the knowl- 
edge needed to cast a fireball (once, or even 
once per day!). 


138 


Most of the random artifact powers duplicate 
existing spells and have the same restrictions. 
Clearly, as magical items, material components 
are never required. Spells that vary by level 
should operate as if cast by a 20th level wizard 
or priest (within the limitations of the spell) 
unless otherwise noted. Powers marked in italic 
boldface are taken from spells found in the Tome 
of Magic. 

Some of the random artifact powers are 
unique. These are described where they appear, 
but because of the necessity to be brief, not every 
rule can be covered. DMs are once more encour- 
aged to resolve these as they think best. Individ- 
ual judgements add to the campaign's unique 
flavor. As an aid to judging and designing new 
artifacts, each table has a brief description of its 
category. 

Two tables given here—Table 29: Nature and 
Table 30: Necromancy—are never used in this 
book. This is not an oversight. These tables are 
provided to round out the set for those DMs 
who want to design their own artifacts. 

This set of tables cannot include every possi- 
ble power an artifact might have. In addition to 
the tables here, there could be others for every 
imaginable topic. Available space demands it 
stop somewhere, though. DMs wanting more 
variety should add whatever powers they 
want, creating new tables if they see the need. 
DMs with this ambition are not limited to the 
AD&D® game rules. Other genres, from horror 
to science fiction, can also provide inspiration. 
For example, many of the mutations found in 
the GAMMA WORLD® game could become 
strange and wonderful powers of a bizaare 
other-worldly device. 

In short, have fun, experiment, and expand. 


Appendix B 


Table 10: Abjurations 


These powers primarily negate things, properties, and powers. Unlike offensive spells, the powers 
here are not intended to destroy those things properly in their place, but instead to remove enchant- 
ments, bindings, and the like that perhaps do not belong. The artifact can: 


Die Roll 


BSeCPAIDNRWNY HE 


— 
N 


13 


Power 

Cast abjure (3/day) 

Cast avoidance between a creature and the user (1/day) 

Cast banishment by touch (1/week) 

Instantly dismiss an elemental (1/week) 

Cast dismissal upon any planar creature by touch (1/week) 

Cast dispel evil/dispel good (l/day) 

Cast dispel magic by touch (1/day) 

Cast holy word/unholy word (1/week) 

Cast Hornung's random dispatcher by touch (1/week) 

Cast imprisonment/freedom by touch. Imprisoned creatures can be freed by naming 
them (1/month). 

Cast knock (3/day) 

Cast lower resistance (7/day) 

Have minor spell turning constantly in effect while the artifact is in hand. 1d4 is 
rolled to determine maximum level of spell turned whenever the user is affected 
by a spell. 

Cast purifyfood & drink upon all items within a 10' radius of the artifact (7/day) 
Cast remove curse by touch (3/day) 

Have repel insects in a 10' radius constantly in effect while the artifact is in hand 
Cast repulsion upon one named creature (1/week) 

Cast spell turning for two turns duration (1/day) 

Dispel illusions within a 60' radius (3/day) 

Have turn wood constantly in effect while the artifact is in hand 


139 


Appendix B 


Table 11: Cataclysms 


Cataclysms can never be intentionally called upon by the artifact's owner. They occur at unplanned times. 
While a character might get lucky and trigger an incendiary cloud just as orcs storm the stronghold, the cata- 
clysm takes no sides. Human defenders and orc attackers are equally vulnerable to the artifact's vengeance; 
even the artifact's owner is fair game. All of the cataclysms described here affect an area one mile in diame- 
ter. Everything within that range is subject to the awful effects of the cataclysm. The artifact will: 


Die Roll 
1 
2 


12 
13 


l4 


15 
16 


17 
18 


19 
20 


140 


Power 

Cast Acid storm to rain down upon the area of effect for two full turns. 

Create a permanent aura of desolation that settles over the area of effect. Individuals of 
good alignment are haunted by terrifying dreams and suffer -2 penalties to THACO and 
saving throw rolls while evil creatures gain +2 penalties to the same. Plants twist and 
wither, crops fail, and herds grow sickly. 

Blanket the area of effect with a blizzard, dropping temperatures to 0° F and inflicting 1d6 
points of damage per hour to those unsheltered. Overland movement is impossible. The 
storm lasts 1d6 + 12 hours and snows remain 1d3 days (summer), 2d6 days (spring/fall), 
or 2d20 days (winter). 

Ravage the area of effect with call lightning for 72 hours (432 bolts), randomly striking any 
targets. 

Create a cloudkill spell upon the area of effect for 1d6 hours. 

Form a ring of creeping doom around the area of effect that constricts in a solid blanket 
inward, not diminishing until the center is reached (4 hours to reach center). 

Settle a deathfog over the area of effect that remains in place for 2d20 rounds. 

Strike the area of effect with a permanent drought. All water present or brought into the 
area of effect evaporates instantly. 

Strike the area of effect with an earthquake spell. 

Rain afire storm down upon the area of effect for 2d6 rounds. 

Flood the entire area of effect, destroying buildings and fields. All living creatures unable 
to fly risk drowning in the rushing waters. The waters recede to safe levels in 1d6 hours 
but remain covering land for 2d20 days. 

Sweep an incendiary cloud through the entire area of effect. 

Settle an insect plague upon the area of effect for 1d6 hours that, in addition to other spell 
effects, destroys all vegetable matter. 

Instantly create a permanent magic-dead area of effect. Nonartifact magical items do not 
function within the zone, spellcasting is impossible, and all existing spells are instantly 
negated, including permanent enchantments on creatures. Summoned beings are 
instantly driven back to their own planes. 

Create a meteor swarm to rain down upon the area of effect for 1dl2 hours (8 
spheres/round, or 480/hour), randomly striking targets within the area of effect. 

Create a permanent spiral of degeneration that settles upon the area of effect. Only arti- 
facts remain unaffected. 

Create a permanent wildzone in the area of effect. 

Transfer the entire area of effect to a randomly chosen lower plane. The artifact is not 
transported. 

Strike the entire area of effect with a storm of vengeance. 

Create permanent wolf spirits to guard the area of effect that are hostile to all nonanimal 
lifeforms. 


Table 12: Combat 


The powers of this table are associated with 
weapons, and as such they generally give advan- 
tages to their owner in melee combat. These 
powers are different from those found on Table 
31: Personal Enhancement, which alter the pos- 
sessor's own abilities and scores. The powers 
here are effective only when the artifact itself is 
used as a weapon. The artifact can: 

Die Roll Power 

Cause paralyzation by touch (3/day) 
Provide initiative each combat round 
Have blur constantly in effect while 
the artifact is in hand 

Cast choose future (1/day) 

Provide double attacks per round 
Cast energy drain by touch (1/week) 
Castfire shield (1/day) 

Cause an opponent tofumble (7/day) 
Cause an opponent to suffer greater 
malison (7/day) 


OAANIAMS WN = 


10 Imbue the user with skills with the 
weapon, regardless of class 

11 Cast harm upon an opponent struck 
by the weapon (1/week) 

12 Cast improved invisibility (1/day) 

13 Cast mirror image (7/day) 

14 Imbue the user with combat skills 
with two weapons at no penalty 

15 Be aware of its surroundings. The 
user is never struck from behind and 
never suffers penalties for fighting in 
darkness. 

16 Cast slay living upon an opponent 
struck by the weapon (1/week) 

17 Imbue the user with all benefits of 
weapon specialization 

18 Cast Tenser's transformation upon the 
user (1/day) 

19 Function as a vampiric regeneration 
ring 

20 Cast warband quest (1/month) 


Table 13: Conjuration 


The powers on this table relate to the ability to 
summon creatures or objects from other places 
or to create things out of thin air. The artifact 
can: 


Die Roll Power 
1 Cast aerial servant (1/week) 
2 Cast animal horde (1/month) 
3 Cast animal summoning I-III with 


the user choosing the type of crea- 
ture summoned (1/day) 

4 Cast animate object (1/day) 

5 Cast call lightning (1/week) 

6 Cast a conjure elemental spell of the 
user's choice (1/week) 

7 Cast Leomund's secure shelter (1/day) 

8 Cast fabricate (1/day) 

9 Call upon Leomund's secret chest at 
any time, using the chest to store 
the artifact when not needed 

10 Cast maze (I/week) 

1 Cast monster summoning I-VII with 
the user choosing the type of mon- 
ster summoned (1/week) 


12 Cast prismatic sphere (1/week) 

13 Summon 1d4 berserkers as a horn of 
Valhalla (1/week) 

l4 Summon a genie (1/week) 

15 Summon an invisible stalker 
(1/week) 

16 Cast summon shadow (1/week) 

17 Inscribe a symbol of the user's choice 
(1/week) 

18 Cast trap the soul upon a creature by 
touch (1/month) 

19 Cast unseen servant to constantly be 
at hand and serve the user 

20 Cast weather summoning (1/week) 


141 


Appendix B 


Table 14: Curses 


These powers, unlike those on Table 11: Cataclysms, affect only the owner of the artifact. Once a curse 
is triggered, the presence of the artifact is not important, since the effect centers on the character and 
not the item. Most curses end when the character voluntarily surrenders the artifact, whether it is 
given up, lost, or stolen. The artifact will: 


Die Roll 


0o A UON = 


N 


Power 

Instantly pollute all holy water within 30' of the user 

Reduce the user's Charisma by 1d4 points 

Inflict a -1 penalty on the user's saving throws vs. magic 

Inflict a -2 penalty on the user's saving throws vs. poison 

Cause the user's touch to rot away wooden items the size of a bow or less in 

1d4 days 

Cause the user's touch to kill plants (inflicts 1d6 points of damage to plant-based 
creatures) 

Cause NPC reactions to the user to be never better than neutral 

Inflict insatiable hunger upon the user, who must eat a full meal once every 
waking hour 

Instantly change the gender of anyone handling the artifact for the first time 
Inflict deafness upon the user, who can only hear voices at a shout. Spellcasters 
must shout their spells to be successful. 

Inflict an incurable disease upon the user. At the start of each month a saving 
throw vs. death must be made to avoid losing | point of Constitution. When the 
user's Constitution reaches 0, death occurs. 

Cause the user's touch to have a 50% chance of draining the magic from any 
nonartifactitem 

Inflict 5dlO points of damage upon anyone handling the artifact for the first time 
Cause a 50% chance of the user being struck by a geas each time a power of the 
artifact is used. The geas must be completed before the artifact can be used again. 
Age the user 1dlO years each time the artifact is used. Although the user suffers 
all the effects of aging, death by old age is not possible as long as the artifact is 
possessed. 

Afflict the user with lycanthropy 

Cause the user's touch to be poisonous (successful saving throw vs. poison or 2d12 
points of damage are inflicted) 

Inflict photosensitivity upon the user, who suffers a -1 penalty to all die rolls while 
out in daylight 

Cause the user's personal possessions to gradually disappear as if lost. Little things 
disappear first, then larger possessions, until the user is stripped of all worldly 
goods. 

Cause the user to become forgetful, starting with small details and progressing 
until full amnesia occurs 


142 


Appendix B 


Table 15: Detection 


These powers are oriented toward finding and 
discovering things hidden, but not necessarily 
unknown Thus, the table includes the power to 
detect poison, but not that of forseeing the 
future Learning what is not normally revealed, 
such as alignment, is covered on Table 16: Div- 
ination. Unless otherwise noted, these powers 
are in effect whenever the artifact is held or 
worn The artifact can 


Die Roll Power 
1 Provide a +1 bonus to the user's 
surprise rolls while the artifact is 
in hand 

2 Imbue the user with all benefits of 
the appraisal proficiency 

3 Have comprehend languages con- 
stantly in effect while the artifact is 
in hand 

4 Have detect charm constantly in 
effect while the artifact is in hand 

5 Cast detect evil/detect good (3/day) 

6 Detect illusions (3/day) 

7 Cast detect invisibility (3/day) 

8 Cast detect magic (3/day) 

9 Cast detect poison (3/day) 

10 Have detect snares & pits constantly 
in effect while the artifact is in 
hand 

11 Detect stonework traps 

12 Cast detect undead (3/day) 

13 Cast emotion read (3/day) 

14 Cast extradimensional detection 
(3/day) 

15 Cast, find traps (l/day) 

16 Have infravision constantly in 
effect while the artifact is in hand 

17 Cast locate object (3/day) 

18 Cast true seeing (1/day) 

19 Cast wizard eye (3/day) 

20 Cast wizard sight (3/day) 


Table 16: Divination 


Divinations are the counterpart of detections, 
revealing things unknown or uncertain Unlike 
most detections, these powers tend to reveal 
intangibles—things that cannot and could never 
have been seen without the aid of the power In 
most cases the artifact must be touched to the 
desired target of the power The artifact can 


Die Roll Power 

1 Cast analyze balance by touch 
(7/day) 

2 Cast augury (3/day) 

3 Permit the user to commune witha 
deity associated with the artifact 
Any question about the artifact or 
its powers will not be answered 
(1/week) 

4 Castconsequence (1/day) 

5 Permit the user to use contact other 
plane through the artifact, which 
selectively screens out all informa- 
tion relating to itself or its powers 
(1/week) 

6 Cast detect lie upon any creature 
within 10' (3/day) 

7 Cast detect scrying (1/day) 

8 Cast, divination (1/day) 

9 Cast divine inspiration (1/day) 

10 Cast ESP by touch (3/day) 

11 Castfind the path (I/day) 

12 Cast foresight (1/week) 

13 Cast identify by touch (1/day). 

14 Cast know alignment by touch 
(3/day) 

15 Cast moment reading (3/day) 

16 Cast past life (3/day) 

17 Cast patternweave by touch 
(I/day) 

18 Cast personal reading upon a crea- 
ture by touch with no knowledge 
of birth or other information 
required (3/day) 

19 Cast read magic by touching the 
artifactto written material (3/day) 

20 Cast stone tell by touch (3/day) 


143 


Appendix B 


Table 17: Elemental Air 


These powers grant knowledge of or control over the elemental forces of Air. Most function iden- 
tically to the spell of the same name. Some are activated by the touch of the artifact while others 
transfer their power to the wielder. The artifact can: 


Die Roll 
1 


e Ui RR UL 


19 


20 


144 


Power 

Cast aerial servant (1/week) 

Cast cloud ofpurification (2/day) 

Cast — cloudkill (day) 

Cast conjure air elemental (1/week) 

Cast control winds (3/day) 

Create a windstorm equal to a djinni's whirlwind. The storm lasts for 1 full turn 
(1/day). 

Have feather fall constantly in effect while the artifact is in hand 

Cast % (3/day) 

Change the user (and all possessions carried) into a gaseous form, vulnerable 
only to area-effect spells. The user can remain gaseous for 2d6 rounds and can 
move at full normal movement rate (1/day). 

Cast gust of wind (5/day) 

Cast solidfog (1/day) 

Cast stinking cloud (3/day) 

Cast wall offog (3/day) 

Cast weather summoning (1/day) 

Cast wind walk (1/day) 

Cast wind wall (1/day) 

Have zone of sweet air (10' radius) constantly surrounding the user while the 
artifact is in hand 

Open a portal to the Elemental Plane of Air. The passage can be traversed in 
both directions and the portal remains open for 1 hour. Any creature can use the 
portal. 

Imbue the user with immunity to the hostile environment found on the Elemen- 
tal Plane of Air and the ability to fly through it normally while the artifact is in 
hand. 

Send messages in a fashion similar to a whispering wind. The user need only 
know the name of the recipient before whispering a message to the sky. The 
user's voice will reach its target within 24 hours, if that person is on the same 
plane (at will). 


Appendix B 


Table 18: Elemental Fire 


These powers grant knowledge of or control over the elemental forces of Fire. Most function iden- 
tically to the spell of the same name. Some are activated by the touch of the artifact while others 
transfer their power to the wielder. The artifact can: 


Die Roll 


£t 


Power 

Cast chariot of Sustarre (1/week) 

Cast conjure fire elemental (1/week) 

Cast delayed blastfireball (1/day) 

Imbue the user with the ability to breathe a cone of fire 30' 10, inflicting 1d6 
points of damage per level (1/day) 

Cast fire burst (3/day) 

Imbue the user with the ability to assume the form of a small fire elemental, 
changing body and possessions into flame. All within 5' suffer 2d6 points of 
damage each round (successful saving throw vs. spell halves) and the user's 
physical blows inflict 2d8 points of damage per hit. The user is immune to all 
types of fire. The form lasts 2d6 rounds. 

Cast fire shield (l/day) 

Castfireball (3/day) 

Cast fireflow (3/day) 

Castflame strike (1/day) 

Castflame walk (3/day) 

Cast Forest'sfiery constrictor (1/day) 

Imbue the user with immunity to the hostile environment found on the Elemen- 
tal Plane of Fire while the artifact is in hand 

Cast light (3/day) 

Cast Malec-Keth's flame fist (3/day) 

Have protection from fire constantly in effect while the artifact is in hand 

Imbue the user with the ability to sculpt normal fire by hand (no damage suf- 
fered). The fire can be fashioned into any shape the user is capable of making, 
but does not gain any special powers because of this. Sculpted fire holds its form 
for 1d6 turns before reverting to normal. 

Cast sunray (1/day) 

Cast wall offire (1/day) 

Open a portal to the Elemental Plane of Fire. The passage can be traversed both 
ways and the portal remains open for 1 hour. Any creature can use the portal. 


145 


Appendix B 


Table 19: Elemental Water 


These powers grant knowledge of or control over the elemental forces of Water. Most function 
identically to the spell of the same name. Some are activated by the touch of the artifact while oth- 
ers transfer their power to the wielder. The artifact can: 


Die Roll 
1 


2 
3 
4 


SN UI 


20 


146 


Power 

Cast airy water (3/day) 

cast cone of cold (1/day) 

Cast conjure water elemental (1/week) 

Transform small quantities of liquids into holy water or unholy water (depending 
upon the item's nature) by touch. Up to 1 pint can be so transformed (3/day). 
Cast create water (1/day) 

Cast ice storm (1/day) 

Shoot a watery blue beam at a single target. If struck, the target must roll a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. death. If the saving throw is failed, the target is slain as it 
melts into a puddle of ooze. If the save is successful, the target still suffers 2d8 
points of damage. This power is not effective on water-based creatures or those 
that lack solid structure (puddings, oozes, etc.) (1/day). 

Empower any basin of water to function like a magic font spell by touch (1/day) 
Cast metamorphose liquids by touch (at will) 

Cast Otiluke'sfreezing sphere (1/day) 

Cast part water (3/day) 

Imbue the user with immunity to the hostile environment found on the Elemental 
Plane of Water and with the ability to breath normally there while the artifact is in 
hand. 

Render any small body of water into a reflecting pool (1/day) 

Imbue the user with all sailing and navigation proficiencies for as long as the arti- 
fact is in the user's possession 

Transform any small body of water into a time pool (1/day) 

Cast wall ofice (1/day) 

Imbue the user with water breathing while the artifact is in hand 

Imbue the user with the abilities of water walk while the artifact is in hand 
Transform the user's body into liquid. The character can move through water at 
normal movement speeds and take the form of a water weird. The user retains all 
normal abilities but cannot venture more than 30' away from a large body of 
water. The user is immune to water-based attacks and suffers only half damage 
from electrical attacks. Fire-based attacks cause double damage, while cold-based 
spells cause no damage but force the user to revert back into true form. The 
power lasts for 1d6 hours or until cancelled by the user (1/day). 

Open a portal to the Elemental Plane of Water. The passage can be traversed both 
ways and the portal remains open for 1 hour. Any creature can use the portal. 


Appendix B 


Table 20: Elemental Earth 


These powers grant knowledge of or control 
over the elemental forces of Earth. Most function 
identically to the spell of the same name. Some 
are activated by the touch of the artifact while 
others transfer their power to the wielder. The 
artifact can: 


Die Roll Power 

1 Cast animate rock by touch (1/day) 

2 Imbue the user with the ability to 
appraise gems and jewelry as long 
as the artifact is in the user's posses- 
sion 

3 Cast conjure earth elemental 
(1/week) 

4 Imbue the user with the ability to 
detect depth underground as a 
dwarf while the artifact is in hand 

5 Imbue the user with the ability to 
detect gems while the artifact is in 
hand 

6 Imbue the user with the ability to 
detect stonework traps as a dwarf 
while the artifact is in hand 

7 Cast earthquake (1/month) 

8 Cast fist of stone upon the user 
(3/day) 

9 Cast flesh to stone by touch (1/day) 

10 Imbue the user with the gem cutting 
proficiency 

11 Cast meld into stone (3/day) 

12 Cast move earth (1/week) 

13 Cast passwall (1/day) 

14 Cast sink (1/week) 

15 Cast stone shape (3/day) 

16 Cast stone tell (3/day) 

17 Cast stoneskin (1/day) 

18 Cast transmute rock to mud (1/day) 

19 Cast wall of stone (1/day) 

20 Open a portal to the Elemental 


Plane of Earth. The passage can be 
traversed both ways and the portal 
remains open for 1 hour. Any crea- 
ture can use the portal. 


Table 21: Enchantment/Charm 


The powers on this table are charms, holds, sug- 
gestions, and other abilities to influence the 
minds of creatures. Most operate directly 
through the artifact—the owner must present 
the device boldly when activating the power. 
The targets are then possibly entranced by the 
power radiating from the artifact. 


Die Roll Power 

1 Increase the user's Charisma score 
by 3, with the enhancement only 
affecting the opposite gender. The 
user need not present the artifact, 
but the power vanishes when the 
artifact is no longer possessed. 

2 Imbue the user with the effects of 
animal friendship while the artifact is 
in hand 

3 Cast charm monster (1/day) 

4 Cast charm person (2/day) 

5 Cast charm plants (5/day) 

6 Cast cloak of bravery/cloak of fear 
(2/day) 

7 Cast command (7/day) 

8 Cast confusion (1/day) 

9 Cast demand (1/week) 

10 Cast domination (1/week) 


11 Cast: emotion (1/day) 

12 Imbue the user's gaze with the 
effects of cause fear while the device 
is in hand 

13 Castfeeblemind by touch (1/week) 

14 Cast forget by touch (3/day) 

15 Cast geas by touch. The mission 


must relate to the goals of the arti- 
fact, if any (I/month). 

16 Cast hold person (1/day) 

17 Cast hypnotism (1/day) 


18 Cast Otto's irresistible dance by touch 
(1/day) 
19 Cast quest by touch. The mission 


must relate to the goals of the arti- 
fact, if any (1/month). 
20 Castsug gestion (3/day). 


147 


Appendix B 


Table 22: Fate and Fortune 


This table is a collection of powers where the user benefits from good fortune. Some powers are 
straightforward, many are unusual, and a few are quite potent. These powers tend to be automatic as 
long as the user possesses the artifact. The artifact can: 


Die Roll 


oo NDAU A 


20 


Power 

Grant a +1 bonus to all of the user's saving throw rolls 

Grant a +1 bonus to the user's THACO 

Grant a +1 bonus (assuming a high roll is good) to all instances of dicing for a 
division of treasure, including magical items (but not other artifacts). This bonus is 
mandatory and cannot be declined by the user. 

Permanently imbue the user with all knowledge of the gambling proficiency. If the 
user is already is proficient in gambling, the ability score improves by 1 point. 
Grant a +1 bonus to the user's encounter reaction rolls 

Imbue the user with natural luck in combat, granting a +1 bonus to all surprise rolls 
Grant a -1 bonus on all of the user's initiative rolls 

Grant the user a change of luck. Once per game day, the player can choose to have 
any single die roll rerolled—an attack roll, damage roll, resurrection survival roll, 
etc. The second roll is the actual result. 

Grant the user incredible luck. Once per game week, the user's player can choose to 
alter any situation by naming an incredible coincidence, as long as it does not 
involve magical items or directly cause the death of a creature, and that event will 
occur. For example, an evil wizardess could be made to trip over her own robes in 
the middle of spellcasting, but could not fall off a cliff to her death. 

Grant the user's adventuring group automatic surprise (1/week) 

Allow the user to always find suitable work, regardless of status or skills 

Prevent the user from ever being completely destitute. Should all of the user's funds 
be consumed, some lucky chance happens to provide just enough to get by—a 
reward, coins in the street, a kind stranger, etc. The amount found is never much, 
but it sees to basic needs. 

Always grant fair sailing winds to any ship or wind-powered vessel the user is on 
Prevent the user from ever being the target of pick-pockets, thieves, house-breakers, 
or con artists—except for those who are specifically after the artifact. The power 
does not prevent general hold-ups by bandits and the like, only individual thefts. 
Cause merchants to never overcharge the user, always offering the best deals 
Prevent the user from ever getting lost 

Allow the user to always sell goods at 50% greater than normal prices 

Prevent the user from ever going hungry. If the user is unable to buy or find food, 
some fortunate circumstance occurs to provide a meal. A deer may wander too close 
to camp, or an innkeeper may extend the hand of charity. 

Cause the user to always appear innocent of crimes. The user is never suspected or 
accused of a crime unless there is no other possibility. Even then, plausible 
explanations cause a reaction roll to see if the story is accepted. 

Cause all spells cast by the user to operate at maximum effect 


148 


Appendix B 


Table 23: Healing 


These powers undo the woes and harms of the world and make it a better place. Most are triggered by 
a touch of the artifact to the person healed or cured. Only a few are constantly in effect. The artifact 


can: 


Die Roll 


19 
20 


Power 

Constantly provide the user with the benefits of accelerated healing 

Cast aid (5/day) 

Cast breath of life (1 /week) 

Render one creature permanently immune to a specific disease or poison by touch 
(1/week) 

Cast cure blindness or deafness (3/day) 

Cast cure critical wounds (2/day) 

Cast cure disease (3/day) 

Cure insanity or restore the mind of one affected by feeblemind or similar spells 
(1/week) 

Cast cure light wounds (7/day) 

Cast cure serious wounds (3/day) 

Purge from a body the effects of any drug, including drunkenness, by touch 
(1/day) 

Cast heal (1 /day) 

Grant the user the power to heal as per the paladin's ability to lay on hands 
Restore hit points to the user by draining 1d6 points from every other creature 
within 10. The drained points are added to the user's but cannot exceed the 
original hit point total. 

Cast neutralize poison (3/day) 

Cast raise dead (1 /week) 

Castregenerate (1/week) 

Place a creature in stasis, halting all further decay and damage. The inert body is 
immune to gases, fire, cold, or lack of oxygen, but can still be harmed by physical 
attacks. Damage from these attacks is subtracted immediately, but death does not 
occur until the stasis is lifted. No further damage affects the body but all damage 
suffered and poisons still in the system continue their normal course as soon as the 
stasis is ended. Only willing targets can be placed in stasis and the effect lasts 1 
week or until the user of the artifact cancels it. Those in stasis are completely inert, 
including all mental and psionic powers (1/week). 

Cause all healing spells applied to the user to be doubly effective 

Erase scars and other disfigurements caused by battle (at will) 


149 


Appendix B 


Table 24: Immunities 


These powers are similar to those found on Table 33: Protections, preventing the user of the artifact from 
coming to harm. Those found here, however, are much more sweeping—these provide a complete shield 
to some effect. Unless otherwise noted, immunities are constantly in effect—the character need only 
have the artifact at hand to gain the benefit. The artifact can: 


Die Roll Power 


1 Imbue the user with immunity to all normal diseases—colds, flu, black death, even 
food poisoning. This does not include diseases caused by spells or monsters (such as 
mummy rot). 

2 Imbue the user with immunity to all magical diseases. While it offers no protection 


from something as mundane as a cold or flu, the immunity does work against dis- 
eases like mummy rot and the results of cause disease spells. 


3 Imbue the user with immunity to all forms of disease, both normal and magical 

4 Imbue the user with immunity to magically caused fear 

5 Imbue the user with immunity to all forms of gas. The user must still breathe, how- 
ever, and so could suffocate or drown. 

6 Imbue the user with immunity to charm- and hold-based spells and spell-like 
effects—except those caused by artifacts 

7 Imbue the user with immunity to missiles from magic missile spells 

8 Imbue the user with immunity to all forms of psionics 

9 Imbue the user with immunity to all magical mental attacks. The character is still vul- 
nerable to psionic attacks. 

10 Imbue the user with immunity to all forms of paralysis, including all hold-based 
spells, the results of web and entangle spells, and the like 

1 Imbue the user with immunity to cold temperatures as low as -50°. Saving throw rolls 
vs. magical cold gain a +2 bonus. 

12 Imbue the user with a magic resistance of 20% or grant a 20% bonus to any existing 
magic resistance 

13 Imbue the user with immunity to all forms of poison 

14 Imbue the user with immunity to normal fire and provide a +2 bonus to saving throw 
rolls vs. all forms of magical fire 

15 Imbue the user with immunity to all forms of electrical attack 

16 Imbue the user with immunity to energy draining 

17 Imbue the user with immunity to illusions, always revealing these as shadowy forms. 


This power does not reveal anything where the physical form has actually been 
changed, such as polymorphed objects or creatures. 

18 Serve as a moral guide. Whenever the user intends something evil or unlawful, the 
artifact delivers a powerful, numbing shock. No damage is taken, but the user is para- 
lyzed for 1d6 rounds. The shocks end when the character gives up the intention or the 
temptation is gone. Note that this power is only suitable for lawful good varieties of 


artifacts. 

19 Imbue the user with immunity to polymorph and shapechanging spells and spell-like 
effects 

20 Imbue the user with immunity to petrification. 


150 


Appendix B 


Die Roll 
13 
4-7 

8-10 
11-13 
14-17 
18-20 
21-23 
24-26 
27-30 
31-33 
34-36 
37-40 
41-43 
44-46 
47-50 


Table 25: Major Spell-like Powers 


The powers on this table are a collection of powerful spells, many of which do not fit well into any 
other category. These powers must be invoked directly from the artifact and work identically to the 
spells named. The artifact can: 


Power 

Cast age object (I/day) 

Cast animate dead (1/day) 

Cast blade barrier (1/day) 

Cast cause critical wounds (1/day) 
Cast cause serious wounds (3/day) 
Cast control undead (3/day) 
Castcontrol weather(l/day) 
Castdestruction(1/week) 
Castforcecage (1/day) 

Cast globe of invulnerability (1/day) 
Castharm (1/day) 

Cast hold monster (2/day) 

Cast liveoak (3/day) 

Cast magic jar (1/day) 

Cast mindshatter (1/week) 


51-53 
54-57 


58-60 
61-63 
63-67 
68-70 
71-73 
74-76 
77-80 
81-83 
84-86 
87-90 
91-95 
96-100 


Cast Mordenkainen's disjunction 
(1/day) 

Cause ghoul-like paralysis by 
touch (3/day) 

Cast physical mirror (1/day) 

Cast prismatic spray (1/day) 

Cast resurrection (1/week) 

Cast reverse gravity (1/day) 

Cast shades (1/day) 

Cast spacewarp (1/day) 

Cast telekinesis (3/day) 

Cast time stop (1/week) 

Cast veil (1/day) 

Cast wall offorce (1/day) 

Cast wall ofthorns (1/day) 

Cast wither (1/week). 


Appendix B 


Table 26: Minor Spell-like Powers 


This table contains all of the minor powers that accompany many artifacts. All of these powers 
function as the spells of the same names and only work when the artifact is pointed at or touched to 


the target or area of effect. The artifact can: 


Die Roll Power 
1 Cast accelerate healing (5/day) 
2-3 Castaudible glamer(7/day) 
4-5 Cast bless (7/day) 
6-7 Cast burning hands (5/day) 
8 Cast call upon faith (5/day) 
9-10 Cast call woodland beings (5/day) 
11 Cast calm chaos (5/day) 
12-13 Cast chill touch (5/day) 
14-15 Cast color spray (5/day) 
16 Castcontagion (3/day) 
17-18 Cast continual darkness (3/day) 
19-20 Cast continual light (3/day) 
21-22 Cast control temperature, 10' radius 
(5/day) 
23-24 Cast create food and water (5/day) 
2526 Cast curse (5/day) 
27-28 | Castdancing lights (5/day) 
29 Castdarkness, 15'radius (3/day) 
30 Cast dispel magic (3/day) 
31 Cast dust devil (5/day) 
32-33 Cast enlarge (3/day) 
34 Cast enthrall (5/day) 
35-36 Cast Evard's black tentacles (3/day) 
38-39  Castfaeriefire (5/day) 
40 Castfear (3/day) 
41 Castfire purge (5/day) 
42-43 Castflame arrow (5/day) 
44-45 Castflaming sphere (5/day) 
46 Cast gaze reflection (3/day) 


152 


Cast glyph of warding (3/day) 
Cast grease (7/day) 

Cast hold animal (5/day) 

Cast hold plant (5/day) 

Cast hypnotic pattern (3/day) 

Cast invisibility (3/day) 

Cast levitate (5/day) 

Castmagic missile (5/day) 

Cast music of the spheres (5/day) 
Cast phantasmal force (3/day) 
Castphantasmalkiller(3/day) 
Cast plant growth (5/day) 

Cast polymorph other (3/day) 

Cast protection from cantrips (7/day) 
Castshadow monsters (3/day) 
Castshocking grasp (5/day) 

Cast shout (3/day) 

Castsilence, 15'radius (3/day) 
Cast sleep (5/day) 

Cast slow (3/day) 

Cast slow poison (7/day) 

Cast spike growth (3/day) 

Cast stinking cloud (5/day) 

Cast stone shape (5/day) 

Cast summon lycanthrope (3/day) 
Cast tongues (5/day) 

Cast trip (5/day) 

Castvampiric touch (3/day) 

Cast web (5/day) 

Cast wizard lock (5/day). 


Appendix B 


Table 27: Movement 


These powers enhance the ability to manuever 
and travel quickly. Since most artifacts cannot 
carry the user, these powers are activated when 
the artifact is in hand. The artifact can: 


Die Roll Power 

Cast air walk (2/day) 

Cast blink (3/day) 

Cast dimensional folding (1/day) 
Imbue the user with double the 
normal overland movement rate as 
long as the artifact is in hand 

5 Cast flame walk (3/day) 

6 Cast fly (2/day) 
7 
8 


AUN m 


Cast free action (1/day) 
Cast haste (1 /day) 
9 Cast jump (5/day) 
10 Cast pass without trace (3/day) 
11 Castpasswall(1/day) 
12 Cast rainbow bridge (1/day) 
13 Cast shadow walk (1/day) 
14 Cast spider climb (3/day) 
15 Cast teleport without error (1/day) 
16 Cast transport via plants (3/day) 
17 Cast water walk (5/day) 
18 Cast wind walk (1/day) 
19 Cast word of recall (1/day) 
20 Cast wraithform (1/day). 


Table 28: Offensive Powers 


These powers are coveted by players, due to 
their powerful punch. Unlike those powers 
associated with Table 12: Combat, the ones 
listed here are not limited to weapons or hand- 
to-hand combat. These powers must be trig- 
gered from the artifact and most function as the 
spell ofthe same name. The artifact can: 


Die Roll Power 
1 Cast age creature (1/day) 
2 Cast Bigby's crushing hand (1/day) 
3 Fire a black beam of death that 
causes 2d8 points of damage to 
any creature successfully hit. The 
beam's range is 100 yards (5/day) 


4 Cast cause critical wounds (1/day) 

5 Cast chain lightning (1/day) 

6 Cast claws ofthe umber hulk 
(1/day) 

7 Inflict an equal amount of damage 


upon any creature that inflicts non- 
spell damage upon the user 
8 Castdisintegrate (1/week) 
9 Cast finger of death (1/week) 
10 Cast fireball (1 Iday) 
ll Cast flame strike (1/day) 
12 Cast lightning bolt (1/day) 
13 Castmindshatter(1/day) 
14 Cast power word, blind (1/day) 
15 Cast power word, stun (1/day) 
16 Cast power word, kill (1/week) 
17 Cast shape change (1/week) 
18 Cast suffocate (1 /week) 
19 Cast vanish (1/week) 
20 Cast weird (1/week). 


153 


Appendix B 


Table 29: Nature 


The powers of this table are related to plants, 
animals, and weather. Most function as spells. 
Other powers are explained below. The artifact 
can: 


Die Roll Power 
1 Have animal friendship constantly in 
effect as long as the artifact is in hand 
2 Castanimal growth (3/day) 
3 Transfer one of a creature's powers to 


the user by touch. This can include 
AC, movement, senses, or any non- 
combat special ability. The transfer 
lasts 1 hour and then fades (3/day). 

4 Imbue the user with the ability to see 
through the eyes of any normal ani- 
mal. The creature must be within 
sight and within 60' of the artifact at 
the time of activation. The power 
lasts 1d3 turns (3/day). 

5 Castanimal summoning III (2/day) 

6 Cast call lightning (1/day) 

7 Protect the user as if a cloak of 
elvenkind were worn 

8 Cast charm plants (3/day) 

9 Castentangle (3/day) 

10 Heighten one of the user's senses— 
keen hearing, infravision, superior 
smell, etc., granting a +1 bonus to all 
surprise rolls 

11 Cast hold animal (3/day) 

12 Have pass without trace constantly in 
effect as long as the artifact is in hand 

13 Castplant growth (3/day) 


14 Imbue the user with the ability to use 
speak with plants at will 
15 Imbue the user with the ability to use 


speak with animals at will 
16 Cast transportvia plants (1/day) 
17 Cast wall of thorns (1/day) 
18 Cast warp wood (3/day) 
19 Cast weather summoning (1/day) 
20 Cast anti-plant shell (1/day). 


154 


Table 30: Necromancy 


These deadly powers are among the most 
hideous known for artifacts. All affect the life- 
force of creatures. Unless otherwise noted, the 
artifact must touch the target for the power to be 
effective. The artifact can: 


Die Roll Power 

1 Cast Abi-Dalzim's horrid wilting 
(1/day) 

2 Cast animate dead (3/day) 

3 Cast Bloodstone's frightful joining 
(2/day) 

4 Cast Bloodstone's spectral steed 
(1/day) 

5 Cast breath of death (1/day) 

6 Cast cause blindness (1/day) 

7 Cast chill touch (3/day) 

8 Cast contagion (2/day) 

9 Cast control undead (2/day) 

10 Cast death spell (1/week) 

1l Cast energy drain (1/week) 

12 Castfeign death (3/day) 

13 Create a window to the border of the 


negative material plane that remains 
open for 1 hour. Creatures can pass 
through freely from both sides. 

14 Cast slay living (1 /week) 

15 Imbue the user with the ability to 
use speak with dead at will, as long as 
the artifact is in hand 

16 Cast summon shadow (1/week) 

17 Transform the user into an undead 
creature. The user retains all original 
hit points and abilities and gains the 
immunities of an undead creature. 
In addition, the user is not affected 
by gasses or poisons that would 
harm a living being. The condition 
lasts 1d6 turns (1/day). 

18 Cast vampiric touch (3/day) 

19 Cast wail of the banshee (1/week) 

20 Cast wither (1/week). 


Appendix B 


Table 31: Personal Enhancement 


Aside from the massive powers of artifacts, these are powers many player characters dream 
about—the undeserved rewards of simply finding an artifact. Unlike many other powers, those 
given here can be used virtually without restriction. Unless otherwise stated, these powers last as 
long as the character owns the artifact. A few are noted as permanent, remaining with the character 
even after the artifact is gone. Permanent powers take effect as soon as the artifact is touched, but 
only once per adventuring group (or until the owner is dead). The artifact can: 


Die Roll 


Power 

Cast alter selfat will 

Cast clairaudience at will 

Cast clairvoyance at will 

Have animal friendship constantly in effect 

Provide the user with the effects of deeppockets, regardless of what is worn 
Imbue the user with invisibility to undead 

Shield the user constantly with protection from evil/protection from good (as appropri- 
ate to the artifact) 

Regenerate 2 of the user's hit points per turn 

Castfeign death at will 

Castfriends at will 

Cast lasting breath at will 

Provide the user with a permanent +1 bonus to saving throw rolls 
Permanently increase the user's prime requisite score(s) by 1 

Permanently imbue the user with the ability to use comprehend languages at will 
Permanently imbue the user with the ability to use negative plane protection at will 
Permanently imbue the user with the ability to use speak with monsters at will 
Permanently imbue the user with the ability to use speak with animals at will 
Permanently imbue the user with the ability to use speak with plants at will 
Permanently imbue the user with the ability to use water breathing at will 
Permanently imbue the user with the ability to use ventriloquism at will. 


155 


qqu——— 
a —— = 3 ; 


ed 


^ 


Appendix B 


56 


1 


Appendix B 


Table 32: Planar 


The powers of this table transcend the limitations of a single realm of existence, allowing the char- 
acter access to other dimensions. These powers only function when the artifact is present and most 
require that it be activated by a specific command. The artifact can: 


Die Roll 


Power 

Cast astral spell (1/week) 

Cast astral window (1/week) 

Cast binding (1/week) 

Cast contact higher plane about any topic other than the artifact or its powers 
(1/week) 

Cast dimension door (1/day) 

Energy drain one level/hit die from an opponent on a successful touch (1/day) 
Cast estate transference (1/month) 

Open a gate to a particular island of protomatter in the ethereal plane 100' x 100' 
across. This can be used by the character as a residence, storage place, or even 
prison (2/day). 

Create a 10' x 10 ethereal window, allowing viewing of whatever lies beyond. The 
window is one-sided, so those being viewed do not know it is there. Stepping 
through the window strands the person in the ethereal plane (1/day). 

Cast exaction (1/week) 

Cast extradimensional manipulation (1 /week) 

Cast gate (1 /week) 

Cast Mordenkainen's magnificent mansion (2/week) 

Imbue the user with the ability to phase like a phase spider (2/day) 

Imbue the user with immunity to the hostile environment of one plane (chosen by 
the DM). The power lasts as long as the user possesses the artifact. 

Open a window to any outer plane. Nothing can pass through the window, but 
events can be seen and heard in both directions (1/week). 

Cast plane shift (1/week) 

Cast speak with astral traveler (1/day) 

Summon one non-deity from the outer planes. The name or type of creature must 
be known. Obedience or service is not guaranteed (1/month). 

Cast wish (1/month). 


157 


Appendix B 


Table 33: Protections 


This table contains a collection of powers that enhance the safety of the artifact's owner and, in 
some cases, any companions present. Unlike Table 24: Immunities, not all of these powers are con- 
stant or 100% effective. Some function all the time, some require the artifact to be in hand, and oth- 
ers must be invoked by the user. The artifact can: 


Die Roll Power 


1 Grant an Armor Class bonus of 2 to the user when held 

2 Function as a ring ofprotection +2 when held 

3 Cast anti-magic shell (1/day) 

4 Cast anti-plant shell (2/day) 

5 Cast armor upon any creature the artifact touches (5/day) 

6 Protect the user constantly with the effects of afeatherfall spell 

7 Cast fire shield (\/day) 

8 Generate a sphere offorbiddance, 15' in radius, centered on the artifact. This forbid- 
dance is not permanent (as is the spell), having a duration of only 2d6 hours. It can 
be password locked, however (1/week). 

9 Have mind blank in effect as long as the artifact is in hand 

10 Have negative plane protection constantly in effect as long as the artifact is in hand, 
with no saving throw necessary 

ll Have non-detection constantly in effect as long as the artifact is in hand 

12 Have protection from normal missiles constantly in effect as long as the artifact is in 
hand 

13 Have protection from lightning constantly in effect as long as the artifact is in hand 

14 Have protection from fire constantly in effect as long as the artifact is in hand 

15 Have protection from paralysis constantly in effect as long as the artifact is in hand 

16 Have shield in effect when the artifact is boldy presented (5/day) 

17 Cast thief's lament on any nonliving item of chest size or smaller by touch. The 
effect is permanent (1 /week) 

18 Cast unceasing vigilance of the holy sentinel (1/week) 

19 Cast undead ward upon a 100' x 100' cube. The undead are turned as if by an 18th 
level priest (1/week) 

20 Cast zone of truth (1/week). 


158 


Appendix C 


Song List for Heward’s Mystical Organ 


Power Stop Settings Song 


Personal Enhancement 


Personal Enhancement 


Personal Enhancement 


Personal Enhancement 


Personal Enhancement 


Abjuration 


Abjuration 


Abjuration 


Abjuration 


Abjuration 


Abjuration 


Enchant/Charm 


Enchant/Charm 


Enchant/Charm 


Enchant/Charm 


Enchant/Charm 


Cataclysm 


Cataclysm 


Cataclysm 


Conjuration 


Conjuration 


Conjuration 


By permission of TSR Inc this page may be reproduced for personal use only 1993 TSR Inc All Rights Reserved 


159 


ULONS & DRAGONS 
AN, CUNGLON MA 


The ultimate test of skill for the 
DUNGEON MASTER™, the 
DRAGON MOLINTAIN™ deluxe boxed set 

presents a consummate 
dungeon craw! through 
the lair of a Great Red 
Wyrm for 10th: to 15th- 
level players. 
Suitable for any AD&D® 
game setting, it features a 
treasure-trcve of plaver 
handouts; six large, full- 
color maps — including 
three that create giant 
tactical playing surfaces for URSUS or the e 
included cardstock stand-ups; 14 new 
monsters; and two incredibly challenging 
adventures that link into one mega-campaign! 
Catch the adventure now at book, game, and 
hobby stores everywhere! 


Also From TSR 


FOR PLAYERS 


FOR PLAYERS 
AND THE DM" 


Advanced 
Dungeons Dragons 
DUNGEQN 
MASTER 
Guide 


FOR THE DM" 
3 Steps for the 


DUNGEON MASTER" 


1. Start with the basic game rules: 
Player's Handbook. 


2. Add the essentials for running 
your own game: DUNGEON 
MASTER™ Guide, Monstrous 
Manual, DUNGEON MASTER 
Screen. 


we 


. Choose a TSR campaign setting 
(see front) or create your own 
world using DM supplements 
and the Historical Reference 
Series. 


Essentials 


Advanced 
Dungeons sragons 


Character Record Sheets 

A handy place to note vital statis- 
tics, equipment, and treasure for 
easy reference during play. 


Adyvage ed 
Dungeomparagons 


Expansions 


Player's Handbook Supplements 

Go beyond the basics! Customize your character with 
specialized "kits"—from the barbarian warrior to the 

acrobatic thief. Discover more detail about your PC's 
class or race, more equipment and new magic, plus a 

smorgasbord of tips for better play. New options and 
rules interest DMs too. 


Complete Fighter's Handbook 

Complete Priest's Handbook 

Complete Thief's Handbook 

Complete Wizard's Handbook 

Complete Psionics Handbook 

Complete Bard's Handbook 

Complete Book of Dwarves 

Complete Book of Elves 

Complete Book of Gnomes and Halflings 


Gaming Tools 


DUNGEON MASTER" Decks 

Banish page-flipping; now the information you need 
is at your fingertips! Over 400 reference cards per 
deck. Each card sums up a single spell, item, or 
subject—with symbols for quick identification. 


* Deck of Wizard Spells 

* Deck of Priest Spells 

e Deck of Magical Items 

* Deck of Encounters (94; DM's tool) 
Essentials Expansions 


Monstrous Manual 

The "all star line-up" for the AD&D® 
game, with spectacular full-color 
illustrations. Includes over 600 
creatures: every monster from 
Volumes 1 and 2 of the 
MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM® 
series, plus favorites from TSR 
campaign worlds and many creatures 
never seen elsewhere. A must-have 
for every DM. 


DUNGEON MASTER Screen 

This self-standing cardboard screen 
puts vital combat and encounter 
tables right before your eyes. Plus, 
it hides secret maps and information 
from players. 


AdVápe ed 
Dungeonsbpragons 


Book ob MERC 


Book of Artifacts 

Artifacts are rare, magical items of phenomenal 
power. This coveted collection features long-buried 
favorites from the original AD&D tomes, all greatly 
expanded for AD&D 2nd Edition players. Also 
included: items native to TSR campaign worlds, plus 
important new discoveries. You'll even learn how to 
create artifacts for your own campaign! 


Guidebooks 


Player's Guides to Campaign Worlds 
An "explorer's view" of each AD&D® campaign 
setting. New for '93: 


* Player's Guide to the 
DRAGONLANCE® Campaign 

* Player's Guide to the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS® Campaign 


Expansions 


Tome of Magic 


Featuring over 200 new wizard and priest spells plus a 


host of magical items. Introduces optional forms of 
magic. No DM or spellcasting character should be 
without this tome for long! 


Historical Reference Series 
(Campaign Sourcebooks) 


History with a twist—just in time. The tools you need 


to adapt historical settings to the AD&D fantasy 
game. 


Vikings 

Charlemagne's Paladins 
Celts 

A Mighty Fortress 

The Glory of Rome 


Expansions 


DUNGEON MASTER™ Guide Supplements 
Add depth to your campaign and bring your adven- 
tures to life: 


* Campaign Sourcebook and Catacomb Guide 
(Running a successful campaign anywhere; 
carving out subterranean thrills) 

* Castle Guide (Adventure in a feudal society— 
from knightly codes to castle construction) 

* Arms and Equipment Guide 
(Handy for players too!) 

* Monster Mythology 
(Gods and myths of nonhuman races) 

* Creative Campaigning (Alternate rules and 
innovative settings for extraordinary games) 


Adventures 


"Challenge" Adventure Series 

Play one-on-one? adventures with your DM or 
adventure with a small group. Helps low-level 
characters build experience. 


* Fighter's Challenge 
e Wizard's Challenge 
* Thiefs Challenge 
* Cleric's Challenge 


Adventures 


Dragon Mountain! 


The DRAGON MOUNTAIN boxed set is the 


ultimate Dungeon Master's fantasy! It's the world's 
most deluxe dungeon, designed to appeal to discrimi- 
nating and demanding role-players 


? & ™ designates trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 


Incredible magic for all campaigns! The Book 
of Artifacts will help every adventure reach 
new plateaus of mystery, danger, and epic 
excitement. Within these pages is the most 
complete collection of legendary and obscure 
artifacts ever assembled for the AD&D® 2nd 
Edition game. Each enigmatic token or 
powerful relic has a detailed history, special 
powers that truly fit the theme of the item, and 
even tips on how to introduce—or 
remove—the artifact from a campaign. 


New and valuable information is also 
included for characters who want to create magical items or recharge 
existing ones. Making that special magical sword or finding ingredients 
for that powerful potion can be the basis for whole adventures! 


Whether the characters find the Machine of Lum the Mad or the Jacinth 
of Inestimable Beauty, the Book of Artifacts packs enough adventure 
between its covers to be an invaluable addition to every AD&D game! 


TSR, Inc. f s TSR Ltd 
POB 756 iat | 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton 
Lake Geneva "ES Cambridge CB1 3LB 
WI 53147 U.S.A. —— United Kingdom 


©1993 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the U.S.A 
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and AD&D are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
DUNGEON MASTER and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 


1560"766728 


$20.00 U.S. 
$24.00 CAN 
£11.99 U.K. 


NN 


9*7 


