: Connie 
Fighter’s 
Handbook 


Advanced 
Dungeons[s5rasons y 


Player's Handbook 


au Edition Rules Supplement 


The 
Complete 


Fighter’s 


Handbook 


The ADVANCED DUNGEONS 
& DRAGONS? 2nd Edition Play- 
er's Handbook and Dungeon 
Master's Guide told you all you 
needed to know about playing 
warriors in the game. But it 
could be that you want to know 
more than the bare minimum it 
takes to play the warrior 
classes. 

That's where The Complete 
Fighter's Handbook comes in. 
In these pages, we're going to 
show you lots of interesting 
things you can do with the war- 
rior classes ... things that the 
Player's Handbook and DMG 
didn't have room to show you. 

Do you want to play fighter 
characters other than Fighter, 
Paladin, and Ranger? Here we'll 
give you rules for characters like 
barbarians, samurai, gladiators, 
amazons—they’re all subsets of 
the three main warrior classes, 
but they're here. 

Do you want new combat 
rules? We have them. You'll find 


rules for different weapon 
styles, combat tactics, combat 
maneuvers, jousting, combat 
results, and many other fighter- 
oriented abilities within these 
pages. 

Is it new equipment you're af- 
ter? That, too, is present in copi- 
ous quantities, from new armor 
and weapons to new magic 
items. 

Or perhaps you want some 
role-playing and campaigning 
tips for your fighter characters 
. . .or your campaign in general. 
In these pages you'll find role- 
playing advice for fighter char- 
acters, and discussion of the 
role of the fighter in regular 
campaigns and in all-fighter 
campaigns, 

Whether you’re a player or 
DM, an intent rules lawyer or 
just someone wishing to add a 
little depth to your campaign or 
character, you'll find something 
here for you. Have fun. 


* * * 


Incidentally, The Complete 
Fighter's Handbook presumes 
that you're using the AD&D® 
2nd Edition game rules for 
Weapon Proficiencies and Non- 
weapon Proficiencies. Many of 
the rules presented in this book 
depend on use of the proficien- 
cies. So if you haven't been us- 
ing them so far in your 
campaign, we highly recom- 
mend that you familiarize your- 
self with them and introduce 
them into your playing. 

Here's a special note for those 
of you who are using this Com- 
plete: Fighter's Handbook with 
your first edition AD&D® game 
instead of the new second edi- 
tion: This supplement mentions 
a lot of page numbers from the 
Player's Handbook and the 
Dungeon Master's Guide. The 
page numbers cited are for the 
second edition, not the first; 
you'll have to ignore the page 
numbers given. 


The Complete Fighter's Handbook 


lntroducllól iss 9 Sse HF FHS sierra 1 AMAZON x4 ca eos er Os katwieaceafediert: Dea ee as 46 
Character Creation ..... sisse — Mb Uso ponere tipbete ql 
Cavallera cis. sis: kes, 9x9 ue radon UE HS Ws EN US V 48 
Races ooo OION | Gladiators -----—-———— 49 
Classes ;.:4 ni cerana a En Se ER P. Wb SSR I 4 Myrmidons ..ssccrererriseriserrioevire netter 49 
ALa xs uus eu dr CERE LCXSU e 6 om ete hatp qn ate 4 Noble Warriors .... esse 50 
busto MEM Tm 4 Peasant Heroes «eee nnn 50 
Proficleneles . eee eee ere tede uy wie oso e Ale von ove 4 Pirates and Outlaws icc sa is 95 sorasa non se Cs OS We xn 51 
PS s ey eeede ers ust oo aote alise Sie. alle’ aGelenspeperiusds ens sis 4 Good-Guy Outlaws and Pirates |....... i.e esee 51 
The WOERD coss US cs coxa S RERZR W ERIEK UE Gd 4 Bad-Guy Outlaws and Pirates ..... 2... 0c cece eee eee 51 
Apprentices and Overseers ........... eese eee 6 Cni P o EONS wr ce A ARRAREN eas: em eae 52 
"Tünedo CráfÜ ATIDOT oc cs meciecicesoee ecg wee: ars, rumen phe tene ina ene 6 GAVARO oc SEA isi ocupa ym panis ah bU Bat RO cem 52 
CosttoXCraft Armor ce ose cccsacorerere.ove ace oceesvraversracerere ore ete 6 Swashbucklers accen aias pe VRESGEVECES US. TS HE rfe tv VU 53 
Chance Failure veis cocoa st aua s 1 Wilderness Warriors iis sis oc oe e RR ds n ra ra tra 53 
Ad EXDODRES vas ca P ESPAPSU DR VMN CX EE XS 8 The Miltary Cambpalgn. asss es mi irae teuer vse eve sia aanas 53 
Player-Character Workshops ......... sese eee 8 Campaign vs, Mini-serles |. «esee nter mrt nmn 54 
Repairing Armor ....... sss eee eee eee eee 8 Combat RUNES 6 6c 2 sine 999 V vOPPECUS . 56 
Repairing Magical Armor ........... 6600 ee eee eens 8 
BowyerlFletcher-. 23:3 thos so ol IG Aea sd ES S 10 New Combat Rues ace nio atero WIR CN sie owe one re wetter 56 
Weaponemithing siis 6s 4 ca denen ss ca ty oP ERSTER da A 10 Off-Hand Weapons Use .....-...- 60sec eee e eee eee 56 
Weaponsmithing Failure ........... sese 10 Kneeling: and Sitting... re se aceceseseseiie seine) 8 sa 918 Ee ES nice 56 
vorbei W———— 10 Range and Initiative .. 1.6... 1 sse 56 
‘Weapons Not SHOWT js «sunrise din ods hero haw ag ase 11 Weapon Proficiency Slots os sic o oeeees es e e wes eva 58 
Money and Equipment ...... lesse 11 Intelligence and Proficiencies ........... lessen 58 
Maile: iG d: sepsis ER Gi HA ERE TE YA two REMI SRR Di S 11 Single-Weapon Proficiency Weapon Specialization ..... 58 
BAPER anerian signes ene sce E ea OX Me RR IAW Qu Vv 11 Weapon-Group Proficiency ........ eee 58 
TighLGroups $2265 65 5: 6$ EUESHQERRRGA SA XR eR Coss 58 
Warrior Kits ....... eet hh m ht m mtt eO 13 Broad Groupe: canre pan Se vea UY VN e os a am oases 59 
Kits and Warriors 26 cecus oe oe ce ase ER GA D 13 Non-GGroups ..... eee eene 60 
Kits and the Warrior Classes ............ eee 14 Weapon Specialization and Weapon Groups ......-.... 60 
Kits ‘and Character Creation. «cccen es e renean si oe axe » 14 Ambldextetlty «usus so sue anA um mar = Bee erase 60 
ar SAPO T cc. occceccomoersvee ose sos etenciercsecg nia. oce suse 14 Style Specialization, «i 52 99 eges Roe Wa os dw oe X Ses 61 
Tere wit neice ieee M apa QU Som pve hese EER ONSE oe 14 Punching and Wrestling Specialization ................ 61 
BROBAPIAIU acetcu music EAA ars Dac ANTATTE DRE ee S 16 Marta Arts Mp 61 
BGABEERIGEE csse occ ec caumrensann cu on nwweunduns ers oa aun 18 Fighting SEY NO as sare aes NE atto are ea) eec 61 
BOS 0 JJ, —— ——————————— 18 The Four Fighting Styles ........ een 61 
O rn EMGHNIUN ARS ClUn nOD luco MEN 22 i all aa QUU 6E DE EE S ERE 62 
"SF Ecce aaa ipM dae per pala E 24 Guldelines-:.— ex e vor; poer va E a eue se 62 
MUERE iow us qa x CRRA RS VP ER RP MOREE RE dE NP d 25 Multiple Style Specializations isis w a as a aars 62 
Noble WatHOT ose avs os coceccaronov oc wo eR e ae e ae cv 26 Limitations on Style Specialization ................. 62 
Peasant Hero ossi aci amid Gad We ecu oe tin 29 Single Weapon GU Midas vil ni E RR ned 62 
Pi OQUEAW aa Dur E n: efe sin o I uin od 30 Two-HanderStyle ......... een ences 62 
AS Celso su Me P LUE DPA. feo M CORDE IRE DM 31 Weapon and Shield Style ....... es di oie oe eee eres 63 
SAVAGE! n qusedam Ga SUEUR UR a RSS UR SOs EG ree 32 Two-WeaponStyle..... «een nn 64 
Swashbuckler << << oc cccc-cccccancuwoueecece awe 34 Sample Style Specialization ........ 0.2200 e ee eens 64 
Wilderness WRPrÍOE-. ce sees coe ara eee rare: ora acm ever 35 Melee Manetivers: iia «ss Ha Heine UE ER ES oh MOSM teet 64 
Recording Kits on the Character Sheet ................ 36 Called SBiotS «3 cz bs x orata a QU SA Ur LESS EE 65 
Warrior Kits and Multi-Class Characters ............... 36 Striking a Specific Body Part .. 0+... ++.seeseeeeees 65 
Warrior Kits and Dual-Class Characters ............sss 37 Smashing Something Being ESO «uui mius ere or seris hen 65 
Abandoning a- KÍb.«« is oe euccacee c i ete aoeceestace es ess. Ics 37 Bypassing Armor ......-- +++ esese seer 66 65 
Modifying the Kits n isidrafetnaqiec is tot aiti estes mh 37 SIDSCIALESGIMIN: sr a 95 PiNERenum) £2 Te à agaia e 
Creating New Kits «lile 37 Disarm ...... eese eene 66 
Thrown-Weapon and Missile Disarms ............... 68 
Role-Playing seesxsasveewseenses3ssswrodOA EXpert DISIE so v oeeseeeis e site are riens yx aoa tete 68 
CDD p MEMTHM"———————— 68 
le e n a a EL dse: aie lo a Grabbing a Person: «esent nt wis ey rime 69 
The Crude Crasher A" RORRNO ROC MAE BRD) AAAS S SHE Ies AR BO I E 40 . ee AMODSIET se wees Gi 2 Le AE NUMEN RA i po 
$ DX es x nda «ca $1 SIS SRST FS te. Be Hee o OIE ses Si 2% YE SORI EE He we DANS a E a 
Ee Me dia Antagonist ...... ise nnn 40 Characters with Multiple Attacks ........ isses. 70 
e Doomed Champion ..........++--+eeseeeeeees 41 0s MPREGMEPHESQU UNO AONNORIRN QUNM ANDER CEU NE 70 
a Merry Cn ad dieses SEIR end amp curpeiEcElNS iie. be. n in Mira OLPC: uic aar sub Savoie Ras 3 70 
The Natural Leader £2 no cs is xn SAXUSSA 1x 1o caca 43 aa in MBA d$ NS NE Eos m 
The Sneaky Thinker envagtrisods on aSmsasMV es ru monat 43 ote eee RR RUD 1 
Changing Personality Types es cs is sese nh n 43 nu c o mau a d dh es hs 71 
Ene War tr CANON rere oe co cence ence se re. ene ia eateries AE OUD RUE Sd alas aem tei AE MA nien at 
Magical World vs. Nonmagical World ...............- 44 Ueo Poles x sce ESEA #2 Pa ou CE ENÜTATAUK G3 em dn: 71 
Magical World -cs n veneosrusOWBROANSN D eames 45 Sap . m a 72 
Mostly Nonmagical World ..........-..-00000ee0 eee 45 cc E MM og are cgrccarorgmeurarerme ong a, cn 72 
Strictly Nonmagical World ..........00 cece cece eee 45 SER e o MANN 72 
The Mixed Warrior- Type Campaign >... i... ON sion eere reri 78 
The One-Warrior-Type Campaign ......... sese 46 Surprise and Flash Maneuvers ..........0000e ee eeuee 73 


The Complete Fighter's Handbook 


Don't Say No; Determine Difficulty ............. isses 73 hir ebrio aaa uea —— 90 
Maneéuversin the Campalfn. s «ass awis css ass ress anasa 74 Tactical Miis cis eses ase asie sra pda @ new caia Saas 90 
Punching, Wrestling, and Martial Arts ........ lesse 74 ROCHON: ses ssia vas me v vA sita oH OR SURE. asta RD 90 
Specializing With Punching and Wrestling ........... 74 Spear Cae S os à rues nua cv new noe Pu X de Y FU IUE 91 
Normal Punching Attacks sgons g aau asu onas aage 75 Directing IraffiG saves nas cone Yn How aa CEN WRN 91 
Punching Specialization ......-.....----.2+++-2055 75 Campaign TAOUCS-. 4: 3 exu mes: s HN $ nem EA xS Soins 91 
Normal Wrestling Attacks o esi seua sis maina paut amase sys 75 Just Arriving in Town iisas cii onea rite mesen aoua nnn 92 
Wrestling Specialization a uer nesse emea taie ene noa ei 75 JheCombat Sheet: «425. iee nues aara Devens Baa EE qun E 92 
Margal ATUS a ous eret voie orta tota Anio m te m ete XD s t n 76 Equi 
Martial Arts RESUMES sv cues smack ies mem eim aen we 76 quipment ........ een een 93 
Descriptions of the Maneuvers ........... lille 76 Cid Weapons & ct an arreter eto SOR a NM edi 93 
Specializing in Martial Arts occ cse e nme sa 77 One-Hand, Two-Hand ........ sse 93 
More Than One Style .... 1... 6... ee eee eee nnn 77 New WEEP ORB: M—————— 94 
Continuing Specialization... 78 Gladiator WEAPONS ; wi wag cea ce a ey ác ey ug Ces 94 
The Complete Martial Artist .........sseeeeeeeee 78 Pirate WEAPONS zs odes ed Gales Heid DWAR REE RENS RET Rs 100 
In Oriental Campaigns ....-.. 1... 0+ esse ne 78 Samurai Weapons i355 s6& 6993 WWE Wee Rae BEY vas 100 
Barehanded Mameuvers «sui ses sects mh nm 79 Savak WEAN ze cick dua Ski kd A KE dick E CN spes iee 103 
Called Shots: Punching and Martial Arts ........ sss. 79 Swashbuckler Weapons ........-..--20 ee 103 
Caled Shots: Wrestling. aes exe ema Hem germ hs 79 New Armor....... cccccccccecucccveccucuveuaeeue 104 
Disarm... 1s eee eee eee eee eee eee eens 79 Gladiator ATIDO us «sss wax eine mew w deere ses ace as es 104 
GIAD sx iex DOR was XC AME ERR AUS OER Hela XT SNe ROG 79 Samurai Armor ........ sels 105 
Hold Attack .. 1.6.6.6 sees eee eect nnn nn 79 EffeCtS CLARO? uu ces seers a ireti ane ges atom e Ims a E 106 
PATTY oe eee eee tees LLL LS 79 ENEC ONAC iussum new wey ore weer caw rame edes Paus 106 
PiN weer eee teen etree eter eee n teen eae e eens 80 Biféctsion. Speed < gei sasapan wens aye ens és ER f 106 
Pull/rip 2. eee ee eee eee eee ees 80 Effects on Dexterity Checks .......... esee 106 
Sap enne nnn 80 Effects on Vision and Hearing.................-4-- 107 
Shield-Punch .. 2.5.0 + see e eee e eee e eee eee es 80 Other Helms and Helmets ..........0.0 eese 107 
Shield-Rush . 2... eee e eee eee eee tee nnn 80 What Head Protection Doesn't Do ...............4- 107 
Strike/Thrust .... esses 80 Vision and Hearing Checks oeo cree ces eais a sma aaa sra 107 
HICLOOHLUOIS. & cece ser poa icy VOCE a A AA GU sy EEA 2 80 No Head Protection ......... csse 107 
The "Numbed" and Useless" Numbers ............-. 80 VdriüniAIIEOÉ sas. sia ony gratas ceu ioca (Og coste RUD qs 109 
Body Locations . «sese nnn] 80 Rage ARO ass ns gene o PERO wes wea MER VERE ER 109 
General Effects of Called Shots ..........6 0.0.0 euee 81 Armor PIDE ccs ira eus p ONE KENT GSK BES & EX Vers c9 109 
Specific Effects of Called Shots ...............---255 81 High-Quality Racial Armor .........-...00e000ees 110 
Recording These Injuries 00.0... eee eee eee eee eee 82 PIECEMEAL ATION ai inss CEPR eger SIE area Bruce ns 111 
Individual Injuries and Healing Magic .............-- 82 Weight of Piecemeal Suits ............ 000 e eee eee ee 112 
Permanent and Crippling Effects ........... esses 82 Magical Armor ........00 0000 cece eee 112 
Monsters and Hit Locations .........-++.++--++++5: 82 Gladiator AYIIOE: ; cse vana mee earns iene wine ooa css ea 112 
This System and Low-Level Characters ........+ +... 82 | DamagetoArmor ............ eere 112 
Recovery «eee ernest entree eee n nn nnn 82 PICCEMERLATMOL xu sa ewes Bers Bess ee pec ENR Vo d 112 
Recovery of Temporary Damage .....-..-...-+s++5+- 82 Magical Armor pisos sas e mem ares RU wae 9 MNA VEND ve 112 
Recording Temporary Damage ....-. 6+. 60-20 eee es 82 Repairing Armor’ ss vse sex wee Dim cae base pus Des E 113 
Recovering From Temporary Damage ............+-- 82 Effects on the Campaign smi san sima ee cence ween ne 113 
Magical Healing and Temporary Damage ............. 83 Magical Items: v auc» «xa aea SS Eiir AGES oani Was asat Hoe 113 
Recovery From Knockout ....-.....-+- + see esse eae 83 Miscellaneous Equipment ............ sees 116 
Temporary Damage and Knockout .......... esses 83 
Magical Healing and Knockout ........ sees 83 Tables .........ee eee nnn n IIB 
Combat Conditions) cuu pya aosa ame pes a tee Hoe ates s 83 F 2 
Darkness and Blindness s isi iosa cinze Taa ED Cra a 83 OEIIBE carcasses b Fea e p aran EAE Ne a S6 sq 120 
Unstable Ground ..... 6... eee eee n 84 Complete Fighter's Character Sheet ..............055 120 
Mounted Combat ...... isses nnn 85 Complete Fighter's Combat Sheet (PC Side) ........... 122 
Jousting MEE LLLLLLLLC 85 Complete Fighter's Combat Sheet (DM Side) ........... 123 
Lance Specialization ,.. i.i nn n 85 Warrior Kit Creation Sheet... ssa s exa ics ¥ Gar iera iea ss 124 
Hoiseback-ATClety ss ces nun na maa eon a © e « 86 
JournaferilS; s sue sve aD AE ETE A I enone eon ta n venu i 86 Written by Aaron Allston 
The Basic Toürnament sos cx cea oc coa ed ee eoe i 86 rris alt WDT — 
The Joust List ...... eee ee eee eee eee 86 Color Art by John anal Lit Lakey, Doug Chaffee, and Jeff Easley 
The Jousting Competition sai css ses oss osje sepe saes 86 Typography by Angelika Lokotz 
Blunted Lancesis «us swa vare ian Essa ei S Da ntt 87 ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS. AD&D. PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION. and 
Queen of Love and Beauty es sssaaa iso me Takas dead 87 the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR Inc. 
EPISC. os adios i SIRE mist Mindy DOSE cauaa ek E Shape: A sugar a 87 ©1989 TSR Inc. All rights reserved. 
OTHER Eve uos specs: vont aeris ania arit mda aco nens Eon 87 Printed in the U.S.A. 
Archery CompetiHon ies ssw eos neminem nimm en 87 Distributed to the book trade In the United States by Random House Inc. and in Canada by 
Foot LISI nucum medi qioretfz-ertici ARE Aen eio p Et gus. d 88 Random House of Canada. Ltd. Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distribu- 
x tors. Distributed in the United Kingdom by TSR UK Ltd. 
Merchants Stalls ....eesseeeeeeee eee eens 88 This product is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any 
Dancing. Socializing V BSW iG SIRS: SHOTS Vnd: SR! EAE Mig NS. See: v 88 reproduction or other unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein is 
Whento End Combat. gas sena erri 9S NUORECUSE Ue S 88 prohibited without the express written permission of TSR Inc. 
When Characters Don't Accept Surrender ............. 88 TSR inc. TSR Ltd. 
When Characters Always Chase Escapees ............- 88 fee eee 120 ind eee Ha 
When Characters Never Negotiate ......... lle 89 WI 53147 US.A. de United Kingdom 
Notes on the Combat Sequence ..........---.00--+055 89 
gni A———————" 89 ISBN 0-88038-779-3 — 2110XXX1501 
Shield Wallsand Polearms. sas sas ease cave ems eem ame 89 


In this chapter, we'll briefly 
present notes on character crea- 
tion in the AD&D* game. This is 
material you already know, but 
we'll be talking about character 
creation as it specifically applies 
to warrior player-characters 
(Fighters, Paladins. and Rang- 
ers). 


Ability Scores 


For a normal 
campaign, any of the six dice- 
rolling methods from the Play- 
ers Handbook, page 13, is 
acceptable. 

If you decide to run an all- 
warriors campaign (see the 
Role-Playing chapter of this 
book for details on such a thing). 
werecommend that you use one 
of the five Alternate Dice-Rolling 
Methods presented. 

Whether or not you run an all- 
warriors campaign. if you uti- 
lize the Warrior Kits chapter of 
this rule book, we recommend 
that you use Method VI to create 
the ability scores for your char- 
acters. Because characters us- 
ing the Warrior Kits are so 
specialized, you'll find it helpful 
to be able to custom-design your 
character ability scores, which 
Method VI allows you to do. 


Races 


Much of The 
Complete Fighter's Handbook is 
written with the human charac- 
ter in mind. However, most of 
the text is equally applicable to 
all the other player-character 
races as well. and can be used 
by them without any sort of ad- 
aptation necessary. 

All the normal rules for racial 
ability adjustments. class re- 
strictions, level limits, lan- 
guages, and miscellaneous 
bonuses and penalties will be 
used, and all the material in this 
book can be used for all the de- 
mihuman races except where 
specifically noted in the text. 


The three war- 
rior character classes (Fighter, 
Paladin, and Ranger) are still 
the only warrior character 
classes. However, those players 
who would like to have more 
specialized warrior classes will 
probably find what they want in 
the Warrior Kits chapter. 

When you're creating single- 
class warrior characters, we rec- 
ommend that you start all 
first-level warriors with the 
maximum number of hit points 
they can have at that level— 
don't even bother to roll the 
dice. In other words. if you have 
a first-level Fighter with a Con- 
stitution of 16, he'd start with 
12 hit points instead of rolling 
his 1d10 and adding +2 for his 
Constitution adjustment. 

Thís is for a couple of impor- 
tant reasons. First. it gives the 
warrior a slightly better chance 
for survival at lower experience 
levels. Second, it reflects the 
fact that warriors are simply 
tougher and hardier than other 
player-character classes. 

But remember: This is for first 
level single-class warriors only. 
Starting with second level, 
these Fighters. Paladins. and 
Rangers have to roll their hit 
points like everyone else. No 
other class gets this benefit, and 
multi-class warriors (such as 
warrior/thieves, warrior/mages, 
and the like) don't get to do this. 


Alignment 

The Complete 
Fighter's Handbook follows all 
normal game rules for character 
alignments. Once the player has 
chosen an alignment for his 
character, he needs to have his 
choice approved by the DM; it 
may be that his choice will clash 
excessively with the alignments 
of other characters in the party, 
so the DM is within his rights to 
disapprove any alignment 


choice. (The chaotic evil fighter 
who wants to play with the 
troupe of wandering paladins 
will be a problem.) 


Warrior Kits 


Once you've 
worked up your character's abil- 
ity scores, and then chosen his 
class and alignment, you can 
choose a Warrior Kit for the 
character. Warrior Kits are dis- 
cussed in the Warrior Kits chap- 
ter of this book. 


Proficiencies 


As the Intro- 
duction notes, use of the Profi- 
ciencies section of the AD&D 
2nd Edition Player's Handbook 
is not optional with The Com- 
plete Fighter's Handbook. The 
Proficiencies are necessary for 
you to customize and fine-tune 
your character, and for the use 
of the Warrior Kits chapter of 
this book. 

Use of the Weapon Proficien- 
cies are pretty much self- 
evident after you read the 
Player's Handbook. Later in this 
book, though, in the Combat 
chapter, you'll learn some inter- 
esting new things which you 
can do with weapon proficien- 
cies. 

Don't forget that high Intelli- 
gence scores grant extra profi- 
ciencies (equal to the number of 
extra languages the character 
receives for the same score). 

Here. let's talk about three 
nonweapon proficiencies (Ar- 
morer, Bowyer/Fletcher. and 
Weaponsmithing) which are of 
particular use to the warrior 
player-character. 


Armorer 


With the Ar- 
morer proficiency, a character 
knows how to build all varieties 
of armor. Armorer overlaps a 
couple of other proficiencies: 


Character Creation 


The Armorer knows enough 
Blacksmithing to forge metal ar- 
mor and craft scale and chain 
mail (though he cannot forge 
horseshoes, wrought iron gates, 
hardened metal tools, or any 
other useful items unless he also 
knows Blacksmithing): 

The Armorer knows enough 
Leatherworking to cut and 
shape boiled leather into leather 
armor, shield coverings, and the 
under-layers of scale mail and 
banded mail (though he cannot 
make dress jerkins, saddles, 
elaborate pouches or rucksacks, 
or any other useful leather 
items): and 

The Armorer knows enough 
of the Tailor's art to manufac- 
ture padded armor and armor 
padding (but not enough to cut 
and sew any sort of good- 
looking garment). 

Naturally, the ordinary Black- 
smith cannot forge metal armor, 
the Leatherworker is not experi- 
enced with making leather ar- 
mors, and the Tailor isn't 
conversant with the making of 
padded armor, unless they also 
take the Armorer proficiency. 

The Armorer can repair exist- 
ing armor that has taken dam- 
age (if you're using that optional 
rule), and can also craft barding 
(horse armor) through use of his 
proficiency. 

But what does all of this mean 
in a campaign? 


The Workshop 


To craft armor, 
the character must first have a 
workshop (a place to work and 
tools with which to do work). 


Metal Armor 

If he intends to make any sort 
of all-metal armor (chain mail, 
field mail, full plate, plate mail, 
and helmets), the workshop is a 
smithy, complete with tools, bel- 
lows, a furnace, an anvil, tongs, 
cauldrons, casting molds, and 
all the other materials neces- 


sary to process unrefined metal 
into armor. 

Such a workshop costs 200 
gp. plus the cost of the shelter 
where it is set up: An additional 
100 gp for a pavilion tent, an ad- 
ditional 300 gp for a well-crafted 
hut/workshop, or more as part 
of a larger dwelling, such as a 
mansion, villa or castle (these 
sorts of dwellings are priced at 
whatever sort of price scheme 
the DM prefers). 

(Included in the price of the 
smithy is the cost of the tools 
necessary to make leather hilt- 
wrappings, padded armor, ar- 
mor linings and padding, and 
the simple leather straps used to 
hold all-metal armors together.) 

This workshop is large 
enough to accommodate the 
character and up to two appren- 
tices working full-time. (The ap- 
prentices, too, must have the 
Armorer proficiency; the char- 
acter can always take in an ap- 
prentice without the proficiency 
and train him, but until he ac- 
quires the Armorer proficiency 
he doesn't count as a productive 
element of the workshop.) 

In theory, the character could 
hire another three-man crew to 
work a second shift in the same 
workshop; thus the workshop 
would be occupied nearly 24 
hours a day. (This presumes 
eight- to ten-hour shifts and a 
certain amount of necessary 
nonproductive time each day: 
Time for furnaces to cool and be 
cleaned, tools to be repaired and 
sharpened, etc.) No more than 
three people can work in this 
workshop effectively; with more 
than three people, the workshop 
suffers a loss of efficiency so that 
it produces goods just as though 
it were only manned by three ar- 
morers. 

To expand the workshop costs 
an additional 50% for each 
+three workers. If the smithy 
costs 200 gp and is set up ina 
300-gp hut, thus costing 500 gp, 
the builder could pay +250 gp. 


Then, the workshop would ac- 
commodate three more armor- 
ers at the same time. For 
another +250 gp, now totalling 
1,000 gp, the shop can accom- 
modate nine armorers at the 
same time. 


Leather Armor 

If he intends to make any sort 
of all-leather armor (hide armor, 
leather armor, and armored 
leather caps), the workshop is a 
leatherworker's shop, including 
apparatus for leather soaking, 
scraping. tanning, boiling, boil- 
ing in wax, shaping. hole- 
punching, sewing, and all the 
other processes by which 
leather is transformed into ar- 
mor. 

Such a workshop costs 25 gp. 
plus the cost of the shelter 
where it is set up: An additional 
25 gp for a large tent, an addi- 
tional 75 gp for a well-crafted 
hut/workshop. or more as part 
of a larger dwelling (at whatever 
price scheme the DM prefers). 

(Included in the price of the 
leatherworker's shop is the cost 
of the tools necessary to make 
padded armor and armor lin- 
ings and padding.) 

As with the smithy above, this 
price presumes one principal 
leatherworker and up to two ap- 
prentices may work together at 
the same time. Above that num- 
ber costs 50% of the workshop 
and housing costs per addi- 
tional three leatherworkers. 


Metal and Leather Armor 

If he intends to make both 
sorts of armor, or armor which 
combines both metal and 
leather elements (banded mail, 
brigandine, bronze plate mail, 
ring mail, scale mail, shields, 
splint mail, and studded 
leather), a combined workshop 
is needed. 

Such a workshop costs 250 
gp. plus the cost of the shelter 
where it is set up: An additional 
100 gp for a pavilion tent, an ad- 


Character Creation 


ditional 300 gp for a well-crafted 
hut/workshop. or more as part 
of a larger dwelling (again, at 
whatever pricing the DM pre- 
fers). 

(Included in the cost of the ar- 
morer's shop is the cost of the 
tools necessary to make wooden 
shield blanks and shield frames, 
padded armor, and all armor lin- 
ings and padding necessary to 
the armored goods.) 

As with the smithy above, this 
price presumes one principal ar- 
morer and up to two appren- 
tices; above that number costs 
+50% of the workshop and 
housing costs per additional 
three armorers. 


Apprentices and Overseers 


The cost of the 
workshop constitutes only the 
set-up cost for the armoring op- 
eration. Maintenance of the 
workshop. pay for the employ- 
ees, and cost of materials also 
come into play. Of course, so do 
the profits from the sale of man- 
ufactured goods. 

Each apprentice costs 2 gp/ 
week for food. upkeep. and 
training. And once an appren- 
tice has reached young adult- 
hood (age 16) and has achieved 
an Armorer ability check of 12 
or better, he'll demand to be pro- 
moted to Overseer status (de- 
scribed immediately below) or 
will find better pickings else- 
where. 

Apprentices cannot run a 
workshop unsupervised. Super- 
vision comes in the form of an 
Overseer, an adult with an Ar- 
morer ability check of 12 or bet- 
ter. Each Overseer costs 15 
gp/week (the DM may wish to 
have the cost relate to the Over- 
seer's Armorer ability check: 15 
gp/week at a check of 12, * 15 
gp/week per *1 to his ability 
check; thus, if his ability check 
is 16, he costs 75 gp/week). 


Time to Craft Armor 


To determine 
the timeit takes to make a piece 
of armor, take the armor's AC. 
The number that the AC is un- 
der 10, multiplied by two weeks. 
is the time it takes an apprentice 
(supervised and aided by an 
Overseer) to craft the item. 

Thus, a set of chain mail (AC 
5) is calculated this way: 10 - 5 
= 5:5 x two weeks = ten weeks. 
It takes ten weeks to make a suit 


of chain mail. 


For pieces of armor which 
don't grant specific AC benefits 
(like helmets). figure the time at 
1 week per 7.5 gp value. Thus, a 
great helm would take four 
weeks to make (it costs 30 gp); a 
basinet, one week and a few 
hours of the eighth day (it costs 


8 gp). 


Cost to Craft Armor 


And it does 
cost money to craft armor. The 
cost is: 


Standard Costs to Manufacture Armor 


Apprentice 
Armor Retail Materials Time & 
Piece Value Cost(gp) Taken Overseer Cost 
Banded Mail 200 100 12 wk 48 * 148 
Brigandine 120 60 8 wk 32* 92 
Bronze plate 400 200 12 wk 114 ** 314 
Chain mail 75 38 IlOwk — 20**€* 58 
Field Plate 2000 1000 16 wk 304 + 1304 
Full plate 7000 3500 18 wk 342 + 3842 
Helm/great 30 15 4 wk 5*9 23 
Helm/basinet 8 4 1 wk 2999 6 
Hide armor 15 7 8 wk 8++ 15 
Leather armor 5 1+++ 4wk 4++ 5 
Padded armor 4 O+++ 4wk 4++ 4 
Plate mail 600 300 14 wk 133: ** 433 
Ring mail 100 50 6 wk 24 * 74 
Scale mail 120 60 8 wk 32 * 92 
Shield/body 10 5 2 wk 4 *** 9 
Shield/buckler 1 O+++ 2 wk LEF 1 
Shield/medium 7 3 2 wk qae 7 
Shield/small 3 1 2 wk 29** 3 
Splint mail B0 40 1l2wk — 24*** 64 
Studded Ithr 20 10 6 wk 6++ 16 
Barding: 
Chain 500 250 10 wk 190 + 440 
Full plate 2000 1000 16 wk 304 + 1304 
Full scale 1000 500 8 wk 152 * 652 
Half brig. 500 250 6 wk 114 * 364 
Half padded 100 50 2 wk 38 + 88 
Half scale 500 250 8 wk 152 * 402 
Lthr/Padded 150 75 4 wk Tur 150 
* Two apprentices, no overseer 
** One apprentice, !/2 overseer 
*** One apprentice, no overseer 
+ Two apprentices, one overseer 
++ 1/2 apprentice, no overseer 


+++ Cost reduced because of easy availability of materials; cost of 
“O gp" means cost is a negligible 


Character Creation 


(a) About half the "retail 
value" of the armor piece for 
materials; plus 

(b) The cost of maintaining 
one or two apprentices during 
the time it takes to make the 
piece; plus 

(c) Additional cost based on 
how much of the overseer's time 
and attention the project takes. 
(The project may take one or 
two overseers full-time on the 
project, may take only half one 
overseer's time on the project. 
or may take none of the over- 
seer's time—the latter consti- 
tute projects that the 
apprentices can do all by them- 
selves. mostly unsupervised.) 

The previous table shows 
standard costs to manufacture 
armor. 

In usual circumstances, the 
difference between the Total 
Cost and the Retail Value is the 
shop's profit when it sells a piece 
of armor. 

As you can see from the table, 
hide armor, leather armor, pad- 
ded armor, medium shields and 
small shields are little-to-no- 
profit propositions. However, 
they keep the apprentices paid 
and keep work in the shop. 


Playing With These Numbers 


Now, the costs 
given above are not the final 
word on how much it costs to 
make armor. With your DM's 
permission. you can skew these 
numbers around (both up and 
down) through the following 
means. 

First. you can put extra men 
on a job. (Important Note: If 
overseers are drafted to do 
apprentice-level work, one over- 
seer counts as two apprentices.) 
You can only put extra men on a 
job in increments of the original 
number of men required for the 
job: In other words, if the job re- 
quired two apprentices, you 
don't see an improvement in 
speed until you assign two more 


apprentices to the job. At that 
point, you cut the speed of the 
job in half. 

Example: From the chart, you 
see it takes one apprentice with 
no overseer ten weeks to work 
up a set of chain mail. That's a 
standard in the armorer's indus- 
try; they'll always tell you it 
takes ten weeks to work up a 
chain mail hauberk. But in an 
emergency situation, they could 
put an extra apprentice on the 
Job (either have two working on 
it at once, or have one on the 
"day shift" and one on the 
"night shift"). With twice the 
available manpower, it would 
only take half the time, or five 
weeks. to create the chain mail. 

Second, if the Overseer is a 
player-character, he doesn't 
have to pay himself as much. 
This is usually the case with ar- 
morers when they first go into 
business for themselves: They 
pay the cost for materials and 
the cost for their apprentices, 
and whatever they have left 
over is their own salary, even if it 
is much less than the 15 gp/ 
week standard mentioned 
above. (That number, 15 gp/ 
week, represents a firm lower- 
middle-class standard of living; 
an armorer who earns less will 
be living at a lower-class stand- 
ard of living.) 

With that in mind, we can re- 
interpret some of the numbers 
above. Let's say that we have 
one player-character armorer 
who wants to work up a set of 
hide armor. 

Hide armor normally takes up 
half the work-day of one appren- 
tice for eight weeks. It costs 7 gp 
in materials. and he can sell it on 
the usual market for 15 gp. If just 
the chief armorer, who counts as 
an Overseer if his Armorer abil- 
ity check is 12 or better. works 
on this item alone. it will take 
him only two weeks to make the 
hide armor (remember. an Over- 
seer counts as two apprentices; 
therefore, he's putting four times 


the manpower on the task as it 
customarily requires, thus cut- 
tin£ the time required to one- 
fourth, or two weeks). If he can 
sell it for 15 gp, he's made 8 gp. 
He's earning a meager 4 gp a 
week, which is better than a 
poverty-level wage, but less than 
middle-class. 


Chance of Failure 


It would seem 
that the thing to do would be to 
set up an armorer's shop and 
just build field plate and full 
plate, which are the most profit- 
able items of armor. However, 
that isn't necessarily so. 

This is because, for every item 
of armor you make, you have to 
make an Armorer Ability 
Check. At the end of the armor- 
making period. the most experi- 
enced (highest ability check) 
character who worked continu- 
ously on the project makes his 
Armorer ability check. If he 
passes the check, the armor is 
just fine. If he fails it, it's flawed. 

If the character missed his roll 
by 1, 2, 3. or 4, the armor looks 
just fine. The maker knows it’s 
flawed, but this will not be obvi- 
ous to anyone on casual inspec- 
tion, and only another armorer 
will be able to detect that it's 
flawed... and only with careful 
inspection. This type of flawed 
armor functions at 1 AC higher 
than it should (thus flawed full 
plate would be AC 2 instead of 
1). If the flawed armor is ever 
struck in real combat with a nat- 
ural to-hit roll of 19 or 20, it 
"breaks" (caves in, splits open, 
etc.). Its AC goes up 4 (thus our 
flawed full plate would shoot 
from AC 2 to AC 6). And because 
it's broken and hanging wrong. 
it hinders the player; until he 
can take it off (this takes 1d4 
rounds), he moves at half his 
normal rate and suffers a —4 
penalty to all of his attack rolls. 

Obviously. most reputable ar- 
morers would never sell a piece 


Character Creation 


of flawed armor. They have their 
reputations to protect, so they 
throw it away. They take a loss 
in money equal to the Total Cost 
of the armor from the chart 
above. 

If the character misses his roll 
by 5 or more, it's obvious to any- 
one, with casual inspection, that 
the armor is flawed. No one will 
buy it at the normal retail value. 
The armorer might be able to sell 
it at half the Total Cost value to 
someone desperate for cheap ar- 
mor, someone who's willing to 
take the risk of wearing flawed 
armor. If he can't sell it, this too 
is a total loss. 

Finally, not all armor is the 
same in the level of difficulty it 
requires to manufacture. Some 
armor is simple enough that ap- 
prentices can work on it alone. 
Some is so complicated that 
only master armorers should 
oversee this work. And hiring a 
master armorer costs more than 
just hiring a normal overseer. 

The chart below shows the 
relative difficulty of manufac- 
turing these different types of 
armor. 


Armor Type Modifier to 
Armorer 
Proficiency 
Check 

Banded Mail *1 
Brigandine *1 
Bronze plate 0 
Chain mail *3 
Field Plate -9 
Full plate -3 
Helm/great +3 
Helm/basinet +3 
Hide armor +3 
Leather armor +3 
Padded armor +3 
Plate mail 0 
Ring mail *1 
Scale mail *1 
Shield/body +3 
Shield/buckler +3 
Shield/medium +3 
Shield/small +3 
Splint mail +3 
Studded leather +3 


Armor Type Modifier to 
Armorer 
Proficiency 
Check 
Barding: 
Chain 0 
Full plate -3 
Full scale 0 
Half brig. 0 
Half padded 0 
Half scale 0 
Lthr/Padded 0 


As you can see, making field 
plate and full plate is a risky 
proposition. Only the best of in- 
dependent armorers will under- 
take such a task because the 
potential losses are so great. (On 
the other hand, a hireling ar- 
morer will do it whenever his 
employer says, because all the 
financial risk is his employer's.) 
And player-character armorers 
run these same financial risks 
when they try to make field 
plate and full plate for them- 
selves or their friends. 


Added Expenses 

If the DM 
wishes, he can add to the grief of 
a player-character armorer by 
confronting him with a lot of the 
hidden expenses of any such op- 
eration: 

Bribery: In many places, local 
officials will expect a little graft 
in order for them to process the 
necessary permits efficiently 
and regularly. If the PC doesn't 
pay up. those permits take a 
long. long time (months) to be 
processed, and during that time 
the PC can't operate a retail ar- 
morer's shop. 

Theft: Armorer's shops can 
be burglarized just like any 
other operation. Thieves are 
quite willing to steal some high- 
quality armor goods and fence 
them elsewhere in the city. De- 
pending on the quality of the 
merchandise lying around in 
the shop. this can be a serious fi- 
nancial blow for the shop. 


Unclaimed Goods: Some- 
times a patron who custom- 
orders a piece of armor never 
shows up to buy it. Maybe he's 
been killed in the meantime; 
maybe he ran low on funds and 
decided not even to tell the ar- 
morer of his misfortune. And if 
the custom piece of armor was 
decorated or fine-tuned to that 
specific customer (for example, 
if it bears his coat of arms or un- 
usual decoration), it could be 
that no one else is willing to buy 
it...except at heavily discounted 
prices. 

Unsold Stock: Armorers 
don't just work up pieces of ar- 
mor to order. The armorer fabri- 
cates numerous examples of the 
most common sorts of armor 
(leather and padded armor, 
shields) for the casual customer 
and as practice for the appren- 
tices. Not all of this gets sold, 
and a piece that is never sold isa 
few gold pieces out of the shop's 
coffers. 

All in all, it may be safer, fi- 
nancially, for a player-character 
to be a full-time adventurer and 
only a part-time armorer. 


Player-Character Workshops 

Often, a PC Ar- 
morer who is also an adventurer 
will set up an armorer's shop 
and crew it with a single over- 
seer and two apprentices. This 
shop's duty will be to keep the 
PC supplied in armor; also, 
whenever the PC returns home, 
he can, if he wishes, operate the 
shop, especially in the "'off- 
shift" (whichever shift the regu- 
lar crew is not operating it). 

If he does hire an overseer, 
he'll have to pay the rates ac- 
cording to the overseer's ability, 
as described above. 


Note that a PC Armorer can 
make armor for his friends. He 
can't avoid paying the mini- 
mum cost for the materials. of 
course. The character can carry 


Character Creation 


a tent and leatherworker's shop 
on the back of a horse, so he can 
work on any sort of all-leather or 
padding armor while on the 
road. But on the road. he can 
only get in a couple of hours' 
work per day, so multiply all 
armor-making times by four to 
determine how long they take. 

The character who does all 
this extra work will be a little 
more tired than his fellows: re- 
duce his Intelligence ability 
check to spot upcoming dan- 
gers. 


Repairing Armor 


If you use the 
optional rules for damaging ar- 
mor found in this rule book's 
Combat chapter, you can also 
use the Armorer proficiency to 
repair damaged armor. 

It costs the armorer '/:ooth the 
armor's retail value for each 
Damage Point that he repairs. 
Again, that’s the cost to the ar- 


2 
APT RÀ 


morer, which assumes that ap- 
prentices are doing the work, 
and unsupervised: apprentices 
can perform all armor-repair 
functions. The cost to the ar- 
morer, compared to the appren- 
tice's wage, shows you how long 
it takes to repair (2 gp/week for 
one apprentice, remember). 

Example: A set of chain mail 
has taken 10 points of damage 
in combat. The owner brings it 
in to be repaired. Retail value of 
chain mail is 75 gp, so the cost 
to repair each point of damage 
will be .75 gp. or 75 cp. The ar- 
morer repairs the 10 points of 
damage. which costs him 750 
cp (75 sp). This is less than 1 gp. 
so the apprentice doing the re- 
pairs takes about two days to fix 
the chain maul hauberk. 

Armorers typically charge a 
50% profit on repair jobs. In the 
example above. the armorer's 
cost was 75 sp: therefore, he'd 
charge the customer about 115 
sp for the repair job. 


CT x 


wv 3T 
Í 
KES RNA = 


Repairing Magical Armor 


Magical armor 
is repaired in exactly the same 
way. Base the cost for repairs on 
the normal retail value of the ar- 
mor as if it were not magical. 

When magical armor is dam- 
aged, holes may be driven into 
it, but the basic enchantment is 
unchanged. Therefore, the ar- 
morer doesn't have to have re- 
pair materials enchanted to 
“match” the original armor; all 
he has to do is patch up the 
holes and the armor will be 
fixed. Typically, the armorer 
will not even know that he’s 
working on magical armor. 

Of course, as we discuss in the 
Combat chapter, if a set of magi- 
cal armor is damaged so severely 
that the enchantment is ruined, 
nothing a normal armorer can 
do will repair it. Armor that seri- 
ously damaged is ruined even as 
normal armor; an armorer won't 
be able to fix it. 


bt 


emm nutri rss == ¢ 
H ih n HAR = NS 
| Ñ 
| 


The material 
on the Bowyer/Fletcher profi- 
ciency from the Player's Hand- 
book, page 58, is all correct for 
use with this supplement. 

A set of bowyer/fletcher's 
tools, which can be used at max- 
imum efficiency by one charac- 
ter, costs 10 gp. (It's 15 gp for a 
set which can be used simulta- 
neously by three workers, and 
*7.5 gp per *3 workers which 
can work simultaneously.) The 
bowyer/fletcher is not required 
to set up a workshop: he can 
work by himself in the field, if he 
chooses. If he chooses to set upa 
permanent shop. tents and huts 
cost the same as what's listed 
for the leatherworker's shop 
(above, under "Armorer"). 

Note that the construction 
times listed in the Player's 
Handbook presume that he's 
working a full week. If he's trav- 
eling or adventuring and work- 
ing on bows and arrows in his 
spare time, multiply all crafting 
times by four. Thus, a long or 
short bow takes four weeks. 

Cost of materials for arrows 
and normal bows is negligible. If 
the character is trying to make a 
weapon of truly fine quality, he 
must either pay 50% of the 
weapon's normal retail value for 
exceptionally fine woods. or add 
an extra 100% to the time it 
takes to craft the weapon; the 
extra time constitutes him hav- 
ing to look for the perfect wood 
and materials in the wild. 


Weaponsmithing 


The text on 
Weaponsmithing proficiency 
from the Player's Handbook 
(page 65) is basically correct, 
but let's elaborate on it. 

As mentioned, a weapon- 
smith does need to have a 
smithy. The costs for having a 
smithy are given above in this 
section, under “Armorer.” In 


fact, the same smithy can be 
used for armoring and weapon- 
smithing. 

The Weapon Construction ta- 
ble on page 65 of the Player's 
Handbook is correct. It consti- 
tutes one Overseer-level wea- 
ponsmith working by himself 
and crafting weapons of average 
quality. An Overseer weapon- 
smith working with two appren- 
tices cuts the time in half. The 
time indicated on the chart 
should be converted to weeks so 
that you can compare the wea- 
ponsmith's times with the ar- 
morer's; consider 5 days on the 
chart to constitute one week. 


Weaponsmithing Failure 


When con- 
structing a weapon, at the end of 
the weapon-making process, 
the weaponsmith makes his 
Weaponsmithing proficiency 
ability check. He'll use the Profi- 
ciency Modifier based on the 
weapon and the weapon quality 
he's trying to achieve: see the 
chart below, under "Weapon 
Quality,” for that modifier. 

If he successfully makes his 
check, he's created the weapon 
he wanted to create. 

If he fails by 1, 2. 3, or 4, he's 
created a weapon that looks 
like what he intended to make 
... but he knows it has a seri- 
ous structural flaw. In a real 
combat, if the wielder rolls a 
natural 5 or less to hit, the 
weapon breaks and is useless. 
(For some reason, it just won't 
break in practice combats ... 
only in the real thing.) He can 
still sell the weapon, of course, 
but eventually, after he's done 
this sort of thing a few times. 
his reputation as a craftsman 
will be utterly ruined. It's better 
just to break the item, sell itasa 
wall-hanger, etc. 

If he fails by 5 or more, the 
weapon breaks and is ruined 
during the last stages of the cre- 
ation process (for example. 


when it's being cooled after 
heat-tempering). 


Weapon Quality 


It is possible to 
construct weapons of different 
quality than just average. 

Poor quality weapons are 
shabbily made. They look bad, 
and like the flawed weapons de- 
scribed above, they break on a 
natural attack roll of 1 to 5. 
They don't hit as well (this is a 
penalty to the attack roll) or do 
as much damage (penalty to the 
damage) as their average- 
quality equivalents. 

Average quality weapons are 
not especially notable; they get 
the job done, they're reliable, 
and they're inexpensive. Unless 
otherwise noted, all (non- 
magical) weapons listed on 
charts in the AD&D* game are of 
average quality. 

Fine quality weapons are very 
well-made. Each will have one 
specific bonus: Either a *1 to 
hit ora * 1 to damage. This bo- 
nus is not magical; it comes 
from improved balance. sharp- 
ness, etc. (The weaponsmith de- 
termines, when he's making the 
weapon, whether he's trying to 
make it more accurate or make 
it hit harder.) They also cost a lot 
more than average weapons. 
Enchantments are typically 
made on weapons of at least 
Fine quality. 

Exceptional quality weapons 
are like fine weapons, but have 
both bonuses: They're +1 to hit 
and +1 to damage. They're also 
very expensive. 

The following list, adapted 
from the list on page 65 of the 
Player's Handbook, shows the 
differences in cost and time to 
create weapons of these differ- 
ent levels of quality. 


Character Creation 


Time to Construct the first blow of their first fight. 
Weapon Type Poor Average Fine Exceptional However, if you prefer to have 
Arrowhead 20/day 10/day 5/day l/day your beginning characters a bit 
Battle Axe 5 days 10 days 20 days 45 days more nervous and defensive, 
Hand Axe 2 days 5 days 10 days 20 days then it's certainly more appro- 
Dagger 3 days 5 days 10 days 20 days priate for you to start beginning 
H. Crossbow 10 days 20 days 45 days 90 days characters at 1st level. 
L. Crossbow 8 days 15 days 30 days 60 days 
Fork, Trident 10 days 20 days 45 days 90 days Character Sheet 
Spear. Lance 2 days 4 days 10 days 20 days 
Short Sword lOdays 20days 45days 90days At the back of 
Long Sword 15days 30days 60days 120 days the book is a character sheet es- 
2-hd Sword 20days 45days 90days 180 days pecially suited for use with The 
~ Complete Fighter's Handbook. 
Effects On Mod. to Prof | Take a look at it, and then we'll 
Performance Check to discuss it in greater detail. 
Weapon Quality Attack Damage Breaks Craft 
Poor -1 =] 1-5 on d20 +2 ie Sheet 
Average 0 O  lond20* oO arm 
Fine +1 +1 s. -2 In the top box 
Exceptional +1 *1 m -4 of the character sheet's front, 


* This isn't an automatic break; it breaks only if the DM feels like it. 

** Fine weapons get eithera +1 to hit or +1 to damage, not both. 
Fine and Exceptional weapons break only in remarkable circum- 
stances, as dictated by the DM (for example, a powerful enemy 
rolling a natural 20 when hitting the weapon. or the character roll- 
ing a natural 1 when striking at an artifact). 


Weapons Not Shown 

If you're trying 
to construct a weapon not 
shown on this chart, compare it 
to the most similar weapon that 
ison the chart and use those val- 
ues. (The DM has the final say 
on what is most similar.) For in- 
stance, if you're trying to create 
a halberd, that's closest to a fork 
or trident. If you're trying to cre- 
ate a bastard sword, that's clos- 
est to a long sword. 


Money and Equipment 

The Complete 
Fighter's Handbook follows all 
the normal Player's Handbook 
guidelines for the character's 
initial money and equipment 
... usually. Use of some of the 
Warrior Kits will dictate differ- 
ences in the way some charac- 
ters spend their beginning 
money. 


Magic 

Some warrior 
characters (Paladins, Rangers. 
and multi-class Fighter/Mages 
and Fighter/Priests) do have 
spells. At this point in the char- 
acter creation process. for the 
multi-class characters, you and 
the DM will have to determine 
the character's spells. (Paladins 
and Rangers wait until 9th and 
8th levels, respectively. to get 
their spells, so you don't have to 
worry about them for a while.) 


Experience 

Here's an op- 
tion you ought to think about if 
you're planning to run espe- 
cially heroic, combat-heavy ad- 
ventures or campaigns. 

You might wish to start all be- 
ginning player-characters out at 
3rd experience level instead of 
Ist. This makes them a bit 
tougher. a bit more heroic. and a 
lot less fearful about dying with 


you put all the vital statistics of 
the character: His name, physi- 
cal and racial characteristics, 
his character class, his Warrior 
Kit (if he uses one—see the War- 
rior Kits chapter), alignment, 
current experience level, his 
current experience earned, and 
the amount of experience it'll 
take him to reach the next level. 

In the second box, you put all 
the information relating to the 
character's six ability scores 
(Strength, Dexterity, Constitu- 
tion, Intelligence, Wisdom, and 
Charisma). All this information 
comes from the charts in the 
Player's Handbook. pages 14-18. 

In the third, narrow. box. you 
write down any bonuses and 
abilities the character receives 
based on his race; for instance, if 
he's an elf, you'd put something 
like "9055 resistant to sleep and 
charm; *1 to hit with bow, 
short sword, long sword; can 
surprise opponents; infravision; 
1 on d6 to detect secret doors (1- 
2 on d6 when looking. 1-3 for 
portals)." 

In the fourth box, you write 
down many of the character's 
game-mechanic notes: How 
many hit points he has, how his 
hit dice are calculated (with 
Fighters, you'd write "d10"). 


what his AC is, what his THACO 
is. what hís saving throws are, 
notes on his followers and any 
special abilities or restrictions 
from his character class choice 
(especially appropriate with pal- 
adins and rangers). and his 
Spell Progression (if any; this. 
too, is especially appropriate for 
paladins and rangers). 

In the fifth box, you note 
down any modifications made 
to the character by the Warrior 
Kit he chooses (again, see the 
Warrior Kits chapter for details). 

In the sixth (bottom) box, you 
record any of the character's 
skill-type abilities: His lan- 
guages, his weapon proficien- 
cies (and specializations!), and 
his nonweapon proficiencies. 


Back of the Sheet 


The back of 
the sheet is used mostly for 
equipment lists. 

The top box is used to record 
his weapons; here, you can put 
all the information found on the 
Weapons table (Player's Hand- 
book. page 68). 

The second box is used for 
short descriptions of important 
equipment, especially magical 
items. 

The third box allows the 
player to indicate where all his 
character's important posses- 
sions are normally kept. The 
DM should insist that the play- 
ers use these blanks: it helps 
prevents mistakes from being 


made in an adventure. (“Of 
course I have my Staff of the 
Magi along! I always have it 
taped to my Staff of Power! No, 
really!") 

And in the bottom box you 
can make any other notes perti- 
nent to the character. 


The Next Step In 
Character Creation 


For the next 
step in our warrior-oriented 
character creation process, turn 
to the Warrior Kits chapter, 
which follows immediately. 


12 


Sometimes it's just not 
enough to be a Fighter, Paladin 
or Ranger. Each of those classes 
is a lot of fun, but there's noth- 
ing which says you want to be 
restricted only to three types of 
fun. 

So, here, we're going to show 
you how to create and play other 
sorts of warrior characters. 


Kits and Warriors 


Each special 
warrior described in this chap- 
ter is defined as a Kit of different 
characteristics. The Kit consists 
of the following elements: 

Description: This paragraph 
talks about what the warrior is. 
It's a general description of the 
appearance, manner, cultural 
background and use of the char- 
acter in a campaign. It also lists 
any requirements necessary for 
the character to take the Kit; for 
instance, to be an Amazon. a 
character must be female. (Sur- 
prise!) 

Role: This paragraph de- 
scribes the role of this warrior in 
the society that spawned him 
and in an ongoing campaign. A 
Samurai has a different cultural 
role from a Wilderness Warrior, 
even if both, say, are Paladins. 

Secondary Skills: If you're 
using the Secondary Skills rules 
from AD&D® 2nd Edition, then 
your Kit may require your war- 
rior to take a specific skill; the 
character may not be able to 
choose or random-roll his Sec- 
ondary Skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: You 
must use the AD&D* 2nd Edi- 
tion game rules for Weapon Pro- 
ficiencies in order to use these 
Warrior Kits. Most of these Kits 
will require your warrior to take 
specific weapon proficiencies. A 
Samurai wouldn't be the same 
without his katana, or a Noble 
Warrior without his lance. for 
example. 

When required to take a spe- 
cific Weapon Proficiency, the 


warrior must take that from the 
number of slots he has available 
to "spend." 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
You also must use the Non- 
weapon Proficiencies rules from 
AD&D* 2nd Edition, as many 
Warrior Kits require your char- 
acter to take specific non- 
weapon  proficiencies. (For 
instance, it's foolish to be a Pi- 
rate without Seamanship. or a 
Wasteland Rider without Rid- 
ing.) 

But these required Non- 
weapon  Proficiencies are 
bonuses—given in addition to 
the nonweapon proficiency 
choices you normally choose. 
Sometimes a bonus proficiency 
will come from a group other 
than the General or Warrior 
groups. but, since it's a bonus. it 
doesn't matter how many extra 
slots it would otherwise be re- 
quired to occupy. 

Some  proficiencies will 
merely be recommended, not 
required. When a choice is rec- 
ommended, it is not given to the 
character; if the character de- 
cides to take this nonweapon 
proficiency, he takes it from the 
number of choices he has. 

If you wish, you can use both 
Secondary Skills and Non- 
weapon Proficiencies in your 
campaign, but you'll find that 
character creation is simpler 
and more consistent if you use 
only the Proficiencies rules. 

Equipment: Some Warrior 
Kits gravitate toward certain 
types of equipment. Noble War- 
riors tend toward heavy armor 
and weapons such as swords 
and lances; Pirates lean toward 
cutlasses, throwing knives, 
light or no armor, and the like. 

These equipment listings 
aren't really restrictions or 
hard-and-fast rules. A Pirate on 
shore may wish to deck himself 
out in full plate. for instance. 
But in normal circumstances, a 
character should gravitate to- 
ward the types of equipment ap- 


13 


propriate for him, and the DM 
must steer him toward such 
equipment types. 

For example, the pirate who 
keeps his full plate on while 
aboard ship will be knocked 
overboard time and time again 
as a reminder of why pirates 
don't usually wear such cum- 
bersome stuff. As he's being 
dragged to the ocean bottom, he 
can reflect on his mistake. A no- 
ble warrior who wears leathers 
when jousting will almost cer- 
tainly get what he deserves for 
his folly. 

Special Benefits: Most War- 
rior Kits have some special ben- 
efits that others don't. Often, 
they're defined as special reac- 
tion bonuses among certain 
classes of society, special rights 
in certain cultures, and so forth. 
Other benefits are more unusual 
or dramatic: The Berserker can 
call on hidden resources of 
strength and vitality when in 
combat, for instances. 

Special Hindrances: Like- 
wise, each Warrior Kit has cer- 
tain disadvantages which 
hinder him. Pirates are sought 
by the authorities; Amazons 
face discrimination in male- 
dominated societies. 

Wealth Options: Some War- 
rior Kits have special rules re- 
garding their wealth. The Noble 
Warrior, for instance, will begin 
play with more starting gold 
than some other Warrior Kits. 
However, he's also required to 
maintain a higher standard of 
living than the others. If he fails 
to do so, he temporarily loses 
some of his Special Benefits. 

Races: Each of these Kits is 
written with the human charac- 
ter in mind, and this paragraph 
describes what happens when 
you have a demihuman charac- 
ter instead. The DM will have to 
ask himself if he wants certain 
race/Warrior Kit combinations 
(Savage Elves? Dwarf Ama- 
zons? Noble Halfling-War- 
riors?). If he does allow them, 


this paragraph will make notes 
on recommended racial modifi- 
cations. For instance, the Noble 
Dwarf-Warrior will be required 
to be proficient with axe and 
hammer rather than sword and 
lance, and won't be required to 
be a rider. 


An Important Note 


In the follow- 
ing sections, several Warrior 
Kits get reaction bonuses and 
penalties as part of their Special 
Benefits and Special Hin- 
drances. A word of caution 
needs to accompany them. 

In the AD&D* game, when a 
character is very charismatic, 
he gets what is called a "reac- 
tion adjustment.” (See the Play- 
er's Handbook. page 18.) When 
the character has a high Cha- 
risma and receives a bonus, it's 
expressed as a plus: +2, for in- 
stance. When he has a low Cha- 
risma and receives a penalty, it's 
expressed as a minus: -3, for 
example. 

However, when you roll the 
2d10 for encounter reactions 
(see the Dungeon Master's 
Guide, page 103, don't add the 
bonus (+) or subtract the pen- 
alty (-) from the die roll. Do it 
the other way around. If the 
character has a Charisma of 16, 
and thus gets a *5 reaction ad- 
justment, you subtract that 
number from the 2d10 die roll. 
(Otherwise the NPCs would be 
reacting even more badly be- 
cause the character was charis- 
matic!) 


Kits and the 
Warrior Classes 


In general, 
each Kit can be used with each 
of the three warrior classes. Your 
character can, for instance, be a 
Barbarian Fighter. an Amazon 
Paladin, or a Samurai Ranger. 

Some choices may be a little 


questionable. For example, it's 
not likely that you'll be playing 
a Pirate Paladin. However, it is 
possible. If your band of pirates, 
in happy-go-lucky movie tradi- 
tion, attacks only the wicked, 
frees all innocents, and per- 
forms in an otherwise mostly- 
honorable fashion, they're 
obviously not an evil group and 
a paladin could adventure 
among them. If that’s the sort of 
pirate campaign you and your 
DM agree to play, then that's 
fine. 

When one warrior class can- 
not choose a specific Warrior 
Kit, the exceptions will be 
noted. 


Kits and Character 
Creation 


You can only 
take one Warrior Kit for your 
character. 

You can only take a Warrior 
Kit for your character when that 
character is first created. 

There's an exception to that 
second rule: If you and your DM 
both want to integrate these 
rules into an existing campaign, 
and both DM and players can 
agree upon what Warrior Kit 
each existing player-character 
most closely resembles, then 
you can use these rules for exist- 
ing characters, adding a Warrior 
Kit to each existing character. 

Once you've taken a Warrior 
Kit, you cannot change it. Later 
in the character's life, he can 
possibly abandon his Kit; see 
“Abandoning A Kit.” later in 
this chapter. 


The Warrior Kits 


Following are 
several sorts of warriors repre- 
sented by Warrior Kits. Before 
allowing his players to choose 
Kits for their characters, the DM 
should review these and make 
notes for himself about them. 


For each Warrior Kit, the DM 
has to choose: 

(1) Ifhe will even allow this Kit 
in his campaign. 

(2) What additional informa- 
tion he needs to give the players 
about each Kit. 

(3) What changes he might 
wish to make to each Kit. 

Let's take the Amazon Kit as 
an example. This Kit was 
loosely derived from the Ama- 
zons of Greek myth. But this 
DM's Amazons may be substan- 
tially different from those. 

So. first, he has to decide if he 
will allow this Kit in his cam- 
paign. If he has any sort of Ama- 
zons on his world, he probably 
will allow this. If he has no Ama- 
zons, then he won't. Let's pre- 
sume that he does. 

Second, he has to decide what 
additional information he needs 
to give the players about the 
Amazons. In his world, let's say, 
the Amazons live on Lunyrra, a 
heavily forested island sur- 
rounded by almost unscaleable 
cliffs, and make war on the sur- 
rounding islands; when players 
are interested in playing Ama- 
zons. he gives them that infor- 
mation in addition to the Kit. 

Third. he has to decide what 
changes he wishes to make to 
the Kit. Since his Amazons are 
sailors instead of famous eques- 
trians, he changes the required/ 
bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies 
from Riding and Animal Train- 
ing to Seamanship and Naviga- 
tion. 

By these means, he has 
adapted the generic Warrior Kit 
below to his own campaign 
world and made it fit in just as 
he likes. 


Amazon 


Description: Amazons are 
women warriors in a male- 
dominated world. Their civiliza- 
tion might have been created by 
a deity who likes women war- 
riors: or they might have been 


women who rebelled from male 
dominations and decided to rule 
themselves; or they might sim- 
ply have been matriarchal soci- 
eties from long before recorded 
history. 

Whatever their origin. they 
now live in civilizations or com- 
munities where women occupy 
the positions and roles tradition- 
ally held by men—and. in the 
campaign, that means espe- 
cially the role of warriors and 
adventurers. 

An Amazon culture may be 
small (a single town or island) or 
large (an entire country or conti- 
nent) very advanced or very 
primitive. Some Amazon cul- 
tures keep men as servants and 
slaves, a stern reversal of the 
former status; others have no 
men in their communities. and 
take long holidays in order to 
visit friendly neighboring tribes 
of men: others perpetuate their 
kind by being very hospitable to 
adventurers passing through 


their territory. (In this last in- 
stance, some Amazon cultures. 
afterwards, may decide to kill 
the adventurers; others don't.) 
For details of exactly how the 
Amazon communities work in 
your campaign world, consult 
your DM. (And give him plenty 
of time to come up with the an- 
swers if it’s not something he's 
thought about before.) 

Traditionally, Amazons are fa- 
mous riders and breeders of 
horses. In their own countries, 
they wear light armor and carry 
shields. spears. swords and 
bows. In other countries, if they 
are disadvantaged by their cul- 
tural weapons and armor, they 
quickly adapt to local weapons 
and armor. 

Here's an important point to 
remember: In most campaigns, 
you don't have to be an Amazon 
to be a female warrior: check 
with vour DM for other ways to 
play a female warrior. The Ama- 
zons are merely a very colorful 


AANA SA 


15 


and distinctive type of female 
warrior. If a player wants to 
have a female warrior character, 
the DM should try to accommo- 
date the player whenever possi- 
ble. and shouldn't have to resort 
to making the character an Am- 
azon in order to allow her to bea 
warrior. In just about every real- 
world history and mythology. 
you'll find female warriors in 
male-dominated societies; oth- 
erwise there would be no Joan 
of Arc or Atalanta of Calydon, 

There are no special ability- 
score requirements to be an Am- 
azon. 

Role: In her own society, re- 
gardless of the level of civiliza- 
tion, the Amazon warrior is very 
highly regarded. She is the de- 
fender of the whole civilization's 
way of life, and every Amazon 
girl aspires to grow up to be a 
warrior. But in the outer world, 
and in the campaign in general, 
the Amazon is a curiosity, often 
regarded as a barbarian (no mat- 


arrior Kits 


ter how cultured her civilization 
might be), stared at, whispered 
about. The people of other cul- 
tures will be suspicious of her, 
and she will probably start out 
being uncomfortable around 
men who appear to be her social 
equal—in her eyes, they are the 
ones who are unnatural. 

The DM will have to guide this 
situation carefully. Once the 
Amazon character has proven 
herself in combat to her outer- 
world allies, and once they have 
proven themselves in combat to 
her, there’s no reason why they 
cannot be staunch allies. NPCs 
may continue to trouble her, but 
player-characters should not; 
and the other PCs should rise to 
her defense when NPCs make 
trouble for her; only the most 
obnoxious of PCs would con- 
tinue to give her trouble, and 
the other PCs certainly 
shouldn't support his attitude. 

Secondary Skills: Required: 
Groom. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Re- 
quired: Spear, Long Bow. (Ama- 
zon fighters can Specialize only 
in Spear or Long Bow.) Recom- 
mended: Various axes, swords. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiencies: Riding 
(Land-Based), Animal Training. 
Recommended: General—Ani- 
mal Handling. (Warrior) Animal 
Lore. Armorer, Bowyer/ 
Fletcher, Hunting, Running. 
Survival, Tracking. 

Equipment: When an Ama- 
zon character is first created, 
she must buy her weapons and 
armor from among the follow- 
ing choices only: Weapons— 
Battle Axe, Bow (Any). Club, 
Dagger/Dirk, Hand or Throwing 
Axe, Javelin, Knife, Lance, 
Spear, Sword (any); Armor— 
Shield. Leather, Padded, Stud- 
ded Leather, Brigandine, Scale 
Mail, Hide, Banded Mail, Bronze 
Plate Mail. Once she has adven- 
tured elsewhere in the world, 
she may purchase weapons and 
armor from those regions. 


Special Benefits: Male war- 
riors in a civilization where fe- 
male warriors are rare tend to 
underestimate the Amazon. 
Therefore, in any fight where 
the Amazon confronts a male 
who is not familiar with her per- 
sonally or female warriors in 
general, she getsa +3 to hit and 
*3 damage on her first blow 
only. This is because her oppo- 
nent's guard is down. 

This doesn't work on player- 
characters unless the player is 
role-playing honestly enough to 
declare that he, too, would un- 
derestimate her. 

This ability doesn't work on 
some other types of characters: 

An NPC who is wary enough 
not to underestimate the Ama- 
zon might, with a successful In- 
telligence check, see the attack 
coming and deny her the bonus; 

A seasoned veteran (any War- 
rior of 5th level or higher, or any 
other character of 8th level or 
higher), in spite of his prejudice, 
will realize that she is moving 
like a trained warrior and keep 
his guard up. denying her the 
bonus. 

If the Amazon hits an NPC 
with this attack, he'll never 
again be prey to it; if an NPC 
even sees an Amazon hit some- 
one with it, he'll never fall for it 
himself. But if she misses that 
first strike, then the target will 
continue to underestimate her 
and she can use those bonuses 
again on her next strike. 

Special Hindrances: The 
Amazon suffers a -3 reaction 
roll adjustment from NPCs who 
are from male-dominated soci- 
eties. This reaction adjustment 
goes away for characters who 
come to respect her, such as 
(presumably) her PC allies. 

Wealth Options: The Ama- 
zon gets the ordinary 5d4x10 gp 
as starting money. 

Races: The Amazons from 
folklore and myth were humans. 
It's not difficult to envision elvish 
or half-elvish clans of Amazons. 


16 


either; they'd follow the rules 
above for human Amazons. 

It's a little harder to envision 
dwarvish, gnomish, or halfling 
Amazons. But if you do use such 
civilizations: 

Dwarf Amazons will have Axe 
and Hammer as their required 
weapon proficiencies; they are 
still Riders, but substitute swine 
for their mount of choice (swine 
are very dangerous, and the 
prospect of a ferocious she- 
dwarf on the back of a biting 
boar is a daunting one). 

Gnome Amazons will have 
Throwing Axe and Short Sword 
as their required weapon profi- 
ciencies; their Bonus Non- 
weapon  Proficiencies are 
Tracking and Survival. 

Halfling Amazons will have 
Javelin and Sling as their re- 
quired weapon proficiencies; 
their Bonus Nonweapon Profi- 
ciencies are Endurance and Set 
Snares; and you will have to pre- 
sume that these halflings aren't 
as fond of ease and leisure as the 
more common sorts of halflings. 


Barbarian 


Description: This is not the 
barbarian of history, but the bar- 
barian of fantasy fiction. He's a 
powerful warrior from a culture 
on the fringes of civilization. 
He's left his home to sell his 
skills and adventure in the civi- 
lized world—perhaps to amass a 
fortune with which to return 
home, perhaps to become an im- 
portant figure in this so-called 
civilization. He's known for 
strength, cunning. contempt for 
the outer world's decadence, 
and for adhering to his own code 
of honor. 

The barbarian is usually very 
strong: therefore, the barbarian 
must have a Strength ability 
score of 15 or more. A character 
can come from a barbarian tribe 
and have a lower Strength than 
that—but he cannot have the 
Barbarian Kit. 


Warrior Kits 


Role: The typical RPG barbar- 
ian is a powerful, dangerous fig- 
ure, as though he were an 
animal totem in human skin. In 
a campaign, he's a front-line 
fighter with some special skills 
and a very different outlook 
than the rest of the characters; 
his player should always play 
him as someone from a different 
land, someone whose likes and 
dislikes and perceptions are 
based on a different culture. (If 
you play him as just another 
warrior from down the street, 
you lose a lot of the mystique 
the character has.) 

If the PC party has no real 
leader, he may gravitate to that 
role; if it has a good enough 
leader. he'll probably stick to be- 
ing a specialist in the things he 
does well. 

Secondary Skills: The DM 
will decide, based on the charac- 
ter's background, what sort of 
secondary skill would be re- 
quired. Most barbarian tribes 
havea required skill; a tribe that 
makes its living by fishing 
would have Fisher as its re- 
quired secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Re- 
quired: Battle Axe, Bastard 
Sword. (These are the classical 
fiction-barbarian weapons: the 
DM may decide to substitute 
others more appropriate to his 
own world.) Barbarian fighters 
may specialize in any weapon, 
but are not likely to encounter 
unusual weapons (like lances, 
quarterstaves, flails, peculiar 
polearms) until they reach the 
outer world. Recommended: 
Bow (any). Sling. Sword (any). 
War Hammer. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiency: Endurance. 
Recommended: General—Ani- 
mal Handling, Animal Training. 
Direction Sense. Fire-Building. 
Riding (Land-Based), Weather 
Sense, (Warrior) Blind-Fighting, 
Hunting, Mountaineering, Run- 
ning. Set Snares, Survival. 
Tracking. (Priest—costs twice 


the listed number of slots if 
Fighter or Ranger, or just the 
listed number if Paladin) Her- 
balism, (Rogue—costs double 
slots) Jumping. The DM is 
within his rights to insist that 
the Barbarian character take a 
proficiency in the tribal spe- 
cialty (Fishing, Agriculture, 
whatever) if the DM so wishes. 

Equipment: The character, 
when he spends his starting 
gold, may not buy armor 
heavier than splint mail, 
banded mail, or bronze plate 
mail. Outside his tribe, once he 
has adventured in the outer 
world, he can use any type of ar- 
mor without penalty. When he 
spends his starting gold, he 
must limit himself to weapons 
the DM says are appropriate for 
his tribe—the usual group of 
weapons includes battle axe, 
bows (any). club, dagger or dirk, 
footman's flail, mace, or pick, 
hand or throwing axe, sling. 
spear. or sword (any). 

Special Benefits: Barbarians 
are impressive because of sheer 
strength, intensity, and animal 
magnetism; this gives them a 
*3 reaction adjustment bonus 
in certain situations. 

Whenever the barbarian char- 
acter achieves a reaction roll of 8 
or less (including Charisma and 
racial bonuses), you subtract 
the modifier. That is, if the reac- 
tion is positive at all, it will be 
even more positive than it other- 
wise would have been. 

Example: Torath the Toranar- 
an is a Barbarian with a Cha- 
risma of 15. Encountering a 
knight who could be friend or 
foe to him, he speaks with the 
knight in a friendly fashion. The 
DM rolls his Encounter Reaction 
and achieves an 11 on 2d10. On 
the "Friendly" column of the 
Encounter Reactions chart from 
the Dungeon Master's Guide, 
this is a "Cautious" reaction. 

But wait—his charisma gives 
him a *3 bonus. The 11 be- 
comes an 8, still an indifferent 


17 


reaction. But because he's 
reached an 8, his Barbarian bo- 
nus comes into play, making the 
final reaction roll a 5: A friendly 
reaction. 

Special Hindrances: All that 
impressiveness can work 
against the Barbarian, too. 
Whenever the barbarian char- 
acter achieves a reaction roll of 
14 or more, he takes an addi- 
tional -3 modifier. That is, if the 
reaction is negative at all, it will 
be even more negative than it 
otherwise would have been— 
the barbarian is scary, and the 
other person overreacts. 

Example: Torath next meets a 
suspicious witch, and is indiffer- 
ent toward her. On the "Indiffer- 
ent" column of the Encounter 
Reactions chart, the DM rolls a 
17. Torath's Charisma bonus of 
3 reduces the roll toa 14, but it’s 
still enough that his Barbarian 
penalty just shoots it right back 
up to a 17 again. The witch be- 
comes Threatening. 

Wealth Options: The Barbar- 
ian gets the starting gold for a 
Warrior (5d4x10 gp). but he 
must spend it all (before starting 
play) except three gp or less; he 
can have some pocket change 
when he reaches civilization, 
but must be close to penniless. 

Races: Demihuman Barbari- 
ans follow the same rules. 
Dwarves are perhaps the most 
admirably suited to being Barbar- 
ians. The DM will have to decide 
whether his elves, half-elves and 
gnomes are brooding and menac- 
ing enough to be Barbarians; the 
question is even harder with the 
leisure-loving halflings. But if the 
DM wishes to allow any or all of 
these demihuman races to have 
Barbarians among them, he may. 

Final Note: Most classic 
fantasy-fiction barbarians are 
male, but this Warrior Kit can 
certainly be taken by female 
characters, with all the Kit's re- 
quirements, benefits, and hin- 
drances in effect. 


Beast-Rider 


Description: The Beast-Rider 
is a warrior in a tribe or clan 
(usually a barbarian tribe) 
which has a strong affinity for 
one type of animal. The animal 
is the totem of the tribe. and the 
Beast-Rider makes friends very 
easily with that type of animal 
and can train it into a riding- 
beast. . . even ifit’s a type of ani- 
mal not normally considered a 
riding-beast. 

In a campaign, the Beast- 
Rider is an exotic warrior who is 
notable for his kinship with his 
animal; like the Barbarian, he 
brings a wild, outsider's attitude 
into the adventuring party. His 
animal also has abilities which 
can benefit the adventuring 
party. However, the more unu- 
sual the animal is, the harder it 
is to accommodate in all situa- 
tions: It's no problem to stable a 
horse at the inn, but just try sta- 
bling a great white wolf, a wild 
boar, or a dolphin! 

To be a Beast-Rider, the char- 
acter must have a Charisma of 
at least 13. (Naturally, there are 
members of the Beast-Rider's 
tribe who are not themselves 
Beast-Riders; the Beast-Riders 
are the tribe's elite warriors.) 

Role: As mentioned, in his 
own society, the Beast-Rider is 
the elite warrior, and he com- 
mands a lot of respect among 
his own kind. Outside his tribal 
grounds, however, he’s very de- 
finitely an outsider. His barbar- 
ian mannerisms and his 
obvious and very unusual 
friendship with his animal set 
him apart from most societies. 
Because of this, the Beast-Rider 
may become especially at- 
tached to the other player- 
characters (if they treat him as 
an equal and not a freak), even if 
he'd never admit it to them. 

The DM needs toreinforce this 
social role by having NPCs react 
to the Beast-Rider's strange- 
ness. For instance, NPCs will be 


leery of speaking to or negotiat- 
ing with the Beast-Rider if 
there's a more “civilized” char- 
acter on hand to perform those 
functions. The DM needs con- 
stantly to use the Beast-Rider's 
reaction modifiers, listed below 
under “hindrances.” 

Secondary Skills: If you're 
using the Secondary Skills 
rules, the character must take 
the Groom (Animal Handling) 
secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Re- 
quired: None. Recommended: 
All the weapons commonly as- 
sociated with mounted war- 
riors—Bow (composite short. 
and short). Horseman's flail, 
Horseman's mace, Horseman's 
pick, Lance (any. according to 
the size of the animal), Spear, 
Bastard Sword, Long Sword. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiencies: Animal 
Training. Riding (Land-based). 
The character must declare 
which one sort of animal both 
these proficiencies pertain to. 
Recommended: General— 
Animal Handling, Direction 
Sense, Fire-building. (Priest) 
Healing (specifically veteri- 
nary). (Warrior) Animal Lore, 
Hunting, Mountaineering, Set 
Snares, Survival, Tracking. 

Equipment: When he is first 
created, the Beast-Rider may 
only have Hide, Leather. or Pad- 
ded armor (plus shield and 
helm). Later in the campaign. 
he may switch to more 
advanced forms of armor . . . as 
longas his mount can carry him 
and the armor both. of course. 
When first created, he may have 
only weapons from the list 
above under "Weapon Proficien- 
cies." (The DM may change or 
add to this list to reflect specific 
cultural details of the Beast- 
Rider's tribe.) 

Special Benefits: The Beast- 
Rider has an amazing rapport 
with one type of animal. The an- 
imal must be of a species nor- 
mally strong enough to carry 


the Beast-Rider and act as a 
mount. With the DM's permis- 
sion, the Beast-Rider character 
gets to decide what sort of ani- 
mal this is; the DM is encour- 
aged to disallow any sort of 
animal that will give the Beast- 
Rider a great advantage in the 
campaign (for example. a pega- 
sus or griffon). 

The Beast.Rider gets a *5 
positive reaction adjustment 
whenever dealing with these an- 
imals. He finds it easy to make 
friends with them: on a die-roll 
result of 9 or less (on the “Hos- 
tile" column of the Encounter 
Reactions Chart, Dungeon Mas- 
ter's Guide page 103). he can 
even persuade attacking ani- 
mals of this sort to leave him 
and his allies alone. 

Additionally, the Beast-Rider 
begins play in the campaign 
with one of these animals as his 
personal friend and mount. This 
animal is devoted to him and 
will risk (or even sacrifice) its 
own life to save the character; 
and the character is expected to 
behave the same way toward his 
mount. (If he doesn't role-play 
this attachment to his animal, 
the DM should decide that the 
character has abandoned this 
Warrior Kit, as per the guide- 
lines given later in this chapter.) 

The Beast-Rider has a tele- 
pathic rapport with his animal. 
When in contact or visual line of 
sight with his animal, he can tell 
what the beast is feeling, even 
thinking if it has some intelli- 
gence; he and the animal can 
communicate with one another 
without appearing to. When the 
two are not within line of sight 
with one another, each will 
know the other's emotional 
state and whether or not the 
other is hurt; each will know the 
direction to travel to find his 
friend, and the approximate dis- 
tance (a hundred yards, an 
hour's travel, several days' 
travel, for instance). 


If the animal ever dies, the 
Beast-Rider can choose another 
animal of the same type as his 
companion. However, the DM 
must include this situation as 
part of the campaign story: The 
character must seek out an- 
other such animal, and may 
only be satisfied with the 
healthiest. strongest. greatest 
examples of this animal (in 
other words, if the character ap- 
pears to be content to settle with 
less, the DM tells him, "You 
sense you won't be able to bond 
with this animal ...") then 
there must be some sort of 
bonding ritual between beast 
and man (for example. a physi- 
cal combat where the human 
must be able to saddle and ride 
the animal in spite of its spirited 
attempts to throw him). Only 
then can the character have his 
new animal. 

Following is a list of many ani- 
mals which are appropriate 
mounts for the Beast-Rider. 
Note that not all of them are in- 
cluded in the Monstrous Com- 
pendium series; if a player 
chooses one not included there, 
and the DM approves the choice, 
the DM will have to work up the 
animal's abilities. 


Bat. Huge * + (mobat) (gnomes 
and halflings only may ride) 

Bear 

Boar 

Buffalo 

Camel 

Dolphin & 

Dragon *+ (only allowable in 
very high-powered heroic 
campaigns) 

Elephant 

Griffon * 

Hippogriff * 

Horse 

Hyaenodon 

Lizard (Fire. Giant, or Minotaur) 

Lobster, Giant & 

Pegasus * 

Ray. Manta & 

Sea-Horse, Giant & 

Smilodon 


Tiger. Wild 

Unicorn (traditionally, only vir- 
gin lawful-good females may 
ride) 

Wolf, Dire (evil characters could 
bond with a Winter Wolf) 


* Flying animals do tend to 
change the nature of a cam- 
paign, especially a low-level 
campaign, by making it easy 
for characters to go long dis- 
tances quickly. to avoid diffi- 
cult terrain, etc. The DM 
should disallow any such 
choice if it will cause prob- 
lems in his campaign. 

* Since many of these crea- 
tures are evil, the DM may 
have to introduce into his 
campaign a nearly-identical 
race with neutral or good ten- 
dencies. 

& This species only works if 
most of the campaign takes 
place in watery domains. 


To calculate the weight-bearing 
abilities of these animals, com- 
pare them to the list on page 78 of 
the Player's Handbook. Choose 
the animal from that list most re- 
sembling your animal in size and 
mass, and then use the values for 
that animal. 

Special Hindrances: As men- 
tioned earlier, the Beast-Rider is 
out of place in most societies. He 
takes a -3 negative reaction ad- 
justment when meeting NPCs 
from any culture but his own. 
(The player-characters do not 
have to be hostile to the Beast- 
Rider if they do not wish, how- 
ever.) 

Also. should the Beast-Rider's 
animal ever die, whether it’s in 
the Beast-Rider's presence or far 
away. the Beast-Rider immedi- 
ately takes 2d6 points of dam- 
age and must make a saving 
throw vs. spells. If he fails the 
saving throw. he behaves as if 
he were a magic-user hit with 
feeblemind for the next 2d6 
hours. Even if he makes the sav- 
ing throw. the player should 


19 


role-play the character's reac- 
tions—he's just felt, through 
their telepathic link, the death 
of his beloved friend, after all. 

Wealth Options: The Beast- 
Rider gets the ordinary 5d4x10 
gp for starting gold. Like the 
Barbarian, however, he must 
spend it all (before starting play) 
except 3 gp or less. 

Races: This is a kit that is es- 
pecially appropriate for demihu- 
man characters. It's easy to 
envision dwarves on boars, 
elves on dire wolves, sea-elves 
on giant sea-horses, and so on. 

Notes: It adds a lot of detail 
and color to a campaign if the 
DM does a certain amount of 
work creating the society of 
each Beast-Rider tribe. The 
tribe’s behavior and activities 
would be dictated by the type of 
animal it was tied to: Horse- 
Riders would live on the plains, 
riding far and wide, while Boar- 
Riders would live in forests and 
moist bottom-land, few ever 
travelling more than five miles 
from their home village. 


Berserker 


Description: The Berserker is 
a warrior who has special attrib- 
utes and abilities when he’s in 
combat. In combat, he can 
achieve an ecstatic state of mind 
that will enable him to fight 
longer, harder, and more sav- 
agely than any human being 
has aright to. This makes hima 
deadly warrior ... who can be 
as much a menace to himself as 
to his enemies. In a campaign, 
he's nearly identical to the 
Barbarian—except it's obvious 
from the outset that he has a 
truly savage and inhuman ele- 
ment in his personality, and he 
tends to disturb and unsettle 
other people. 

Like the Barbarian, the Ber- 
serker must have a Strength 
ability score of 15 or more. 

Role: In his tribe, the Ber- 
serker has a special role. He's 


9 
Xl / Warrior Kits 
T 


been touched by supernatural 
forces, and accepted that touch 
so that he might better defend 
his people. 

The idea of a Berserker Pala- 
din is a little strange, and some 
DMs will prefer not to allow it. 
That's fine. It's not always inap- 
propriate, though. If the charac- 
ter's tribe is deeply involved with 
an appropriate animal totem, 
such as a bear or wolverine, a 
paladin might even be required 
to be a Berserker. since the DM 
may reason that it's only the su- 
pernatural touch of the totem an- 
imal spirit that gives the paladin 
his other powers. But, again. 
that's up to the individual DM. 

Secondary Skills: As with the 
Barbarian, the DM will decide 
what sort of secondary skill is 
most appropriate for that spe- 
cific barbarian/berserker tribe. 

Weapon Proficiencies: No 
specific weapon proficiencies 
are required of the Berserker— 
but he may not start out play 
having a proficiency in a ranged 
weapon (no thrown axes or 
knives, no bows or crossbows, 
etc.). The Berserker lives to de- 
stroy things in hand-to-hand 
combat, so he cannot start play 
with any sort of ranged weapon 
proficiency. He can learn others 
during the course of the cam- 
paign. if he and his DM wish to 
allow it—but it's a little out of 
character for the Berserker. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiency: Endurance. 
Recommended: General—Ani- 
mal Handling. Animal Training. 
Direction Sense, Fire-Building. 
Riding (Land-Based), Weather 
Sense. (Warrior) Blind-Fighting. 
Hunting, Mountaineering, Run- 
ning. Set Snares, Survival, 
Tracking, (Priest—costs twice 
the listed number of slots if 
Fighter or Ranger) Herbalism, 
(Rogue—costs double slots) 
Jumping. As with the Barbar- 
ian, the DM may choose to insist 
that the Berserker character 
take a proficiency in the tribal 


specialty (Trapping, Agricul- 
ture, etc.). 

Equipment: As with the Bar- 
barian, the Berserker may not 
use his starting gold to buy ar- 
mor heavier than splint mail, 
banded mail, or bronze plate 
mail. Once he has adventured in 
the outer world, he can use any 
type of armor without penalty. 
When he spends his starting 
gold, he must limit himself to 
weapons known to his tribe, and 
may not choose missile weap- 
ons. Good choices include battle 
axe, club, dagger or dirk, foot- 
man’s flail, mace, or pick, hand 
axe, spear, or sword (any). 

Special Benefits: Berserkers 
receive a +3 reaction adjust- 
ment bonus from NPCs belong- 
ing to any tribe that also has 
Berserkers—they recognize the 
Berserker instinctively and re- 
spect him, even if he is an 
enemy. 

The other benefit the Ber- 
serker receives is his Berserk. 

At any time, the Berserker 
may choose to Go Berserk. This 
isn't an instantaneous pro- 
cess—he must spend a little 
time to “psych himself up.” It 
takes a full turn (ten combat 
rounds) to Go Berserk. In that 
time, the character is growling. 
moaning, uttering imprecations 
... it's impossible to be quiet 
when trying to Go Berserk. He 
may also be fighting during that 
time, meaning that he can start 
to Go Berserk on the round the 
fight begins, fight for ten full 
rounds, and then be Berserk on 
the eleventh round. 

Of course, when the Berserker 
knows a fight is coming, he can 
begin to Go Berserk, even if 
there is no fight currently going 
on. At the end of a full turn of 
preparation, he can become Ber- 
serk instantaneously. If there's 
no enemy in sight yet, he can 
hold the Berserk until combat is 
engaged. But ifno combat takes 
place within five more full 
turns, he automatically reverts 


20 


to "normal" and suffers the or- 
dinary consequences for com- 
ing out of a Berserk (described 
below). The character can come 
out of his Berserk once the last 
enemy is down (he must liter- 
ally be down on the ground, 
even if still alive and surrender- 
ing; the Berserker will stay ber- 
serk and continue fighting so 
long as there are enemies still on 
their feet). Once the fight ends, 
the Berserker must come out of 
his Berserk state. 

For these reasons, Berserking 
is a more appropriate reaction 
when the characters are about 
to attack or be attacked by a foe 
they know about. If the charac- 
ters are, instead, jumped by a 
small party of orcs, it’s usually 
not worth the effort to Go Ber- 
serk; the consequences and ef- 
fort outweigh the benefits. 

When Berserk, the character 
has phenomenal endurance and 
resistance to pain and some 
forms of magic. Only while Ber- 
serk, he gains the following ben- 
efits: 

(1) He is immune (no Saving 
Throw is necessary) to the wiz- 
ard spells charm person. 
friends, hypnotism, sleep, irrita- 
tion, ray of enfeeblement, scare. 
geas. and the clerical spells 
command. charm person or 
mammal, enthrall, cloak of 
bravery, and symbol. 

(2) He gets a +4 to save 
against the wizard spells blind- 
ness. Tasha's uncontrollable 
hideous laughter, hold person. 
charm monster, and confusion. 
and the clerical spells hold per- 
son and hold animal. 

(3) The emotion spell has no 
effect on the Berserker, unless 
the caster chose the fear result. 
If fear was chosen, the Berserker 
gets a normal Saving Throw: if 
he makes it, he continues on as 
before, but if he fails it, he is pre- 
maturely snapped out of his 
Berserk, with all the normal ef- 
fects of coming out of the Ber- 
serk (but he doesn't suffer any 


Warrior Kits 


other fear effect). The fear spell 
has exactly the same effect: If he 
saves, there is no effect, and if he 
doesn't save. he's snapped out 
of the Berserk. If he fails a sav- 
ing throw against charm mon- 
ster, he simply counts the caster 
as one of his allies; he doesn't 
come out of the Berserk or obey 
the caster's commands. 

(4) Being Berserk offers no 
real protection from finger of 
death, except that the spell ef- 
fects do not take place until the 
character has come out of his 
Berserk. If the Berserker saves, 
he doesn't suffer the 2d8+1 
damage until immediately after 
he snaps out of the Berserk. If he’ 
fails to save, he doesn't die until 
he snaps out of the Berserk. 

(5) The Berserker. while Ber- 
serk, is immune to KO results 
from the Punching and Wres- 
tling rules, and takes only half 
damage from bare-handed at- 
tacks from these rules. 


(6) While Berserk, the charac- 
ter gets *1 to attack, *3 to 
damage. and *5 hp. 

Special Hindrances: The Ber- 
serker has hindrances as severe 
as all those benefits he receives. 

(1) The Berserker character 
receives a —3 reaction from all 
NPCs (except. that is, charac- 
ters from tribes which have ber- 
serkers in them, as described 
above). 

(2) When the Berserker goes 
Berserk, the DM should immedi- 
ately say to him, "Tell me how 
many hit points you currently 
have.” From that point until the 
fight is done and the Berserker 
has returned to normal, the DM 
keeps track of his hit points. The 
player is not told how many hp 
he has left, nor how many 
points of damage he is taking 
with each attack. (After all, the 
character can feel no pain. . . so 
he cannot keep track of how 
close he is to death.) The DM 
simply tells him something like: 


21 


"The orc-captain hits you with 
his axe, a mighty blow which 
you barely feel...” It is there- 
fore very possible for a Ber- 
serker to be nickled and dimed 
to death and not know it until he 
drops dead. The DM can also, if 
he so chooses, roll all Saving 
Throws for the Berserker, not 
telling the player whether they 
were failures or successes. 

(3) While Berserk. the charac- 
ter can use no ranged weapons. 
He kills only in hand-to-hand or 
melee-weapon combat. 

(4) While Berserk, he must 
fight each opponent until that 
opponent ís down. Once an op- 
ponent is felled, the Berserker 
must move to the nearest en- 
emy and attack him. He can't, 
for instance, choose to attack 
the enemy leader if that leader is 
behind seven ranks of spear- 
men. The Berserker must keep 
fighting until all enemies are 
down. as described earlier. 


*l/ Warrior Kits 


(5) While Berserk, the charac- 
ter cannot take cover against 
missile fire. 

(6) If. while the character is 
Berserk, another character tries 
something he can interpret as 
attack (for instance. hits him to 
move him out of the way of an 
incoming attack.) the Berserker 
must roll 1d20 vs. his Intelli- 
gence. If he succeeds (that is, 
rolls his Intelligence score or 
less). he's dimly aware that his 
friend is not attacking him. If he 
fails (rolls higher than his Intelli- 
gence), he now thinks his friend 
is an enemy, and continues to 
think so until the fight is done 
and he is no longer Berserk. 

(7) While Berserk. the charac- 
ter is temporarily unaffected by 
the clerical spells bless, cure 
light wounds. aid, cure serious 
wounds, cure critical wounds, 
heal, regenerate (and wither). 
He will gain the benefits of those 
spells only afterhe has come out 
of his Berserk and suffered any 
and all damages which occured 
then. 

(8) The taunt spell is automat- 
ically successful. and will cause 
the Berserker to abandon his 
current enemy and rush to at- 
tack the taunter. 

(9) Finally, when the charac- 
ter comes out of his Berserk, bad 
things happen to him. He loses 
the 5 hp he gained when he be- 
came Berserk. (This could drop 
him to or below O hp and kill 
him. of course.) He collapses in 
exhaustion (exactly as if hit by a 
ray of enfeeblement, no saving 
throw possible, for one round for 
every round he was Berserk. He 
suffers the effects of any spells 
which wait until he's returned 
to normal before affecting him 
(finger of death. for instance). 
And only then can healing mag- 
ics affect him. 

Wealth Options: The Ber- 
serker gets the ordinary 5d4x10 
gp for starting gold. Like the 
Barbarian, however, he must 
spend it all (before starting play) 


except three gp or less. 

Races: It's the DM's choice as 
to whether his demihuman 
characters can have Berserkers 
among them. It's entirely appro- 
priate for dwarves, and not inap- 
propriate for elves, gnomes and 
half-elves. Halfling Berserkers 
are not very likely. In any case, 
demihuman Berserkers would 
not advertise the fact that they 
were such: until the first time 
they Berserked in combat, their 
companions would probably be 
unaware that they were Ber- 
serkers. (The DM can help pre- 
serve the secret by not 
publicizing the fact that all 
NPCs are taking a —3 to reac- 
tion rolls concerning the Ber- 
serker characters.) 


Cavalier 


Description: The Cavalier is 
the ultimate mounted warrior of 
civilized cultures, especially 
those of Middle Ages technology 
and outlook. In a campaign, he's 
the shining knight who leads his 
fellows on an eternal quest for 
truth, justice, and the elimina- 
tion of evil. To the world at large. 
he's a mighty hero. To his 
friends and allies, he's a staunch 
friend. a tireless cheerleader, 
and often an overenthusiastic 
pain in the neck. 

This is a good Warrior Kit for 
paladins to take. It can be ar- 
gued that paladins look some- 
thing like this already, but that 
isn't necessarily so: Only pala- 
dins of cultures resembling me- 
dieval Europe would look like 
this (a paladin of a Japanese- 
type culture, a paladin of a 
Polynesian-like culture, and a 
paladin of a culture resembling 
later Renaissance Europe would 
all be very different from the 
Cavalier). Therefore, a paladin 
who wants to look every inch 
the shining knight should take 
the Cavalier Warrior Kit. 

The Cavalíer kit resembles 
the Noble Warrior kit (q.v.) in 


22 


that both are noblemen war- 
riors. but the Noble Warrior is 
primarily interested in defend- 
ing the rights and maintaining 
the status quo of his social class, 
while the Cavalier pursues 
loftier goals. 

To be a cavalier, the character 
must be of any good alignment 
(chaotic good, neutral good, law- 
ful good) and have at least the 
following minimum ability 
scores: Strength 15, Dexterity 
15, Constitution 15, Intelligence 
10, Wisdom 10. 

Also, the character must be- 
long to the noble social class in 
the campaign. It's up to the DM 
to determine whether this is 
possible. If his campaign uses a 
random die-roll to determine 
who's nobility and who isn't, 
then the character must first 
successfully roll to be noble in 
order to be a Cavalier. If it's more 
of a role-playing exercise in the 
campaign, then any character 
who takes the Cavalier Warrior 
Kit will be presumed to be of the 
nobility. (This doesn't mean 
that he has a lot of money; it’s 
quite likely that he belongs to an 
impoverished noble family, one 
with a lot of honorable tradition 
but no money to speak of.) 

Fighters and Paladins may be 
Cavaliers; Rangers may not. 
Only humans, elves, and half- 
elves may be Cavaliers. 

Role: In his own and similar 
cultures, the Cavalier is a 
mighty hero who has the re- 
spect of the majority of the pop- 
ulation (the criminal classes and 
evil characters excepted). He 
has the good-will of the people 
(reflected as bonuses to his reac- 
tion rolls). but the people also 
make many demands of him: 
When there's danger. when 
someone is in trouble, the peo- 
ple turn to the Cavalier for help. 
This character does not get 
much tíme for rest and relaxa- 
tion. 

Secondary Skills: If you're 
using the Secondary Skills 


Warrior Kits 


rules, the Cavalier must take 
Groom. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Re- 
quired: Lance (any: player 
choice) and Sword (any: player 
choice). Recommended: All 
other Lances, all other Swords, 
all Horsemen's weapons, Dag- 
ger, Spear, Javelin. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiencies: Riding, 
(Land-based. horse). Etiquette. 
Recommended: Animal Han- 
dling, Animal Training, Danc- 
ing, Heraldry, (Priest, double 
slots unless Paladin) Musical In- 
strument,  Reading/Writing. 
(Warrior) Blind-Fighting, En- 
durance. 

Equipment: The Cavalier 
must start play with (i.e., spend 
his initial gold on) at least two 
weapons. including one lance 
and one sword. and must then 
buy the most expensive set of 
armor he can still afford. After 
those expenditures. whatever 
remains of his gold can be spent 
on items of his choice. 

Special Benefits: The Cava- 
lier enjoys many special bene- 
fits, including: 

At Ist level, he getsa * 1 to hit 
with any lance for which he has 
proficiency, when using the 
lance from horseback. This goes 
up +1 every six experience 
levels (so he'll be +2 at 7th level, 
+3 at 13th, etc.). 

At 3rd level, he gets a +1 to 
hit with any one type of sword 
(his choice from among those he 
has proficiency with; most com- 
mon are broad sword, long 
sword, bastard sword, and scim- 
itar). This goes up +1 every six 
experience levels (so he'll be +2 
at 9th level, +3 at 15th, etc.). 

At 5th level. he getsa +1 to hit 
with either horseman's mace, 
horseman's flail, or horseman's 
pick (his choice from among 
those he has proficiency with). 
This goes up +1 every six expe- 
rience levels (so he'll be *2 at 
llth level, +3 at 17th level, 
etc.). 


These pluses to hit do not add 
to damage, and don't allow the 
Cavalier to hit a monster that can 
only be hit by magical weapons. 

The Cavalier is completely im- 
mune to the fear spell. Because 
he is so brave, he inspires others 
to courage, and so, while he is 
fighting. he actually radiates an 
emotion spell in a 10’ radius. 
This emotion spell radiates 
courage (see the writeup for the 
4th-level wizard spell emotion). 
but only to the extent that it ne- 
gates fear; it does not bestow the 
berserk fury that the actual wiz- 
ard spell provides. 

The Cavalier is +4 to save vs. 
all magic which would affect his 
mind, such as the wizard spells 
charm person, friends, hypno- 
tism, sleep. irritation. ray of en- 
feeblement, scare. and geas, 
and the clerical spells com- 
mand, charm person or mam- 
mal. enthrall. cloak of bravery. 
and symbol. 

The Cavalier starts play with 
a horse which he does not have 
to pay for. This will be either a 
Heavy Warhorse, Medium War- 
horse, or Light Warhorse (see 
the Monstrous Compendium. 
Volume One entry on Horses). 
The player may choose what 
sort of horse it is. subject to the 
DM's approval. It will automati- 
cally be a Charger (see the sec- 
tion on Horse Quality in the 
Dungeon Master's Guide, page 
36); the DM may roll for its per- 
sonality traits according to 
those rules. If this horse dies. 
the Cavalier has to acquire him- 
self another one through the 
usual campaign means (buy 
one, be given one for noble 
deeds, etc.), but will not be con- 
tent with any horse which is not 
a Warhorse of Charger quality. 

The Cavalier receives a +3 re- 
action from anyone of his own 
culture (except criminals and 
characters of evil alignment, 
from whom he receives a —3). 

And finally, the Cavalier has 
the right to demand shelter. 


23 


When he travels, he can de- 
mand shelter from anyone in his 
own nation who is of status 
lower than nobility. And most 
people of his own status or 
higher will be happy to offer him 
shelter when he is travelling. 

Special Hindrances: For all 
these benefits, the Cavalier has 
some pretty hefty hindrances as 
well. 

The Cavalier cannot attack an 
opponent at range if he can in- 
stead charge ahead and attack 
him in melee or jousting com- 
bat. Therefore, he cannot snipe 
on enemies with a bow or cross- 
bow; he cannot use a polearm 
from behind a shield wall. He 
has to be on the front line, meet- 
ing his foes face-to-face. (A Cav- 
alier could conceivably shoot an 
opponent with an arrow to stop 
that opponent from killing an in- 
nocent person; that doesn't con- 
stitute a violation of his code. 
But he couldn't shoot the en- 
emy to protect a friend if his 
friend is fighting that enemy 
honorably . . . even if his friend 
is losing.) 

In any combat, the Cavalier 
must attack the enemy who is 
the biggest and most powerful- 
looking. If he's held up by lesser 
troops. he must dispatch them 
as quickly as possible and then 
get to his "real" opponent. 

He must always have the 
highest-quality armor he can af- 
ford. As he goes through his 
early experience levels, if he has 
the money. he'll constantly be 
selling his old armor and buying 
the next most protective set of 
armor. His goal is to have a set of 
full plate armor; the next step 
down from that is field plate, 
then plate mail, then bronze 
plate mail. then banded or 
splint, then chain, then scale or 
brigandine, then ring or stud- 
ded. And to him. magic bonuses 
don't mean as much as the type 
of armor: He prefers a suit of or- 
dinary field plate to a set of 
banded mail *5. The DM must 


rigorously enforce this limita- 
tion on the character if the 
player is inclined to ignore it. 

The Cavalier must also follow 
the very strict Code of Chivalry. 
In most AD&D® game cam- 
paigns. his code includes these 
rules: He must cheerfully per- 
form any noble service or quest 
asked of him: he must defend, to 
the death, any person or item 
placed in his charge; he must 
show courage and enterprise 
when obeying his rulers; he 
must show respect for all peers 
and equals; he must honor all 
those above his station (his so- 
cial class); he must demand re- 
spect and obedience from those 
below his station; he must scorn 
those who are lowly and ignoble 
(he will not help the ill- 
mannered, the coarse, the 
crude; he will not use equip- 
ment which is badly-made or in- 
ferior; he will fight on foot before 
riding a nag; etc.); he must per- 
form military service to his lord 
whenever asked; he must show 
courtesy to all ladies (if the Cav- 
alier is male); he must regard 
war as the flowering of chivalry. 
and a noble enterprise; he must 
regard battle as the test of man- 
hood, and combat as glory; he 
must achieve personal glory in 
battle; he must slay all those 
who oppose his cause: and he 
must choose death before dis- 
honor. 

If a Cavalier chooses not to fol- 
low this code, bad things hap- 
pen. The first time he breaks his 
vows, the DM will warn the 
player that the Cavalier feels 
bad about violating his code. 
The second time he breaks his 
vows, the Cavalier loses all his 
special benefits until such time 
as he repents and undertakes a 
dangerous task to redeem him- 
self. When performing thís task, 
he must behave according to his 
code and his hindrances. Only 
when the task is successfully ac- 
complished does he regain his 
benefits. 


If the Cavalier breaks his vow 
a third time without repenting 
and undertaking that task, he 
has abandoned his Cavalier 
Warrior Kit. He permanently 
loses all the special benefits of 
the Kit. He no longer has to obey 
his knightly code. He receives a 
permanent -3 reaction adjust- 
ment from all members of his 
own culture (even those who do 
not know of his past will be put 
off by the air of treachery and 
faithlessness that now haunts 
the man). His horse, even if it is 
not the one he began play with, 
leaves him—either rides off into 
the sunset without him, or at- 
tacks him. He may never ride it 
again, even if he kills it trying to 
do so. See "Abandoning a Kit" 
later in this chapter. 

Wealth Options: The Cavalier 
gets the standard 5d4x10 gp in 
starting gold. 

Races: Of the demihuman 
races, only elves and half-elves 
may be Cavaliers. 


Gladiator 


Description: The gladiator is 
a showman-warrior from a soci- 
ety where public combat com- 
petitions are a popular sport. 
The gladiator is a professional 
warrior in this high-profile 
arena; for the delight (and blood- 
lust) of the crowds, for his own 
personal wealth and aggran- 
dizement (or, if he is a slave, for 
the profits of his owner), he 
fights organized matches 
against human, demihuman, 
and even monstrous opponents. 

There are no special ability- 
score requirements to be a Glad- 
iator. 

Role: For the Gladiator to ap- 
pear in a campaign, the DM 
must establish that at least one 
culture has gladiatorial com- 
bats, and the Gladiator charac- 
ter must come from such a 
culture. (He need not have been 
born there . . . but he will either 
have been a slave there or, if he 


24 


was a freeman, will feel like a 
naturalized citizen there.) A 
Gladiator player-character can 
be an active gladiator in the 
arena, one who adventures in 
his free time (or within some 
other context of the current ad- 
venture), or can have formerly 
been a gladiator now living the 
life of the adventurer. 

In the campaign, the Gladia- 
tor is going to be a showy, high- 
profile warrior. He performs 
dangerous stunts in combat. He 
attracts the attention of crowds 
of admirers. He receives a lot of 
credit for brave deeds whether 
he deserves the credit or not. A 
Gladiator can be a callous brute, 
a dirty arena fighter with no in- 
terests other than killing his en- 
emy as quickly as possible and 
making off with his prize; or he 
can be a clean-limbed, heroic 
figure. a hero who always fights 
honorably in the arena and 
never kills when he does not 
have to. 

DMs take note: a Gladiator 
character is not likely to be a 
Ranger. You can permit it if you 
wish, but Rangers are very 
wilderness-oriented characters, 
and Gladiators are very urban. 
A Ranger could have been cap- 
tured, enslaved, trained as a 
Gladiator, and then escaped... 
but still, the Ranger and Gladia- 
tor personalities don't seem to 
work together very well. Allow 
this only if you really wish to. 

Its up to the DM to decide 
whether there are female gladia- 
tors on his world. Unless his 
campaign is already rigidly set 
up to prevent it, he might as well 
allow it; a she-gladiator charac- 
ter could be a very interesting 
one. 

Secondary Skills: The Gladi- 
ator character receives his sec- 
ondary skill through whatever 
means is usual for the 
campaign—by choice or ran- 
dom die-roll. This skill probably 
represents the trade he learned 
before becoming a Gladiator. 


Warrior Kits 


Weapon Proficiencies: Re- 
quired: short sword (gladius), 
trident, net. Gladiators should 
learn an even mix of normal and 
unusual weapons: the DM is 
within his rights to insist that 
the Gladiator learn one strange 
weapon proficiency (such as 
whip) for every "normal" profi- 
ciency (like sword, spear. etc.). 
(Also. see the Equipment chap- 
ter, under "New Arms" and 
"New Armor.” for weapons and 
armor especially appropríate to 
Gladiator characters.) 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiencies: (Warrior) 
Charioteering. (Rogue) Tum- 
bling (for the combat showman- 
ship that characterizes arena 
fighting). Recommended: (Gen- 
eral) Animal Handling, Animal 
Training, Etiquette, Riding 
(Land-Based), (Warrior) Ar- 
morer, Blind-Fighting, Endur- 
ance, Gaming, Weapon- 
smithing, (Priest) Healing (dou- 
ble slots unless Paladin). 

Equipment: The Gladiator 
may buy any sort of non- 
magical weapon or combination 
of weapons before beginning 
play. However, he must choose 
his armor from the listing of 
Gladiator Armor in the Equip- 
ment chapter, under "New Ar- 
mors.” 

Special Benefits: Gladiators, 
because of their intensive train- 
ing, get a free Weapon Speciali- 
zation (see under "Weapon 
Specialization” in the 2nd Edi- 
tion Player's Handbook). This 
doesn't cost any of their begin- 
ning weapon proficiencies: 
They still get all four of those, 
and get this Specialization free. 
It must be chosen from one of 
the following weapons: bow 
(choice). cestus*. dagger. dru- 
sus*, lasso*, net*. scimitar, 
short sword, spear. trident, and 
whip. (The "*" indicates a new 
weapon found in the Equipment 
chapter.) 

Special Hindrances: Gladia- 
tors tend to be recognized—as 


Gladiators, at least, if not by 
their own names—wherever 
they go. This makes it more diffi- 
cult for them to do things in se- 
cret; some troublesome NPC is 
always remembering “the tall, 
fair-haired gladiator” who was at 
the scene of the action, which 
makes it very easy for the au- 
thorities to follow the heroes’ 
trail. (This is something the DM 
will have to enforce scrupulously 
if the Gladiator is to have hin- 
drances offsetting his benefits.) 

Also, and this is strictly a role- 
playing consideration, pro- 
moters and managers are 
always interfering in the Gladia- 
tor's life: Trying to hire him to 
participate in certain-death 
events, to fight people the Gladi- 
ator doesn't want to fight, to 
force him to participate in 
events taking place at the exact 
time the Gladiator needs to be 
somewhere else, etc. These pro- 
moters will go to any length to 
get their way: they may black- 
mail the character, kidnap his 
followers, use the time-honored 
bait of a gorgeous romantic in- 
terest (whom the Gladiator 
doesn't immediately realize is 
an employee of the promoter). 
and so forth. 

To make sure this is regarded 
as a hindrance, the DM should 
make it clear that these pro- 
moters are mostly of the sleazy 
variety who will cheat, rob and 
betray him at the drop of a hat. 

Wealth Options: The Gladia- 
tor gets the standard 5d4x10 gp 
to spend, and may spend it any 
way he chooses (subject to the 
restrictions listed in "Equip- 
ment,’ immediately above) or 
have it all unspent at the begin- 
ning of play. 

Races: Any demihuman war- 
rior can be a Gladiator. Opera- 
tors of the arenas try to acquire 
as many different, unusual 
fighters as they can, by hiring or 
enslaving them, and demihu- 
mans (when they can be ac- 
quired) are major attractions. 


25 


Myrmidon 


Description: The Myrmidon 
is the ultimate soldier. Soldier- 
ing is his life. He may be a high- 
ranking officer or a career 
sergeant; he may belong to one 
nation's armed forces or may be 
a mercenary. To the campaign 
and the adventuring party, he 
brings discipline and a useful 
understanding of military tac- 
tics; he's often rigid and con- 
temptuous of rugged 
individualists or characters who 
don't like to take orders, so he 
can cause a lot of friction in an 
adventuring party, too. 

When first created, the Myr- 
midon's player must decide 
whether his character is part of 
a standing army or a mercenary 
unit. If he's part of a standing 
army. he's employed as a soldier 
or officer in the army ofa nation, 
large region. city guard, or even 
palace/castle guard. If he's part 
of a mercenary unit, he belongs 
to a group of freelance soldiers 
who hire themselves to just 
about anyone who can pay; or 
may be a personal bodyguard. 
The DM will have the deciding 
vote in what sort of force the 
Myrmidon belongs to; if, for in- 
stance, the DM doesn't want to 
have an all-military campaign. 
he'll probably insist that the 
Myrmidon be a mercenary, cur- 
rently employed by a player- 
character or NPC important to 
the current story. 

However, in the course of the 
campaign. the Myrmidon's em- 
ployment can change. once or 
several times. He may start out 
as a mercenary bodyguard; 
later in the campaign, he may 
find himself commanding a 
small mercenary force in a bor- 
der war; later still, he may ac- 
cept a commission in the king's 
army and find himself a regular 
officer. 

The choice of whether the 
character is of a non-commis- 
sioned rank (such as recruit, pri- 


Warrior Kits 


vate, or sergeant) or an officer's 
rank (such as captain) is entirely 
up to the DM, who'll make his 
choice based on what works 
best in his campaign's current 
storyline. 

To be a Myrmidon, the charac- 
ter must have scores of at least 
12 in Strength and Constitu- 
tion. 

Role: in the campaign's cul- 
ture, the Myrmidon is a career 
soldier. In times of war. they're 
heroes to the nation. In times of 
peace. the common folk often 
look on them as parasites, living 
off taxes but providing no useful 
service. Mercenaries are often 
looked on as bandits and preda- 
tors. Regardless of the public's 
opinion, though. the Myrmidon 
and the standing army are nec- 
essary to the defense of the na- 
tion, and so there are always 
Myrmidons to be found. 

Secondary Skills: If you're 
using the Secondary Skills 
rules, the Myrmidon may 
choose his Secondary Skill, but 
must choose it from the follow- 
ing list: Armorer, Bowyer/ 
Fletcher, Forester. Groom. 
Hunter, Leather worker, Naviga- 
tor, Sailor, Scribe, Teamster/ 
Freighter, Weaponsmith. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The 
Myrmidon may spend his 
Weapon Proficiency slots any 
way he chooses. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiencies: Ancient 
History (specifically Military 
History). Fire-Building. Recom- 
mended: (General) Animal Han- 
dling, Cooking, Heraldry, Riding 
(Land-based), Seamanship. 
Swimming. Weather Sense, 
(Priest, double slots unless Pala- 
din) Reading/Writing. (Rogue. 
double slots) Disguise, (Warrior) 
Armorer, Blind-Fighting, Bow- 
yer/Fletcher, Charioteering, En- 
durance, Navigation, Set 
Snares, Survival, Tracking. 
Weaponsmithing, (Wizard, dou- 
ble slots unless Ranger) 
Reading/Writing. 


Equipment: The Myrmidon 
may spend his starting gold on 
whatever sort of arms, armor, 
and equipment he chooses. If, 
when he’s first created, it is 
agreed that he'll be part of a spe- 
cific military force with specific 
equipment requirements. he's 
required to buy that equipment, 
but the DM must give him extra 
gold in the amount of half that 
cost. 

Special Benefits: The Myrmi- 
don has two advantages of note: 

First, he gets a free Weapon 
Specialization. He must choose 
it from the following group: Bat- 
tle axe, Bow (composite long 
bow. composite short bow. or 
long bow). Crossbow (heavy 
crossbow or light crossbow), 
Lance (choice). Polearm 
(choice), Spear, Sword (choice). 

Second, the Myrmidon is usu- 
ally in the employ of some pow- 
erful patron. The DM will have 
to decide what immediate bene- 
fits this grants him; they vary 
with the type of employer he is 
working for. 

For instance, if he’s working 
for a wealthy nobleman, he 
won't have to spend any money 
for room and board and will en- 
joy an upper-class existence. 

Or. if he's part of a standing 
army. he may be immune to 
prosecution by the civilian au- 
thorities (though he can cer- 
tainly face court martial for 
misdeeds). 

Special Hindrances: The 
Myrmidon is instantly recogniz- 
able by his military demeanor, 
erect posture. disciplined man- 
nerisms, etc. (There are plenty 
of soldiers and mercenaries who 
aren't Myrmidons who aren't so 
distinctive.) Because he is dis- 
tinctive, the Myrmidon is easily 
remembered and described by 
witnesses to his adventures; 
this makes it easier for the en- 
emy to identify him and follow 
his trail if he's trying to escape 
or travel through dangerous ter- 
ritory. 


26 


A second hindrance is his em- 
ployer. Naturally, his employer 
makes many demands on the 
Myrmidon. If the Myrmidon is a 
bodyguard. he must accom- 
pany his employer just about 
everywhere, regardless of any 
personal goals or interests the 
Myrmidon has. If the Myrmidon 
is a common soldier, he's sub- 
ject to the orders of his officers. 
If the Myrmidon is a military of- 
ficer, he's subject to the orders of 
his superiors or the local ruler, 
and bears the added stress of 
having to look out for his men 
whenever they're engaged in 
military action. 

Wealth Options: The Myrmi- 
don receives the standard 
5d4x10 gp starting gold. 

Races: Depending on the way 
the DM has set the campaign up, 
any demihuman race can have 
Myrmidons. Mercenary Myrmi- 
don demihumans will be travel- 
ling mostly in human-occupied 
lands. while Myrmidon demihu- 
mans in standing armies will 
usually stick to their own race's 
territories ... although some 
special ones (i.e., the player- 
characters) will often find them- 
selves sent out on special quests 
and adventures all over the 
campaign world. 


Noble Warrior 


Description: This character 
is of the nobility, and theoreti- 
cally represents everything the 
ruling class stands for. In classic 
medieval fantasy, this means 
chivalry, the protection of 
women (those who want to be 
protected. that is—it's a bad 
idea to try to protect a woman 
warrior anxious to prove herself 
in combat), and (especially) up- 
holding the rights of the ruling 
class to rule (and upholding the 
rights of the other classes to 
serve ...). Noble Warriors in 
most campaigns are called 
Knights or Squires. though spe- 
cific campaigns may have differ- 


> 
| / Warrior Kits 
Y 


ent designations and be based 
on different sources than medi- 
eval European history. 

To be a Noble Warrior, a char- 
acter must have Strength and 
Constitution scores of 13 or 
better—it's what comes of being 
forced to train in heavy plate ar- 
mor for so many years. 

Role: In a campaign. the No- 
ble Warrior is a romantic ideal 
which most of society looks up 
to. The Noble Warrior is sup- 
posed to be courageous, gallant, 
protective of the defenseless, 
dedicated to honorable ideals. 

But that's just what society 
expects of the Noble Warrior. 
Some theoretically Noble War- 
riors are mere brutes in shiny 
armor, warriors who take what 
they want, murder the inno- 
cent, and continually betray the 
oaths they took when they first 
won their spurs. So it's up to an 
individual player to decide what 
alignment his Noble Warrior 
takes and how well helivesup to 
the pertinent ideals. 

Whether the Noble Warrior 
character is a Knight or a Squire 
(or some other designation) de- 
pends on the campaign and its 
DM. From the viewpoint of con- 
venience, it's best for Noble War- 
rior characters to begin play as 
young knights who have just 
won their spurs; this will ac- 
count for the fact that they have 
little money (they're just start- 
ing out as free-lancers) or fol- 
lowers, and for the fact that 
they're wandering around ad- 
venturing: they're anxious to 
prove their mettle. If the DM pre- 
fers, the starting Noble Warrior 
could be the squire for an NPC 
knight, one who is aging and 
needs the stout sword-arm of a 
young squire; but here, the DM 
has to run the NPC knight until 
it's time for the squire character 
to leave his knight. 

Secondary Skills: All Noble 
Warrior characters must take 
the Groom skill. Squires are ex- 
pected to care for their knights' 


horses, and don't forget this 
skill when they themselves be- 
come knights. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Un- 
less the campaign deals with a 
culture unlike medieval Europe, 
all Noble Warriors must take the 
following proficiencies: long 
sword or bastard sword (player 
choice), lance (player choice of 
type, usually jousting lance), 
and horseman's flail or horse- 
man's mace (player choice). The 
last proficiency may be used for 
a weapon of the warrior's choice 
or to specialize in one of the re- 
quired choices. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiencies: (General) 
Etiquette, Heraldry, Riding 
(Land-Based). Recommended: 
(General) Animal Training, 
Dancing. (Warrior)  Blind- 
Fighting, Gaming. Hunting, 
Tracking. (Priest, cost double 
slots unless Paladin) Local His- 
tory, Musical Instrument, 
Reading/Writing. 

Equipment: The Noble War- 
rior may spend his gold pretty 
much as he chooses—but there 
are certain minimum standards 
he cannot violate. He cannot 
buy armor less protective than 
brigandine or scale mail. Before 
starting play. he must buy a suit 
of armor, a shield, at least one 
weapon larger than a dagger, a 
horse (at least a riding horse), 
riding saddle, bit & bridle, 
horseshoes and shoeing. halter 
and saddle blanket. 

Special Benefits: The Noble 
Warrior starts with more gold 
than other Warrior Kits; see be- 
low under Wealth Options. The 
Noble Warrior receives a +3 re- 
action from anyone of his own 
culture. When travelling. he can 
demand shelter from anyone in 
his own nation who is of lower 
social status than he. Most peo- 
ple of his own status or higher 
will offer him shelter when he is 
travelling—up to two persons 
times the Noble Warrior's expe- 
rience level. (That is. if the Noble 


28 


Warrior is fifth level, the patron 
will offer shelter for the Noble 
Warrior and up to nine of his 
companions). In his own land, 
the Noble Warrior can adminis- 
ter low justice upon common- 
ers—act as judge, jury and exe- 
cutioner for minor crimes he 
comes across (the definition of 
"minor crimes" is necessarily 
up to the DM of the campaign, 
but in general should include 
things like assault, petty theft, 
etc.). 

Special Hindrances: In order 
to become a Noble Warrior. the 
character has sworn an oath of 
loyalty to some £reater noble. If 
he'ssquire toa knight. he has an 
oath to his knight. If he's a 
knight himself, he's sworn an 
oath to his king or some other 
noble—or perhaps to both. He'll 
be expected to live up to that 
oath from time to time: Accom- 
pany his lord into combat. pro- 
vide troops to his lord. even 
beggar his own household in or- 
der to support his lord's needs. 

Additionally, the Noble War- 
rior is expected to live well. After 
he is created, he must add 
+10% to the base cost of goods. 
equipment, and services he is 
buying—for each experience 
level he has—to reflect his noble 
tastes and requirements. 

This extra cost is notjusta tip. 
The character is buying higher- 
quality goods. Here's how it 
works. 

Example: Sir Amstard rides 
into town. He's in need of a new 
sword, a night's lodging at the 
inn for himself and his squire, 
and meals and baths for both. 
He's a 5th-level Noble Warrior. 

He stops by a weaponmaker. 
The basic cost for a long sword 
is 15 gp. Amstard must choose a 
better weapon than the “basic 
long sword," and so chooses a 
more decorative one having the 
exact same combat characteris- 
tics, but costing 22 gp and 5 sp. 

He goes to the inn. The basic 
rate at that specific inn is 2 gp 


per night per person. Amstard 
won't settle for the basic room, 
though, and so pays 3 gp per 
night per person, all for better 
quality rooms. He pays 6 gp, one 
night's stay for himself and his 
squire. 

The two baths would be 3 cp 
each, or 6 total. Amstard, 
though, must have soap and a 
brush and the water heated es- 
pecially for him (and for his 
squire, too); total cost is 9 cp. 

And soon... 

If the Noble Warrior is unable 
to spend this extra money be- 
cause of lack of funds, he can 
settle for lesser goods. . . but his 
bonus to Reaction rolls will be 
reduced, at —1 per such inci- 
dent, until it reaches +0, to re- 
flect the fact that people are 
seeing that he is settling for 
shabbier goods and otherwise 
not living up to their expecta- 
tions of how a noble warrior 
should live. At the DM's discre- 
tion, other problems may follow 
this: Nobles fail to offer him 
shelter or help because he's 
such a shabby specimen, he 
gets a reputation as a penny- 
pincher, etc. 

To retain his bonus, when the 
Noble Warrior is once again in 
the money he must do whatever 
It takes to upgrade his situation 
(buy new clothes, go on a buy- 
ing spree, etc., at the DM's dis- 
cretion) and his +3 reaction will 
return. 

If a Noble Warrior gets a bad 
reputation, deservedly or unde- 
servedly, his +3 reaction be- 
comes a -6 reaction from 
everybody who knows of the 
reputation. 

And just as other nobles are 
expected to extend shelter to the 
Noble Warrior, he is expected to 
offer other nobles shelter when 
they are travelling through his 
territory —or when they meet on 
the road while he is encamped 
and they are not, etc. Whenever 
a Noble Warrior character is get- 
ting too cocky, the DM can have 


him visited by a nice, large 
crowd of nobles to whom he ís 
expected to offer shelter and 
food . . . and who proceed to eat 
him out of house and home. 

Wealth Options: The Noble 
Warrior begins play with more 
gold than other Warrior Kits; he 
receives 225 gp plus the stand- 
ard 5d4x10 gp. But do not forget 
that he is required to spend a 
large portion of that on specific 
items described above... 

Races: It's appropriate for any 
sort of demihuman race to have 
a class of Noble Warriors. 


Peasant Hero 


Description: The Peasant 
Hero is the "local boy done 
good,” the home-town warrior 
who fights and adventures to 
the delight of the people in his 
home area. The Peasant Hero is 
the most common sort of fighter 
found wandering the land and 
adventuring; every village has 
one or has had one within living 
memory. 

There are no ability-score re- 
quirements to be a Peasant 
Hero. 

Role: In the campaign, the 
Peasant Hero is the fellow who 
won't forget that his roots are in 
the country and in the soil. He 
can be a rebel against the crown 
in lands where the peasants are 
especially oppressed; he can be 
the farmboy who becomes a 
mighty general; he can be the 
noble's child (secretly raised by 
peasants) who grows up to fulfill 
an ancient prophecy: but in 
every case, he remembers his 
origins and strives to make 
things better for his family and 
home community. 

Secondary Skills: The player 
may choose his character's sec- 
ondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The 
player may choose his charac- 
ter's weapon proficiencies, but 
may not choose any that the DM 
feels would be unusual for his 


29 


campaign-world's peasants. 
Short sword, spear, bow, foot- 
man's weapons and the like are 
all very appropriate; horse- 
man's weapons, exotic po- 
learms, lances, long swords, 
tridents and the like are not. 
This is only a restriction when 
the character is first created: af- 
terwards, of course, he can learn 
any weapon he receives training 
with. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiencies: Agricul- 
ture or Fishing (player choice), 
Weather Sense or Animal Lore 
(player choice). Recommended: 
Any of the General proficien- 
cies. 

Equipment: The Peasant 
Hero may spend his starting 
gold any way he sees fit, but 
may have no more than 3 gp left 
when he begins play. 

Special Benefits: No matter 
what he's done or what anyone 
thinks of him, the Peasant Hero 
always has shelter and often has 
other help when he's in his own 
community. Unless it is known 
that the Peasant Hero has hurt 
people from his own commu- 
nity, he'll always find people to 
put him up, hide him and com- 
panions from the law, supply 
them with food and drink and 
what little weaponry can be 
scraped together (usually dag- 
gers), and even provide them 
with helpers—earnest O-level 
youths who want to grow up to 
be like their hero. 

Special Hindrances: Since 
the Peasant Hero is looked upon 
as a patron and hero by the peo- 
ple from his home, they will fre- 
quently come to him for help. 
Whenever the village is losing 
people to nocturnal predators, 
whenever a village overlord 
turns out to be a dangerous ty- 
rant, whenever a local citizen is 
jailed and tried for something he 
didn't do, the citizens turn to 
the Peasant Hero for help. And if 
he turns them away, he loses 
their respect and earns a -2 re- 


arrior Kits 


action from all of the peasants in 
the land until he is once again in 
his home community's good 
graces. 

Wealth Options: The Peasant 
Hero gets the standard 5d4x10 
gp starting money. 

Races: The Peasant Hero is a 
distinctly human sort of charac- 
ter: it's also appropriate to half- 
lings, and to half-elves living 
among humans. But no other 
demihumans should have Peas- 
ant Hero characters unless the 
DM decides that their cultures 
are very much like rural human 
society. 


Pirate/Outlaw 


Description: This character 
is the heroic scofflaw. the war- 
rior who defies the laws and 
rulers of the land and steers his 
own course. Usually in the com- 
pany ofother pirates or outlaws, 
he fights the minions of the 
rulers he defies, and comes to be 
regarded as a hero by others 
who suffer at those rulers’ 
hands, The Pirate, of course, is 
the adventurer of the high seas, 
who makes his living raiding 
other ships and seacoast com- 
munities; the Outlaw makes his 
home in the wilderness (often 
deep forest) and preys on the 
traffic moving through that wil- 
derness. 

There are no special ability- 
score requirements to be a Pi- 
rate or Outlaw. 

Role: In a campaign, the pi- 
rate or outlaw can belong to one 
of two orientations. Either he'sa 
“good guy.” and it is the law and 
the rulers who are evil. or he isa 
"bad guy" and simply takes 
what he wants from those who 
have it. The player. therefore, 
gets to decide on his character's 
alignment and (mis)deeds. 

Note, though, that good guy 
pirates and outlaws tend to live 
by a very strict code of 
conduct—for example, the clas- 
sic cinema code of Robin Hood 


and his Merry Men, where the 
outlaws robbed from the rich 
and gave to the poor, and pro- 
tected the defenseless with 
more honor and zeal than En- 
gland's supposedly Noble War- 
riors did. 

Naturally, if a player chooses 
to be a good guy in a company of 
bad guys. or vice-versa, when 
his companions find out his true 
colors, they'll probably try to 
kill him or to turn him in to the 
law for the reward on his head. 

Secondary Skills: If the char- 
acter is a Pirate, roll d100 for his 
Secondary Skill. On a 01-70, his 
Secondary Skill is Sailor; on a 
71-80, it’s Shipwright; on 81-00, 
it's Navigator. If the character is 
an Outlaw, the character may 


choose between Bowyer/ 
Fletcher, Forester, Hunter, and 
Trapper/Furrier. 


Weapon Proficiencies: If the 
character is a Pirate, he must 
take the following proficiencies: 
Cutlass*, and Belaying Pin* or 
Gaff/Hook* (player choice). If 
the character is an Outlaw. he 
can take any weapon proficien- 
cies he chooses... but the DM, 
if he's created this campaign so 
that the outlaws have a special 
motif weapon (such as Robin 
Hood's Merry Men and their 
longbows) may insist that all 
Outlaw characters take a spe- 
cific weapon proficiency. Rec- 
ommended to classic Merry 
Man-type outlaws are longbow, 
long sword and quarterstaff. 
(The "*" symbol indicates a 
new weapon found in the Equip- 
ment chapter.) 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Pirate's Bonus Proficiencies: 
(General) Rope Use, Seaman- 
ship. Pirate's Recommended 
Proficiencies: (General) Swim- 
ming, Weather Sense, (Warrior) 
Navigation, (Priest, double slots 
unless Paladin) Engineering (for 
shipbuilding), Reading/Writing 
(for mapmaking). (Rogue, dou- 
ble slots) Appraising, Set Snares 
(in association with Rope Use 


30 


skill), Tightrope Walking, Tum- 
bling, (Wizard. double slots un- 
less Ranger) Engineering (for 
shipbuilding). Reading/Writing 
(for mapmaking). Outlaw's Bo- 
nus Proficiencies: Direction 
Sense, Fire-Building. Outlaw's 
Recommended Proficiencies: 
(General) Riding (Land-Based), 
(Warrior) Animal Lore, Bowyer/ 
Fletcher, Endurance, Hunting, 
Running, Set Snares, Survival, 
Tracking. (Priest, double slots 
unless Paladin) Healing, Herbal- 
ism. Local History, (Rogue, dou- 
ble slots) Disguise. Special Note: 
Your DM may bea fan ofthe very 
acrobatic pirate or outlaw mov- 
ies of the past, and prefer that 
Tumbling be one of your Bonus 
Proficiencies instead of one of 
the ones listed; check with him 
to see if this is so. 

Equipment: Pirates and Out- 
laws come from widely diverse 
backgrounds, so there's no real 
restriction on what they can buy 
with their starting money. How- 
ever, it would be foolish for either 
tvpe of character to buy metal ar- 
mor of any kind (banded, brigan- 
dine, bronze plate. chain, field 
plate, full plate, plate mail, and 
ring mail). Pirates wearing such 
armor in naval combat will inevi- 
tably fall overboard and sink 
(they can't swim with such stuff 
on); if they're lucky enough to 
get it off so they can swim, 
they've lost the armor. Outlaws 
living out in the wild have their 
belongings exposed to the ele- 
ments, and metal armor quickly 
corrodes. Therefore, it's up to the 
DM to keep things in balance. If a 
Pirate or Outlaw buys metal ar- 
mor and keeps it stowed away 
for special occasions (major land 
engagements, climactic battles, 
etc.), that's fine. But if they wear 
such stuff all the time. the DM 
should continually take it away 
from them through accidents, 
rust and corrosion, etc. 

Special Benefits: Pirates and 
Outlaws do not have any intrin- 
sic special benefits, although 


the DM can bestow some 
campaign-based benefits on 
them if he chooses. For in- 
stance, in many Pirate settings. 
there is a powerful pirate city 
where the PCs can go to trade 
their ill-gotten gains, a place 
where the law dares not enter; 
this makes it easier for them to 
dispose of their goods and enjoy 
the benefits of a home city when 
otherwise they wouldn't have 
one. As another example. in a 
"Merry Men" type outlaw cam- 
paign. the heroes have the dubi- 
ous benefit of knowing that 
they're on the right side and if 
they can just oust the current 
rulers (probably restoring the 
proper rulers in the process). 
they'll have their fortunes re- 
stored or enhanced. the land 
will once again be bright and 
shiny, and everyone will live 
happily ever after. 

Special Hindrances: The ma- 
jor problem with being an out- 
law or pirate is that the law is 
always after the characters. 
Though the authorities do not 
have to put in an appearance in 
every Single  play-session, 
they're always out there, plot- 
ting against the heroes. Many of 
them are quite clever, they prob- 
ably have more money. ships 
and men than the heroes, and 
they'll continue to plague the 
heroes until the campaign is 
done. 

Wealth Options: Pirate and 
Outlaw characters get the 
standard 5d4x10 gp for starting 
gold. 

Races: Outlaws and Pirates, 
unless your campaign is very 
human-oriented, will take just 
about anyone they can get. so 
it's perfectly appropriate for 
there to be Outlaws and Pirates 
of the demihuman races. 

Note: In a Pirate campaign, it 
could be that the player- 
characters will eventually come 
to terms with the authorities 
and "go straight.” This doesn't 
mean they have to abandon the 


Pirate Warrior Kit, however. 
They could instead become 
Privateers—who are basically 
pirates sailing under the papers 
of (permission of) their ruler, 
and preying on the nation's ene- 
mies. At that point, they can 
still behave just as they did pre- 
viously, and the other nation's 
authorities become their spe- 
cific enemy. 


Samurai 


Description: The samurai is a 
warrior from cultures based on 
the medieval Japanese civiliza- 
tion. He lives by a very strict 
code of honor and behavior. a 
code demanding: absolute obe- 
dience to his lord; readiness to 
die for honor or for his lord at 
any time; eagerness to avenge 
any dishonor to his lord, his 
family. or himself: willingness to 
repay all debts honorably; and 
unwillingness to demonstrate 
the most dishonorable trait of 
cowardice. 

Samurai must have mini- 
mum scores of 13 in Strength, 
Wisdom. and Constitution, and 
of 14 in Intelligence. They may 
be of lawful alignment only (but 
still may be good. evil, or neu- 
tral). 

Role: In a campaign. unless 
the campaign itself is set in an 
eastern culture, the Samurai is 
present to provide a touch of the 
exotic (culture clashes are al- 
ways very interesting in a cam- 
paign) it also allows for a 
variety of warrior who can be 
tremendously deadly. 

A samurai can fall from his 
noble position within a greater 
lord's household. It may be that 
the house has perished in a war 
or other calamity, or that the 
samurai's lord has rejected him, 
or ordered him to commit sui- 
cide and the samurai has 
refused, or that the samurai has 
left his lord for some other point 
of honor. Regardless, the samu- 
rai is now masterless; he is 


31 


called ronin. The ronin has all of 
the abilities of the samurai, but 
operates under slightly different 
rules, as you will see below. 
With your DM's permission, you 
can create your character as a 
ronin instead of a samurai. A 
samurai can become a ronin at 
any time in a campaign: like- 
wise, by swearing allegiance toa 
lord who will have him, a ronin 
can become a samurai again. 

Before you create a samurai or 
ronin character, ask your DM if 
such things exist on his world 
and if you may play one. It could 
be that the DM does not wish to 
allow samurai and ronin in his 
campaign (because the cam- 
paign world has no oriental set- 
ting to act as their origin, for 
instance). 

Secondary Skills: A samurai 
or ronin must have the Scribe 
secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The 
samurai and ronin start play 
with two free extra weapon pro- 
ficiency slots—that's the good 
news. The bad news is that. of 
his six initial weapon proficien- 
cies, five are chosen for him. 
The samurai and ronin must 
specialize in katana* (samurai 
sword, two proficiency slots) 
and daikyu* (samurai great 
bow, three proficiency slots). 
The samurai or ronin may 
spend his last proficiency slot as 
he chooses ... but only from 
among the samurai weapons 
listed in the Equipment chapter 
of this book. (The " *" symbol in- 
dicates a new weapon to be 
found in the Equipment chap- 
ter.) After the character is in 
play in another culture, he may 
become proficient in weapons of 
that other culture. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiencies: Etiquette, 
Riding (Land-Based). Required 
(samurai/ronin must purchase 
these, but gets no extra slots to 
pay for them): (Priest and Wiz- 
ard, costs double slots unless 
Paladin or Ranger) Reading/ 


Writing. Recommended: Gen- 
eral—Artistic Ability/Calligra- 
phy. Artistic Ability/Painting, 
(Warrior) Blind-Fighting. Run- 
ning. 

Equipment: The samurai and 
ronin must buy all their starting 
equipment from the samurai 
weapons, armor and equipment 
listed in the Equipment chapter. 
They may have no more than 10 
gp left when they have pur- 
chased their equipment. Samu- 
rai and ronin do not have to buy 
their katana; that is free to the 
character. 

Special Benefits: The samu- 
rai and ronin are able to focus 
their vital energies to increase 
their Strength score—tem- 
porarily. Once per day per expe- 
rience level, the samurai or 
ronin can increase his Strength 
to !5/oo. This lasts for one full 
round, and must be preceded by 
a loud kiai shout (making it im- 
possible for him to summon this 
strength silently or stealthily). 
For that one round, all his hit 
probability, damage adjust- 
ment, weight allowance, maxi- 
mum press. open doors, and 
bend bars/lift gates rolls and 
functions are calculated as if his 
Strength were !9/oo. 

Special Hindrances: The 
samurai and ronin have differ- 
ent special hindrances. The 
samurai is (supposed to be) ab- 
solutely devoted to his lord. He 
is expected instantly to obey 
every one of his lord's orders. up 
to and including killing himself 
or those he loves. If he refuses to 
obey an order, he is dishonored 
and is expected to kill himself. 
(If he does not, he becomes 
ronin.) The DM should make 
sure that the samurai is acutely 
aware of this by having his lord 
occasionally issue orders which 
are difficult for him to keep. 
This doesn't always have to be 
"Kill all of your allies.” but the 
lord can issue orders which in- 
terfere with the samurai's per- 
sonal goals and remind him that 


he is subservient to his lord. The 
ronin has his own great diffi- 
culty: He earns experience 
points at half the normal rate. 
When the DM awards the char- 
acters their experience, the 
ronin receives only half what he 
would if he were still a samurai. 
This particular hindrance goes 
away when the character once 
again swears allegiance to a lord 
and becomes a samurai. (Of 
course, once he's a samurai 
again, he is subject to the hin- 
drances of the samurai.) 

Wealth Options: The samurai 
and ronin start with the normal 
5d4x10 gp beginning money. 

Races: The historical prece- 
dent for the samurai is strictly 
human, so it's up to the individ- 
ual DM if he wants to have an 
oriental-based demihuman cul- 
ture with a samurai warrior 
class. Such a thing is perhaps 
most visually appropriate to 
elves and half-elves, but a DM 
could allow it to any demihu- 
man race in his campaign. 

Note: Players and DMs wishing 
to have more game-oriented in- 
formation on the samurai should 
read Oriental Adventures, an 
AD&D* game supplement deal- 
ing exclusively with the topic of 
eastern campaigns. Your DM may 
adapt anything he chooses to use 
from that supplement to AD&D? 
2nd Edition game rules and sta- 
tistics. The samurai presented 
here is a simplified version of the 
OA samurai. 


Savage 


Description: The Savage is a 
tribesman, technologically and 
culturally far more primitive 
than even the Barbarian and 
Berserker, who is very much in 
tune with the natural world. 

A Savage can be an honorable 
jungle vine-swinger raised by 
animals. a very dirty and primi- 
tive warrior who lives in mud- 
wattle huts and fights with bone 
weapons, a breathtakingly 


32 


beautiful native princess from a 
culture which the characters 
consider impossibly primitive 
and yet uncorrupted and very 
noble. . .andsoon. In short, the 
tribal culture from which the 
Savage character comes can be 
as crude or civil, coarse or noble, 
nasty or admirable as the play- 
ers and DM want it to be. 

To be a Savage, a character 
must have a minimum Strength 
score of 11 and a minimum Con- 
stitution score of 15. 

Role: In a campaign, the sav- 
age character has a couple of 
roles. His particular skills and 
benefits are of use to the average 
adventuring party. If he comes 
from a particularly noble tribe, 
he may choose to act as the 
"voice of conscience" for the ad- 
venturing party, asking why, if 
the other characters are sup- 
posed to be so much more civi- 
lized than his own people, their 
honor and ethics seem to drag 
so far behind? But for the most 
part. he's a role-playing chal- 
lenge. and should be chosen 
only by players willing to devote 
the extra effort to portraying 
someone from such a different 
culture ... and how that char- 
acter reacts with the other PCs’ 
culture. This is an opportunity 
for a lot of humor and nota little 
tragedy in a campaign ... but 
only if the player is willing to go 
to that effort. 

Secondary Skills: The Sav- 
age character should have 
Fisher, Forester, Hunter, or 
Trapper/Furrier as his Second- 
ary Skill (player choice). 

Weapon Proficiencies: The 
DM should define a set of weap- 
ons which the PC can choose his 
beginning weapon proficiencies 
from. A typical set, for classic 
“noble savages": blowgun, long 
bow, short bow, club, dagger. 
javelin, knife, sling. spear. The 
character must make his first- 
level weapon proficiencies selec- 
tions from these choices. Once 
he begins play and begins ad- 


Warrior Kits 


venturing in the outer world. he 
may learn any other weapon, of 
course ... but it's better role- 


playing if he prefers to stick to — 


the weapons of his tribe. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiencies: (General) 
Direction Sense, Weather Sense, 
(Warrior) Endurance, Survival. 
Recommended: (General) Ani- 
mal Handling. Animal Training. 
Fire-Building, Fishing. Riding 
(Land-based). Rope Use, Swim- 
ming, (Warrior) Animal Lore, 
Bowyer/Fletcher. Hunting, 
Mountaineering, Running. Set 
Snares, Tracking, (Priest, dou- 
ble slots unless Paladin) Heal- 
ing, Herbalism, Local History, 
Religion, (Rogue, double slots) 
Jumping. Tightrope Walking, 
Tumbling, (Wizard, double slots 
unless Ranger) Herbalism, Reli- 
gion. 

Equipment: The Savage gets 
no gold (0 gp) with which to pur- 
chase his weapons and equip- 
ment. Instead, he may take up 


to four of the weapons listed un- 
der "New Savage Weapons” in 
the Equipment chapter. He may 
assemble an equipment list of 
up to ten additional items, sub- 
ject to the DM's approval, which 
he will have accumulated dur- 
ing his years with the tribe; they 
must be items which members 
of a savage tribe could have 
made (things such as pouches, 
clothing. food. rope. fishing 
gear, sheathes for weapons, and 
so forth—no mirrors, lanterns. 
iron cooking pots. and the like.) 
With the DM's permission, if the 
tribe is a river-tribe or a riding 
tribe, he may have either a rid- 
ing horse (with saddle-blanket, 
halter. bit and bridle) or a small 
canoe. 

Special Benefits: One of the 
Savage's special benefits is that 
he receives more bonus non- 
weapon proficiencies than any 
other type of  warrior— 
testimony to the fact that the 
Savage must know more skills 


just to stav alive than other 
characters. Another, substan- 
tial, benefit the Savage receives 
is this: He has a special ability, 
resembling a spell, which he 
may use once per day per expe- 
rience level he has (i.e.. a 5th- 
level savage could use his ability 
five times per day). 

The special ability must be 
chosen from the list below, must 
be chosen when the character is 
first created, and may never be 
changed. The special ability is 
not truly magic, and Detect 
magic will not detect it; it is an 
ability natural to the Savage. It 
does not require verbal, so- 
matic, or material components, 
even if such are required from 
the normal spell. 

The list: 

(1) Alarm (Wizard Ist Level). 
Special effects: This is only usa- 
ble by the Savage when he is 
resting or sleeping in a quiet 
place. The ability does not 
sound an alarm like the spell: it 


xl / Warrior Kits 
Y 


merely alerts the Savage to in- 
trusion (if he is already awake) 
or awakens him (if he is asleep). 
It is not cast upon a particular 
place; it alerts him to activity 
within 10 feet of the place where 
he lies (as if he were at the center 
of the 20-foot cube of effect of 
the actual spell). 

(2) Detect Magic (Wizard Ist 
Level). Special effects: This re- 
flects the fact that the Savage is 
in tune with nature and can feel 
when there is something unnat- 
ural (i.e., magical) in the air. Un- 
less the Savage is also a Ranger. 
he cannot determine the type of 
magic present (i.e.. alteration, 
conjuration. etc.). 

(3) Animal Friendship (Priest 
lst Level). Special effects: This 
ability can only make friends of 
an animal which is not angry or 
threatened. It can be used to 
make an angry or threatened 
animal calm. To make friends 
with an angry or threatened ani- 
mal, therefore, the Savage must 
be able to use the ability twice 
that day (i.e., he must be of 2nd 
level or higher) and must have 
two uses left. To use the ability, 
the Savage must confront the 
animal. face to face. at no fur- 
ther away than the limits of the 
animal's attack range. As with 
the spell. the Savage must actu- 
ally have no ulterior motives. for 
such will be detected by the ani- 
mal, and the ability will fail. 

(4) Detect Evil (Priest lst 
Level). Special effects: this is 
like the Detect Magic ability, 
above. Like the Priest spell. this 
Detect Evil cannot detect evil in 
a PC—only in a monster, place. 
or magical item. 

The DM can disallow any of 
the four abilities given above, or 
introduce new ones—though he 
can't add anything that resem- 
bles a magical spell above Ist 
level. 

Special Hindrances: The 
Savage has some drawbacks. 
too. He is uncomfortable in civi- 
lized clothes and armor—When 


wearing any sort of clothing 
more cumbersome and conceal- 
ing than his normal tribal dress. 
he suffers a -1 to all attack. 
damage and nonweapon profi- 
ciency rolls: he's uncomforta- 
ble. and it's affecting his actions 
and reactions. 

Likewise, he can wear any 
type of armor, but is so uncom- 
fortable in it that he will suffer a 
-3 to all attack, damage. and 
nonweapon proficiency rolls 
while wearing any sort of armor 
at all. If a player blatantly de- 
cides not to role-play his charac- 
ter's dislike of armor and simply 
wears armor continually, ac- 
cepting that negative modifier. 
the DM should gradually in- 
crease the modifier: -3 in one 
play-session, -4 in the next, -5 
in the next, and so on... with 
no limit. If the player asks why 
this is happening. the DM need 
merely reply that the character 
is growing more and more un- 
comfortable in his unnatural 
trappings and finding it harder 
and harder to concentrate on 
the job at hand. 

Wealth Options: The Savage 
starts out with no gold. He gets 
his starting weapons as described 
above, under Equipment. After 
the campaign starts, the charac- 
ter will inevitably come across 
the concepts of money: it's up to 
the player how he reacts to them 
(he could either like the idea and 
try to accumulate the stuff as his 
allies do, or put it down to civi- 
lized corruption and stay away 
from it). 

Races: Most role-playing cam- 
paigns tend to think of the demi- 
humans as being more civilized 
and cultured than humans, but 
it's perfectly all right to have 
Savage dwarves. elves. gnomes, 
half-elves, and even halflings in 
your campaign if the DM wishes 
them to be there. 

Note: “But.” you say. "what if 
my character grew up in a Sav- 
age tribe and was later enslaved 
and trained as a Gladiator and 


34 


then escaped? What is he, a Sav- 
age or a Gladiator?" 

That's up to you to answer. If 
he still considers himself a 
member of his tribe and has not 
been distanced [rom it by his 
capture and training, take the 
Savage Warrior Kit; perhaps 
your DM will allow you to use 
some of your proficiencies to 
learn weapons and skills appro- 
priate to Gladiators. Likewise, if 
the character is now more ur- 
ban than savage, build him with 
the Gladiator Warrior Kit. . . but 
have him use some of his profi- 
ciencies on Savage skills and 
weapons. 

The same sort of theory ap- 
plies if you're creating any char- 
acter with a complicated 
background: A Barbarian youth 
brought up in the traditions of a 
Samurai, an Amazon lass who 
has grown up to be a Knight (No- 
ble Warrior). a Pirate boy who 
gave up the seas and took to be- 
ing a big-city Swashbuckler. De- 
cide which Warrior Kit the 
character considers himself to 
belong to, create him with that 
Kit, and use some of your profi- 
ciencies to buy weapons- 
knowledge and skills pertaining 
to the other Kit. 


Swashbuckler 


Description: The Swash- 
buckler is the sophisticated, 
witty. lightly armed and ar- 
mored hero in a sophisticated 
city-based campaign—a la The 
Three Musketeers. He's fully ca- 
pable of putting on heavy ar- 
mor. picking up a bastard 
sword, and soldiering alongside 
other tank warriors ... but he 
shines in comparison when the 
heroes are adventuring in the 
city. in light armor and with 
light weapons. 

To be a Swashbuckler, a char- 
acter must have an Intelligence 
and Dexterity of 13 or better. 

Role: In a campaign, the 
Swashbuckler is the happy-go- 


Warrior Kits 


lucky hero with the ready wit 
and the flashing rapier. He's 
happiest when he's in the big 
city, but can be an imposing 
warrior anywhere—enemies of- 
ten underestimate him because 
of his charming manners and 
don't realize that he can plate on 
armor and wield heavy weapons 
as well as anyone else. The 
Swashbuckler, because he's 
bright and well-spoken. often 
becomes party leader ... or at 
least the leader's spokesman. 
Secondary Skills: The 
Swashbuckler can choose his 
own Secondary Skill. Good 
choices include: Navigator (if 
he's in with a band of pirates, es- 
pecially), Gambler, Jeweler, 
Scribe, and Weaponsmith. 
Weapon Proficiencies: The 
Swashbuckler receives two ex- 
tra weapon proficiency slots 
which must be devoted to 
weapon proficiency with one of 
the following weapons: sti- 
letto*, main-gauche*, rapier*, 
and sabre*. (The "*" symbol de- 
notes new weapons to be found 
in the Equipment chapter.) 
Throughout his career, he must 
devote half of his weapon profi- 
ciency slots to those four weap- 
ons. Once he has achieved 
specialization in all four of those 
weapons, he may freely choose 
where the rest of his weapon 
proficiency slots go. 
Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiencies: (General) 
Etiquette, (Rogue) Tumbling. 
Recommended: (General) Artis- 
tic Ability, Dancing, Heraldry, 
Languages (Modern), Riding 
(Land-Based), Seamanship, 
(Warrior) Blind-Fighting, Gam- 
ing, (Priest. double slots unless 
Paladin) Musical Instrument, 
Reading/Writing, (Rogue) Ap- 
praising, Disguise, Forgery. 
Juggling. Musical Instrument, 
Tightrope Walking, (Wizard, 
double slots unless Ranger) 
Reading/Writing. 
Equipment: The Swashbuck- 
ler must buy the weapon in 


which he has specialized, but 
except for that limitation may 
spend his gold precisely as he 
pleases. 

Special Benefits: The Swash- 
buckler has three special bene- 
fits. First. when using up his 
Nonweapon Proficiency slots, 
he doesn’t have to devote dou- 
ble the normal number of slots 
when choosing Rogue proficien- 
cies. Second, when he's wearing 
light or no armor (i.e.. no armor, 
leather armor. or padded ar- 
mor), he receives a —2 bonus to 
his AC (that is. an AC of 7 would 
become a 5): he's so nimble that 
he's very hard to hit. Third, the 
Swashbuckler is such a roman- 
tic figure that he always re- 
ceives a *2 adjustment on his 
reaction roll from NPC members 
of the opposite sex. 

Special Hindrances: Trouble 
seeks out the Swashbuckler. 
This is something that the DM 
wil! have to play very carefully if 
the Swashbuckler is to be as 
hindered as all the other Warrior 
Kits. When there's another 
Swashbuckler around, intent 
on proving that he's the best 
swordsman in the world. it's the 
PC Swashbuckler he settles 
upon and challenges. When a 
certain young lady is being pur- 
sued by the king's guards. who 
are intent on stopping her from 
revealing secrets in her posses- 
sion. it is the Swashbuckler she 
stumbles across when fleeing. 
When a prince is too drunk to at- 
tend his own coronation, mirac- 
ulously he looks just like the 
Swashbuckler. Life conspires to 
make things difficult for the 
Swashbuckler, and the DM 
should always throw justa little 
more good-natured bad luck at 
that Warrior Kit than at any 
other. 

Wealth Options: The Swash- 
buckler receives the standard 
5d4x10 gp starting money allot- 
ment. 

Races: Any demihuman 
who'd look elegant in foppish 


35 


dress, wielding a narrow blade, 
will work fine as a Swashbuck- 
ler, especially elves, half-elves 
and halflings. Dwarves and 
gnomes are not entirely inap- 
propriate, but are likely to have 
to defend themselves from 
plenty of jokes at the expense of 
their curious looks. 


Wilderness Warrior 


Description: This hero repre- 
sents some tribe (either civilized 
or barbarian) living in a danger- 
ous, threatening, or unusual 
wilderness environment—such 
as the desert, deep in swamp 
territory, in the frozen North, 
tucked away in the jungle or 
tropical rain forest, or in distant 
mountains. 

The Wilderness Warrior is dif- 
ferent from the Barbarian. He's 
not automatically a menacing 
figure when travelling around in 
the campaign's normal society: 
he's just exotic and unusual. He 
can be very cultured and civi- 
lized, but, coming as he does 
from a different culture, will 
have different attitudes from the 
other player-characters on 
many subjects. 

For example, a desert nomad 
character may be merely of- 
fended at the theft of his prop- 
erty but be outraged by (and 
demand the death penalty for) 
theft of his water; he may be- 
lieve that women should stay in 
camp and leave fighting to the 
men (an opinion he will find 
himself quickly disabused from 
when in the outer world); he 
may feel the need to prostrate 
himself whenever he passes the 
church or temple of the deity he 
worships: and so on. 

The player decides (with DM's 
permission) what sort of tribe 
and environment the Wilder- 
ness Warrior comes from. Then, 
working with the DM, he must 
determine what sort of unusual 
beliefs and customs the charac- 
ter and his tribe possess. He 


*| / Warrior Kits 
~ 


may later abandon a few of 
these beliefs in the outer world, 
but should not abandon most of 
them; they are part of what 
makes him unique in the cam- 
paign. 

To be a Wilderness Warrior, 
the character must have a Con- 
stitution score of at least 13. 

Role: In a campaign. like the 
Barbarian and Savage, the Wil- 
derness Warrior is the "outsid- 
er's voice" who questions all the 
strange quirks and discrepan- 
cies in the player-characters' 
culture. He's also an opportu- 
nity for some comic-relief ad- 
ventures, when he misin- 
terprets some aspect of the soci- 
ety and it leads him into confu- 
sion and trouble. More 
importantly, the DM should ar- 
range for the occasional adven- 
ture to take place in lands like 
those of his birth. so that he can 
demonstrate hís skills in that 
environment. 

Secondary Skills: If you're 
using the Secondary Skills 
rules, the Wilderness Warrior 
may choose his skill from the 
following list: Fisher, Forester, 
Hunter, Sailor, Trapper/Furrier. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The 
Wilderness Warrior may spend 
his Weapon Proficiencies any 
way he pleases. The DM may in- 
sist that he spend one or two on 
weapons appropriate to his cul- 
ture: A desert nomad should 
have Scimitar and Short Com- 
posite Bow, while an arctic war- 
rior should have Harpoon and 
Spear. for instance. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Bonus Proficiencies: Survival 
(in his native environment), En- 
durance. Recommended: Any 
relating to the land of his birth, 
such as Animal Handling. Ani- 
mal Training. Dancing (his cul- 
tural dances). Fire-building. 
Fishing. Riding (Land-based). 
Swimming. (Warrior) Mountain- 
eering, Tracking. 

Equipment: The Wilderness 
Warrior may only spend his 


starting gold on items appropri- 
ate to his culture. For example, 
the desert nomad couldn't buy 
any armor at all with his start- 
ing gold, while the arctic warrior 
could only have leather or hide 
armor. (Of course, if the DM de- 
termines that his is a trading 
culture. he could have access to 
goods from all over the world.) 
The Wilderness Warrior doesn't 
have to spend all his starting 
gold before entering play. Once 
he begins play. there are no re- 
strictions on what sorts of 
equipment he may buy. 

Special Benefits: The Wilder- 
ness Warrior gets a special bo- 
nus of +5 to his Survival 
proficiency roll. This only ap- 
plies to the Survival proficiency 
pertaining to environments like 
that of his origin: if he later 
takes a second Survival profi- 
ciency for another type of terri- 
tory, the bonus doesn't count 
toward it. 

Special Hindrances: The Wil- 
derness Warrior. in his early 
years, is occasionally hindered 
by his unfamiliarity with the 
player-characters' society, but 
this is a role-playing consider- 
ation: the DM must occasionally 
enforce it until he believes the 
character is sufficiently familiar 
with the usual culture. 

Wealth Options: The Wilder- 
ness Warrior gets the usual 5d4 
x 10 gp in starting gold. 

Races: This is a very appro- 
priate Warrior Kit for demihu- 
man warriors, and the DM may 
wish to create some unusual de- 
mihuman tribes to showcase it. 
For example. everyone would 
expect Dwarven Wilderness 
Warriors from the mountains. 
Elf and Gnome Wilderness War- 
riors from the tropical rain for- 
est, etc. But what about Desert 
Dwarves? Arctic Elves? Swamp 
Gnomes? Mountain Halflings? 
Such unusual choices can add 
some color to a campaign. 


36 


Recording Kits on the 
Character Sheet 


The character 
record sheet presented in the 
Character Creation chapter has 
blanks for all of the benefits. 
hindrances, and other notes 
generated when a character 
takes a Warrior kit. 


Warrior Kits and 
Multi-Class Characters 


These Warrior 
Kits are designed to add depth 
to a warrior-class character. But 
if the character is already multi- 
class (for example, an elf fighter- 
mage). he doesn't need any 
more depth. Therefore, only 
single-class warriors can take 
one of the Warrior Kits de- 
scribed above. 

However, with your DM's per- 
mission, there's no reason why 
a multi-class warrior can't use 
his weapon and nonweapon pro- 
ficiency choices to simulate one 
of the Kits ... and, again with 
DM permission, the characters 
possessing that Warrior Kit can 
consider him “one of their own" 
within the context of the cam- 
paign. 

For example, let us say that 
your campaign features an el- 
vish Amazon tribe and you 
want to play an elf fighter/thief 
who belongs to that Amazon 
tribe. 

Build her this way: Have her 
take Spear and Long Bow 
Weapon Proficiencies. For her 
Nonweapon Proficiencies, have 
her take Riding (Land-Based) 
and Animal Training (she 
doesn't get either of these for 
free, like the "real" Amazon, but 
she can still choose them). For 
her Equipment. limit her to the 
equipment choices of the Ama- 
zon. 

If you do all this, and have 
your DM's permission. within 
the context of the campaign. 


Warrior Kits 


your character will be consid- 
ered an Amazon. That is, she 
comes from the Amazon tribe 
and the other Amazons con- 
sider her to be a shield-sister 
and one of their own. You know, 
and the DM knows, that she 
doesn't have all the special ben- 
efits of the Amazon Warrior Kit. 
And the DM is within his rights 
to assign the character the spe- 
cial hindrances of the Amazon— 
after all, you've chosen for her to 
be identified with a race of peo- 
ple with those hindrances. But 
to all outward eyes, she is indis- 
tinguishable from any other el- 
vish Amazon. 


Warrior Kits and: 
Dual-Class Characters 


The same is 
not true of dual-class charac- 
ters. 

If a character starts off as a 
warrior, he may take any of the 
Warrior Kits above. If, later, he 
decides to change classes ac- 
cording to the normal Dual- 
Class Benefits and Restrictions 
rules, he doesn't lose any of the 
benefits or hindrances of the Kit 
he chose; he is still that sort of 
fighter. If that second character 
class also has a range of Kits 
available to it, he may not 
choose a new, additional Kit. 

If a character starts off as 
some other character class, does 
not take on a Kit appropriate to 
that class, and then later 
switches to one of the warrior 
classes, he can choose a Warrior 
Kit at that time .. . though the 
DM may insist that certain cam- 
paign events be accomplished 
in order to allow him to do this. 

For instance, let's say that a 
human mage decides, later in 
life, to become a Fighter, and he 
wants to be a Gladiator. Well, 
there's nothing wrong with that. 
But the DM should insist that 
the next several adventures deal 
with that transformation. The 


character must be hired by (or, 
alternatively, captured and en- 
slaved by) an arena or fighting- 
stable owner, trained, and pitted 
against other Gladiators. The 
other characters in the cam- 
paign could also be entering the 
gladiatorial arena, or the DM 
could contrive things so that the 
current adventure involves 
gladiatorial elements and still 
get all the PCs involved. 

To better simulate the wait in- 
volved for the character to learn 
his new trade, the DM is within 
his rights to insist that the char- 
acter not receive his Warrior Kit 
until he's reached second expe- 
rience level in his new class. 


Abandoning A Kit 


Sometimes it 
happens that a character is cre- 
ated with a Warrior Kit and cir- 
cumstances later force him to 
reconsider his character's role. 
For example, a Noble Warrior 
could become disgusted with 
the corruption and excesses of 
his class and decide to renounce 
his ties to the nobility. Or, a Sav- 
age could become increasingly 
comfortable with the civilized 
world and increasingly uncom- 
fortable with his savage kin. In 
such a case, the player should 
think about abandoning the 
Warrior Kit. 

To abandon the kit, the player 
should privately tell the DM his 
intentions. If the DM has no ob- 
jections to the abandonment, 
then it will take place. Unless 
the choice for abandonment 
were brought on by a sudden, 
traumatic event, the DM may 
have to have some time to work 
the abandonment into the story- 
line. Often, in the story, the 
character doing the abandoning 
will have to role-play out the sit- 
uation: Publicly renounce his 
ties with the others of his War- 
rior Kit, and then suffer any con- 
sequences that might arise. (In 


37 


Greek mythology, for instance, 
the Amazon queen Antiope 
abandoned her former life to 
stay with King Theseus of Ath- 
ens...and she later died fight- 
ing her former countrywomen 
when they came after her.) 

Once the character abandons 
his kit, he also abandons all the 
special benefits and hindrances 
it provides. Often, those benefits 
included free Nonweapon Profi- 
ciencies or Weapon Proficien- 
cies. The character doesn't Jose 
those, but he must pay for them 
from the next free slots he has 
available to him. 

The character may not take 
another Warrior Kit to replace 
the one he's abandoned. Once 
he gives up his Warrior Kit, he's 
an ordinary Fighter, Paladin, or 
Ranger for the rest of his playing 
life. 


Modifying The Kits 


The DM can, 
and should, modify the Kits pre- 
sented above to represent his 
own campaign setting more ac- 
curately. 

For example, if there are no 
Amazons in his world, he 
should disallow the Amazon 
Kit. If Gladiators are all chosen 
from the ranks of savages de- 
spised in the civilized land, he 
should modify the Gladiator 
hindrances to reflect the fact 
that they have no respect in the 
campaign setting. 


Creating New Kits 


Similarly, if 
there's a special sort of warrior 
that the DM would like to have 
in his world, he can design a 
new Warrior Kit for that warrior. 

To design a Warrior Kit, you 
must answer the following ques- 
tions about the warrior and his 
role in your campaign. 

Description: What is this 
warrior? What literary, mytho- 
logical, or historical source is he 


XL / Warrior Kits 


drawn from? What special re- 
quirements are there if a charac- 
ter wishes to be one? 

Role: What is this warrior to 
be in the campaign? How does 
his culture look at him? How do 
other cultures look at him? Is 
there a special sort of outlook he 
needs to have to belong to this 
Warrior Kit? And what does this 
warrior tend to do in a 
campaign—lead mighty na- 
tions? brutalize and betray his 
allies? upset the delicate bal- 
ance of political strategies? have 
a good time without making 
waves? 

Secondary Skills: If you're 
using the Secondary Skills 
rules, you need to determine if 
this Warrior Kit requires such a 
skill. If no one secondary skill 
should be common to all war- 
riors of this type. then don't re- 
quire a secondary skill. But. if 
all members of a Warrior Kit 
seem to have this skill, then you 
should require it of all who take 
this Kit. 

Weapon Proficiencies: 
Many Warrior Kits seem to grav- 
itate toward specific weapon 
types. Knights lean to swords 
and lances; Merry Men of the for- 
est prefer the longbow. If the 
warrior you're simulating 
seems to prefer one or two weap- 
ons above all others. then, in 
this Kit, you require them to 
take the proficiencies for those 
weapons. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Most Warrior Kits, again, seem 
to have certain skills in com- 
mon. It would be silly to have a 
Noble Warrior without Eti- 
quette, for instance. So you may 
assign up to two proficiency 
slots to be given free to the char- 
acter. If it's appropriate, the pro- 
ficiencies may come from 
listings not appropriate to 
warriors—the Priest, Rogue. 
and Wizard listings. (Though 
normally the cost in slots for 
such proficiencies doubles, 
since they are here being given 


free to the character. that 
doesn't matter.) 

Equipment: If a Warrior Kit is 
best-known for having specific 
types of equipment, require that 
the warrior have such equip- 
ment when the campaign be- 
gins. If many examples. but not 
an overwhelming majority, of 
this sort of Warrior seem to pre- 
fer a specific type of equipment, 
simply list it among the types of 
equipment the Warrior Kit rec- 
ommends. 

Special Benefits: Every War- 
rior Kit should have some spe- 
cial benefit. It's up to you to 
choose what that benefit is, but 
it should fit in with the way this 
warrior appears to function in 
fiction, mvthlore or wherever he 
comes from. Types of benefits 
include: 

Bonuses to reaction rolls, es- 
pecially from certain categories 
of people: 

Bonuses to hit and/or dam- 
age, especially against certain 
categories of enemies, or in spe- 
cial circumstances; 

A free weapon specialization: 

Resistance (immunity or a bo- 
nus to saving throws) against 
specific types of magic: 

Special rights in the culture in 
which the characters normally 
travel (for example, immunity 
from prosecution for certain al- 
leged crimes, or the right to de- 
mand shelter); and so on. 

Special Hindrances: You 
should also provide a special 
hindrance (or  hindrances) 
which limit the character as 
much as hís benefits help him. 

Such hindrances can include: 

Minuses to reaction rolls, es- 
pecially from certain types of 
people: 

Minuses to hit and/or damage. 
especially against certain cate- 
gories of enemies; 

Inability to learn specific 
weapon or nonweapon profi- 
ciencies; 

Vulnerability to specific sorts 
of magic (either a minus to sav- 


38 


ing throws, or the magic is auto- 
matically successful); and 

Special restrictions in the cul- 
ture in which the characters 
travel (for example, not being 
able to own property or get mar- 
ried, or excessive punishments 
for specific crimes). 

Wealth Options: If the War- 
rior Kit has any restrictions or 
benefits in the awarding of his 
starting gold, or in the ways he 
can spend it, note them here. 

Races: If there are variations 
to the Kit based on the charac- 
ter's race, note them here. Some 
races can't take a specific Kit; 
some will have different profi- 
ciencies, benefits and hin- 
drances attached to them. 

Notes: If you have any addi- 
tional notes about the Warrior 
Kit pertinent to your campaign 
(such as which players you'd 
prefer for specific Kits, for exam- 
ple), put them here. 

Additionally, you could create 
Kits for other classes than War- 
rior, or adapt the existing Kits to 
the other through tinkering 
with the skills, proficiencies, 
benefits, and hindrances. There 
could easily be Rouge Swash- 
bucklers or Barbarian Priests, 
for example. 


The Warrior Kit Creation Sheet 


On page 124 is 
the Warrior Kit Design Sheet. If 
you wish to design a new War- 
rior Kit, just photocopy the 
sheet and design your new Kit 
upon it. When you're showing 
the Warrior Kits above to your 
players. also include the new 
Warrior Kits you've designed. 


Role-Playing 


The AD&D* game isn't all 
combat and magic. and so a war- 
rior doesn't have to be just a col- 
lection of numbers which 
responds to situations by killing 
everything in sight and collect- 
ing coins. No, there's much more 
to role-playing than that, and 
this chapter is devoted to role- 
playing the warrior character. 


Warrior Personalities 


There's a mis- 
conception that warriors are 
just square. solid guys who do 
the physical work in a fight; that 
rogues are the clever ones who 
do all the conniving and trick- 
ing: that wizards are awesome, 
impersonal intelligence dedi- 
cated solely to their magical 
studies; that priests are only in- 
terested in the advancement of 
one's spiritual learning. 

While that's a simplification 
convenient for first-time players 
of the game. more experienced 
players may desire to add depth 
to their characters by providing 
more detail to their characters’ 
personalities: Deciding how 
they react in certain situations, 
how they relate to other charac- 
ters, and so forth. 

Experienced _ role-players, 
those who already do this. 
should skip down to the head- 
line reading "The Warrior Cam- 
paign." Beginning role-players 
should continue from here. 

In the first part of this chapter. 
we'll be talking about Warrior 
Personalities, describing a few 
types of heroes common to fic- 
tion and mythology. Read each 
description, think about 
whether the description comes 
close to matching your concep- 
tion about your character's per- 
sonality, and if it does, try to 
utilize that description's advice 
when role-playing and making 
decisions for your character. 

Each personality in this chap- 
ter will be described in the fol- 
lowing way: 


Character Description: 
These paragraphs talk about 
the character's attitudes and 
motivations, and how the char- 
acter tends to act and interact in 
a normal campaign. 

Best Suited For: These para- 
graphs talk about the align- 
ments for which this per- 
sonality type is best suited, and 
about the Warrior Kits (from the 
last chapter) for which the per- 
sonality is best suited. It's possi- 
ble to come up with a good 
rationale for why a character of 
a specific personality type 
should have an alignment that 
doesn t (at first glance) seem ap- 
propriate for that personality 
type. so there is absolutely no 
firm alignment restriction when 
you're choosing personalities. 
However, the recommendations 
made for appropriate choices 
are good enough for most char- 
acters, so keep them in mind. 

In Combat Situations: These 
paragraphs talk about how the 
character reacts in combat situ- 
ations. Not all warriors unstrap 
their swords and wade in swing- 
ing: some approach battle situa- 
tions more slowly more 
cleverly, or more aggressively. 

In Role-Playing Situations: 
These paragraphs talk about 
the character's general reac- 
tions to NPCs in role-playing sit- 
uations; you can use them as 
general guidelines for your 
character's role-playing conver- 
sations and other such encoun- 
ters. 


The Brash Youth 


Character 
Description: This character has 
just recently become an adven- 
turer, and he doesn't have much 
experience or common sense 
. .. meaning that he gets in trou- 
ble. and leads his companions 
into trouble. quite often. There- 
fore. vou should only choose a 
Brash Youth personality when 
you're willing to role-play this 


39 


attitude. The Brash Youth is 
easy prey for fast-talkers and 
con men, suggests straightfor- 
ward and foolish plans sure to 
get the party captured or killed, 
admires more experienced war- 
riors without questioning their 
motives, and can be quite a 
menace to himself unless taken 
in hand by a more experienced 
adventurer. 

Inevitably, a Brash Youth 
character has to "wise up"—to 
lose some of his preconceptions 
and naivete. If this doesn't hap- 
pen naturally in the course of a 
campaign. the DM should de- 
sign an adventure around the 
Brash Youth, an adventure 
where he's confronted with the 
consequences of his brashness. 
For instance, a confidence man 
could trick the Youth into acci- 
dentally betraying his allies; or, 
a Youth's plan could go horribly 
awry and seriously or critically 
endanger his friends; or, a hero 
particularly admired by the 
Youth could turn out to be far 
less admirable than the Youth 
has always thought. 

When this happens, the char- 
acter must stop being a Brash 
Youth and choose some other 
personality type. By now, he 
should have been playing long 
enough that the player will 
know what sort of personality 
that is: alternatively. the events 
that shock him out of being a 
Brash Youth could affect him se- 
riously enough that this event 
chooses his new personality for 
him (this results in such person- 
alities as a disillusioned Crude 
Crusher or a hostile Dangerous 
Antagonist). 

Best Suited For: In terms of 
alignment, the Brash Youth is 
best suited to the full range of 
Good and Neutral alignments 
(L/G, L/N. N/G, N. C/G C/N). Evil 
characters aren't suited to being 
naive and trusting. In terms of 
Warrior Kits, the Brash Youth is 
admirably suited to all of them! 
The only kit that might give you 


a problem is that of the Samu- 
rai, but it's possible to play an 
inexperienced and eager Samu- 
rai struggling to keep his enthu- 
siasm from showing beneath 
the veneer of eastern detach- 
ment; this is an especially good 
choice in an all-samurai cam- 
paign, where one character is 
the brash young warrior inter- 
acting with more experienced 
and settled samurai. 

In Combat Situations: The 
Brash Youth is likely just to 
charge up to a foe and begin 
pounding away, unless that foe 
is so big and scary that even the 
most foolish youth will be afraid 
of it. He's very likely to take 
combat orders from his friends. 
however, so it's easy for one 
wiser warrior to keep him from 
killing himself through bad tac- 
tics. It's often a good idea for the 
party to make the Brash Youth 
one of their designated archers, 
because it usually keeps him 
out of direct hand-to-hand com- 
bat until he has wised up. 

The Brash Youth can learn 
from his experiences. on a case- 
by-case basis. After he's been 
hammered by a troll, he can be 
more cautious with the next 
troll or troll-like monster he 
encounters. But he'll be just as 
brash with a monster unlike the 
others he's encountered . . . 

In Role-Playing Situations: 
The Brash Youth gets along with 
everybody until such time as 
the other person insults one of 
his friends, challenges one of his 
preconceptions, or betrays him. 
Even then, he'll simply be furi- 
ous and willing to fight or op- 
pose the other fellow; to be truly 
vengeful requires that the Youth 
go through his personality 
change and take on a new per- 
sonality. 

The Brash Youth should be 
played as either hesitant and 
nervous in new situations, or ea- 
ger to throw himself into such 
situations—he's never bored or 
indifferent. Other characters 


find his youthfulness charming. 
but may also find him exasper- 
ating because he's always get- 
ting into trouble. 


The Crude Crusher 


Character 
Description: The Crude 
Crusher is a rude, boisterous, 
belching, physical sort of char- 
acter. He may be very clever, but 
he prefers force to trickery or 
persuasion—it feels good to 
pound people. He doesn't like 
proper manners, court eti- 
quette, literature and poetry. or 
haughtiness. He has very coarse 
and common customs ... al- 
though he could be of high birth 
(nothing says a high-born war- 
rior must be clean, virtuous, 
and polite. after all). Put him ina 
tavern with a crowd of noisy 
table-banging drinkers, where 
the drinks pour freely and the 
occasional brawl grinds furni- 
ture into sawdust, and he's 
happy. 

Best Suited For: In terms of 
alignment, the Crude Crusher 
can belong to any of them. If 
he's Lawful, he's still operates 
by a code of behavior that others 
can observe and count upon 
(even if he is a social misfit); and 
if he's Good, he's not going to 
take the things he wants (by 
force) from those who own 
them. For these reasons, a 
Lawful/Good Crude Crusher 
isn't likely to have a lot of fun. In 
terms of Warrior Kits, the Crude 
Crusher is well-suited to the 
Barbarian. Beast-Rider, Ber- 
serker, Gladiator, Peasant Hero, 
Pirate/Outlaw, Savage, and Wil- 
derness Warrior. A Crude 
Crusher Noble Warrior will al- 
ways suffer the reaction penal- 
ties given to Noble Warriors who 
don't live according to their so- 
cial stations (see the description 
of the Noble Warrior from the 
last chapter for more on this). 
Amazons are usually too up- 
tight in male socleties to be as 


comfortably coarse as the Crude 
Crusher is. The Samurai and 
Swashbuckler tend to be too 
cultured for this personality 
type. The Cavalier can t take the 
Crude Crusher personality. 

In Combat Situations: The 
Crude Crusher is a brawler. He 
prefers one-on-one combats and 
fights dirty, doing whatever it 
takes to wina fight. He fights ex- 
actly as he chooses, and may or 
may not follow the team plan. In 
combat, he's single-minded and 
effective. 

In Role-Playing Situations: 
The Crude Crusher can be a lot 
of fun to play. because he says 
whatever he wants whenever he 
wants. His crude remarks scan- 
dalize more refined characters. 
He's likely to antagonize his 
“betters” in conversation, ei- 
ther accidentally or (more prob- 
ably) deliberately, and this can 
spoil party negotiations and 
muck up the party's plans. How- 
ever, none of this means that the 
Crude Crusher can't be loyal. 
courageous, competent and 
powerful, so adventuring par- 
ties aren't likely to kick him out 
because of his mouth; but 
they're usually exasperated by 
his attitudes. 


The Dangerous Antagonist 


Character 
Description: This character is a 
hero with an attitude problem. 
He's grim and humorless, and 
never fights just to give some- 
one a drubbing—he fights to 
kill. He's driven by some power- 
ful, unsympathetic motivation: 
A desire for revenge, over- 
whelming desire for a posses- 
sion, or even a near-psychotic 
desire just to be left alone. He 
must be carefully played so that 
there actually is a reason for 
him to accompany the other 
player-characters, and the DM 
may need to remind his player 
occasionally that he can have 
friends and loyalties, even if he 


Role-Playing 


prefers to conceal that fact be- 
hind hard-bitten mannerisms 
and an evil temper. Naturally. 
this personality type has few or 
no romantic inclinations or rela- 
tionships. 

Best Suited For: In terms of 
alignment, the Dangerous An- 
tagonist is appropriate for all of 
them. Different alignments re- 
sult in different motivations: A 
Lawful/Good Dangerous Antag- 
onist has been embittered by 
events in his life, while a 
Chaotic/Evil character is a soci- 
opath. In terms of Warrior Kits, 
most are appropriate; the usual 
exceptions are the Cavalier and 
Swashbuckler, who tend to be 
better-tempered characters. 

In Combat Situations: The 
Dangerous Antagonist fights in 
a smart and deadly fashion (un- 
less he's a Berserker). He prefers 
a “Take no prisoners!” attitude, 
but can allow himself to be over- 
ruled by his friends, especially if 
they can persuade him that 


there's a practical reason for it 
(just being merciful and hu- 
mane isn't good enough). He 
can be a good combat tactician 
for the team. directing his allies 
to fight in the most deadly and 
efficient manner possible; or, he 
could be a wade-right-in fighter 
who vents his hatred on his ene- 
mies. 

In Role-Playing Situations: 
This character generally 
doesn't do role-playing negotia- 
tions with NPCs, unless the PCs 
are attempting to intimidate or 
frighten the NPCs. The Danger- 
ous Antagonist must be played 
carefully; many Dangerous An- 
tagonist characters are merely 
kill-crazy fighters with overin- 
flated opinions of themselves, 
and so it's very easy when play- 
ing such a character to aggra- 
vate the other players with his 
pretentiousness. In other 
words: Be menacing. but con- 
centrate that menace more on 
NPCs than your PC allies. 


41 


The Doomed Champion 


Character 
Description: This hero has 
been afflicted with a curse or a 
prophecy that haunts him 
throughout his life. He may 
have lost his One True Love and 
been fated never to find her. He 
may be doomed to bring misfor- 
tune on anyone he cares about. 
He might be prophesied to die 
whenever certain campaign- 
related goals are achieved. He 
might be the last survivor of his 
race, doomed to die without is- 
sue, so that the race dies with 
him. When he's not fighting for 
his goals, this character is suf- 
fering. For this reason, you 
shouldn't play such a character 
unless you enjoy portraying 
that suffering. If you choose 
such a character type, you must 
consult with your DM to deter- 
mine just what sort of curse af- 
flicts the character—it's 
absolutely pointless to play a 


Role-Playing 


Doomed Champion unless there 
actually is a doom or curse at 
work. 

Best Suited For: Any align- 
ment is appropriate for the 
Doomed Champion. In terms of 
Warrior Kits, most are appropri- 
ate, except for the essentially 
cheery Swashbuckler. 

In Combat Situations: The 
Doomed Champion tends to 
fight in an all-out. desperate- 
strength manner. He throws 
himself fully into a fight and 
seeks out the most dangerous 
opponents. Either he's simply 
desperate to achieve his ends 
and elude his curse, or he's un- 
consciously seeking his own 
death. He's therefore not good 
asa team tactician. On the other 
hand, his bravery is inspira- 
tional to other heroes and fol- 
lowers. so he's often made the 
leader of war parties. He can be 
merciful in combat, or kill all 
who face him (all the while re- 
gretting the grim necessity of it). 

In Role-Playing Situations: 
The Doomed Champion tends to 
be sympathetic to others' needs 
and pains. . . but is himself very 
depressive. because he knows 
that some grim fate awaits him. 
This means he's often easy to 
persuade to aid in others' quests 
(not quests for money: quests 
for more personal goals). 


The Fated Philosopher 


Character 
Description: This character is 
both similar to and very differ- 
ent from the Doomed Cham- 
pion. Like the Champion. he 
knows that a particular grim 
fate awaits him: Death. But he's 
very philosophical about it and 
does not torture himself about 
it. He's likely to be an old cam- 
paigner with very few illusions 
left, but with a keen apprecia- 
tion of all life has to offer. 
Best Suited For: In terms of 
alignment, Lawful and Neutral 
characters are most suited to be 


Fated Philosophers; Chaotic 
characters are seldom that in- 
trospective. The Philosopher is 
equally suited to Good, Neutral, 
and Evil characters. In terms of 
Warrior Kits, the Philosopher is 
most admirably suited to the 
Samurai. He's appropriate to 
most of the other kits as well, ex- 
cept the Berserker, which isn'ta 
very introspective sort of hero. 

In Combat Situations: Differ- 
ent Fated Philosophers face 
combat in different fashions. 
Some are as thoughtful in com- 
bat as elsewhere, and take a 
very analytical approach to 
combat: Striking where the 
need is greatest, evaluating the 
enemy's strategy. and so forth. 
Others, knowing that they can- 
not forestall their fate, jump into 
the thick of things and fight 
with unrestrained battle-fury 
(and. perhaps. joy). The player 
is left to decide how his Fated 
Philosopher character fights. 
Basically, he should simply 
choose the method of combat he 
prefers for this character, and 
then rationalize it according to 
the character's philosophy of 
life. 

In Role-Playing Situations: 
The Fated Philosopher is often a 
sort of fatherly-advisor charac- 
ter. He thinks about everything, 
he's full of sage advice. Though 
he may be driven by goals as 
strong as any other character's, 
in person he is seldom very in- 
tense. 


The Merry Showoff 


Character 
Description: This character 
lives for style or entertainment. 
He may be a clown who delights 
in entertaining people and 
shooting barbs into the egos of 
the self-important. He may be 
an elegant fighter who loves to 
show the world what fighting is 
like in the bands of a master. He 
may simply love attracting the 
eyes of ladies. Whichever, he's 


42 


always in motion: he never 
merely gestures when he can in- 
Stead make a flourish, never 
walks when he can stride, never 
talks when he can orate. 

Best Suited For: Chaotic 
characters are a little better 
suited to be Merry Showoffs, as 
they're more spontaneous than 
the reasoned Lawful or cautious 
Neutral characters. However. 
there's no restriction on this. 
Good, Neutral. and Evil charac- 
ters can all be Merry Showoffs: 
The elegant, dramatic. self- 
centered. villainous lieutenant 
is a classic example of an Evil 
Merry Showoff. In terms of War- 
rior Kits. the Swashbuckler, 
Gladiator. and Pirate/Outlaw 
are best suited to this personal- 
ity: the Amazon, Barbarian. 
Berserker. and Samurai are 
least suited: the other kits are 
appropriate. 

In Combat Situations: The 
Merry Showoff must fight in the 
most dramatic fashion possible, 
even when it isn't as efficient or 
safe as another tactic. He leaps, 
he bounds, he shouts, he ges- 
tures, he taunts the enemies, he 
makes challenges for single 
combat. . . he can be aright nui- 
sance, for allies as well as ene- 
mies. and so the player should 
be careful not to aggravate his 
friends too much with his an- 
tics. 

In Role-Playing Situations: 
Likewise. this character should 
be as charming and theatrical as 
possible in role-playing situa- 
tions. He doesn't necessarily 
have to be witty; that might put 
too much of a strain on a player 
who isn't able to wisecrack with 
ease. But he should be debonair 
and gracious at all times, even 
when talking to the leader of his 
enemies or the rudest and coars- 
est boor. 


The Natural Leader 


Character 
Description: This character is 
the all-around man in charge. 
He's the responsible hero who. 
even if he isn't party leader. 
thinks like one: He's always 
thinking about the team's goals 
and how to implement them. 
the safety of his friends, the 
strategy of the bad guys. and so 
forth. He may be happy to be the 
leader-type, or may be a reluc- 
tant leader: either way. his 
friends look to him for direction. 
Naturally, you should only 
choose this personality type for 
your character if vou're to make 
the effort to do all that thinking 
and planning. and are willing 
for your character to be respon- 
sible for others. 

Best Suited For: In terms of 
alignment, Lawful and Neutral 
characters are most appropri- 
ate; Chaotic characters tend to 
be more spontaneous than the 
Natural Leader. However. if you 
have a good rationale for a Cha- 
otic Natural Leader. your DM 
may choose to allow you to play 
it that way. Most Warrior Kits 
are appropriate to this personal- 
ity type. especially the Cavalier 
and Noble Warrior. In a party 
representing several different 
Warrior Kits. though, the Ber- 
serker and Savage shouldn't be 
Natural Leaders: Other charac- 
ter types don't tend to trust 
them as leaders. 

In Combat Situations: The 
Natural Leader. whether he 
wants to or not, is alwavs think- 
ing in combat and trying to di- 
rect his allies' activities. He 
makes sure that there's a good 
mix of ranged to melee combat, 
that shield walls don't have big 
holes in them, that when a 
friend falls there's someone to 
drag him behind the lines and 
another to take his place. If a 
player with a Natural Leader 
character doesn't do this, and 
simply jumps right into combat 


without any intent to think 
about or direct things, the DM 
should assign him temporary 
minuses to hit and damage: 
This reflects the fact that the 
character is troubled by his fail- 
ure to lead. even if the player 
isn't. 

In Role-Playing Situations: 
The Natural Leader is a very re- 
sponsible character, but beyond 
that, there is no limitation on 
the way he should be played in 
role-playing situations. He may 
be grim or humorous, straight- 
forward or deceitful, arrogant or 
modest, as the player decides. 
He will often be the negotiator 
for the party. but this isn't re- 
quired of him. 


The Sneaky Thinker 


Character 
Description: This character 
lives and loves to outwit other 
characters. He loves tricking 
money out of people. outwitting 
opponents in combat. persuad- 
ing people to help him against 
their better sensibilities, and so 
forth. It’s best for a campaign 
when the Sneaky Thinker is a 
good friend of the rest of the PCs 
and so mostly turns his talents 
on NPCs: the DM needs to make 
sure that the campaign docsn't 
turn into an endless succession 
of incidents of the Sneaky 
Thinker tricking members of 
his own party. 

Best Suited For: In terms of 
alignment. Neutral and Chaotic 
characters are best suited to be 
Sneaky Thinkers, as Lawful 
characters often have more re- 
spect for the rights of others; 
but, again, with a good enough 
rationale provided, the DM may 
allow himself to be convinced 
that a Lawful character should 
be a Sneaky Thinker. Most War- 
rior Kits are equally suited to 
the Sneaky Thinker character: 
the Berserker, however, is an in- 
appropriate choice and should 
not be taken. 


43 


In Combat Situations: The 
Sneaky Thinker hates to engage 
enemies in melee. He doesn't 
mind being a ranged fighter, but 
he'd really prefer to be doing 
something clever or spectacu- 
lar: Sneaking around the fight to 
come up on the enemy's un- 
guarded rear, loosening rocks 
on the hillside above to drop 
down on the enemy, persuading 
one of the enemy's allies to turn 
on the enemy, anything that will 
demonstrate his mental super- 
iority over the enemy (and 
maybe over his allies as well). 
It's up to the player whether the 
character is actually cowardly 
or not: Sneaky Thinkers can be 
as brave as the bravest warrior 
in a pinch, if that's the player's 
conception of the character. 

In Role-Playing Situations: 
The Sneaky Thinker is often the 
party's negotiator, as he loves 
talking with other characters 
and getting the best possible 
deal for himself and his friends. 
In most role-playing situations, 
the Sneaky  Thinker will, 
chameleon-like, adapt himself 
to the personality of the person 
he's talking to, concealing his 
true thoughts and emotions be- 
hind the mask he thinks is most 
appealing to the other charac- 
ter. Its very hard to find out 
what the Sneaky Thinker is ac- 
tually thinking or feeling. Note 
that it's a dangerous temptation 
to trick your friends and allies: 
in a campaign where the PCs' 
party is founded on trust and al- 
legiance, such a Sneaky 
Thinker will probably find him- 
self cast out or killed for betray- 
ing his erstwhile friends. 


Changing Personality Types 


The above ad- 
vice is for players who don't yet 
have a firm handle on role- 
playing different personalities 
from their own. And the person- 
alities presented here aren't 
firm, formal rules which any 


character has to follow: they're 
guidelines with no real restric- 
tions placed upon them. 

Naturally, then, it's very ap- 
propriate for you to write up 
more Personality Types appro- 
priate to your campaign ... if. 
indeed, you need to formalize 
them to that extent. 

It's also very appropriate for a 
character to change his Person- 
ality Type in the course of a 
campaign. Here are some ways 
it can happen: 

The Brash Youth wises up 
and loses his naivete and inex- 
perience. This has to happen 
eventually (unless he gets killed 
before he ever gets wise). His ex- 
periences in the campaign so far 
will probably have a strong in- 
fluence on the next type of per- 
sonality he chooses. Here's a 
note for the other personalities: 
Nothing short of amnesia ever 
changes a character to the 
Brash Youth personality. 

The Crude Crusher isn't 
likely to change. but a couple of 
things could bring about such a 
change. He could fall in love 
with a more refined partner, 
and, feeling gross and coarse in 
comparison. train himself to be- 
come more sophisticated. (The 
Merry Showoff and Fated Phi- 
losopher become good options 
at this point.) He could have 
heavy responsibility laid upon 
him (such as a military officer's 
commission) and be changed by 
it (at which point the Natural 
Leader is a good choice). 

The Dangerous Antagonist 
is only likely to change when 
whatever made him a Danger- 
ous Antagonist originally is re- 
solved. For instance, if he ever 
avenges himself on whomever 
hurt him in the first place, he 
could change to a Fated Philoso- 
pher or Natural Leader. 

The Doomed Champion isn't 
likely ever to change. He's 
doomed, after all. But if, in the 
course of the campaign, the DM 
allows him to un-doom or un- 


curse himself, he could suffer a 
change of personality. He could 
become a Fated Philosopher or 
Natural Leader. He might enjoy 
life so much that he becomes a 
Merry Showoff or Sneaky 
Thinker. He's not likely to be- 
come a Dangerous Antagonist 
unless the events which freed 
him from his curse were so 
nasty that they still scarred his 
personality forever. 

The Fated Philosopher isn't 
likely to change. This personal- 
ity type comes at the end of a 
process of personality develop- 
ment, not in the middle. 

The Merry Showoff could so- 
ber up under the weight of re- 
sponsibility, like the Crude 
Crusher. and become a Natural 
Leader. Or he could naturally 
evolve into a Sneaky Thinker 
when it became less and less ful- 
filling merely to entertain peo- 
ple and more fun to manipulate 
them. 

The Natural Leader could 
easily change if dramatic events 
made him sick and disgusted 
with always being so responsi- 
ble and dependable. At that 
point, any personality except 
Doomed Champion is appropri- 
ate. However, unless he's be- 
come totally amoral, even in his 
new personality he'll probably 
still have leadership impulses 
and do a lot of tactical thinking. 

The Sneaky Thinker isn't 
ever likely to change: His way of 
life is too much fun to him. If he 
were to change. to become a lit- 
tle less secretive, he'd probably 
become a Merry Showoff. 

For any character, some horri- 
ble event (such as the brutal 
murder of a loved one) could 
change the character, at least 
temporarily, to a Dangerous An- 
tagonist or Crude Crusher. 


44 


The Warrior Campaign 


So far. we've 
mostly talked about the warrior 
character and his role in normal 
AD&D* game campaigns. 

However, it's possible to run a 
good campaign whose charac- 
ters are mostly warriors ... or 
all warriors. 

There are a couple of reasons 
to think about having an all- 
warrior campaign. First, in 
many campaigns, after the first 
few experience levels, the fight- 
ers increasingly take a back 
seat to the magic-using classes, 
whose power increases faster 
than the fighters’. Second, 
many movies, novels, myths 
and legends just feature fighter 
characters, and if one of those 
settings particularly appeals to 
you, and you want to simulate 
it in your campaign, you'll 
want to limit your campaign to 
fighters. 

There are several ways to run 
such a campaign. Some sample 
arrangements include: 


Mixed Warrior-Types in a 
Magical World 

Mixed Warrior-Types in a 
Mostly Non-Magical World 

Mixed Warrior-Types in a 
Strictly Non-Magical World 

One Warrior-Type in a Magical 
World 

One Warrior-Type in a Mostly 
Non-Magical World 

One Warrior-Type in a Strictly 
Non-Magical World 


In the second part of this 
chapter, we'll be talking about 
all those arrangements, how 
they can be set up and what 
they mean to a campaign. 


Magical World vs. 
Non-Magical World 


The DM, when 
setting up his campaign, must 
decide how much magic there is 
in the world—not just magical 


items, but magical monsters. 
spells, and effects of any sort. 


Magical World 


In a warrior- 
oriented campaign where magic 
exists at the normal AD&D* 
game limits, magic is consid- 
ered a scary thing which normal 
people don't appreciate at all. 
Most wizards encountered in 
the campaign will be villains. 
The ones who are friends of the 
PCs are mostly low-powered 
(low-level). 

This follows the pattern of 
many sword-and-sorcery fiction 
series, where each story's reso- 
lution comes down to a contest 
between the hero and his fight- 
ing prowess vs. a dastardly wiz- 
ard or magical creature and his 
spells. 

In such a campaign, the DM 
will have to decide whether any 
player-character can be a multi- 
class or dual-class hero with 
Wizard or Priest spells. It's all 
right to have Ranger and Pala- 
din characters, as they only ac- 
quire their spells slowly, and 
after many experience levels... 
but the more magically potent 
wizards and priests pose a big- 
ger problem. Their magic is too 
handy and too dependable; the 
DM has to make his magical vil- 
lains even more powerful in or- 
der to cope. In a campaign 
where PCs can't be priests or 
wizards, a much lower-level 
magical villain will be much 
more effective against them. 

For these reasons, if you're go- 
ing to try running a warrior- 
oriented campaign for the first 
time, we recommend that you 
not allow PCs to be priests or 
wizards. You can always choose 
to add the option lateron . . . but 
if you find that you like the non- 
magical warrior arrangement, 
it’s not so easy to remove the 
PCs’ magical abilities from a 
campaign where you've already 
allowed them. 


Mostly Non-Magical World 


In a world 
where there's very little magic. 
no PC can learn spells. This 
means that no player-character 
can take a Priest or Wizard class 
as his character profession. or 
cven as one of a dual-class or 
multi-class character's profes- 
sions. 

In such a campaign. charac- 
ters can still be Rangers and Pal- 
adins. Even they can't learn 
spells . . . but they still get their 
other special abilities. 

Paladins still have the abilities 
of detecting evil, *2 to saving 
throws, immunity to disease, 
healing by laying on hands, 
aura of protection. turn undead. 
devils, and demons, and calling 
of war horse; he can use the spe- 
cial abilities of a holy sword in 
the unlikely event he can find 
one. All the Paladin limitations 
still apply. 

Rangers still have their abili- 
ties of bonuses vs. a chosen en- 
emy, dealing with creatures, 
building castles, forts, and 
strongholds, and attracting fol- 
lowers. All the Ranger limita- 
tions still apply. 

In this type of campaign, mag- 
ical items and treasure of any 
sort are very, very rare. They 
may even be nonexistent, as the 
DM decides. 

Magical monsters, equally 
rare, are especially nasty and 
fearsome. For example, a 
dragon encountered in a 
warriors-only campaign is more 
like the ferocious. unstoppable 
engine of death it appears in the 
myths, and it takes an espe- 
cially brave St. George to con- 
front one. 

And wizards—if wizards are 
found, they are evil beings who 
have made pacts and alle- 
giances with nether powers and 
received their spells from those 
powers. They're particularly 
nasty. powerful. and frighten- 
ing because they have access to 


45 


powers which the heroes can't 
even approximate. The heroes 
must use all their brains and 
brawn to confront such power- 
ful beings, and will often have to 
prepare for such a confrontation 
by finding artifacts, researching 
the history of the wizard to dis- 
cover his motives and wcak- 
nesses, and so forth. 


Strictly Non-Magical World 


In worlds 
where there is no magic at all, 
there can be no genuine Mage 
characters. (Of course, there can 
be characters pretending to 
have magical powers, but 
they're probably Rogues run- 
ning some sort of scam opera- 
tion.) Priests, Rangers. Paladins 
and Bards exist but have no 
spells or magical abilities what- 
soever; they have only whatever 
special status their society 
places on their professions. 

Warrior-oriented campaigns 
set on strictly non-magical 
worlds are good for a lot of 
things. By taking the emphasis 
off magic, you put it on such 
things as combat, battling the 
elements, and pure adventure. 
In such a campaign. only one's 
wits, physical abilities and skills 
make the difference between 
success and failure, life and 
death. Magic, with all its mys- 
tery and all its complications, 
doesn't ever enter the picture. 

This also means that things 
which would be unimpressive 
in a magical world can be awe- 
some and mysterious in a non- 
magical one. A "dragon" may 
just bea giant dinosaurian beast 
with no intelligence, no magic 
spells, and no breath weapon, 
but it will be terrifying anyway, 
as the characters have no magic 
with which to help destroy or 
defeat it. 

Without magic present, char- 
acters are never raised from the 
dead. They must be played 
more carefully than in games 


where resurrection is a com- 
monplace event. It might be ad- 
visable to start characters out at 
3rd level, as described in the 
Character Creation chapter, so 
that they'll be a little tougher to 
compensate for this situation. 
Such a campaign is ideal for 
settings based on historical peri- 
ods. You could base your AD&D* 
£ame campaign on the Cru- 
sades, on the era of piracy, on 
the wars of imperial Rome or an- 
cient Greece, on the conquest of 
the New World. These are all set- 
tings rich in action and mystery, 
but for which there's little evi- 
dence of monsters or magic. 


The Mixed-Warrior-Type 
Campaign 


In this type of 
campaign, the characters are 
mostly single-class warriors, 
and each may have a different 
Warrior Kit. With the DM's per- 
mission, multi-class and dual- 
class characters (so long as one 
of the class choices is Fighter), 
priests and rogues may also be 
played, but the majority of 
player-characters (over half) 
must be single-class warriors. 
And the DM, if he wants a 
fighters-only campaign. never 
has to give permission for those 
other character classes to be 
played. 

In a campaign devoted to War- 
riors, the DM should foster an at- 
titude that it’s more desireable 
to be a fighter than another 
class of character. Other classes 
may be allowed, but are usually 
represented by only one charac- 
ter each. 

One way to foster this attitude 
is for the warrior-characters to 
get the lion’s share of admira- 
tion from the people. Characters 
belonging to other classes will 
get from the public the mini- 
mum amount of admiration 
they deserve for their deeds, but 
such acclaim shouldn't be their 
main motivation; these charac- 


ters must have other goals if 
they're to be satisfied in such a 


campaign. 


The One-Warrior-Type 
Campaign 


In this type of 
campaign, most or all of the 
player-characters have the 
same Warrior Kit. They don't all 
have to be of an identical class: 
In a Swashbucklers campaign. 
one character could be a 
Fighter/Swashbuckler, another 
a Ranger/Swashbuckler, and 
another a Paladin/Swashbuck- 
ler. 

The DM may require that all 
characters in such a campaign 
be Warriors, or may allow a mix 
of character classes appropriate 
to the campaign's subject ... 
but the majority of characters 
must still be Warriors, and other 
classes can be represented only 
by one player-character. For ex- 
ample. in a campaign based on 
the legends of Robin Hood, most 
of the characters will be War- 
riors with the Pirate/Outlaw kit; 
the DM could permit just one or 
a few to be Thieves; there's only 
one Priest (Friar Tuck) and only 
one Bard (Allen a'Dale). 

The purposes of this cam- 
paign (other than the normal 
Having Fun and Going on Ad- 
ventures, of course) are to show- 
case the lives of characters with 
this Warrior Kit. and to pursue 
the goals common to characters 
who share this Warrior Kit. So, 
below. you'll find descriptions of 
campaigns centered around all 
the specific Warrior Kits and 
their specific goals. 


Amazons 


In an Ama- 
zons campaign, obviously, most 
or all the characters are 
Amazons—reclusive women 
warriors. 

The most interesting purpose 
for such a campaign would be to 


46 


showcase a clash of cultures: 
Have a party of Amazon player- 
characters go adventuring in 
the outside world (the mysteri- 
ous, dangerous, treacherous, 
woefully male-dominated out- 
side world). A lot of the role- 
playing opportunity provided 
by such a campaign would in- 
volve the characters doing the 
following: Running up against, 
and battering down, prejudices 
against women warriors; and 
fighting their own prejudices, 
which dictate either that men 
are inferior and must be down- 
trodden, or are all treacherous 
and must always be viewed with 
distrust and suspicion. They 
can also have encouraging. 
amusing or even tragic encoun- 
ters with the women of the out- 
side world, whom they try to 
convince that the Amazon way 
of life is the One True Way. 

Here's a sample adventure 
idea, drawn from mythlore 
about the Amazons: 

Before the adventure begins, a 
ship from the world of men (or a 
group of horsemen, if your Ama- 
zons are landbound) arrives in 
the Amazon community, claim- 
ing to wish to conduct peaceful 
trade or negotiations with the 
Amazon peoples. They are gra- 
ciously received by the Amazon 
court and negotiations are held. 

But something goes wrong. 
The next morning the negotia- 
tors are gone, all fled—and the 
Queen is missing. too, obviously 
kidnapped by the men. The 
queen's sister assembles and 
sends forth a team of crack war- 
riors. the player-characters, to 
retrieve the kidnapped queen or 
die trying. 

The PCs must equip them- 
selves, then head into the outer 
world. In the course of their pur- 
suit of the kidnappers. they'll 
meet a lot of NPCs. Some will be 
callous and stupid, intending 
only to oppress or enslave the 
PCs, and must be dealt with by 
cunning or violence. Others will 


be admiring of the characters' 
independence and ability, and 
will challenge the Amazon no- 
tion that all men in the outer 
world are their enemies. 

Finally. when the PCs reach 
the city where their queen is be- 
ing held, the DM has to decide 
what her true status is. She 
might have indeed been kid- 
napped by the negotiators and 
needs to be rescued; the Ama- 
zon PCs may need to break into 
her prison and sneak her out, or 
may need to ally themselves 
with an outer-world army and 
sack the city. Or, she might not 
have been kidnapped at all. but 
might instead have been struck 
by a sudden love for one of the 
negotiators, and fled with him— 
especially fleeing her responsi- 
bilities as queen. If that's the 
case, the PCs might choose to 
turn around and go home, or 
might have to sack the city any- 
way, to avenge the affront done 
them by their thoughtless ex- 
queen. 

Since not many playing 
groups will want to switch over 
to the eccentric all-Amazon for- 
mat, you ought to read the text 
below on “Campaign vs. Mini- 
Series” for a way to play such a 
thing without disrupting your 
usual campaign. 


Barbarians and Berserkers 


In the Barbari- 
ans and Berserkers campaign, 
most or all characters belong to 
a single barbarian tribe. 

The Barbarians and Ber- 
serkers campaign has a couple 
of purposes. First, it's an oppor- 
tunity for a campaign with a Jot 
of combat. especially if the cam- 
paign revolves around clashes 
between two or more competing 
tribes. Second, it's an opportu- 
nity to showcase how decadent 
and corrupt the "civilized" 
world is, contrasted with the 
simple strength and rude honor 
of the barbarian tribes. 


There are several common 
types of Barbarians and Ber- 
serkers campaigns. 

One type is the Tribal Cam- 
paign: The PCs live with their 
tribe and act as its defenders 
and heroes. They repel inva- 
sions. hunt mighty and mon- 
strous animals for their meat, 
attack rival tribes. and do what- 
ever they can to ensure their 
own tribe's survival. Here's one 
sample adventure idea: In 
wastelands distant from civili- 
zation, two tribes do battle. One 
is an NPC tribe. and the other is 
represented by the player- 
characters and some NPCs. The 
two tribes can be enemies be- 
cause they compete for hunting 
lands, because of some old 
grudge, for any reason or none. 

Adventures involving battles 
between them might be simple 
fights to the death between 
small squads (made particularly 
interesting by rough terrain and 
weather), but you can compli- 
cate things. too. What if the two 
tribes, in the course of their mo- 
bile combat, stumble across 
some silent, time-lost city popu- 
lated by monsters? The tribes 
may continue their running bat- 
tle through the city, awakening 
the ancient, sleeping monsters, 
who will eventually come after 
the barbarians, forcing them to 
combine their efforts or die... 

Another type is the Barbari- 
ans in a Civilized World Cam- 
paign: The player-character 
barbarians and  berserkers 
travel through the so-called civi- 
lized world. They may be seek- 
ing a new place to settle their 
tribe, the old site being unten- 
able for one reason or another: 
they may be mercenaries who 
hire themselves out to anyone 
with enough gold; they may be 
pursuing some villain who in- 
sulted them, or who sacked 
their village while the warriors 
were away adventuring. 

The player-characters travel 
through a world where civiliza- 


47 


Role-Playing 


tion equals decadence, where all 
men are weaker than our bar- 
barian heroes. They encounter 
terrifying black magic in jungle 
ruins, battle enemy armies 
which stand in their way. stum- 
ble across hidden evil wizards 
and the bizarre monsters they 
create, and so forth. 

Yet another type is the Barbar- 
ians for the Crown Campaign: 
This is much like the Barbari- 
ans in a Civilized World cam- 
paign, but here the barbarian 
heroes have a purpose. One or 
more of them intends to rule a 
civilized nation. He and his 
friends must gather enough 
power to be able to accomplish 
this. usually by joining the 
army of some great nation, ris- 
ing quickly through its ranks 
(all the while going on many 
dangerous army-oriented ad- 
ventures), and winning enough 
popular support in the army 
and elsewhere that they can 
overthrow the current despotic 
royal family. 

A last choice for a campaign 
combines all three of the cam- 
paign styles above. In the early 
stages of the campaign, all the 
characters are great tribal de- 
fenders: many adventures can 
be run with this theme. Later, 
some great calamity forces the 
heroes to leave their native 
tribe. As described earlier, this 
could be a mission of vengeance 
which forces them to leave for 
the outer world; it could be the 
destruction of their entire tribe 
by powerful, evil forces: it could 
be a prophecy which says that 
one of the PCs will bring doom 
on the tribe if he stays, but glory 
to himself and his companions if 
he leaves. So for many game- 
years the heroes will adventure 
in the outer world, until some- 
thing (another prophecy, their 
own desires, the desires or ma- 
nipulations of an NPC involved 
with the group) point them at 
the crumbling throne of a great 
nation. 


In the Barbarians and Ber- 
serkers campaign, by the way. 
magic use is almost always 
scorned. Magic is considered 
unclean and almost all wizards 
are evil enemies of the heroes. 
Though it would not be inappro- 
priate for one character to be 
some sort of shamanistic hero 
(for example, a dual-class 
Fighter/Mage). this sort of cam- 
paign is best suited to worlds 
with little or no magic. 


Beast-Riders 


The Beast- 
Riders campaign is very similar 
to the Barbarians and Ber- 
serkers campaign. But there are 
significant differences in the 
player-characters' goals and 
motivations. 

In the Beast-Riders campaign, 
it's the tribe's association with 
its totem animal that provides 
much of the flavor of the cam- 
paign. The villains and threats 
of the campaign don't just men- 
ace the humans; they also en- 
danger the animals on whom 
the tribe is so dependent. 

For example, in such a cam- 
paign, an evil wizard deeper in 
the wilderness has allied him- 
self with an animal that is a nat- 
ural (or unnatural) enemy of the 
tribe's totem. Now, he's sending 
his own warriors after the tribe's 
animals, trying to destroy them 
and conquer the tribe. If the 
player-character tribesmen ride 
dire wolves, the sorcerer's min- 
ions, fewer in number than the 
tribesmen, will be ogres riding 
smilodons (sabre-tooth tigers). If 
the PCs ride pegasi, the more- 
numerous enemies might be 
goblins riding giant bats. 

Perhaps this evil sorcerer 
wants the tribe's land; perhaps 
he wants the tribe's princess; 
perhaps his god is an enemy of 
the god representing the tribe's 
animal totem. Whatever the 
cause, he's evil and must be 
dealt with. 


In the early stages of the cam- 
paign, the ordinarily-happy 
tribesmen suddenly begin suf- 
fering attacks at the hands of 
these enemies. They must de- 
fend their village from the first, 
murderous assault, then set up 
patrols and reconnaissance mis- 
sions to probe into enemy terri- 
tory and find out what's going 
on. Ultimately, they will have to 
assemble a crack team of tribes- 
men (the player-characters and 
their immediate friends) to pen- 
etrate enemy territory. sneak 
into the citadel of the enemy, 
and destroy him. 

Additionally, all the campaign 
types appropriate for the Bar- 
barians and Berserkers cam- 
paign work just as well with the 
Beast-Riders campaign. 

In this sort of campaign, since 
everyone has the same Warrior 
Kit and might seem very simi- 
lar, each warrior should choose 
a very different Personality in 
order to distinguish himself 
from his fellows. 

This campaign may have no 
interaction at all with the 
world’s civilized nations; or, the 
tribe’s enemy might be a power- 
ful lord from the civilized lands, 
and the heroes’ mission to de- 
stroy him will be doubly peril- 
ous because they don't know 
what they'll be facing in those 
strange lands. 


Cavaliers 


In the Cava- 
liers campaign, the player- 
characters are all noble knights 
questing for goodness and glory. 

This can be one of the great 
weaknesses of such a campaign. 
Who wants to be clean- 
scrubbed, dedicated to good- 
ness, and holier than thou all 
the time? 

So when running such a cam- 
paign. the DM and players must 
be careful to distinguish the 
Cavaliers from one another in 
personality, motivations, dress 


48 


and style. Yes, they'll all be de- 
voted to good; but they can have 
different alignments, outlooks, 
and personalities. One Cavalier 
can be a heavy-hearted Fated 
Philosopher; another. though 
still devoted to doing good, may 
have been sufficiently embit- 
tered by his pre-campaign expe- 
riences to be a Dangerous 
Antagonist; still another may 
have been cursed and is now a 
Doomed Champion. 

Cavalier Campaigns are usu- 
ally run to showcase epic strug- 
gles between pure good (the 
player-characters) and pure 
evil. The fate of the nation or the 
entire world may be at stake. 
For example, at some time in 
the past, the world's greatest 
king has discovered that a great 
menace threatens to overwhelm 
all the world, so he has assem- 
bled his bravest new knights to 
find out what it is and deal with 
it. In their early adventures, 
these Cavaliers are gaining ex- 
perience, rising up from the low- 
est levels, and assembling clues 
as to what sort of menace the 
world faces. As they learn more, 
and begin to have more and 
more direct confrontations with 
the minions of the menace, they 
realize that the threat is indeed 
real...and that they're not yet 
adequate to save the day. They 
must continually quest to be- 
come better warriors. to find 
specific magical items which 
are supposed to be useful 
against the menace, and to 
gather allies and raise armies 
... until the final hour is upon 
them, and it's time for these 
much more experienced heroes 
to face the battle of their lives. 

Since all Cavaliers are good- 
aligned, the campaign attitude 
is not going to promote rude PC 
behavior: Theft, robbery, as- 
sault, insults, and betrayals are 
all actions that will get the PCs 
in trouble with each other (and 
with the DM). 


Role-Playing 


Gladiators 


There are two 
interesting approaches to hav- 
ing a gladiator-based cam- 
paign. 

You could have a campaign 
centered around the gladiato- 
rial arena. Each character is a 
different type of gladiator: One 
novice. one square-jawed hero 
adept at everything. several 
gladiators each specializing in 
one interesting weapons com- 
bination. The campaign deals 
with the hero-gladiators in their 
efforts to survive not only the 
arena but the plotting and 
trickery of gladiators belonging 
to a rival patron. 

In one adventure, the ene- 
mies might drug our heroes' 
food before the heroes are due 
to fight some particularly fierce 
monster on the sands; if the he- 
roes fight, they are in extra dan- 
ger because of the drug's 
effects, and if they do not fight, 


they lose considerable audi- 
ence popularity and political 
clout. 

In another adventure, a popu- 
lar slave-gladiator leads a rebel- 
lion; do our heroes, if they're 
free gladiators, help the rebel- 
lion or help repress it? 

In another adventure, the en- 
emy patron manages to frame 
one or more of the heroes for an 
insult they did not perform, and 
they are challenged to arena- 
battle to the death by a group of 
noble heroes they do not wish 
to fight . . . and soon. 

However. though many ad- 
ventures can be generated 
around the coliseum life, such a 
campaign is inherently limited, 
and will either end fairly soon 
or branch out into other adven- 
tures. 

If you're familiar with Italian 
sword-and-sandal movies, you 
know of one way such a cam- 
paign could branch out. In such 
films. you often have groups of 


VU B EE 
M | M I 7 


gladiators and ex-gladiators go- 
ing out into the world and right- 
ing wrongs. When a city is 
being bled dry by a tyrannical 
ruler, the gladiators show up 
and cast him down. When the 
Emperor's daughter is kid- 
napped and ransomed, the Em- 
peror doesn't call on his crack 
guardsmen; he asks the gladia- 
tors to rescue the princess. 

Such adventures often have a 
lot of broad comedy in them. 
Gladiators usually have fierce 
unarmed-combat abilities so 
that they don't have to kill 
common-grunt guardsmen in 
every tavern brawl. 


Myrmidons 


In the Myrmi- 
dons campaign, the player- 
characters are all heroes with 
the Myrmidon Warrior Kit. 
They're either part of an elite 
unit in a regular army or guard. 
or they're a small, efficient mer- 


SNO 


3-2 
e 
24 


cenary team who've worked to- 
gether for years (before the cam- 
paign began. that is). 

This campaign is best suited 
to providing the characters with 
interestíng military and tactical 
situations. 

For example, in one adven- 
ture, their superiors/employers 
instruct them to rescue a kid- 
napped ambassador from an 
old, abandoned fort that is now 
occupied by bandit/kidnappers. 
The heroes are given a map of 
the place. a certain amount of 
gold for equipment. and a dead- 
line (never more than a few 
days). They have to work out all 
the plans of the assault and res- 
cue, then go in, retrieve the kid- 
napee, and escape with him 
unharmed if they're to get their 
money or the commendation of 
their superiors. 

In other adventures, the char- 
acters' unit might be part of a 
much larger military force fight- 
ing a long-standing war; some 
adventures will be stand-up 
combats with enemy troops. 
some will be reconnaissance 
missions behind enemy lines. 
some will be rest and recreation 
binges in nearby civilian towns. 

In most cases, the players 
should have the opportunity to 
plan out their own military oper- 
ations. This gives them a 
greater sense of satisfaction 
when the plans succeed . . . and 
a better understanding of how 
things work in the game-world 
when the plans fail. 

Obviously, this is a very pro- 
military campaign setting, and 
the PCs and their NPC friends 
won't tolerate differing out- 
looks. Minor villains in this cam- 
paign include officers who know 
less about military operations 
than the PCs, or officers who de- 
liberately sacrifice subordinates 
in order to gain success and pro- 
motions: so are civilians who 
rabidly oppose the ongoing con- 
flict, those who are disrespectful 
of soldiers. etc. 


Noble Warriors 


This is a cam- 
paign of knights and chivalric 
doings. Some of the characters 
are traditional medieval 
knights, some are their squires; 
others may be warriors or mer- 
cenaries accompanying their 
party, or other types of charac- 
ters being escorted by them (no- 
blemen and  noblewomen, 
priests, etc.). 

This type of campaign differs 
greatly from the Cavaliers cam- 
paign in that the Noble Warriors 
don't have to be staunch sup- 
porters of goodness and light. 
Some will be true heroes: some 
will be self-centered boors. But 
they share the common ties of 
knighthood and nobility, so they 
usually get along with one an- 
other. 

For an idea of what sorts of ad- 
ventures are appropriate to a 
Noble Warriors campaign. you 
need only read the books and 
see the movies, available in the 
hundreds or thousands, appro- 
priate to such characters. In par- 
ticular, the novels of Sir Walter 
Scott and the chronicles of the 
doings of Camelot are very ap- 
propriate source material (and, 
no, not all the knights of Came- 
lot were Cavaliers; some were 
brutes). 

In Noble Warriors campaigns. 
the heroes wander the land 
righting wrongs by sword or 
lance; they fight dragons which 
lair in menacing caverns in the 
deepest woods; they defend the 
land against infidels and in- 
vaders: they compete with one 
another in friendly tourna- 
ments and unfriendly clashes 
between rival kings or barons: 
and they raise and lead great 
armies on overseas crusades. 

They also defend the preroga- 
tives of their class. For instance, 
in a Cavaliers campaign, the PC 
heroes might join a peasant's re- 
bellion against the land's rightful 
(but greedy and abusive) rulers, 


50 


and even completely overthrow 
that land's system of rulership. In 
a Noble Warriors campaign, the 
PCs will instead help put down 
the rebellion ... and then the 
good ones among them will in- 
vestigate the cause of the rebel- 
lion, and perhaps depose the evil 
lords on their own. At that point, 
they'd elevate the next person in 
line for the throne or lordship. . . 
as long as he was a noble enough 
character. 

In Noble Warrior campaigns. 
if the PCs all agree to it, they can 
all be unchivalric boors. Per- 
haps they all prefer to be robber- 
barons and  ill-tempered 
knights. If that's the case. and 
the DM has no problem with it, 
that's fine. 


Peasant Heroes 


In a campaign 
dedicated to Peasant Heroes, 
you have much the same situa- 
tion as with Barbarians and Ber- 
serkers. Three good approaches 
for campaigns are the Town De- 
fenders, Peasant Heroes Out in 
the World. and Peasant Heroes 
Aiming for the Crown. much as 
the Barbarian campaigns were 
structured. 

There are differences between 
the Peasant Heroes and Barbari- 
ans campaigns, though. In the 
Barbarians campaign. the 
player-characters are outsiders 
in this civilization, and civiliza- 
tion itself is bad—decadent, 
crumbling, not at all admirable. 
In a Peasant Heroes campaign. 
the player-characters belong to 
this civilization; they are, in 
fact. small-town folk who are 
much admired. Civilization is 
not bad or ruinous, though the 
nation may be ruled by dissi- 
pated nobles who have to be 
overthrown or eliminated (leav- 
ing the throne open, of course, 
for one of the Peasant Heroes to 
take). 

One very appropriate Peasant 
Heroes mini-series to play 


would involve a Foreign Inva- 
sion. Troops from the neighbor- 
ing enemy nation pour over the 
border and swarm through the 
PCs' country, slaughtering or 
enslaving everyone in their 
path. One large unit of enemy 
soldiers approaches the PCs' vil- 
lage. The PCs and their allies 
must fight and keep the enemy 
at bay to give the villagers time 
to escape. Afterward. hopefully, 
the PCs themselves can escape 
into the nearby wilderness to 
figure out what to do next. 

Their nation has been caught 
by surprise and overwhelmed 
by this sudden attack; the capi- 
tal is taken. the king imprisoned 
or executed. The heroes have 
the option of fleeing their land 
for some nation not yet taken by 
the invaders ... or arranging a 
resistance and revolt movement 
to take the nation back from the 
invaders. From episode to epi- 
sode. the heroes can make and 
then execute their plans: Harry- 
ing the enemy troops. building 
the resistance army up to 
greater strength, going on sabo- 
tage missions into dangerous 
invader-held territory, raiding 
armories, kidnapping impor- 
tant invaders, anticipating and 
thwarting invader repercus- 
sions, and eventually throwing 
off the yoke of the enemy alto- 
gether. 

Such a campaign could go on 
for years, and when it was done, 
and the enemy was in retreat, 
could change into an altogether 
different sort of campaign. The 
surviving PC heroes could be 
knighted, and commence a No- 
ble Warriors campaign; or, now 
that their work is done, they 
could find themselves unable to 
return to their normal, worka- 
day lives and decide to become 
raiders of the high seas (i.e.. 
pirates). 


Pirates and Outlaws 


It's quite en- 
joyable to have a whole cam- 
paign where everyone isa pirate 
or outlaw, In pirate campaigns. 
all the characters are raiders of 
the seas; in outlaw campaigns. 
everyone is a lawless warrior. In 
both campaigns. the bands of 
characters prey on the weak 
(but wealthy) and may have im- 
portant goals to achieve other 
than just taking money away 
from people who have too much 
of it. 

The DM should determine 
and then make it clear from the 
outset whether this is a "good 
guy" or "bad guy" campaign. 


Good-Guy Outlaws and Pirates 


If i's a "good 
guy" campaign, the player- 
characters are heroes ... but 
misunderstood. 

They may have been framed 
for crimes they did not commit, 
and were forced to flee the au- 
thorities (it's hard to prove vour 
innocence when you're swing- 
ing from a gibbet). They may be 
enemies of the new ruling power 
(if a wise old ruler dies and is re- 
placed by an oppressive and un- 
fair new ruler. that's ample 
justification to embark on a life 
of outlawry . . . in the game and 
the movies, anyway). 

In such a campaign. the char- 
acters are wanted by the law, 
but it's the law that's wrong, 
and the heroes treat their cap- 
tives and victims with golden- 
rule ethics. 

In other words, they'll capture 
innocents and take their money 
and goods ... but they'll offer 
no insult to victims who deserve 
none, will tend to release such 
prisoners unharmed. Inevitably. 
some of these former prisoners 
will be re-introduced in the 
story in an upper-hand position. 
and may be able or willing to 
help the unlawful heroes when 


51 


they're in a bad position. 

On the other hand, victims 
who are their true enemies 
(wicked representatives of the 
evil rulers, personal enemies, 
tax collectors, competing pi- 
rates and outlaws with no scru- 
ples. and self-centered 
money-grubbers of any sort) 
tend to be humiliated and em- 
barrassed while they are pris- 
oners of the PCs. Unless they 
behave very stupidly and attack 
the PCs. they. too, are likely to 
be released unharmed; if they 
do attack, they tend to be bat- 
tled in single combat, and usu- 
allv are killed. Enemy prisoners. 
if released. also tend to reappear 
in the story down the line ... 
usually at a time when they can 
do a lot of harm to the player- 
characters. 

The main goal of this sort of 
campaign is restoring the old 
status quo. If the characters 
used to be law-abiding citizens 
and are now wanted by the law 
for the wrong reasons, their 
eventual goal is to prove their in- 
nocence. If the land used to be 
ruled by a wise ruler who is now 
imprisoned or dead, the charac- 
ters' goal is to release him from 
prison or find and crown his 
wise true heir. 

Often, the heroes’ force of men 
(pirate ship or outlaw band) will 
prove useful to someone in a po- 
sition of power (like the rescued 
ruler or another powerful no- 
ble), and that personage will is- 
sue them  pardons and 
commissions into his army or 
navy just before the slam-bang 
climax of the campaign or mini- 
series. 


Bad-Guy Outlaws and Pirates 


If it's a "bad 
guy" campaign. the DM and 
players will have to define the 
campaign goal. It may be noth- 
ing more than the acquisition of 
treasure over years of outlawry. 
It may be considerably more 


Role-Playing 


specific, such as the finding of a 
treasure buried by a famous 
long-dead pirate, or the execu- 
tion of a brilliant robbery plan. 

The bad-guy campaign is 
mostly suitable to characters of 
neutral or evil orientation, and 
to players who just want to play 
in a nasty fashion for a while. 
Their characters don't have the 
dainty ethics of the good-guy pi- 
rates and outlaws. No, they rob 
everyone, from other villains to 
virtuous maidens to pious cler- 
gymen. Prisoners in their hands 
won't know what to expect: 
they may get not-too-uncom- 
fortable imprisonment for ran- 
soming purposes, or brutal mis- 
treatment, or death, or worse 
than death, however the player- 
characters feel. Further, the 
PCs' feelings. and their treat- 
ment of prisoners, may change 
from day to day. 

This is a dangerous environ- 
ment and campaign. Since the 
PCs are as scummy as their 
worst enemies, there probably 
won't be any DM sympathy to 
help keep them alive in bad situ- 
ations. The PCs will be compet- 
ing on equal terms with the 
nastiest of villains, and you can 
expect a high body count 
among PCs and NPCs alike. 

On the other hand, when 
you're in a destructive mood, it 
can be a lot of fun. 


Samurai 


In the samurai 
campaign, obviously enough, 
the characters are samurai or 
ronin, and here you have the 
same sort of division as you had 
in the pirates/outlaws cam- 

gn. 

If the characters are samurai, 
their usual adventures are likely 
to be missions for their lord. An 
ongoing campaign might deal 
with the lord's campaign to be- 
come ruler of all the land (while 
the PCs maneuver for power be- 
neath him, possibly with the in- 


tention of removing and 
replacing him later on); the cam- 
paign might instead deal with 
expeditions into unknown lands 
(such as the usual player- 
character setting, which cre- 
ates, just like in the Amazons 
description above, the opportu- 
nity for a "clash of cultures" 
mini-series). 

If the characters are ronin. 
their usual adventures could be 
mercenary actions as they play 
a part in warfare in their land; or 
the campaign could be an exer- 
cise in outlawry, as with the pi- 
rates and outlaws description 
above. These ronin character 
could be noble samurai driven 
into a lawless and lordless state, 
or could be honorless bad-guy 
ronin with no interests beyond 
survival, wealth, and killing 
people. 

Either way, if you intend to 
Tun a samurai campaign, you 
ought to buy the Oriental Ad- 
ventures game supplement, an 
extensive AD&D® game treat- 
ment of the world of oriental 
role-playing. You won't have to 
adapt everything in it to your 
AD&D 2nd Edition campaign, 
but you'll find useful material 
there anyway. 


Savages 


There are a lot 
of ways to run a Savages cam- 
paign. Here are only a few of 
them: 

Just Like Barbarians and Ber- 
serkers: A campaign featuring 
savages as the player-char- 
acters could be run practically 
identically to the campaigns 
given for the Barbarians and 
Berserkers descriptions above. 
The main difference is that Sav- 
age characters are considerably 
more distanced from civiliza- 
tion than barbarians are. They 
don't understand it nearly as 
well and are likely to be 
alarmed, scared. offended or put 
off by many more features of the 


52 


civilized world than the barbar- 
ian character. They're not as 
likely to want to become rulers 
in the outside world, because 
they don't like it as much. 

Jungle Kings: You could have 
the campaign revolve around a 
Jungle King: A powerful savage 
warrior who may have been 
reared by or spirit-bonded with 
some sort of noble animal (apes. 
wolves, lions, etc.). The Jungle 
King character is often the 
friend of one savage tribe (in- 
cluding the other player- 
characters), and can lead them 
on all sorts of fantastic adven- 
tures. Treasure-hunting trips 
into eerie valleys (populated by 
lost tribes, monsters out of an- 
cient legend. or dangerous and 
alien wizards), and elaborate 
raiding missions against the en- 
croachments of civilization, are 
two good examples. Also. the 
Jungle King seems always to 
fall in love with a woman from 
the outer-world civilization, and 
she, in turn, has a tendency to 
be kidnapped out of her new 
jungle haven: other adventures 
can involve missions to rescue 
her. (Naturally, a Jungle Queen 
character could find herself a 
civilized mate with the same in- 
clinations toward being kid- 
napped.) 

Savages In the Big City: If 
you're interested in playing a 
comedy adventure, try running 
a scenario where a group of sav- 
age player-characters must en- 
ter a huge civilized city (for any 
of the noble reasons discussed 
earlier, such as a rescue). but 
play the adventure for laughs. 
The savages will probably be as 
sneaky and clever as ever at 
creeping across rooftops in the 
moonlight, but try confronting 
them with objects and situa- 
tions more likely to get a laugh 
than a combat response. Sav- 
ages from the unspoiled wilder- 
ness will not know how to cope 
with elemental-powered self- 
driving chariots, bureaucracy. 


distilled liquors, wizards, famil- 
iars, parades, magically-ani- 
mated street-sweeper machin- 
ery. dancing brooms cleaning 
out the mage's tower, talking 
swords, dance-halls for the un- 
dead, or any such thing. 


Swashbucklers 


The  Swash- 
bucklers campaign is for play- 
ers who want characters with a 
lot of style adventuring in a so- 
phisticated setting. The Muske- 
teers novels of Alexandre 
Dumas are a perfect source for 


character types, adventure 
ideas, and settings for such a 
campaign. 


In the Swashbucklers cam- 
paign. the player-characters are 
elegant heroes. experts with the 
rapier, making their way in a 
huge city. They tend to live hand- 
to-mouth. gaining large treasures 
one day and spending through 
them in a very short time, so they 
may be rich and generous one 
day and stealing their food the 
next. This is not a campaign de- 
voted to honest and hard- 
working heroes. The PCs may be 
as honorable as their players 
want, but they're still charming 
rakes who like to get by on as lit- 
tle effort as necessary. 

However, when danger looms, 
they'll gladly throw themselves 
into an adventure, one which 
may lead them on a desperate 
horseback race across the land 
or into the dark catacombs un- 
der the city, where monsters 
dwell. Adventures may lead 
them from the court of their 
king. to the barracks of the na- 
tion's army (as they briefly be- 
come soldiers or commissioned 
officers). to the front lines of the 
ongoing war with a neighboring 
power, to desperate missions be- 
hind enemy lines, to secret for- 
ays into the capital cíty's prison 
(so that they might rescue the 
king's secret twin or their friend 
who's been imprisoned for 


knowing too much). 

The heroes are in a constant 
competition to out-style the 
other. In combat, each tries to be 
the flashiest. In romance, each 
tries to be the most witty, most 
courteous, most gallant. Also. 
they're in similar competition 
with rival NPC swashbucklers, 
who are often members of a 
competing military force or 
fencing academy. 

In all, it’s a campaign of great 
style and showmanship. 


Wilderness Warrlors 


In the Wilder- 
ness Warriors campaign, the 
player-characters are members 
of tribes or clans living in harsh 
wilderness environments. Such 
campaigns are, again, very simi- 
lar to the choices for Barbarians 
and Berserkers campaigns, but 
one of the differences and at- 
tractions of the Wilderness War- 
riors campaign is the setting. 

In such a campaign. the DM 
must go out of his way to spot- 
light the wonder and danger of 
the setting. These are true wil- 
derness adventures, where na- 
ture and monsters are the 
characters' enemies much more 
frequently than enemy men or 
demihumans. 

And because wildernesses are 
so big and unexplored, the char- 
acters, in their wanderings, may 
encounter many unusual cities 
and societies, ruins and trea- 
sures. 

For example, in a Desert No- 
mads campaign. the characters 
might be fighting a rival nomad 
tribe when a vast sandstorm, 
lasting hours or days, forces 
them all to seek shelter. When 
the storm blows over, it has un- 
covered a long-buried city. The 
two forces continue their war 
through the streets, buildings. 
and catacombs of the city ... 
while the ancient evil that was 
buried with the city slowly 
awakens... 


53 


In an Arctic Warriors cam- 
paign. the local seal or whale 
population might have 
disappeared—been hunted to 
extinction, or just left for myste- 
rious reasons. In the campaign, 
the PC heroes have to wander 
over unexplored regions to find 
a new place capable of sustain- 
ing the tribe; they'll encounter 
yeti, ice golems controlled by 
frozen liches, avalanches, frost 
giants, and other arctic perils 
before they find their promised 
land. 


The Military Campaign 


Finally. you 
can run an all-military cam- 
paign without it necessarily be- 
ing an all-Myrmidons cam- 
paign. 
Possibly the most interesting 
way to do this is to gradually 
move the campaign setting to- 
ward a major war. Early in the 
regular campaign, establish 
that the player-characters' 
country often has problems and 
frictions with a neighboring 
country; showcase the disputes 
between the nations by having 
NPCs from the other nation be 
rude or abusive to the PCs (and, 
to be fair, have NPCs from the 
player-characters' country be 
equally vulgar to foreign NPCs 
who don't deserve such treat- 
ment; the PCs may find them- 
selves in the uncomfortable 
position of being honor-bound 
to defend the "enemy" from 
their own dishonorable country- 
men!). 

As the campaign progresses 
and the player-characters gain 
experience levels, increase the 
friction between the nations. 
Occasionally, the PCs will run 
into foreign spy-nests and spy- 
plans. 

Ultimately, when the PCs 
have achieved high experience 
levels and are important charac- 
ters in the nation. they should 
be in on the events that spark 


Role-Playing 


the eventual war. For example, 
their king may ask them to ac- 
company him to the peace con- 
ference where he and his old 
enemy are supposed to patch up 
their differences, marry their 
children to one another, and 
sign mutual nonaggression 
pacts. But when they're there, 
something goes drastically 
wrong: Perhaps dopplegangers 
pretending to be the PCs assas- 
sinate the foreign king, while 
dopplegangers pretending to be 
the greatest heroes of the other 
nation assassinate the PCs' 
king. (The dopplegangers, of 
course, are under the control of 
the evil king of a third nation, 
who intends to move in, pick up 
the pieces, and conquer every- 
one when these two nations 
have beaten each other to 
pieces.) 

At this point, war is inevita- 
ble, and the PCs are put in com- 
mand of an entire army. For the 
remainder of this extended 
storyline. the PCs have to lead 
their men in combat against en- 
emy forces, defending their own 
nation or penetrating ínto the 
enemy territory: meanwhile. 
they'll be doing their own ad- 
ventures and investigations, 
trying to come up with proof 
that the two rulers were assassi- 
nated by a third party. not by 
the heroes of the two nations. 

Once the two armies are get- 
ting seriously tired and hurt, the 
PCs should be able to come up 
with the proof they need. They 
convince the new rulers of both 
nations of the identity of their 
true enemy. At this point, it's 
time for the two armies to join 
forces (and swallowing down 
their many years of mutual dis- 
trust. especially after the last 
several months of fighting, will 
be particularly hard, leading to 
even more plot opportunities). 
Now, the two battered armies 
march into the third nation, the 
PCs still in charge of their own 
army (or perhaps each PC is 


now a general in his own right), 
and the final battle with the 
fresh forces of the evil enemy 
ruler is still to come... 

In such a way, you can sustain 
an all-military campaign for 
many months of game-time. 
and resolve important conflicts 
and storylines in your campaign 
world. 


Campaign vs. 
Mini-Series 


Though you 
can take any of the above cam- 
paign ideas and make it into a 
formal campaign. one which is 
supposed to continue episode 
after episode until the DM and 
players grow tired of it, you can 
also run any of them as a mini- 
series. a campaign which is de- 
liberately run only for enough 
episodes to complete one full- 
length story. In a sense, the reg- 
ular campaign is like a TV 
series, while the mini-series is 
like a novel or movie. 


Campaigns 

The campaign 
goes on over a long period of 
time and encompasses many 
smaller stories and goals; it 
sometimes goes through cast 
changes as the principal heroes 
die, leave. or retire. 

The bright promise of the 
campaign is that, so long as the 
DM and players remain together 
and interested, it can go on for a 
long. long time: the characters 
can participate in adventure af- 
ter adventure, story after story. 
The campaign can chronicle 
generations of the adventurers' 
families, as the original adven- 
turers sire children who them- 
selves grow up to be the 
player-characters. 

In a campaign. PCs are de- 
signed to be played practically 
forever. You figure on the char- 
acter growing and developing 


54 


slowly, over time, and so PCs are 
almost always created at low 
level, usually Ist level. 

As the PCs develop. their play- 
ers sometimes become very at- 
tached to them, so much so that 
when a character dies (in such a 
fashion that he cannot be 
raised. it is very upsetting to the 
player. 


Mini-Series 


The mini- 
series. on the other hand. typi- 
cally covers one extended 
story—the acquisition of one 
treasure, the defeat of one spe- 
cific master villain, the explora- 
tion of a newly-discovered 
island. the resolution of a war 
between nations. It may be 
played in a single session or £o 
on for a dozen, but the DM and 
players know that it's supposed 
to be limited in scope. 

Its characters are rolled up 
and can be played quite differ- 
ently. Since they are "tempo- 
rary" characters, they can be 
created at a level best suited to 
the plot of the story. If the sce- 
nario is supposed to involve a 
crack squad of cavalrymen on a 
special mission, everyone could 
be created at 5th level. If it's to 
be powerful, experienced 
knights on a quest, everyone 
could be created at 9th level. If 
it's to be legendary heroes trans- 
ported from the past at the peak 
of their powers, they could be 
created at 20th level or higher. 

In some regular campaigns, 
PCs die regularly. If the DM of 
such a campaign runs a mini- 
series. the players can expect 
the same, but probably won't 
mind so much because the char- 
acters were "temporary" any- 
way. 

In some regular campaigns. 
the DM tends to protect the PCs 
a little bit. covering over for little 
errors which could be fatal, es- 
pecially when they take place in 
incidents which are not impor- 


tant to the campaign or current 
storyline. In a mini-series, on 
the other hand, the DM is likely 
to be more deadly (because no 
one is quite so involved with his 
character), meaning that the 
setting and situation are more 
dangerous; the players will have 
a greater sense of the danger to 
their characters in this type of 
setting. 

One last option with the mini- 
series: Though it is a very lim- 
ited campaign, deliberately 
created so that ít will soon end. 
the DM can always run mini- 
series “sequels.” In the sequel. 
the survivors of the original 


— RUE 


mini-series can band together 
again to meet a new challenge, 
joined by new heroes (replace- 
ments for those who fell in the 
last story). The DM can fiddle 
with experience levels as he 
chooses, running one mini- 
series (for example) at fifth level, 
the sequelat ninth level, the sec- 
ond sequel at 13th, and so on. 


Switching Between Them 


Because cam- 
paigns and mini-series are very 
different but equally compel- 
ling. DMs should think about 
switching between them from 
time to time. 


For most people, the cam- 
paign is the most satisfying for- 
mat. But. also for most people, 
the campaign gets a bit tiresome 
after a while, and the group 
breaks from it for a time. In that 
time, it's very appropriate to run 
a short-term mini-series (or sev- 
eral), allowing the DM and play- 
ers to explore new settings and 
characters until they're ready to 
pick up the regular campaign 
again. 

This is the ideal forum for you 
to try out some of the more unu- 
sual or outrageous campaign 
ideas described earlier in this 
chapter. 


T 
f 
1 


Er SV o6 


> 
| e. e » - 
^ 4779 
€ i EN 5 
EJ ~ 
1 i . GP 
À . —, = 
, " «d " s E 
NOT | 3 
Pi r ! ai Fe 
"3 4 -— ^ 4 
d : g- 
x iti d j 


Combat Rules 


The Warrior is a character 
whose primary function is com- 
bat, and combat is what this 
chapter is all about. Though the 
AD&D* game combat system is 
sufficient to most of your com- 
bat needs, this chapter will give 
you optional rules and advice 
which can add flavor to your 
game. 

It'S important to remember 
that everything in this chapter 
is an optional rule: nothing rec- 
ommended here can be imple- 
mented in your campaign 
without the DM's permission. 


New Combat Rules 


Here are some 
optional rules you can add to 
combat in your campaign. 


Off-Hand Weapons Use 


All characters 
are presumed to be better with 
one hand than the other—in real 
life, most people are right- 
handed, quite a few are left- 
handed, and only a very few are 
truly ambidextrous. 

When a character is first cre- 
ated, the player should specify 
his handedness (right or left). If 
he does not specify one, the DM 
should assume the character is 
right-handed. 

If a character, for whatever 
reason, fights with his off-hand 
instead of his good hand, he suf- 
fers a -2 penalty to hit with all 
attacks. For example, should a 
character find himself with his 
right hand chained to a wall, 
and yet he needs to draw and 
throw a dagger and must use his 
off-hand, he'll then suffer the 
—2 penalty to hit. 

If you wish a character to be 
ambidextrous, consult "Ambi- 
dexterity,” below, under 
"Weapon Proficiency Slots." 


Kneeling and Sitting 


A character 
who is kneeling or sitting (for ex- 
ample, because he's been 
knocked down or injured) is at a 
disadvantage in combat. He 
can't move around as effectively 
and so cannot dodge incoming 
attacks. For that reason, when- 
ever someone attacks a victim 
who is kneeling. the attacker 
getsa *1to hit; when someone 
attacks a victim who is sitting. 
the attacker getsa +2 to hit; and 
when someone attacks a victim 
who is flat on his back (but 
aware of the attack and trying to 
avoid it), the attacker gets a +4 
to hit. 

Attacking a character who is 
held (by magic) or asleep is auto- 
matically successful, causing 
normal damage. 

When a character is kneeling, 
sitting. or on his back, he can 
get to his feet one of two ways. If 
he still has an attack left to per- 
form this round, he can give it 
up, not make an attack, and 
stand up instead. Or. he can 
wait until after initiative is 
rolled for the next round: When 
it comes time for him to describe 
his action, he can stand up then, 
without losing any of his attacks 
for that round. 


Range and Initiative 


Here's a rule to 
give some advantage to those 
characters and parties (and 
monsters) which always have 
ranged attacks ready. 

When two groups first come 
within sight of one another at 
distances of 20 feet or less (here 
a "group" can consist of only 
one person or creature, or can 
have more), and only one group 
has missile capability already ín 
hand, that group gets a "free 
shot" with its ranged weapons. 

This isn't a full combat round, 
not a bonus round from sur- 
prise: It's a split second of in- 


57 


stinctive reaction on the part of 
the missilers in the group. While 
they're firing, mages and priests 
can't cast spells, other charac- 
ters can't ready weapons. A 
knife expert can't draw a knife 
and throw it in this split second; 
he can only throw it if he already 
has it in hand. In this split- 
second, characters can take no 
action other than, perhaps, to 
talk or shout something brief to 
one another. 

Once that free shot is taken, 
on the first full combat round of 
the fight, roll initiative nor- 
mally. The party that was fired 
upon gets a +2 modifier for be- 
ing slightly disadvantaged by 
the enemy's missile superiority. 

Remember that this option 
can only be taken when one 
side, and not the other, has 
ready missile weapons (i.e., 
bows or crossbows in hand with 
arrows and quarrels already 
nocked, or throwing weapons 
such as spears, javelins, axes 
and knives already in hand). 
Also, the party which can take 
this option doesn't have to; the 
group does not have to fire upon 
another person, group or mon- 
ster the instant it sees its target. 
If the group chooses not to, the 
opportunity is lost and the char- 
acters have the usual options to 
talk to the other group: if they 
choose to fight, initiative is 
rolled normally. The side with- 
out the missile weapons doesn't 
get the +2 modifier this time. 

If the party is wandering 
around in conditions of poor vis- 
ibility (such as a dungeon), the 
DM can rule that the target is 
barely visible and that the party 
cannot recognize many details 
about the target: “Ahead of you 
in the corridor, about 60 feet up, 
you see a group of human-sized 
silhouettes moving your way. 
As you spot them, they spot 
you, too, and slow down. You 
can't tell what they are...” At 
this point, if the PCs have mis- 
sile weapons and the NPCs 


Combat Rules 


don't. the PCs can take this free 
shot, but are faced with the 
prospect of attacking an un- 
known quantity. They could be 
firing upon the High King and 
his adventuring retinue, for all 
they know. 

When two groups both have 
ready missile weapons. neither 
gets this option. Roll initiative 
normally. (If two groups both 
have ready missile weapons, 
and one group spots the other 
without the other group realiz- 
ingit, that group wins initiative, 
but doesn't get the "free shot.” 
Picture it this way: When the 
first group looses its volley, the 
missilers of the second group 
immediately turn around and 
loose theirs. So we're put in a po- 
sition of normal combat.) 

Finally, for this option, re- 
member that spell-type missile 
abilities don't count, but “natu- 
ral" ones do. A dragon's breath 
acts as a ready missile weapon. 
as do a manticore's tail-spikes. 
However, a gold dragon's spells 
don't count, nor does a vam- 
pire's charming. for example. 


Weapon Proficiency 
Slots 


You know 
about Weapon Proficiencies 
from pages 51-52 of the Player's 
Handbook. Here, we'll talk 
about some additional. special 
things you can do in a campaign 
with Weapon Proficiencies. 


Intelligence and Proficiencles 


We're going to 
be showing you a lot of interest- 
ing things you can do with the 
Weapon Proficiencies rules. 
Therefore, you need to use the 
rule for extra Proficiencies given 
on page 51 of the Player's Hand- 
book. There. it says that you 
may, with the DM's permission. 
take extra proficiencies when 
first created equal to the num- 


ber of extra languages the char- 
acter gets from high Intelligence 
(see Table 4. page 16, Player's 
Handbook). These extra profi- 
ciencies may be divided as the 
player chooses between Weapon 
Proficiencies and Nonweapon 
Proficiencies. 


Single-Weapon Proficiency, 
Weapon Specialization 


In the Player's 
Handbook. the only things you 
can do with Weapon Proficien- 
cies are take single-weapon pro- 
ficiencies and specialize in 
particular weapons. 

To briefly review the informa- 
tion from that section: 

A character must have a Profi- 
ciency with a weapon to use it 
normally. To become proficient, 
the character “spends” one of 
the Weapon Proficiency Slots he 
has on that weapon. Each slot 
can buy proficiency with one 
weapon. If he uses a weapon 
he's not proficient in, he suffers 
an attack penalty: -2 for weap- 
ons which are completely unfa- 
miliar, or -1 for weapons 
similar to those with which he 
already has proficiency. (That 
penalty is worse for non- 
Warriors.) 

To specialize in a particular 
weapon, the character must de- 
vote an extra weapon profi- 
ciency slot to it. (In the case of 
bows or crossbows. it takes two 
extra slots.) When using his spe- 
cial weapon, the character gets 
a *1to hit and *2 to damage. 
(With bows and crossbows, he 
instead gets a new range cate- 
gory. point-blank: 6-30 feet for 
crossbows. 6-60 feet for bows. 
Within that range. he isat *2 to 
hit. Also, if his weapon is ready 
and there's a target in sight. he 
can fire in the combat round be- 
fore initiative is rolled.) 

Only single-class warriors 
(fighters. paladins. and rangers) 
can take weapon specialties. 
Such a character can only take 


58 


one when he is first created, but 
may specialize in more weapons 
as he gains new slots. 

With that in mind, let's elabo- 
rate on the use of weapon profi- 
ciencies ... 


Weapon-Group Proficiency 


However, let's 
look realistically at weapon profi- 
ciency. Currently, if a character 
has Weapon Proficiency with 
Dagger/Dirk. he doesn't have it 
with Knife. He certainly doesn't 
have it with Short Sword. Of 
course, the DM can always decide 
that such weapons are related to 
one another. If he does. then the 
warrior would suffer a —1 to hit 
with the unknown weapon in- 
stead of the -2. (See page 52 of 
the Player's Handbook). 

Still. to be proficient in all 
sorts of blades, from the Player's 
Handbook and additional 
blades from this rulebook, you'd 
have to spend around 14 
weapon proficiency slots. and 
that's too many. 

So. we're making it possible to 
take weapon proficiencies with 
whole weapon groups. 

For our purposes. there are 
two types of groups: Tight 
Groups and Broad Groups. 


Tight Groups 


A Tight Weap- 
ons Group consists of a set of 
weapons that are very similar in 
the way they are wielded. 

It costs two Weapon Profi- 
ciency Slots to become profi- 
cient in an entire tight group. 
After paving those two slots. the 
character will know how to use 
every weapon in that group 
without the usual -2 penalty 
for unfamiliarity (that —2 is for 
Warriors; with other classes. the 
penalty is more severe, as de- 
scribed on page 52 of the Play- 
er's Handbook). 

Following are several exam- 
ples of Tight Groups. Any 


Combat Rules 


weapon marked with an aster- 


isk (*) is a weapon described in 


The Compiete Fighter's Hand- 


book. in the Equipment chapter. 


Axes: 

Battle axe, 
Hand/throwing axe. 

Bows: 
Composite long bow, 
Composite short bow, 
Daikyu*, 

Long bow, 
Short bow. 

Clubbing Weapons: 
Belaying pin*. 
Club, 

Footman's mace, 
Horseman's mace, 
Morning star, 
Warhammer. 

Crossbows: 
Hand crossbow, 
Heavy crossbow. 
Light crossbow. 

Fencing Blades: 
Dagger/Dirk, 
Knife/Stiletto*. 
Main-gauche'*, 
Rapier*, 

Sabre*. 

Flails: 
Footman's flail. 
Horseman's flail. 

Lances: 

Heavy horse lance, 
Light horse lance, 
Jousting lance. 
Medium horse lance. 

Long Blades: 
Bastard sword, 
Katana", 

Long sword, 
Scimitar, 
Two-handed sword. 

Medium Blades: 
Cutlass*, 

Khopesh. 
Wakizashi*. 

Picks: 
Footman's pick. 
Horseman's pick. 

Polearms: 

Awl pike, 
Bardiche, 
Bec de corbin, 
Bill-guisarme, 


Fauchard, 
Fauchard-fork, 
Glaive, 
Glaive-guisarme, 
Guisarme, 
Guisarme-voulge, 
Halberd. 

Hook fauchard, 
Lucern hammer, 
Mancatcher, 
Military fork. 
Naginata*, 
Partisan, 
Ranseur, 
Spetum, 
Tetsubo*, 
Voulge. 

Short Blades: 
Dagger/Dirk, 
Knife/Stiletto*, 
Main-gauche*. 
Short sword/Drusus*. 

Sickles: 
Sickle, 

Scythe. 

Slings: 
Sling, 
Staff Sling. 

Spears: 
Harpoon, 
Javelin, 

Long Spear*. 
Spear, Trident. 

Whips: 
Scourge, 

Whip. 


You'll notice there's a little over- 
lap between the Fencing Blades 
and Short Blades group: some 
weapons are common to both 
groups. 

You'll also notice that some 
groups don't look like they save 
you any weapon proficiency 
slots. The Axes, Flails, Picks. 
Sickles. Slings. and Whips 
group all have two weapons 
each in them. Since a tight 
group costs two proficiency 
slots, it appears that there's no 
savings. Which is true ... un- 
less, in your campaign. other 
weapons related to those groups 
are developed or introduced. If 
they are—if, for instance, a 
medium-sized war-axe appears 


59 


in the campaign—then the char- 
acter with the group proficiency 
will be able to use it at no pen- 
alty, while the character with 
proficiency in just the two exist- 
ing axes will suffer the attack 
penalty. 

These categories are very 
close to the related weapon 
groups from page 52 of the Play- 
ers Handbook, and your DM 
can, if he wishes, use these cate- 
gories as related groups. This 
helps determine whether or not 
a warrior gets the full attack 
penalty when he uses a weapon 
unfamiliar to him, or whether 
he receives only half the penalty 
for using one similar to a 
weapon with which he has profi- 
ciency. 


Broad Groups 


A Broad Weap- 
on Group consists of a set of 
weapons that are somewhat 
similar in the way they are 
wielded. 

It costs three Weapon Profi- 
ciency Slots to become profi- 
cient in an entire broad group. 
After paying those three slots, 
the character will know how to 
use every weapon in that group 
without the usual penalty for 
unfamiliarity. 

Following are several exam- 
ples of Broad Groups. As before, 
any weapon marked with an as- 
terisk (*) is a weapon described 
in The Complete Fighter's 
Handbook, in the Equipment 
chapter. 


Blades: 
Bastard sword, 
Cutlass*. 
Dagger/Dirk, 
Katana*. 
Khopesh, 
Knife/Stiletto*, 
Long sword, 
Main-gauche*, 
Rapier’, 
Sabre*, 
Scimitar, 


Combat Rules 


Short sword/Drusus*, 
Two-handed sword. 
Wakizashi*. 
Cleaving/Crushing 
Weapons: 
Battle axe, 
Belaying Pin*. 
Club. 
Footman's mace, 
Footman's pick, 
Hand/throwing axe, 
Horseman's mace, 
Horseman's pick, 
Morning star, 
Warhammer. 
Pole Weapons: 
Aw] pike, 
Bardiche, 
Bec de corbin, 
Bill-guisarme, 
Fauchard, 
Fauchard-fork, 
Glaive, 
Glaive-guisarme, 
Guisarme, 
Guisarme-voulge. 
Halberd, 
Harpoon, 
Hook fauchard, 
Javelin, 
Lucern hammer, 
Long Spear*, 
Mancatcher, 
Military fork, 
Naginata*, 
Partisan, 
Ranseur, 
Sickle. 
Scythe, 
Spear, 
Spetum, 
Tetsubo*, 
Trident, 
Voulge. 
Small Throwing Weapons: 
Dagger/Dirk, 
Dart, 
Hand/throwing axe, 
Knife/stiletto*, 
Shuriken*. 


Again, you'll see some overlap 
between the Small Throwing 
Weapons group and other 
groups. 

These groups may not be used 
to calculate weapon similarity 


for determining whether a char- 
acter receives the full or partial 
attack penalty for using an unfa- 
miliar weapon. 


Non-Groups 


Finally, the fol- 
lowing weapons do not belong 
in any sort of group whatsoever. 
To learn any of these weapons, 
the character must spend a 
weapon proficiency slot on it, 
and none of these is similar in 
use to any other weapon. When 
a character picks one up and 
uses it without being proficient 
in it already, he suffers the full 
penalty. 


Weapons Not Belonging To 
Any Group: 
Arquebus, 

Blowgun. 

Bola*. 

Chain*, 

Gaff/hook*, 

Lasso, 

Net, 

Quarterstaff/Bo stick*. 
Nunchaku*, 

Sai*. 


Special Note: The Cestus* 
doesn't require any Proficiency. 
It enhances punching damage, 
and everyone knows how to 
punch. 


Weapon Specialization and 
Weapon Groups 


Although it is 
possible to become proficient in 
an entire group of weapons, this 
doesn't mean a character can 
specialize in an entire group of 
weapons. 

As before, each weapon spe- 
cialization costs one Weapon 
Proficiency Slot in a weapon the 
character is already proficient 
in. A character can't pay two 
points to be proficient in the 
Fencing Blades group and then 
another two to specialize in the 
same group: He'd have to take 
one-slot Specializations individ- 


60 


ually for Dagger/Dirk, Knife/ 
Stiletto, Main-gauche, Rapier, 
and Sabre. 

Let's say a character wants to 
know how to use every type of 
blade ever made ... but he 
wants to be especially good with 
the Long Sword. As a first-level 
Warrior, he receives four 
Weapon Proficiency Slots to 
start with. He spends three to 
take Proficiency with the entire 
Blades broad group, and spends 
his fourth to specialize in Long 
Sword. He has his wish: He can 
pick up and use any blade 
weapon without penalty, but is 
particularly adept with the Long 
Sword. 

Similarly, a character might 
wish to be proficient with all 
bows, and especially good with 
the Composite Long Bow. He 
spends two weapon proficiency 
slots to be proficient with the en- 
tire Bows tight group, and 
spends two more slots (because 
bows are trickier to specialize 
in—see the Player's Handbook, 
page 52) to specialize in Com- 
posite Long Bow. This character 
is at a disadvantage with any 
sort of weapon other than bows, 
but can use all bows, and is es- 
pecially good with the Compos- 
ite Long Bow. 


Note 


That's all you 
need to know now about the use 
of Weapon Proficiencies ... as 
they're used to buy proficiency 
and specialization with weap- 
ons. But there are more things 
to use these proficiencies on, as 
you'll see as you proceed 
through the chapter. 


Ambidexterity 


If a player 
wants his character to be ambi- 
dextrous, as described above 
under “Off-Hand Weapons Use,” 
he must devote one weapon pro- 
ficiency to Ambidexterity. 


If he does so, he'll be able to 
fight normally with both hands, 
and will be equally adept at non- 
combat tasks with both hands. 

This doesn't give him two at- 
tacks per round. It just means 
that if he loses the use of one 
hand, or drops the weapon in 
that hand, he'll be equally adept 
with the other. 


Style Specialization 

You can use 
Weapon Proficiencies to special- 
ize in certain styles of fighting. 
such as two swords, two- 
handed weapon, and so on. We 
describe how to do this below. 
under "Fighting Styles." 


Punching and Wrestling 
Specialization 


As you can 
specialize in certain weapons, 
you can also specialize in 
Punching and Wrestling. You al- 
ready know about Punching 
and Wrestling from the Player's 
Handbook, pages 97-98; here, 
you'll learn how to improve a 
character's Punching and Wres- 
tling abilities. You'll find this in- 
formation below, | under 
"Punching, Wrestling, and Mar- 
tial Arts.” 


Martial Arts 


Additionally. 
you'll learn how make your 
character proficient (or even a 
specialist) in eastern-style mar- 
tial arts. These rules work like 
the existing Punching and 
Wrestling rules, but constitute a 
whole new set of maneuvers and 
tactics a skilled fighter charac- 
ter can use in combat. These 
rules, too, you'll find below un- 
der "Punching. Wrestling. and 
Martial Arts.” 


Fighting Styles 


It gives a cam- 
paign more color when the war- 
riors fight with different styles. 
A huge warrior-knight wielding 
a greatsword looks and fights a 
lot differently from a slender 
fencer carrying a rapier and 
main-gauche. 

Below, we'll describe several 
common combat styles ... and 
the interesting things you can 
do with them by taking a Style 
Specialization. 

All these Fighting Styles refer 
to fighting with melee weapons 
only. None of them applies to 
missile weapons. 


The Four Fighting Styles 


There are four 
common Fighting Styles em- 
ployed by anyone using a melee 
weapon. They are: 

Single-Weapon Style: The 
character wields a weapon in 
one hand and carries nothing in 
the other hand. The weapon can 
be as short as a Dagger or as 
long as a Bastard Sword or Long 
Spear. 

Two-Hander Style: The char- 
acter wields a weapon which re- 
quires (or at least 
accommodates) the use of two 
hands. Such weapons include 
those which require two hands 
(Two-Handed Sword, Polearms, 
and Quarterstaff, for instance) 
and those which can be used 
one-and two-handed (Bastard 
Sword and Spear, for example). 

Weapon and Shield Style: 
The character wields a weapon 
in his good hand and carries a 
shield on his off-hand. This 
combination can vary from a 
street-bravo's choice of dagger 
and small buckler to the classic 
knight's choice of long sword 
and body shield. 

Two-Weapon Style: The char- 
acter wields one weapon in each 
hand. Unless both weapons are 
Small (S on the Size column on 


61 


Combat Rules 


the Weapons chart), the weapon 
in the character's off-hand must 
be lighter in weight than his pri- 
mary weapon. This character 
can vary from a street-thief 
wielding two identical daggers, 
to a fencer using a rapier in one 
hand and a main-gauche in an- 
other, to a heavily-armored war- 
rior with a long sword in one 
hand and a short sword in the 
other. Note: Read the Player's 
Handbook, page 96, for the rules 
on Attacking With Two Weap- 
ons. 

AII Warriors start play know- 
ing how to use all four styles. 
Priests start play knowing how 
to use Single-Weapon, Two- 
Hander, and Weapon and Shield 
styles. Rogues start play know- 
ing how to use Single-Weapon, 
Two-Hander, and Two-Weapon 
styles. Wizards start play know- 
ing how to use Single-Weapon 
and Two-Hander styles. Charac- 
ters cannot learn new styles af- 
ter they re created; these are the 
styles they are limited to by 
their choice of character class. 

A character can use a weapon 
style he knows with a weapon 
he does not know how to use. 
For example. wizards know 
Two-Hander style ... so they 
can learn to use a quarterstaff. If 
a wizard who doesn't have Profi- 
ciency with a quarterstaff picks 
one up, he can still use the 
weapon in two hands. However, 
he suffers the —5 attack penalty 
required by his unfamiliarity 
and his character class. 

Each style confers some basic 
advantages and disadvantages 
when used. These are described 
in the descriptions of each indi- 
vidual style. below. Addition- 
ally, characters can specialize in 
these styles. Single-class war- 
riors can eventually specialize 
in all of them; other classes can 
only specialize in one style, ever. 


Combat Rules 


Specializing In the Styles 


You take a 
Style Specialization by devoting 
one weapon proficiency slot toa 
fighting style. 


Guidelines 


To use a Style 
Specialization with a specific 
weapon, you must have weapon 
proficiency with that weapon. 
For example, a character might 
have bought Style Specializa- 
tion with Two-Hander Style. If 
he has Weapon Proficiencies 
with polearms, he can use the 
benefits of Style Specialization 
whenever he uses polearms. But 
if he doesn't also have profi- 
ciency with Two-handed Sword, 
and picks one up to use it, he 
doesn't get the benefits of Two- 
Hander Style Specialization 
with that weapon. 

You can have both a Weapon 
Specialization and a Style Spe- 
cialization in the same weapon, 
but neither is dependent on the 
other; you can have one without 
the other. For example, a char- 
acter could have Proficiency 
with Sabre, Specialization with 
Sabre, and then Style Speciali- 
zation in Single-Weapon style: 
he'd be a master fencer with the 
sabre. Or, he could have just 
Proficiency and Specialization 
in Sabre, or just Proficiency in 
Sabre and Style Specialization 
in Single-Weapon style. 


Multiple Style Specializations 


A single-class 

Warrior can take more than one 
Style Specialization. Weapons 
such as Bastard Sword, Javelin, 
and Spear, which can be used 
one-handed or two-handed, 
with or without a shield, can 
have up to four different Style 
Specializations taken for them. 
Example: A single-class War- 
rior has Proficiency with Bas- 
tard Sword. He could 
theoretically take Single- 


Weapon Style Specialization, 
Two-Hander Style Specializa- 
tion. Weapon and Shield Style 
Specialization. and Two-Weap- 
on Style Specialization with it. 
Between fights, or even in the 
course of the fight, he could 
change the way he uses his 
weapon in order to gain differ- 
ent advantages in the course ofa 
combat. 


Limitations on Style 
Specialization 


A character 
may begin play with only one 
Style Specialization. If he is a 
single-class Warrior. may learn 
others as he gains new Weapon 
Proficiencies through experi- 
ence. 

Only Warriors, Rogues and 
Priests can buy Style Specializa- 
tions. Only Warriors and Rogues 
can buy the Two-Weapon Style 
Specialization. Only single-class 
Warriors can ever learn more 
than one Style Specialization. 

Below are descriptions of the 
four Fighting Styles. 


Single-Weapon Style 

Single-Weap- 
on style means that the charac- 
ter wields a one-handed weapon 
in one hand and nothing in the 
other. Though in real life this 
type of weapon use is often at a 
disadvantage compared to 
many of the others, it's very 
popular in film and fiction ... 
and so it has some virtue in the 
game. 


Advantages 
The  advan- 
tage of single-weapon style in 
the AD&D* game is that the 
character keeps a hand free for 
grappling, for switching weap- 
ons, for surprise maneuvers, for 
whatever comes along in the 
course of combat. 
For instance. two fighters are 


62 


going at it, and one pins the oth- 
er's weapon (see Pin, below, un- 
der "Melee Maneuvers"), the 
single-weapon fighter can use 
his free hand to perform punch- 
ing maneuvers; and he can try 
to perform barehanded maneu- 
vers (below, under “Punching, 
Wrestling, and Martial Arts”). 


Disadvantages 


The main dis- 
advantage to this style is that 
the character does not gain the 
benefit of a shield's AC bonus. 


Style Specialization 


If the charac- 
ter devotes a weapon profi- 
ciency to Style Specialization 
with Single-Weapon Style, he 
Betsa +1 AC bonus when using 
any one-handed weapon (for 
which he has proficiency) in 
Single-Weapon Style. He 
doesn't get the bonus if he car- 
ries a shield or weapon in his off- 
hand. 

Additionally, he can devote an 
extra proficiency to Single- 
Weapon Style and have a total 
+2 AC when fighting in this 
style. That's the limit, though: 
He cannot devote more than two 
proficiencies (for a total of *2 
AC) with Single-Weapon Style. 


Two-Hander Style 


Two-Hander 
Style involves carrying and 
wielding a weapon with both 
hands. Naturally, many weap- 
ons (including polearms, the 
great axe, the two-handed 
sword, and others) require two- 
handed technique. Other weap- 
ons (such as bastard sword, 
javelin, and spear) have it as a 
listed option. (Two-handed op- 
tions for Harpoon, Javelin, Long 
Spear, Spear, and Trident are 
given in the Equipment section 
of this rulebook, not in the Play- 
er's Handbook.) 


Combat Rules 


Advantages 


The main ad- 
vantage of two-handed weapon 
technique is that it allows the 
character to wield large two- 
handed weapons which can do 
substantial amounts of damage. 

A second advantage is that, if 
you are using a two-handed 
weapon. the Disarm maneuver 
(see "Melee Maneuvers.” below) is 
only of partíal use against you. 

A single successful Disarm 
against a two-handed weapon 
user won't knock the weapon 
out of the wielder's hands; it will 
merely knock his weapon askew 
and make him take some time to 
recover, so he automatically 
loses initiative on his next 
round. 

However, two Disarm maneu- 
vers successfully made against 
the character in the same round 
will knock the weapon loose. 


Disadvantages 

As with single- 
weapon use,  two-handed 
weapon technique has the 
drawback that the user cannot 


wear or use a shield, or gain the 
shield's AC bonus. 


Style Specialization 


You can, by de- 
voting a weapon proficiency to 
it, take a Style Specialization 
with Two-Hander Style. 

Style Specialization with Two- 
Hander Style gives you a very 
specific benefit: When you're 
using a weapon two-handed. 
that weapon's Speed Factor is 
reduced by 3. 

For example, a fighter with 
Two-Hander Style Specializa- 
tion and wielding a Bastard 
Sword can wield his weapon 
faster in two-handed style than 
in one-handed style. Used in one 
hand. the Bastard Sword has a 
Speed Factor of 6. In two hands 
(normally), it has a Speed Factor 
of 8. But used in two hands by 


someone with Two-Hander Style 
Specialization, it has a Speed 
Factor of (8-3) 5. 

This is because when a fighter 
wields such a weapon with both 
hands on the hilt, he has more 
leverage on the blade and can 
move it faster. That's what Style 
Specialization in Two-Hander 
Style will do for the character: It 
teaches him how to use the 
weapon much faster and more 
aggressively than someone with 
less specialized training in the 
weapon. 


One-Handed 
Used Two-Handed 


Some players don't realize that 
many other one-handed weap- 
ons can also be used two- 
handed. Since these weapons 
don't do any more damage two- 
handed, there usually isn't 
much reason to use them this 
way: however, with Style Spe- 
cialization in Two-Hander Style, 
now there's a reason. 

If you specialize in Two- 
Hander Style and then use a 
one-handed weapon in two 
hands. you also get a bonus of 
*1todamage. Thus. if you take 
a Two-Hander Style Specializa- 
tion, when using a long sword 
two-handed, you do ld8*1 
damage instead of the base 1d8 
(or 1d12 * 1 vs. large targets. in- 
stead of the base 1d12). 

The one-handed weapons 
which can be used two-handed 
in this fashion include: Battle 
axe, Club. Footman's flail, Foot- 
man's pick. Horseman's flail, 
Horseman's mace, Horseman's 
pick, Morning star, Long sword, 
Warhammer. 


Weapon and Shield 
Style 
This is the 


classic technique of using a one- 
handed weapon and carrying a 
shield on the other arm. 


63 


The principal 
advantage of Weapon and 
Shield Style is that you get the 
AC bonus of a shield; this is es- 
pecially good when you can find 
a magical shield which confers a 
better AC bonus. 

A second advantage is that 
the character can use the 
Shield-Rush maneuver (below. 
under "Melee Maneuvers”). 


Disadvantages 


The disadvan- 
tage to Weapon and Shield Style 
is that the left arm (right arm, 
for left-handed characters) is 
dedicated to the shield and is 
not much use for anything else. 
If the character is disarmed, all 
he has to wield offensively is his 
shield, until he can get back to 
his weapon. If he is pinned in 
combat, he can't use his shield 
hand for grappling. 


Style Specialization 


If you devote a 
weapon proficiency slot to spe- 
cialization in Weapon and 
Shield Style, you receive one ex- 
tra attack per round ... only 
when using a shield on the 
shield-hand, that is. You can use 
that extra attack only for the 
Shield-Punch and Parry maneu- 
vers (see under "Melee Maneu- 
vers,” below). 

As with the normal "Attack- 
ing with Two Weapons" rules 
(see the Player's Handbook. 
page 96). when striking with 
both hands in a single combat 
round, the character suffers a 
-2 to hit with his weapon anda 
-4 to hit with the Shield-Punch 
or Parry. (If you're ambidex- 
trous, as described above under 
"Off-Hand Weapons Use,” that's 
a -2 with weapon and -2 with 
shield.) If vou devote a second 
weapon proficiency slot to 
Weapon and Shield Style Spe- 
cialization, that penalty drops to 


Combat Rules 


O with the weapon and -2 with 
the shield. (If you're ambidex- 
trous, that penalty is O with 
weapon and O with shield.) 

On any round when vou per- 
form two maneuvers, you do not 
get the AC bonus for the shield 
for the rest of the round. If you 
swing vour sword and perform a 
Shield-Punch in the same 
round, you do not get your 
shield's AC bonus if anyone at- 
tacks vou later in the round. 


Two-Weapon Style 


With this pop- 
ular style. the fighter has a 
weapon in each hand—usually a 
longer weapon in his good hand 
and a shorter one in his off- 
hand. Unless the character has 
Style Specialization in this 
style, the second (off-hand) 
weapon must be shorter than 
the primary weapon. 


Advantages 


One great ad- 
vantage to this style is that you 
always have another weapon in 
hand if you drop or lose one. A 
single Disarm maneuver cannot 
rid you of your weapons. 


Disadvantages 


The principal 
disadvantage to this style. as 
with some other styles. is that 
you don't gain the AC benefit of 
a shield. 


Style Specialization 


Please read 
the "Attacking with Two Weap- 
ons" section from the Player's 
Handbook. page 96. before con- 
tinuing. 

If vou devote a weapon profi- 
ciency slot to style specializa- 
tion with Two-Weapon Style. 
you get two important benefits. 
First. vour attack penalty drops: 
before, it was a -2 with your 
primary weapon and -4 with 


your secondary, but with Spe- 
cialization in Two-Weapon Style 
it becomes O with your primary 
weapon and a -2 with your sec- 
ondary weapon. (If you're al- 
ready ambidextrous, as per 
"Off-Hand Weapons Use.” 
above. that penalty is O with pri- 
mary weapon and O with sec- 
ondary weapon.) Second, you're 
allowed to use weapons of the 
same length in each hand, so 
you can, for example, wield two 
long swords. 

When fighting with two- 
weapon technique. you can 
choose for both wcapons to try 
the same maneuver (for exam- 
ple. two strikes, or two disarms). 
or can have each try a different 
maneuver (one strike and one 
parry, one pin and one strike). If 
the two maneuvers are to be dif- 
ferent. each receives a —1 at- 
tack penalty. 

Though rangers don't suffer 
the off-hand penalties for two- 
weapons use, they do not get a 
bonus to hit if they devote a 
weapon proficiency slot to Two- 
Weapon Style. They do get the 
other benefit. of being able to 
use weapons of equal length. 


Sample Style 
Specialization 


Here's an ex- 
ample of how a character can 
use the weapon proficiencies, 
weapon specialization, and 
style specialization rules to be- 
come very dangerous and very 
versatile indeed. 

Berris is a Ist level fighter, but 
he's already very accomplished 
with his weapon of choice, the 
Bastard Sword. He has taken 
Weapon Specialization with the 
Bastard Sword (two slots), Two- 
Hander Style Specialization 
with the Bastard Sword (one 
slot). and Single-Weapon Style 
Specialization with the Bastard 
Sword (one slot). 

From his weapon specializa- 


tion, he receivesa +1 to hit and 
+2 to damage whenever using a 
Bastard Sword, regardless of the 
technique he uses. 

When using the weapon in 
Single-Weapon Style. one- 
handed, he getsa +1 to AC. 

When using the weapon in 
Two-Hander Style, his weapon's 
speed factor drops from an 8 
(normal two-handed speed fac- 
tor for the Bastard Sword) to a 5. 
making it a very quick weapon 
in his hands. 


Style Specialization and the 
Character Sheet 


Since style 
specializations give the charac- 
ter certain benefits in combat, 
these benefits need to be written 
down on your character sheet. 

The character sheet has 
blanks for all pertinent notes. 
For example, with the Berris 
character mentioned just 
above, the character sheet 
would include blanks with the 
following information: 


Special Abilities and Restric- 

tions: 

* 1 to hit 

+2 damage Bastard Sword, 

* 1 AC used Single-Hand, 

Speed Factor 5 used Two- 
Handed 


Weapon Proficiency Slots 
Available: 4 

Prof w/Bastard Swd: 1 

Spec w/Bastard Swd: 1 
Single-Weapon Style: 1 
Two-Hander Style: 1 


Melee Maneuvers 


Strike and 
counter-strike, strike and 
counter-strike: That's the for- 
mula for dull, mechanical com- 
bat, and it’s no way to run the 
sort of swashbuckling. action- 
packed combat which should be 
the backbone of your AD&D* 
game adventures. 


So here, we'll be describing all 
sorts of different combat ma- 
neuvers which your characters 
can perform in combat. 

These maneuvers aren't lim- 
ited to warrior-classes alone. 
Anyone can perform any of 
these maneuvers, provided he 
has the right weapon or equip- 
ment. Any priest with a shield 
can perform a Shield-Punch or 
Shield-Rush; any rogue or mage 
with a good attack can Disarm a 
foe. But warriors will be per- 
forming these maneuvers most 
often. 

Each of these maneuvers, 
when used in combat. consti- 
tutes one Attack. Characters 
with multiple attacks per round 
can mix and match their ma- 
neuvers. A character with two 
attacks per round could perform 
one Strike and one Parry. for ex- 
ample, one Called Shot and one 
Disarm, one Pin and one Grab, 
two Strikes. two Parries. or 
whatever combination he 
wanted. 


Called Shots 


Take a look at 
the Dungeon Master's Guide. 
page 58. There, you'll find the 
rules for Called Shots. under 
“Hitting a Specific Target." 

As you'll see in those rules. 
when you wish to make a Called 
Shot. vou announce this before 
initiative is rolled, and you re- 
ceivea * 1 penalty to your initia- 
tive. Then. when your turn 
comes up in combat, you suffer 
a —4 penalty to your attack roll. 
Naturally, you can take Called 
Shots with melee, thrown, and 
missile weapons, and even with 
weapon-like spells such as 
magic missile. 

Called Shots can be used for a 
variety of purposes. The most 
important of these are: Disarm- 
ing a weapon: striking a specific 
body part: smashing something 
being held: bypassing armor; 
and special results. 


Disarming a weapon warrants 
its own maneuver, so you'll find 
"Disarm" below. 


Striking A Specific Body Part 
As it mentions 
in the DMG, again under “Hit- 
ting a Specific Target" the nor- 
mal AD&D* game is not geared 
toward a hit-location system 
which chronicles where every 
blow lands and which body 
parts get injured. We'll be pre- 
senting some options for that 
sort of thing later in this chap- 
ter, but this section concerns 
something slightly different. 

Monsters often have body 
parts or features with extraordi- 
nary or magical effects: exam- 
ples include the eyes of the 
beholder, tentacles of the car- 
rion crawler, individual heads of 
the chimera, and so on. Many 
animated statues are motivated 
by a medallion, inscription, or 
imbedded gem. 

A hero can take a called shot 
to attack those very specialized 
locations; this is a very heroic 
thing to do. It's up to the DM to 
determine how much damage 
such body parts can take; some 
will take as little as 1 point of 
damage before being destroyed. 
while others may be expressed 
in fractions of the creature's nor- 
mal hit point total. 


Smashing Something 
Being Held 


Often, an enemy will be holding 
something and a hero will not 
wish him to hold on to it. If the 
attacking character wishes to 
knock it out of his hand, that's 
the Disarm maneuver: if he 
wishes to destroy ít in the oppo- 
nent's hand. that's Smashing 
Something Being Held. 

If an alchemist is holding a 
bottle of flammable liquid to 
hurl at the party. it's very heroic 
to swing a sword or throw a 
knife and smash it while he 


65 


holds it up to throw: With one 
blow, you've protected your 
friends and immolated an evil 
enemy. If a demonic foe has fi- 
nally gotten his hands on the 
Cursed Wand of Anti-Life, it's 
more than appropriate to fire an 
arrow or quarrel and smash it in 
the demon's hands. 

Again, the DM decides how 
many points it takes to smash 
such things. In the case of a vial 
of liquid, it's not much—one or 
two at most. 


Bypassing Armor 

This option is 
not present to let heroes bypass 
or ignore the AC value of normal 
armor. If that were allowed, all 
PCs and all monsters would be 
using the Called Shots maneu- 
ver almost exclusively, which 
would be very annoying. 

No, the Bypassing Armor op- 
tion is used when the DM has in- 
troduced a monster or enemy 
which can't be beaten any way 
except through the discovery 
and exploitation of its "weak 
spot." Like Talos, the invulnera- 
ble bronze man of Greek myth. 
these monsters are impossible 
to damage (this is usually ex- 
pressed as a monstrous AC and 
an invulnerability to any but the 
most powerful of magical 
weapons— +4 or better); how- 
ever, each one has a weak spot. 

These weak spots are always 
visible to the eye, if the hero 
thinks to look for it and can see 
the body part where it is. (For 
example, a dragon might not 
want to fly: this is so that it can 
keep its wings folded down over 
its unarmored spots.) A clever 
warrior will realize that it's cov- 
ering up for something and try 
to trick it into moving its wings. 

If a hero is bright enough to 
look for the weak spot, and per- 
haps trick a monster into show- 
ing the weak spot, the warrior 
can then take a Called Shot and 
hit it. He'll do the monster great 


Combat Rules 


damage (or perhaps kill it out- 
right; that's for the DM to deter- 
mine). 

Examples: A dragon which 
has invulnerable hide (but 
which,  suspiciously. never 
opens its mouth to breathe 
flame ... because its inner 
mouth is not armored); a me- 
chanical man with a small, 
nearly-invisible slot used by the 
inventor to open it up (but 
which a hero with a knife can 
use to damage its internal ma- 
chinery); a warrior with ar- 
mored skin but an unarmored 
ankle; a mummy which keeps 
one arm crossed over its chest to 
protect its otherwise unde- 
fended heart: a 9' high golem 
whose weak spot is the unseen 
top of its head. 

Again, this only works when 
the DM has created a monster 
which can (or must) be defeated 
in this very way. If a fight isn't 
going the characters' way but 
the characters are gradually do- 
ing damage to the monster, then 
the monster probably isn't one 
of these invulnerable-beasts- 
with-weak-spots, and it's point- 
less to take lots of called shots at 
random body parts "just in 
case." 


Special Results 


Finally, the 
Called Shot can be used for a vari- 
ety of special results, especially 
neat and interesting results such 
as the ones you see in movies and 
fiction. Examples: 

Carving Initials Into Some- 
one. Each successful Called 
Shot will enable a character 
with a sharp blade to slice one 
letter or initial into a tabletop, a 
wall . . . or the flesh of an oppo- 
nent. This does only one point of 
damage. and has one of two re- 
sults: Against an enemy of equal 
or lower level or influence, it can 
cause the enemy to lose morale 
or surrender (DM choice): 
against an enemy of equal or 


higher level or influence, it will 
be considered such an insult 
that this enemy will not rest un- 
til you are dead. Thus, it is best 
performed against enemy min- 
ions to impress and scare them, 
to persuade them to run away or 
help you. Performed against en- 
emies who are your equal ín 
ability or status. this maneuver 
merely earns you a foe for life. 

Cutting Buttons Off. Each 
successful Called Shot will en- 
able a character to snip off one 
button, brooch, gem or other 
sartorial element from an ene- 
my'soutfit. It can also be used to 
flip a necklace off someone's 
head. spring the catch on a 
bracelet, etc. This has the same 
good effects as carving initials 
into someone, but will not earn 
you the enmity of an opponent 
who is your equal. 

Stapling. This classic maneu- 
ver is best performed with a 
thrown knife or with an arrow or 
quarrel, though it can be per- 
formed with sharp melee weap- 
ons. The target must be near 
some piece of furniture or wall, 
and that furniture or wall 
should be wood. plaster. or any 
other material that such a 
weapon will penetrate. With a 
successful Called Shot, you sta- 
ple some item of the target's 
clothing (your choice) to that 
nearby surface. The target must 
spend a combat round getting 
himself free. (This does not re- 
quire any sort of roll; it just 
takes a few moments to pull the 
knife free, tear the cloth of his 
garment, whatever it takes.) If 
someone attacks him while he is 
pinned, he suffers a -2 penalty 
to AC (i.e., a 3 becomes a 5) and 
attacks. If the target is stapled 
and must defend himself while 
trying to tear himself free, he 
suffers those AC and attack pen- 
alties but will be able to tear 
himself free after a total of three 
rounds. 

Hostage-Taking. If a charac- 
ter successfully grabs a victim 


66 


during one round (see the Grab 
maneuver, below). he may use a 
Called Shot on his next round to 
put his dagger to the hostage's 
throat. This does no damage to 
the hostage, but the attacker 
can then, at any time, drive the 
knife home for twice normal 
damage (which he will probably 
do if the hostage does not sur- 
render. or if someone else he is 
threatening does not surrender.) 


Disarm 


The Disarm is 
a specific variation on Called 
Shots. With the Disarm. the at- 
tacker takes a Called Shot at the 
weapon his target is currently 
using. 


Disarm vs. Single-Handed 
Weapons 


With the basic 
Disarm maneuver, the attacker 
follows the normal rules for 
Called Shots (announcing his 
intention before initiative and 
receivinga * 1 modifier to initia- 
tive, and then suffering a —4 at- 
tack penalty); if his attack is 
successful. he will (normally) 
cause his enemy's weapon to go 
flying from his enemy's hand. 
Roll 2d6. The number rolled is 
the number of feet the weapon 
flies. Roll 1d6. The number 
rolled determines which direc- 
tion the weapon goes. (This is 
described in terms of the attack- 
ers facing. Straight Ahead 
means straight ahead from the 
attacker; Behind means behind 
the attacker. 


Straight Ahead 
Ahead, Right 
Behind, Right 
Straight Behind 
Behind, Left 
Ahead. Left 


OU e O N | 
"www 


This Disarm can also be used 
on magic wands, crystal balls. 
and any other sort of magical 
apparatus which is held in one 
hand. If the item is worn (like 
jewelry). it cannot be Disarmed. 
(Note: Weapons, when used, 
cannot be worn like jewelry.) 


Disarm vs. Two-Handed 
Weapons 


Disarm does 
not work nearly so well against 
two-handed weapons. If you 
perform a Disarm against a 
wielder of a two-handed weapon 
(including magical staves), it 
merely knocks the weapon out 
of alignment briefly: the weap- 
on's wielder automatically loses 
initiative on the next round. 
However. two Disarms made 
against the wielder in the same 
round will knock the weapon 
free; roll only 1d6 to see how 
many feet it flies. and 1d6 to see 
which direction it goes. 


Naturally, the two Disarm ma- 
neuvers don't have to come 
from the same character. Two 
characters can work together to 
disarm the two-handed wielder; 
or, one character with multiple 
attacks in a round can do the job 
himself. 

If a character finds his two- 
handed weapon partially dis- 
armed, and he still has at least 
one attack to perform this 
round, he can elect to forget 
about his next attack and may 
use that attack to recover his 
weapon instead. 

Example: Torreth and Am- 
stard are fighting, Torreth with 
long sword and shield, Amstard 
with two-handed sword. Both 
characters have two attacks per 
round. Torreth has initiative. He 
successfully Disarms Amstard, 
drawing his weapon out of line. 
Amstard now has his first attack 
of the round. He can either 
punch Torreth with his gaunt- 
leted fist, in which case his 


di 
al 


67 


sword will still be out of line, or 
he can recover from the Disarm. 
He chooses to recover. He 
swings the weapon back into 
line and is ready for the next ex- 
change. He suffers no initiative 
penalty on the next turn. 


Disarm vs. Shields 


Disarm is only 
of partial usefulness when 
struck against a shield. It won't 
tear the shield loose from the 
wielder's arm. However, it will 
draw it out (knock it out of align- 
ment, so that the wielder is not 
protected by it). For the rest of 
the round, the shield-wielder 
loses the AC bonus of the shield 
(and any magical benefits, too). 
At the start of the next combat 
round, even before initiative is 
rolled, the character regains his 
shield's AC bonus. 

If a shield has other proper- 
ties, those stay in effect, even 
when the shield is Disarmed out 


Combat Rules 


of alignment. For example, let's 
say a shield radiates a protec- 
tion from evil spell. If it's Dis- 
armed, and drawn out of 
alignment. its wielder still gets 
the benefits of that protection 
from evil spell. Only when he 
drops the shield or has it forc- 
ibly wrested away from him 
does he lose that benefit. 

As with the Disarming of two- 
handed weapons, if a character 
finds his shield disarmed, and 
he still has at least one attack to 
perform this round, he can elect 
to forget about his next attack 
and may use that attack to re- 
cover his weapon instead. 

Example: At the start of the 
next round, Amstard's ally Je- 
ter. carrying a halberd, joins the 
fight. Torreth wins initiative 
again. He takes an ordinary 
strike at Amstard and misses. 
Jeter chooses to Disarm Tor- 
reth's shield *4. He success- 
fully Disarms it. Now, Amstard 
takes his shot, his chances 
greatly improved because Tor- 
reth's shield bonus to AC 
doesn't come into play. He 
smites Torreth with a mighty 
blow. Torreth has another at- 
tack this round: Realizing that 
he's going to get hurt if he 
doesn't have his shield up. he 
forgets about a second attack 
and uses that time to bring his 
shield back up. 


Thrown-Weapon and 
Missile Disarms 


You can per- 
form the Disarm maneuver with 
thrown weapons and missile 
weapons. 

When throwing small (S) 
weapons. you sulfer an addi- 
tional -2 attack penalty be- 
cause these weapons don't have 
a lot of weight: it's harder for 
them to knock the weapon out 
of someone's hands. Medium 
(M) or larger weapons don't suf- 
fer this penalty, nor do arrows. 
quarrels. or sling stones. 


Thrown-weapon and missile 
Disarms may only be performed 
against single-hand weapons. 
They automatically fail vs. two- 
hand weapons and shields. 
Expert Disarms 

If you're a very 
experienced fighter. and are 
willing to suffer a serious pen- 
alty in order to impress your en- 
emy. you can perform an 
"expert disarm" against single- 
hand weapons only. This suffers 
the penalty of two Called Shots: 
Announce intent before initia- 
tive, then suffer a *2 to initia- 
tive anda -8 to hit. 

But if it does hit, when you 
Disarm the weapon, you can 
send it pretty much where you 
want it to, within 12 feet of the 
target. If. for instance, one of 
your allies has lost his sword, 
and your enemy is wielding a 
comparable sword, you might 
wish to Expertly Disarm your 
enemy's sword to land right in 
front of your friend. Or, if you're 
fighting with a dagger and your 
enemy has a sword you want. 
you might Expertly Disarm his 
blade to fly up into the air; you 
drop your knife and the sword 
drops right into your hand. 

This is an almost preposter- 
ously heroic sort of thing to do 
(it only happens in the most 
swashbuckling fiction and mov- 
ies, after all) so the DM may not 
wish to allow this option in a 
more gritty or realistic cam- 
paign. On the other hand, he 
may grant bonus XP to charac- 
ters with the temerity to try it 
...and succeed! 


Grab 


The Grab is 
another type of Called Shot. To 
perform it, you must have at 
least one hand free: two hands 
are better if you're grabbing and 
trying to hold a person. 

When performing the Grab. 


begin as with a Called Shot (an- 
nounce before initiative, *1 to 
initiative, —4 to hit). 

If you hit, you've gotten your 
hand on whatever it was you 
were trying to grab: It could be 
an enemy's weapon, an impor- 
tant item you're trying to re- 
trieve, or any such thing. 

However, just because you've 
grabbed hold of the object 
doesn't mean that you're in con- 
trol of it. If some other person al- 
ready has hold of the object, he's 
going to struggle with you for 
control. 

In the same round that you 
performed the grab, roll 1d20. 
Your opponent will do the same. 

Compare the number you 
rolled to your Strength ability 
score. Whichever one of you 
rolled better against his score 
won the tug-of-war contest. 

For purposes of the Grab, all 
18 scores (01-50, 51-75. etc.) are 
just 18. However, in case of a tie, 
a higher-percentile 18 beats a 
lower-percentile 18. (For in- 
stance, an !9/4o beats an !®/30, an 
15/5o beats an !5/oeo, etc.) 

Example: Rathnar the Bar- 
barian tries to grab the Ruby 
Orb of Blassendom from the 
hands of his enemy. He success- 
fully rolls to hit and gets his free 
hand on the Orb. 

Rathnar is Strength 17. His 
enemy is Strength 15. Both roll 
1d20. 

Rathnar rolls a 10. He's made 
his roll by 7. His enemy rolls a 9. 
He's made his roll by 6. Rathnar 
snatches the Orb away. 

If you grab something and 
then fail your Strength ability 
roll. then you've lost: Your en- 
emy has snatched the object 
back out of your hand. 

A tie (for instance, if both of 
you made your roll by 5, or both 
missed it by 2, or came up with 
any other identical answer) 
means that you re-roll. during 
the same round. Treat this sec- 
ond roll as if it were a second at- 
tack in the same round for 


Combat Rules 


determining when in the round 
it takes place (in other words. it 
will take place after all other 
characters have performed their 
first maneuvers for the round). 

However, all these Strength 
rolls resulting from a single 
Grab maneuver are counted as 
one "attack:" if a character can 
make two attacks in a round, 
and his first attack is a Grab. 
and the grab leads to two or 
three Strength rolls due to 
struggling. that's all still only 
one attack. The character still 
gets his second attack later in 
the round. 


Grabbing A Person 


If vou're Grab- 
bing someone to hold him 
against his will, you need to con- 
sult the Wrestling rules from the 
Players Handbook. pages 97- 
98. Also, see below under 
"Punching. Wrestling. and Mar- 
tial Arts." 

If you're Grabbing someone 
and you use only one hand, you 
have two strikes against you. 
First, the attack is treated as a 
Called Shot, with the usual pen- 
alties; second, you're treated as 
if your Strength ability score 
were 3 less. If you have a 
Strength of 15 and grab some- 
one one-handed, you make your 
Strength roll as if you had a 
Strength of 12. 

(Strengths of 18 aren't auto- 
matically dropped to a 15; it de- 
pends on the 18 Strength's 
percentile bonus. An !*/oo drops 
toan !8/s1. An 18/91-18/99 drops to 
an !5/o1. An !9/7e-!5/o0 drops to a 
plain 18. An !5/5i-!/75 drops toa 
17. An !5/o: drops to a 16. And 
the plain 18 drops to a 15.) 

If vou use both hands, you 
don't have to use the Called 
Shot rules; you can make a 
Wrestling attack without an- 
nouncing it far in advance, and 
don't suffer the +1 initiative or 
—4 to hit penalty. Also, vou get 
to use your full Strength score. 


Determine the results of your at- 
tack as a Wrestling attack. 

If your opponent has any at- 
tacks left this combat round, he 
can respond with a Wrestling. 
Punching, or other attack (such 
as stabbing you with a short 
weapon. for instance). If your 
Wrestling attack roll resulted in 
a hold of some sort (any result 
on the “Punching and Wrestling 
Results" chart with a “*” beside 
it), he has a -4 penalty to hit 
with any attack but another 
Wrestling attack. However, he 
can use his attack to try to break 
your hold (using the Strength 
roll tactic described above, un- 
der the description for Grab). 


Grabbing a Monster 


The same 
rules apply to grabbing mon- 
sters . . . but there are a couple 
of other things to consider. 

No Strength Ability Score. 
Most monsters aren't listed with 
a Strength ability score. This 
makes comparisons a little diffi- 
cult. In general. if the situation 
ever comes up. the DM should 
decide for himself what 
Strength a specific monster has. 

Here's one rough rule of 
thumb to approximate a 
Strength score: Determine how 
much damage the monster can 
do with its single largest attack. 
That's your starting number. (In 
other words, if it does 1-8 dam- 
age with its worst attack, you 
start with the number 8.) 

If the monster has multiple at- 
tacks, add 1 to the starting num- 
ber per extra attack the monster 
has. 

Add 8 to the number if the 
monster is an animal known for 
its ability to carry weight 
(horses. pegasi, camels) or con- 
tains parts of such a monster (as 
the hippogriff does). 

The DM may further adjust 
this number as he desires. 

The result is a rough measure 
of the monster's Strength. 


69 


(Yes, there will be many exam- 
ples which don't adhere well to 
that rule of thumb. But it's 
someplace to start.) 

Example: The Nightmare has 
attacks of 2-8/4-10/4-10. Its larg- 
est possible attack is 10 (our 
starting number); it has two ex- 
tra attacks per round (fora +2 
to that starting number): it’s a 
horse-like animal (for a +8). Fi- 
nal Strength score: 20. 

Size Difference. Also, the rel- 
ative size of the two combatants 
is important. Humans are 
medium-sized (M) "monsters." 
They have an advantage when 
grabbing small monsters (such 
as goblins. imps. and children, 
for instance) and a disadvantage 
when grabbing large ones (drag- 
ons, golems and hippopotami, 
for example). 

Treat a character's Strength 
as 3 higher when he is grabbing 
and struggling with a smaller 
monster. and 6 lower when 
grabbing and struggling with a 
larger one. (This bonus or pen- 
alty is halved with player- 
character races and 
demihuman NPCs. Thus. half- 
lings. goblins. kobolds and 
gnomes are ata -3 when wres- 
tling with Medium-sized oppo- 
nents such as humans: 
Dwarves, because they are so 
close to human-sized, are not. 
Humansare ata mere +1 bonus 
to Strength when wrestling with 
halflings, goblins, kobolds and 
gnomes.) 

Grabbing is performed with 
hands only. The character may 
be wearing gloves or even the 
Cestus described in the Equip- 
ment chapter of this book, but 
may not be holding any other 
weapon in his Grabbing hand. 


Hold Attack 


This is a sort of 

non-attack maneuver. 
The Hold Attack maneuver is 
a way for a character to delay 
making his attack until later in 


Combat Rules 


the combat round. It's usually 
performed when the character 
is hoping that battle circum- 
stances will change so that he 
can get a shot in somewhere 
that is currently too well- 
defended. Archers use this ma- 
neuver a lot, so that they can 
snipe more effectively. 

To perform the Hold Maneu- 
ver, the character, when ít's 
time for him to announce his in- 
tention, says “I'm holding my 
maneuver.’ Combat proceeds to 
the next character. 

Then, once everyone has gone 
in the round, as secondary at- 
tacks are being determined, the 
DM again asks the character 
what he's going to do; he can 
take his action then. If he does 
not, he forfeits that attack. 


Characters With 
Multiple Attacks 


If a character 
already has multiple attacks in 
a round, he can still perform the 
Hold Attack maneuver with any 
or all of hís attacks. This can 
make things a little compli- 
cated, but it's not a lot of trou- 
ble. 

Example: In this fight, 
Rathnar the Barbarian (who has 
one attack per round). Drusilla 
the Spear-Maiden (who has two 
per round), and Lacksley the 
Archer (who has three per two. 
and has two this round) are 
fighting a jungle warrior (two at- 
tacks per round) and his mon- 
strous jaguar ally (three attacks 
per round). 

This round, Lacksley wants to 
shoot the jaguar: but he's still 
caught in a spring-loaded ani- 
mal trap. and Drusilla is be- 
tween him and the jaguar. 

The player-characters win ini- 
tiative. Drusilla uses her first at- 
tack to spear the jungle warrior. 
Rathnar uses his sole attack to 
swing his axe at the jaguar mon- 
ster. Lacksley announces that 
he's holding his maneuver. Now 


it's time for the monsters to re- 
spond: the jungle warrior at- 
tacks Drusilla with his own 
spear. and the jaguar-monster 
jumps on Rathnar and uses one 
of its two paw hits. 

It's time for secondary ma- 
neuvers. Drusilla misses her 
second strike. Rathnar has no 
second strike. It's time for Lack- 
sley to act. He asks the DM if 
Drusilla has moved out of posi- 
tion yet, and the DM rules that 
she has. He fires, scoring a hit 
on the jaguar monster. The jun- 
gle warrior stabs Drusilla again 
with his second strike, and the 
jaguar latches hold of Rathnar 
with his second paw strike. 

It's time for tertiary maneu- 
vers. Lacksley. because of his 
Hold Attack maneuver, now 
takes what would have been his 
secondary maneuver. He shoots 
the jaguar again, killing it; it 
rolis off Rathnar before it can in- 
flict its third attack. a deadly 
bite or an even more deadly 
rake. 


Parry 

Take a look at 
the Dungeon Master's Guide, 
page 61. at the "Parrying" op- 
tional rule. 

That's one way to simulate a 
fighter going on the defensive: 
the optional Parry maneuver 
presented here is done a differ- 
ent way. 

To perform this Parry. you 
must announce before initiative 
is rolled that you're going to 
Parry. (If you have more than 
one attack per round, you must 
announce how many of them 
are going to be Parries.) 

Then, during the round, the 
first time an attacker strikes at 
you (even if it's before your turn 
to strike). you roll your Parry. 
Roll to hít your attacker, and roll 
vs. his AC (including all bonuses 
for shield, magical items, etc.). 
You can use your weapon at its 
normal chance to hit, or your 


70 


shield at a *2 to your chance to 
hit (plus any magical bonus the 
shield confers). If vou hit, his at- 
tack is parried and does you no 
damage. 

You can Parry thrown weap- 
ons. but not missile attacks 
(quarrels. arrows, sling stones, 
magic missiles, etc.). 


Choice of Parries 


You don't nec- 
essarily have to Parry the very 
first attack made against you 
... though that is the simplest 
way to do things. If you prefer. 
you can choose which attacker 
you're going to Parry. 

Example: Amstard is fighting 
an ogre and its idiotic goblin 
jester. Before initiative is rolled, 
heannounces that he'll be using 
one of his two attacks to Parry. 

The NPCs win initiative and 
attack. The jester attacks first. 
Amstard announces that he's 
not Parrying this attack. The 
jester hits him, doing minuscule 
damage. Then the ogre attacks. 
Amstard announces that he is 
Parrying this attack. The ogre 
rolls to hit, and succeeds: Am- 
stard rolls to hit, and succeeds 
in Parrying the attack. 

Then. its the player- 
characters’ turn. Amstard still 
hasanattack left, and so swings 
at the ogre. 

If a character Holds his Parry. 
anticipating that some other at- 
tacker will swing at him, but 
that attack never materializes 
(for example. because that spe- 
cific opponent went somewhere 
else). and he's still suffering at- 
tacks this round, he can use that 
Parry against one of these other 
attacks. He may not, however, 
apply it against an attack that 
has already taken place. 


Polearm Parries 


If you're wield- 
ing a polearm, you can parry an 
attack from another character 


Combat Rules 


wielding a polearm, even if that 
character is attacking someone 
else, To do this, you must be 
within range either of that at- 
tacker or his intended victim. 

Example: Amstard is wielding 
a halberd from behind the 
shield-wall his friends are hold- 
ing. Amstard announces, before 
initiative, that he'll use one of 
his attacks for a Parry and the 
other for an attack. After initia- 
tive, an NPC with a glaive takes 
a swing at Drusilla. Though the 
glaive-wielder is out of Am- 
stard's range. Drusilla is right in 
front of Amstard. easily within 
his range. Amstard rolls his 
Parry. rolling against the glaive- 
wielder's AC, and hits; he par- 
ries the attack. When it's time 
for the PCs to attack. Drusilla 
puts the glaive-wielder down 
and Amstard swings his halberd 
against another enemy. 


Missile Weapon Parries 


In desperate 
situations, a character can 
parry with a missile weapon he 
is holding (bow, crossbow, or 
staff sling. but not sling). If he is 
successful with his parry, 
though. his weapon is ruined: 
the enemy's attack has de- 
stroyed it. He may continue par- 
rying with it until it is 
completely destroved (rules for 
destroying weapons and armor 
appear in the Equipment chap- 
ter of this book), but it may 
never again be used for its origi- 


nal purpose. 
Parrying from the DMG 


Even if you 
use this Parry maneuver, you 
can still use the Parrying option 
from the Dungeon Master's 
Guide, page 61. 

Incidentally, since the DMG's 
Parrying counts against all at- 
tacks coming in on the fighter 
that round, the fighter needs to 
announce, before initiative is 


rolled, that he is performing the 
Parrying maneuver for the AC 
bonus. 


With the Pin 
maneuver, you move close to 
your enemy (right up in his face) 
and use either a weapon or your 
shield to pin. or trap. his 
weapon—usually by pressing it 
against him so that he can't 
move. 

This is like a Called Shot. ex- 
cept that you don't have to an- 
nounce it before initiative and 
you don't suffer a +1 to initia- 
tive. You do still suffer the —4 at- 
tack penalty. 

If you successfully hit, the vic- 
tim can't use his pinned weapon 
until the pin is broken, and you 
can't use your pinning weapon 
or shield until the pin is broken. 

When the pin is first per- 
formed, the victim gets one 
chance to struggle. using a 
Strength roll exactly as de- 
scribed for the Grab maneuver, 
above. If he succeeds, he yanks 
the weapon free: if he has attacks 
left this round. he can use all of 
them. If he fails, the weapon re- 
mains pinned for the rest of the 
round; the victim loses one of his 
attacks for the round (if he only 
had one, he's out of luck until 
next round); but next round and 
in succeeding rounds. his first 
struggle attempt each round 
does not count against his avail- 
able attacks. (Subsequent ones 
in the same round do count as 
attacks.) 

It is possible to Pin someone 
with the missile weapon you are 
carrying (except for the ordi- 
nary Sling). While it's being 
used to Pin, it may not be used 
as a missile weapon. If it was 
armed (an arrow was nocked, a 
quarrel was in place, or a stone 
was in the staff-sling's pouch). it 
loses that missile in the strug- 
gle; the character must reload it 
later. 


71 


Pull/Trip 


This maneu- 
ver is designed to knock oppo- 
nents down. 

When using the Pull/Trip ma- 
neuver, the attacker announces 
his intention when it's his turn 
to attack. He describes how he's 
performing the maneuver to the 
DM. who may rule that it's im- 
possible. 

If it is possible, though, the at- 
tacker rolls vs. the target's AC as 
with any normal attack. 

The target then rolls 1d20 
against his Dexterity. If he suc- 
ceeds, he stays on his feet. If he 
fails, he falls down. Modifiers to 
his Dexterity include: 


+6 Target Was Not Moving 
-3 Target Was Unaware of 
Attack 


The Pull/Trip maneuver is 
best performed on someone 
who is moving and unaware of 
you. A target who is standing 
still (not walking or running) 
and is aware of his attacker is 
very hard to knock down. 


Use of Polearms 


Polearms (and 
any other weapons with long 
staff-like elements—quarter- 
staves, lances, spears, etc.) are 
good weapons to have when 
you're trying the Pull/Trip ma- 
neuver. 

You can Pull/Trip someone at 
the maximum range of your 
weapon, for instance, with no 
additional penalty to hit. 

You can Pull/Trip moving ani- 
mals with a polearm; this is ata 
—6 penalty to hit if the animal is 
Large (but you can't even try it 
on a Large animal without a 
pole of some sort). 

And. finally, they are very use- 
ful for knocking riders off their 
mounts. With a mancatcher or 
polearm (though not with a 
quarterstaff, lance or spear), 
you can attack a mounted rider 


Combat Rules 


and have a good chance of pull- 
ing him from his horse. The 
Dexterity modifiers listed above 
also apply to the rider's chance 
to stay mounted. 


Sap 


Sapping some- 
one—i.e., hitting him over the 
head in order to knock him 
out—is a maneuver you under- 
take when you wish to capture 
an enemy alive (or just incapaci- 
tate him without killing him). 

To do this, the attacking char- 
acter makes a Called Shot at an 
additional —4 to hit (so it's -8 
total. plus the usual Called Shot 
penalties of having to announce 
your maneuver before initiative 
and suffering a * 1 to initiative). 

If the attack hits, the charac- 
ter rolls ordinary damage for the 
weapon. He gets a 5% chance of 
knockout (as per the Punching 
and Wrestling rules) for every 
point of damage he does, up to a 
maximum of 40%. 

Example: Sir Amstard wants 
to knock out a noble opponent 
rather than kill him. He attacks 
to Sap the opponent. Luckily. 
even with the —8 to hit, he suc- 
cessfully hits his foe. With his 
sword, he rolls 6 points of dam- 
age. This gives him a (6x5%) 
30% chance of an instant 
knockout. On his percentile 
dice. he rolls 42; he has failed 
this time. He'll try again. 

The damage done by Sap at- 
tacks is the same as that done 
by Punching: in other words. 
only 25% is normal, or "perma- 
nent; damage. The other 75% 
is temporary. and wears off after 
a short while, as we'll discuss 
later in this chapter. 

When using a special or magi- 
cal weapon to perform the Sap. 
you do not count the weapon s 
attack or damage bonus. You're 
not using the weapon the way it 
is meant to be used; you're hit- 
ting your target with the flat of 
the blade. with the hilt or pom- 


mel of the weapon, etc. There- 
fore, those bonuses don't count 
for anything. 

When performed on a charac- 
ter who is asleep or magically 
held. the Sap maneuver auto- 
matically hits. The chance for 
knockout goes up to 10% per 
point of damage done, up to 
80%. However, if the subse- 
quent percentile die-roll is 81 or 
higher. the victim is not 
knocked out—he's been awak- 
ened by the attack. (Why try a 
Sap maneuver on an already- 
asleep target? Because you may 
want to kidnap him or smug- 
gling him out of a cell and can't 
risk him waking up and alerting 
the guards.) 

The Sap maneuver can only 
be performed with melee weap- 
ons or bare hands; it cannot be 
performed with missile weap- 
ons. 

The Sap maneuver is usable 
only on Small (S) or Medium (M) 
monsters; it will not work on 
Large (L) or bigger monsters 
such as dragons. They just can't 
be knocked out with this ma- 
neuver. 


Shield-Punch 


The  shield- 
punch is a very basic maneuver. 
If you are using a buckler, small 
shield, or medium shield, vou 
can use it to attack with as well 
as defend. by slamming it into 
your target's body. 

When your turn to attack 
comes. simply announce that 
you're shield-punching and 
make your attack roll. You get 
no attack bonus from the shield, 
regardless of its size or magical 
enchantment. 

A shield-punch does 1-3 dam- 
age. plus your Strength bonus. 
Once you have performed a 
shield-punch. you lose the AC 
bonus of the shield for the rest of 
the combat round from now un- 
til your next attack. (If you have 
an attack later in the round, you 


72 


regain the AC bonus then: if you 
don't have an attack until next 
round, you regain the AC bonus 
at the very start of the next 
round.) 

This is a good maneuver to 
perform when you've dropped 
your weapon, as it will do some- 
what more damage than a bare- 
handed attack. 


This maneu- 
ver is like a combination of the 
Pull/Trip and Shield-Punch ma- 
neuvers. 

The attacker must start at 
least 10 feet away from the vic- 
tim, and must have either a me- 
dium or body shield. Basically, 
he runs at full speed up to his 
victim. slamming full-tilt into 
him, hoping to injure him or 
knock him down. 

As with the Shield-Punch, the 
attacker gets no bonus to hit 
from the shield, nor does he get 
the AC bonus of his shield from 
the time he starts the maneuver 
until his next attack. 

If he hits, he does damage 
equal to the Shield-Punch, and 
the target must make a 1d20 
roll against Dexterity to stay on 
his feet. The target applies these 
modifiers to his Dexterity: 


*3 Target Was Moving Toward 
Attacker 

*3 Target Was Not Moving 

-3 Target Hit From Behind 

-3 Target Was Unaware of At- 
tack 


As you can sec, it's more reli- 
able a knockdown than the Pull/ 
Trip. 
However, the attacker also 
has a chance to be knocked 
down. 

If he misses his roll to hit, he 
slams into the target anyway. 
and does no damage to his tar- 
get. He must make his Dexterity 
ability check at a —6 penalty; if 
he makes it, he is still standing, 


Combat Rules 


but if he fails it, he is knocked 
down. Either way, his target re- 
mains standing. 

Even if he succeeds in his at- 
tack roll, he still has a chance to 
fall down. The attacker rolls 
1d20 against his own, unad- 
justed Dexterity. If he fails it, he 
falls down. too. 


Strike/Thrust 


This is the ba- 
sic combat maneuver, and is in- 
cluded here just for com- 
pleteness. 

With the Strike/Thrust ma- 
neuver, the attacker uses the 
weapon he has in hand and 
strikes, swings, or thrusts it at 
the intended victim. If it hits. 
the attack does the damage ap- 
propriate to the weapon and the 
attacker's Strength bonus. 

"Striking" with a Missile Weap- 
on or Thrown Weapon con- 
stitutes firing i/throwing it at 
your target. Usually. you just say 
"Shoot" instead of "Strike" when 
announcing your maneuver. 


Surprise and Flash Maneuvers 


AM of these 
maneuvers, and the many pos- 
sibilities they provide for char- 
acters to customize their 
fighting styles, should give you 
the idea that the DM should be 
encouraging wild. extravagant. 
interesting maneuvers and 
styles in combat. This is a lot 
more entertaining than ordi- 
nary, plodding swing vs. swing 
combat. 

Therefore, the DM should re- 
ward intelligent, creative efforts 
in combat by granting them bo- 
nuses to hit and damage. 

Examples: 

A lightly-armored hero with 
the Acrobatics nonweapon pro- 
ficiency could charge a foe, then 
use his Acrobatics to flip over 
him and strike him from the 
rear: the DM might give him a 
bonus to hit in addition to strik- 


ing at a part of the target's body 
that is unprotected by a shield. 

A crossbowman could use a 
Called Shot against the rope 
holding the chandelier, causing 
the chandelier to come crashing 
down onto the villain's head: in- 
stead of suffering a massive at- 
tack penalty for such a 
preposterous shot, the DM might 
give the player an attack bonus 
for the surprise value of the at- 
tack, plus a percentage change 
for knockout, as per the "Attack- 
ing Without Killing" rules (Play- 
er's Handbook. Page 97). 

A swashbuckler running up a 
flight of stairs with guardsmen 
in hot pursuit could tumble a 
stack of casks down the stairs 
behind him: the DM could give 
him a Pull/Trip maneuver 
against each one of those 
guardsmen, and even an im- 
proved chance to hit, for at- 
tempting this classic move. 

On the other hand, a player 
might come up with a plan or 
maneuver that is merely foolish 
or abusive to the campaign. The 
DM can assign such a maneuver 
minuses to hit and damage. 

Examples: 

Rathnar's player decides that 
if Rathnar makes faces at an orc 
he is fighting. then the orc will 
become spooked and run away. 
When Rathnar attempts this. 
the orc proceeds to make faces 
right back at him, then begins 
the process of cutting Rathnar 
to ribbons. 

Later, after some time at the 
healer's guild. Rathnar is in bet- 
ter armor and is in dire combat 
with another orc. Rathnar de- 
cides that he'll tuck and roll be- 
tween the orc's legs. stand up 
behind him. and cleave him in 
twain from behind. However, 
his player has failed to consider 
that Rathnar is in bulky plate 
mail and knows nothing about 
acrobatics. The DM assigns 
Rathnar a stiff penalty to his 
Dexterity roll when Rathnar 
tries the maneuver. Rathnar 


73 


ends up flat on his back, bang- 
ing against the orc's legs with 
the orc looming over him, and 
the DM assigns the orc a bonus 
to hit Rathnar because of the he- 
ro's clumsy position. 


Don't Say No; 
Determine Difficulty 


A good rule of 
thumb to use, when a player- 
character tries something 
strange or daring in combat, is 
this: Don't say no to his pro- 
posal; just determine the diffi- 
culty of the maneuver in your 
head, give him a general idea of 
that difficulty, and let him try it. 

An easy way to do that is arbi- 
trarily to assign a "difficulty 
number" of 1 to 10 to any spe- 
cial maneuver. Then, have the 
character roll against which- 
ever of his abilities (Strength, 
Dexterity, etc.) that seems most 
closely to pertain to the task. . . 
and subtract that difficulty 
number from his ability. If he 
succeeds in rolling equal to or 
less than his modified ability, he 
has succeeded in his task. 

Example: Drusilla wants to 
try the same mancuver Rathnar 
was going to pull. She, too, has 
no acrobatic training. but is in 
light leather armor. The DM 
thinks that this will be pretty 
difficult for her (though not as 
difficult as it was for Rathnar), 
and assigns the maneuver a dif- 
ficulty factor of 5 if she leaves 
her spear behind. It'll be an 8, if 
she tries to take her spear along 
on the maneuver. He tells Dru- 
silla's player that it is difficult 
but possible, though it will be 
nearly impossible if she uses her 
spear. Reluctantly, she drops 
the spear and pulls out a short 
sword before attempting the 
maneuver. 

Her Dexterity score is 13; with 
the -5 penalty. it's modified to 
an 8. On her combat action. she 
attempts the maneuver. and 
rolls 1d20 against her modified 


Combat Rules 


Dex. She rolls an 8, and achieves 
it exactly; Drusilla rolls between 
the orc's legs, stands up behind 
him. and drives the short sword 
home before he knows what hit 
him. The DM gives her an arbi- 
trary +4 to hit for the surprise 
value of the maneuver. 

Someone with Acrobatics 
nonweapon proficiency might 
be able to perform that same 
tuck-and-roll with no penalty, or 
with a penalty dictated only by 
the type of armor he is wearing. 
See the “Armor Modifiers for 
Wrestling" chart on page 97 of 
the Player's Handbook: those 
modifiers would work equally 
well in this situation. 

Another thing to do when a 
maneuver will probably work 
automatically if the intended 
target doesn't see it coming. is 
to assign a difficulty number to 
the target's chance of seeing it. 
This difficulty could be a pen- 
alty or a bonus, depending on 
how obvious the maneuver is. 
and so could be from 1 to 10 in 
either direction. The DM would 
have the intended target roll 
1d20 against his modified Intel- 
ligence, and if he rolled equal to 
or less than that number, he'd 
see the maneuver coming and 
be able to avoid it. If he failed, 
the DM could give the attacker 
ordinary chances of success, or 
even make the attack an auto- 
matic success. 

Example: Amstard is in a 
street brawl with a big brute ofa 
warrior; they've been punching 
the daylights out of one another, 
and Amstard has just been 
knocked down. His player an- 
nounces that he's trying a clas- 
sic trick: He'll inconspicuously 
pick up a handful of sand and. 
as he's rising to return to the 
fight. he'll dash the sand into his 
opponent's face, blinding him. 

That's a reasonable trick to 
try. The DM decides that the 
brute's chance to figure out Am- 
stard's maneuver is directly pro- 
portional to Amstard's finesse in 


scooping up the sand. He tells 
Amstard to roll against his Dex- 
terity, unmodified, when pick- 
ing up the sand ... and the 
number he makes his roll by 
wil be the brute's difficulty 
number in secing it coming. 

Amstard's Dexterity is 13. He 
rolls a 10 on 1d20, making it by 
3. The brute's Intelligence is 10; 
with the difficulty of 3, his modi- 
fied Intelligence is 7. Secretly. 
the DM rolls 1d20 for the brute. 
achieving an 8: the brute 
doesn't see the maneuver com- 
ing. But Amstard's player can't 
be told that until Amstard is 
committed to his maneuver. 

Amstard now throws the 
sand: this counts as an attack. 
The DM gives him an ordinary 
attack roll to succeed. Amstard 
successfully hits vs. the brute's 
AC. and now the brute is tempo- 
rarily blinded... 

That's how the thought proc- 
ess works, anyway. The players 
should have the opportunity to 
try just about any maneuver or 
approach they can imagine, and 
the DM should figure out how 
likely each try is of success. 
Nothing should be impossible to 
try just because it isn't specifi- 
cally covered in the rules. 


Maneuvers In the Campaign 


AM of the 
above maneuvers and ap- 
proaches can be used in any 
AD&D* game campaign. There 
are a couple of things you 
should realize about them. 

First. they'll add a lot of rich- 
ness of detail to vour combat. 
Using them, you can do just 
about everything in combat that 
you can imagine your character 
doing. However, the flip-side of 
that benefit is that it adds a level 
of complexity to your combat: 
the players and DM have to do 
more thinking about individual 
maneuvers and combat situa- 
tions. Therefore, we don't rec- 
ommend you use these 


74 


maneuvers until you already 
have a firm grasp on the combat 
system, and can run basic com- 
bats with little or no difficulty. 

Second. they'll allow the 
player-characters to be more 
colorful and efficient in combat. 
But the flip-side of this benefit is 
that the NPCs and monsters can 
be equallv colorful and efficient. 
It will be a rude awakening for 
the player-characters when 
they run across a band of evil 
fighters as diverse and accom- 
plished as they are. 


Punching, Wrestling, 
and Martial Arts 


Punching and 
wrestling are described in the 
Players Handbook, pages 97- 
98. We'll elaborate a little on 
those rules here, and introduce 
rules for basic Oriental-style 
martial arts maneuvers. 


'Specializing With Punching 


and Wrestling 
Though every- 

one has a certain knowledge of 
punching and wrestling. so that 
everyone can be considered to 
have a "weapon proficiency" 
you can now Specialize in either 
of the two techniques. 

To Specialize, you must devote 
a weapon proficiency slot to the 
technique. Any character of any 
class can Specialize in Punching 
or Wrestling (or Martial Arts, de- 
scribed later) ... but except for 
the Fighting-Monk (described in 
The Complete Priest's Handbook, 
no character other than a single- 
class Warrior can ever specialize 
in more than one of these tech- 
niques. A single-class Warrior 
can end up specializing in both, 
but may begin play specializing 
in only one of them. 

Specialization does not count 
as a Weapon Specialization. A 
first-level fighter could special- 
ize in both Long Sword and 


Combat Rules 


Punching if he wished to. A 
Rogue, who cannot take any 
Weapon Specialization, can still 
take one unarmed fighting style 
specialization. 

Fighting style specializations 
(i.e., Single-Weapon, Two- 
Hander, etc.) do not grant any 
bonuses to Punching. Wres- 
tling, or Martial Arts combat. 
They're of use only to combat 
with melee weapons. 


Normal Punching Attacks 


Review the 
Punch rules from the Player's 
Handbook, page 98. Remember 
that a normal punch does 1-2 
damage (plus Strength bonus). 
and a punch with a metal gaunt- 
let does 1-3 (plus Strength bo- 
nus), and that 75% of all 
punching damage is temporary, 
and wears off within minutes af- 
ter the combat is included. 

A character can pull his 
punch, so that he does no dam- 
age, or only his punch damage 
(without his Strength bonus). 


Punching Specialization 


If a character 
spends one Weapon Proficiency 
on Punching, thus taking spe- 
cialization with Punching, he 
gains the following benefits: 

He gains a +1 bonus to all his 
attack rolls when punching; 

He gains a +1 bonus to all 
damage when punching; 

He gains a +1 chart bonus 
with all punching attacks; 

He gains one additional 
punching attack per combat 
round (both hands must be free, 
holding nothing, for the charac- 
ter to gain this benefit); and 

If the character wishes, when 
he pulls his punch, he can also 
refuse to do the +2 damage that 
specialization gives him. 


The chart bonus is a reflection 
of the character's superior accu- 
racy with punching. As you al- 


ready know, when the character 
successfully hits, the roll itself 
determines which maneuver 
was made: vou use the chart on 
page 97 of the Player's Hand- 
book, and the attack roll also de- 
termines the maneuver used. 

But on a successful hit, the 
punching specialist can modify 
that result. If he has a chart bo- 
nus of *1. he can choose the 
maneuver one higher or one 
lower on the chart. 

Example: Sir | Amstard 
punches a troll. (He's recklessly 
brave, after all.) He rolls a 12 to 
hit. and this turns out to be a 
successful hit. On the "Punch- 
ing and Wrestling Results" 
chart, we see that this is a Kid- 
ney Punch, doing 1 point of 
damage, with a 5% chance for 
knockout. But Amstard is a 
Punching Specialist with a 
chart bonus of *1. He can 
choose instead for the result to 
be an 1 1-Hook (doing 2 points of 
damage and with a 9% chance 
for knockout), or a 13-Hook (do- 
ing 2 points of damage and with 
a 10% chance for a knockout). 
He changes the maneuver from 
a Kidney Punch to a 13-Hook. 

Only if a character specializes 
in punching and thus has a 
chart bonus can he affect his 
punch results in this manner. 

A character using a Cestus 
does get to add the bonuses to 
hit and damage from Punching 
Specialization to his Cestus 
damage. If he has specialized in 
Cestus too. he can decide from 
round to round which of his bo- 
nuses he will apply this round. 
Additionally, you may use the 
Cestus attack's attack roll to de- 
termine which Punching ma- 
neuver was used with the 
attack; you still use the damage 
for the Cestus instead of the ma- 
neuver, but now also have the 
possibility of a knockout. This 
can make combats with cesti a 
little more complicated. so the 
DM may disallow this rule if he 
chooses. 


75 


It is possible for a Warrior to 
continue to improve his Punch- 
ing abilities: See "Continuing 
Specialization,” below. 


Normal Wrestling Attacks 


Review the 
Wrestling rules from the Play- 
er's Handbook, page 98. Each 
successful wrestling move does 
l point of damage (plus 
Strength bonus, if the attacker 
desires): a continued hold 
causes cumulatively 1 more 
point of damage each round 
than the round before. 

In Wrestling combat, when 
two characters are wrestling, 
each rolls to hit the other—using 
normal attack rolls against the 
opponent's AC, and utilizing the 
"Armor Modifiers For Wres- 
tling" table on page 97 of the 
Player's Handbook for modifiers 
to hit. 

In a single combat round, a 
character can perform Wres- 
tling on the other character, 
with the normal results from the 
Punching and Wrestling Results 
table from that same page. On 
Wrestle results from that table 
which are marked with an aster- 
isk (*), the attacker, if success- 
ful, can maintain that hold until 
it's broken; use the Strength-roll 
rules described above for the 
"Grab" maneuver to determine 
when holds are broken. 

A character can pull wrestling 
damage; he can do no damage, 
or the 1 point associated with 
each successful maneuver, or 
the 1 point plus Strength bonus 
allowed to him, whichever he 
chooses. 

As with punching damage, 
wrestling damage is also tempo- 
rary. 


Wrestling Specialization 


If a character 
spends one Weapon Proficiency 
Slot on Wrestling, and thus spe- 
cializes with Wrestling, he gains 


Combat Rules 


the following benefits: 

He gains a +1 bonus to all his 
attack rolls with Wrestling: 

He gains a +1 bonus to all 
damage with Wrestling (that is, 
all his maneuvers will do 2 
points of damage plus his 
Strength bonus, and continued 
holds cause cumulatively 1 
more point of damage for each 
round they are held): 

He gains a *1 chart bonus 
with all Wrestling attacks; 

He gains a +2 to Strength, only 
for maintaining a wrestling hold 
(i.e.. a Strength 15 character rolls 
against Strength 17 when main- 
taining a wrestling hold, but only 
for that purpose): and 

When he chooses to pull wres- 
tling damage. the character 
may also pull the +2 to damage 
granted by specialization. 

So if, for instance. he hasa +1 
chart bonus, and rolls a 16 to hit 
(Elbow Smash). he can instead 
choose a Trip or an Arm Lock. 
He'll decide based on his cur- 
rent situation: If it's in his best 
interest to put his opponent on 
the ground, he'll choose a Trip. 
and if it's better for him to have a 
maneuver that allows him to 
hold onto his opponent from 
round to round, he'll choose an 
Arm Lock. 

It is possible for a Warrior to 
continue to improve his Wres- 
tling abilities: See "Continuing 
Specialization.” below. 


Martial Arts 


As you saw in 
the Players Handbook. every- 
body knows how to punch and 
wrestle. 

Martial Arts, however, are an- 
other matter. Not every charac- 
ter in a normal medieval-style 
campaign will know how to uti- 
lize oriental-style Martial Arts. 

The Martial Arts described in 
this section aren't any real- 
world fighting style; they're a 
combination of "generic" mar- 
tial-arts maneuvers in the tradi- 


tion of martial-arts movies. 

These Martial Arts are only 
available in a campaign if the DM 
decides that the art is available 
for characters to learn. He must 
first decide if he wants characters 
to be able to use these maneuvers 
in his campaign, which will tend 
to give the campaign a more ori- 
ental flavor: then, if he wishes to 
use them, he needs to establish a 
history for these combat abilities. 
Customarily, they've been devel- 
oped by some distant civilization, 
and recent trade with that cul- 
ture has brought some practition- 
ers and teachers of the art to the 
player-characters' society. 

To learn Martial Arts at its basic 
level, the character spends one 
Weapon Proficiency slot on Mar- 
tial Arts. Once he has spent that 
slot. he can use Martial Arts in the 
same way that other people use 
Punching and Wrestling, as we'll 
describe immediately below. 


Martial Arts Results 


At its basic 
level, Martial Arts skill is used 
just like Punching and Wrestling. 
Martial Arts combat occurs when 
a character attacks with his bare 
hands. feet, and even head. No 
weapons are used. (A character 
can hold a weapon in one hand 
and nothing in the other, attack- 
ing with his weapon one round 
and with his Martial Arts skill in 
the next.) 

As with Punching, damage 
from Martial Arts is handled in a 
slightly different fashion. The 
damage from any bare-handed 
Martial Arts attack is broken 
into two parts: 25% of the dam- 
age from the attack is normal 
damage, while the remaining 
75% is “temporary” damage. 
The Players Handbook, page 
98. discusses temporary dam- 
age. as does this chapter, in the 
section on “Recovery.” below. 

When attacking with Martial 
Arts skill, the character makes a 
normal attack roll against the 


76 


normal Armor Class of the tar- 
get. (If the attacking character 
has armor on, he does suffer the 
"Armor Modifiers For Wres- 
tling" from Table 57 on page 97 
of the Player's Handbook.) If he 
hits, he does the damage listed 
from the maneuver plus any bo- 
nus from his Strength score. 

If the attack roll is successful, 
the attacker consults the table 
below for the result of the at- 
tack. If. for instance, the charac- 
ter rollsa 13 to hit, the result is a 
Body-Punch. doing 1 point of 
damage (plus the attacker's 
Strength bonus for damage). 


Martial Arts Results Table 


96 
Attack Martial Arts DmgKO 
Roll Maneuver 


20* Head Punch 3 5 
19 High Kick 2 10 
18  Vitals-Kick 2 8 
17  Vitals-Punch 2 5 
16 Head Bash 2 ‘$ 
15 Side Kick 1 3 
14 Elbow Shot 1g 
13 Body-Punch V c2 
12 Low Kick E^ 
11 Graze O 1 
10 Body-Punch 1 2 
9 Low Kick 1 l 
8  Body-Punch i- 2 
7  Knee-Shot 1 S 
6 Side Kick LU t5 

5 Head Bash 2 10 
4 Vitals-Punch 2 10 
3 Vitals-Kick 2 15 
2 High Kick 2 20 
1* Head Punch 8 30 
* Or less 
Descriptions of the Maneuvers 
Body-Punch: This is a 


straightforward punch into the 
target's stomach or chest. 

Elbow Shot: With this ma- 
neuver, the attacker plants his 
elbow into the target's chest, 
side, or stomach. 

Graze: This could have 
started out as any sort of ma- 
neuver, but it merely grazed the 
target: it wasn't landed firmly. 


Combat Rules 


Low Kick: The attacker kicks 
the target in the leg or thigh. 

Head Bash: The attacker 
slams his forehead into the tar- 
get's face, which is a stout ma- 
neuver. 

Head Punch: This is a good. 
strong blow with the fist to the 
enemy's head. particularly his 
jaw. 

High Kick: The attacker kicks 
the target in the upper body 
somewhere: Stomach, chest. 
back. or shoulder. 

Knee-Shot: The attacker 
brings his knee up into the tar- 
get's stomach or thigh. 

Side Kick: With this maneu- 
ver, the attacker has time to pre- 
pare and launch a very powerful 
sideways kick (which may be at 
the end of a cinematic leap). 

Vitals-Kick: The attacker 
kicks his target at some vulnera- 
ble point: Groin, kidney, neck, 
solar plexus, etc. 

Vitals-Punch: The attacker 
puts his fist into one of the vul- 


nerable points mentioned im- 
mediately above. 


Specializing in Martial Arts 


The same Spe- 
cializing rules apply to Martial 
Arts: Once the character has 
Proficiency in Martial Arts (by 
spending one Weapon Profi- 
ciency slot), he can Specialize in 
it (by spending another). 

When the character becomes 
a Martial Arts Specialist, he 
gains the following benefits: 

He gains a +1 bonus to all his 
attack rolls with Martial Arts; 

He gains a +1 bonus to all 
damage with Martial Arts; 

He gains a *1 chart bonus 
with all Martial Arts attacks; 

He gains one additional Mar- 
tial Arts attack per combat 
round (both hands must be free, 
holding nothing. for the charac- 
ter to gain this benefit); and 

He may pull his attack just as 
Punching and Wrestling charac- 


ters do, and when he pulls his 
attack, he can also refuse to do 
the * 1 damage that Specializa- 
tion gives him. 


So if he rollsa 15 to hit, and the 
attack hits, he has performed a 
Side Kick. If he uses his +1 chart 
bonus, he can change that into an 
Elbow Shot or a Head Bash. He'll 
probably choose to change it to a 
Head Bash for the improved dam- 
age and improved chance of 
knockout. 

It is possible for a Warrior to 
continue to improve his Martial 
Arts abilities: See "Continuing 
Specialization.” below. 


More Than One Style 


Any character 
can specialize in one of the three 
types of unarmed combat 
(Punching. Wrestling, and Mar- 
tial Arts). 

A single-class Warrior can 
only specialize in one of the 


77 


Combat Rules 


three unarmed combat styles 
when he is first created. After 
first level, however, he may spe- 
cialize in the other two. He can 
take specialization in only one 
style each time he receives a 
new Weapon Proficiency. so he 
could not possibly be a special- 
ist in all three until he reaches 
sixth experience level ... and 
ninth level is more likely. 

Usually, the character. if he 
wants to specialize in more than 
one style, will take either Mar- 
tial Arts or Punching, not both. 
because their usefulness over- 
laps a great deal: and then he'll 
take Wrestling, because Wres- 
tling is useful when the charac- 
ter is being grappled. 


Continuing Specialization 


This is an op- 
tion that is only available to 
single-class Warriors (and to 
Fighting-Monks from The Com- 
plete Priest's Handbook). 

If the warrior continues to de- 
vote Weapon Proficiency slots to 
an unarmed combat style after 
he is already specializing in it, 
he gets the following benefits. 
Note: The character may not 
take more than basic Specializa- 
tion in any of the arts at first ex- 
perience level; thus, at first 
level, he may devote one slot to 
Punching. or one slot to Wres- 
tling, or two slots to Martial 
Arts. but not more than that to 
any of them. At third level, 
when he receives another slot, 
he may devote it then to im- 
prove his Speciaiization. 

For each additional slot de- 
voted to his art: 

He gainsa * 1 bonus to all his 
attack rolls with his combat 
style: 

He gains a +1 bonus to all 
damage with his combat style; 
and 

He gains a +1 chart bonus 
with all attacks in that combat 
style. With chart bonuses of +2 
or more, the character can 


choose any maneuver within 
the range of maneuvers covered 
by his chart bonus (see the ex- 
ample below). 

Example: Cassius the Gladia- 
tor is a Punching Specialist. He 
Specialized in Punching at first 
level, put another Weapon Profi- 
ciency slot into it at third level. 
another at sixth, and still an- 
other at ninth. 

At ninth level, he has a +3 bo- 
nus to attack rolls with Punch- 
ing, a +3 to damage rolls with 
Punching, anda +3 chart bonus. 

Let's say he rolls a 16 to hit 
someone, and that the attack 
does hit. This would normally 
bea Glancing Blow. But he hasa 
+3 chart bonus. He can choose 
for the maneuver, instead of just 
being a rolled result of 16, to be 
anywhere from 19 to 13. He can 
choose for the maneuver to be a 
Wild Swing. a Rabbit Punch, a 
Kidney Punch, a Glancing Blow 
(as rolled). a Jab, an Uppercut. 
or a Hook. 

Of these seven maneuvers, 
Jab and Hook do the most dam- 
age. and Hook has a slightly 
higher chance of knockout suc- 
cess. so he chooses it. With his 
punch. he will do a basic 2 
points for the maneuver, *3 
points from the damage bonus 
he gets for specializing. and any 
bonus his Strength gives him. 


The Complete Martial Artist 


If you wish to 
create a character who is princi- 
pally a Martial Artist, you ought 
to take other Weapon and Non- 
weapon Proficiencies which are 
appropriate to the classic 
martial-arts hero. 

Almost all Weapon Proficien- 
cies are appropriate for the char- 
acter, including all swords, 
bows. and polearms, and espe- 
cially proficiencies with the 
Samurai weapons from the 
Equipment chapter of this book. 

Nonweapon  fProficiencies 
which are especially appropri- 


78 


ate include: (General) Dancing, 
Direction Sense. (Warrior) 
Blind-fighting, Endurance, 
Running, (Rogue, double slots) 
Jumping, Tightrope Walking, 
and Tumbling. 

In campaigns with more clas- 
sical and oriental elements to 
the martial artists, Nonweapon 
Proficiencies such as (General) 
Artistic Ability, (Priest. double 
slots unless Paladin) Ancient 
History, Astrology, Healing, Her- 
balism, Local History, Musical 
Instrument, Reading/Writing, 
Religion, (Wizard, double slots 
unless Ranger) Ancient History, 
Astrology, Herbalism, Reading/ 
Writing. Religion. 

Fighting Style Specializations, 
from this chapter, are also very 
appropriate for the character. 

Naturally, vou won't be able to 
afford all these things for your 
Martial Artist character. even if 
your DM does allow you the In- 
telligence bonus for extra Profi- 
ciencies mentioned earlier in 
this chapter. Think not about 
having all these abilities, but 
about taking specific abilities to 
make the character unique. dif- 
ferent from all the other PCs... 
even if they, too, are principally 
Martial Artists. 

For instance, one character 
could be a Paladin/Swash- 
buckler who takes Weapon Pro- 
ficiency with all Fencing Blades 
(two slots). Specialization with 
the Sabre (one slot), and Special- 
ization with Punching (one slot). 
Another character could be a 
Ranger/Beast-Rider who takes 
Weapon Proficiency with all 
Bows (two slots) and Proficiency 
and Specialization with Martial 
Arts (two slots). This way. no 
two Martial Artists are likely to 
be even remotely alike. 


In Oriental Campaigns 


If your cam- 
paign is based in an oriental set- 
ting. you need to make an easy 
change. Instead of normal profi- 


Combat Rules 


ciency with Punching and Wres- 
tling being free, and proficiency 
with Martial Arts costing one 
slot, normal proficiency with 
Martial Arts is free, while profi- 
ciency with Punching and Wres- 
tling cost one slot each. 


Barehanded Maneuvers 


It's possible to 
use most of the maneuvers de- 
scribed above under "Melee Ma- 
neuvers" when fighting 
barehanded, either Punching. 
Wrestling. or Martial Arts. 

When a character wishes to 
perform a maneuver that's not 
one of the standard maneuvers 
for the barehanded fighting 
style in question, he makes that 
announcement at the appropri- 
ate time in the combat sequence 
(that is. if it's a Called Shot of 
some sort, he announces before 
initiative; otherwise, he makes 
the announcement when he's 
called on for the description of 
his action for the round). 

When his turn comes up. he 
rolls to hit. If he's specialized in 
a barehanded fighting style, he 
still gets the attack bonus for his 
Specialization. If he hits, he 
doesn't do one of the maneuvers 
from his fighting style: he per- 
forms the specific maneuver he 
elected. However, if he's a Spe- 
cialist, he does get the damage 
bonus from his fighting style. 

Here are examples of how this 
works with the specific Melee 
Maneuvers: 


Called Shots: Punching 
and Martial Arts 


A Puncher or 
Martial Artist can perform 
Called Shots. but none will do 
any extra damage. They can be 
very effective in combat in very 
specific situations if the charac- 
ter is trying to perform one of 
the standard Called Shots: 
Striking a Specific Body Part (as 
mentioned earlier. to damage a 


beholder's special eye, for exam- 
ple), Smashing Something Be- 
ing Held (though the attacker 
risks having the contents of 
whatever he's smashing spilled 
on him), and Bypassing Armor 
(again, this only works on mon- 
sters where the DM has de- 
signed a specific weakness into 
the monster). 

A Puncher or Martial Artist can 
also perform a Called Shot to at- 
tack a specific Hit Location. See 
the text on "Hit Locations,” be- 
low. This is the sort of attack the 
character wants to use if he's try- 
ing to hit an enemy in the jaw to 
knock him out, pound him in the 
solar plexus to double him over, 
and so on; all normal rules for Hit 
Locations are used. 


Called Shots: Wrestling 


A Wrestler can 
take a Called Shot in order to 
choose the specific Wrestle ma- 
neuver result he wants. If he 
succeeds, he does not randomly 
roll the wrestle maneuver which 
takes place; he chooses it. This 
is of special usefulness when 
he's trying to achieve a hold 
result. 

Example: A wrestler decides 
to take a Called Shot. Before ini- 
tiative is rolled. he announces 
that he's taking a Called Shot to 
achieve the result of Arm Lock. 
He suffers the usual + 1 to initia- 
tive; when his turn comes up. he 
suffers a —4 to hit. If he hits, the 
maneuver result is Arm Lock, 
regardless of the roll. 

Also, when a fighter is wres- 
tling another character, he 
might find it to his advantage to 
make a Called Shot to pull the 
enemy's helmet down over his 
enemy's eyes, blinding him fora 
combat round or two. 

But, obviously, such suc- 
cesses depend heavily on the 
good-will of the DM. If he thinks 
such maneuvers are more 
bother than color, don't try to 
perform them. 


79 


Disarm 


It's possible for 
a barehanded fighter to disarm 
an armed opponent, but it's 
dangerous. When so trying, the 
barehanded fighter's AC suffers 
a penalty of 2 (for example, a 5 
becomes a 7; he’s having to ex- 
pose himself to attack briefly), 
and his Disarm attempt is at an 
additional —4 to hit. But if it 
hits, it’s just as successful as 
any other Disarm. 


Grab 


As described 
above, the Grab is designed for 
barehanded use, and so suffers 
no penalty when the attacker is 
barehanded. 


Hold Attack 


A barehanded 
fighter can hold his attack with 
no penalty. 


Parry 

A barehanded 
fighter trying to parry a bare- 
handed attack does so at normal 
odds. 

As with Disarm, it's possible, 
but dangerous, for a bare- 
handed fighter to parry an at- 
tack from a melee weapon. The 
Parrying character must suffer 
an AC penalty of 2 (for the same 
reasons described under Dis- 
arm, immediately above), and 
his AC stays disadvantaged un- 
til his next attack comes up. 
Then, when performing the 
Parry (which usually consists of 
getting so close to the enemy 
that the Parrying character can 
get his own hand under the de- 
scending weapon-hand), the 
Parrying character suffers an 
additional —2 to hit. 


Combat Rules 


Pin 


A barehanded 
character can't use the Pin ma- 
neuver to pin someone else's 
bare hand. Use the Wrestling 
rules for such an attempt. 

A barehanded character can 
try to use Pin to pin someone's 
weapon; use the modifiers de- 
scribed immediately above for 
Parry. 


Pull/Trip 


A barehanded 
character can try to Pull/Trip an- 
other character with no addi- 
tional penalty. Barehanded, the 
character can only Trip charac- 
ters who are adjacent to him, 
and cannot Trip any Large crea- 
ture or monster. 


Sap 


A barehanded 
Sapping attack (basically. a 
punch to the jaw) is a classic 
combat maneuver. It can be per- 
formed with Punching and Mar- 
tial Arts, but not with Wrestling. 
As with the regular Sap, the 
barehanded fighter makes his 
Called Shot at an additional —4; 
if he hits, he does normal dam- 
age for his attack, and has the 
normal Knockout chance of 5% 
per point of damage done. 

Between the Sap maneuver 
and the Called Shot for the Head 
Hit Location, the character has 
two attacks that can hit an ene- 
mvy's head. They are very differ- 
ent, however, and so they are 
not redundant. 

The Sap provides a chance for 
knockout; the Called Shot to the 
Head doesn't. 

The Called Shot to the Head 
has several unusual possible re- 
sults (Blindness, Knockdown, 
etc.): the Sap doesn't. 

And the Called Shot to the 
Head can only be used if the DM 
allows Hit Locations in his cam- 
paign. If he doesn't, the Sap is 
all you're left with. 


Shield-Punch 


Since a Shield- 
Punch requires the use of a 
shield, a barehanded character 
obviously cannot perform this 
maneuver. 


Shield-Rush 


Since a Shield- 
Rush also requires the use of a 
shield, a barehanded character 
cannot perform this maneuver. 


Strike/Thrust 


When a bare- 
handed character tries the 
Strike/Thrust maneuver, we call 
ita "Punch" and use the normal 
Punching rules. 


Hit Locations 


We've said be- 
fore that this whole book con- 
sists of optional systems for 
your campaign; well, this Hit 
Locations system can be consid- 
ered very optional. 

The AD&D* game doesn't en- 
courage a hit locations system. 
for the reasons given in the 
Dungeon Master's Guide, page 
72 ("Injury and Death"). Some 
of you still want one, however, 
so in this section we're present- 
ing a Hit Locations system that 
allows you to determine individ- 
ual injuries . . . but stays true to 
the game's philosophy. 


The **Numbed" and 
“Useless” Numbers 

When using 
this system, the first thing to do 
is to calculate your character's 
"Numbed'" and "Useless" Num- 
bers. 

Calculate 2596 (one-fourth) of 
your character's hit point total 
(don't count current injuries; 
this is his starting hit point to- 
tal). Round up if the fraction is .5 
or higher. On your character 
sheet, near the hit point listing, 


write down "Numbed" and that 
number. (You can also use the 
Combat Sheet included at the 
end of this book.) If the result 
was O, write down 1 instead. 

Then, calculate 50% (one- 
half) of your character's hit 
point total. Round up if the frac- 
tion is .5 or higher. On your 
character sheet, also near the 
hit point listing (or on this chap- 
ter's Combat Sheet), write down 
"Useless" and that number. If 
the result was 1, write down 2 
instead. 

Whenever you go up a level 
and gain new hit points, recal- 
culate those numbers. 

Example: Zaross has 27 hit 
points. His Numbed number ís 
6.75 (rounds up to 7). and his 
Useless number is 13.5 (rounds 
up to 14). 


Body Locations 


Now,  when- 
ever you conduct combat, do so 
normally. And every normal blow 
struck is deducted from the char- 
acter's hit points normally. 

Every normal blow struck 
(that is, every blow not declared 
as aimed at a specific Body Lo- 
cation) hits the character's torso 
(i.e.. any point from his shoul- 
ders to his hips). 

However, if you take a Called 
Shot, you can make your strike 
at any one of six other Body Lo- 
cations (head, two arms, two 
legs, and stun-points). 


The Locations 


These are the 
character's Body Locations: 

Torso: As described above. 
The Torso is hit with any non- 
Called Shot. 

Head: Must be hit with a 
Called Shot at an additional -4 
to hit. 

Arms (2): One right, one left. 
Must be hit with a Called Shot. 

Legs (2): One right, one left. 
Must be hit with a Called Shot. 


Combat Rules 


Stun-Points: This rather 
broad category includes the so- 
lar plexus and other nerve cen- 
ters which, when struck, tend to 
cause the victim a lot of pain. 
Stun-Points must be hit with a 
Called Shot at an additional -4 
to hit. 


General Effects 
of Called Shots 


Now, when 
you take a Called Shot against 
one of those special locations, 
interesting things can happen: 

If the attacks damage 
equalled or exceeded the vic- 
tim's "Numbed" number in a 
single blow, then that location is 
Numbed. It is useless for the rest 
of this combat round. At the 
start of the next round, before 
initiative is rolled, the character 
recovers full use of that body 
part. 

If the attack’s damage 
equalled or exceeded the vic- 
tim's "Useless" number in a sin- 
gle blow. then that location is 
injured, and is Useless for the 
rest of the fight. Once the fight is 
over (i.e.. one side or the other is 
defeated, surrendered, or de- 
parted, or the two sides are now 
at peace), the character recovers 
use of the injured body part in 
2d6 minutes. . . or immediately 
upon its being magically healed 
up to the "Numbed" number or 
better. 

For these effects to take place. 
remember that the attack must 
have done the required amount 
of damage in a single blow: mul- 
tiple blows don't add together 
for this purpose. 

Damage from Punching, 
Wrestling. and Martial Arts can 
also cause body parts to become 
Numbed and Useless. 

A Sap attack (described above 
under "Melee Maneuvers"), re- 
gardless of how much damage it 
does, does not achieve the 
Numbed or Useless results. 
That maneuver attempts an in- 


stant knockout; if the knockout 
fails, the victim takes only the 
damage done by the attack and 
none of the special body loca- 
tions results described here. 


Specific Effects 
of Called Shots 


You may be 
asking yourself, "Figuring out 
what a useless arm is all about is 
pretty easy; but what do they 
mean when your head is use- 
less?" 

Avoiding the normal wise- 
cracks that would result from 
such a straight line, let's talk 
about the actual effects of this 
"uselessness" for each of the hit 
locations. 

Torso: The torso doesn't be- 
come useless; the "Numbed" 
and "Useless" numbers have no 
bearing on it. 

Head: When a character takes 
a Numbed or Useless result to 
his head, one of the following ef- 
fects can take place. The DM, 
not the player. chooses which 
one. He can random-roll on 1d6, 
or just choose the one that he 
fancies most. 

(1) Blindness: The character is 
blinded (from the pain, not in- 
jury to his eyes) until the Numb- 
ness or Uselessness ends. When 
a character is blind but still try- 
ing to defend himself, anyone 
attacking him gets a bonus of 
+4 to hit. (If, for some reason, he 
is also kneeling. sitting or flat on 
his back, the bonuses to hit are 
cumulative). 

(2) Deafness: The character 
hears ringing in his ears until 
the Numbness or Uselessness 
ends. The character suffers no 
combat penalty, but cannot 
hear orders or warnings 
shouted at him. 

(3) Dizziness: The character is 
concussed and dizzy. He per- 
forms any Dexterity ability rolls 
with a penalty of —4 until the 
Numbness or Uselessness ends. 
Anytime he is hit in combat for 


more than 2 points of damage, 
he must make a Dexterity abil- 
ity check to avoid falling down. 

(4) Knockdown: The charac- 
ter is knocked flat on his back- 
side by the blow, but does not 
suffer any additional ill effect. 
His head is not really Numbed or 
Useless; as soon as he stands up 
again. the disadvantage for the 
Knockdown goes away. 

(5) Blindness and Deafness. 

(6) Dizziness and Knockdown. 

Arms (2): A Numbed or Use- 
less arm cannot hold a weapon: 
the character immediately 
drops the weapon. The charac- 
ter will not drop a shield 
strapped to the arm, but does 
not get the AC benefit of the 
shield until his arm recovers. 

Legs (2): When a character's 
leg is Numbed or Useless, he 
must immediately make a 1d20 
roll against his Dexterity. If he 
rolls his Dexterity or less, he re- 
mains standing (on one foot): 
otherwise, he flops to the 
ground (and is considered sit- 
ting for purposes of striking at 
him). His movement drops to a 
fourth of what it should be until 
he recovers. Every time he is hit 
for more than 2 points of dam- 
age. he has to make that same 
1d20 roll against Dexterity, and 
will fall down if he fails it. A 
Shield-Rush attack will auto- 
matically knock this character 
to the ground. 

Stun-Points: When a charac- 
ter has taken a "Numbed" or 
"Useless" attack result to à 
stun-point, he has the wind 
knocked out of him and has a 
hard time defending himself. 
His movement drops to half of 
what it should be until he recov- 
ers; and his attackers are at a 
+2 to hit him until he recovers. 
(This bonus is cumulative with 
other attacker bonuses for 
blindness or bad position.) 


Combat Rules 


Recording These Injuries 


It's simple to 
record these injuries. 

You don't record the damage 
separately. All the hit-poínt 
losses are applied against the 
character's normal pool of hit 
points, just as before. 

On the Combat Sheet pro- 
vided at the end of this chapter, 
or on a scratch-sheet. you'll 
want to record any special com- 
bat results and how long they're 
in effect. For example: "Right 
arm useless until combat over.” 


Individual Injuries 
and Healing Magic 


When a char- 
acter who has taken a Useless 
result is healed before the area 
recovers naturally. then the 
healing magic is presumed to 
heal the injured region first. If 
the magic heals one-fourth of 
the character's hit points, the 
Useless body part is working 
fine again. 


Permanent and 
Crippling Effects 

This system 
does not support any perma- 
nent damage or crippling ef- 
fects, in accordance with the 
general AD&D* game philoso- 
phies. 


Monsters and Hit Locations 


These rules 
can be used for monsters, too. 
even those with extra limbs and 
body parts (extra heads, wings. 
tails, etc.). As with humans, it 
takes a "Numbed" shot (one- 
fourth the monster's hit points 
in a single blow) to numb an 
area for one round, and a "Use- 
less" shot (onc-half the mon- 
ster's hit points in a single blow) 
to incapacitate the body part for 
an entire fight. 

Remember that the "Useless" 
number does not mean that the 


monster (or character) has 5096 
of its hit points invested in that 
body part: if it did, a creature 
might have more than 300% of 
its own hit points! The 
"Numbed" and "Useless" num- 
bers are just ways to determine 
how much damage it takes to in- 
capacitate a certain body part, 
and the hit point damage is al- 
ways applied to the victim's nor- 
mal hit point score. 


This System and 
Low-Level Characters 


Low-level 
characters. with their small 
store of hit points. are compara- 
tively easy to hurt in this sys- 
tem. A character with 10 hit 
points has a Numbing number 
of 3 and an Injuring number of 
5. However. since these special 
damage results are all tempo- 
rary. and add a certain amount 
of flavor to combats, you should 
have no difficulty using them 
with characters of any level. 

However, don't forget that all 
these special shots must be 
Called Shots. They don't come 
about because of random die- 
rolls. 


Recovery 


You already 
know how fast characters re- 
cover the use of damaged Hit Lo- 
cations when those locations 
are Useless: It takes only 2d6 
minutes. 

But there are a couple of other 
types of recovery which need 
some elaboration. 


Recovery Of 
Temporary Damage 


As you know, 
damage from Punching, Martial 
Arts, and the Sap maneuver is 
25% normal and 75% tempo- 
rary. 

This means, whenever a char- 
acter is sustaining damage from 


82 


one of these attacks, he must 
calculate which portion of it is 
normal, "permanent" damage, 
which must be healed by magic 
or by medicine, and which por- 
tion is temporary, which will 
wear off after a while. 


Recording Temporary Damage 


Usually, it's too 
much trouble to calculate pro- 
portions on every attack you sus- 
tain. Instead, keep a separate 
track of all damage you receive 
in a single combat from Punch- 
ing, Martial Arts, and Sap at- 
tacks. When the combat is over, 
divide them up into Normal and 
Temporary damage. When you 
have a fraction of .5 (or less) on 
the Normal Damage result, 
round down; all the rest of the 
damage is Temporary damage. 

Example: Sir Amstard is in a 
boxing match with the devastat- 
ing Cassius, and is getting the 
worst of it. He takes one shot for 
5 points of damage, another for 
6, and another for 3, and on this 
third shot Cassius successfully 
rolls his Knockout percentage. 
Amstard is knocked out. 

Amstard has sustained a total 
of 14 points of damage. One- 
fourth, or 25%, of that is Normal 
Damage. That's 3.5. which we 
round down to 3. He's taken 3 
points of Normal Damage. The 
remaining 11 points are Tempo- 
rary damage. 


Recovering From 
Temporary Damage 

A character re- 
covers from Temporary Damage 
at a rate of 1 hit point every five 
minutes. If Temporary Damage 
has caused a character to go un- 
conscious. he'll recover con- 
sciousness when he returns to 1 
hit point or more. 

Example: Amstard, above, 
took 11 points of damage before 
he was knocked out. He'll re- 
cover one point of damage every 


Combat Rules 


5 minutes. After 55 minutes. 
he'll be as healthy as he can be 
until his Normal Damage is also 
healed up. However, since it 
wasn't the Temporary Damage 
he took that knocked him out. 
but a Knockout result from à 
Punching attack, he won't wake 
up from recovery of Temporary 
Damage: recovery from Knock- 
out is handled differently. 


Magical Healing and 
Temporary Damage 


When a char- 
acter who has sustained both 
Normal and Temporary damage 
receives magical healing. the 
healing spell first heals the Nor- 
mal (real) Damage. If it heals all 
the Normal Damage, it then 
goes to work on the Temporary 
Damage. 

Example: Let us say Amstard 
receives a cure light wounds 
spell immediately after being 
knocked out. The priest rolls a 6 
on 1d8. The first three points of 
healing cure his three points of 
Normal Damage. The remain- 
ing three are applied to his Tem- 
porary Damage. When that's all 
done, Amstard is down 0 points 
of Normal Damage and 8 points 
of Temporary Damage. 


Recovery From Knockout 


A Knockout 
result can be reached from 
Punching and Martial Arts at- 
tacks and from the Sap maneu- 
ver. 

When a character is knocked 
out, he must immediately make 
a System Shock percentile roll 
(see "Table 3: Constitution.” in 
the Player's Handbook. page 
15). If he makes the roll, he will 
awaken in 2d6 minutes. If he 
fails the roll. he will awaken in 
2d6 hours. 


Temporary Damage 
and Knockout 


If a character 
sustained enough Temporary 
Damage to render him uncon- 
scious in the same blow as he 
suffered a Knockout, he doesn't 
wake up until conditions for re- 
covery of both the Temporary 
Damage and the Knockout are 
met. 

Example: In a rematch, Am- 
stard pounds Cassius silly until 
his last blow knocks him out. 
That last blow reduced him to 
-3 hit points, rendering him 
unconscious, and Amstard also 
successfully rolled for Knockout 
on percentile dice. So, when 
does Cassius wake up? 

It will take Cassius 20 min- 
utes to recover 4 points of Tem- 
porary Damage, which will put 
himat 1 hpand let him wake up. 
Cassius rolls his System Shock 
roll and is successful, meaning 
that he will wake up from 
Knockout after 2d6 minutes. He 
rolls a 7, so he would wake up in 
7 minutes. 

But both recoveries have to 
finish for him to wake up. After 
7 minutes, he's still uncon- 
scious. and will stay that way 
until 20 minutes are up. 


Magical Healing and 
Knockout 


If a character 
who has been Knocked Out re- 
ceives healing magic (a cure light 
wounds spell or any more power- 
ful healing spell, excluding irrele- 
vant spells such as cure disease 
or neutralize poison). and he suc- 
cessfully made his System Shock 
roll, he'll wake up immediately 
(provided. as usual, that he's 
above O hit points). 

If he receives healing magic 
but failed his System Shock 
Roll, the magic still helps him: 
He may now calculate his recov- 
ery as though he successfully 
made his System Shock roll. 


83 


Combat Conditions 


Not all fights 
take place in wide-open spaces 
with level ground and in condi- 
tions of adequate light. Here. 
we'll talk about what effects bad 
conditions can have on combat. 


Darkness and Blindness 


When things 
are really dark, characters have 
a hard time finding and attack- 
ing their foes . . . and defending 
against their enemies’ attacks. 

Characters and monsters don't 
start suffering penalties in dark- 
ness until it's very dark indeed. 
When it becomes very dark, they 
suffer penalties to hit their ene- 
mies. And if their enemies can 
see better than they can, their en- 
emies get bonuses to hit. 

On page 117 of the Player's 
Handbook is a chart of Visibility 
Ranges. 

Let's add one line to that 
chart: Total Blackness. In Total 
Blackness. all Visibility Ranges 
are 0. 


Combat Modifiers for 
Darkness and Blindness 
Condition Mel. Mis. Infr. 
Bonus 

Clear sky 

(daytime) -0 -0 +0 
Fog, dense 

or blizzard -3 -4 +0 
Fog. light 

or snow -1 -2 +0 
Fog. 


moderate -2 -3 +0 
Mist or 
lightrain -0 -1 +0 


Night, 

full moon -2 -4 +2 
Night, 

no moon -3 -6 +3 
Total 

darkness -4 -6 +3 
Twilight -] -2 +l 


On the chart above, you'll see 
all those same Visibility Ranges 
in the first column. 


Combat Rules 


The second column indicates 
the character's attack penalty 
when he's attacking someone in 
melee combat in that sort of visi- 
bility. 

The third column lists the 
penalties for shooting at some- 
one in ranged combat in those 
visibility conditions. This pen- 
alty is taken once at Short 
Range. again at Medium Range, 
and once more at Long Range 
(sce Table 45 on page 69 of the 
Player's Handbook). 

The fourth column is the 
Infravision Bonus. If a character 
has Infravision, his bonus is ap- 
plied against his attack penalty 
for Melee. and against his attack 
penalty for Missile attacks suf- 
fered at each range step. 


How This Works 


When a char- 
acter is in a situation where he 
suffers a penalty to hit in melee 
combat. he's obviously in some 
dark area. He, and everyone else 
with similar vision, suffers the 
penalties to hit in melee and 
missile combat. 

Example: Rathnar is in a fight 
in pea-soup fog. He can barely 
see his hand in front of his face. 
An enemy looms up in the fog. 
Rathnar strikes at it. . . but suf- 
fers a -3 to hit. The fog is so 
thick that it's difficult to strike 
exactly the right place. He rolls 
an attack that would barely 
have hit his foe in ordinary cir- 
cumstances; in these circum- 
stances. hís blow isa clean miss. 

The missile penalty gets 
worse and worse the further 
away the attacker is from his 
target. 

Example: Sir Amstard, at the 
head of an army. is firing at the 
oncoming army of orcs, which is 
half-way across the plain. The 
orcs are at 200 yards. barely in 
range of the heroes' long bows. 
The weather, however, is drizzly 
and rainy, considered to be Mist 
on the chart above. 


The chart says that Amstard 
and allies take a —1 to hit... at 
each range step. That's -1 at 
short range, another -1 at me- 
dium, and a last -1 at long 
range. Amstard and friends take 
a -3 to hit when firing at the 
ores. 

Suddenly. the cloud breaks 
and a heavy rain falls on every- 
one. The DM rules that it’s the 
equivalent of light fog or snow. 
The orcs haven't yet gotten 
within 140 yards, so they re still 
at long range. Amstard and 
friends fire again. Now, they re 
at -2 to hit per range step. or 
—6 total to hit their enemies. 


How Infravision Works 
(The Simple Way) 


The simplest 
way to use Infravision in these 
circumstances is to ignore that 
fourth column on the chart 
above and just say that Infra- 
vision cancels out all darkness 
penalties. This is simple, easy to 
remember. and doesn't cause 
any combat hassles. 


How Infravision Works 
(The Complex Way) 


If you prefer 
more realism and complexity. 
then Infravision is a help, but 
it’s still not quite as good as be- 
ing in broad daylight. 

With these optional rules. Infra- 
vision can be a big help in times 
of darkness. A character with 
Infravision isn't as disadvan- 
taged by poor lighting conditions. 

First, in melee combat, in any 
condition of darkness where one 
person has better vision than 
the other, he gets a bonus to hit. 
This bonus is equal to the other 
fellow's attack penalty. (The 
character with infravision is still 
subject to the normal penalty— 
in effect, this bonus cancels the 
character's own penalty.) 

Example: It's dark and moon- 
less outside. and Rathnar is 


84 


fighting Aspendale the Elf. 
Rathnar doesn't have Infra- 
vision: Aspendale does. Rath- 
nar. because it's dark and moon- 
less, istakinga —3 penalty to hit 
Aspendale in melee. Aspendale, 
therefore, has a +3 when strik- 
ing at Rathnar. ( —3 for bad light- 
ing. +3 for Rathnar's handicap. 
+3 for infravision bonus). 

Second, in missile combat, in 
similar conditions. the charac- 
ter with the better vision gets a 
bonus to hit his target. This, 
also, is equal to the other fel- 
low's melee, not missile. penalty 
to hit. 

Example: Takíng a beating. 
Rathnar runs off into the dark- 
nessand gets to his bow. Aspen- 
dale accommodates him. Firing 
at Medium Range, Rathnar is at 
a -12 to hit! That's -6 each at 
Short and Medium rangcs. ac- 
cording to the chart above. 

Third. the third column of the 
chart above gives a bonus for 
Infravision. This is applied to 
the character's penalty for me- 
lee combat. and to his penalty 
for missile combat at each range 
step. 

Example: Aspendale returns 
fire. He would be at a —6 per 
cach range step. too. but he has 
Infravision. He gets a —6 at 
Short and at Medium Range, 
but that’s offset by a +3 at Short 
anda +3 at Medium Range. His 
penalty: -6. And because he 
can see better in the dark than 
Rathnar anyway. he gets a bo- 
nus equal to Rathnar's melee 
penalty: +3. His final penalty: A 
mere ~—3. He shoots back at 
Rathnar, hitting him clean on. 


Unstable Ground 


Characters 
sometimes have to fight on un- 
stable ground. Earthquakes hap- 
pen. Giant monsters burrow their 
way up from the depths of the 
earth. shaking everything. Char- 
acters have naval battles where 
they fight on the decks of ships. 


Combat Rules 


When such situations come 
up. the DM decides what the 
force of the ground-movement 
is. If it's sufficiently violent. 
characters will have to make 
d20 rolls against Dexterity at 
the beginning of each combat 
round to stay on their feet. 
Sometimes those Dexterity rolls 
will have bonuses, sometimes 
penalties. When they fail those 
rolls, they fall down. 

The chart below shows sev- 
eral such situations and the 
types of Dexterity ability checks 
they require: 


Dexterity 
Check 
Situation Required? 
Big Monster Yes, at 
Digging Up Dexterity score 


Minor Tremor No 


Major Tremor Yes, at 
Dexterity +3 

Minor Yes, at 
Earthquake Dexterity score 

Major Yes, at 
Earthquake Dexterity -6 

Ship's Deck, 

Slightly Rolling No 

Ship's Deck, Yes, at 

Rolling Dexterity +3 

Ships Deck, Yes, at 


Storm-Tossed Dexterity -3 


So, if a character with 
Dexterity 13 finds himself 
fighting on the deck of a 
storm-tossed ship, each turn 
he'll have to make his Dexterity 
check ata —3: He'll have toroll a 
10 or less on 1d20 or fall down. 


Mounted Combat 


You'll find rules 
for Mounted Combat in the 
Dungeon Master's Guide, pages 
76-77. Let's elaboraté on them a 
bit. 


Jousting 


Jousting is a 
type of combat where two 
mounted warriors, armed with 
lances ride at one another and 
try tospit one another with their 
weapons. 

It's the sport of knights and 
kings, and is very appropriate to 
campaigns with a medieval set- 
ting. 


Initiative 


As a special 
rule, when two riders are joust- 
ing. don't bother with initiative 
rolls. On the first round of a 
joust, the two jousters ride at 
one another and roll to hit; on 
the second, both continue their 
ride, turn around, and start 
back toward one another. 

Allattacks are resolved simul- 
taneously. Initiative does not en- 
ter the picture. 

If jousting is taking place dur- 
ing a larger battle, where other 
things are going on and initiative 
must be rolled. try this: When it's 
time for the jouster who won ini- 
tiative to take his action, the 
jouster who lost initiative also 
gets to make his attack roll, 
though this takes place during 
the middle of the enemy's com- 
bat sequence. This helps simu- 
late the fact that the lance-strikes 
take place simultaneously. 


Multiple Attacks 


When a char- 

acter has multiple attacks in a 
single round, and is jousting. he 
does not get multiple lance at- 
tacks. He can only use that 
lance once in a combat round 
(and loses the next round turn- 
ing his horse, if he's to come 
back and face the same enemy). 
However, that second attack 
in the same round can still be ef- 
fective; the best use for it is for 
the rider to Parry the incoming 
lance attack with his shield. 
This can make a joust a 


85 


lengthier affair—which isn't a 
bad thing: a classic joust should 
go on for a few rounds at least. 


Lances and Dismounting 


The DMG, 
page 76-77, talks about being 
dismounted in combat, but 
doesn't discuss at length the 
usefulness of the lance in dis- 
mounting opponents. 

The lance is designed to dis- 
mount opponents as well as to 
inflict damage. Anytime a lance 
hits a mounted target and does 
8 points or more of damage (af- 
ter doubling). the victim has a 
chance of being dismounted. He 
must roll his Riding proficiency: 
if he fails, he falls for an addi- 
tional 1-2 damage. 

Since both lancers can hit at 
the same time, and both can 
conceivably miss their Riding 
rolls, both can be dismounted si- 
multaneously ... which tends 
to be embarrassing, and can be 
dangerous in large battles. 


Lance Breakage 

Lances often 
break. Any lance that hits and 
does more than 12 points of 
damage. and any lance that has 
been successfully Parried by a 
shield, may break. The player 
rolls 1d6: on a 1 or 2, the lance 
breaks and is useless (except as 
a club). 


Lance Specialization 

If a character 
takes Weapon Specialization in 
lance, he gets the usual benefits 
of attack and damage bonuses. 
But he also gets the following 
benefits: 

He can perform the Shield- 
Rush maneuver with his lance- 
tip. In order for this to do 
damage like a Shield-Rush in- 
stead of a lance strike the char- 
acter must be mounted. and 
must strike a character who has 
metal (or leather-and-metal) ar- 


Combat Rules 


mor or a shield. If the character 
does not have such armor, the 
attack is automatically a lance 
strike. 

He gets a *2 bonus to AC 
(thus, an AC 2 would become a 
0), only when jousting and only 
vs. another jouster. (That is, the 
AC bonus is only against incom- 
ing lance attacks, and only 
works when the defender is 
himself mounted and carrying a 
lance.) 


Horseback Archery 


Only the Com- 
posite Short Bow, Short Bow. 
Daikyu (from this supplement's 
Equipment chapter). and Cross- 
bows may be used from horse- 
back. The Long Bow and 
Composite Long Bow may not 
be. 

Firing a bow from the back of 
a still horse (one which is not 
running) is done at a — 1 penalty 
to hit. 

Firing from the back of a walk- 
ing or trotting horse is done at a 
—2 penalty to hit. 

Firing from the back of a gal- 
loping horse is done ata -4 pen- 
alty to hit. 

In some barbarian tribes, es- 
pecially those who inhabit wild- 
open plains, every warrior 
knows Riding for the tribe's fa- 
vorite riding animal and Spe- 
cializes in Composite Short 
Bow. This makes them very. 
very dangerous opponents in a 
cavalry engagement. 


Tournaments 


Tournaments 
are events where fighters get to- 
gether to compete . . . for prizes. 
to show off their abilities, etc. 

Fighting isn't all that goes on, 
and fighters aren't the only ones 
in attendance. Tournaments are 
huge social events where every- 
one gathers to watch, compete, 
gossip, trade, bet, and sport. But 
fighters are the center-piece; the 


event revolves around them and 
their deeds. 


The Basic Tournament 


The basic 
tournament, in a medieval-type 
setting, consists of a joust com- 
petition. This can take place in 
an ordinary field. but is more 
colorful and entertaining when 
it takes place on a special joust 
list. 


The Joust List 


This field con- 
sists of a long strip of ground 
with a low fence along the mid- 
dle of it; the jousters ride toward 
one another, each with the fence 
to his left, and make jousting 
passes until one or the other is 
dismounted. 

Along one or both long sides of 
the list, stands are set up for on- 
lookers. There may be a box or 
special seating arca for the local 
ruler and his retinue. 

At both ends of the list, where 
the horses turn around, are 
racks of lances for the riders' 
use. At one end of the list is an 
exit to the field where the 
knights and other participants 
have their tents set up. 


The Jousting Competition 


The most pop- 
ular event in a tournament, the 
event which the tournament re- 
volves around, is the jousting 
competition. 

In this competition, all partici- 
pating fighters announce them- 
selves to the seneschal, knights’ 
marshal, or other minor digni- 
tary who docs the actual work of 
running the tournament. There 
is no fee for admission, but each 
entrant must have his own 
mount, armor, and lances. It's 
best if he also has a squire, page 
or friend to wait by his lance- 
rack to hand him a new lance 
when one breaks. 

In some societies, all entrants 


86 


must be of the nobility, but that 
is necessarily left up to each 
DM. 

The jousting competition is 
single elimination. The field of 
entrants is broken down into 
randomly-chosen pairs (some- 
times the choosing is not so 
random, if the organizers want 
to pit especially interesting 
fighters against one another... 
or to rig the tournament re- 
sults). Each pair makes a num- 
ber of jousting passes until one 
is dismounted (or yields the 
field—i.e.. surrenders in order 
to avoid further damage). If 
both combatants are dis- 
mounted in the same pass, they 
get up, remount, and start over. 

The winner of the pair ad- 
vances to the next round of 
matches; the loser is consoled. 

When the number of entrants 
is an odd number, one fighter 
doesn't have an opponent. He 
gets to "fight the bye." An oppo- 
nent is chosen for the jouster: 
Someone who lost in an earlier 
match. a warrior not entered in 
the competition, etc. Regard- 
less of who wins the match. the 
jouster is advanced to the next 
round (and thus has a slight 
benefit over someone who 
didn't get to fight the bye); but 
he's just as tired and injured as 
any other fighter. 

No fighter may fight the bye 
more than once in any tourna- 
ment; the organizers re-arrange 
things if the same fighter ends 
up without an opponent in an- 
other match. By the last 
matches of the competition, the 
tournament numbers will have 
evened out and no more byes 
will be fought. 

With each subsequent round, 
the number of entrants is 
halved, until at the end only two 
are left: the winner of that 
match is the winner of the tour- 
nament. 


Combat Rules 


Blunted Lances 


Tournaments 
may be fought with blunted 
lances. Blunted lances work just 
as normal lances, but they do 
damage like Punching damage 
(i.e.. 7596 of all damage is tem- 
porary. and wears off after the 
end of the match). Blunted 
lances do not have metal or 
pointed heads: they weigh as 
much as regular lances, but cost 
only half as much. 


Queen of Love and Beauty 


Often, the win- 
ner of the jousting competition 
gets to choose the tournament's 
"Queen of Love and Beauty." 
The local ruler or tournament 
organizer gives him a crown or 
coronet. which the fighter may 
bestow upon any lady (at the 
tournament) of his choosing: 
typically, the crown is placed 
over the end of the fighter's 
lance. so that he might ride 


along the stands and give the 
crown, at lance-point, to the 
lady of his choice. The Queen of 
Love and Beauty sits with the 
fighter and local ruler at the 
night's feast, and the award is a 
sign of status and respect, but 
confers no lasting benefit. 

In a campaign where women 
also fight. naturally, the female 
fighter would be given a crown 
to award to the "King of Grace.” 


Prizes 


Prizes are of- 
ten awarded to the winner of the 
joust. These are not generally 
cash prizes. or magical prizes: 
they are usually some jewelled 
or ornamental sign of favor. and 
act as trophies for the victor. 


Other Events 


Other events 
taking place at a tournament (at 
the discretion of the organizers 
and the DM) include: 


87 


An  archery 
competition is usually for long 
bows or light crossbows; some 
tournaments have one competi- 
tion for each. 

In the archery competition, 
the targets are set up at the 
weapon's long range: all com- 
petitors suffer a —5 to hit with 
each shot. Targets are AC 10. 

In each tournament round, 
each participant fires five ar- 
rows or quarrels at his target. A 
miss counts as O points. A nor- 
mal hit counts as 3 points. If a 
character rolls 5 over what he 
needed to hit, it counts as 5 
points. If a natural 20 is rolled, it 
counts as 1O points (a bull's- 
eye). 

At the end of each round, 
points are tallied and half the 
field. the ones with the lowest 
scores, are eliminated. This con- 
tinued until there are only two 
or three competitors left: when 


Combat Rules 


that happens. the competition 
has reached its final round. 

In the final round. the same 
rules are in place, but smaller. 
harder targets are used; they 
have AC 4. 

Prizes often consist of new 
bows. quivers, sheaves of ar- 
rows, and jewelry. Archery is 
pretty respectable: it does not 
command the sort of status or 
prizes the joust does. but is 
better-regarded than the lowly 
foot-list. Nobles and peasants 
alike may participate. 

In some cultures, the cross- 
bow is thought of as a vulgar 
weapon; in such cultures, most 
tournaments won't have a 
crossbow competition. The few 
such competitions which take 
place are not attended by noble 
competitors. 


Foot-Lists 


A foot-list is or- 
ganized like a joust, except that 
its entrants fight on foot, and are 
not restricted to the nobility 
(even when the joust is). 

Since melee weapons are 
deadlier than blunted lances, 
some tournament organizers 
prefer not to have foot-lists; the 
chances of a fighter dying are 
pretty high, and organizers are 
not required or expected to have 
a high-level priest on hand to 
raise some peasant warrior who 
dies in a competition. 

Prizes often consist of weap- 
ons and minor jewelry, usually 
not as expensive or fancy as 
those awarded to the jousters. 


Merchants’ Stalls 


Also present at 
larger tournaments are rows 
upon rows of merchants' stalls: 
a large tournament is a fascinat- 
ing place to go shopping. and a 
good place to find experts in all 
sorts of craft-making, weapon- 
making. and armor-making. 


Dancing, Socializing 


Finally, the 
tournament is a grand social 
event. Musicians play, people 
gossip, dances are conducted; 
it's a grand place to hear new ru- 
mors, or start them, to meet 
contacts. to stumble across 
mysteries ... all of which the 
DM should keep in mind. 


When to End Combat 


Combats in 
the game don't have to go on un- 
til everyone on one side is dead 
... Or even defeated. 

Don't forget that one side or 
the other (including the PCs' 
side) can surrender, or retreat, 
or even convince the other side 
to stop fighting and do some 
talking or negotiating. 

When every fight must end in 
one side achieving total. bloody 
victory. the game rapidly grows 
boring. When there's opportu- 
nity for a greater number of res- 
olutions. there's more 
uncertainty to combat, and to 
the campaign's storyline. 

If you have characters who 
won't stop fighting when it 
should be done, you have prob- 
lems. Here are some things to do 
about them. 


When Characters Don't 
Accept Surrender 


When your 
characters won't ever accept an 
enemy's surrender, you have à 
serious problem, because it also 
means that those characters 
won't ever surrender themselves 
(because they know it always 
means certain death), and that 
you can never have two charac- 
ters (PC and NPC) fight and later 
end up as allies (unless they're 
both chaotic evil, for instance). 

You can enforce the right of 
your NPCs to surrender (and ex- 
pect to live through it) through a 
couple of means. 


First. a surrendering charac- 
ter who is about to be butchered 
could “turn out" to have some 
information critical to the char- 
acters, and say something like 
"Kill me and you'll never learn 
about (fill in the blank)" This 
stubborn NPC won't reveal the 
information, even on pain of 
death. unless the PCs promise 
to accept his surrender (and 
those of his friends) and keep 
the NPCs alive afterwards. (If 
the PCs promise, and later re- 
nege. you can always visit other 
revenge upon them.) 

Second, a local deity, spirit or 
monster could see the PCs hack- 
ing on surrendering NPCs and 
grow offended. Much tougher 
than the PCs will ever be, this 
being snatches up the most of- 
fensive of the PCs, tells him 
what he's doing and why, and 
then curses or kills the PC as a 
lesson to the others. 

This is a brute-force tech- 
nique, but such players have al- 
ready shown that they 
understand little but brute force 
anyway. 


When Characters Always 
Chase Escapees 


Some charac- 
ters chase after every group of 
enemies who run away from 
combat, with the avowed inten- 
tion of running them down and 
killing them. 

The best way to counter this 
attitude, and persuade the PCs 
to let the occasional band of in- 
consequential NPCs and mon- 
sters escape. is to have such 
enemies set up traps along their 
escape route. If the PCs pursue, 
they get caught in the traps and 
suffer damage and embarrass- 
ment. That will teach them to be 
more cautious in future events. 

Once the characters see ene- 
mies getting away, they may 
come to the realization that they 
may themselves occasionally 
flee and get away. 


When Characters 
Never Negotiate 


Sometimes. 
when PCs and NPCs are thick in 
combat, an NPC may try to calm 
things down, call for the two 
sides to part and cease 
fighting—at least for a while. It 
may be that the NPC has figured 
out that the two parties should 
be allied. or that he wants to 
bribe the PCs, or even conduct 
surrender negotiations . . . from 
a position of strength. 

If vour characters never nego- 
tiate, once again vour campaign 
options are limited. You have to 
brute-force some sense into 
them. A good way to do this is to 
have the PCs fight an NPC group 
who have a hostage or artifact 
crucial to the PCs. The NPCs say 
they will kill the hostage or de- 
stroy the artifact if the PCs don't 
stop fighting for a minute. And 
they're telling the truth... 

Once the PCs have lost several 
hostages or artifacts dear to 
them. they may start reconsid- 
ering their reactionary policies. 
And once they get in the habit of 
doing a little talking with the en- 
emy. they may figure out that 
they can also initiate such com- 
munication in future combats. 


Notes On the 
Combat Sequence 


Here are a cou- 
ple of tips to give you more op- 
tions in combat. 


Called Shots 


With all the 
rules and options we've intro- 
duced in The Complete Fight- 
ers Handbook. we need to 
remind you to be diligent about 
asking about Called Shots dur- 
ing the Combat Sequence. 

In the game, combat follows 
this sequence: 

(1) The DM decides what the 
NPCs and monsters will do; 


(2) The DM asks the players 
what they will do; 

(3) Initiative is rolled; and 

(4) Combat is resolved in ini- 
tiative order. 

In a lot of campaigns, Step 2 is 
skipped. The DM decides what 
the NPCs or monsters are doing, 
has everyone roll initiative, and 
then asks the player-characters, 
as their actions come up, what 
they're doing. 

But if vou're using Called 
Shots, you have to be diligent 
about keeping Step 2 in the se- 
quence, so that the characters' 
Called Shots can be established 
before initiative is rolled. 


Waiting on Initiative 


There's an- 
other good reason not to skip 
Step 2 of the Combat Sequence: 

Though combat is the war- 
rior's profession. some DMs 
launch the player-characters 
into combat more often than 
they necessarily need to. 

Why is this? It's because it be- 
comes very easy to narrate an 
encounter this way: "You round 
the corner and there, 30 feet 
ahead. you see a party of six orcs 
advancing. They see you, too. 
Roll for initiative." 

Once again, Step 2 is skipped: 
and, merely by saying "Roll for 
initiative.” you presume that 
the player-characters will attack 
the orcs, and that the orcs will 
attack the PCs. Not only do you 
presume it: You practically 
guarantee it. The players will 
follow the DM's call for initia- 
tive, and combat ís joined before 
anyone figures out that they 
had other options. 

If this has become your habit 
when DMing. try substituting 
some other statement instead: 
Ask "What do you do?" instead of 
calling for initiative rolls. This 
gives the players the opportunity 
to talk to or challenge the other 
party. Combat might result any- 
way: a particularly militant PC. 


89 


or aggressive NPCs, could bring 
about a combat immediately. But 
if that doesn't occur, the PCs and 
NPCs can talk, argue. choose to 
fight or agree to cooperate. what- 
ever they choose. 

If the two groups decide to 
fight, roll initiative normally. 


Tactics 


All too often, a 
warrior character simply 
charges up to the front line in 
every combat, and in non- 
combat situations sits back and 
listens while his wiser mage and 
priest friends handle all the nig- 
gling details of the adventurer's 
life outside of combat. 

Well. neither of these ap- 
proaches is particularly good. 

In combat, the front-line at- 
tack is only one of several op- 
tions the party needs to cover. 

And out of combat, the fighter 
is admirably suited to dealing 
with several everyday details 
that concern the adventuring 
party. 


Combat Tactics 


When the 
characters (not just the warrior- 
characters) enter combat, these 
are some things that the warrior 
should remember and provide 
for: 


Shield-Walls and Polearms 


As has been 
mentioned before. a character 
with a polearm (or long spear, or 
javelin) can stand behind a char- 
acter with a shorter weapon and 
attack the same targets that his 
ally is attacking. That's one of 
the principal advantages to the 
polearm, but it's ignored all too 
often in AD&D* game cam- 
paigns. 

This is the way it works: 

The character with the po- 
learm positions himself behind 
an ally, preferably a fighter with 


Combat Rules 


a shield. Because the polearm 
fighter must work around the 
friend in front of him, he suffers 
a -2 to hit anyone on the other 
side of his friend. However, he 
isn't limited just to the enemy of 
the man he's standing behind: If 
our polearm hero is standing be- 
hinda line of three men (whoare 
side-by-side), he can strike at 
anyone who is close enough to 
attack any of those three men 
with a medium-length weapon. 

This is useful in a combat be- 
cause the polearm wielder can 
attack targets without being 
right in their faces, or engaged 
with them. That means he can 
switch targets without any 
fancy footwork. When one of his 
buddies is foundering. or taking 
a beating. the polearm wielder 
can begin attacking that bud- 
dy's enemy. 

And don't forget the polearm 
vs. polearm Parry. as described 
above under that maneuver's 
description. 


Wolf-Pack Tactics 


When the ad- 
venturing party gets in combat 
with a single large monster 
which can be confronted di- 
rectly (like a troll. for instance. 
and unlike a dragon. which has 
a strong mix of melee abilities. 
ranged combat abilities, and 
mobility), it's foolish just to line 
up and hack at the thing. In fact. 
it's not necessarily clever just to 
surround the monster and hack 
at it. Try this instead: 

Surround the monster, of 
course. 

On the first round, half of the 
circle of heroes should perform 
a Parry, or the Parrying maneu- 
ver from the DMG. The other 
half should attack as vigorously 
as possible. 

On the second round, the 
action switches: The group 
which attacked last round, now 
defends, and the group which 
defended now attacks. 


In real life (for example, when 
practiced by wolf-packs). this of- 
ten has the effect of confusing 
the prey and reducing its fight- 
ing effectiveness. The prey feels 
a bite to its rear and turns to at- 
tack there; but while it's concen- 
trating on enemies in that 
direction. the wolves now to its 
rear make their attack. 

In the AD&D* game, the wolf- 
pack tactic can have similar ef- 
fects ... if the DM wishes to 
allow it to. If the DM approves of 
this tactic, he can cooperate by 
having the monster, for a few 
rounds at least. behave in the 
predictable fashion: Each 
round. the monster turns and 
attacks the group that attacked 
it last, which is now defending. 
This will give the party several 
rounds of combat where it has 
the advantage and can whittle 
the monster down. 

But be aware: Even if the DM 
is nice enough to give you this 
slight tactical advantage. even- 
tually even the stupidest mon- 
ster will get wise and try to 
break through the circle of fight- 
ers. A good thing doesn't last 
forever. 

It may be that your DM has no 
interest in letting this tactic 
work. Ask him if it has a chance 
of doing some good in your cam- 
paign. If he says no, don't even 
try it. Even if he says yes, he 
may not remember to grant that 
little benefit; if, after a few wolf- 
pack attempts. you haven't 
seen it work once, give up on the 
tactic. 


Tactical Mix 


It's a good idea 
for the fighting characters (in- 
cluding rogues and priests) in a 
party to represent a mix of 
weapons and combat styles. 
Several should be front-line 
fighters, bearing heavy armor 
and large. damaging weapons. 
One or two would be behind-the- 
lines fighters, carrying po- 


learms. And one or two should 
be missilers, carrying bow, 
crossbow, or even sling or 
throwing knives. 

This gives the party a certain 
amount of versatility. The heavy 
fighters can engage the heavy 
opposition. The polearm fight- 
ers can attack the enemy with 
reduced risk of being hurt. The 
missilers should concentrate on 
eliminating enemy missilers 
first, and then can turn their at- 
tention to doing unreturned 
damage to the melee-fighting 
enemies. 

It's especially good when 
characters can mix and match 
their roles. Any character can 
have a sling or a throwing axe at 
his belt and becomea missiler in 
a matter of seconds. for exam- 
ple. 


Rotation 


It often hap- 
pens that a front-line fighter be- 
comes seriously damaged when 
fighting . . . and then must con- 
tinue fighting. because he has 
no other option until the enemy 
is defeated. This doesn't have to 
be the case. 

In a large party combat, par- 
ticularly damaged front-line 
fighters can be "rotated out," 
pulled from the front line and re- 
placed by a less hurt warrior... 
or not replaced at all: The shield- 
wall (i.e.. the other front-line 
fighters) can close ranks and 
plug up the hole. 

See the rules for Retreat (Play- 
er's Handbook, page 97). During 
his combat action. the injured 
man announces that he's re- 
treating; the ally or allies he 
stood side-by-side with need to 
announce that they're blocking 
pursuit (i.e.. they're moving so 
that the enemy can't just wan- 
der in through their line). That 
puts the hurt man behind his 
own line, where he can keep 
away from damage or even seek 
some healing. 


Combat Rules 


If one of the polearm fighters 
is accommodating, they can 
take the rest of their combat 
round to switch weapons. The 
injured man takes the polearm, 
and the other fighter takes the 
front-line weapons. On their 
next combat round, the unin- 
jured man moves up into the 
line and the injured man begins 
whacking enemies with his po- 
learm. 

This is a good way to keep 
people alive. 


Spear-Carriers 


In some cam- 
paigns, players have the atti- 
tude that NPCs are along to get 
killed so that the PCs won't. 

That's patently ridiculous: an 
adventuring party with that at- 
titude would soon gain a very 
bad reputation. and would find 
it increasingly difficult to hire 
NPCs. would find that inns and 
taverns always denied them 
service, would find that sages 
told them to buzz off, etc. 

However. there's a type of 
spear-carrier NPC that any 
group of adventurers should 
consider hiring—and that's the 
actual spear-carrier. 

In many towns and villages. 
the heroes can find a strong, 
strapping youth who is willing 
to come along with them for the 
promise of some treasure and 
combat training. This energetic 
youth shouldn't be slapped in 
armor and put up front to be 
killed: Instead, he should be 
charged with carrying an extra 
weapon or two and making sure 
that all his allies have weapons 
at all times in combat. In a com- 
bat, the spear-carrier may act as 
a behind-the-lines polearm war- 
rior, if his hands aren't full al- 
ready. He also serves as backup 
defense for people who stay be- 
hind the lines because they 
can't fight well: Noncombatant 
NPCs, mages. etc. 

Here's how it works: 


The spear-carrier is given a 
single weapon of his own, such 
as a spear, and also carries a 
couple of extra weapons. which 
are party-owned weapons— 
such as a long sword in a back 
sheath and a short sword on his 
belt, for instance. 

In combat, he stays behind 
the line and takes the occasional 
spear-poke at the enemy over 
the line. Whenever a PC loses a 
weapon (to a fumble, or an ene- 
my's Disarm, or when a weapon 
is shattered by a foe), the spear- 
carrier uses his next available 
combat round to move in close 
and give the PC one of the extra 
weapons he's carrying. 

The spear-carrier is also useful 
for keeping a more distant eye on 
what's going on with the combat. 
He might notice new enemies ar- 
riving on the horizon, or notice an 
enemy skulking to get around the 
edge of the shield-wall, before a 
player-character has the opportu- 
nity to do so. 

Since this character is an 
NPC, he doesn't have to share 
the player-characters' frantic 
desire to make every combat 
round of every combat count for 
something. He can afford to 
keep an eye on things and won't 
necessarily be desperate to bang 
on an enemy every round. 

A variant of this character is 
the spear-carrier devoted to a 
specific PC. A PC who is a spear- 
thrower. for instance, might 
have a page or squire devoted to 
carrying two or three extra 
spears for him. In such a case. 
the PC is usually responsible for 
teaching the page or squire to 
fight (without getting him 
killed) so that NPC might some- 
day become a knight. 


Directing Traffic 

It's very help- 
ful for one fighter in a party to 
act as tactical coordinator (that 
is, combat leader). In combat, he 
keeps his eye on the situation 


91 


and issues orders to his allies. 

The tactical coordinator 
should be the one to notice that 
one of his frontline friends is be- 
ing chopped to pieces, and order 
that character rotated back be- 
hind the line. When one particu- 
lar enemy is discovered to be 
more deadly than the rest, the 
tactical coordinator should or- 
der missilers and polearm fight- 
ers to concentrate their efforts 
on that one. When the fight goes 
against the heroes and can't be 
turned around, the tactical coor- 
dinator should order the 
retreat —and make sure, if possi- 
ble. that it's an orderly one, with 
no one missing and fighting- 
ranks still maintained. 

If no PC fighter volunteers or 
naturally evolves into the com- 
bat leader role. the DM can help 
"push things along" by deter- 
mining. in his best opinion, 
which PC would be best in that 
role ... and then having NPCs 
turn to that character for orders 
when combat situations come 


up. 
Campaign Tactics 


The warrior 
isn't helpless or useless outside 
of combat, either. 

In situations where the party 
is preparing for an adventure, 
planning a mission, or just ar- 
riving in a new place (town, cas- 
tle, whatever). the fighters 
(especially the combat leader) 
should make themselves re- 
sponsible for learning the fol- 
lowing things . . . and reporting 
these facts to the others: 


Combats and 
Combat Missions: 


What's the 
lay of the land? The fighters 
should get detailed descriptions 
(and, if possible. maps) of the 
area where they will be fighting; 
this will help them plot strategy, 
ambushes. etc. 


M Combat Rules 


What sort of forces does the 
opposition muster? This might 
be details of the enemy army, or 
the garrison of a castle the he- 
roes want to invade, or just ru- 
mors of what might be found in 
the dark dungeon the charac- 
ters intend to explore. 

Is anything strange going on 
at the site? If there is, it might be 
symptomatic of something im- 
portant to the characters. Do the 
locals hear grumblings and 
rumblings deep in the earth that 
weren't there before? This 
might indicate that a dragon 
has moved in... or that some- 
one is doing some mining se- 
cretly. Are there suddenly a lot 
of strangers in town? This 
might mean the enemy has 
spies in town. or is hiring new 
warriors. who pass through 
town on route to their final desti- 
nation. Whenever there's some- 
thing strange going on, the 
heroes will have to face its 
source eventually, and should 
be as prepared as possible. 
When the fighters hear of some- 
thing strange going on, they re- 
ally ought to consult with the 
mages and priests. who might 
have ideas on the matter based 
on their own fields of learning. 

Can the heroes count on local 
help? If this is a combat assault. 
can the heroes request, hire or 
levy local troops to back them 
up? If they can. and the situa- 
tion warrants it, they should. 
But if they never ask. they al- 
most never get help. 

Can the heroes hire local ex- 
perts? If their mission is to take 
them into an area where a local 
knows more about the situation 
than they do, it’s a good idea for 
the characters to hire a local ex- 
pert. Guides who know the local 
sites, especially, are an invalu- 
able resource. 

What sort of equipment will 
the party need? Any sort of spe- 
cial situation (walls to climb, 
specific monsters to fight, inter- 
esting terrain to cross, etc.) is 


likely to require specialized 
equipment, and it's the fighters’ 
responsibility to determine 
what sort of equipment that is 
...and then to get it. 


Just Arriving in Town 


What are the 
characters' rooms like? Wheth- 
er the heroes are being accom- 
modated by friends, by an inn, 
or by a local ruler or noble, the 
fighter should check out their 
rooms in terms of defensibility. 
If the heroes are attacked in 
their rooms in the middle of the 
night in the dark, the fighter 
should know (because he's pre- 
pared himself in advance) how 
many exits there are from the 
room, whether they are open, 
closed, or locked, how defensi- 
ble the room is, what story it is 
on and how far it is to the 
ground, etc. He might wish to 
consult with the Rogue, who 
might be inclined to check for 
secret doors or traps, or on the 
feasibility of going up to the roof 
when the heroes go out the win- 
dow. 

What are the local laws? The 
fighter should find out what the 
local ordinances are concerning 
the carrying of weapons and the 
wearing of armor. If it turns out 
that either is illegal or restricted, 
he ought to let his friends know 
about it. Contrary to what some 
campaigning groups think, lo- 
cal communities have the right 
to make such laws and enforce 
them ... and when player- 
characters defy the local author- 
ities, refuse to take off armor or 
abandon weapons. and even at- 
tack and kill local peace officers, 
the PCs are for the moment vil- 
lains, not heroes. 

The other character classes 
have their own subjects to ex- 
plore in the same situations. By 
comparison: 

Mages can take responsibil- 
ity for: Learning the history of 
the current situation, how it 


92 


came to be; perhaps there's a 
clue to getting things fixed in 
the history of the matter. Get- 
ting details of the magic of the 
situation; only a mage can prop- 
erly evaluate these details; per- 
haps the mage can arrange or 
research a counter-spell useful 
in the situation. 

Priests can take responsibil- 
ity for: Learning what the local 
priests think of the situation. 
Communing with their deities 
to see if the deity has any proph- 
ecy, advice or admonition to of- 
fer. Provisioning the party; the 
priest is best suited to arranging 
for ordinary provisions (food. 
clothing. etc.). 

Rogues can take responsi- 
bility for: Putting an ear to the 
street (that is, the people of the 
street) and seeing what's afoot; 
it's always a clue to the resolu- 
tion of a problem if the rulers 
say one thing and the common 
people say something different 
about a situation. Evaluating in- 
filtration and break-in opportu- 
nities; the rogue is best suited to 
determining how possible and 
useful it would be to getting a 
spy in the enemy camp, break- 
ing in to a specific site, etc. 

Naturally. all these descrip- 
tions are generalizations. Any 
specific character might be par- 
ticularly talented at one of these 
roles, even if he belongs to a 
"wrong" character class. But 
someone should undertake 
each of these tasks: otherwise, 
the characters are going into a 
situation knowing less than 
they could know about it. 


The Combat Sheet 


On page 122 is 
a Combat Sheet. One side con- 
tains information for PCs, the 
other is for the DM to record vi- 
tal combat statistics about the 
characters. 


Warriors do not live by raw 
combat talent alone (though 
they've been known to die by it). 
No. they also need equipment, 
the tools of their trade: weap- 
ons, armor, and miscellaneous 
gear appropriate to the warrior- 
class. 

In this chapter, we'll talk 
about that equipment, and elab- 
orate on the weapons and armor 
presented in the Player's Hand- 
book. 


Old Weapons 


We need to 
clarify some details about weap- 
ons which appeared in the Play- 
er's Handbook. 


One-Hand, Two-Hand 


Weapons, for 
purposes of how they're held 
and wielded, fall into four cate- 
gories: one-handed only, one- 
handed but can be wielded 
two-handed, one-handed or two- 
handed, or two-handed only. 

One-Handed Only means the 
weapon can only be wielded 
one-handed, in one hand or the 
other. 

One-Handed But Can Be 
Wielded Two-Handed refers to a 
weapon principally designed for 
one-handed use but which can be 
used two-handed. These wea- 
pons have enough haft or hilt on 
them that the wielder can wield 
the weapon in both hands. which 
confers no benefit . . . unless the 
character has taken a Style Spe- 
cialization in Two-Hander Fight- 
ing Style (see the description of 
Two-Hander technique in the 
Combat chapter). 

One-Handed Or Two-Handed 
weapons are designed specifi- 
cally to be used with one or both 
hands. and have separate dam- 
age listings for the two different 
fighting styles. 

Two-Handed Only weapons 
can only be wielded in two 
hands. 


Examples 


Each of the 
weapons from the Player's 
Handbook falls into one of those 
four categories, as follows: 


One-Handed Only 


Dagger/dirk, 
Dart, Footman's mace, Hand/ 
throwing axe, Knife, Lances 
(all), Scourge, Sickle, Sword/ 


Khopesh, Sword/Scimitar, 
Sword/Short, Whip. 
One-Handed But Can Be 
Wielded Two-Handed 

Battle axe, 


Club, Footman's flail. Foot- 
man's pick. Horseman's flail. 
Horseman's mace, Horseman's 
pick, Morning star, Sword/Long, 
and Warhammer. 


One-Handed Or Two-Handed 


Harpoon, Jav- 
elin, Spear, Sword/Bastard, Tri- 
dent. 


9? 


Two-Handed Only 


Arquebus, 
Blowgun, Bows (all), Crossbows 
(all), Mancatcher, Polearms (all), 
Quarterstaff, Sling (one hand to 
load. one hand to throw), Staff 
sling. Sword/Two-handed. 


More On One-Handed or 
Two-Handed 


As you can 
see, five weapons fall into the 
One-Handed Or Two-Handed 
category: The Bastard Sword, 
and four spear-like weapons 
(Harpoon, Javelin, Spear. Tri- 
dent). 

In the Player's Handbook, it's 
presumed that you're fighting 
with Spear one-handed, and 
with Harpoon, Javelin, and Tri- 
dent two-handed. (This is be- 
cause Spear is a Medium 
weapon and the others are 
Large.) However, in The Com- 
plete Fighter's Handbook, any 
of these weapons can be used ei- 
ther in one hand or in both. 


Weight 
Item Cost lbs.) 
n% 

One-handed 20gp 6 

Two-handed 20gp 6 
Javelin % 

One-handed 5sp 2 

Two-handed 5 sp 2 
Spear % 

One-handed 8sp 5 

Two-handed# 8sp 5 
Spear, Long % 

One-handed 5gp 8 

Two-handed # 5gp 8 
Trident % 


One-handed 15gp 5 
Two-handed 15gp 5 


tc he 


cc EE 


L 
L 


Speed Damage 


Size Typet Factor S-M L 


P 7 1d4+11d6+1 
P 7 2d4 2d6 
P 4 1d4  1d4 
P 4 1d6  1d6 
P 6 1d6 = 1d8 
P 6 1d8+1 2d6 
P 8 1d8 1d8+1 
P 8 2d6 3d6 
P 7 1d6+1 3d4 
P 7 1d8+1 3d4 


% This weapon is intended for one-handed or two-handed use. 
# This weapon inflicts double damage when firmly set to receive a 


charge. 


93 


<a 


But they can also be wielded 
two-handed, and do even more 
damage when they are. The ta- 
ble shows both the one-handed 
and two-handed damage for 
each of the four weapons. 

Also, to this list we're adding 
the Long Spear. This is like the 
ordinary spear, but mounted on 
a much longer (12'-18') shaft. 
It's not especially suited to one- 
handed use, but inflicts a lot of 
damage when used two- 
handed. 

The Harpoon, Javelin, Spear, 
and Trident can all be thrown, 
but the thrown weapon damage 
is always the one-handed dam- 
age, never the two-handed dam- 
age. The Long Spear is not built 
for throwing. 

These five spear-like weapons 
are as fast and maneuverable 
when used two-handed; there- 
fore, unlike the Bastard Sword, 
their speed factor does not 
worsen when they are used two- 
handed. 


New Weapons 


Several of the 
warrior-kits described in the 
Advanced Warrior Types chap- 
ter mentioned new weapons ap- 
propriate to those warrior types. 
On the next page is a chart of all 
those new weapons; a little fur- 
ther on we'll discuss what they 
are and how they're used. 

Many of these weapons have 
special abilities. bonuses and 
combat functions not reflected 
on the chart; these abilities help 
account for the high costs listed 
for some of the weapons. 

Other weapons, particularly 
the bone and stone ones, seem 
to be of very limited usefulness. 
There's a reason for that, dis- 
cussed a little further on in this 
section. 


Missile Weapon Ranges 
Weapon ROF S M L 
Bolas l 3 679 
Chain 2 Bhs 2 
Dagger. 

bone 2f 1 2 3 
Dagger, 

stone e D228 
Daikyu ?h 7 14 21 
Javelin, 

stone 1 2 4 6 
Knife, ; 

bone "ic m 38 
Knife, 

stone 2/4 1 2 3 
Lasso . 1 PUE 
Net T 5 a a TE. 
Shuriken ?4 2 4 6 
Spear, 

stone 1 2 3 
Stiletto Itu Q0 T: 
Trident 1 0 1 2 


The chain, lasso and net are 
included in the table above be- 
cause their use. in combat, is 
much like a missile weapon. 
They have ranges related to the 
length of the chain. the lasso of 
the net's trailing rope. 

The "*" means the weapon 
doesn't precisely have a rate of 
fire: it may be used as often as 
the character's level (and per- 
haps specialization) dictates for 
a melee wcapon. 


Use of These Tables 


The fact that 
these weapons appear on tables 
in an AD&D* game product 
doesn't mean that players may 
immediately buy these wcapons 
for their characters. These 
weapons are not commonly 
available, and may only be 
taken with DM permission ... 
and that permission should de- 
pend on the character's origin. 

You see, each of these weap- 
ons is appropriate to a certain 
culture (and to the Warrior Kits 
belonging to that culture); and 
each of these wcapons is further 
described below, under the 


94 


heading that corresponds to 
that culture or Warrior Kit. 

If, for instance, your character 
isn't a Gladiator, he can't start 
play with a drusus. In fact. if he 
doesn't belong to a culture 
which has gladiators, never 
travels to such a culture, and 
doesn't even find a market with 
contacts with such a culture, he 
can never even get a drusus. 

So the DM, and DM alone, de- 
cides how accessible each of 
these weapons is based on how 
many ties the campaign culture 
has with the culture that creates 
these weapons. Even if he says 
that there is contact, it may not 
be possible or easy for PCs to ac- 
quire these weapons; just be- 
cause samurai visit the court of 
your king doesn't mean that 
they'd be willing to sell their 
treasured katanas. after all. 

In short, acquisition of this 
type of equipment is left as an 
exercise in role-playing and ad- 
venture, in played-out game 
sessions. not as something as 
simple as dropping some gold 
pieces off your character sheet. 


Gladiator Weapons 


Gladiators are 
trained in a variety of weapons. 
In addition to the new weapons 
on the chart above, gladiators 
can be trained in the following, 
more commonly-available. 
weapons: Long bow (any type), 
Short bow (any type). Dagger. 
Footman’s flail, Knife, Halberd, 
Scourge. Scimitar, Short sword, 
Spear, Trident, and Whip. 

The short sword used by glad- 
iators, incidentally, is a short, 
straight-bladed weapon sharp- 
ened on both edges; it is called 
the gladius, and gladiators take 
their name from it. The gladius 
has the characteristics of an or- 
dinary short sword. 


Bo stick & 
Bolas ! 
Cestus ! 
Chain & 
er 

Bone ! 

Stone ! 
Daikyu & 
Daikyu arrow & 
Gaff/hook ! 

Attached 

Held 
Javelin, Stone 96 

One-handed 


Lasso & 
Net & 


Sai! 

Shuriken ! 

Spear, Long % 
One-Handed 
Two-Handed £ 

Spear, Stone % 
One-handed 
Two-handed 

Stiletto ! 

Sword 
Cutlass ! 
Drusus ! 
Katana % 

One-handed 


Wakizashi $ 


ow Qoae «€ 


This weapon inflicts dou 
The "Type" category is d 
of attack made, which may alter the weapon's e 


- 
= 
° 


FAN oo -nng vgn NN MN —-Oo-- ONNAN 


vae oss 


optional rule in the Player's Handbook. page 90. 


Size 


ezezzzz zz OFZ cc varë gzocoo cc NH zron cozcosz 


Typet 


avg va vvv vc vSuv GISI ge vv vy vivu mouumv 


S/P 


Speed 
Factor 


lane anore | 


OPA OF NOD WH NNN WONONN eb NN 


This weapon is intended for one-handed use, and may not be used two-handed. 
This weapon is intended for one-handed use, but may be used two-handed (see the rules for Two-Hander 
Style Specialization in the Combat chapter). 
This weapon is intended for one-handed or two-handed use. 

This weapon is intended for two-handed use only. 

ble damage when firmly set to receive a charge. 

ivided into Bludgeoning (B), Piercing (P), and Slashing (S). This indicates the type 
ffectiveness against different types of armor. See the 


Damage 
S-M L 
1d4 1d4 
1d3 1d3 
1d6 1d4 
1d3 1d2 
1d4 1d3 

1d4+1 1d4 
1d2 1d2 
1d3 1d2 
1d8 1d6 
1d4 1d3 
1d4 1d3 
1d4 1d4 
1d4+1 1d6 
1d2 1d2 
1d2 1d2 
1d4 1d3 
1d6 1d6 
1d8 1d10 
1d8 1d8 
1d4 1d2 
1d4 1d4 
1d8 1d8+1 
2d6 3d6 
1d4 1d6 
1d6 2d4 
1d3 1d2 
1d6 1d8 
1d6+1 1d8+1 
1d10 1d12 
2d6 2d6 
1d6+1 1d8+1 
1d6+1 1d8+1 
1d8 1d8 


<a 


Bolas 


The bolas are 
three balls attached to ropes or 
cords about a yard in length: the 
other ends of the cords are tied 
together in a knot. The wielder 
of the bolas whirls them by the 
knot and throws them at a tar- 
get: if they hit, they wrap 
around the target, with the balls 
smashing painfully into the tar- 
get as they connect. Once they 
have wrapped themselves 
around a target, it takes the vic- 
tim one full round and a suc- 
cessful ability check vs. 
Strength to get them free. (If the 
character fails his Strength 
check, he does not get the bolas 
free this round.) 

This weapon does only a little 
damage. but it is especially use- 
ful if vou are using the Hit Loca- 
tions rules from the Combat 
Rules chapter. 

If the attacker makes a Called 
Shot to the target's Legs (he 
doesn't have to specify which: if 
the attack hits, it hits both), and 
successfully attacks. the bolas 
wrap themselves tightly around 
his legs. He can no longer run or 
walk until he gets them free. Hc 
must make a Dexterity check 
just to avoid falling down. In 
fact. if he was moving when the 
attack was made. he suffers a 
-3 penalty to his Dexterity 
check to avoid falling down. 

If the attacker makes a Called 
Shot to the target's Arms (again, 
he doesn't have to specify: both 
will be hit) and successfully at- 
tacks. the bolas wrap them- 
selves tightly around his arms 
and torso. He cannot wield his 
weapon and does not get the AC 
bonus of his shield until he gets 
himself free. His roll to free him- 
self is at a —2 penalty to his 
Strength ability score because 
he has no leverage. 

If the attacker makes a Called 
Shot to the target's Head. the bo- 
las wrap themselves around the 
targets neck and begin stran- 


gling him. (This does not work if 
the character was wearing a 
Close-Faced Helm or a Great 
Helm, described later this chap- 
ter.) The bolas do the listed dam- 
age on the round they hit. 
Thereafter. on each successive 
round where they begin the 
round still on the victim's throat. 
they do 1d3 hp of damage from 
strangulation. The damage 
stops when they arc removed or 
when the target is dead. 

Weapon proficiency with the 
Bolas is not related to any other 
weapon proficiency. Specializa- 
tion grants the usual benefits. In 
case of a Called Shot to the tar- 
gets head. the damage bonus 
only applies to the initial hit; it is 
not added to the subsequent 
rounds of strangulation. 

Any leatherworker or weap- 
onsmith can make a set of bolas 
. . . but he must have exact mea- 
surements for the cords and ex- 
act weights for the balls to do it 
right. Simply hearing such a 
weapon described, the crafts- 
man can make something líke ít 
... but unless he makes his 
craftsman ability check by 3 or 
better. the weapon he makes 
will be proportioned wrong and 
will beata —4 to hit. 


Cestus 


The cestus is a 
glovelike weapon, studded with 
sharp spikes and edges on the 
back of the glove and across the 
knuckles. Gladiators fighting 
with the cestus usually wear 
two. one on each hand (the plu- 
ral is cesti); here. it pays for a 
gladiator to have Cestus Wea- 
pon Specialization, Two- 
Weapon Style Specialization, 
and/or Punching Specialization. 

Cestus combat is very popular 
with arena crowds because it is 
extremely bloody and up-close. 
Also, because the weapons do 
comparatively little damage. 
the fighters tend to last a long 
time in combat. 


96 


When wearing a cestus or two 
cesti, a character may still make 
a Grab maneuver with the hand 
the cestus is on. This attack will 
beata -2 to hit for clumsiness, 
and a -2 to the attacker's 
Strength (for purposes of hold- 
ing on) likewise. 

Cestus. because it is simply a 
bonus to punching-type at- 
tacks, does not require weapon 
proficiency; anyone can use 
cesti with no proficiency pen- 
alty. Therefore, Specialization 
with Cestus costs only weapon 
proficiency slot. 

In a culture where there is 
gladiatorial combat, cesti are 
readily available from weapon- 
smiths, but they are not ex- 
ported, as they're such a basic 
weapon the market is not very 
good. Any foreign weaponsmith 
who has cesti described to him 
can make perfectly functional 
cesti: the first two cesti he 
makes will be at twice the listed 
cost, and subsequent ones will 
be at the listed cost. 


Drusus 


The Drusus is 
a Gladius (short sword) of Ex- 
ceptional quality (as per the 
types of weapon quality de- 
scribed in the Character Crea- 
tion chapter of this rule book). It 
looks just like an ordinary gla- 
dius: only by testing the sharp- 
ness of the blade can someone 
tell the difference. The Drusus 
has been forged so that the 
metal is better-tempered and 
holds an edge better, and then 
sharpened until it has a razor- 
like edge. 

Because of this, it does *1 
damage and confers a non- 
magical *1 to hit over the nor- 
mal gladius. (This means the 
wielding character gets a +1 to 
hit when using the weapon, but 
the weapon does not give him 
the ability to hit monsters which 
require magical weapons to af- 
fect.) 


A. 


The Drusus also has a disad- 
vantage. In order to keep its 
keen edge, it must be regularly 
sharpened with a lot more atten- 
tion and time than an ordinary 
weapon requires. After any day 
in which the Drusus has been 
fought with (even one attack!). 
someone with either the Ar- 
morer or Weaponsmith second- 
ary skill. or the Blacksmithing, 
Armorer, or Weaponsmithing 
nonweapon proficiency, must 
sharpen the blade for half an 
hour ... or. on the next day. it 
will act as an ordinary short 
sword (losing its to-hit and dam- 
age bonus) until it is so sharp- 
ened. 

Exposure to high heat (a 
smith's forge, dragon's breath. 
lava, etc.) will ruin the temper 
on a Drusus, turning it into an 
ordinary short sword and for- 
ever destroying its to-hit and 
damage bonus. 

The Drusus uses the same 
weapon proficiency as the short 
sword. If a character can use a 
short sword. he can use a Dru- 
sus with equal proficiency. 
Weapon specialization with one 
does transfer to the other. 

In cultures where there are 
gladiators, any weaponsmith 
with a weaponsmithing ability 
check of 14 or better can make a 
Drusus for the cost shown. 
These weapons are seldom ex- 
ported, as local demand is high 
for the few made. A foreign 
weaponsmith could not make 
one merely if it were described 
to him; he would have to study 
with a local weaponsmith. Hav- 
ing done so, he could make the 
weapon. 


Lasso 


The lasso, or 
lariat, is a length of rope with a 
loop at the end; the wielder 
holds the slack in his off-hand, 
twirls the lasso in his other 
hand. and hurls the loop at his 
target. On a successful hit, the 


lariat settles over the target, giv- 
ing the wielder the chance to 
dismount him, pull him to the 
ground, trip him. etc. 

In other words, when you at- 
tack someone with a lasso, you 
must declare what you're trying 
to accomplish with the attack. 

If you're trying to trip him. 
you're trying to make the loop 
settle about his legs. This re- 
quires a Called Shot at the legs 
as per the Hit Locations section 
of the Combat Rules chapter. 

If you hit, he must make a 
Dexterity ability roll, with the 
usual modifiers for the Pull/Trip 
maneuver: if he fails. he falls, 
and if he succeeds, he's able to 
jump out of your loop before it 
closes. 

If you're trying to pin his arms 
to his sides, you're trying to 
make the loop settle about his 
torso and arms. This requires a 
Called Shot at the arms as per 
the Hit Locations section of the 
Combat Rules chapter. 

If you hit, he must make a 
Strength ability roll, again with 
the usual modifiers for Pull/Trip. 
If he succeeds, he shrugs the 
loop off before you can pull it 
taut. If he fails, you pull the loop 
taut. Both of his arms are 
pinned, as in the Pin maneuver. 
The target gets to struggle each 
round, also as per the Pin ma- 
neuver rules. Each additional 
lasso that hits the target to pin 
him gives him a -4 to his 
Strength ability for purposes of 
his struggling. When his 
Strength reaches O, he has no 
chance of escaping. 

If you're trying to dismount à 
rider, you're trying to make the 
loop settle about his torso—and 
then brace yourself for the im- 
pact (when his mount's move- 
ment reaches the end of your 
rope, both you and he are going 
to be jarred). This doesn't re- 
quire a Called Shot: You must 
merely hit your target normally. 

If you hit. both you and the 
unfortunate rider must now 


98 


make Strength ability rolls. If he 
rolls his better than you roll 
yours, the lasso is torn from 
your hands and you take 1d2 
damage. If you roll yours better 
than he rolls his, you yank him 
from his saddle and he takes 
1d3 from impact with the lasso 
and the earth. If you both make 
your roll by the same amount, 
then both results occur; the 
lasso is yanked from your 
hands, doing 1d2 to you, and 
he's yanked from his horse, tak- 
ing 1d3. (Incidentally, if you've 
had time to tie your rope to an 
absolutely stationary object, 
like a boulder, you don't have to 
roll against your Strength abil- 
ity; you win this contest unless 
your target rolls a 1. in which 
case the rope breaks and he can 
ride off laughing.) 

If you're trying to lasso a tar- 
get's head (for example. when 
you're up in a tree and your tar- 
get is an unsuspecting guard 
walking below), this is a Called 
Shot to his Head as per the usual 
rules. 

If. after the modifiers, you still 
hit. you can yank for 1d3 dam- 
age (plus vour Strength bonus). 
On subsequent rounds, you can 
yank for 1 point of damage each 
(plus your Strength bonus). But 
if vou're in a position to hoist 
your target up in the air (for in- 
stance. if you're up on a tree- 
branch, lasso your victim, and 
then drop off the branch on the 
other side, holding onto the rope 
to hoist your victim up). you do 
your victim 1d4 points of stran- 
gulation damage per round 
(Strength bonus does not apply 
to this). If he can get his knife 
free and cut himself loose, that's 
good for him: if not, it's good for 
you. While strangling, a victim 
cannot shout or raise the alarm. 

If you're trying to drop your 
loop around the head of a 
mounted rider. . . well. it's diffi- 
cult, but possible. Make it as a 
standard Called Shot to the 
head. 


If you hit, you must again 
make your Strength ability 
check. If he wins it, he takes 1d4 
damage from the impact of the 
lasso around hís neck going taut 
... but the lasso is still yanked 
from your hand, doing 1d2 to 
you. and he can ride off. If you 
win it, he takes 2d6 damage 
from the impact, another 1d3 
from hitting the ground, and 
he's dismounted. If you both 
make it by an equal amount, he 
takes 1d4, is dismounted and 
takes an additional 1d3. and 
you take 1d2 from the lasso be- 
ing yanked out of your hands. 
(If. in this example, you've had 
time to tie the other end of your 
lasso to an absolutely stationary 
object, your target still gets his 
roll. On a 1, the rope breaks and 
he takes 1d4 damage. Other- 
wise, he's automatically dis- 
mounted and takes 3d6 
damage. 

Such a maneuver, hard as it is 
to set up. could easily break 
someone's neck, killing him in- 
stantly.) 

In the chart above, the lasso 
was listed as a large weapon be- 
cause of the amount of space it 
takes to twirl and wield it. 

You cannot perform a Parry or 
Disarm with the lasso, or use it 
as a melee weapon for Pin—only 
at range. 

Lasso requires its own 
weapon proficiency, which is 
not related to any other weapon 
proficiency. Weapon specializa- 
tion gives you the normal +1 to 
hit with the lasso and +2 dam- 
age on all damaging effects of 
the lasso (strangulation after the 
initial hit is still only 1d4, not 
1d4 +2). 

Cultures with gladiators are 
not the only ones which come 
up with the lasso. Civilizations 
which depend heavily on herd- 
beasts often have the lasso as a 
weapon. In some cultures, the 
lasso is a favorite weapon of as- 
sassins. It’s up to the DM to de- 
termine if the lasso is a weapon 


of the player-characters' cul- 
ture. 

If itis not, a PC need only train 
with someone who has profi- 
ciency with the weapon (and the 
PC must have a free weapon 
proficiency slot) in order to learn 
how to make and use the lasso. 


Net 


The gladia- 
tors' net consists of a small (8' to 
12' diameter) circular net with 
weights around the edge and a 
trailing rope used for control. 
Customarily, it is folded in such 
a manner that it will twirl open 
when thrown; the gladiator 
throws it with one hand, keep- 
ing a grip on the trailing rope 
with the other. 

If the gladiator makes his roll 
to hit, he has a Pin maneuver on 
his target (see the rules for Pin 
maneuver from the Cormibat 
Rules chapter). All the notes on 
Pin apply here, except one: the 
netted character may not make 
any sort of attack on the netter 
until he's won a Strength ability 
check and thrown that net off. 

On the round after the gladia- 
tor has netted his opponent, he 
has a choice of what he wants to 
do. 

He can hold onto the trailing 
rope with his off-hand (in order 
to maintain the Pin), pull out an- 
other weapon with his free 
hand, and attack his prey with 
that weapon. Eventually, his 
prey will probably win a 
Strength ability check and 
shrug that net off; in the mean- 
time, the gladiator may get sev- 
eral rounds of unreturned 
attack on him. 

Alternatively, he can try to im- 
prove his hold on the target. By 
continuing to loop the trailing 
rope around his victim, he can 
improve the capture until the 
victim has no chance of escape. 
To do this, he must make an or- 
dinary roll to-hit against his vic- 
tim's AC each round. On each 


99 


9 


successful hit, the victim loses 4 
points of effective Strength for 
purposes of breaking free of the 
net. If the victim wins a 
Strength ability check against 
his captor before his Strength 
drops to O, he breaks free (and 
his Strength is normal for all 
other purposes). If he fails, and 
his Strength is brought down to 
O, he is hopelessly enmeshed in 
the net and cannot get out until 
his captor lets him. 

When a gladiator throws a net 
and misses, it is open and un- 
folded. That doesn't mean he 
can no longer fight with it... 
but it is not as accurate, because 
it's not folded right. Each subse- 
quent roll to hit with the un- 
folded net is ata -3 to hit. 

With a properly-folded net, an 
attacker can perform Disarm, 
Parry and Pin maneuvers. Once 
a net is unfolded, such attacks 
are ata —3 to hit. 

Weapon proficiency with the 
net also give you the ability to 
fold the net properly, and to 
make fighting-nets. Weapon 
Specialization gives you the nor- 
mal +1 to hit; since it cannot 
give you a +2 to damage (the 
net doing no damage), you get 
that +2 as a bonus to your 
Strength when you're making 
Strength ability checks against 
netted prey. 

Cultures with gladiatorial 
combat do export such weap- 
ons, and the knowledge of their 
use (gladiators do demonstra- 
tions and exhibitions in foreign 
capitals all the time). Also, cul- 
tures with no knowledge of glad- 
iatorial combat independently 
develop the net weapon skill; at 
the DM's discretion, any charac- 
ter with the Savage warrior kit, 
the Hunter secondary skill or 
Hunting nonweapon profi- 
ciency, or any good rationale 
could spend a weapon profi- 
ciency slot to learn the use of the 
net. 


A. 


Pirate Weapons 


The world of 
piracy doesn't demand that pi- 
rates use any specific weapons 
. . . but for reasons of tradition 
and convenience, some specific 
weapons are very common to pi- 
rate crews. 

In addition to the new weap- 
ons on the chart above, pirates 
are readily familiar with: Battle 
axe, Bow (all types). Club. 
Crossbow (all normally-avail- 
able types), Dagger/Dirk, Hand/ 
throwing axe, Harpoon, Javelin, 
Knife, Polearm/Awl pike, 
Polearm/Partisan, Scourge 
(mostly for disciplinary pur- 
poses), Sling, Spear, Sword (all 
but Khopesh), Trident, and 
Whip (also mostly for discipli- 
nary purposes). 

Additionally, the world of the 
Pirate overlapped that of the 
Swashbuckler to a considerable 
degree. With the DM's permis- 
sion (and there's usually little 
reason to deny it), Pirates may 
have access to all the weapons 
listed on the chart above and de- 
scriptions below for Swash- 
bucklers. 

The new weapons for Pirates 
include: 


Cutlass 


The cutlass is 
a short. heavy sword, sharp 
along only one edge, with a 
heavy basket hilt (a protective 
cup) around the hilt to protect 
the hand. 

The cutlass' basket hilt pro- 
vides the following benefits: it 
gives the wielder a +1 to hit 
with the Parry maneuver; and it 
works just the same as an iron 
gauntlet if the wielder wishes to 
punch someone with the hilt 
rather than slash with the blade. 
(See the Player's Handbook, 
pages 97-98. Bare-hand attacks 
do 1d2 damage, plus strength 
bonus, and the other effects of 
Punching from the chart on 


page 97: metal gauntlets and 
other metal hand-protection 
makes that 1d3 plus strength 
bonus and punching effects. 
Note: An enchanted cutlass, say 
acutlass * 1, does not confer the 
+1 tohitand damage with these 


basket-hilt punches ... only 
with blade attacks.) 
Proficiency with Cutlass is re- 


lated to proficiency with short 
sword, dagger/dirk. knife/stilet- 
to, and main-gauche. Weapon 
Specialization with Cutlass is 
normal, except that you also get 
the *1 to hit and *2 damage 
with those basket-hilt punches. 

In a campaign with pirates, 
cutlasses are common and read- 
ily available in any port commu- 
nity; they are much less 
common inland. 


Belaying Pin 


The belaying 
pin is a short rod of wood or 
metal. It’s inserted in a hole 
bored through the ship's rail, 
and ship's ropes are made fast 
(tied) to it. It can also be yanked 
free and brought in violent con- 
tact with enemies; in a pirate 
fight, anyone who loses a 
weapon or starts out without 
one ends up with a belaying pin 
in his hand. 

Weapon proficiency with Be- 
laying Pin is related to clubs and 
maces; if you have proficiency 
with club or mace, you take only 
a -1 when using a belaying pin 
you don't have proficiency for. 
Weapon specialization with be- 
laying pin gives the usual bene- 
fits. 


Belaying pins are very availa- 
ble on any ship: you can get any 
number of them at a seaside 
town or city, especially at a ship- 
builder's, a warehouse, or a 
business that supplies ships. 


Gaff/Hook 


The gaff is a 
metal hook with a wooden or 
metal crossbar at the base; it's 
held in one hand, the hook pro- 
truding between the middle and 
ring fingers, and normally used 
to hook and land fish. 

However, like the belaying 
pin, it’s in ready supply onboard 
a ship. Also, many pirates who 
lose a hand have a cup with a 
gaff on it attached to the stump, 
and so always have a weapon 
"on hand"—one that can't be 
dropped or Disarmed. 

Proficiency with the gaff is not 
related to any other proficiency. 
Specialization grants the usual 
benefits. 


Samurai Weapons 


The exotic, 
oriental world features many 
weapons which are strange to 


western eyes .. . including the 
eyes of the PCs in most cam- 
paigns. 


Many of these weapons sim- 
ply look a little different and 
bear different names. Old, famil- 
iar weapons with slightly 
changed forms and names in- 
clude: the Battle axe, Hand axe, 
Dagger (tanto), Halberd, Jave- 
lin, Light lance, Mace, Pike, 
Spear. Long sword, Short 
sword, Two-handed sword (no- 
daichi), and Trident. These 
weapons have game character- 
istics identical to the normal 
versions, and proficiency with 
the common weapon works just 
as well with the more exotic ver- 
sion. 

The new samurai-society 
weapons listed in the chart 
above include: 


Bo Stick 


The bo stick is 
an ordinary hardwood staff, the 
height of a man or slightly taller. 

Bo stick shares a proficiency 
with Quarterstaff. If you can use 


one, you can use the other. (This 
doesn't mean that the two styles 
are identical; an oriental bo 
stick fighter looks very different 
in combat than a western quar- 
terstaff combatant. But if they 
traded weapons, they'd be just 
as good with the other guy's 
weapon ... each in his own 
style.) Weapon specialization in 
bo stick gives you the usual ad- 
vantages. 

Bo sticks are common every- 
where; any 6' or 7' hardwood 
walking staff is a bo staff. To use 
it as such, however, you have to 
have the bo stick/quarterstaff 
weapon proficiency. The pri- 
mary difference between the 
weapons, and the reason the 
quarterstaff does more damage 
against Large monsters. is that 
the combat quarterstaff has 
iron-shod, even lead-weighted 
ends. (A quarterstaff which does 
not have these features should 
do damage identical to the bo 
stick.) 


Chain 


This weapon 
isa 6' or 10' length of chain with 
weights at both ends. In com- 
bat, it's whirled very fast, the 
weighted end inflicting the dam- 
age on the target. 

The chain combines some of 
the useful traits of melee weap- 
ons and the lasso. You can at- 
tack with it for normal Called 
Shots, Disarm. Parry, and 
Strike/Thrust maneuvers. Addi- 
tionally. you can perform three 
of the lasso's five special func- 
tions: Pull/Trip by striking at a 
target's legs, Dismount a Rider, 
and Snag a Rider's Head. 

The chain is easy to conceal, 
and (at least in western lands) is 
not usually recognized as a 
weapon until wielded as one. 

The chain requires its own 
weapons proficiency, which is 
not related to any other weapon. 
Weapon specialization confers 
the usual bonuses. 


Chains are to be found in any 
civilization with the technologi- 
cal skill to make them (this in- 
cludes most AD&D* campaign 
settings), but the technique of 
fighting with them is mostly an 
eastern-culture development. A 
character would have to study 
with a practitioner of the tech- 
nique. and be able to spend a 
weapon proficiency slot, in or- 
der to learn how to use the 
weapon. 


Daikyu 


The daikyu is 
the great samurai longbow. It's 
7’ long (hence its size designa- 
tion of L). Its hand-grip is not in 
the center of the weapon; it’s lo- 
cated closer to the bottom, so 
the daikyu can be fired from 
horseback and from kneeling 
positions. 

As with other bows, the 
daikyu can be used to perform 
the Called Shot, Disarm, Hold 
Attack, and Strike/Thrust (i.e., 
shoot) maneuvers. 

The daikyu and katana are 
the two principal weapons of the 
samurai. 

The daikyu requires its own 
weapons proficiency. It is re- 
lated to, but not identical to, 
other bow _ proficiencies. 
Weapon specialization confers 
the usual benefits. 

The daikyu is not exported 
from eastern nations. However, 
it is a simple task, if you are in 
such a nation, to commission 
the making of one. A western 
bowyer would have to have 
studied in the east to make one. 


Katana 


The katana is 
the samurais sword. It’s a 
medium-length, slightly curved 
blade with no quillions (only a 
small. circular guard) and a hilt 
suitable for one-handed and 
two-handed use. The blade is 
sharpened only along one edge 


101 


and at the tip, but it is sharp- 
ened to a razor's edge. It is 
forged with a special technique 
known only in the east, where 
layers of steel and iron are sand- 
wiched, heated, folded, 
stretched. re-folded, stretched. 
re-folded, on and on until the 
blade consists of microscopi- 
cally thin layers of alternating 
metals, providing strength, re- 
silience. and the ability to hold a 
remarkable edge. This is why 
the katana has the excellent 
speed and damage listed for the 
weapon. 

The katana requires its own 
weapon proficiency. which is re- 
lated to the bastard sword/long 
blades group. Weapon speciali- 
zation confers the usual bene- 
fits. 

Katanas are very personal; a 
samurai is dishonored if he loses 
his, and so very few are lost. 
This means that it is very hard 
to get one in the west. other than 
by taking it from its owner...a 
difficult task. In the east, a char- 
acter might be willing to com- 
mission one from a wea- 
ponsmith, for the listed price. . . 
if he gets a good reaction roll 
from the NPC. (An ordinary 
weaponsmith could not make 
one. The blade-making tech- 
nique requires study in the east 
and the learning of a specialized 
individual weaponsmithing 
nonweapon proficiency.) 

Also. a hero who does a favor 
or performs a mission for an 
eastern lord might be awardeda 
matched set of katana and waki- 
zashi, if he’s very lucky; this 
would be a high honor. 


Naginata 


This is a po- 
learm. a 6' to 8' shaft with a 
curved, sword-like blade at the 
end. It's the favored weapon of 
the female fighters of the orient. 
but they are not limited to it, nor 
is it limited to them. 


A 


Naginata proficiency is re- 
lated to all other polearms. 
Weapon specialization confers 
the usual benefits. 

Naginatas are readily availa- 
ble in oriental ports, and such 
weapons are readily exported, if 
the DM says there is a market 
for them. 


Nunchaku 


The nunchaku 
consists of two lengths of hard 
wood connected by a short 
length of chain or rope. 

The weapon can be used to 
perform Called Shots, Disarm, 
Parry, and Strike/Thrust ma- 
neuvers. 

Nunchaku requires its own 
proficiency. which is not related 
to any other weapons profi- 
ciency (including flails). Weapon 
specialization confers the usual 
benefits. Masters of the weapon 
often have weapon specializa- 
tion in nunchaku and Style Spe- 
cialization in Two-Weapons 
Style, giving them the ability to 
fight effectively with nunchaku 
in either hand. The only way to 
acquire this proficiency is to 
study with someone who al- 
ready has the proficiency, and to 
have a proficiency slot available 
to spend on nunchaku. 

Nunchaku are readily availa- 
ble in oriental ports, and such 
weapons are exported; western 
collectors are quite enthusiastic 
about them, even if these collec- 
tors usually cannot use them. 


Sal 


This is a short, 
defensive weapon, consisting of 
a metal bar with a hilt, and over- 
sized upward-curving quillions. 
When used by someone with 
proficiency in the weapon, sai 
confer a +1 to hit bonus when 
using the Pin and Disarm ma- 
neuvers. 

In the chart at the start of this 
chapter, the Sai is listed as hav- 


ing two types of damage: P 
(piercing) and B (bludgeoning). 
That's not quite right: the nor- 
mal sai is only a Bludgeoning- 
damage weapon. However, 
certain warriors prefer for it to 
be a sharp stabbing weapon. so 
the damage may be Piercing in- 
stead. A sai may only have one 
type of damage. not both. 

Sai requires its own profi- 
ciency, which is not related to 
any other. Weapon specializa- 
tion confers the usual benefits. 
To learn the proficiency, one 
must study with someone who 
has it. and the character must 
have a weapon proficiency slot 
to spend. 

Many warriors proficient in 
the sai take Style Specialization 
in Two-Weapon technique and 
utilize twin sai in combat. 

Sai are readily available in ori- 
ental ports, and are exported. 


Shuriken, of- 
ten called throwing stars, are 
small thrown weapons. They do 
as much damage as a thrown 
dagger, and are considerably 
more concealable. Ornamental 
shuriken can often be worn as 
jewelry and not recognized as 
weapons, and a pocketful of 
shuriken weigh no more than 
many other single weapons. 

However, shuriken require 
their own weapon proficiency, 
which is not related to any 
other. Weapon specialization 
confers the usual benefits. To 
learn shuriken proficiency, one 
must study with someone who 
has it, and must have a weapon 
proficiency slot to spend. 

Shuriken are available in ori- 
ental ports, but most occidental 
collectors don't know how to 
use them. 


102 


Tetsubo 


The tetsubo is 
a long walking-staff, its upper 
end shod with studded iron 
strips. 

Its weapon proficiency is re- 
lated to other polearms; special- 
ization confers the usual 
benefits. 

Tetsubos can be had in orien- 
tal markets, but none are ex- 
ported because it is a relatively 
simple weapon to make. 


Wakizashi 


The wakizashi 
is the short-sword companion of 
the katana. Its blade is forged 
the same way, and the weapon 
looks like a shorter version of 
the katana. It is often part of a 
matched set with the katana, 
and is of almost equal impor- 
tance as the katana to the samu- 
rai. Only samurai can wear both 
katana and wakizashi. 

Wakizashi proficiency is re- 
lated to short sword. Specializa- 
tion confers the usual benefits. 
Many samurai fight with the ka- 
tana in one hand and wakizashi 
in the other, in two-weapon 
technique, and some learn the 
two-weapon style specialization 
to further improve their ability 
with this style. 

Wakizashis are as hard to 
come by as katanas. 


Note 


The AD&D® 
game supplement Oriental Ad- 
ventures describes many, many 
other weapons and provides a 
lot of resource material for ori- 
ental characters and cam- 
paigns. A certain amount of 
conversion is required, as the 
supplement was written for the 
first-edition game. 


Savage Weapons 


The lump 
term "savages" is being used 
here to refer to any number of 
different types of people. They 
have in common these traits: 
They're not as technologically 
advanced as the normal peoples 
of the campaign. though some 
do make weapons of bronze or 
iron; and they're probably 
hunter-gatherers who have not 
yet embraced the agricultural 
revolution. And that's really all 
they have to have in common. 
“Savages” might be highly cul- 
tured, artistic, peaceful peoples, 
but if they have dirt floors or 
flint-tipped weapons, the rest of 
the world calls them savage. For 
our purposes, “savages” en- 
compasses Neanderthal man, 
Old Stone Age Cro-magnon, and 
New Stone Age modern men. 

Stereotypical savages know 
the following weapons: Blow- 
gun (mostly jungle tribes), Long 
and Short bow (no composite 
bows), Club, Dagger, Hand/ 
Throwing Axe, Javelin, Knife, 
Sling, and Spear. 

Depending on their level of 
technological development, 
they may make their weapons 
(including arrowheads, spear- 
heads, etc.) out of iron, bronze, 
stone or even bone. 

For our purposes, iron and 
bronze weapons have the same 
characteristics as steel weap- 
ons; it’s not worth generating 
all-new weapon stats for the 
slight game-mechanic differ- 
ences. 

Stone and bone weapons, on 
the other hand, require their 
own statistics, which is why 
they're represented on the 
weapon chart at the top of the 
chapter. 


Stone Weapons 

Stone weap- 
ons are used just like their mod- 
ern counterparts, but are worth 


less money, do less damage, and 
are more prone to shattering. 

The damages and costs 
(should some ever be sold on the 
market) for these weapons are 
given on the chart above. 

Stone weapons have a chance 
of breaking every time they hit 
and do damage. Every time a 
stone weapon successfully hits 
a target, the player must roll 
1d6. Regardless of the roll, this 
attack does its full damage, but 
on a roll of 1 on the 1d6, the 
weapon or weapon-head shat- 
ters and is useless. 


Bone Weapons 


Bone weapons 
are likewise used like their mod- 
ern counterparts, but are worth 
even less money, can only be 
used with smaller stabbing 
weapons (knives and daggers). 
and shatter even more readily— 
on a roll of 1 or 2 on 1d6. 


Other lises for 
Stone and Bone Weapons 


Generally, no 
one in his right mind is going to 
trade in nice, modern steel 
weapons for bone or stone coun- 
terparts. But characters don't 
always have the choice. 

Characters with the Savage 
warrior kit start out with the 
level of weapons the DM decides 
for him: “Modern,” stone or 
bone. In a campaign where most 
savages are simply hunter- 
gatherers who live at a certain 
distance from the PCs' culture, 
but who trade and interact with 
them, modern weapons are fine. 
When the savage culture is far 
away and more technologically 
primitive, stone weapons are 
more appropriate. If the savages 
are supposed to be very primi- 
tive indeed, bone weapons are 
the proper choice. In all likeli- 
hood, these savage characters, 
reaching more advanced lands 
and seeing how much more 


103 


P 


damage more modern weapons 
will do, will make the switch. . . 
though they're likely to stick to 
the types of weapons they know 
best (spears, bows, daggers, 
etc.). 

Remember, though, that the 
clubis the same weapon regard- 
less of technological advance- 
ment; the surliest caveman can 
make a club that has the 
weapon stats of the most mod- 
ern baseball bat. 

Also, player-characters might 
find themselves stripped of 
weapons and cast adrift in the 
wilderness. If they want weap- 
ons, they'll have to make them, 
possibly of stone or bone. For 
these purposes, too, the weapon 
stats above can be useful. 


Swashbuckler Weapons 


Swashbuckler 
weapons are light, fast weapons 
used by lightly-armored oppo- 
nents, usually in an environ- 
ment (a culture, nation or even 
just a city) where heavier arms 
and armor are illegal or out- 
dated. They're also appropriate 
for shipboard campaigns and sit- 
uations; the light armor is easier 
to get out of so you don't drown if 
you fall overboard. So, usually, 
swashbucklers emerge in an 
area where the days of the plate- 
armored, broadsword-wielding 
knight are past ... or at least 
numbered. Swashbuckler char- 
acters might bolt on the plate 
mail and pick up the lance for 
genuine warfare, but in their cos- 
mopolitan big-city adventures 
they stick to the lighter stuff... 
and can be sure that most of the 
opponents they face will be like- 
wise armed and armored. 

Weapons from the Player's 
Handbook which can be consid- 
ered swashbuckler weapons in- 
clude: Bows (all types), 
Crossbows (all available types), 
Dagger/Dirk, Knife, Polearms 
(all types), and Short Swords. 
The only sorts of shields they 


A. 


use regularly are bucklers and 
small shields. and they tend to 
wear only leather. padded, and 
hide armor. 

The new weapons listed on 
the chart above include: 


Stiletto 


The stiletto is 
a type of narrow-bladed knife, 
sharp only at the point. Its most 
unusual trait is that it confers a 
*2 (non-magical) bonus to hit 
against certain armor types: 
Plate mail (bronze and normal). 
ring mail. and chain mail. (This 
is because its narrow point and 
blade slip in more readily 
through any sort of armor that 
is not solid metal or overlapping 
plates of metal.) 

It otherwise behaves like any 
other knife. and Knife weapon 
proficiency is exactly the same 
as Stiletto weapon proficiency: 
If you know one, you know the 
other equally well, at no addi- 
tional cost in proficiencv slots. 


Main-gauche 

The main- 
gauche is a large-bladed dagger 
with a basket hilt (see the de- 
scription of Cutlass, above) and 
large quillions. Though it is a 
stabbing weapon. it's primarily 
a defensive weapon wielded in 
the left-hand in two-weapon 
technique (or two-weapon style 
specialization). 

When used by someone with 
Main-gauche weapon profi- 
ciency, the weapon confersa +1 
bonus to hit with the Disarm 
and Parry maneuvers. Because 
of its cutlass-like basket hilt, the 
main-gauche, too, works like an 
iron gauntlet if the wielder 
wishes to punch someone with 
the hilt rather than slash with 
the blade. 

Main-gauche proficiency is re- 
lated to, but not identical to, 
dagger proficiency. Specializa- 
tion confers the usual benefits. 


Rapier 


The rapier is a 
long-bladed, one-handed sword, 
normally sharp only at the 
point. It's a thrusting weapon, 
wielded with lightning-like 
thrusts and lunges. Swashbuck- 
lers often learn Two-Weapon 
Style Specialization and use ra- 
pier with rapier. with main- 
gauche, with short sword, or 
with dagger. stiletto, or knife. 
It's also occasionally used with 
buckler. 

Rapier requires its own profi- 
ciency. which is related to sabre 
proficiency—not long sword 
and its related weapons. 
Weapon specialization confers 
the usual benefits. 

You can have a rapier made 
with a basket hilt. This adds 2 
gp to the cost, +1 Ib. to the 
weight, and confers the normal 
basket-hilt benefits: +1 to hit 
with Parry maneuver, and the 
iron-gauntlet benefit for Punch- 
ing. 


Sabre 


The sabre is a 
light slashing weapon. Its prac- 
titioners commonly use only sa- 
bre. and often take 
Single-Weapon Style Specializa- 
tion and Sabre Weapon Speciali- 
zation. They are very deadly 
with their blades and may be in- 
ordinately proud of the facial 
scars they accumulate (and deal 
out). 

Sabre requires its own profi- 
ciency, which is related to rapier 
proficiency. 

Sabres. like cutlasses and 
main-gauches, are made with a 
basket hilt. This confers the nor- 
mal basket-hilt benefits: +1 to 
hit with Parry maneuver, and 
the iron-gauntlet benefit for 
Punching. 


104 


New Armor 


Some of the 
new warrior types represented 
by the warrior kits also have 
their own special forms of ar- 
mor: the Gladiator and Samurai 
both introduce new forms of ar- 
mor to the campaign. 


Gladiator Armor 


There are 
three normal types of gladiator 
armor: Thracian, Gallic, and 
Samnite. 


Armor 
Armor Type Class 
Thracian 9 
Gallic 7 
Samnite 5 


They're all made up from sev- 
eral smaller pieces of armor. 
which include: 


Wgt 

Armor Piece Cost (lbs) 
Belt: 

Protective metal 

belt at waist 2gp 5 
Cuirass: 

Leather or metal 

chest plate 
Fasciae: 

Leather bands 

on legs 
Galea: 

Visored Helmet 
Galerus: 

Shoulder piece 

on weapon 

shoulder 5gp 3 
Manicae: 

Leather sleeve 
Myrrmillo: 

Visored helm 

resembling 

sea fish 10gp 5 


Also used by the gladiators 
are the parma (a small shield, ei- 
ther square or round) and scu- 
tum (an oblong medium shield). 

These armor types are named 
for real-world sites (Thrace, 
Gaul, and Samnos); if you have 


50 gp 20 


10gp 5 
10gp 5 


10gp 5 


gladiators in your campaign, 
you may want to rename these 
types according to place-names 
more appropriate to your set- 
ting. 


Thracian 


The Thracian 
gladiator wears only fasciae on 
his legs. This gives him AC 9, or 
8 with a shield—and he carries a 
shield, a parma. In gladiatorial 
combat, the Thracian gladiator 
fights only with a dagger. In the 
field. adventuring. he could use 
anything he wants. 


Gallic 


The Gallic 
gladiator wears the galea, the 
belt. manica on his weapon 
arm, and fasciae. This confers 
an AC of 7. He also carries a scu- 
tum, to bring it toa 6. The Gallic 
gladiator fights with any num- 
ber of weapons. 


“Ne 
7 ri 
24A “iF => 


Samnite 


The most 
heavily-armored type of gladia- 
tor, the Samnite, wears a cui- 
rass, fasciae on his legs, manica 
on his weapon arm. and the ga- 
lea helmet. His basic AC is 5, or 
4 with the scutum he carries. 

Should someone just wear the 
cuirass, his base AC would be 7. 


Samurai Armor 


The main dif- 
ference between oriental and oc- 
cidental armor, from a 
game-mechanics point of view, 
is descriptive. Oriental armor is 
colorful and elaborately con- 
structed, often brightly enam- 
elled or decorated with paint or 
painted leathers, silk cords, 
precious-metal plating, etc. 

But from a game-mechanic 
point of view, leather armor is 
leather armor, plate is plate. 
Samurai wear armor that is the 
equivalent of padded leather. 


25 M 
e 
ES £ Uii M wo 


‘dull 


105 


P> 


studded leather, scale mail, and 
brigandine: basic costs, 
weights, and AC values are 
identical to the western armor 
styles. However, a samurai may 
wish to spend more than the 
minimum amount on his ar- 
mor; the extra money goes into 
making it a remarkable exam- 
ple of eastern art. 


Kote 


The samurai 
also have one sort of armor un- 
known to the west: The kote. 
This is a pair of armored sleeves 
which may be worn concealed 
under the samurai's tunic. 

Mechanically, the kote costs 
twice as much as and acts al- 
most the same as a buckler. 
There are a couple of differences 
between buckler and kote, 
though. Kote cannot be Dis- 
armed, and you can use weap- 
ons in the hands of the arms to 
which kote are attacked. The 


A. 


fact that kote consists of a pair of 
sleeves doesn't mean you get a 
*2 bonus to AC; only the *1 
normally conferred by a buck- 
ler. 


Effects of Armor 


Here are some 
optional rules for use with the 
wearing of armor in your cam- 
paign. You may wish to use 
some, all, or none of these; we'll 
try to discuss what effects each 
will have on your campaign. 

A lot of the information we'll 
be discussing and elaborating 
upon is contained in the follow- 
ing charts. 


Armor AC Dex Wgt 
Type Chks (Ibs) 
Banded mail 4 -2 35 
e 6 -2 ‘35 
Bronze 
plate mail 4 -3 45 
Chain mail 5 -2 40 
Field plate 2 -3 60 
Full plate 1 -3 70 
Gladiator 
Gallic 7 =] 15 
Samnite 5 -2 30 
Thracian 9 [t 5 
Hide 6 -3 30 
Leather 8 0 15 
Padded 8 0 10 
Plate mail 3 -3 50 
Ring mail 7 =} 50 
Scale mail 6 -2 30 
Shield 
Body * -8** 18 
Buckler/ 
Kote e -0% 3 
Medium/ 
Scutum * -2** 10 
Small/ 
Parma € =en 5 


Splint mail 4 -2 40 
Studded 


leather 7 = 25 
* A shield makes the AC one 
better: Leather + shield is 
AC 7. 
** This penalty is only counted 
for certain situations; see be- 
low. 


The armor a character wears 
affects his AC, his Encum- 
brance (if that optional system 
is used). and also his ability to 
perform dexterous actions—in 
other words, heavier armor pe- 
nalizes a character's Dexterity 
score for purposes of Dexterity 
ability checks and Dexterity- 
based nonweapon proficiencies. 

A character's choice of head 
protection, on the other hand, 
affects his Encumbrance, his 
ability to spot things, and the 
ability of some weapons and at- 
tacks to affect him in combat, as 
we'll discuss further on. 


Helmet Vis. Hrg. Wgt. 


Type (Ibs) 
Cap -0 -1 2 
Coif -0 -1 2 
Close-Faced -2 -3 5 
Great helm -3 -4 10 
None -0 -0 0 
Open-Faced -1  -2 5 


Effects On AC 


The effects of 
armor on the characters' AC are 
already well-documented with- 
in the game. 

In the campaign, the only fea- 
ture of the armor/AC system 
that tends to cause trouble in- 
volves the shield. Remember 
that attacks to the character's 
rear are made at the character's 
AC without the shield (unless 
he's wearing it slung across his 
back, of course); this is some- 
thing that is easy to forget. DMs. 
if they don't keep the informa- 
tion written on a helpful record 
sheet, should ask their players: 
"What's your AC from the 
rear?" when such incidents 
come up. not just "What's your 
AC?" 


Effects On Speed 


There's a mis- 
conception that armor, particu- 
larly plate-type armor, trans- 
forms graceful warriors into 
lumbering oafs who can be 


106 


pushed down and sat upon with 
comparative ease, 

Nothing could be further from 
the truth. Armor is designed to 
be as accommodating as possi- 
ble to a fighter's movements, 
and so the AD&D* game doesn't 
assign an armored warrior any 
sort of initiative penalty for 
wearing armor. 

Now, armor isn't made for 
some other types of movement 
(acrobatics, dancing, etc.) and 
so will constrict many other 
Dexterity-based abilities, as 
we'll discuss below. It is also 
heavy, which slows down an ar- 
mored character's running 
speed, as is already documented 
in the game. 


Effects On Dexterity Checks 


Armor does in- 
terfere with a character's grace- 
fulness in many situations. For 
this reason, we assign the char- 
acter a penalty to Dexterity 
checks (and dexterity-based 
nonweapon proficiencies) when 
the character is in armor; those 
penalties are listed on the armor 
chart above. 

These penalties are applied 
when the character is using all 
nonweapon proficiencies except 
Riding (Land-based or Airborne) 
or Charioteering, which are ex- 
empt from the penalty. (Why 
someone would be performing 
many of those skills in armor is a 
mystery . . . but it could happen.) 

In addition, the penalty pre- 
scribed for the shields is applied 
when the character is using the 
nonweapon proficiencies Jug- 
gling, Tightrope Walking and 
Tumbling. (The DM may choose 
to disallow the shield penalty for 
certain examples of these skills’ 
use. For example. a character 
who is juggling a one-handed 
technique won't be put off by 
having a shield on the other 
hand. But these exceptions will 
be rare.) 


In the Campaign... 


These dexter- 
ity-roll penalties are provided 
only for those gamers to whom 
the matter means something. If 
you don't care about such 
things. don't use these rules: 
they'd merely be an annovance 
and extra complication for you. 

But if you prefer for a charac- 
ter to be a little less graceful 
when in full plate or hide than in 
soft leather or no armor at all, 
these rules are for your cam- 


paign. 


Effects On Vision and Hearing 


Helms and 
helmets restrict vision and hear- 
ing. They frame the face, ob- 
scure his vision, muffle his 
hearing. and generally give the 
character less ability to observe 
what's going on around him. 
(They also sometimes keep 
maces from caving in his skull, 
which is why fighters like helms 
and helmets.) 

With these optional rules, 
we'll talk about different kinds 
of helms and helmets, how 
they're used. and what other ef- 
fects they have in combat. 


Other Helms and Helmets 


The types of 
armor listed in the Player's 
Handbook. page 69, include 
only two types of helmet (great 
helm and basinet) and then 
don't really describe what the 
differences are between them 
. . . Other than price and weight. 

In The Complete Fighter's 
Handbook. we'll talk about six 
different types of head protec- 
tion. Each one has different ef- 
fects on the character's ability to 
see things and to protect himself 
from different types of damage. 


What Head Protection 
Doesn't Do 


The one thing 
your choice of head protection 
doesn't do is change your Ar- 
mor Class. A warrior can have 
on full plate and a great helm, or 
full plate and no helmet at all, 
and he'll have the same AC. So 
when making your choice of 
head protection for your charac- 
ter. don't worry about the char- 
acter's AC, for it won't be 
affected. 


Vision and Hearing Checks 


In a combat or 
any other loud situation (such 
as a raucous tavern, a charging 
mob. an earthquake, a hurri- 
cane, or a singing contest at a 
dwarven boiler-making plant), 
the DM may want his PCs to 
make Vision and Hearing 
Checks in order to see and hear 
certain things. 

Certainly. when a fighter is 
pointed in a certain direction. 
there's nothing distracting him, 
and an ogre is lumbering at him 
from that direction, the fighter 
is going to see the ogre. No roll is 
necessary. 

But when there's a chance 
that the character could fail to 
notice such a thing (as defined 
by the DM). the character gets to 
make a Vision Check or a Hear- 
ing Check (whichever the situa- 
tion calls for). 

A Vision or Hearing Check isa 
1d20 roll against the character's 
Intelligence or Wisdom, which- 
ever is higher. If the PC rolls his 
ability or less. he's successfully 
made his check and can see or 
hear whatever it is he's sup- 
posed to. If he fails, he doesn't. 

Protective headgear, however, 
provides penalties to the charac- 
ters Vision and Hearing 
Checks. as well as providing 
other benefits and hindrances. 


107 


9 


No Head Protection 


If a character 
chooses to wear no head protec- 
tion at all, he suffers no Vision or 
Hearing check penalties. 

However, the character has 
one hindrance, if you're using 
the optional hit location rules 
from the Combat Rules chapter. 

If a character is wearing no 
head protection, an attacker can 
make a Called Shot against his 
head and thereby ignore the 
character's AC benefits from ar- 
mor. (All bonuses from shields, 
high Dexterity scores, and mag- 
ical items still count, however.) 
Since this is a very difficult shot 
(a total -8 to hit, remember), 
this doesn't do the attacker 
much good, unless the victim is 
otherwise heavily armored. 

Example: Halway the archer 
has two possible targets, Terri- 
tor and Bosque, two brutal 
guards. Territor is wearing 
leather armor and no headgear; 
this puts him at AC 8, and with 
his Dexterity bonus he’s AC 6. 
Bosque is wearing full plate +2, 
no headgear, and body shield: 
this puts him at AC - 2. 

Halway, after all modifiers for 
range, his Dexterity, and other 
factors. is THACO 16. (He's a 
6th-level warrior. with a Dexter- 
ity of 16, and is firing at Medium 
Range.) 

If he shoots at Territor, AC 6. 
he needs only a (16-6) 10 or bet- 
ter to hit him. If he shoots at 
Territor's unprotected head, the 
shot becomes much harder; he's 
shooting at AC 8 (AC 10, -2 for 
Territor's Dexterity), and so 
would normally need a (16-8) 8; 
but with the —8 to hit for a head 
shot, he's back to a roll of 16 or 
better. It's easier for him to hit 
Territor with a normal, non- 
specific shot. 

If he shoots at Bosque, AC - 2. 
he needs to roll an (16-[-2]) 18 or 
better to hit him. If he shoots at 
Bosque's unprotected head, the 
shot becomes somewhat easier; 


<a 


he's shooting at AC 9 (AC 10, 
modified by Bosque's shield), 
and so would normally need a 
(16-9) 7; with the —8 to hit fora 
head shot, he's up to a roll of 15 
or better. Thís makes it slightly 
easier to hit Bosque, and may 
give him the special effects of 
the head location shot if he suc- 
ceeds, so that's the shot he at- 
tempts. 

The lower (better) a target's 
AC is, the better an option it is to 
try a head shot, if hís head is un- 
protected and the rest of his 
body is armored. Characters in- 
terested in this option should 
calculate the math of both shots 
and compare the results, if they 
know all the relative ACs and 
modifiers; if they don't, they 
should ask the DM, in general 
terms, if it’s even worth their 
time to try such a shot. 


The Cap 

The Cap is a 
padded, leather or even steel 
skullcap which is about the size 
of and worn much like a close- 
fitting cap. beret or hat. It gives 
the wearer no penalty for Vision 
Checks, and a -1 penalty with 
Hearing Checks (as it partially 
covers the ears). It's often worn 
in conjunction with padded, 
leather. hide, studded leather, 
and other lightweight armors. 


The Coif 


The Coif is a 
padded chain mail hood; it fits 
fairly snugly around the neck 
and over all the head except the 
face from chin to forehead. Like 
the Cap. it gives the wearer no 
penalty for Vision Checks and 
only a - 1 penalty with Hearing 
Checks. It's usually worn with 
chain mail. 

Often, a heavily-armored 
knight will wear a chain mail 
coif and wear a Great Helm over 
it. The only benefit this confers 
is that such a knight can remove 


his Great Helm, the better to see 
and hear around him, and still 
have some head protection. As a 
disadvantage. it adds a little 
weight to the knight's equip- 
ment, but it does not decrease 
his Vision and Hearing checks 
any further than just wearing 
the Great Helm. 


The Open-Face Helmet 


The Open- 
Faced Helmet, made of rein- 
forced leather, or of metal, 
covers the back, sides and top of 
the face, leaving most of the face 
open. It gives the wearer a -1 
penalty with Vision Checks, and 
a -2 penalty with Hearing 
Checks (it completely covers the 
ears, usually with small holes or 
grating over the ears so that the 
wearer can hear at all). 
Examples include the Corin- 
thian helmets of ancient Greece. 
In a medieval campaign, open- 
faced helmets are often worn by 
military officers and soldiers 
who can afford the protection. 


The Closed-Face Helmet 


The Closed- 
Face Helmet is made of metal 
and is much like the Open- 
Faced Helmet ... except that 
there is armor plate, often in the 
form of a visor which may be 
opened, in front of the face. It 
gives the wearer a —2 penalty 
with Vision Checks, and a -3 
penalty with Hearing Checks. 

Examples include the basinet 
mentioned in the Player's Hand- 
book, the galea and myrrmillo 
mentioned for the gladiators 
(above), and many other combat 
helmets. Many knights and 
other mounted warriors wear 
helmets of this type. 

If the wearer of a Closed-Face 
Helmet is also wearing plate 
mail or field plate armor, he gets 
a +1 to saving throws vs. 
dragon breath, and to spells 
such as burning hands, pyro- 


108 


technics, fire ball, flaming 
sphere. wall of fire, delayed 
blast fireball, incendiary cloud, 
and meteor swarm, and other 
fire-based spells and magical ef- 
fects (as determined by the DM). 

If someone uses a Lasso, 
Chain, or Bolas in an effort to 
snare a rider's head. and that 
rider is wearing a Closed-Face 
Helmet, the victim gets to roll 
1d6. On a 4-6, the attack is han- 
dled normally, but on a 1-3, the 
attack is treated just as a normal 
lasso or chain dismount; the at- 
tacker doesn't do the extra dam- 
age that the head-lasso attack 
normally allows. 


The Great Helm 


The Great 
Helm is a massive helm which 
covers the entire head, from the 
top of the head to the top of the 
shoulders. leaving slits open for 
the eyes and holes open for 
breathing: it has no removable 
visor. It gives the wearer a -3 
penalty with Vision Checks, and 
a -4 penalty with Hearing 
Checks. 

The Great Helm provides the 
following other benefits: 

The wearer of a Great Helm 
getsa *2 saving throw vs. wiz- 
ard spells such as hypnotism. 
light cast on his eyes, blindness, 
hypnotic pattern, suggestion, 
fire charm, rainbow pattern, 
and some other mind-control- 
ling spells ... but not charm 
person, charm monster, or dom- 
ination. 

If the wearer of a Great Helm 
is also wearing plate mail or field 
plate armor, he gets a +2 to sav- 
ing throws vs. dragon breath, 
and to spells such as burning 
hands, pyrotechnics, fire ball, 
flaming sphere, wall of fire, de- 
layed blast fireball, incendiary 
cloud, and meteor swarm, and 
other fire-based spells and magi- 
cal effects (as determined by the 
DM). If, instead of plate mail or 
field plate, he is wearing full 


plate. the bonus is a +3 to sav- 
ing throws. 

If someone uses a Lasso, 
Chain, or Bolas in an effort to 
snare a rider's head, and that 
rider is wearing a Great Helm. 
the attack is automatically 
treated just as a normal attack. 
With lasso or chain. it's a nor- 
mal lasso or chain dismount, 
and the attacker doesn't do the 
extra damage that the head- 
lasso attack normally allows. 
With Bolas. the attack does nor- 
mal damage. but no strangula- 
tion damage. 


In the Campaign . . . 


If you use 
these rules in a campaign, you 
add some color and distinction 
between the types of armor that 
your PCs will be wearing. On the 
other hand, once again, it's an 
added level of complexity which 
the game doesn't have to have. 
Use these rules only if the added 
complexity doesn't bother you, 
and if the special functions of 
the different types of helmets 
appeal to vou. 


Variant Armor 


The types of 
armor given in the Player's 
Handbook are all vou need to 
play the game. However, you 
can use other types of armor in 
your campaign; here, we'll talk 
about two different types of al- 
ternative armor. 


Racial Armor 


It'sasking a lot 
to suppose that elves will make 
their armor just as humans 
make theirs, that it will look the 
same and function identically. 
Here are some ways to make the 
armors of different races more 
individual. 


Armor Fitting 


Armor made 
for one race rarely fits another; 
it may be too big, too small, or 
proportioned too strangely. 

Below is a chart. The column 
to the left shows the type of de- 
mihuman trying to wear the ar- 
mor. The rows along the top 
show what species the armor 
was made for. The percentage 
chances shown are the chances 
that the person can wear the ar- 
mor, and the " +“ and" -" sym- 
bols show whether the armor is 
more likely to be too big or too 
small for the wearer. (If there is 
no such symbol, it means that 
odds are even, 50% that it will 
be too big, 50% that it will be too 
small.) "Too large" could mean 
that it is so baggy or empty that 
it hinders the wearer and does 
not protect him well enough, or 
that it is so long on him that it 
interferes with his walking. 
“Too small" could mean that it 
is not broad enough to accom- 
modate the wearer's chest, or 
that it is so short that it looks ri- 
diculous and does not suffi- 
ciently protect the wearer. 

Now, at the DM's discretion, 
many things can affect these 
percentage chances. 

If a character of one sex is try- 
ing to put on armor built for an- 
other sex, chances go down that 
it will fit. The chance is reduced 
10% (but never goes below 5%). 
If a fit fails because of that modi- 
fier, it's because the woman 
found the man’s armor too big, 
or the man found the woman’s 
too small. 


Race 

Trying To 

Wear Armor: Dwf Elf 
Dwarf 80% 0% — 
Elf 10% + 9096 
Gnome 40% + 40% + 
Half-Elf 20% + 45% 
Halfling 75% + 30% - 
Human 50% - 20% - 


109 


9 


However, the DM may allow 
the difference in sex to help 
sometimes—in cases where the 
armor is not likely to fit a male 
human because it is too small in 
the shoulders and chest. A hu- 
man woman trying to put on a 
male half-elfs armor might be at 
no modifier, and find herself at a 
+10% modifier to wear a male 
elfs armor. 

Remember that full plate has 
its own modifiers for chances to 
fit; it has only a 20% chance to fit 
another member of the same 
race (10% if the new wearer is of 
the other sex). A character can- 
not wear full plate made for a 
character of another race, per- 
iod. 

The DM can allow previously 
role-played determinations of a 
character's height and build to 
affect the chances from the 
chart below. For instance, if one 
player has always said that his 
human character was short and 
stocky. say 5'4" and powerfully 
built, so that many people joked 
about him having a dwarvish 
ancestor, the DM can give him a 
+15% chance to wear dwarvish 
armor: this raises his chance 
from 50% to 6596, as if he were a 
human trying to wear armor of 
his own kind. The DM should, 
however, subtract that same 
modifier from the character's 
chance to wear armor built for 
humans: that chance would go 
down from 65% to 50%. 

Example: An adventuring 
party kills a beholder in its lair 
and finds the armor worn by 
previous victims. The adventur- 


Race For Which Armor Was Built: 


Gnm 1/2 El !l5-g Hum 
10% - 10% - 35%- 40% 
50% - 70% + 35% + 50% + - 
75% 25% + 60% + 20% + 
10% + 70% 35% 50% 
35% - 35% + 70% 20% + 
5% = 30% - 10% - 65% 


S 


ers include a huge human male 
barbarian, a slender human 
warrioress, a dwarf axeman, 
and a female gnome. The dead 
victims include an elf male in 
enchanted chain mail and a 
halfling male in enchanted 
leather. The heroes see who can 
wear the captured armor. 

The DM decides arbitrarily 
that the human barbarian can- 
not even roll. He's always de- 
scribed himself as being 
massive, with enormous rip- 
pling muscles and a body- 
builder's physique. In this 
campaign. that often helps him 
with the ladies, but this time it 
disqualifies him from wearing 
any of the treasure. 

The slender human warrioress 
tries the elfs chain mail. A hu- 
man trying on elf armor, on the 
chart above, has a 20% to wear it 
successfully. The DM raises her 
chance 10% because she is a fe- 
male human trying to fit into 
male elf armor; her build is at an 
advantage here. He raises it 10% 
further because in the campaign 
she has always described herself 
as of delicate build, very slender. 
This raises her chance to 40%. 
She rolls 38 on percentile dice; 
she can wear the chain. She also 
tries the enchanted leather. A 
human woman trying to wear 
male halfling armor is at 10%, 
and the DM again assigns her the 
+20% from the two modifiers 
mentioned. She has a 30% 
chance, but rolls a 79; she can- 
not wear it. 

The dwarf axeman tries the el- 
vish chain. A dwarf trying to 
wear elf armor has a 0% chance 
to wear it. He can't. He has a 
35% chance to wear the half- 
ling's armor; the DM lowers that 
to 25% because this character 
has always described himself as 
especially burly for a dwarf. But 
he rolls 03 on percentile dice; he 
can wear the enchanted leather. 

The female gnome tries the el- 
vish chain. She has a base 40% 
chance to wear it. The DM does 


not modify it for her sex. She 
rolls a 51 and fails. She tries the 
leather: she has a base 60% 
chance with it. — 10% for differ- 
ent gender equals 50%. She 
rolls a 33 and can wear it. 

So the human warrioress gets 
the chain mail, and the dwarf 
and gnome must choose or gam- 
ble to decide who gets the leath- 
ers. 


High-Quality Racial Armor 


Armor found 
as treasure has a chance to be 
high-quality armor. Ordinary 
armor has a 10% chance on per- 
centile dice; magical armor has 
a 25% chance. 

Each race adds something dif- 
ferent to its armor if it is high- 
quality. 

Dwarves: High-Quality 
dwarvish armor is very, very re- 
sistant to damage. Whenever 
High-Quality dwarvish armor 
must make a saving throw (see 
the Dungeon Master's Guide. 
pages 39-39), it getsa +6 tosave 
in addition to any bonuses it re- 
ceives if it is magical. Addition- 
ally, if you use the "Damage to 
Armor" rules described later in 
this chapter, all High-Quality 
dwarvish armor has twice the 
number of damage points of or- 
dinary armor. 

Elves: High-Quality elvish ar- 
mor is !/2 the weight of ordinary 
armor; it constitutes “elven 
steel" (see the chart on page 38 
of the Dungeon Master's Guide). 

Gnomes: Gnomes make very 
quiet studded and padded 
leather armors; these are the 
only High-Quality armors they 
make. High-Quality gnome ar- 
mor does not take any penalties 
on the "Thieving Skill Armor 
Adjustment" table (Player's 
Handbook, page 39, last 
column); thus, a £nome thief or 
dual-class thief does not suffer a 
—30*56 when picking pockets, or 
a -20% when moving silently, 
etc. 


110 


Half-Elves: Half-Elf armorers 
do not make any High-Quality 
leather armor, padded armor, 
studded leather, hide armor, or 
bronze plate mail. All their other 
armors can be made as High- 
Quality armor. High-Quality 
half-elf armor is made from fine 
steel; it is — 1095 the weight of 
ordinary armor of the same 
kind, fine steel, for normal 
thickness, -10% weight. and 
gets a +2 to saving throws (on 
the "Metal" column on page 39 
of the Dungeon Master's Guide). 

Halflings: Halflings only 
make leather armor as High- 
Quality armor. Their High- 
Quality leather armor counts as 
"No Armor" on the “Thieving 
Skill Armor Adjustment table 
(Player's Handbook, page 39). 

Humans: Humans make all 
types of armor as High-Quality 
armor. This is especially tough 
armor; whatever it is made of, it 
is *2 to saving throws on the 
appropriate line of the "Item 
Saving Throws" chart on page 
39 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide. Also, plate mail (not in- 
cluding bronze plate), field 
plate, and full plate made to 
High-Quality specifications is 
made of fine steel, but instead of 
being lighter than usual, it is 
built thicker in order to make it 
more resistant to damage. It is 
*4 to saving throws on that 
"Item Saving Throws" chart, 
and is normal weight. Also, it 
gives the wearer a *2 to saving 
throws vs. Rod, Staff. or Wand 
and Breath Weapon attacks. In 
addition, if you are using the 
"Damage to Armor" rules found 
later in this chapter, it has one 
and a half times the normal 
damage points for the type of ar- 
mor it is. 


Other Notes on High-Quality 
Racial Armor 


All the above 
descriptions were for worn ar- 
mor, not shields. High-Quality 
shields do not impart any spe- 
cial bonus unless you're using 
the "Damage to Armor" rules, 
in which case they have twice as 
many damage points as the nor- 
mal sort of shield. 

How much does it cost to buy 
a set of High-Quality racial ar- 
mor? First, the DM has to decide 
whether there is any available to 
sell. Usually, the answer will be 
no; there is only a 1% chance 
that a normal village armorer's 
will have made any piece of 
high-quality armor to sell, and 
that will be racial armor of the 
armorer's race. The chance goes 
up to 5% in a big city, or 25% if 
you're looking for racial armor 
of the race that is most common 
in the cíty. Thus, to find high- 
quality dwarvish armor, go to a 
big dwarf community ... and 
there your chances are still low. 

But if you find what you're 
looking for, or are able to hire an 
armorer to build you a set, it 
costs ten times the normal cost 
of the armor. High-quality dwarf 
plate mail, then, would cost 
6.000 gp. Often, it's not worth 
the price to the adventurer. 

In nocase will an elvish crafts- 
man custom-make a set of High- 
Quality elvish armor for 
someone. Such armor is only 
made for the elvish royalty, and 
their kings sometimes bestow a 
piece on a non-elf hero ... but 
only for deeds of exceptional 
valor which have helped the 
elves. 

Another question adventur- 
ers are sure to ask: Can an ar- 
morer of one race build his own 
type of High-Quality armor for 
another race? For example, can 
a master gnome armorer build 
High-Quality gnome armor fora 
human? 


The answer is yes. Instead of 
costing ten times the normal 
cost of the armor, the price is 15 
times the normal cost. But it can 
be done. Again, though, an elf 
armorer will never make High- 
Quality armorer for anyone but 
his rulers. 

Custom-built High-Quality ar- 
mor takes four times as long to 
make as normal, average armor. 


Piecemeal Armor 


What happens 
when a character takes a heavy 
metal breastplate from a set of 
field plate and then wears chain 
mail sleeves and leggings and a 
leather armor cap? (That is, 
what happens other than he 
looks stupid?) 

Characters can wear armor 
assembled out of the remnants 
of other, mismatched sets of ar- 
mor. It’s not as good, and cer- 
tainly not as good-looking, as 
wearing a matched suit. But 
sometimes necessity dictates 
that characters wear what's on 
hand. 

When you're assembling a full 
suit of armor out of pieces on 
hand, the first thing to do is to 
see what you have. Compare 
your armor on hand with the 
chart below. 


9? 


Example: A character is 
robbed of all his worldly goods. 
Later, he finds the aftermath ofa 
battle, with a couple of dead 
warriors still in their armor. One 
body wears a badly battered set 
of field plate (of which the 
breastplate is intact), while the 
other wears a full suit of chain 
mail (of which the chest is rid- 
dled with holes and one leg is de- 
stroyed). 

He tries to piece this together 
into a suit for him. He takes the 
field-plate’s breastplate. Look- 
ing at the chart, we see it grants 
an AC bonus of 4. He also takes 
the field-plate's two arms. Look- 
ing at the chart, we see they 
grant an AC bonus of 2. He takes 
the surviving chain mail leg. 
Looking at the chart, we see that 
it grants an AC bonus of O. (He'll 
also take the surviving helm or 
helmet from one of these war- 
riors, so that he'll have some ar- 
mor on his head in case of a 
Called Shot to the Head.) 

His AC bonus is 6, so his AC 
now is 4—not too bad. If there's 
a shield, he'll have an AC of 3. If 
someone takes a Called Shot to 
his unarmored leg, he'll be at 
AC 10 (or 9 with the shield), as 
per the Combat Rules chapter, 
but that attacker will take a —4 


Bonus to AC Per Type of Piece: 

Armor Full Breast. Two One Two One 
Type Suit Plate Arms Arm Legs Leg 
Banded Mail 6 3 2 1 1 0 

4 2 H 0 1 0 
Bronze plate 6 3 2 1 1 (0) 
Chain mail 5 2 2 1 1 0 
Field Plate 8 4 2 1 2 1 
Full plate 9 4 3 1 2 1 
Hide armor 4 2 l 0 1 (6) 
Leather armor 2 l l 0 0 0 
Padded armor 2 1 1 0 0 0 
Plate mail 7 3 2 1 2 1 
Ring mail 3 l l 0 1 0 
Scale mail 4 2 l 0 1 0 
Splint mail 6 3 2 1 1l 0 
Studded leather 3 1 1 0 1 0 


A. 


penalty to hit for the Called Shot 
maneuver. 


Weight of Piecemeal Suits 


To calculate 
the weight of a piecemeal suit of 
armor, follow these guidelines: 

The breastplate is !/2 the 
weight of the original suit. 

Each arm and leg is '/s the 
weight of the original suit. 


About Magical Armor 


If a suit of 
magical armor is used for one of 
these piecemeal efforts, it grants 
none of its magical bonus; once 
the magical armor is split into 
little bits, or pieces are merely 
separated and not worn to- 
gether, the magical bonus 
doesn't work. 


Gladiator Armor 


These rules for 
piecemeal armor are, in effect, 
how the types of Gladiator Ar- 
mor described in this chapter 
are built. 

Thracian armor consists of 
fasciae, the equivalent of Hide 
armor worn on two legs—thus 
an AC bonus of 1, for an AC of 9. 

Gallic armor consists of fas- 
ciae (Hide armor on two legs). 
one manica (the equivalent of 
Splint Mail on one arm, thus an 
AC bonus of 1), and a protective 
metal belt. The belt is a special 
piece of gladiator armor; it con- 
stitutes half a breastplate of Hide 
armor in both weight an AC bo- 
nus. so it grants an AC bonus of 
l. All together, Gallic armor 
grants an AC bonus of 3, for a fi- 
nal AC of 7. Note: The armor belt 
cannot be worn in addition to a 
Breastplate, only instead of one. 

Samnite armor consists of a 
cuirass (a splint mail equivalent 
breastplate conferring an AC bo- 
nus of 3), and splint-equivalent 
armor on one arm (AC bonus of 
1) and both legs (AC bonus of 1), 
for a final AC of 5. 


The piece of armor called the 
Galerus, worn on the weapon 
shoulder, does not add anything 
to the AC bonus; it is considered 
part of the sleeve or breastplate. 


Damage to Armor 


It's easiest in a 
campaign just not to worry 
about the damage that armor 
and shields are taking. It's pre- 
sumed that characters go on ad- 
ventures, get in fights, and 
during some of their off-hours 
they repair their armor. 

If you want know precisely 
how much damage a piece of ar- 
mor can take before being de- 
stroyed, and how to repair 
damaged armor (without the 
PCs necessarily having to do so 
themselves), you can use the fol- 
lowing rules. 


Damage Points 


Every time a 
character wearing armor is hit 
and damaged by an attack, his 
armor takes damage. too. It 
takes 1 Damage Point per blow 
that hits. If an attack hits for 1 
point of damage, the armor 
takes 1 DP. If an attack hits for 
10 points of damage, the armor 
takes 1 DP. 

Shields only take damage 
when the character successfully 
Parries with a Shield. Each time 
he parries an attack that would 
have hit him, his shield takes 1 
DP. 

Helms only take damage 
when the character is hit with a 
Called Shot to the Head or a Sap 
maneuver. Each time the char- 
acter wearing a helm is hit with 
such an attack, the helm takes 1 
DP. 

When a piece of armor drops 
to O DP. it falls apart and is ru- 
ined; it cannot be repaired. So 
long as it has 1 DP it can be re- 
paired. 

Armor has the following DP: 


112 


Armor Type AC DP 
Banded Mail 4 30 
Barding 

Chain 5 50 
Full plate 2 80 
Full scale 6 40 
Half brigandine 7 30 
Half padded 9 10 
Half scale T7 30 
Leather/Padded 8 20 
Brigandine 6 20 
Bronze plate 4 30 
Chain mail 5 25 
Field Plate 2 40 
Full plate 1 45 
Gladiator 

Gallic 7 15 

Samnite 5 25 

Thracian 9 5 
Helms 

Cap +0 5 

Coif +0 15 

Close-Faced* +0 25 

Great +0 35 


Open-Faced +0 20 


Hide armor 6 20 
Leather armor 8 10 
Padded armor 8 10 
Plate mail 3 35 
Ring mail 7 15 
Scale mail 6 20 
Shields 
Body +1 35 
Buckler +1 10 
Medium +1 25 
Small +1 10 
Splint mail 4 30 
Studded leather 7 15 


* Includes basinet, galea, myr- 
rmillo 


Piecemeal Armor 


If you're using 
the Piecemeal Armor rules from 
earlier in this chapter, consider 
the armor's Breastplate to have 
the number of DP listed for it in 
the chart above. Each arm and 
leg will have a DP amount equiv- 
alent to (!/10 the DP total from 
the chart. The breastplate will 
take all DP damage from attacks 
unless they are Called Shots to 
other body parts. 


Magical Armor 


Magical Ar- 
mor does not gradually lose its 
protective enchantment as it is 
damaged. However, if it reaches 
O DP before being repaired, the 
armor is destroyed and so is the 
enchantment. 

Being magical does not confer 
any extra Damage Points on the 
suit of armor. It can gradually be 
destroyed by brute force like 
any unenchanted suit of armor. 


Repairing Armor 

Guidelines for 
repairing damaged armor are 
presented in the Character Cre- 
ation chapter, under the head- 
lines "Repairing Armor" and 
"Repairing Magical Armor." 


Effects on the Campaign 


These rules for 
calculating damage to armor 
add a little complexity to com- 


bats in the game. Every time a 
character is hit in combat, he'll 
have to add one tally-mark to a 
separate scratch sheet of paper 
showing the damage his armor 
is taking. It’s easy to forget: the 
DM will constantly have to re- 
mind his players to do this in the 
first weeks he is introducing this 
rule into his campaign. There- 
fore, we recommend you use 
this system only if it's important 
to you. If it isn't, don't bother 
with it. 


Magical Items 


Following are 
some new types of magical trea- 
sures, magic especially suited to 
fighting characters. 


Bracelet of Charms: This ap- 
pears to be a nicely-crafted 
bracelet of sturdy gold links. It 
looks like any other bracelet to 
which small charms and me- 
mentos are attached. 


9 


But when a warrior (only a 
warrior, multi-class warrior, or 
dual-class warrior) slides the 
bracelet around the blade or 
haft of a weapon, and speaks the 
command word engraved on the 
bracelet's clasp, the weapon dis- 
appears ... and a gold charm 
matching the weapon appears 
on the bracelet. 

Thereafter, when the warrior 
speaks the command word and 
the name of the weapon. the 
weapon magically appears in 
the hand on whose wrist the 
bracelet rested ... and the 
bracelet disappears. 

The bracelet can hold up to 
four weapons/charms this way. 
They can be normal or magical. 
Shields and miscellaneous 
equipment cannot be held in 
this fashion; only weapons built 
as weapons. Siege weapons can- 
not be held. 

The change from bracelet to 
weapon takes no time at all, but 
can be accomplished only once 


7. 7 


- 


A. 


per turn. The bracelet itself can 
be used only eight times in a 
day; turning the bracelet into a 
weapon counts as one use, and 
turning the weapon back into a 
bracelet counts as one use. 

If the weapon held in the 
bracelet's enchantment is called 
on. and wielded, and then dis- 
armed, the character cannot 
call on another weapon from the 
bracelet. The bracelet itself is 
within the weapon. The charac- 
ter must retrieve the weapon 
first, and only then can he use 
its magic. 

A weapon can be taken out of 
the bracelet's array. When a 
character wishes to do this, he 
takes the bracelet off his wrist 
and speaks the name of the 
weapon. and then says the com- 
mand word ...a reversal of the 
previous procedure. 

The bracelet does not magi- 
cally know its owner. Anyone 
who steals the bracelet from its 
owner and discovers what it is 
can use it and call the previous 
owner's weapons forth. 

This item is best used when 
the wielder wants to carry a va- 
riety of different weapons, and 
wants to do so secretly. With a 
single warrior, the weapons car- 
ried might be a long bow and 
quiver (quivers count as part of 
the weapon they carry arrows 
for), a bastard sword, a halberd, 
and a dagger. This gives the 
warrior the ability to call forth 
the weapon best suited to the 
task at hand. 

If a weapon is broken, the 
bracelet isn't; the user needs to 
call forth the bracelet, then sep- 
arate the broken weapon from 
it. 

Quivers are not magically re- 
plenished when they're the size 
of charms. However many ar- 
rows are in the quiver when it 
becomes a charm are still in it 
when it becomes a quiver again. 
Likewise, a broken bow-string 
stays broken. 


The Bracelet of Charms may 
not be used on the same weapon 
as a set of Rings of Readiness. 


Cage of Shelter: This object 
looks like a large bird-cage that 
has been neatly folded down 
into a package about the size of 
a medium shield. 

The user, who can be of any 
character class, places it upon 
the ground, steps back from it, 
and claps his hands loudly ei- 
ther two or three times. 

If he claps his hands twice, the 
cage grows up into a sturdy 
metal-framed tent which can 
house eight people—you can 
substitute one horse for four 
people. This tent confers no 
magical blessing on its inhabit- 
ants. but by using it and hud- 
dling together for warmth a 
party can survive a snowstorm 
that would kill an unprotected 
party: by erecting it in the des- 
ert, a party can avoid the danger 
and discomfort of a sandstorm. 

If the user claps his hands 
three times, the cage grows up 
into a strong 10' by 10' cell. The 
door to the cell has the equiva- 
lent of a wizard lock; the cage's 
owner can open it any time he 
wishes, and any magician with 
the knock spell can open it by 
using that spell. A person in the 
cell would have to make his 
Bend Bars/Lift Gates roll suc- 
cessfully (or use a knock) to es- 
cape: the door's lock cannot be 
picked. 

To return the cage to its origi- 
nal form. the owner claps again, 
twice if it is in tent form, three 
times if it is in cage form. If some- 
one is in it when it is a tent and 
begins collapsing, it opens up 
around the person inside; both 
he and it are unhurt. If someone 
is in it when it is a cage and be- 
gins collapsing. it collapses 
around him, inflicting 2d6 dam- 
age before it breaks open: there- 
after. it is ruined forever. 

The cage of shelter knows its 
owner. If someone finds it in a 


114 


treasure, he must carry it in his 
gear for a month for the cage to 
attune itself to him. If its true 
owner sells it to someone else in 
the cage's presence, the cage 
will obey the claps of its new 
owner immediately. 


Charm of Favor: When dei- 
ties and other powerful beings 
are pleased with the deed of a 
mortal. they sometimes give 
him a charm of favor. This is a 
small charm or statuette, usu- 
ally of semiprecious material 
and two or three inches in size, 
which represents the god or one 
of his aspects. 

The charm is rather like a lim- 
ited wish. It represents a favor 
which the deity will do for the 
character at some time in the fu- 
ture. To use it, the owner must 
throw the item on the ground so 
hard that it breaks, and then call 
out his request. 

The request must have some- 
thing to do with the attributes of 
the god: It's no use asking the 
Goddess of Love to dry up an oa- 
sis into a desert, or to ask the 
God of Earthquakes for a fog to 
hide the adventurers. 

The god hears it when the fa- 
vor is requested. And he. in the 
guise of the DM, evaluates the 
favor. If the favor is something 
which pertains to one of his at- 
tributes, and if the god does not 
think that the character is mak- 
ing the request out of mere 
greed or selfishness, and if be- 
stowing the favor will not con- 
flict with any of the god's other 
aims or desires, he will grant the 
favor. 

So it would be appropriate to 
ask the God of Insects to send a 
cloud of bees to rout one's ene- 
mies, or to ask the Goddess of 
Love to cause some NPC to fall 
in love with the player- 
character, or to ask a deity of the 
Earth to cause fruit-trees to 
grow and save the characters 
from death by thirst and starva- 
tion. 


Because the deity is evaluating 
the character's request, the ask- 
ing character cannot expect an 
outrageous favor to be granted. 
And most enemies who steal the 
charm from the PC cannot use it 
successfully; one might take it, 
hurl it to the ground and break it 
with his request, and find the 
cranky god stomping on him and 
freeing the faithful PC. (This, 
however, constitutes using up 
the favor.) But an NPC friend of 
the owner of the charm might be 
able to get the item and ask the 
god to help the charm's true 
owner ... particularly if he is ill 
or kídnapped and cannot do so 
for himself. 

Any character of any class 
can receive such a charm as a fa- 
vor. But when they are found in 
treasure, they are useless; they 
were not intended for the char- 
acter who finds them. after all. 

The charm of favors does not 
radiate magic. 


Rings of Readiness: This 
magical item consists of two 
plain iron rings, one suitable to 
be worn on a finger and one 
larger. some 2" in diameter. 

The larger ring is to be placed 
on some item. It can be sewn 
into or bolted onto a set of ar- 
mor; it can be placed upon the 
pommel of a weapon (in which 
case it shrinks until it fits 
snugly): it can be attached to 
any item of personal gear weigh- 
ing less than 100 Ibs. 

When the larger ring is at- 
tached to an object, and the 
smaller ring is worn by acharac- 
ter, the character needs only to 
utter the magical word in- 
scribed on the inside of the 
smaller ring. When he does, if 
the other ring is within 10 miles, 
it will instantaneously transport 
that object to the character. 

If the item attached to the 
other ring is a weapon, it will ap- 
pear in his hand. If the item isa 
suit of armor, it appears on the 
character: if he is already wear- 


ing a suit of armor, it appears 
next to him. If the item is some- 
thing else, it appears in a fash- 
ion dictated by the DM; a crown 
will appear on the character's 
head, while a sewing machine 
would appear next to him, for 
instance. 

If the item attached to the 
larger ring is more than 10 miles 
away, nothing happens. 

The use of the rings must be 
announced before initiative in 
the combat turn. Use of the 
rings takes no time. The charac- 
ter calls out the magic word be- 
fore initiative; then, later in the 
turn, when his actions come up, 
the item in question appears. 

If a character finds the smaller 
ring without the larger one, then 
he can summon whatever ob- 
ject the larger one is attached to, 
even if it is not his. These rings 
recognize no single owner. An 
interesting quest in a campaign 
might be for a character to find 
the smaller of a set of rings and 
have to wander to find the larger 
ring and summon it and its ob- 
ject to him: remember, it only 
works within 10 miles of the 
summoner. 

The magic only works if the 
item attached to the larger ring 
is inanimate. Living things are 
not transported. 

Once summoned, these ob- 
jects may not be sent back. This 
is a one-way trip. 

The rings may be used any 
number of times; they do not 
wear out. 

Many heroes use this magical 
item so that they never lose 
their weapons. If the hero finds 
his sword disarmed in combat, 
he can call it to his hand on the 
next round. without wasting the 
time to go get it. Some con art- 
ists use it to run a scam: They'll 
secretly attach the larger ring to 
some great item of treasure, sell 
it to a dealer, ride out of town 
with their money and then sum- 
mon the treasure back. This is a 
good tactic until the vengeful 


115 


9 


dealers catch up with them. 
This magical ítem may be 
used by characters of any class. 
Rings of readiness cannot be 
used on the same weapon as a 
bracelet of charms. 


Sheath of Holding: This item 
looks like an ordinary sheath for 
a large knife; the sheath is any- 
where from 6" to 10” long, in- 
cluding its belt loop. 

But it doesn't hold a knife. It 
holds a sword—a full-sized 
sword. With magic rather like 
that found in the bag of holding. 
this item slides most of the length 
of the blade into a pocket dimen- 
sion, so that only the weapon's 
hilt shows, with the sheath sug- 
gesting another 5" or so of blade. 
(This looks rather strange when it 
holds a bastard sword, where the 
hilt will be longer than the appar- 
ent blade, but the sheath of hold- 
ing can do it.) 

Each sheath of holding is de- 
signed to hold one type of 
sword. The DM can decide 
which sort of sword it's designed 
to hold. or can roll on the table 
below. The sheath will not hold 
a sword it is not built to hold. 


Weapon 
Roll Held By Alternate 
d100 Sheath Roll 
01-10 Bastard 

sword 01-15 
11-15 Cutlass 
16-20 Dagger 16-25 
21-25 Dirk 26-30 
26-30 Gladius/ 

Drusus 
31-33 Katana 
34-38 Khopesh 31-35 
39-43 Knife 36-45 
44-53 Longsword 46-65 


54-58 Main-gauche 
59-68 Rapier 
69-73 Sabre 
74-78 Scimitar 
79-88 Short sword 
89-93 Stiletto 
94-98 Two-handed 
sword 
99-00 Wakizashi 


66-75 
76-90 


91-00 


A. 


Ignore any rolls which are not 
appropriate for your campaign 
setting; if you have no katanas, 
you don't need to accept any 
rolls for sheathes for katanas. 

The "Alternate Roll" column 
is used if you are not using the 
new weapons introduced in The 
Complete Fighter's Handbook. 

This magical item can be used 
by any character class, but most 
end up in the hands of warriors 
and rogues. 


Saddle of the Spirit-Horse: 
This is a very strange magical 
item which may only be used by 
warriors (either single-. multi-, 
or dual-class). 

To all appearances, it is an or- 
dinary. worn leather saddle of 
good quality. However, it is a 
magical item. If worn by a single 
horse, it attunes itself to that 
horse when worn for three days. 
(It doesn't have to be worn con- 
tinuously for 72 hours—just 
worn as an ordinary saddle is.) 

Once it is attuned to the horse, 
nothing remarkable happens 
... unless the horse dies while 
wearing the saddle. If it does. 
the spirit of the horse stays with 
the saddle for another 24 hours. 
Half an hour after the horse 
died, the spirit of the horse will 
“awaken,” and climb to its un- 
seen feet, and prepare to carry 
its master wherever he wants to 
go. The ghost-horse continues 
to wear the saddle and to carry it 
around...andthe horse's mas- 
ter or other favorite riders may 
ride it during that time. 

For the next 24 hours, the 
horse-ghost will tirelessly carry 
its rider wherever he wants to 
go, at the full running speed the 
horse could manage when it 
was alive. But it's a spooky 
sight: The saddle floats in the 
air, four or five feet up (at the 
height the living horse carried 
it): the rider must mount nor- 
mally. treat the horse as he did 
normally. and pretend all is as it 
ever was. 


Other than running. the 
horse-spirit has no unusual abil- 
ities. It cannot be seen or 
touched. It can whinny and 
neigh. and it can buck ... 
though only the saddle is seen to 
buck in the air. It cannot truly 
fly; when it comes to a ravine, 
for instance, it must descend to 
the bottom and climb the other 
slope as it would have had to do 
if it were alive. 

This frightens living horses. 
No normal horse will approach 
the animated saddle within a 
hundred feet. For this reason, it 
is best used when the character 
is alone and, has his horse killed 
out from under him, 

If a character kills his horse to 
get this 24 hours of fast, tireless 
service, the ghost-horse will re- 
member this and be offended by 
it. . . even if the character did it 
secretly, by poison or long- 
distance magic, the horse will 
know it. It will allow him to 
mount the floating saddle, and 
behave normally for a while, but 
at some catastrophic time it will 
try to kill the character. It may 
jump off a cliff. or ride him 
straight back at the enemy he's 
trying to elude, or buck him off 
into a pit of snakes. 

These saddles may also be 
made for donkeys, camels, or 
any other ground animals. They 
don't work with pegasi. griffons, 
or other flying beasts. 


Shield of Medusae: This 
magical item may only be used 
by warriors or priests (including 
multi-class and dual-class war- 
riors or priests). 

It is shaped like and works 
like a normal medium shield. 
But the outside (the side that 
faces the enemy) is mirror- 
reflective. and the inside (where 
the warrior's straps are) is crys- 
tal clear. 

To use the shield of medusae, 
the warrior holds it up before 
him, in front of his eyes, and 
looks through its clear surface. 


116 


While he is doing so, he is im- 
mune to the stoning gazes of 
creatures such as the medusa 
and basilisk, and to magical 
items which duplicate their 
gazes. When the character car- 
rying this shield confronts a 
stoning creature, he reflects 
their images back at them. and 
it is they who must make saving 
throws vs. petrification or be 
turned to stone. 

Unlike ordinary shields, the 
shield of medusae has only two 
damage points before it shat- 
ters. In other words, if it is hit 
twice, it is destroyed. 


Miscellaneous 
Equipment 
The following 


pieces of equipment are of some 
use to warriors and other char- 
acters. 


Atl-Atl: This is a stick with a 
broad. shallow groove along its 
length and a knot at the end; itis 
a few feet long. 

The character places a javelin 
(not a spear, long spear, har- 
poon, or trident) in it so that the 
javelin butt rests against the 
knot and the javelin lies along 
the groove; the warrior holds it 
at the other end. Thereafter, 
when he flings his javelin, he 
uses the atl-atl as a lever and is 
able to throw it much farther 
than before. 

When used with an atl-atl, the 
javelin acquires the following 
characteristics: 


Javelin/Atl-Atl: ROF 2/s, S 3, 
M6.L 9. 


The atl-atl costs 1 silver piece 
to make, but can be carved out 
of a stick by anyone with the 
Weaponsmith proficiency. It 
weighs one pound. 


Spike, Spring-Out: This is a 
nasty weapon used mostly by 


rogues and chaotic warriors, 
though any sneaky player- 
character could acquire one. 

It consists of a blade identical 
in characteristics to the knife, 
housed in an innocuous rod or 
handle. When the secret catch is 
pressed, the blade snaps out in- 
stantly and the character is 
armed. 

Usually. the spring-out spike 
is built into items the character 
will be carrying a lot ... and 
when he doesn't wish it to be 
known he's armed. Common 
objects with built-in spikes in- 
clude royal sceptres. the ends of 
quarterstaves (this converts a 
staff into a spear). and some- 
times the hilts of swords and 
daggers. Assassins often carry a 
dagger with an ordinary blade 
...and a poison-coated spring- 
out spike. 

The spring-out spike weighs 
one pound and costs 40 gp. 
When built into an ordinary ob- 
ject. it adds one pound and 40 
gp to that object's cost. It cannot 
customarily be built into an ex- 
isting weapon; it must be built 
into the weapon when it is first 
created. 

The spring-out spike is illegal 
in most civilizations. If the au- 
thorities catch a character using 
one, they'll jail him on assump- 
tion of assassination motives. 


Sheath, Secret Spring: This 
is another item considered use- 
ful by rogues. strect-fighters, as- 
sassins, and characters wishing 
to appear unarmed. 

It consists of a sheath for one 
of the following weapons: Dag- 
ger, Knife, or Stiletto. A sheath 
for one of these three weapons 
will not hold either of the other 
two. It cannot be built for a 
weapon other than these three. 
It is not just a sheath, but is also 
a mechanical device, and is 
worn on the character's arm 
just below the elbow. 

Whenever the character 
straightens his arm out and 
flexes it in a certain way, the 
blade in the sheath pops into his 
hand. The character must make 
a Dexterity ability check to 
catch it; he gets a +3 bonus be- 
cause it's not difficult. but a nat- 
ural 20 always fails. If he fails to 
catch it, it pops straight out and 
drops to the floor. It cannot be 
"shot out" as an attack like a 
thrown knife; it will not hurt 
whomever it hits, and always 
hits hilt-first when fumbled in 
this fashion. 

This is another way, and a 
non-magical one, for the un- 
armed character to be suddenly 
armed when the need arises. In 
the combat sequence, he must 
announce before initiative is 


117 


9? 


rolled that he is going to pop out 
his blade; when his action 
comes up for that round, if he is 
still able to straighten out his 
arm, his blade pops into his 
hand and is instantly ready. The 
character may still attack this 
round: the action of arming 
himself doesn't use up an at- 
tack. 

The Secret Spring Sheath 
weighs '/2 pound and costs 35 
Ep. It requires someone with 
both the Set Snares and 
Weaponsmithing proficiencies 
to create. Like the Spring-Out 
Spike, it is illegal in most places, 
but isa lesser crime, punishable 
by a fine (10d6 gold pieces) and 
a few days (1d6) in jail. 


That's the end of The Com- 
plete Fighter's Handbook. 

Now that you've read it, the 
thing to remember is this: Use 
whatever appeals to you, as the 
DM, and nothing more. If any 
rule or recommendation worries 
you, if you feel that it will unbal- 
ance your campaign or skew 
your players toward bad habits. 
then don't allow it in your cam- 
paign. As for all the other rules. 
recommendations, and guide- 
lines: Try them. You may like 
them. 


Martial Arts Results One-Handed or Two-Handed Weapons 
Attack Martial Arts 926 Weight Speed Damage 
Roll Maneuver Dmg KO Item Cost (lbs. Size Typet Factor S-M L 
20+ Head Punch S 15 Harpoon % 
19 High Kick 2 10 One-handed 20 gp 6 L P 7 1d4+1 1d6+1 
18  Vitals-Kick 2 8 Two-handed 20 gp 6 L P 7 2d4 2d6 
17  Vitals-Punch 2 05 
16 Head Bash 2 5 | Mercier 
15 Side Kick 1 3 One-handed 5 sp 2 L P E! 1d4 1d4 
14: Elbow Shot 1 l Two-handed 5 sp 2 L P El 1d6 1d6 
13  Body-Punch 1 2 Spear % 
12 Low Kick * sf One-handed 8sp 5 M P 6 ld6  1d8 
11 Graze D. d Two-handed #  8sp 5 M P 6 1d8+1 2d6 
10 Body-Punch t 2 Spear, Long % 
9 Low Kick I d One-handed 5 gp 8 L P 8 1d8 1d8+1 
Body-Punch I 2 Two-handed# 5gp 8 L P 8 . 2d6  3d6 
7 | Knee-Shot 1 3 Trident 9 
e um ) 5 | Onehanded 15g 5 L P 7 d6*1 3d4 
A ViglePünsh 2 10 Two-handed 15 gp 5 L P 7 1d8+1 3d4 
3  Vitals-Kick 2 15 % This weapon is intended for one-handed or two-handed use. 
2  HighKick 2 20 # This weapon inflicts double damage when firmly set to receive a 
1* Head Punch 3 30 charge. 
* Or less 
Armor Fitting 
Race 
Combat Modifiers for Trying To Race For Which Armor Was Built: 
. 1 1/5- 
Darkness and Blindness | Wear Armor: iia a n à : i: i € on 
Condition Mel. Mis. Infr. Elf 10% + 90% 50% - 70% + 35% + 50% + 
Bonus | Gnome 40% + 40%+ 75% 259 * 609 * 20% + 
Clear sky Half-Elf 20% + 45%  10%+ 70% 35% 50% 
(daytime) -0 -O +0 Halfling 75% + 30%- 35% - 35%+ 70% 20% + 
Fog. dense Human 50% - 20%- 5%- 30%- 10%- 65% 
or blizzard -3 -4 +0 
Fog, light 
= "pec Piecemeal Armor 
moderate -2 -3 +0 Bonus to AC Per Type of Piece: 
Mist or Armor Full Breast. Two One Two One 
lightrain -O -1 +0 Type Suit Plate Arms Arm Legs Leg 
Night. 1 0 
Night. + Bronze plate 6 3 2 l 1 o 
nomoon =3 =6 ^73 | Chainmail 5 2 2 1 l 0 
Ts Field Plate 8 4 2 1 2 1 
darkness -4 -6 +3 | ipie 9 4 3 1 2 1 
Twilight CN M Hide armor 4 2 1 0 l 0 
Leather armor 2 1 1 0 0 0 
Padded armor 2 1 1 0 0 0 
Plate mail 7 3 2 1 2 1 
Ring mail 3 1 1 0 1 0 
Scale mail 4 2 1 0 1 0 
Splint mail 6 3 2 1 1 0 
Studded leather 3 1 1 0 1 0 


New Weapons List 
Weight Speed Damage 

Item Cost (Ibs.) Size Typet Factor S-M L 
Arrows, Stone 

Flight & 3 cp/12 Mo M P — 1d4 1d4 
Belaying pin ! 2cp 2 S B 4 1d3 1d3 
Bo stick & 2cp 4 L B 4 1d6 1d4 
Bolas ! 5 sp 2 M B 8 1d3 1d2 
Cestus ! 1 gp 2 S S 2 1d4 1d3 
Chain & 5 sp 3 L B 5 1d4+1 1d4 
Dagger 

Bone ! lsp 1 S P 2 1d2 1d2 

Stone ! 2sp 1 S P 2 1d3 1d2 
Daikyu & 100 gp 3 L — 7 E — 
Daikyu arrow & 3 sp/6 1 M P — 1d8 1d6 
Gaff/hook ! 

Attached 2 gp 2 S P 2 1d4 1d3 

Held 5 ep 2 S P 2 1d4 1d3 
Javelin, Stone 96 

One-handed 5 cp 2 L P 4 1d4 1d4 

Two-handed 5cp 2 L P 4 1d4+1 1d6 
Knife 

Bone ! 3 ep 1/2 S P/S 2 1d2 1d2 

Stone ! 5cp 1/2 S P/S 2 1d2 1d2 
Lasso & 5sp 3 L — 10 — — 
Main-gauche ! 3 gp 2 S P/S 2 1d4 1d3 
Net & 5 gp 10 M = 10 — — 
Nunchaku ! 1 gp 3 M B 3 1d6 1d6 
Polearm 

Naginata &# 8 gp 10 L P 7 1d8 1d10 

Tetsubo & 2 gp 7 L B 7 1d8 1d8 
Sai ! 5sp 2 S P/B 2 1d4 1d2 
Shuriken ! 3sp 1 S P 2 1d4 1d4 
Spear, Long % 

One-Handed 5 gp 8 L P 8 1d8 1d8+1 

Two-Handed # 5 gp 8 L P 8 2d6 3d6 
Spear, Stone % 

One-handed 8cp 5 M P 6 1d4 1d6 

Two-handed 8cp 5 M P 6 1d6 2d4 
Stiletto ! 5 sp Ya S P 2 1d3 1d2 
Sword 

Cutlass ! 12 gp 4 M S 5 1d6 1d8 

Drusus ! 50 gp 3 M S 3 1d6*1 1d8+1 

Katana % 

One-handed 100 gp 6 M S/P 4 1d10 1d12 
Two-handed 100 gp 6 M S/P 4 2d6 2d6 

Rapier ! 15 gp 4 M P 4 1d6+1 1d8*1 

Sabre ! 17 gp 5 M S 4 1d6+1 1d8+1 

Wakizashi $ 50 gp 3 M S/P 3 1d8 1d8 


! This weapon is intended for one-handed use, and may not be used two-handed. 

$ This weapon is intended for one-handed use, but may be used two-handed (see the rules for Two-Hander 
Style Specialization in the Combat chapter). 

% This weapon is intended for one-handed or two-handed use. 

& This weapon is intended for two-handed use only. 

# This weapon inflicts double damage when firmly set to receive a charge. 

+ The “Type” category is divided into Bludgeoning (B), Piercing (P), and Slashing (S). This indicates the type 
of attack made, which may alter the weapon's effectiveness against different types of armor. See the 
optional rule in the Player's Handbook, page 90. 


Complete Fighter's Character Sheet 


Character Name: ] Class: 

Player: Warrior Kit: 

Race, Sex: Alignment: 

eight, Welghtt. [B8 12 LL LL LL lb. —— Level: 

Hair, Eyes: Experience: 

Age. Appearance: — ~ 00. Experience for Next Level: 

Strength  — Hit: Dmg:—— Wgt. _____ Press: Doors: | . | Bars/Gates: ___ 
Déxterity.  — — — -ReacAdj. —. Msi Att Adj: ___ Def (AC) Adj: —— 
Constitution. HP Adj: —— Sys Shk: ___ Res Sur: Pois Sav: Regen: — 
Intelligence — . # of Lang: Sp Lvl: Lrn Sp: —— Sp/Lvl: Immun: | 
Wisdom. . Magic Def: Bonus Spells: 96 Fail: Immun: . 
Charisma — |. .. MaxfHench: ___ Loyalty Base: — Reac Adj: —— 
Racial Bonuses and Abilities: 

Hit Points: — . 2. . Hit Dice Type;d.—— —. - — Armor Class: 

THACOs  — ll Attacks/Round: — 1. Movement Rate: 

Saving Throws: Paralyzation/Poison/Death: 

Rod/Stei/ Wald .— — —.— — — —— ——— Petrification/Polymorph: 

Breath Weapon; RE Spell: 

Special Abilities and Restrictions: 

Spell Progression: Ist 2nd. .-——— Jm.— — 4th 

Warrior Kit Bonus Proficiencies: 

Warrior Kit Benefits: 

Warrior Kit Hindrances: 

i O MM 
IEEE E a 
Languages Known: 

oa o a ——————— 
Weapon Proficiency Slots Nonweapon Proficiency Slots 


| 


—————————————————————— 
———————————————— 
—_— 


120 


Complete Fighter's Character Sheet 


Weapons Weight Speed Damage 
Carried Cost (Ibs) Size Type Factor S-M/L 
Equipment Purpose/Effects Where Kept* 


* B=belt/hand; P = backpack; S= saddlebags: A = pack animal; H = home. 


Notes: 


121 


Complete Fighter's Combat Sheet (PC Side) 


"Numbed" and "Useless" Numbers 


Chaiacter'sHP; —L1——  — 
"Numbed" Number: | | (25% of character's HP, round up from .5) 
"Useless" Number: (50% of character's HP, round up from .5) 


Normal Damage = Temporary Damage 


Body Modifier Effect if "Numbed" or 
Locations To Hit "Useless" Number Reached 
Torso -0 No Effect 

Head -8* DM Chooses or Rolls 1d6: 


1) Blind: attackers get *4 to hit 

2) Deaf: character cannot hear 

3) Dizzy: check Dexterity at —4 

4) Knockdown: character knocked down 
5) Blind and Deaf: as above 

6) Dizzy and Knockdown: as above 


Arms -4* Drop Held Weapon: Shield Does Not Help AC 
Legs -4* Check Dexterity to Stay Upright 
Stun Points -B* Movement is Halved; Attackers get *2 to hit 


* Called Shot: announced before initiative, +1 to initiative roll 


Combat Attack 
Maneuver Modifier Maneuver Result 
Called Shot * -4 Varies 
Disarm* -4 ]-hand weapon flies 2d6 feet: 

2-hand weapon or shield out of position 
Grab* -4 Gets hand(s) on object 
Hold Attack -0 Attack waits until later in round 
Parry -0 Announce before initiative: 

successful parry stops enemy attack 
Pin -4 Enemy's weapon pinned against him 
Pull/Trip -0 Successful attack knocks enemy down 
Sap* -0 Damage X 5% = KO change (40% max) 
Shield-Punch -0 1-3 points damage ( * Strength bonus) 
Shield-Rush -0 As shield-punch * knockdown chance 
Strike/Thrust -0 Basic attack with weapon or empty hand 


* Called Shot: announced before initiative, * 1 to initiative roll 


122 


Complete Fighter's Combat Sheet (DM Side) 
Player-Characters and Their Allies 


Character Name Class/Level THACO Attacks AC HP 


————— 9 ————— M LL 
ee CN 0 —— 
—————— a ae L————— 
ee M 
ee 
Oe —- 


Non-Player Characters and Monsters 


Character Name Class/Level THACO Attacks AC HP 


Č m_a c lM 
ee —— 
— MÀ Á 
—— 
——— a Ml 
——————— nm ——— 0 — 
ee 
ee 
iis 
eee ———— 
—— 
— —— 
———— 
————— 


ee 
———— 


123 


Warrior Kit Creation Sheet 


Warrior Kit: 


Campaign: 


Dungeon Master: 


Description: 


Secondary Skills: 


Weapon Proficiencies: 


Nonweapon Proficiencies: 


Equipment: 


—————————————————————————— 
um 


124 


Special Benefits: 


Special Hindrances: 


Wealth Options: 


Advanced Dungeons{)Dragons} 


Player’s Handbook / Rules Supplement 


The 
Complete 


Fighter’s 


Handbook 


Who says fighters are the poor cousins of the AD& D® 
game? No one will say it aloud after reading the 
Complete Fighter’s Handbook; 128 pages of mind- 

expanding advice on how to make your fighter the 
leanest, meanest threshing machine for leagues 
around. New weapons, new proficiencies, new fight- 
ing styles, and ‘Fighter Kits" make this optional 
AD&D accessory a useful item for players and DMs. 


$15.00 U.S. 0-88038-779-3 


w 
TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd 
POB 756 TSR, Inc. 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 Cambridge CB1 3LB 


U.S.A United Kingdom 


AD&D, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, 
PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMANGINATION, and the TSR logo are 


4636302110 "8 ©1969 TSR, Inc A Rights Reserved Printed in the S.A. 


