ons Dragons 


Historical Reference 


Charlemagne’s 
Paladins 


Campaign Sourcebook 


by Ken Rolston 


Table of Contents 


Chapter I: Introduction .................»»: 2 Chapter 6: The Tales of Charlemagne 

Chapter 2: A Survey of Carolingian History .. 4 Bnd Pris PaladiBss roue decer SIME 57 

Chapter 3: Character Design .............. 11 Chapter 7: Adventures on the 

Chapter 4: The Setting ..................- 25 Saxa Erentlet" orsi sce ERI CIN UR. 69 

Chapter 5: Equipment and Treasure ........ 52 Appendix: Predesigned Player Characters ... 93 
Credits ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, and D&D are registered trade- 


marks owned by TSR, Inc. The TSR logo is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc. 
©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved: Printed in the U.S.A. 


Editing: Mike Breault 


Random House and its affifiate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the 


Additional Editing: Dori “the Barbarian” Watry book trade for English language products of TSA, inc 
Illustrations: Roger Raupp Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR, Inc. 
Typography: Gaye O'Keefe Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors. 


Cartography: John Knecht This book is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America 
Playtesting: Paul Harmaty, Anna Harmaty, Henry Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material contained herein is prohibited 


Monteferrante, Daria Swain, Richard "fe eres wne ma ee 
Garner, Brian Cummings ISBN 58070 959: gor? 
Special Thanks: Alan Kellogg 


TSR, Inc. 

POB 756 

Lake Geneva 

WI 53147 U.S.A. 


TSR Ltd. 

120 Church End, Cherry Hinton 
Cambridge CB1 3LB 

United Kingdom 


CHAPTER 


Introduction 


One of the greatest challenges facing a DM is 
to create a detailed, dramatic, and plausible 
campaign setting for role-playing. Adapting a 
historical setting like the Carolingian period of- 
fers some spectacular advantages for meeting 
this challenge. The historical and legendary per- 
sonalities and events of Charlemagne's time pro- 
vide a wealth of epic themes for a role-playing 
campaign. 

We suggest you choose one of the following 
three strategies to develop an AD&D® role-play- 
ing campaign set in the time of Charlemagne. As 
you read this book and consider how to use it in 
your campaign, keep the following three options 
in mind. 


The Historical Campaign 


This type of campaign should be held to the 
same standards for accuracy as a historical novel 
or film. Such standards vary greatly, especially 
in the action-adventure genre. Often we forgive 
inaccuracies so long as the tale is dramatic, but a 
careless disregard for detail ruins our pleasure in 
the historical setting. Most significant for 
AD&D game players, the visible effects of magic 
in a historical world must be far more subtle 
than those found in a more typical AD&D cam- 
paign. 


The Legendary Campaign 


This type of campaign exploits the legends of 
Charlemagne and his Paladins as recounted in 
late Medieval tales. Unfortunately, certain as- 
pects of these legends (plate armor, jousting, chi- 
valric romance, and others) are historically 
inaccurate. However, the sorcerers, magical 
swords and rings, and marvelous fairy king- 
doms should be retained and adapted to the Car- 
olingian setting. They can enhance or expand 
any campaign. 

In a legendary campaign, the restrictions on 
spellcasters and spellcasting are somewhat re- 
laxed. Encounters with mythical creatures, such 
as hippogriffs and pegasi, and with sinister sor- 
cerers are standard fare. Though spells and mag- 
ical effects are somewhat restricted, a legendary 
campaign is considerably closer to the standard 
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS® 
game than is a historical campaign. 


2 * Chapter One 


The Fantasy Campaign 


This type of campaign melds a weak-magic 
AD&D fantasy campaign with various historical 
and legendary elements associated with Charle- 
magne and his times. Except for some restric- 
tions on player characters and magical items, 
players are expected to use their PCs pretty 
much like they would in any other AD&D game 
setting. 

The big advantage of this is that the players 
get all the abilities they are accustomed to, while 
the DM has access to abundant campaign setting 
detail to adapt for fantasy scenarios (many his- 
torical books are available at the public library). 


Historical Role-Playing 


This is not a history book! This is a handbook 
for running AD&D game action-adventure cam- 
paigns in the time of Charlemagne. Our focus 
produces a necessarily narrow and occasionally 
distorted picture of the period. 

Great differences existed between east and 
west, north and south, in Charlemagne's vast 
European empire. For simplicity we have 
glossed over many distinctions. Historical de- 
tails true of one region may not be true of an- 
other; details true to the period in general may 
not necessarily be true in various localities. 


DM Tips 


Your task is similar to that of a historical nov- 
elist. We have done the basic research for you, 
but the true pleasure of designing a historical 
campaign is in adapting the materials you find 
here and in the library. 

As your research progresses, you will quickly 
realize that we don't know very much about folk 
in the Dark Ages. You'll have to piece together 
what you've learned from books, films, and oth- 
er historical settings to imagine what things 
might have been like. 

Finally, remember that role-playing is primar- 
ily a dramatic art. When given a choice between 
facts and drama, go for the drama. Satisfy your 
players' desire for authenticity, but don't be ob- 
sessed with facts. Your main task is to capture 
the feeling of the human drama and setting of 
the Dark Ages for your players. 


xx LY Y ORE AODAN 
SEAN 


I Que 


| 0 MM 
ev Pul 


í S lh eg 


il 
CC © NULL 
iM wm 


mut onm 


n n» 
i MURRU 
B9 MM 
mno mom 


SUN LUN 
WY) b 
33! S ) mm 


I k y NU j | Ki WYW T1 | MIHI BA i M i. 5 
Men. VÉ MWS - VI o. MEN a 
Vott Cg Sy ) \ | : Ki] | vani, "HII 


Introduction * 3 


CHAPTER 


“Illustrious race of the Franks, instituted by 
God himself, courageous in war, in peace con- 
stant . . ., of noble stature, brilliant whiteness of 
skin, exceptional beauty, daring, swift, and har- 
dy, converted to the Catholic faith free of her- 
esy. . . . Long live Christ, who loves the Franks." 

— From the prologue to a compilation 
of the laws of the Franks 


The greatest king of this fortunate race of 
Franks, Charlemagne (or Charles the Great, 
Carolus Magnus), by the grace of God, by 
boldness in war, and by mercy and enlighten- 
ment in peace, brought the Dark Age barbarian 
peoples of Europe together under one rule in 
the Carolingian Empire. Great in history and 
legends, Charlemagne and his Paladins became 
symbols of the struggle to rise from the vio- 
lence, disorder, ignorance, and pag nism ` the 
Dark Ages toward the noble, heroic, just, and 
enlightened society idealized in chivalric Medi- 
eval romances. 


Timeline 


711: The conguest of Spain begun by Muslims 
of North Africa. 

714: Charles Martel (1st Carolingian) inherits 
effective rule as Mayor of the Palace under a 
weak Merovingian king. 

c. 725: Probable composition of Beowulf. 

732: Charles Martel defeats Muslims at Battle of 
Poitiers. 

751: Pepin, son of Charles Martel, crowned 
King of Franks. 

768: Pepin dies and Charlemagne is crowned 
king. 

773: Charlemagne invades Lombard Italy. 

774: Charlemagne defeats Lombards and makes 
himself their king. 

778: Charlemagne's Spanish campaign fails; Ro- 
land is killed at the Pass of Roncesvalles. 

782: Alcuin, Anglo-Saxon scholar, joins 
Charlemagne's court and becomes head of pal- 
ace school. 

789: Anglo-Saxon chronicles record first Viking 
attack in England. 

797: Irene becomes Empress of Byzantine Em- 
pire amidst doubts that a woman can legally rule 
the empire. 


LL LL 


4 * Chapter Two 


A Survey of Carolingian History 


799: Charlemagne completes subjugation of 
Saxons. 

800: Charlemagne crowned emperor of Romans 
by Pope Leo III. Charlemagne builds his chapel 
at Aix-la-Chapelle (Aachen). 

802: Empress Irene overthrown and succeeded 
by male ruler. 

812: Michael I, emperor of Byzantium, ac- 
knowledges Charlemagne as his "brother" em- 
peror. 

814: Charlemagne dies; Louis the Pious be- 
comes emperor. 

840: Louis the Pious dies, dividing the Carolin- 
gian empire among his three sons. Viking raids 
grow in size and frequency. 

843: After war among Louis's sons, Charles gets 
Aquitaine and western France, Lothar gets Italy 
and Lorraine, Louis the German gets Germany 
and the east. 

870: Part of Lothar's kingdom is divided be- 
tween Charles the Bald and Louis the German. 
871: Alfred the Great becomes king of Wessex. 
884: Carolingian empire reunited for the last 
time under Charles the Fat. 

886: Alfred and the Anglo-Saxons make peace 
with the Danes and establish boundaries of the 
Danelaw. Great Viking raid on Paris. 

888: Charles the Fat dies and empire is perma- 
nently partitioned. 

911: Carolingian line comes to an end in Germa- 
ny; Charles the Simple grants land in northwest- 
ern France to the Vikings (the future Normans). 
962: Charlemagne's German empire is revived 
under Otto I. 

987: The last Carolingian on the French throne 
is succeeded by Hugh Capet, first of the Cape- 
tian dynasty. 


Charlemagne and His Times 
The Decline and Fall of the Romans 


In the Fourth Century AD, the western Ro- 
man Empire had united most of what is now 
modern Europe under the Pax Romana. In the 
Fifth Century AD that Roman Empire declined 
and fell as a result of internal political strife and 
external threats posed by invading tribes of Ger- 
manic and Hunnic barbarians. Four principle 
kingdoms succeeded the collapse of the western 


Romans: the separate Gothic kingdoms of Spain 
and southern Italy, the Lombard kingdom that 
replaced the Goths in northern Italy, and the 
Frankish kingdom of Gaul (modern France) and 
Germany. The cultures of these barbarian king- 
doms were but shadows of the sophisticated Ro- 
man civilizations they supplanted. Many 
Roman villas (large rural farms) were aban- 
doned, and forests sprang up amidst their ruins. 
Many of the great urban centers of Roman Eu- 
rope were largely unoccupied or altogether de- 
serted. After the long reign of the classical 
civilizations of Greece and Rome, Europe had 
entered the Dark Ages. 


The Carolingian Empire 


In the Eighth Century AD, an energetic, force- 
ful, benevolent, and enlightened king bonded 
most of barbarian Europe into a new Western 
Empire, the Empire of Charlemagne, or Charles 
the Great. The Carolingians, as Charlemagne's 
ruling family was called, sought to establish a 
new standard of law and Christian enlighten- 
ment for the people of the Carolingian Empire. 
They tried to secure its borders from the raids 
and invasions of the pagan Vikings, Slavs, 
Avars, and Moors. Historians and poets of the 
later Middle Ages looked back on the compara- 
tive peace and unity of Charlemagne's 46-year 
reign with a romantic awe and reverence, calling 
him the “father of Europe.” 

The Carolingian dynasty reigned for almost 
two centuries, from the accession of Charles (the 
Hammer) Martel on the death of his father Pip- 
pin in 714 to the end of Louis the Coward's reign 
in 997. Charlemagne's Paladins focuses on the 
years of Charlemagne's reign. 

The earlier timeline provides a quick over- 
view of important dates and events for the entire 
Carolingian period, while the following histori- 
cal notes are presented in the style of excerpts 
from the Royal Frankish Annals. These consist 
of a year-by-year contemporary account of sig- 
nificant events in the Frankish kingdom during 
Charlemagne's reign. Remarks in parentheses 
add significant details that might be known to a 
noble of the period. For a brief review of the 
lands and peoples mentioned in these historical 
notes, see Chapter 4. 


For more detail on the history of Charlemagne 
and the Carolingian Empire (and abundant in- 
spirations for AD&D® game scenarios and cam- 
paigns), see the references listed in "Suggested 
Reading" section at the end of this chapter. 


Adapted and Annotated Excerpts from the Roy- 
al Frankish Annals 


732: Charles Martel (the Hammer) defeats the 
Moors at the Battle of Poitiers in southern 
France and turns the tide of Moorish invasions 
from Spain. 

750: Pepin the Short, son of Charles the Ham- 
mer, is elected king according to the custom of 
the Franks. He is anointed and crowned king of 
the Franks by the hands of the Pope's delegate, 
Archbishop Boniface of saintly memory. (Saint 
Boniface was a famous Anglo-Saxon missionary 
who preached Christianity to the Saxon.) 
754-56: Pope Stephen II travels to Pepin's villa 
called Quierzy and crowns Pepin again, along 
with his sons Carloman and Charles I (the future 
Charlemagne) and confers upon all three the ti- 
tle of Roman Patrician in return for Pepin's com- 
mitment to defend the Pope and Rome against 
the aggressive Lombards. Pepin and the Franks 
march against the Lombards, and by the grace of 
God and the intercession of the blessed apostle 
Peter, the Franks claim victory. Pepin presents 
the lands he wins to the Pope (the Donation of 
Pepin; these lands become the Papal States). 
768: Charles I and brother Carloman come to 
the throne together upon the death of Pepin. 
769: The glorious Lord King Charles marches to 
suppress revolt in Aquitaine and Gascony, and 
by the grace of God he gains the victory despite 
brother Carloman who declined to aid him in 
this campaign. (Carloman dies in 771, leaving 
Charlemagne sole ruler of the Franks.) 

772: King Charles holds an assembly at Worms, 
and from thence he marches into Saxony. He 
seeks out and destroys the great Pagan idol Ir- 
minsul, the oak of Geismar, the Father Tree that 
supports the vault of heaven, worshiped by the 
Pagan Saxons, and takes away the gold and sil- 
ver he finds there. He holds parleys with the 
Saxons, who make peace and give hostages, 
then returns to Francia. (The Saxons maintained 
their pagan worship of forest spirits and sacred 


A Survey of Carolingian History * 5 


groves like the Druids of old times. Charle- 
magne's intent was to convert these ungodly 
peoples to the worship of the True Faith.) 

773: Charles marches across the Alps into Italy 
to aid Pope Stephen against the insolent and op- 
pressive King Desiderius of the Lombards. By 
the grace of God, the Franks gain the victory 
and besiege Pavia. The Lord Charles celebrates 
Christmas in Holy Rome. The savage and 
treacherous Saxons fall upon the borderlands 
left exposed by Charlemagne's absence and put 
Christians and churches to flame and sword. 
774: Charles captures Pavia and returns home 
victorious. He then sends four detachments to 
Saxony, and with God's help has the victory and 
returns with much booty. (Though Charlemagne 
desired that the Saxons be brought to the 
Church, he also was pleased to enrich his lords 
and knights with the spoils of war.) 

775: King Charles campaigns in Saxony, where 
he takes many hostages and much booty, and 
causes much slaughter among the Saxons. 

776: King Charles marches into Italy and de- 
feats the oath-breaking Lombard Hrodgaud, 
then returns victorious to Francia. Then, hear- 
ing that the treacherous Saxons have rebelled 
and abandoned their hostages and broken their 
oaths, he campaigns against them. Then all the 
Saxons came before him at the source of the 
Lippe River, to surrender their lands to the 
Franks, to put up security, to promise to become 
Christians, and to submit to the rule of King 
Charles and the Franks. Many are baptized and 
many more are taken hostage, and fortified 
camps are built and Frankish garrisons installed 
to guard them before King Charles returns to 
France. 

777: A Moorish Embassy headed by ibn-al-Ara- 
bi comes to ask King Charles's aid in overthrow- 
ing Abd-er-Rahman, emir of Cordoba. 
(Ibn-al-Arabi, a partisan of the Abbassid caliphs 
ruling everywhere in the Islamic world except 
for Spain, hoped to obtain Charlemagne's aid in 
ousting the emir of Cérdoba, a supporter of the 
Umayyad caliphate. Charlemagne hoped that 
the Christian population of Spain would rise in 
arms and join forces with his army once he en- 
tered Spain.) 

778: King Charles marches forth with a great ar- 
my of Franks, Lombards, Burgundians, Ro- 


6 * Chapter Two 


mans, Bavarians, and Goths and enters Spain. 
However, his campaign does not succeed, and 
he withdraws. In the pass of Roncesvalles in the 
Pyrenees Mountains, treacherous Basques pre- 
pare an ambush and fall upon the baggage and 
rear-guard. The entire Frankish force is slain, in- 
cluding many officers of the palace. The bag- 
gage is plundered, and the enemy melts away 
into the wild lands, so vengeance is frustrated. 
(The Song of Roland is inspired by this battle; 
among the fallen Franks were Roland [Count 
Hruodland, warden of the Breton Marches], Eg- 
gihard the royal seneschal, and Anselm, count 
of the palace. In legend Oliver and the Archbish- 
op Turpin fell that day. Though the Spanish 
campaign was a failure, the establishment of the 
Spanish Marches, a defensive zone north of the 
Pyrenees, assured the security of Aquitaine from 
Spanish Moorish invasion.) Learning that the 
Saxons are in revolt, Charlemagne returns in 
haste and puts down the rebellion. 

779-780: Lord King Charles campaigns in Sax- 
ony. 

781: Lord King Charles celebrates Easter in 
Rome, where Pope Hadrian anoints Charle- 
magnes sons, Pepin and Louis, to be king of Ita- 
ly and king of Aquitaine, respectively. 

782: The Saxon chief Witunkind leads the Sax- 
on tribes in an uprising, and Charles is drawn 
away from a campaign against the Slavs to put 
down the rebellion. The Saxons come once 
again to Charles and submit to the king, and 
they surrender the evildoers who fomented the 
rebellion—4,500 persons—who are put to 
death, though Witunkind, having fled into 
Nordmannia, is not among them. 

783-84: Charles campaigns in Saxony. 

785: Charles campaigns in Saxony. Witunkind 
is forced to sue for peace, and he is baptized. 
The whole of Saxony is then subjugated, and 
their stubborn treachery quiets for several years 
because they can find no convenient occasion 
for revolt. (Though minor Saxon revolts contin- 
ued for years, mass deportations of Saxons into 
France and Frankish colonies established in Sax- 
ony achieved a final settlement of the region by 
the end of the 790s.) An ambitious conspiracy 
among the East Franks, led by Count Hardrad, 
is discovered, and its principals are deprived of 
their eyes and sent into exile. 


786: The Lord King Charles sends into Brittany 
his army under his seneschal Audulf. By God's 
will they conquer many Bretons with their forti- 
fications and strongholds in swamps and forest. 
They bring the leaders back to Worms to submit 
and render tribute to King Charles. Then King 
Charles in winter takes his army into Lombardy 
to assume its rulership, as he already has in his 
power its King Desiderius. (Henceforth northern 
Italy is part of Charles's empire.) 

787: The most pious King Charles enters Rome 
with his expedition and is received with great 
honor by the Lord Pope Hadrian. There Lord 
King Charles accepts the oath of Duke Arighis of 
southern Italy. With Pope Hadrian he chastises 
the inconstant and deceitful emissaries of Duke 
Tassilo of Bavaria (who had sworn oaths of sub- 
mission and loyalty to both Charles and his fa- 
ther Pepin). King Charles tells them that if the 
duke in his stubbornness disobeys the words of 
the pope, then Lord King Charles would be ab- 
solved of any sin or guilt in burning, murder, 
and other atrocities that might occur if King 
Charles and the Franks must enforce the oaths. 
Yet Duke Tassilo persists, and King Charles 
causes three armies to be raised and marches 
upon Bavaria. Duke Tassilo, seeing himself sur- 
rounded and that the Bavarian people prefer to 
concede the king's right rather than oppose him, 
comes in person to King Charles, places his 
hands in the king's, and commends himself into 
vassalage. 

788: By the counsel of his rancorous wife, Luit- 
berga, a woman hateful to God, Duke Tassilo 
forsakes his oaths and plots treason, causing 
the Byzantine Greeks and Avars to make war 
in the east and in Italy. With the help of God, 
the Franks prevail, and Duke Tassilo, granted 
his life by the mercy of King Charles, enters a 
monastery to do penance for his many sins. 
(The Kingdom of Bavaria becomes part of the 
Empire.) 

789: A campaign into the land of the Wilzi (a 
Slavic tribe) is launched. By the guidance of 
God, King Charles receives submission, hos- 
tages, and oaths from the magnates and chief- 
tains of the Slavs. 

790: No campaign is undertaken. While in 
winter residence at Worms, his palace there is 
accidentally burned during the night. 


791: The king campaigns in the land of the 
Avars. When they see the Franks approach, the 
Lord strikes them with fear, and they abandon 
their fortifications. Christ guides the king and 
his armies without harm into the Avar strong- 
holds, and the campaign is accomplished with- 
out any misfortune, except for a plague that 
slays nine of every ten of the horses in the king's 
command. 

792: No campaign is undertaken. A conspiracy 
of some Franks and the king's son Pepin is dis- 
covered. Some are executed by the sword for 
high treason; others are hanged on the gallows. 
793: The Saxons revolt, intercepting and defeat- 
ing a Frankish army, and Moors raid southern 
France and return home victorious after slaying 
many Franks. 

794: The king sends two armies into Saxony, 
and the Saxons, seeing they are surrounded, 
promise to become Christians and be loyal to the 
king, though they had no intention of keeping 
their oaths. 

795: The king campaigns in Saxony. Once the 
Saxons have been soundly beaten, their country 
laid waste, and their hostages received, the king 
returns to the palace at Aix-la-Chapelle. 

796: Pope Hadrian dies and is succeeded by 
Pope Leo. Duke Eric of the Franks campaigns 
into Pannonia, defeats the Avars, and enters in- 
to the ring of the Avars (a fabled fortification of 
the Avars). There they find much booty and 
send many wagonloads of treasure home to the 
king. 

797: The Lord King campaigns in Saxony and 
receives the submission of the whole Saxon peo- 
ple. The governor of Barcelona, Zatun, comes in 
person and submits himself and his city to the 
king. At his palace in Aix-la-Chapelle, Charles 
receives the Saracen Abdallah and an envoy 
from the governor of Sicily. 

798: Faithless Saxons take prisoner the envoys 
sent to them, execute some, and hold the others 
for ransom. The king summons an army and 
lays waste to the whole of Saxony. He defeats 
them in battle and takes hostages, including the 
most treacherous Saxon nobles. Lord King 
Charles then returns to Francia. At Aix-la-Cha- 
pelle, he receives an embassy of peace from 
Empress Irene of the Byzantine Greeks of 
Constantinople. 


A Survey of Carolingian History * 7 


799: The Romans capture the Pope, blind him, 
tear his tongue out, and cast him into prison. He 
manages to escape and is delivered into safety. 
There is war on the borders with the Avar and 
with the Moorish and Saracen pirates in the Ba- 
leric Islands (in the western Mediterranean). 
Count Wido, commander of the Breton March, 
enters Brittany, and conquers and subjugates the 
whole province to the Franks—something that 
has never happened before. 

800: The king travels to Rome, where he holds 
an assembly to examine the accusations of 
crimes charged to Pope Leo. No one is willing to 
prove these charges, and with the Gospel in 
hand, Pope Leo invokes the name of the Holy 
Trinity and purges himself by oath of the 
charges. Thereafter, on Christmas, when the 
king rose from prayer in front of the shrine of 
the blessed apostle Peter to take part in the 
Mass, Pope Leo placed a crown on his head. 
Lord King Charles is hailed by the whole Roman 
people: To the august Charles, crowned by God, 
the great and peaceful emperor of the Romans, 
life and victory! Thereafter he is called Emperor 
and Augustus. (A great historical controversy 
has grown up over the issue of whether Charle- 
magne had anticipated and desired to be 
crowned emperor, or whether Pope Leo had sur- 
prised him and crowned him against his will. In 
any case, this title of Emperor of the Western 
Roman Empire was a great symbolic confirma- 
tion of Charlemagne's divinely inspired ruler- 
ship over Western Europe.) 

801: The emperor receives envoys from the king 
of Persia (Haroun-al-Raschid, 5th Abbassid Ca- 
liph of Baghdad, prominent figure in Thousand 
and One Arabian Nights), one a Persian from 
the East and another a Saracen from Africa and 
the envoy of Emir Abraham. The city of Barce- 
lona is captured after a two-year siege and Za- 
tun, its governor, is captured and condemned to 
exile. 

802: Issac the Jew, whom the emperor had sent 
five years before to the king of the Persians, re- 
turns to the emperor at Aix-la-Chapelle and de- 
livers, along with many other wonderful 
presents from the Persian king, an elephant 
whose name is Abul Abaz. 

803: A great earthquake around the palace at 
Aix-la-Chapelle causes a large death toll. En- 


8 * Chapter Two 


voys from Emperor Nicephorus of Byzantium 
are received with a written proposal for peace. 
They are dismissed with a letter from Emperor 
Charles. 

804: Charles meets with Pope Leo in the city of 
Reims and gives him many fine gifts. The emper- 
or has heard rumor that in the city of Mantua 
the blood of Christ has been found, and he asks 
the Pope to inquire into the truthfulness of this 
rumor. (The Pope's report on this rumor is not 
recorded.) 

805: The emperor sends an army under his son 
Charles into the country of the Slavs called Bo- 
hemia. Charles ravages the native land from one 
end to the other and slays their chief Lecho. The 
emperor gives his time to hunting in several of 
his palaces, then settles for the winter in his pal- 
ace at Thionville, where he is joined by his sons 
Pepin and Louis for Christmas. 

806: The emperor makes arrangements for the 
division of his empire among his sons: Louis the 
western empire, Pepin Italy, and Charles the 
east. (Charles and Pepin died before Charle- 
magne, which left the entire empire to Louis, 
thence to be called Louis the Pious.) Armies are 
sent into the lands of the Slavs along the Elbe 
River and in Bohemia, Corsica is defended from 
Moorish pirates, and Navarre and Pamplona 
(northeastern Spain) are once again placed un- 
der the emperor's authority. 

807: The emperor receives an embassy of 
monks from Jerusalem from the patriarch 
Thomas. He also receives an envoy from the 
king of Persia, along with many fine gifts, in- 
cluding a marvelous water clock with many as- 
tounding mechanisms. The Moors on Sardinia 
and Corsica are defeated and put to flight. 

808: King Godofrid of the Danes threatens war 
on the Saxon borders. Godofrid gains many 
Slavs as allies, but the emperor lays waste the 
lands of these Slavs and withdraws without re- 
ceiving hurt to his armies. Eardwulf, king of the 
Northumbrians of Britain, is deposed from his 
throne and driven from his country. Eardwulf 
meets with the emperor and then proceeds to 
Rome; on his return from Rome the emperor 
sends him back to Northumbria with envoys of 
the Pontiff Leo III and of Emperor Charles. 
809: A fleet from Greek Byzantium skirmishes 
with the forces of Lord Pepin, king of Italy. King 


Louis enters Spain with his army, but, seeing he 
can achieve little quickly, returns to Aquitaine 
with his army unimpaired. Warfare between the 
emperor's Saxon allies and Godofrid the Dane's 
Slav allies causes the emperor to build, fortify, and 
garrison a castle on the Elbe River for defense. 
810: The Moors with a fleet of enormous size in- 
vade Sardinia and Corsica. King Pepin attacks 
treacherous Venice and ravages the shores of 
Dalmatia. Godofrid and his Danes invade Frisia 
and take great tributes of silver from the van- 
quished Frisians. The emperor without delay 
sends out messengers to gather an army. The ele- 
phant that Haroun, king of the Persians, had 
sent the emperor dies suddenly. The emperor 
seeks battle with Godofrid, but the army of the 
Danes has returned home, and Godofrid has 
been murdered by one of his retainers. Hem- 
ming, Godofrid’s son, succeeds his father and 
makes peace with the emperor. Emperor Ni- 
cephorus of Byzantium and Abul Aas, king of 
Spain, also make peace with the emperor. 
Charlemagne's son Pepin, king of Italy, dies. 
811: Three armies are raised and sent into dif- 
ferent parts of the empire: the first army against 
the Slavs across the River Elbe, the second army 
into Pannonia against the Slavs and Huns, and 
the third army into Brittany. They all return 
home unharmed after carrying out their emper- 
or's orders successfully. 

812: Hemming, king of the Danes, dies, and 
many Danes die in battles over the succession to 
the throne. Emperor Nicephorus dies in battle 
against the Bulgars after many remarkable vic- 
tories. His son-in-law, Michael, becomes Emper- 
or, and sends envoys to acclaim the emperor, 
after their own Greek custom, "Emperor" and 
“Basileus.” Peace is made with Abul Aas, king of 
Spain, and with Duke Grimoald of the Beneven- 
tans, who pays tribute of 25,000 gold solidi. 
813: The emperor invites his son Louis, king of 
Aquitaine, to a general assembly at Aix-la-Cha- 
pelle, places the crown upon his head, and 
shares the title of emperor with him. 

814: While spending the winter at Aix-la-Cha- 
pelle, the Lord Emperor Charles departs this life 
on January 28, in about his 71st year, in the 47th 
year of his reign, in the 43rd since the conquest 
of Italy, and in the 14th since he had been named 
Emperor and Augustus. 


The Decline of the Carolingians 


Louis the Pious succeeded Charlemagne, but 
lacked his father's forceful will and energy. On 
his death in 840, Louis split the empire among 
his three sons. Aquitaine and western Francia 
went to Charles; Lothar received Italy and a 
broad belt of Eastern France (the Lorraine-to- 
be); and Louis the German got Bavaria and the 
east. The sons squabbled in civil wars; eventu- 
ally Lothar remained emperor, though the title 
had no authority over his brothers. 

For a short two years, Charles the Fat succeed- 
ed to rule the whole Carolingian empire, but the 
imperial title had lost all its power to the numer- 
ous strong dukes and kings who had divided the 
empire among themselves. Various later Caro- 
lingians received the title of emperor, without 
gaining any noticeable power or influence as a 
result, as the sundry Frankish dukes and kings 
refused to recognize their authority. The lack of 
respect these late Carolingian rulers commanded 
is suggested in their nicknames: Charles the 
Bald, Louis the Child, Louis the Stammerer, 
Charles the Simple, and Louis the Coward. 

Though the stories of these later Carolingians 
are colorful, often filled with scheming, intrigue, 
and civil war, they lack the heroic, epic stature 
of the history and legend of Emperor Charle- 
magne. If you wish to set your Carolingian cam- 
paign during the reigns of the later Carolingian 
rulers, see the "Suggested Reading" section for 
the historical details. 


Suggested Reading 


A short game reference like this cannot possi- 
bly offer the inspiring historical detail, colorful 
maps, illustrations, and photographs to be 
found in abundance at your local library. For 
DM and player alike, much of the fun of a Caro- 
lingian campaign is in reading about the history 
and legends of Charlemagne and his Paladins 
and bringing them to life in your game sessions. 
The following books are recommended: 


Dixon, Phillip; Barbarian Europe. Compact 
treatment of Charlemagne and the Franks; excel- 
lent archaeological presentation, with great il- 
lustrations, cut-away plans, and diagrams of 
buildings and settlements. 


A Survey of Carolingian History * 9 


Einhard and Nottker the Stammerer; Two 
Lives of Charlemagne. Einhard was a contempo- 
rary and intimate of Charlemagne. Nottker nev- 
er met Charlemagne and wrote years after his 
death; his account is more a collection of anec- 
dotes along the line of the fable of George Wash- 
ington tossing a silver dollar across the 
Potomac; it is therefore more interesting as a 
document of human values and the apotheosis 
of a culture hero than a historical document. 

Heer, Friedrich; Charlemagne and His World. 
Good general introduction to Charlemagne and 
his era. Lavishly illustrated with color and 
black-and-white reproductions of period draw- 
ings, paintings, and art treasures. 

Lamb, Harold; Charlemagne: The Legend and 
the Man. Well-written, almost poetic narrative 
personal biography. 

Nicolle, David; The Age of Charlemagne. Os- 
prey Men-at-Arms series. Concise military his- 
tory of the period with excellent color plates of 
warriors and equipment from throughout the 
Empire. 

Riche, Pierre; Daily Life in the World of 
Charlemagne. Oodles of concrete, specific detail 
about the peoples and customs of the period. 

Scholz, Bernhard Walter; Carolingian Chron- 
icles: Royal Frankish Annals and Nithard's Sto- 
ries. Contemporary historians’ account. Lively 
and readable. Nothing beats reading the words 
of folks who were actually there. 

Simons, Gerald; Barbarian Europe. Time-Life 
Great Ages of Man series. Good treatment of life 
and customs of the European barbarians. 

Winston, Richard; Charlemagne. A Horizon 
book. A historical biography and survey of the 
events of Charlemagne's reign. Lavishly illus- 
trated with color and black-and-white reproduc- 
tions of period drawings, paintings, and art 
treasures. 


10 e Chapter Two 


For prose retellings of the tales of Charle- 
magne and his Paladins from the chansons de 
geste and Italian epic Medieval romances, see 
the following books: 


Anderson, Poul; Three Hearts and Three Li- 
ons. This novel features Ogier the Dane, a great 
hero of the Charlemagne legends, as its central 
character. 

Anonymous; The Song of Roland. This po- 
em, renowned as the finest of the chansons de 
geste, can be found in various verse and prose 
translations. 

Ariosto, Ludovico; Orlando Furioso. In the 
two-volume Penguin edition, 1252 pages feature 
epic action-adventure fantasy-historical poetry. 
Bulfinch and Baldwin give good Reader's Digest 
Condensed-style versions of the essential char- 
acters, settings, and actions, but for style and 
detail, lovers of language and storytelling 
should go to the source. 

Baldwin, James; The Story of Roland. An ex- 
cellent translation and re-telling of many of the 
best tales of heroes and wizards. Highly recom- 
mended. 

Bulfinch, Thomas; Bulfinch’s Mythology: 
Legends of Charlemagne. The classic collection 
of old fables, and a sentimental favorite. 

de Camp, L. Sprague, and Pratt, Fletcher; The 
Complete Enchanter. The third of the fantasy- 
adventures of Harold Shea, The Castle of Iron, 
is set in Atlantes the Sorcerer's castle in the Pyre- 
nees and features the principal characters and 
settings of Orlando Furioso. 

Tarr, Judith; Roncesvalles. An alternate histo- 
ry story about Charlemagne's Spanish cam- 


paign. 


CHAPTER 


Character Design 


Character Class Availability 


Because of differences between a standard 
AD&D® game campaign and one set in the Dark 
Ages, certain character classes are not available 
to player characters and are not suitable as non- 
player characters without a specific DM ration- 
ale. Also, some character classes may be subject 
to special restrictions, 

The following table indicates which classes 
are available according to the type of Carolingi- 
an campaign you want to run (as discussed in 
the previous chapter). 


Carolingian Character Classes Table 


Class Historical Legendary Fantasy 
Fighter A A A 
Paladin NA A A 
Ranger NA NA A 
Mage NA NA NA 
Specialist Mage NA DM A 
Psionicist NA NA NA 
Cleric A A A 
Druid NA NA NA 
Thief A A A 
Bard NA DM A 


A = Available; NA = Not available; 
DM = Available only with DM approval 


Carolingian characters may not be psionicists. 
We also recommend that all PCs be either of no- 
ble background or plausible companions of no- 
bles. Only the noble classes had the freedom and 
resources to travel, make war, and seek adven- 
ture. The background and adventure material in 
this supplement presumes that most PCs are of 
noble classes. 

Listed below are the character classes availa- 
ble and any adaptations or restrictions required 
for play in Carolingian campaigns. 


Warrior Classes 


In any Carolingian campaign, warriors 
should be the most common player character. 

Because of the enhanced role of fighters in his- 
torical settings, use of The Complete Fighter's 
Handbook supplement is recommended. 


Permitted Warrior Kits 


The Noble Carolingian Warrior Kit (see fol- 
lowing) best represents the Frankish mounted 
warriors that were the foundation of Charle- 
magne's empire. Other appropriate Warrior Kits 
include the following: 

Peasant Hero: Non-noble fighters who have 
learned their fighting skills as levies on Charle- 
magne's campaigns on the borders and marches 
of the empire, or in militia defense of their lands 
against Saracen, Saxon, or Viking raids. 

Wilderness Warrior: Non-noble commoners 
or nobles who live on the Eastern Saxon, Slavic, 
or Avar frontiers and in the Spanish and Breton 
Marches, or foreigners welcomed in friendship, 
service, or embassy by the Franks. 

Pirate/Outlaw: Non-noble fighters loyal to the 
Church and Empire but driven to outlawry by 
corrupt local noble and church officials. 

The Noble Warrior and Cavalier Kits are not 
appropriate, even for legendary or fantasy cam- 
paigns, because of their later Medieval feudal 
and courtly features such as plate armor, joust- 
ing, heraldry, noble oaths, and other trappings. 


Noble Carolingian Warrior Kit 


Description: The Carolingian noble is trained 
from childhood in warfare, hard riding, and 
hard living. As an adult he represents the offen- 
sive and defensive strength of the empire, serv- 
ing in the king's frequent campaigns of conquest, 
defending the empire against raids and invasions 
of barbarians and infidels, and loyally support- 
ing the authority of the king and his chosen rep- 
resentatives, the counts and bishops. 

Role: In education, culture, principles, and pi- 
ety, the Noble Carolingian Warrior varies wide- 
ly. To best develop a conception of your Noble 
Carolingian's role in society, study Chapter 4: 
The Setting. For simplicity, you may choose one 
of the following three simplified concepts of a 
Noble Carolingian's role in the empire. 

* The Sportsman: This warrior is motivated 
by his love of action, competition, and self- 
testing, as best represented in the manly pursuits 
of hunting and warfare. He desires to develop 
his skills to his best advantage and to gain the 
respect of his peers. 


Character Design * 11 


* The Ambitious Noble: This noble wishes 
to increase his wealth and power by gaining 
booty on campaigns and by distinguishing him- 
self as a leader of men. The wealth and power 
necessary for advancement can be won only on 
military campaigns. 

* The Christian Soldier of the Empire: This 
noble fights to secure the benefits of Christian 
culture and Charlemagne's benevolent reign for 
his empire and for the poor misguided heathens 
on its borders. 

Secondary Skills: Groom (care for your own 
horse). 

Weapon Proficiencies: Long sword, lance 
(light or medium), short bow. 

Non-Weapon Proficiencies: Bonus—Riding 
(land-based). Recommended— Gaming, Hunt- 
ing, Local History, Religion. 

Equipment: Mail or scale armor, shield, long 
sword, dagger, short bow, horse, saddle, bit and 
bridle, horseshoes and shoeing, halter and sad- 
dle blanket. 

Special Benefits: +3 reaction from anyone of 
his own culture; hospitality of other nobles, 
churchmen, and monasteries when traveling 

Special Hindrances: Expected to honor his 
oaths and the Christian virtues; may be bound 
to his king or count by personal oath, obligation 
of service in return for protection, or family con- 
nection; must come at the king’s summons for 
campaigning in spring and at need when raids 
threaten local region; must spend +10% to base 
cost of goods and services per experience level 
for quality befitting his social station. 

Wealth Options: 150 gp & 5d4 x 10 gp 


Fighters 


The trained warrior class of the Carolingians 
was primarily a noble, horse-owning class, 
though all freemen were liable for military serv- 
ice in response to a local crisis. Most men would 
know how to use some weapon, since hunting 
was a part of everyday life, but only the noble 
classes could afford the armor, weapons, horses, 
and the leisure to train in their use. A less-well- 
trained-and-armed levy or militia infantry could 
provide a free commoner with some fighter 
skills. These, along with archery skills—a logi- 
cal asset of a commoner who provides meat for 


12 * Chapter Three 


the table with his bow—could be the foundation 
of a non-noble fighter character. 

All noble fighters must initially be proficient 
with the long sword, lance, and short bow. All 
non-noble fighters must initially be proficient 
with the spear and short bow. Additional profi- 
ciencies can be chosen as the player prefers (pro- 
vided the weapon is available in the campaign). 

Upon attaining 9th level, a non-noble Caro- 
lingian fighter is granted a title and becomes a 
noble (if he has not already won this honor dur- 
ing the campaign). 

Upon attaining 9th level, a Carolingian fighter 
can attract a body of warriors. However, instead 
of using the tables found in the Players Hand- 
book, the number and types of followers attract- 
ed are listed on the following tables. 

To use the tables, roll once to determine the 
leader type, once to determine the troop type, 
and once to determine the elite troop type. For 
leaders, a suggested magical item is given in pa- 
rentheses for fantasy campaigns only. 


Carolingian Fighter Followers Table 


d100 
Roll Leader Type 


01-40 — Sth-level fighter, chain mail, shield 
(long sword +1) 

41-75  éth-level fighter, chain mail, high- 
spirited horse (shield +1, light lance 
+1) 

76-95  6th-level fighter, chain mail, high- 
spirited horse (light lance +1, long 
sword +1, shield +1), plus 2nd-level 
priest, chain mail, shield 

96-99  7th-level fighter, chain mail (+1), 
shield (+1), long sword (+2), superb 
horse (i.e., charger) 

00 DM's option 

d100 


Roll Troop Type 


01-50 20 cavalry with leather armor, shield, 
light lance, long sword; 100 infantry 
with leather armor, short bow, club 

51-75 40 cavalry with leather armor, shield, 


light lance, long sword; 40 infantry 
with studded leather armor, short 
bow, long sword, spear 


Character Design 


Character Design * 13 


76-90 60 cavalry with studded leather armor, 
shield, light lance, long sword 


91-00 60 cavalry with studded leather armor, 
shield, light lance, long sword; 20 in- 
fantry with studded leather armor, 
short bow, long sword 

00 DM's option (100 men total) 

d100 


Roll Elite Type 

20 mounted young nobles: Ist-level 

fighters with chain armor, shield, light 

lance, long sword 

10 mounted noble veterans: 3rd-level 

fighters with chain armor, shield, light 

lance, long sword 

10 mounted noble veterans as above, 

but mounted on high-spirited horses 

10 mounted noble veterans mounted 

on high-spirited horses as above, plus 3 

warrior priests: 2nd-level priests with 

chain mail, shield, mace 

00 DM's option (legendary warriors, pal- 
adins, fighting priests, sorcerers, etc.) 


Rangers 


The special magical and nonmagical abilities 
of the ranger have no place in historical or leg- 
endary Carolingian campaigns. Rural levies, ad- 
venturers, and heroic outlaws with exceptional 
woodcraft and tracking skills are best repre- 
sented in these campaigns by standard fighters 
taking a Peasant Hero or Pirate/Outlaw kit. On 
the other hand, the limited magical abilities of 
the ranger are compatible with a fantasy Caro- 
lingian campaign. 

In a fantasy campaign, a ranger gains fol- 
lowers normally as described in the Player's 
Handbook. 


Paladins 


The high ideals and magical powers derived 
from the purity associated with paladins are the 
product of later Medieval romance and chivalry, 
not of the Carolingian historical period. These 
abilities are more appropriate in a late Medieval 
historical setting like the Crusades or in legend- 
ary or fantasy Carolingian, Arthurian, or chi- 
valric campaigns. A fighter inspired by 


14 * Chapter Three 


Christian ideals is not implausible in the histori- 
cal Carolingian context, but he would be a 
standard fighter accepting all the limitations and 
restrictions of a paladin, but enjoying none of 
the game benefits of the class. 

In a legendary campaign, the special benefits 
of the paladin class are restricted as follows: 

* The detect presence of evil intent ability 
may be used only once per day. 

* The paladin can use his laying on of hands 
only on another character or creature. 

* A paladin of 9th level or higher may cast 
only priest spells from the divination, healing, 
and protection spheres; he may not cast spells 
from the combat sphere. 

In a fantasy campaign there are no restrictions 
on the special benefits of the paladin class. 


Wizard Classes 


Wizards play no recorded part in the history 
of the Carolingian Empire. They do appear in 
the romantic tales of the Charlemagne legends, 
usually as antagonists. However, two wizards, 
Malagigi (one of King Charlemagne's Twelve 
Peers) and Angelica (the sorcerer-princess of Ca- 
thay) are major protagonists in the Charlemagne 
legends. Thus, with DM approval, specialist 
mages, though rare, may be player characters in 
legendary or fantasy campaigns, with the fol- 
lowing restrictions. Note that a player desiring a 
wizardlike spellcaster in a legendary or fantasy 
campaign may find the bard class a better match 
to the type of wizard encountered in the legends 
of Charlemagne. 

Player character specialist mages in a legend- 
ary Carolingian campaign lack the effective com- 
bat resources of a wizard in a standard AD&D® 
game campaign. Game balance has been emphat- 
ically shifted in favor of fighters and priests, 
much to the detriment of wizards. Playing a wiz- 
ard in a legendary Carolingian campaign is a role- 
playing challenge that is most likely to reward 
those who savor the distinctive role rather than 
the flashy power of wizard spellcasters. 

Wizards are rare, solitary, eccentric figures in 
Carolingian romance (think of Merlin in the Ar- 
thurian stories). They do not gather in adventur- 
ing fellowships, provide heavy weaponry for 
monster hunts, or gain new spells when they ad- 


vance in experience level as wizards do in most 
AD&D® game settings. There are no wizard 
shops or guilds, no magic colleges, no standard 
procedures for learning new spells. 

Much of their power comes from their knowl- 
edge of ancient and exotic lands and their 
shrewd schemes, not from spellcasting. They do 
not attack directly at the object of their desire, 
but they council and beguile others into doing 
their bidding. The greatest benefits a wizard 
confers as an ally and counselor are his clever 
plans. They must rely on schemes and trickery 
rather than direct confrontation. 

Another important magical resource for spe- 
cialist mages in legendary and fantasy cam- 
paigns is their understanding of various magical 
items. Most of Malagigis powers derive from 
the magical book he is always consulting. The 
ring that confers invisibility on Angelica of Ca- 
thay when she places it in her mouth is the pri- 
mary source of her sorcerous abilities. 

Playing the role of a wizard in the style of 
Carolingian romance requires study of the wiz- 
ards encountered in the tales—in particular Ma- 
lagigi, Angelica, Atlantes, Merlin, and Melissa 
the witch—to get an idea of how they fit into the 
legendary setting. See Chapter 6: "The Tales of 
Charlemagne and His Paladins,” for examples of 
episodes featuring some of these sorcerers. 

In a fantasy Carolingian campaign, the DM 
may choose to relax some or all of the restric- 
tions on specialist mages. He or she may also in- 
troduce the notion of an ancient and 
international secret society of sorcerers that sup- 
ports common AD&D game conventions, such 
as magic colleges. However, the more access that 
is allowed to typical AD&D game spells and 
powers, the less the campaign retains any dis- 
tinctive Carolingian flavor. 

DM Note: Specialist mage player characters 
of 11th level or higher can create many magical 
effects greater than those produced by magicians 
in the legendary tales. 


Restrictions on Specialist Mages and 
on Spellcasting 
e Only the following specialist mages are 


permitted: conjurers, diviners, enchanters, and 
illusionists. 


* Specialist mages may only learn, cast, re- 
search, and create spells within their own school 
of magic, with the exception of the read magic 
spell, which any specialist mage may learn as 
though it were a spell in his school. 

œ Certain spells that are more closely associ- 
ated with standard AD&D game settings than 
with the sorcery found in romantic tales of 
Charlemagne and his Companions are not avail- 
able in legendary campaigns. (See the following 
list of prohibited spells.) 

* When using these restrictions, a specialist 
mage is automatically successful when attempt- 
ing to learn any spell of his college. 

* Casting times for wizard spells in Charle- 
magne's world are longer than in most AD&D 
game worlds. Treat each segment of casting time 
as a round, each round as a turn, each turn as an 
hour, and each hour of casting time as a full day. 
The spellcaster must still concentrate during the 
entire course of the casting, and any disturbance 
will disrupt the spell. 

* Wizard kits are not permitted. 


Prohibited Spells 


The spells in the following list should be pro- 
hibited. The DM may decide to exclude other 
spells to this list, or to permit the use of spells 
from this list. The DM should provide the wiz- 
ard's player with a list of spells prohibited in his 
or her campaign. 

Conjuration/Summoning: Find Familiar, 
Melf's Acid Arrow, Flame Arrow, Evard's Black 
Tentacles, Conjure Elemental, Leomund's Secret 
Chest, Invisible Stalker, Drawmij's Instant Sum- 
mons, Limited Wish, Mordenkainen's Magnifi- 
cent Mansion, Power Word Stun, Prismatic 
Spray, Maze, Power Word Blind, Prismatic 
Wall, Symbol, Power Word Kill, Prismatic 
Sphere, Wish 

Enchantment/Charm: Sleep (permitted as if it 
were a 4th-level spell), Tasha's Uncontrollable 
Hideous Laughter, Leomund's Secure Shelter, 
Domination, Feeblemind, Leomund's Lamenta- 
ble Belaborment, Guards and Wards, Charm 
Plants, Shadow Walk, Mass Charm, Otto's Irre- 
sistible Dance, Sink, Mordenkainen's Disjunc- 
tion, Succor 

Greater Divination: ESP 


Character Design * 15 


Illusion/Phantasm: Nystul's Magical Aura, 
Blur, Hypnotic Pattern, Mirror Image, Invisibil- 
ity 10' Radius, Wraithform, Phantasmal Killer, 
Shadow Door, Shadow Magic, Mirage Arcana, 
Mass Invisibility, Shadow Walk, Simulacrum 


Priest Classes 


The Western Roman Church was a powerful 
unifying element in Charlemagne's empire. 
Churchmen — popes, archbishops, priests, chap- 
lains, abbots and abbesses, monks and nuns— 
should be significant characters in historical 
campaigns. It was common knowledge that the 
supernatural powers of the Church as vested in 
the saints, in the clergy, in consecrated ground, 
and in holy relics could protect the faithful from 
disease, misfortune, and malign spirits. The mir- 
acles associated with ancient and contemporary 
saints and relics were as solemnly and credu- 
lously recounted as historical events. With some 
modifications and restrictions, the priest charac- 
ter class is suitable for historical, legendary, and 
fantasy Carolingian campaigns. 

In a historical campaign, priests are ideal com- 
panions to warriors. They can serve either as 
chaplains, missionaries, or as educated clerks to 
kings and nobles on campaign or at home in the 
palace. One or more priests accompanied by an 
escort of warriors may venture as missionaries 
into the Saxon lands to baptize and preach the 
word, or to establish a frontier church in the wil- 
derness. A monk or abbot may join forces with a 
local count and his men to defend his flock 
against bandits or the acquisitive designs of an 
ambitious noble. In a classic adventure, a group 
of noble warriors might be required to accompa- 
ny several priests bringing a precious manu- 
script to a remote monastery for copying. 


Permitted Priest Kits 


The following priest kits are appropriate for 
Carolingian campaigns: 

Nobleman Priest: The most common type of 
adventuring priest. 

Peasant Priest: As a monk or hermit. 

Scholar Priest: As a monk or hermit. 

Prophet Priest: As a monk or hermit. 


16 * Chapter Three 


The Western Church 


Priests of the Carolingian Empire are servants 
of the Western Roman Church. This church 
preaches redemption through faith and good 
works and through the sacrament of baptism, 
promising eternal life for the good and eternal 
torment for the wicked. The church teaches 
right action through doctrines (which are proba- 
bly understood and appreciated only by the 
more educated clergy) and through the Gospels, 
parables, and homilies— practical stories easily 
understood by the people, guiding right action 
through dramatic example. The clergy of the 
Western Church is a hierarchy with the Pope liv- 
ing in Rome as the supreme authority. Archbish- 
ops and bishops are below the Pope's authority, 
and local chaplains and parish priests are at the 
bottom of the chain of authority. Also in the hi- 
erarchy are monastic communities, each gov- 
erned by an abbot and consisting of monks 
dedicated to a life in service to the Church. 

Priests of the Western Church who abuse their 
powers will lose them. Priests must be humble, 
and they must ask for spells and miracles only 
when necessary and when serving the needs of 
the Western Church and its followers. Use of 
spells or miracles for personal convenience or 
gain is a sin that may result in temporary loss of 
those powers. To regain his powers, a priest 
must do penance (see Penance, page 24). Ideally 
the player should humbly and sincerely strive to 
avoid calling on his special powers, but an occa- 
sional reminder from the DM in the form of a 
temporary loss of powers can be a wonderful in- 
spiration to earnest role-playing. 

See “The Western Church,” in Chapter 4, for 
additional background, rules, and restrictions 
concerning the Western Church in a Carolingian 
campaign. 


Requirements for Western Church Priesthood: 

Attribute Scores: Standard for priest 

Alignment: Any 

Weapons Permitted: Bludgeoning weapons only 

Armor Permitted: Any 

Nonweapon Proficiencies Required: Religion 

Nonweapon Proficiencies Recommended: 
Reading and Writing, Healing 


Weapon Proficiencies Required: None 

Duties: Know the liturgy. Defend and ad- 
vance the Faith by preaching the Scriptures and 
educating the faithful in virtue and doctrine 
through parable, homily, and sermon. Gather 
tithes, burn candles, give communion, attend 
Mass, scold those rude and idle chatterers who 
disrupt the sanctity of the Church. Observe the 
canonical offices (i.e., perform personal offices 
of prayer at appointed hours each day, and lead 
the Faithful in prayer and ritual during Church 
services). Baptize unbelievers and bring them in- 
to the faith. Avoid the Seven Deadly Sins. Hon- 
or the Seven Virtues. Admonish sinners and 
direct them from their wicked ways. Abstain 
from superstition and forbid pagan practices. 
Give obedience to your superiors in the Church. 
Do good works: comfort the sick, feed the hun- 
gry, clothe the naked, visit prisoners, harbor the 
homeless, and bury the dead. Make confession 
and do penance for sins. Fear the Last Judgment 
and the torments of Hell. Look forward to 
death, salvation, and the bliss of eternal life in 
the hereafter. 

Rights: The Western Church is the State Reli- 


Ves ce 
i Nd «íf mW 4 


Nw \ 


gion of the Empire, though it is nowhere near as 
powerful a force in government or society as it 
will become in later Medieval periods. The fol- 
lowing rights are accorded to the priesthood, 
but may be limited as indicated. 

* Right of Coronation: Priests have the hon- 
or of officiating at the coronation of the king or 
emperor, but they do not have the right to refuse 
to coronate. 

* Right to Church Trial: Clergy have a right 
to be tried under church law. 

* Confirmation of Marriage: The Christians 
would generally prefer to have marriage with 
the benediction of a priest, though it was not ob- 
ligatory. The Church judges terms of divorce 
and annulment. 

* Tithes: All lay members must tithe 10% of 
their annual income to the Western Church, 
payable in coin, in kind, or in service. In prac- 
tice, corrupt nobles and churchmen might col- 
lect these tithes and divert them to personal use. 

* Separation from the Faith: In rare cases the 
high-ranking clergy may excommunicate (cast 
out) members for serious offenses against the re- 
quirements of the Faith. An entire town or re- 


Character Design * 17 


gion might be placed under the interdict, prohib- 
iting any Church ritual or sacraments within the 
interdicted area, threatening all members with 
eternal damnation. Such extreme measures were 
reserved for the most desperate and heinous 
crimes. 

Restrictions: Priests may neither marry nor 
indulge in carnal pleasures. Priests may use only 
those magical items consecrated to Church use. 
Priests may not shed blood except in self-defense 
or in the protection of the Faithful or the poor, 
aged, or sick. Priests may not attack in ven- 
geance, for vengeance is reserved to the Al- 
mighty. Humility forbids vain, prideful, greedy, 
or frequent request for miracles. 

Spheres: Special; see “Spells Allowed” (next 
section). 

Granted Powers: 

* Historical Campaign—None. 

* Legendary or Fantasy Campaign— Turn un- 
dead; at 3rd level, +2 bonus to saving throws 
vs. all wizard spells; at 7th level, laying on 
hands (heal self or other for 2 hit points per ex- 
perience level once per day); at 10th level, sav- 
ing throws vs. enchantment/charm spells are 
automatically successful. 

Followers and Strongholds: Followers are re- 
ceived at 8th level. These consist of one 3rd-level 
priest and two Ist-level priests of the Church, 
five 1st-level fighters, and 40 normal men and 
women. The priest may take two priests and 
three fighters with him on adventures. The 
Church will pay for half of the stronghold con- 
struction, which may be started at 8th level. The 
stronghold may be a missionary stronghold on a 
frontier of the Empire (e.g., the Saxon or Avar 
frontier); such a stronghold must be constructed 
primarily as an easily defensible, rustic stockade 
with a chapel and living guarters. Or the strong- 
hold may be a new or renovated town cathedral 
or manorial chapel within the borders of the Em- 
pire; such a stronghold need not concentrate on 
defense, but may glorify the Faith through the 
beauty of its decoration and treasure and the 
power of its holy relics. Prelates and abbots of- 
ten compete with one another for prime relics to 
grace their missions or churches. Often a priest 
will be assigned a pilgrimage or adventure under 
the patronage of a high-ranking Church official 
or a local lord to seek out a relic suitable for his 


18 * Chapter Three 


chapel before he can build his stronghold. 

Reguirements for Followers: 

Alignment choices: Any 

Duties and Restrictions: Avoid the Seven 
Deadly Sins. Honor the Seven Virtues. Attend 
church, be guiet and respectful during services, 
and learn from the scriptures and preachings. 
Do good works. Make confession and do pen- 
ance for sins. Fear the Last Judgment and the tor- 
ments of Hell. Look forward to death, salvation, 
and the bliss of eternal life in the hereafter. 

Priest and Follower Alignments: Most West- 
ern Church priests and followers are of good or 
neutral alignments, but evil and chaotic align- 
ments are possible, so long as priests and fol- 
lowers with such alignments observe and respect 
the duties and restrictions of the Western 
Church. Sinning priests may lose their powers as 
a result of evil or chaotic actions, and both 
priests and followers may be separated and cast 
out of the Western Church by judgment of the 
priesthood. The Church, however, teaches for- 
giveness and repentance, and usually a sinner is 
given an opportunity to make confession, do 
penance, and rejoin the Faithful. 


Spells Allowed 


Which spells are allowed depends on the type 
of Carolingian campaign being played. The fol- 
lowing paragraphs indicate the allowed spells 
for the three different types of campaigns. Also, 
certain spells may only be available as Miracles. 

Miraculous Access Only to Certain Spheres 
and Spells: The priest may not normally cast 
spells from certain spheres listed as “Miraculous 
Access Only,’ and certain spells from permitted 
spheres are listed as “Miraculous Use Only.” The 
priest knows that in special circumstances in the 
past these spell effects have been granted to 
priests of the Church as Miracles. If a priest be- 
lieves the circumstances warrant it, he may pray 
for a Miracle. 

Praying for a Miracle takes one round. Roll 
percentile dice. The chance of success is 1% per 
level of the priest, plus any modifiers the DM de- 
cides are warranted. Success means the Miracle 
has been granted and the spell takes effect. Fail- 
ure means the request for a Miracle has not been 
granted. At the DM's discretion, he or she may 


include positive or negative modifiers; for exam- 
ple, if the Miracle is desperately needed and of 
great importance to the Church, a +5% or 
+10% modifier may be appropriate. On the 
other hand, if the request is for the priest's con- 
venience or for frivolous reasons, a -5% or -10% 
modifier may be called for. Also, praying for a 
Miracle on consecrated ground or in the pres- 
ence of holy relics may confer positive modi- 
fiers, according to circumstances. 


Historical Campaign: In a historical cam- 
paign, a priest has access to the following spell 
spheres: 

* Major access to the all, divination, healing, 
and protection spheres. Only evil characters 
may use reversible versions of these spells. Mi- 
raculous use only of the following spells: know 
alignment, speak with animals, locate object, 
speak with dead, reflecting pool, magic font, 
find the path, speak with monsters. 

* Miraculous major access only to the necro- 
mantic sphere. Only evil characters may use re- 
versible versions of these spells. 

* Miraculous minor access only to animal, 
charm, sun, and weather spheres. Only evil 
characters may use reversible versions of these 
spells. 

* Prohibited spells: barkskin, reincarnate, 
resurrection. 


Requesting Miracles in a historical campaign 
may be a sin of pride. If a Miracle is requested 
but not granted, the priest immediately loses all 
his priestly powers indefinitely until he com- 
pletes a penance (see page 24) or is granted for- 
giveness for his actions by an atonement spell. 
On the other hand, the granting of a Miracle is a 
rare and marvelous event and may be regarded 
as a sign that the priest is destined for sainthood 

. . or martyrdom. 


Legendary Campaign: In a legendary cam- 
paign, a priest has access to the following spell 
spheres: 

* Major access to the all, divination, healing, 
and protection spheres. Only evil characters 
may use reversible versions of these spells. 

* Miraculous minor access only to the ani- 
mal, charm, necromantic, sun, and weather 


spheres. Only evil characters may use reversible 
versions of these spells. 

* Prohibited spells: barkskin, reincarnate, 
resurrection. 


Fantasy Campaign: In a fantasy campaign, a 
priest has access to the following spell spheres: 

* Major access to the all, divination, healing, 
and protection spheres. 

* Minor access to the animal, charm, necro- 
mantic, sun, and weather spheres. 


Restrictions on Spell Effects 


In historical and legendary campaigns, priest 
spells of the protection sphere can benefit only 
members of the Western Church in good stand- 
ing. Pagans cannot benefit from protection 
spells cast by priests of the Western Church ex- 
cept if requested and granted as Miracles. Priests 
who have lost their priestly powers, or charac- 
ters of other classes who have committed a grave 
crime against the Church, cannot benefit from 
protection spells cast by priests of the Western 
Church until they have done a penance (see page 
24). At the DM's discretion, members of the 
Western Church may also be denied the benefits 
of healing magic, though the Christian virtue of 
charity demands that this benefit never be de- 
nied if the life of the character is at stake. 


Rogue Classes 


Of course there were thieves and outlaws in 
Carolingian times. A historical campaign or leg- 
endary Robin Hood-style campaign would 
work well in the setting—though the only class 
appropriate for PCs in such a campaign would 
be thieves, with perhaps an occasional monk or 
parish priest companion, such as Friar Tuck. 

It is recommended, however, that most PCs in 
a Carolingian campaign be of noble back- 
ground. All PCs should be at least compatible 
with predominantly noble PC parties, since this 
permits a wider variety of character classes in 
the PC party. 


Permitted Rogue Kits 


The Noble's Clerk kit (see following) is best 
suited for nobles or noble companions who have 


Character Design * 19 


rejected both the role of the warrior and the role 
of the priest in the Carolingian setting. Such 
characters may include scholars, historians, 
merchants, clerks, entertainers, counselors, and 
female characters denied access to the warrior's 
lance and shield and the priest's vestments. 

Other appropriate Rogue Kits include: 

Scout: Noble or common warriors who de- 
pend on stealth, caution, and deception rather 
than direct confrontation; such may be sent as 
scouts on campaigns or as couriers or emissaries 
on diplomatic or commercial ventures. 

Spy: Nobles or commoners serving as diplo- 
matic and intelligence agents or advisers to kings 
and counts. 

Note: Most roles appropriate to a rogue char- 
acter in a Carolingian campaign would be equal- 
ly well played as a fighter or a priest and without 
the serious limitations on combat skills and 
equipment. Only in diplomatic and intrigue sce- 
narios where much of the action takes place in- 
doors without full armor and weaponry can a 
rogue character take advantage of the rogue 
class's distinctive abilities. 


Noble's Clerk Kit 


Description: A noble's clerk is an educated no- 
ble or commoner who rejects both priest and 
warrior paths. 

Role: A noble's clerk may serve as an officer 
of the palace or manor for a noble, as a tutor or 
scholarly counselor, as an entertainer, or he may 
provide advice and services for an illiterate mas- 
ter. He may also be a royal courier or licensed 
merchant-adventurer. Since he is denied both 
the skills of the warrior and the authority of the 
Church, he must be more shrewd and indirect in 
his methods. Not being bound by the honor of 
the warrior or the sanctity of the priest, he may 
rely on deception and stealth to maneuver to- 
ward his goals. Further, since the clerk's status is 
lower than that of warriors and priests, he has 
readier access to the common classes, and he is 
able to obtain information and favors through 
them. 

Secondary Skills: Scribe. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any weapon normally 
permitted to the thief class and available in the 
Carolingian period. 


20 * Chapter Three 


Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus—Read/ 
Write; Required—None; Recommended— Eti- 
quette, Stewardship, Statecraft, Local History, 
Appraising, Alertness”, Fast- Talking", Informa- 
tion Gathering", Intimidation*, Observation". 

Skill Progression: The stealth and listening 
skills are most useful, along with picking pock- 
ets. Manual dexterity and fast-talking are essen- 
tial in intercepting documents and parcels for 
private examination. 

Special Benefits: Parchment, writing ink, and 
sealing wax are provided without cost by the 
clerk's patron. 

Special Hindrances: The clerk has low social 
status compared with warriors or churchmen: -3 
reaction unless in the company of lord or pa- 
tron. 


Thieves 


In a historical campaign, a thief character is 
usually found in the role of clerk, scout, or emis- 
sary. A few characters resembling standard 
AD&D® game thieves are encountered in the 
tales of Charlemagne, but never as protagonists; 
with DM approval, however, such a character is 
possible in a legendary campaign. In a fantasy 
campaign, in addition to the other roles suggest- 
ed above for Carolingian rogue characters, a 
thief might be played as a roguish companion of 
world-traveling royal emissaries, merchants, or 
adventurers. 


Bards 


The special magical and nonmagical abilities 
of the bard have no place in a historical Carolin- 
gian campaign. With DM approval, a bard may 
be played in a legendary campaign as a Proven- 
cal troubadour poet; even though the trouba- 
dours are associated with a somewhat later 
historical period, a bard fits well into the courtly 
setting of the legends. A bard could also serve as 
a wizardlike spellcaster in the style of the 
Charlemagne legends. With the exception of the 
restrictions on use of magical scrolls and books 


* See The Complete Thiefs Handbook for these non- 
weapon proficiencies. 


to 10th level and above, the bard class is actually 
the closest in style and abilities to the wizards, 
such as Malagigi and Angelica, that are found in 
the legendary tales. 


Other Details of Character 
Creation 


In addition to a character’s class, a host of oth- 
er details about the character's background 
needs to be determined before he is ready to 
play. 


Races 


All characters in Carolingian campaigns are 
human. 


Sex 


In a typical historical campaign, all warrior 
player characters and almost all priest player 
characters are men. Strong-willed women play a 
part in Carolingian history, but typically they 
are portrayed as villains—scheming, beguiling, 
and misleading the noble rulers and counts. 


Women had few rights in the male-dominated 
Frankish society—they could not inherit real es- 
tate if any male relative existed, and they could 
not buy and sell valuables at will. Grounds for 
divorce were few, but many husbands discarded 
wives almost casually. A "free" woman was for- 
bidden to live according to her own free will; by 
law she must always remain under the power 
and rule of men. Thus, the good action- 
adventure roles seem to be reserved for men. 

However, the option to play female characters 
should take precedence over strict historical ac- 
curacy for those players who enjoy playing fe- 
male characters. Note that two of the 
predesigned player characters included with this 
supplement, Frida and Louisa, are females. 
Their appearance in the primarily historical set- 
tings of the two adventures presented in this 
supplement is not historical. 


Names 


A list of historical Carolingian names is pro- 
vided here. During this period, people were 
known by one name; they did not use last 


Character Design * 21 


names. To distinguish one Egbert or Charles 
from another, a nickname may be added. The 
nickname may either identify the person by his 
father (Charles, son of Pepin), by his home, 
birthplace, or lands (Charles of Aquitaine, 
Egbert of Metz, Hemming the Dane), his title 
(Count Charles of Ardennes; Egbert, Count of 
the Breton Marches), or a descriptive phrase 
(Charles the Bald, Egbert the Wise, Grifo the 
Fat). 

Selecting a name for a legendary campaign is a 
bit trickier. Since all the tales have been trans- 
lated from French or Italian, various transla- 
tions use different methods of rendering names 
into English. As a result, for example, Count Ro- 
land of the Song of Roland may be spelled 
Hruodland, Roland, or Orlando. 


Building the Player Character 
Group 


A unified player character group may be cre- 
ated as a group of family members, loyal retain- 
ers, and local confederates of one of 
Charlemagne's counts. Most beginning charac- 
ters are young noble warriors, sharing the com- 
mon experience of military training, hunting, 
and gaming of young aristocrats, owing honor 
and respect to their teachers—the older warriors 
in the count's service—and owing duty and obe- 
dience to the count, the head of the family, and 
the war band. Some player characters may be 
churchmen of the count's chapel or clerks help- 
ing to administrate the manor. With the possible 
exception of the churchmen, who may occasion- 
ally come from another region, most characters 
have the same backgrounds of geography, histo- 
ry, and culture. 

The predesigned player characters provided 
with this supplement offer an example of a play- 
er character group centered in the northeastern 
region of the empire. This region was chosen be- 
cause of its relative proximity to the rebellious 
Saxons and the warlike Danes, two fine sources 
of action, adventure, and conflict. You may use 
this setting for your own player character 
group, or you may design a similar one in an- 
other section of the empire. 

The predesigned player characters have been 
culled from remote regions of the empire and its 


22 * Chapter Three 


Male Carolingian 
Names 
Adalbert 
Adalhard 
Amalwin 
Anshelm 
Arnulf 
Bernard 
Bertrich 
Carloman 
Charles 
Donatus 
Drogo 
Eberhard 
Egbert 
Egfrid 
Einhard 
Emmon 
Fardulf 
Frederich 
Fulbert 
Gerold 
Gervinus 
Grifo 
Guntbald 
Halitgar 
Hardrad 
Hegibert 
Hilduin 
Hruodmund 
Hugo 
Lothair 
Louis 
Mathfrid 
Meginhard 
Nordbert 
Odulf 
Otgar 
Pepin 
Reginhard 
Richard 
Rudolf 
Sigimund 
Suidger 
Theobald 
Theodoric 
Unroch 
Vivian 
Warin 
Welf 
Wido 
Worad 


Female Carolingian 
Names 
Ada 
Adelind 
Alberta 
Anselma 
Berta 
Binga 
Brunhilde 
Charlene 
Della 
Eadith 
Emilia 
Ertha 
Francesca 


Helga 
Hildegard 
Hruodtrude 
Idelle 
Irmengarda 
Jarvia 
Judith 
Karolina 
Leoda 
Liutberga 
Lorelei 
Matilda 
Odelia 
Olga 

Rica 

Rilla 
Rolanda 
Solvig 
Thora 
Ulrika 
Uta 

Velda 
Winifred 
Yetta 
Zerlina 


frontiers (see page 93). Though such coinciden- 
tal assemblages of people from widely separated 
regions are fairly unlikely in a historical context, 
we encourage you to follow our example in find- 
ing excuses to add individuals from various re- 
gions if players express an interest. 


Proficiencies 


You are encouraged to use the optional profi- 
ciency rules. Player characters may select their 
proficiencies freely according to the AD&D® 
game rules. The following proficiencies are not 
available for cultural or historical reasons: 

Heraldry 

Riding, airborne 

Charioteering 


The following new proficiencies belong to the 
General (Nonweapon) proficiencies group: 

Stewardship: This proficiency provides the 
administrative knowledge and skills to run a 
large estate. Land is wealth, and proper manage- 
ment of land resources and the servants and 
freemen on that land is essential to a noble's 
well-being. The noble himself needs at least a ru- 
dimentary understanding of stewardship, but 
loyal subordinates are usually entrusted with the 
management of day-to-day affairs. 

A character who has this proficiency under- 
stands not only the technical business of land and 
estate management, but the politics and personal- 
ities of the manor and palace. He is alert and sen- 
sitive to power and influence in families and 
retainers of a noble household. He knows where 
to seek information and how to apply pressure to 
achieve the objectives of his lord and his own per- 
sonal ends. He recognizes strengths and weak- 
nesses in a noble household, and he knows how 
to take advantage of them. He also understands 
quality and luxury, and he knows how to impress 
and influence others with hospitality. 

Statecraft: This proficiency includes the knowl- 
edge and understanding of politics within the state 
and in the state's dealings with other states. It also 
encompasses the diplomatic skills needed to ana- 
lyze, guide, and influence people and events to 
achieve government and personal ends. 

A character with this proficiency knows and 
understands the significance of current events 


and the major personalities that shape them. He 
is knowledgeable about the cultures and ambi- 
tions of foreign allies and enemies. He also un- 
derstands the conflicts between prominent 
counts, churchmen, and royal officers, and he 
studies the will and whim of the king. 


Notes for Carolingian Campaigns 
Healing 


Frankish medicine was primitive when com- 
pared to the sophisticated knowledge of the Byz- 
antines and Arabs. Most treatments consisted of 
bleeding, potions, or simples (herbs). The check 
modifier for the healing and herbalism non- 
weapon proficiencies is -5 rather than -2. Also, 
in historical campaigns no person or creature 
may be healed to more than 50% of his total hit 
points by magical means. Thus magic can speed 
healing, but it cannot miraculously remove 
wounds and injuries. À priest may attempt to 
heal a creature to over 5046 of its hit points, but 
success would require a Miracle. 


Priest Divination 


In historical and legendary Carolingian cam- 
paigns, the following priest divination spells 
work only in consecrated areas sanctified to the 
divine being that grants the magical effect: know 
alignment, speak with dead, detect lie, divina- 
tion, and commune. Other magical divination 
abilities similar to these spells (i.e., the paladin's 
detect evil ability) are similarly limited. 


Consecrated Areas 


The DM shall determine all consecrated areas. 
Consecrating areas is not a player character 
function, though they may participate by pro- 
viding holy relics, by being granted a Miracle, or 
by participating in consecration rituals conduct- 
ed by NPC priests. 

Consecrated areas are associated with certain 
supernatural powers and abilities that vary ac- 
cording to circumstances and DM whim. A few 
guidelines may be helpful: 

ee Usually the initial consecration of an area 
confers only a very modest effect. Such areas 
have two common features: know alignment 


Character Design *23 


magical effects function within their boundaries, 
and the area is protected by a protection from 
evil effect when a priest of the Faith is present. 

* Over time, and through continuous occu- 
pation and worship, consecrated areas may 
grow in power. For example, cathedrals and 
monasteries occupied since Roman times may be 
blessed and protected by more powerful magical 
effects, such as bonuses to healing magic or per- 
manent protection from evil effects. 

* The presence of holy relics may enhance the 
magical effects of a consecrated area. Typically 
the benefit of the presence of the relic cannot be 
gained if the relic is not on consecrated ground 
(that is, the relic may be a magical item that 
works only in consecrated areas). Even if the holy 
relic produces magical effects when not in conse- 
crated areas, it usually produces more varied and 
powerful effects when in consecrated areas. 

è The granting of a Miracle (see the "Spells 
Allowed" section) to a PC or an NPC may indi- 
cate that a location is destined to become conse- 
crated. High-level priests often try to establish 
chapels or shrines in such locations. 

The magical effects of consecrated areas and 
holy relics should be determined by the DM so 
that they may be tailored to his or her campaign. 
Any reduction of their magical effects to charts 
and tables would be counter to the marvelous 
and miraculous spirit of such holy and supernat- 
ural phenomena. 


Loss of Powers 


Priests who abuse the powers granted them 
may lose them. Members of the Church or other 
character classes may lose the ability to benefit 
from some priest magic. Loss of such benefits is 
at the DM's discretion, but should result only 
from serious abuses or crimes. 

Priests may lose their powers as a result of 
grievous or repeated commissions of any of the 
Seven Deadly Sins, most commonly for offenses 
against the sin of Pride (too frequently calling 
upon divine aid when simple diligence and cour- 
age would suffice), Covetousness (desire for per- 
sonal wealth or power), or Anger (vengeful 
violence when patience, charity, mercy, and for- 
giveness are called for). 

Characters of all classes may lose the benefits 
of priest magic through commission of grievous 


24 * Chapter Three 


sins, though for nonpriest characters this penal- 
ty is likely to accompany only the most grievous 
sins of violence (murder in particular) or sacri- 
lege (destruction of sacred objects; defilement of 
altars, churches, or other consecrated areas; and 
verbal or physical attacks upon the clergy). 


Penance 


A priest or other character who loses the ben- 
efits of priest magic may make a penance to re- 
gain those benefits. 

The penitent priest character must retreat 
from the world (into a church or monastery or, 
if none are available, into wilderness seclusion) 
and devote himself to fasting, meditation, and 
private prayer, observing the canonical offices 
strictly with a meek and humble heart. Normal- 
ly the priest's power will return after a day or 
two of strict penance, but cases of serious or re- 
peated offenses against the Church may require 
longer periods of penance before the priest's 
powers return. 

Penitents of other character classes must first 
confess their sins to a priest, then perform a pen- 
ance as directed by that priest. The DM shall de- 
termine the nature of these penances at his or her 
own discretion. The penance usually entails re- 
dressing the evil effects of any crime, while at 
the same time evidencing a meek and humble ac- 
knowledgement of the penitent's true contrition 
for his act. The more heinous the crime, the 
more burdensome the penance. For example, a 
character guilty of looting a church of its sacred 
treasures must first return or replace the trea- 
sures, then serve as a humble guardian of that 
church under the orders of the church's priest. 


Trial by Combat and Ordeal 


Priests are permitted to aid combatants by pray- 
er or Miracles, but only by asking for magical ben- 
efits for the champion beforehand. Direct 
interference during a trial is an offense against cus- 
tom and a sign of guilt. Sorcerous magic is corrupt 
and not permitted during these trials. Paying for a 
champion in coin or kind is not permitted, but a 
retainer can undergo a trial for his employer. 

Oaths must be sworn in the presence of a 
priest before combat to renounce the use of evil 
sorcery or forbidden methods, and to abide by 
the judgment of God. 


Our interest in Carolingian history in this sup- 
plement concentrates on those details of the set- 
ting that will be useful for Dungeon Masters and 
players in historical, legendary, or fantasy cam- 
paigns based in the time period. As such we look 
more carefully at those aspects of society famil- 
iar to noble warriors and priests. Unlike most 
Carolingians of common birth, such persons 
will be well traveled, either as campaigning war- 
rior noblemen and as men who answer the call 
of the king and his counts, or as churchmen who 
must balance their service for those nobles 
against the spiritual and worldly demands of 
their particular faith and their ecclesiastical su- 
periors. 


The Lands of the Age of 
Charlemagne 


The Empire 


Francia (Frankland, or Empire of the Franks): 
Francia, land of the Franks, is the nation Charle- 
magne inherited from his father, Pepin. It com- 
prises five major regions: Austrasia and 
Neustria (the lands of the East and West Franks, 
respectively), Burgundy, Aquitaine, and a Medi- 
terranean region (Septimania and Provence, 
two non-Frankish lands added to Francia 
through conquest). 

Austrasia (East Franks): This heavily forested 
province along the Meuse and Rhine Rivers 
formed the political core of Charlemagne's Em- 
pire. Here were the loyal Frankish horsemen 
who were the backbone of the Carolingian mili- 
tary machine. The Carolingian Renaissance, a 
brief flowering of respect for scholarship and 
classical culture, had its focus at Aix-la-Chapelle 
(Aachen) in the court of Charlemagne and in the 
Palace School of Alcuin of York. Here also some 
of the great Roman cities along the Rhine— 
Cologne and Mainz, among others—survived 
the barbarian invasions after the collapse of the 
Roman Empire. The churchmen of these cities 
and other Frankish cathedral cities surviving 
from Roman times became the conservators of 
the heritage of law, order, and culture that lin- 
gered as memories from the Pax Romana. 

To the north along the North Sea was the Great 
Plain, the future Low Countries (the Netherlands 


CHAPTER 


The Setting 


and Belgium). The Great Plain's proximity to the 
sea and numerous navigable rivers provided easy 
access for trade—and for the fierce Viking raiders 
of the later Carolingian period. The central heart- 
land of Austrasia was hilly and heavily forested, 
drained by the Meuse and Moselle Rivers, and 
bounded on the east by the high Vosges Moun- 
tains and the Rhine River valley. 

Neustria (West Franks); More Romanized 
than Germanic, this wine-and-wheat producing 
province flourished along the banks of the Seine 
and Loire. Here along the old Roman road net, 
many of the great Roman cities survived the 
Dark Ages to become cathedral towns that pre- 
served the civilized legacy of Roman Gaul. 
Though this province was to play a major part 
in later French history as the focus of govern- 
ment shifted toward Paris, the eastern Austra- 
sian province was the primary focus of 
Charlemagne's Empire. 

Burgundy: This wealthy and powerful non- 
Frankish province of Francia was centered in the 
trough of the Rhone-Saone River valley, bound- 
ed on the west by France's central highland pla- 
teau and on the east by the Jura Mountains and 
the Alps. 

Aquitaine: This independent and rebellious 
southwestern province of Francia, with its genial 
climate and wine and wheat, was an important 
Roman province. It retained the thoroughly Ro- 
manized customs, culture, and economy of Ro- 
man Gaul much later after the fall of the Roman 
Empire than did the Germanic lands. Early in his 
reign, Charlemagne put down the Aquitainian 
revolt inherited from his father Pepin. During 
Charlemagne's reign, the province was relatively 
loyal to the empire, if only because it depended 
on the empire for protection against the incur- 
sions of the Spanish Moors and the Moorish 
pirates. 

Septimania and Provence: These southern 
provinces shared the warm, dry climate, agricul- 
ture, and heavily Romanized culture of the Med- 
iterranean. Here olives, fruit, and grape vines 
flourished, and the summer drought limited the 
forest to evergreen trees and shrubs such as ol- 
ive, myrtle, cypress, stone pine, and the ever- 
green oak. These provinces were frequently 
troubled with Moorish raids and invasions dur- 
ing Carolingian times. 


The Setting * 25 


E EK 
A dum NEUSTRIA 
= 


? Brittany ^ : 
,Breron 
So March 


Aquitaine 


SN 
* 
` 


A Gascony : 
E. o 


Subject Lands of the Empire 


Lombardy: The Lombards were Teutonic bar- 
barians like the Franks who established a power- 
ful society in the mountainous region of what is 
now northern Italy. This was among the first re- 
gions to be incorporated into Charlemagne's 
Empire by military conquest. Lombard cavalry 
became the backbone of Charlemagne's armies 
in Italy and in his eastern campaigns against the 
Avars. 

Saxony and Thuringia: For most of the first 
half of his long reign, Charlemagne campaigned 
against the pagan Saxon tribes of these regions, 
seeking to bring their souls to the Western 
Church and their lands and peoples into the em- 
pire. The Franks saw the Saxons as savage, idol- 
atrous heathens, oathbreakers, and murderers. 
At the end of each summer campaign, the Sax- 
ons would make peace with Charlemagne, ac- 
cept the Faith, then turn and slay the 
missionaries and rise in revolt the next spring. 

After decades of almost yearly revolts and 
raids along the empire's frontier lands, these 
proud and independent barbarians tribesmen 


26 * Chapter Four 


the FRANK)SD empre f 
IN 814 


“ Thuringia 
AUSTRASIA,” 
LI 


annia ` Bavaria TER. 


ocupa bia 


ge PANNOMIA 
ies fmun 


Venice x 


: m. A 


were at last conguered and subjugated by the 
ruthless application of fire and sword, by the es- 
tablishment of colonies in the region, and by 
mass deportations of Saxon tribesmen to remote 
parts of the empire. Once accustomed to the 
new religion and Frankish rule, the Saxons be- 
came allies against the Danes and the Slavic bar- 
barian tribes to the east. 

The Italian States: The Latins were perceived 
as fashionable and corrupt, the soft, civilized 
remnants of the great Roman culture gone to 
seed. The Papal States, lands granted by Pepin 
to the Pope and lands won in conquest by 
Charlemagne, were ruled by Rome and the Pope 
of the Western Church. The other states, most 
important among them Venice and the duchies 
of Spoleto and Benevento, were allies of the Em- 
pire and were frequently threatened, raided, or 
invaded by the Byzantines and Moors. 

Brittany: This isolated, rugged, infertile re- 
gion was of little interest to the Romans, and it 
retained a distinctive non-Frankish culture. Ref- 
ugees from southwestern Britain gave Brittany 
both its name and its Celtic language. Its Chris- 
tianity was of the independent Celtic rather than 


the monolithic Roman variety. A number of mil- 
itary campaigns early in Charlemagne's reign 
subjugated the province, but it was never fully 
assimilated into the empire, retaining its charac- 
ter as a defensive "march" or border region. 

The Spanish March: Charlemagne's early 
Spanish campaign ended in disaster with the 
Battle of Roncesvalles Pass, where Count Ro- 
land and various important officers of Charle- 
magne's court perished along with the baggage 
train and the rear guard of his retreating armies. 
The Basques of the Pyrenees and the Navarre re- 
gion were hostile to the Franks, and the Moors 
mounted frequent raids into Aquitaine and Sep- 
timania from this area. Charlemagne established 
the Spanish March as part of Aquitaine under a 
count of the march known as a markgraf, mar- 
grave, or marquis. This region south of the 
Pyrenees along with the independent Christian 
nation of Asturias and a pacified Basque 
Navarre region were established as a defensive 
buffer between Aquitaine and Moorish Spain 
late in Charlemagne's reign. 


The Frontiers 


The Lands of the Northmen: These savage, 
heathen Scandinavian peoples called themselves 
the Vikings, but the Franks knew them as the 
Nordmanni, or Northmen. During Charle- 
magnes reign, the most important Scandinavian 
nation was Denmark, a low-lying flat land of 
bogs, heaths, and sand dunes between the North 
Sea and the Baltic Sea. The Danes and their Slav 
allies fought a brief war with Charlemagne, but 
internal struggles weakened and forced them to 
sue for peace. 

During Charlemagne's reign, the Frankish 
coastal defenses were sufficient to deter sea- 
borne attackers, but after Charless death and 
the subsequent disintegration of the central gov- 
ernment, the Northmen in their longships were 
able to raid the North Sea coastlands and the 
great cities along the rivers of northern 
Frankland at will. (For details, see the AD&D® 
game's Historical Reference HR1, Vikings Cam- 
paign Sourcebook.) 

The Lands of the Avars: These Asiatic nomads 
had ruled the Slavic tribes of the central Danube 
plains as conquering overlords since the 6th 


Century. They had grown soft after centuries of 
unchallenged rule. In a series of campaigns be- 
tween 791 and 796, Charlemagne and his son 
Pepin invaded, conquered, and annexed the 
western half of Avar lands. The Avar capital 
was known in legend as The Ring, and it was 
probably a ring of concentric defensive fortifica- 
tions. Within The Ring, the conquering Carolin- 
gian armies discovered the fabled treasures of 
the Avars and sent wagonloads of art objects 
and precious metals back to Charlemagne's pal- 
ace at Aix-la-Chapelle. Via the Avars came 
many innovations in military technology from 
China, including the Central Asian stirrup, the 
framed saddle, light horse armor, and sophisti- 
cated siege engines, such as the mangonel. 

The Lands of the Slavs: Various Slavic tribes 
were subjected to Frankish rule during Charle- 
magne's reign. Chief among them were the Wilt- 
zi, Wends, Sorbs, and Bohemians along the 
eastern border of Saxony and Thuringia and the 
Croats on the southeastern border of the Empire 
near Lombardy and the Adriatic Sea. The word 
"slave" is derived from Slav, an indication of the 
number of captives taken during the Carolingian 
military campaigns against the Slavs. 

The Lands of the Moors: Also known as Sara- 
cens, these proud and fierce followers of Islam 
ruled a stable culture in Moorish Spain, also 
known as the Emirate of Cordoba. In the 
Charlemagne legends, the Moors are often ac- 
counted as honorable and chivalrous warriors, 
shrewd, fearsome, and worthy enemies, even 
though they were, in the eyes of the Franks, pa- 
gan heathens. Late in Charlemagne's reign and 
throughout the rest of the Carolingian period, 
Moorish raiders and pirates controlled the west- 
ern Mediterranean and raided, invaded, and at 
times occupied parts of southern Italy and 
Frankland. 


Foreign Lands 


England: Across the North Sea from Francia 
lay the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of Northumbria, 
Wessex, and Mercia. Mercia’s ruler, Offa, was 
the only European ruler, apart from the Pope, 
who could deal with Charlemagne on equal 
terms. The Anglo-Saxons of England were civi- 
lized Roman Christians, represented in the 


The Setting * 27 


Frankish Empire both by Anglo-Saxon mission- 
aries, the Benedictine monks, and by learned 
men like Alcuin, the head of Charlemagne's pal- 
ace school. 

Byzantium: Also Known as the Eastern Roman 
Empire, Byzantium with its great capital Con- 
stantinople was the center of Hellenistic Greco- 
Roman culture. This stable empire depended on 
an efficient administrative bureaucracy, shrewd 
diplomacy, a powerful army and navy, and a 
monolithic religious orthodoxy. It controlled 
Greece, Iurkey, southern Italy, Sicily, Crete, and 
scattered lands and islands in the Balkans and 
throughout the Mediterranean. Though at times 
Byzantium challenged Charlemagne's assump- 
tion of the mantle of Roman Emperor in the 
West, in the end Emperor Michael acknowl- 
edged Charlemagne as a brother emperor. 

The Arab Empire: North Africa and the Near 
East was ruled by the Islamic Arab Empire. 
From the Persian capital of Baghdad, the Abbas- 
sid caliph, the fabled Haroun-al-Raschid of the 
Arabian Nights entertainments, ruled an Islamic 
Arab Empire that stretched from the Near East 
across northern Africa to Spain. Though the 
Frankish Empire and the Arab Empire ex- 
changed emissaries and gifts, there was little 
contact between these cultures except the occa- 
sional raids and invasions of Mediterranean 
Frankish lands by Spanish and north African 
Moors. 

Other Lands: Real and imagined lands and 
landmarks known to the Carolingians include 
the Tigris, Euphrates, Ganges, and Nile rivers, 
India, Chaldea, the Kingdoms of the Magi, Ar- 
menia, the land of Amazonia, the land of Gog 
and Magog near the Caspian Sea, Aethiopia, 
and Far Cathay of the exotic Orient. 


The World of the Frankish Empire 
The Landscape of Francia 


The southern regions of Charlemagne's Fran- 
cia retained much of the urban civilized culture 
of the Roman Empire, with agricultural lands 
surrounding the towns, which served as centers 
of culture and trade. But in the sparsely inhab- 
ited northern Neustrian and Austrasian regions 
that were the heartland of Francia, the Roman 
towns grew up at crossroads and borderland 


28 * Chapter Four 


military camps and were less integrated into the 
life of the Germanic tribes. Though some Ro- 
man cities survived through the Dark Ages in 
the north, they had only a modest influence on 
the local culture. Most northern settlements con- 
sisted of numerous smaller village clusters under 
the rule of noble overlords. These mounted, 
sword-wielding warrior aristocrats were the 
foundation of Charlemagne's Frankish nation 
and the source of his military might. 


The Wilderness of Nature 


While civilization might have been the pre- 
dominate image of the Roman European culture, 
the wilderness was the dominant image of the 
Dark Ages. Cities and settlements were rela- 
tively small, framed by the larger forest wilder- 
nesses that surrounded them. The energetic 
trade and industry of the fallen Roman Empire 
was gone, and with it the frequent traffic and 
communication between regions. Each settle- 
ment and town had to be more self-sufficient in 
its isolation in the midst of the vast, rugged 
northern woodlands. 

From the Neustrian wooded countryside in 
the east across the vast forests of the Ardennes 
and the Vosges Mountains to the ancient Hyrca- 
nian wilderness stretching from the Rhineland to 
the crags of Bohemia, the land was covered with 
dark, primeval forests. On the high mountains 
grew the dense conifer forests of pine and 
spruce; above the treeline were the bleak, wind- 
swept, often snow-covered alpine meadows. 
The rest of the land was covered with trees of the 
deciduous type—oak, ash, beech, hazel, poplar, 
hornbeam. These occurred sometimes as high- 
crowned, open forest and sometimes as dense 
thickets with close undergrowth often broken by 
swamp or thinning out into clumps of trees dot- 
ting grassy clearings. Nobles might hunt wild 
animals for sport and pelts, and commoners 
might hunt small game and cut wood for the 
hearth, but generally men did not stray far from 
the settlements into the forests. 

At night the forest must have been most terri- 
fying, when man might imagine that vast inhu- 
man darkness full of wild beasts, thieves and 
bandits, malefic spirits, and the servants of the 
Devil. In truth, the wild beasts were a great dan- 


LET 


Gyr, WW | s 
i AI y SN ) 


AALA Ag ‘ y " 
AWYR 


WV WN RE x 


ger, among them the stag, boar, bear, bison, buf- 
falo, auroch, and most fearsome, the wolf—the 
scourge of the countryside. 

Carolingian man was also desperately vulner- 
able to the vagaries of climate, weather, disease, 
and natural disaster. Though the temperatures 
were apparently somewhat warmer during 
Charlemagne's time (grapes were grown as far 
north as modern Holland and southern En- 
gland), the winters were nonetheless long and 
brutal. Drought or too-heavy rainfall could 
spoil a crop, and famine and shortages were a 
common concern. Floods were disastrous. Hu- 
man and livestock epidemics could decimate a 
settlement. The land itself could become ex- 
hausted and unproductive from excessive culti- 
vation. 


The Rural Manor 


Low-lying lands with good drainage and river 
valleys supported small villages with surround- 
ing cultivated fields—islands of settlement in the 
wilderness. These villages were collections of 
simple timber houses surrounded by cultivated 


s, 


we 
Ws cn NN Ww 


WYNN WA. YA 


E— m 
htir 


sw ANN AUN AMA 


ye ^ 
z S i- 


^w Wi (M 

fields and the uncleared forest. The migratory 
Germanic tribal ancestors of the Franks lived in 
small villages of rough-built huts that were 
meant to be abandoned at whim. The Saxons 
and Slavs of Charlemagnes time probably lived 
much the same way as did the Franks' ancestors. 

The Carolingian manor settlements—the hall 
of the count or local lord and the associated sta- 
bles, barns, workshops, peasant houses, and ru- 
ral church—were more permanent occupations 
than the barbarian hamlets. Also referred to as a 
fisc, domain, demesne, villa, or estate, the rural 
manor was the foundation of Frankish society. 
The manor's overlord might be a lay aristocrat 
or a churchman. The lay aristocrat might have 
had his lands granted to him by the king or 
handed down through the noble family. The 
churchman might have received his lands in the 
same fashion or through the Western Church, 
for bishops and abbots would administrate the 
lands belonging to the cathedrals and monas- 
teries. 

A peasant house had a sturdy framework of 
heavy timbers, with a thatched roof and walls of 
wattle-and-daub or of lighter timber or wicker 


ES 


ep 
Acsi 


The Setting * 29 


sealed with clay. In a more modest or frontier 
manor, the rural church and overlord's timber 
hall might be larger, but not substantially differ- 
ent in construction; only the wealthiest of lords 
and churchmen could afford stone masonry. 
None of the timber buildings from this period 
survived, and archaeology rarely gives us de- 
tailed floor plans like the one we have for the 
monastery of St, Gall (see page 35). Presented 
below are the imagined plans of two different ru- 
ral manors—one the humble frontier outpost of 
Count Brego, the other the manor of the 
wealthy and powerful Count Dolan—for use in 
your adventures. 

Peasant huts might be partitioned into small 
rooms, with a hole in the roof to permit the 
smoke from the hearthfire to escape. A modest 
manor's timber hall would be more elaborate. 
Two rows of posts down the central axis of the 
hall might divide the hall into central corridor 
and side aisles, or the roof-supporting timbers 
might be built into the walls and buttressed by 
outside braces, freeing the interior space of post 
rows, The timber hall might have a second story, 
and rooms might be partitioned for privacy. 


On a larger estate, the hall itself (or "palace") 
might be only the largest of a complex of build- 
ings, including kitchens, storehouses, and pri- 
vate chambers, perhaps surrounded by a 
stockade or arranged around a central courtyard 
along the lines of the old Roman villas. In addi- 
tion to the central structures, the nobles com- 
plex would also have stables, barns, raised grain 
or hay shelters, workshops, servant or slave 
quarters, and a small chapel. All of this would 
be enclosed within a wooden palisade and per- 
haps a defensive ditch. In the more secure re- 
gions of Austrasia and Neustria, the stockade 
defenses might be modest or absent, but on the 
Rhine borders, the northern coasts, and in the 
buffer marchlands, where there was constant 
threat of heathen raids and revolts, the lord's 
stockade would be especially well fortified, 

Rural manors had to be self-sufficient; com- 
merce was small in volume and limited to lux- 
uries, Near the peasant huts were intensively 
farmed vegetable gardens; farther out were the 
fields where grains were grown to provide 
bread, the staple of the Carolingian diet, and 
where orchards provided fruit. Beer, the chief 


30 * Chapter Four 


SAY 
SARAH 


drink of the northern Franks, was brewed from 
malt made from oats, Grapes and wine were 
produced in a few favored areas (the Seine, Mo- 
selle, and Rhine valleys); the southern Franks 
preferred wine to beer. In the fallow fields and 
wastes at the edge of the cleared land grazed 
livestock, such as cattle and pigs. Beyond lay the 
forest where game birds, fish, rabbits, wild boar, 
and deer might be hunted with spear and bow, 
and where honey—the only available sweeten- 
er—might be gathered from the wild bees. The 
forest also provided timber for buildings, posts 
for fences, and fuel for fires. Simple furniture, 
utensils, and tools were made from forest tim- 
ber. Sheep provided wool for clothing, and cow- 
hide furnished shoes. 

Much of the land was held in small parcels by 
free peasants, though the situation varied from 
region to region. Many peasants were share- 
croppers (paid for living on the land with labor 
and payments in kind or coin) or slaves. Free 
and tenant peasants might owe their lords serv- 
ice in their fields and a portion of their produce 
as taxes. They must also answer the muster for 
military campaigns or defense of the land, but 
they were more or less free men. 

The processes that created the “unfree” serfs 
and land-ruling lords of feudal Europe were al- 
ready in progress, however. There was a strong 
tendency for small holdings to be absorbed by 
larger holdings. The free owner might donate his 
land to a monastery or a lay landowner, promis- 
ing rent or service to that lord, and receiving in 
return that lord’s protection. Holdings of vary- 
ing sizes were grouped into fiscs or villae: some 
were defenses (owned and worked by monastery 
or landowner), others were dependent tenures 
(sharecroppers) cultivated by peasants in return 
for labor services and payments in kind. Grain 
crops provided most of the food, supplemented 
by a wide range of vegetables and fruits from or- 
chards. 


The Town 


Life in Neustria and Austrasia was predomi- 
nately rural, but in the south the urban life of the 
late Roman Empire persisted, though greatly re- 
duced by the collapse of trade and communica- 
tions. Even in the north, many Roman cities 


survived as cathedral towns, and small ports on 
the coasts and along the rivers accounted for the 
modest luxury trade that existed. 

Rome, the mother of cities, was still the most 
celebrated city of the Carolingian West, though 
its population had dropped from 250,000 in ear- 
lier Roman times to perhaps 20,000. The resi- 
dence of the Pope, the spiritual leader of the 
Western Church, on the Caelian hill of Rome 
was the religious and administrative center of 
Rome and the Roman Church. Visiting kings 
and emperors stayed in the annexes of the Basili- 
ca of St. Peter on the Vatican hill outside the 
walls of Rome. Pilgrims who came to the Holy 
City to view the tombs of saints and shop for ho- 
ly relics could find accommodations in nearby 
hotels, hospices, and oratories. Italian cities 
(such as Pavia, Milan, and Venice) and southern 
Frankish cities (such as Toulouse, Narbonne, 
Names, Arles, and Aix) retained much of the ur- 
ban culture of the late Roman Empire. 

In the north, however, those Roman cities 
that survived owed much to the bishops and the 
religious communities that centered on the ca- 
thedrals there. Through control of tithes re- 
ceived by the church, by taxes on markets and 
merchandise, and through the royal grant of 
minting rights, such bishops had considerable 
economic power. They could fund the enlarge- 
ment and decoration of cathedrals or the con- 
struction of new cloisters and monasteries. The 
bishops could also employ and shelter the arti- 
sans necessary for construction and mainte- 
nance of the church communities. 

Some merchants and artisans established per- 
manent quarters in the vicinity of the regular 
market places, and tavern keepers set up shop 
near fair grounds and places of pilgrimage. On 
religious feast days, the urban populations 
would gather in the cathedrals, which were of- 
ten too small to hold them. All these activities 
centered around the cathedrals and the bishops 
who ruled them. Though no reliable population 
Figures exist for towns of this period, the town of 
Metz is estimated to have been home to about 
6,000 souls, while Paris's population might have 
been 4,000. 

Monastic communities were also important 
communal centers, sometimes small towns with- 
in themselves. Around a core of buildings de- 


The Setting * 31 


voted to the religious function, a monastic town 
might extend, with storerooms and accommo- 
dations for the artisans and guards in the monas- 
terys employ; hospitals and shelters for the 
aged, sick, and indigent; and guest houses for 
pilgrims and travelers. Like the bishops of the 
towns, the monastery's abbot might have the 
right to hold a market and tax merchandise sold 
there. Taverns to serve the needs of the thirsty 
merchant and pilgrim alike appeared to be a 
good source of income for the monks. The pop- 
ulation of such a monastic town, including a re- 
ligious population of perhaps 1,000 monks, 
servants, and indigents for the larger monas- 
teries, formed a community comparable to the 
old Roman towns. The monastery’s abbot 
served as the town’s patron and protector in the 
same way that the bishop was in a cathedral 
town. 


Everyday Life 


Since no one had watches, the passage of time 
might be marked by candles or by hourglasses, 
but most usually by sunrise, noon, and sunset, 
and by the singing and saying of prayers in 
chapels, churches, and monasteries. Therefore 
Carolingians marked the passing hours, not as 
we do today by the clock (with terms such as 
“ten o'clock" or "five-thirty") but by the Canoni- 
cal Hours, the names of the different prayers 
that were said at different times of the day. Next 
to the name of the Canonical Hour is the time it 
represents; instead of “at nine o'clock AM,” they 
may say "at tierce.” 


The Canonical Hours 
Prime (6 AM or sunrise) 
Tierce (9 AM) 

Sext (12 noon) 

Nones (3 PM) 

Vespers (6 PM or sunset) 
Compline (9 PM) 
Matins (12 midnight) 
Lauds (3 AM) 


The following gives an idea of how a day 
passes on a rural manor. 

You are awakened by the bells of the lord's 
chapel at dawn. You rise from a peasant pallet or 


32 * Chapter Four 


noble bed, cross yourself, and say a prayer. Af- 
ter dressing and washing your hands and face, 
you go to the village church or the lord's chapel 
to pray or hear mass. Afterward you make a 
breakfast of bread or porridge, then the peasant 
is off to work, perhaps to plow the field or repair 
fences or cut firewood or tend the livestock. The 
noble may visit the fields or exercise his martial 
skills, or he may take his leisure, having a snack 
at tierce, then a more substantial meal at noon. 
The lady may supervise the affairs of the estate 
or join the peasant women in gossip and house- 
hold labors, such as sewing or mending clothing 
or preparing food. 

After the noon meal, the noble naps, gambles, 
gossips, or hunts, while the peasant, having fin- 
ished his day labor for the lord, hurries back to 
work on his own land and to tend his own vege- 
table garden. As night falls, vespers is sung in 
the lord's chapel, and work ends. It's time for 
supper; the rich folk light candles, oil lamps, or 
resin torches, while the poor folk have the light 
of their hearth fires. By compline, the fire em- 
bers are covered, and noble and peasant are off 
to sleep, several to a pallet or bed, naked be- 
tween the sheets. 

Though Carolingian menus have not sur- 
vived, we know the principal foods were bread, 
meat, poultry and dairy products, vegetables, 
fruit, and wine or beer. Rich folk ate white 
bread; servants and poor had to make do with 
rye, while many peasants ate a porridge of bar- 
ley or oats as a substitute for bread. Meats for 
the well-to-do included deer, beef, poultry, 
sheep, fish, and, most popular, pork; the peas- 
ant had to make do with small game from the 
forest and meat on special occasions. Eggs, but- 
ter, and cheese were also available. Vegetables 
included legumes, such as beans, lentils, green 
beans, peas, and edible herbs, and root vegeta- 
bles, such as leeks, garlic, onions, and carrots. 
Sweet and sour apples came from the orchards 
and grapes from the vines. 

Honey was used as a sweetener and as the ba- 
se for the fermented drink known as mead. Rich 
folk liked their food well seasoned: pepper, cum- 
in, cloves, and cinnamon from the East were 


mixed with native spices to produce savory 
dishes. 


Trade and Manufacturing 


Trade and manufacturing, already in decline 
toward the end of Roman period, continued to 
decline during the Carolingian era. The lack of 
an effective government bureaucracy, the deter- 
rent of aging, poorly maintained, and unguard- 
ed road networks, and the danger of Viking and 
Moorish pirates on the seas were among the 
many reasons why commerce during the period 
was small in volume and limited to luxuries. 

Life in the Frankish Empire was predominate- 
ly rural, and most of the food and products of 
the manor's workers (woven wool cloth, leather 
goods, ironware, and so on) were consumed lo- 
cally. The only skilled artisans on smaller ma- 
nors might be carpenters or blacksmiths. Larger 
manors of the more powerful and wealthy royal 
court, counts, and monasteries could employ 
blacksmiths, carpenters, masons, goldsmiths, 
parchment makers, saddlers, harness makers, 
shoemakers, and other workers with specialized 
skills, 

Local town or monastery markets might be 
held on Fridays or Saturdays, at which time 
commoners and nobles could sell surplus farm 
produce or buy manufactured goods. The king 
administered and guarded local markets and col- 
lected taxes; these rights were granted to counts 
or bishops in many locations. Local potters, 
weavers, and smiths could sell their products at 
the market for eggs or chickens. Blacksmiths 
were scarce and celebrated as sorcerers, since the 
virtues of fine steel seemed almost magical. Car- 
olingian steel long swords were exceptionally 
fine weapons, internationally prized by Sara- 
cens and Northmen. In addition to the local arti- 
sans and farmers at the fair, itinerant peddlers 
selling housewares, pottery, or other goods 
might travel from one market to the next. Im- 
portant seasonal markets and fairs associated 
with major holidays and festivals might last sev- 
eral days and draw visitors from miles around. 

Some professional merchants bought and sold 
commodities such as wheat, wine, salt, and iron 
within the empire, particularly eager to buy 
grain cheaply in times of plenty and sell it dear in 
times of scarcity. Beyond the empire, the few 
trade routes east to Russia were regulated and li- 
censed by the king, and usually traveled by Ar- 


ab and Jewish traders. Some trade in beaver and 
marten furs from Scandinavian countries and in 
cloth from England continued across the North 
Sea and the Baltic, though this trade was in- 
creasingly threatened by Viking pirates as the 
period progressed. Commerce on the western 
Mediterranean was intermittent and subject to 
Moorish piracy. 

Trade in luxury goods from the Eastern 
Mediterranean—Byzantine silks, ivory, spices of 
the Middle East—continued throughout the pe- 
riod. Exports from Frankish lands included 
woven cloth, bear skins, beaver skins, black fox 
fur, marten fur, fine Carolingian steel swords— 
and slaves. Captives from campaigns against the 
Slavs on the eastern borders of Frankland were 
taken through Mediterranean ports to be sold as 
slaves to Muslims in the Near East, Africa, and 
Spain. In fact, as mentioned earlier, the word 
“slave” comes from the name of the Slavic peo- 
ples so often sold into bondage. Some Western 
Churchmen, scandalized by this slave trade, of- 
fered to buy the slaves and save their souls rath- 
er than have them sold into slavery to Islam. 


Travel 


Though the bustling commercial traffic of Ro- 
man Gaul was a thing of the past, there were 
other compelling reasons for travel. Perhaps the 
most important was the need of the noble class 
to visit their various, often widely separated 
land holdings. It was also vital for the king and 
his agents to represent in person the authority of 
the central government in the widely separated 
provinces of the Frankish empire. In the absence 
of the efficient government bureaucracy of the 
late Roman Empire, administration was vested 
in the person of the ruler and expressed through 
the ruler or his royal agents. The noble and king 
had the same problem—to make sure that sub- 
ordinates in charge of remote properties were 
competent and loyal. Both noble and king also 
traveled among their different holdings to 
spread the immense cost of supporting their 
court and retainers among different resource 
centers. 

The king traveled from palace to palace, and 
from city to city, with an entourage of several 
hundred people. He had to warn his hosts of his 


The Setting © 33 


approach if he expected them to be ready to offer 
their hospitality, for finding food and lodgings for 
several hundred people with noble tastes and roy- 
al connections was a serious undertaking. 

Nobles traveled to give council to the king as 
required in the spring and autumn convoca- 
tions, or when personally summoned by the 
king. They also visited other nobles for busi- 
ness, politics, and friendship. When nobles 
couldn't travel, they sent couriers with letters. 
Their correspondence might deal with serious 
affairs of state and economy, or it might simply 
share gossip and intimacies among friends. The 
kings emissaries also traveled among the dis- 
tricts with edicts and summons; they had the le- 
gal right to demand lodgings and provisions 
without cost for their men and mounts from the 
kings loyal subjects. Common folk also traveled 
the roads: groups of free peasants looking for 
better lands and kinder masters, slaves and out- 
laws in flight, refugees from invasions, mission- 
aries, pilgrims, clerks who had broken vows, 
wine merchants with ox-carts piled high with 
barrels, and slave merchants with their human 
cargo. 

In times of war, the roads were flooded with 
both noble and freeman traveling across the wide 
empire to remote border battlefronts. Barbarians 
from the frontiers of the empire marveled at the 
wondrous Carolingian highways, and in fact the 
great military successes of Charlemagne's Empire 
lay not so much in battlefield tactics, superior 
weapons, or armor as in its logistical support. 
Transporting troops, food, and supplies quickly 
and efficiently over long distances on the Frank- 
ish roads was the real secret of successful military 
campaigning in the empire. 

Many inconveniences and dangers faced the 
traveler. Brigands and outlaws attacked the 
roads. Sly thieves disguised as beggars preyed 
on unwary guests and pilgrims in taverns and 
hospices. After a heavy rain, some roadways 
turned into channels of mud. Paths across the 
forest wildernesses were poorly marked, and a 
traveler might lose his way. Some rivers had 
wooden bridges, but even these were often de- 
stroyed by flood or fire. Travelers needed to 
know the locations of usable river fords, but 
they could never be sure a ford was safe when 
the river was in flood. In the winter, ice on the 


34 è Chapter Four 


road made footing uncertain for horses, and al- 
pine passes blocked with snow and ice and dead- 
ly cold were particularly dangerous. 

How did Carolingians know where they were 
going? Maps as we know them did not exist. 
Large mappae mundi—maps of the world—had 
only a vague and distorted correspondence to 
the world they represented. The standard sort of 
map used by travelers, military expeditions, 
voyagers, and territorial partitions was an "itin- 
erary"—a basic list of place names and locations 
to be visited, 

Where did the Franks find accommodations? 
Nobles could expect the hospitality of other no- 
bles along the way, but the monastery or cathe- 
dral community was a place open to noble and 
commoner, rich and poor alike. Hospitality was 
a form of alms-giving, of honoring the Christian 
duty of welcoming guests. 


Monasteries 


The spiritual function of Frankish monastic 
religious communities had declined after the fall 
of the Roman Empire when they became chan- 
nels for the expression of the piety and wealth of 
the noble classes. Aristocrats seeking to impress 
the Church with their religious fervor and to 
daunt their neighbors made rich endowments to 
the monasteries. At the same time, a distrust of 
the pagan values of classical authors caused the 
Church to turn away from the Latin cultural 
foundations that had inspired the original 
founders of the monastic orders. 

Nonetheless, the monastery's self-sufficient, 
self-ordered organization and common princi- 
ples made it well suited for the isolated rural ex- 
istence of its noble counterpart, the rural manor. 
In addition to serving the spiritual needs of its 
monks, the monastery sheltered the poor, aged, 
and infirm, and it provided education for fortu- 
nate laymen. It also provided hospitality for 
travelers and pilgrims, with guest chambers for 
the well-to-do and more modest accommoda- 
tions for the commoner. 

Charlemagne recognized the potential of the 
monasteries as centers of culture and learning. 
He used his authority to promote the reform of 
the monasteries according to the Benedictine 
rule, a strict code of monastic living. He had 


PLAN OF MONASTERY OF ST. GALL 


Id 
TH. 


liii 
ie 
ah 


00 
Dn 


N 
La] 


0A 


3i 
This diagram is a reduced copy from the 9th century original preserved in the present monastery m It represents an ideal 
Benedictine house. and probably was never carried i ciel arie detail. The enclosure. surrounded by a wall, was about 
400 feet long by 300 feet wide. 


1. Entrance to the Church from beyond the walls. 19. Goat stalls and lodgings for goatherds. 
2. Church with two apses and numerous alrars, 20. Pigsty and lodgings for swineherds. 
2a. Vestibule for entry to hostelry for important visitors 21. Stable for pu cows and lodgings for dairymen. 
and ro the extern school 22. Horsebarn and lodgi grooms. 
2b. Vestibule for entrance to the monastery for all visitors. 23. Stables for mares and oxen with se al above 
2c. Vestibule for entrance to the hospice for the poor and and quarters for servants in.the middle. 
to the commons. 24. Workshops for coopers and turners. 
2d. Lodging for the master of the hospice for the poor. 25. Storehouse for brewery grain. | 
2e. Monks’ parlor. 26. Fruit-drying house. l 
3. Main cloister: showing arches. 27. Brewery and bakery for resident monks, showing 
4. Monks’ dormitory above, room with heating mortars and hand-mills. 


Workshops of shoemakers, saddlers. sword and 
shield makers, carvers, turners. goldsmiths, and fullers 
Granary and threshing floor. — 
House of poultry keeper. 

. Poultry yard. 
Goose 


apparatus below 28 
5. Monks refectory below. wardrobe above. 
6. Monks cellar with foodstores above. 29 
7a. Hospices for pilgrims and poor travelers. 30a. 
7b. Kitchen, bakery, and brewery for pilgrims and 30b 
poor travelers, 30c. | 
8a. Ground floor scriptorium with library above. 31 Gardener's house, with monks" adjoining, 
8b. Ground floor sacristie with wardrobe above. 32. Cemetery and orchard. j 
9. Livingroom and dormitory for visiting monks. 33a. Infirmary cloister and living rooms of the novices 
33b. 
34 
35a. 
35b. 
36 
37 
38 
39. 


10. Lodging for the master y dii extern school and their teacher, and of convalescents: 
T. Extern school: schoolroom for pupils with lodgings . Novices’ kitchen and bath. | 
for teachers. Church for the novices and the ill. 
12: Porter's lodge. Infirmary cloister and living rooms. especially for the 
13. Hostelry for important visitors seriously ill. 
M. Brewery and bakery for 13. . Infirmary kitchen and bath. 
15a. St. Michael's Tower. Infirmary garden. 
15b. St. Gabriel's Tower. Physician's quarters. apothecary-shop, 
16. House for the emperor's suite (identification uncertain), and room for patients. | 
17: Sheepfold and shepherd's lodging 
18. House for farm workers and servants attached to 
the emperor's suite (identification uncertain), 


ep] for bleeding and purgation. 
| Ain house, fersiynau cellar. and bath. 


The Setting 35 


copies of the Benedictine rule distributed to the 
monasteries and encouraged them to adopt it. 

Monastic life according to the Benedictine rule 
meant that you surrendered your worldly goods 
and took a vow to remain within the monastery 
for the rest of your life. You promised to live in 
poverty and chastity, and to be obedient to the 
abbot and to follow the Benedictine rule. A lock 
of your hair was cut by the bishop (a ritual 
called the tonsure), transforming you from a 
layman into a clerk. Your life ideally would be 
happily filled with reading the Holy Books, 
manual labor, prayer, and sleep. You would rise 
before dawn, recite the matins and lauds, work 
at various occupations until the fourth hour. 
Your labors might include cooking; making or 
repairing clothing, housewares, or tools; work- 
ing the fields or gardens; studying Latin; or 
copying manuscripts. Then you might read the 
Holy Books or recite psalms until dinner. After a 
period of rest, you resumed work until com- 
pline. After compline the whole community 
went to bed. 

The abbot of a great monastery was one of the 
most powerful magnates of Carolingian society. 
He was usually a loyal friend or family member 
appointed by the king or nobles who endowed 
the monastic lands. Such an abbot was careful to 
serve the interests of his benefactors so that he 
could count on their protection for the monas- 
tery. And monasteries needed protection, for 
counts and nobles coveted their lands and eco- 
nomic power. A local lord might menace or ha- 
rass a monastery, hoping to force its monks and 
abbot to give over lands to the lord in return for 
“protection.” A monastery without powerful 
sponsors would be at the mercy of land-hungry 
nobles. 

See the diagram of the plan of the Abbey of 
St. Gall (page 35). This plan was prepared in 820 
as a guide to remodeling and reconstruction of 
an existing abbey. It represented the ideal mon- 
astery but may not have been carried out in all 
its details. A few terms may need explanation. A 
sacristies is a room where sacred utensils, vest- 
ments, and so on are stored. Extern means non- 
resident, and an extern school would be for 
those not belonging to the abbey community. 
The refectory is the monk's dining hall. A scrip- 
torium is a room where monastic scribes copied 


p— ne YH HI I I HI HI HI HI HUU —————————— 


36 * Chapter Four 


manuscripts of sacred and classical works. Mon- 
asteries often had large libraries of rare and 
valuable manuscripts. Manuscripts might be 
loaned to another monastery so they might 
make a copy. Monks were very reluctant to let a 
manuscript leave their libraries, however, since 
its loss might be irreplaceable, and failure to re- 
turn a borrowed manuscript was a serious mat- 
ter indeed. 


The King and the Law 


King Charles and the Royal Court 


From Einhard, his biographer, we get the im- 
pression that Charlemagne was a great bear of a 
man with piercing eyes, a trifle heavy in the 
stomach, but vigorous and healthy, well built 
and often engaged in horseback riding, the hunt, 
and swimming. Though masterful, manly, and 
dignified in movements and speech, his voice 
was “thin for a man of his physique" —so you 
may choose, when your player characters meet 
the great King Charles, ruler of the Western 
World, to speak regally, but in a sgueaky voice. 

His feast clothes, or dress outfit, featured a 
suit of gold cloth, jeweled shoes, a cloak fas- 
tened with a great gold brooch, and a golden 
crown set with precious stones. However, he ap- 
parently preferred to dress like a common 
Frankish noble: Next to his skin he wore a linen 
shirt and linen drawers; over this he wore long 
hose and a tunic edged with silk. He wore simple 
shoes on his feet and wrapped long bands of 
cloth around his legs in the Frankish fashion. In 
the winter he wore an otter or ermine skin jerkin 
and a blue cloak. He always wore a sword 
strapped to his side, with hilt and strap of gold; 
for state occasions he wore a special jeweled 
sword. 

In personal habits he was devout, going to 
Mass each morning and attending services at 
night, and he was guick to criticize faulty per- 
formance of religious rites. He liked company, 
conversation, and activity. He invited lords to 
consult with him on state matters during his 
morning bath, and he surrounded himself with 
learned men, seeking stimulating conversation 
on political, historical, aesthetic, and other less 
formal topics. Daily meals and banguets were 
among his greatest pleasures; he loved to eat, es- 


pecially roasted meat, but he despised drunken- 
ness. During meals he liked to be entertained by 
jugglers, jesters, and minstrels, or to have read 
aloud to him historical and religious works, par- 
ticularly The City of God by St. Thomas 
Aquinas. He was also interested in the heroic 
legends and tales of his Teutonic ancestors, and 
wished them set down in writing for posterity. 

Most of all, Charlemagne loved hunting. Of- 
ten accompanied by his wives and daughters, 
the entourage would hunt wild game in the 
morning, then rest in clearings, with comfort- 
able tents and plenty of wine and food. The day 
often ended at a hunting lodge, where more eat- 
ing, drinking, and romantic pleasures were in- 
dulged. 

He was very fond of his large family. He had 
five official wives and numerous concubines. His 
first son, the elder Pepin, was the deformed off- 
spring of a concubine; this illegitimate hunchback 
later conspired with a group of nobles to over- 
throw Charlemagne. Pepin was permitted to 
withdraw into a monastery, where he died under 
mysterious circumstances. A number of the trea- 
sonous nobles died resisting arrest. His three le- 
gitimate sons—Charles, the younger Pepin, and 
Louis—were intended to rule after him, but only 
Louis survived Charlemagne. He became the next 
emperor, commonly known as Louis the Pious. 
Charlemagne also had a number of daughters. If 
the daughters had married, their husbands might 
have had a claim to the throne under Frankish 
custom, so Charlemagne forbade them to marry. 
He kept them always near him for the pleasure of 
their beauty and charming company. These 
daughters managed their romances in the royal 
court nonetheless, which caused their father some 
grief and embarrassment. 

The royal court is the place where lay and ec- 
clesiastical aristocrats gathered around the king 
seeking gifts, favors, and position. In the spring 
and fall, noblemen were summoned to the king's 
council at the royal court. Here the counts and 
the king's advisors met to discuss the business of 
Frankland and the empire; afterward, the king 
would issue capitularies, or edicts in the form of 
a series of articles, concerning the matters dis- 
cussed. These capitularies contained regula- 
tions, recommendations, and royal commands 
on various legal, political, social, and economic 


matters. Military musters before the summer 
campaigns assembled to organize and take coun- 
sel at the royal palace. At the royal court, the 
king also received foreign ambassadors, emis- 
saries, and guests—Bulgar chieftains, Anglo- 
Saxon scholars and deposed kings, Byzantine 
court officials, and Arabs from Spain and the 
Near East. 


The Palace School and the Carolingian 
Renaissance 


Charlemagne had an apparently earnest love 
and respect for learning. He was interested not 
only in the practical aspects of education that 
might make his noble agents and counts more ef- 
fective administrators, but| also in poetry and 
the preservation of biblical and Latin literary 
manuscripts. He received instruction in Latin 
and Greek and unsuccessfully attempted to 
teach himself to write. (Reading and writing 
were then different skills.) | 

Alcuin, an Anglo-Saxon} scholar from York, 
England, and friend of Charlemagne, was 
brought to Charles's palace at Aix-la-Chapelle to 
head the Palace School. Charlemagne planned 
that young men, noble or common, who 
showed promise would be brought to the Palace 
School and educated. In this predominantly un- 
educated age, most nobles, though they were re- 
sponsible for the administration of the 
government and their own vast estates, could 
not read, write, or do arithmetic; they had to re- 
ly on churchmen or lay clerks to perform these 
services for them. A Palace School education 
would enable young nobles and clerks to handle 
their own reading, writing; and administrative 
tasks. 

In addition to ecclesiastical history, Church 
doctrine, and Latin, students at the Palace 
School were instructed in the seven liberal arts 
of antiquity—the trivium (grammar, rhetoric, 
and dialectics) and the quadrivium (arithmetic, 
geometry, astronomy, and music). Latin was the 
foundation of all education in this period; al- 
ready the foundation of the Western Church, it 
became the language of politics and administra- 
tion, the one common denominator among vari- 
ous languages of the empire! Some young nobles 


undoubtedly found little Bleasure or value in 


— M € e s 


The Setting © 37 


schooling, preferring education in the manly 
arts of hunting and warfare, but others would 
someday become counts and abbots and royal 
agents. These nobles would pass on their respect 
for learning to their peers, their subjects, and 
their descendants. 


Charlemagne’s Palaces 


As we have seen, King Charles, like other no- 
bles, had to travel from one residence to another 
to make sure that his lands were being properly 
administrated. Carolingian nobles also traveled 
for a more practical reason: Apart from booty 
taken during military campaigns and gifts from 
the king or other aristocrats, a noble's only in- 
come was from the food and goods produced by 
his estates. In order to efficiently use these re- 
sources, he had to travel from estate to estate to 
consume them. 

Charlemagne, for example, had many royal 
palaces on his estates through the empire. Some 
were probably little more than elaborate hunt- 
ing lodges. Others were substantial country es- 
tates like Roman villas. Still others were grand 
complexes on the scale of palaces of the late Ro- 
man Empire. Run by a royal representative who 
supervised the estate's peasants and artisans, 
such larger palaces were designed to receive the 
king and his entourage for weeks or months at a 
time, They contained large chapels for religious 
ceremonies and accommodations sufficient to 
house hunting nobles, to shelter general assem- 
blies and councils, or to serve as a staging area 
for a military expedition. 

The only palace building still standing is the 
royal chapel at Aix-la-Chapelle (now known as 
Aachen). This chapel was based on the famous 
Roman church in Ravenna built by Emperor Jus- 
tinian. On the ground floor is the altar of Mary, 
where palace servants gathered for services. The 
second level was a gallery with a royal throne 
opposite the altar of Christ; the king and nobles 
would gather on this gallery. Above all was the 
image of God, a gold mosaic on the ceiling of the 
dome. 

Charlemagne meant the palace at Aix to be 
the New Rome, a symbol of the Frankish Em- 
pire's inheritance of the splendor, culture, and 
power of the old Roman empire. To this end, he 


38 * Chapter Four 


imported many examples of Roman art and stat- 
uary to decorate the palace. On the ruins of an 
ancient Roman bath house, he had a new bath 
house built using the natural hot springs of Aix. 
The palace domestic residences of family, 
friends, and entourage and the barracks of the 
emperor' elite royal cavalry troops were more 
modest timber buildings. 


The King's Authority 


In Charlemagne's Empire, interest in educa- 
tion was not simply aesthetic. He had the practi- 
cal desire to improve the efficiency of his 
administration. Through the schools he was 
teaching the future counts and administrators of 
the empire to read and write Latin and to under- 
stand laws and capitularies with the intent to 
centralize government administration. 

Charlemagne's Empire was divided into coun- 
ties. For each county a graf or count was ap- 
pointed by the king. The counts appointed the 
local lords beneath them with the approval of 
the king; counts and local lords alike swore 
oaths of loyalty to the king. Within the counties, 
answerable only to the king, counts had ulti- 
mate authority as a royal deputy with wide- 
ranging powers. Each count was responsible for 
publishing the king's wishes to the local freemen 
and for collecting taxes and tributes. Some of 
these taxes were forwarded to the king; other 
revenues were retained by the count to carry out 
public works. The count assembled the local 
troops for campaigns or in local emergency mus- 
ters and led them in combat. The count also pre- 
sided over the local law court and administered 
justice. In return for his services, the count was 
awarded one-third of local taxes and court fines; 
he also often received gifts of lands from royal 
estates within his county or from remote regions 
of the empire. A count's office was granted for 
life; if he were competent, the count could ex- 
pect his title to be handed on to a son or a mem- 
ber of his family. 

In theory, the counts were to be extensions of 
the king's authority and concern for the welfare 
of the people. In practice, the counts and nobles 
were a landed class eager to increase their wealth 
and power. Where the interests of the nobles and 
the commoners conflicted, they of course fa- 


vored the nobles. The nobles also competed 
with one another for land, power, and wealth. 

Initially Charlemagne's successful yearly cam- 
paigns provided him with abundant lands and 
wealth that he could distribute to encourage and 
assure the loyalty of his counts. But as conquests 
became difficult and newly acquired lands far- 
ther flung, and as the strain of administering and 
protecting the lands already conquered grew, 
the empire's needs outstripped its resources for 
rewarding loyalty to the king. The problem was, 
simply stated, that land was the source of all 
wealth in Frankish Empire. To purchase the loy- 
alty of his counts, the king had to reward them 
with land, but once the counts had received the 
land, they held the power of the land. Only 
while the king could continue to hold out the 
promise of reward could he ensure the coopera- 
tion of his nobles. 

When the king no longer had new lands and 
booty to reward his counts, ambitious nobles 
had to prey on one another, on the lands of the 
Church and monasteries, on the lands of the free 
peasants, and on the wealth and power of the 
king. As power tended to accumulate in the 


the pALAC€ 
OF CDARLEMAGNE 
AT ALx—LA—cbapeLle 


. Palace Chapel 
Porch flanked with 
iwo turrets 
Atrium 

- Small lateral basilicas 
Aula palatina 
Porch above the 
judgement hall 
Barracks of the milites 
(royal corridor above) 
Probable location 
of palace 
Baths 


counts, there was no central authority or system 
adequate to hold the center together. In later 
Medieval periods, the Church and the feudal 
system were to provide the necessary centralized 
hierarchical authority for a stable culture, but 
these institutions were only just beginning to de- 
velop during the Carolingian period. 

The problems of administrating the huge, un- 
wieldy Frankish Empire were almost insur- 
mountable. Only through Charlemagne's 
personal energy and inspiration did he manage 
to hold it together during his lifetime. After his 
death, his son Louis divided the empire among 
his own sons. The empire collapsed into numer- 
ous pieces, each fighting with one another for 
dominance. 


The Social Classes 


The Franks divided themselves into three ba- 
sic social groups: those who fought, those who 
prayed, and those who toiled. Those who 
toiled—the artisans and peasant freemen, serfs, 
and slaves who worked the land—were gener- 
ally despised by those who fought—the noble 


The Setting #39 


warrior class, Those who prayed were generally 
judged, not according to their piety and learn- 
ing, but according to their wealth and noble or 
common birth. 


The Noble Warrior 


There was no clear definition of nobility for 
the Franks. Though the most powerful Franks 
were “gentlemen” from established families like 
the Arnulfings (Charlemagne's family), the Eti- 
chonids, Rorgonids, the Widonids, the Girarids, 
the Unrochids, the price of access to the noble 
classes seemed to be the price of a warrior's mili- 
tary kit. The required gear for a Carolingian 
warrior—horse, body armor, greaves, shield, 
lance, sword, and scabbard— costs as much as 
20 oxen. During the years of Charlemagnes suc- 
cessful conquests, a warrior might always hope 
to rise in station by amassing booty from a mili- 
tary campaign or by winning the friendship and 
patronage of more powerful nobles through 
feats in battle. There were very few merchants 
or artisans who could hope for such a rapid gain 
in wealth or power through the exercise of their 


FLOW OF AUTDORITY 
FROM CHURCH AMO STATE 


KING pope 


COUNT — mishop 


Ya BRIER? 


The King appointed the counts. who appointed 
the local lords. 

The bishops and abbots were consecrated by the 
Church through the Pope and his ecclesiastical 
hierarchy and answerable to them in doctrine and 
Church affairs, but they were chasen by the king 
and the counts. The selection of the parish priest. 
nominally the privilege of the bishop. was often 
determined by the local lord who protected and 
provided for the parish 


40 * Chapter Four 


peacetime skills. The warrior class was also eligi- 
ble to marry into one of the wealthy established 
families. 

By tradition and according to Christian doc- 
trine, the noble classes were supposed to protect 
the weak. In fact, most nobles scorned common 
folk and did not respect elevated folk (priest or 
lay) of inferior birth. Rich noblemen were often 
greedy for more privilege and wealth, securing 
military exemptions in exchange for gifts of 
lands, and taking land and wealth from the 
Church and the peasants at every opportunity. 
For example, the nobles often employed the tax- 
es they collected from the peasants not for the 
welfare of the people, but for the benefit of their 
own holdings. The tithes granted to the parish 
priests and their churches were often diverted by 
nobles for their own use. 

Land was wealth, and nobles were rich in 
land. Each noble had his own domain, or land 
holdings. The wealthiest nobles might own 
many domains scattered throughout the empire. 
Charlemagne, for example, owned over 1,000 
private domains. Control over the products of a 
domain gave the noble economic power, and 
leadership and sponsorship of the warriors on 
his domains gave the noble military power. 

In a noble family, the father or paternal uncle 
wielded the power. A family in theory often 
owed its authority over its holdings to the king, 
but in fact control of the holdings remained in 
the family and were divided among the surviv- 
ing male heirs. Since Frankish nobles cherished 
illegitimate children as well as the legitimate 
children, and since illegitimate children and sons 
by marriage had rights of inheritance by Frank- 
ish custom, the division of a noble inheritance 
upon a family head's death was a common prob- 
lem. Siblings often fought bitterly for a larger 
portion of the inheritance. The themes of fidelity 
and betrayal, of family members switching alli- 
ances to suit circumstances and self-interest, are 
familiar elements in the histories of Frankish no- 
ble families. 

The noble classes were hardly better educated 
or refined than the peasantry. Most noblemen 
were schooled only in the arts of war and hunt- 
ing; the supervision and administration of their 
land holdings they left to their church-educated 
clerks and stewards. 


The dissolution of tribal bonds had eroded 
communal values, and the Christian virtues and 
feudalism had yet to replace them as ideals. 
“Might makes right” and “more is better” were 
the guiding principles of the noble classes in Car- 
olingian times, with few exceptions. Charle- 
magne himself and trusted courtiers and 
advisors, such as Alcuin, seemed to be excep- 
tions to these ruthless principles. 

A good player character will emulate these 
positive examples, while stereotypically crude, 
violent, impious, and greedy land barons will 
serve as excellent antagonists in historical Caro- 
lingian campaigns, 

Following are a few NPC noble stereotypes 
the DM might use. 

The Prosperous Baron: Splendidly dressed, 
stylishly overweight, surrounded by well- 
dressed friends, retainers, and clerks, he is none- 
theless uncouth in speech and action, 
unself-consciously greedy and grasping, fierce 
and direct in person, quick to rage, and violent 
when frustrated. 

The Grizzled Veteran: An aging warrior, 
grown wealthy and powerful in land and booty 
from campaigning, eager to marry his daughters 
into more genteel families and to provide his 
sons with abundant lands and wealth. A true 
and noble patriot and partisan of the Franks and 
a loyal servant of the king. Initially naive and 
pliable in the hands of scheming barons, but 
forthright and honorable when true villainy is 
revealed to him. 

The Young Ambitious Warrior: A younger 
son intent on gaining his own wealth and privi- 
lege through excellence in warfare. Contemptu- 
ous of learning and churchmen, he trusts in his 
sword and his fellow cavalrymen. A useful tool 
for good or evil according to his masters and 
mentors. 

The Scholar: Indifferent or clumsy in the art 
of war, he prefers the intellectual challenges of 
history, politics, or the Church. He admires the 
lost civilization of ancient Rome and looks for- 
ward to a refinement of culture among the 
Franks. A comfortable student, he develops no 
strong principles or beliefs until confronted with 
a crisis such as war, cruelty, or injustice that 
touches him or his loved ones personally. 


Peasants and Slaves 


Four-fifths of the population were rural folk. 
Many of them were free farmers on small land- 
holdings of 12-16 hectares (30-40 acres). A free- 
holder owning four or more manses (dwellings) 
was directly responsible for military service, and 
thus was, by our definition, noble; less fortunate 
freemen were permitted to combine resources 
and pay for the support of a warrior. On large 
domains, part of the land was worked by tenant 
farmers; the other part was the master's reserve, 
worked by serfs and slaves for the master's ex- 
clusive benefit. 

Six days a week, the rural peasant worked 
hard by day according to the different rhythms 
of the seasons. He cultivated the fields and vege- 
table gardens, tended the domestic animals, 
made and repaired farm and household tools 
and implements, and cut wood for hearth fires 
and for charcoal. He alio performed public 
works, such as road Be rues forest clear- 
ing, or bridge building at the direction of the lo- 
cal lord. We have few clues as to how they spent 
their "leisure" time, but we may suppose they 
gathered with family and friends around 
hearthfires, ate and drank, gossiped and griped, 
swapped fantastic tales of heroes and wizards, 
and loved, laughed, and suffered much as we do 
today. Sundays and religious feast days were 
holidays with no labor. Peasants were obligated 
to attend Mass each Sunday as ordered by king 
and bishop, but the services might be short and 
rudimentary. Afterward the church might serve 
as a community center for fellowship, singing, 
or dancing. 

The following are a few serviceable peasant 
stereotypes for NPCs encountered. 

The Rabelaisian Peasant: Coarse and boister- 
ously cheerful, extravagant and lewd. He ac- 
cepts the hardships of peasant life with crude 
energy and enjoys the pleasures of food, dance, 
song, and flesh to their fullest. 

The Salt-of-the-Earth Peasant: Naturally 
good-hearted, generous, and hard-working. He 
takes pleasure in his labors; loves his family and 
friends; and enjoys conversation, food, song, 
and drink, but in moderation and dignity. He ex- 
emplifies the Christian virtues in a naive, in- 
stinctive fashion despite his ignorance. 


The Setting * 41 


The Peasant Weasel: Mean-spirited, envious 
of other's good fortune, and desirous of gaining 
wealth and influence at the expense of his neigh- 
bor. He is never happy with what he has, blames 
his problems on others, and works his petty re- 
venges on the world by devious and dishonest 
means. 

The Brutish Toady Peasant: Strong, cruel, and 
sadistic. He does the dirty work of villains for 
coin and the pleasure of pushing others around. 


Priests and Monks 


Though in some ways priests and monks 
formed a separate class from the nobles and 
peasants, actually in Carolingian times they 
were little more than two subclasses of the noble 
and peasant classes. Noble churchmen enjoyed 
the same benefits of land, wealth, and privilege 
that lay nobles enjoyed, yet suffered few restric- 
tions for their status as churchmen. With the de- 
cline of the Roman empire, there was a rapid 
decline in educational standards, doctrine, and 
pastoral duties among the clergy. In effect, the 
high clergy became indistinguishable from the 
ordinary large landowners. Though the clergy 
had always been permitted to acquire wealth to 
increase the Church's capital, to embellish the 
liturgy, and to aid the disinherited, they had 
originally been bound by many restrictions of 
poverty and propriety that set them apart from 
the secular aristocracy. Now, in Charlemagne's 
time, prelates and abbots engaged in blood 
feuds, went hunting, fought with the warriors 
on campaign, kept women, and established dy- 
nasties through which episcopal lands were 
handed down from father to son. 

Though Charlemagne attempted to establish 
and maintain higher standards for education 
and performance of the liturgy, he did not at- 
tempt to reform the secularization of the clergy. 
In fact, he continued to appoint bishops and ab- 
bots as it suited him and his noble advisors, 
though in theory a bishop ought to have been 
elected by his clergy and flock, while an abbot 
ought to have been chosen by the monks of his 
abbey. He cautioned bishops and abbots to 
show restraint in hunting, drinking, and wom- 
anizing, but that's as far as it went. Essentially, 
Charlemagne decided it was more important for 


42 * Chapter Four 


the security and coherence of the Empire to have 
a loyal class of noble churchmen with modest or 
doubtful religious credentials than to challenge 
and risk losing the support of a large and influ- 
ential landholding class. 

The Palace School accepted promising stu- 
dents of humble origins as well as young noble- 
men. From time to time, Charlemagne was 
proud to appoint deserving men of lowly origin 
to high positions over the protests of nobles who 
coveted such profitable positions for them- 
selves. Once placed in high office, however, 
even a sincere and virtuous priest might suffer 
temptations of wealth and power, and he might 
find it necessary to adopt a gentlemanly stand- 
ard of living in order to maintain the respect of 
his ecclesiastical peers. 

At the other end of the scale, the parish priest 
was often a man of limited qualifications. Most 
churches and chapels were built on lands set 
aside by the local lord for such purposes; the 
land and the church remained the property of 
the lord, and as such the lord exercised the right 
to appoint the parish priest and direct the man- 
ner of his service. Peasants were required to tithe 
1/10 of their personal revenues for the upkeep of 
the parish, to be collected by priests in coin or 
kind. Instead of giving the parish an indepen- 
dent source of income, these proceeds were of- 
ten confiscated by Church and lay proprietors. 
A parish priest remained essentially a household 
servant; he would, of course, say Mass, but he 
was as likely to be required to serve at the lord's 
table or to lead the hounds on a hunt. 

Such a position was not very attractive to any 
self-respecting, educated man of ability. The 
lord might simply choose a serf who could not 
resist and have him consecrated by a coopera- 
tive bishop (usually an accommodating member 
of the privileged class); occasionally the village 
idiot or another equally useless person would be 
chosen since he had no other practical value to 
the landlord. 

As a result, parish priests were often men of 
doubtful quality. They were usually illiterate, 
knew little or no Latin, and might have only a 
vague or grotesque notion of Church doctrine 
and ritual. They probably lived much like the 
members of their flocks, coarse and cheerful, 
drinking, carousing, and cursing like any lay- 


man. A clever, enterprising, and unprincipled 
parish priest might believe that worldly values 
outweighed spiritual values and make himself 
modestly wealthy by skimming money intended 
for the upkeep of the parish. 

Abbots and monks, though influenced as 
much as bishops and parish priests by their no- 
ble or humble origins, probably were better edu- 
cated in general and more familiar with Church 
doctrine and ritual. Monasteries and abbeys 
were perhaps just other types of landed estates, 
but they were generally better organized, better 
run, and better endowed, with consequent bene- 
fits for their members. 

Player character bishops, priests, abbots, and 
monks should be of exceptionally fine Christian 
virtue. This is particularly true if they enjoy the 
benefits of the priest class in a historical cam- 
paign, for the spiritual gifts of healing and divine 
protection should be granted only to those who 
have proved themselves worthy of them. Un- 
principled and worldly characters would be bet- 
ter served to be of the warrior or thief classes. 
And how should we account for the use of 
priestly powers in villainous priests? Such 
powers must be understood as deriving from 
dark, pagan, unholy sources that all virtuous 
characters would spurn. 

The following are a few serviceable priest and 
monk stereotypes for NPCs encountered. 

The Worldly Bishop or Abbot: He hunts, eats, 
and drinks like a landed lord. His knowledge of 
Church ritual and doctrine is vague, but he is 
skilled at extracting income from his lands and 
from tithes meant for the bishopric or monas- 
tery. At best, he is simply a greedy, self-inter- 
ested, self-centered noble like most other landed 
gentlemen; at worst he is a sinister, grasping vil- 
lain who conspires with other landed lords to 
steal from the king, competing nobles, the 
Church, and the peasantry to enhance his per- 
sonal wealth and privilege. 

The Earnest Servant of the Church: Of hum- 
ble blood, educated in a monastery or the Palace 
School, he observes the rules against hunting, 
warfare, wine, and women. He is a voice for 
mercy in the courts and a protector of fugitives 
and outlaws against harsh and unjust overlords. 
Of course, he is hated by the gentry. 

The Mendicant Friar: He journeys about the 


land, teaching the Gospel and Christian virtue in 
parables and sayings, accepting hospitality 
where he finds it or sleeping rough in the wilder- 
ness. He protects himself against outlaws and 
beasts with strength and wisdom, and he be- 
friends the poor and unfortunate regardless of 
the risks. 

The Weak, Ignorant, Well-Intentioned Priest: 
Made a parish priest by his lord for convenience, 
this priest does his best. He knows nothing of the 
Church or Christian doctrine, but he tries to 
help and protect his flock as best he can. He is 
scorned by the gentry and the high clergy and 
casually regarded by his peasant flock, but when 
a crisis comes, the peasants turn to him and the 
Church for help. 

The Unfrocked Priest or Monk: Cast out of 
the Church for insubordination, drunkenness, 
or lechery, this rascal poses as a man of God to 
gain confidences and hospitality. He may be a 
common thief or scoundrel or a more complex 
character, on the surface a man of deep faith and 
Christian virtue, but at heart cynical of the cor- 
rupt values of the Church. 


The Art of War 


The vitality and coherence of the Carolingian 
Empire depended on its military might and on 
the lands and booty gained from its wars. After 
Charlemagne's death, when the frontiers were 
remote, difficult to defend, and no longer ripe 
for conquest, the king could no longer reward 
loyal subjects with plunder and new lands. The 
Empire began to dissolve amidst the squabbles 
between greedy land barons. 

The Carolingian noble's most important pos- 
sessions were his horse, his sword, and his ar- 
mor. From youth, aristocrats trained in weapons 
and horseback riding and exercised their skills in 
mock combats and hunting. In almost every 
year of Charlemagne's reign, there was a general 
assembly in March or May in preparation for a 
military campaign. The promise of loot and rec- 
ognition in battle was the dream of every ambi- 
tious noble warrior. 

Heavy cavalry was the queen of battle. The 
king's personal guard was a small standing army 
comprised of elite troops known as scarae, small 
units of 50-100 heavy cavalrymen led by the 


OO I 


The Setting * 43 


king's sons. These young paladins were the most 
powerful, best-armed and -trained, and most 
mobile fighting units of Charlemagne's armies. 

The count of a region gathered and personally 
led the mounted troops of his own region; such 
units varied in size and quality. Perhaps regional 
infantry levies were also mustered, particularly 
in response to an immediate crisis, like a Viking 
raid, but we are not sure. 

The morale and discipline of Carolingian arm- 
ies was generally high, probably because of the 
consistent successes of Charlemagne's cam- 
paigns and because of the abundant opportuni- 
ties for plunder and personal advancement. 

About the actual composition of Charle- 
magne's armies we are ill informed. In addition 
to the heavy cavalry outfitted with helmet, mail 
body armor, greaves, shield, sword, scabbard, 
lance, and horse, there were probably a large 
number of lightly armed horsemen. This light 
cavalry fought without helmet, body armor, or 
sword; such men would probably have moved 
about the battlefield on horseback, then dis- 
mounted to fight with spear and shield or bow. 
We know even less about the role of infantry in 
Carolingian armies; presumably local militias 
with spear, shield, and bow might be mustered 
against Saxon or Viking raids. Perhaps foot 
archers played a significant part in eastern cam- 
paigns where horses were more scarce. 

Something must also be said about the arms 
and armor of the empire's allies and enemies. 
The Arabs of Muslim Spain probably fought 
primarily as infantry and light mounted skir- 
mishers, with much use of archery. The Bretons 
had very effective heavy cavalry armed with 
sword, heavy spears, and light javelins; they al- 
so used horse armor. In Aquitaine, southern 
France, and Italy, urban infantry levies were 
used to defend city walls. Gascons and Basques 
fought primarily as infantry or as light cavalry 
skirmishers. Armed with lances and Chinese- 
style bows, Avar armored cavalry used cast-iron 
stirrups and lamellar horse armor. The Avars al- 
so introduced Europe to advanced techniques of 
siege warfare from the Orient. The Saxons, fero- 
cious foes in the first part of Charlemagne's 
reign, then later allies against the Slavs and 
Danes, fought almost exclusively as infantry 
armed with spear, sword, and axe and were pro- 


44 * Chapter Four 


tected by little armor. The Slavs fought as infan- 
try armed with shield, spear, and bow. The 
Viking raiders had infantry with shield and 
leather or padded armor, and chain byrnies and 
helmets for the wealthiest; they fought with 
broadsword, spear, seax (a type of short sword), 
and bow. They could use their longships as 
transport to strike swiftly and withdraw before 
effective resistance could be mustered. 

Military campaigns and defensive garrisons in 
the Spanish Marches and Saxony are good set- 
tings for historical campaigns. Coastal defenses 
against the Danes and other Northmen are an- 
other possible campaign element. A plausible 
concept for a player character party is a small 
group of spies and scouts sent in advance of 
Charlemagne's armies to study enemy defenses. 


Faith and Superstition 
The Western Church 


It is hard to know what people really believed 
twelve centuries ago, and harder still to general- 
ize about the different personal faiths of millions 
of people in Charlemagne's time. Nonetheless, it 
appears that Church ritual and superstition were 
more widely accepted than the Christian ethic 
and spirit. A jeweled reliquary containing the 
bones of a saint was a more powerful, concrete, 
and accessible symbol of religious faith than the 
cross symbolizing Christ's sacrifice and redemp- 
tion of man. 


Christian Ideals 


As mentioned earlier, the worldly higher cler- 
gy and the ignorant parish priests were poor ve- 
hicles for preaching by word and example the 
higher spiritual values of the Western Church. 
Copies of the Gospels and commentaries were 
rare and valuable, and literacy was extremely 
limited; at best most folk would have had to rely 
on the sermons and homilies of priests with 
doubtful educational qualifications. Some 
points could be made clear and simple: Baptism 
was essential to salvation, and salvation was es- 
sential for gaining everlasting life after death and 
avoiding eternal torment in the fires of Hell. 
Members of the Faith were taught to embrace 
the Seven Virtues: Faith, Hope, Charity (these 


three called “the Christian virtues”), Justice, For- 
titude, Prudence, and Temperance (called “the 
natural virtues”). They were also told to avoid 
the Seven Deadly Sins: Pride, Covetousness, 
Lust, Anger, Gluttony, Envy, and Sloth. 

In spite of the corruption and worldliness of 
its ecclesiastical hierarchy and the poor qualifi- 
cations and education of the typical priest, the 
Church was a powerful symbol of aspiration to 
higher moral and ethical virtues. Perhaps the ca- 
thedral and monastery communities were the 
best example of the Christian virtues in action, 
with their dedication to charity and education, 
the food, shelter, hospitals, and orphanages. 
Church members of high and low birth alike 
were reminded by the clergy to do good works, 
and many wealthy nobles must have been sin- 
cere in their generous endowments of churches, 
monasteries, and relics. 

Finally, Charlemagne's legend features many 
anecdotes that tell of his piety and his preference 
for earnest, well-educated clergy over greedy, 
ill-tutored priests. Charlemagne's numerous mil- 
itary campaigns and services to the Pope and 
Church were presented as crusades to extend the 
Faith and chastise the pagan. Whether or not 
Charlemagne actually took any effective action 
to reform the clergy, he nonetheless did much to 
add elements of the Christian ethic to tribal cus- 
tomary law. In the later Middle Ages, Charle- 
magne became a symbol of the pious and 
virtuous Christian monarch who upholds law 
and justice, protects the Church, defends and 
advances the Faith, and rules in accord with 
Christian principles. 


Ritual and Superstition 


The uneducated folk were easily awed and 
swayed by the sensational appeals of magic, su- 
perstition, and the supernatural. On one hand 
they were moved by the positive forces repre- 
sented in the Faith: angels, saints, relics, vision- 
ary hermits and ascetics, wandering priests, and 
impassioned preachers. At the same time they 
were equally fascinated by the malevolent forces 
identified by the Church: devils, demons, ma- 
lign spirits, deformity, madness, exorcism, tor- 
ture, and inquisition. 

Daunted by the malign influences in the world 


around him, the Christian appealed to the aid of 
angels and saints and miracles to strengthen his 
faith. "Protect me, Blessed Mother and all the 
Saints!" The veneration of saints suited the older 
pagan traditions of sacred sites and nature spir- 
its, magic, and ritual. For many the pagan pan- 
theons were simply replaced by a new 
assortment of intimate and personal saints, an- 
gels, and other divine personalities subordinate 
to the abstract and impersonal deity of the West- 
ern Church. 

The veneration of holy relics was another ad- 
aptation of Church doctrine to Germanic tradi- 
tions of worship. Holy relics could protect 
against natural, human, or demonic afflictions, 
cure disease, or repel invaders. Relics were used 
to consecrate churches and were regarded as val- 
ued possessions by nobles. Pilgrims made long 
journeys just to touch or view a glittering reli- 
quary containing a fragment of a holy man's re- 
mains or soil soaked in a saint's blood. 

Pilgrimages are further manifestations of the 
faithful searching for supernatural wealth. 
Those of modest means might make short trips 
to local churches and holy sites to visit famous 
relics. More wealthy persons might travel to vis- 
it saints' tombs, the holy precincts and cata- 
combs in Rome, or the most venerated sites in 
the Holy Land. Pilgrims might travel hoping to 
find or purchase a sacred relic, to fulfill a vow 
sworn before God, or to do a penance demand- 
ed by the Church to expiate a great sin. 

The power of holy ground and sacred enclo- 
sures is another manifestation of the supernatu- 
ral protective power of the Church. Worshipers 
entered chapels and cathedrals as though they 
were portals to another world. Censers and per- 
fumes filled the silent, reverent air; bells were 
rung to chase away demons and disorderly per- 
sons; and lamps were lit to triumph over dark- 
ness. (See "Consecrated Areas" in Chapter 3.) 

The dark supernatural forces that faced the 
Christian were terrifying beyond comprehen- 
sion. The Devil and the Legions of Hell were not 
simply powerful monsters that could rend your 
flesh; the real terror of these evil spirits was their 
desire to steal your immortal soul and your 
promise of salvation and everlasting life. The 
Prince of Darkness was a devious creature, ca- 
pable of assuming any shape, of crafting skillful 


The Setting * 45 


` M 
IIN) 
"P" 


ONAN 


46 * Chapter Four 


" 


MA 4 / A a ” 
y/ i, M | Lap. AL ml 
22 — 
A0 M 


mir ra E íì NN 


| Wi a" if | F y 


rr 


arguments, and of cloaking his evil intent in 
honorable words. The Devil's desires were sim- 
ple: to fill Hell with souls and to torment the 
sinners. 

In a historical Carolingian campaign, any hint 
of sorcery or witchcraft is immediately and un- 
questionably evil in the eyes of the Western 
Church. Eighth- and ninth-century capitularies 
denounce all magicians, enchanters, diviners, 
dream interpreters, and fortune tellers. Pagan 
practices were punished severely; worshipers of 
springs, trees, or groves could be fined and 
barred from church services; burning the dead 
to ashes in pagan rites was punishable by death. 
People suspected of witchcraft, most often 
women, were believed to be able to induce love 
or hatred through potions; to provide protection 
and healing through amulets, herbal concoc- 
tions, and incantations; and to tell the future 
through auguries, card reading, dream interpre- 
tation, and other means. Astrology and reading 
portents in the heavens, oddly enough, was a 
more or less respectable art practiced by church- 
men, scholars, and historians. 

In legendary and fantasy campaigns, most 
sorcery and witchcraft is still seen as evil, but 
some sorcerers (Merlin, for example) may be 
viewed romantically as neutral or even good. 
Their supernatural powers may be interpreted as 
scientific or scholarly, or even divinely inspired, 
rather than diabolic. 


The Clergy 


After the fall of Rome, uneducated barbarian 
nobles became dependent on  literate, 
administration-skilled churchmen. Churches 
and bishops in major cities remained stable cen- 
ters of culture as surrounding regions declined 
from Roman levels of economy and govern- 
ment. Many nobles entered the Church and used 
its resources as an alternate route to wealth, 
land, and power; the temptations of worldly 
treasures eroded and corrupted the spiritual val- 
ues of the clergy. At the same time, abbeys and 
monasteries, though dependent on patronage, 
retained higher standards of learning and piety 
that could inspire later reforms. 

The organization of the Western Church was 
a strict hierarchy, requiring canonical and abso- 


lute obedience to superiors. At the top of the hi- 
erarchy was the Pope and his college of cardinals 
in Rome. Below the prelates in Rome were arch- 
bishops, and beneath them bishops, with each 
high priest responsible for church affairs within 
his jurisdiction. The parish priests answered di- 
rectly to the bishops. Monks were responsible to 
their superiors, abbots who reported to the 
heads of their monastic orders, who in turn re- 
ported to the Pope. In theory, even the king 
ruled by the grace of God and was subject to 
sanction through God's representative on Earth, 
the Pope; as such, in Carolingian times, treason 
had become a sin as well as a crime. 

However, as we have seen, the power and au- 
thority of the Church hierarchy was limited to 
Church doctrine and internal affairs in Carolin- 
gian times. The king, the counts, and the local 
lords were the economic masters of the Church 
hierarchy. Through control of the Church's in- 
come and of most appointments of archbishops, 
bishops, priests, and abbots, the king and his 
loyal noble supporters exerted great influence 
over the clergy in worldly affairs. Such influence 
might be exercised directly—by orders and de- 
mands backed by the explicit threat of armed 
force or confiscation sind or tithes. Or the 
influence might be more subtle and indirect —by 
withholding support for candidates for high ap- 
pointment or political maneuvering with secular 
and Church nobles to undermine a prelate's 
standing in the Church hierarchy. 


The Teutonic Pantheon 


The Saxons and pagan Franks probably wor- 
shiped a Teutonic pantheon similar to the Norse 
pantheon (see the Legends & Lore book), but 
sources for Germanic myths are unfortunately 
far more sparse and fragmentary than for the 
Norse. Woden (Odin) and Tiw (Tyr) were the 
gods of the noble and priestly classes. Woden 
was the magical priest-king, while Tiw repre- 
sented the law, society, and monarchy. Woden 
was the ruling and dominant cult. Woden's wife 
was Frija (Frigga). Donar (Thor) was the god of 
the warrior class. The Vanir, a group of gods in- 
cluding Frey, were the gods of fertility, peace, 
health, and welfare of the agricultural common 
folk. Loki, the trickster of Norse myth, appar- 


The Setting * 47 


ently does not figure in Teutonic myths. The 
Norns, or Weirds, were the masters of wyrd, or 
fate. Teutonic faeries appearing at the cradle 
might offer gifts or utter maledictions that 
would follow a character all its life, as happened 
with Ogier the Dane, a famous paladin of the 
Charlemagne legends. 

The Idisi or Waelcyrie (Valkyries) were dis- 
pensers of destiny to warriors. Recognized as 
swan-maidens as well as the familiar helmeted 
goddesses mounted on flying steeds and brand- 
ishing flaming spears, these female divine spirits 
gave victory to one side or another in battle. 
They also determined who should perish and 
who should be admitted to Woden’s Hall in Val- 
halla. One myth associated with the Idisi is 
found in the Neibelungenlied: When a swan- 
maiden shed her feathery garment, a man who 
succeeded in stealing that plumage might force 
her to obey his will and to help gain victory in 
war. (The swanmay in Monstrous Compendium 
II may be readily adapted as a swan-maiden 
form of the Idisi.) 


Pagan Myths 


Supernatural Spirits: The visible world of na- 
ture to the Teutonic pagans was inhabited by an 
invisible world of supernatural spirits. These 
spirits, also known sometimes as “elves” or 
“goblins,” were conceived as assuming human- 
oid forms, sometimes exquisitely beautiful, 
sometimes horribly shrunken, deformed, or gro- 
tesque. Some of these spirits were benign, others 
inconceivably malevolent and malignant. 

Many familiar creatures found in the Mon- 
strous Compendia are based on spirit creatures 
from Teutonic myth—for example, nixies are 
based on Germanic water-sprites. Our accounts 
of pagan myth are fragmentary, partly because 
these traditions are so old, partly because the 
myths were either not written down or the ac- 
counts have not survived, and partly because 
the Church energetically attempted to suppress 
these pagan beliefs. So, rather than limit DMs to 
the fragments of what is known about Teutonic 
spirit beings, here is a scheme for designing your 
own unique spirits that will be consistent with 
the mythic traditions, but will appear as myste- 
rious and otherworldly to your PCs as the Teu- 


—— uu ——_—_—_—__—____—————Í —— 


48 * Chapter Four 


tonic myths must have seemed to Christianized 
Franks. 

First, name your spirit. Use one of the follow- 
ing schemes: 

* [Name of a natural feature]-man, -woman, 
or -sprite (e.g., Waterman, Oakwoman, or 
Firesprite) 

* [Color associated with a natural feature or 
process] Man, Woman, or Maiden (e.g., Green 
Man, Blue Woman, or Red Maiden) 

* [Father/Uncle/Brother or Mother/Sister/ 
Maiden] [Name of a natural feature, season, or 
elemental force] (e.g., Father Forest, Brother 
Autumn, Storm Maiden) 


Next, imagine the personality of your spirit as 
the personification of the natural feature or 
process listed in its name. For example, a winter 
personality might be cold and cruel, a babbling 
brook might be soothing and restful, and a fire 
might speak with a hissing, popping voice and 
be greedy for things to destroy. The alignment of 
the personality may vary according to your 
whim; a field of wild wheat may be golden and 
generous with its gift of grain, or sinister and 
greedy for blood sacrifice to make its soil more 
fertile. As a guideline, think of spirits as bush- 
league gods with all the vanity, imperiousness, 
and inhuman eccentricity of personality associ- 
ated with immortal beings but little of the power 
of real gods. 

Finally, design the game characteristics of 
your spirit. Each spirit should be a unigue crea- 
tion, but they typically have the following fea- 
tures: 

* Armor class of 0 or better 

* Immunity to nonmagical weapons or magi- 
cal weapons with less than +2 bonus 

* High intelligence 

* [mmunity to many spells and magical ef- 
fects 

* Ability of instantaneous travel to the Other 
World (a distant plane not accessible by PCs 
without knowledge of travel in Faerie); spirits 
may come and go as they please and cannot be 
easily threatened or coerced by mortals 

* Magical attack forms, such as sleep, paraly- 
sis, fear, geas, etc. 

* Magical powers, such as healing, limited 
wish, commune, and so on, which are available 


by making offerings and paying respect to the 
spirit at its sacred site (spring, tree, grove, etc.) 

* Demands for offerings that must be satis- 
fied before the spirit will aid a petitioner 

* Alignments vary, and the price of worship 
varies according to alignment (for example, a 
good or neutral spirit may simply require pro- 
tection of the site and sacrifices of suitable trea- 
sures; evil or chaotic spirits may demand blood 
sacrifices or dark deeds performed) 


The spirits you create should usually be asso- 
ciated with a specific site, perhaps a natural fea- 
ture like a pool, ancient oak or grove of 
hemlocks, a massive rock outcrop, a deep cave, 
or a field cultivated with grain for many genera- 
tions. Local pagans will have old tales concern- 
ing the site and strange events occurring there. If 
pagan practices are still common, some locals 
may still worship these spirits; if most local folk 
are converted to the Church, or at least intimi- 
dated from pagan practices by the harsh laws 
against such, the significance of the sites and 
their associated spirits may be forgotten or 
known only to the old folk and secret wor- 
shipers of the Old Ways. In historical cam- 
paigns, PCs should be terrified and threatened 
by pagan spirits. They will typically wish to 
cleanse the site of what they perceive to be evil 
demons. In legendary and fantasy campaigns, 
characters may have a more romantic fascina- 
tion with and tolerance for enchanted sites and 
magical beings without necessarily endangering 
their souls. 

Occasionally these pagan spirits are tricked 
by faithful Christians into performing services 
or useful deeds. For example, there is a tale of an 
evil giant spirit who offered to erect a church, 
but only at the price of human sacrifice. A clever 
saintly man found a way to outwit the spirit, the 
church was built, and the spirit had to abandon 
the site forever. 

Elves and Dwarves: In historical campaigns, 
"elves" is just a general term for the Teutonic na- 
ture spirits mentioned earlier. In legendary and 
fantasy campaigns, however, "elves" and 
"dwarves" are specific types of otherworldly 
creatures of the world of Faerie. The world of 
Faerie and its inhabitants are more properly the 
subject of later chivalric periods, and they aren't 


covered in this supplement. However, since Fa- 
erie and a number of faerie enchantresses play 
important roles in the later legends of Charle- 
magne, here are a few notes to guide DMs who 
wish to add faerie adventures to their legendary 
Carolingian campaigns. 

The faeries, or fays, of the Charlemagne tales 
are usually female enchantresses and sorceresses. 
They typically appear to be exquisitely beautiful 
women, but they may actually be wizened crones 
concealed by their magic. Some are sinister and 
scheming—Alcina, Morgan le Fay, and Falerina, 
for instance; others, like Logistilla, may aid mor- 
tals against the wiles of the wicked fays. 

The scheming faeries usually have but one 
purpose in mind: to capture and ensorcel virtu- 
ous knights. The captive knights become so be- 
sotted with the timeless love, luxury, and leisure 
of Faerieland that they forget their paramours 
and perilous quests completely. And when Al- 
cina tires of her latest knight conquest, she will 
turn him into a tree to keep him out of trouble; 
she has a whole grove of former knights close at 
hand. A faerie enchantress may have in her serv- 
ice a host of monstrous guardians, beasts, gi- 
ants, and warrior-wizards to guard her 
stronghold. She can usually summon a variety 
of beasts and horrors to her aid. 

In game terms, a faerie queen may be repre- 
sented by a high-level elven wizard with power- 
ful conjuration/summoning, enchantment/ 
charm, and illusion/phantasm spells and magi- 
cal items. Her monstrous guardians may be rep- 
resented by any sort of grotesque humanoids, 
beasts, or giants. Her retainers may be repre- 
sented by multi-class elven characters (e.g., 
fighter-mage or fighter-mage-thief with conjura- 
tion/summoning, enchantment/charm, and il- 
lusion/phantasm spells) outfitted with magical 
items and enchanted mounts and animal com- 
panions such as hawks and hounds. Usually 
these faerie queens are far too powerful and 
skillful of enchanters to be defeated in combat, 
even by the greatest knights who ever lived. In- 
stead, rescuers must rely on wits and tricks, and 
usually the aid and counsel of a friendly faerie or 
a sorcerer wise in the ways of faerie lore. 

The faerie queen's domain is a palace sur- 
rounded by gardens, forests, and natural barri- 
ers, such as mountains, lakes, rivers, and 


The Setting * 49 


oceans. This domain is located in the world of 
Faerie, an alternate Prime Material plane. Not 
even the sorcerers and wizards of the tales seem 
to know how to travel to the world of Faerie. 
Seldom do faerie beings venture out into our real 
world, but sometimes humans may stray or be 
lured into Faerie through bridges. Bridges into 
Faerie may take many forms and may or may 
not be attended by faeries or guarded by marvel- 
ous or monstrous beings. 

Faeries are also known to appear at the birth 
of great heroes, bringing blessing and prophecies 
about their futures. For example, at the birth of 
Ogier the Dane, six faeries appeared and gave 
him a brave, strong heart; opportunity, skill, 
and strength; fairness of speech; nobility of 
action; courtesy and kindness; and compassion. 
The sixth gift was brought by none other than 
Morgan le Fay, Queen of Avalon; she foretold 
that Ogier should one day visit Avalon and sit at 
the table with King Arthur and his heroes in 
eternal summerland. 

The dwarves we encounter in the tales (like 
the Dwarf Brunello, the thief-sorcerer from 
whom Bradamante steals the Ring of Invisibili- 
ty) may simply be grotesque humans of normal 
birth—usually short, deformed hunchbacks 
who have big heads, pale faces, and long beards. 
They may also be exceptionally ugly faerie be- 
ings exiled from the world of Faerie; though 
their sorcerous talents are too feeble to compete 
in the world of Faerie, here in our world even 
their modest magical talents give them an ad- 
vantage over mortal beings. Even in a historical 
campaign, superstition might cause folk to 
imagine that any short, deformed normal man 
skilled in metalcraft or stonework was using fa- 
erie powers to enhance his products. 

DMs interested in adding faeries and 
Faerieland to their Carolingian legendary or fan- 
tasy campaign will find ideas in Chapter 6 and in 
the various Charlemagne chivalric romances as 
represented in Bulfinch's Mythology and Orlan- 
do Furioso. For Faerieland sources from other 
medieval traditions, also see the myth of Orfeo 
who rescued his wife from a faerie king's court, 
the tale of Thomas the Rhymer who is shown a 
path to Faerieland by a faerie gueen and bound 
to live beneath the earth with her for seven 
years, and the classic Faerie Oueen by Edmund 


50 * Chapter Four 


Spenser. Another possible source of Faerieland 
adventures is PC1, Tales of the Wee Folk, a 
D&D® sourcebook on faerie creatures that may 
be easily adapted to AD&D® game play. 


Carolingian Encounters 
Creatures of Nature 


The following beasts found in Monstrous 
Compendium Volumes I and Il are suitable for 
inclusion in historical Carolingian AD&D® 
game campaigns: 

Animal, Herd: The auroch was an aggressive 
variety of cattle found in the European wood- 
lands. The males of the herd always attacked 
when the herd was threatened. Wild deer were 
hunted for food and sport; use the entry for an- 
telope. 

Mammal, Small: Wild pigs, rabbits, and 
squirrels were hunted for sport and food. Bea- 
vers, ermines, minks, muskrats, and otters were 
hunted for their pelts. Hoards of mice were en- 
countered as supernatural plagues or divine por- 
tents. 

Rat: Like mice, swarms of rats were encoun- 
tered as supernatural plagues or divine portents. 

Whale and Giant Squid: These sea monsters 
may be encountered on ocean voyages. 

Horse, Pony, and Mule: Use these entries 
when a character's precious mount is threatened, 
for example, by wolves during a night encamp- 
ment. 

Stag, Giant: This powerful creature could be 
hunted as challenging and dangerous prey. A 
white stag (called a white hart) is a legendary 
symbol of purity—encountering it may be a su- 
pernatural or miraculous sign. To follow the 
hart is to seek something of special value or sig- 
nificance. To slay the hart is a tragic crime of 
pride and ignorance. 

Boar: Wild boars were hunted for sport and 
food. The ancient, terrible giant boar may be en- 
countered in isolated, lonely sections of the 
Great Forest. 

Elephant: There is only one elephant in Eu- 
rope: Abu Abbas, a gift to Charlemagne from 
Haroun-al-Raschid, the sultan of Baghdad. 
Since there is only one, it is inevitable that the 
PCs should encounter it. Charlemagne will want 
it returned unharmed, of course. 


Dogs: Wild dogs may be encountered in the 
wastes surrounding settled areas. War dogs may 
be encountered as watchdogs, hunting dogs, or 
war dogs controlled by antagonists. 

Wolf: The most commonly encountered dan- 
gerous animal of the European forests was the 
wolf. During harsh winters, they would even at- 
tack settlements. The legendary dire wolf is a 
rare and fearsome encounter limited to the deep- 
est wilderness regions. 

Bear: Black and brown bears were hunted for 
sport and food by the exceptionally brave and 
foolhardy. The ancient cave bear may still occa- 
sionally be encountered in the remote wilderness 
regions of your campaign. 

Men: Many varieties of men may be encoun- 
tered in the DM's Frankish lands and the 
frontiers. Adventurers may be retainers on a 
mission from their lord, military scouts, or de- 
serters from a military campaign. Bandits and 
brigands may be otherwise common peasants 
moonlighting as marauders, hardened profes- 
sional raiders, or honest peasants driven to out- 
lawry by greedy landlords. Barbarians include 
many peoples encountered in Saxon and Slavic 
lands. Berserkers may be encountered as 
Northmen and as better equipped and belliger- 
ent Saxons, Slavs, and Basques. Farmers, 
herders, and peasants may be encountered as lo- 
cal militias mustered to meet a crisis like a Vi- 
king or Saxon raid, or as dissatisfied folk in 
search of a more just lord. Small groups may be 
hunting on wastelands or poaching on the lord's 
domain. Gentry are lesser nobles traveling to 
visit their own domains, to visit other noble do- 
mains or the royal palaces, to answer a royal 
summons to council or war muster, or to act as 
royal messengers and emissaries. Knights are 
Frankish warriors in chain armor on medium 
horses; they may be on campaign, traveling to 
muster, patrolling their lord’s lands, or running 
errands for their lord. Merchant sailors and fish- 
ermen are found in rivers or North Sea ports. 
Pilgrims may be traveling to a local church or 
shrine, or they may be on a greater pilgrimage to 
a great cathedral city or Rome. Pirates as North- 
man raiders may be encountered along the 
North Sea coast or up wide rivers, such as the 
Rhine, Meuse, Seine, Garonne, and Rhone. 
Priests, often accompanied by guards, may be 


clerics or monks performing Church or state 
business, seeking precious relics from distant 
Rome, or carrying a raré manuscript from one 
abbey to another for copying. Slavers are 
marching the latest captives from the Slavic 
campaigns to Mediterranean seaports for sale to 
Muslims. Soldiers are more lightly armed Frank- 
ish warriors, traveling to campaign muster, re- 
turning heavily laden with plunder from 
campaign, or responding to Viking or Saxon 
raiders. 


Creatures of Legend 


The following beasts found in Monstrous 
Compendium Volumes I and II are suitable for 
inclusion in legendary or fantasy Carolingian 
campaigns. Also see "Pagan Myths" earlier in 
this chapter for other suitable legendary or fan- 
tasy encounters. 

Supernatural Spirits: The following AD&D® 
game creatures are similar to supernatural crea- 
tures from Teutonic pagan myths: nereids, 
pixies, brownies, dryads, sprites, nymphs, and 
nixies. 

Haunts and Heucuva: Most standard AD&D 
game undead are not suitable for Carolingian 
campaigns. The haunt and heucuva, however, 
are exceptionally fitted to the Carolingian set- 
ting. 

Lycanthropes: Do not use standard AD&D 
game lycanthropes. One example of a Teutonic 
werewolf legend features men who are forced to 
live in wolf form all but one day of each month; 
on that single day, the men may remove their 
skins and live as normal humans. A human who 
foolishly puts on the temporarily discarded wolf 
skin of such an enchanted creature then becomes 
a werewolf. For such a creature, use normal man 
entries for the man form and wolf entries for the 
wolf form; otherwise the werewolf has none of 
the magical abilities of the AD&D game's lycan- 
thrope. 

Legendary sorcerers like Malagigi and Mor- 
gan le Fay are always opening their magical 
books and summoning a variety of goblins, spir- 
its, and other magical creatures to do their bid- 
ding. Entries listed under homunculus, imp, and 
gargoyle may be used to represent these sum- 
moned magical beings. 


The Setting è 51 


CHAPTER 


Equipment and Treasure 


Money and Payments 


Characters purchasing goods or services in a 
Carolingian historical campaign will use the fol- 
lowing three types of payment: payment in 
kind, payment through barter, and payment in 
coin. 

Payment in Kind: Most payments in a Caro- 
lingian campaign would be payments in kind, 
where characters exchange services rather than 
money. Such payments must be arranged be- 
tween the DM and players through role-playing, 
with the DM the sole judge of the fairness and 
plausibility of such an exchange. 

An example of this would be a fighter asking a 
blacksmith to fashion chain armor. The fighter 
does not have the coin to pay for it, but he is a 
man of good reputation, a retainer of the local 
lord, and he has land granted for his use by the 
local lord. The fighter grants the blacksmith the 
right to the use of that land for ten years, which 
the blacksmith in turn might grant to a peasant. 
In return for the grant of the use of the land from 
the fighter, the blacksmith agrees to make the 
chain armor for the fighter. The blacksmith 
might also demand a service, such as traveling to 
a distant market to obtain high quality ore or a 
special tool. 

Payment by Barter: Barter is a straightforward 
swap of one type of goods for another. A peas- 
ant might offer a shoemaker 25 chickens and 10 
geese for a pair of shoes. When obtaining most 
goods by barter, simply use the value of the 
goods given in the Players Handbook as a 
guideline; at the DM's discretion, certain non- 
weapon proficiencies might give a character a 
chance to obtain a good deal (e.g., the cobbler 
proficiency might help get a good deal for 
shoes). 

When exchanging trade goods with for- 
eigners, a merchant adventurer can expect to 
gain value to compensate him for the expense 
and risk of his enterprise. As a guideline, mer- 
chants can sell export goods for 300% of their 
original purchase value when delivered to a 
trade port or in a foreign land. Further, while at 
a trade port or in a foreign land, they can buy 
import goods for 25% of their original value. 

Payment in Coin: The only Carolingian coin 
minted in quantity during this period was the 


pS 


52 * Chapter Five 


denier piece (dp), a silver coin weighing 1/20 
ounce. Two other types of coins might be en- 
countered in this period—Arabian and Byzan- 
tine coins. The Arab dinar was a gold coin 
equivalent to the old Roman solidus; a dinar was 
worth 20 Arab silver coins called dirhem. The 
Byzantine nomisma was a gold coin also equiva- 
lent to the old Roman solidus. 

The following tables of equivalent values for 
coins are simplified and distorted slightly for 
ease of play. 


Carolingian Coins Table 


Coin Type Game Equivalent 
Obole (op) 5 cp 
Denier (dp) lsp 
Foreign Coins Table 

Coin Type Game Equivalent 
Byzantine nomisma 1gp 

Arab dinar lgp 

Arab dirhem 5 cp 


The electrum piece, gold piece, and platinum 
piece have no equivalent coins circulated com- 
monly in the Frankish kingdoms. They convert 
to the denier piece as follows: 1 ep = 2 dp; 1 gp 
= 4 dp; 1 pp = 20 dp. 


Available Equipment 


The Carolingian Age was technologically and 
culturally different from the standard AD&D® 
game fantasy setting. Not all items on the Play- 
ers Handbook weapon and equipment lists are 
available. Some items had not yet been invent- 
ed; others were beyond the resources of the Car- 
olingians. Some extremely rare items might be 
found only in exceptional circumstances. 

The following table modifies the equipment 
lists presented in the Players Handbook for a 
Carolingian campaign. Price adjustments are 
marked for some items, giving denier piece 
costs. Any item marked "N/A" is not available 
for use in a Carolingian campaign. 

For prices given in the Players Handbook 
equipment lists in gp, multiply by 4 to get the 
cost in denier. 


EQUIPMENT COSTS TABLE 


Clothing 

Item Cost 
Cloak (marten or otter) 360 dp 
Monk's cowl 60 dp 
Sheepskin cloak 12 dp 
Silk jacket 1,600 dp 
Daily Food and Lodging’ 

Item Cost 


Abbey or monastery lodging 
(per day) 


Common 5 dp 

Poor 1 dp 
Household Provisioning 
Item Cost 
Coarse sugar N/A 
Figs (Ib.) 160 dp 
Raisins (lb.) 160 dp 
Spice (lb.) 

Exotic 800 dp 

Rare 480 dp 

Uncommon 160 dp 


Tack and Harness 


Item Cost 
Barding 

Half-padded N/A’ 

Half-scale N/A’ 

All other types N/A 
Transport 
Item Cost 
Canoe (all types) N/A 
Caravel N/A 
Carriage (all types) N/A 
Chariot (all types) N/A 
Cog N/A 
Dromond N/A’ 
Galleon N/A 
Great galley N/A 
Sedan chair N/A 


Miscellaneous Equipment 
Item Cost 
Lantern (all types) N/A 
Lock 

Good N/A 

Poor 960 dp 
Magnifying glass N/A 
Oil, Greek fire N/A’ 
Paper N/A 
Papyrus N/A 
Rope, silk N/A 
Spyglass N/A 
Thieves’ picks N/A‘ 
Water clock N/A 
Animals 
Item Cost 
Camel N/A 
Elephant N/A 
Horse 

Draft N/A 

Heavy war N/A 
Hunting cat N/A 
Peacock N/A 
Pigeon, homing N/A 
Weapons 
Item Cost 
Arquebus N/A 
Blowgun N/A 
Bow 

Composite N/A 

Long N/A 
Crossbow (any) N/A 
Lance 

Heavy horse N/A 

Jousting N/A 
Mancatcher N/A 
Polearm 

Awl pike N/A 

Bill-guisarme N/A 

Fauchard-fork N/A 

Glaive-guisarme N/A 

Guisarme-voulge N/A 

Hook fauchard N/A 

Ranseur N/A 
Scourge N/A 
Staff Sling N/A 


Sword 
Khopesh N/A 
Long (fine) 500 dp’ 
Scimitar N/A’ 
Two-handed N/A 
Armor 
Item Cost 
Banded mail N/A 
Brigandine N/A 
Bronze plate mail N/A 
Field plate N/A 
Full plate N/A 
Helmet, great helm N/A 
Plate mail N/A 
Ring mail N/A 
Scale mail N/A’ 
Splint mail N/A 


' Many aristocratic PCs should 
be able to impose on the hospitali- 
ty of noble relatives and friends 
when traveling within the Empire. 
Short-term lodging for pilgrims 
and travelers may also be found at 
abbeys and monasteries; the cost 
listed represents an offering. 

' Breton and Byzantine heavy 
cavalry employed horse barding. 
Count Roland of the Breton 
Marches and his forces, for exam- 
ple, might have employed horse 
barding. Nonetheless, horse bard- 
ing was not widely available and is 
permitted only by DM approval. 

" These items are not available 
in the Empire. Dromonds, scale 
mail, horse barding, and scimitars 
may be found in Byzantine and 
Arab lands; Greek fire is a secret 
of the Byzantines. 

“With locks uncommon, there 
is no developed art of picking 
locks. A set of tools useful for 
breaking and entering can be 
made by a blacksmith for 300 dp. 

* The quality long sword of 
Carolingian steel was famed 
throughout the pagan world. This 
fine long sword has a +1 bonus to 
damage. 


Equipment and Treasure * 53 


Treasure 


Silver coins were primarily useful for mer- 
chants and peasants. Objects made from gold 
and silver, often decorated with wood and ivory 
carvings and precious stones and pearls, repre- 
sented the real treasure hoards of the aristocracy 
and the Church. 

The craftsmanship of a gold or silver object 
was often of less significance than the weight 
and purity of its metal. The value of gold and 
silver treasures can therefore be approximated in 
terms of metal weight, with some additional val- 
ue for fine craftsmanship and decoration. One 
pound of silver is worth 320 deniers; one pound 
of gold is worth 3,840 deniers. 

The value of other treasures (e.g., silk vest- 
ments, carved ivory book covers, illuminated 
manuscripts) is hard to judge, though in many 
cases the phrase “worth its weight in silver” or 
“worth its weight in gold” may be a useful guide. 
The following are examples of lay and Church 
treasures taken from contemporary records. 

Manuscripts: Psalters, Bibles, and other 
books, some with illuminations (illustration and 
decoration of pages), some with covers deco- 
rated with carved ivory, silver, gold, and pre- 
cious stones. 

Swords and daggers: Carolingian steel was 
greatly prized, even in Byzantium and the Near 
East; the grip, guard, and blade might be gold 
and silver ornamented with precious stones and 
pearls. 

Scabbards and baldrics: Decorated with gold, 
precious stones, and carved ivory. 

Armor: Helmet, hauberk, greaves, gauntlets, 
spurs decorated with gold and precious stones. 

Vestments (civil and Church): Fine linen or 
silk with silk and gold embroidery. 

Vases: Carved from marble, horn, tinted glass, 
or wood and sometimes decorated with silver or 
gold. 

Reliquaries: Containers for holy relics; ivory, 
crystal, silver, and gold with ornaments of 
carved ivory or precious stones. 

Signet rings: Silver or gold with ivory inlay. 

Jewelry: Brooches, rings, pins, pendants, 
bracelets in silver and gold with precious stones 
and pearls. 

Sacramental items: Crosses, portable altars, 


54 * Chapter Five 


patens (plates), chalices, candlesticks, and other 
objects in silver and gold. 


Magical Items 


Many of the most familiar magical items in 
the AD&D® game are inspired by medieval fa- 
bles like those told about Charlemagne and his 
Paladins in the chansons de geste and Italian epic 
poetry. However, rarely are these items found in 
the hands of the warrior heroes of these tales, 
who generally succeed through strength of char- 
acter or arms. The magical devices are usually 
possessed and wielded by wizards, sorcerers, 
and enchantresses from exotic foreign or faerie 
realms; such magical treasures will seldom if ev- 
er be discovered in a treasure trove in Charle- 
magne's Empire. 

To maintain the proper atmosphere for a Car- 
olingian campaign, keep the magical resources 
of the player characters to an absolute mini- 
mum. Note, for example, that the predesigned 
player characters accompanying this supple- 
ment are 4th level, and yet they do not have a 
single magical item among them. If you wish to 
develop the fabulous fantasy aspects of the set- 
ting, give magical items to your NPC antago- 
nists, and make those magical items 
incomprehensibly marvelous and completely 
unusable by player characters. Occasionally 
great magical items belonging to powerful NPC 
wizards may fall briefly into PC hands, or an 
NPC ally may temporarily loan a magical item 
to a PC, but such events in the Charlemagne leg- 
ends are more often devices to move the story 
along than to give added magical firepower to a 
hero. 

Try hard not to distribute many magical items 
in treasure troves; try even harder to avoid ran- 
domly determining those few that you do dis- 
tribute, The table on the following page may be 
used instead of Table 88: Magical Items 
(Dungeon Masters Guide, p. 135) when ran- 
domly determining magical items found in 
Charlemagne's Empire. 

In addition, the Unavailable Magical Items 
Table on the next page lists things unlikely to be 
discovered in Charlemagnes Empire. Do not 
distribute such items as randomly selected ele- 
ments of a treasure trove. 


Magical Items in the Empire Table 


Roll Category 


01-10 Potions and oils 

11-20 = Scrolls* 

21-25 Rings 

26 Staves 

27-28 Misc. magic: Books and tomes* 
29-30 Misc. magic: Jewels and jewelry 
31-32 Misc. magic: Cloaks and robes 
33-34 Misc. magic: Boots and gloves 
35-36 Misc. magic: Girdles and helms 
37-38 Misc. magic: Household items 
39-40 Misc. magic: Musical instruments 
41-55 Armor and shields 

56-90 Weapons 

91-95 Holy relics 

96-00 Legendary magical treasures 


* Any spells discovered in scrolls or miscella- 
neous magic must be spells permitted for use by 
clerics or wizards in Carolingian campaigns. 


Unavailable Magical Items Table 


Potions 

and Oils Animal Control, Climbing, Dragon 
Control, ESP, Fire Breath, Giant Con- 
trol, Human Control, Oil of Elemen- 
tal Invulnerability, Oil of Ethereal- 
ness, Plant Control, Polymorph Self, 
Treasure Finding, Undead Control 
Blinking, Djinni Summoning, Ele- 
mental Command, Human Influence, 
Mammal Control, Shooting Stars, 
Telekinesis, Ring of Water Walking, 
Wishes (Multiple), Wishes (Three), 
Wizardry, X-Ray Vision 


Rings 


Holy Relics 


Holy relics are sacred remains of saints and 
martyrs—sacred objects that confer supernatu- 
ral powers, Typical relics include bones, earth 
soaked in a martyr's blood, the shroud that cov- 
ered a martyr or saint, or bits of the Cross. 
Relics are always contained in special ornament- 
ed containers called reliquaries. Made from pre- 
cious metals and often studded with gems, 
reliquaries are often fabulously valuable. Natu- 


rally they are of great interest to thieves and pa- 
gan raiders, even though the relics contained 
within are of no value to either, who often sim- 
ply discard or destroy the sacred relics. 

A holy relic provides benefits only for mem- 
bers of the Western Church who have not lost the 
benefits of clerical magic for repeated or grievous 
sins (see "Loss of Powers" in Chapter 3). 

The following are a few sample holy relics. To 
design others, assign the magical effects of one 
or more clerical spells to a relic. The spells may, 
at your discretion, be limited to spells normally 
available to priests of the Western Church, or 
they may include spells from spheres not nor- 
mally available to such priests. Also determine 
whether the relic must be in a consecrated area 
to confer its benefits and whether laymen, 
priests, or both may obtain the benefits the relic 
confers. 

Blessed Relic: A layman or priest of the West- 
ern Church bearing this relic is personally pro- 
tected by the permanent effects of the 1st-level 
priest spell protection from evil. 

Founders Relic: When within a consecrated 
area, this relic provides the effects of the 1st- 
level priest spell bless for laymen and priests of 
the Western Church. If not within a consecrated 
area, this relic provides no additional benefits. 

Martyr's Relic: When within a consecrated ar- 
ea, this relic provides a layman or priest of the 
Western Church with the effects of the 1st-level 
priest spell sanctuary. If not within a conse- 
crated area, this relic provides no additional 
benefits. 

Relic of Divine Wisdom: When within a con- 
secrated area, a priest who touches this relic is 
granted one use of the Sth-level priest spell com- 
mune. Too-frequent use of this relic's powers is a 
sin against pride and may result in temporary 
loss of priest powers. 

Saint's Relic: When within a consecrated area, 
a priest of the Western Church gains the power 
to cast the dispel magic spell. The area of effect 
is the entire consecrated area. A cleric may also 
cast the 3rd-level priest spell prayer three times a 
day, regardless of whether he is in a consecrated 
area. The bearer (priest or layman) of this relic is 
further protected at all times by the 1st-level 
priest spell protection from evil. 


Equipment and Treasure * 55 


Legendary Magical Items 


Magical items in the tales of Charlemagne are 
often identified as the previous possessions of fa- 
mous persons of history or of classical myth and 
legend. For example, Roland's sword Durandal 
once belonged to Hector, a hero of the Siege of 
Troy as told in the classical Greek tales of 
Homer's Odyssey. 

To give a magical item the exotic and antique 
flavor of “instant legend,” invent a heroic histori- 
cal or legendary owner for any magical item you 
introduce to your campaign. For example, po- 
tions and oils might have been created by the fa- 
mous alchemist of Araby, Hermes Trismegistus. 
Books and tomes might have once belonged to 
Merlin or Saint Boniface or Morgan le Fay. Gir- 
dles, helms, armor, shields, and weapons might 
have belonged to Greek heroes, such as Perseus 
or Achilles; to King Arthur or his Knights of the 
Round Table; or to heroes of the Old Testament, 
such as Samson or David (of David and Goliath 
fame). When no suitable legendary personality 
comes to mind, make one up, like Al-Wazir, the 
Fell Wizard of Araby, or Lady Donabel, Princess 
of the Faerie Isles. 

Further, magical items always come from for- 
eign lands such as Araby, Far Cathay, 
Aethiopia, or Turkestan, or from Faerie lands 
such as Morgan le Fay’s island of Avalon. A fab- 
ulous tale of how a device came to the empire 
adds to the exotic flavor of its magic. 

The following are a few sample legendary 
magical treasures. Dozens of ideas for other leg- 
endary magical treasures can be found in the 
various versions of the Charlemagne legends. 


——————————— M € ——— 


56 * Chapter Five 


Once again, such treasures should not become 
permanent possessions of player characters. At 
most they might fall temporarily into a PC's 
hands; thereafter, they should soon be either 
stolen by a master antagonist, graciously hand- 
ed on to an epic hero of suitable stature, or given 
as a gift to King Charlemagne. 

Durandal: Once owned by Hector, hero of the 
Trojan War, later owned by Roland. When used 
against a less honorable opponent, this sword 
confers a +4 bonus to the attack roll. When 
used against a more honorable opponent, this 
sword has a —4 penalty to the attack roll. The 
sword confers no damage bonus in either case. 
Determination of the most honorable opponent 
is at the DM's discretion. 

The Horn of Roland: When blown, this horn 
may be heard by all within five miles of the user. 

Malagigis Book: This book contains all wiz- 
ard spells of the Conjuration/Summoning and 
Greater Divination schools except for those spe- 
cifically prohibited for use by wizards in Caro- 
lingian campaigns (see "Spells Allowed" in 
Chapter 3). 

The Ring of Angelica: When this ring is placed 
within the user's mouth, the user becomes invisi- 
ble. Also, no spells can affect the bearer while 
this ring is in his mouth. 

The Shield of Atlantes: This shield is normally 
covered with a silken sheath. When the sheath is 
removed, any character or creature viewing the 
shield's dazzling front surface falls into a trance- 
like sleep for 1d4 +4 rounds. Creatures with 8 or 
more Hit Dice receive a saving throw vs. spell; 
lesser creatures receive no saving throw. 


The heroic and magical tales of Charlemagne 
and his Paladins represent some of the best- 
known, best-loved myths and legends of Euro- 
pean civilization. The primary sources for these 
legends are four epic poems: the anonymous 
Song of Roland, Orlando Innamorato (Roland 
in Love) by Matteo Maria Boiardo, Orlando Fu- 
rioso (Roland Mad) by Lodovico Ariosto, and 
Morgante by Luigi Pulci. 

The Song of Roland tells the tragic tale of the 
Frankish rear guard ambushed in the Pyrenees 
and slain to the last man in the Pass of Ronces- 
valles (see “The Horn of Roland” in this chap- 
ter). This 11th-century Breton epic poem and 
other 11th- and 12th-century chansons de geste 
("songs of great deeds") celebrated the historical 
and legendary deeds of King Arthur's knights 
and Charlemagne's Paladins. These became 
sources for the later 15th- and 16th-century Ital- 
ian epic romances by Boiardo, Ariosto, and 
Pulci. 

Orlando Innamorato tells how Roland ("Or- 
lando" in Italian) and the other Paladins desert 
the court of Charlemagne to pursue their great 
loves. Through endless intertwined subplots, 
the Paladins battle with giants and pagan war- 
riors and struggle with baffling enchantments, 
managing in one scene a desperate nick-of-time 
rescue only to lose what they had gained in the 
next scene to some new misfortune. Boiardo's 
poem ends with the pagan warrior Roger still 
searching for the warrior maiden Bradamante. 

Ariosto picks up Boiardo's tale in Orlando Fu- 
rioso and follows Roland as he pursues, finds, 
and loses his love Angelica. Driven mad with 
grief, Roland wanders off into the wilderness. 
The Paladin Astolpho flies to Aethiopia on his 
hippogriff, borrows the chariot of Elijah, and 
with Saint John as his guide, travels to the 
moon. There he recovers Roland's lost wits, and 
then he returns those wits to Roland in an urn. 
Roger the pagan knight converts to Christianity. 
With the rest of Charlemagne's Paladins finally 
reassembled, they lift the siege of Paris where 
the king is threatened and win a great climactic 
battle against the pagans. 

Morgante was published before Orlando In- 
namorato and Orlando Furioso, but it covers 
the later adventures of Roland's life up to his 
death in the Pass of Roncesvalles. Morgante is a 


CHAPTER 


Ihe Tales of Charlemagne and His Paladins 


giant who becomes Roland's faithful companion 
after Roland spares his life. Pulci's treatment is 
comic burlesque rather than epic romance. For 
example, a giant friend of Morgante's dies of 
laughter upon seeing a monkey wearing his 
boots, and Morgante himself dies of a crab bite. 

In this chapter you'll find a selected menu of 
incidents and characters especially suitable for 
an AD&D® game campaign. We suggest the fol- 
lowing possible schemes for organizing such a 
campaign. 

In Their Footsteps: The PCs are lesser noble 
warriors and retainers of Charlemagne sent out 
looking for the great heraes of the legends (Ro- 
land, Astolpho, Ogier the Dane, etc.) or their 
paramours (Angelica, Bradamante, etc.). Of 
course, the PCs never find the heroes, but they 
inevitably encounter the same adventures as 
they follow the legendary heroes and heroines 
across the globe. 

Agents of the Sorcerer; The PCs are sent by 
Malagigi, Charlemagne's sorcerer-advisor, on 
various secret missions—where they run into the 
fume kinds of problems that the great Paladins 

o. 

Faithful Companions of the Hero: The PCs 
are companions of one of the great heroes. 
When the hero disappears, as he inevitably 
does, the PCs are honor-bound to seek out and 
aid him. They may often successfully participate 
in their hero-patron's rescue, but, as usual, their 
hero will almost immediately thereafter be 
drawn into some new adventure from which he 
must be rescued. And so on. Typically the sorts 
of physical dangers that mean nothing to the in- 
vulnerable heroes will give the PCs fits, while 
the sorcerous enchantments and amorous snares 
that always baffle their hero-patrons are imme- 
diately seen through by the clear-thinking and 
clever player characters. (Epic heroes, as a result 
of their noble, refined natures, are almost never 
careful planners; clever, cautious, or sensible; or 
capable of figuring out traps based on illusion, 
romance, or deceit. Thus well-played player 
characters can actually play a significant role in 
such a campaign.) 


The following list is an abridged menu of 
characters and incidents. The original works are 
bursting at the seams with charming monsters, 


The Tales of Charlemagne and His Paladins * 57 


sinister plots, scheming villains, and enchanted 
treasures that you can adapt for a legendary 
AD&D® game campaign. 


A Partial List of Characters 
from the Legends 


Charlemagne and His Peers 


Charlemagne: In the legendary tales, Charle- 
magne is a powerful, passionate, Christian king, 
but often blind to the faults of subordinates— 
particularly Ganelon—and too proud to be 
practical, sensible, or even just at times. He is 
portrayed as a flawed personality, but nonethe- 
less a great leader and worthy of the unquestion- 
ing loyalty of his Paladins. 

Duke Namon: This venerable noble is old and 
no longer a powerful warrior, but he is wise in 
counsel and respected and trusted by all. 

Ganelon of Mayence: The traitor. Ganelon is 
always scheming some treachery and treason, 
and though it is obvious to the reader, it never 
occurs to the other characters in the legends until 
at last he is revealed for betraying Roland to his 
death in the Pass of Roncesvalles, 

Pinabel the Gascon: A petty, vain, and mean- 
spirited knight, kinsman of Ganelon. This vil- 
lain rudely dumps Bradamante into a ravine and 
abandons her there. 

Roland: The greatest of Charlemagne's Pala- 
dins. A peerless warrior, he is also the sensitive 
type; when spurned by Angelica, the woman he 
loves, he goes crazy and wanders as a mad her- 
mit through the wilderness for years. A brief cat- 
alogue of Roland's personal treasures may 
suggest the sorts of extraordinary magical items 
that might be seen in a legendary campaign: 

* A helmet fashioned by the Roman god Vul- 
can. 

e A warcoat from Wayland, the Teutonic 
master smith; no thrust of lance or stroke of 
sword could harm its wearer. 

© Spurs from Morgan le Fay. 

e The sword Durandal, forged by Vulcan and 
borne by Trojan Hector. 

è Roland's ivory horn, made from a sea- 
horse tusk or unicorn's horn. 

Oliver: Roland's best friend and companion, a 
peerless Paladin in his own right. 


58 * Chapter Six 


Ogier the Dane: Son of the king of Denmark 
and one of Charlemagne's greatest warriors. 

Archbishop Turpin: A fighting cleric, he ac- 
companies Charlemagne on military campaigns 
and is always in the heat of battle. He dies a he- 
ro's death with Roland and Oliver in the Pass of 
Roncesvalles. 

Bradamante: The White Knight, a warrior 
maiden, and sister of the gallant Reinhold of 
Montalban. The model of a female warrior, she 
is a skilled fighter, but at the same time she seems 
less likely to fall for silly tricks than most simple- 
minded male heroes. 

Astolpho the English Knight: He flies around 
on a hippogriff and gets turned into a tree by Al- 
cina. Actually, he has a lot of exciting adven- 
tures and does fairly well for himself. 


Wizards and Faeries 


Malagigi the Wizard: Charlemagne's sorcerer- 
advisor. Sometimes Malagigi seems to be an ally, 
sometimes an enemy of Charlemagne and his 
Paladins; in fact, Malagigi keeps his own subtle 
counsels. Like Merlin, he finally falls victim to a 
female sorcerer, Angelica, who imprisons him, 
but she frees him later when he promises to do 
her a favor. He and other wizards, such as An- 
gelica and Atlantes, need only open their magi- 
cal books and see plainly written the future, or 
by speaking enchantments from their pages and 
by making magical circles they may summon 
goblins, efreeti, or other creatures to do their 
will. They also rely on magical items, such as 
sleeping powders, to deal with troublesome war- 
rior types. 

Angelica, Princess of Cathay: A master sor- 
ceress and femme fatale, Angelica's main claim 
to fame is her marvelous magical ring; this con- 
venient narrative device appears in the hands of 
numerous heroes and heroines throughout the 
legends. When this ring is placed in the mouth or 
to the lips, the bearer becomes invisible and may 
travel at the speed of thought wherever he wish- 
es to go. This ring also protects its bearer against 
all enchantments. 

Atlantes the Sorcerer: A well-meaning and 
terribly powerful wizard who builds a marvel- 
ous enchanted Castle of Iron in the Pyrenees, 
then kidnaps numerous knights and ladies. This 


he does to provide diversions for his nephew 
Roger, the finest of pagan knights. Atlantes wor- 
ries that Roger will go off and become a Chris- 
tian, betraying his faith and saving Char- 
lemagne from the Saracens, as Atlantes has seen 
prophesied in his enchanted Book of Fates. At- 
lantes flies around on a hippogriff casting en- 
chantments from a magical book held in one 
hand and dazzling knights into unconsciousness 
with a magical shield he carries on the other 
arm. Both the hippogriff and the magical shield 
get quite a workout when they fall into the 
hands of various heroes later in the tales. 

Brunello the Dwarf: An ugly master thief and 
sorcerer, he manages to steal Angelica's magical 
ring, then loses it to Bradamante while he's gap- 
ing at the spectacle of a hippogriff ridden by At- 
lantes. 

Alcina, Logistilla, and Morgan le Fay: These 
are the three sisters of Arthur and are powerful 
fairy princesses. Alcina is a wrinkled, tiny crone 
who presents herself as surpassingly lovely 
through magic. She turns knights into trees and 
ensorcels Roger into slothful idleness and exces- 
sive love. (Melissa rescues Roger from Alcina in 
the guise of Atlantes, using the famous magic- 
dispelling ring of Angelica.) Logistilla is a rea- 
sonable and friendly faerie and a sometime aid 
and ally of the heroes. Morgan le Fay is neither 
clearly a friend or foe; she brings a hopeful 
prophecy to Ogier the Dane at his birth, but she 
also thwarts Roland in his quest for the arms of 
Hector. 

Melissa: She is a sorceress and confederate of 
Merlin and a friend and ally of Bradamante. She 
assists in regaining Angelica's magical ring from 
the Dwarf Brunello and in freeing Roger by 
tricking Atlantes from his hippogriff and con- 
founding Atlantes's mesmerizing shield. Melissa 
also aids Bradamante in the rescue of Roger 
from Alcina. 

The Hermit: Not any one specific character, 
but a commonly encountered stereotype. The 
Hermit may appear as a saintly poor man who is 
actually a wizard with a book, able to summon 
genies, or he may appear as a lustful old hermit 
with sorcerous powers who kidnaps Angelica, 
summons an evil spirit and conjures it into a 
horse for her to ride, and then dumps her on an 
island where he tries to take advantage of her. 


The old hermit is also popular disguise for Mala- 
gigi the Wizard. 


Pagans 


King Marsilius, King Sacripant, King Gradas- 
so, King Mandricardo: The principal pagan 
kings, antagonists of Charlemagne. 

Roger: Nephew of Atlantes the Sorcerer, a 
handsome and noble pagan warrior who is des- 
tined to become a Christian and help save 
Charlemagne from the Saracen invaders. 

Ferrau the Moor: A strong but ignoble Sara- 
cen knight who pursues Angelica. 

Agramante and Rodomonte: Two principal 
pagan warriors. 


The Horn of Roland 


The most famous of the Charlemagne legends 
is the Song of Roland. The following is a con- 
densed version of the story of Roland in Ronces- 
valles Pass ("the Vale of Thorns") from the epic 
poem. 


King Marsilius of Spain sent to Charlemagne, 
entreating peace and promising rich tribute. 
He promised that he would come to Aix at 
Michaelmas to be baptized and do homage and 
hold Spain faithfully in fief for King Charle- 
magne. Charlemagne toak counsel among his 
Companions. Roland counseled against trusting 
the Moor, but all the other peers, save Roland 
and Oliver, counseled peace. 

"Who shall we send to Marsilius to accept his 
oath and receive his pledges of good faith?" said 
Charlemagne. It was a dangerous task, since ev- 
er did the Saracen plot and scheme. Roland vol- 
unteered, but the king would not consent, 
saying instead that Roland must choose the en- 
voy. Roland chose Ganelon. Trembling with fear 
that he might never return from the false- 
hearted Saracen, Ganelon went, but he swore to 
himself, “This is Roland's doing, and I shall hate 
him all my life long.” 

Ganelon came to Marsilius in Saragossa, and, 
long-used to guile and cunning, he twisted the 
words of Charlemagne so as to provoke the fury 
of the proud Saracen king. Marsilius might have 
slain Ganelon, but shrewd counselors of the 
king noted the treachery on Ganelon's face. 


The Tales of Charlemagne and His Paladins e 59 


They proposed instead to treat with him and 
plot treason and bloodshed. The Moorish king 
was well pleased and offered Ganelon wagon- 
loads of silver, gold, silk, and red wine if he 
could deliver Roland, the king's nephew and the 
flower of Frankish chivalry. Ganelon said, “Send 
to Charlemagne tribute and hostages, and prom- 
ise to be baptized at Aix and do homage for 
Spain. Then, when, well pleased, Charlemagne 
returns to France, have you set 100,000 Moors in 
ambush in the passes of Roncesvalles, the Vale of 
Thorns. There from the high ground you may 
fall upon the rear guard, containing Roland and 
Oliver and 20,000 Frenchmen, and destroy them 
utterly.’ 

And Marsilius was pleased with this plan. 
Ganelon returned to Charlemagne, and it fell 
out as he had guessed, for as Charlemagne 
marched his army out of Spain, well satisfied 
with his peace, Ganelon counseled that Roland 
should command the rear guard. Roland was 
right willing to accept this dangerous trust, and 
with him were bold Oliver and great Archbish- 
op Turpin and 20,000 valiant Frankish warriors. 

High were the rock walls of Roncesvalles, and 
dark and shadowy the narrow pass between 
them, but the day was bright and the sky clear. 
Then the sound of horns was heard before them, 
and climbing a pine Oliver saw a greater army of 
Saracens than he had ever seen before. And Oli- 
ver bade Roland to sound his mighty horn, that 
Charlemagne might hear and turn and rescue 
them from ambush, but proud Roland refused, 
loudly saying so that all might hear, "Better I 
should die than that any say | show fear. For my 
king has placed his trust in me, and in you all his 
heroes, and better we should perish than should 
we be shamed. Draw your swords and we shall 
slay many a Moorish traitor.” And aside to Oli- 
ver Roland said, “And so dire is this Saracen am- 
bush that scarcely do I believe that the king 
might save us, even if he would hear our horn.” 
And brave Archbishop Turpin said to the Frank- 
ish host, “The king has left us here, and for him 
ye shall stand, and if ye die, ye shall have a place 
in Paradise.” 

The hearts of the Franks then were light, and 
Roland brandished his blade Durandal, and 
pointed toward the Moorish foe, and said, 
“Comrades, ride onward! The day shall be 


60 * Chapter Six 


ours!” And Oliver said, “Forget not the war-cry 
of our beloved Charlemagne,” and at once the 
Franks swept forward with cries of “Montjoy! 
Montjoy!” 

And for a time it seemed the Franks might car- 
ry the day, for many a Moor was slain, and 
many a valiant deed was achieved by Roland 
and his peers. But at last Marsilius sent down a 
fresh troop of 7,000 Moors, and the Frankish he- 
roes fell on every side. At last Archbishop Tur- 
pin persuaded Roland to sound his horn, not to 
summon Charlemagne to rescue them, but that 
the king might protect the bodies of the doomed 
rear guard from scavengers and wild beasts. 

Many miles away Charlemagne heard the 
horn. Ganelon pretended the king had but imag- 
ined it, but the king knew then that Ganelon had 
betrayed him. He had the traitor made prisoner 
and bound, and rode at once with all his host 
back to Roncesvalles. 

Now the end was near, for in the Vale of 
Thorns the Moors had overwhelmed the Franks. 
All but Roland, Oliver, and the archbishop were 
slain. Then Oliver took a mortal wound, and he 
parted from his Roland with great love and sad 
words of farewell. Then, fearfully hurt, with 
blood flowing from many wounds, Roland fee- 
bly sounded his ivory horn a last time. Charle- 
magne, in the pass not far away, heard Roland's 
horn. Knowing Roland in great distress, he bade 
his men blow their trumpets loudly so Roland 
might know rescue was nigh. And Roland did 
hear and rejoiced, but the pagans heard also and 
rushed upon Roland and the archbishop and 
struck them down. Then hearing once again the 
horns of the mightiest king of Christendom, the 
Saracens fled in great haste from the field. 

Roland and the archbishop had received the 
wounds of death, and Roland could do aught 
but move about the field and gather the slain he- 
roes closer to the archbishop so they might re- 
ceive his last blessing. Roland took his blade 
Durandal, and rather than have it fall into the 
hands of pagans, he sought to smash the blade 
upon a rock. Shatter it he could not, though he 
broke the rock in many pieces. Then he lay 
down on the grass, placed his horn and sword 
beneath him, set his face toward the foe, and 
raised his glove and offered it to God in heaven. 
Then did the angels come down, and they took 


A 
~ A pG 
mel Tm 


Sus. NS 4 
Er VU 
NS NS 
"MSS NS 


| yh 
| 


YN Y 


y-» 
WN 


Sr W T 
lli; 5), 
AU 


| 
da. 


The Tales of Charlemagne and His Paladins @61 


Roland's glove, and with this token they bore his 
soul to Paradise. 

Sad was the scene that Charlemagne beheld, 
arriving too late to save a single man. He flung 
himself from his horse and wept upon the bosom 
of dead Roland, and swore vengeance upon the 
false-hearted Saracens and the traitor Ganelon 
who contrived his end. Charlemagne and his 
host pursued the Saracens. They besieged and 
took Saragossa and burned it, and they hung 
Marsilius the Moorish king. Ganelon the traitor 
was hung, drawn, and quartered in the Pass of 
Roncesvalles amidst the curses and contempt of 
his countrymen. And the Franks buried their 
dead in the Vale of Thorns, but Roland and Oli- 
ver and the archbishop the king bore to Blaye in 
Frankland. There they were laid in white marble 
tombs in the chapel of St. Romans. The ivory 
horn of Roland was taken to Bordeaux and filled 
with fine gold. It was laid upon the altar of the 
church there. 


Adapting the Vale of Thorns to 
Role-Playing 


Many players should know that no one sur- 
vives from the ambush at Roncesvalles Pass. 
This gives a DM a wonderful opportunity to tor- 
ment his or her players with suspense: Are their 
characters really doomed or is there some hope 
that history and legend were wrong, and that 
someone lived to tell Roland's tale? 

Events leading up to the Vale of Thorns may 
develop the skirmishes and sieges with the Sara- 
cens in the Spanish March. Player characters 
may then be assigned to the rear guard with Ro- 
land and Oliver to help protect the baggage. 
They may suspect Ganelon's treachery and be 
frustrated by Roland's refusal to summon help. 
Finally, will they choose to stand and die like he- 
roes, and become part of the legend, or will they 
try to escape? Are they taken captive by the 
Basques and Saracens, only to escape later and 
have to make their way alone through hostile 
territory back across the rugged Pyrenees? 


Sir Ogier the Dane 


The following is an incident concerning the 
youthful Ogier the Dane and Roland before they 


DN EEE aa 


62 * Chapter Six 


became knights of renown. Such a story might 
also be the occasion for a group of humble low- 
level player characters to come to the attention 
of a count or king through heroic performance 
on a battlefield. The scene of battlefield knight- 
ing, the details of plate armoring, and the con- 
vention of mistaken identity while concealed in 
armor belongs to the Age of Chivalry rather 
than Charlemagne's time, but the spirit is so no- 
ble and stirring that it may honorably be adapt- 
ed to a Carolingian setting. 


The Saracens came forth to give battle. Lordly 
Duke Namon led the vanguard of Charle- 
magne's force. The golden banner of the King, 
Oriflamme, was borne by Alory the Lombard. 
Ogier and Roland, not yet recognized as 
knights, remained in the rear of Charlemagne's 
army with the sguires. 

Namon at first drove back the Saracens, but 
the pagans stiffened and suddenly the cowardly 
Lombards—Alory the standard bearer in- 
cluded—fled from the battle. The pagans were 
heartened, the tide of battle turned. Duke Na- 
mon and other knights were taken prisoner. 
Charlemagne was unhorsed and unlanced, yet 
still he fought on. 

Seeing this desperate situation on the field, the 
rank of sguires advanced, challenging the cow- 
ardly Lombards, dragging them from their sad- 
dles, and taking their arms and armor. Ogier the 
Dane retrieved and held aloft Oriflamme, the 
king's standard. 

Only 100 knights remained on the field for the 
defense of Charlemagne, now once again on 
horse. The pagans were already gloating, but 
Ogier and Roland and the ranks of sguires 
swooped down and surprised the Saracens. Cap- 
tive French knights were rescued and sguires 
took the armor from slain Saracens and pursued 
the shaken pagan armies from the field. Charle- 
magne followed, his sword Joyeuse in hand. 

Corsuble, the Saracen king, fled and Charle- 
magne pursued. Two pagan knights came to 
Corsuble's aid, slaying Charlemagne's horse and 
throwing the Frankish king to the ground. See- 
ing the golden eagle on Charlemagne's casgue, 
the Saracens dismounted to deal the death blow, 
when Ogier the Dane appeared, rode over one 
Saracen and buffeted the other with Oriflamme. 


Ogier, his face and features concealed by the 
armor he took from the cowardly Alory, then 
helped Charlemagne to his feet and saw him 
mounted on a Saracen horse. Charlemagne, see- 
ing the coat of arms, thought Ogier was Alory. 
He praised the knight and promised a reward for 
bravery. Ogier said not a word, but took off in 
pursuit of the fleeing Saracens. 

The Saracens were in full retreat, leaving the 
field to the victorious Franks. Archbishop Tur- 
pin gathered the army, laid aside his helmet and 
sword, said “Te deum laudamus,” and led the as- 
sembled host singing in praise of the Lord. While 
they sang, Ogier the Dane brought Oriflamme, 
all torn and covered with dust, and laid it at 
Charlemagne's feet. The king spoke kindly, 
praising the noble warrior for his bravery; Tur- 
pin held his hands above their heads and blessed 
both men. 

Roland then suddenly threw off his helmet 
and Ogier's, and the other squires were also re- 
vealed. Charlemagne and his knights showed 
great wonder at being saved by squires. The 
king embraced Roland and Ogier and called 
down the choicest blessings on their heads for 
the honor they had done him by being so brave 
and by serving the cause of Christendom. Na- 
mon then asked, and the king granted, that 
Ogier and Roland be invested immediately as 
knights. 

The young men knelt before their king. After 
a short, solemn service by Turpin, warning of 
the duties of the knight and the temptations in 
their way, the archbishop then took prepared 
swords and laid them on a rude altar. Charle- 
magne stepped forward, smote the young men 
three times on their shoulders and said "In the 
name of God and St. Michael, I dub thee knight: 
be loyal, valiant, and true. 

Then knights arrayed Ogier and Roland in 
knightly garb. Namon laced their golden spurs. 
Turpin blessed their white armor and vested 
each in his coat of mail, Duke Richard of Nor- 
mandy buckled on breastplates. Guy of 
Bourgogne presented arm-pieces and gauntlets. 
Charlemagne brought them their swords. To 
Ogier was given a plain steel blade marked with 
the words, “Wear Me Until You Find a Better.” To 
Roland was given a wondrous weapon with a 
jeweled hilt, marked with many a fair device— 


the sword Durandal. The new knights then took 
an oath of chivalry: to be faithful to God and 
loyal to the king; to revere all women; to be ever 
mindful of the poor and weak; never to engage 
in unrighteous war; never to exalt oneself to the 
injury of others; always to speak the truth; to 
love mercy; and to deal justly with all men. 

Charlemagne then blessed them and promised 
to love them as sons; in turn they vowed to love 
and honor him as their father in knighthood. 
Then they donned their helmets, mounted 
steeds, and received honor as full knights. 

The cowardly Alory was sought and brought 
into Charlemagne's presence. Poor Alory had 
nothing to say in his own defense; his peers 
judged him disinherited and forbade him to 
show his face in court or to mingle in the compa- 
ny of true knights. But Ogier and Roland, hear- 
ing of the sentence, begged leave to speak in 
Alory's favor. "Do not deal harshly and unmer- 
cifully with another man 5 weakness. If all who 
fled from battle were disinherited, greatly 
thinned would be our zc One gifted with the 
heart of a hare cannot exchange it for a heart of a 
lion. Forgive Alory, and do not entrust him with 
duties too great for him.’ Charlemagne and his 
peers, well pleased with the new knights' words, 
forgave Alory for his unfortunate deeds. 


Malagigi the Wizard 


The following incident suggests how easily 
supposedly wise kings and peers are deceived by 
the wiles and tricks of wizards. 

Reinhold of Montalban owned one of the 
most famous horses of the Charlemagne leg- 
ends, a splendid beast named Bayard. For a time 
Charlemagne held Reinhold to be a traitor, be- 
cause of Bayard. Once Reinhold fell asleep in a 
wood. A passing countryman who knew some- 
thing of wizardry used spells and enchantments 
to steal Bayard. The countryman brought Bay- 
ard to Paris and gave him to Charlemagne, who 
rewarded the thief with a generous grant of land. 

When he awoke, Reinhold was greatly dis- 
tressed at the loss of Bayard. The wizard Malagi- 
gi, ever pursuing his own plots, appeared to 
Reinhold in the guise of a hermit. After testing 
Reinhold's patience and courtesy by repeatedly 
asking for gifts, Malagigi revealed himself to 


The Tales of Charlemagne and His Paladins * 63 


Reinhold and offered to provide him with a dis- 
guise and ruse that might regain Bayard. 

In Paris two beggars, their features concealed 
in the cowls of their poor robes, waited at a 
bridge as four grooms leading Bayard ap- 
proached. Charlemagne, Roland, and all the 
peers were close behind the grooms. One beggar 
approached the king. The peers would have 
pushed the beggar away, but the charitable king 
bid him draw close and speak. 

“Most gracious king, I pray grant us a boon,” 
the beggar said. “My poor brother (he gestured 
at the beggar standing with him) has been deaf 
and dumb and blind for these many years. A 
wizard told me if he could but ride ten steps on 
Bayard he might be cured.” The king and his re- 
tainers laughed. Charlemagne said, “I've a mind 
to let him try. I've heard of, but never seen, a 
miracle.” The grooms then lifted the supposed 
beggar to Bayard's back. At once Bayard sprang 
away, joyful at the touch of his master 
Reinhold's hand, and stopped not once until 
they were back in Montalban. The other beggar 
disappeared in the confusion, but Charlemagne 
was not deceived further. "Curse that Malagigi! 
Fooled again! If that wizard comes in my reach, 
he shall suffer for it.” 


64 * Chapter Six 


Roland's Quests in Fairylands 


The following is a partial account of Roland's 
adventures in Faerie. Player characters entering 
Faerie may expect to confront similar monstrous 
guardians, subtle tricks and puzzles, and peace- 
able but defiant faerie antagonists. 


Restless at court, Roland was given leave by 
Charlemagne to seek out the Faerie Gardens of 
Falerina, in the Far East, where the arms of Hec- 
tor awaited the coming of a hero. “I already 
have his sword,” said Roland, “and would fain 
have his armor.” All tried to dissuade him, for 
none knew where Faerie lay, with no maps or 
guidebooks in those days. Undaunted, Roland 
set out, headed for the rising sun, veering now 
and then southward. For many days he traveled, 
and left behind the broad lands of France, and 
the fair plains of Lombardy, and the towering 
Alps, and the great sea. In every village and 
town he was welcomed and kindly entertained 
as a Christian knight. Everywhere he asked 
about the gardens of Falerina, but all pointed 
east and shook their heads, and encouraged him 
to give up his quest. 

One day he came to a bridge over a slow- 


flowing river; the other side was hidden in a 
dark mist. A pretty maiden stood to take toll. 
Roland asked the way to Faerie. 

“It is not far from here,” she told him. “Drink 
this cup of water from the river and you shall see 
clearer through the mists which hang over Faerie 
and hide it from mortal sight.” But the maiden 
was speaking of the Faerie of Forgetfulness and 
not of Falerina. Roland drank and forgot all 
friends and quests and himself, and he thought 
only of the fair country he saw across the river, 
and the tall castle. He was led by the maiden into 
the halls of the castle where he and many other 
entrapped knights passed many days in pleasur- 
able forgetfulness. 

Fortunately, Angelica of Cathay, owner of the 
magical ring of invisibility, came to rescue Ro- 
land and the other knights from the Castle of 
Forgetfulness. She put her ring to her lips and 
was at the bridge with the maiden. The maiden 
offered the cup, but Angelica dashed it aside and 
entered the castle. In the banquet hall were Ro- 
land and Reinhold and many other brave 
knights drinking and making merry. Angelica 
stood with her book of enchantments in one 
hand and her trumpet in the other. She blew on 
the horn, and the knights awoke and rushed to 
outfit themselves. They vowed to follow Angeli- 
ca wherever she wished, on whatever adven- 
ture. And they rode back over the now-dry 
River of Forgetfulness into the world of reality. 

Reinhold and other knights hurried back to 
Charlemagne, but Roland wished to try once 
more to find Falerina. He traveled alone through 
many lands toward the setting sun till he came to 
a wood where he heard a fair lady in distress, 
bound hand and foot to a tree and guarded by a 
knight. The knight said the woman was Deceit, 
who was dishonest, untrustful, and treacherous. 
Were she liberated, no end of mischief she would 
result. Roland challenged the knight, but the 
knight said, “If after what I've told you, you 
wish to befriend such a creature, not a word fur- 
ther can I say,’ and with disgust he turned and 
rode away. Roland released the lady and put her 
up behind him on his horse. 

He went forward and at the edge of the wood 
encountered another young lady, a beautiful 
damsel, riding on a white palfrey. “How lucky! 
Had you gone ten yards farther, you would have 


been in plain sight of the gardens of Falerina, 
and you would have been slain by the watchful 
dragon before the gate,’ the beautiful damsel 
said. “Wait here until sunrise, when the gates are 
thrown open for a time; if you are wise, you 
may enter the garden—but watch the dragon!" 
The damsel gave Roland a little book with a map 
of the enchanted garden and a picture of Fa- 
lerina's palace, and directions how to reach it 
and enter it. “The faerie queen; continued the 
damsel, "has been long shut up within, forging a 
magical sword that might be proof against all 
witchery and sharp enough to slay even those 
protected by the unseen powers, for she has seen 
in the book of Fate that a hero will come out of 
the West and that he will trample down her gar- 
den and take from her all her witch's powers. 
The sword is finished, and if you can snatch it, 
you will be safe from her snares.” 

Roland lay down to sleep, and the false-heart- 
ed lady he saved took his steed and his sword 
Durandal and rode away. When Roland awoke, 
he was downcast but resolute. Taking an elm 
branch he approached the gates. Thrusting the 
elm branch into the jaws of the dragon, he vault- 
ed over the dragon's back and through the gates 
just as they opened to admit the floods of light of 
day. 

Within Roland saw a marble image of a river 
nymph in the middle of a stream; in Greek it 
said, "Seekest thou the enchanted palace? Fol- 
low the river.” Never doubting, Roland followed 
the stream and came in a short while to the faerie 
palace of Falerina. He entered, and the faeries, 
never having known an enemy within their 
walls, took no note. He came to Falerina's cham- 
bers and found her admiring herself with the 
sword leaning nearby. He paused to admire her 
for a moment, then snatched up the sword. 
"Yield, and I will spare thee.” 

She said nothing. 

"Show me the Trojan Hector's arms, and thou 
shalt live.” 

“Surely thou are brave to threaten me in my 
own dwelling,” Falerina said calmly, “Surely you 
are Knight Roland of the West.” 

“Roland is my name, and I have come for the 
Arms of Hector. Tell me where I shall find them.” 

“I shall tell thee nothing,” she replied, folding 
her arms. 


The Tales of Charlemagne and His Paladins * 65 


Finding that neither threat nor prayer would 
persuade her, he took her and bound her gently 
with ropes given him by Malagigi. He then fol- 
lowed the stream further, took out the book the 
damsel gave him, and noted a gate that was al- 
ways open. Between that gate and the palace 
was a large lake; on the lake, the book said, was 
a siren whose song charmed passers-by and 
caused the death of many brave knights. 

Roland stuffed his helmet and ears with 
flowers so he could not hear. From the lake rose 
a creature, not beautiful, part fish, part bird, but 
its song was so sweet it charmed the animals 
nearby. At last it ceased its song. Roland pre- 
tended to be charmed. The siren swam close 
thinking to seize him, but Roland grabbed its 
neck and severed the head with the magical 
sword of Falerina. Roland wandered about fur- 
ther and questioned many faeries, but none had 
heard of the arms of Hector, save one old faerie, 
who said it had been carried into another garden 
and that he could not hope to find it without un- 
dergoing many hardships and dangers of which 
he knew nothing. 

Roland returned to the palace, but the splen- 
dor had faded, the birds flown away, the flowers 
closed, and the light was supplanted by shadow. 
The hapless faerie queen was no longer happy 
and defiant, but weeping bitterly. Roland asked 
for the arms of Hector once again, and she said, 
“They are given over into the keeping of Morgan 
le Fay, whence you must go, and take care not to 
let the golden opportunity slip by unimproved.” 
Then Roland freed the faerie queen and gathered 
her worried attendants and said he had no desire 
to hurt her or them. Then he went forth from her 
gardens and sought out the stronghold of Mor- 
gan le Fay. 

The castle of Morgan le Fay was guarded by a 
grim giant wearing steel armor and wielding a 
great club guarding the bridge, never beaten nor 
foiled in battle. The giant challenged Roland to 
battle; Roland was happy to accept combat with 
one whose only virtue was strength. The magi- 
cal blade of Falerina struck through the giant's 
armor, and the giant would have been slain, but 
he swiftly snatched Roland to his chest and leapt 
into the moat. The giant could breathe water, 
but Roland, though half-choked, forced the gi- 
ant to let go. Roland rose to the surface, found 


66 * Chapter Six 


the gate open and unguarded, and walked bold- 
ly through. 

He found himself in a broad field covered 
with diamonds, pearls, rubies, emeralds, and 
every other gem stone. He stopped not to ad- 
mire but proceeded to a garden even more beau- 
tiful than that of Falerina. He was not tempted 
by this pleasure, but kept on. In the middle of 
the garden was a fountain and a nearby bower 
of surpassing loveliness where he beheld Mor- 
gan le Fay asleep, and was all but smitten with 
her charms. But he heard a voice that said, 
“Seize the beauty by the forelock while yet the 
golden moment lasts!” 

The knight saw Morgan's head-back was bare 
and smooth, but her forelock was rich with 
golden hair. Roland looked about for the source 
of the voice, not thinking to follow its strange 
command. Looking up he was amazed by a 
strange vision of a great and busy city, and he 
forgot himself. The vision faded, and he looked 
down, but Morgan had arisen and was dancing 
around the fountain, singing a verse that chided 
Roland for losing his one chance. Then she 
sprang away, and Roland followed in vain, for 
she led him a merry chase, and was never seen 
by him again. 

At last a storm arose, and a hag appeared be- 
fore him out of a cavern and scourged him with 
a leather thong and drove him down into the 
valley. “My name is Repentance, and it is my du- 
ty to punish every one who through hesitation 
and neglect fails to seize the faerie fortune at that 
one golden moment which is allotted him. Go 
back, now, to France. Thy guest is vain. The 
prize you sought has been won by another.” 

Roland went down, hoping to find the faerie 
castle, but found only the desert and rocky 
mountains of Persia. In his hasty pursuit he had 
lost his magical sword, and he was now alone, a 
stranger in a strange land, far from France. 

An old man on a mule appeared, leading a 
war horse—Roland's own horse Brigliadoro— 
and bearing Durandal. The old sguire said, “Let 
us hasten back to France, for while you waited 
and dreamed, an Oriental prince went in, seized 
the prize, and went away. He is on his way now 
to France even as we speak, where he has vowed 
to win from you Durandal and make all Hector's 
arms his own.” 


Bradamante the Warrior Maiden 


The model of the warrior maiden is Brada- 
mante, the White Knight, sister of Reinhold. 
The following is a brief account of several of her 
more famous adventures. 


Bradamante came upon a downcast Pinabel, 
kin of Ganelon of Mayence. Asked of his woes, 
Pinabel told her that his fair maiden had been 
borne away by a winged horse to a Moorish ma- 
gician's castle in the Pyrenees. Bradamante of- 
fered to aid him in rescuing his maiden; Pinabel, 
as treacherous as his kinsman Ganelon, immedi- 
ately began to plot how he might betray and kill 
Bradamante, since Pinabel was enemy of all of 
Montalban blood. 

He led Bradamante up a mountain and to a 
great cleft in the rock. At the bottom of a deep 
gorge could be seen a flood of light coming from 
a narrow door. Pinabel peered into the cleft and 
excitedly reported that he had seen a damsel 
clothed like a princess trying to escape, but she 
was caught and dragged into the inner cave by a 
ruffian jailor. Bradamante fashioned a crude 
ladder from a broken limb and bid Pinabel to 
hold it while she descended to rescue the maid- 
en. But Pinabel let her fall. Bradamante lay 
there, stunned and helpless, as Pinabel, chuck- 
ling with delight, mounted and rode away. 

When Bradamante recovered her senses, she 
went in the door she found at the bottom of the 
gorge and came into a well-lit cavern with an al- 
tar. Bradamante knelt to pray, and a weird 
woman, disheveled and barefooted, entered 
through a secret door. 

“I am Melissa the witch,” the weird woman 
spoke. "This temple was built by Merlin, and 
this is the cavern cell where he lay when he was 
outwitted by the Lady of the Lake—here he still 
lies sleeping but not dead.” Melissa brought Bra- 
damante to Merlin's bier, where she heard the 
wizard's voice and long conferred with him. He 
promised her that she should be the most fa- 
vored of women, the mother of kings and heroes 
as noble as those of ancient Rome. Then Melissa 
brought Bradamante back to the chapel. Melissa 
told her the story of the winged horse and his 
master and the steel-bright mountain fortress. 

Atlantes, the most knowing of sorcerers, had 


a nephew, Roger, the bravest and noblest of 
Moorish princes. Atlantes read in his Book of 
Fates that Roger was destined to leave home and 
kindred and friends and to ally himself with 
Christian foes. Atlantes was determined to con- 
found Fate. In a day and night he built a moun- 
tain stronghold of shining metal, the Castle of 
Iron, and took Roger there. He brought wise 
men to teach Roger, and minstrels from north 
and south to entertain him, and brave knights 
and fair ladies, so Roger should be content and 
not leave. 

Agrimant, king of Africa, wished to defeat 
Charlemagne. He was told by a counselor that 
he must get Roger to aid him, and that to get him 
from the castle, he needed the ring of Angelica. 
"Send Brunello, dwarf and greatest thief in the 
world, to Cathay to steal the ring,” the counselor 
had told Agrimant. Brunello, a wizard himself, 
had little trouble getting to Cathay and stealing 
the ring while Princess Angelica slept. 

Melissa told Bradamante that she must get the 
ring from Brunello before he arrived at 
Atlantes's castle and tried the ring's powers. "Go 
out of the cavern down the road to the seashore 
and to an inn where you will meet Brunello. 
Make an excuse to travel with him on his way, 
but do not touch him until you are in sight of the 
wizard's tower.’ More Melissa whispered in Bra- 
damante's ear. Bradamante then rested, and in 
the morning they set out. Soon they came to the 
seashore, where Melissa bade farewell. 

In the appointed inn Bradamante met Brunel- 
lo and made his acquaintance. Wily Brunello 
saw at once that she was one of Charlemagne's 
warriors. He was on his guard, answering her 
questions with falsehoods, then asking her in 
turn, but the maiden met guile with guile. She 
answered with many a feigned story while 
checking his hand to see if the ring was there. 
Finally each withdrew to their respective rooms. 

In the morning Bradamante and Brunello 
were awakened by a clamor outside the inn 
about a winged horse ridden by a knight in ar- 
mor with an open book in his hand. Bradamante 
told Brunello she wished to visit the bright Cas- 
tle of Iron and to challenge Atlantes to a duel. 
Brunello offered to act as guide, since he had 
with him a book that described the road and 


The Tales of Charlemagne and His Paladins * 67 


country. Bradamante bought a palfrey while 
Brunello followed on a mule as they traveled to- 
gether toward Atlantes's stronghold. 

When they arrived, Bradamante contrived to 
take the ring from Brunello, but she would not 
stoop to harm a creature so weak and unskilled 
in self-defense; she slipped it from his finger as 
he gazed rapt upon the towers. She bound him 
to a tree and heeded not his cries and tears. 

She blew her horn and the winged horse and 
enchanter appeared, he carrying a shield cov- 
ered with a silk shroud in one hand and a book 
in the other. She could not strike past the shield 
with her lance, and Melissa had warned her of 
the shield’s magic powers; when the silk cover 
was removed, the magic light from its polished 
surface had the power to blind, disarm, and 
overthrow all who looked upon it. Angelica's 
ring made Bradamante proof against the shield's 
enchantments, but when at last Atlantes de- 
scended and showed the bright face of the magi- 
cal shield, Bradamante pretended to be affected 
and fell to the ground as if asleep. Atlantes drew 
near, and Bradamante seized him. She would 


68 * Chapter Six 


EN 
MÀ 


have slain the wicked wizard, but she took pity 
on his sorrowful face and snow-white hair; she 
bound him with his own cord. Atlantes mourn- 
fully explained that he captured knights only to 
provide pleasing company for Roger in the 
mountain stronghold. He claimed that though 
the Castle of Iron was a sort of prison, it was 
more delightful than many a palace. Brada- 
mante dismissed Atlantess excuses, claiming 
that liberty was the sweetest of enjoyments. 

Together Bradamante and Atlantes ascended 
the narrow way. Coming to the golden gates of 
the enchanted castle, Atlantes lifted a broad flat 
stone to reveal a chamber filled with all kinds of 
crucibles and lamps burning secret wizard fires. 
Atlantes took these vessels and threw them into 
the valley below. At once the illusion of the cas- 
tle disappeared, revealing a bleak and cheerless 
mountain cave. A long procession of knights, 
ladies, and damsels came forth, including Roger 
the Moorish prince, King Sacripant, Ferrau the 
Moor, Gradosso, Roland, Astolpho of England, 
and Angelica of Cathay. Atlantes sneaked away, 
grieved, shamed, and disappointed. 


CHAPTER 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier 


To make it easier to get started with historical 
role-playing in a Carolingian setting, here are 
two adventures, complete with predesigned 
player characters and background handouts for 
your players. 

You may use the player characters provided, 
or your players may create their own characters 
using the predesigned characters as models. 

Both adventures use the manor of Count Bre- 
go of Eigenmachtig as a home base. The adven- 
tures may be run separately or linked in 
sequence as a mini-campaign. 

The adventures and characters are specifically 
designed for historical settings with a minimum 
of magic and a maximum of period setting. If 
adapted for legendary or fantasy campaign play, 
PCs and NPCs may require additional magical 
resources, and the adventures may need revision 
to maintain play balance. 


Brego and the Boar 


The PCs follow their lord, Count Brego, on a 
hunt for a Christmas boar in the dead of winter. 
The lord disappears while pursuing a marvelous 
boar; later, the PCs discover evidence that their 
count may have met with foul play on a rival 
count's land. Will the PCs be permitted to search 
for Brego on the rival count's land? Was the rival 
count, who had a long-standing feud with Bre- 
go, involved in an attack on him? The PCs are 
courteously invited to share the hospitality of 
the rival count's Christmas Eve feast; here they 
must mind their manners while searching for 
clues to the disappearance of their lord. On 
Christmas Day the rival count discovers that his 
chaplain is missing. While searching for both the 
missing chaplain and Brego, the PCs are am- 
bushed. If they survive, they discover a trail 
leading them to the missing chaplain and Brego 
and a strange explanation for their sudden dis- 
appearances. 


Background 


In the winter of 773, Charlemagne spent 
Christmas in Rome. Much of his army was en- 
gaged in the siege of Pavia, but certain Eastern 
Frankish nobles were required to return with a 
portion of their household forces to safeguard 
the peace of the land. Among those nobles were 


Count Brego of Eigenmachtig and his retainers. 
The counts fortified frontier manor sat on a 
small tributary of the Rhine eight miles south of 
the confluence of the Moselle and Rhine. It was 
well situated for defensive reaction against Sax- 
on unrest or river piracy. 

Count Brego and his retainers (including the 
PCs) arrived home three days before Christmas. 
The adventure begins as Brego and his party 
crest a rise of ground and catch their first 
glimpse of Eigenmachtig Manor, their home. 


Brego and Retainers (NPC Profiles) 


Count Brego of Ardennes: AC 8 unarmored; 
MV 12; F10; hp 70; THACO 11; #AT 3/2; Dmg 
1d8+5; ML 15; AL LN; Riding proficiency 
check 20; Mount of High-spirited quality, MV 32 

Brego is a noble warrior in the tradition of his 
barbarian forebears—hard riding, hard fighting, 
hard-living, with little patience for the clerkish 
preoccupations of literacy, education, and reli- 
gion. Like any Frankish noble, he loves hunting, 
family, feasting, and conquest. 

Berta: Brego's wife (no statistics necessary). Still 
attractive in middle-age, Berta is more ornament 
than substance, charming and well-bred, but excit- 
able and high-strung. Excessively affectionate and 
dependent on Brego and her family members, Ber- 
ta lives for the happy days when everyone is home 
at the manor and bitterly resents worldly affairs 
that draw her brood away from her. 

Warnar the Forester: AC 8 unarmored; MV 
12; Fl; hp 9; THACO 20; #AT 1; Dmg 1d4 
(dagger)/1d6 (bow); ML 14; AL LN; Proficiency 
checks: Hunting and Weather Sense 14, Track- 
ing 15, Direction Sense 16, Survival 12 

Warnar succeeds his father as Brego's forester 
and huntmaster. Still young and inexperienced, 
Warnar nonetheless knows Brego's lands ex- 
tremely well. 

Mother Karla: AC 10 unarmored; MV 9; HD 
1/2; hp 4; THACO 20; #AT 1; Dmg 1d4 -2; ML 
10; AL LN 

Mother Karla is an ancient crone, a favorite of 
Brego. This tough old bird always accompanies 
the hunts “so the lord can have a proper feed.” 

Buchard and Hardrad: AC 10 unarmored; 
MV 12; HD 1; hp 6,5; THACO 20; ZAT 1; Dmg 
1d4 (club); ML 10; AL LN 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier * 69 


These two peasants accompany the hunt as 
bearers. Normally this duty is a treat, but a 
winter hunt may not be so much fun. 


Race to the Gate 


When Count Brego sees the manor, he lets out 
a whoop and gallops at full speed toward the 
bridge and the gate to the stockade. This is clear- 
ly a challenge to a race. 

What do the PCs do? Explain that they may 
choose to accept the challenge and race to the 
gate, or they may follow at a safe but conserva- 
tive speed, or they may proceed slowly or not at 
all. 

In the race to the bridge and gate, Brego and 
all PCs face three Riding challenges. The follow- 
ing guidelines for using Riding proficiency 
checks supersede those presented in the Player's 
Handbook. 

1. The flat-out gallop to the bridge. First Bre- 
go and his retainers must race to the bridge over 
the flooded ditch outside the walls of the manor 
stockade. This race is represented by three suc- 
cessive rounds of Riding proficiency checks. Ex- 


DNI § 


SINN 
\) TM 


P 


N ND A 


70 * Chapter Seven 


plain that PCs who choose to race may increase 
their horses normal movement rate by 1 for 
each additional -1 modifier they are willing to 
receive to all Riding proficiency checks. For ex- 
ample, increasing their mount's normal rate by 4 
requires them to roll all Riding proficiency 
checks with a -4 penalty. PCs may also choose to 
move slower than their horse's normal rate in or- 
der to gain positive modifiers. At the beginning 
of each round, each player secretly marks on a 
scrap of paper the movement rate of his mount. 
Then all reveal their mounts' movement rates 
and roll Riding proficiency checks. In each 
round, if a Riding proficiency check is failed, the 
player moves only the normal movement rate of 
the horse, and then must check his Riding profi- 
ciency again immediately. If this second check is 
failed, the PC falls from his horse. 

The PC whose horse has traveled the farthest 
at the end of the three successive rounds of 
checks is the leader of the race to the bridge. The 
other PCs still in the race are in descending order 
behind him according to their total movement. 

2. The maneuver at the bridge. To remain in 
the race, each rider must pass another Riding 


t Í li 
^ SU Met 


i= 


check at the bridge. If the check fails, the horse 
does not make the turn at the bridge and plunges 
into the flooded ditch before the gate. The rider 
must then make another Riding check; if this 
check is failed as well, the mount suffers 1d6 +2 
points of damage from the mishap. 

3. The leap of the gate. Leaping the gate into 
the manor would be an elegant feat of horse- 
manship. Any PC who remains in the race must 
pass another Riding check with a -4 penalty for 
exceptional difficulty. If this check fails, the 
mount does not clear the gate cleanly, and both 
horse and rider suffer 1d6+2 points of damage 
crashing to the ground. 

Note that this race has a large audience of 
peasants and servants who gasp and frown 
scornfully at poor riders or cheer wildly for 
spectacular feats of horsemanship. Note also 
that Count Brego has the advantage of a high- 
spirited mount and an exceptional Riding profi- 
ciency; as DM, you decide how much he 
chooses to increase his mount's movement rate 
in the gallop to the bridge. Initially Brego does 
not press his advantage, hoping to encourage his 
offspring and retainers to an exciting race. If 


challenged, however, he will spare no risk to be 
first to enter the manor. 


Winter Hunt 


It is the morning of the second day before 
Christmas, Count Brego wakes the PCs and tells 
them to prepare to accompany him on a hunt. 
Of course, as loyal retainers of the count, there 
is no question about whether they are willing to 
accompany him. By tierce Count Brego is 
mounted and ready to go, accompanied by the 
peasants Buchard and Hardrad to carry the 
boar, forester Warnar to guide the party, the old 
woman Karla to prepare the midday hot meal, 
and the PCs. Everyone is dressed to hunt (i.e., 
no armor or shield, armed only with bow and 
lance), but since the count and his retainers are 
theoretically here to keep the peace, the count 
encourages everyone to pack his sword and ar- 
mor for the journey. Again his wife privately 
begs him not to go, but he dismisses her and sets 
out. 

The hunting party encounters a variety of 
small game in the morning, but no boar is seen. 


AOVENTURES OM TDE SAXON FRONTIER 


*eeeee ROADS 30 
= RIVERS ques 


LJ 

. 
Neuss & 
è 


Cologne, Ne Deutz 
T Mis si 
e nM Duren : 


Aix-la-Chapelle * 


a0 50 


& Edet 


we Frankfurt 


Mainz 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier ® 71 


The weather is cold, but the sky is clear. Game is 
easily sighted with the leaves gone from the 
trees, but the horses make a lot of noise moving 
through the downed limbs and fallen leaves cov- 
ering the ground. 

Tell your players that hunting etiquette per- 
mits small game (birds and rabbits, for example) 
to be shot by bow from the saddle. Larger game, 
such as wild pigs and boars, may be attacked 
with the spear (i.e., light lance) from horseback, 
but that this is considered poor form among the 
young noble warriors. It is far more respectable 
to dismount and challenge the pig or boar on 
foot with the spear. One does not attack game 
with anything but arrow, lance, or spear; at- 
tacking game with a sword would insult the dig- 
nity of the warrior's profession. Pursuing game 
on horseback in rugged terrain is tricky, and 
may also give young nobles many opportunities 
to display their fine horsemanship. 

Staging Hunting Encounters: Stage at least 
one minor hunting encounter to familiarize the 
players with hunting game procedures, to give 
the nobles a chance to role-play their competi- 
tive delight in the sport of hunting, and to give 
restless players a chance to bounce the dice. 
Here is a procedure for staging a hunting en- 
counter: 

1. Spotting the Prey: Determine the party or- 
der, then determine which side of the party the 
animal approaches from. Check Hunting profi- 
ciencies for appropriate characters to see who 
spots the game first and therefore gets first shot 
at hunting it. Determine what prey is spotted 
and how many at your discretion. Here are two 
suggestions: 

Rabbit (1): MV 12, AC 6, no attacks, 3 hp 

Wild Pigs (5): MV 12, AC 9, HD 2, #AT 1, 
Dmg 1d4 

2. Determine Terrain and Modifiers: Deter- 
mine the terrain at your discretion. According to 
the type of terrain, the following modifiers are 
appropriate: 

Clearing: no modifiers to Riding or missile fire 

Open Parkland: -2 to Riding, -2 to missile fire 

Moderate Forest: -2 to movement for large an- 
imals (especially horses), -2 to Riding, -2 to mis- 
sile fire, no missile fire at long range 

Dense Forest: -4 to movement for large ani- 
mals (especially horses), -4 to Riding, -4 to mis- 


72 * Chapter Seven 


sile fire, no missile fire at medium or long range 

Wetlands: -6 to movement for large animals 
(especially horses), -4 to Riding, -2 to missile 
fire, no missile fire at long range 

3. Pursuing the Prey: Roll 2d10 to determine 
how many yards away the prey is when it is 
sighted. Roll for initiative and surprise. The 
prey usually flees at maximum speed from the 
party. Daring horsemen may increase the speed 
of their mounts at a cost in penalties to their Rid- 
ing checks as described previously in “Race to 
the Gate.” 

4. Killing the Prey: The rabbit may be shot 
with bow from horseback without dishonor. 
The pigs may be attacked from horseback, 
though it is considered poor form and will earn 
Count Brego's amiable scorn and mocking jests 
from the other PCs. To attack from horseback, 
the PC must successfully pass a Riding check be- 
fore he rolls his normal attack; if the Riding 
check fails, he has no attack that round. To dis- 
mount and attack with a spear in the same round 
requires a successful Riding check; this elegant 
maneuver is considered very fine form. 


Chill of Waning Light 


The party stops at midday for a modest meal, 
then continues. Continuing a winter hunt after 
midday is unusual; the forester cautiously ques- 
tions Brego about it and is told that the hunt will 
continue until a suitable Christmas boar is 
found. The forester acknowledges his lord's 
command, but he speaks privately of his con- 
cerns to one of the PCs chosen at random. First, 
the hunting party is not prepared for a winter 
overnight camp, and there is no hunting lodge or 
shelter in the neighborhood. Further, the count 
is headed west toward the lands of Count Do- 
lan. Tell any PC who hears the forester's words 
that a successful Local History check is required 
to get further information. 

A successful check indicates that the PC 
knows of the old feud between Count Brego and 
Count Dolan. For many years there was a feud 
between the families of the two counts. Finally, 
seven years ago, Pepin, Charlemagne's father, 
decreed that the feud would be at an end. He for- 
bid Count Brego or Count Dolan to provoke 
one another lest they incur the wrath of the king. 


PRG 
[aS | 
EN, 


i A, 
MW yi | n é 


i ax y du X it 
AY Dyer ike 9 


dn awn au 


: A 
Pe 
2 Le 
Sa Ne. 


/ 3 NO 
LN Tess 
P 
ES Ja 


I^ 
= 
= 
ga X 


ern yN 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier * 73 


For seven years both counts have honored the 
royal decree, have been polite to one another in 
public and on campaign, and have not given 
each other any cause for complaint. In particu- 
lar, neither count nor any of their retainers have 
set foot on one another's lands for seven years. 
The boundary of Count Brego's and Count Do- 
lan's lands is still about a half-day's travel west, 
but the forester is concerned. Count Brego is in a 
strange mood; if a suitable boar is not found, the 
hunting party may find itself making a winter 
camp unprepared, and Brego may continue in 
the morning—possibly on to Count Dolan's 
land. 

The PCs know that Count Dolan might well 
consider Brego hunting on Dolan's lands as a 
provocation of the old feud. They also know, 
however, that the chances of Count Dolan or his 
men being out on a winter hunt along the bor- 
ders of his land are extremely slim. If a PC con- 
fronts Brego about the idea of making a winter 
camp or traveling on to Dolan's land, Brego 
sternly says that a winter camp is no serious 
risk— veteran campaigners should hardly notice 
such modest discomfort. In any case, he con- 
tinues waspishly, he has no intention of going on 
Count Dolan's land, and he intends to honor the 
royal decree just as he has for the previous seven 
years. 

Late in the afternoon, as the temperature has 
begun to drop, the clouds roll in and it becomes 
dark and gloomy. Suddenly a group of four 
boars is spotted. Stage the hunt of the boars as 
described above. 

As DM, make sure your NPC Count Brego is 
in the thick of the hunt, and make sure also that 
Count Brego's superior mount and horseman- 
ship force the PCs to take risks if they hope to 
compete with him or impress him with their skill 
and daring. 

Wild Boars (4: AC 7; HD 3+3, hp 17; 
THACO 17; #AT 1; Dmg 3d4; SA at 0 hp the 
boar continues to fight for 1d4+1 rounds, the 
boar dies at -7 hp 

If no boar is slain, Brego orders the hunt to 
continue. However, it is extremely likely that 
most parties will kill at least one—and probably 
all four—of the boars. The forester arranges for 
the largest boar to be carried on a long pole be- 
tween the two peasant bearers and prepares to 


74 * Chapter Seven 


head back toward Eigenmachtig Manor. But 
Count Brego loudly proclaims that the boar is 
too small to be suitable for a Christmas boar and 
that the hunt must continue. 

The PCs should be reluctant to challenge their 
lord's command, but his continuing the hunt as 
evening approaches is unreasonable. The for- 
ester suggests that they should make camp now 
before the light fades so enough firewood can be 
gathered, but Brego insists on continuing, say- 
ing he feels in his bones that a great Christmas 
boar will be slain on this day. 


The Great Boar 


The hunting party continues as the light con- 
tinues to fade. The forester is not sure where 
Count Dolan's lands begin, but he believes it is 
still some distance west. Just at twilight, Brego, 
who insists on leading the party, shouts and gal- 
lops forward into the forest. The terrain is open 
parkland; before them the PCs see Brego charg- 
ing a boar of immense size that stands near a 
thicket ahead. The giant boar turns and disap- 
pears into the thicket; Brego crashes through in 
pursuit, and the chase is on. 

Brego and the giant boar have gained surprise 
and initiative, and they lead the party by one 
round. The PCs may pursue as they wish and 
may risk Riding check penalties by increasing 
their mounts' movement as described previously 
in "Race to the Gate.” 

Almost immediately the giant boar and 
Brego—and the pursuing PCs—break into a 
large clearing. The wall of dark, dense forest is 
solid around the boundaries of the clearing; the 
clearing itself is dimly lit by the fading daylight. 
The giant boar runs to the opposite side of the 
clearing and begins running around its outer 
edge with Brego in pursuit. 

The giant boar is a very unusual, perhaps 
magical, possibly other planar, creature. 

Giant Boar: AC -4; HD 7; hp 100; THACO 11; 
#AT 1; Dmg 3d6 

In the first round that the PCs observe it, it 
moves at a rate of 15. However, in each succeed- 
ing round, its movement increases by 3, so that 
it becomes faster and faster. As it runs around 
the edge of the clearing, Brego and the PCs may 
make attacks, but they discover that it is very 


hard to wound and it moves miraculously 
quickly. In a typical AD&D® game campaign, 
the players would assume that the boar must be 
magical. If they question you about this, tell 
them that a person of this period is more likely 
to imagine that he is witnessing a miracle or 
witchcraft. Belief in sorcery is very uncommon, 
and certainly one wouldn't expect to find a sor- 
cerer in the middle of a Frankish forest. 

The climax of this encounter must have the gi- 
ant boar escaping the clearing with Count Brego 
in hot pursuit. The PCs must fail to follow the 
escaping boar and Brego to permit this adven- 
ture to continue as planned. The boar is almost 
invulnerable and moves quickly enough that the 
players should easily imagine it could escape 
them. 

On the other hand, though Brego is better 
mounted and a better rider than most PCs, clev- 
er or lucky PCs may devise desperate plans to 
prevent Brego and the boar's escape (a reckless 
PC may even attempt to slay Brego's prized 
horse to prevent Brego's getaway). 

Run the pursuit as long as possible, forcing the 
PCs to make desperate Riding rolls to keep Bre- 
go in sight. If a PC increases his mount's speed, 
report that Brego speeds up also. At some point, 
all the PCs will have failed their Riding checks, 
and Brego and the boar are lost to sight. 

Darkness is falling, and the trail cannot be fol- 
lowed unless a character who has Hunting or 
Tracking proficiency searches on foot—thus en- 
suring the mounted Brego and the fleet-footed 
boar must escape. 

Noble and persistent characters will pursue 
nonetheless, even if the chase is futile. Sooner or 
later they will discover that they have lost the 
trail in the dark, or on rocky ground, or in a wet 
slough. They will also belatedly realize that they 
have left the forester, old woman, and two peas- 
ants behind, and they probably are thoroughly 
scattered in the cold winter night. The shouts of 
the forester are audible over long distances, 
however; he is calling everyone to return and 
make camp as soon as possible. 


The Dark Forest 


The PCs and the remaining NPCs now must 
struggle to make camp as best they can. Most 


gamers are familiar enough with overnight wil- 
derness camping that they can role-play the 
problem, but you may permit Survival profi- 
ciency checks or make hints through the forester 
if the players seem to need help. 

To the 8th-century noble, even the hardened 
veteran warrior, an overnight camp in a freez- 
ing, wind-swept forest is a nervous venture. The 
best procedure would be to find an easily de- 
fended spot sheltered from the wind, and to 
gather enough wood for an all-night fire for light 
and comfort and to keep animals away. In the 
dark both of these activities will be difficult. Fur- 
ther, the nobles will sensibly expect the two 
peasants and the forester to do all the hard phys- 
ical work. 


Brego and the Boar 


And what has happened offstage to Count 
Brego and the giant boar? 

Brego has pursued the giant boar onto Count 
Dolan's lands. There Brego caught the boar and 
in a mighty, epic battle, Brego slew the boar. Re- 
alizing that he is lost and wounded and exhaust- 
ed from his battle with the boar, he makes a fire 
for warmth, then goes to sleep. 

By incredible coincidence, a peasant from Fa- 
belhaft village is out poaching this evening. He 
smells the smoke from Brego's fire and comes to 
investigate. Finding one of the count's boars 
slain and a strange man sleeping nearby, the 
peasant assumes he has discovered a poacher. 
He runs back to his village to report to Dolan's 
forester, Felix, hoping to get a reward for his 
service. By another incredible coincidence, Fa- 
ther Fulrad, Count Dolan's steward, chaplain, 
and chancellor, happens to be awake and over- 
hears the peasant's report to the forester. Father 
Fulrad immediately suggests that the forester 
keep the matter a secret. Fulrad suggests further 
that Felix, Fulrad, and six other trusted peasants 
immediately go capture the poacher for the 
count's justice. 

When Fulrad, Felix, and the six peasants 
armed with spear and bow arrive at Brego's rest- 
ing place, Brego's horse takes alarm, and Brego 
is awakened by the whinny. Brego sees men in 
the darkness around him, draws his sword and 
dagger, and attacks, killing three peasants. 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier e 75 


However, a single arrow from Felix's bow strikes 
Brego in the throat and kills him. (A single ar- 
row never kills a high-level AD&D® game char- 
acter, but Fulrad has cast a hold person spell on 
Brego, unbeknownst to Felix.) 

Felix examines Brego's body and immediately 
realizes from his victim's possessions that he has 
killed a nobleman. Fulrad makes Felix and the 
other peasants swear a solemn oath of secrecy. 
At Fulrad's suggestion they take Brego's posses- 
sions, his horse, and the three dead peasants and 
hide them in a cave in a nearby river gorge. 
From the cave Fulrad, Felix, and the three re- 
maining peasants take different routes back to 
Fabelhaft. By morning Fulrad and Felix have re- 
turned to Dolan's manor, three peasants have re- 
turned to their homes in the village, and the 
three dead peasants have apparently disap- 
peared. 

Then, without consulting Fulrad, Felix takes a 
pair of horses and drags the giant boar back to 
Dolan's manor, delivering it to the amazed cooks 
to be served to Lord Dolan for the Christmas 
feast. When Fulrad discovers the presence of the 
PCs from peasant informants, or when he dis- 
covers the pig roasting in the kitchen, Fulrad 
seeks out Felix. Together they leave the manor 
and head for the refuge of the cave in the river 
gorge. 


The PCs Search for Brego 


The PC hunting party awakens on the morn- 
ing of Christmas Eve. The forester can follow 
the trail easily in the daylight. The PCs must de- 
cide whether to return to Eigenmachtig or to 
search for Brego by following the trail. 

PCs who return immediately to Eigenmachtig 
are commanded by Berta to return and search 
for her husband. She threatens to go by herself if 
they are reluctant. 

Following the boar's trail southwest for an 
hour, the party enters Dolan's territory. One 
hour farther down the trail they come upon a 
scene where some great struggle obviously took 
place. By this time the forester is certain that 
they are now on Count Dolan's land. (See the 
"Scene of the Struggle" map.) 

At the scene the PCs find evidence that 
someone—perhaps Brego—had built a fire and 


76 * Chapter Seven 


made camp here last night; the embers beneath 
the ash are still warm. A large number and con- 
fusion of footprints here suggest some sort of 
struggle, but they reveal little about what actu- 
ally occurred. There are no bodies, but in sev- 
eral places something large, at least man-sized, 
fell and bled copiously. In one place some very 
heavy body (perhaps a giant boar) was slain; the 
undergrowth has been crushed by a great weight 
and there is far more blood than one would ex- 
pect from a man's death. 

A special clue is found by anyone who specifi- 
cally searches the nearby woods beyond the area 
disturbed by footprints; here Brego's distinctive 
carved-horn-handled dagger lies hidden some 
ten feet northeast of the disturbed site, undis- 
covered by Brego’s killers. 

Only two trails lead away from the site. One 
trail leads south toward the river gorge; the signs 
suggest that four or five men and a heavily laden 
horse without a rider went this way, but that 
trail disappears on rocky ground 15 minutes 
from the site and about two miles from the river 
gorge. The other trail appears to lead northwest 
toward Fabelhaft, where the village and manor 
of Count Dolan lie. This trail is confused with 
many recent footprints. All that is certain is that 
many more men on foot came to this place than 
went away from it in this direction, and that a 
two-horse-team and cart came here after most 
of the men on foot (since the hoofprints cover 
most of the men's footprints). Then the heavily 
laden cart headed back toward Fabelhaft. 

Now what? 

The evidence at the site strongly suggests that 
the giant boar they saw the day before was killed 
here, then carted away toward Fabelhaft. Signs 
also point to the serious injury or death of one or 
more men here, but there are few clues as to 
their identities. However, Brego would not have 
allowed his horse to be led away into the wilder- 
ness without him on it unless he were severely 
injured or dead. 

The PCs realize they have trespassed on the 
lands of their lord's ancient enemy, lands Brego 
was forbidden to enter by royal decree. The PCs 
must discover the fate of their missing lord, but 
since Brego seems to have trespassed and possi- 
bly poached on Lord Dolan’s lands, they are in a 
difficult position requiring delicate judgment. A 


COUNT BREGO'S MANOR 
AT EIGENMACDTIG 


ES Shed 


= Brego's Hall 


BE warriors Hall 


O 100 200 300 400 
Se 


FEET 


TWO FRANKISD 
RURAL MANORS 


COUNT BREGO'S MANOR AT EIGENMACHTIG 
AMO 
COUNT DOLANUS MANOR AT CA9BCELDAFTT 


WARRIOR'S 
baLt 


BR€GO'S DALL 


1. Private platform spaces 
for retamers 

2. Hearth Hall 

3 firego's Quarters 

4: Stalls fot horses 
and Investock 

5 Living Spaces 

6. Privare Quarters 


| 


NSS AEN ir NT f 


SCENE OF Tbe STRUGGLE 


one hex equals vs mile 


FABELDAET VILLAGE & COUNT DOLAN'S MANOR 


ES Peasant Dwelling 
HII Peasant Vegetable Garden Parish Church 
B Shed 


Stables 


Well & Pool 


Banquet Hall 


hi | ee 


COUNT OOLAN'S MANOR 
o 5 10 15 20 25 
— —"———mum 


eer 


4 foot high timber wall 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier * 77 


successful Statesmanship proficiency check sug- 
gests that failure to inform Count Dolan imme- 
diately of their discovery of possible foul play 
may be construed as complicity on the part of 
the PCs, if some crime was committed here. 

The PCs may follow the first trail toward the 
river, then try to search beyond the point where 
the trail disappears on rocky ground. If they do, 
go to the section called “Following the Dead End 
Trail.” 

The PCs may follow the trail toward Fa- 
belhaft. If they do, go to the section called “The 
Village of Fabelhaft ^" 

The PCs may return to Eigenmachtig. If they 
do, Berta demands that they go to Fabelhaft im- 
mediately and find her husband. She threatens 
to do it herself if the PCs are reluctant. 


Following the Dead-End Trail 


The ground along the river gorge features 
large expanses of exposed bedrock. No trail can 
be found to the cave where the dead peasants, 
Brego, his horse, and his possessions are con- 
cealed. 

If you intend to railroad your players back to 
Fabelhaft so they can enjoy the role-playing en- 
counters there, make it immediately clear that 
any further searching here is a dead end by em- 
phasizing the ruggedness of the terrain, the vast 
area to be searched, and the impossibility of 
finding tracks on the exposed bedrock. The for- 
ester, an expert in local terrain, can tell the PCs 
that a clever man, and a man familiar with the 
territory, has taken advantage of the rocky 
ground and river fords to confound any attempt 
by a small party like the PCs to search the area 
in a reasonable period of time. As DM, also, you 
may remind the players that certain types of op- 
ponents may have special abilities (such as mag- 
ic, for instance) to conceal trails. 

Nonetheless, some players may sensibly ex- 
pect that a horse and men are bound to leave a 
trail or some sort. Further, they may insist that a 
systematic scheme for searching—for example, 
searching only along the banks of the river— 
cuts the area to be searched to more manageable 
dimensions. At this point you must decide 
whether to forcibly steer your players back to 
Fabelhaft, or to let them enjoy devising their 


78 * Chapter Seven 


own methods of finding Count Brego. Much of 
the charm of this scenario lies in the Fabelhaft 
role-playing sessions, but if your players are 
action-adventure fans who prefer hunting and 
fighting to role-playing, they may be better 
served by missing Fabelhaft and playing out the 
search for Brego along the river gorge. 

Searching for the Cave: Use the following 
notes to improvise the details of a wilderness 
search for Brego (using the "Scene of the Strug- 
gle" map): 

* Only characters with Tracking or Hunting 
proficiencies have a chance to discover hints of a 
trail or the cave. Other characters may contrib- 
ute clever suggestions that earn modifiers to ba- 
sic chances of success, but individually such 
characters lack the skill to succeed on their own. 

* For each hour spent in a hex searching for 
evidence of a trail, a character with the Tracking 
or Hunting proficiency has a basic 5% chance of 
discovering a clue. At your discretion, clever or 
thorough search schemes may increase the 
chance to a maximum of 50%. All percentile 
rolls are made in secret by the DM. 

* A successful roll means a clue is discov- 
ered. The clue indicates through which edge of 
the hex the trail leads toward the cave. If the PCs 
are in the cave hex, a successful roll means they 
find the cave. 

* Felix knows the terrain and keeps a careful 
watch. Felix has a 75% chance of knowing when 
the PCs enter a hex adjacent to the cave's hex; he 
automatically knows when the PCs enter the 
cave's hex. 

* Atany time when PCs are in the cave's hex, 
Felix and Fulrad may ambush the PCs as de- 
scribed in "Ambush in the Forest;' page 85, gain- 
ing automatic surprise. They may also ambush 
the PCs in any hex adjacent to the cave's hex, 
but surprise must be rolled for normally. 

Suggested Tactics for Fulrad and Felix: To dis- 
tract and discourage the search, Felix and Fulrad 
may use any of the following tactics at your dis- 
cretion: 

* Sniping: In any hex adjacent to the cave, 
Felix gains automatic surprise with two bow 
shots from cover at medium range. He always 
shoots at the least armored character. In the fol- 
lowing round he withdraws, taking advantage 
of terrain to move without being seen and with- 


out leaving a trail. The PCs may get a glimpse of 
him and know the direction from which the ar- 
rows are fired (which should be misleading), but 
they do not under any circumstances get a 
chance to return fire. Felix can snipe no more 
than once per day. 

* Felix's Night Camp Raid: If the PCs build a 
campfire, Felix moves within close range and 
shoots two bow shots at an exposed individual, 
preferably someone on watch. As in sniping 
above, he immediately withdraws, leaving no 
trail and permitting no chance of return fire. If 
the PCs keep the campfire going, he returns and 
attacks again in the same fashion an hour later. 

* Fulrad's Night Camp Raid: Fulrad sum- 
mons eight wolves and sends them to attack the 
camp. He then moves close enough to cast a con- 
tinual darkness spell on the scene of the combat. 
In addition to rendering missile fire impossible 
and giving a -4 penalty to all melee combat with- 
in the area of effect, players should be encour- 
aged to role-play terror, since the darkness is 
obviously supernatural and unlike anything 
they've ever experienced before. Fulrad, how- 
ever, is not skilled at concealing his trail like Fe- 
lix. If by a stroke of luck the PCs guess which 
direction to pursue, Fulrad uses a second contin- 
ual darkness spell to confound pursuit, then 
flees to the river gorge. At night it is impossible 
to follow his trail, but in the morning PCs with 
Hunting or Tracking proficiencies have a 50% 
chance per hour that they search to find Fulrad's 
trail. Further, once found, this trail leads directly 
to the cave. If the PCs follow this trail to the 
cave, Felix and Fulrad ambush as described in 
"Ambush in the Forest" later on in this chapter, 
but they do not automatically gain surprise; roll 
for surprise normally. 

* Full-Scale Night Camp Ambush: If you 
choose, Felix and Fulrad may take advantage of 
darkness—and Fulrad's spell abilities—to attack 
the PCs in camp as described in "Ambush in the 
Forest.” Fulrad would only attempt this if he 
thought he had a good chance of killing every 
PC in the party; otherwise he would prefer to 
hope that the PCs will fail to find the cave and 
abandon their search. A pitched battle is the last 
thing Fulrad wants. 

Concluding the Search: The logical conclu- 
sion of an extensive search for the cave will be 


one of the following: 

* The PCs fail to find the cave, abandon 
their search, and head for Fabelhaft. The only 
adjustments necessary to the village and manor 
encounters are according to the date. If the day 
is Christmas Eve, no changes are necessary. If 
the day is Christmas, there is a Christmas feast 
but no giant boar. The village and manor are 
astir with the rumors of Father Fulrad's disap- 
pearance, If the day is after Christmas, the PCs 
may be greeted by an armed search party from 
the manor led by Thunar, Dolan's eldest son; 
they are initially suspected in Father Fulrad's dis- 
appearance. In the heightened tension of the cir- 
cumstances, the PCs receive a chilly, even hostile 
welcome from Thunar. 

* The PCs fail to find the cave, abandon 
their search, and return to Eigenmachtig. Berta 
commands them to return and find her husband. 
The PCs arrive in Fabelhaft after Christmas. 
They are greeted by an armed search party led 
by a suspicious, hostile Thunar as described in 
the previous paragraph. 

* The PCs find the cave, and Felix and Fulrad 
ambush them as described in "Ambush in the 
Forest" later in this chapter, leading to the con- 
clusion of the scenario. 


The Village of Fabelhaft 


See the "Scene of the Struggle map. 

The obvious trail leads through open wood- 
lands to a road where the hard-packed surface 
leaves no hint of footprints and only occasional 
marks of hoofs and cartwheels. To the north the 
road leads toward the nearby village of Fa- 
belhaft and Count Dolan's manor, and beyond 
that toward distant Duren and Aix-la-Chapelle. 
To the south the road leads several miles to a 
bridge across the river gorge and farther south 
toward distant Echternach Abbey and Trier. A 
successful Tracking proficiency check indicates 
that the most recent cart and hoof signs point to- 
ward Fabelhaft. PCs heading north quickly find 
encouraging evidence that the heavily laden cart 
has passed this way. PCs headed south travel as 
far as the wooden bridge over the river gorge 
without finding any further signs of recent cart 
travel. The forester strongly suggests going 
north. 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier * 79 


As they approach Fabelhaft through the sur- 
rounding fields, PCs see many peasants bustling 
about. The smell of baking bread and special 
Christmas pastries is in the air. A number of peo- 
ple are gathered outside the parish church, 
which is decorated for the holiday. In particular, 
several men and women stand at the church 
front door speaking in animated gestures with 
the parish priest. 

As the PCs approach, all the villagers stop 
what they are doing to stare and point. The ar- 
rival of a strange party of noble warriors at 
Christmastime is a very unusual event, and it 
could mean anything. Mutterings and rumors 
like “Saxon uprising, you bet! Call to muster!” 
or “Heavens! The king is coming for Christmas! 
And not a word of warning!” are heard among 
the crowd as they swarm out to the road to ex- 
amine the visitors. 

If the PCs initially do not mention Brego, the 
boar, or the cart, and inquire instead about local 
news, a peasant boy quickly tells them that three 
peasants are missing in the night, and no one 
knows where they went. If the PCs immediately 
tell about their missing lord, the peasants in- 
stinctively keep quiet and are evasive if ques- 
tioned, since they know nothing good can come 
of these questions. 

If questioned directly, the parish priest will- 
ingly explains that the peasants disappeared 
without a trace from their homes last night. If 
the PCs directly question the families of the 
missing peasants, most family members are re- 
luctant to admit that they occasionally slip out 
at night to poach on the count's land. One wife, 
however, admits that her missing husband occa- 
sionally slipped out at night, but that she never 
asked him what he did, since she didn’t want to 
know. 

The three surviving peasants who accompa- 
nied Felix and Fulrad stay out of sight to avoid 
being questioned. There might be clues hidden 
among these three peasants’ possessions (per- 
haps small tokens stolen from Brego's body), but 
the PCs have no right to question peasants under 
Dolan’s protection. Dolan and his three sons im- 
mediately arrive in a dangerous mood if a peas- 
ant comes to the manor complaining of 
mistreatment by strange warriors. 

The village encounter permits the PCs to role- 


80 * Chapter Seven 


play interactions with the peasants and parish 
priest, but no important clues to Brego's death 
can be found without Count Dolan's aid and 
consent. If Dolan permits ar assists in question- 
ing all the peasants about the matter, the three 
guilty peasants are skilled liars (as poachers 
must be). Though the PCs may have reason to 
suspect that these peasants know something 
they are not telling, no direct evidence or testi- 
mony can be obtained to reveal what has hap- 
pened to Brego. 


Invitation to the Christmas Eve Feast 


See the diagram of Dolan's manor and the 
profiles of the count and his retainers. 

The outer gate is open, but the inner gate is 
closed. If asked, any peasant will run to the 
manor to announce the arrival of noble visitors; 
otherwise, the PCs may approach the door to 
the entrance hall directly and knock or other- 
wise announce their arrival. [n time a servant ar- 
rives at the entrance hall door and asks the 
party's business. The servant then asks the party 
to wait while he informs his lord of the arrival of 
guests. 

The party waits for a very long 15 minutes. 
Finally Thunar, the count's eldest son, appears at 
the door. Thunar is very courteous; regardless of 
what the servant or other peasants have told him 
about the purpose of the PCs' visit, he behaves 
as though unpopular, poor, and socially clumsy 
relatives have arrived unannounced and must be 
treated with formal hospitality. He insists that 
the party join the family for the Christmas Eve 
banquet that evening. He is careful not to offend 
PCs by belittling the gravity of their problems, 
and he generously offers them any physical aid 
they might request (e.g., a group of men to 
search for Brego). He insists that nothing should 
be done in haste, and that he and his father will 
give all matters their complete and careful con- 
sideration, but that it is impossible at present to 
interrupt the preparations for the Christmas 
feast. 

He firmly refuses to discuss or consider any 
specific charges, and he treats Brego's disappear- 
ance as a troubling incident but not immediately 
important. 

Thunar carefully avoids directly accusing the 


PCs of any crime or social offense in entering 
Dolan's lands uninvited, but he implies by his 
manner that the PCs are intruding where they 
have no right to intrude and that their host is 
bending over backward to show how sensible, 
understanding, and fair he is. If the PCs are 
crude enough to directly or indirectly suggest 
that Count Dolan, his retainers, or peasants 
may have caused Brego harm, Thunar maintains 
his calm poise, though he becomes more icily 
polite, insisting that such charges must be made 
formally to the count. Unfortunately, the count 
is unable to grant a formal audience at this time; 
the earliest that a court could be called to con- 
sider the matter would be in a week's time. 

Now what? 

The PCs may accept Count Dolan's hospitali- 
ty, thinking it an opportunity to meet the count 
and his retainers and snoop around. Once the 
PCs agree to accept the invitation to the ban- 
quet, Thunar assigns them to guest lodgings at- 
tached to the banquet hall, and he assigns three 
or four serving boys and girls to attend them. 
Thunar politely suggests that it would be unwise 
to go anywhere unattended, and pointedly di- 
rects the serving boys and girls to stay with the 
PCs at all times. 

The PCs may refuse Count Dolan's hospitali- 
ty, but if they insist on continuing to search for 
Brego on Dolan’s land, Thunar politely but firm- 
ly refuses. He points out that the PCs have no 
right to seek justice on Count Dolan's lands 
without the count's consent, and he also man- 
ages to imply that retainers of Count Brego actu- 
ally have no right to even be on Count Dolan's 
lands, according to the king's decree. 

Continued insistence on searching Dolan's 
lands forces Thunar to withdraw as quickly as 
possible and bar the door. Thunar then sounds 
an alarm, summons his father and brothers, 
sends messengers to muster the peasant militia, 
and makes plans to arrest, capture, or kill the 
PCs. If the PCs leave immediately before 
Thunar organizes the militia, the PCs may re- 
turn to the river gorge and search for Brego. If 
they find Brego and Fulrad, Dolan and Thunar 
will forgive the PCs' rude and illegal disregard of 
the count's authority over his lands. If the PCs 
wait around and get into combat with Dolan, his 
sons, and the militia, the PCs have become out- 


laws. Whether or not they survive or escape Do- 
lan's forces, the PCs can look forward to a trial 
for treason if apprehended. Blinding awaits 
them if convicted of treason; blinding and exe- 
cution await if they are convicted of killing the 
count or any of his sons, 

Snooping Around the Manor: Once having 
accepted the invitation to the banquet, the PCs 
may poke around the manor looking for clues in 
the guise of getting a tour from the servants at- 
tending them. In the process they may meet any 
of the manor's NPCs, with the exceptions of 
Count Dolan, his wife Alvina, Felix the forester, 
and Father Fulrad, who avoid contact with PCs 
on purpose. In addition, they may meet any 
number of cooks, servants, and manor crafts- 
men and laborers. These improvised role-play- 
ing encounters let the) PCs learn about the 
various important NPCs at the manor. In addi- 
tion, there are several significant things that 
may be discovered. | 

The most important is that the giant boar that 
Brego killed is roasting on a spit in the yard be- 
hind the kitchen. The DM can lead the PCs to 
this clue at any time by noting the lovely smell 
of roasting pork in the air. (Alternatively, the 
DM may leave this revelation to the banquet, 
when the roast boar is brought before the 
guests.) The cooks note that the forester, Felix, 
brought the magnificent beast in that morning 
and offered it for the Christmas feast. No one 
but Felix and the cooks know about the giant 
boar. The PCs may search in vain for Felix; they 
are told he is probably out hunting for fresh 
game for tonight's table. If the PCs report the 
discovery of the boar to Thunar or any of Do- 
lan's family, they express polite interest, promise 
to ask Felix about it as soon as he returns, and 
promptly forget about it. 

If the PCs are thorough and persistent in their 
poking about, they may learn that only four ma- 
jor figures at the manor manage to avoid meet- 
ing them personally: Dolan, Alvina, Felix, and 
Fulrad. The PCs may infer that they are all 
guilty of something, but in fact only Fulrad and 
Felix avoid the PCs out of guilt. 

Felix and Fulrad have gone into hiding at the 
river gorge, where they intend to ambush any- 
one who comes looking for them. Felix success- 
fully avoids leaving any trace of his and Fulrad's 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier * 81 


path to the river gorge; all attempts to track Fe- 
lix or Fulrad from the manor are futile. 

Count Dolan and Alvina are in their private 
quarters where they have left strict orders that 
they are not to be disturbed. Dolan is furious 
that Brego or Brego's retainers have stepped on 
his lands despite the king's decree. Count Dolan 
is a good, old-fashioned war lord; his idea of jus- 
tice would be to kill the PCs for their trespass on 
his land. The sensible Alvina and Thunar have 
prevailed upon Dolan to control his temper and 
to let Thunar handle the matter, but neither Al- 
vina nor Thunar trust Dolan’s restraint. Thus 
they are keeping him away from the PCs. 


The Christmas Eve Banquet 


The banquet begins at compline (9 PM) in the 
banquet hall. The room is decorated with 
greens, holly, and colorful ribbons; a minstrel 
recites poetry to quiet musical accompaniment. 
Three tables are set: two long trestle tables fac- 
ing one another with a short table across the bot- 
tom ends of the long tables, forming a "U^ 

Along the right-hand trestle table are seated 
all the manor's servants (along with Brego's for- 
ester, Warnar, who accompanied the PCs). 
Along the left-hand trestle table are the lord's six 
children and the PC guests. At the short table 
are places for Count Dolan and Lady Alvina in 
the center, with two places at either side of them, 
one reserved for Father Fulrad, the steward and 
chaplain, the other reserved for any priest ac- 
companying the PCs. 

The count's male children are seated with the 
eldest closest to the count's table. If there are any 
eligible female PCs, they are seated alternatingly 
at the left of the eldest males of the Dolan family. 
If there are no female PCs, or not enough to al- 
ternate between Dolan's sons, Dolan's daughters 
are seated at their brothers' left hands. Then, 
farther to the left, the male PCs are placed in de- 
scending order of distinction (as perceived by 
Thunar, who makes all such judgments on seat- 
ing). The intent is to seat the eldest children of 
Dolan as close as possible to their father's table, 
to alternate eligible female visitors close to Do- 
lan's male offspring, and to give Dolan's daugh- 
ters (Gisla, Judith, and Adelaide) either social 
precedence or, if Thunar deems any PC socially 


82 * Chapter Seven 


significant enough, a suitable PC dinner com- 
panion. As DM, seat the party to create the 
greatest possible opportunity for conversation 
and conflict between the PCs and Dolan's off- 
spring. 

The following events ought to occur during 
the banquet in the order presented. Other events 
may occur spontaneously as you or your players 
invent them. 

1. Seating the Guests: The servants' table is 
filled first, then the table for the PC guests and 
Dolan' children; any PC priest is seated at the 
head table to await the arrival of the count and 
his wife. Finally, after suitable delay and fanfare, 
Count Dolan and Lady Alvina arrive. Everyone 
stands and cheers the lord and lady's entrance, 
and the lord asks a priest for a benediction. Do- 
lan notices with some puzzlement that his chap- 
lain, Fulrad, is missing from the feast (neither 
Fulrad nor Felix appear for the banquet, and 
their empty places are conspicuous), but he 
smoothly turns to any PC priest or to Thunar 
and asks for a prayer and blessing for the feast. 

2. The Starting Courses: Plenty of food and 
ale is served, and servants stand at the wall be- 
hind each table to get whatever the guests re- 
quire. During this period all the Dolan children 
are well-mannered and more or less polite, and 
they make pleasant conversation with their din- 
ner companions. 

3. The Count Leaves and Returns: Visibly 
annoyed, partway through the feast Dolan 
leaves the table and the hall. He returns in a few 
minutes, still fuming, but politely adjusting his 
mask of social propriety. He has gone out to in- 
quire after the absence of his steward and chap- 
lain, and he has been informed that Fulrad is 
inexplicably missing and nowhere to be found. 
He has returned angry and puzzled, but resolved 
to leave the matter for later. 

4. The Main Courses and the Serious Drink- 
ing Begin: All Dolan family members, with the 
exception of Thunar, begin to eat and drink with 
abandon. Fardruf, Dolan's second son, begins to 
needle various PCs and casually challenges them 
to minor contests of eating, drinking, witty ban- 
ter, and accounts of honor, courage, skill, and 
prowess. Colmar, the third son, immediately 
has more to drink than he ought; he is either ex- 
ceptionally friendly or exceptionally touchy and 


hot-tempered, according to whether PCs treat 
him with friendliness or hostility. Gisla begins a 
campaign to either seduce or embarrass a suit- 
ably gullible PC. Adelaide drives her dinner 
companions mad with idle and incessant chat- 
ter; she is obviously headed toward embarrass- 
ing drunkenness. Judith is initially reserved, but 
warms to anyone who treats her with respect or 
genuine friendship. Thunar is carefully cool but 
hospitable, and he is clearly keeping an eye on 
his siblings and the PCs. 

5. The Roast Boar Arrives: The servants bring 
in the Christmas boar, causing an instant sur- 
prise and sensation. Never has so huge and suc- 
culent a boar been presented to the count. The 
count is genuinely impressed and pleased, and 
he loudly claps and asks, “To whom do I owe 
thanks for this fine boar? Let him speak up, and 
may he ask me for a generous reward!" Unless 
the PCs speak, there is a silence that grows un- 
comfortably long. The count becomes impatient 
and demands to know where the boar came 
from. No one in the hall seems to know, so the 
count once again stalks out of the hall to ques- 
tion the cooks. Lady Alvina rescues the awk- 
ward moment by entreating everyone to dig in 
and enjoy the fine Christmas boar. 

If the PCs try to bring up the matter of Brego 
and the boar with Count Dolan at this point, 
Count Dolan, already irritable, may snap and 
challenge the PCs one and all to a duel. Lady Al- 
vina will try to intervene as a peacemaker; 
Thunar will intervene as a fierce and threatening 
defender of the hospitality of the feast. If the 
PCs and Dolan and his sons come to blows here, 
the scenario must end disastrously in the rekin- 
dling of the Dolan-Brego feud at the very least 
and may result in death or outlawry for the 
player characters. Sensible PCs will recognize 
that offending against their host's hospitality is a 
serious crime and a poor testament of their char- 
acter. Reckless, impulsive, or proud PCs may 
trigger an immediate and disastrous climax to 
the whole adventure. 

6. The Post-Feast Show: The feast has reached 
its dramatic climax and begins to decline into a 
loud party fueled by overindulgence in ale. Lady 
Alvina and most of the servants leave the ban- 
quet hall, but Lady Alvina encourages her chil- 
dren and guests to continue the party in her 


absence. At this point both Fardruf and Colmar 
separately challenge some PCs to either a wres- 
tling or drinking contest, Wrestling contests are 
judged as described in the DMG on pages 59-60. 

Drinking contests are judged by the following 
procedure. For each round drunk by a character, 
roll a Constitution check. If the check succeeds, 
the character loses 2 HP, If the check fails, the 
character loses 1d4 +2 hit points. The loss of hit 
points counts just as though it were real combat 
damage, but the injuries are neither serious nor 
permanent. The last character standing wins the 
drinking contest. Losers are unconscious for 1d4 
hours and cannot be revived by herbal or magi- 
cal healing. Furthermore, losers (those rendered 
unconscious by drink) are hung over the follow- 
ing day and suffer a -4 penalty to all combat and 
proficiency rolls. Gisla arranges a late-night ren- 
dezvous with a chosen PC; she arranges this ren- 
dezvous in a freezing barn and fails to arrive at 
the scheduled time. 

If at any time the festivities seem about to get 
out of hand, Thunar steps in and guides his 
brothers to bed, graciously thanking the PCs for 
their company and pointedly suggesting that the 
PCs should also go to bed. 

If questioned about the absence of Fulrad or 
Felix, all characters except for Dolan and Thu- 
nar are openly puzzled, acknowledging that it is 
very odd for both to be absent under such cir- 
cumstances, Dolan rudely observes that it is no- 
body's business but his own, while Thunar is 
instinctively circumspect, assuming that Fulrad 
must have his reasons, but that the PCs ought 
not to trouble themselves on his account. 

After the feast, however, Thunar also makes 
inquiries among the staff, then personally 
searches the manor for both Fulrad and Felix. He 
is beginning to suspect that something potential- 
ly embarrassing to the family is going on, and he 
wants to find out about it before the player char- 
acters do. 


Count Dolan and His Household 
(NPC Profiles) 


Count Dolan: AC 8 unarmored; AC 2 ar- 
mored; MV 12; F12; hp 90; THACO 9; FAT 3/2; 
Dmg 1d8 +3; ML 15; AL LN; Riding proficiency 
check 15; Mount of High-spirited quality, MV 32 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier * 83 


An old man at 57 but still in fighting form, 
Dolan looks and acts like the lord of all he sur- 
veys. He earned his present power and influence 
as a young man in Pepin's service against the 
Saracens, when his martial prowess and courage 
endeared him to his men and his superiors. Nei- 
ther Dolan's advisors nor the loyal folk of his 
county nor Charlemagne are aware of the de- 
cline of his grasp of government and estate man- 
agement, so skillfully have his wife and steward 
advised and manipulated his judgments. Un- 
aware of his role as beloved figurehead, Dolan is 
proud, impulsive, and overbearing, as he be- 
lieves a gentleman should be. He can also be 
generous and forgiving to those loyal to him. 

Lady Alvina (no statistics necessary). Count 
Dolan's wife, Alvina is 14 years her husband's 
junior. She is energetic, shrewd, and ambitious, 
skilled at stewardship and statecraft. She plays 
the role of a fashionable simpleton and works 
through her husband and his children, intelli- 
gently manipulating them toward her ends. She 
recognizes her husband's limited intelligence, 
dim grasp of statecraft, and impulsive temper; 
she handles him carefully to preserve his current 
power and influence. 

Father Fulrad: AC 10 unarmored; AC 4 ar- 
mored; MV 12; C10; hp 65; THACO 14; #AT 1; 
Dmg 1dó; ML 15; AL NE; Spells (6/6/3/3/2): 
cause fear, cause light wounds (x2), darkness, 
pass without trace, sanctuary; charm person or 
animal (x2), enthrall, hold person (x2), with- 
draw; call lightning, continual darkness, feign 
death; animal summoning I, spell immunity, un- 
detectable lie; cause critical wounds, commune 

Father Fulrad, Dolan's steward, chaplain, and 
chancellor, is a dynamic villain who was former- 
ly a true neutral, but is now on his way down 
toward chaotic evil. A gifted scholar and theolo- 
gian in his youth and well respected in York, En- 
gland, where he was schooled, Fulrad began his 
service to Dolan pleased to be able to guide and 
temper the count's judgments and actions to- 
ward more enlightened and humanistic policies. 

Fulrad, however, believes himself to have 
been regularly visited by an angel whom he ini- 
tially believed to be a miraculous messenger of 
divine inspiration. This angel has told Fulrad to 
keep his visits secret and has offered visions of 
the future along with access to powerful magical 


84 * Chapter Seven 


spells as a sign of divine favor. On some level 
Fulrad now realizes that he is being guided and 
supported not by an angel, but by some other 
sort of powerful spirit, but he does not con- 
sciously admit this to himself, 

As DM, you may decide what Fulrad's 
"guardian angel" actually is. If the PCs somehow 
discover the source of Fulrad's unusual priest 
abilities, they may reasonably conclude that 
Fulrad is in the thrall of some servant of the 
Great Fiend, but some witch, sorcerer, or an in- 
dependent ancient pagan spirit might also be re- 
sponsible. 

Felix the Forester: AC 10 unarmored; AC 8 
armored; MV 12; F6; hp 45; THACO 15; #AT 1; 
Dmg 1d6 +2 (bow)/1d4 +2 (dagger); ML 15; AL 
LN 

Felix is a good person and a good forester, 
though he's quiet and solitary by nature, and no 
one claims to know him well. Felix earnestly be- 
lieved Brego to be a poacher and trespasser 
when he slew him. Felix is a shrewd forest fight- 
er, always aiming at the character with the poor- 
est armor, attacking by surprise and swiftly 
withdrawing, concealing his route, before he 
can be spotted or pursued. Fulrad arranges to 
murder Felix and frame him with Brego's death. 

Thunar: AC 8 unarmored; AC 2 armored; 
MV 12; F7; hp 55; THACO 14; #AT 3/2; Dmg 
1d8 +4 (sword)/1d6 +4 (light lance); ML 15; AL 
LN; Riding proficiency check 17 

The eldest son of Count Dolan and Alvina has 
inherited both his father's warrior traits and his 
mother's wit and social skills, He has also inher- 
ited his father's temper and his mother's ambi- 
tion, but he keeps them both under control. He 
wants to be an even more powerful and re- 
nowned count than his father—not out of greed 
or lust for power, but because he simply wishes 
to use his god-given talents to their fullest. He is 
exceptionally fond and protective of his parents 
and siblings, and he cannot be easily tricked into 
fighting when wit and diplomacy would serve 
him better. 

Fardruf: AC 10 unarmored; AC 4 armored; 
MV 12; F3; hp 20; THACO 18; #AT 1; Dmg 
1d8+3 (sword)/1d6 (light lance); ML 12; AL 
LN; Riding proficiency check 14 

The second son of Dolan and Alvina has most 
of the charm and twice the good looks of 


Thunar, but he has been spoiled and has done 
nothing to improve on his inherited abilities. He 
is always in Thunar's shadow; though outward- 
ly respectful of Thunar, he secretly resents his 
brother's greater status. 

Colmar: AC 9 unarmored; AC 3 armored; 
MV 12; F2; hp 15; THACO 19; #AT 1; Dmg 
1d8+1 (sword)/1d6 (light lance); ML 15; AL 
LN; Riding proficiency check 15 

The third son of Dolan and Alvina, Colmar is 
a born fighter, courageous, generous, and like- 
able, but he is self-centered and not particularly 
clever. He tends to excess in all emotions; he ei- 
ther hates or adores, and he always exaggerates 
the intensity of his own and other's feelings. 

Gisla (no statistics necessary). The eldest 
daughter of Dolan and Alvina is intelligent, 
good-looking, and bored. Gisla amuses herself 
by tormenting men and by establishing domi- 
nance over women. She controls men by her 
feminine wiles; women she controls by a more 
subtle application of status and psychology. 

Judith (no statistics necessary). The second 
daughter of Dolan and Alvina is independent, 
rebellious, and imaginative; Judith is the black 
sheep of the Dolan family. Skeptical and cyni- 
cal, she is at first cool and suspicious of stran- 
gers, but she responds to sincere respect and 
interest. 

Adelaide (no statistics necessary). The third 
daughter of Dolan and Alvina is sweet, scatter- 
brained, and impressionable. Adelaide is kind 
and generous to all, particularly with her ever- 
flowing stream of aimless babble. Though she is 
always eager to be of help, such help is often a 
great burden on its beneficiary. 


The Morning After 


When the PCs rise in the morning, they are in- 
vited to breakfast with Dolan and the family. At 
breakfast Thunar offers to accompany the PCs 
in a search for Brego, so long as they do not 
leave until after Christmas morning mass and so 
long as they can return for the evening Christ- 
mas feast. 

After breakfast, the family and PCs go di- 
rectly to the chapel, where they discover that 
Fulrad is still missing. A PC priest, if available, 
is asked to conduct the services; immediately af- 


terward, Thunar comes to the PCs, admits that 
he is concerned about Fulrad's disappearance, 
and suggests that they set out at once to search 
for him. Thunar is mounted and armed for com- 
bat, and he brings two peasant guides on foot 
and armed with bows. Thunar suspects that 
Fulrad and Brego's disappearances may be con- 
nected, so he is eager to examine any trail lead- 
ing from the site where the PCs believe that 
Brego may have been slain. 


Ambush in the Forest 


PCs searching the trail toward the river even- 
tually run into an ambush staged by Father 
Fulrad and Felix. 

DM Note: PCs searching the trail toward the 
river after the Christmas Eve feast are accompa- 
nied by Thunar and two peasant guides. When 
ambushed, Thunar concentrates on protecting 
his peasant companions and expects the PCs as 
warriors to be able to defend themselves. 

Fulrad's Ambush: See the "The Ambush" 
map. Felix begins firing from hard cover (behind 
tree trunks) when the PCs come in range. After 
two rounds of missile fire from Felix, the five 
bears magically summoned by Fulrad rush 
through the woods to attack the PC party as in- 
dicated. 

Black Bears (5): AC 7; MV 12; HD 33; hp 
24; THACO 17;.#AT 3; Dmg 1d3/1d3/1d6 (paw 
hits for 18 or better do additional damage of 
2d4) 

While the bears attack the party, Fulrad casts 
a call lightning spell, blasting Felix to death with 
a lightning bolt (which the PCs certainly hear, 
even if they do not see exactly where it strikes). 
Fulrad then hastens back to the cave where the 
bodies of the three dead peasants and Brego's 
body, horse, and possessions are concealed, 
leaving an obvious trail of broken branches, dis- 
turbed piles of leaves, and other marks in the un- 
dergrowth that anyone can follow, even without 
a Tracking or Hunting proficiency. 


A Deceptive Solution to the Mystery 


In the cave Fulrad slashes the throats of Brego 
and the peasants. He then slashes the throat of 
Brego's horse, killing it, and beheads a black 
cock. Taking the blood from the horse and cock, 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier * 85 


he splatters it upon a rune-inscribed rock he has 
previously prepared to simulate the evidence of 
a witchcraft ceremony, He then casts two cause 
wounds on himself, making the wounds appear 
as though he has been struck from behind by a 
heavy object. He then lies down among the 
bodies of Brego and the peasants and casts a 
feign death on himself. 

PCs who survive the bear attack will certainly 
discover Felix's blasted body and an obvious 
trail back toward the river gorge and the cave. 
Do not tell the players that the trail is of a single 
person and leads away from Felix's body unless 
the trail is specifically examined in detail, or if 
the PCs specifically mention that they are look- 
ing for number and direction of travelers along 
the trail. 

When they follow the trail back to the cave, 
they discover the bodies of Brego, the three 
peasants, and Fulrad, along with Brego's dead 
horse and his possessions, the slain black cock, 
and the blood-stained, rune-inscribed rock. 
Fulrad waits until he has been definitely identi- 
fied as dead, then after a period of time he 
moans and twitches, revealing that he is miracu- 
lously not dead after all. He pretends to be delir- 
ious unless magically or otherwise healed, when 
he appears to feebly recognize his surroundings. 
After a plausible time to recover, he tells the fol- 
lowing story. 

Fulrad explains that early that morning he had 
seen Felix bring the giant boar to the kitchen. 
Fulrad asked Felix where the boar came from, 
and Felix replied in a curiously evasive way that 
the boar was a Christmas gift from heaven. 
Fulrad was puzzled and persisted in questioning 
Felix, but Felix remained evasive and left abrupt- 
ly, claiming he had important affairs to attend 
to. Fulrad impulsively followed Felix outside the 
manor and down a game trail. Fulrad says he 
doesn't remember what happened after that. 

Fulrad plays dumb about all recent events un- 
til other PCs or NPCs report these events to him. 
He does not recognize the cave he's in, the 
bodies, or anything else in the cave. He leaves it 
to other PCs or NPCs to suggest a chain of 
events that might explain the death of Brego and 
Fulrad's disappearance. 

Felix, of course, must have been a witch or a 
servant of a Dark Power. The dead cock and 


86 * Chapter Seven 


the MOST 
3 BEARS 


e e! 
e teg? 
& | 


mm the PARTY 


* 
“efe € 
î, 
2 dim 


blood-splattered, rune-inscribed rock are the 
most obvious evidence, and superstitious faith- 
ful folk will immediately see the bolt of lightning 
that killed Felix as a miraculous judgment from 
Heaven. It is not clear how the peasants or Brego 
were killed, but the assumption is that they were 
unholy sacrifices for evil powers. The giant boar 
and the bears are also assumed to have been 
witchly sendings under Felix's control. 

Fulrad does not suggest any of these interpre- 
tations; in fact, he goes out of his way to dismiss 
the notion that Felix was a worshiper of evil. He 
admits that the evidence is strong, but he claims 
to suspect instead that Felix was the unwilling 
puppet of some more powerful evil being. 
Fulrad insists that the cave and nearby forest be 
searched for evidence of another evil creature's 
comings and goings. 


Resolving the Adventure 


Thunar and Count Dolan are quick to accept 
the hypothesis that Felix was the tool of an evil 
power and that Brego was killed by Felix, per- 
haps with the aid of another evil being. Thunar 


persuades Count Dolan that Brego did not come 
on Count Dolan’s lands voluntarily, but only as 
a result of being compelled or ensorcelled by 
some evil enchantment. Count Dolan therefore 
is happy to graciously grant that there has been 
no breach of the king's decree in the PCs’ tres- 
pass. He henceforth treats the PCs cordially, ex- 
pressing sympathy and horror over the manner 
of their lord Brego's death. Dolan admits that he 
hated Brego in life, but says that he would not 
wish such a death even on his worst enemy. 

The PCs may discover indications that con- 
tradict the above hypothesis and point toward 
Fulrad's guilt. For example, the PCs may ques- 
tion any of the corpses under speak with dead 
spells. Also, three peasant accomplices survive 
as live eyewitnesses to the killing of Brego. In 
addition, the obvious trail leading to the cave 
from Felix's lightning-blasted body may be dis- 
covered upon close examination to be a single 
pair of footprints, and headed away from Felix's 
body, not toward the body, as might be expected 
if they were Felix's footprints. 

However, for political reasons, both lay and 
Church officials find it convenient to believe 
that Felix and an unknown evil mentor are re- 
sponsible. Conversely, no one would find it con- 
venient or plausible to suspect Fulrad of any 
complicity in the killing. Fulrad's reputation is 
beyond reproach, and Count Dolan and Fulrad's 
Church superiors are powerful enough to sup- 
press any accusations aimed at Fulrad, regard- 
less of the quality of the evidence. 

Speak with Dead Special Effect: If you like, 
Fulrad may have been granted a special magical 
ability by his evil patron that permits him to 
block speak with dead spells. This magical abili- 
ty essentially causes a premature separation of 
the spirit from the body, causing the speak with 
dead spell to work as though the creature had 
been dead longer than the maximum length of 
time for a successful casting. Further, a spirit 
torn away from its body before its natural time 
would be added support for the hypothesis that 
a great supernatural evil power played a part in 
the incidents of the scenario. 


If this adventure is run as an isolated scenario, 
you may prefer to give the PCs a chance to con- 
front Fulrad in an action climax. If Fulrad were 


convinced that the PCs might be a danger to 
him, he could conceivably attempt to destroy 
them individually or collectively. Even a high- 
level character such as Fulrad has little chance 
against a party of PCs, but the odds could be 
evened by giving Fulrad some strong NPC or 
summoned assistance. 

If this adventure is run as part of a campaign, 
Fulrad is an excellent continuing NPC villain, al- 
ways appearing ostensibly as a PC ally, but al- 
ways working secretly at cross purposes to foil 
or destroy the PCs. It is especially galling, and 
therefore dramatically effective, to constantly 
confront PCs with an NPC who must be treated 
publicly like a trusted friend and ally, but who is 
privately suspected of being a deadly enemy. 


Rewards 


If the PCs successfully discover Brego's corpse 
and provide a plausible explanation for his 
death, Charlemagne, on his return from Italy, 
grants the player character with highest status 
the lordship of Eigenmachtig on the behalf of 
Berta, Brego's widow. The player character does 
not receive Brego's former status of count; in- 
stead, Eigenmachtig is placed under the author- 
ity of Count Dolan, and the player character, 
Berta, and his companions are answerable to 
Dolan's authority. Further, the substantial in- 
crease in status for each PC is represented by an 
immediate gain of 10 pounds of silver. 

If the PCs fail to discover Brego's corpse or ac- 
count for his disappearance, they gain no in- 
crease in status or wealth. In addition, Count 
Dolan is granted sovereignty over Eigenmach- 
tig, and Berta, Brego's widow, and the PCs are 
henceforth subject to Count Dolan. 

Since this adventure offers relatively little in 
terms of treasure or combat experience points 
for very great risk, the following experience 
point bonus awards are suggested: 

* For good role-playing, particularly in the 
village of Fabelhaft and Count Dolan's manor: 
award 5-10% of the PC's current XPs. 

* For cautious and diplomatic handling of 
the tricky situations with Count Dolan and his 
sons: award 5% of the PC's current XPs. 

* For shrewd analysis or guesses about the 
real explanations behind Brego's death, whether 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier * 87 


the PCs are able to do anything about it or not: 
award 5-10% of the PC's current XPs. 


The Church and Saxon Fire 


While Charlemagne was in Rome over the 
winter of 773-74, the Saxons fell upon neighbor- 
ing Frankish lands with a large army. The church 
at Fritzlar had been consecrated by Saint Boni- 
face, who had prophesied that it would never be 
destroyed by fire. 


Background 


The PCs are at Eigenmachtig Manor when 
they receive word of the Saxon uprising across 
the Rhine. The “Player Briefing” section summa- 
rizes their mission and what they know about 
the settlement at Fritzlar. 

The church is a simple timber one inside a 
stockade, along with the hall and stable of an 
aged lesser noble and five smaller huts for the 
colonists. Father Egfrid, the church's missionary 
priest, is an energetic, fervent apostle with vi- 
sions of sainthood. Wigman is a gallant veteran 
with illusions of grandeur; his wife Hruoditrude 
is a middle-aged, pragmatic woman of common 
birth with coarse manners and good sense. The 
peasant colonists are four 0-level farmers and 
one 0-level blacksmith, who has six 0-level sons. 
They have no armor; their militia training sim- 
ply enables them to take orders and wield their 
spears. 

The stockade and two more huts are incom- 
plete, with only 75% of the stockade finished. 
The church's modest treasures include silver 
plates, cups, a cross, and most valuable, a reli- 
guary containing soil stained by the blood of 
Saint Boniface. The religuary itself, made of 
gold and ornamented with gems, is worth 2,000 
dp. The holy relic provides the effects of the 1st- 
level priest spell sanctuary to any priest of the 
Western Church within the confines of the 
church. 


Player Briefing 


The Saxons have been guiet for the preceding 
year, but late this winter they have risen in rebel- 
lion once again. Raids with sword and fire 
against Frankish settlements across the Rhine are 


88 * Chapter Seven 


reported. 

A royal messenger from Aix-la-Chapelle ar- 
rives from the mayor of the palace, who is in 
charge while King Charlemagne remains in Italy. 
You are charged with the responsibility of pro- 
tecting the church mission at Fritzlar, its people, 
and the treasures of the church against the sav- 
age Saxons. 

You must cross the Rhine at Cologne and take 
the road east into Saxony. Fritzlar lies three days 
along this road near the River Eder. Once in Sax- 
ony the road is poor. Since there are few secure 
settlements there, plan to make camp along the 
road. 

The church at Fritzlar is a simple timber hall 
inside a stockade, along with the timber hall and 
stable of an aged lesser noble and several smaller 
huts for colonists. 

The population of the church compound in- 
cludes the venerable missionary priest, Father 
Egfrid; his two servants, the noble veteran 
Frankish warrior Wigman and his wife Hruodi- 
trude; and 11 able-bodied men. 

The church's treasures include silver plates, 
cups, a cross, and a religuary containing soil 
said to be stained by the blood of the Martyred 
Boniface of Sainted Memory. The church itself 
was consecrated by Boniface, and a prophesy is 
attributed to him that the church shall never be 
burnt by fire. 


The Road to Fritzlar 


The player characters are well-armed and un- 
likely to invite attack along the road. The 
weather is poor, however, with alternating peri- 
ods of raw cold and freezing rain. Once across 
the Rhine at Cologne, failed Survival proficien- 
cy checks indicate that no suitable camp can be 
made; each PC must pass a Constitution check 
or lose 1d3 hit points from exposure. As they ap- 
proach Fritzlar, the weather becomes even wet- 
ter. This is difficult weather for mounted 
fighting, and the weather further complicates 
any plan to evacuate Fritzlar in case of attack, 
since the Saxons might easily pursue and attack 
the slow-moving refugee column delayed by the 
muddy roads. 


Approaching the Settlement 


As the PCs approach, they see the following 
things: 

* The northwestern section of stockade is not 
completed. 

* The fields around the settlement are very 
wet and covered with low stubble and brush. 
This is terrible terrain for mounted warfare. 
Each round of mounted combat requires a Rid- 
ing check before attacking. If the check suc- 
ceeds, normal movement and attack are 
possible; if failed by fewer than 5 points, no 
movement is possible; if failed by more than 5 
points, both horse and rider go down for 1d4 
points of damage each. Mounted Franks will be 
at the mercy of infantry— particularly if they 
have archers—in these conditions. 

e The wooded hills to the northeast and 
northwest provide excellent cover for scouts to 
watch activity at the settlement. 


The Problem 


The Saxons greatly outnumber the defenders. 
The wet fields surrounding the compound are 
unsuitable for mounted combat. Because of their 
hit points and armor, the PCs can expect to han- 
dle Saxon raiders easily, but the people of the 
settlement are likely to die like flies if they try to 
defend the settlement, and a large enough mob 
of Saxons could combine to overbear and cap- 
ture the PCs. Completing the stockade with a 
makeshift barricade might take 100-200 man- 
hours, but such an activity might only encour- 
age the Saxons to attack immediately before the 
defenses are completed. At present, the size, lo- 
cation, even the existence of a nearby Saxon 
force is uncertain. The PCs will, of course, want 
to scout the neighborhood, but they should be 
aware of the desperate risk in engaging even a 
fraction of their small force. Moving into the 
forests nearby assures Saxon infantry and 
archers of terrain ideally suited to skirmishes 
with Frankish cavalry. 

Unfortunately, evacuation is not much more 
promising. The only mounts in the settlement 
are the two horses belonging to Wigman; there 
are also two ox carts and oxen to pull them, but 
on the poor roads they would be desperately 
slow moving. Abandoning the stockade could 


give the Saxons a slow-moving, highly vulnera- 
ble target to pursue and attack on the road. 
Worse yet, the priest, confident in the prophe- 
cies of Boniface, and the old veteran, stubborn 
and proud, absolutely refuse to evacuate. They 
might finally consent to the evacuation of the 
settlement's other inhabitants, but they refuse to 
leave under any circumstances. Egfrid further 
refuses to permit the PCs to carry away the 
church treasures for safekeeping. 


Possible Solutions 


Evacuation is a poor solution. Egfrid and 
Wigman could conceivably be evacuated 
against their will along with the church trea- 
sures, but defending the entire evacuating group 
successfully is almost impossible. In practical 
terms, rescuing the priests, nobles, and the 
church treasures is a limited victory of sorts, but 
hardly a heroic or honorable triumph. 

Successful scouting of the Saxons and a deter- 
mined series of raids directed at the weaker, less 
well-armored opponents can greatly improve 
the odds of defending the settlement. On the 
other hand, the loss of two or more player char- 
acters during such raids could be a disaster; the 
Saxon ability to direct all missile fire at a single 
target can be deadly. Even without scouting and 
raids, a defensive plan that shields the more vul- 
nerable folk of the settlement and permits the 
better armored PCs to wreak havoc among the 
rank-and-file of the Saxons has a good chance of 
breaking Saxon morale. Challenging the leader 
of the Saxon forces to a personal combat to de- 
cide the fate of the settlement is another possible 
ploy, though considering the toughness of the 
Saxon leader, Abbi, it may not be a wise 
scheme. 

Clever plans that exploit the superstitious 
fears of the Saxons, when combined with effec- 
tive scouting, raids, and defense plans, assure 
the PCs of complete victory. Magic and Mira- 
cles, particularly if perceived as a sign of other- 
worldly divine powers, are certain to terrify and 
intimidate the Saxon rank-and-file. 


Role-Playing the Inhabitants of Fritzlar 


Four major NPCs provide numerous role- 
playing and problem-solving challenges for the 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier * 89 


PCs: Father Egfrid, Wigman, Hruoditrude, and 
Mathfrid, the blacksmith’s son. The other NPCs 
are less important and may be portrayed as 
cardboard stereotype figures or improvised as 
colorful supporting parts at your discretion. 

Father Egfrid: AC 10 unarmored; MV 12; C3; 
hp 15; THACO 20; #AT 1; Dmg 1d6; ML 15; AL 
LG; Spells (4/3): bless, cure light wounds (x2), 
protection from evil; augury (x2), resist fire 

Stubborn and fearless, Father Egfrid is certain 
that God will not forsake him and his church. 
He has complete faith in Boniface’s prophecy 
that the church will be protected from Saxon 
fire. Even if he did have doubts, he would rather 
die than flee before the savage pagans. 

Wigman: AC 10 unarmored; AC 4 armored; 
MV 12; Fé; hp 20; THACO 15; #AT 1; Dmg 
1d8+3; ML 15; AL LG; Riding proficiency 
check 12 

Wigman is a lovable but foolish old warrior. 
He has a completely unrealistic assessment of his 
own diminished combat skills and the actual 
courage and competence of the Saxons. Senior 
in years and campaign experience to the PCs, he 
expects to be placed in charge of the settlement's 
forces. All the other Fritzlar folk instinctively 
follow his orders, no matter how unwise they 
may seem. If a PC questions Wigman's orders, 
Wigman challenges the PC to personal combat. 
If politely or forcibly convinced of his folly, 
Wigman becomes a humble and self-sacrificing 
hero. 

Hruoditrude: AC 10 unarmored; MV 12; HD 
1/2; hp 4; THACO 20; #AT 1; Dmg 1d4; ML 15; 
AL LG 

Hruoditrude is a willful, vigorous woman in 
late middle age. Though accustomed to yielding 
to Wigman in major policy decisions, she actu- 
ally manages most of the administrative affairs 
of the settlement, and the settlers look to her for 
guidance in the absence of Wigman. Hruodi- 
trude has a much more practical and realistic 
grasp of the current problems than Wigman. If 
enlisted on the side of the PCs and common 
sense, she can persuade Wigman to listen to rea- 
son. During the defense of the settlement, she 
can be counted on to remember details the PCs 
forget, such as keeping fire-fighting materials 
close to hand and keeping noncombatants out of 
the line of fire. 


90 * Chapter Seven 


Mathfrid: AC 10 unarmored; MV 12; HD 1; 
hp 6; THACO 20; #AT 1; Dmg 1d6; ML 15; AL 
LG 

The son of the settlement's blacksmith, Un- 
roch, Mathfrid admires the young PC warriors 
and longs to become a warrior himself. He is the 
first to volunteer for any scouting mission, 
boasting accurately of intimate knowledge of 
the surrounding lands. 

Haido and Nanthar: AC 10 unarmored; MV 
12; HD 1; hp 2,2; THACO 20; FAT 1; Dmg 1d4; 
ML 5; AL LG 

Father Egfrid's servants are meek and timo- 
rous creatures who hate this frontier outpost 
and would love an excuse to return to civiliza- 
tion. 

The Male Settlers (10: AC 10 unarmored; 
MV 12; HD 1; hp 6,6,5,4,4,4,4,3,2,2; THACO 
20; #AT 1; Dmg 1d6; ML 7; AL LG 

Five husbands and five sons: Unroch, Otgar, 
Pepin, Odo, Old Warin, Young Warin, Sinbert, 
Ebbo, Machelm, and Amalwin. 

The Female Settlers (10): AC 10 unarmored; 
MV 12; HD 1; hp 3,3,3,3,2,2,2,2,1,1; THACO 
20; FAT 1; Dmg 1d4; ML 5; AL LG 

Five wives and five daughters: Olga, Ramona, 
Amelia, Leonarda, Erme, Velma, Alarice, 
Charlene, Lorraine, and Garnet. 


The Saxons 


The Saxons hope to plunder the church and 
manor of its silver and gold; in revenge for 
Charlemagne's bloody campaigns and his de- 
struction of the Irminsul, they also hope to kill 
everyone in the settlement. Their chieftain, Ab- 
bi, is unconcerned when he hears of the arrival 
of the PCs to stiffen the defense, but his spiritual 
advisor, Cobbo, warns that the black priests are 
powerful sorcerers. The Saxons, awaiting the ar- 
rival of most of their troops, have carefully 
scouted and kept the settlement under continu- 
ous observation for the last two days. The bulk 
of Abbi's followers arrive tomorrow during the 
day, and the attack is scheduled for that night. 

The Saxon camp is in a small hollow in the 
forest to the northwest, in à ravine cut by the 
small brook. Four well-concealed sentries guard 
the camp from scouting or ambush. If intruders 
approach, the sentries use bird calls to warn the 


camp; if possible, the sentries remain hidden and 
attempt to backtrack and ambush intruders as 
they withdraw. If the camp is approached by in- 
truders, the Saxons melt into the woods and 
count on bow fire to discourage attack. If the in- 
truders are located, the 2nd-level fighters direct 
the farmers to pursue and attack or remain in de- 
fensive positions. Abbi, Cobbo, and the 4th- 
level fighter bodyguard avoid engagement, the 
better to observe and direct their troops. 

Attacking the Settlement: Every Saxon farmer 
carries a torch during night attacks. The plan is 
for six groups of ten farmers (each led by a 2nd- 
level fighter) and the command group (consist- 
ing of Abbi, Cobbo, and the five 4th-level 
warriors) to sneak within bow range of the 
stockade but to stay beyond the range of the 
torch-lit stockade walls under cover of darkness. 
If the stockade is still incomplete, they approach 
the open section; otherwise they attack the wall 
opposite the gate. 

When everyone is in place, three groups of 
farmers light their torches and charge while the 
other three groups provide covering bow fire. 
Once the first three groups are inside the stock- 
ade, they are to engage in combat or set fire to 
thatched roofs or other flammable targets. At 
the same time, the archers and the command 
group move forward to the walls—the archers 
to mass their fire against targets of opportunity, 
the command group to charge any strong pocket 
of resistance. 

The Saxons are all aware of Boniface's proph- 
ecy, and they initially avoid approaching the 
church. If the attacks seems to be succeeding, 
then they head for the church and the treasure it 
promises. 

Once engaged in battle, the Saxons do not roll 
morale checks until 50% of their force has fallen 
or they witness a significant magical event that 
in some way confirms the prophecy that the 
church and the settlement are protected by the 
powerful god of the Franks. Western Church 
priests asking for miraculous use of any spell in- 
volving light or producing effects that suppress 
fire are automatically answered favorably. One 
or more heroes withstanding mass attacks while 
mowing Saxons down like wheat may also seem 
like a supernatural intervention. A character 
protected by endure heat, resist fire, or protec- 


tion from fire spells to smother flames with his 
own body should have an especially terrifying 
effect to the Saxons. 


The Saxon Forces 


Abbi (7th-level chief): AC 2; MV 12; F7; hp 
65; THACO 14; FAT 3/2; Dmg 1d8 +4; ML 15; 
AL LN; Armed with a fine long sword, shield, 
and chain armor 

Cobbo (3rd-level shaman): AC 7, MV 12; C3; 
hp 17; THACO 20, #AT 1; Dmg 1d6; ML 14, AL 
LN; Armed with short sword, shield, lighted 
torch, and leather armor; Spells (4/3): cure light 
wounds (x2), cause fear (x2); augury, obscure- 
ment (x2) 

4th-level Fighters (5): AC 4; MV 12; F4; hp 32, 
30, 27, 25, 21; THACO 17; #AT 1; Dmg 1d8 +2; 
ML 14; AL LN; Armed with long sword, shield, 
short bow, and chain armor 

2nd-level Fighters (6: AC 7; MV 12; F2; hp 
19, 17, 15, 14, 12, 10; THACO 19; #AT 1; Dmg 
1d6; ML 12; AL LN; Armed with spear, shield, 
short bow, lighted torch, and leather armor 

O-level Farmers (60): AC 7; MV 12; HD 1; hp 
(roll each as needed); THACO 20; #AT 1; Dmg 
1d6; ML 11; AL LN; Armed with spear, shield, 
short bow, lighted torch, and leather armor 


Rewards 


If the PCs successfully defend Fritzlar, its 
church, and treasures with minimal loss of life, 
each PC receives an XP bonus award of 10% of 
his current XP total, in addition to awards 
gained for killing Saxons. The Saxons, intimi- 
dated by the power of the Frankish god to pro- 
tect his own shrines, abandon their raids and 
withdraw deep into Saxony. In gratitude, the 
bishop of Cologne also grants each PC the gift of 
2 pounds of silver. 

If the PCs successfully defend Fritzlar, its 
church, and treasures, but only at considerable 
cost in lives (i.e., a total of 50% of the settlers 
killed, or the death of four major PCs or NPCs), 
each PC receives an XP bonus award of 5% of 
his current XP total, in addition to awards 
gained for killing Saxons. The Saxons abandon 
their attacks on Fritzlar, but continue their raids 
on other Frankish settlements nearby. 

If the PCs fail to defend Fritzlar and its 


Adventures on the Saxon Frontier € 91 


S WA 


| 


Es 


g 


church, but rescue the church treasures with 
minimal cost in lives, each PC receives an XP 
bonus award of 5% of his current XP total, in 
addition to awards gained for killing Saxons. 
The Saxons, emboldened by the failure of Boni- 
face's prophecy, set upon the isolated Frankish 
outposts all along the Rhine. Charlemagne must 
abandon his siege of Pavia and return at once to 
put down the Saxon revolt, and the reputations 


92 * Chapter Seven 


Wr 


x 


My A, n 


| 
S- 


of the PCs suffer. 

If the PCs fail to defend Fritzlar, its church, 
the church treasures, or its people, the PCs re- 
ceive no mission experience point bonuses. Fur- 
ther, the PCs as a group gain a reputation for 
foolhardiness, incompetence, or cowardice. 
When Charlemagne returns from Italy to quell 
the Saxon rebellion, the PCs are sent as colonists 
to the inhospitable Spanish or Eastern Marches. 


APPENDIX 


Predesigned Player Characters 


Brother Thierry 

Priest (Nobleman Priest Kit) 
Lawful Good 

Level 4 (6,100 xp) 

Male, 29 years old 

5 feet tall, 188 pounds 


Str 12 Dex 9 Con 14 
Int 9 Wis 15 Cha 14 
ACA THACO18 — hp18 


Weapons: Mace, sling 

Weapon Proficiencies: Mace, sling, club 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Riding, Religion, Lo- 
cal History, Healing, Language (Latin) 

Spells: Five 1st, three 2nd 


Lotho of Ardennes 

Fighter (Noble Carolingian Warrior Kit) 
Lawful Good 

Level 4 (8,300 xp) 

Male, 26 years old 

6 feet tall, 192 pounds 


Str 12 Dex 12 Con 10 
Int 11 Wis 13 Cha 17 
ACA THACO 17 hp 25 


Weapons: Fine long sword, lance, spear, short 
bow 

Weapon Proficiencies: Long Sword, Spear, 
Short Bow, Light Lance (specialized: Attacks 
3/2) 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Riding, Stewardship, 
Local History, Gaming 


Frida of Ardennes 

Fighter (Noble Carolingian Warrior Kit) 
Chaotic Good 

Level 4 (8,600 xp) 

Female, 23 years old 

5 feet tall, 148 pounds 


Str 15 Dex 17 Con 15 
Int 16 Wis 10 Cha 17 
AC1 THACO17  hp32 


Weapons: Fine long sword, lance, spear, short 
bow 

Weapon Proficiencies: Long Sword (specialized: 
Attacks 3/2), Spear, Short Bow, Light Lance 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Riding, Local Histo- 
ry, Hunting, Endurance 


Louisa of Ardennes 

Fighter (Noble Carolingian Warrior Kit) 
Lawful Good 

Level 4 (8,200 xp) 

Female, 23 years old 

5 feet 8 inches tall, 142 pounds 


Str 15 Dex 17 Con 15 
Int 16 Wis 16 Cha 15 
AC1 THACO17  hp27 


Weapons: Fine long sword, lance, spear, short 
bow 

Weapon Proficiencies: Long Sword, Spear, 
Short Bow, Light Lance (specialized: Attacks 
3/2) 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Riding, Local Histo- 
ry, Stewardship, Animal Lore, Weather Sense 


Predesigned Player Characters e 93 


Pinabel the Gascon 

Rogue (Noble's Clerk Kit) 
Chaotic Neutral 

Level 5 (11,500 xp) 

Male, 22 years old 

6 feet 1 inch tall, 168 pounds 


Str 11 Dex 18 Con 15 
Int 17 Con 15 Cha 17 
AC3 THACO 18 hp 23 


Weapons: Fine long sword, dagger, short bow 

Weapon Proficiencies: Long Sword, Bow, Dag- 
ger 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Riding, Language 
(Frankish), Fast-Talking, Etiquette 


Alonzo the Moor 

Fighter (Wilderness Warrior Kit) 
Lawful Neutral 

Level 4 (8,600 xp) 

Male, 23 years old 

6 feet 2 inches tall, 189 pounds 


Str 17 Dex 17 Con 15 
Int 11 Wis 13 Cha 6 
AC1 THACO 17 hp 26 


Weapons: Long sword, lance, spear 

Weapon Proficiencies: Long Sword, Light Lance 
(specialized: Attacks 3/2), Spear 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Riding, Tracking, 
Hunting, Language (Frankish) 


Einar the Dane 

Fighter (Wilderness Warrior Kit) 
Neutral Good 

Level 4 (8,350 xp) 

Male, 21 years old 

6 feet 4 inches tall, 191 pounds 


Str 15 Dex 11 Con 17 
Int 9 Wis 10 Cha 15 
AC 4 THACO17  hp39 


Weapons: Long sword, lance, spear, short bow 

Weapon Proficiencies: Long Sword (specialized: 
Attacks 3/2), Light Lance, Spear, Short Bow 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Riding, Hunting, 
Seamanship, Navigation 


Esica the Saxon 

Fighter (Wilderness Warrior Kit) 
Lawful Good 

Level 4 (8,150 xp) 

Male, 20 years old 

6 feet 5 inches tall, 195 pounds 


Str 18/30 Dex 16 Con 12 
Int 8 Wis 12 Cha 8 
AC2 THACO 17 hp 20 


Weapons: Long sword, spear, short bow 

Weapon Proficiencies: Long Sword (specialized: 
Attacks 3/2), Spear, Short Bow 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Hunting, Survival, 
Endurance, Language (Frankish) 


E —MÀ—— ——— ——— a M —M MÀ M — M M: —— — M ÀM— M M M ——— ——— 


94 * Appendix 


Brother Thierry: The eldest son of Brego, 
Thierry is his father's chancellor and chaplain. A 
worldly scholar with deep spiritual values, he is 
something of a disappointment to his father, the 
warrior. Thierry was educated in York where he 
gained a respect for the ancient wisdom of the 
pagan classics. Thereafter he led the cloistered 
life of an academic, though he has served in the 
abbey hospices of St. Gall. He has gained a sen- 
sitivity to the central role of the church in pro- 
tecting the weak, poor, and infirm. He believes 
the Church must provide a counterbalance to 
the rapacity of the ignorant, uneducated war- 
rior-lords. 

Lotho of Ardennes: Lotho is the second son of 
Brego and the heir apparent. A competent war- 
rior and leader, this self-assured, charming, and 
persuasive young man has been raised to rule as 
his father's successor. Lotho's instinctively gen- 
erous and noble impulses have won the hearts of 
his father's servants. His faithful adherence to 
his father's will has assured him of his right to 
succeed, 

Frida of Ardennes: Sister of Lotho and 
Thierry, Frida is more aggressive and impulsive 
than her identical twin sister, Louisa. Frida styles 
herself as nobly chaste and virtuous in the Chris- 
tian fashion, but in fact she cheerfully employs 
shrewdness, guile, or deceit when her will is 
crossed. She is a naive tomboy in romantic mat- 
ters, but an inspired warrior in battle. Frida is 
also obsessively competitive; she finds it almost 
impossible to decline a dare or challenge. 

Louisa of Ardennes: Sister of Lotho and 
Thierry, Louisa is more cautious and sensible 
than her twin, Frida. Where Frida is the typical, 
aggressive warrior maiden, Louisa is an excel- 
lent horsewoman and outdoorswoman, devot- 
ing less time to the sword. More practical and 
experienced than her sister in most things, 
Louisa is steady and reliable where her sister is 
impulsive and obsessive. 

Pinabel the Gascon: The fifth son of Count 
Guillem of Gascony, Pinabel serves as clerk and 
seneschal to Brego. Pinabel's education and busi- 
ness sense are matched with a skill at handling a 
household's affairs; the prosperity of Brego's 


holdings is largely the result of Pinabel's skilled 
management. Because he is a rather poor fighter, 
Pinabel is somewhat cynical about the vigorous, 
manly codes of the noble Christian Frank. Hunt- 
ing and military campaigning are dreary, dirty 
work, and Pinabel finds the professed Christian 
piety of Frankish aristocrats a bit hypocritical. 

Alonzo the Moor: Alonzo is the fourth son of 
Marsilius of Barcelona, a pagan Spanish king. 
He is a hostage of the truce between Charle- 
magne and Marsilius. Alonzo is a ferocious, 
strong warrior, but he is unfamiliar with Frank- 
ish and Western Church customs. What Alonzo 
respects most are skill in combat, fine horseman- 
ship, courage, and daring. Finding all these 
things in Count Brego, and to some extent in his 
offspring and retainers, Alonzo is fairly happy 
and comfortable with his hostage status. He 
looks forward to winning glory and booty in 
battle. 

Einar the Dane: Einar is the third son of a 
lesser Danish noble, given as hostage to Charle- 
magne as pledge of loyalty by the Danish king. 
He has been granted hospitality by Brego at the 
king's request. Einar is a lusty barbarian fighter 
with little of the polish of Frankish civilization. 
Loud, cheerful, hard-drinking, and violent, 
Einar's rash temper and touchy pride make him a 
difficult guest and companion at times. His close 
friend Esica the Saxon keeps the big Northman 
from getting into too much trouble and also tem- 
pers his anger. 

Esica the Saxon: The son of a Saxon chieftain 
defeated and now subject to Frankish rule, Esica 
has been sent to Brego to learn the ways of the 
Franks. Esica is a recent convert to the Western 
Church and a sincere and pious believer in 
Christ's tenderheartedness and the future City of 
God, where all things shall be ruled by Christian 
virtue. Esica is a dedicated student of all modern 
and civilized Frankish ways. He is always eager 
to impress his hosts by his enthusiastic if clumsy 
attempts to ride, hunt, and fight like a Frankish 
warrior. Any Saxons not yet under Frankish do- 
minion are likely to look with hatred upon Esi- 
ca's acceptance of the conqueror's culture, and 
they may seek to do him harm. 


Predesigned Player Characters e95 


ook, this is a book of 
dark secrets," reveals 
Teridina. 
"Monster Mythol- 
— ogy describes the spir- 
its worshipped by goblins, 
orcs, giants, beholders, and 
even worse unseen things. All 
of them are served by shamans 
and witch doctors, and no one 
knows much about them... 
until now! This tome could save 
your character some day. The 
monstrous races have their 
icons, and the more your char- 


acter knows about them, the 
better.” 

This new DMGR gives DMs 
new insights to character class- 
es and campaign worlds. The 
Monster Mythology also ex- 
pands on the best-selling Leg- 
ends & Lore. Look for it 
everywhere TSR game acces- 
sories are sold. 


NEW FROM TSR! 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and AD&D are registered trademarks owned by TSR. Inc. The TSA logo «s a trademark owned by TSR. In 


1932 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved 


& 


[Advanced Dungeonsf Dragons, 
Charlemagne's 
Paladins 


Campaign Sourcebook 


Lay on, soldiers of France! This day we win or die! 


Charlemagne—conqueror, statesman, lawmaker, the 
greatest medieval king of Europe. His reign lasted 
forty-four years, but his influence was felt for a thou- 
sand. From the chaos of the dark ages he forged a 
kingdom that rivaled Roman Byzantium in its power 


and prestige. Join the noblest heroes of the age— 
mighty Roland, Bradamant the warrior maiden, arch- 
bishop Turpin, and Malagigi the wizard—on royal 
quests and wars against the Lombards, Moors, 
Saxons, and Vikings. Find adventure at the dawn of 
chivalry! 


51500» 


TSR, Inc. TSR, Ltd. 
POB 756 120 Church End, 
9"78156 63932 Lake Geneva, Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 Cambridge CBI 318 


ISBN 1-5607b-393-0 wae United Kingdom 


$151LS. $18 CAN £9.99 LK. ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and AD&D are registered 
trademarks owned by TSR, Inc 
The TSR logo Is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc 
©1992 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A. 


