The 
Complete Book 
O 


CNOMES 


m 


f; 
H 


H alil ngs 


Lael 


The 
Complete Book of 


Gnomes 


Halflings 


by Douglas Niles 


Table of Contents 


Introduction: The Small Folk ...... S 
CODER NON Ser esee NBE S 5 
The Invisibility Factor .......... 8 
Pie SM 5 io, enaA ERS 8 
GNOMES 
Introduction: Gaomes -esea resinen ninjaene 9 
Gnomes in AD&D® 2nd Edition ............ 10 
New Stuff About Gnomes ............ eese 10 
Chapter 1: 
Myths of the Gnomes ........... 11 
Gods of the Gnomedom .......... 14 
Garl Glittergold ............... 14 
Baervan Wildwander .......... 14 
Callarduran Smoothhands ..... 14 
Flandal SteelsEin siaua er eret noaa wie 14 
Segojan Earthcaller ....................ese 14 
Urdlen, The Crawler Below ................ 14 
Chapter 2: 
Gnome Subraces ................ 15 
Rock Gnomes as.. eese eswziso 15 
Svirfneblin (Deep Gnomes) ..... 21 
Tinker Gnomes (Minoi) ........ 26 
Forcat CRONES ecu scie nire 30 
Chapter 3: 
Gnomish Culture ............... 34 
Festivals: cava clite exusta a ies 34 
PRES sals kea atala dina Sca lator Hea S 35 
Marriage and Family ............ 35 
The Nose Knows ................ 35 
Food ani Drink! .2...:22-- 94 3 IR HI mises 35 
(er CP CCPERSTIBRSSELG DCN SIGUE EIE 36 
Crafismanship iani nsina enar kx slower rice SN 36 
BC MRTORSRCOPSCUDETEDODCESDEOC TOO silat saree 37 
TV NABROCOSDOCEOOOTIITRT DIT IO SEED 37 
Lais APIS CES DU ST TCR PROCHES ICE EHOLT I TO 38 
Le Gini) WARNE SCC On Ae OO eT ENSIS YO 39 
Animal FrIBIUS «6. oreo Ife oa v AI9 ruine nc 39 
WMWaPEBSe Lunes Drs cicinten re: a 3ERUC Aa A JI 9276: 40 
Magie ida x di»(e a:b a 1] 4-076137 1b in [vio 909 se [STo| 67475. 41 
Wandering Jc alan am sese RI m C090 erst arses 42 


2 * Table of Contents 


Chapter 4: 
Gnome Character Kits ........... 44 
Structure of the Kits ............. 44 
Bighter K18/...oceerneecetme dee es 45 
Breac hanane 2.124 «ecce 45 
GODISHCKET s oie sco eroe decer eoe 46 
LETT KT ERIS SCC UEICIDE TIGE 48 
Mousebatelar. ,oceeieeiexTe e nre nm eR ECEN IINE 48 
Shere 1c [EAS R EAE TT MODUS. 49 
Ius Gm KE renes IA a E a 50 
CCAIR so 45 acu apis sce oa Ioue eo ERU DEOR: 50 
AT ner o eee ei ED SERRA FEET ee 51 
Müulticlasw A t E OEE T ES A 52 
Bulfoon CAD. user ad ES erate aia are 52 
SPSS) cc racesiieserec eee rete oe ES 53 
Puesta ors AN iacet ean AE EN 54 
horktender € oa espe ERE CTS 54 
*Hreekenider on «<4: n-0)0:012)0 sini TERTII USO 55 
Chapter 5: 
Granitehome 
—A Typical Gnomish Village ... 56 
Description of Granitehome ...... 56 
Map of Granitehome ............ 57 
HALFLINGS 
Introduction: Halflings .......... 59 
Halflings in AD&D® 2nd Edition 60 
New Stuff About Halflings ..... 60 
Chapter 1: 
Myths of the Halflings ........... 61 
The Story of Littleman ........... 61 
A General History 
of the Halfling Race ........... 63 
Gods of the Halflings ............ 63 
Yondalla the Provider .............. es 65 
Sheela Peryroyl i.e nonees ean mere sent 65 
Cyrrollalea:.....oocecsaeue o economie 65 
Arvoreen the Defender ............... e 65 
BrandobariS 105: 2]. E [9 9 [SEATS 65 


Table of Contents 


Chapter 2: 
Halfling Subraces ............... 66 
The Wanderings of Littleman ..... 67 
Haitfoot isa ssena ess 68 
SHEE! 1o tic ot entree ea Ter were 69 
TallfelIlOW! s. ceri ssresis otv loco 70 
Kendér 2065360: son nuce lise Viu ar delle elu 7 
Athasian HAURE oe rove esten ev aei rem 73 
FUIChdR 235.3 erede Eire a VE|a &X4vca] 5:6 ES vss 75 
Chapter 3: 
Halfling Culture ................ 77 
The Name "Halflings" ........... 77 
The Hearth and the Burrow ...... 77 
PUG STATES AOL E EASES 79 
ASTER UD reset ets FEIERT 80 
Sustblarice. and MO correre is RAI RAM 81 
The VIP: Lo ner EAE acetate a exe PORTE 82 
Crafts, Labor, and Products: |... 29v eed ens 82 
e nescitis VEIPIRNENN EESMTEN E sre t 83 
Society Norms and Taboos ............ «sse 84 
Joy; arid amor. oc... even err en ns EA re etes 85 
Sorrow-and Anger |...» 5054 95 ses Eres ome 86 
Riddles:. s eoo vire siens E Srsl lara b RTI 86 
Villages and SMES 2p os ccc RISE R ES eal RR 87 
Wartane® ouesse qe woh ego se eee riot, ElCOISNE TELA 87 
DE (20. eI hte erenons RAS SHO? GOTO LUE S 88 
Magic... «opes ak ev vine nibs oninia e e elefe AAE 89 
Why Most Halflings Are Homebodies ......... 90 
Why Some Halflings Pursue Adventure ........ 90 
Chapter 4: 
Halfling Character Kits .......... 91 
The Structure of the Kits ......... 92 
Figlist KHS o a posara rtt 93 
Xhp AINE 12-2 xerit HSE 93 
Forestwalker .......2 2 trn 94 
PIGIBeSBOQOBE coeur esce nce Io mta ape eres iit ara o) 96 
LE ee cic APRES IET T TIIOOLISO OI QUD I QU 98 
SheritE orc E ave ERIS SE REESCU SEE ECHTE RUE TES 99 
SEL. oue seresa kiuntwini Heini a cip rt 101 
"Ihpnebdb e e E A A EE, 102 
PEE a AIA ATA EEA AE 103 
BE corer ee E S A PEE A OA 103 
Tg. E pia ENAA A I TSA 106 


BUAT cis secas uu. viz aaraa NE aura SORTS MD 108 
jet ca LT i oshna araara alaia NEEE SLR 110 
ECRI aerga aana a AEE Ea SAES EA y 112 
Fighter/ThiuE Kits 122 aaiae ees ES ints 113 
CArtonraplie*- 02.0 vse ciues rore ie sant 113 
"Tracer N Do ara slase cera E islas A ON 115 
"Irazveler uus veru ee ais pe scar mls le) Se a eral 117 
CIE KRS: «osuere bi nro ee Ies E a S6 [6 aNXIU rien HIS 118 
LHealàir ovo equ xiU Hu e VICCaNTS sine OENTRTE S 118 
Léattender- 2227 eoo r A O 119 
EAS usua eem nes Gars ke ORTU SIE YN Ree 120 
Chapter 5: 

Lindendale 
—A Typical Halfling Village ... 121 
Description of Lindendale ....... 122 
Map of Lindendale ............. 123 


Appendix: Adventure Suggestions 
for Gnome and Halfling Campaigns ........ 126 


CREDITS 

Designer: Douglas Niles 

Editor: John D. Rateliff 

Color Artists: Larry Elmore, Keith Parkinson, 
and Clyde Caldwell 

Black and White Artists: James Crabtree and Ned Dameron 

Additional Black and White Art: Larry Elmore, Brom, Jim 
Holloway, Stephen Fabian 


Cartographer: Dave Sutherland 

Typographer: Tracey Zamagne 

Graphic Designer: Paul Hanchette 

TSR, Inc. zd TSR Ltd. 
201 Sheridan Springs Rd. AADA 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, alatus Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 Wig). Cambridge CB1 3LB 
U.S.A. "rrr United Kingdom 


AD&D, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, DRAGONLANCE, 
FORGOTTEN REALMS, MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, AL-QADIM, 
DARK SUN, DUNGEON MASTER, and SPELLJAMMER are registered 
trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. The TSR logo is a trademark owned by TSR, 
Inc. 

©1993 TSR, inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in U.S.A, Third Printing, 
February 1994. 

Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights 
in the book trade for English language products of TSR, Inc. 

Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd. 
Distributed to the toy and hobby market by regional distributors. 

This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of 
America. Any reproduction or other unauthorized use of the material or art- 
work printed herein is prohibited without the express written permission of 
TSR, Inc. 


ISBN 1-56076-573-9 


Table of Contents * 3 


4 * Introduction 


The Small Folk 


Why a book for the small folk? And what 
do gnomes and halflings have in common 
that warrants their inclusion in a tome to- 
gether? The answer to the second question 
lies in the first, for it is the diminutive size of 
both these popular races that is the most sig- 
nificant factor in the way they cope with 
their environment. 

The worlds of the AD&D® game can be 
frightening and overpowering even to charac- 
ters broad of girth, potent of magic, and pos- 
sessing strength great enough to face many of 
those worlds' challenges. Imagine how much 
greater the danger to beings of small stature, 
limited strength, and little or no magic. 

This is the environment faced by the gnome 
and the halfling. It is a world teeming with 
larger races, each of whom claims its niche 
and jealously guards its prerogatives: prolific 
humanity, with its potent wizards and power- 
ful clerics; dour dwarves, with their mighty 
fortresses and their doughty fighters; enchant- 
ed elves, masters of the woods; not to mention 
the monsters— giants, trolls, goblins, ghosts, 
and dragons—that lurk everywhere. 

To counter these inherent disadvantages, 
and to make and keep a place for themselves 
in a hard world, gnomes and halflings long 
ago developed several traits that allow them 
not only to survive, but to flourish. Common 
to both races is an instinct for avoiding direct 
conflict when possible. Just as valuable is a 
gift for being unobtrusive. But most impor- 
tant of all, perhaps, is the open-mindedness 
both halflings and gnomes show in their deal- 
ings with members of other racial groups. 

Despite the many traits they share, gnomes 
are not halflings and halflings are not gnomes: 
each race remains distinct unto itself. Conse- 
quently, this book is divided into two major 
sections—one about gnomes and the other 
about halflings. These sections contain all a 
player or DM needs to know about the socie- 
ty, character, subraces, and kits of these di- 
minutive demihumans. 

Still, it's worth thinking about a few con- 


siderations that apply to both gnomes and 
halflings, especially those that relate to their 
size (which is small not just in comparison 
with humans but most of the other intelligent 
creatures with which they share their world). 
These are the traits of the races that are most 
useful to players, as well as important hall- 
marks of any all-gnome or all-halfling 
campaign. 


Cooperation 

Gnomes and halflings both have learned the 
value of cooperating with members of other, 
larger races. Halflings typically carry this in- 
teraction farther than do their bearded cous- 
ins, but gnomes, too, understand that 
alliances and friendship make for more pros- 
perous neighbors than do feuding and war. 
Members of both races are not inherently ad- 
verse to making business deals with dwarves, 
humans, and elves—or even humanoid mon- 
sters, provided there is no inherent racial an- 
tipathy. Even where such enmity exists, as 
between gnomes and kobolds or goblins, it is 
usually the result of competition for living 
space; in settings where this traditional bone 
of contention is absent (as in the AL-QADIM* 
setting of Zakhara), gnomes find it easy to be- 
friend even these traditional enemies. Natu- 
rally, halflings and gnomes alike will be 
cautious regarding offers of mutual coopera- 
tion from those who have been active enemies 
in the recent past, but at least they will give 
such offers a fair hearing. 

Alliances: The value of a military pact with 
a strong neighbor is an obvious one to any 
race. The trick, however, is to avoid the 
smaller partner being dominated or swallow- 
ed up by the larger. The small folk have devel- 
oped diplomacy into an art and are adept at 
being able to negotiate mutually-beneficial 
pacts with a variety of their neighbors. For ex- 
ample, elves and dwarves might ally them- 
selves with different groups of humans but not 
with each other, while the humans probably 
will have trouble getting along even among 


The Small Folk € 5 


themselves. Halfling or gnome communities 
in the same area are quite likely to have mutu- 
al assistance agreements worked out with the 
above mentioned dwarves, elves, and several 
of the human nations. Of course, these pacts 
will apply to outside threats only, as the small 
folk have no desire to get involved in the in- 
ternal power struggles of their neighbors. 

Even in cases where no military alliance is 
formed, a community of the small folk will 
strive mightily to maintain peace with its 
neighbors. Halflings and gnomes will readily 
suggest or agree to negotiation over points of 
contention, and they are capable of carrying 
on these talks for a very long period of time. If 
a group of humans decides to resolve an issue 
by force, the small folk will probably agree to 
the terms without violent resistance unless a 
matter of strong principle is at stake. How- 
ever, even in acquiescence the halflings or 
gnomes might find a way to make the human 
victory a hollow one. 

Say, for example, that a small patch of for- 
est forms a common border between a human 
town and a halfling village. The halflings will 
strive to see that the woods is preserved and 
shared, even to the point of bestowing upon 
their neighbors gifts of game, mushrooms, 
and nuts from the woods. If the humans sud- 
denly claim the woods as their exclusive prop- 
erty, the halflings will spend a long time trying 
to talk them out of this selfish notion—and 
they'll continue to use the woods as they al- 
ways have for so long as the talks last. 

If, however, the local human ruler issues an 
order barring halflings from the forest and sets 
guards around it to see that he or she is 
obeyed, the halflings will probably resort to 
discreet poaching, using their skills at moving 
silently to evade the guards. Ironically, with- 
out the tending of Forestwalkers and Leaften- 
ders (see the halfling kits), the forest will 
produce much less—and the humans proba- 
bly can't even find the mushrooms! Within a 
short time, the woods will become a wilder, 
more desolate place. Thus, both sides suffer 


rr ———— 


6 ® Introduction 


from the humans’ greed, and—if the friend- 
ship between the communities is main- 
tained—the halflings will hope that in a few 
years the human policy can be reversed. 

In an extreme case, where the human ruler 
decides that the woods should be cut down 
and the lumber used to build him or her a new 
summer palace, the halflings might be driven 
to more dire resistance. If the forest is really 
important to the community's survival and 
identity they may feel compelled to fight for 
it. Rather than declaring war on their neigh- 
bor, they will sabotage logging operations, 
waylay small parties of loggers, and generally 
make the project too time consuming and ex- 
pensive for the humans to continue. 

In all cases of possible conflict, halflings 
will first try affability, progressing from there 
to passive resistance, and only resorting to 
guerilla warfare if all else fails. Gnomes (espe- 
cially Rock Gnomes) are somewhat more 
quick to anger under mistreatment, but they 
too will never be the aggressors and will glad- 
ly end hostilities at the very first opportunity. 
It's easy to underestimate the small folk, but 
they make tenacious foes to those who insist 
on becoming their enemies. 

Intermingling: To varying degrees both kinds 
of small folk are open to the cultures of other 
races, whether this means individual gnomes 
and halflings living amongst humans, dwarves, 
and elves or accepting members of the “Big 
Folk” into their own communities. Between 
gnome and halfling, a member of one group will 
be warmly welcomed and feel quite comfortable 
living among or visiting the other. 

When gnomes or halflings live among an- 
other race, say in a populous city, they are 
adept at retaining their old customs while 
adapting them to the traits and peculiarities of 
the people around them. The hearth, so essen- 
tial to the halfling, or the fire without which 
no gnome dwelling would be complete, will be 
found anywhere a member of the respective 
race calls home—even if “home” is a corner in 
a crowded tenement and the hearth a mere 


candle or a tiny flame nourished within an 
oilpot. 

At the same time, the small folk will ven- 
ture forth, sampling the city's wonders, ex- 
ploring its corners bright and dark, and as 
likely as not making a few friends in the proc- 
ess. Within a short time after their arrival, 
chances are that they will be productive and 
popular members of the urban community. 


The invisibility Factor 

There isn't any magical vanishing act (with 
the exception of certain gnome illusionists), 
but both gnomes and halflings have inherent 
talents at "blending into the woodwork,” so to 
speak—at least, in situations where they de- 
sire not to be noticed. This is not so much a 
matter of size as it is of skill; a skill they take 
time to cultivate (it's significant that the favor- 
ite game of both gnome and halfling children 
is "Hide and Seek"!). 

In woodland settings, this trait is illustrated 
most effectively by the halfling's ability to lit- 
erally disappear among the underbrush. 
While gnomes aren't quite so adept at this, 
their keen sense of hearing and ever-present 
diligence generally allows them to hear some- 
one approaching and take shelter before they 
are discovered. 

In more social circumstances, the small folk 
are adept at directing attention away from 
themselves, whether in a city street, crowded 
tavern, or elegant dinner party. By moving 
quickly and smoothly, the diminutive charac- 
ters will often cause a human or elf to react 
with "I could have sworn there was a gnome 
there! Where'd he go?" And when others are 
asked, it turns out that no one saw him leave 
or arrive, but they all have some vague mem- 
ory of his presence! Under most circumstanc- 
es, it's possible for a gnome or halfling to slip 
away with little or no warning. 

One skill developed by both of these races is 
the art of diversion, often in very subtle 
forms. With a quick glance off to the side, a 
slight widening of the eyes, or sharp intake of 


8 * Introduction 


breath, many a halfling or gnome has success- 
fully diverted the attention of another charac- 
ter. Halflings use the time thus gained for 
some quick picking of pockets or other sleight 
of hand and to escape from potentially sticky 
situations, while gnomes use it to buy time 
and to set up elaborate practical jokes. 


Fighting Small 

When courtesy and elusiveness both fail 
and the small folk are forced into combat, 
they are adept at using their size to their own 
advantage. Whenever possible, halflings and 
gnomes will choose to fight in an area where 
larger creatures are hindered by overgrowth, 
low ceilings, or narrow constricting passages. 
Gnomes are particularly skilled at fighting 
giant-class creatures, using their small size 
and nimbleness to gain the —4 bonus to Ar- 
mor Class against them; halflings employ 
their Dexterity in other ways and have 
mastered the use of small missile weapons so 
that they can do battle with larger creatures 
before those hulking brutes get close enough 
to grapple. 

In their homes, villages, burrows, and war- 
rens, the small folk will often prepare an es- 
cape route that is only large enough to let a 
gnome or halfling squeeze through. If these 
crawlways are framed with sturdy stone en- 
trances, they can effectively block pursuit by 
larger creatures—and even if they're merely 
dirt, the time and effort needed to expand the 
tunnels often allows the fleeing gnome or half- 
ling family time to escape. 

In any conflict, the rules the small folk rely 
on to survive are easily summed up: never 
lose your head, take advantage of the Big 
Folks bulk and clumsiness where possible, 
and, when all else fails, run away. 


The full moon cast its pure illumination 
across a region of rocky hills, etching each 
knob in coral light or black shadow. Fringes 
of forest clustered among the stone of cliff and 
pinnacle, like shaggy hair trailing from the 
scalp and shoulders of granite-faced giants. 
Higher and higher the moon climbed into the 
night sky, bringing more of the landscape into 
brilliant relief. 

Yet even that brilliance did not penetrate the 
shadowy realms of forest in the valley bot- 
toms, where dank cliffs glowered overhead 
and narrow tracks wound their way through 
inky shadow. 

It was here, on these invisible trails, that 
small figures moved in steady progression. 
They came from everywhere, emerging from 
narrow cave mouths in the rocky cliffs, or 
dark ravines in the depths of the forest glen— 
and even from gaps in craggy stumps, where 
the hollowed shells of ancient trees provided 
this small folk with access to their well con- 
cealed abodes. 

They remained in the shadows as they fol- 
lowed the secret tracks. Each figure was short, 
no more than half the height of a man, but 
these little folk walked with a confidant and 
steady march, as if they knew that nothing 
would stand in their way on this night. Small 
beards, neatly trimmed around the chin, dis- 
tinguished the faces of the males, while the 
rounded cheeks of the females were framed by 
long, unbound locks of curling hair. 

Finally the marching columns came to a 
gathering of the trails, and here the path en- 
tered a narrow slot between two sheer and 
craggy cliffs. One after the other these small 
folk marched into the crack, following the 
twists and turns that would have blocked the 
passage of a creature any taller or any wider. 

Eventually the enclosing walls spread away, 
letting the glory of the moonlight reveal a rock- 
walled valley. A pond of cool water reflected 
the light in wind-rippled sparkles, while a nar- 
row waterfall spumed like a column of ivory 
down the face of a towering cliff. 


The file of figures marched steadily and si- 
lently into the vale, gathering by village and 
clan into its corners, settling themselves in 
grassy clearings or atop rocky outcrops. More 
than a thousand were already here, and thou- 
sands more had yet to come. 

But enter they did, as the moon neared its 
zenith, Now the entire floor of the valley was 
washed by the cool illumination, as the last of 
the little fellows entered via the narrow crack. 
They settled themselves comfortably, and 
though the vale teemed with upraised faces, 
no sound disturbed the still, midnight air. 

And then the moon began to fade. 


The sturdy but diminutive gnome is per- 
haps the most misunderstood of the tradition- 
al AD&D® game character races. They're kind 
of like dwarves, of course... but isn't there's 
more to it than that? 

Indeed there is. Gnomes do share some 
traits with their longer bearded cousins: they 
are exceptional miners, comfortable under- 
ground, and resistant to magic. Yet, to the 
shorter nosed dwarves, gnomes seem exces- 
sively frivolous, sometimes even weaklings. 
Gnomes are quite comfortable out of doors, 
well at home in a forest. The major rituals of 
gnomish life all occur beneath the stars, and 
no cosmic symbol is as important to them as 
an eclipse, in contrast to the dwarves, who 
prefer nothing so much as solid rock overhead 
and care little for cosmic occurrences of any 
kind. 

Gnomes are also cheerful and social crea- 
tures, of good-tempered and tolerant disposi- 
tion. They regard rudeness as a major fault—a 
characteristic which in itself is enough to mark 
them as very different from most dwarves! 
Gnomes relish the company of other gnomes 
and will eagerly compete in the telling of tales. 
Their calendar is marked by many festivals, 
each of which is an occasion of great feasting, 
drinking, singing, and dancing. 

Although gnomes are friendly, they are also 
reticent; it is possible to know a gnome for 


Gnomes * 9 


many years without learning much about him 
(or her). When a gnome does become friends 
with a member of another race, that person is 
adopted by the gnome's whole family as some- 
one they like and trust. Gnomes have much to 
fear from the larger creatures of the world, 
but they have not allowed this caution to be- 
come a compelling paranoia. 

Very fond of good food, gnomes show little 
imagination in their recipes. They are skilled 
with fire, and quite uncomfortable—even for- 
lorn—if circumstances prevent them from 
having an evening blaze. 

Finally, the gnomes have raised the art of 
the illusionist to a cultural heritage that per- 
meates many aspects of gnomish life and soci- 
ety. The steadfast loyalty and useful skills of a 
gnome character can provide fine additions to 
any group of adventurers. 


Gnomes in AD&D® 2nd Edition 

Gnomes as a player character race are intro- 
duced in the Players Handbook and the 
DUNGEON MASTER? Guide. 

In addition, as NPCs they have been cov- 
ered with an entry in the Monstrous Compen- 
dium, Volume One. Two of the gnomish 
subraces are also covered in Monstrous Com- 
pendium entries—the Svirfneblin in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS® Appendix (MC3) 
and the Tinker Gnomes (Minoi) in the 
DRAGONLANCE® Appendix (MC4). 


New Stuff About Gnomes 

This section of The Complete Book of 
Gnomes and Halflings will attempt to flesh 
out the gnome and his or her society. The way 
these little people live and interact, the things 
that motivate them to be brave, cautious, or 
shy, and the kind of world they desire for 
themselves and their offspring are all treated 
in some detail. 

In addition, the various subraces of gnomes 
are distinguished—including the Rock Gnomes, 
who are the typical gnomes of the campaign 
world, as well as the Deep Gnomes (Svirfneblin) 


10 * Introduction 


and the Tinkers. A new subrace, the Forest 
Gnome, is also introduced here. Close to Rock 
Gnomes in many ways, they are nevertheless a 
distinct group, preferring the habitat of wooded 
glades and deep meadows to the rock-and-dirt- 
walled underground lairs of their more common 
kin. 

The section also includes a selection of play- 
er character kits for gnomes, each of which 
entails specific advantages and liabilities, al- 
lowing players to tailor their characters to- 
ward the specific desires of the PC’s campaign 
and background. 

The final chapter in this section briefly de- 
scribes a typical gnomish village, designed so 
it will easily fit in any AD&D® campaign 
world. This warren can serve as a suitable 
‘home base’ from which to launch an all- 
gnomish campaign. Finally, the Appendix at 
the end of the book contains several adven- 
ture suggestions for gnomish PCs. 


CHAPTER 


Myths of the Gnomes 


The moon faded as the shadow of the world 
slipped across its surface, until the natural am- 
phitheater— recently so brilliantly illuminated 
under the full circle of white glare—slipped in- 
to darker, deeper shadow. Finally, in nearly 
complete blackness, the masters stepped from 
their niches onto the stages of honor set around 
the gathering. Each of these stages was a pinna- 
cle of rock, rising several dozen feet above the 
heads of assembled gnomedom. 

One of these masters raised his hands and 
muttered an incantation. Immediately the 
midnight air around him flared into a blossom 
of red light, light that spilled like a shower of 
liquid onto the floor of the valley. Another 
master spoke, and green illumination grew in 
a spurting fountain around her. Soon other 
showers of light, in blues and whites and pale 
yellows, spread across the darkened vale. The 
rock walls reflected the magical flares until the 
whole of the bowl-shaped vale brightened un- 
der the illusionary magic. 

Then the circle of lights faded again, as a 
file of stunted figures moved into the smooth 
clearing beside the lake. Abruptly, these 
gnomes raised their hands—and the tale of the 
gods began.... 


Unlike most other civilized races, the 
gnomes do not have a creation myth. Instead, 
they view the world—and their place in it—as 
a constant within the flow of time, changing 
only in small and insignificant ways. In the 
big picture, they assume that things will re- 
main very much as they always have been. 
Good and evil, chaos and law, exist in equilib- 
rium, and the preservation of this balancing 
act is the primary purpose of time. 


A great wall of white light flickered into the 
sky. A fountain of golden sparks appeared in 
the midst of the pale illumination, and the 
whiteness encircled the gold like a mantle 
wrapping royal shoulders. Slowly a figure 
grew distinct —gnomish of form but enor- 
mous in size, covered with rippling golden, his 


eyes gleaming like twin diamonds of incom- 
prehensible size and value. 

Murmurs of appreciation and comprehen- 
sion rippled through the assembled gnomes. 
They knew that this was the image of Garl 
Glittergold, the patriarch of the gnomish pan- 
theon of deities from time immemorial. In 
mute confirmation, the gleaming shape of a 
huge, silver-bladed axe materialized in the 
god's hands. This, they knew, was Arumdina 
the justifier, the great battleaxe that would 
cleave the enemies of gnomedom as easily as 
she might slice through water. 

Other fountains of color spurted upward, 
and within them grew the shapes of additional 
gods—the mischievous and merry face of 
Baervan Wildwanderer; the calm, stoney fea- 
tures of Calladuran Smoothhands; the vibrant 
metal-faced visage of Flandal Steelskin; Sego- 
jan Earthcallers benign features—until the 
whole cosmic family was represented in the 
bright vale. 

Only then came the creeping white shadow, 
reaching forward with steel-shod claws, its 
shape like that of a blunt and blinded beast. It 
glowed like a corpse-candle, its illumination 
swallowing up all other light, its pale glare un- 
mistakably pure evil. 

The gnomes gasped collectively, and little 
ones instinctively shrank beside their moth- 
ers, for they all knew that this was Urdlen— 
the dark center of evil that remained, even 
within gnomedom, always ready to flourish 
in the world. 


The gnomish outlook on life requires a very 
balanced view of the universe. Thus, while 
gnomes consider themselves and their race to 
be generally good, the force of evil in the 
world—and even within the gnomes them- 
selves—cannot be denied. Indeed, only by ac- 
knowledging evil, by recognizing it as the 
counterpoint of goodness, can the balance of 
all things be maintained. 

Like the gnomes themselves and the other 
gods, Urdlen the Evil One is assumed to have 


Myths of the Gnomes ® 11 


always been there, and to remain for all time 
to come. Yet only in the steady struggle 
against the creature and what it represents can 
the truly happy and vital nature of these peo- 
ple be insured. 


The colors flowed and flamed. In their tow- 
ering pillars they told of the great battles of 
life, as darkness ever strives to swallow light 
but always the brightness breaks through. 

Thousands of gnomish throats first howled 
with laughter, then groaned in collective grief, 
as the images of the gods cavorted across the 
epic stage. They watched in awe as Garl Glit- 
tergold raised his axe, chopping at imaginary 
stantions of stone to bring a thunderous col- 
lapse—this was the tale of Garl's triumph over 
Kurtulmak the kobold god, in which Garl 
brings down the cavern that Kurtulmak would 
have made his prison upon his captor's head. 

Next the images of a thousand gnomes, ar- 
rayed for war, marched from the cliff walls, 
striving toward each other with braying trum- 
pets and drums that pounded like thunder. But 
again came Garl Glittergold, the goldenskinned 
giant of a gnome, and with a swipe of his axe he 
cast glittering sparks of light all across the 
ground. Immediately the gnomish host threw 
down their arms, and the audience roared with 
amusement as they scuttled about to collect the 
gems that their deity had scattered. By the time 
the gathering was done, the weapons were lost 
and the trivial argument that had once pro- 
pelled them to war had been forgotten. 


Central to the mythology and self aware- 
ness of the gnomes is a sense of the race's to- 
getherness—even among the different 
subraces that make up the whole (see Chapter 
2). Indeed, one of Garl Glittergold's main 
tasks in the world is to intercede in potential 
gnome-to-gnome conflicts, usually by humor 
and diversion. It is this awareness that makes 
conflicts among these folk—whether they be 
marital arguments, property disputes, disre- 
spectful youth, bitter clan rivalries, or war- 


——————————————————————ÁÁÉÓÓÓÓBáBÉáÓááÉÓáÓÓU EE ILBÍCTILDLCÜ?ÜZTÍCLBBDI?TTGBBÓL.L.]af'2Ó0 1 ,L0»,80)].,C[PüLLDLLGoOÉLLLL1.L)LLZD»1.4ALLLALIGLOLLLt' d.  .,|.kÀüÁá«ÁL AGO ÀLÓRUIUL 


12 * Chapter One 


fare—so extremely rare. 

When they do occur, the practicers of vio- 
lence (on both sides) are likely to face com- 
plete ostracism until the conflict is resolved. It 
is interesting to note that, once resolution is 
achieved, the gnomes are usually quick to for- 
give and to welcome transgressors back into 
the fold. Their patience is not limitless, how- 
ever, and blatant aggressors or bullies who re- 
peatedly hector others are not likely to be 
easily forgiven. Fortunately, such malefactors 
are quite rare. 


The image of the goldenskinned gnome, 
surrounded by his entourage of lesser gods, 
cavorted from mountaintop to hillcrest, scam- 
pering around the vale that held so many of 
his people. They laughed and roared at his an- 
tics, cheering as he and Baervan sat together 
at a table and alternately stole a succulent 
haunch of roast back and forth from each oth- 
er. The illusionary roast, which was the size of 
a small house, sizzled and sputtered, casting 
the warmth of steam and the scent of its juices 
enticingly across the gathering. 

But then the crowd drew breath in hushed 
anticipation as they saw, lurking in the hollow 
below Garl's golden image, the hideous bulk 
of Urdlen, The Crawler Below. Reaching up- 
ward with steely claws, the hairless, blind 
beast groped for the higher gods, seeking to 
strike and injure them in its spite and hate. 
Small gnomish children, not yet initiated in 
the scope of the tale, shouted warnings, their 
squeaking voices rising above the hush and 
stillness of the vale. 

Garl took no notice, however, instead 
choosing that moment to perch on one foot 
and do a wild, spinning dance for the edifica- 
tion of the crowd. Ever upward crept the 
monstrous mole, until those steel talons 
reached almost to the great god's golden boot. 

Suddenly, just as Urdlen prepared to lunge 
at its apparently unsuspecting victim, Garl 
leapt into the air and did a double somersault 
backwards over the creeping beast, finally 


coming to rest on a hilltop a full quarter-mile 
away. Hissing in hate and spite, the evil mole 
reared up to make a last desperate swipe at its 
escaping prey, only to overbalance in its haste 
and fall backward, rolling over and over like a 
runaway snowball as it slid down the slippery 
slope, not stopping until it hit the bottom of 
the shaded vale between the two summits. A 
moment later an avalanche of gems it had dis- 
lodged in its fall buried it from sight. 

And then, to the echo of Garl's laughter and 
the relieved cheers of ten thousand gnomes, 
the shadow slipped from the face of the moon. 
As brightness again filled the vale, the per- 
formance of the illusions faded... and the cele- 
bration began. 


The task of the gnome, as he or she views 
his or her place in the world, is a mixture of 
important work and equally important play. 
Whatever the nature of the job at hand, a 


gnome will apply himself or herself to it with 
great good humor, even carrying his or her 
joking wit and humorous outlook into the 
subterranean depths of a mine or down the 
forest trail. 

But it is when the work is done that the true 
nature of gnomehood becomes apparent. No 
one could mistake a boisterous gathering of 
singing, dancing gnomes for a hard-working 
bunch of dwarves. Indeed, the humor that 
possesses them comes to the fore in these days 
of celebration. For example, the festival of the 
Lunar Eclipse described in this chapter runs 
until the next full moon. For a full month, the 
gnomes set their cares and chores aside, using 
the cosmic occasion as an excuse to gather 
from far and wide, spending their days and 
nights in a loud and boisterous celebration of 
themselves and their role in life. 


Myths of the Gnomes * 13 


Gods Of Gnomedom 

Gnomes are not a tremendously devout 
folk, but they do have a well-developed pan- 
theon of deities, and they like to honor their 
gods with frequent "observances"— rites that 
tend to be performed, naturally, as wild and 
raucous festivals. The major gods listed below 
are described in more details on pages 33-37 
and 71 of DMGR4, Monster Mythology. 


Garl Glittergold (Greater God) is the patri- 
arch of the hierarchy and probably the most 
approachable of all the Greater Gods. He of- 
ten travels the worlds looking for mischief to 
get into. He appears as a gold-skinned gnome 
with gemstone eyes that shift from sapphire to 
emerald to ruby. 

A master of pranks, Garl is a good- 
humored jokester who is nevertheless proud 
and protective of his diminutive followers. 
His chief concerns are twofold: to see that 
gnomes everywhere cooperate and work to- 
gether and to remind them that while life may 
sometimes be hard, it's important to always 
keep a sense of humor. 

Garl carries his intelligent two-headed axe, 
Arumdina, everywhere he goes; she is more a 
companion than a possession. Although he is 
a capable fighter, he prefers to use trickery 
and illusions to accomplish his goals, and en- 
courages his followers to do the same. 


Baervan Wildwanderer (Intermediate God) is 
the most popular member of the pantheon af- 
ter his friend Garl, for he is the protecter of the 
forests and glades that are so important to 
gnomish well-being. Even the Svirfneblin 
honor him as the “Father of Fish and Fungus.” 
Baervan is also the patron of gnomish thieves 
and a mischief-maker to rival Garl himself. He 
is pictured as a spry old gnome with nut- 
brown skin and a jaunty beard. His friend and 
constant companion in his escapades is a giant 
raccoon named Chiktikka Fastpaws. 


Callarduran Smoothhands (Greater God) is 


14 * Chapter One 


the master of stone, worshipped primarily by 
Svirfneblin. The Deep Gnomes consider him 
equal in might to Garl Glittergold, though he 
is largely ignored by the other subraces. It was 
Calladuran who taught Svirfneblin how to 
summon and befriend earth elementals. He 
will often send his avatar to aid his people; his 
appearance is that of a wiry Svirfneblin miner, 
indistinguishable from virtually any other 
Deep Gnome except for a golden ring with a 
star insignia he always wears. 


Flandal Steelskin (Intermediate God), with his 
skin of mithril steel, eyes like flaming coals, and 
beard of silver-blue, is the patron of gnomish 
smiths—not just blacksmiths but also gold- 
smiths, silversmiths, and all other workers in 
metal. He is physically the strongest of the 
gnomish gods, and his uncanny ability to sniff 
of the veins of metal that thread through the 
earth makes him a patron of miners. 


Segojan Earthcaller (Intermediate God) is a 
nature deity whose province is the creatures 
who burrow through the earth; he taught the 
gnomes how to befriend moles, badgers, and 
other subterranean animals. He appears as a 
grey-skinned gnome clad in armor made from 
grass and roots, accompanied by an intelli- 
gent stone golem. 


Urdlen (Intermediate God)'s form is that of a 
white mole, hairless, sexless, and blind but 
with wicked claws of steel. A mindless force 
of malicious evil and destruction, Urdlen 
serves as a warning to every gnome to beware 
the taint of greed that lies within the gnomish 
delight in gems and jewelry. In keeping with 
the importance of a balance of forces, Urdlen's 
place in the pantheon is unquestioned, though 
the god is greatly feared and secretly reviled. 
Its few worshippers destroy gems and works 
of art to propitiate the god and thus are re- 
garded as immoral villains by the bulk of 
gnomish society. 


CHAPTER 


Gnome Subraces 


The gnome subraces are very distinct 
groups of these diminutive demihumans. Two 
of them, the typical gnome (also known as the 
Rock Gnome) and the Deep Gnome, or 
Svirfneblin, have been introduced and used in 
a number of AD&D® products. Hence, both 
have long been known to players and DMs. 

The third type, the Tinker Gnome or Minoi, 
is a native of Krynn, encountered primarily in 
DRAGONLANCE® campaigns (though, dis- 
tressingly, they have been known to spread to 
other realms through the use of Spelljammers). 
These beings are very much like typical gnomes 
in appearance, but their personality and out- 
look, and especially their overzealous love of 
technology, makes them very distinct as a sub- 
race (and an extreme menace to themselves and 
their companions). 

A fourth gnomish subrace, the Forest 
Gnome, is introduced here. These shy folk are 
relatives of the Rock Gnome, though they do 
not share their cousins' love of mining and ex- 
cavation. The rarest of gnome subraces, the 
Forest Gnomes is most likely to be encoun- 
tered in pristine woodlands and undisturbed 
wilderness. They tend this habitat with sur- 
prisingly fierce determination. 

In keeping with the gnomes' lack of a crea- 
tion myth, they have no folklore to describe 
the origin of the different subraces—the dif- 
ferent branches of the racial family are as- 
sumed to have always been there. While 
there's no hostility between the subraces (un- 
like the High Elves and the Drow, or the Hill 
Dwarves and the Duergar), there is also little 
contact. Each subrace keeps mostly to itself, 
and it is very rare to find mixed communities 
of Rock Gnomes with Svirfneblin, Forest 
Gnomes, or (Garl forbid!) Tinker Gnomes. 


Rock Gnomes 

Big of nose, quick with a laugh, cheerful, 
visionary, and industrious in their approach 
to life, the Rock Gnomes form the picture of 
the gnomish race as it is viewed by most of the 
larger folk who know them. 


"['ve had some experience with the little fel- 
lows, if I do say so myself... matter of fact, I 
had a whole team of ‘em apprenticing in my 
smithy a while back. They were good work- 
ers, too—though not quite serious enough for 
my taste. Too many jokes and pranks, not a 
good idea around a hot forge! And those illu- 
sions! Never did know if it was a real fire I was 
lookin' at or just one of them bright spells. 

"Still, they caught on quick to everything I 
tried to teach 'em. They could shovel coal 
good as any dwarf—well, good as some 
dwarves—and they showed a real gift for 
wielding the hammer and shaping the steel. 
‘Course, they don't have the patience to make 
a real quality sword or axeblade, but they had 
the technique down okay. They'd batter at it 
awhile, then one of 'em would make a joke 
and the next thing you know the bellows'd be 
idle and the metal would be gettin' cool. 

"Another thing, too—when it came to mak- 
ing the hilt, that's where they really shined! 
I've never seen gemwork like those gnomes 
could do, working any kind of stone into a 
leather hilt, wrapping it onto the steel butt 
with scarcely a waver or imperfection. You 
know, as long as they let a dwarf do the finish- 
ing of the edge and the tempering of the blade, 
those gnomes could put the finishing touches 
on a weapon like you've never seen before! 

“When they were done with work—now 
that's another story. Showed no proper re- 
spect for their teachers or elders. Sat around 
and drank like fish, far as I could tell. And 
those songs ! Manys the time I got up out of a 
sound sleep and had to kick 'em out of the 
place, just so I could get a little rest (I had to 
get the fire going before dawn, you know— 
that's another thing you couldn't count on the 
gnomes to do!). 

"Still, you know, I kind of miss 'em. Would 
have been glad to keep 'em on, too. A couple 
were skilled enough to be journeymen—might 
have even made the mastership! But that 
weren't for them. Nope, instead they learned 
what they could and then, all in a pack, just 


Gnome Subraces 9 15 


up and left one day. I heard tell they went 
back to their grotto, but of course I've never 
been up there to check." 


—Gwintroc Fanish, dwarf and master 
weaponsmith, on his experiences in 
working with Rock Gnomes 


Rock Gnomes are the most common type of 
gnome among the known worlds, and indeed, 
when one speaks of a "gnome;' chances are he 
or she means a Rock Gnome. While not a pop- 
ulous race in comparison to humans or other 
demihumans, they are encountered in a wide 
variety of environments, showing no particu- 
lar preference for any one type of climate. 
They do, however, tend to make their homes 
in areas with an abundance of natural rock 
(even if it's invisible under a layer of loam and 
forest). 

All gnomes have a fondness for gemstones 


16 * Chapter Two 


of all kinds, and in fact each subrace has a 
stone that it reveres above all others. No other 
gnomish race, however, is as adept at cutting 
and shaping these precious baubles as are the 
Rock Gnomes. The gem symbol of this sub- 
race is, appropriately, the diamond. Dia- 
monds are used as symbols of status and 
accomplishment, and wealthy and highly re- 
garded clans will often have dishes, candela- 
bras, and other elegant possessions encrusted 
with these hard and precious stones. 

The most distinctive physical characteris- 
tic of the Rock Gnome is an enormous nose— 
a proboscis that is larger than that of any 
dwarf or human, despite the gnome's diminu- 
tive size. Indeed, the size of one's nose is a 
matter of some status among Rock Gnomes, 
and more than one good-natured debate has 
resulted in actual comparisons being made. 
The true test of a mighty nose is the ability to 
poke it into your opponents eye without 


having his nose do more than tickle the fringe 
of your beard (the use of the male pronoun is 
not generic here; females pride themselves on 
big noses too, but in addition to lacking 
beards they are less prone to such boisterous 
comparisons). 

Rock Gnomes average about 3!/' in height. 
Unlike the burly dwarves, who tend to weigh as 
much or more than the average human, Rock 
Gnomes are lightly-built. Their small frame is 
deceptive, however, for despite their size these 
gnomes are as strong as most humans. 

The eye color of a Rock Gnome is predomi- 
nantly blue, though shades of green and, rarely, 
yellow or brown are not unknown. Such unusu- 
al eye colors are apparent from birth and is con- 
sidered to signify either very good fortune or 
very dire omens, depending on the traditions of 
that particular gnomish community. 

The brownish color of the Rock Gnomes' 
skin can be encountered in many shades, 
ranging from a light tan to nearly black. 
While the race does not avoid the sun, they 
suffer no effects from exposure—they don't 
sunburn or tan, so the shade of a gnome's skin 
has nothing to do with the proportion of his 
or her life spent outdoors or underground. In 
mature adults, the hair and beard are almost 
universally white or pale gray, but in young- 
sters and adolescents one will find as wide a 
variety of hair color as among human-kind. 
Only the males are bearded, with facial hair 
growing in near the beginning of the gnome's 
second century of life. Unlike dwarves, how- 
ever, gnome males keep their beards neatly 
brushed and trimmed, with a maximum 
length of only about six inches. Sometimes the 
beard will be trimmed into fashionable shapes 
such as a goatee, or brushed into a long, curl- 
ing point (or pair of points, in a real statement 
of high fashion). 

While the average lifespan of a Rock 
Gnome is in the area of four centuries, it is not 
uncommon to find an elder patriarch or matri- 
arch who has been around for more than 600 
years. The oldest of them have been known to 


approach the venerable age of 750 years. 

The first half-century of a gnomes life is gen- 
erally spent in a carefree childhood. Youngsters 
are indulged and benignly guided by their el- 
ders, with rarely a harsh word or punishment 
employed against them. The children learn by 
example and strive to please the adults around 
them. Sages attribute the fact that all gnomes re- 
spond better to praise and encouragement than 
threats to this upbringing. 

By the time he or she has reached 50 years 
of age, a gnome is expected to begin applying 
himself or herself to the development of a use- 
ful skill and to learn the basics of self-defense 
and weaponcraft. However, during this half- 
century-long adolescence, gnomes are still not 
subjected to an array of responsibilities—in- 
stead, they are encouraged to experiment with 
a variety of trades and activities until they 
find those best suited to their own talents and 
personality. 

The occasion of his or her hundredth birth- 
day is of great significance to a Rock Gnome, 
for it indicates that he or she has reached 
adulthood. It is customary for his or her fami- 
ly to host a large party, with a gathering of 
any clans within traveling distance to cele- 
brate the coming of age. Since the party itself 
is likely to run for a month or more, it is not 
uncommon for gnomes to travel hundreds of 
miles for such a get-together! Each clan will 
bring a practical gift for the newly anointed 
adult, and it is a cause for great pride if the 
present is judged to be the finest among the ar- 
ray of gifts. However, the practical nature of 
these tokens is inviolate—boots, a shield, a 
sturdy tunic, even a weapon or tool are all ap- 
propriate. Gem-encrusted baubles, works of 
art, or simple decorations, although highly 
valued by gnomes, will not be given as com- 
ing-of-age gifts. 

The industrious nature of gnomes is well- 
documented, and probably represents their 
closest similarity to dwarves. Like dwarves, 
gnomes will organize for a task, with each in- 
dividual lending his or her talents where they 


Gnome Subraces * 17 


will be most useful. When digging a tunnel, 
for example, the strongest gnomes will work 
with picks to break up the rock in their path, 
while others—more nimble, if not so power- 
ful—scamper among the flailing picks, scoop- 
ing up the debris with shovels and pails. A 
third group of gnomes, those who are very 
hardy and capable of great endurance, will 
carry the crushed rock (often in wheelbar- 
rows, but sometimes in leather sacks slung 
over the shoulder) out of the tunnel to the 
dumping grounds. 

In their pursuit of mining, gnomes are not 
so speedy to excavate as dwarves, but they are 
more careful with what they find. Indeed, 
many a vein of ore that has been "played out" 
by dwarven standards has been taken over by 
gnomes and continued to yield its riches to the 
more meticulous gnomish miners. 

Even while they work, however, these 
gnomes will pursue their tasks with high good 
humor, bawdy stories, and a succession of 
jokes of all types. Only rarely, however, will 
this frivolity interfere with the effectiveness of 
the group's work. 

Nowhere is Rock Gnome precision more in 
evidence than in their stonecutting and 
gemwork. Their skill at cutting, polishing, 
and mounting gemstones is unsurpassed by 
any other race. They are also skilled enough 
metalworkers to make elaborate frames and 
mounts for jewelry. Indeed, gnomish metal- 
smiths work better with soft metals such as sil- 
ver and gold than they do with iron and 
steel —another significant difference between 
them and their larger cousins, the dwarves. 
Gold chain belts, silver necklaces, and shining 
buttons are all proudly displayed by the well- 
accoutred gnome. 

This is not to say that gnomes cannot be- 
come fine blacksmiths when they are so in- 
clined. Indeed, every community will have at 
least one well-muscled resident who is in 
charge of toolmaking and of crafting other ob- 
jects such as dishes and weapons out of iron 
and steel. Gnomes generally purchase steel 


18 * Chapter Two 


from dwarves or humans, however, rather 
than smelting it themselves. The finest weap- 
ons in a gnomish community are generally of 
outside (dwarven or elven) manufacture, of- 
ten purchased in trade with the gem and jew- 
elry work that they do so well. 

Rock Gnomes also can become skilled car- 
penters and (perhaps not surprisingly, given 
their dextrous and artistic nature) exceptional 
woodcarvers. Though most gnomes do not 
devote a lot of attention to fabrics, those that 
do are skilled tailors and embroiderers as well. 

In the area of culinary skills gnomes are not 
so elaborate. In fact, their standards when 
compared to halflings are downright plain. 
Their ideal meal is boiled or roasted meat, un- 
spiced, accompanied by potatoes and mush- 
rooms. Also unlike halflings, Rock Gnomes 
rarely keep cows, so they have little milk, but- 
ter, or cheese. Their bread is unleavened and 
relatively unpalatable to others with more re- 
fined tastes. 

In the area of brewing, Rock Gnomes be- 
lieve themselves to be every bit the match of 
halflings and humans and insist that they 
make a much tastier beverage than the heavy 
mead favored by dwarves; some gnomes even 
champion their wares above the famed elvish 
wines. Impartial judges pronounce gnomish 
brews a distinctive but acquired taste. Gnom- 
ish brewers make a variety of ales and are in- 
genious at finding ways to chill these 
beverages even in the height of summer. They 
will employ underground storage caverns, of- 
ten sealed in ice which is brought down during 
colder months. In fact, many gnome com- 
munities will have wooden piping systems in- 
stalled from these subterranean coolers so that 
the amber fluid can be pumped to spigots on 
the surface. Any gnomish innkeeper worth his 
or her salt (high praise indeed for a gnome!) 
will have such an arrangement in the cellar, 
and as a general rule, the better the chill on the 
beverage, the higher the perceived quality of 
the establishment. 

Rock Gnomes typically make abysmal 


farmers, but they can be capable hunters and 
are excellent at gathering the bounty of their 
native woodlands, including nuts, fruits, 
grubs, mushrooms, and wild greens. A com- 
munity will typically tend a small field of 
grain, which is used in about equal propor- 
tions to make bread and ale. 

In one area Rock Gnomes most closely re- 
semble elves among all the other demi-hu- 
mans—in the category of music and dancing. 
Unlike dwarves, gnomes are very musical, 
and have designed and perfected a wide varie- 
ty of instruments including flutes and horns, 
stringed instruments such as lutes and mando- 
lins, and a great assortment of percussion. 
The latter range from concave rocks, rattles, 
cymbals, and gongs to standard drums made 
of hide stretched over a base of wood or 
metal. The most talented gnomish musicians 
are famed for their skill and highly sought as 
entertainers, and nearly every adult can play 
some sort of instrument; family gatherings of- 
ten climax in a cacophony of music-making 
and merriment. Unfortunately (for non- 
gnomish listeners, at any rate) their vocal 
skills in no way come close to their instru- 
ment-playing abilities, and since they insist on 
singing along to most every kind of music, the 
resulting melodies are not necessarily pleasant 
to the non-gnomish ear. 

A Rock Gnomes idea of an ideal setting for a 
home is an area of wooded hills with an under- 
lying bedrock of limestone that can be trans- 
formed into a complicated network of lairs, 
tunnels, and stairways. Rock Gnomes are not 
so comfortable in the deep and dank recesses of 
the Underdark as, say, dwarves—or their own 
gnomish cousins, the Svirfneblin. Therefore, 
their settlements will almost always be found 
near the surface, where the steep faces of hillside 
or cliff can provide a number of entrances and 
airholes to a many-layered dwelling. Often 
these entrances must be reached along narrow 
and precarious trails—easily traveled by 
gnome-sized creatures but perilous to larger 
would-be intruders—taking one far above steep 


slopes of jagged rocks, or along the edge of a 
deep gorge, with a rolling torrent of icy water 
plunging below. 

Rock Gnomes are very social creatures, and 
generally live in thriving, active communities, 
Such communities are organized into up to a 
dozen clans, and all permanent residents are 
member of one or another of these families. 
Smaller outposts may consist of a single tight- 
knit family, with a patriarch, matriarch, or 
pair of elders providing benign leadership 
over three or four dozen gnomes. The typical 
upper limit of any one community is 400-500 
gnomes, mainly due to limitations in the sur- 
rounding food supply —not due to any desire 
for isolation from their neighbors. 

Whatever the size of a Rock Gnome settle- 
ment, the chain of status will always culmi- 
nate in one unquestioned leader. To this chief 
(who is usually, but not always, male) come 
all crucial decisions on matters of defense and 
trade, as well as the arbitration of the rare in- 
stances of discord within the community. 
When this chief makes a ruling or command, 
he or she is obeyed immediately, with a disci- 
pline that can instantly transform a pastoral 
community into a determined work force or 
warlike army at need. 

Most communities of Rock Gnomes will be 
found within a few days' or weeks' travel of 
each other, with grand gatherings of the 
clans—often including four or five thousand 
gnomes—held every decade or so. These festi- 
vals can last for a fortnight or more and gener- 
ally climax in frenzied musical performances, 
nose-measuring contests, tournaments to de- 
termine who is best at drinking, snoring, and 
other things, and feasting. 

The individual burrows of the Rock 
Gnomes are small and tidy. Generally a mar- 
ried couple will have a small chamber to 
themselves, with all children (cousins as well 
as siblings) sharing a common room. Adoles- 
cents are segregated by sex, with a large bur- 
row having two separate chambers for its 
young males and females respectively. Most 


——— ET 


Gnome Subraces e 19 


of these private chambers will be connected 
via tunnels to a central family chamber, where 
the fire is kept, food is prepared and eaten, 
and the family members meet for the talk and 
socialization that occupies virtually all their 
nonworking waking hours. The common 
room will always have a chimney vented to 
the outside (often through a very long pas- 
sage). Ideally, it will have some other access to 
fresh air and light as well—chambers with no 
window are considered oppressive and tomb- 
like by many Rock Gnomes. 

The family quarters will also connect (usu- 
ally via an underground passage) to the other 
families that make up the clan; and similarly 
each clan in the community will be connected 
to the others. At every place junctures occur, 
there are large chambers. In the bigger towns 
these areas contain inns and shops, as well as 
open commons where impromptu parties (as 
well as many scheduled festivals) can take 
place. 

Gnomes travel frequently among their com- 
munities, and many of them will venture into 
human or demihuman cities out of curiosity. 
They mix well with halflings and find life in a 
halfling village quite pleasant. Unlike half- 
lings, they have no particular compulsion that 
holds them to their own homes or locales, and 
their long lifespans afford them the time to in- 
dulge their curiosity about how other races 
live. 

While Rock Gnomes can survive and even 
flourish in a community of humans, dwarves, 
elves, or halflings, few would care to leave 
their fellow gnomes permanently. It's far more 
common for a gnome to live among other 
races for a few decades, perhaps even a centu- 
ry or more, before returning home to his or 
her own clan. Perhaps a quarter of all Rock 
Gnomes spend at least part of their second 
century "seeing the world" before returning to 
take up his or her role in clan affairs. 

Rock Gnomes will sometimes welcome 
members of other races into their communi- 
ties. However, humans and especially elves 


20 * Chapter Two 


tend to find gnome cities claustrophobic, 
while the furniture and passageways between 
rooms are usually too cramped for the aver- 
age dwarf. Halflings sometimes exchange ex- 
tended visits to their gnome neighbors but it's 
a rare halfling who leave his or her own bur- 
row behind forever. 


Table 1: Rock Gnome Ability Scores 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 6 18 
Dexterity 3 18 
Constitution 8 18 
Intelligence 7 19 
Wisdom 3 17 
Charisma 3 18 


Ability Score Adjustments: 

+1 to Intelligence; —1 to Wisdom 
Languages: Gnome, Common, Dwarf, Half- 
ling, Kobold, Goblin, and Burrowing Animal 
(the latter is a language of signs, grunts, and 
snorts that allows minimal communication 
with moles, badgers, weasels, and similar 
creatures, including giant versions). 
Infravision: Yes (60") 

Special Features: Rock Gnomes have a num- 
ber of special abilities. These are described on 
page 22 of the Players Handbook and are 
summarized here for easy reference: 

Detect Underground Features—Like dwarves, 
Rock Gnomes can locate sloping passages (1-5 
on 1d6), flawed stonework (1-7 on 1d10), and 
approximate depth (1-4 on 1d6) and direction 
(1-3 on 1d6) underground. 

Saving Throw Bonus—The Rock Gnome 
gains a +1 bonus to his or her saving throws 
versus spell for every 3.5 points of Constitu- 
tion. 

Combat Bonuses—Rock Gnomes add +1 to 
all melee attack rolls against kobolds or gob- 
lins, their traditional racial enemies. They re- 
ceive a —4 bonus to their Armor Class when 
attacked by giant class creatures (gnolls, 
trolls, bugbears, ogres, ogre magi, trolls, ti- 
tans, and giants).. 


Svirfneblin (Deep Gnomes) 

To most surface dwellers the gnomes of this 
race are mysterious denizens of the Underdark 
about whom little is known. Those who judge 
by appearance see them as stunted and 
gnarled creatures and believe them to be the 
Rock Gnomes' evil counterparts, the gnomish 
equivalent to the Drow and Duergar. In truth, 
they are no more evil than their more numer- 
ous cousins; their sinister reputation is merely 
the result of ignorance. The Deep Gnomes are 
the most reticent of all the gnomish subraces, 
surviving in an extremely hostile environment 
entirely by their own wiles. 


"Svirfneblin? I loathe them—they are fit on- 
ly to die on the tip of a Dark Elf's sword! They 
scurry about the sunless realms with tenacity. 
We kill them wherever we find them, and still 
they return! They show no fear of our Drow 
mages, even when dozens of them perish at a 
time. Even the priestesses of Lolth, while they 
slay the sniveling gnomes in mass, do not in- 
spire enough terror to stop their malicious in- 
trusion! 

"And why do they come? The answer is 
gems. They thirst for precious baubles with a 
ferocity I have never seen. They will drive 
their tunnels into the farthest corners of the 
Underdark, and this is what makes them a 
threat to me and my people. 

"| give you a tale of Desselderekathe, a 
great cavern network not so very far from my 
own home. Its mere existence was naturally a 
threat to us, and thus—more than a century 
ago—we sent an army to destroy it. | myself 
commanded a company of lizardriders in the 
assault. 

"Our Drow forces struck them from all 
sides. My own cavalry entered through the ca- 
vern ceiling and rode down the walls, striking 
into the heart of Desselderekathe before the 
foe knew they were attacked. Our mages cast 
clouds of poison gas that settled into the city's 
low places, and into these we drove the 
screaming little pests. 


"Within a few hours it was over—not a single 
Deep Gnome remained alive within the walls of 
Desselderekathe! We withdrew in triumph, and 
I myself was decorated by the matron mother of 
our city's greatest house! Yet within a decade we 
heard reports that renegade Deep Gnomes had 
moved into the abandoned ruins. We set a garri- 
son in the place, but they suffered ambush and 
other treachery—and it proved too expensive to 
station a full army in what was otherwise a 
worthless shell. Though there were in fact some 
gem-bearing rock formations in the region, the 
excavation proved too troublesome to warrant 
the return. Seventy years ago we abandoned 
Desselderekathe, and now I hear that the place 
is again full of Svirfneblin! I suppose we'll have 
to do it all again, and I know these runts will not 
allow us to simply repeat our first attack. We 
shall have to devise a new tactic, one which 
may well be more costly in terms of Drow lives. 
And for what? Simply to insure our destiny, 
and our right to live in peace. 

"You see now, I trust, why the Svirfneblin 
are fit only to be hated, loathed, and 
despised?" 


—Fassyth Yssarial, Secondboy of House 
Twylleenimor, Imperial Drow City of 
Qaucium. 


These diminutive inhabitants of the Under- 
dark are as tenacious at survival as the just- 
cited opinion by their mortal enemies 
indicates. Unlike their Rock Gnome cousins, 
they have no friendly neighbors to ally them- 
selves with, forcing them to become entirely 
self-reliant. Only the few who have won their 
trust know that they are in many ways as so- 
cial and artistic as other gnomes. 

Why do they endure this frankly hostile en- 
vironment? The answer is simple: they are 
drawn by the lure of gemstones, which is 
more pronounced in the Deep Gnomes than in 
any other subrace. 


Gnome Subraces e 21 


The gem that most draws the interest and 
devotion of the Svirfneblin is the ruby, which 
is the predominant symbol of the race. The 
Deep Gnomes view these crimson stones with 
reverence approaching awe—so much so that 
they are never used for mundane practices 
such as ornamentation of garments, weapons, 
or armor. Rubies are reserved for sacred pur- 
poses and are often employed to decorate arti- 
facts that are dedicated to the Svirfneblin 
gods. They are also favored by Deep Gnome 
monarchs, so much so that a Svirfneblin king 
or queen might have a full ring of rubies 
around his or her crown, with others of the 
precious stone set in the throne and sceptre. 

Svirfneblin average between 3 and 3!/2' in 
height, rarely exceeding this norm by more 
than an inch or two. They are creatures of 
wiry muscle and tough bones, slightly thinner 
than their surface cousins but possessing as 
much strength as any other gnome. 


22 * Chapter Two 


Like their cousins of the other gnomish sub- 
races, Svirfneblin have prominent noses. 
Otherwise their faces are much narrower. 
Many males have completely hairless bodies; 
most females have only thin and stringy hair, 
which they wear no longer than shoulder 
length. A Deep Gnomes skin is rock-colored, 
predominantly brown or gray. Eye color is al- 
ways a shade of gray, sometimes so dark as to 
be almost black. 

The Svirfneblin are not so long-lived as their 
surface-dwelling kin, living to an average old 
age of only about 250 years; a good number 
meet a violent demise before this time is up. 
They mature relatively quickly, however, with 
the first quarter century of life considered child- 
hood and the next two decades as a period of 
disciplined adolescence. A Svirfneblin is as- 
sumed to reach adulthood somewhere around 
the age of 45 or 50, though this milestone is not 
marked by any grand ceremony such as is per- 


formed by the Rock Gnomes. Indeed, the Deep 
Gnomes don't even keep track of the passage of 
days, so there is no way to record ones actual 
“birthday.” 

The most valued common skill among the 
Svirfneblin is that of the miner, with perhaps 
75% of any given community's adult males de- 
voting themselves to that pursuit. Svirfneblin 
miners are exceptionally able with pick and 
shovel, capable of chiseling a passage through 
solid stone more quickly than Rock Gnomes or 
even dwarves. While mining is broken into spe- 
cializations, such as choppers (who do the actu- 
al pickaxe work), scouts (who locate promising 
veins for excavation), and haulers (who carry 
the tailings away from the scene), a Deep 
Gnome miner will be reasonably proficient at 
all aspects of his trade. The most alluring target 
of the Svirfneblin miner is, naturally, gems. 
However, these diligent diggers will also pursue 
veins of metal, including gold and silver, and 
they also occasionally gather a stockpile of coal 
or iron ore—from which they make a very pass- 
able steel. 

A smaller percentage of the Svirfneblin 
work force (perhaps 10%) is engaged in the 
processing and finishing of the gemstone ma- 
terial excavated by the miners. These include 
polishers, smelters, carvers, and smiths. 
Though they lack a bit of the exceptional de- 
tail skill of the Rock Gnomes, in the other ar- 
eas they are at least as proficient as their 
surface-dwelling cousins. Indeed (and unlike 
Rock Gnomes), Svirfneblin blacksmiths can 
possess exceptional skill. Their weapons and 
tools are generally made by Deep Gnome arti- 
sans, and these are nearly the equal of the 
products of the highest level of dwarven 
craftsmanship or Drow weaponsmiths. 

Perhaps because suitable habitat is harder 
to find in the Underdark than on the surface, 
Deep Gnome communities tend to be larger 
than those of the Rock Gnomes. Generally the 
Svirfneblin live in thriving cities located in 
deep cavern networks, often with more than a 
thousand residents. However, these com- 


munities are generally separated by great dis- 
tances from any others of the same subrace, 
and thus they tend to be more insular than the 
towns of the gnomes who dwell on or near the 
surface. Indeed, most Deep Gnomes live out 
their lives without ever seeing another 
Svirfneblin community beyond the one in 
which they were born. 

Still, festivals and celebrations are as com- 
mon among these gnomes as they are on the 
surface—it's just that the Svirfneblin don’t trav- 
el from far distances for the gatherings. Instead, 
each community tends to have its own special 
observances, and though the whole city will 
turn out for many of them it is rare that any out- 
side guest would be admitted. Also, these cele- 
brations are not tied to recurring cosmic events, 
such as solstices or eclipses; instead, they occur 
when the city’s priests declare that they are due. 
These instigations occur more for political and 
psychological reasons than by any regular pas- 
sage of time. 

In fact, it's worth noting that Svirfneblin 
don't even measure the passage of their lives 
in years—after all, the cycle of seasons has lit- 
tle meaning amid the eternal chill of the 
Underdark. However, if the priests notice that 
the production of the workers has begun to 
lag, or tempers are growing short among the 
chieftains and warriors, they will act hastily 
to initiate a grand festival full of pomp and 
song, good food and potent (one hesitates to 
say 'good') beverage. 

Svirfneblin festivals are often invoked to re- 
call great events of the past, though again 
these recollections bear no calendar relation- 
ship to the occurrence being commemorated. 
However, if teams of miners are preparing to 
embark on one of the periodic quests for new 
gems that propel so much of Svirfneblin activ- 
ity, then the priests and illusionists will recall 
stories of grand expeditions in the past, even 
trotting out sacred objects encrusted with the 
jewelry made from the proceeds of these pre- 
vious missions. Similarly, if a war is being 
contemplated, or a raid against some maraud- 


DE 


Gnome Subraces * 23 


ing monster becomes necessary, the warriors 
will be sent off with tales of great military 
campaigns in the past. It's interesting to note 
that these war stories are not all tales of victo- 
ry—the Svirfneblin, perhaps because of the 
many defeats they have suffered over the 
years, have a keen interest in doomed causes 
and will draw considerable emotional support 
from the story of a dramatic last stand made 
by their forefathers. Even cautionary tales, 
such as the obliteration of a city by treacher- 
ous Drow attack, are related at these celebra- 
tions and used as a warning against future 
lapses of vigilance. 

Another unique aspect of Deep Gnome so- 
ciety is that roles are far more rigidly deter- 
mined by sex than in any other gnomish 
culture. Males perform all of the mining and 
warrior work that occurs beyond the borders 
of the community cavern, as well as most 
types of jobs within the city as well. Females 
concern themselves almost exclusively to the 
vital tasks of raising and preparing food (in 
the great mushroom farms that are a part of 
every Deep Gnome city) and the care of the 
young. In fact, females venture out of their 
cities so rarely that even the Drow have never 
encountered any in the neutral territory of the 
Underdark. Both sexes wear nondescript 
clothing which, with their ability to stand ab- 
solutely motionless, helps them avoid being 
spotted by enemies. 

Besides the many types of fungi that are the 
staples of the Svirfneblin diet, Deep Gnomes 
sometimes maintain a small herd of rothe or 
other underground mammals. They are also 
fond of fish, and each city is likely to have sev- 
eral shallow lakes where blind trout and other 
subterranean delicacies are bred and captured. 
Deep Gnome women are responsible for tend- 
ing of all these food sources and serve as the 
fishers and cooks as well as the farmers and 
herders. Also, salt is an important part of every 
Deep Gnome meal and is one of the most valued 
commodities in the trading of the Underdark. In 
fact, most Svirfneblin food is so heavily salted 


24 * Chapter Two 


that a typical surface dweller would find it quite 
unpalatable. 

As a beverage the Svirfneblin prefer for 
daily use a pungent brew made (naturally) 
from fungi, fermented by a unique process 
that involves great amounts of salt and not a 
little fish protein. It is highly intoxicating, 
tasting somewhat like an oversalted and wa- 
tery fish chowder. It has been tasted by a few 
courageous non-Svirfneblins who (when they 
finally regain their voices) tend to decline a 
second serving. 

The Svirfneblin also distill a strange drink 
known as Gogondy about which little is 
known other than it is deep red in color, kept 
in wrought iron bottles, and potent beyond 
belief. It has been called the finest wine in the 
world and is said to grant strange visions to 
those who drink it, but more than one human 
who drank it has promptly fallen asleep for 
decades or died after the first glass with horri- 
fied looks on their faces. The Deep Gnomes 
prize Gogondy almost as much as rubies and 
will only give or trade it to their most trusted 
friends, making it rare indeed. 

The Svirfneblin survive in domains that are 
populated by many implacable enemies. The 
two most dire among these are the kuo-toa and 
the Dark Elves, who continually seek to drive 
these gnomes from territory they consider right- 
fully theirs. Illithids (mind flayers) often attack 
individual Deep Gnomes, considering them 
something of a delicacy, but never in such num- 
bers as might drive away such tasty prey. 
Svirfneblin rarely encounter surface-dwelling 
gnomes, and the latter find them little less puz- 
zling than do those of other races. 

The cities of the Deep Gnomes are vast and 
complex places. Many layers of caverns, tun- 
nels, and buildings are connected by narrow 
corridors and spiraling staircases. Generally, 
however, at least the central part of the city 
will occupy a single large cavern, with narrow 
streets winding among tall stone buildings. If 
large stalagmites are present, high-ranking 
Svirfneblin will claim these and excavate the 


interiors for the private homes; most resi- 
dences, however, are carved into the natural 
bedrock of the earth. 

Because of the confined nature of the envi- 
ronment, the home of the typical Svirfneblin 
family is more crowded than that of their sur- 
face-dwelling cousins. Parents and children 
will likely be crowded into a single, rather 
small, chamber. Families tend to be small, 
however, so this is rarely more than a half- 
dozen individuals. They are not so clannish as 
the Rock Gnomes, so that the population of a 
city is generally an amalgamated mass of 
Deep Gnomes, with overriding clan structure 
dividing the city. 

However, they also tend to be rather quick- 
tempered and fractious (again, by comparison 
to other gnomish subraces). Every Deep 
Gnome city is ruled by both a king and a 
queen, each independent of the other yet 
equally powerful. The king's province is min- 
ing and protecting the community; the queen 
controls the food supply and is responsible for 
the day-to-day lives of the citizens. Both posts 
are determined by popular choice: when a 
monarch dies, a contest is held to select the 
best possible replacement, with the winner be- 
coming the new ruler. 

Svirfneblin worship the same pantheon as 
their Rock Gnomes cousins (although they 
conceive of these beings as Deep Gnomes). 
Urdlen plays a large role in Deep Gnome my- 
thology, with cautionary tales of how he 
snared many an unwary Deep Gnome being a 
staple of any Svirfneblin's upbringing. 


Table 2: Deep Gnome Ability Scores 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 6 18 
Dexterity 6 19 
Constitution 6 18 
Intelligence 3 17 
Wisdom 4 18 
Charisma 3 16 

Ability Score Adjustments: 


+1to Wisdom; +1 to Dexterity; 


—1 to Intelligence; —2 to Charisma 
Languages: Deep Gnome; Gnome Common; 
Underworld Common; Drow; Kuo-toan; 
earth elemental language (a curious “lan- 
guage” without words consisting solely of 
vibrations; each different pitch conveys a dif- 
ferent message). 

Infravision: Yes (120) 

Special Features: Deep Gnomes have a num- 
ber of special abilities detailed fully under the 
entry for Svirfneblin in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS® appendix to the MONSTROUS 
COMPENDIUM? accessory (MC3): 

Detect Underground Features—Svirfneblin 
are very good at determining slopes (1-5 on 
1d6), depth (1-4 on 1d6) and direction (1-3 on 
1d6) underground, and unsafe stonework (1-7 
on 1d10). 

Magic Resistance— Deep Gnomes have a base 
magic resistance of 20% and gain an extra 5% 
for every level beyond the 3rd. 

Saving Throw Bonuses—Svirfneblin gain a 
*3 bonus to all saving throws except those 
against poison (for which they receive a +2 
bonus instead). 

Inherent Illusionist Powers—All Deep 
Gnomes radiate non-detection. In addition, 
all have the innate ability to cast blindness, 
blur, and change self once per day. 

Freeze in Place—Svirfneblin can remain abso- 
lutely still for long periods, giving them a 60% 
chance to remain undetected by any observer, 
even one with infravision. 

Surprise Bonuses—Deep Gnomes are only 
surprised on a roll of 1 on 1d10; they surprise 
opponents 90% of the time. 

Defense Bonus—The typical Svirfneblin war- 
rior has a Armor Class of 2. Deep Gnomes be- 
come harder to hit as they gain experience in 
dodging in combat, causing their Armor Class 
to improve by one point for every level be- 
yond 3rd, to a maximum of AC —6. 
Combat Bonuses—Svirfneblin make and 
wield stun darts, throwing them to a range of 
40 feet, with a +2 bonus to hit. Each dart re- 
leases a small puff of gas when it strikes; any 


ED 


Gnome Subraces e 25 


creature inhaling the gas must save versus poi- 
son or be stunned for 1 round and slowed for 
the four following rounds. Elite warriors (3rd- 
level and above) also often carry hollow darts 
with acid inside ( +2d4 to damage) and crystal 
caltrops which, when stepped on, release a 
powerful sleep gas. 


Tinker Gnomes (Minol) 

These unique creatures, native to the 
DRAGONLANCE? world of Krynn, are 
among the most technologically... er, perhaps 
we should say 'innovative' creatures among 
the known worlds. Unfortunately, their keen 
and inventive motivation is not matched by 
any particular talent—thus, a Tinker inven- 
tion is at least as likely to cause harmful or fa- 
tal damage (probably to its creator) as it is to 
do what it's supposed to do. In spite of this, 
Tinkers are a thriving subrace that have even 
managed to spread beyond their native world. 


"They're not real gnomes, of course—don't 
know how anyone could think that they are! 
'Course, they might look like us, and sound 
like us—but that's as far as it goes. There's not 
an illusionist among 'em, nor anyone else 
whos got a useful skill to his name, far as I can 
tell. Fact is, they're a menace! 

"As for getting into space, that must have 
been luck. One of 'em invented something 
that actually worked—a fluke, I assure you— 
and launched 'em into the stars. The only rea- 
son they re still up here is they haven't figured 
out how to get back down again. 

"And if you ever see one of those ships of 
theirs, you'd know what I mean. It's got cata- 
pults that shoot nothing but air, gears and 
propellers that spin to no good purpose, and if 
you get close to it a blast of steam is liable to 
shoot out and barbecue you before you can 
say ‘get me outta here!' " 


—Kappelheim Gladdensnoot, famed Rock 
Gnome explorer and Spelljammer 
extraordinaire 


26 * Chapter Two 


The Tinkers are a very courageous and curi- 
ous bunch of gnomes, and Gladdensnoot is no 
doubt exaggerating when he suggests that 
their attainment of Spelljamming travel is ac- 
cidental. Nevertheless, he provides a good ex- 
ample of the attitude held by those few other 
gnomes who've encountered the Tinkers. Of 
course, it's not likely that the Tinker would 
stop and take notice—he or she is probably 
too busy working on the finishing touches of 
his or her newest invention (in fact, many Tin- 
kers spend the bulk of their lives working on a 
few such 'finishing touches')! 

In one respect the Tinkers resemble the rest 
of gnomedom—in the fact that they do value 
various types of stones, attributing to them 
great and supernatural powers. However, 
whereas the other subraces seek gems, the 
Tinkers hold a different substance as the 
grandest rock of all: coal. The Tinkers hold 
that coal (also known as the "Father of 
Steam") is the most valuable substance of the 
world, and those places where it can be mined 
quickly become Tinker Gnome warrens. 

In size and stature, the Tinkers resemble 
Rock Gnomes—so much so that the difference 
is not immediately apparent, at least when 
based only upon appearance. Perhaps because 
their numbers are fewer, there is not such a va- 
riety of hair and skin color among Tinkers as 
is found in their more common cousins: their 
hair is almost always white or a slightly col- 
ored shade that is nearly white. Their skin 
tends toward brown, in ruddy and earthen 
shades. Their eyes are blue or, less frequently, 
violet, but the noses are every bit as promi- 
nent as those of any other gnomish subrace. 

The clothing of a Tinker is likely to be repre- 
sentative of his or her travels and background— 
i.e., it will have parts of all kinds of things 
somehow attached together and providing a 
modicum of covering. As a rule, the more exotic 
the better, though the Tinker Gnomes tend to be 
fastidious about cleanliness. 

Tinkers who live out their lives can attain 
an age of 250 or 300 years, but it must be 


noted that this is a rare occurrence among the 
members of this subrace. If one of his or her 
own inventions doesn't do a Tinker in, 
chances are good that one of his or her neigh- 
bor's gadgets will. 

Even in childhood, Tinkers are encouraged 
to experiment with gadgets and gimmicks, 
trying different means of making things to 
perform tasks that could otherwise be easily 
done by hand. The Tinker reaches adulthood 
at about the age of fifty (by which time per- 
haps 10-15% of them have already suc- 
cumbed to the common fate of their kind). 
Despite this high attrition, it's not until matu- 
rity that a Tinker Gnomess activities begin to 
get really dangerous. 

Upon reaching adulthood, the Tinker 
Gnome must select a guild for himself or her- 
self. The number of guilds available varies by 
location, but in Mount Nevermind on 
Krynn—which is the center of Tinker civiliza- 


d "» 
à qu 2 HT 
6 7 Ss Soe zi I 


= je 
x P MI « 


the 


> 


tion and by far the largest community of these 
inventive creatures anywhere—there are 
more than 150 active guilds. These include 
virtually all areas of practical endeavor, and 
quite a few impractical ones as well: Weapon- 
ry, Steam Power, Hydraulics, Mathematics, 
Agriculture, Warmaking, Animal Taming, 
Brewing, Carpentry, Astronomy, Ceramics 
(Rockmaking), Air Utilization, Historians, 
Coalmining, Rockcarving, Vehicle Design, 
and Music. 

These guilds are not like the guilds common 
in many human and dwarven societies, how- 
ever; in the latter cases, the guild’s purpose is 
generally to impart the knowledge of the mas- 
ters to a steadily growing crop of apprentices 
and journeymen. The Tinker guilds have a 
different philosophy dedicated to a right- 
eously-held belief, to wit: whatever has been 
done before can be done better with a new and 
improved invention. Consequently, a Tinker 


aa eee ————————————————— 


Gnome Subraces ® 27 


Gnome who enters the Music Guild, for exam- 
ple, will spend the bulk of his or her life trying 
to design a musical instrument with at least 
one more moving part than the last instru- 
ment designed by a guildmaster (it is not ad- 


visable to ask the guild for a 
performance—whole audiences have been 
scalded by ruptured steam pipes or deafened 
by ultrasonic waves of crushing sound). 

A good example of the Tinker Gnome ten- 
dency of not knowing when to stop is the infa- 
mous Giant Space Hamster. Not content with 
this remarkable achievement, the Animal 
Breeders’ Guild that created the creature 
promptly began working on developing new 
strains. The result include such monstrosities 
as the sabre-toothed giant space hamster, the 
carnivorous flying giant space hamster (“a re- 
grettable if understandable line of inquiry”), 
the fire-breathing phase doppleganger giant 
space hamster, and the miniature giant space 
hamster (a dwarf variant the exact same size 
as the ordinary rodent). 

However, Tinkers are nothing if not tena- 
cious. After selecting a guild, each member of 
the subrace settles upon a Life-quest. The ac- 
tual choice of the quest may take several dec- 
ades, but once it has been decided, it becomes 
the reason behind that Tinker's existence. The 
Lifequest is an attempt to reach a perfect un- 
derstanding of some device (anything from a 
spelljamming helm to a screw), a task at 
which the Tinker very rarely succeeds. In- 
deed, the best estimate is that less than 1% of 
these gnomes ever do fully grasp the nature of 
the object that has occupied their attention for 
so much of their adult lives; the rest of these 
easily-distracted gnomes get hopelessly side- 
tracked somewhere along the way. 

Despite the vagaries of their existence, the 
Tinkers are a fun-loving and generally socia- 
ble race. Their speech is unique in both its 
speed and complexity. Two Tinkers can rattle 
off information and opinion to each other in a 
succession of thousand-word sentences, 
speaking simultaneously and yet listening and 


a 


28 * Chapter Two 


understanding (as much as is possible, given 
the esoteric nature of many discussions) each 
other even as they voice their own points of 
view. Those Tinkers who have had some ex- 
perience interacting with other races have 
learned to slow the pace of their communica- 
tion but never quite overcome their frustra- 
tion with those who can't talk and listen at the 
same time. 

Despite the chaotic impression given by an 
initial encounter with the Tinkers, these 
gnomes have a highly-organized societal 
structure. Their culture is unusual, for 
gnomes, in that guilds are more important to 
most Tinkers than their clans; the typical Tin- 
ker identifies himself or herself not by the 
family he or she was born into but the guild he 
or she joined upon reaching adulthood. The 
community is ruled by a council made up of 
the masters of the various guilds and the patri- 
archs of the various clans. The result is a para- 
lyzed bureaucracy that nevertheless keeps 
itself going with debate, argument, near reso- 
lution, and subsequent disagreement. Follow- 
ing long and careful consideration (sometimes 
lasting for years, even decades) the various 
concerned parties go off and do whatever they 
wanted to from the beginning. 

However, the debates themselves can be 
well-reasoned, extremely polite, and quite ex- 
tensive. Just the recital of names at the begin- 
ning of a presentation can often take weeks, 
since the full and formal title of each gnome 
involved is used—and remember, this is de- 
spite the fact that Tinker Gnomes speak very 
rapidly indeed! For those Tinkers who come 
from extensive and well-documented ancestry 
and have themselves lived long and eventful 
lives, the formal introduction can last the bet- 
ter part of two days. Because of this inconven- 
ience, an abbreviated form of a gnome's name 
(usually taking less than a minute to recite) is 
used in daily life. 

Tinker Gnomes have the least involved 
family life of any of the subraces, since all 
adults are too involved with their Lifequests 


to devote much time to the raising of their 
children. The youngsters learn mostly by ex- 
ample, and of course are possessed of that in- 
satiable curiosity that seems to take the place 
of so many other emotions in the lives of a 
Tinker. Tinker males and females accept their 
Lifequests with equal obsession; there is no 
difference between the sexes in level of recog- 
nition and attainment. For example, guild- 
masters and clan leaders are as likely to be 
female as male. 

Their communities are located under- 
ground, but always close to the surface, with 
plenty of access to fresh air. Their penchant 
for burning coal to achieve steam makes good 
ventilation necessary —we needn't dwell on 
the unfortunate results of those experiments in 
deep subterranean quarters amid caverns 
warmed by vast, oxygen-devouring furnaces. 

The various chambers of a Tinker commu- 
nity will be connected by various means of 
transport, powered by steam, spring-power, 
wind, water, gravity, and any other means 
available. Types include cars that run along 
rails or are suspended from cables and pul- 
leys, soaring gliders, 'gnomeflingers' (i.e., cat- 
apults), elevators that run up and down 
through shafts bored through rock, and inde- 
pendently-steered carts and cycles propelled 
by various means. Needless to say, there is a 
high rate of attrition on gnomish transport— 
generally a character stands about a 3% 
chance per trip of suffering grievous injury 
(usually about 1-12 hit points of damage). 

For private living quarters, Tinkers are in- 
clined to settle for any old niche in the wall 
that can be closed off for a little privacy. They 
like to sleep in absolute darkness but have ab- 
solutely no trouble slumbering amid a thun- 
derous cacophony of noise. 

Far more important than his or her bedroom, 
to a Tinker, is his or her workshop. This area will 
be a private chamber, if the gnome is influential 
enough to warrant such a luxury, or if he or she 
inherits it from a deceased parent (for obvious 
reasons, Tinkers tend to gain their inheritance at 


a far younger age than do any other gnomish 
subrace). The shop should ideally be well-lit, by 
candle, coal-oil lantern, or natural light. One of 
the more successful gnome inventions is a net- 
work of mirrors aligned to reflect sunlight 
through long tunnels so that it reaches caverns 
far underground. Despite its utility, this inven- 
tion is considered an abysmal failure by most 
Tinkers, due to its utter lack of moving parts. 

Tinker Gnomes do not worship the usual 
gnomish pantheon, instead venerating the 
Krynnish god Reorx, patron of blacksmiths, 
crafters, and inventors. One of the oft-re- 
peated pieces of evidence Rock Gnomes are 
wont to put forward in their neverending at- 
tempts to prove that Tinkers aren't "real" 
gnomes is that "they haven't even heard of 
Garl Glittergold!" 

Additional details on the Tinker Gnomes 
can be found under the entry for "Gnome" in 
the DRAGONLANCE? appendix to the 
MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM? accessory 
(MC4). 


Table 3: Tinker Gnome Ability Scores 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 6 18 
Dexterity 8 18 
Constitution 8 18 
Intelligence — 8 18 
Wisdom 3 12 
Charisma 3 18 


Ability Score Adjustments: +2 to Dexterity; 
—1 to Strength; —1 to Wisdom 

Languages: Tinker Gnome, Gnome Common, 
various human tongues 

Infravision: Yes (60') 

Special Features: Tinker Gnomes share many 
of the same special abilities as their Rock 
Gnome cousins, a fact which has led some 
sages to argue that Tinker Gnomedom is a cul- 
ture rather than a true subrace. Whatever the 
truth, all Tinkers have the following innate 
abilities. 

Detect Underground Features— Tinker Gnomes 
can identify sloping passages (1-5 on 1d6), 


Gnome Subraces * 29 


flawed stonework (1-7 on 1d10), and approxi- 
mate depth (1-4 on 1d6) and direction (1-3 on 
1d6) underground. 

Magic Resistance— The Tinker Gnome gains a 
* 1 bonus to his or her saving throws versus 
spell for every 3.5 points of Constitution. 
Combat Bonuses— Tinker Gnomes receive a 
—4 bonus to their Armor Class when attacked 
by giant class creatures. 


Forest Gnomes 

This subrace is not so common as are the 
others, but its members fill an important niche 
in their environment. Forest Gnomes are shy 
and reclusive, and often the mere arrival of 
human settlers within their wooded domain is 
enough to send them migrating to a new, un- 
spoiled home. Nevertheless, they have been 
known to aid adventurers from other races 
and are particularly friendly with elves. 


"For the longest time—and 1 speak of many 
centuries—we didn't even know they were 
there. Of course, the Wyndhome Wood is a 
vast place, full of sheltered ravines and wide, 
hidden grottos... but we elves had always 
prided ourselves on knowing every inch of the 
place. 

"Then came the years of the Troll Tide, and 
we thought that the forest was lost. All of the 
elven clans banded together, and we fought 
for each tree—indeed, not a blade of grass or 
meadow blossom was surrendered to that 
horde without a fight—but it seemed that our 
defeat would be inevitable. There were too 
many of the brutes, too few of us. 

"But then, when the situation had grown 
most dire, they came from those ravines, from 
the shaded grottos and the darkest thickets, 
and they lent their arrows and their courage to 
our cause. Short and frail we judged them— 
harshly, I admit. But they're smaller even than 
halflings, and so shy that it was painful even 
to speak with them! 

"Yet they fought—and died, in great 
numbers—for Wyndhome, and their bravery 


30 * Chapter Two 


was unsurpassed, their deadly skill decisive. 
At last, after many lives lost, many villages 
burned, the Troll Tide was turned away. 

"In its wake the forest was left in ruins, with 
smoldering trunks stretching to the far hori- 
zons. Yet these shy gnomes—these tiny crea- 
tures whose aid had turned the balance of 
battle—joined with us for the task at hand. It 
was an effort that took years, but during those 
years we forged a lasting friendship. 

"My people were stunned to learn that the 
Forest Gnomes had dwelled as our neighbors 
since the very time of our arrival in the 
wood—and never had we so much as suspect- 
ed their existence! Sadly, it took a war to 
breach the wall of their privacy. 

"But now that struggle is in the past, and for 
both our peoples we rest secure in the knowl- 
edge that, whatever challenges the future 
holds, we shall face them with our allies at our 
side." 


—Kasseryth Daltine, Elven Captainrider 
and hero 


The Forest Gnomes prefer a life in which no 
one knows who they are or where they live. 
They dwell in large swaths of woodland, and— 
unlike the other gnomish subraces—prefer to 
dwell in houses that are at least partially above 
ground. They are creatures of nature far more 
than any of their cousins, and to those rare folks 
who meet them (and pass through the walls of 
initial shyness) they can prove to be steadfast al- 
lies and delightful companions. 

However, this subrace has not totally aban- 
doned the love of gemstones that is so inher- 
ent to all gnomes. The emerald is the favored 
gem of the Forest Gnomes, no doubt because 
it most accurately reflects the healthy colors 
of their verdant homelands. While these 
gnomes can make excellent gemsmiths and 
jewelers, their work tends to be reverent im- 
ages of the flowers, leaves, butterflies, and 
birds that are such a key part of the Forest 
Gnome's environment. 


These are the smallest of the gnomish sub- 
races, averaging from 2' to 21/2’ and peaking 
out at a few inches under three feet. They 
share the stocky physique of the Rock and 
Tinker Gnome and the bulbous nose which is 
so characteristic of the race in general. They 
are the only gnomes inclined to wear beards 
and hair very long, and an older male is likely 
to have a beard that extends to within a few 
inches of the ground, and hair that, when un- 
bound, falls all the way to his waist. These 
beards are a source of great pride to the vener- 
able males, and they often trim them to a fine 
point or curl them into hornlike spikes that ex- 
tend to either side. 

The skin of a Forest Gnome tends toward a 
greenish cast of tan rather like bark, although 
often darkened and ruddy from exposure to 
weather. Their eyes are generally brown or 
blue, but green eyes are not unheard of and 
are considered very attractive and the omen of 


a good life for their owner. Their hair color is 
brown or black, often becoming gray or white 
in old age. 

The Forest Gnomes are a very long-lived 
people, with an average life expectancy ap- 
proaching 500 years. Childhood and adoles- 
cence blend together in the growing process. 
Since these gnomes do not generally embark 
upon a craft or apprenticeship as a life special- 
ity, there is no need to differentiate a carefree 
youngster from an equally happy-go-lucky 
youth. Adulthood is granted upon the hun- 
dredth birthday, and this anniversary is a 
cause for great celebration. 

Shy and timid when it comes to relations 
with other intelligent races, Forest Gnomes 
are very determined caretakers of their wood- 
ed domains. They are viewed with friendship 
by the animals of the forest and have devel- 
oped a limited language of signs and sounds 
(similar to the Rock Gnomes ‘speech’ with 


Hr qux A 


zx 


Gnome Subraces * 31 


burrowing mammals) that allows them to 
communicate with these creatures, though 
without a great deal of detail. Thus a squirrel 
might chatter something about an intruder in 
the forest and even indicate the general direc- 
tion of the trespasser, but it can provide no in- 
formation as to the nature, size, or numbers of 
the possible enemy (as a rule of thumb, con- 
sider all such communications to consist of a 
single word only; i.e. “danger!” “food,” "hap- 
py, and the like). 

Forest Gnomes are also very adept at pro- 
tecting and caring for the plant life of their 
woods. They gather the nuts, fruit, and other 
bounty of the woods for sustenance, taking 
meat only infrequently—and always with a 
reverent ceremony to the spirit of the animal 
slain by the gnomish hunter. They despise the 
use of traps, never employing snares, pitfalls, 
or such traps themselves. When they encount- 
er such devices set by humans or others, the 
Forest Gnomes have been known to rig the 
traps so that they capture (with a snare) or in- 
jure (as with a deadfall or pit trap) the trapper 
when he or she comes along to check for 
game. Generally, the trapper receives the 
same effect that his or her trap would have in- 
flicted upon an animal. 

Aside from meat, Forest Gnomes eat their 
food raw, though with a great deal of ceremo- 
ny and politeness. Even a nut or a berry is on- 
ly consumed after the tree or bush that gave it 
life has been properly, albeit silently, thanked. 
Needless to say, meals among the Forest 
Gnomes are very long, quiet affairs. 

These diminutive beings are exceptional 
woodcarvers, far more skilled than any other 
subrace at the working of this natural materi- 
al. They can also be skilled carpenters, and 
their skills lean heavily toward natural-look- 
ing renditions of their structures. A storage 
shed, for example, might be built to resemble 
a clump of tightly-clustered pine trees, con- 
cealing the fact that there is any kind of struc- 
ture there at all. 

Priests have a higher status in this society 


32 * Chapter Two 


d 


than in any other gnomish culture. Baervan 
Wildwanderer is the patron deity of most of 
these clerics and has blessed them with a num- 
ber of duties and tasks, most of which in- 
volved the protection and preservation of the 
forests and the wild creatures found there. 

The most hated enemies of the Forest 
Gnomes are orcs, with troglodytes and lizard- 
men close behind. These creatures will be 
ruthlessly attacked and ambushed whenever 
they are encountered. Despite their shyness, 
Forest Gnomes have made friends with elves 
and halflings, though they tend to distrust hu- 
mans and dwarves, who in their experience 
all-too-often view trees only as so much fire- 
wood. Occasionally, with great courage, one 
of these smallest of gnomes will venture out of 
his or her forest domain in a quest to see the 
world, though he or she will usually try to re- 
turn after a few years and will never be entire- 
ly comfortable in a place that has no trees. 

The gnomes of this subrace tend to live in 
smaller communities than do their kin, largely 
because their numbers are so much fewer. A 
Forest Gnome village will average less than a 
hundred residents, and the family homes that 
make up the “village” may be hundreds of feet 
apart. They are always located in a dense 
woods and are virtually invisible to anyone 
who happens to wander through—even a vet- 
eran woodsman might stroll down the main 
street of a Forest Gnome village without 
knowing he or she was in anything other than 
trackless wood. In part, this is because the for- 
est gnomes disdain the use of tracks and 
trails—they are adept at moving through the 
underbrush while leaving no sign of their pas- 
sage. Also, their dwellings tend to be con- 
cealed within the trunks of large, hollow trees 
and, sometimes, into burrows that extend be- 
low the surface of the ground. 

The preferred house of a Forest Gnome, 
however, is above the ground and within the 
comfortable wooden enclosure of a tree 
trunk. These creatures prefer lairs of many 
different levels since, even to these small 


gnomes, most hollow trees don't provide a lot 
of floor space. Instead, the house will be a net- 
work of cylindrical rooms, usually no more 
than four feet from floor to ceiling, connected 
to the floors above and below by tiny trap- 
doors and rope ladders or, sometimes, spiral- 
ing stairways carved into the wood of the tree. 
Each floor will have a few windows opening 
to the outside, but these will be so cleverly 
camouflaged on the outside by bark or limbs 
as to be virtually invisible. 

Excavated chambers are used for the com- 
mons areas of the Forest Gnomes, so that when 
a whole community gathers (as they do many 
times a year, to observe this or that celebration) 
they can do so in large, earthen caverns con- 
cealed underground. These chambers are con- 
nected by dirt tunnels and are often quite large, 
with ceilings reinforced by timber and brace. 
Forest Gnomes have no interest in excavating 
through stone, and though they will occupy a 
natural cave if they find one conveniently lo- 
cated, they will never dig into bedrock to ex- 
pand or shape their surroundings. 

A village of Forest Gnomes is organized 
very much like a large family, with the oldest 
patriarch or matriarch in the community gen- 
erally revered as the venerable leader. As far 
as actual societal organization, there is very 
little—when Forest Gnomes act as a group 
(for example, to defend their woodland or mi- 
grate to a new homeland) they do so because 
the necessity of action is obvious to every 
member of the clans. 

Forest Gnomes are sometimes mistaken for 
brownies by those humans who catch a rare 
glimpse of them, but the two races are not re- 
lated. For one thing, brownies prefer rural set- 
tings—farms and small human or halfling 
villages; the very environments Forest 
Gnomes go out of their way to avoid—to the 
forest. Despite their size, brownies are more 
closely related to elves than any of the other 
demihuman races. Also, brownies are highly 
magical, while Forest Gnomes distrust magic 
and make less use of it in their daily lives than 


any other gnomish subrace. The two races are 
friendly, but their paths seldom cross. 


Table 4: Forest Gnome Ability Scores 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 3 17 
Dexterity 8 19 
Constitution 8 18 
Intelligence 3 17 
Wisdom 6 18 
Charisma 3 18 

Ability Score Adjustments: 


+1 to Dexterity; +1 to Wisdom; 

—1 to Strength; —1 to Intelligence 
Languages: Forest Gnome; Gnome Common; 
Elf; Treant; forest mammal 

Infravision: No 

Special Features: The Forest Gnomes have 
several characteristics in common with their 
racial cousins, as well as several unique 
abilities: 

Pass without Trace—A Forest Gnome can 
pass through any kind of wooded terrain 
without leaving a sign of his or her passage. 
Saving Throw Bonus—The Forest Gnome 
gains a +1 bonus to his or her saving throws 
versus spell for every 3.5 points of Constitu- 
tion. 

Hide in Woods—Like the halfling, a Forest 
Gnome can make himself or herself virtually 
invisible in wooded surroundings. 

Combat Bonus—Due to size and quickness, 
Forest Gnomes receive a —4 bonus to their 
Armor Class whenever they fight man-sized 
or larger creatures. Also, they get +1 bonuses 
on all attack and damage rolls when fighting 
orcs, lizard men, or troglodytes, or any crea- 
ture which they have directly observed dam- 
aging woodlands (e.g., a woodman chopping 
down a tree full of birds’ nests). 


Gnome Subraces ® 33 


CHAPTER 


Gnomish Culture 


Soon the cool wash of moonlight illumi- 
nated the vale, the disk of shadow passing 
across the lunar face. Brilliant in the glory of 
the summer solstice, the silvery orb outlined 
the thousands of gnomes in white light and 
shadow. 

Then the bonfires flared into life, dozens of 
them flickering into the sky, silhouetting rings 
of small, dancing figures. Soon the rugged ca- 
dence of chant and song, accompanied by the 
wail of pipes and the strident beat of the 
drums, echoed from the looming cliffs. 

Finally, the full brightness of the moon was 
restored; in the stark outline of light and dark, 
the festival commemorating the moon's re- 
birth began. 


Living for the most part isolated from the 
other cultures of their worlds, the gnomes 
thrive and prosper. Their labors go unnoticed 
by mankind, their mines undiscovered by the 
dwarves. The Forest Gnomes, in their dense 
and tangled thickets, remain unseen even by 
their sylvan neighbors, the elves. 

Who are these reclusive folk? How do they 
live, and what lure draws some of them from 
their pastoral homes and onto the road lead- 
ing to adventure and peril? 

This chapter looks at several aspects of 
gnomish life and culture. It addresses those 
traits that all gnomes have in common, since 
the previous chapter was devoted to the dif- 
ferences between the subraces. Where excep- 
tions exist, these are noted where possible. 


Festivals 

All gnomes enjoy festivals. These celebra- 
tions typically involve much music, dancing, 
feasting, storytelling, illusionary magic 
shows, drinking, and contests of strength and 
wit. While the actual festival observances 
vary somewhat by subrace, a given commu- 
nity will generally gather for no less than 12 to 
15 big celebrations every year. 

These will be for many different occasions, 
including celebrations of harvests, seasonal 


34 * Chapter Three 


occurrences like the solstice and equinox, and 
anniversaries—of birthdays, famous victories 
or discoveries, and even weather phenomena. 
Rock Gnomes have been known to hold cele- 
brations to commemorate the date of a hor- 
rendous cyclone that once ravished their 
realm, the eruption of a volcano, or even a 
notable blizzard; anything which might serve 
as a good excuse for a party. The patterns can 
vary by subrace, since Svirfneblin don't keep 
track of dates and the Tinkers often forget 
what year it is, yet gnomes of all types seem to 
have a communal sense of when a gathering is 
needed. When the time is right, they'll get to- 
gether. 

The truly major festivals, however, are of- 
ten years apart. The festival commemorating 
the total eclipse of the moon, for example, on- 
ly takes place about once per century. For 
Rock and Forest Gnomes, this is the most sig- 
nificant occasion of all, and as such it calls for 
the grandest festival. Svirfneblin reserve simi- 
lar festivities for the coronation of a new king 
or queen, while Tinkers celebrate the success- 
ful design and completion of an invention— 
now thats rare! Likewise, a gnome's most 
significant birthday in most subraces is con- 
sidered his or her one hundredth. 

Another trademark of the gnomish gala is 
that they go on for a long time—the bigger the 
occasion, the longer the celebration. Even the 
smaller festivals are generally two-day affairs, 
with the first day devoted to preparations 
(such as rehearsals of performances and cook- 
ing the wide variety of food necessary for the 
feast). The second day, beginning at dawn, is 
likely to be a sequence of songs and perform- 
ances, mixed with appropriate rituals and re- 
membrances, and liberally spiced with many 
opportunities to eat and drink. Ale and wine, 
together with the music and revelry, flows 
freely from dawn to dusk and throughout the 
following night. 

The greater festivals last many days or sev- 
eral weeks, with the most significant lasting a 
full month or more. However long the cele- 


bration, the gnomes are generally quite ready 
to pitch back in to work as soon as the festivi- 
ties are concluded. In the case of the longer 
celebrations this is an especially good thing, 
since a month of extreme partying can pretty 
much exhaust the food and drink reserves of a 
community! 


Fires 

Gnomes have a peculiar fascination with 
flame and the light it brings into the darkness 
in which they would otherwise dwell. One 
well-known gnomish nursery tale relates the 
story of Verpoolisch Popplepip, a typical 
gnomish hero: 

A master illusionist and thief, Verpoolisch 
crept into the halls of the gods and watched 
the deities labor at their forges. Becoming in- 
trigued by the shower of sparks falling from 
their great hammers, he substituted an illu- 
sionary brightness for a real spark and stole 
the actual flame. By the time the gods realized 
the deception, Popplepip had made it safely 
back to the world. There he nourished his 
spark, and it became the father of fire. With 
typical generosity, the gnomes shared this 
blessing with the rest of the world. 

Every gnome has a place in his or her home 
for a small fire, and in pensive moments he or 
she will be inclined to sit before the flame and 
meditate. 


Marriage and Family 

Weddings, perhaps surprisingly, are not big 
social occasions. Instead, they are private cer- 
emonies attended by the immediate families of 
the young couple—and even these guests soon 
depart to leave the newlyweds with a chance 
to get to know each other privately. 

Bride and groom have generally been 
friends since childhood and have made the 
match of their own free will. Marriage com- 
monly occurs during the decades immediately 
following the coming of age period for mem- 
bers of that specific subrace, though gnomes 
who choose not to wed are not ostracized or 


even considered odd. Gnomes marry for com- 
panionship as much as procreation, and a 
couple will almost always remain happily 
married until one or the other of them passes 
away. Remarriage is rare, although it has been 
known to occur; divorce is unknown. 

Gnomish couples rarely have the numerous 
broods familiar to halflings and humans. A 
family with three children is considered large, 
and only sizable clans will have five or six 
youngsters dwelling in the warren at any one 
time. Even in adulthood, gnomes retain deep 
bonds of friendship with their siblings and 
parents. It is very common for brothers and 
sisters to join together in business endeavors, 
for example. 


The Nose Knows 

The big schnozzola is an important status 
symbol among all of the gnome subraces. Par- 
ents proudly point out the size of their chil- 
dren's noses and make enthusiastic 
prognostications about future growth. While 
the practical applications of such a facial fea- 
ture are admittedly limited, gnomes will fre- 
quently embark on size contests, with heavy 
wagers, between members of rival clans. 
Svirfneblin go so far as to make this a primary 
determinant in the selection of a new king or 
queen! 


Food and Drink 

Gnomes enjoy feasting and drinking, but 
their diet and beverage selection reflects far 
less variety than does that of the halfling or 
even most communities of humankind. No 
gnomish subrace, for example, uses yeast in 
the baking of bread nor in its brewing. They 
don't keep cows or make cheese or butter. 
Sugar is unknown in their diet, and gnomes 
tend to avoid sweets even when they travel to 
places where cakes or candies are available. 
Also, spices and sauces are rarely employed in 
the preparation of gnomish cuisine. 

However, those foods that gnomes do cook 
they cook well. They are excellent at prepar- 


Gnomish Culture € 35 


ing wild game and in using the natural 
products of their surrounding areas for salads 
and hot dishes. All gnomes like salt, although 
the Deep Gnomes carry this to the greatest ex- 
tremes. They cook their meat until it's very 
well done. This tendency, coupled with the 
liberal use of salt, insures that the food keeps 
for a long time without spoiling. 

The brewing skills of the gnomes are effec- 
tive, even if the results are not exactly tempt- 
ing to humans and other demihumans. Heavy 
meads and ales are favored. In areas where 
fruit can be readily harvested (apples and 
cherries are preferred) gnomes make passable, 
if somewhat astringent, cordials. 


Gems 

More than a medium of wealth, gems are 
cherished to a degree difficult for non-gnomes 
to comprehend. Every gnome has a small gem 
he or she will carry at all times, often feeling or 


36 * Chapter Three 


stroking it when thoughtful or troubled. Every 
gnomish village will have a few particularly 
splendid stones that belong to the community 
as a whole, each with an accompanying 
legend, and enchanted gems are the favorite 
magical items of gnomish spellcasters. 


Craftsmanship 

The single most artistic endeavor of the 
gnomish craftsman (excluding Tinker Gnomes) 
is, of course, the carving and mounting of pre- 
cious gems. These little folk are adept at every 
aspect of the jewelers trade, including the 
smelting and finishing of precious metals. 
While each subrace has a special affinity to a 
certain type of stone (diamond, ruby, and em- 
erald respectively for the Rock, Deep, and For- 
est Gnomes; coal for the Tinkers), their 
gemcarvers are capable of working with virtu- 
ally any type of stone. 

This artisanship goes beyond mere rote skill. 
Gnomish jewelers are capable of very creative 
designs in jewelry and have developed the 
most elegant royal crowns, sceptres, and deco- 
rative sculptures known to demihuman-kind. 
Stonecarving is another skill at which gnomes 
excel, and in those caverns where they have 
dwelt for many centuries intricate patterns 
have been scrolled into many of the walls and 
ceilings, enhancing the natural beauty of the 
rock 

Their special affinity to stone makes 
gnomes exceptional excavators, miners, and 
tunnelers. Those gnomes who seek employ- 
ment among other cultures might work as 
gemsmiths if sufficiently skilled but are far 
more likely to find work in the mines of hu- 
mankind. Even dwarves, grudgingly, admit 
that gnomes are almost as good at digging as 
themselves. This is, in fact, an ungenerous 
assessment—Rock Gnomes in particular are 
every bit the equal of dwarves in this profes- 
sion! 

Beyond the working of stone, however, the 
gnomes are somewhat limited in the tooling of 
materials into useful products. As a general 


rule, gnomes find it hard to produce raw ma- 
terials but easy to shape it. For example, they 
do not weave, so all their clothing is either 
made of leather or of materials bartered from 
other folk. However, given the right fabrics, a 
gnomish tailor can create almost any kind of 
garment, often with elaborate stitching and 
similar attention to detail characteristic of all 
gnomish work. 

Carpentry is another skill that demon- 
strates the gnomish penchant for elaboration. 
Whereas dwarves will hew timbers to shore 
up a mine shaft and at need can make rough 
tables, beds, and chairs for their own use, 
gnomes have a compulsion to cover every 
available inch with decoration which goes far 
beyond utility. Thus gnome miners will often 
use their breaks to carve delicate designs into 
the support timbers (taking care not to weak- 
en the beams!), often having friendly contests 
between different shifts as each continues the 
other's work. Gnomish furniture is a marvel 
of fine woodcarving, with a multitude of 
baroque detail. 


Trade 

The primary stock-in-trade of the gnomish 
folk, whether on the surface or under the 
ground, is naturally the gemwork that is such 
a trademark of the race. The urge to create is 
so strong (in Tinker Gnomes, it has run 
amuck) that gnomes regularly trade finished 
jewelry for uncut gems, and gnomish gem 
traders will sometimes travel great distances 
in the course of their labors. 

However, gems aren't the only thing gnome 
communities seek in trade. Salt is a necessity 
to the gnomish diet, and if there is no natural 
source available gnomish traders will go to 
great lengths to acquire it. Weapons, fabric, 
and raw steel are generally not made by 
gnomes but needed by the community. Delica- 
cies, such as tender meat, dark flour, and 
strong liquor, are other items sometimes 
gained by trade. 

Since these folk have little interest or capa- 


bility in freight-hauling, those who would sell 
such bulk goods to them generally have to 
take responsibility for delivery as well. Hu- 
man and demihuman traders know this, and 
many a human and halfling merchant has got- 
ten rich simply by carting loads of textiles or 
steel to the vicinity of a gnomish village. Of- 
ten, the trader will sell cart and pony at the 
same time—after all, he or she doesn't need 
much space to haul away a fortune in finely- 
cut gems! 


Taboos 

"Did you hear about Kasselwort Biddles- 
tumpf? He brought some of that dwarvish 
black brandy to the Acorn Festival—and after 
he drank it, it went straight to his tongue! 

"First he insulted his old grandfather, 
Wigglefount Biddlestumpf, who tried to re- 
buke him for his behavior. Kassel was betting 
on all the contests, showing around these little 
bloodstones as if they were rubies! 

"Then he got into a fight with Nucklereet 
Shtoomiss—he called old Nuck' a "Shortnose 
Blowhard, and of course the poor fellow 
couldn't let that pass (we all know Shtoomiss' 
nose leaves a little to be desired, but Kass' had 
no call to be making fun of it)! 

"But that's not the worst of it! Finally, when 
they came down to the nut-eating contest, 
Kass' bet on Graybeard Friggleheit to win, but 
the old fellow choked on a husk and had to 
quit the contest. And when it came time to 
pay up—believe it or not!—Kasselwort 
Biddlestumpf refused to pay! 

“It'll be a long time before he can show his 
nose in this village again!" 


—Lillyllotta Glindlehome, gnomish matri- 
arch (and self-admitted gossip) 


Gnomes are a fun-loving society, with a 
great emphasis on personal freedom. How- 
ever, a cornerstone of this freedom is a respect 
for the rights of others—and those who tromp 
on those rights are considered to have com- 


—— A aaaaaE-E|-EEAEESDEDEEEEEEAE-U--EEEIIN|hsEEE E —  — —  — 


Gnomish Culture e 37 


mitted a grave breach of gnomish etiquette. 
This cornerstone of individual responsibility 
is the key to understanding the gnomish 
culture. 

Some of the worst infractions of this per- 
sonal code that a gnome can commit involve 
the performance of his or her work. It is, how- 
ever, a rare circumstance for a gnome to shirk 
a duty or to perform it at anything less than 
his or her highest level of ability. Those few 
gnomes who refuse to work are generally, af- 
ter many chances to reform, cast out from 
their communities. They don't usually live too 
long on their own. 

It is a little more common for offending be- 
havior to occur in social settings, often ac- 
companied by the consumption of alcohol. 
Virtually all gnomes enjoy drinking, and ale 
and mead are important features of gnomish 
festivals and clan gatherings. In most cases, 
gnomes become quite jolly and carefree when 
they drink, singing, laughing, and joking— 
the "mean drunk" is not a familiar character in 
gnomish society. 

However, strong liquor is not a customary 
drink among gnomes—their ales and fruit 
wines, while strong-tasting by human stand- 
ards, are not the match of brandy or whiskey 
in potency (Svirfneblin fish beer and Gogon- 
dy excepted). When a gnome gets hold of 
something stronger, trouble has been known 
to result. When it does, the malefactor is sub- 
jected to stern criticism from the bulk of the 
community—usually when he or she is in the 
throes of the worst hangover of his or her life. 
One such experience is generally enough to 
bring about a lifelong reform. 

The contests that are an integral part of eve- 
ry gnomish festival are another source of 
pride to these small demihumans, and the 
honor of the participants is accepted and, for 
the most part, taken for granted. Wagering is 
a common practice, but one is not expected to 
bet more than he or she is prepared to lose. 
Welching on a bet is a gross affront to a gnom- 
ish sense of right and wrong. Similarly, a trad- 


38 * Chapter Three 


er who cheats gnomish clients by substituting 
inferior goods for those promised will be 
marked for life; no gnome will ever trade with 
that individual again. 

Finally, while friendly insults are commonly 
and frequently exchanged among gnomes, 
one is expected never to criticize lack of nose 
size. Those gnomes who have been cursed 
with small noses (those that stick out less 
than, say, three or four inches from the face) 
are assumed to suffer the curse of their shame 
inwardly. It is nothing more than needless cru- 
elty to ridicule this unfortunate lack of en- 
dowment. 


Emotions 

Gnomes are very emotional creatures, 
given to laughter and joy, weeping and sor- 
row, in loud and affecting displays. This ap- 
plies to both work and play. Despite their 
physical resemblance to dwarves, a group of 
gnomish miners can easily be distinguished 
not only by their smaller size but by the laugh- 
ter and song that accompanies them on their 
task. 

When given cause for sorrow, such as the 
death of a friend or relative, gnomes grieve 
openly and loudly. Natural disasters or mali- 
cious acts from enemies are likewise cause for 
wailing and crying—so much so that an ob- 
server might assume that an entire community 
has just received a sentence of painful doom. 
However, these moods pass quickly (perhaps 
because of the effusiveness of their grief) and 
many a boisterous party has resulted from 
what began as a funeral observance. 

Very unlike dwarves (or elves, for that mat- 
ter), gnomes are quite open in displays of af- 
fection and love. Hugs are frequent whenever 
friends, spouses, and relations meet. Parents 
cuddle children, and the youngsters accept the 
attention with no self-consciousness. While 
romantic couples are private with their inti- 
macy, husbands and wives will loudly and 
publicly profess their affection and love. 


Humor 

Gnomes are famous, or perhaps infamous, 
for their sardonic sense of humor. All gnomes 
love practical jokes, the more elaborate the 
better. This can be very disconcerting when a 
gnome decides to express friendship or affec- 
tion to a non-gnome by making that individ- 
ual a special target for a string of practical 
jokes. As a rule, it's considered bad form to 
devise a joke which actually hurts somebody; 
the art comes from surprising the victim and 
making him or her look ridiculous. 

In a way, practical joking takes the place 
filled by violence in many human cultures; 
two gnomes who have a heated argument are 
more likely to launch a feud of booby-traps to 
prove who is the cleverest than come to 
blows. Taking their cue from Garl Glittergold 
himself, gnomes extend this attitude to their 
military endeavors; its considered a more 
courageous act to make an enemy look foolish 
in the eyes of his or her allies or followers than 
it is to kill the same enemy. 


Animal Friends 

A warren of gnomes will typically be 
guarded by several watchful mammals. In 
the case of Forest Gnomes or Rock Gnomes, 
these will be woods-dwelling or burrowing 
creatures. Among the most popular compan- 
ions are badgers, wolverines, and weasels— 
in mundane as well as giant size. Svirfneblin 
sometimes gain similar companionship from 
moles, shrews, bats, and giant rats. In return 
for kind treatment from the gnomes, these 
creatures often take up residence nearby 
gnome dwellings. 

These creatures are not domesticated as hu- 
mans understand the word; they are allies, not 
pets. Still, they provide useful service as senti- 
nels, quickly bringing word of any strangers 
in the area, and if the community is attacked 
the animal guardians will always fight sav- 
agely in defense of their friends. Many villages 
have tales of youngsters who have fallen into 
a stream only to be plucked forth and saved 


Gnomish Culture e 39 


by the jaws of a giant weasel, for example, or 
of young climbers who have gotten into trou- 
ble on the steep and rocky slopes so common 
in gnomish habitat only to be carried to safety 
on the sturdy back of a climbing badger. 


Warfare 

"Dey come from da rocks of da ground, 
everywhere attackin' and killin’, what wit 
dem bolts and dat majick! We din't see where 
dey wuz or where dey went, but when dey 
wuz gone all my pals wuz kilt. 

"We had deez goblyns what wuz suzpozed 
to watch dat side—but dey run away! Da 
lucky ones ran, dat iz. Lots a dem wuz kilt 
too. Dem nomes, dey really whomped da 
goblyns—din t like 'em too much at all, I cud 
tell. Da goblyns wuz gonna turn to meet 'em, 
but da nomes come on too fast. Dey din't let 
'em make da line or get off a shot. 'Course, 
dat's what you espect a' goblyns. 

"Den I tought we ogres would stomp 'em, 
stomp 'em good. But dey wudn't fight fair, 
wudn't come out and let uz stomp 'em! Dey 
sat dere and shot wit' dem dang bolts, what 
poked out eyes and did all sorts a' nasties. We 
run at dem but dey hid —we din't know where 
dey went, ‘till dey come up behind us and 
whomped us pretty good dat way too. 

“Nope, sir, you kin tell me ta go but I ain't 
goin'—1 ain't gonna fight no nomes no more!" 


—from the battle diary of Barkan 
Delsuutor, Ogre veteran and brigade 
commander 


Like halflings, gnomes are slow to anger 
and reluctant to wage war. However, also like 
their diminutive cousins, they become savage 
and tenacious fighters when fully motivated 
into battle. 

Because of their small size, gnomes try to 
avoid combat situations that place them in 
open terrain where they must meet the head- 
on onslaught of much larger attackers. They 
prefer instead to fight in rough terrain, shel- 


40 * Chapter Three 


tered by rocks or trees, where their size can 
actually work to their advantage. In under- 
ground combat situations where they have 
sufficient time to prepare, gnomes like to ex- 
cavate numerous low-ceilinged tunnels for 
mobility of attack and retreat. 

They are not so adept with missiles as are 
halflings, but gnomish troops can nevertheless 
deliver a furious barrage of arrows and sling 
stones when such a tactic is needed. Firing in 
an undisciplined fusillade, they continue to 
pepper their targets with this painful attacks 
for as long as possible. They launch their ar- 
rows from sturdy shortbows or solid, albeit 
small, crossbows. 

Though many of them wield spears, they 
prefer to use these as melee rather than missile 
weapons. Gnomes are adept (and very coura- 
geous) at setting these spears to meet the 
charge of much larger attackers. They will al- 
so use their quickness to strike from ambush, 
and when a force of gnomes can mingle 
among the troops of a larger enemy, their 
small size allows them to inflict a lot of dam- 
age. A favorite tactic, useable only when 
gnomes gain complete surprise (such as that 
provided by a mass invisibility spell), is to 
fearlessly dart among enemy horsemen, using 
their sharp daggers to cut the straps holding 
the riders' saddles onto their mounts. Such a 
tactic, when successful, can go a long way to- 
ward evening the odds of an unbalanced en- 
gagement. 

When marching to battle, most gnomes will 
carry a missile weapon as well as a hammer, 
spear, or short sword, with a dagger reserved 
for the final line of defense. 

Gnomes are also skilled at using deception, 
diversion, camouflage, and disguise as battle 
tactics. Their natural talents at illusionary 
magic help a great deal —gnomish illusionists 
will frequently create the appearance of the 
force in some unimportant area, while other 
spellcasters conceal the actual presence of the 
gnomes from enemy discovery. The sudden 
appearance of a gnomish force, virtually in 


the midst of the enemy, can be enough to 
throw the most veteran army into confusion. 

They are also good at using these spells to 
conceal the true nature of the battlefield—ei- 
ther to create the appearance of obstacles 
where there are none or to conceal the loca- 
tion of hazards such as ravines, thickets, bogs, 
and streams. Many a thunderous charge has 
been broken when the howling attackers sud- 
denly find out that what looked like solid 
ground is actually intersected by a twenty- 
foot deep gully, its bottom lined with sharp 
stakes. 

Other uses of illusionary magic have 
stretched the creative bounds of military 
imagination. In one famous battle, gnomish 
illusionists concealed the actual location of 
the sun and replace it with a duplicate, caus- 
ing the enemies' reinforcements to march five 
miles to the east when they were supposed to 
be going west! They have also used images of 
dragons, giants, beholders, and other horrors 
to distract the attention of their foes and keep 
them guessing as to the true nature of their 
opponents. 

Another asset that gnomes carry into battle 
is the lack of the hubris that can so often be 
the downfall of human or dwarven command- 
ers. Gnomes show no hesitation when it 
comes to abandoning a lost cause; when 
things start to go bad, the gnomes will run 
away, preferring this pragmatic tactic to a 
doomed stand motivated mainly by pride. 
The retreating gnomes quickly scatter and (if 
possible) disappear down holes into the 
ground or vanish among the enclosing under- 
brush of a forest. Even if the victorious oppo- 
nents pursue ruthlessly, they are unlikely to 
kill or capture more than a handful of the 
gnomish survivors. Of course, this scattering 
means that it takes longer to reassemble the 
force and prepare to fight again, but that is a 
drawback that any gnomish commander will- 
ingly accepts rather than see his or her forces 
annihilated. 


Magic 

The primary sorcery of the gnomes, of 
course, is illusionary magic. This is far more 
than a practical application of arcane powers, 
however—in gnome society, the casting of il- 
lusions affects all aspects of life from art to ro- 
mance to celebration to war. A lover might 
woo his sweetheart with a message borne by a 
whispering wind spell, for example. For 
gnomes, illusionary magic is a way of life, not 
something they use just to make life easier. 

Illusions are also constantly employed for 
practical jokes among these fun-loving folk. 
Of course, gnomes are more adept at recog- 
nizing illusions than are most other creatures, 
so those illusionary pranks targeted against 
them must be subtly crafted and strategically 
planned in order for them to succeed. Invisi- 
bility, illusionary script, and wraithform 
spells are popular choices for this purpose. 

Illusionary magic is often used to comple- 
ment the finest efforts of gnomish craftsmen. 
A fine piece of jewelry, for example, might be 
enhanced with a shower of light caused by a 
phantasmal force, or even a hypnotic pattern, 
in order to create a truly stunning work of art. 

On the practical side, illusionary magic is 
not usually employed to screen the location or 
nature of a gnomish community. Though such 
arcane devices might prove effective at con- 
cealing them against mundane detection, the 
emanation of magical power actually serves 
as a beacon to those who use spells such as de- 
tect magic. The latter enemies are judged, 
rightly, to be far more dangerous to a gnomish 
community than the former. 

However, on the battlefield or in other con- 
tests of might and skill, gnomes will pull out 
all the stops. Hallucinatory terrain, the vari- 
ous applications of invisibility, and illusion- 
ary walls will be used to disguise the true 
nature of the battlefield, while spells such as 
phantasmal force, fear, phantasmal killer, 
and shadow monster will be employed di- 
rectly against the enemy troops. 


———— EE Ea 


Gnomish Culture * 41 


Wandering 

Unlike the other short folk, the halflings, 
gnomes are often possessed by a strong desire 
to wander. Their natural curiosity leads them 
to constantly wonder about what's beyond 
the next hill, or across that sea... or even 
down that dark hole in the mountainside. 

A major compulsion for this wandering 
among all gnomes is the desire to find the per- 
fect gem. Tales of rich veins of rubies, or a 
wealth of diamonds or emeralds, will often 
draw an entire party of gnomes onto a long 
and dangerous quest. Whether or not they've 
seen evidence of the find, their belief in its ex- 
istence will be strong, even unshakable, and 
determined gnomes will brook no diversion in 
their pursuit of this ultimate treasure. 

Despite their reticent nature and the care with 
which they conceal their communities' exact lo- 
cations, gnomes are quite willing to make 
friends with those visitors who prove them- 


42 * Chapter Three 


selves worthy of that friendship. Many a wide- 
eyed gnomish youngster has listened to a 
human knight tell of great castles or a merchant 
describe the wonders of a large city market. 
These gnomes typically grow up with the desire 
to see these places, and no one thinks it odd 
when, after reaching adulthood, they pack up 
their belongings and head down the road. 

Another strain of this honest friendliness is 
a deep-running loyalty to those the gnomes 
consider friends. The suggestion that one of 
these kindred spirits is in trouble will also 
prove a strong motivation to bring a gnome 
onto the adventuring road. 

Finally, gnomes keep a close eye on their 
surroundings and are very familiar with the 
world in their general vicinity. If they notice 
things changing (for example, a village crop- 
ping up on what used to be a wilderness 
stream) they will be irresistibly drawn to the 
scene to find out what's going on. 


gor ap m 


P (Gr ae E - 


qs v 
7 T" 


E 


we S94 Bae Vent beth 
"ove m vb V 


CHAPTER 


Gnome Character Kits 


The kits introduced in this chapter allow 
players to define their characters with more 
detail and precision than are determined sim- 
ply by race and character class. The gnome 
kits provide a selection of specialized PCs and 
NPCs, each designed for a specific character 
class or multi-class combination. Each kit has 
its own strengths and weaknesses, and each is 
tailored to illustrate some important aspect of 
gnomish life. 

The kits are purely optional—no gnome 
must use one. They can be incorporated into 
characters already existing in the campaign, 
as long as the PC's background makes sense 
given the nature of the kit. Once a character 
has been assigned a kit, that selection remains 
for the life of the character. 

These kits are specifically designed for 
gnomes and should not be employed by char- 
acters of other races. Gnomish characters who 
don't wish to use a kit from this book can se- 
lect a kit from another handbook that is appli- 
cable to their character class: The Complete 
Fighters Handbook, The Complete Thiefs 
Handbook, The Complete Priest's Handbook, 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook, and The 
Complete Bard's Handbook all have kits that 
are available to gnomish characters of the ap- 
propriate class. 

Gnomes can become clerics of up to 9th 
level, fighters of up to 11th level, thieves of up 
to 13th level, and illusionists of up to 15th 
level; exceptionally talented gnomes (those 
with high scores in their prime requisites) can 
exceed these maximums by up to 4 additional 
levels. Multi-class combinations are also al- 
lowed between any two classes available to 
gnomes, with illusionist/thief being a favor- 
ite. Priests are not terribly common among 
gnomes—the Svirfneblin have the most, Tin- 
ker Gnomes none at all—and multi-classed 
combinations including them are the rarest of 
all gnome character classes (and hence have 
no kits devoted to them). 

Players and DMs may cooperate in the cre- 
ation of original kits, as long as care is taken 


44 * Chapter Four 


to balance the advantages and disadvantages 
with those presented here. 


Structure of the Kits 

Each kit begins with a general description of 
that character type, along with any back- 
ground and ability score requirements that are 
necessary to qualify for the kit. Further infor- 
mation on the kits is broken down into these 
categories: 

Role: The specific functions of this charac- 
ter type within gnomish society. 

Secondary Skills: In campaigns using the 
secondary skills rules from the AD&D® 2nd 
Edition game, a character might be required to 
take a specific secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The character must 
take the proficiencies listed. Unless it is specif- 
ically stated otherwise, these required profi- 
ciencies do not increase the number of slots 
the character has available. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: A gnom- 
ish character using a kit gains these proficien- 
cies for free—he or she is not required to 
spend a slot for any of them. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
These proficiencies are not required of the 
character, but they do match up well with the 
kit. They require a normal nonweapon profi- 
ciency slot(s) to be used for each one. 

Thieving Skil Emphasis (thief, thief/ 
illusionist, and thief/fighter classes only; 
there are no thief/priest kits): The AD&D® 
2nd Edition rules allow considerable flexibili- 
ty in a thief character's selection of thieving 
abilities. Characters wishing become Stalkers 
or Mouseburglars usually choose to specialize 
in stealth-related skills such as Move Silently 
and Hide in Shadows. A gnomish thief who 
needs to survive on city streets might prefer to 
focus on Pick Pockets and Open Locks. Each 
kit comes with suggested areas of skill concen- 
tration for that character type. These are not 
mandatory, nor do they grant any special bo- 
nuses or confer any penalties. 

Equipment: Any special equipment needs of 


the character are listed. 

Special Benefits: These are things a charac- 
ter can do, or perhaps protections he or she 
gains, because of the kit. 

Special Hindrances: These are requirements 
or limitations placed upon the character by 
the kit. 


Fighter Kits 
Breachgnome 


This burly gnome takes a "heads up and 
face front" view to battle. Armed to the teeth 
and armored to the eyeballs, he or she hoists 
weapon, fully prepared to stand toe-to-toe 
with any attacker menacing home or ally. In 
some senses, this is the gnomish equivalent of 
the knight, mixed with a stubbornness and 
tenacity suggestive of the most determined 
dwarven heroes. 

A Breachgnome devotes all his or her life to 


the fighter's art, from wrestling as a child to 
mastering an assortment of weapons as the 
character grows to adulthood. Often he or she 
will be taught by fighters of other races (hu- 
man and dwarf, in particular) as well as ac- 
cepting the tutelage of a gnomish master. 

The Breachgnome must have a Strength of 
at least 16. 

Role: This character is the one who steps 
out of the crowd of gnomes to confront the 
bullying ogre. Breachgnomes excel in defen- 
sive fighting; if his or her warren is invaded by 
enemies, the Breachgnome will stand in a cor- 
ridor and hold the creatures at bay until the 
rest of the villagers can escape. Only after all 
have fled will the valiant defender (possibly) 
begin to think about his or her own safety. 

The classic Breachgnome is an epic figure in 
gnomish battle lore. The tale of Maddi 
Gaddlroot is typical: Maddi supposedly held 
off a whole army of ogres for an entire day, 


Gnome Character Kits @ 45 


standing before a cave mouth between two 
trees, where only one of the enemy could get 
at her at a time. Behind her, her city of a thou- 
sand gnomes stood threatened, and during the 
course of that day the young and infirm (to- 
gether with most of the treasure) were hustled 
through narrow tunnels into the depths of the 
earth. 

Only after she had slain dozens of the 
brutes did Maddi fall before the superior 
might of her attackers. Then the ogres lunged 
into the lair, only to be met by a clever net- 
work of ambushes and illusionary traps—de- 
fenses which the Breachgnome's heroic 
sacrifice had given her fellow gnomes time to 
create. In the end, the attack was defeated, the 
city saved, and the hero elevated to legendary 
status among her people. Interestingly 
enough, virtually every gnome settlement 
considers itself to be the one Maddi Gaddlroot 
died defending and will often point out to visi- 
tors the site of her last stand! 

Secondary Skills: The Armorer or Weapon- 
smith secondary skills are useful to the 
Breachgnome. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Breachgnome 
must have a proficiency in the use of the short 
sword and either the hammer or axe. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: None 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
The Breachgnome should consider the Armor- 
er, Weaponsmith, Endurance, and Black- 
smithing proficiencies. 

Equipment: The Breachgnome will typi- 
cally carry at least two melee weapons, a 
shield, metal armor, and some type of missile 
weapon (crossbow and sling being preferred). 

Special Benefits: Because of their short size 
and gusty determination, all Breachgnomes 
gain bonuses to their Armor Class when they 
can fight in a position with one or both flanks 
protected by solid objects such as trees, walls, 
or support beams. If the gnome has such an ob- 
ject within 3' of either side, he or she receives a 
—1 bonus to AC; if both sides are protected, the 
bonus is —2. Assume the gnome is 2' wide to 


46 * Chapter Four 


determine if both sides are protected—i.e., the 
Breachgnome can gain the double bonus when 
standing between walls no more than 8' apart. 
This bonus is cumulative with any applicable 
size and Dexterity bonuses. 

Because of their single-mindedness in weap- 
on training, Breachgnomes gain weapon pro- 
ficiency slots at the rate of one every two 
levels (with the first extra proficiency slot be- 
coming available at third level). 

Special Hindrances: When faced with a bat- 
tle that he or she might be able to win—but 
companions or common sense that urge a 
withdrawal—the Breachgnome must make a 
Wisdom check. He or she can repeat the check 
every round, but the character cannot retreat 
until it succeeds. 


Goblinsticker 


These gnomes are considered eccentric, if 
not downright mad, by their more normal 
kin—Goblinstickers actually seem to enjoy 
battle and will go so far as to seek out enemies 
for the purpose of wiping them out. The two 
most common foes of the Goblinsticker are, 
naturally, goblins and kobolds. 

Often a Goblinsticker is propelled by some 
dark event or tragedy in his or her past—a 
wrong which cannot be righted but which he 
or she feels compelled to try and atone for or 
avenge for the rest of his or her days. A 
Goblinsticker is especially effective at fighting 
the particular foe which caused this tragedy 
(often, but not always, goblins), often forgo- 
ing treasure and other incentives to pursue his 
or her revenge. "Goblinsticker" is a generic 
term for this kit; there are also koboldstickers, 
skeletonstickers, ogrestickers, et cetera, who 
differ only in the focus of their animosity. 

A character must have a Strength or Consti- 
tution score of at least 15 in order to choose 
this kit. 

Role: Because they are virtually fearless, 
these characters form the shock troops of any 
gnomish assault against their chosen enemy. 


They are likely to choose a life of adventure, 
one that will put them on a collision course 
with their hated foe. 

Teams of Goblinstickers have been known 
to work together, for adventure or pay. In ar- 
eas of monster infestation, Goblinstickers can 
frequently find employment as "extermina- 
tors"—especially in cases where the monsters 
are small, such as goblins or kobold, and live 
in dens where the size of human attackers 
would prove a drawback. 

Secondary Skills: The Weaponsmith and 
Armorer are appropriate secondary skills for 
this character. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Goblinsticker 
must have a missile weapon proficiency and 
two melee weapon proficiencies. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The 
Goblinsticker gains no bonus proficiencies. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
This character will find the Rope Use, Direc- 


tion Sense, Blindfighting, Armorer, and 
Weaponsmith proficiencies useful. 

Equipment: Together with his or her weap- 
ons and armor, the Goblinsticker traditionally 
carries the tools of the dungeon-crawler— i.e., 
ropes, hammer and spikes, oil, and several 
days’ rations. 

Special Benefits: At first level the Goblin- 
sticker character must declare the hated foe of 
his or her life. When engaged in battle against 
this type of creature, the character receives a 
+1 bonus on all rolls to hit and to determine 
damage inflicted. This bonus applies to both 
melee and missile weapons and is cumulative 
with other gnome benefits, including the Rock 
Gnome's standard +1 attack bonus versus 
goblins and kobolds. 

Special Hindrances: When confronted with 
an opportunity to attack or continue to fight 
his or her hated foe, the Goblinsticker must 
make a successful Wisdom check or be unable 


Gnome Character Kits * 47 


to decline the battle. The check can, however, 
be modified or ignored based on circumstanc- 
es. For example, no Goblinsticker will break 
cover and blow an ambush to tromp on the 
first goblin to appear when he or she knows 
that a little patience will mean the chance to 
bop a lot more of them. 


These stealthy characters are consummate 
spies and sneak thieves who in some ways be- 
have more like halflings than the average 
gnome thief. Striving to be as quiet as mice, 
they infiltrate lairs, mansions, or enemy 
camps. They rely upon secrecy, disguise, and 
silence in order to conceal their presence. Pre- 
ferring very much to flee rather than fight, 
they consider a truly successful mission one 
which is concluded before the victim even 


learns that the gnome has been there. 

A Mouseburglar must have both Dexterity 
and Intelligence scores of 13 or better. 

Role: Mouseburglars, like other gnomish 
thieves, rarely prey upon victims of their same 
race. They will be much more inclined to look 
for targets among the settlements of clan ene- 
mies, especially humanoids, or in anonymous 
settings like large cities. 

In addition to their larcenous activities, 
Mouseburglars also serve as scouts and spies, 
should there be a need for such reconnois- 
sance. Their emphasis on stealth and 
concealment—together with their generally 
high Intelligence—makes them excellent 
eavesdroppers. Many a gnomish military 
campaign has been laid over the carefully 
gathered reports of a Mouseburglar. 

These characters also find great application 
as adventurers, lending a lot of advantage to a 
party of mixed races and classes. Their small 


size coupled with their skills (and the fact that 
most have infravision) allow them to get into 
places that larger thieves can't. 

Secondary Skills: Any secondary skill can 
be appropriate to this kit. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Mouseburglar 
always chooses to specialize in weapons that 
can be wielded silently, preferring the sling or 
bow over the crossbow and the dagger or 
short sword over the hammer and axe. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Mouse- 
burglars receive either Disguise or Rope Use as 
a bonus nonweapon proficiency. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
This character can benefit by knowing addi- 
tional languages (very important for one who 
intends to spy or eavesdrop!), as well as For- 
gery, Reading Lips, and Tightrope Walking. 

Thief Skill Emphasis: The Mouseburglar is 
likely to find the Move Silently, Hide in 
Shadows, and Open Locks skills to be particu- 
larly useful. At first level he or she must di- 
vide the 60 discretionary points between these 
three abilities. 

Equipment: The Mouseburglar will be sure 
to maintain a complete set of lockpicks. He or 
she prefers to wear dark clothes and soft boots 
when on a job and will often have the materi- 
als for one or two effective disguises concealed 
somewhere on his or her person. 

Special Benefits: A Mouseburglar gains an 
additional 5% chance of success to both Open 
Locks and Move Silently at first level. For 
each additional level he or she advances, the 
character receives another 5% bonus that can 
be applied to any one of the following scores: 
Open Locks, Move Silently, Find/Remove 
Traps, or Read Languages. 

Special Hindrances: The Mouseburglar so 
prefers stealth to combat that the character's 
fighting skills suffer as a result. Specifically, 
the Mouseburglar receives a —1 penalty on all 
attack rolls made in melee combat (except 
those delivered with the backstab benefit). 
This does not affect damage inflicted. 


Tumbler 


Tumblers employ size and energy as the 
main assets of a thieving career. Quick and 
nimble, they are able to use escape routes that 
larger and clumsier pursuers find quite un- 
manageable. Tumblers are part entertainer, 
part con artist, and part acrobat. 

Coming from a variety of backgrounds, 
Tumblers usually have been exposed to a num- 
ber of different races and often perfect their 
trade in some kind of urban environment. Of- 
ten they will find work in a circus or carnival, 
moonlighting after show hours to augment 
their honest income. 

The Tumbler must have a Dexterity score of 
at least 14. 

Role: The Tumbler is a gnome who employs 
creative and vigorous means to get into plac- 
es, meanwhile performing tricks and feats for 
the edification of his or her fellow villagers. 
Adept at climbing and falling, the Tumbler 
can walk a rope stretched between two high 
points, scale a sheer surface, and bob and 
evade his or her way through deadly com- 
bat—often rolling right between a larger op- 
ponent' legs! 

Secondary Skills: Any of the secondary 
skills can be used by this character. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Tumbler is eligi- 
ble to use any weapon available to gnomish 
thieves. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The Tum- 
bler character receives Tumbling as a free pro- 
ficiency when first selecting this kit. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
The Tumbler must take Jumping, Juggling, 
and Tightrope Walking in order to practice his 
or her trade. 

Thief Skill Emphasis: The Tumbler can find 
particular use in the Pick Pockets, Move 
Silently, and Climb Walls thieving skills. The 
kit places no restriction on how he or she allo- 
cates the discretionary points, however. 

Equipment: The Tumbler will always be 
found with a coil of strong, lightweight 


Gnome Character Kits e 49 


rope— generally at least a 60' length. 

Special Benefits: Gnomish Tumblers receive 
all the normal benefits of the Tumbling profi- 
ciency. Tumbling ability and small size com- 
bine to give Tumblers a —6 bonus to AC in 
rounds in which the Tumbler wins initiative 
and elects to forgo all other actions than evad- 
ing enemy attacks. 

Against larger than human-sized creatures, 
the gnomish Tumbler can try a special maneu- 
ver: rolling between the creature's legs. A suc- 
cessful Dexterity check means the Tumbler 
dives between the opponent's legs, rolls to 
safety, and bounces to his or her feet behind 
the enemy. If the Dexterity check fails, how- 
ever, the gnome can be attacked with no spe- 
cial bonus to Armor Class. If the Tumbler 
successfully performs this maneuver and wins 
initiative on the next round, he or she can 
backstab that opponent. 

At first level, Tumblers also receive a 
+10% bonus to their chances to successfully 
Climb Walls; this bonus increases by +2% 
per level thereafter. 

Special Hindrances: Because of the boister- 
ous nature of this specialty, Tumblers are lim- 
ited in some of the other areas of thieving 
skills. Specifically, their base scores to Open 
Locks and Detect Noise begin at 0, not at the 
levels (10% and 15%, respectively) listed on 
Table 26 on page 39 of the Player's Handbook. 
The bonuses and penalties specified on Tables 
27-29 are not affected by this provision. 


Illusionist Kits 
Imagemaker 


This is the maestro of the gnomish world. 
His or her services are in demand at every 
gnomish festival; his or her skills known far 
and wide, sought by humans, dwarves, and 
others beyond the ken of gnome society. The 
Imagemaker is an artist in the art of illusion 
who can create spectacles and is capable of 
drawing audiences to the edge of awe and be- 
yond with soaring images, thunderous sound 


50 * Chapter Four 


effects, and realistic creations. 

Any gnomish illusionist can elect to be an 
Imagemaker. 

Role: The Imagemaker's role in gnomish so- 
ciety extends far beyond his or her ability to 
tell tales and create pictures. On the battle- 
field, Imagemakers are the primary source of 
the diversionary illusions that gnomish forces 
use so well to balance the odds against them. 
Since they specialize in the creation and ma- 
nipulation of very realistic illusions, they can 
be very useful to adventuring parties—for ex- 
ample, by creating duplicate images of the 
party to distract a powerful enemy. And, of 
course, no gnomish ceremony would be com- 
plete without the sound and spectacle of the 
Imagemakers art. 

Secondary Skills: Any will work, though 
the Gambler and Scribe secondary skills can 
have particularly useful applications. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The Im- 
agemaker gains the Ventriloquism proficiency 
(normally available only to rogues) as a free 
proficiency as soon as this kit is selected. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Artistic Ability is a useful accompaniment to 
the Imagemaker's skill, as are proficiencies in 
Ancient History, Astrology, and Singing. 

Equipment: An Imagemaker likes to have 
several mechanical tools available to augment 
his or her spellwork, including smokepots, 
flashballs, and probably a musical instru- 
ment. Smokepots must be lit by a fuse, which 
can be set for 1-10 rounds; upon igniting they 
belch out a 10' diameter cloud of colored 
smoke, blocking all visibility. The cloud dis- 
perses in one round out of doors or in a large 
enclosed space; in more constricting quarters 
it lasts for 2-5 rounds. Flashballs erupt with a 
bright flash of flame when they are thrown (or 
dropped) and strike a solid object such as 
stone or metal. When used in darkness they 
will effectively blind (for 1-6 rounds) a charac- 
ter who witnesses the flash. 

Special Benefits: The Imagemaker has per- 
fected the use of specific kinds of illusions— 


specifically, those that create the image of 
something from nothing. The various phan- 
tasmal force spells, minor creation, the 
shadow monster spells, programmed illusion, 
and shades are examples of spells that fall 
within this specialty; invisibility, vacancy, 
and seeming are spells that do not. 

The pictures, sounds, and smells created by 
the Imagemaker are especially realistic. 
Therefore, any player attempting disbelieve 
them does so with a —2 penalty. In addition, 
all creatures—even those not normally sus- 
ceptible to illusion—can be taken in by the 
creations of the Imagemaker. However, crea- 
tures that would not normally be fooled by il- 
lusions do not suffer the —2 penalty when 
they attempt to disbelieve. 

In addition, the Imagemaker's skill is such 
that the images he or she creates last longer 
than those cast by a non-specializing illusion- 
ist. Illusions that do not require concentration 
have their duration doubled when cast by an 
Imagemaker. Illusions requiring concentra- 
tion last for 2-12 rounds after the caster ceases 
concentrating. In the latter case, of course, the 
object will not be able to respond to specific 
events, but it can continue to repeat move- 
ments or patterns established when the caster 
was concentrating. 

Special Hindrances: Because of intense spe- 
cialization, the Imagemaker suffers additional 
restrictions on spells he or she can learn; spe- 
cifically, Imagemakers cannot learn spells 
from the greater divination or conjuring/ 
summoning schools of magic. 


Vanisher 


The Vanisher is an illusionist with the spe- 
cialization of making things disappear—in 
that sense, he or she is the opposite of the Im- 
agemaker. Invisibility is stock-in-trade, but 
the Vanisher is also adept at spells that alter 
and disguise the appearance of something, 
equally ready to replace the vanished object 
or creature with an alternate as to make it dis- 


appear entirely. 

Any gnomish illusionist can elect to be a 
Vanisher. 

Role: The Vanisher is the valued counterpart 
to the Imagemaker, whether on the battlefield 
or in a dungeon. By concealing the existence of 
a party he or she can insure them the advan- 
tage of surprise, which is always useful. His or 
her skills can also benefit reconnoissance or 
retrieval missions. 

Secondary Skills: Any can be useful, 
though Scribe and Navigator skills preferred. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Vanisher has no 
restriction on weapon proficiencies. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The 
Vanisher receives Reading/Writing skill with- 
out expending a slot. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
These include Spellcraft, Heraldry, Blindfight- 
ing, Direction Sense, Weather Sense, and 
Navigation. 

Equipment: The Vanisher likes to keep a vi- 
al of dust of disappearance handy; see Special 
Benefits, below. 

Special Benefits: The Vanisher gains extra 
skills with any spell involving invisibility, as 
well as other spells of the illusion/phantasm 
school that allow the caster to alter the ap- 
pearance of a creature or object or to impair 
the sense of an observer. Some of the latter in- 
clude blindness and deafness spells; spells 
which alter appearances include blur, change 
self, fool's gold, illusionary script, Leomund's 
trap, Nystul's magic aura, and vacancy. 

When casting one of these specialty spells, 
the Vanisher gains several benefits. The dura- 
tion of the spell is doubled. Saving throws 
against the effects of these spells suffer a —2 
penalty. Characters or creatures that could 
normally see invisible objects must make a 
successful Intelligence check, with a —4 pen- 
alty to the roll, before they can see objects 
screened by a Vanisher. 

Also, at the second level of experience the 
Vanisher gains the ability to make a simple 
form of dust of disappearance from flour and 


Gnome Character Kits € 51 


a modicum (100 gp worth) of crushed dia- 
mond. It takes the Vanisher a full hour and a 
successful Intelligence check to perform this 
task, which can be attempted once per day. 
This homemade dust of disappearance retains 
its potency for two weeks. 

Special Hindrances: Like the Imagemaker, 
the Vanisher's devotion to mastering illusions 
is such that it precludes his or her learning any 
spells from the greater divination or conjur- 
ing/summoning schools of magic. 


Multiciass Kits 
Buffoon (Thief/Illusionist) 


The name of this character kit is inno way a 
reflection on the intelligence of the character 
who plays the role. It does, however, reflect 
the way the non-gnomish world views him or 
her—it is a gentle deception that can consist- 
ently cause enemies and other NPCs to under- 
estimate or even ignore the character. Indeed, 
the Buffoon carefully cultivates this role, of- 
ten even to the point of concealing the fact 
that he or she possesses illusionist skills. 

In order to use this kit, a character must 
have an Intelligence score of at least 15. 

Role: Buffoons are travelers, entertainers, 
gossips, pranksters, and gadflies. They make 
friends everywhere they go and enjoy using 
their skills to aid those friends in a multitude 
of causes. Buffoons make themselves figures 
of fun and then use this as a means of making 
fun of others—usually with just the right ele- 
ment of sharpness in their wit. An empress, 
for example, will not be subjected to the ridi- 
cule that, say, a city guard might merit—at 
least not in her presence! Buffoons are alert 
and observant, quick to discern who are safe 
targets, currently out of favor with the powers 
that be; such unfortunates often become the 
butt of a Buffoon’s jests. 

Favorite Buffoon tactics include comical 
imitations of the character being lampooned 
and questions designed to trap the unfortu- 
nate victim in a no-win quandary—e.g., 


52 * Chapter Four 


“Have you stopped overtaxing the peasants 
yet?” Every Buffoon is adept at keeping the 
crowd on his or her side, but it is said that eve- 
ry good Buffoon keeps one eye on the exit, 
ready to beat a hasty retreat should the mood 
of the onlookers suddenly turn nasty. 

The Buffoon is an avaricious but capable 
adventurer, always on the lookout for gems of 
any shape, color, and size. He or she doesn’t 
keep these in a horde, instead preferring to 
barter them for goods (or goodwill) whenever 
passing through a gnomish community. The 
Buffoon is quite likely to find good friends in 
any gnomish village along his or her trail and 
also among the gnomish citizens of larger cit- 
ies and towns. 

Secondary Skills: Jeweler is a popular sec- 
ondary skill for the Buffoon, as are Navigator 
and Gambler. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Buffoon likes to 
keep several daggers concealed about his or 
her person and will be adept at using them 
both as missile weapons and hand-to-hand. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: All Buf- 
foons gain a knowledge of Etiquette as a bo- 
nus proficiency—not that they practice it, but 
their natural sensitivity helps them judge what 
is and is not considered appropriate in a given 
situations (and tailor their barbs accordingly). 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
History and Disguise, as well as Juggling, Lip 
Reading, Tumbling, and Ventriloquism are all 
useful complements to the Buffoon’s art. 

Thief Skill Emphasis: The Buffoon may 
wish to emphasize Hide in Shadows, Detect 
Noise, and Find/Remove Traps; the kit places 
no restrictions on his or her choices. 

Equipment: The Buffoon generally travels 
with a variety of comical gimmicks, including 
horns and bells, whistles and juggling balls, 
and a full makeup kit that often includes wigs 
and false beards. 

Special Benefits: The Buffoon benefits from 
an ability to distract and entertain. Often a 
Buffoon can break the concentration of a 
spellcaster with a rude jibe or irritating pun. 


The gnomish character must speak a language 
in common with the spellcaster and must win 
initiative on the round. If both of these are 
met, he or she can say something (DMs are en- 
couraged to require roleplaying of the re- 
mark) clever and distracting to the spellcaster. 
The caster is allowed a Wisdom check to ig- 
nore the distraction; failure means his or her 
concentration has broken and the spell is 
wasted. The DM may, at his or her option, al- 
low the difference between the Buffoon's and 
spellcaster's levels to be used as a modifier 
(* or —) to the Wisdom check. 

The Buffoon also has two bard-like abili- 
ties: First, he or she can entertain NPCs with 
juggling, jibes, and buffoonery. This has the 
same effect as the bard's ability to influence re- 
actions (explained on page 42 of the Player's 
Handbook). Second, he or she can counter the 
effects of songs and poetry used as magical at- 
tacks (see page 44 of the Players Handbook). 

Special Hindrances: He or she has to walk 
around looking ridiculous. 


Stalker (Fighter/Thief) 


Whether in woodland meadow or dungeon 
pit, the Stalker is a specialist in quiet move- 
ment and stealthy pursuit followed by sharp 
and deadly combat—on whatever terms the 
foe demands. 

The Stalker must have Strength and Dexter- 
ity scores of at least 13. 

Role: The Stalker is adept at hunting and 
tracking, both above and belcw ground. He 
or she is a skilled fighter but prefers to reach 
his or her objectives by quickness and stealth 
wherever possible. Stalkers wear light, quiet 
armor and have a keen eye with a missile 
weapon but don't shirk from a toe-to-toe 
sword fight when circumstances require. 

Secondary Skills: Any. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Stalker must be 
proficient in both a missile and a melee 
weapon. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Because 


of a lifelong interest in wild places, the Stalker 
gains a bonus proficiency in either Tracking or 
Set Snares (not both). 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Useful proficiencies for this character include 
Fire Building, Fishing, Hunting, Survival, and 
Disguise. 

Thief Skill Emphasis: Move Silently and 
Detect Noise are the two skills which receive 
most of the Stalker's emphasis; at first level he 
or she must divide his or her discretionary 
points between these two. 

Equipment: In addition to his or her weap- 
ons, the Stalker prefers leather armor and dis- 
dains the use of a shield. Most Stalkers possess 
a climbing rope; some carry a set of thief's 
lockpicks. 

Special Benefits: When using a missile 
weapon, the Stalker gains a +1 on all attack 
and damage rolls. 

In addition, the Stalker can blend into 


Gnome Character Kits € 53 


underbrush, disappearing as effectively as a 
halfling when out of doors. In an under- 
ground setting, nonSvirfneblin Stalkers can 
freeze in place exactly like Svirfneblin (see 
page 25); a Deep Gnome stalker's chance of 
success with this tactic is 80% (not 60%). 

Special Hindrances: The Stalker cannot use 
a shield or wear any type of metal armor (not 
even elven chain). 


Priest Kits 
Rocktender 


This underground-dwelling gnomish priest 
is a specialist in understanding and relating to 
the fundamental powers of stone and rock. 
Most Rocktenders are Svirfneblin; a few may 
be found among Rock Gnomes. They vener- 
ate not the deities of earth and stone but the 
very rock itself, which they conceive of as a 
beneficent, living entity. Rocktenders are not 


54 * Chapter Four 


averse to mining and excavation but strive to 
ensure that such activities are carried out with 
appropriate reverence. 

Role: The Rocktender is a priest literally in 
touch with the world around him or her. 
While active in the community, a Rocktender 
spends much of his or her time alone, inspect- 
ing, studying, and meditating upon the strong 
bedrock of the world. He or she is keenly in 
tune with that rock, even to the point of being 
able to predict earthquakes and volcanic erup- 
tions, and becomes a master at the working of 
stone into useful or beautiful shapes. 

Secondary Skills: Mason or Miner are ap- 
propriate. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Rocktender will 
never use metallic weapons, preferring ham- 
mers and clubs with stone heads, slings with 
stone bullets, and spears or arrows with flint 
or obsidian tips. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: None. 


Equipment: The Rocktender will only bear 
weapons of stone. He or she can use a wooden 
shield and leather or padded armor but will 
not wear metal armor nor carry a metallic 
shield. 

Special Benefits: The Rocktender can detect 
underground features with perfect accuracy 
(sloping passages, faulty stonework, and the 
like) in most cases. Where the flaws or fea- 
tures are very subtle, the DM can allow up to 
a 1 in 10 chance of failure, but no greater. 

Because of his or her intuitive link with the 
surrounding stone, a Rocktender can become 
aware of impending rock-based convulsions 
before they occur. These include rockfalls, 
earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions. The 
character is allowed a Wisdom check to see if 
premonitions of the disaster force their way 
into his or her consciousness; success will pro- 
vide 1-12 hours of warning for quakes and 
eruptions or 1-6 hours of warning before a 
rockslide or collapse of stonework. 

In addition, these characters have a special 
affinity to creatures from the elemental plane 
of earth. If a Rocktender summons an earth 
elemental, he or she will always get the largest 
possible type, and the elemental will be excep- 
tionally loyal to the Rocktender. 

Special Hindrances: A Rocktender can only 
cast spells or use one of his or her special abili- 
ties when he or she is in direct contact with 
unhewn rock. 


Treetender 


Dwelling in the woods, often knowing each 
stump and mossy bole with careful precision, 
the Treetender declines the companionship of 
his or her fellow gnomes in favor of a nearly 
hermit-like existence in the woods. 

Role: Although they rarely interact with 
other gnomes on a daily basis, these nature 
priests are highly respected for helping to pre- 
serve the environment in which their fellows 
live. Like the druid of humankind, the 
Treetender takes a fierce interest in his or her 


domain and will vigorously strive to protect it 
against all threats. He or she is not a complete 
recluse, however, and will usually make it to a 
local village for all the major festivals, as well 
as helping gnomes (and, sometimes, halflings) 
who pass through his or her woods. 

Secondary Skills: Forester is the secondary 
skill of choice; Navigator is also good. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Treetenders special- 
ize in weapons made of wood, though they 
are not averse to using stone heads on long 
wooden shafts, Unlike most priests, Tree- 
tenders can use bows. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The 
Treetender gains an innate Set Snares skill. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Fire Building, Weather Sense, Direction 
Sense, and Healing are all useful skills in 
woodland environments. 

Equipment: In addition to weapons, a 
Treetender carries a selection of herbs and 
roots which he or she can use to make a potion 
of healing. Making the potion requires 6-12 
turns, and it must be consumed immediately. 

Special Benefits: All Treetenders have the 
abilities to identify plants, animals, and pure 
water and to pass through overgrown areas 
without leaving a trace. At third level he or 
she gains immunity to charm spells cast by 
woodland creatures. Also starting at third 
level, the Treetender gains one additional 
woodland language per level (i.e., one a 3rd 
level, two at 4th level, three at 5th, &c). 

Special Hindrances: The Treetender cannot 
wear metal armor or wield weapons where 
more than 10% of the weight is metal. 


Gnome Character Kits *« 55 


CHAPTER 


Granitehome—A Typical Gnomish Village 


Located among a series of heavily forested 
ridges, this community of some three hundred 
and fifty gnomes is organized into seven clans, 
each with its own large underground warren. 
Though it is typical of a Rock Gnome abode, 
a Forest Gnome community would be very 
similar (although much more spread out and 
less densely populated)—and if it was much 
farther underground, the general layout is not 
unlike a portion of a Deep Gnome city. 

On the surface, nothing of the community 
is visible—even the entrances leading into the 
warrens are well-camouflaged, screened by 
brush, disguised in the trunks of large trees, 
or hidden beneath flat boulders hinged from 
below. 


1. High Warren 


This series of excavated chambers serves as 
a gathering place for the community. Several 
stone-walled inns and gemshops line the walls 
of a vast cavern. The central chamber—a pop- 
ular setting for festivals—is bowl-shaped, 
with rings of seats that can hold nearly a thou- 
sand gnomes. Atop the knoll, through an en- 
trance reached by a high, spiraling stair, is a 
large clearing where the gnomes hold out-of- 
doors gatherings. 


2. Kappelkourt Clanhold 


These chambers are the homes and work- 
shops of the major gemcutting clan in the 
town. The clan has some thirty members. 


3. Lafftalligon Clanhold 


This clan specializes in stonecarving; it has 
some forty members. 


4. Astrolacyll Clanhold 
The seventy-five members of this family do 


a great deal of foodgathering and patrolling of 
the forest. Traditionally, most of the village's 


56 * Chapter Five 


priests have been from this clan. 
5. Mines 


These connecting tunnels and caverns hold 
the currently-worked veins of gemstones in 
the Granitehome area. The entrance to the 
tunnel is hidden in an innocuous room with a 
secret door to help conceal the mines from any 
intruders into the village. 


6. Pipwhistlion Clanhold 


These family of eighty provides the bulk of 
the community's miners. 


7. Kwilliticutti Clanhold 


This prosperous clan specializes in hunting 
and herding; they tend a small herd of sheep 
and rothe in their caverns. There are some six- 
ty well-fed, plump Kwilliticuttis. 


8. Mastacalatl Clanhold 


The twenty-five members of this small but 
wealthy clan specialize in fishing. This family 
has also produced the most famous adventur- 
ers in village history, several of whom have 
come home to retire. 


9. Barackathal Clanhold 


This clan of forty souls have small noses 
(for gnomes) but great courage; they are re- 
sponsible for defense of the warren. 


10. Warehouse and Secret Exit 


These chambers, concealed by secret doors 
and many traps, are kept stocked with plenti- 
ful supplies of food and drink; in a desperate 
situation, they will serve as a last bastion of 
the village's defense. 


Y 
b^ 
& 
> 
r- 
i. 
= 
© 
= 
J 


ica 


A Typ 


Granitehome— 


itehome—A Typical Gnomish Village € 57 


Gran 


58 * Introduction 


"Sit with me for a while, young sprouts, 
while these coals soothe my aged bones." 

"Your bones aren't old, Grandmother!" 
piped up the youngest of the brood—Kepli, a 
tiny cherub not two feet tall. He glared at his 
mother's mother's mother, as if challenging the 
venerable halfling to dispute her scion' faith. 

"Oh, you're right about that, Little Kep—I 
could still dance a step or two! Why, I remem- 
ber the night of the Twenty Year Festival, a 
dozen years back..." 

"Tell us, Grandmother— please!" implored a 
chorus of voices. 

But instead, the oldster held up her hand 
and shook her white head, hair tied in a neat 
bun at the back of her neck. Ample jowls jos- 
tled amiably as she chuckled at the young- 
sters' enthusiasm. "Another time, sprouts... 
you'll hear about that, all right. But tonight, 
you'll have a different tale." 

The old halfling settled into her soft chair, 
adjusting her well-padded form amid the 
worn cushions, pulling back the comforter on 
her left, where she faced the fire. 

"You see, the story I'll tell you now is one I 
had from my own grandmother, when I was 
not much older than Pedderee here." She 
ruffled the coppery curls of a beaming little 
girl. Pedderee turned proudly to her siblings 
and cousins, but their attention remained riv- 
eted on the seated figure of the matriarch. 

"And its my true hope," she continued, 
"that when one of you sits in this chair here— 
many, many years from now—you'll remem- 
ber, and share it with your own little sprouts." 

"We will, Grandmother! We promise!" Eyes 
wide, faces serious, the young halflings 
pledged their attention. They already under- 
stood that, tonight, it was no ordinary story 
they would hear. 


The diminutive halfling has become as ar- 
chetypical a character in heroic fantasy as the 
stalwart knight in shining armor or the robed 
wizard fumbling with his spellbooks. Perhaps 
it is because, in stature and appearance, half- 


f* 


Halflings 


] - | 
LA 


lings is so unheroic that they have won their 
way into our hearts and our adventuring con- 
sciousness. 

Of course, for most halflings, the life of ad- 
venture seems a slightly mad choice of life- 
style—a road one takes out of dire necessity 
or because of profound misfortune. Some- 
times simple eccentricity or mental imbalance 
is attributed as the reason for a friend or rela- 
tive's leaving his or her hearth behind, with 
the townsfolk quietly clucking their tongues 
and sympathetically agreeing that the adven- 
turer was "never quite right in the head, that 
one.” 

The halfling race, by and large, cherishes a 
pastoral existence full of comfort. As a peo- 
ple, they are remarkably lacking in ambition, 
content to dwell in a snug, well-furnished bur- 
row, enjoying a pipe of rich tobacco and a fill- 
ing, multi-course meal at dinner. The typical 
halfling would look askance at the meager 
trail fare of the average party of adventurers. 
Our well-padded Stout or Tallfellow, like- 
wise, would be horrified by the rude, chill, 
and drafty sleeping accomodations available 
on a rocky forest floor or in the sheltered re- 
cesses of dim caverns and dungeons! 

Yet, for a wide variety of reasons, a few 
members of this quiet race do choose to em- 
bark on the path of danger, adventure, and 
possible wealth. Indeed, it is the latter consid- 
eration that brings many halflings onto the 
adventure road—the comforts of life that 
make living so enjoyable are not always cheap 
or easily attained! Also, halflings all have a 
strong sense of duty, and a just cause in the 
name of a friend will often pry a reluctant 
halfling from his or her burrow when nothing 
else would. 

Despite their short stature, halflings who 
choose the life of adventure can be splendid 
assets to a party. For one thing, the generally 
cheerful outlook of halflings, together with 
their ability to make friends with members of 
a wide variety of different races, can be pow- 
erful, if intangible, assets to the group's mo- 


Halflings * 59 


rale. Faithful and trustworthy to their friends, 
one of the Small Folk can often provide a focal 
point of trust and even leadership within a 
party of much larger characters. 

On the more practical side, halflings' nim- 
ble fingers are famed for a dexterity that is the 
envy of many a human thief —and don't make 
the mistake of confusing small size with physi- 
cal frailty or weakness. Though they admit- 
tedly weigh much less than most of their likely 
opponents, halflings have found that their 
speed and their wits are more than ample re- 
placements for brute size. An unaggressive 
race, halflings have never been known to war 
with others of their kind, and they resort to 
organized warfare against other races only in 
cases of dire need. At such times, their tactics 
lean toward ambuscade and the use of screen- 
ing terrain, rather than frontal clashes where 
the greater weight of any opponent's troops 
would likely prove decisive; given the choice, 
they would rather drive a foe away than 
slaughter it. 

The small size of the halfling has proven to 
be a lifesaver on more than one occasion. In- 
deed, a party consisting entirely of halflings 
can investigate dens, caverns, and burrows 
where humans, elves, and dwarves would be 
fatally constricted by space. 

Halfling society, too, is a flexible and for- 
giving structure, easily capable of allowing 
individuality and freedom. A halfling who 
leaves his or her home in search of fortune 
and fame will almost certainly be sure of a 
warm welcome on that perhaps distant day 
when he or she at last returns. At the very 
least, such a traveler is likely to return with 
interesting stories.... 

But to all halflings, travelers and home- 
bodies alike, there is something compelling 
and desirable about the solid stone hearth of 
his or her own burrow. Even the most well- 
traveled halflings are likely to eventually re- 
turn to the place of their birth when they are 
ready to settle down and remember. 


60 * Introduction 


Halflings in AD& D? 2nd Edition 

Halflings are briefly described in the 
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS* 
2nd Edition Players Handbook. The three 
most common subraces (Hairfoot, Tallfellow, 
and Stout) are detailed in the Monstrous 
Compendium, Volume One, while the feral 
halflings of Athas are described in the DARK 
SUN? Rule Book as well as in the DARK SUN 
MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM appendix 
(MC12). Finally, players of campaigns set in 
the DRAGONLANCE® world of Krynn will 
find that the ubiquitous Kender has finally 
been ranked (for better or worse) among the 
official halfling subraces. 


New Stuff About Halflings 

The following chapters provide much 
greater detail on halflings than any previously 
published rulebook. This information is in- 
tended for players who enjoy running halfling 
PCs and for DMs who wish to create more in- 
teresting NPCs to employ in their campaigns. 

The primary halfling character in a typical 
AD&D campaign is the Hairfoot; this book 
includes additional detail on not just the Hair- 
feet but all the halfling subraces—including a 
nearly unknown variety, the Furchin (hitherto 
featured only in a single SPELLJAMMER® ad- 
venture). Each subrace is differentiated not 
just by background but by special abilities and 
characteristics. Halfling society, too, is de- 
tailed in all its facets. A variety of halfling 
character kits are included to allow players to 
tailor their individual halfling PCs into spe- 
cialists, each with its own strengths and weak- 
nesses. A typical halfling village, suitable for 
any AD&D® campaign world, is given in 
some detail to provide a starting place for an 
all-halfling campaign, and the Appendix con- 
tains several adventure suggestions aimed at 
halfling PCs. 


CHAPTER 


Myths of the Halflings 


Halflings can be found on almost all the 
worlds inhabited by demihumans and human- 
kind—and, in at least one case, have settled a 
world without any human or elven inhabit- 
ants. Though they resemble their larger hu- 
man cousins in physical characteristics as well 
as geographic locale, the halfling race differs 
significantly in the common tale of its origin. 

Whereas humans throughout the known 
worlds have countless legends, tales, and 
myths to explain their arrival and presence 
there, halfling cultures all share a common 
story: the Story of Littleman. Of course, the 
common tale is inevitably flavored with local 
custom—for example, the role of the goddess 
Yondalla varies depending on whos telling the 
story. Yet its core is always the same: the story 
of a small person wandering in the midst of 
chaotic, populous lands, facing a thousand 
difficulties and triumphing over them all 
through luck, courage, wits, and persistence. 


The Story of Littleman 

"There, Petrilly—be a dear child and fill my 
teacup. Surely thanks. Oh, and just a wee 
splash from the bottle to give it some charac- 
ter. Well done, lass." 

"The story, Grandmother—tell us the sto- 
ry!" Eyes wide, the youngsters waited impa- 
tiently until the old halfling's tea was properly 
mixed. She sipped, and smacked her lips, and 
then began. 

"Yes... the story of Littleman. But it's not 
just a story of the first halfling—it's a story of 
the gods, as well. The gods of the Big Folk and 
the Bad Folk, humans and goblins, who dwell 
up in the Seven Heavens and look out over the 
worlds and watch out for their followers." 

"And Yondalla, Grandmother? She's there 
too, isn't she?" 

“Mercy, child! Where else would she be? All 
you little ones know shes the great Protector 
of all halflings. Of course she lives there! In 
fact, the tale’s not just about Littleman, but 
about Yondalla as well. But in those days, 
when our story begins, she was not yet our 


protector. Indeed, back then Yondalla was 
held by most of her fellows to be an unimport- 
ant goddess and was little heeded by the great 
lords of Human and Elf, Dwarf and Monster. 

“Not that she was weak, or meek, mind 
you—quite the contrary. Yondalla was bold 
and brave, and quick to speak her mind when 
the gods met together in one of their great 
councils. But alas, since she had no faithful 
worshippers, her wise words were often ig- 
nored by the other gods, deities who boasted 
of their multitude of followers like peacocks 
showing off their pretty tailfeathers. Then, 
too, there was the matter of her size—gods are 
like too many people I could mention and are 
quicker to give respect to the huge and awe- 
some than the small and clever, and Yondalla 
barely reached to the knee of many of the 
mightier lords.” 

"But, but, Grandmother...?" Kepli spoke 
tentatively. "Yondallas a mighty goddess— 
isn't she?" 

"Aye, Sprout—that she is. But even in those 
days, many other gods already had the weight 
of worshipping legions to support them and 
cause others to listen to their words. Yondalla 
had none, and thus many of the greater lords 
ignored her, especially after she was banned 
from their councils for a time...." 

"But why would they do that to someone as 
nice as Yondalla?" Petrilly wanted to know. 

"Simple, lass. She'd often heard various of 
the gods boast that they were the wisest, or 
strongest, or most popular deity of them all. 
One time when all the gods were gathered in 
council, she asked 'Which of you is the great- 
est?’ Quickly the responses grew heated, and 
the argument that followed lasted for a long, 
long time; by the time it was over just about 
everybody was mad at just about everybody 
else. And they decided to blame it all on poor 
Yondalla for bringing it up in the first place— 
isn't that just like Big Folks? 

"But it wasn't just that; her questions had 
gotten her in the soup before, and not listen- 
ing to the big gods making long speeches and 


Myths of the Halflings € 61 


trying to impress one another was hardly pun- 
ishment in her mind. 1 think it was more that 
she was tired of being ignored. It seemed to 
her that even those gods and goddesses who 
were her friends often treated her with conde- 
scension, as if her size meant she had no more 
sense than a child! Humph! 

"Also, Yondalla is a kind and tolerant god- 
dess. She admires kindness and generosity— 
not traits that the other gods held in 
abundance. But remember, my little ones, 
Yondalla is also a clever god. She saw the 
power that followers gave to the other gods, 
and she determined that she would have fol- 
lowers of her own. Finally, the goddess decid- 
ed there was nothing for it but to find some 
worshippers of her own." 

"Kepli, the fire needs another log—Ah! 
theres a good lad. 

"Yondalla left the Seven Heavens and came 
to the Worlds Below, where she searched for a 
long time, looking for the perfect worshipper. 
But it was a long, hard search: most of the 
folks she came across already had gods of 
their own. She could have tried to steal away 
the other gods' worshippers, of course, but 
that would have meant trouble, and it was 
never Yondalla's way to stir up trouble when 
there was an easy way of avoiding it. Other 
folk had no gods, but watching them Yondalla 
saw that they were cruel and savage, hurting 
one another for no reason. She wanted fol- 
lowers she wouldn't have to scold every ten 
minutes, and decided to continue her search. 

"I don't know how long she searched—my 
old grandmother used to say it was 'a day and 
a year and a year and a day'—but surely it 
was a long weary time. Then one day she saw 
Littleman sitting on a riverbank, fishing, and 
at that moment her search was over." 

The old matriarch stopped. There was a 
long, thoughtful pause as her audience consid- 
ered the story. Unnoticed, Pedderee refilled 
the venerable halflings empty cup. Finally 
Kepli broke the silence: “Grandmother? 


62 * Chapter One 


Where did Littleman come from? What was he 
doing before Yondalla found him?” 

“Ah, child, who knows? Remember, this 
was in the Bad Old Days, before our folk had 
farms, and villages, and shires of our own. 
Back then we were scattered like mice when 
the owls are out. Each family kept to itself and 
had its own hidden burrow. It was a hard life: 
sneaking, and hiding, and getting by on glean- 
ings and scraps, always listening for enemies 
at the door. 

“But Littleman, he wasn't afraid like the rest. 
He used to boast there wasn't a monster in the 
whole forest he couldn't outsmart, and he 
proved time and again that his quick wits were 
more than a match for brute strength by leading 
enemies into trap after trap as they chased him, 
until finally they'd given up and decided to 
leave him alone. Thanks to his carrying on so, 
his folk were safer than they had been in a long 
day, for none of the Bad Folk wanted to mess 
with any halfling they came across, in case it 
turned out to be Littleman. 

"Yondalla watched Littleman for a long time 
and decided she liked what she saw. Here was 
a potential worshipper who was clever, brave, 
kind-hearted, and full of mischief. Best of all, 
he was just the right size. So one day she re- 
vealed herself to him and made him a bargain: 
if Littleman would gather all his scattered peo- 
ple into villages and communities, in return 
for their worship Yondalla would protect 
them from all their many enemies and give 
them a life of plenty and peace. 

"Now, Littleman thought this over and de- 
cided it sounded fair, so he said 'Done!' And 
from that day to this, Yondalla has watched 
over our folk and guarded our prosperity, and 
we have been her people." 

"And Littleman, Grandmother? What be- 
came of him?" Pedderee asked. 

"Why, child, she sent him on his wander- 
ings, to all the worlds where any of the small 
folk lived," chuckled the white-haired matri- 
arch. "But that's a tale for another night." 


A General History of the Halfling Race 
The myth of Littleman is repeated in virtu- 
ally all halfling cultures of the mortal realms. 
However, the details of the story differ with 
every teller. In some versions of the tale, Yon- 
dalla creates Littleman out of essences she has 
stolen from the humans, gnomes, dwarves, 
and elves. In others, she said to have created 
halflings long before Littleman’s time but then 
left them alone for an age to see how they'd 
turn out, like a farmer who plants seeds and 
then leaves them be until the young plants 
have sprouted. Others give no explanation of 
how halflings came into the world but simply 
start with Yondalla's meeting with Littleman. 
All versions agree, however, that before re- 
corded history began, halflings were a shy and 
fugitive people living as hunter-gatherers on the 
edges of civilization, hiding in isolated burrows 
from the humanoids and monsters that preyed 
upon them. The civilized races—elves, humans, 
dwarves, and gnomes—took little if any notice 
of them, while to the humanoids they were 
merely tasty, if elusive, meals. Then, for reasons 
which these races have never fully understood, 
the small folk suddenly came out of hiding, 
gathered together, and created small agricul- 
tural settlements for themselves across the face 
of the known worlds (the halflings themselves 
attribute the impetus to their mythical cultural 
hero, Littleman, and the goddess Yondalla). At 
any rate, it is clear that halflings arrived on the 
scene after humans and well behind the longer- 
lived dwarves, elves, and gnomes. The halflings 
seem to have made a point of not competing 
with the brawnier neighbors, instead selecting 
regions of lowland or dense thicket which they 
industriously drained and cleared, forming the 
pastoral shires inherited by their descendants. 
Halfling societies have developed among 
most of the lands that have seen significant 
human settlement. Sometimes the small folk 
live among the humans, sharing their cities 
(though many will be gathered in a well- 
defined "Halfling Quarter") or farming beside 
their larger cousins. More often, however, 


halflings will live in small enclaves on the 
fringes of human realms. As a rule, halflings 
do not display the urge to expand their 
frontiers that so characterizes humanity; they 
are on the whole an easy-going and unambi- 
tious people. Once every dozen generations or 
so some restless halfling will gather a group of 
like-minded souls and forge into wilderness to 
clear new lands, but like their ancestors they 
will avoid areas already inhabited by others 
(whether human, demihuman, or humanoid). 
There is no record of halflings ever invading 
an area for the purpose of driving its inhabit- 
ants out and settling there themselves, al- 
though they are adept at mingling with 
whatever inhabitants they find already there. 

Halflings strive to form the most neighborly 
of societies wherever they live. The race has a 
gift for getting along with dwarves, elves, hu- 
mans, and gnomes in all climes and environ- 
ments. Lack of prejudice is a noted halfling 
characteristic—one which allows them to wel- 
come all types of strangers into their com- 
munities and to mingle comfortably in the 
cities and towns of larger races. Typically, 
halflings will cooperate with their neighbors 
for the defense of a larger area. Thus they gain 
an alliance with larger troops, and the ally 
welcomes companies of superb missile troops. 


The Gods of the Halflings 

Like the universal story of Littleman, half- 
lings have a common pantheon which under- 
goes a great deal of local variation. 
Community individualism runs rampant 
among halfling populations; thus, every vil- 
lage will honor the same gods but probably 
call them by a different name. Among the 
halflings of the Moonshae Islands in the 
Forgotten Realms, for example, Yondalla is 
known as Perissa and is held to have made Lit- 
tleman on one of those faerie isles. Those half- 
lings who live along the Sword Coast to the 
south of Waterdeep (not terribly far from the 
Moonshaes) refer to Yondalla as Dallillia and 
hold that her origins are as the village goddess 


Myths of the Halflings * 63 


of a small woodland community. The half- 
lings of Lurien far to the south insist in turn 
that their land is Littleman's original home. 
And of course each halfling pictures Yondalla 
as belonging to his or her own subrace (unlike 
Littleman, who is conceived of as sharing 
characteristics of all the subraces rather than 
belonging to any single one). 

It's important to remember that this distinc- 
tion extends farther than simply among the 
subraces. Halfling villages scarcely two dozen 
miles apart might each have a different name 
for Yondalla, and the citizens of each might 
believe that this goddess is a local deity, con- 
cerned far more with the single village than 
with the race of halflings as a whole. 

This reflects an important fact of halfling 
mentality: the only really important things are 
those that happen close to home. They're far 
more interested in worshipping an immediate 
and beneficent deity—one whose responsibili- 
ties are to them, and no one else—rather than 
an abstract goddess who is presumed to over- 
look the entire race. The remoteness of most hu- 
man deities bewilders many halflings, as does 
the deference human worshippers show to their 
deities. It's not that halflings are irreligious; it's 
just that while they treat Yondalla and her com- 
panions with respect, they're far less in awe of 
her than is the norm between god or goddess 
and follower. 

As halflings see it, they have a bargain with 
the gods: in return for their worship, the gods 
promised to take care of them. Halfling clerics 
exist to see that both sides of the bargain are 
kept—to remind halflings to give the gods 
their due and to remind the gods that they are 
responsible for the safety and comfort of their 
loyal followers. Although this sounds like a 
cold-blooded business arrangement, it is not: 
stories of the "Bad Old Days" remind all half- 
lings of how much they owe Yondalla, and the 
average halfling feels both gratitude and affec- 
tion toward her for her gifts. 

In addition, halflings will worship a vast 
number of very specialized minor deities, var- 


64 * Chapter One 


iously called "the small gods" and "the thou- 
sand home gods.” Each house commonly has a 
protector of its own hearth, often inspired by 
some matriarch or patriarch in the clan's his- 
tory. The Homesteader who starts a small 
community might well be accorded a similar 
status in later years—that is, his or her spirit 
might be invoked on matters relating to the 
health and prosperity of the village. Littleman 
is widely viewed (by nonhalflings) as a com- 
posite of a multitude of these forgotten cul- 
tural heroes into one archetypical figure. 

Halflings are inclined to see evidence of 
these small local gods in many aspects of their 
surroundings. A patron deity of baking might 
be credited for the way a particularly good 
batch of bread comes out, for example; if the 
game is plentiful, the god of the neighboring 
woods (often pictured as a hare or fox) will be 
thanked with small offerings. Halflings who 
fish commonly revere venerable river deni- 
zens, such as an ancient and battle-scarred 
trout. In the latter case, a halfling who hooks 
or nets the great one will almost certainly let 
him go—you don't see mounted fish or animal 
heads on the wall of a halfling burrow! 

A full detailing of the most common half- 
ling pantheon is detailed in DMGR4, Monster 
Mythology. The listing here is intended as an 
introduction, summary, and quick reference. 

The small folk have a very matriarchal view 
of religion: all their primary deities are female. 
The goddesses are all concerned with the most 
important aspects of halfling life; the male gods 
are viewed almost as sidekicks, ruling over pe- 
ripheral (if necessary) aspects of life. 

The avatar listed for each deity is a tempo- 
rary incarnation, the form in which that god- 
dess or god is most likely to be encountered 
during play. Of course, these avatars are not 
intended as NPCs to be commonly encoun- 
tered by the player characters—rather, they 
can be used as beings of more or less normal 
appearance but great, almost unlimited, 
power. Perhaps they appear to offer the PCs a 
warning or to suggest a course of action. Lit- 


tleman has no avatar, being not a god but a 
legendary (and possibly mythical) folk hero. 

The following are the great halfling gods, 
universal to the race (though under many 
guises and names). The real force of daily 
worship, however, is much more likely to be 
directed to one of the "small gods,” a locally 
famous deity who can influence the success or 
failure of mundane tasks and simple, creature 
comforts. 


Yondalla the Provider (Greater Goddess) 

Yondalla is a goddess of nature, plants, and 
growth. She is viewed as the chief matriarch in 
the halfling pantheon, responsible for the race's 
creation and for blessing them with peace, com- 
fort, and plenty. She is also viewed as the race's 
chief protector; although benign and gentle in 
most of her incarnations, with a wave of her 
hand she can age or wither any who have 
wronged her faithful children. Her symbol is a 
shield bearing a cornucopia, representing her 
dual roles as Provider and Protector. 

Avatar: Yondalla appears as a proud, vi- 
brantly attractive halfling with long golden 
hair, a skirt of forest green, and a stout wood- 
en shield. 


Sheela Peryroyl (Intermediate Goddess) 

The goddess of agriculture, nature, and 
weather, the image of Sheela is often mixed, 
almost interchangeably, with Yondalla herself; 
some hold that Sheela and Yondalla are differ- 
ent aspects of the same goddess. Just as con- 
cerned with preserving wilderness as tilling 
fields, she guards the balance between the 
two. Sheela is also held responsible for feast- 
ing and celebration and, perhaps most impor- 
tantly, romance; her major festivals are held 
at harvest time. 

Avatar: Appearing as a pretty young half- 
ling maiden with brilliant flowers in her hair, 
Sheela is usually laughing and just generally 
delighted by life. Though she appears naive, 
even simple, she can wield great powers of na- 
ture magic. 


Cyrrollalee (Intermediate Goddess) 

This goddess is the overseer of many of the 
mundane and day-to-day aspects of halfling 
life, chiefly concerned with the burrow and the 
hearth; again, some believe her to be a persona 
of Yondalla rather than a separate entity. Friend- 
ship among her worshippers is considered the 
highest praise one can raise to her name; she is 
most displeased with those who fail to display 
proper hospitality and good fellowship. 

Avatar: Cyrrollalee often takes the form of 
a stooped halfling of indeterminate years, 
worn by poverty and work into a frail shell. 
In this guise, she often visits halfling burrows 
to see if the inhabitants are truly hospitable; 
woe to the family that turns her away! 


Arvoreen the Defender (Intermediate God) 

A god of stern defense and aggressive 
watchfulness, Arvoreen is the patron of 
watchful diligence, not war. He is more seri- 
ous than the typical halfling (or halfling deity) 
and serves as a reminder that the safety they 
currently enjoy was hard-won and can be 
easily lost. 

Avatar: Arvoreen appears as a handsome 
young halfling warrior, muscular of build and 
generally very lightly clothed. He commonly 
carries a short sword and often a gleaming 
metal shield. 


Brandobaris (Lesser God) 

This is the god of adventure (and misadven- 
ture), a favorite among halfling adventurers 
(especially thieves). He has a bawdy sense of 
humor and little sense of propriety. Brando- 
baris is always ready with a joke or a jug, yet 
he is such a friendly rapscallion that he rarely 
makes an enemy. He is a good friend of Garl 
Glittergold and Baervan Wildwanderer. 

Avatar: In avatar form Brandobaris ap- 
pears as a plump and jolly halfling. He's al- 
ways very well-dressed and ready with a 
smart reply to any attempt at conversation. 


Myths of the Halflings e 65 


CHAPTER 


Halfling Subraces 


Three halfling subraces—the Hairfoot, the 
Stout, and the Tallfellow—are introduced in 
the Players Handbook and detailed in MON- 
STROUS COMPENDIUM? Volume One; ad- 
ditional information on all three is included 
here. These three subraces exist almost every- 
where halflings are found, frequently in mixed 
communities. Hairfeet are by far the most nu- 
merous of these three subraces, making up 
about 75% of most worlds’ halfling popula- 
tion, with Stouts about 15% and Tallfellows 
only about 10%. Rumor persists that the orig- 
inal stock from which these three derive still 
exists in remote deep forests, but no sighting 
has ever been reliably confirmed; if a few rare 
feral halfling clans do survive in odd corners, 
these “wild halflings" guard their privacy so 
carefully as to be virtually undetectable by 
members of any other race. In most cases, 
these so-called “wild halflings" are probably 
Hairfeet, Tallfellows, or Stouts whose homes 
have been destroyed by war or some other di- 


66 * Chapter Two 


saster and have reverted to a primitive ances- 
tral lifestyle. 

Three other subraces are less common; each 
originated on a single world and is found pri- 
marily only on its home planet. The Kender 
are native to Krynn and have been featured in 
numerous DRAGONLANCE® products, in- 
cluding Tales of the Lance and the 
DRAGONLANCE MC appendix (MCA). 
Originally found only on Krynn, their insatia- 
ble curiosity has led many to stow away 
aboard spelljamming ships, spreading indi- 
viduals to many odd places. The information 
here is for those players and DMs rash enough 
to allow them into their non- 
DRAGONLANCE® campaigns—or unfortu- 
nate enough to do so before they have a full 
grasp of the consequences! 

The  Athasian halfling from the 
DARK SUN® campaign world is described in 
the original DARK SUN boxed set and the 
DARK SUN MC appendix (MC12); so far as 


is known, no member of this subrace has ever 
been encountered anywhere besides Athas it- 
self. 

Finally, the extremely rare Polar Halflings, 
or Furchin, have spread beyond their desolate 
homeworld by spelljamming ships, albeit not 
by choice, and can now be found on the Rock 
of Bral and in many other places where 
spelljammers congregate. 

All halflings, whatever their subrace, are 
highly resistant to magic and poisons; for 
every 31/2 points of Constitution, a halfling 
gains +1 to his or her saving throws vs. 
spells, rods, staves, wands, and poisons. Half- 
lings also enjoy exceptional agility, gaining 
+1 to all their attack rolls involving missile 
weapons. Surefooted and stealthy, they are 
able to move very, very silently, giving them 
an excellent chance to surprise opponents 
(wearing metal armor naturally negates this 
ability). Finally, halflings are quick to pick up 
languages; in addition to their own language 
and the common tongue, most halflings will 
know at least a few words of gnome, elf, 
dwarf, goblin, and orc (the actual number of 
additional languages known being determined 
by the character's Intelligence, as described in 
the Players Handbook, page 16). 


The Wanderings of Littleman 

“Now, Littleman set to work, and gathered 
his people together, and showed them how to 
outsmart their enemies, frightening most 
away and banding together to defeat the rest. 
Soon there was a small village along the river- 
bank. True to her word, Yondalla showered 
her blessings upon them and gave them a com- 
fort and contentment they had never known 
before. There was enough to eat, and safe 
places to sleep; friends to visit, and a fire in 
every home. 

"That was the greatest of all her gifts, the 
greatest treasure to show her love for her new 
people: the hearth you'll find today, my 
sprouts, in every halfling home, no matter 
hoi humble, no matter how small. Its fire 


kept the halflings warm, and cooked their 
food, and brightened their burrows, a con- 
stant reminder of Yondalla’s gifts. 

"So great was their love of their new life 
that most of Littleman's people wanted to re- 
main always beside their hearths, till the Bad 
Old Days faded to a distant memory, a re- 
minder to help them cherish their new way of 
life all the more." 

The venerable ancestor coughed for a mo- 
ment, and took another sip of her potent tea. 
Sighing contentedly, she leaned back in the 
soft chair. Kepli had climbed into her lap, and 
she patted the youngster's head absently. 

"And what of Littleman, Grandmother? 
Did he settle down with the rest?" demanded 
Pedderee, sticking out her tongue at her privi- 
leged brother. 

"Well, strange to say, all the changes that 
had come over his fellow halflings, changes 
he'd caused, didn't affect Littleman much. He 
was the same merry scamp he'd always been, 
and when he'd finished the task Yondalla had 
set him would have gone back to his old care- 
free ways, had she not had other plans for 
him. 

"Yondalla was well pleased with her Little- 
man, and wanted him to do the same for half- 
lings everywhere as he'd done for those of the 
Green Fields, And Littleman, he was full of 
wanderlust, and agreed, thinking it'd be a fine 
thing to travel the world and see all there was 
to see. So he set out on his travels, and for 
years he went from forest to forest, anywhere 
there were any of our people, and showed 
them how to put their fear aside and make 
places for themselves in the world alongside 
the Big Folk. And when he was done with 
that, Yondalla showed him how to travel the 
paths to other worlds, paths known only to 
the gods. 

"So Littleman went on his way, traveling to 
all the worlds that were, looking for the scat- 
tered homes of our people. He noticed how 
people are more apt to like those who have a 
lot in common with them, so when he found 


Halfling Subraces * 67 


some of our folk living nearby settlements of 
the Big People, he taught them how to adopt 
some of the Big Peoples ways. If he found 
some of the small people living in a deep forest 
ruled by elves, by the time he left a village of 
Tallfellows prospered in a nearby forest glen. 
Where a few families had been driven into the 
hills not far from a dwarven underground 
city, a homestead of Stouts sprang up. 

"And everywhere he went, Littleman found 
humans. It seemed that humans could live 
anywhere. Even in those days their numbers 
were far greater than those of the dwarves or 
elves. He watched the humans carefully, for of 
all the Big Folk they seemed the closest to the 
small folk in nature. He saw them in many 
guises, in many places. Whereas the elves kept 
to their forests and the dwarves their moun- 
tains, humankind dwelt in temperate plains, 
amid lofty mountains and forbidding gla- 
ciers—even in steaming jungles and parched 
desert. Most of the places Littleman found any 
of our people dwelling, their nearest neigh- 
bors were human farmers or pioneers. Hence 
the Hairfeet came into being, and the long 
friendship between our folk and the Big Folk 
begun.” 

“And Littleman, Grandmother? Surely Yon- 
dalla rewarded him for all his work?” wonder- 
ed Calkin. 

“Aye, lad, that she did—but in her own 
way, and her own time. For a very long time 
Littleman traveled the worlds, meeting new 
people and seeing strange and wonderful 
sights, marvels beyond belief. Many of the 
folk in the villages he founded invited him to 
stay with them, but always he refused and set 
out again to see what lay beyond the next 
bend in the road. 

“Then one day he climbed a hill and looked 
down into a valley, and it seemed to him that 
he'd never seen a fairer sight. A shady river 
wound its way along through well-tended 
fields surrounded by friendly forest. It was a 
small village of our folk, and just as Littleman 
was thinking how he'd like to sit along that 


68 * Chapter Two 


riverbank and fish, he saw that it was the very 
river he used to fish in all those years ago! He 
found his old burrow, kept clean and snug all 
the time he'd been away by his neighbors, and 
sat down contentedly by his own hearth once 
again. He'd come back to his own home at the 
end of all his wanderings, and if he's not gone 
away I ‘spect he's there still.” 

Silence settled over the room, and the chil- 
dren wondered if the old halfling had fallen 
asleep—so comfortable did she seem, sunk in 
her chair by the fire. This time it was Pedderee 
who dared to ask the question. 

“Grandmother... is it true that you yourself 
traveled the Wide Sea once... and even into 
the skies, and beyond?” 

A twinkle of firelight reflected from a half- 
opened eye—an eye that gleamed with de- 
lightful memories. 

“Aye, child... that I did. And a fine time I 
had of it, too! But that's a story that'll have to 
wait for another time.” 


Hairfoot 

This most common of halflings is found 
throughout lands that have been settled by hu- 
mans (with the notable exception of Krynn, 
where this role is filled by the Kender). They 
live much as humans do but prefer rural settings 
and villages to towns and cities. Their crafts 
tend toward the ordinary and practical— 
farmers, millers, innkeepers, weavers, brewers, 
tailors, bakers, and merchants are common in 
Hairfoot society. 

Averaging about 3’ in height, Hairfeet are 
slightly stockier in build than is typical for hu- 
mankind. Their complexions run the gamut 
from pale to very dark, with hair color corre- 
spondingly blond to black and eyes that are 
brown or hazel. They rarely wear shoes (only 
in bad weather and bitter cold) and can be eas- 
ily distinguished by the thick patches of hair 
growing atop each foot. They have no facial 
hair (besides eyebrows and eyelashes, of 
course). They wear brightly-colored, com- 
fortable clothes, such as trousers and shirts or 


dresses, with a vest, jacket, hat, sash, or bon- 
net added as a flourish. Their faces are round 
and very expressive, often appearing child- 
like to humans. 

Hairfeet are slightly longer-lived than hu- 
mans, averaging 100 years—though a few pa- 
triarch and matriarchs have reached ages of 
140 and beyond. Full adulthood is generally 
recognized at about 25 years of age. 

Hairfeet are only moderately industrious, 
but they tend to make up in talent for what 
they lack in drive. A Hairfoot farmer may 
tend a small plot in the morning, for example, 
and spend the afternoon lying in the shade— 
yet his or her irrigation ditch will be so clev- 
erly aligned that his or her field yields a crop 
equal to that of a much larger human-tended 
farm. A Hairfoot-woven tunic will have a fin- 
er weave and be less scratchy than a similar 
human product, thus fetching a considerably 
higher price. 

Hairfeet are the halflings most closely inte- 
grated into human society. They will work for 
human employers or hire human laborers, 
and many a Hairfoot merchant has made his 
or her fortune by appealing to the human elite 
of a city's population. While they will dwell in 
buildings in human neighborhoods, Hairfeet 
do prefer to live among others of their own 
race (though not necessarily their own sub- 
race) when this is possible. 

A Hairfoot's preferred type of house is the 
combined above and below ground burrow. 
The upper portion is almost always wood- 
framed, with several doors and windows and 
a bright, airy feel—though the ceilings are 
typically no more than 5' above the floors. 
The lower portion will contain the fireplace 
and several small, cozy rooms. 

Lacking the time, property, or means to 
build a traditional home, however, a Hairfoot 
will cheerfully occupy a human house, a shel- 
tered cave, or even a shack or tent. Wherever 
he or she lives, a Hairfoot will find a place to 
have a fire and gather for social conversation. 


Table 5: Hairfoot Ability Scores 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 3 17 
Dexterity 8 19 
Constitution 10 18 
Intelligence 6 18 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 7 18 


Ability Score Adjustments: —1 to Strength, 
* 1 to Dexterity 

Languages: Any one human language in 
addition to normal halfling tongues. 
Infravision: No 

Special Features: Hairfeet are very good at 
getting along with humans; this translates into 
a +2 bonus to all their Reaction Rolls involv- 
ing human NPCs. 


Stout 

Stouts are not as common as their cousins, 
the Hairfeet, but they are nonetheless a popu- 
lous and widespread subrace. They are about 
the same height as Hairfeet, averaging an inch 
or two below 3’, but much stockier—indeed, a 
typical Stout weighs half again as much as the 
average Hairfoot! This girth is not all fat, 
however—Stouts are more muscular than any 
other halfling and tend to regularly best their 
kin in the wrestling contest that are a favorite 
Stoutish entertainment. 

Ruddier in complexion than the other sub- 
races, Stouts tend to blush easily when 
pleased or embarrassed and flush bright red 
when angry. Their hair color tends to be on 
the light side, with blonds and sandy reds pre- 
dominating; their eyes are blue, grey, and 
green. Unlike Hairfeet and Tallfellows, male 
Stouts can grow some facial hair, although 
not full beards; usually it takes the form of un- 
usually thick sideburns or muttonchops. 
Moustaches are rare, and the few able to grow 
them are often inordinately proud of their ac- 
complishment. 

Stouts favor sturdy garb, commonly made 
of well-cured leather. They prefer practicality 
to appearance, and thus the members of a 


Halfling Subraces * 69 


community tend to dress with an almost drab 
sameness. However, a Stout will try to make a 
point of having a brightly colored outfit of 
exotic material (such as cotton, wool, or, rare- 
ly, silk), for use on special occasions. They of- 
ten wear boots, which are really more like 
thick moccasins that offer good protection 
from the rocky or marshy ground typically 
under Stoutish feet. 

These halflings tend to segregate themselves 
from human society more than do Hairfeet, 
preferring the company of dwarves. Stouts 
and dwarves mix very readily, and their com- 
munities will often be located near to each 
other. Military and defensive alliances be- 
tween the two races are common, and pros- 
perous trading is also the norm. 

Stoutish villages will generally be in hilly or 
rocky regions near good fishing waters and 
well-watered fields. They are the only half- 
lings with any affinity to mining, but they are 
quite good at it and will often develop a bus- 
tling business from the excavation of miner- 
als. Stouts can also be skilled jewelers, 
stone-masons, builders, smiths, boatmen, and 
carvers. They are lackluster farmers at best, 
except where mushrooms are concerned, and 
as merchants they excel primarily at selling 
the products of the above trades. 

Preferring underground habitation more 
than any other halfling subrace, a Stout will 
typically live in a fully-excavated burrow. He 
or she will have several round, shuttered win- 
dows placed in a few walls to let in light and 
air, but the overall place will be cooler, dark- 
er, and somewhat damper than a Hairfoot 
home. 

The most industrious of halflings, a Stout 
can accomplish a great deal of work in a short 
time. They make doughty soldiers, and their 
infravision (60' range) gives them a great ad- 
vantage in night-fighting. They are skilled 
swimmers and boatmen and have used small, 
slender canoes with great effect in night at- 
tacks against larger vessels. 

With a typical life expectancy of more than 


70 * Chapter Two 


130 years, Stouts are not considered adults 
until they reach 30 years of age. The eldest of 
the race have been known to exceed two cen- 
turies in age. 


Table 6: Stout Ability Scores 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 5 17 
Dexterity 8 19 
Constitution 10 19 
Intelligence 6 18 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 5 18 


Ability Score Adjustments: —1 to Strength; 
+1 to either Dexterity or Constitution 
Languages: Any dwarven tongue in addition 
to the normal starting languages for halflings. 
Infravision: Yes (60") 

Special Features: Stouts have a 75% chance to 
detect sloping passageways and a 50% chance 
of determining direction when underground. 


Tallfellow 

This subrace of halflings is not so common 
as the Stout or Hairfoot but exists in signifi- 
cant numbers in many areas of temperate 
woodland. Averaging a little over 4' in height, 
Tallfellows are slender and light-boned, 
weighing little more than the average Hair- 
foot. They wear their hair long, often topped 
by a small brightly-colored cap. 

The longest-lived of all halfling subraces, 
Tallfellows have an average life expectancy of 
180 years, with the eldest exceeding 250 years. 
Like Hairfeet, Tallfellows shun footwear. 
Their characteristic foot-fur is somewhat 
sparser and finer than that of their cousins. 

Tallfellows favor woodland shades of brown, 
yellow, and green and have developed several 
vibrant shades of the latter color through 
unique dyes. They enjoy the company of elves, 
and most Tallfellow villages will be found near- 
by populations of that sylvan folk, with a flour- 
ishing trade between the two peoples. 

Preferring to live above ground, Tallfellows 
often dwell in spacious houses of wood, with 


many windows. Indeed, the ceiling of a Tallfel- 
low house will typically be nearly 6' above the 
floor! Though the house will often have a cellar, 
this will be used primarily for storage. How- 
ever, during days of hot summer Tallfellows will 
often retire to their underground chambers for a 
long evening's conversation and sleep. 

Tallfellows display the greatest affinity to- 
ward working with wood of any halfling. 
They make splendid carpenters (often build- 
ing boats or wagons for human customers), as 
well as loggers, carvers, pipesmiths, musi- 
cians, shepherds, liverymen, dairymen, 
cheese-makers, hunters, and scouts. They are 
better farmers than Stouts (although not as 
good as Hairfeet) and more adept than any 
other subrace at harvesting natural bounties 
of berries, nuts, roots, and wild grains. 

The only halflings who enjoy much profi- 
ciency at riding, Tallfellows favor small po- 
nies. Indeed, many unique breeds of 
diminutive horse have been bred among 
Tallfellow clans: fast, shaggy-maned, nimble 
mounts with great endurance. In a charge, of 
course, they lack the impact of a human- 
mounted warhorse; nonetheless, Tallfellow 
companies have served admirably as light 
lancers and horsearchers during many a hard- 
fought campaign. 

On foot, Tallfellows wield spears with rare 
skill. They are adept at forming bristling 'por- 
cupine' formations with these weapons, creat- 
ing such a menacing array that horses and 
footmen alike are deterred from attacking. 
This is one of the few halfling formations ca- 
pable of standing toe-to-toe with a larger op- 
ponent in the open field. 


Table 7: Talifellow Ability Scores 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 3 17 
Dexterity — 8 19 
Constitution 10 18 
Intelligence 6 18 
Wisdom 7 19 
Charisma 5 18 


Ability Score Adjustments: —1 to Strength; 
* 1 to either Dexterity or Wisdom 
Languages: Any one elven language in addi- 
tion to the normal halfling starting languages. 
Infravision: No 

Special Features: Like elves, a Tallfellow can 
recognize a secret door on a roll of 1 on a dé. 
All Tallfellows receive a +2 bonus to surprise 
rolls when in forest or wooded terrain. 


Kender 

The fabled Kender is a curious example of 
convergent evolution. Their native world of 
Krynn is one of the few with no true halflings 
of its own, yet this "ecological niche" is filled 
by another race which, though unrelated, is 
similar in size, appearance, and culture: the 
Kender. Hairfeet, Stouts, and Tallfellows who 
have been to Krynn or have met Kender wan- 
derers on other worlds have adopted them as 
honorary cousins, despite misgivings about 
the Kender's complete lack of the prized half- 
ling virtue of common sense. 

An extensive description of the Kender is 
provided in the DRAGONLANCE® Adven- 
tures hardcover rulebook and in the Tales of 
the Lance boxed set. The information given 
here focuses on playing Kender in a general 
AD&D® campaign—i.e., Kender who have 
strayed from the DRAGONLANCE® game 
setting into other worlds. It should be noted 
that it is entirely up to a DM whether he or she 
wishes to allow Kender into his or her own 
campaign—and he or she is encouraged to 
consider very carefully before agreeing! 

Kender are somewhat taller than an average 
Hairfoot or Stout, averaging 3'7". They are 
much more slender than true halflings, and 
they tend to show their age more—a fifty year 
old Kender will look like a forty year old hu- 
man, whereas a Hairfoot will probably retain 
his or her youthful looks even into old age. 
Kender complexions are light, but they tan 
easily. They tend to wear their hair very long, 
with a characteristic topknot and long, trail- 
ing tail. They wear shoes most of the time, 


Halfling Subraces © 71 


since unlike true halflings, they completely 
lack foot-fur. 

Kender are the most curious of all halfling- 
kin, the most willing to depart from their hearth 
and home to embark on a life of adventure. 
Most Kender are infused with wanderlust about 
the time they reach adulthood (in their early 
twenties) and are likely to spend several decades 
in an exploration of the world around them, on- 
ly to feel an equally compelling urge to return 
home and settle down as they begin to age (mid- 
fifties to early sixties). Kender are absolutely 
and utterly fearless—even to the point of immu- 
nity to magically induced fear—and as a result 
are willing to travel literally anywhere and try 
almost anything. 

The life expectancy of a Kender is similar to 
Hairfoot's (about a century) but it must be 
noted that, due to their curiosity and fearless- 
ness, Kender are far more likely than any oth- 
er halfling subrace to meet with a sudden and 


72 * Chapter Two 


violent demise. They are not suicidal, but they 
do get carried away. 


Table 8: Kender Ability Scores 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 6 16 
Dexterity 8 19 
Constitution 10 18 
Intelligence 6 18 
Wisdom 3 16 
Charisma 6 18 


Ability Score Adjustments: +2 to Dexterity 
(to a maximum of 19); —1 to Strength. 
Languages: Kender, Krynn Common, and any 
other(s) allowed by Intelligence. 

Infravision: Yes (30") 

Special Features: Kender who are not thieves 
have a base 5% chance to perform any thiev- 
ing skill except Read Languages (no chance) 
and Climb Walls (40% chance). Dexterity 
modifiers do apply, but these abilities never 


2 8 i | 
N A 


increase as the Kender goes up in level. 

Kender are totally immune to the effects of 
both magical and nonmagical fear, whether 
caused by monsters like the mummy or lich or 
by spells such as scare and symbol of fear. 

The Taunt: Kender are adept at the art of 
taunting an enemy until that foe loses all abili- 
ty for rational thought or restraint and is 
goaded into an uncontrolled attack. If the vic- 
tim can understand the Kender's speech, he, 
she, or it must make a saving throw versus 
spells (Wisdom bonuses apply). If it fails, the 
victim will attack the Kender wildly for 1d10 
rounds, suffering a —2 penalty to all attack 
rolls and a +2 penalty to Armor Class. 


Athasian Halfling 

This subrace of halflings is encountered on- 
ly on the world of Athas, beneath the 
Dark Sun. Its members primarily inhabit the 
jungles along the ridgeline of the Ringing 
Mountains, the most well-watered terrain on 
all of Athas. They establish their villages in 
the dense tangle of the rain forest and jeal- 
ously guard their territory against intrusion. 

The Athasian halfling is by far the least so- 
cial of all halfling subraces: clannish, suspi- 
cious, and distrustful of strangers. Their habit 
of eating intruders who venture into their ter- 
ritory makes them a danger to all unwary 
travelers. The Athasian halfling is unique 
among halfling cultures in this horrifying die- 
tary trait (significantly, they do not consider 
themselves cannibals, since they don't eat 
each other, only members of other races). 

The villages of these essentially nomadic 
folk are each centered around a great stone 
pyramid, with a scattering of small stone 
buildings around it. The village is the resi- 
dence of a chief and a few of his or her fol- 
lowers. The rest of the halflings roam a 
well-defined patch of forest-land, though all 
the clans will gather at the village once every 
hundred days. 

Athasian halflings average about 3'3" in 
height. Their skin color varies widely in tone, 


though even the paler shades tend to be well- 
bronzed by the sun— since this is a subrace 
that, as a rule, shuns clothing. Both males and 
females wear their hair in long, unkempt 
manes, aside from priests, who usually shave 
their heads; otherwise, their bodies are com- 
pletely hairless. 

Adept at negotiating all types of forested 
terrain, including dense swamps, thorny 
thickets, mangroves, and so on, Athasian 
halflings utilize this natural cover to screen 
their villages from larger folk. A network of 
pathways, each less than 4' high, will pass 
throughout the huge, densely verdant forest. 

Athasian halflings thrive in terrain where 
other societies might have a hard time surviv- 
ing. In part, this is because they are so self- 
sufficient, sharing many skills among the 
members of a single clan. Woodcarving, 
weaving, hunting and snaring, tanning, pot- 
tery, herbal medicine, alchemy (including the 
preparation of deadly or paralyzing poisons), 
farming and herding, jewelry, and feather- 
work are all common proficiencies among the 
Athasian halflings. 

Though they will cautiously open trading ar- 
rangements with nearby cultures, whatever 
their race, these halflings tend to conduct all 
transactions in a neutral location or in the other 
party's community—foreign traders are not al- 
lowed into their villages. This arrangement is 
satisfactory to the other races as well, since 
these traders realize that they're taking their 
lives in their hands by venturing into the half- 
lings' jungles—even large, well-armed parties 
are subject to raids and thievery by these half- 
lings. 
Halflings of Athas will treat members of 
their own subrace from other tribes with re- 
spect, generosity, and friendship—even if 
those halflings are accompanying enemies of 
the clan (a few renegade clans, however, 
refuse to recognize the common kinship, and 
traveling halflings are advised to avoid falling 
into their clutches). 


Halfling Subraces * 73 


As with all halfling subraces, a few Atha- 
sian halflings are very curious about the cus- 
toms and traits of other cultures outside the 
boundaries of their own jungles and will be- 
come wary wanderers. While they find it hard 
to overcome suspicions that the folk they meet 
on their travels are only waiting for their 
guard to drop before trying to kill and eat 
them, these bold wanderers will experiment 
with different types of behavior and show 
great openness in trying new forms of food, 
entertainment, and other experiences. 

The only halfling subrace to show any incli- 
nation for climbing trees, some halflings of 
Athas even make their homes in the branches 
of particular types of forest giants. The homes 
of such a village are connected by hanging 
bridges, often leading down spiraling ladders 
to additional buildings on the forest floor. A 
more typical camp is located in a clearing be- 
side a steady supply of clean water. A thorny 


74 * Chapter Two 


barrier, grown like a hedge to a height of 10' 
or more, protects the entire village except for 
a single, endlessly-guarded gate. 

In combat, halflings of Athas prefer short 
bows, slings, and daggers. Since there is little 
metal on Athas, most of their weaponry is 
made of wood and bone. The subrace is also 
adept at the use of a very accurate blowgun 
which can silently fire darts up to 60'. These 
darts are typically coated with one of the viru- 
lent toxins or fast-acting paralytics distilled by 
the tribe's alchemists. 


Table 9: Athasian Halfling Ability Scores 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 3 18 
Dexterity 12 20 
Constitution 5 20 
Intelligence 5 20 
Wisdom 7 20 
Charisma 5 20 


Ability Score Adjustments: +2 to Dexterity; 
+2 to Wisdom; —2 to Strength; 
—1 to Constitution; —1 to Charisma 
Languages: The halflings of Athas have a lan- 
guage of their own based upon the sounds of 
forest animals (hoots, howls, chirps, whistles, 
and the like). Most halflings speak this lan- 
guage and no other. However, a tribe's chiefs 
will usually know the languages of their 
neighbors as well in order to handle trade. 
Wanderers can pick up any language allowed 
by the individual's Intelligence score. 
Infravision: No 
Special Features: In addition to the usual 
priest, fighter, and thief classes, Athasian 
halflings can be druids, gladiators, rangers, il- 
lusionists, and psionicists (all in their DARK 
SUN? setting variations). 

Also, in keeping with the world of Athas 
campaign, these halflings begin play as 3rd 
(not 1st) level characters. 


Furchin (Polar Halfling) 

This rarest subrace of halflings originated 
on Falakyr (which simply means "the World" 
in the Furchin tongue), a frigid world of ice, 
mountain, and glacier. The Furchin are the 
dominant intelligent race there, though 
dwarves also inhabit some of Falakyr's under- 
ground regions; humans, elves, and gnomes 
are not found on Falakyr. 

The Furchin would probably still exist in 
blissful isolation, had not an evil spelljam- 
ming wizard come across their world in his 
travels and decided these bearded halflings 
would make good slaves. Consequently, 
many were captured and taken to different 
worlds by the wizard's ships. Some escaped in 
various ports and eluded recapture until their 
ship had departed; thus, while they are ex- 
tremely rare, Furchin can conceivably be met 
with in any campaign setting. 

The most distinguishing feature of this sub- 
race is the full, long beard that sprouts from 
the chin of the mature males. These beards are 
a matter of great pride, and in older Furchin 


often extend as far as the waist. The race fa- 
vors warm clothing, woven of animal hair or 
lined with fur. They regularly wear snow- 
shoes and boots. 

Furchin halflings resemble Stouts in both 
height and girth, though their average life ex- 
pectancy (80 years) is considerably shorter, no 
doubt due to their harsher native environ- 
ment. Hair and skin color vary widely, but 
tend to be pale, though eyes are usually dark. 
Those few Furchin born with green eyes are 
accorded much status—they are believed to 
be emissaries of the gods and are treated to a 
life of near-royal privilege. 

In their own environment, the Polar Half- 
lings are primarily nomadic, ranging across 
icy glaciers and barren tundra, following 
great herds of migrating animals. They have 
become adept at surviving in these very harsh- 
est of conditions. 

The Furchin dwell in small clans, usually no 
more than thirty individuals in a community. 
In summer they live in tents of leather; in 
winter they make small, domed shelters of ice. 
Their clothing is made of fur, their equipment 
from leather, bone, and ivory; wood is almost 
unknown on Falakyr. Tribal leaders often 
wield metal weapons and tools acquired 
through trading with the dwarves inhabiting 
Falakyr’s interior. 

Having developed a number of specialized 
skills, the Furchin halflings are among the 
most adept demihumans in existence at sur- 
viving in their grueling environment—and 
seemingly having a good time while they're 
doing it! In general, the Furchin are a good- 
humored people who enjoy practical jokes, 
funny stories, and bawdy songs. Both parents 
care for the young with great tolerance and 
tenderness, teaching their children early on 
the secrets of surviving in their harsh clime. 

Strangers—especially those who bring 
gifts, objects for trade, or interesting stories to 
tell—will be welcomed by the Furchin with 
warm hospitality. Although their lives are 
hard, they are an unselfish people and will 


Halfling Subraces * 75 


treat visitors with kindness and generosity 
(unless given reason to do otherwise). 

Members of this subrace are very proficient 
in specialized skills suited to their environ- 
ment, some of which will carry over quite ef- 
fectively into other locations. They are among 
the most patient trappers in the known worlds 
and skilled hunters, tanners, and leatherwork- 
ers as well. Their characteristic boat is a min- 
iature kayak, a virtually water-tight shell of 
leather covering a sturdy bone frame. While 
only one of their skilled boatwrights can craft 
these vessels, virtually all adult Furchin are 
adept at piloting them. 

When hunting, the Furchin use leather 
slings for small game and long, barbed spears 
for more formidable foes; a strong line can be 
attached to the spear to allow it (and whatever 
it has impaled) to be drawn back toward the 
launcher. In melee combat (which they avoid 
if at all possible), the Furchin use short han- 
dled axes and daggers. Because of their small 
numbers and an absence of potential foes, the 
members of this subrace are unused to war 
and have developed no tactics for fighting an 
organized formation of soldiers. 

In the realm of hunting and stalking, how- 
ever, the Furchin are second to none. Occa- 
sionally, a few Furchin led by an experienced 
warrior will embark on an mission to slay 
some dangerous threat to the tribe—such as a 
band of yetis or a frost giant. Through clever 


use of terrain and diversion, as well as patient- 
ly planned and executed ambush, these half- 
lings have been known to vanquish foes many 
times their own size. In this respect, obvious- 
ly, they are not so different from their cousins 
who live in warmer climes. 


Table 10: Furchin Ability Scores 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 3 17 
Dexterity 8 19 
Constitution 10 19 
Intelligence 6 18 
Wisdom 3 17 
Charisma 7 18 

Ability Score Adjustments: 


+1 to Constitution; +1 to Dexterity; 
—1 to Strength; —1 to Wisdom 
Languages: Furchin and Dwarven 
Infravision: No 
Special Features: All Furchin automatically 
receive a proficiency in Cold-Weather Surviv- 
al. In addition, they enjoy a +4 bonus to all 
saving throws versus cold-based attacks, 
whether magical or nonmagical, in addition 
to any other bonuses due to Constitution. 
Because of their nimbleness at evasion, all 
Furchin receive a —4 bonus to Armor Class 
when fighting giant-class creatures and a —2 
bonus to Armor Class against attacks from 
man-sized creatures. The two bonuses are not 
cumulative. 


76 * Chapter Two 


CHAPTER 


Halfling Culture 


A culture of harmony and peace, a warm 
emotional attachment to family and friends— 
including a willingness to look beyond 
physical differences to the common bond be- 
neath—and an appreciation of the finer things 
in life... these are the hallmarks of halfling ex- 
istence. Whereas Chapter 2 looked at the dif- 
ferences between the halfling subraces, this 
chapter focuses instead on the things all half- 
lings have in common—their gregarious na- 
ture, trustworthy character, and delight in 
whatever physical comforts their surround- 
ings provide. 

No culture has displayed such a willingness, 
even enthusiasm, in mingling with members 
of other races. And halflings, with their gener- 
ally cheerful demeanor, more or less honest 
approach to life, and helpful ingenuity, have 
been sincerely welcomed into communities of 
humans, elves, dwarves, gnomes, and even 
treants, giants, and (rarely) goblinoids. 

But despite this willingness to diversify— 
or, perhaps, because of it—halflings of all cul- 
tures feel a strong identity with their extended 
families; the company of other halflings is im- 
portant to members of this small race. Fami- 
lies remain close, however large they grow in 
size, and many adult halflings will consult 
with their brothers, sisters, grown children, or 
parents concerning important decisions; if no 
kinfolk are about, they will turn to friends 
and even mere acquaintances, so long as they 
are fellow halflings. Even if advice is not tak- 
en, halflings feel a sense of comfort in know- 
ing that other small folk have been privy to 
the decision. 


The Name **Halflings"' 

It should be noted that, so far as halflings 
themselves are concerned, the name "halfling" 
is a misnomer. They don't consider them- 
selves half the size of anything; in their opin- 
ion, it's everybody else who's oversized. Their 
own name for their race translates simply as 
'the folk' or 'the small folk' (a term which 
sometimes includes gnomes as well); humans, 


elves, and dwarves are collectively referred to 
as ‘the Big Folk’ The halflings also have a 
slang term they use to refer to humans which 
translates as 'too-talls: 


The Hearth and the Burrow 

"See the fire, there, sprouts... how he settles 
in his bed, snug and warm. He has no flame 
for us now— but we don't need it. If anything, 
his coals are even warmer." 

"Warm enough for a story, Grandmother?" 
inquired Pedderee, quickly taking the coveted 
lap position while her sister Petrilly as well as 
Kepli, Calkin, and the others settled around 
the stone hearth, snuggling into thick fur rugs. 

"You know me too well, Little Kitten. To- 
night, you pick; what story do you want to 
hear?" 

"Well... last time you told us about how Lit- 
tleman came home again after all his wander- 
ings. What was his burrow like?" 

"Ah, but that's a question you could answer 
for yourself if you thought for a minute, Little 
One. You see, when Littleman returned to 
Green Fields, Yondalla was determined to see 
that he would never leave again. Before he'd 
left, his burrow had just been a place to sleep, 
or a refuge to hide from enemies in. She decid- 
ed to make it a place that would draw him like 
the sun draws the dew from the grass, a home 
so perfect that no place in all the worlds could 
lure him away. Now, children... what things 
would she look for?" 

"Water!" squeaked Kepli. "A flowing 
stream to chuckle in the night and soothe him 
with its song." 

"Good, lad—very good. And water deep 
and clean enough for a cool bath, wide 
enough to shelter plump trout. Also, a small 
waterfall, beautiful to watch and hear." 

"Flowers too?" asked Pedderee, tentatively. 
"Or a hillside of soft grass or clover to lie on in 
the sunny afternoons?" 

"Both, lass—and bushes and trees as well. 
Littleman loved growing things, and wild 
things as well, so outside his windows Yondalla 


Halfling Culture € 77 


placed a perfect meadow. His burrow was on 
a hillside, facing the south so that it warmed 
to the sun in autumn and winter—with an 
overhanging fringe of grass to shade the doors 
and windows in summertime when the sun 
was high. Flowers blazed in the meadow from 
spring to fall, and tall trees surrounded it— 
hardwoods, with broad, shady boughs, and 
tall pines, green for all the year 'round." 

"And the burrow, Grandmother— surely it 
had a fireplace?" 

"Aye, Calkin, you've put your finger on it 
there. You see, sprouts, the hearth is the heart 
of any burrow—it's the place where you 
should dream now of where you'll go and 
what you'll do when you grow up... and then, 
in later years, the place where you'll sit and 
savor your memories. ..." 

The old halfling stared into the fire, a far- 
away look in her half-closed eyes. For a mo- 
ment the children wondered if she was drifting 
off to sleep—but she merely took a brief stroll 
down the paths of her own memories. 


To the halfling the primary symbol of the 
importance of home, family, and community 
is the burrow and its ever-present hearth. No 
halfling dwelling will be without some sort of 
fireplace, and even halflings who live above- 
ground tend to refer to their dwelling as a 
‘burrow, even if it's only a room in a inn. 

While burrows will naturally vary some- 
what depending on the climate and terrain—a 
Furchin's icehouse will, for example, differ 
significantly from an Athasian halfling's tree 
house—all halfling dwellings have some fea- 
tures in common. If at all possible, there will 
be windows, which will be open during all but 
the chilliest of days—halflings never confuse 
‘snug’ with ‘stuffy. Tallfellows carry this fond- 
ness for fresh air the farthest, positioning their 
homes to take advantage of whatever gentle 
breezes waft through the area, while Stouts 
represent the opposite extreme and might well 
have only a few small port windows. 

Although well-ventilated, the burrow will 


78 * Chapter Three 


be shielded against drafts by shutters of wood 
or leather that can be tightly closed and sealed 
against gusts and storms. Unlike dwarves, 
halflings keep their homes brightly lit, with 
lamps in every room, yet shutters and doors 
will be so well-set in their frames that not a 
glimmer of illumination will show on the out- 
side when the burrow is locked up tight. 

The fireplace will be built with as much 
stone as possible, given materials at hand, and 
capped with a large wooden mantle. It will 
have a wide mouth and a well-designed chim- 
ney to draw smoke up and out of the room. In 
colder climates, elaborate fireplaces are some- 
times constructed with their own air-inlet 
ducts connecting to the outside of the burrow, 
allowing the house can be snugly sealed with- 
out suffocating the fire, while other ducts 
channel the heated air away. Conversely, in 
very warm locales halflings enjoy gathering 
around communal outdoor fires for an eve- 
ning's conversation and fellowship—yet even 
so, each individual burrow will always have 
its own homefire as well. 

It is not uncommon in a halfling burrow for 
a single fire to last for years, even decades or 
generations, without a second kindling. Even 
in very warm climes where it is allowed to die 
down to coals during the daylight hours, the 
embers are coaxed back to life at nightfall. 
Well-seasoned hardwoods are a favorite fuel, 
but wherever they live, halflings will quickly 
learn the best fuels for producing a warm, 
steady heat. Halflings are adept at using dif- 
ferent local firewoods (hickory, mesquite, 
applewood, &c) to "sweeten the air" or season 
the food they cook. 

A halfling fireplace usually has several 
racks beside it, so that a variety of cauldrons 
and kettles can be swung over the coals. In 
this way dinners are cooked, milk curdled into 
cheese, and clay pottery fired by the steady 
heat. Often a large oven nestles in one corner 
of the coal bed, for use in baking the bread 
that forms the centerpiece of the halfling diet. 


A lazy man sits in his old chair all day en- 
joying the sunshine, while an industrious man 
labors to earn the money to buy a fine new 
chair he may sit in someday. I ask you, who is 
the fool? 


—Hairfoot Philosophy 


Halflings have been called connoisseurs of 
comfort, and the interior of a burrow will be 
furnished as cozily as the inhabitant(s) can af- 
ford. The floor will boast several rugs, mats, 
or carpets. Every halfling, however poor, has 
a table and a few stools, and at least one well- 
padded comfy chair. The bed will be small but 
snug, its mattress filled with clean straw or 
sometimes down, with several soft pillows. 

The mantlepiece will feature a variety of 
decorations—most practical, like dishes and 
candlesticks, a few ornamental or exotic. The 
latter will often be among their owner's prized 
possessions, even if he or she hasn't a clue as 
to what the things are, provided they look in- 
teresting enough. Paintings and statuary are 
rare, as halflings generally prefer their trea- 
sures to be useful as well as pretty to look at. 


The Famlly 

"Pedderee, when your mother was a little 
girl she had those same curls dangling by her 
cheeks—she was my first granddaughter, vou 
know, and I couldn't have been prouder! And 
you, Calkin—your dad was my second neph- 
ew on my brother Theadrics side. He had 
Theadrics stubborn jaw, and—if you don't 
mind me saying so—1 see that same firm set of 
the chin in you!" 


A single burrow will be occupied by mem- 
bers of one family. Depending on the size of 
both burrow and family, the dwelling could 
have as many as twenty-five residents or as 
few as one. A populous burrow will have a 
patriarch or matriarch (occasionally both) 
who presides over the brood with genial au- 
thority. Four generations of a family living in 


/£ 


a burrow is not at all uncommon, although 
sometimes a just-married couple will decide 
they want a burrow of their own. Occasional- 
ly an older halfling will decide that he or she 
would like a private burrow, but such individ- 
uals are viewed as eccentrics by their families 
and neighbors—it is hard for most of these 
gregarious folk to imagine anyone wanting to 
be alone. 

Halflings respect experience and wisdom 
and defer to their elders out of affection and 
trust. Aside from the venerable head of a fam- 
ily, adult halflings of different generations 
(even parents and children) view each other as 
equals. Only the youngest halflings, not yet 
adults, are subject to rules and restraints im- 
posed by authority; all grown halflings living 
in the burrow will be there because they want 
to be. 

Parenting duties are shared by all the adult 
members of the family; fathers, mothers, 
aunts, uncles, grandparents, and older sib- 
lings all share in the upbringing of youngsters. 
It is a rare halfling who grows up as the only 
child in a household; it is more common to be 
one of a number of brothers and sisters and 
cousins who play and explore together. 

Though family bonds are felt warmly, they 
are not a cause of exclusivity. Feuds between 
clans are rare, since most disputes are blamed 
on the disputers themselves, not their fami- 
lies. For example, a halfling who gets into a 
fight (a rare, but not unheard of, occurrence) 
is likely to be criticized soundly by his or her 
own family for his or her lack of self- 
control—there's no "Let's go and whup them 
guys what beat on my brudder!" mentality. 

Although disagreements are naturally inev- 
itable in these crowded living conditions, half- 
lings rarely engage in outright bickering or 
argument. For one thing, the presence of two 
people arguing in a burrow several dozen peo- 
ple call home is considered a major intrusion 
into the privacy of the others and hence a se- 
vere breach of etiquette by those engaged in 
the fracas. 


Halfling Culture * 79 


Many of the traditional causes of such 
fights among humans are removed by the 
halfling's communal outlook on life. Supper is 
prepared by everyone who has a free hand, 
and those who didn't cook will pitch in the 
cleaning up or help entertain the youngsters 
after the meal. Only when all the chores are 
done is an individual member free to go about 
his or her own business. Because of their 
ready-to-help nature, tasks like cooking and 
cleaning up don't take very long, so this still 
leaves family members with plenty of time to 
get their feet up and their eyelids down. 

In cases of deeper disputes, such as a cou- 
ples disagreement on whether to move out 
and find a place of their own, the discussion 
will generally be waged quietly, over a period 
of months or even years. One member might 
make a friendly remark, after a crowded din- 
ner around a small table, how pleasant it 
would be to have enough room to stretch out 
his elbows at the table. A week later his 
spouse might reply, in an equally pleasant 
tone, how nice it is that there was such an in- 
teresting conversation—“so many points of 
view” —around that same table on a different 
evening. Naturally, it takes a long time to re- 
solve an issue like this—but when it's re- 
solved, the decision is far more likely to have 
been mutually arrived at than it would have 
been among a human couple. 


Growing Up 

Offspring are a source of great pride and 
joy to their parents. Halflings enter the world 
as helpless as human infants, requiring similar 
care for the early part of their lives. 

For the first ten years, a halfling's relative 
growth pretty well parallels a human's—i.e., a 
ten year old human and halfling will look 
much the same age, although not in size, and 
will have about the same level of maturity. 
Children of both sexes and many different 
ages commonly play together, following rules 
created by the older youths that still allow the 
youngest a measure of freedom and decision- 


80 * Chapter Three 


making in the game. 

It is during these formative years that 
young halflings practice those traits that will 
form some of their basic skills when they grow 
up. Hide and Seek is a favorite game among 
halflings and is almost always played out of 
doors. Thus the youngsters become adept at 
concealing themselves in all sorts of natural 
cover—in patches of brush, behind tree- 
trunks, and even amid beds of flowers. Young 
halfling quickly develop the calm patience 
that allows them to remain still for long peri- 
ods of time, since they learn over and over 
that it is the one who moves that is seen first. 

Another favorite game is called Knock the 
Block, in which a small object such as a block 
of wood, or perhaps a tin pot or iron kettle, is 
placed some distance away, and the young 
halflings take turns throwing things at it, re- 
cording points for hits. The game is sometimes 
played with slings and stones (among older 
youths). For special tournaments and impor- 
tant matches, clay targets are used, with the 
winner determined by whoever's shot strikes 
hard enough to shatter the object. This com- 
mon game is presumably one reason why so 
many halflings grow up to be so adept with 
missile weapons. 

From the age of eleven or so on to adult- 
hood, halfling development slows in compari- 
son with the Big Folk. A halfling's adolescence 
lasts for about a decade and a half (more in the 
case of the longer-lived subraces). However, 
the period is characterized by a lot less angst 
than is typically felt by a human— perhaps be- 
cause of the warm, supportive, noncompeting 
environment provided by family, burrow, 
and community. 

Halfling artisans and craftsmen do not fol- 
low a formal apprenticeship program— 
indeed, adolescents are encouraged to 
experiment with a wide variety of pursuits. 
The cheesemaker, for example, will be helped 
by virtually every village youth over the 
course of several years. Those who find that 
they enjoy the work will spend more and 


more time with the 'master, until by adult- 
hood the youth has learned everything the 
cheesemaker can teach about the trade. 

Another reason, perhaps, for the relaxed 
adolescence of the typical halfling is that 
male-female friendships are as common as 
friendships between members of the same sex, 
often lasting from childhood through adult- 
hood. Many of these lifelong friendships cul- 
minate in marriage. 


Sustenance, and More 

In another moment the old matriarch's eyes 
flashed open, and she grinned at the eager 
faces around the hearth. 

"What else, Grandmother?" inquired Kepli. 
"How did Yondalla keep Littleman home in his 
burrow?" 

"She kept him there with the other things he 
loved... with bread hot from the oven, and 
fresh butter and cheese. With the tangy scent 


X mw jj 
PEE OL Wet Clo 
Y * My 
* 


of meat cooked just right, and good drink to 
nourish the meal along—wines sweet and dry, 
and cold milk, and even colder beer. She made 
stout and mead for him, to help the fires of his 
hearth keep him warm." 


Halflings enjoy eating and drinking in plen- 
tiful quantities—indeed, despite the difference 
in size, the typical halfling will eat as much if 
not more than a human twice his or her size; 
this is because halflings have a very high me- 
tabolism. Most halflings eat three large meals 
a day, interspersed with three sizable snacks: 
breakfast, brunch, lunch, teatime, supper, 
and bedtime snack. Although they enjoy an 
occasional meal of meat, especially poultry or 
wildfowl (roast pheasant is considered a great 
delicacy), the short folk rely extensively on 
bread, fruit, and cheese. 

Halfling bakers are famed for their abilities 
with dough, making all types of sweet or 


Halfling Culture e 81 


salty, light or heavy breads. Cheesemaking is 
another skill in which many halflings are pro- 
ficient, and here, too, variety is a prime hall- 
mark—each individual cheesemaker will 
typically specialize in one kind of cheese, no 
two of which will be alike, allowing a halfling 
community to offer a variety of sharp and 
mild, hard and soft cheeses. 

Halflings are born gardeners, far exceeding 
any other race in their knack for growing 
foodstuffs. Any halfling with access to a plot 
of ground will usually maintain a garden, 
wherein he or she will carefully nurture fruits 
and vegetables of all types appropriate to the 
climate. Even in a small garden, a halfling will 
generally plant at many different times during 
the spring, assuring a continuing harvest from 
early summer through late autumn. Halflings 
do not favor a lot of spice in their foods, how- 
ever, so few raise peppers or other strongly- 
flavored crops unless a nearby ready market 
for them exists. Onions are a notable excep- 
tion—many halflings love them and have 
even been known to munch them raw, much 
as a human might eat an apple. 

Halfling brewers are well-known and their 
products popular with humans as well as oth- 
er halflings. As with cheesemaking, a brewer 
will specialize in a single beverage. These can 
vary from heavy stout (halflings often joking- 
ly hand a first-time human drinker a knife and 
fork with the glass) to light and creamy ales. 
Fruit wines are also popular, with halfling 
vintners specializing in using whatever fruit is 
near to hand. 

It should be noted that, though halflings fa- 
vor many sorts of wines and ales, they rarely 
get drunk, due no doubt to their high metabo- 
lism. Rather, the alcohol tends to make them 
pleasantly drowsy, and a group of halflings 
that share a bottle of potent stuff will typically 
become quite relaxed, quiet, and contented as 
the evening wears on. 


The Village 
The key to the village is the halfling's desire 


82 * Chapter Three 


for the maximum of comfort with the mini- 
mum of effort. These pragmatic folk long ago 
learned that, though one halfling might learn 
to grow and cook and sew and build and so 
forth, specialization in these tasks creates a 
much higher level of quality all around. Thus, 
we see the cooperative roots of the halfling's 
picture of community. 

Indeed, this cooperation extends to all as- 
pects of life. The breadmaker will give his or 
her loaves to the other villagers, as will the 
cheesemaker with his or her cheese and the 
brewer with his or her beverage. Perhaps the 
baker's family gets the best loaf from a partic- 
ular batch, but everyone gets a fair share. 

Burrow excavation and house-building op- 
erates under the same pattern—the most expe- 
rienced builder in the town will supervise a 
legion of workers, so that the initial portions 
of the task can be accomplished in a few days. 
As to the furnishing of the burrow, the occu- 
pants see to that themselves. 

Though halflings mingle well with human 
society, this does not mean they have departed 
from the concept of the village—rather, it is 
an indication of their broad vision, for no- 
where is it written that the villagers must be 
fellow halflings. A halfling who dwells in a 
city will treat his or her neighbors as fellow 
villagers—this is what makes halflings such 
good neighbors. They are quick to recognize 
when their generosity is not reciprocated, 
however, and thus will soon narrow their cir- 
cle of 'villagers' to those who feel a similar 
sense of cooperation and friendship. 


Crafts, Labor, and Products 

Halflings are adept at utilizing local re- 
sources in their labors. Although only the 
Stouts are very effective at mining, all sub- 
races will be intimately familiar with the sur- 
face features of their surroundings. If they live 
in an area with a lot of trees, carvers will 
know everything about each variety of wood 
available. If the environment is rocky, experi- 
enced stone-masons will predominate. The 


most dramatic evidence, perhaps, of this 
adaptability is the fact that the Furchin have 
developed a high level of skill at working the 
raw materials in their nearly woodless and 
stoneless environment: they make everything 
from their homes to their tools, weapons and 
clothing out of leather, bone, and ice. The spe- 
cific skills likely to be found in a halfling com- 
munity vary by subrace (see Chapter 2). 

The quality of halfling work is very consist- 
ent. While rarely the equal of the greatest arti- 
sans in the world—dwarves make better 
axeblades, elves better wine—on the average 
it is better than the average available else- 
where. 

Areas where halfling craftsmen truly excel 
include many tasks involving dexterity and 
great detail. The small folk make splendid 
jewelers, engravers, locksmiths, woodcarv- 
ers— indeed, artists of all types. They love col- 
ors, and once again the propensity for detail 
allows a halfling painter to bring a scene to 
bright and vivid life. If clocks are known to a 
world (e.g., if its technology is sufficiently 
advanced), then it is likely that the finest 
clockmakers will be halflings. 

Also, because of their proclivity for enter- 
taining gossip and news of all kinds, halflings 
make great storytellers. Some of them have a 
gift for music, and halfling musicians and sto- 
rytellers are in great demand at any village 
feast or festival. 

Halflings are ill-suited for jobs requiring 
size and strength, such as blacksmithing, 
ocean sailing, or cargo hauling. Though a 
halfling village will usually have a smith who 
makes nails and horseshoes, his or her work 
will not be up to the level of most human 
smiths and will probably be for local con- 
sumption only; the same is true of halfling 
teamsters. 


Trade 

"They cleaned me out! What's even more 
amazing, they made me feel like I was having 
a good time while they did it! 


“Now, I've taken my wagon of goods into 
many a village before, and always 1 came 
away with a little more than I took in. This 
trip I had it all: bright copper kettles, some 
jeweled necklaces and bracelets—trinkets, 
really —and an assortment of good hammers 
and knives. 

"Id no sooner rolled into town than I 
smelled bread baking. I think that was the 
start of it—I didn't realize how hungry I was. 
The baker came out and gave me a piece— 
free! Best crust I ever tasted, too. 

"Then there was the innkeeper, who 
brought me over a mug of sweet ale. Why, be- 
fore I knew it they were givin‘ me a bit of this 
and a taste of that, and 1 just sort of started 
doing the same thing back. 

"Fact is, though, you can't make it in this 
business if you trade a steel knife for a glass of 
beer, or a copper kettle for a loaf of bread. 
Why, the liveryman took such good care of 
my horses—they positively gleamed in the 
morning!—that I paid his bill with a smile. 

"Gave him one gold for each horse, 1 did. 
You know, I can't even remember when I've 
forked over that much to put myself up for the 
night!" 


—Grantancrous Jute, Human Tinker and 
Tradesman 


Barter is a way of life to the halfling— 
though in more cases than not it is the un- 
spoken, unrecorded barter of village life. 
However, halflings also trade among them- 
selves on a more formal basis and are skilled 
at interacting with human suppliers and cus- 
tomers. They have a keen eye for detail and 
are generally quick to spot counterfeit or low- 
quality goods, all the while proclaiming the 
good points of whatever they are offering in 
return. 

Most trade between halfling villages, and 
between halflings and other folk, is carried on 
by professional halfling merchants called 
Traders (see Chapter 4: Character Kits). These 


Halfling Culture € 83 


halfling merchants transport surplus goods 
from one village to trade for the products of 
another. While halfling merchants will cer- 
tainly take gold and other coinage as pay- 
ment, they are also willing (more so than 
human or dwarven traders, certainly) to ac- 
cept goods in return for goods. Pragmatic here 
as elsewhere, however, Traders generally 
don't take goods unless they feel that they will 
be able to sell or barter those same goods at 
one of their next few stops. 

Since they enjoy the give-and-take of a 
good bartering session, a typical halfling mer- 
chant will offer far less for the goods he or she 
desires than they are actually worth, while at 
the same time asking an exorbitant price for 
his or her own. The small folk view bartering 
as something of a game and sometimes forget 
how much better they are at it than most of 
the Big Folk. However, a halfling who belat- 
edly discovers that he or she has unwittingly 


(mt 


u 
CUM 48 


= 


h 


= 


\ A 
M Bee t 


84 * Chapter Three 


talked a human into buying goods at consider- 
ably more than their value will often salve 
his or her conscience by throwing in a ‘bonus’ 
once the deal is closed to compensate the poor 
bargainer. 


Society Norms and Taboos 

“As pleasant as his burrow was, Littleman 
often felt there was something missing as he 
sat alone by his hearth. It wasn't long before 
he realized that he was lonely, and it wasn't 
long after that till he knew he'd found the per- 
fect person to cure his loneliness—Melindy, 
the fairest maiden among all his neighbors, 
she of the plump, red cheeks, bouncing curls, 
and smoothest downy fur on the tops of her 
feet. But, as luck would have it, she was al- 
ready being courted by another—stolid 
Genrill, a farmer and herdsman of good 
wealth and solid standing in the community. 

“Naturally, Genrill objected to his new- 


P 
U £I 


found rival but—alas for him—Melindy's 
heart was swept away by the dashing Little- 
man, with his tales of travel and adventure, 
his ready laugh, and his warm smile." 

"But Grandmother—did Genrill not fight 
for his love? Didn't he bash Littleman over the 
head... or something?" wondered Kepli. 

"Posh, child—you talk like a human! Of 
course he didn't. Melindy made known her 
choice, and she became Littlemans bride. 
Genrill himself provided the roast beast for 
the wedding feast!" 


Though they have no lack of courage, half- 
lings shun violent or aggressive behavior in 
social settings. They are slow to anger and al- 
ways ready to seek a negotiated solution to 
any dispute. 

A halfling feels no sense of shame if he or 
she chooses to leave the presence of some ob- 
noxious bully rather than getting involved in a 
fight—even a fight the halfling thinks he or 
she can win. Fortunately, because of their 
communal village upbringing, few halflings 
are this rude, and such situations mainly arise 
when the halfling mixes company with hu- 
mans, dwarves, or goblinoids. 

Personal insults delivered to a fellow vil- 
lager are considered low class, reflecting more 
poorly on the one who makes the insult than 
the target. Politeness is much admired, and 
one who shows tolerance to a neighbor who 
has wronged him is considered to be the 
epitome of a class act. 

Parties among halflings are common and 
will be given for a variety of reasons. Birth- 
days are always cause for celebration, and 
with so many family members living together 
it's rare for a month to go by without several 
birthdays in it. Each community will also 
have many annual holidays. These vary by 
culture—there are no such holidays observed 
by halflings everywhere. Often the Small Folk 
will celebrate whatever festivals are popular 
among their human and demihuman neigh- 
bors, soon giving these observances a charac- 


ter all their own. 

The hosts of a party are expected to provide 
food and drink—but much of this will be con- 
tributed by neighbors prior to the event. 
Thus, none of the guests show up with any- 
thing to contribute, but they've all provided a 
bottle, a wedge of cheese, loaf of bread, or the 
like beforehand. Indeed, this is one way half- 
lings get invited to parties—if you find out 
that your neighbor is celebrating his birthday, 
for example, take over a small jug of ale in the 
morning and he can hardly turn you away 
when the festivities commence in the after- 
noon! 

There is little sense of social status among 
the halflings in a village, aside from the 
amused tolerance shown by adults to children 
and the general respect for the elderly. 
Wealthy halflings are expected to throw big- 
ger parties and to generally show generosity 
to those less fortunate—yet they are not ac- 
corded any 'upper class' standing because of 
this. The villagers may well elect a sheriff, 
mayor, or constable and give this individual 
nominal authority to arrest troublemakers. 
Rambunctious behavior is rare among half- 
lings themselves, however, so the sheriff's 
main concern will be to control the behavior 
of humans, dwarves, and other possible trou- 
blemakers who come through the community. 


Joy and Humor 

Halflings are a folk who can derive pleasure 
from many simple things and are not afraid to 
show it—a halfling who is happy laughs; one 
who feels affection or love will express himself 
or herself with words or deeds. 

The small folk love to tell and hear stories 
and will generally be attentive and silent when 
anyone spins a tale. Not surprisingly, they es- 
pecially love stories in which the small and 
clever triumph over those who are physically 
larger and stronger but clumsier and less 
quick-witted. 

Halflings also have a frank appreciation for 
bawdy humor and practical jokes. They have 


Halfling Culture * 85 


the ability to laugh at themselves, though one 
prank often leads to another in retaliation, 
and so on. Such good-natured exchanges have 
been known to continue, reciprocated back 
and forth, for decade after decade. 


Sorrow and Anger 

"There came a time of troubles to the Green 
Fields. In the first year, bitter winds blasted 
from the highlands, drying out the fields and 
leaving no grain and no fruit to harvest in the 
fall. 

"But Littleman turned to his bride, Melindy, 
and he said— we've still got our sheep, and 
our pony, and our plow. We'll have a good 
crop next year!’ And she smiled at him, and 
they waited. 

"Then, when spring came, it brought the 
rains in a flood, and with them came a sick- 
ness of flies across the land. They bit the ani- 
mals, and the sheep and the ponies all got the 
evil sickness. They wasted away and died, 
even before the crop got in the ground. 

"So Littleman turned to Melindy and he 
said— be happy, my wife. We still have our 
stream, and our flowers. And again she 
smiled at him, and they waited for the flies to 


go. 

"Which they did, but only when the frosts 
came to freeze everything across the land. The 
stream dried away, caught in the highlands in 
a grip of ice, and all the flowers and even the 
grass withered away and died. 

"This time Littleman turned to his wife and 
he soothed her fears: 'Don't worry, my dear— 
we have our hearth, and our burrow to shelter 
us. 

"But next came the storms, with such wind, 
such power, that the very roof was torn from 
the burrow, and the stones of the hearth fell 
down into a great pile, nearly crushing the 
two of them before they could flee from the 
broken wreckage of their home. At last they 
stood outside, shivering and desolate, with no 
food, no animals, and not even a shelter over 
their heads." 


86 * Chapter Three 


"Then what, Grandmother?" asked Kepli, 
wide-eyed and sorrowful. "Then did Little- 
man know sorrow and grief?" 

"You might think so, Sprout—but you'd be 
wrong. For even then, with all of his life in 
ruins around him, he turned to Melindy, and 
he said: ‘Be happy, my love—all we have lost 
we shall regain, in years to come. And for 
now, we still have each other." 


The small folk know the same griefs as 
humankind— death and illness, partings, nat- 
ural disasters, and other tragedies. Though 
they, as a people, are deeply affected by such 
misfortune, halflings tend not to display their 
grief as openly as do humans. Halfling vil- 
lagers who have just lost several neighbors 
and friends to marauding bandits will shuffle 
around as if they are in shock—there will be 
few tears, little wailing or crying. 

Even more surprising, there will be few ex- 
pressions of outright anger or hostility. Re- 
venge is not a great drive to most halflings, 
though occasionally a wrong will be judged so 
heinous, so unforgivable, that retribution is 
required (deliberate murder is a prime exam- 
ple). Loss of possessions, however—whether 
due to accident or the malicious acts of 
others—tends to be greeted with a more re- 
laxed attitude of ‘easy come, easy go: 

In their day-to-day lives, halflings are re- 
markably impervious to frustration and de- 
pression. Members of the small folk show a 
remarkable ability to adapt to the circum- 
stances of their surroundings. If the crops fail 
and food is short, they derive that much more 
pleasure from the meager fare that they eat. If 
the roof caves in and the family has no place 
to sleep, they will remark how fortunate they 
were that no one was seriously hurt—and 
they'll mean it! 


Riddles 

“Did you ever try to get a straight answer 
out o' one of the little maggots? I know I have, 
and l ain't succeeded yet! Why, they'll answer 


a question with another question sure as the 
sun goes down at night! Most irritatin' thing I 
ever done was ask a halfling for directions! 

"Where can I find the mayor?’ I said, 
straightforward-like. 

"Which mayor is that?' says the little runt. 

"The mayor o' this town, o' course, I told 
the dummy, nice as you please. 

"Why, do you want to see her?’ says the 
dang fool. 

"Course I do!' I said, trying to resist the 
urge to wring his scrawny neck. 'Why else 
would I be askin’? 

"Don't you know? he has the gall to ask 
me! 

“I tell you friend, if the mayor hadn't come 
walkin’ down the street that very moment, I 
think that scene might have ended in blood- 
shed!” 


—Dwarven wayfarer, describing his unwit- 
ting participation in the Question 
Game. 


A favorite form of contest among halflings 
of all subraces is the exchange of riddles. 
These can vary from simple questions and an- 
swers to complex puzzles involving clues 
vague and obtuse. It’s not uncommon for a 
halfling to spend an hour or more pondering 
such a problem in silence punctuated only by 
his or her frequent admonitions: "don't tell me 
the answer!” 

Even more baffling to nonhalflings is the 
Question Game, a contest in which each par- 
ticipant must answer a question with another 
question. Each response must be a complete 
sentence, relevant to the one that preceded it, 
and delivered within ten seconds, or the play- 
er loses a point. Experienced players can con- 
tinue the game for hours; one legendary 
brother-and-sister team are rumored to have 
carried a game on every time they met for the 
last twenty years of their lives. Some halfling 
enthusiasts of the game will treat every ques- 
tion addressed to them as an invitation to 


play, with sometimes regrettable results 


Villages and Shires 

Halfling settlements for the most part tend 
to remain small—they will live in towns and 
shires scattered throughout a human empire, 
for example, or they might occupy several 
small villages in a forest ruled by an elven 
king. In a few cases, halfling holdings have ex- 
panded to the size of a kingdom— both the 
Forgotten Realms and Krynn boast nations 
populated and ruled entirely by halflings. But 
even here, they have labored to maintain 
peaceable relations with the realms that share 
their borders. 


Warfare 

Though they abhor war, halflings neverthe- 
less have proven to be tenacious fighters in de- 
fense of their homes or in the service of an 
alliance. The following letter, written by 
General Krastarian of Keltar upon the event 
of his defeat at the hands of an outnumbered 
halfling militia, perhaps best describes their 
tactics: 


The little devils stayed out of the open 
country—undoubtably they knew that our 
horsemen would have trampled them like rab- 
bits! They gave us their towns and farms in 
the plain, while they fell back to the accursed 
wood. And there I, the conqueror, would fol- 
low with my footmen—though in truth I 
knew there to be ten of them to every one of 
my own men. 

My companies vanished in the tangle, 
breaking ranks and thrashing blindly ahead. 
And then, across the length of the front, came 
a murderous shower—a thousand deadly ar- 
rows piercing the flesh of my men, while the 
vermin archers remained invisible. 

I swear, Your Majesty, they swarmed 
through the brush like mosquitoes! Thou- 
sands of them, on all sides! Everywhere we 
turned, little figures skulked—arrows flew 
with uncanny accuracy, piercing eyes and 


Halfling Culture e 87 


necks, dropping even armored men in their 
tracks! We charged and they scattered, van- 
ishing into the thicket as if they had never 
been—only the bodies of my men told other- 
wise. 

At last I determined to fire the wood—the 
wind favored our advance—and gave orders 
to do so. The blazes took hold with great ef- 
fect, but again that hellish place betrayed the 
logic of war. The brush exploded like tinder, 
and the blaze swept not only with the wind— 
but back into our faces! 

Many fine men perished in that inferno—a 
blaze I believe to have been sorcerously al- 
tered by the enemy. Minutes after my own 
very narrow escape, my scouts reported the 
bulk of the enemy force slipping from the 
brush while we fled the blaze. 

I request, Excellency, that we return to 
Lurien with sufficient forces to deal with this 
pestilent threat —perhaps two legions, and a 
full column of horse. I realize that this will 
stretch the defense of your borders in a tenu- 
ous manner, but I believe there to be no other 
way for the forces of Keltar to prevail against 
this pervasive foe. 


It makes an interesting historical footnote 
to add that the general commanded some 
eighteen hundred men, including companies 
of elite guards, longbowmen, and light lanc- 
ers. Never did the halfling force opposing him 
number even a thousand! He was subsequent- 
ly removed from command through the sim- 
ple expedient of removing his head from his 
shoulders; the halflings of Lurien were left 
alone for many decades to follow. 

Though this is an heroic incident in the 
annals of halfling military history (and ad- 
mittedly, a more patient and imaginative com- 
mander may well have found the human force 
sufficient for the conquest), it is illustrative of 
the tactical finesse and courage displayed by 
the small folk when they are motivated for 
battle. 

Another feature has also contributed to the 


88 * Chapter Three 


halflings’ fine reputation as allies: the small 
folk traditionally have demonstrated a will- 
ingness to honor the terms of a longstanding 
alliance. They will provide the troops they 
promised, when and where they are re- 
quired—and those troops display almost as 
much determination in supporting an alliance 
as they would in defense of their own bur- 
rows. However, they must have some strong 
motivation before resorting to violence to 
solve a dispute. Almost always this motiva- 
tion is defensive in nature—either the half- 
lings or their friends are attacked by some 
aggressor. Occasionally the small folk might 
participate in an offensive campaign, but only 
when it is a preemptory strike against a foe 
who has already committed enough bloody 
acts to warrant retribution and is currently 
gathering forces for an attack on the halflings 
or their allies. 

However, when the need is clear, halflings 
are speedy and resolute to answer the call to 
arms. Indeed, this trait is one that makes half- 
ling/human treaties attractive to the rulers of 
the latter. Also, the deadly accuracy of half- 
ling bowmen and slingers is known to all who 
have faced them—and few of those desire to 
do so again! 


Tactics 

As already noted, halflings prefer to avoid 
war if at all possible. A community of the 
small folk will be willing to negotiate exten- 
sively, and even yield to a certain amount of 
extortion, in order to avoid bloodshed. 

However, when pressed to the point of no 
return, halfling troops make determined fight- 
ers with a number of effective tactics at their 
command. In most cases, only about half the 
adults will fight, the remainder remaining be- 
hind to protect the elderly and children. In 
cases of dire need—where the very survival of 
the community is at stake—every able-bodied 
adult may well be drafted into the cause. 

Halflings have a reputation for being easy- 
going and somewhat lazy, but this does not 


mean they cannot fight effectively if they need 
to—the legends of the Bad Old Days remind 
every halfling of what life was like before 
they had villages and lands of their own, and 
they will fight with surprising tenacity, even 
ferocity, to keep from slipping back into that 
fugitive existence. Thus each halfling has 
something that can be used as a weapon in his 
or her burrow, no matter how peaceful the 
area. If the village has had to fight in the re- 
cent past, then each resident might have a 
short sword and shield as well as a bow and 
arrows or a sling and bullets. Even if battle is 
rare or virtually nonexistant, villagers will be 
able to arm themselves with a missile weapon 
apiece (bow, sling, or perhaps darts) and at 
least a long knife or spear for melee combat— 
a fact invaders expecting to find them easy 
prey have discovered time and again, to their 
surprise and regret. 

Halfling companies are almost always irreg- 
ular—i.e., they don't fight in neat ranks and 
lines. They will be quite capable of firing vol- 
leys of missile fire upon command, and they 
will advance and withdraw on the orders of 
their captains—but they would have a hard 
time facing, for example, a tight rank of ar- 
mored human infantry or orcish swords. 

Instead, the halflings favor battles in wood- 
ed or otherwise obstructed terrain. Their scat- 
tered formation is ideal for each fighter 
finding his or her own source of cover, though 
they are far more adept than humans at hold- 
ing their company's unity even in thickets 
where visibility and mobility are severely lim- 
ited. The fabled ability of halflings to virtually 
disappear in underbrush is never more useful 
than at moments like this. 

A favored tactic of a halfling force, when 
fighting in this type of concealing terrain, is to 
create a loud diversion. A few veteran war- 
riors will thrash through the brush, firing 
many arrows, giving the impression that they 
number scores of times more than they actu- 
ally do. Then, if the opponent's force turns to 
face this imaginary onslaught, the real half- 


ling company screened by the woods attacks 
the enemy's flank. 

If a halfling force is attacked in unfavorable 
(i.e., open) terrain by a force of large crea- 
tures, the small folk might try to stand off the 
attack if they feel they have a chance of suc- 
cess. If they are attacked by horsemen or are 
out-numbered by well-armored infantry, 
however, the entire formation will usually 
scatter, joining up again at a place offering 
more concealment and protection. 

Halflings rarely fight mounted, though 
Tallfellows are a notable exception, occasion- 
ally riding into battle on small ponies or, very 
rarely, beasts such as dire wolves. When half- 
lings fight as members of an alliance, they are 
often used as missile troops. Well-screened be- 
hind formations of human or dwarven foot- 
soldiers, halfling archers and slingers can 
shower the enemy with a deadly rain of ar- 
rows and bullets. 

Another common specialty of halfling 
troops is tunneling and underground opera- 
tions. They are not particularly adept at dig- 
ging such passages—that task is better left to 
dwarves—but halfling troops can negotiate 
much smaller passages than can most of their 
allies. Thus, if combat is expected in close 
quarters or beneath a low ceiling, halfling 
troops are often selected to lead the way. 


Magic 

"| could tell that they feared me when I 
came into their village and demanded a place 
to sleep for the night. Gave me a nice room, 
they did, too. 

"But when I woke up, everything I had in 
my pockets, my pouches—even my wand and 
the rings from my fingers—all were gone! On- 
ly my spellbook was left—though how they 
knew about the runes I'd put on it to fry any- 
one who touched it besides me I'll never 
know. 

“I spent the whole morning negotiating for 
most of my equipment back. Then, when I 
would have turned to whole nest of them into 


Halfling Culture * 89 


an anthill, something made me think the bet- 
ter of it. A couple of them might have stuck 
me with arrows before 1 could finish the 
spell—not a pleasant prospect. 

"So I left, and brother, let me tell you it'll be 
a long time before I subject myself to halfling 
hospitality again!" 


—Parzemon the Mighty, Wizard of Thay 


Sorcery is one area of power where halfling 
skills are lacking. Their inherent resistance to 
magic protects them against many of the 
power-crazed spellcasters in the world, but it 
also prevents them from mastering those 
forces for themselves: no halfling has learned 
much about the wielding of arcane power (al- 
though comic tales about bumbling but well- 
intentioned halfling apprentices are popular in 
many places). Unlike many humans and 
dwarves, they do not regard magic as particu- 
larly threatening; trust in their innate resist- 
ance enables halflings to extend to spellcasters 
the typically friendly greeting they give to all 
strangers—a fact which no doubt explains the 
fondness some wizards have for the race. 


Why Most Halflings Are Homebodies 
Almost all halflings suffer to some degree 
from feelings which resembles the condition 
humans call agoraphobia—a fear of unknown 
or open places. It's not that halflings are liter- 
ally afraid, merely that they become very un- 
comfortable whenever they're too far away 
from their villages and burrows or in unfamil- 
iar places. Whether this is one of Yondalla's 
‘gifts; designed to keep them close to home 
and hearth, or a holdover from the Bad Old 
Days when enemies lurked behind every tree 
and bush, none can say. But it has been ob- 
served that the symptoms increase with age— 
halfling children freely range far and wide, 
while the very old rarely step outside their 
burrows. Not that the halflings see this as a 
bad thing: to them, it's simply the way things 
are and ought to be—youth is the time to gad- 


90 * Chapter Three 


about, age the time for rest and reflection. 


Why Some Halflings Pursue Adventure 

If his or her burrow and its attendant com- 
pany and comforts are the most important 
features of a halfling’s life, why then would 
any halfling leave this perfection for a life of 
short rations, crude lodging, exposure to bad 
weather, danger, and possible violence? 

That's the question asked by most of the 
rest of a village when a young halfling packs 
his or her tote bag and waves goodbye to his 
or her parents. His or her neighbors will often 
gather to see the would-be adventurer off, 
watching the already small form grow smaller 
in the distance, knowing there's a good chance 
that they'll never see their friend again. 

There are nearly as many answers to this 
question as there are halflings who have 
walked down that road. Some do so reluctant- 
ly, out of a sense of duty. Others find the 
temptations of excitement, adventure, and 
treasure too great to ignore. One thing almost 
all of them share in common, however, is that 
they lack the characteristic halfling dread of 
faraway places. 

For reasons which once again are unknown 
—halflings call it ‘the legacy of Littleman'—a 
few rare halflings are born entirely free of the 
condition which keeps their fellows tied to 
their homes. Instead, they are filled with an 
endless curiosity to see new places, new peo- 
ple, and new things. Usually this wanderlust 
fades later in life and the homing instinct reas- 
serts itself, but a few halflings remain wander- 
ers for the rest of their days (see the Traveler 
kit in the next chapter). These restless individ- 
uals are considered ‘eccentric’ by their fellow 
halflings, but their exploits are often admired 
just the same. 

Some examples of the specific callings of 
halflings who leave their villages behind are 
discussed in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER 


Halfling Character Kits 


Despite the fact that halflings are defined by 
their subrace and their character class, many 
players enjoy a little more distinction in their 
PCs. The halfling kits present a variety of dif- 
ferent frameworks for playing a character of 
the small folk, each with its own strengths and 
weaknesses—but more importantly, each with 
a specific niche in his or her society. 

Kits are optional —no halfling must follow 
one. They can be incorporated into characters 
already existing in a campaign, as long as the 
PC's background is consistent with the char- 
acter type of the kit. However, a character 
who is assigned one kit can never exchange 
that kit for another. 

The kits in this chapter are designed for 
halfling characters and should not be em- 
ployed with PCs of other races. It should be 
noted that halflings can use many of the kits 
introduced in other rulebooks, including the 
Complete Fighters Handbook, the Complete 
Thiefs Handbook, the Complete Priest's 
Handbook, the Complete Psionics Hand- 
book, and The Complete Spacefarer's Hand- 
book. Indeed, one kit usable only by 
halflings, the Whistler, appears in The Com- 
plete Bard' s Handbook. 

Each of the four character classes available 
to halflings (fighter, thief, fighter/thief, and 
cleric) is given several kits. A character may 
only take a kit suited to his or her character 
class. All characters are limited to a single kit. 
Halflings may become clerics of up to 8th 
level, fighters of up to 9th level, thieves of up 
to 15th level, and fighter/thieves of up to 
9th and 15th level, respectively. At the DM's 
option, exceptionally talented halflings 
(those with scores of 15 or above in their 
prime requisite) can exceed these maximums 
by up to 4 additional levels. 


The Structure of the Kits 

Each kit begins with a general description of 
the character type, including any background 
requirements that might be necessary. Follow- 
ing this, additional information is organized 


92 * Chapter Four 


into these categories: 

Roads to Adventure: This category, unique 
to the halfling kits, suggests several reasons 
why the character might be motivated to do 
such a rash thing as leave his or her hearth and 
burrow for a life on the road. 

Role: The specific functions of this charac- 
ter within halfling society and beyond. 

Secondary Skills: In a campaign that uses 
the secondary skills rules from the AD&D® 
Second Edition game, taking a particular kit 
might require the character to take a specific 
secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The listed proficien- 
cies must be among those taken by a halfling 
character at first level. Unless the entry specif- 
ically states otherwise, they do not increase 
the number of proficiencies available but must 
be taken out of the standard allotment of 
slots. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: A halfling 
character using a kit gains these proficiencies 
free—the PC is not required to spend a slot for 
any of them. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
These proficiencies are not required of the 
character, but they do match up well with the 
kit. They require normal nonweapon profi- 
ciency slots be expended for each one. 

Thieving Skill Emphasis: (For thief and 
fighter/thief characters only.) The AD&D® 
Second Edition thief rules allow considerable 
flexibility in a character's selection of thieving 
abilities. A character may wish to specialize in 
the stealth-related skills such as Move Silently 
and Hide in Shadows if he or she is a spy or 
cat burglar. A thief who needs to survive on 
city streets might prefer improved scores in 
Pick Pockets and Open Locks. This entry lists 
appropriate skills for each kit. They are not 
mandatory, nor do they grant any bonuses or 
confer any penalties beyond what they would 
grant any thief character. 

Equipment: Any special equipment needs of 
the character are detailed here. 

Special Benefits: These are things a charac- 


ter can do (or protections he or she gains) be- 
cause of the kit. 

Special Hindrances: These are limitations 
placed upon the character by the kit. 


Fighter Kits 
The Archer 


An Archer is a halfling warrior who devotes 
nearly all of his or her time and energy to the 
development of skill with a missile weapon. 
"Archer" is the generic name for this kit: a 
"slinger" version of the kit also exists and is 
nearly as popular as the Archer itself, while 
halflings who live in jungle regions (like the 
wild halflings of Athas) have developed a 
blowgun variant. In those rare campaigns 
where firearms are allowed, this kit can be 
used to create a halfling sharpshooter (assum- 
ing the firearms are small enough for a half- 
ling to wield; i.e., muskets rather than 
arquebuses). 

An Archer must have a Dexterity score of at 
least 15. 

Often an Archer comes from a background 
as a hunter, though membership in the local 
militia is another possible avenue into the kit. 

Roads to Adventure: Archers are likely to 
be drawn into adventure for several reasons. 
The challenge of competition is strong—the 
best Archer in the village will naturally be 
tempted to test his or her skill against small 
folk, other demihumans, and human archers. 
Because their skill is so easily measurable, 
halfling Archers are particularly susceptible to 
this urge to go out and test their abilities 
against the toughest competition they can 
find. Alternately, a halfling Archer may be 
vigorously recruited by other adventurers 
who recognize the value of a skilled bowman. 

Also, the Archer's skill helps to make him 
or her an accomplished hunter, and many an 
adventure can begin during a long stalk 
through the trackless forest. At the same time, 
his or her likely status as a prominent member 
of the villages defense militia makes the 


archer a likely candidate for any rescue party 
or guard duty that might develop. 

Role: The Archer is a respected figure 
among a race where missile skill is the norm— 
he or she is the best of the best. In a small 
village he or she will be one of the primary 
hunters. Archers work well with Forest- 
walkers; it is often the Archer's task to bring 
down the game the Forestwalker has tracked. 

The Archer also forms a staunch pillar of 
the community defense force—often, a skilled 
Archer will be placed in command of a com- 
pany of halfling bowmen. 

Secondary Skills: An Archer should have 
the Bowyer/Fletcher secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Three of the Archer's 
initial weapons proficiency slots must be used 
for missile weapons. If the weapons speciali- 
zation optional rules are used, the Archer can 
specialize in one chosen missile weapon by ex- 
pending two (not three, as is the norm) slots 


Halfling Character Kits * 93 


for the weapon of specialization. 

Bonus Non-Weapon Proficiencies: All 
Archers automatically receive the Bowyer/ 
Fletcher proficiency. 

Recommended Non-Weapon Proficiencies: 
The character should consider taking Hunt- 
ing, Firebuilding, Tracking, and Weather 
Sense. 

Equipment: The Archer's most essential 
piece of equipment is his or her bow or sling. 
At the start of his or her career this is likely to 
be a non-magical (although well-made) weap- 
on, but throughout his or her adventures the 
character will continually search for the per- 
fect bow. All Archers carry a plentiful supply 
of ammunition—usually at least twice the 
usual quiverfull of arrows. 

As often as not, halflings with this kit will 
collect a variety of special missile types for use 
in special situations. For example, an Archer 
might have a few blunt-headed arrows (for 
stunning, rather than killing, targets), barbed 
arrows with thin lines attached (enabling him 
or her to retrieve small game simply by reeling 
in the string after a hit) and fire arrows (extra- 
long arrows with rags wrapped around their 
heads; when soaked with oil and ignited, these 
missiles fly half the distance of regular arrows 
but have an excellent chance to ignite any 
flammable substance that they strike). A 
slinger will likewise have a selection of special 
sling bullets—some spiked, others hollow and 
filled with skunk oil, sleeping gas, or a num- 
ber of other noxious substances. 

Special Benefits: The Archer can choose to 
make a called shot, earning additional bo- 
nuses on his or her missile attacks in certain 
circumstances. By electing to take careful 
aim, he or she gains a +2 bonus on his or her 
attack roll for that arrow. However, this re- 
quires that he or she forgo initiative (i.e., the 
shot must be the last act of a melee round). 
Also, the Archer must concentrate on the 
shot, meaning he or she can only make one 
shot that round. Finally, any successful at- 
tack against the Archer will naturally break 


94 * Chapter Four 


his or her concentration and cause the benefit 
to be lost, although in this case the shot still 
has a normal chance to hit. The +2 bonus is 
in addition to any other attack bonuses the 
character might have due to Dexterity, weap- 
on specialization, bless spells, or magical 
weaponry. 

In outdoor melee, the same procedure (sin- 
gle shot; last act in the round) can be used to 
increase the range of the shot instead of gain- 
ing the attack bonus (i.e., the Archer can 
choose to make a called shot with increased 
accuracy or extended range, but not both at 
the same time). The extra range is equal to the 
weapon's medium range added to the long 
range; the attack is modified with the long 
range penalty to hit. 

Special Hindrances: The Archer can gain 
normal proficiency in only one melee weap- 
on. He or she can spend proficiency slots on 
others but will always wield them with a —1 
penalty on all attack rolls. For example, sup- 
pose Willem the Archer learns to use a short 
sword as well as his bow, sling, and throwing 
knives. If he later decides to use a proficiency 
for hand-to-hand knife-fighting, he can do so 
(assuming he has the proficiency slot to spare) 
but he will suffer a —1 penalty on his melee 
attack rolls with the knife. 


Forestwalker 


The Forestwalker is the halfling version of 
the Scout, adept at moving through the wood- 
lands, tracking prey and trespassers. Forest- 
walkers are very protective of their woods 
and tend to be loners, although they are far 
from being hermits. Indeed, a Forest-walker is 
happy to share his or her campfire with guests 
and will often come to the aid of travelers who 
treat the woods with due respect; many are 
the tales of adventuring parties lost in the 
woods rescued by a friendly Forestwalker. 

Whereas most halflings consider a single 
burrow or building their home, for the Forest- 
walker the whole forest in which he or she 


lives is “home.” The Forestwalker is likely to 
maintain several shelters in the particular 
woods he or she has claimed for his or her 
own. These might range from cramped niches 
in hollow tree stumps, providing little more 
than bare shelter from the elements, to elabo- 
rate burrows in small caves or earthen holes 
excavated beneath a sheltered bank. Though 
the halfling cannot be said to live in any single 
one of these, he or she is likely to keep them 
all well-stocked with food, fuel, candles, blan- 
kets or furs, and perhaps a jug or two. If at all 
possible, each shelter will have some kind of 
fireplace—in some cases, a simple circle of 
stones; in others, a well-built hearth complete 
with chimney or vent to carry the smoke 
away. Where no fireplace is possible, the 
Forestwalker will seek consolation in a pipe of 
tobacco. 

The Forestwalker must have a Wisdom 
score of at least 13. Most, but not all, 


Forestwalkers are Tallfellows. 

Roads to Adventure: The Forestwalker is 
extremely protective of his or her woods and 
will seek retribution against any force that 
hurts the forest; he or she will be willing to go 
to great lengths (and travel great distances) to 
see justice done in such a case. This retribu- 
tion might be seen as exceeding the typical 
halfling nonchalance regarding revenge. It's 
not, though—the Forestwalker thinks of his 
or her wood as a living being, not a thing. 
Consequently, any affront against the forest is 
treated like an attack on a friend, not like the 
theft of a possession. 

The curiosity that lies latent in so many 
halflings bubbles near the surface of the 
Forestwalker—a simple love of exploring will 
often draw him or her away on long expedi- 
tions. He or she delights in following the 
course of streams and rivers and in analyzing 
the various drainage patterns in a watershed. 
The opportunity to encounter new types of 
trees and map out hitherto unknown regions 
of forest and woodland is often enough to 
tempt a Forestwalker into joining an adven- 
turing party on a short-term basis, but he or 
she will always return to his or her home for- 
est eventually. 

Role: The Forestwalker is the protector of 
the woods: the guardian of game, fire mar- 
shal, and an important scout against enemy 
incursion into a halfling realm. He or she is a 
respected figure in the village and is more 
likely than not to have a family and comfort- 
able burrow amid the dwellings of his or her 
neighbors. However, between a sense of duty 
and sheer wanderlust, a typical Forestwalker 
will rarely spend more than one day in ten 
with spouse and offspring, a situation his or 
her family respect and accept. 

The Forestwalker also tends to be one of the 
more skillful hunters of a halfling community. 
Thus, when he or she does come in to town, it 
is often with a large cache of fresh meat—a 
trait which further endears him or her to these 
feast-loving folk. Often the Forestwalker can 


Halfling Character Kits * 95 


K 


barter for all the other essentials of life, simply 
through knowing how to gain the bounty of 
the woods. 

Besides hunting, Forestwalkers are also 
adept at finding nuts, edible berries and other 
fruits, herbs, roots, and—best of all, from a 
halfling’s point of view—mushrooms. Many 
are fine cooks, able to serve up savory soups 
and rich stews that would be the envy of any 
fine restaurant. 

Secondary Skills: The Hunter and either the 
Trapper/Furrier or Fisher secondary skills fit 
in well with this character's lifestyle. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Forestwalker 
must spend an initial proficiency slot on a mis- 
sile weapon, and another on a weapon that 
can be made from wood, such as a club or a 
small quarterstaff. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The 
Forestwalker gains Survival (Woodland) and 
Tracking (the latter with a +2 to all proficien- 
cy checks made in woodland settings), plus 
any one of the following (players choice): 
Firebuilding, Fishing, and Hunting. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Whichever of the above not taken as bonus 
proficiencies are recommended; the Animal 
Lore, Set Snares, and Bowyer/Fletcher profi- 
ciencies can also be of daily use to the Forest- 
walker. Artistic Ability is also popular, as 
whittling and woodcarving are common pas- 
times among Forestwalkers. 

Equipment: In addition to his or her weap- 
ons, the Forestwalker will rarely be found 
without flint and tinder for firemaking, a large 
waterskin, and a heavy cloak or blanket that 
can double as a bedroll. He or she will always 
have a knife, even if it is too small to properly 
be considered a weapon, for marking trails, 
skinning small game, and whittling. 

Special Benefits: In addition to the normal 
halfling benefit of being hard to spot in natu- 
ral terrain, the Forestwalker can move at his 
or her full movement rate through tangled un- 
dergrowth ("born and bred in the briar patch, 
Brer Fox!"). If he or she chooses to slow down 


96 * Chapter Four 


to the normal movement rate, however, he or 
she can Move Silently through such terrain 
(no ability check necessary). 

Forestwalkers are also adept at hiding 
tracks. By slowing his or her movement rate 
to half that allowed for the terrain type, a 
Forestwalker can conceal all trace of his or her 
passage and, if he or she is walking in the rear 
of a party, a number of companions as well. 
To determine if the trail of a large party is ef- 
fectively concealed, the player must make a 
successful Tracking proficiency check with a 
—1 penalty for each non-Forestwalker in the 
party ( — 2 for each horse, mule, or other four- 
footed animals accompanying the party). If 
the proficiency check is successful, the track 
will be invisible even to a skilled tracker. Note 
that even though some characters may be rid- 
ing instead of walking, this does not improve 
the Forestwalker's chances to cover their 
tracks, as the added weight makes the mount's 
trail more difficult to conceal. The halfling 
will know whether or not his or her efforts 
have met with success. 

Special Hindrances: Forestwalkers may on- 
ly wear leather armor, and many eschew ar- 
mor altogether. Since metal makes so much 
noise in the woods, they will avoid carrying 
much of it on their person and will not use any 
metal weapon larger than an arrowhead, 
hatchet, or knife. 

The Forestwalker is a bit of a loner and con- 
sequently may be a little slow to learn of big 
news that sweeps through the community and 
the realm. Also, Forestwalkers tend not to be 
terribly skilled in the social graces and suffer a 
—2 penalty to NPC Reaction rolls from non- 
halflings (—4 when the setting calls for good 
manners and/or elegant dress). 


Homesteader 


This is a doughty brand of halfling that, by 
his or her very nature, represents a departure 
from the halfling norm. Often a young and 
unattached individual, either male or female, 


the Homesteader is a halfling who sets out to 
found a new farmstead in a region of wilder- 
ness or abandoned land. Another common 
homesteading situation involves a young cou- 
ple, recently married and previously living in 
a very crowded burrow. Such small folk, if 
adventurous enough in spirit, can find imme- 
diate rewards to homesteading. 

Rarely will a Homesteader challenge an es- 
tablished authority over an area—if humans 
or orcs have laid claim to a fertile valley, for 
example, the Homesteader will probably look 
elsewhere for his or her plot. 

Many halfling villages have grown around 
the individual plot of a brave Homesteader— 
and indeed, unlike many human frontiers- 
men, the halfling Homesteader welcomes the 
company of his or her fellows and will active- 
ly recruit other halflings to live nearby. 

The Homesteader is a hardy halfling, will- 
ing to work harder than the average farmer 
and to accept a certain reduction in the com- 
forts of his or her life—at least, temporarily. 
His or her ideal, however, is to have a com- 
fortable burrow and cheerful batch of neigh- 
bors by the time he or she reaches old age. 

The halfling Homesteader must have a 
Strength of at least 12 and an Intelligence or 
Wisdom of at least 12. 

Roads to Adventure: The Homesteader's 
most common route to adventure is in the en- 
acting of his or her goal: seeking out free land, 
clearing it, and defending it against any who 
might care to take it away. However, once the 
farm is established, the Homesteader is likely 
to embark on a long journey, visiting many 
farflung halfling communities in the attempt 
to recruit other settlers to come and join him 
or her. Indeed, this journey can involve sev- 
eral years of travel and often forms the seeds 
of an epic tale that becomes the cornerstone of 
the community's history—if the community 
survives, that is. 

Also, the very trek involved in reaching the 
homestead can form a grand adventure for the 
brave halflings who seek unsettled land. By 


nature curious, the Homesteader might pass 
through a lot of different locales in the search 
for the perfect steading. The adventures and 
obstacles of such an epic journey can easily 
create the foundation of a great character 
history. 

Role; Homesteaders are responsible for 
much of the expansion of the race across the 
known worlds. Most halfling villages can 
trace their history back to a hardy Home- 
steader couple, and these individuals tend to 
be revered by the generations who have fol- 
lowed in their footsteps. This matriarch or pa- 
triarch will be honored and feted in his or her 
old age and regarded as a prime source of in- 
teresting stories. This is regarded as nothing 
less than a just reward for one who took such 
risks and endured such hardships in order to 
bring another halfling community into being. 

Commonly, a halfling that sets out on a 
homesteading adventure will take at least one 
stone from his or her family fireplace along on 
the journey. Then, when he or she finally 
builds his or her own place, this stone will be 
used as a key part of the new hearth. 

Secondary Skills: Farming is the secondary 
skill most necessary to the homesteader. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Homesteader 
should be proficient in either the short bow or 
the sling and should also have a melee weapon 
proficiency with the knife or short sword. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Agricul- 
ture or Animal Handling is a bonus proficien- 
cy to all characters who select the 
Homesteader kit. In addition, the character 
can select either Hunting or Fishing as an addi- 
tional bonus proficiency. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
This character has need of a wide variety of 
skills; some of the more useful include Car- 
pentry, Rope Use, Weather Sense, and Surviv- 
al. Others can be tied to the type of farming 
the Homesteader intends to do: a shepherd 
can benefit from Weaving, a dairyman from 
Cheesemaking, any herdsman has a use for 
Leatherworking, and a grain-grower can 


Halfling Character Kits © 97 


profit from a knowledge of Baking or Brew- 
ing, for example. 

Equipment: There is no specific item of 
equipment universal to halfling Homestead- 
ers. Many of them will have a handcart or 
small wagon, however, to carry their belong- 
ings on the quest for the perfect plot of land. 
Additionally, a beast of burden such as a pony 
or mule or animals that produce something 
useful (a few ducks, chickens, or geese; a 
dairy cow or goat; a few sheep) can be worth 
their weight in gold. Animals large and steady 
enough to pull the cart can prove of double 
value when the homestead is finally reached. 

Special Benefits: The Homesteader who 
carefully selects his or her land, works hard at 
tending it, and then travels far and wide to re- 
cruit settlers is likely to end up a very wealthy 
halfling, having earned the respect of the new 
community and a place in the local histories. 
In effect, he or she exchanges a lot of hard 


98 * Chapter Four 


work and difficulties at a young age for the 
chance to be treated very well when he or she 
grows old. Other intangible benefits can in- 
clude such grandiose attainments as having a 
town named after you, or the simple satisfac- 
tion of seeing well-plowed fields and a thriv- 
ing village where there was none before. 

Special Hindrances: The primary hindrance 
to the hardy Homesteader is that he or she has 
to do just about everything on his or her own 
—he or she does not have a community of 
skilled neighbors to draw upon for help, bar- 
ter, and advice. 


Mercenary 


The halfling Mercenary is a bit of a rare 
bird—one of the small folk proficient enough 
as a fighter to earn a place alongside warriors 
of larger and more aggressive races, and one 
who doesn't mind the difficulties of campaign 


life or the terror and confusion of battle. 
Note that this stops well short of saying: 
“A Mercenary loves to fight and kill.” 

A halfling Mercenary must have ability 
scores of at least 13 in two of these categories: 
Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution. 

Roads to Adventure: It would be a rare 
halfling who would adopt the Mercenary life- 
style by choice. Mercenaries are almost al- 
ways outcasts who for some reason or another 
have been disowned by their families and 
driven from their villages, forced into a life of 
violence and danger. Many of them are, not 
surprisingly, quite bitter about this involun- 
tary exile. Whether or not the individual was 
actually guilty of the crime of which he 
or she is accused is irrelevant; the effect is 
the same in either case. Whatever misdeed or 
misfortune drove the halfling to become a 
Mercenary, it tends to be a private matter, 
jealously guarded. 

Role: The Mercenary is an outcast from 
halfling society who is forced to mingle with 
humans, elves, dwarves, even goblinoids— 
and consequently, over time he or she will be- 
gin to acquire some of the characteristics of 
those races. Now and then in his or her wan- 
derings, a Mercenary might enjoy an opportu- 
nity to visit a friendly burrow and sit by the 
hearth of a fellow halfling for the night or 
two, but soon he or she will be wanting to 
move on, perhaps propelled by the frowning 
looks of neighbors less open-minded than his 
or her host. 

Secondary Skills: Since no halfling plans to 
grow up and become a Mercenary, he or she 
could have almost any secondary skill to rep- 
resent his or her former profession. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The halfling Merce- 
nary must be proficient with at least one melee 
and one missile weapon. If the optional weap- 
on specialization rules are used, the character 
must have a weapon specialization by the time 
he or she reaches second level of ability (see 
Special Benefits, below). 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: None. 


A 


Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Halfling Mercenaries have been known to find 
the following proficiencies useful: Carpentry, 
Riding, Armorer, Blindfighting, Bowyer/ 
Fletcher, Tracking, and Weaponsmithing. 

Equipment: The Mercenary will typically 
be offered decent weapons and armor by his 
or her employer—nothing special, but equal 
to the equipment of the rest of the company. 
Anything superior to this has to be provided 
by the Mercenary himself or herself. 

Special Benefits: Due to his or her continual 
exposure to warriors—and typical Small Folk 
quick-wittedness—the halfling Mercenary re- 
ceives two extra weapon proficiency slots 
upon reaching second level. The slots must be 
used to purchase a weapon specialization, if 
he or she does not already have one. Like the 
Archer, the halfling Mercenary can specialize 
in the bow or other missile weapon at a cost of 
only two proficiency slots (not three). 

Special Hindrances: This is not generally 
considered a socially acceptable career for a 
halfling. Thus, a halfling Mercenary is likely 
to be given quite the hairy eyeball by others of 
his or her race—at least, those who know 
what the character does for a living. This 
translates into a —2 penalty on Reaction 
Rolls. 


Sheriff 


The halfling Sheriff is really more of a be- 
nign constable than a tough enforcer, but he 
or she does represent the long arm of the law 
(so to speak) among the villagers and visitors 
in his or her community. The position is, for 
the most part, an honorary one—since half- 
lings don't have a lot of troublemakers among 
their own ranks and don't run the kind of es- 
tablishments that tend to draw humans ruffi- 
ans. Still, the post represents the faith and 
confidence of a good number of villagers, and 
the responsibility tends to be taken very seri- 
ously by the halfling who holds it. 

A halfling Sheriff must have a Charisma of 


Halfling Character Kits * 99 


K 


at least 13 (most have Charismas which are 
much higher) and a Strength of at least 11. 

Roads to Adventure: The solving of a com- 
plex crime can serve admirably to draw a half- 
ling Sheriff into an adventure. Though his or 
her primary duty always lies with the halflings 
of his or her village or shire, the Sheriff is will- 
ing to range far and wide in pursuit of those 
who have wronged those neighbors. In keep- 
ing with halfling values, however, this dogged 
pursuit extends only to those who have caused 
bodily harm—the Sheriff is not likely to make 
a vigorous pursuit merely to recover lost 
property. Thus a Sheriff may turn a blind eye 
on the doings of Bandits and Smugglers in the 
area, but ruffians who beat up an elderly 
farmer will soon find the same Sheriff leading 
an angry posse in hot pursuit. 

Role: Within the village, the halfling Sheriff 
has a small office—often a corner of his or her 
own burrow—where he or she can usually be 
found when not out “keeping an eye on 
things.” Jails are not common in halfling vil- 
lages, but if there is a lockup it will be nearby. 
It will, however, have its own separate en- 
trance, secured by a stout door and lock, 

Most of the Sheriff's time is spent in seeing 
that all goes as it should and in looking out for 
signs of trouble ("Odd that Old Mistress El- 
derberry didn't come to market this morning; 
she hardly ever misses a day"). Although he or 
she doesn't maintain a regular ‘beat, the Sher- 
iff does spend a lot of time ambling through 
the village and will try to find an excuse to vis- 
it outlying farms and isolated families at least 
once a week to see that all is well with their 
inhabitants. 

Often he or she is politely nosy, asking 
questions about things that have changed, dis- 
playing interest in everything going on in the 
community or canton. A Sheriff knows all the 
local citizens by name and is familiar enough 
with their normal habits to take note of any 
break in routine—such as the baker not firing 
up her oven in the morning, or the farmer 
leaving his irrigation gate closed. In these in- 


100 * Chapter Four 


stances, the Sheriff would make a friendly 
check to make sure nothing is amiss. 

Among halflings there are not a lot of laws 
that require the attention of law enforcement. 
Thievery is one, and so is violent assault and 
of course murder. None of these crimes are 
likely to be committed by one villager against 
another—in the rare case where this occurs 
and can be proven, a thief is forced to make 
restitution, while a halfling guilty of deliber- 
ately harming another is banished from the 
community for life (many of these become 
Mercenaries; see the preceding kit). More 
common are boundary disputes, complaints 
from halfling fathers about overzealous suit- 
ors who pursue their daughters, or charges of 
unfair trading. The Sheriff usually resolves all 
of these with calm diplomacy, and it is not un- 
common for even the loser to come away 
from a settlement feeling that he or she has re- 
ceived very fair treatment. 

The Sheriff also typically has the authority 
to call up the Small Folk in times of crisis, cry- 
ing for a muster of all who can bear arms. The 
post does not necessarily entitle him or her to 
command of the company when it assembles; 
such leadership is more often a matter of past 
experience and age. 

Being Sheriff of a halfling village, especially 
if it's a smaller community, is not necessarily a 
full time job, so it is quite likely that this char- 
acter will run a small farm or practice some 
sort of trade as well. Running a small store is a 
common practice among Sheriffs, since it al- 
lows them to remain at their post most of the 
time and also provides interaction with the 
village citizenry. 

Secondary Skills: Any. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Sheriff should 
be proficient in the use of the short sword, the 
club, and the knife. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: None. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Tracking skill and knowledge of an extra lan- 
guage or two are proficiencies that can make a 
Sheriff's job a lot easier. 


Equipment: A Sheriffs arms and armor 
usually come with the job, so the character 
doesn't have to purchase these. It is not un- 
likely that he or she will also have access to a 
pony, should the need for a mount arise. 

Special Benefits: The authority of respect- 
able halfling society is the primary benefit of 
the Sheriff. He or she receives a +2 bonus on 
all NPC Reaction Rolls made for halfling 
NPCs (as long as the other character knows of 
the Sheriff's rank). 

Special Hindrances: All Sheriffs have a 
strong sense of duty and will respond at once 
when called upon—i.e., whenever anyone in 
the village has a need for his or her services. 
This can often entail long hours and rude in- 
terruptions in the Sheriff's enjoyment of life. 


Squire 


Halfling fighters have been known to form 
strong friendships with fighters, rangers, and 
paladins of other races—most notably hu- 
man, but not disallowing dwarven, elven, and 
other more exotic folk (one chaotic evil half- 
ling is said to have formed a partnership with 
a red dragon!). Since such adventuring pairs 
typically encounter most of their excitement 
in nonhalfling societies, the halfling partner is 
often regarded (by the members of that other 
society) as an apprentice, squire, or sidekick 
to the warrior of local origin. Such an as- 
sumption, naturally, is very far from the 
truth; the two are in fact full partners. 

However, the halfling warrior does serve a 
number of useful functions that would prove 
difficult for the larger partner to accomplish 
on his or her own. Squires make marvelous 
scouts and spies, since they specialize in acting 
dumb and nonthreatening. 

The size of the halfling, together with the 
ability to hide in bushes and undergrowth, 
makes him or her an exceptionally valuable 
companion when it comes to gathering infor- 
mation. It’s even possible for a Squire to dis- 
guise himself or herself as a human child to 


gain access to places where adult adventurers 
fear to tread. 

The Squire needs two minimum attribute 
score: a 10 for Strength and a 12 for Cha- 


risma. 

Roads to Adventure: For the Squire, friend- 
ship is a strong enough inducement to draw 
him or her away from the typical halfling 
comforts. In this case, anything that compels 
the first member of the pair will draw the half- 
ling character along as well. 

The Squire is often motivated by genuine 
friendship for his or her partner, sometimes 
coupled with a sense of gratitude for some- 
thing that has happened in the past, or a mu- 
tual goal (perhaps even a quest) that the pair 
have embarked upon together. 

Role: When among strangers, the halfling 
Squire often plays the role of simpleminded 
servant; this increases his or her chances to 
eavesdrop and usually causes potential ene- 
mies to underestimate the danger he or she 
poses. All Squires are adept at observing near- 
ly everything that goes on around them and 
often act as ambassadors to other races—par- 
ticularly those who might be hostile to the 
Squire's partner. 

It is important to realize that, in reality, the 
Squire and his partner are full equals—the 
halfling is not a squire in the traditional sense 
of apprentice or servant. Even if the two act 
out a false relationship for appearances’ sake, 
the Squire and his partner remain together be- 
cause of trust and affection; there is no room 
for one or the other to be the boss. 

Secondary Skills: A Squire should have the 
Groom secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: This character 
should have a proficiency in at least one melee 
and one missile weapon. A proficiency that 
matches his or her partner's can provide extra 
benefits (see Special Benefits, below). 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The 
Squire character receives either the Animal 
Handling or the Riding (Landbased) proficien- 
cy as a bonus. In addition, the halfling can 


Halfling Character Kits * 101 


gain proficiencies known to his or her part- 
ners, simply through the progress of their co- 
operative adventures, as follows: 

When the halfling goes up in level and at 
least half the necessary experience points to 
gain the new level were earned from tasks that 
the Squire performed with his or her partner, 
the halfling can add one proficiency slot, fill- 
ing it with a proficiency that his or her partner 
holds and used during the course of the pre- 
vious adventures. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Heraldry and Foreign Languages are proficien- 
cies that often prove useful in a Squire; also, 
the Armorer, Bowyer/Fletcher, and Weapon- 
smithing skills can be helpful. 

Equipment: A Squires companion will try 
to provide a suitable steed for his or her part- 
ner, as well as weapons and armor for the 
halfling, if he or she has the means. 

Special Benefits: The Squire becomes very 
familiar with the habits and characteristics of 
his or her partner's race; thus, he or she gains a 
*2 bonus to NPC Reaction Rolls made for 
members of that race. 

In addition, the Squire can advance to 
slightly higher levels than can other halfling 
warriors. The Squire can reach a total of two 
levels higher than he or she would otherwise 
be allowed (see page 92); however, he or she 
cannot pass the level of his or her partner by 
this means. 

Special Hindrances: The loss is mostly in- 
tangible, but the halfling Squire is forced to do 
without the comforts of hearth and burrow 
that are so fundamental to his or her kind. In 
effect, he or she chooses to replace his or her 
family with the partner; a Squire who loses 
that partner to death or other mischance is a 
lonely halfling indeed. 


Tunnelrat 
This is a dirty-under-the fingernails halfling 


with an unusual amount of courage and a 
scrappy attitude toward dangerous and pow- 


102 * Chapter Four 


erful foes. The cheerful, matter-of-fact, 
bloodthirsty attitude of these professionals 
usually comes as a great surprise to humans 
and others who think of all halflings as jolly 
farmer-types. The Tunnelrat specializes in un- 
derground search-and-destroy missions, espe- 
cially in areas where constricted space or low 
ceilings would put larger warriors at a signifi- 
cant disadvantage. 

The Tunnelrat must have a Strength score of 
at least 13 and a Constitution score of 11 or 
greater. 

Roads to Adventure: Most Tunnelrats are 
drawn to this deadly calling by some dire 
event in the past—usually nothing less than a 
life-shattering trauma will suffice to drive a 
normally peaceful halfling into such gritty 
and dangerous work, as when a halfling who 
has lost loved ones to the depredations of gob- 
lins or kobolds becomes an implacable enemy 
to those evil creatures. Occasionally, of 


course, the drive is not due to such dark 
causes—the lure of easy money, simple talent, 
or mental instability might propel a sturdy 
halfling into a career as a Tunnelrat. After all, 
this is one of the few areas (perhaps the only 
one) where small size is not only not a liability 
but a basic prerequisite. 

Role: The Tunnelrat specializes in rooting 
out smallish humanoid monsters who make 
their lairs underground. Goblins, Duergar 
and kobolds are the most common of these en- 
emies, though many other types are possi- 
ble—including lycanthropes, undead, and 
animal monsters like giant rats, giant weasels, 
and carrion crawlers. 

Tunnelrats generally seek out the dens of 
their enemies, attacking them for whatever 
profit they can find there—and, more impor- 
tantly, for the satisfaction of eliminating an 
enemy of their people. Tunnelrats sometimes 
work together as a team and will sometimes 
band together with gnomish Goblinstickers 
on a joint mission, especially if the two groups 
share the same foe. In the latter case, the 
gnomish presence provides a very useful com- 
plement to the halflings—without any in- 
crease in size. Tunnelrats will sometimes join 
forces with dwarves as well, but since a typi- 
cal dwarf is significantly larger than a gnome 
or halfling, this severely restricts the size of 
tunnels that the party can investigate. 

Secondary Skills: No particular secondary 
skill is required for the Tunnelrat. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Tunnelrat 
should be proficient in the use of the short 
sword, hand axe, or war hammer, as well as 
either the crossbow, short bow, blowgun, or 
darts. If weapon specialization is used in the 
campaign, the Tunnelrat must have a melee 
weapon specialization by the time he or she 
reaches third level. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The Tun- 
nelrat automatically receives Blindfighting in 
addition to any other proficiency. Also, he or 
she can select one of the following languages 
in addition to any the character would nor- 


mally know: goblin, orc, kobold, and 
Duergar. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Rope Use, Swimming, and Mountaineering 
(for scaling underground cliffs) are all useful 
to the Tunnelrat. 

Equipment: The Tunnelrat is typically 
equipped with a generous coil of thin but 
strong rope, flasks of oil, flint and steel, at 
least one lantern, and metal climbing spikes. 
His or her weapons will be slung from belts 
and straps, readily reachable with either 
hand. Also, he or she will be sure to carry a 
plentiful supply of ammunition for his or her 
missile weapon. 

Special Benefits: Tunnelrats who are not 
Stoutish will gradually develop an infra- 
vision-like ability to see in the dark. The range 
of this sight (which works exactly like infra- 
vision) is equal to 10' per level of the Tun- 
nelrat (to a maximum of 60’). 

Special Hindrances: Tunnelrats are consid- 
ered shockingly crude and more than a little 
mad by most other halflings—why would 
anyone choose to root around in dirty holes 
after dangerous monsters? Therefore, the Tun- 
nelrat suffers a —2 penalty on Reaction 
Checks made for NPC halflings. 


Thief Kits 
Bandit 


The halfling Bandit is a far cry from his or 
her human or orcish counterpart. While the 
basic approach to thievery is the same, he or 
she pulls off robberies with more panache. 
The target is confronted with a choice: hand 
over your goods or suffer bodily harm—yet 
the halfling Bandit always retains a certain 
amount of sympathy for his or her victims 
and will never bully someone simply for the 
pleasure of it. 

Bandits tend to work in small groups, 
though not all thieves in the band need be 
members of this kit—or even halflings. They 
will have a headquarters in some remote loca- 


Halfling Character Kits e 103 


K 


tion, almost always screened by forest (in- 
cluding forested swampland). Trails to the lair 
are well hidden, and if the entire band is com- 
posed of halflings it's likely that in many plac- 
es these access paths will pass under 
low-hanging branches, through close and 
thorny thickets, and even under stone arches 
only 2' to 3' tall. Depending on the size of the 
Bandit band, one or two lookouts will proba- 
bly be on duty at all times along the most- 
traveled of these obscure paths. 

A Bandit PC should have a Charisma of at 
least 12 and a Strength or Constitution of 
at least 13. 

Roads to Adventure: Some halflings be- 
come bandits because they want to put a 
healthy distance between themselves and the 
nearest authorities; others choose this profes- 
sion for the fun of the thing. For example, a 
halfling who stands up to a local duke's rapa- 
cious tax collector and drives him out of the 
village will probably want to consider a very 
long vacation as soon as she calms down. 
Once she has fled to the woods, established a 
hideout, and made a reputation for herself by 
harassing more of the human lord's agents, 
other halflings may flock to her banner— 
some because they believe in her cause, some 
because the lifestyle appeals to them. 

The Bandit has a curious standing in half- 
ling society—officially he or she is disap- 
proved of, and the local Sheriff will often send 
the area's ruler long reports lamenting his or 
her inability to stop the holdups. Privately, 
the same Sheriff might be a friend of the Ban- 
dit leader—indeed, he or she may have rela- 
tives belonging to the band—and remain 
content to leave them alone so long as they 
avoid violence and don't rob members of their 
own race. Most of their fellow halflings will 
regard them with amused tolerance, shading 
to frank envy and hero-worship by the young 
and young-at-heart. A local Bandit gang 
might trade occasionally with halfling vil- 
lagers in the surrounding area. In this way, the 
Bandits can maintain most of the comforts of 


104 * Chapter Four 


the hearth and burrow and also have the bene- 
xm 5 a job where they don't have to work too 
ard. 

Consequently, young halflings from these 
neighboring villages become acquainted with 
the Bandits, and at least a few of them are 
drawn to that apparently idyllic forest life— 
and thus the ranks of the band are replen- 
ished. Others who have become fugitives 
through the same causes as the original Bandit 
can find safe haven and join the cause; many 
of them may choose to remain even after the 
original injustice is eventually rectified. 

Sometimes an entire halfling community is 
driven to banditry—as when a human lord 
forces halflings from their homes to make way 
for human setters, or when wars and invasion 
sweep across the land. In such cases, Bandits 
have been known to become the backbone of 
the halfling defense, harassing enemies and 
supporting friends until the crisis passes. It's 
memories of times like these that explain the 
forgiving attitude of the typical halfling to- 
ward these carefree rogues. 

Role: Bandits consider themselves equaliz- 
ers of wealth. After all, a quick look around 
will show that some folks have just too much 
money —and the Bandit takes it upon himself 
or herself to correct this inequity. 

Halfling Bandits will avoid violence, in so 
far as they can while still accomplishing their 
objectives. They will not use violent ambush 
(such as an arrow barrage) to halt a merchant 
party, for example—though nets and pit traps 
are popular tactics. Utilizing the halfling abili- 
ty to conceal themselves in underbrush, Ban- 
dits delight in suddenly appearing around a 
daydreaming trader and his or her body- 
guards. By the time the victims can react, 
it's usually too late. Often, one or more half- 
lings skilled in Rope Use will lurk ahead and 
behind the ambush, ready to lasso any of the 
intended victims who might make an aggres- 
sive move or a break for freedom. 

Those victims who have the good sense to 
quietly surrender will be politely relieved of 


the better part of their wealth and allowed to 
go their way. Those who put up a fight will be 
subjected to a certain amount of indignity— 
the better to teach them to behave next time, 
according to the Bandit's admittedly convo- 
luted version of justice. For example, Bandits 
traditionally will leave a victim his or her 
horses and wagons (if any) and enough of his 
or her goods or money to get started again in 
the next town. Indeed, a very believable tale 
of hardship ("What! All of you are orphans? 
Poor fellows!") might possibly succeed in 
causing the Bandit to let the poor unfortu- 
nate(s) pass unmolested! 

However, a target who chooses to be "diffi- 
cult" and is nonetheless captured will be treated 
much more severely. His or her mount will be 
taken, along with all his or her goods; the unfor- 
tunate victim will be left to make his or her way 
back to town on foot, probably having been re- 
lieved of even his or her outer garments! 


Secondary Skills: Forester is a useful sec- 
ondary skill to the Bandit; however, any sec- 
ondary skill is acceptable. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Bandit should 
be proficient in the short bow or hand cross- 
bow, as well as at least one melee weapon. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The Ban- 
dit can claim one of the following as a bonus 
nonweapon proficiency: Direction Sense, 
Fishing, Rope Use, or Disguise. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
In addition to those listed above, Swimming, 
Weather Sense, Forgery, Set Snares, and 
Tightrope Walking can all prove useful to a 
bandit. 

Thieving Skill Emphasis: Any. 

Equipment: Bandits can equip themselves in 
whatever fashion they choose (within reason). 

Special Benefits: The Bandit usually enjoys 
a considerable amount of support from the 
halflings in the local population (“local” being 


UU a 


Halfling Character Kits e 105 


within about three or four days' travel of the 
bandit lair). This typically translates into ad- 
vance warning of any attempt to seek out and 
destroy the lair by militia, men-at-arms, or 
hired parties of adventurers. 

Special Hindrances: There's always the 
chance that the Bandits will pick on the wrong 
victim—a powerful wizard who only looks 
like a plump merchant, or an arrogant young 
lord or lady who determines to have revenge 
at all costs. In the latter case, the full weight of 
the local ruler, whether king, duchess, or bar- 
on, could well be thrown into an effort to root 
out the Bandit lair. 


Bilker 


The Bilker is a clever halfling thief who en- 
tertains his or her victims even as he or she 
steals from them—and, as often as not, the 
target of the crime doesn't even realize he or 
she has been robbed until the Bilker has trav- 
eled on to the next town. Bilkers are unusually 
larcenous for halflings, although it is only fair 
to point out that the Bilker tends to regard his 
or her activities as a grand game, and the 
profits thereof as a just fee for the entertain- 
ment he or she has provided. He or she is a 
diminutive con artist who likes to leave 'em 
laughing—but also to leave 'em far behind, 
and quickly. 

A Bilker must have Charisma and Dexterity 
scores of 13 or higher. 

Roads to Adventure: The Bilker is forced 
onto the road, you might say, because he or 
she tends to outlast his or her welcome rather 
quickly simply by practicing his or her trade. 
Like other halfling thieves, he or she will gen- 
erally avoid victimizing fellow halflings. Un- 
fortunately for all concerned, the Bilker's 
definition of “victimize” doesn't always match 
up with the victim's. For example, a Bilker will 
not consider it theft to gamble with the inn- 
keeper for free drinks every night—the inn- 
keeper, after losing for seven straight nights, 
may beg to differ. 


106 * Chapter Four 


Naturally, a fresh supply of targets is essen- 
tial to the Bilker's activities. A Bilker who 
works smaller towns and villages must of ne- 
cessity be prepared to stay on the move to 
keep one step ahead of his or her former cus- 
tomers. A Bilker who decides to exercise his or 
her talents in a large city might be able thrive 
for a considerable while, but eventually a 
gradual increase in the number of victims will 
inevitably pressure the halfling to move on. 
Obviously, a fine sense of timing is important 
for any Bilker who does not wish to end his or 
her career at the hands of an angry mob. Ever 
optimistic, he or she often tells friends about a 
wonderful opportunity that has just arisen to 
sample the life in some far distant locale—im- 
mediately before decamping with the goods! 

Role: The Bilker is a curious fellow—unde- 
niably a scoundrel, scallywag, and all-around 
rascal, yet also a thoroughly likeable person 
whose powers of persuasion can make him or 
her a valuable asset to any adventuring party. 
Many a Bilker has used his or her silver 
tongue to get friends out of a sticky situation, 
only to cheat them out of their pocket money 
the next night. Fellow halflings can almost al- 
ways see through a Bilker's schemes and view 
the gullibility of Big Folk with amused dis- 
belief. 

A Bilker travels from town to town—usu- 
ally by himself or herself, sometimes in the 
company of a group of companions. His or 
her tricks can range from simple gambling 
games intended to earn enough to pay for his 
or her room and board to complex schemes in- 
volving the exchange of valuable treasures. 
Sometimes these are even legitimate transac- 
tions in which the Bilker has somehow gotten 
involved and out of which he or she has engi- 
neered a percentage of the profits— perhaps 
from each party!—in return for his or her 
services. On other occasions, the transaction 
might be an out-and-out fraud, where the pur- 
chasers acquire something that has been coun- 
terfeited. Such complex schemes can involve 
property deeds, rare objects of art, bogus trea- 


sure maps, or beautiful and valuable jewelry 
that will be recognized as stolen the first time 
the unwary buyer wears it in public. 

Secondary Skills: Gambling is the second- 
ary skill most appropriate to the bilker. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Bilker should be 
adept at the use of the knife. The hand cross- 
bow, often concealed under a cloak or inside a 
hat, is a favored missile weapon of Bilkers 
everywhere. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Gaming. 
Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
A knowledge of Disguise, Local History, Ap- 
praising, and Ventriloquism can all prove use- 

ful to the enterprising Bilker. 

Thieving Skill Emphasis: Manual dexterity 
is essential to the Bilker's sleight of hand 
games; hence, Pick Pockets is a favorite. Hear 
Noise also often comes in handy. 

Equipment: The Bilker is a cautious soul; he 
or she usually appears unarmed in order to 
disarm suspicion, while carrying a weapon or 
two concealed somewhere on his or her per- 
son. Also, he or she will never be found with- 
out the tools of his or her trade—a pack of 
cards, some dice, a few shells, and knuckle- 
bones. After all, you never know when you 
might be able to get a friendly game together! 

Special Benefits: The Bilker is adept at pre- 
senting an acquaintance (the "sucker" or 
^mark") with an interesting gaming opportu- 
nity. The game involves the acquaintance 
guessing about some apparently random 
chance—which shell is the pebble under, or 
what number will come up on the knuckle- 
bone? The sucker is usually allowed to win a 
round or two, but by the time the game is 
over, the Bilker ends up holding the coins. 

Use the following procedure to resolve 
these attempts, once the Bilker has found an 
appropriate NPC mark: 

The bet usually centers around a single 
coin—silver or gold, most likely, but varying by 
the standards of the surrounding establishment. 
The Bilker can automatically lose any round he 
or she chooses. À fair game can be played by 


À 


rolling 1d10 for the Bilker and another for the 
NPC, with a tie going to the mark. 

If the Bilker wants to rig the game, his or 
her Dexterity score is subtracted from the 
mark's Wisdom score (to a minimum Wisdom 
of 0). The victim must then roll that number 
or less on 1d20. If the check fails, the Bilker 
wins the bet. If it succeeds, the mark realizes 
he or she is being hoodwinked, and an intrigu- 
ing roleplaying encounter may occur. 

The Bilker can repeat the attempt as many 
times as he or she wants—however, for each 
attempt, the victim gains a +1 bonus to his or 
her roll. Thus, a wise Bilker knows when to 
call it a night. 

Bilkers also have the additional ability 
which helps them sometimes talk their way 
out of trouble. When confronted by a poten- 
tially hostile person or persons, a Bilker may 
attempt to smoothtalk the other party (natu- 
rally, the attempt is only possible if both par- 
ties speak a common language, and the ability 
will not work if combat has already been 
joined). The Bilkers Charisma score is sub- 
tracted from the victim's Wisdom score, and 
the victim must then roll under the resulting 
number or he or she (or it) will find himself- 
herself-itself nodding in agreement with what- 
ever the Bilker is proposing. Naturally, truly 
outrageous proposals will give the victim a 
hefty bonus ( +1 to +5, depending on the na- 
ture of the suggestion). The victim also gains a 
cumulative +1 bonus for each previous time 
the Bilker has used this ability on him or her. 
Still, this ability is very useful to help get a 
Bilker and his or her friends out of a tight 
spot. Alas, the effect is temporary, lasting on- 
ly a minute or two, so a Bilker soon learns to 
get while the getting is good. 

A Bilker's larger schemes and scams should 
be are left to the player character to create and 
enact. The DM should take appropriate pre- 
cautions for whatever NPC faces bilking. 

Special Hindrances: The Bilker is a fun 
character to have around, but he or she usu- 
ally leaves bad tempers behind when he or she 


Halfling Character Kits € 107 


departs. His or her opportunistic behavior 
makes it difficult for the halfling to make 
longterm friendships or keep allies, eventually 
leaving the character to face the woes of his or 
her own making alone. The longer a Bilker 
plies his or her trade, the more numerous his 
or her former victims become, making it al- 
most inevitable that one day, when the Bilker 
least expects it, his or her path will cross that 
of an "old friend.” Often, the previous victim 
is very glad to find the halfling thief who 
made him or her feel like a fool and walked off 
with a goodly amount of his or her money. 
The Bilker, naturally, might not be so delight- 
ed with the reunion. 


Burglar 
The halfling Burglar is a benign specialist at 


retrieving objects of value from those who 
have come by them wrongly —at least, that's 


108 e Chapter Four 


the way the Burglar sees it (admittedly, the 
one who has been burgled tends to disagree). 
Adept at stealthy movement, lockpicking, 
recognizing traps, and removing them, the 
Burglar aspires to a life of comfort simply by 
virtue of his or her talents—the ultimate in 
halfling accomplishment. 

A Burglar must have a Dexterity score of at 
least 15. 

Roads To Adventure: Burgling involves 
skills that most halflings learn at a young 
age—children are forever sneaking into each 
other's rooms, borrowing each other's toys, 
and spying on their siblings. As the young- 
sters mature, a few of them begin to consider 
the potential profitability of their skills, turn- 
ing their attention toward more lucrative and 
dangerous targets. As with many kinds of 
thievery, burglaring has a built-in inducement 
to travel—if the local authorities begin to 
grow suspicious, the life of a simple Burglar 


can become very complicated indeed. 

Other motivations can include the recovery 
of property that has been wrongfully taken 
from the Burglar or his or her friends. Natu- 
rally, the Burglar won't face certain death sim- 
ply to recover stolen goods, but if the 
character thinks he or she can get away with 
it, he or she might derive a certain amount of 
satisfaction from setting matters right. Some- 
times the simple challenge of slipping into a 
great fortress or burglaring a well-defended 
treasure is enough to draw a Burglar's inter- 
est—not so much for the value of the goods as 
for the test of skills involved. 

Like the Archer, the Burglar is the best of 
the best, a halfling who has developed to per- 
fection skills all halflings possess to some de- 
gree—stealth, nimbleness, and unobtrusive 
movement. As such, he or she is highly re- 
spected by the halfling community for his or 
her expertise. Whereas an accomplished hu- 
man thief usually tries to hide his or her pro- 
fession, a Burglar's trade will be well-known 
by his or her halfling neighbors and his or her 
accomplishments highly-regarded—indeed, it 
is a source of civic pride for a village to be 
home to a really first-class Burglar, something 
for the town as a whole to boast about. This 
acceptance works to the community's benefit, 
since most Burglars will be willing to help out 
in times of crisis by using their talents for spy- 
ing or gathering information that might prove 
useful to the village as a whole. 

Role: The burglar is the master of several 
thiefly arts, most notably Move Silently and 
Open Locks, though skill at finding and re- 
moving traps can be another lifesaving talent. 
Burglars can be found in all areas of halfling 
society, including the comfortably wealthy as 
well as the most destitute. 

Most Burglars congregate in areas of larger 
communities, where they can mingle with 
members of other races. Like most halfling 
thieves, the Burglar tends to avoid halfling 
victims, preferring the treasures of humanoid 
monsters and humans above all others. Occa- 


sionally a Burglar will choose to use his or her 
skills to aid fellow halflings who have suffered 
injustices; such Burglars can rise to the status 
of folk hero. 

Secondary Skills: Many Burglars have skills 
at Trading and Bartering. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Burglars prefer 
weapons that can be wielded quickly and in 
relative silence. Daggers and short swords are 
preferred for melee, though some specialize in 
other weapons. The sling is a popular missile 
weapon for a Burglar, as are darts and, in 
areas where they are known or used, the 
blowgun and hand crossbow. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The 
Burglar gains a nonweapon proficiency for 
Appraisal. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Rope Use, Disguise, and Tightrope Walking 
are all useful to a Burglar. 

Thieving Skill Emphasis: Move Silently; 


Halfling Character Kits © 109 


K 


Hide in Shadows; Open Locks; Find and Re- 
move Traps. 

Equipment: A rope and a set of lockpicks 
are the standard tools of the Burglar. He or she 
will often scorn the use of armor altogether, 
and in any case will wear nothing heavier than 
leather, delighting in dark, silent clothing. 

Special Benefits: At first level the Burglar 
gains an additional 1096 to Open Locks or 
Move Silently. Each time he or she gains a new 
level, the Burglar receives a +5% bonus that 
can be applied to either of the above two tal- 
ents or to Find and Remove Traps. 

Special Hindrances: The Burglar devotes so 
much of his or her time to developing the 
skills of stealth that he or she is at something 
of a disadvantage in face-to-face combat, suf- 
fering a —1 penalty on all attack rolls in me- 
lee. However, attacks made as a backstab are 


not affected by this penalty. 
Smuggler 


The Smuggler is a halfling thief who gives 
every appearance of being an honest trader. In 
fact, he or she would prefer to be a straight- 
forward and upright merchant, but (generally 
speaking) the impossible situation created by 
taxes and tolls of intrusive humans, dwarves, 
and elves drives him or her to more under- 
handed dealings. Thus, he or she imports and 
exports many things from many places—most 
of which are not supposed to be leaving or ar- 
riving at these specific locations. 

The reasons for smuggling goods vary con- 
siderably; the following are the most common 
among them: 

Excessive Taxation. A local government 
may wish to retain a monopoly on a local 
product (wine from the duke's vineyard, for 
example) and so seizes or stamps a high tariff 
on any competing goods brought into the 
duchy. 

Belligerent Status. Two rival states involved 
in a border dispute will often prohibit trade 
with the enemy. Local farmers and tradesmen, 


110 * Chapter Four 


however, don't always grasp the wisdom of a 
policy that cuts them off from their customers 
—thus, the aid of a Smuggler can keep the 
economy alive. 

Contraband. A particular commodity 
might be banned outright, with penalties of 
varying severity for those who violate the 
prohibition. If a rival religious sect, for exam- 
ple, values bloodstones in its rituals, the en- 
trenched state religion might bar that stone 
from the realm, decreeing that anyone caught 
with a bloodstone be put to death. Whatever 
the nature of the contraband, chances are that 
it is very valuable to someone—and conse- 
quently, there's a great deal of profit incentive 
for the bold Smuggler. 

A Smuggler must have a Charisma or Intel- 
ligence score of at least 13. 

Roads to Adventure: Smugglers almost al- 
ways begin as traders, transporting goods 
from one location to another, turning a small 
profit, and bringing something new back to 
the point of origin. Sooner or later, as he or 
she expands his or her routes and the world 
changes, such a trader runs afoul of one of the 
above prohibitions—and the pragmatic half- 
ling doesn't see why such a minor detail 
should change the way he or she conducts 
business. Thus, the merchant continues to do 
what he or she has always done—but with a 
little more risk, and a little more profit. 

Tied into the Smuggler's normal way of life 
can be any number of special missions—tasks 
which allow the Smuggler to employ his or 
her skills in the name of a higher cause. Rescue 
of a prisoner is one, or the delivery of a mes- 
sage or item of great importance. A Smuggler 
can function as a very effective spy, reporting 
back on the mood of the local people as well 
as more typical information on land features 
and defensive preparations. 

Role: The Smuggler is a vital cog in the un- 
official economy of virtually any region in a 
civilized world—for without him or her, a far 
greater proportion of the wealth would re- 
main in the hands of those who hold the reins 


N 
$ 
A 
a 
LI 
^ 
> 
` 


ES n 


PUE 


of power. Many goods that would otherwise 
have no outlet find their way to customers 
thanks to the intrepid Smuggler. Whether he 
or she carts it down rural highways or barges 
it along placid streams, the Smuggler will, 
quietly and reliably, see that his or her cargo 
reaches its destination. 

Smugglers build a network of loyal friends 
and companions (which is why high Charisma 
is such an asset) and treat these accomplices 
well in return for protection and help. 

The value of the goods smuggled is depen- 
dent on two factors: the market for those 
goods at their destination (supply and de- 
mand) and the difficulties and dangers en- 
dured by the smuggler in transporting them. 
Something which is valuable to begin with 
that now carries the threat of death will bring 
many times its normal worth to the Smuggler. 

Secondary Skills: Either the Trader/Barter- 
er or Teamster/Freighter secondary skills are 
appropriate for the Smuggler. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: All 
Smugglers gain the Local History proficiency 
for areas on their regular routes. Also, Smug- 
glers pick up languages during their travels, 
gaining the ability to speak and understand an 
additional language every other level, starting 
at second level. Naturally, the new language 
must be one he or she has had contact with 
during the course of the previous two levels of 
experience. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Riding, Appraising, Disguise, and Forgery 
can all help a Smuggler in his or her work. 

Thieving Skill Emphasis: Move Silently 
helps a Smuggler avoid attracting unwanted 
attention, while Hear Noise often alerts him 
or her to unwanted company. 

Equipment: Unless he or she transports 
very small quantities, the Smuggler needs 
some way to haul cargo. Wagons and carts are 
easy to trace, so Smugglers prefer either some 
form of boat (e.g., canoe, river raft, or small 
sailboat) or a pack animal (such as a mule, 


112 * Chapter Four 


pony, donkey, or large hound). In general, a 
Smuggler will only use a wheeled vehicle 
when he or she has a very good road to follow 
and is certain his or her smuggling activities 
have gone unsuspected. 

Special Benefits: A Smuggler who possesses 
the Local History proficiency for an area gains 
a +4 bonus to NPC reaction checks in that ar- 
ea. He or she will also have full knowledge of 
any hidden pathways or secret trails along his 
or her regular route. 

Special Hindrances: The inherent risks of 
challenging authority, including threat of im- 
prisonment or worse, are the primary draw- 
backs to the Smuggler's career. 


Urchin 


The Urchin is a specialized halfling thief 
who attempts to pass as a human child. Many 
an unsuspecting victim has tried to collar the 
annoying brat, only to learn that the appar- 
ently feeble child who robbed him or her is in 
fact an adult with all the skills of an accom- 
plished thief. 

Urchins are encountered almost exclusively 
in cities and large towns, where people don't 
know all their neighbors. Roaming the chaotic 
network of a city's streets and alleys, the Ur- 
chin blends in to the local population, keeping 
several escape routes and hiding holes ready 
to hand at all times. Living mostly on the 
street, the Urchin takes shelter where he or she 
can find it—as often as not among the poor 
and destitute of the community. 

The Urchin must have a Charisma score of 
at least 11. 

Roads to Adventure: The Urchin character 
is typically a kit chosen by necessity—a half- 
ling comes to a city alone and finds no market 
for his or her skills. At the same time, he or 
she grows tired of sneering bullies, some of 
whom pick on the halfling merely because of 
his or her size. Finding it easier to escape un- 
wanted attention by blending in than by 
flight, he or she finds welcome anonymity in a 


life of disguise. 

Role: The Urchin typically works alone, 
though he or she may well be a member of a 
small group; urban thieves' guilds made up 
entirely of halflings have been known to exist, 
most of whose members will be either Urchins 
or Burglars. Sometimes a halfling Urchin be- 
comes the leader of a gang of children, both 
human and demihuman. In this case the Ur- 
chin will take a very protective, almost paren- 
tal care with his or her young charges. 

Dressing in juvenile clothes, with a haircut 
similar to those of local children, the Urchin 
will wander about the city like any child with 
a free day. However, he or she is adept at pick- 
ing pockets and always has several escape 
routes memorized, ready at any moment for a 
quick getaway. 

Diversions and distractions are a part of the 
Urchins typical routine. If he or she can top- 
ple—or better yet, get someone else to top- 
ple—a fruit vendor's cart, for example, the 
resulting confusion will result in a situation 
ripe with possibilities for profit. 

Secondary Skills: Any or none. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Urchin's double 
life prevents the character from openly wear- 
ing weapons children would normally not car- 
ry (“Say—what's that kid over there doing 
with that crossbow?"). Hence Urchins tend to- 
ward easily-concealed or disguised weapons 
(dagger, darts, sling, quarterstaff). 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Because 
his or her very existence depends upon play- 
ing a role, the Urchin quickly develops a 
knack for disguise. At first level, the Urchin 
can effectively disguise himself or herself as a 
human. Upon reaching second level, the Ur- 
chin gains the Disguise proficiency in full. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Forgery, Blindfighting, Tumbling, and Ventril- 
oquism can all have their uses to the Urchin. 

Thieving Skill Emphasis: Urchins are con- 
summate pickpockets (see Special Benefits, 
below); Climb Walls and Hide in Shadows are 
helpful when it comes to getaways. 


x 


Equipment: Aside from weapons and per- 
haps a set of lockpicks, the Urchin needs no 
special equipment. 

Special Benefits: With Urchins, picking 
pockets is both a hobby and a way of life. Be- 
cause of constant practice, Urchins develop 
unusual skill in this particular aspect of thiev- 
ery. This translates into a +5% bonus per 
level to their Pick Pockets rolls, starting at 
second level (i.e., +5% at 2nd level, +10% at 
3rd level, &c.). 

Special Hindrances: The local guardsmen 
and city officials can take a real dislike to the 
activities of an Urchin, causing no end of trou- 
ble for the poor player character. 


Fighter/Thief Kits 
Cartographer 


This character is an explorer and mapmaker 
who sets out to see the world and wants to re- 
turn with a good account of his or her adven- 
tures. Although such a calling is unusual 
among halflings (except among Kender, many 
of whom believe themselves to have great tal- 
ent along these lines), the Cartographer exists 
among all halfling subraces, however rare he 
or she may be. Indeed, his or her exploits form 
the great part of many popular legends among 
the small folk. 

Cartographers are, by their nature, very in- 
terested in the land and its features. They are in- 
clined to take little note of the occupants of 
those lands, unless forced to do so. To a Cartog- 
rapher, a city’s setting on a high riverside bluff 
will seem far more profound than the fact that 
the guards of that same community have just ar- 
rested him or her under suspicion of being a spy 
or just generally being a stranger. 

A Cartographer must have an Intelligence 
score of at least 13. 

Roads to Adventure: The Cartographer is 
drawn to the road for no other purpose than 
curiosity of what lies over the next hill— 
though many a Cartographer has become en- 
tangled in events along the way that resulted 


Halfling Character Kits * 113 


in fame and fortune. 

If the Cartographer enjoys exploring and 
adventuring for its own sake, he or she also 
enjoys keeping records of his or her experi- 
ences (to reminisce over in his or her old age, 
assuming the character survives to have 
one)—primarily by mapping out everywhere 
he or she goes. He or she has a great interest in 
new places and will often journey far out of 
his or her way simply to investigate some 
unique feature he or she has heard about. Car- 
tographers tend to ignore obstacles created by 
an area's inhabitants (hence, Cartographers 
have a high mortality rate) but will be well 
aware of the difficulties involved in crossing 
certain geographic challenges, such as deserts, 
mountain ranges, seas, and swamps. 

Role: The Cartographer is a happy wander- 
er, as comfortable under the encircling limbs 
of a thick pine as in a goosedown bed. The 
weariness of the trail may weigh down his or 


————— —mm—!Ü——À— — n cÍÓÉÜ2SÉáÓ IM MBEIUDU-BUEDEDEDEDIDODSOCSLGSLDCSSDLLILLLULULILULLEXLA LLLUÉ?OGDLLLILLCS'LHILLSSsüctc LLUUL VERBERE EP PPPEMPREEPPECPER M QS LS RN 


114 * Chapter Four 


her feet, but curiosity will still propel the trav- 
eler over one more hill, around another bend. 
The Cartographer doesn't go looking for 
trouble (i.e., adventure), but it seems to have 
a way of finding him or her, due no doubt to 
his or her inexhaustible curiosity. Often a half- 
ling Cartographer will be found mapping a 
trade route through a war zone or tracing the 
path followed by an ancient expedition 
through a forgotten dungeon, oblivious to the 
arrows flying around him or her! 
Cartographer rarely hold any sort of offi- 
cial positions as court mapmakers, with the 
ironic result that many a trackless land lies 
virtually unknown to its human or dwarven 
overlord while some retired halfling Cartogra- 
pher has a perfectly good map of the place 
tacked up above his or her hearth. Fortunately 
Cartographers are often willing—even ea- 
ger—to show others their maps; adventurers 
willing to listen patiently to the halfling tell at 
length of his or her journeys will often gain 
much valuable information for their trouble. 
Unfortunately, it must also be noted that 
just because a map was drawn by a halfling 
Cartographer, theres no reason to assume 
that a map is entirely accurate. Any feature 
the Cartographer has seen for his or her self 
will be just as it is drawn; however, some Car- 
tographers are trusting souls and will incorpo- 
rate features into their maps that they have 
only heard about second- hand. In such cases, 
the second-hand information is only as reli- 
able as the source. Kender maps are no- 
toriously unreliable, because a Kender Car- 
tographer will exaggerate what he or she sees 
in order to make a more interesting map: 
mountains become taller, rivers wider, dis- 
tances farther apart, and the like. Thus Ken- 
der maps are entertaining but relatively 
useless; a grain of truth will lie behind them, 
but it may be somewhat difficult to extract. 
Secondary Skills: Any (player's choice). 
Weapon Proficiencies: The Cartographer is 
a well-rounded character, proficient in at least 
one missile and one melee weapon. Short 


bows and short swords are the most popular, 
though the sling-staff is another favorite. Ken- 
der Cartographers will of course specialize in 
their national weapon, the hoopak. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Cartogra- 
phers gain Direction Sense as a bonus profi- 
ciency when the character is created. 

Upon reaching second level, halflings using 
this kit gain a unique proficiency: Cartogra- 
phy. The Cartography proficiency allows a 
character to accurately render on paper or 
parchment the distances and directions of fea- 
tures that he or she has personally seen. If a 
Cartographer sails along a coastline, for ex- 
ample, he or she will be able to chart its bays, 
points, reefs, and inlets, as well as give a gen- 
eral impression of the shoreline—is it forest or 
meadow, mountain or plain? However, he or 
she will not know the shape of inland features 
such as valleys or the course of rivers and 
streams. 

Cartographers who spend time chatting 
with local folk will be able to learn about 
more than the places they see themselves. 
Such second-hand maps, however, are only as 
accurate as their source—and even then they 
will lack a level of detail that the Cartogra- 
pher can add from the scenery before his or 
her own eyes. Thus, secondhand maps tend to 
have more imaginary or inaccurately- 
described features. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
A character desiring to be a Cartographer 
must take the Navigation proficiency. In addi- 
tion, Modern Language can prove very useful 
in asking directions, while Weather Sense and 
Survival can help keep the Cartographer alive 
in the wild. 

Thieving Skill Emphasis: Read Languages 
skills enable a Cartographer to research old 
maps and help plan his or her journeys; Climb 
Walls can help overcome obstacles on the 
way. 

Equipment: The Cartographer feels lost 
without his or her mapmaking kit: paper or 
parchment, quills, and ink. He or she will 


improvise in a pinch, using virtually any ma- 
terial that comes to hand (leather, bark, drift- 
wood, &c.), but will transfer such crude maps 
to more permanent form as soon as the chance 
presents itself. 

Special Benefits: Cartographers almost nev- 
er get lost, even in places they have never been 
before, above ground or below. If confronted 
with a question like "Which way back to 
town?" or "Which of these corridors leads to- 
ward the surface?" a Cartographer can make 
an Intelligence check; success means that he or 
she know the answer and failure means that 
he or she doesn't know and realizes the fact. 
Optionally, the DM can rule that on a fumble 
(a result of 20 on 1d20) the Cartographer 
thinks he or she knows the way but starts out 
in the wrong direction. 

Special Hindrances: None to speak of. 


Trader 


The halfling Trader is a legitimate version of 
the Smuggler—an honest merchant who 
spends more time in legal activities and has a 
little more fighting ability with which to pro- 
tect his or her cargo (and, incidentally, his or 
her self as well). Traders generally stake out a 
territory and a regular route and don't range 
too far afield; only a chance to dramatically 
increase his or her profits will tempt a typical 
Trader into deviating from the established 
routine. A Trader is very likely to have a bur- 
row in a local community, and though he or 
she may be absent for several days at a time he 
or she is always glad to return home again. 

A Trader must have a Charisma score of at 
least 11. 

Roads to Adventure: The Trader is a natural 
target for thieves; fortunately, his or her combi- 
nation of character classes makes this hard- 
working halfling merchant well equipped to 
vigorously defend his or her cargo. 

By the nature of his or her business, the 
Trader has the chance to make many friends 
and become acquainted with the problems in 


Halfling Character Kits e 115 


many different areas. Motivated by a strong 
sense of right and wrong, together with the 
strength of his or her influence, the Trader will 
often take a leadership role in situations that 
call for dramatic and decisive action. 

Role: Trading among halflings begins as a 
very simple, need-based process. The Trader 
finds some high quality commodity, usually 
from his or her own village, which is in large 
supply. Typical goods, especially for starting 
Traders, include cheese, produce, wine and 
beer, pottery or cloth, shellwork, unique spic- 
es or flavorings, and woodcarvings. Often, in 
fact, the local source of these goods will ‘front’ 
the Trader for his or her first cargo, in antici- 
pation of much increased business. This is on- 
ly done, however, if the young Trader is a 
local lad or lass known to be a sober and re- 
sponsible individual. 

Next the Trader determines another area, 
where he or she anticipates a demand for 


116 * Chapter Four 


"V 


fe 


z 


4 
t 


those goods and decides what he or she will 
trade for in return. The Trader typically starts 
small, with a limited and regular route upon 
which he or she tries to establish a profession- 
al reputation. If the enterprise prospers, he or 
she might show a (generally conservative) ten- 
dency to expand business; since he or she is a 
halfling, any new stops along the route usu- 
ally means the Trader will be making new 
friends there as well. 

Secondary Skills: The Trader/Barterer is 
the typical secondary skill of this kit. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The Trad- 
er can select either Appraising or Local His- 
tory as a bonus proficiency at the onset of his 
or her career. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Direction Sense, Animal Handling, and 
Weather Sense are all useful proficiencies for 
anyone who spends a lot of time on the road. 


Thieving Skill Emphasis: Detect Noise helps 
the Trader anticipate ambushes, while Read 
Languages is useful for bookkeeping. 

Equipment: The Trader will typically have 
a cart or wagon to haul his or her goods and 
some beast of burden—a pony, donkey, draft 
horse, or ox. River-based Traders will have a 
small, easily-managed boat with plenty of 
cargo space. Unlike Smugglers, Traders keep 
to well-traveled (and well-guarded) highways 
and hence prefer wagons to pack animals. 

Special Benefits: The Trader is a well- 
known and popular character, privy to the lo- 
cal news all along his or her trade routes, 
often the first to bring news and gossip from 
village to village. He or she is quick to learn of 
new and interesting discoveries and to deter- 
mine what goods and commodities are in de- 
mand in various locales. Additionally, he or 
she has a marvelous opportunity to get rich. 

Special Hindrances: In a word, thieves. 


Traveler 


This popular character is the halfling equiv- 
alent of the bard, a musician and storyteller 
traveling about out of curiosity and a general 
love of life. His or her wanderings give the 
character grist for the tales and legends by 
which he or she earns a living. Like the Car- 
tographer, he or she is curious about the wide 
world, but it is people, not places, that draw a 
Traveler's attention. Nothing makes a Trav- 
eler happier than meeting people from a wide 
variety of cultures, and this enthusiasm trans- 
lates into a remarkable ability to understand 
and adapt to local customs. 

A Traveler must have a Charisma score of 
at least 15. 

Roads to Adventure: The Traveler is an- 
other of those rare (some would say ‘mad’) 
halflings for whom the comforts of hearth and 
burrow are simply not enough. It begins al- 
most always in childhood with the feeling that 
the fair in the next village must be just a little 
grander than the one at home. Accomplished 


Travelers can become the confidants of kings 
and queens, the emissaries of earls, the enter- 
tainers of nobles and sages. 

Role: The Traveler does much the same 
work as a bard but takes himself or herself far 
less seriously. He or she is an accomplished 
wordsmith, capable of spinning a yarn on the 
spur of the moment that can reduce an audi- 
ence to tears or helpless laughter. All Travelers 
play a musical instrument, but it will always 
be a simple, homey instrument like a banjo, 
harmonica, or fiddle rather than one of the 
more sophisticated instruments favored by 
bards. Travelers are also fond of entertaining 
children with simple sleight-of-hand tricks, 
and one will often put on a special show just 
for children when he or she comes to town. 

A Traveler’s performances are almost al- 
ways informal, homespun affairs—swapping 
stories and sharing a jug with the old folks 
around a hearthfire, playing the fiddler and 
being the caller for courting couples at the lo- 
cal hoedown and square dance, thrilling 
youngsters with monster stories enlivened by 
special sound effects. Travelers are masters of 
the Question Game and enjoy matching their 
skill against that of the local champs. Because 
of their genuine enjoyment of people, Trav- 
elers are quick to make friends. As a rule, they 
are welcomed nearly everywhere they go and 
remembered fondly when they depart. 

Secondary Skills: Most Travelers will avoid 
secondary skills on principle. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Traveler can use 
any weapon; usually he or she will try to se- 
lect something unique. Travelers are particu- 
larly fond of weapons that don't look like 
weapons—for example, a walking stick which 
is actually a swordstick, or wooden juggling 
balls that can be used as missile weapons. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The Trav- 
eler receives Musical Instrument as a bonus 
proficiency. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Dance, Disguise, Etiquette, Juggling, Tum- 
bling, and Ventriloquism are all useful profi- 


Halfling Character Kits * 117 


ciencies for a Traveler. 

Thieving Skill Emphasis: Travelers do very 
little actual stealing, as a rule, but the Pick 
Pockets skill comes in handy in their sleight- 
of-hand shows. 

Equipment: Aside from his or her musical 
instrument, weapons, and the clothes he or 
she wears, a Traveler will have few posses- 
sions, no more than he or she can easily carry. 
Gold has a tendency to tie a body down, in his 
or her opinion, and the character is likely to 
leave any excess wealth that comes his or her 
way on the door of some worthy widow or or- 
phan as he or she leaves town, light of heart 
and empty of pocket. 

Special Benefits: The Traveler has several 
bard-like abilities: he or she receives a +2 to 
all Reaction Rolls due to the character's innate 
goodwill to all and friendly demeanor. A 
Traveler who has time to tell friends and allies 
an inspiring story before they enter a combat 
gives them the same attack and saving throw 
bonuses as a bless spell. Finally, his or her mu- 
sic offers immunity to song-based charm at- 
tacks (for example, a harpy's singing) to all 
within earshot, but only so long as the Trav- 
eler can keep playing non-stop. 

Special Hindrances: As noted above, all 
Travelers are poor, by choice. It has been said 
that a Traveler has a million friends and no 
home, and this is true; while his or her folksy 
manner and homespun ways win the charac- 
ter a welcome everywhere he or she goes, he 
or she has no family or burrow to return to. 
Travelers are essentially sociable loners who 
dread the day when old age will force them to 
stop their wandering at last. 


Cleric Kits 
Healer 


The Healer is the community physician, 
counselor, and spiritual adviser for his or her 
fellow halflings (though not every village or 
town is fortunate enough to have one). Heal- 
ers must have an alignment of good or neutral 


118 * Chapter Four 


and specialize in the benign arts of tending in- 
juries, curing diseases, midwifery, and general 
public health. 

The Healer must have a Wisdom score of at 
least 12. 

Roads to Adventure: Typically, the Healer 
gets drawn into adventure not because of any 
all-consuming drive to see the world or to gain 
fame and fortune, but because he or she feels 
that he or she will genuinely be able to help his 
or her friends—who for some reason the heal- 
er cannot fathom are seeking fame, fortune, 
and excitement. 

Healers are very confident in their abilities 
and those of their friends and are thus com- 
forting to have around. They tend to be right- 
eous, even a tad stodgy, in their beliefs, but 
loyal to a fault (even to those who might not 
feel a similar loyalty in return) and very deter- 
mined when in pursuit of a worthy goal. 

Role: The Healer is fond of reminding his or 
her companions that he or she is "just a simple 
country doctor, a phrase which rarely does 
this highly competent cleric justice. He or she 
has very little aptitude for combat, preferring 
instead to let more vigorous allies handle the 
tasks of violence. Naturally enough, the Heal- 
er specializes at repairing the damage inflicted 
by such battles after they are over—or, some- 
times, while they rage around him or her. 

Healers also often function as "the voice of 
reason" in a party; they give advice freely, 
whether it is asked for or not, and are not 
afraid of speaking their minds— whether to 
defend an underdog, praise an unpopular de- 
cision, or criticize an evil warlord to his or her 
face. 

Secondary Skills: The Healer's calling is a 
full-time job in itself, leaving no time for any 
secondary occupation. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Healer only re- 
ceives one weapon proficiency slot at first 
level; he or she can select any weapon eligible 
for a cleric. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The Heal- 
er automatically receives the Healing profi- 


ciency, without any penalty to his or her pro- 
ficiency checks. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
The Healer can benefit from a knowledge of 
Agriculture, Herbalism, and Reading/Writ- 
ing. 

Equipment: A Healer will never be with- 
out his or her bag, which contains scalpels, 
bandages, ah-sticks, and various herbs, 
barks, and roots useful in the event he or she 
needs to whip up a quick poultice or oint- 
ment. 

Special Benefits: The Healer gains a +1 hit 
point bonus per die rolled to all cure wounds 
spells he or she casts. 

Special Hindrances: Healers refuse to wear 
armor in all but the most dire circumstances. 
A Healer's famed lack of tact can also cause 
problems in some situations. 


Leaftender 


The Leaftender is similar in many ways to the 
druid—he or she is a priest who lives in and 
watches over the wild places that are so impor- 
tant to the halfling race. Despite the fact that his 
or her home and burrow is located deep in the 
woods, the Leaftender is not antisocial—half- 
ling visitors will always find a warm welcome 
and be invited in to share a cup of a tea, a bit of 
conversation, and a warm fire. Nonhalflings 
will meet with a similar reception once the Leaf- 
tender has ascertained that they offer no threat 
to his or her treasured domain. 

Unlike the Forestwalker, who is devoted to 
keeping the forest the way it is, and the Home- 
steader, who wishes to turn it into farmland or 
pasture, the Leaftender works to slowly tame 
a forest without destroying it. He or she will 
plant nut trees and berry bushes to provide 
more food for the local wildlife, tend sick 
trees, and generally make the woods he or she 
dwells in a healthier, friendlier place. 

Roads to Adventure: The Leaftender is like 
a wilderness gardener. Anything that threat- 
ens to undo his or her work by endangering 
the peace or health of the trees, water, or ani- 
mal life in his or her woods will draw the ire of 
the Leaftender—and compel him or her to 
take steps to counter that threat. 

Role: The Leaftender is more integrated in- 
to his or her society than is the druid—he or 
she is not a hermit, even though he or she may 
live some distance away from the community. 
Since the wild and beautiful places are so im- 
portant to halflings as a whole, the commu- 
nity tends to be very supportive of this cleric's 
activities. 

When a Leaftender visits nearby halfling 
communities (which he or she will do far more 
often than would, say, a druid) he or she will 
bring gifts of the woods' bounty— berries, 
mushrooms, and herbs—to add variety and 
spice to the village menus. Alone of all half- 
lings, Leaftenders are vegetarians and eat no 
animal products. 


Halfling Character Kits e 119 


K 


Secondary Skills: Agriculture is a possible, 
though not a necessary, secondary skill for a 
Leaftender. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Leaftender is 
limited to the following weapon types (listed 
in order of preference): sling, sickle, spear, 
scythe, dagger, staff, club, and dart. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The Leaf- 
tender receives Herbalism and Survival 
(Woodlands) as bonus proficiencies. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Weather Sense and Direction Sense can prove 
very useful, as well as Animal Lore, Swim- 
ming, and Firebuilding. 

Equipment: The Leaftender will assemble 
whatever materials he or she needs to carry 
out his or her work of tending the forest. 

Special Benefits: As they advance in level, 
Leaftenders become increasingly attuned to 
their environment, granting them the follow- 
ing abilities: 

At 2nd level, the Leaftender can pass 
through overgrown areas at his or her normal 
movement rate without leaving a trail. 

At 3rd level, he or she can identify plants, 
animals, and pure water with perfect accu- 
racy. 
At Sth level, he or she becomes immune to 
charm spells cast by woodland creatures such 
as dryads and nixies. 

Special Hindrances: Leaftenders cannot use 
metal armor and will not use leather armor. 
They may, however, use wooden shields. 


Oracle 


The Oracle is the halfling cleric who deals 
with spiritual matters, the will of the gods, 
auguries and prophecies, and the like. Where- 
as the Healer's emphasis is on spells that affect 
his or her people directly, the Oracle is more 
concerned with interpreting the gods' will to 
the people. 

Roads to Adventure: The Oracle can be 
drawn into a quest by a prophecy that he or 
she interprets as the will of the gods; alter- 


120 * Chapter Four 


nately, like the Healer, he or she will accompa- 
ny his or her companions on their own 
adventures out of a sincere belief that, with- 
out his or her help, they are doomed. 

More than any other halfling type, the Ora- 
cle is driven by a consuming desire to learn, to 
answer great questions, to complete some 
great quest. The drive for such activities origi- 
nates as a spiritual calling, but the Oracle with 
typical halfling common sense will follow up 
such motivations with very practical determi- 
nation and drive. 

Role: The Oracle seeks to be an interpreter 
who looks for signs of the gods' will and then 
teaches his or her people what they should do. 
As part of that role, he or she casts spells de- 
signed to communicate with those deities. He 
or she will usually be chosen to preside over 
the community's occasional religious ceremo- 
nies and festivities. 

Secondary Skills: The Scribe secondary 
skill is useful to the Oracle. 

Weapon Proficiencies: An Oracle can use 
any weapon allowed for the standard cleric. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The Ora- 
cle receives Astrology as a bonus proficiency. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Heraldry, Ancient History, Religion, and 
Spellcraft are recommended for the Oracle. 

Equipment: Any he or she desires. 

Special Benefits: When the Oracle performs 
any spell of the sphere of divination, he or she 
will receive (from the DM) unusually reliable 
and accurate information. The specifics of this 
benefit vary by spell, of course. 

Oracles also occasionally receive visions di- 
rectly from their deities; however, these vi- 
sions are usually cryptic, requiring time and 
thought to unravel their significance. 

Special Hindrances: The Oracle is very un- 
willing to compromise—he or she is more 
stubborn than the typical halfling. He or she 
treats every mission as a quest and will never 
abandon a task no matter how many difficul- 
ties stand in the way. 


" 7 = 
Ay 


a ae Wu. A we “= METS TENGE WTI T n» — 
Lindendale—A Typical Halfling Village 


XE 


8 


i 


Lindendale—4A Typical Halfling Village © 121 


Lindendale is a small community, a town of 
halflings that could exist in almost any cam- 
paign world. It is presented here for two rea- 
sons: (1) it provides a look at a typical halfling 
village, with examples of households and the 
various trades and skills represented there, 
and (2) it can be used as a home base for 
launching an all-halfling campaign, as it can 
easily be dropped into any ongoing campaign. 

The village is mapped on page 123. It lies in 
a sheltered valley on the south side of a long, 
forested ridge. About a mile to the south of 
the map, a major road runs from east to west. 
A small dirt track leads from this highway to 
the village. 

A placid stream, the Lindenbrook, winds 
along the base of the ridge. While no more 
than three or four feet deep, the creek's silty 
bottom makes fording difficult. 


1. Inn of the Brass Tankard 


This homey place is the first building a visit- 
er sees upon approaching Lindendale. It is a 
two-story structure of whitewashed wood 
with brown shutters and a round, oversized 
door. The common room is large enough for 
humans but still cozy to halflings. The guest 
rooms come in two sizes, for Big Folk (upper 
level) or small folk (lower level), with appro- 
priately-sized furniture in each. 

The innkeeper, Gwiston Shortwick, lives 
here with his wife Lucretia, their four daugh- 
ters, and Lucretia's elderly mother; the family 
quarters are in a burrow at the south end of 
the inn. Several other halflings work here as 
stablehands and waitresses, but they live in 
the village with their families. 


2. Mill and Bakery 


Dottery Dale is a bawdy halfling wench 
who runs the village mill and also bakes fabu- 
lous bread and cakes. She has two brothers 
anda sister who live here as well, each of them 
married with several children—but the un- 


122 * Chapter Five 


married Dottery is unquestioned head of the 
household. 

The Millbridge is attached to the great 
wooden building and is the only dry means of 
crossing the Lindenbrook for more than a mile 
in either direction. 


3. Cheese Factory 


Hofflik Kaese is the master cheesemaker 
here. He takes all the milk that the local dair- 
ies can provide and turns it into a sharp, white 
cheese (called "Lindenbrook") that is highly 
prized within the local area and beyond. It is 
the village's major export. 

Hofflik, a bachelor, lives in a small set of 
rooms beside his factory. Two small compart- 
ments within the shop itself provide quarters 
for the one to four full-time apprentices (both 
male and female) he's likely to have working 
with him at any one time. 


4. Dairies 


These three prosperous concerns each own 
a dozen or more cows and graze them in these 
distinct pastures. The animals are sheltered in 
neat, low-ceilinged barns. Each herd includes 
a half-dozen calves; a great bull occupies his 
own pen on the Kalliwart farm north of the 
stream. 

The clans that run these dairies are friendly 
rivals, striving to outdo each other in milk 
production—most of which is bartered or sold 
to the cheese factory. 

4a. Kalliwart Farm, the largest of the three, 
is managed by Glenvius and Blythi Kalliwart, 
who recently celebrated a complete century of 
marriage. Ten children and their spouses, 
twenty-two grandchildren, and five great- 
grandchildren make up the rest of the house- 
hold. The family is known for its slightly 
rambunctious youngsters—they are charis- 
matic and popular, but prone to be trouble- 
makers. The farm boasts twenty-two milk 
cows and the village's only bull. 


oes ?e9506 


eens 
Bete 


Fanns 
Ix 


dul 


LI] 


E 


# stream 


ing 


build 


) 


m 


indenbrook 


y 


L 
i 


Ez 


Lindendale—A Typical Halfling Village e 123 


4b. Bandawax Farm, with its fifteen cows, 
is tended by a smaller clan with a reputation 
for thrift, even tightfistedness. Gammer Ban- 
dawax is a venerable matriarch who keeps 
tight control over the family purse strings. 
Her five daughters and their husbands, to- 
gether with fourteen grandchildren, live in a 
sprawling, multi-roomed burrow. 

4c. Lily Hectare, the third farm, is where 
the Jallisall family tends a herd of twelve 
cows. A trio of brothers, all widowers, head 
the family, sharing the house with a dozen de- 
scendants. The farm is most noted for the gor- 
geous flowerbeds that surround not only the 
house but the barn and pasture as well. 


5. Trading Stump 


The arched bridge descends from the mill 
into a small grove of towering oaks. Among 
them is centered the hut of Filbert the Trader. 
Before his ramshackle dwelling is a flat stump, 
more than four feet in girth, where a tree 
struck by lightning was cut down. Here, in the 
shade of the arching branches, the wily half- 
ling merchant sits and barters with his many 
customers. 

Filbert Oldfur is a well-traveled halfling, a 
former adventurer and a famous character in 
the village. His home sprawls through several 
underground tunnels around his shop, and he 
shares his burrow with seven nieces and neph- 
ews, and a vivacious “housekeeper” named 
Milliciny. This attractive halfling lass returned 
to the village with Filbert following one of his 
travels and has been the source of considera- 
ble gossip and raised eyebrows among the 
good citizens of Lindendale. 

Filbert maintains a regular stock of the vil- 
lage’s major products, including Lindenbrook 
cheese, Amsterbock ale, and Daleside red 
wine. He also offers samples of Dwilcath Ba- 
tel’s woodcarvings, including well-turned 
cups and bowls. 

The trader also keeps a number of goods of 
human, dwarven, and elven make in stock, 


124 * Chapter Five 


including metal pots, pans, utensils, tools, ar- 
rowheads, and knives; salt, spices, tobacco; 
wines, ales, and cheeses from surrounding vil- 
lages; and an extensive collection of fabrics, 
including wool, cotton, and even bolts of 
bright silk. 


6. Mayor's Mansion 


This large burrow belongs to Fairweather 
Montajay, Lindendale's esteemed mayor. An 
adventurer in her youth, she lived for ten 
years in a large city not too far away. A first- 
class Burglar, she eventually rose to become 
head of the local Thieves' Guild before retiring 
and returning to her home town. Her clan is 
numerous, including her husband Ashworthy 
(whom she met in the city and brought back 
to Lindendale), five children and their spous- 
es, and fifteen grandchildren. 


7. Sheriff Greenspan's Burrow 


The primary force for law and order in Lin- 
dendale is this stocky warrior with graying 
hair and grizzled sideburns. He and his wife 
live in this comfortable burrow, together with 
their six children, two daughters-in-law, and 
their first grandchild (who is perhaps a trifle 
spoiled). 

The sheriff is a calm fellow who enjoys the 
comforts of life, slow to respond in an emer- 
gency but level-headed and dependable in a 
crisis. His chief secret in keeping the peace is 
to always allow everybody to have his or her 
say before passing judgment. Just downhill 
from the family home he and his sons have 
constructed a small, partially buried shed. He 
uses this for storage, but it can be securely 
barred on the outside if it's necessary to lock 
someone up. 


8. Carissa Candlemaker 


The elderly Carissa is a widow famed for 
her stubborn determination and unwillingness 


to compromise. She is kind-hearted but 
cranky, unusually crotchety for a halfling. 
She lives her with two sisters (also widowed) 
and a dozen children and grandchildren. The 
burrow is surrounded by clover, as the family 
maintains a row of beehives from which they 
harvest honey and wax. They barter with the 
honey and use the wax to make fine candles 
which are prized throughout the village. 


9. Benden Sire, Locksmith 


This halfling is something of a hermit. He is 
also the wealthiest halfling in Lindendale, 
having made a fortune designing the locks to 
protect an emperor's hoard that foiled the at- 
tempts by heads of three thieves' guilds to pick 
them. His burrow is extensive and mostly un- 
derground, with stout shutters over the win- 
dows and an iron-barred door of heavy 
planks. Benden lives here alone, never having 
married and being totally absorbed in the pur- 
suit of his art; he spends almost all his time 
working on his dream of creating a lock that 
cannot be picked. To test his creations, he has 
amassed the finest collection of lockpicks for 
many miles around. 


10. Amster's Brewery 


This hardworking family of seven brews 
the dark ale called Amsterbock here. The 
business was started by a famous ancestor, Al- 
berti Amster; today, his granddaughter Jess 
carries on the family tradition, added by sev- 
eral cousins. This beverage is one of Linden- 
dales most popular products, allowing Jess 
and her cousins to live quite comfortably, al- 
though rumor has it that she has succumbed 
to the adventuring bug and may soon head 
out into the world to seek her fortune. 


11. Woodcarver's shop 


Dwilcath Batel is the premier woodcarver 
of Lindendale, living in this burrow near the 


fringe of forest above the town. He is a benign 
patriarch, still skilled with his knife, though 
much of the heavier work (woodcutting and 
carpentry) is now done by his four sons. They 
are all married, and three grandchildren live 
here, with the fourth on the way. 


12. Vintners 


Pally and Dorith Quettory are a cheerfully 
robust couple, middle-aged and childless, 
who have devoted their energies to the sweep- 
ing vineyards which cover the hillside below 
their front door. Their primary vintage is 
called Daleside Red, though they make a rarer 
Pale version that is also highly prized. 


13. The Fletchery 


This new burrow is inhabited by Wally and 
Sass Talbot, a young couple who only recent- 
ly married and got a home of their own; they 
are now expecting their first child. Comfort- 
able if not ostentatious, it is crowded with ar- 
rows finished and unfinished (Wally's 
handiwork) and Sass's latest bow. Sass only 
makes bows to order, carefully crafting each 
one for the person who commissioned it; so 
well made is her handiwork that the original 
owner receives a +1 bonus to his or her 
chance to hit when using it. 


14. Farms 


These nine burrows range from modest to 
capacious and are the home to the families of 
farmers who tend the fields surrounding Lin- 
dendale: the Baldorfs, Byttnis, Dudleys, 
Heathertoes, Newters, Ostgoods, Trills, 
Tucks, and Weatherbees. 


Lindendale—A Typical Halfling Village € 125 


Adventure Suggestions 


It is important to remember when playing a 
gnome or halfling character that halflings are 
not short humans, nor are gnomes scrawny 
dwarves: each is an entirely different race, 
with different perspectives on the world and 
different motivations. 

Opportunities that might bring human or 
dwarven characters bounding to their feet, 
eyes gleaming in anticipation, can bring quite 
a different response from a halfling—e.g., "So 
what if the old castle's full of treasure? I've got 
a warm fire, a jug half-full of ale, and my 
bread's almost done rising!” However, the 
same halfling might change his or her tune 
upon learning that the only known copy of a 
legendary chef's cookbook was rumored to be 
in the castle as well. Likewise, whereas the Big 
Folk would avoid a tomb if at all possible once 
they learned it was heavily-trapped, a gnome 
might well want to explore it for the same rea- 
son in order to see how the traps work and 
employ the same principles in his or her next 
practical jokes. 

In any adventure involving a gnome or 
halfling character, the player must ask himself 
or herself "Why is my character here?" 
Gnomes love gems like halflings love good 
food, and most gnomequests will involve 
searching for fabled gems and lost mines. A 
halfling will be more likely to join an adven- 
ture out of a sense of duty (e.g., an old friend 
is in trouble) or pure curiosity than from greed 
for treasure or a desire to go out and fight 
monsters. 

The following outlines are kernels for ad- 
ventures specifically designed for an all- 
gnomish or all-halfling campaign. They can 
easily be adapted to almost any AD&D® cam- 
paign world and level of experience. 


Gnome Adventures 

Goblin Infestation: This begins as isolated 
and mysterious attacks against lone gnomes, 
who are either killed or otherwise unable to 
describe their assailants. During these raids 
the goblins capture something very valuable, 


126 * Appendix 


whether it's the community's prized gemstone 
artifact or a well-liked gnome NPC. 

The characters must anticipate where the 
attackers will strike next, lay illusionary bait 
for them, and then follow the raiders back to 
their lair. Once they've located the attacker's 
home base, they must infiltrate it, rescue the 
missing treasure or hostages, find a way to 
disrupt the goblins so badly that it will put an 
end to the ambushes, and escape. 


Festival of the Starmelt: The clans are sched- 
uled to gather for an important, once-in-a- 
decade observation. An old and evil dragon 
gets wind of the plans and decides to make an 
attack against the assemblage with the aid of a 
tribe of kobolds. Gnomish adventurers must 
discern the plan from captive kobolds and 
then take steps to confuse or divert the dragon 
before the festival begins. 


City of Illusions: Gnome illusionists begin to 
find that sometimes their spells don't work, 
while at other times they behave in unexpect- 
ed ways. Investigation will eventually trace 
the source of the problem to a strange village 
peopled entirely by intelligent illusions cre- 
ated for company by a since-deceased master 
Imagemaker. They resent the "involuntary 
servitude" of their fellow illusions and are try- 
ing to nudge them into rebellious sentience, 
with some success. The PCs must find a way 
to placate the angry illusion-people; with luck 
and tact, they may gain some unusual allies in 
the process. 


Gemquest: A strange gnome comes to the vil- 
lage, badly wounded by some bizarre and 
magical force. He collapses and dies, but not 
before he drops a huge and stunningly beauti- 
ful gem of a type none of the gnomes have ev- 
er seen before, together with a gasped-out 
description of a "Mount Crystal" that lies 
somewhere in the distance. In truth, the gem- 
stone is an intelligent parasitic quartzite crea- 
ture from the elemental plane of earth that 


for Gnome and Halfling Campaigns 


sapped his strength with its baneful magic, but 
not before he served as the bait to lure more 
gnomes into its trap. 

Gnomes who make the journey will find 
Mount Crystal, a shining hill of white quartz. 
Inside, they find abandoned mines holding an 
incredible wealth of gems of all types—un- 
known to them, more of the creatures. Each 
creature forms a bond with a single gnome 
and drains 1d4 points of his or her Constitu- 
tion per day. The characters must realize what 
is going on, find a way to break the charm 
which prevents each gnome from throwing 
away his or her own stone, and make a des- 
perate break for freedom. 


Halfling Adventures 

Meddlesome Officialdom: A nearby human 
lord decides to charge the small folk a toll for 
using a road, bridge, or river passing through 
their town, as well as a tax on all transactions, 
sending guards and tax collectors to make sure 
that his commands are followed. The halflings 
must find a way to avoid paying the tariffs 
and eventually rid themselves of the pestering 
presence without resorting to violence. 


The Bully: A tough human knight, or perhaps 
even an ogre, troll, or giant, takes up resi- 
dence nearby. He or she appoints himself or 
herself the village's "protector" and demands 
food and drink, and eventually treasure, from 
the small folk in return. He or she is too strong 
for the villagers to defeat in combat, forcing 
the halflings to use their wits to come up with 
a clever plan to chase the brute away. 


Kidnapped: All the human children from a 
nearby community are captured by goblins or 
kobolds and taken to the humanoid's lair—a 
lair with ceilings too low and passages too 
narrow for adult humans to enter. The hu- 
mans approach the halflings and beg them to 
rescue the children, offering whatever induce- 
ments they can to gain the aid of a brave band 
of small folk. 


A Tinker Comes to Town: A strange peddler 
rolls into the village with a wagon full of won- 
drous gew-gaws and trinkets. He or she sells 
many of these and gives others away. Shortly 
after the stranger leaves, the villagers start to 
change their lifelong patterns of behavior— 
some become short-tempered or depressed; 
others frivolous and irresponsible. 

The trinkets are not the cause of the 
changes, however. There's an evil wizard at 
work, and the tinker's gifts are charms against 
her enchantments. The halflings must first 
find out what's going on, and then find a 
means to drive the wizard away. 


Monster Depredation: A tribe of monsters, 
such as gnolls or orcs, begins to ravage the 
area. Only if halflings and their human and 
demihuman neighbors unite do they stand a 
chance to defeat the menace. The halflings 
must convince rival groups of humans, 
dwarves, and elves to work together in a com- 
mon cause. When it comes to actually facing 
the foe, the halflings should try to defeat them 
through cleverness and deception rather than 
an outright attack. 


The Forest Plague: A mysterious malady be- 
gins to affect the surrounding woods, causing 
trees to wither and die, crops to fail, and a 
general blight to settle across the land. 

After some investigation (which can be an 
adventure in itself), the halflings determine 
that the plague results from losses suffered by 
local treants and dryads due to indiscriminate 
logging. The small folk must then find a way 
to deter the woodcutters until the people of 
the trees have a chance to recover, while at the 
same time avoid causing the woodcutters 
from losing their livelihood. 


Adventure Suggestions for Gnome and Halfling Campaigns * 127 


ENTER NEW WORLDS OF EXCITEMENT AND FUN 
IN EVERY ISSUE! 


The leader of the role-playing 
world offers gaming advice, new 
ideas, reviews, monsters, 
cartoons, and treasures not 
found anywhere else! « 


ADVENTURES FOR TSR ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 


The module magazine for 
AD&D® and D&D® game 
players leads you to the 
limits of the known 
gaming universe! 


“FILL OUT AND MAIL THE SUBSCRIPTION FORM 
to receive the world’s greatest gaming magazines. 


aM BELOW j 


DRAGON® Magazine 


Subscription type: 
"| New ^1 Renewal (enclose mailing label) 
Amount of payment (send U.S. funds only!) 
To U.S. address To Canadian address 
1 year (12 issues) for $30 €] 1 year (12 issues) for $38 
[3 2 years (24 issues) for $57 2 years (24 issues) for $66 
1 8 years (36 issues) for $84 3 years (36 issues) for $95 


To foreign address (prices include GST) 


[i 1 year (12 issues), by surface mail, for $50 
O 1 year (12 issues), by air mail, for $90 


DUNGEON” Adventures 
zy um type: 
C Renewal (enclose mailing label) 
Amount of payment (send U.S. funds only!) 

To U.S. address To Canadian address 

31 1 year (6 issues) for $18 J 1 year (6 issues) for $24 

7 2 years (12 issues) for $33 2 years (12 issues) for $40 
-] 8 years (18 issues) for $48 C 3 years (18 issues) for $56 
To foreign address (prices include GST) 

] 1 year (6 issues), by surface mail, for $35 

1 year (6 issues), by air mail, for $52 


Check the appropriate boxes under the publication(s) 
to which you are subscribing. Then, mail this form 
with payments to: TSR, Inc., P.O. Box 5695, Boston 
MA 02206. (All payments must be in U.S. funds.) 


(Please PRINT clearly.) 


Name 

Address 

City State/Prov. 
Country__  ... Zip/Postal Code 
Method of Payment 


O Check O Money order O MasterCard O VISA 


Credit card no. 
Expiration date —— (— . MC bank no. 
Signature. —-— — —( Vae 


Your first issue should arrive within 8 to 10 weeks in the U.S. and Canada. All 


prices are subject to change without notice 
(ASB) 


DRAGON. DUNGEON. AD&D, and DAD are registered trademarks of TSR, Inc ©1995 TSA. Inc. All Rights Reserved 


Advanced Dungeons{)Dragons} 


Players Handbook Rules Supplement 


The Complete Book of 


GNOMES Nalflings 


Clever illusionists and sly practical jokers. Brilliant 
burglars and easygoing farmers. Now The Complete 
Book of Gnomes and Halflings reveals the secrets of 
these two popular races--their culture, beliefs, and 
subraces (including two new subraces), as well as 
twenty-eight new character kits, from the gnome 


Goblinsticker to the halfling Forestwalker. If you 
enjoy playing gnome or halfling characters, or if 
you're a DM" interested in creating an all-gnome or all- 
halfling campaign, this is the book for you! 


TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd 
POB 756 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, = J Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 ; Cambridge CB1 3LB 
U.S.A United Kingdom 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS &. DRAGONS and AD&.D 
are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
*1993 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Printed in the LLS. A. 


<OOSLS 


$15.00 U.S. 3 £9.99U.K. $18.00 CAN 


