The 
Complete 
Paladin’s 
Handbook 


A 
Dungeonsf>ragons 


nd 
Player’s Handbook 2“ Edition Rules Supplement 


The 
Complete 


Paladin’s 
Handbook 


by Rick Swan 


Table of Contents 


Introduction... 


Chapter 1: Character Creation 
Paladin Requirements, 5 

Level Advancement, 5 

Armor and Weapons, 6 
Clerical Magic, 7 


10 


Chapter 2: Paladin Abil 
Detect Evil Intent, 10 
Saving-Throw Bonus, 11 
Immunity to Disease, 12 
Cure Diseases, 13 
Laying On Hands, 14 
Aura of Protection, 14 
Holy Sword, 15 
Turning Undead, 16 
Bonded Mount, 17 
Clerical Spells, 24 


a 


Chapter 3: Ethos 
Strictures, 25 


Virtues, 32 
Code of Ennoblement, 37 
Violations and Penalties, 39 


Chapter 4: Paladin Kits... 
Acquiring Kits, 44 
DM Decisions, 44 
Kit Subsections, 44 

True Paladin, 46 

Chevalier, 46 

Divinate, 48 

Envoy, 49 

Equerry, 50 

Errant, 

Expatriate, 54 

Ghosthunter, 56 

Inquisitor, 57 

Medician, 58 

Militarist, 59 

Skyrider, 61 

Squire, 62 

Votary, 65 

Wyrmslayer, 66 
Abandoning Kits, 68 
Creating New Kits, 68 
Demihumans as Demipaladins, 69 
Dual-Classed Paladins, 70 


Chapter 5: Proficiencies 
Compiled Proficiencies, 71 
Clarifications and Modifications, 72 
New Proficiencies, 73 


2 * Table of Contents 


Chapter 6: Equipment... MT 
Standard Equipment, 77 

Badges, Standards, and Crests, 79 

Additional Equipment, 79 


New Magical Equipment, 82 


284 


Chapter 7: Role-Playing... 
Demographics, 84 
Becoming a Paladin, 86 
Routine Activities, 90 

A Day in the Life, 93 
Courtly Love, 94 
Economics, 96 

The Paladin’s Personality, 98 
Strongholds, 100 

Privileged Relationships, 106 
Experience, 106 


Chapter 8: Faith ... 
Campaign Models, 108 
Alternatives to Churches, 111 
Guidelines for Religious Edicts, 111 
‘Types of Edicts, 112 


Chapter 9: Orders... 
Standard Information, 116 

Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart, 117 
Radiant Heart Auxiliary, 117 

Ancient and Revered Order of the Thorn, 118 
Distinguished Order of the Crystal Dawn, 118 
Righteous Order of the Iron Dragon, 119 
Order of the Divine Hand, 120 


Appendix: Bibliography . 
Appendix: Original AD&D” Game Paladins 
Paladin Character Record Sheets. 
Paladin Kit Sheet... 


Tables 
1: Class Qualifications, 5 


‘otal Proficiency 
aving Throws 

6: Paladin Attacks Per Round, 6 

7: Two-Weapon Attack Roll Penalties, 7 

8: Paladin Spell Progression, 7 

9: Paladin Spells, 7-8 

10: Turning Undead (Paladin), 8 

11: Degrees of Evil, 11 

12: Level Progression of Special Powers, 13 
13: Bonded Mounts, 18 

14: Fealty Combinations, 34 

15: Penalties for Enchanted Paladins, 42 


Introduction 


16: XP for Equerry Bonded Mount, 51 
17: Ghosthunter Abilities, 56 

18: Turning Undead (Ghosthunter), 57 
19: Frequency of Dispel Evil Magic, 58 
20: Militarist Honors, 60 

21: Skyrider Mounted Missile Fire, 61 
22: Votary Spell Progression, 65 
Nonweapon Proficiencies, 71 

24: Barding, Construction Times, 72 
Miscellaneous Equipment, 80 

26: Job Applicant's Reaction, 105 
27: Staff Sizes for Strongholds, 105 
28: Paladin Experience, 107 

29: Optional Experience Awards, 107 

30: Experience Levels (Ist Edition), 122 
31: Attacks Per Round (Ist Edition), 122 
32: Spell Progression (Ist Edition), 123 


CREDITS 
Design: Rick Swan 
Editing: Allen Varney 
Black and White Art: Ken Frank, Mark Nelson, 
Valerie Valusek 
Color Art: Les Dorscheid, Fred Fields, 

L. Dean James, Glen Orbik 
Electronic Prepress Coordination: Tim Coumbe 
Typography: Angelika Lokotz 
Production: Paul Hanchette 


TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd. 
POB 756 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 Cambridge CB1 3LB 
USA United Kingdom 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and AD&D are regis- 
tered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. DUNGEON MASTER, DM, 
and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 


This book is protected under the copyright laws of the United 
States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the 
material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the 
express written permission of TSR, Inc. 


Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distrib- 
ution rights in the book trade for English language products of 
TSR, Inc. Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United 
Kingdom by TSR Ltd. Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by 
regional distributors. 


© 1994 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the U.S.A. 


To ride abroad redressing human wrongs, 
To speak no slander, no, nor listen to it, 

To honor his own word as if his god's, 

To lead sweet lives in purest chastity, 

To love one maiden only [...] 

And worship her by years of noble deeds... 


—credo of the Knights of the Round Table 
(Alfred, Lord Tennyson, The Idylls of the King) 


What comes to mind when you think of the pal- 
adin? For many of us, his image is indelibly linked 
to that of the medieval knight, the supreme hero of 
the Middle Ages. Clad in shining armor, his lance 
gleaming in the morning sun, the knight is the 
quintessence of gallantry, the champion of the pow- 
erless, and the personification of courage—at least 
as we remember him from history. 

Though The Complete Paladin's Handbook encom- 
passes aspects of the historical knight, it ca 
much wider net. While you'll find the hor: 
diers who served the lords of the feudal age, you'll 
also meet riders of unicorns, killers of dragons, and 
nemeses of the undead; men and women who ride 
majestic war horses and wield magical swords; and 


worshippers of ancient religions and followers of 
arcane philosophies, some serving powerful 
churches and monarchies, others answering only to 
their own conscienct 

This book focuses on the paladin’s motivations, 
special abilities, and unique restrictions—that is, all 
of the elements that distinguish him from other 
character types and make him so challenging to 
play. We probe the paladin’s personality, unravel 
his emotions, and try to understand what makes 
him tick; look at his role in an adventuring party 
and in society as a whole; and examine what his 
religion demands of him and what he expects from 
himself. Along the way, we discuss more than a 
dozen new character kits, show you how to design 
a code of behavior for your paladin, and describe 
new proficiencies and equipment. 

For your convenience, this book compiles and 
summarizes all of the relevant rules from the 
DUNGEON MASTER™ Guide (abbreviated DMG 
in the text) and Player’s Handbook (abbreviated PH). 


el 


Introduction * 3 


It also includes a new set of character sheets in the 
back of the book, designed to record virtually every 
detail about a paladin character. 

Keep in mind that all of this material is optional. 
Every idea must have the approval of the DM™ 
before it can be incorporated into a campaign. 

All of the material in this book uses the AD&D® 
2nd Edition rules. Players using the original 
AD&D PH and DMG should carefully adapt this 
handbook to the campaign. For reference, the 
appendix of this book summarizes original AD&D 
paladin rules. 


The Unearthed Arcana book, a supplement to the 
original AD&D rules, declared the paladin to be a 
sub-class of the cavalier. In the AD&D 2nd Edition 
game, this no longer applies. The paladin remains 
tied to the fighter group, with the cavalier, ina 
streamlined form, reworked as a character kit in 
The Complete Fighter’s Handbook. 

Many concepts in The Complete Paladin's Hand- 
book draw heavily on the proficiency rules intro- 
duced in the AD&D 2nd Edition PH. We strongly 
recommend you use proficiencies in your cam- 
paign and review the rules before proceeding. 


The Roots of the Paladin 


The life of the historical knight was less roman- 
tic than fictional accounts would have us believe. 
The word cniht was first used to describe the sons 
of French peasants who arrived in England fol- 
lowing the Norman conquest in 1066. Crude in 
manner and appearance, the cniht soldiers 
attracted attention because of their expensive 
armor and horsemanship, a skill held in high 
regard. Despite these advantages, the cniht were 
still second-class citizens, a notch above peasants 
but decidedly inferior to the aristocracy. 

With feudalism the status of the cniht (eventu- 
ally Anglicized to knights) improved dramati- 
cally. The feudal era began when wealthy lords 
gave small pieces of land to groups of peasants in 
exchange for their labor, and struggling land- 
owners signed over their property to a lord in 
return for protection. The relationship was 
secured by a bond of honor and a clear under- 
standing of their mutual responsibilities. In time, 
all parties in feudal relationships became part of 
the nobility, and feudal offers were extended only 
to those of acceptable stature. 

As a lord’s holdings grew, so did his need for 
skilled warriors to defend against foreign 
invaders. Knights made ideal candidates. In the 
feudal tradition, lords secured their services by 
offering them property, grand estates including 
much farmland, many buildings, and even the 


peasants who provided the labor. As the knights 
acquired wealth, they also gained prestige, 
becoming a distinct and honored social class that 
was usually restricted to the sons of aristocrats. 

The status of the knights solidified in the 11th 
century when the church, prompted by self-inter- 
est and a genuine desire to promote order in an 
increasingly anarchic society, gave its official 
sanction. Knighthood was declared a sacred call- 
ing, and the ordainment of new knights became a 
holy ritual. With this new accreditation came new 
responsibilities, formally defined in the code of 
chivalry, a set of principles based on religious 
ideals. While continuing in the lower ranks of the 
privileged class, the knight now symbolized the 
highest standards of moral behavior and was 
admired by peasants and royalty alike. 

Though the knight commanded respect, he was 
rarely envied. His life was dangerous and brutal, 
marked by incessant confrontations and the con- 
stant threat of humiliation. Rather than adventur- 
ing for honor or pleasure, most engaged ina 
constant struggle for income, desperately seeking 
any and all opportunities to earn an honest living. 
The rigid chivalric code, which made abstract 
principles of loyalty more important than life 
itself, resulted in a death sentence for most 
knights. Few lived beyond age 30. Those who 
survived often spent their remaining years penni- 
less and broken, depending on the charity of a 


society that had all but forgotten them. 


4 * Introduction 


CHAPTER 


Character Creation 


This chapter compiles all of the statistics, adjust- 
ments, and level progressions from the PH and 
DMG pertaining to the paladin. Although no two 
paladins are exactly alike, all of them have these 
fundamentals in common. 


Paladin Requirements 


It takes an exceptional character to become a pal- 
adin, as reflected in the class qualifications listed in 
Table 1. 


Table 1: Class Qualifications 


Ability Requirements 
Strength 12 
Constitution 9 
Wisdom 13 
Charisma 17 


Prime Requisites 
Strength 
Charisma 


Races Allowed 
Human 


Alignments Allowed 
Lawful good 


A player who tries to generate a paladin by using 
Method I, described in Chapter 1 of the PH, may be 
rolling dice all day. Although the odds improve 
slightly when using Methods II-IV, only Methods V 
and VI give a reasonable, albeit slim, chance of pro- 
ducing the necessary numbers. 

Although the strict ability requirements may 
frustrate a player wanting to create a paladin char- 
acter, they're necessary to regulate play balance. 
Paladins are among the game’s most formidable 
characters. If they were as easy to roll up as, say, 
warriors or mages, the surplus of powerful charac- 
ters would make it difficult, perhaps impossible, 
for the DM to come up with encounters challenging 
enough for all members of a party. A DM may also 
have other reasons for limiting the paladin popula- 


tion—for instance, the campaign world may dis- 
courage the development of paladins—or may 
restrict the number of paladins simply to enhance 
their mystique. 

But if your DM is open to paladin player-charac- 
ters, you might consider using Table 2 instead of 
dice rolls to generate the required ability scores. 
Roll 1d12 and use the indicated statistics. 


Table 2: Pregenerated Ability Scores 


D12 Str Dex Con Int Wis Cha 
1 12 8 16 10 15 17 
2 17 10 10 9 14 17 
3 12 9 12 10 16 18 
4 15 13 15 1 14 17 
5 14 16 9 15 18 17 
6 12 11 au 9 13 18 
7 w 2 12 12 14 7 
8 13 11 14 
4 16 10 11 11 16 tá 
10 13 14 13 9 13 17 
11 15 12 17 14 15 18 
12 14 15 10 13 13 17 


* Roll percentile dice for exceptional Strength. 


Level Advancement 


Paladins advance in level and hit points at the 
same rate as fighters. For each level up to 9, they 
gain 1d10 hit points. They receive 3 extra hit points 
at level 10 and beyond. Table 3 summarizes the pal- 
adin’s level advancements, along with the corre- 
sponding THACO scores. 

Keep two adjustments in mind: 

e Paladins whose Strength and Charisma scores 
equal or exceed 16 earn a 10% bonus to all earned 
experienced points. A paladin must have a 16 or 
more in both of these abilities to qualify for the 
bonus. 

e Unusually high Constitution scores award hit 
point adjustments. A paladin with a Constitution 
of 17 receives a +3 bonus per hit die, and a score of 
18 grants a +4 bonus. 


el 


Character Creation * 5 


Table 3: Experience Levels 
Level XP Needed Hit Dice (d10) THACO 


1 0 1 20 
2,250 2 19 

3 4,500 3 18 
4 9,000 4 17 
5 18,000 5 16 
6 36,000 6 15 
7 75,000 7 14 
8 150,000 8 13 
9 300,000 9 12 
10 600,000 9+3 11 
11 900,000 9+6 10 
12 1,200,000 9+9 9 
13 1,500,000 9+12 8 
14 1,800,000 9+15 7 
15 2,100,000 9+18 6 
16 2,400,000 9+21 5 
17 2,700,000 9424 4 
18 3,000,000 9427 3 
19 3,300,000 9+30 2 
20 3,600,000 9433 1 


Advancing in level, a paladin gets new profi- 
ciency slots, as shown on Table 4. Remember that a 
paladin suffers a -2 penalty when using a weapon 
without the required proficiency, 


Table 4: Total Proficiency Slots 


Level Weapon Nonweapon 
1-2 4 3 
3-5 - 5 4 
6-8 6 5 
9-11 7 6 
12-14 8 7 
15-17 9 8 
18-20 10 9 


Table 5 summarizes the saving throws applicable 
to each level. Unlike other characters, paladins 
receive a +2 bonus to all saving throws. For conve- 
nience, the paladin’s modified throws are given in 
parentheses; for example, a Ist-level paladin must 
roll a 12 or better to avoid the effects of paralyzation. 


ao SSSSSSSSSSSGSeseM 


6 * Chapter One 


Table 5: Saving Throws 


Level PPDM RSW PP Breath Spell 
1-2 14(12) 16(14) 15 (13) 17(15) 17 (15) 
3-4 = 13(11) 15(13) 14(12) 16(14) 16 (14) 
5-6 11(9 13(11) 12(10) 13(11) 1412) 
7-8 10(8) 12(10) 11(9) 12(10) 1311) 
9-10 8(6) 10(8) 9(7) 9(7) 119) 
11-12 75) 9(7) 86) 8(6) 10(8) 

13-14 5(3) 76) 64) 568) 8(6) 

15-16 4(2) 6(4) 5(3) 4(2) 76) 
17+ 30) 5(3) 49 4(2) 6 


Abbreviations 
PPDM = Paralyzation, Poison, or Death Magic 
RSW = Rod, Staff, or Wand 
PP = Petrification or Polymorph 
Breath = Breath Weapon 


Armor and Weapons 


As members of the warrior group, paladins can 
wear any type of armor. Regardless of the armor 
worn, paladins suffer no penalties to any of their 
special abilities. 

Paladins can also wield any of the weapons 
listed in Chapter 6 of the PH. As they increase in 
level, they can make more than one attack per 
round, as shown in Table 6. 


Table 6: Paladin Attacks Per Round 
Level Attacks/Round 


1-6 1/round 
7-12 3/2 rounds 
13+ 2/round 


A paladin may fight with two weapons at the 
same time, holding one in each hand, providing the 
second weapon is smaller and lighter than the main 
weapon, and that he avoids using a shield. With 
these qualifications, the paladin may make an addi- 
tional attack each round with the second weapon. 
However, fighting with two weapons simultane- 
ously gives a penalty on both attack rolls. The base 
penalty is -2 for the main weapon and —4 for the 


second weapon. The paladin’s Reaction Adjust- 
ment, based on Dexterity, modifies both penalties, 
though neither may be modified above 0. Table 7 
summarizes these penalties. 


Table 7: 
Two-Weapon Attack Roll Penalties 


Main Weapon Second Weapon 


Dex. Penalty Penalty 

1 -8 -10 

2 6 -8 

3 -5 -7 

4 4 6 

5 -3 -5 
6-15 -2 4 

16 al -3 
17-18 0 -2 


Clerical Magic 


At 9th level, a paladin becomes eligible to cast 
clerical spells. Table 8 shows the number of spells a 
paladin receives at each level. The table also indi- 
cates the spell level cast. For example, if a 13th- 
level paladin casts the 2nd-level slow poison spell, 
the effects persist for 5 hours; the spell’s duration 
is 1 hour/level and, as shown on Table 8, a 13th- 
level paladin casts it at 5th level. A paladin’s spells 
never rise beyond 9th level. 

Paladins only have access to spells of the Com- 
bat, Divination, Healing, and Protective spheres. 
For reference, Table 9 lists all spells from the PH 
available to paladins. The following restrictions 
also apply: 

e Paladins don’t get bonus spells for high Wis- 
dom scores. 

e Paladins can’t use priestly magical items, nor 
can they cast spells from clerical or druidical 
scrolls. However, they may use any magical items 
intended for the warrior group, even if priests use 
them too. 


Table 8: Paladin Spell Progression 


Paladin Casting 
Level 


17-18 


9 

10 
in 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 


19 
20 


Level 


wWKHWWWNNNNKAS 


w 


Table 9: Paladin Spells 


Level 


NNNNNNNNNNN 


www w 


Priest Spell Levels 


a 8 4 
1 = z 
2 = = 
2 1 = 
2 1 - 
2 1 1 
3 2 1 
3 3 1 
3 3 2 
3 3 3 


Name Sphere 
Cure Light Wounds Healing 
Detect Magic Divination 
Detect Poison Divination 
Endure Cold/Endure Heat Protection 
Magical Stone Combat 
Protection from Evil Protection 
Sanctuary Protection 
Detect Snares and Pits* Divination 
Locate Animals and Plants Divination 
Shillelagh* Combat 
Augury Divination 
Chant Combat 
Detect Charm Divination 
Find Traps Divination 
Know Alignment Divination 
Resist Fire/Resist Cold Protection 
Slow Poison Healing 
Speak with Animals Divination 
Spiritual Hammer Combat 
Withdraw Protection 
Barkskin* Protection 
Dispel Magic Protection 
Locate Objects Divination 
Magical Vestment Protection 
Negative Plane Protection Protection 


ee 


Character Creation * 7 


Table 9 (cont.) 


Level Name Sphere 
3 Prayer Combat 

3 Remove Curse Protection 

3 Remove Paralysis Protection 

3 Speak with Dead Divination 

3 Protection from Fire* Protection 
Cure Serious Wounds Healing 


4 

4 Detect Lie 
4 Divination 
4 
4 


Divination 
Healing 
Protection 


Neutralize Poison 
Protection from Evil, 
10’ Radius 


4 Spell Immunity Protection 
4 Tongues Divination 
4 Protect. from Lightning* Protection 
4 Reflecting Pool* Divination 
4 Repel Insects Protection 


* Italicized entries were classified as druidic 
spells in the original AD&D® rules. Paladins using 
the Ist Edition may not choose any of these spells. 


Optional spell restriction: At the DM's dis- 
cretion, AD&D® 2nd Edition paladins may be 
forbidden to cast the italicized spells on Table 9. 


At 3rd level, a paladin gains the ability to turn 
undead. The number and type of undead turned 
depends on the paladin’s level, as per Table 10. 

A paladin turns undead just like a priest of two 
levels lower than the paladin. The player rolls 
1d20 and consults the relevant column of Table 10. 
A result equal to or greater than the listed number 
indicates success. A “T” means the attempt suc- 
ceeds automatically; no roll is necessary. A “D” 
means the targeted undead are destroyed. Turning 
attempts can’t be made against categories of 
undead indicated by a dash. A successful roll, or a 
“T” or “D” notation, affects 2-12 (2d6) undead. 
Only one die-roll is made per turning attempt, 
regardless of the composition of the undead group. 


eee 


8 * Chapter One 


Use the same die result on all applicable columns 
of Table 61. (See Chapter 2 for more about this 
ability.) 


Table 10: 

Turning Undead (Paladin) 

Paladin Category of Undead 

Level 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 11 1213 
3 1013161920 - - - = -- -- 
4 71013161920 - - - - - - - 
5 4 71013161920 - - - - - - 
6 T 4 71013161920 - - = - - 
Z LT 4 10S 161920 =- ww 
8 DTT 4 71013161920 - - - 
9 DDT T 4 71013161920 - - 
10 D*‘DD TT 4 71013 16 19 20 - 
u PUD T T 4 7 10°18)16:19 20 
12-13 D*D*D*D D T T 4 7 10 13 1619 
1415 D*D*D*D*D D T T 4 710 1316 
16+ D*D*D*D*D*D D T T 4 7 1013 

Key to Categories 

1: Skeleton (or 1 HD undead) 

2: Zombie 

3: Ghoul (or 2 HD undead) 


4: Shadow (or 4 HD undead) 
5: Wight (or 5 HD undead) 

6: Ghast 

7: Wraith (or 6 HD undead) 
8: Mummy (or 7 HD undead) 
9: Spectre (or 8 HD undead) 

10: Vampire (or 9 HD undead) 

11: Ghost (or 10 HD undead) 

12: Lich (or 11+ HD undead) 

13: Special undead, including one-of-a-kind crea- 
tures, free-willed undead of the Negative 
Plane, outer planes undead, and certain greater 
and lesser deities. 


* An additional 2d4 creatures of this type are turned. 


CHAPTER 


Paladin Abilities 


All paladins have innate abilities that set them 
apart from other character classes. These are granted 
powers resulting from the paladins’ strong faith. In 
this chapter, we examine each of these abilities in 
detail, discussing their applications, limitations, 
and special rules. 


Detect Evil Intent 


The paladin, so thoroughly aligned with the 
forces of good, can experience the mere presence of 
evil as a physical sensation. Although similar to the 
detect evil spell, the paladin’s sensitivity to evil 
essentially functions as a sixth sense. But, like the 
spell, this ability doesn’t work automatically. The 
player must make it clear that the paladin is at- 
tempting to detect evil; only then will the DM 
reveal the relevant information. 


Use and Limitations 


Unlike other senses, the detection of evil works 
only when the paladin concentrates for one full 
round, remaining still and taking no other actions. 
Often, paladins close their eyes, lower their head, 
and clear their minds by focusing on their own 
breathing. Some paladins extend their palms, touch 
their foreheads with their fingers, or sweep their 
hands slowly in front of them. Details of the con- 
centration routine vary from paladin to paladin, 
and each is free to come up with a unique routine. 
Once settled on a routine, the paladin should always 
execute it the same way. 

If attacked, distracted, or otherwise disturbed 
while concentrating, the paladin fails to detect evil. 
He may try again in subsequent rounds. 

The paladin may target an individual or group 
up to 60 feet distant, in an area about 10 feet wide, 
or a location where an individual or group might 
be hiding, such as a clump of bushes or a con- 
cealed alcove. The paladin must face the indicated 
individual, group, or location, but need not see 
the target. If blindfolded or in thick fog, for exam- 
ple, the paladin can target an individual by voice 
or movement, or just take a guess. In a shadowed 
corridor, the paladin’s detect-evil ability can 


10 * Chapter Two 


determine if anyone—or anything—with strong 
evil intent lurks in the darkness. 


Eligible Targets 


A paladin can detect evil radiated by characters 
and monsters; undead created by evil magic; Nega- 
tive Plane influences; evil artifacts; certain en- 
chanted swords; and other intelligent objects that 
radiate evil. The ability can’t detect cursed objects 
or traps, nor does it work on creatures of Animal 
intelligence or less (Intelligence 0 or 1), such as cen- 
tipedes or carnivorous plants. 

The paladin’s sensitivity to evil responds to the 
target’s intention to commit an evil act. The ability 
doesn’t reveal the precise nature of the intended 
act, nor does it reveal the target’s actual alignment. 
Characters who are strongly aligned, who do not 
stray from their faith, and are of at least 9th level 
might radiate evil if intent upon appropriate 
actions. For instance, if the paladin uses this ability 
on a suspicious nonplayer character, the paladin 
may sense that the NPC radiates evil, but not that 
the NPC is neutral evil, or that the NPC plans to 
ambush and kill the paladin. If an NPC recently 
murdered a passerby, the paladin might pick up 
evil emanations from the NPC but cannot deter- 
mine the nature of the crime. Creatures such as the 
rakshasa, who disguise themselves with illusions, 
may conceal their appearances but not their evil 
intentions. 

A high-level character unshakably committed to 
an evil alignment may radiate evil even when not 
specifically planning an evil act or thinking evil 
thoughts. Powerful evil monsters, such as red 
dragons and hill giants, also radiate evil uncontrol- 
lably. A paladin can always detect the presence of 
these types of evil beings, unless unusual condi- 
tions are in effect. For instance, in some evil strong- 
holds or planes, everything reads evil, effectively 
negating the paladin’s evil-sensing ability. 

Subject creatures may not make saving throws to 
resist a paladin’s attempt to sense evil. However, 
undetectable alignment and similar spells cast on a 
target temporarily prevent the paladin from sens- 
ing the target’s evil emanations. But as soon as the 


spell ends, the paladin is free to make another 
attempt. 

A paladin can’t detect an evil presence through 3 
feet or more of wood, 1 foot or more of stone, or 1 
inch or more of metal. A thin coat of lead also pre- 
vents the use of this ability. A paladin perceives 


such barriers as nonspecific obstructions, without 
knowing their composition or widths. 


Interpreting the Results 


If an attempt at sensing evil fails, or if there’s no 
evil present, the paladin feels nothing out of the 
ordinary. If evil is present, the paladin might expe- 
rience an unmistakable physical sensation. Though 
the type of sensation varies among paladins, a 
given paladin always has the same reaction. Ty 
cal reactions include tingling in the fingertips, a 
warm flush, a cold chill, or a dull throb behind the 
eyes; the DM can make up sensations. Usually the 
sensation lasts only a moment. 

If the paladin scans a crowd of people, tingling 
fingers won't pinpoint the character responsible for 
the evil emanations. If scanning a pool of murky 
water, throbbing eyes won’t reveal the number or 
species of evil creatures lurking below the surface. 
However, the paladin may determine the degree of 
evil from the intensity of the sensation. Table 11 
lists four general degrees and examples of sources. 
Two ways that a paladin might experience the cor- 
responding sensations also appear. In an encounter, 
the DM describes only the sensation when a pal- 
adin successfully detects evil; the player must 
interpret tite meaning of the sensation. 

At the DM’s option, the paladin may discover 
the general nature of the evil as well as its degree. 
A pickpocket may radiate an expectant evil, a vam- 
pire’s evil may be malignant. The DM may use the 
sensations suggested in Table 11 to indicate the 
nature of evil (the paladin experiences an expectant 
evil as an itch on his fingertips), or may employ a 
different set of sensations (a warmth in the chest 
indicates expectant evil). 


Table 11: Degrees of Evil 


Sensations 

Slight itch on tips of 

fingers; light throb 

behind eyes 

Moderate Mugger; skeleton Tiny pinpricks 
created by evil along fingers; 
cleric; imp; dull pounding 
typical orc behind eyes 


Degree Typical Sources 
Faint Pickpocket; 
nonevil bully 


Strong Mass murderer; Pinpricks over 
ghoul; vampire entire surface of 
hands; intense 
pounding hurts 
eyes 
Over- Venerable red Sharp pain in 


whelming dragon; lich; 
vampire mage 


hands; agonizing 
headache 


Ambiguous situations produce ambiguous 
results. If a vampire waits behind a 3-inch-thick 
stone wall fortified with 2 feet of wood, a paladin 
may detect a moderate or strong sensation of evil, 
rather than an overwhelming one. If a murderer 
hides behind a window with a coat of flaking lead 
paint, a paladin may detect a moderate instead of a 
strong sensation. 

If the DM can’t decide which category in Table 11 
to use, it’s acceptable to give the paladin mixed sig- 
nals. If a vicious mugger hides in a closet, but plans 
to surrender rather than fight if discovered, a pal- 
adin may detect both faint and moderate sensa- 
tions (fingertip itches alternating with pinpricks). 


Saving-Throw Bonus 


As detailed in Chapter 3, a paladin’s ethos com- 
pels him to put his life on the line far more often 
than other characters. While companions may hesi- 
tate, a paladin will fight to the last enemy, volun- 
teer for near-suicidal missions, and face death to 
defend a principle. 

To compensate for these risks, a paladin’s faith 
grants increased immunity to poisons, death magic, 
and similar hazards. This immunity is manifested 
as a permanent +2 bonus to all saving throws. The 


a 


Paladin Abilities * 11 


quia 


nh 


bonuses take effect at Ist level. Table 5 in Chapter 1 
summarizes the paladin’s saving throws. 

These bonuses do not apply to a paladin’s ability 
checks. A paladin with a Strength of 16 attempts a 
Strength check at 16, not 18. However, the paladin 
does benefit from the saving-throw bonuses avail- 
able to other characters, such as those awarded for 
high Dexterity and Wisdom scores (shown on 
Tables 2 and 5 in the PH) and magical armor. 


Immunity to Disease 


A paladin has complete immunity to all forms of 
organic disease. This immunity includes diseases 
from rat, otyugh, and neo-otyugh bites, as well as 
nonlethal but disabling maladies like measles and 
earaches. A paladin never catches a cold or suffers 
from tooth decay, and is unaffected by parasitic 
monsters such as green slime, violet fungi, gas 
spores, phycomids, and rot grubs. His wounds 
never become infected. The process occurs 
instantly, automatically, and painlessly; the paladin 


aaa 


12 * Chapter Two 


Mow, 
SS 


isn’t even aware of exposure to a disease. 


A paladin’s disease resistance is divinely given 
and can’t be transferred to another character. A 
magical blood transfusion, for instance, would not 
grant disease immunity to the recipient. Nor are a 
paladin’s progeny automatically immune to dis- 
eases, unless they become paladins themselves. 

A paladin experiences the normal consequences 
of the following: 

Physical trauma. All wounds inflict normal 
damage. A paladin is as susceptible to concussions, 
broken limbs, and exhaustion as any other charac- 
ter, and also suffers the normal effects of extreme 
temperature, such as sunburn, heatstroke, and 
frostbite. 

Poison. A paladin is vulnerable to nearly all 
types of ingested, injected, and inhaled toxins. 
These include irritants (acids, mercury), organic 
toxins (poison mushrooms, snake venom, crystal 
00ze), nerve poisons (belladonna, arsenic), and poi- 
sonous gases (vapors that stop the heart or inhibit 
breathing). The paladin can become intoxicated by 


drinking too much alcohol, and may experience 
allergic reactions to pollen, dust, or other sub- 
stances, but does not suffer from virus-based or 
bacteria-based toxins, such as the saliva of a rabid 
dog or bat. 

Curses and magical diseases. Lycanthropy, 
mummy rot, and similar afflictions are curses and 
not diseases. A paladin suffers the normal effects. 
(See the PH, page 27, and the DMG, page 131, for 
details.) 

Note that paladins are immune to the cause dis- 
ease spell. The DM may decide that very powerful 
diseases, like mummy rot, may override the 
paladin’s natural immunity, but could be cured by 
the paladin’s cure disease ability. 

Effects of aging. A paladin ages at the normal 
human rate. Age brings the ability penalties given 
on Table 12, Chapter 1 of the PH, and also the 
normal debilitations associated with aging. For 
instance, even though the paladin’s teeth resist 
bacterial decay, they may still fall out as a result of 
enamel erosion. A paladin whose body wears out 
dies, at the same age as a normal human. 

Psychological disorders. A paladin is as prone 
as anyone else to hallucinations, nightmares, mem- 
ory loss, insanity, and similar mental and emo- 
tional disorders, providing the disorder isn’t a 
consequence of a disease (such as a fever-induced 
delirium). 


Cure Diseases 


A paladin is not only immune to natural dis- 
eases, but tan cure such diseases in others. This 
requires no materials or rituals, merely a touch of 
the victim with a finger, usually on the forehead, 
cheek, or hand. Only a moment's contact is neces- 
sary, so long as skin touches skin. The cure occurs 
automatically. The victim may be any human, 
humanoid, demihuman, or natural animal. A pal- 
adin can’t cure lycanthropes, undead, or creatures 
of extraplanar or supernatural origin. 

A paladin can use this ability once per week for 
each five levels of experience (see Table 12). A vic- 
tim receives no additional benefits from being 
cured for the same disease more than once; multi- 


ple applications won't accelerate recovery or heal 
damage. However, should the victim succumb to 
the same disease at some point in the future, a pal- 
adin may cure him again. 

A paladin may cure any disease. He can’t use 
this ability to heal physical trauma, cure lycan- 
thropy (or most other curses), or neutralize poi- 
sons. Mummy rot can be cured with this power. 
Diseases from wishes, artifacts, gods, or similar 
sources, however, might not be curable. 


Recovery 


The victim's recovery begins immediately after 
the paladin touches him, Recovery time varies from 
a few minutes to 10 days, depending on the sever- 
ity of the disease and how long the victim has been 


Table 12: Level Progression of Powers 


Paladin Cure Laying On 
Level Diseases* Hands** Other 

1 1 2 - 
2 1 4 - 
3 1 6 Turn undead 
4 1 8 Bonded mount 
5 1 10 - 
6 2 12 - 
7 2 14 - 
8 2 16 = 
9 d 18 Priest spells 
10 2 20 = 
11 3 22 - 
12 3 24 - 
13 3 26 z 
14 3 28 = 
15 3 30 = 
16 4 32 = 
17 4 34 - 
18 4 36 s 
19 4 38 - 
20 4 40 - 


* Times per week. 
** Hit points restored. 


aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaalllllIIIIIIIIIIMMlMlMlMlM 


Paladin Abilities * 13 


suffering. A victim cured of a mild cold or a tooth- 
ache may recover in a turn. A victim with advanced 
pneumonia or smallpox may require the full 10 
days. The DM decides the recovery period based 
on these parameters. 

A cured victim doesn’t automatically recover hit 
points lost as a result of the disease, but ceases to 
lose additional hit points. Hit points are recovered 
at a normal rate, abetted by rest, medicinal or mag- 
ical treatments, and possibly the paladin’s ability of 
laying on hands (see below). Though the curing alle- 
viates disabling symptoms of the disease (such as 
headaches associated with a fever or blurred vision 
from an eye infection), it doesn’t correct any phys 
cal consequences (such as pockmarks or weight 
loss). 


Laying On Hands 


A paladin can restore lost hit points to himself, 
another character, or a natural animal with the lay- 
ing on hands ability. To use this ability, the paladin 
briefly presses both palms against the damaged 
character or creature—usually against the temple 
or chest, but any surface of the body will do. Touch- 
ing the skin directly isn’t necessary. The paladin 
may be gloved or the subject may be wearing cloth- 
ing, so long as the paladin presses hard enough for 
the recipient to feel the pressure. 

Laying on hands works automatically, restoring 
a number of hit points equal to twice the paladin’s 
experience level (see Table 12). A paladin can use 
this ability only once per day, and only on a single 
character or creature. The following restrictions 
also apply: 

e The recipient can’t recover more hit points than 
he normally has. If a 6th-level paladin lays hands 
on a character who’s lost a total of 3 hit points, the 
character recovers exactly 3 hit points and no more. 
Though the paladin could theoretically restore 12 
hit points, the excess are “lost” in this case. 

e The recipient must still be alive. Laying on 
hands can’t bring dead characters back to life. 

e Laying on hands doesn’t cure diseases—that 
requires a different paladin power (discussed ear- 
lier). However, laying on hands may restore hit 


14 + Chapter Two 


points lost to disease or poison. (Note that laying 
on hands doesn’t negate poison or lengthen its 
onset time; the neutralize poison and slow poison 
spells cause these effects.) 

e If the paladin is unconscious or immobile, a 
companion can’t pick up the paladin’s hands and 
heal himself or anyone else. Laying on hands 
requires the paladin’s willful participation. 

è Laying on hands won't work unless the pal- 
adin employs both hands at the same time. Before 
using this ability, he must sheath his sword, put 
down his bag, or take whatever other actions are 
necessary to free his hands. If he’s disabled—for 
example, if he’s lost an arm in an accident—he may 
petition the gods to allow him to heal with a single 
hand. Assuming the paladin has served honorably, 
the gods probably grant his request. 


Aura of Protection 


An invisible aura of protection continuously sur- 
rounds a paladin. The aura extends 10 feet in all 
directions, enveloping anyone and anything within 
its boundaries. The aura persists even when the 
paladin is asleep or unconscious, dissipating only 
when the paladin dies. However, it doesn’t extend 
through walls, doors, or any physical barrier. 

The magical aura has a disrupting and disturb- 
ing effect on evil opponents, causing them to make 
all attack rolls at a -1 penalty. Affected opponents 
include: 

* Monsters and characters whose alignments are 
lawful evil, neutral evil, and chaotic evil. 

e Extraplanar, conjured, and summoned evil 
entities, or those summoned by evil spellcasters. 

* Monsters and characters who have been 
charmed by evil casters or otherwise have been 
compelled to commit evil acts. 

Only evil opponents within the radius of the 
aura suffer the attack penalty. The aura affects a 
large opponent if even a portion of its body occu- 
pies the aura’s radius. When an evil opponent 
moves out of the aura, the penalty no longer ap- 
plies, but as soon as the opponent re-enters the 
aura, the penalty again takes effect. 

An evil opponent within the aura suffers the -1 


penalty when directing attacks against the paladin, 
other characters or creatures within the aura, or 
characters or creatures outside the aura. The penalty 
applies to all physical attacks made by an evil 
opponent, but not magical attacks. Because the 
aura disrupt: 
objects, missile attacks made outside the aura’s 
radius aren't penalized; an ogre who throws a rock 
at a paladin from a distance of 11 feet makes a nor- 
mal attack roll. 


s living creatures and not inanimate 


Special considerations include these: 
e Evil opponents experience the paladin’s aura 
of protection as an unpleasant physical sensation, 
such as mild nausea, a prickling of the skin, a tight- 
ening of the throat, or a sudden chill. Because the 


sensation is so pronounced, evil opponents can 
almost always identify a paladin as the source, 
even if the paladin is disguised. Non-evil creatures 
nsations. 


and characters don’t experience thes 
Consequently, they may not be sure when they 
move in and out of the aura’s range. Nor does the 
paladin feel anything unusual when an evil oppo- 
nent enters the aura; therefore, the aura in no way 
helps to detect evil. 

e A paladin may benefit from a protection from 
evil spell, even though the aura mimics many of the 
spell’s properties. Protection from evil also blocks 
attempts at exercising mental control and prevents 
bodily contact by extraplanar and conjured crea- 
tures. The spell and the aura function simultane- 
ously for the spell’s duration, with the paladin 
receiving the benefits of both. However, the attack 
penalties aren’t cumulative; evil creatures suffer a 
-2 penalty to their attack rolls, not -3. 

e The aura of protection gives the paladin obvi- 
ous advantages in melee combat. But though a pal- 
adin may be inclined to gather companions around 
during a battle so that they may also benefit from 
the aura, this isn’t always a good idea. Strategic 
movement can be difficult when several people 
struggle to remain in a confined area, and a 10-foot 
radius doesn’t allow much freedom. A cluster of 
characters also makes a good target for enemy mis- 
sile attacks as well as spell attacks affecting large 
areas. 


Holy Sword 


A holy sword is a special type of consecrated 
weapon that provides a paladin with unique bene- 
fits. Though the sword +5, Holy Avenger (described 
in the Appendix of the DMG) is one of the more 
common examples, others exist as well. A few are 
described in Chapter 6 of this book. 

Aside from their exceptional craftsmanship, holy 
swords are often indistinguishable from ordinary 
magical weapons. A paladin may not become 
aware of the sword’s special powers until he uses 
it. In some cases, a paladin may be able to identify a 
holy sword by its cryptic inscription (which may 
require the Ancient Languages proficiency or a 
friendly mage’s read magic spell to translate). A 
skilled weaponsmith or sage may also recognize a 
holy sword. Occasionally, a holy sword will glow 
when touched by a paladin, or the paladin’s arm 
may tingle when he picks it up. 

Holy swords are hard to come by, and a paladin 
rarely finds more than one in his entire career. Usu- 
ally, a paladin acquires a holy sword under difficult 
or extraordinary circumstances. A holy sword may 
be part of a venerable red dragon’s treasure horde, 
concealed in a cave atop a high mountain. A pal- 
adin may hear rumors of a holy sword buried in a 
desert ruins; in fact, the ruins contain a map that 
shows the actual location of the holy sword, embed- 
ded in a glacier in an arctic wilderness. If a paladin 
reaches a high level without acquiring a holy 
sword, his deity might direct him to one in a tem- 
ple on the ocean floor or a treasure chest ona 
remote island. In any case, the DM should treat the 
acquisition of a holy sword as a significant cam- 
paign event, and design the circumstances of its 
discovery accordingly. 

When unsheathed and held by a paladin, every 
holy sword projects a circle of power 10 feet in diam- 
eter. The paladin’s hand serves as the center of the 
circle. The circle moves with the paladin and per- 
sists as long as he grips the sword. The sword pro- 
jects the circle even if a glove, gauntlet, or bandage 
covers the paladin’s hand. 


el 


Paladin Abilities * 15 


Note: The first sentence in the paragraph regard- 
ing the paladin’s holy sword in Chapter 3 of the PH 
(page 27) should read: “A paladin using a holy 
sword projects a circle of power 10 feet in diameter 
when the sword is unsheathed and held.” 

Within its range, the circle of power dispels all 
hostile magic of a level less than or equal to the pal- 
adin’s experience level and creates a magic resis- 
tance of 50%. Specifically: 

e All evil opponents within the circle are unable 
to cast spells, including monsters and characters of 
evil alignment; extraplanar, conjured, and sum- 
moned evil entities; and monsters and characters 
who have been charmed or controlled by evil cast- 
ers. The circle neutralizes a spell the instant it’s 
cast. Opponents may not make saving throws to 
resist the circle of power. 

* Evil opponents have normal use of their spell 
and spell-like abilities once they leave the range of 
the circle. However, the paladin remains immune 
to their spells, even when cast from outside the cir- 
cle. An evil wizard can cast a fireball spell at a pal- 
adin, but the fireball dissipates as soon as it enters 
the circle. An evil spellcaster’s attempts to mentally 
probe or control a paladin (with spells such as ESP 
and magic jar) will also fail. 

e Magical items created by evil magic won't 
work within the circle. Physical properties remain 
unchanged, however; a sword +1 may still be 
wielded as a normal sword. Outside the circle, 
magical items function normally, but the paladin 
remains immune to their effects. 

The following restrictions also apply: 

e The paladin is always vulnerable to magic 
from opponents whose level exceeds his own. The 
paladin has the normal chances of avoiding the 
affects of these magical attacks. 

* The circle functions only as long as the paladin 
grips the holy sword. Should he sheathe or drop it, 
he immediately becomes vulnerable to evil magic. 

e The paladin must be conscious and in control 
of his own actions for the holy sword to project a 
circle of power. A holy sword doesn’t dispel magic 
in the grip of a comatose or sleeping paladin. 

* An evil spellcaster may temporarily negate the 
magic of a holy sword, including its power to pro- 


a ————eeSSSSSSESESESESESESeESeSESEeMe 


16 * Chapter Two 


ject a circle of protection, by casting dispel magic 
directly on the weapon. The holy sword may resist 
the spell with a successful saving throw vs. spell, 
using the paladin’s saving-throw number. If the 
throw fails, the holy sword’s magic is inert for 1-4 
rounds. 

e A paladin is still subject to indirect effects of 
evil magic. If an evil spellcaster uses a lighting bolt 
spell to cause an avalanche, the paladin risks dam- 
age from falling boulders. 

Certain holy swords may have additional bene- 
fits and limitations. A Holy Avenger, for instance, 
inflicts +10 points of damage on chaotic evil oppo- 
nents. Each holy sword described in Chapter 6 has 
its own special properties. In designing holy swords, 
the DM may use the standard benefits and limits 
described above, perhaps adding a +1 to +5 bonus 
on attack and damage rolls against certain kinds of 
evil opponents. 


Turning Undead 


By tapping into the powerful forces generated by 
his faith, the paladin can become a living conduit of 
lawful good energy. He may focus this energy to 
terrify undead or blast them out of existence. 

A paladin gains the ability to turn undead at 3rd 
level. As shown on Table 10 in Chapter 1, a paladin 
turns undead at two levels lower than a cleric; that 
is, a 3rd-level paladin turns undead as a Ist-level 
cleric. Otherwise, a paladin has the same restric- 
tions as a cleric: 

e A turning attempt counts as an action and 
takes one combat round to execute. The attempt 
occurs during the paladin’s turn, determined by 
the order of initiative. 

e A paladin can make only one attempt to turn a 
particular group of undead. In general, a group 
consists of all undead that the paladin can see, 
within a reasonable range (as determined by the 
DM). If a paladin successfully turns five of a group 
of seven skeletons, he can’t make a second attempt 
on the remaining two. Another priest or paladin, 
however, may make try to turn them. 

Two or more paladins (or priests) can attempt to 
simulaneously turn the same group of undead. If a 


particular undead suffers more than one penalty, 
apply the most effective result. For instance, if a 
skeleton suffers a “T” result from a paladin and a 
“D” result from a priest, apply the “D” result. 

e The paladin’s hands must be free, and he must 
be able to speak; he can’t turn undead by simply 
standing in place. The attempt should be accompa- 
nied by a dramatic gesture (the paladin sweeps his 
arms before him, or extends both palms towards 
the undead, then squeezes his hands into fists) or 
phrase (such as “Disperse and dispel!” or “Fall 
before the power of righteousness!”’). The exact 
gesure or phrase is up to the paladin. 

What happens to an undead when it is turned? A 
“D” result destroys it, instantly and permanently. 
The DM determines the physical effects—the 
flashier, the better. A skeleton crumbles to dust. A 
crimson flame envelopes a ghoul, then dissappears. 
A spectre screams as it is sucked through an invisi- 
ble portal the size of a pinhole. A vampire melts 
into a steaming puddle. 

The effects of a “T” result depend whether the 
undead is bound by the orders of another or has 
free will. A bound undead, such as a skeleton, 
retreats, hugs the wall, or otherwise gets out of the 
way of the paladin and his companions. If free- 
willed, the undead tries to flee. If unable to escape, 
it circles at a distance, coming no closer to the pal- 
adin than 10 feet. Once turned, the undead may 
hiss or claw the air, but it will take no direct action 
against the paladin, even if the paladin turns away. 
Should he move within 10 feet of the undead, the 
paladin violates the turning, and the undead 
attacks normally. 


Bonded Mount 


Perhaps the paladin’s greatest asset is the bonded 
mount, usually a heavy war horse of exceptional 
strength, courage, and intelligence that serves its 
master with steadfast devotion. The bond is partly 
instinctual, partly divine; many believe that the 
gods bring them together to insure the paladin has 
a companion as noble as himself. Once joined, the 
mount remains loyal so long as the paladin stays 
true to his principles. 


A paladin becomes eligible to receive a bonded 
mount at 4th level. The mount may appear any 
time thereafter. Because the mount's arrival marks 
a major event in the paladin’s career, the DM may 
wish to delay its appearance. For instance, if a 4th- 
level paladin is about to embark on a lengthy 
exploration of an underground civilization, the DM 
may postpone the mount’s appearance until the 
paladin surfaces. In all cases, the DM determines 
when and how the mount appears. 

A paladin may never have more than one bonded 
mount at a time. Further, he can have no more than 
one mount in the same decade. If the mount dies or 
is otherwise lost, the paladin won't become eligible 
for a replacement until 10 years after the day he 
acquired his original mount. 

Most bonded mounts are war horses, but other 
creatures can also become mounts. Table 13 lists 
some of the possibilities. The DM may augment 
Table 13 with other creatures, so long as they are 
suitable for riding, reasonably intelligent, and of 
good or neutral alignment. 

The player may suggest the type of mount he 
prefers for his paladin character, but the DM makes 
the final choice. The DM may roll on Table 13 or 
select a particular creature. Regardless of the method 
used, remember that only the strongest, smartest, 
and bravest creatures become bonded mounts. To 
qualify as a bonded mount, most creatures must 
meet certain statistic requirements. These are rec- 
ommendations, not rigid rules; the DM may mod- 
ify them as desired. 

Hit Points. Most mounts have at least 6 hit 
points per hit die. A heavy war horse, for instance, 
has 21-27 hit points. 

Intelligence. A species’ listed Intelligence must 
be at least Animal (1). However, the Intelligence of 
the mount may differ from the listed Intelligence of 
the species: 

e Ifa mount's species normally has Animal Intel- 
ligence, the mount itself has an Intelligence score of 
Semi- (4). For example, the war horse species has 
an Intelligence of 1, but a war horse bonded mount 
has an Intelligence of 4. 

e If the mounts species normally has an Intelli- 
gence score of Semi- or higher, the mount itself has 


uu 


Paladin Abilities * 17 


+2 over the highest typical score. The Monstrous 
Manual shows an Intelligence range of 2-4 for the 
griffon; a griffon bonded mount has an Intelligence 
of 6. 

Morale. A species’ listed Morale must be at least 
Unsteady (5-7). The Morale of a mount may exceed 
that of its species: 

e Ifa mount’s species normally has Unsteady or 
Average morale, the mount has a Morale of 11 
(Steady). 

If the mount’s species has a range of Morale 
scores, the mount has the highest possible score. 
The griffon has a Morale range of 11-12; a griffon 
bonded mount has a Morale of 12. 

Upgraded mounts. The DM may improve any 
species of bonded mount by adding 2+2 HD to its 
hit dice base and 3 to its movement base. An up- 
graded heavy war horse bonded mount has 5+5 
HD and a movement rate of 18. 


Level Restrictions 

To maintain balance, the DM should consider 
restricting a low-level paladin’s choice of bonded 
mounts. For instance, the DM may decide that a 
paladin can’t acquire a bonded mount other than a 
war horse until he reaches 7th level, or an aerial 
mount before 10th level. 

Alternately, a DM may restrict all paladins to the 
following choices: 

e A paladin may only have a land-based mount 
whose hit dice are less than or equal to the pal- 
adin’s experience level. 

e A paladin may only have a flying mount whose 
hit dice are no more than half the paladin’s experi- 
ence level. 

Using these guidelines, a 7th-level paladin could 
have a 3+3 HD hippogriff as a bonded mount, but 
not a 7 HD griffon. If an unacceptable choice comes 
up on Table 13, roll again or choose an acceptable 
mount. 


18 * Chapter Two 


Campaign Restrictions 

The DM should select bonded mounts with the 
rest of the party in mind, as well as the parameters 
of the campaign. A griffon mount may be disrup- 
tive if the paladin’s companions all ride horses, 
particularly if the griffon has a taste for horseflesh. 
A hippocampus won't be much fun if the campaign 
rarely takes the party near water. Again, disregard 
any inappropriate outcome on Table 13 and make a 
new roll or choose something else. 


Species Preference 

Bonding requires the voluntary participation of 
the mount, and some species may have their own 
ideas about what constitutes a suitable companion. 
Unicorns, for instance, will only accompany female 
paladins, while light war horses may be reluctant 
to bond with overweight riders. If a match doesn’t 
work, try a different combination. 


Character Kits 

Certain character kits may have specific mount 
requirements that take precedence over other con- 
siderations. See Chapter 4 for details. 


Table 13: Bonded Mounts 


D100 Roll Mount 
01-77 War horse* 
78-79 Griffon 
80-81 Unicorn** 
82-83 Pegasus 
84-85 Hippogriff 
86-87 Giant eagle 
88-89 Dire wolf 
90-91 Elephant or oliphant 
92-93 Great cat (lion or tiger) 
94-95 Giant lizard 
96-97 Aquatic (hippocampus, sea horse, sea 
lion, small whale, or dolphin) 
98-00 DM's choice 


* The paladin’s standard war horse. 
** Female paladins only. 


Paladin’s War Horse 


The paladin’s standard war horse is an unusu- 
ally hardy steed, slightly larger than a heavy war 
horse and more heavily muscled. Its shaggy coat 
and thick hide provides it with natural armor. Pow- 
erful legs enable it to move at the speed of a 
medium war horse. It has a carrying capacity of 
300, an encumbered (half-speed) capacity of 450, 
and an encumbered (one-third movement) capacity 
of 600. 

Paladin’s standard war horse: Int low (7); AL N; 
AC 5; MV 18; HD 5+5; THACO 15; #AT 3; Dmg, 
1d3/1d8/1d8; SZ L; ML 12; XP 270. 


Acquiring a Mount 


Usually, an opportunity to acquire a bonded 
mount occurs within a few months after a paladin 
reaches 4th level and declares himself receptive. 
The DM decides the exact time and the circum- 
stances, working the mount’s appearance into the 
flow of the campaign. The acquisition of a mount 
should be dramatic; after all, it is a landmark of a 
paladin’s career. Some possibilitie: 

Dream. The paladin may experience a dream, 
induced by the gods, where he sees a mount ina 
specific location. He may dream of a wounded war 
horse on a battlefield, surrounded by the corpses of 
lizard men. A unicorn may lie comatose in a field of 
crimson flowers, overcome by the petals’ anaes- 
thetic fragrance. The dream may be a premonition 
of an event yet to come or an image of a situation 
that has alfeady occurred. The paladin may experi- 
ence the dream with increasing regularity over sev- 
eral weeks. The dream may become more vivid 
near the source. Eventually, he encounters a scene 
exactly as portrayed in the dream. By overcoming a 
final obstacle, such as fighting off predators from 
the wounded horse or finding an antidote for the 
comatose unicorn, the paladin unites with the 
bonded mount. 

Reward. A paladin may receive a mount as a 
reward for an exceptional act of heroism. If he 
saves a village from a family of red dragons or sin- 
gle-handedly turns back an advancing army of 


orcs, the grateful community may present him with 
their finest war horse. A paladin honoring his faith 
by building a temple at the peak of a high moun- 
tain may slip and fall; as he plummets into the 
abyss, a griffon swoops from the cloud and rescues 
him, a gift sent by the gods. 

Quest. The paladin may hear of the whereabouts 
of a potential mount and decide to track it down. 
The information may come from a befriended sage, 
a rumor overheard at an inn, or a mysterious docu- 
ment found in an abandoned castle. He may spend 
weeks or months pursuing the lead, only to dis- 
cover one or more obstacles preventing him from 
bonding with the mount. The mount may be 
guarded by a monster, in the custody of an evil 
monarch, or for sale at an auction at an astronomi- 
cal price. A spirited mount may resist capture, 
leading the paladin on a wild chase through treach- 
erous terrain. 

Magic. A magical ceremony may evoke the 
appearance of a bonded mount. A paladin may 
learn the details of such a ceremony from an arcane 
parchment or a helpful mage. A giant eagle trapped 
in a diamond may be freed if bathed in a lep- 
rechaun’s tears. A painting of a war horse on a cave 
wall may come to life if the paladin burns a special 
incense. If he gathers the scattered bones of a grif- 
fon and casts them into the sea, a living griffon may 
arise from the water, ready to serve. 


Recognizing a Bonded Mount 


Though a mount always knows when bonding 
has occurred, it may not be immediately obvious to 
the paladin. The DM shouldn't announce to the 
paladin that he’s just bonded with a mount, but 
instead describe the behavior of the mount and let 
the paladin come to his own conclusions. Here are 
a few signs the paladin might look for: 

e The mount seems unusually bright. A war 
horse immediately comes when called. A hip- 
pogriff fetches on command. 

e The mount seems unusually brave, fearlessly 
fighting alongside the paladin against formidable 
opponents or intervening when a monster attempts 
an ambush. 


a 


Paladin Abilities * 19 


* The mount seems unusually loyal and affec- 
tionate. A horse trots placidly behind the paladin 
wherever he goes, stopping when he stops, moving 
when he moves. A unicorn rests its head in the pal- 
adin’s lap. 

After observing such actions for a day or two, 
even the dullest paladin should conclude that he’s 
acquired a bonded mount. To alleviate lingering 
doubts, a friendly spellcaster may verify the bond- 
ing by casting speak with animals or a similar spell. 


Routine Care 


In general, a bonded mount has the same needs 
as a normal steed. For the most part, it can care for 
itself, grazing or hunting when hungry, and drink- 
ing when thirsty. Unless ordered otherwise, a 
bonded mount rests when the paladin rests. 

Occasionally, the mount may have to count on the 
paladin for routine care. In the absence of a suitable 
pasture or hunting grounds, the paladin will have to 
provide food. In a dry desert, the paladin may have 


_—_—_——O ee eee eee 


20 * Chapter Two 


to share his water. Mounts often need regular doses 
of salt to replace the salt lost from sweating. Sick or 
wounded mounts may need medical attention 
Some mounts, horses in particular, require daily 
grooming to stay healthy. The mount’s coat must 
be brushed, then wiped down with a soft cloth. Its 
hooves must be thoroughly examined for cracks, 
imbedded stones, and other abnormalities that 
could cause serious damage if left unattended. All 
mounts appreciate expressions of affection, such as 
tasty snacks, soft words, and soothing touches. 


Special Traits 


All bonded mounts, regardless of their species, 
have the following traits in common: 

Faithful service. A bonded mount’s loyalty is 
unshakable. It obeys the paladin’s commands 
without hesitation, assuming it understands them. 
When the paladin is on foot, the mount remains at 
his side, following wherever he goes unless ordered 
to stay put. 


On the battlefield, the mount remains with the 
paladin, even in the face of impending death. A 
bonded mount will never abandon the paladin to 
save itself; in game terms, the mount is considered 
to have Fearless (20) Morale when fighting beside 
or defending the paladin. 

A bonded mount is indifferent to the paladin’s 
companions, unless it has been specifically trained 
to protect them or respond to their commands. 
Should a companion approach the paladin in what 
the mount perceives as a threatening manner, the 
mount may snort or stamp its hooves as a warning, 
or even attempt to push the companion away. Once 
reassured by the paladin, the mount withdraws, 
though it may keep a wary eye on the companion. 
The mount responds to nonplayer characters in the 
same way, ignoring nonhostile NPCs who keep 
their distance, reacting strongly to those who 
appear to pose a threat. 

Comes when called. A bonded mount comes 
immediately to the paladin’s side when sum- 
moned. The mount responds to a shout, whistle, 
hand gesture, or any audible or physical signal of 
the paladin’s choice. The paladin must demon- 
strate the signal to the mount only once; the mount 
unfailingly responds to the signal ever after. 

Handling. The paladin can always calm an 
excited or agitated bonded mount. The Animal 
Handling proficiency isn’t required. 

Riding. A paladin requires neither the airborne nor 
the land-based riding proficiency to ride his bonded 
mount. Additionally, the paladin can perform all of 
the feats associated with the proficiency that applies 
to his mouñt’s species. Feats normally requiring, pro- 
ficiency checks (described in Chapter 5 of the PH) 
instead require Riding checks. For land-based 
mounts, make the Riding check against the paladin’s 
Wisdom score, modified by +3. For airborne mounts, 
the Riding check equals the paladin’s Wisdom -2. 
(These modifiers are identical to the standard check 
modifiers given on Table 37 in the PH.) 

Unless trained otherwise, a bonded mount 
allows only the paladin to ride it, bucking and 
snorting furiously if anyone else makes an attempt. 
A soothing word from the paladin prevents the 
mount from actually harming an unwanted rider. 


Combat. A bonded mount aggressively defends 
its paladin against attacks, biting and kicking until 
the attacker withdraws. The mount also attacks any 
target indicated by the paladin, continuing its 
attacks until the paladin orders it to stop. 


Training 


A bonded mount can perform all of the actions 
discussed in “Special Traits.” A paladin may also 
wish to train the mount to perform additional 
tricks and tasks. Tricks are simple actions per- 
formed in response to specific commands; such 
actions require no independent decision-making 
from the mount. Tasks are more complex actions 
which may require multiple steps and a bit of 
improvisation. Because of its rapport with its pal- 
adin, a bonded mount can master an impressive 
repertoire of tricks and tasks, and can learn more 
efficiently than other animals. 

The Animal Training proficiency isn’t necessary 
to train a bonded mount, though the procedure is 
similar. The paladin tells the DM which trick or 
task he wants to teach. If the DM approves, the pal- 
adin begins the training. It takes 1-2 weeks to teach 
a trick to a bonded mount, and 2-5 (1d4+1) weeks 
to teach it a task. At the end of the training period, 
the paladin makes a Wisdom check (using his own 
Wisdom score, not the mount’s). If the check suc- 
ceeds, the mount has learned the trick or task. If the 
check fails, the paladin may try again, investing 
another 1-2 weeks of training for a trick, or 2-5 
weeks for a task. When the training period ends, he 
makes a second Wisdom check. If this check fails, 
the mount is incapable of learning that particular 
trick or task. A bonded mount can learn 9-20 
(1d12+8) tricks and tasks, in any combination. 

A paladin can use the Animal Training profi- 
ciency to train other animals while training his 
mount. He can train three animals, including the 
mount, at the same time. 

A paladin must regularly work with the mount 
to teach it a trick or task. The exact time spent is 
less important than working with the mount every 
day. If the paladin falls behind—for instance, if he 
skips a training session several days in a row—the 


e 


Paladin Abilities * 21 


DM may rule that he must start the training again, 
beginning a new period of 1-2 or 2-5 weeks. 

Several examples of tricks and tasks suitable for 
bonded mounts are described below. A paladin 
isn’t confined to this list; he may attempt to teach 
his mount any task or trick he can think of, so long 
as the mount is physically and mentally capable of 
performing it and the DM approves. 

A mount executes most tricks and tasks automat- 
ically; die-rolls or success checks aren’t needed. The 
DM may ask for an ability check if the outcome is 
uncertain (for instance, a mount successfully walks 
a plank spanning a deep chasm if it makes a Dex- 
terity check). Alternately, the DM may assign a per- 
centile chance of success (the mount has a 30% 
chance of safely crossing the chasm). The DM adju- 
dicates all combat-related tricks and tasks like any 
other combat action, using attack and damage rolls 
as necessary. 

Exceptionally intelligent mounts. Mounts who 
can communicate with spoken language and whose 
Intelligence scores are comparable with those of 
humans need no training. Such creatures perform 
any tricks or tasks their paladins ask them, within 
reason. 


Sample Tricks 

Speak. The mount neighs, growls, or makes 
some other predetermined sound on command. 

Pack Animal. Normally, bonded mounts resist 
being used as pack animals. Some are only com- 
fortable carrying human riders; others feel that 
hauling equipment is beneath their dignity. Once a 
mount masters this trick, however, it effortlessly 
shifts between carrying riders and gear. To avoid 
chafing and sores, a mount usually requires a pack 
saddle when carrying gear. The cost of a pack sad- 
dle for a horse is 5 gp. The cost of pack saddles for 
other species ranges from 5-15 gp, depending on 
the animal's size and the DM's decision. 

Pursue. Normally, a mount breaks off its attacks 
when an aggressor withdraws. When taught to 
pursue, the mount chases a retreating enemy. If the 
mount catches the enemy, it resumes its attacks. 
The mount may pursue indefinitely, returning 
when the enemy has been defeated or has escaped, 


—— OO ee ———— ———— 


22 + Chapter Two 


or it may be taught to return at the paladin’s com- 
mand. 

Stay. The mount stands still until the paladin 
gives it permission to move. 


Sample Tasks 

Rescue. If the paladin falls unconscious on the 
battlefield, the mount drags him to safety, either to 
a predetermined location, such as the paladin’s 
campsite, or to the nearest safe location. 

Strategic attacks. In a combat encounter, the 
mount makes its own decisions regarding strategy 
and choice of targets. The mount may temporarily 
leave the paladin to lure away a charging monster, 
or it may attack an enemy that the paladin doesn’t 
see (such as one about to plunge a knife into the 
paladin’s back). 

Guard duty. The mount stands guard at a camp- 
site or other location, watching for intruders. 
Should the mount spot an intruder, it reacts as 
directed by the paladin. It may alert a sleeping, pal- 
adin (or other designated character) by nudging, 
him awake, crying out, or attacking. 

As some mounts may not be able to distinguish 
between friendly and hostile intruders, the mount 
will most likely react if any person or creature 
enters the guarded area. To improve the mount’s 
value as a guard, the paladin may teach it to re- 
spond to a specific type of intruder (say, anyone 
riding a horse, or any ogre). Recognizing a specific 
type of intruder is considered a distinct trick, re- 
quiring a separate training period. In other words, 
the mount must first learn the task of guard duty, 
then any number of tricks to recognize specific 
types of intruders. 

Search. The follower can search for a particular 
type of item in a general location and, if it finds it, 
return the item to the paladin. Suitable items 
include gems, weapons, bundles, flasks, or parch- 
ments. Suitable locations include a small cave, a 
shallow valley, or the interior of a building. The 
paladin must show the mount a sample of the 
sought object, the more specific, the better. (If the 
paladin wants a particular weapon from an armory, 
he must show the mount a close copy.) The paladin 
must also designate the area to be searched. The 


Paladin Abilities + 23 


mount won't search indefinitely, usually returning 
within an hour if it can’t find the item. 

If the circumstances of the search are unusually 
difficult, the DM may call for ability checks. For 
instance, if the mount searches an armory for a par- 
ticular golden sword, but the building contains 
dozens of similar swords,-the DM may require the 
mount to make an Intelligence check. The mount 
locates the correct sword only if the Intelligence 
check succeeds. 

A mount may also be taught to locate specific 
people. However, a mount can’t locate a person 
that it hasn’t been taught to recognize. The mount 
must first learn the task of searching, then any num- 
ber of tricks to recognize specific individuals. A 
bonded mount can always recognize its paladin; no 
special training is required. 


Bonded Mounts as 
Nonplayer Characters 


Because bonded mounts are living, breathing ; 
entities with thoughts and feelings of their own, 
the DM should consider running them as non- 
player characters. Like a human or demihuman 
NPC, a bonded mount has a distinct personality. 


It may be stubborn or bold, complacent or curi- 
ous, foolhardy or cautious. It may have an aver- 
sion to bearded strangers, a fear of water, a 
fondness for apples. Exceptionally intel 
mounts may communicate with head 


foot stomps, or a sa age 
serve as canfidantes and advisors. : 


Parting Company 


Under normal circumstances, a bonded mount 
serves its paladin for no more than 10 years. During 
this time, the paladin may voluntarily dismiss the 
mount if it becomes crippled or ill, if the paladin’s 
journeys take him to a terrain inhospitable to the 
mount, or for any other reason of the paladin’s 
choice. The mount instinctively knows when the 
paladin dismisses it, and responds by dutifully wan- 
dering away. The DM should stage this parting as a 


e aaaaaŘħŮĖÁ 


24 + Chapter Two 


significant event similar to the mount's arrival. 

If the paladin returns to the area where he dis- 
missed the mount and calls out for it, the mount 
may return. A dismissed mount returns if all of the 
following conditions exist: 

* The mount is alive and ambulatory. 

* The mount hasn't left the area and can hear the 
paladin’s call. 

* Ten years haven't yet passed since the day the 
paladin originally acquired the mount. 

e The paladin hasn't acquired a new, conven- 
tional mount in the interim. 

* The DM approves of the return. 

A bonded mount abandons its paladin for either 
of the following reasons: 

* Ten years have passed since the mount origi- 
nally bonded with the paladin. Many steeds, par- 
ticularly horses, are too old for a life of adventure 
at this age. Others, like unicorns, become restless 
for new experiences. 

After a decade of service, the paladin may volun- 
tarily dismiss his mount. Otherwise, the mount 
simply disappears at the earliest opportunity. A 
paladin in good standing then becomes eligible for 
a new bonded mount. The opportunity may arise 
within the next few months, under the guidelines 
described in the “Acquiring a Mount” section 
above. The new mount may be a different species 
from the previous mount. 

è If the paladin is stripped of his special abilities 
as a consequence of violating his ethos (see Chapter 
3), the bonded mount loses its allegiance to the pal- 
adin and escapes at the earliest opportunity. Once 
stripped of his abilities, a former paladin can never 
again acquire bonded mounts. 


Clerical Spells 


A paladin acquires spells through prayer, just 
like a priest. Assuming the paladin has adhered to 
the tenets of his faith, the deity or greater power 
usually grants the requested spells. After receiving 
spells, a paladin uses them the same way as a 
priest, employing identical components, casting 
times, and effects. See Chapter 8 for more about 
paladins and their faiths. 


The set of principles that structures a paladin’s 
life and regulates his behavior is called an ethos. 
While an ethos may encompass the written laws of 
society, its scope is much broader, incorporating 
spiritual edicts and moral absolutes to form an eth- 
ical ideal. A paladin’s ethos defines his attitudes, 
shapes his personality, and influences virtually 
every decision he'll ever make. 

Though a guiding ideology is certainly not 
unique to paladins, the paladin’s ethos differs from 
that of other character classes in two significant 
ways. First, the paladin’s ethos is complex, com- 
prising a long list of general guidelines and specific 
rules. Second, the paladin’s ethos is uncompromis- 
ing, requiring absolute dedication. Violations have 
severe consequences, ranging from reprimands to 
suspensions of privileges. Extreme violations may 
result in a complete loss of status and permanent 
removal of all his special abilities. 

Still, the paladin considers his ethos a privilege, 
not a burden. To him, all conduct has a moral qual- 
ity. Every action is a choice between right and 
wrong. With justifiable pride, he considers himself 
an embodiment of the highest standards of human 
behavior. 

We begin with the three general components of 
the paladin’s ethos: strictures (formal rules), edicts 
(commands from authorities), and virtues (behav- 
ioral values). The final section explains how a pal- 
adin may violate his ethos, and suggests suitable 
punishments and atonements. 


Strictures 


The most important elements of a paladin’s ethos 
are his strictures, a set of inviolable rules from the 
PH that the paladin must follow at all times. The 
paladin’s strictures are as inflexible as his ability 
requirements; they are part of what defines a char- 
acter as a paladin and distinguishes him from other 
classes. 


Lawful Good Alignment 


Every paladin must be lawful good. The moment 
he abandons the conditions of this alignment is the 


moment he stops being a paladin. 

At the heart of a lawful good alignment is the 
belief in a system of laws that promotes the welfare 
of all members of a society, ensures their safety, and 
guarantees justice. So long as the laws are just and 
applied fairly to all people, it doesn’t matter to the 
paladin whether they originate from a democracy 
or a dictator. 

Though all lawful good systems adhere to the 
same general principles, specific laws may be dif- 
ferent. One society may allow a wife to have two 
husbands, another may enforce strict monogamy. 
Gambling may be tolerated in one system, forbid- 
den in another. A paladin respects the laws of other 
lawful good cultures and will not seek to impose 
his own values on their citizens. 

However, a paladin will not honor a law that 
runs contrary to his alignment. A government may 
believe that unregulated gambling provides a 
harmless diversion, but a paladin may determine 
that the policy has resulted in devastating poverty 
and despair. In the paladin’s mind, the government 
is guilty of a lawless act by promoting an exploitive 
and destructive enterprise. In response, the paladin 
may encourage citizens to refrain from gambling, 
or he may work to change the law. 

Particularly abhorrent practices, such as slavery 
and torture, may force the paladin to take direct 
action. It doesn’t matter if these practices are cul- 
turally acceptable or sanctioned by well-meaning 
officials. The paladin’s sense of justice compels him 
to intervene and alleviate as much suffering as he 
can. Note, though, that time constraints, inade- 
quate resources, and other commitments may limit 
his involvement. While a paladin might wish for a 
cultural revolution in a society that tolerates canni- 
balism, he may have to content himself with rescu- 
ing a few victims before circumstances force him to 
leave the area. 

When will a paladin take a life? A paladin kills 
whenever necessary to promote the greater good, 
or to protect himself, his companions, or anyone 
whom he’s vowed to defend. In times of war, he 
strikes down the enemies of his ruler or church. He 
does not interfere with a legal execution, so long as 
the punishment fits the crime. 


EE a 


Ethos * 25 


Otherwise, a paladin avoids killing whenever 
possible. He does not kill a person who is merely 
suspected of a crime, nor does a paladin necessar- 
ily kill someone he perceives to be a threat unless 
he has tangible evidence or certain knowledge of 
evildoing. He never kills for treasure or personal 
gain. He never knowingly kills a lawful good 
being. 

Though paladins believe in the sanctity of inno- 
cent life, most kill animals and other nonaligned 
creatures in certain situations. A paladin may kill 
animals for food. He will kill a monster that endan- 
gers humans, even if the monster is motivated by 
instinct, not evil. While some paladins avoid hunt- 
ing for sport, others may hunt to sharpen their 
combat and tracking skills. 


Magical Item Limit 


The paladin’s limited access to spells also extends 
to the number of magical items he may posses 
Under no circumstances may a paladin retain more 
than 10 magical items, regardless of his level, kit, or 
status. 

Paladins are limited not only to the number of 
magical items, but also the type. Specifically, a pal- 
adin can have the following: 

One suit of magical armor. This excludes all 
pieces of normal armor that have been temporarily 
enchanted, as well as accessories such as a cloak of 
protection, a helm of protection, or boots of speed (all of 
which count against the paladin’s miscellaneous 
item limit). A single piece of magical armor, such a 
chest plate, counts as a full suit for limitation pur- 
poses. 

One magical shield. 

Four magical weapons. This excludes all normal 
weapons temporarily affected by enchanted weapon 
or similar spells, but includes holy swords. A quiver 
or case of arrows or bolts counts as one item. Indi- 
vidual arrows and bolts are counted as one item if 
they have special magical properties, such as arrows 
of direction and arrows of slaying. 

Four miscellaneous magical items. This cate- 
gory includes rings, rods, staves, gems, and scrolls. 
A bag of beans, a set of ioun stones, and a deck of many 


aaam 


26 * Chapter Three 


things each count as one item. A magical potion 
counts as one item, regardless of the number of 
Items temporarily enchanted by spells are 
excluded. 

To ensure that a paladin stays within his limit, 
it’s important to clarify who owns each of the 
party’s magical items. In general, a paladin won't 
use a magical item unless it’s his. It doesn’t matter 
who actually carries the item; if a paladin has 
claimed ownership, it belongs to him. A paladin 
may loan items to his companions, but so long as 
he retains ownership, loaned items count against 
his limit. 

Conversely, if a paladin has 10 items, he won't 
borrow items from other characters. A paladin 
won't look for ambiguities to exploit; he remains 
true to the spirit as well as the letter of these rule: 

Of course, a paladin may not know that an item 
is magical when he acquires it. But as soon as he 
becomes aware of its special properties, he’s oblig- 


dose: 


ated to give it away or to get rid of another item to 
remain within his limit. 

A paladin may voluntarily rid himself of a magi- 
cal item if he finds a more desirable one. For in- 
stance, he may give up an arrow of direction if he 
iscovers a javelin of lightning. 

Excess magical items may be given to other law- 
ful good characters, donated to the paladin’s reli- 
gious institution, or simply discarded. Since excess 
items technically don’t belong to the paladin (he 
won't claim ownership), they may not be sold or 
traded, even if the paladin intends to funnel the 
profits to a worthy cause. 


Wealth Limits 


A paladin has no interest in wealth for its own 
sake. He seeks spiritual rather than material satis- 
faction, derived from serving his faith and his gov- 
ernment to the best of his ability. To a paladin, the 
pleasures of ownership are fleeting, superficial, 
and ultimately debasing. The rewards of duty are 
lasting and deep. 

Still, the paladin realizes that a certain amount of 
money is necessary to survive. Rather than forego 
money altogether, he retains enough wealth to 


meet his worldly obligations and sustain a modest 
lifestyle. 

A paladin doesn’t expect handouts, nor does he 
rely on the generosity of strangers or his compan- 
ions. He feels responsible to pay his own way and 
takes pride in his self-sufficiency. He earns income 
from treasure, rewards, and fees, the same as any- 
one else. Unlike most other characters, however, the 
paladin operates under strict guidelines as to how 
he can spend his money and how much he can save. 


Budgeting, 

A paladin requires funds to cover the following 
expenses: 

Food. A paladin is responsible for feeding him- 
self and his steed. To hold down costs, the paladin 
might hunt his own game, and may gather fruits, 
nuts and vegetables from the wildernes: 

Weapons, armor, and clothing. This includes the 
costs of purchase, upkeep, repair, and replacement. 
A paladin seldom skimps in this area, spending as 
much as his funds will allow to secure the highest- 
quality equipment. 

Tack and harness. As with weapons and armor, 
many paladins splurge to buy the best, especially 
for bonded mounts. 

Lodging. When sleeping outdoor n't practical, 
paladins seek out the least expensive inns. 

Taxes and licenses. The paladin must make all 
payments required by his liege. He must also pay 
all foreign tolls and fees levied during his travels. 

Training costs. A paladin may pay a tutor for 
training, providing the tutor is of lawful good 
alignment and the paladin has permission from his 
patron. (See Chapter 7 for more about training pro- 
cedures.) 

Miscellaneous provisions. Including medicines, 
lantern oil, clothing, bedding, and grooming sup- 
plies. Many paladins prefer to forage, improvise, or 
manufacture these items instead of buying them 
outright, in order to save money. 

Salaries. Fair salaries are required for all servi- 
tors and henchmen. 

Stronghold expenses. A paladin pays all costs 
associated with the construction and maintenance 
of his stronghold. 


Strongholds 

In addition to his contingency fund, a paladin 
may also maintain a separate fund to save for a 
stronghold. As explained in Chapter 7, construc- 
tion prices vary wildly, though all are expensive. A 
paladin may have to save for years, even decades, 
to accumulate enough wealth to build a strong- 
hold. A wise paladin, then, begins his stronghold 
fund as soon as possible; 1st level isn’t too early to 
start saving. 

Once a paladin establishes a stronghold, he 
acquires a universe of new expenses, particularly 
those involving personnel and maintenance. The 
paladin must adjust his monthly budget accord- 
ingly. He may also wish to build up his contin- 
gency fund to cover two or three months’ worth of 
overhead. 

An established stronghold typically falls into one 
of three economic categories, each of which has a 
particular impact on the paladin’s finances: 

Subsidized. The stronghold has no significant 
agricultural or manufacturing base. Any crops or 
goods produced at the stronghold are insufficient 
to pay the stronghold’s maintenance costs and 
employees. The paladin must make up the differ- 
ence out of his own pocket, which raises his monthly 
financial obligations dramatically. 

It’s not unusual for a paladin to subsidize a new 
stronghold until it gets up and running. With care- 
ful management and a little luck, a stronghold 
becomes self-sustaining within a few months or, at 
most, a few years. Some paladins, however, subsi- 
dize their strongholds indefinitely, usually for one 
of two reasons: 

e The stronghold was never designed to gener- 
ate income, functioning instead as a military 
stronghold, training center, hospital, or religious 
sanctuary. Such a stronghold requires the commit- 
ment of a paladin with considerable resources. 

e The stronghold was designed to generate 
income, but due to misfortune or incompetent 
management, never succeeded. Should the paladin 
decide to cut his losses and abandon the strong- 
hold, he must first see to the well-being of his faith- 
ful employees, giving them adequate severance 
pay and doing what he can to find them new jobs. 


e 


Ethos * 27 


Self-sustaining. The stronghold pays its own 
way through the sale of crops, goods, or services. 
The paladin needn’t subsidize the operation in 
any way, nor does he have to worry about the 


proper disposal of excess profits (there aren't 
any). This is the ideal arrangement for most pal- 
adins. 

Profit-making. The stronghold generates regular 
and dependable profits from the sale of crops, 
goods, or services. The paladin uses these profits to 
expand his holdings (to provide jobs for more peo- 
ple or to further glorify his deity, never for personal 
gain) or to increase his donations to his church or 
other worthy causes. A profit-making stronghold 
usually requires extra time and attention from the 
paladin, or the services of skilled managers. 


Excess Funds 

All of a paladin’s excess funds must be forfeited. 
This includes all money remaining after he pays his 
regular expenses, as well as any money not specifi- 
cally allocated to a savings fund for building a 
stronghold. He may keep a contingency fund equal 
to two or three times his normal monthly budget 
(including maintenance costs and employee salaries 
for his stronghold) but no more. He many not 
stockpile money to buy gifts, leave to his heirs, or 
pay a friend’s expenses. 

What does a paladin do with the excess? He has 
three options: 

e Refuse it. If an appreciative community offers 
him a sack of gems for destroying a vampire, he 
politely declines. (“Your gratitude is more than suf- 
ficient.”) If he discovers a treasure chest filled with 
pearls, gold pieces, and a book of poetry, he takes 
the book and leaves the rest (and he’s likely to give 
the book to a friend or a library after he’s finished 
reading it). 

© Donate it to the church. This does not count as a 
regular tithing (see the Tithing section below), as 
it’s not considered part of his income. 

e Donate it to another worthy institution of lawful 
good alignment. Suitable recipients include hospi- 
tals, libraries, and orphanages. Research facilities, 
military organizations, and governmental opera- 
tions are acceptable only if the paladin is certain 


————— —————————eeSSSSSSSGSGSeM 


28 + Chapter Three 


that the money will be spent on lawful good pro- 
jects. 

Within these guidelines, a paladin may dispose 
of his excess funds as he wishes. He may donate 
treasure to a hospital on one occasion, and refuse 
a monetary reward for rescuing a kidnapped 
prince on another. However, he may never give his 
excess funds to another player character, or to any 
nonplayer character or creature controlled by a 
player. 

Remember, too, that just because a paladin 
declines a reward for rescuing a prince doesn’t 
mean his fellow party members can’t accept it. If a 
paladin kills an evil dragon, then walks away from 
its treasure hoard, his companions are still free to 
help themselves. 


Loans 

A paladin falling on hard times or confronted 
with unanticipated expenses may arrange for a 
loan from a lawful good character or institution. 
While borrowing money may be a humiliating 
experience, it’s rarely an ethos violation unless the 
paladin borrows money he doesn’t need or doesn’t 
intend to repay. 

In general, a paladin may borrow only small 
amounts of money (say, an amount equivalent to 
his monthly budget). He may also borrow the mini- 
mum amount required for an emergency; an oppor- 
tunity to buy a treasure map leading to a holy sword 
doesn’t qualify, but medicine to treat a dying com- 
panion might. Borrowing money to pay the 
monthly operating expenses of a stronghold is 
allowed, but only if necessary to keep lawful good 
workers employed or to make vital repairs. (A 
leaking roof can wait; a crumbled wall probably 
can’t.) A paladin should strive to repay his debts as 
quickly as possible. 

Repeated borrowing is discouraged, and chronic 
debt should be considered an ethos violation. If a 
paladin borrows money for several consecutive 
months, he might lose his stronghold, his bonded 
mount, or any other obligation that’s costing him 
more than he can afford. 


Tithing 


A paladin must give 10% of all his income to a 
lawful good institution. This 10% is called a tithe. In 
most cases, a paladin tithes to his church or other 
religious organization. If he doesn’t belong to a 
church or operates independently (as in the case of 
the Expatriate character kit described in Chapter 4), 
he may designate any lawful good organization, 
such as a hospital or university, as the recipient of 
his tithes. A paladin has no say in how his tithes are 
spent, though the money typically goes towards 
the institution’s maintenance, recruitment, equip- 
ment, and education costs. A paladin usually tithes 
to the same institution for his entire career. 

A paladin’s first tithe usually comes out of his 
starting funds of 5d4 x 10 gp. After that, he must 
tithe from all sources of income, including rewards, 
treasure, wages, and profits generated from his 
stronghold. When he acquires a gem or magical 
item, he owes his designated institution 10% of the 
item’s value (as determined by the DM), payable at 
the earliest opportunity. If he finds a diamond 
worth 500 gp, he owes 50 gp; if the gem is lost or 
stolen, he still owes 50 gp (the institution isn’t 
penalized for the paladin’s carelessness). 

Tithes are due only on funds the paladin actually 
claims for himself. If he walks away from a treasure 
or refuses a reward, no tithes are necessary. 

It’s the paladin’s responsibility to get his tithes to 
his institution as soon as possible. A monthly pay- 
ment will suffice in most cases, with the paladin 
turning in 10% of all the income he’s acquired in 
the previous four weeks. If a monthly payment is 
impossible or impractical—for instance, if the pal- 
adin is on a mission halfway around the world, or 
if he’s a prisoner of war—he may make other 
arrangements, providing he offers a satisfactory 
explanation. A paladin may personally present his 
tithings to his institution or he may deliver them by 
messenger. 

Tithes carried by the paladin but not yet deliv- 
ered are still considered to be the property of the 
institution. A starving paladin who has no other 
funds aside from 10 gp of tithes may not spend his 
tithes on food, unless he first petitions his deity for 


permission. If he’s behaved responsibly—say, if he 
used his last gold piece to pay for treatment of a 
dying child—permission is usually granted, with 
the understanding that the tithes must be replaced. 


Alignment of Associates 


A paladin is known by the company he keeps. 
Ideally, a paladin associates only with good-aligned 
companions. Relationships with neutral characters 
may be tolerated in limited circumstances, but pro- 
longed contact may result in an ethos violation. Any 
association with an evil-aligned character can be 
construed as an evil act. In general, a paladin bears 
responsibility for the actions of his associates, even 
those taken without his knowledge or consent. 
‘elings. Without exception, all of a paladin’s 
men-at-arms and stronghold employees must be 
lawful good. The paladin should do his best to 
determine their alignment before he hires them. 
Should a hireling commit an evil act or otherwise 
reveal himself to be of an alignment other than law- 
ful good, the paladin has no recourse but to fire 
him and, if necessary, turn him over to the proper 
authorities for prosecution. 

In some cases, a paladin shares responsibility for 
the evil actions of his hirelings. For instance, a pal- 
adin’s stable master commits murder. The paladin 
may not be legally liable, but he may be considered 
an accomplice in an ethical sense. Although the 
authorities may not prosecute the paladin, he may 
still suffer a punishment for violating his ethos, 
particularly if he was remiss in investigating the 
stable master’s background prior to his employ- 
ment. As always, it’s up to the DM to determine if 
an ethos violation has been committed. 

Henchmen. A paladin accepts only lawful good 
characters as henchmen. As with a hireling, the pal- 
adin should make every effort to determine a 
potential henchman’s alignment before an alliance 
develops. The paladin must immediately dismiss a 
henchman who commits an evil act. 

Good characters. In an adventuring party, a pal- 
adin naturally gravitates to other lawful good 
player characters, making them his confidants and 
closest companions. Rarely, however, can a paladin 


Ethos » 29 


Oh, (hi) 


N w rl if 
A , 


oy 
aÑ 


S 
a 
4 


choose the composition of his party, as fate often 
throws together characters of vastly different out- 
looks. A paladin cooperates with a party so long as 
the majority of the characters are good-aligned; a 
majority of neutral characters or the presence of 
even a single evil character may present problems. 
A paladin can maintain a comfortable partner- 
ship with a neutral good characters, despite his 
reservations about the neutral good character's 
indifferencé to social structures. However, the neu- 
tral good character must be working strictly in the 
interests of good. A paladin is less at ease with 
chaotic good characters, owing to their indepen- 
dent nature and lack of respect for authority. But a 
paladin will work with chaotic good characters so 
long as their behavior complies with his goals. 
Neutral characters. Next to good characters, 
some paladins feel most comfortable with lawful 
neutral characters, admiring them for their sense of 
duty and loyalty to their government. This, of 
course, presumes the lawful neutral characters 
serve reasonably benevolent governments, not 


30 * Chapter Three 


despots or slave traders. 

A paladin will cooperate with a party that con- 
tains a minority of lawful neutral or true neutral 
characters. But he most likely keeps neutral charac- 
ters at arm’s length, resisting their gestures of 
friendship. Instead, he tries to serve as an example 
to the neutral characters, hoping to convince them 
through words and deeds that a commitment to 
good results in a richer, fuller life. So long as neutral 
characters refrain from committing evil acts, a pal- 
adin continues to work with them. 

A paladin won't join a party consisting entirely 
of neutral characters, unless the stakes are excep- 
tionally high. He may, for instance, work with a 
neutral party to retrieve a holy artifact, rescue his 
king, or save his church from destruction. For less 
momentous undertakings, such as treasure hunts 
or reconnaissance expeditions, the paladin should 
excuse himself. (If a party mostly consists of neu- 
tral PCs, the DM should explain the general nature 
of a new adventure to a player with a paladin PC. 
The player should have the option of gracefully 


bowing out of the adventure or choosing another 
character.) 

Evil characters. Because he is duty-bound to 
suppress evil, a paladin won't tolerate an evil PC. 
He may take the evil PC into custody, physically 
restrain him, or demand his expulsion from the 
party. If all else fails, the paladin severs his ties with 
the party and go hi 
tion is unacceptable. 

A paladin finds it difficult, if not impossible, to 
avoid contact with evil NPCs. They’re everywhere: 
walking down a street, dining at an inn, shopping 
at a bazaar. A paladin’s ethos doesn’t compel him 
to attack or even confront all evil NPCs; in many 
cases, hostile confrontations could be counterpro- 
ductive, particularly if such an action distracts the 
paladin from a more important mission, or if it trig- 
gers retaliation from the NPC’s companions against 
innocent bystanders 

Time and circumstances permitting, a paladin 
may question evil NPCs, follow them, or make 
inquiries about them. None of these actions violate 
a paladin’s ethos when used in moderation. (How- 
ever, spying and similar actions should be a last 
resort, because they connote deception). A paladin 
walks on shaky ground, however, the moment he 
begins an association with an evil NPC that could 
be perceived as friendly or compliant. 


own way. In any event, inac- 


Edicts 


Edicts include commands, instructions, and tra- 
ditions the paladin has pledged to obey, usually 
imposed by the paladin’s patron. The paladin must 
follow his edicts to the letter; he takes them as seri- 
ously as any other element of his ethos 

A paladin doesn’t choose which edicts to follow. 
Rather, he pledges to follow any and all edicts 
issued by specified sources. The paladin chooses 
his sources when he begins his career. Additionally, 
the DM may make recommendations or require 
specific sources. 

Edict sources may be chosen from the list below. 
Usually, a paladin’s background will suggest 
appropriate choices. For instance, a paladin whose 
parents expect him to adhere to their traditions 


may swear to follow all edicts from his father and 
mother. 

The DM determines the nature of all edicts. He 
also decides how they apply and when they occur. 
At the DM's direction, a source may issue a set of 
edicts at the outset of a paladin’s career. Alter- 
nately, a source may wait to issue edicts until a par- 
ticular event occurs (such as the acquisition of a 
stronghold or a declaration of war). At any time, a 
source may issue new edicts, modify old edicts, or 
suspend standing edicts. It’s possible that a source 
may neve 1e an edict. In any case, it’s up to the 
paladin to keep track of his edicts and follow them 
exactly. 

Occasionally, edicts from different sources may 
conflict. For instance, a paladin’s church might 
issue an edict that clashes with an edict from his 
government. In most cases, religious edicts take 
priority over edicts from other sources. In all cases, 
a paladin’s strictures and core principles have 
priority over strictures issued by any social insti- 
tution. For more about conflicting edicts, see 
Chapter 8. 


Religion and Philosophy 

If the paladin belongs to an organized religion, 
the church will probably be the major source of 
edicts. Church edicts encompass spiritual obliga- 
tions, behavior restrictions, and service require- 
ments. Philosophies, too, may have their own 
edicts, imposed by the architects of the philosophy 
or by the paladin himself. A deity may also issue 
edicts to the paladin directly, appearing in a dream 
or as an avatar. Chapter 8 discusses religious and 
philosophic edicts in detail. 


Government 

A paladin who has pledged fealty to his govern- 
ment must follow its edicts. Some examples: 

e Perform military service. 

* Donate the use of his stronghold for any legiti- 
mate government purpose (housing soldiers, enter- 
taining government guests, storing supplies, and 
so on). 

e Pay a one-time tax or fee. 

e Temporarily loan a stronghold hireling. 


el 


Ethos * 31 


e Guard a particular item or person. The paladin 
assumes complete responsibility for the safety of 
the item or person. 

e Undertake a cavalcade, a long journey for the 
purpose of escorting dignitaries, delivering mes- 
sages, or scouting new territory. 

e Represent the government in a jousting match 
or other contest of skill at a tournament. 

e Appear at a state banquet or other ceremonial 
function. 


Mentor 

Paladins who have no ties to an organized reli- 
gion often choose to follow the edicts of a mentor. 
A mentor can be any teacher, sage, or elder whom 
the paladin respects; often, the mentor is the pal- 
adin’s ethical role model or the person who tutored 
him in philosophy. A group or organization can 
also qualify as a mentor. Possible edicts: 

e Take regularly scheduled tests that measure 
intelligence or integrity. For instance, the mentor 
may engage the paladin in probing philosophic 
discussions on the nature of evil or the obligations 
of friendship. 

e Care for the mentor in his old age. 

* Pass along the mentor’s ideas to a young 
acolyte of the mentor’s choice. (In effect, the pal- 
adin becomes a mentor to someone else.) 


Culture 

Unless they contradict the principles of his gov- 
ernment or religion, a paladin may choose to fol- 
low edicts from his culture. Cultural edicts arise 
from the long-standing traditions of a particular 
tribe, region, or race, and as such, they rarely change. 
Examples include: 

e Marry by a certain age. 

* Always bow from the waist or curtsy to 
strangers and elders. 

e Hold the lives of animals to be equal to those of 
men. A paladin following this edict never eats 
meat, never hunts for sport or food, and only kills 
an animal to protect himself or those he’s sworn to 
defend. 


———————  ——————SSSSSSFSFSseF 


32 * Chapter Three 


Family 

Family edicts derive from tradition, obligations 
to relatives, and the wishes of particular family 
members. Edicts may be issued by the paladin’s 
parents or grandparents, or by a consensus of all 
living family members. 

Won't all paladins automatically choose to fol- 
low the edicts of their families? Not necessarily. A 
paladin’s family may not be of good alignment. 
The paladin may be an orphan and have no knowl- 
edge of his family. Sympathetic families may not 
wish to burden the paladin with their problems. If 
a paladin has not vowed to follow the edicts of his 
family, his obligations to them are no different from 
his obligations to anyone else. Typical family edicts 
nclude: 

* Visit the family burial ground once per year on 
a designated day. 

* Uphold a tradition never to harm a particular 
animal. (For example, if a bear sacrificed itself to 
save the paladin’s infant sister from a dragon, the 
paladin may vow never to harm bears.) 

* Donate a fixed percentage of all income to the 
family. 


Virtues 


Virtues are traits exemplifying the highest stan- 
dards of morality, decency, and duty. They com- 
prise the paladin’s personal code. Although not 
specifically detailed in the PH definition of a pal- 
adin, a paladin’s virtues are implied by his stric- 
tures as well as his outlook, role, and personality. 
Just as a paladin must obey his strictures, he must 
also remain true to his virtues. 

Though most paladins adhere to all of the virtues 
described below, exceptions are possible. For 
instance, a paladin from a primitive society may be 
so unfamiliar with civilized etiquette that including 
courtesy as part of his ethos would be unreasonable. 
All adjustments must be cleared by the DM at the 
outset of a paladin’s career. 

There are no rules for adjudicating virtue viola- 
tions. The DM is advised to err in favor of the pal- 
adin when the player makes honest mistakes. 
Conversely, the player should graciously accept the 


DM's rulings and, in the spirit of the paladin, avoid 
looking for loopholes to take advantage of the 
DM's good will. The entries below include exam- 
ples of how virtues might influence the paladin’s 
behavior in the context of a game. 


Fealty 


In feudal times, fealty referred to the relationship 
between a warrior and his lord. A warrior swore 
allegiance to a lord in exchange for protection, sup- 
port, and property. The lord, in turn, could count 
on the warrior for military duty and other services. 
Both the lord and the warrior scrupulously hon- 
ored this agreement. Perfidy, the breaking of the 
promise by either party, was considered a treacher- 
ous breach of faith, 

This book takes a broader view of fealty, defining, 
it as loyalty not only to a lord but to any lawful 
good government, religion, or philosophy. For con- 
venience, we refer to the recipient of a paladin’s 
loyalty as the patron. 

Regardless of who—or what—functions as the 
patron, fealty gives the paladin a sense of belong- 
ing to something greater than himself. Fealty also 
sets the criteria for a paladin’s moral code; in es- 
sence, the patron establishes the difference between 
right and wrong, good and evil. However, although 
the patron provides the basic moral code, it is ulti- 
mately the paladin who is responsible for and bears 
the consequences of his actions. 


About the Categories 

Let’s také a closer look at the three categories of 
fealty patrons: 

Religion. A religion is a set of beliefs centering 
on one or more omnipotent deities with supernat- 
ural powers. The patron is usually a church repre- 
senting an established religion, but can be a deity. 

Government. This can be any individual or gov- 
erning body with the absolute power to make laws 
and declare war. In most campaigns, the patron is 
usually a monarch. 

Philosophy. A philosophy is a system of ideas 
that explains the nature of the universe, exclusive 
of supernatural beings. The patron may be an 


established philosophy developed by scholars, or a 
unique philosophy developed by the paladin him- 
self. (Chapter 8 discusses the definition of a philos- 
ophy in more detail, including the differences 
between philosophies and religions.) For the pur- 
poses of fealty, religion and philosophy are mutu- 
ally exclusive; a paladin can’t pledge fealty to both. 


Choices of Patrons 

Every paladin must pledge fealty to something. 
As a minimum, he must pledge fealty to either a 
religion or philosophy; this faith is what grants him 
the special powers described in Chapter 2. Beyond 
this requirement, patrons should derive logically 
from the paladin’s background and outlook. In 
most campaigns, the proper patrons will be self- 
evident. For instance: 

e If a paladin follows the tenets of a lawful good 
religion and serves in the military of a lawful good 
tuler, he probably swears fealty to both his church 
and government. 

e If a paladin comes from a rigid theocratic cul- 
ture (a society ruled exclusively by priests) or 
serves no feudal lord, he probably pledges fealty to 
the church alone. 

e If a lawful good monarchy has no formal rela- 
tionship with an established religion, the paladin 
might pledge fealty to a ruler and a philosophy, 
and not to a church. 

e If a paladin operates independently and has no 
ties to a government or church, he'll probably 
pledge fealty to a philosophy. 

For reference, Table 14 lists all possible fealty 
combinations. A paladin may pledge fealty to any 
of the Permitted combinations (assuming the DM 
approves). He may not pledge fealty to any of the 
Forbidden combinations. The ways in which gov- 
ernments, religions, and philosophies interact are 
discussed at length in Chapter 8. 


—— eee 


Ethos * 33 


Table 14: Fealty Combinations 


Combination Permitted/Forbidden 

Government, religion, Forbidden* 
and philosophy 

Government and religion Permitted 


Government and philosophy Permitted 
Religion and philosophy Forbidden* 
Government alone Forbidden** 
Religion alone Permitted 
Philosophy alone Permitted 


* For the purposes of fealty, religion and philoso- 
phy are mutually exclusive. 

** Every paladin must pledge fealty to either a 
religion or philosophy, which serves as the source 
of his special powers (described in Chapter 2). 


Obligations of Fealty 

Once a paladin pledges fealty to a particular 
patron, he’s bound to that patron indefinitely. 
Should his king engage in evil activities, or his 
church become corrupt, the paladin may be forced 
to pledge fealty to another patron; the Expatriate 
kit (see Chapter 4) describes one possible conse- 
quence. Normally, however, a paladin’s patrons 
never change. 

The responsibilities associated with fealty vary 
with the patron. Monarches, for instance, may 
require their paladins perform military service. 
Churches may expect their paladins to follow rigid 
rules of behavior. The “Edicts” section elsewhere in 
this chapter discuses such requirements in detail. 
In general, however, fealty requires the paladin to: 

e Faithfully serve the patron regardless of per- 
sonal adversity. 

e Promote the principles and ideals of the patron. 

e Honor and respect the representatives and 
symbols of the patron. 
e his life for the patron if necessary. 


learns that his homeland has declared war against Drys- 
ton, a neighboring state. Geffen is distressed by the 
news. Many of his schoolmates now live in Drys 
so does his brother-in-law. Nevertheless, Geffen vows to 


a 


34 © Chapter Three 


engage all soldiers of Dryston as enemies, regardless of 
who they might be. 

e Ina distant village, Sir Geffen hovers on the edge of 
death, struggling to recover from serious wounds 
inflicted by a red dragon. A compassionate farmer offers 
to take Geffen to a medical specialist. Geffen accepts, and 
the farmer loads him in his wagon. An hour into their 


journey, the wagon passes a herald carrying the banner 
of Geffen’s homeland. Geffen demands that the cart stop, 
then insists that the driver lift him to his feet. Reluc- 
tantly, the driver does as he’s told. With his last ounce of 
strength, Geffen raises his hand to salute the flag. 


Courtesy 


To a paladin, courtesy involves more than merely 
following rules of etiquette. It’s also an attitude, a 
way of presenting himself to the world. A paladin 
carries himself proudly, maintains self-control, and 
accepts ill-mannered behavior with grace. He fol- 
lows social customs to the best of his ability. He is 
polite and deferential to friends and strangers alike. 

Additionally, the paladin must: 

* Consider the feelings of others and take care 
not to offend them. A paladin always demonstrates 
proper manners (shaking hands with friends, 
expressing gratitude for favors). He also keeps 
himself immaculately groomed (bathing regularly, 
wearing clean clothes). 

e Speak tactfully and kindly. A paladin never 
knowingly insults or slanders another person, even 
his greatest enemy. If others engage in insults or 
slander, the paladin walks away. 

e Behave with dignity. A paladin refrains from 
emotional outbursts, excessive eating and drink- 
ing, foul language, and other boorish acts. 

Examples: 

e Sir Geffen asks a grizzled innkeeper for directions. 
“My information ain't free,” snarls the innkeeper. 
especially for the likes of you.” The innkeeper spits in 
Sir Geffen’s face, then glares at him, daring him to 
respond. Sir Geffen politely thanks the innkeeper for his 
time, discreetly wiping the spittle from his cheek as he 
turns to leave. 

After a long day spent slogging through a muddy 
swamp, Sir Geffen's companions can't wait to make 


camp and get to bed. Sir Geffen, however, stays up for 
combing dried mud from his hair and cleaning the 
grime from his armor. 


Honesty 


A paladin always tells the truth as he knows it. 
He may decline to speak or choose to withhold 
information, but he will never intentionally mi 
lead anyone, even his enemies. He may ask permis- 
sion not to answer a direct question, but if pressed, 
he’ll tell the truth (however, he may frame h 
answers in such a way as to withhold vital infor- 
mation). Though a paladin doesn’t make promises 
lightly, once he gives his word, he always keeps it. 

Example: 

o Sir Geffen has been captured by an evil army. The 
commander demands to know the whereabouts of the 
paladin’s companions. Sir Geffen says nothing. 

“My spies inform me that your colleagues plan to 
arrive at King Relhane’s castle by dawn tomorrow,” says 
the commander. “Is this true?” 

The commander's information is accurate, but Geffen 
remains silent. 

“If you say nothing, I will conclude that I'm cor 

“You may conclude whatever you wish,” says Geffen. 

e Prevost, a young companion of Sir Geffen, asks 
about his performance on the battlefield yesterday. Sir 
Geffen believes that Prevost fought ineptly. “With your 
permission,” says Geffen, “I prefer not to answer.” 

“Please,” in Prevost. “I want to know.” 

Geffen looks him in the eyes. “Very well. You allowed 
an opponent to escape. You dropped your sword at a cru- 
cial moment: Your performance was poor.” 

Prevost glowers at Geffen, then angrily stomps away. 


s 


Valor 


A paladin demonstrates unyielding courage in 
the face of adversity. No danger is too great to pre- 
vent him from fulfilling a promise or completing a 
mission. His commitment is stronger than his fear 
of pain, hardship, or even death. 

A paladin’s valor is particularly evident on the 
battlefield. He regards war as a noble enterprise, 
and combat as an opportunity to glorify the institu- 


tion he represents. A paladin attacks an enemy 
without hesitation, continuing to fight until the 
enemy withdraws or is defeated. Whenever possi 
ble, a paladin chooses the most formidable enemy 
—a powerful monster, a giant, a dragon, or the 
leader of an army—as his primary opponent. In 
general, a paladin prefers melee to missile combat, 
so he can engage his opponent face to face. 

Examples: 

e A moment ago, Sir Geffen and his companions were 
riding peacefully through a shaded valley when they 
were ambushed by a brutish hill giant. The giant 
snatched young Fredrin from his horse and is now wav- 
ing him in the air like a trophy. 

“I claim this youth as my slave!” thunders the giant. 
“If you want him back, send your best man to fight!” 

Without hesitation, Sir Geffen rides forward. 

© Locked in battle with an army of ogres, Sir Geffen's 
party is suffering mounting casualties. “Withdraw!” 
shouts Bordu, a friend of Geffen. “We will regroup and 
fight another day!” 

Sir Geffen’s companions scramble from the battlefield, 
but Geffen lingers behind. “Come with us!” cries Bordu. 
“You can't win!” 

“Perhaps not,” says Geffen, steeling himself for a pha- 
lanx of charging ogres. “But I shall cover your with- 
drawal as long as 1 can.” 


At the DM’s discretion, a paladin can withdraw 
with honor if outnumbered by more than 2:1 in hit 
dice. If the paladin belongs to an elite organization, 
the DM might allow the paladin to withdraw if he 
faces odds of more than 3:1. If the player suspects 
such a situation exists, he may ask the DM whether 
a withdrawal with honor is possible. With the 
DM's permission, the paladin may withdraw with- 
out violating his ethos. 


Honor 


An honorable paladin conducts himself with 
integrity regardless of circumstance. He behaves in 
a morally sound manner even when he’s by him- 
self or when no one else will know of his actions. 
It’s an admirable act to comfort a dying friend, but 
an act of honor to comfort a dying enemy. 


ee 


Ethos * 35 


ge a 
K Ee 


Honor also involves respect, not just for the pal- 


adin’s peers and superiors, but for anyone sharing 
the paladin’s commitment to goodness and justice. 
The paladin shows mercy to the repentant, and 
refuses to inflict undue suffering even on the vilest 
evildoer. 

Additionally, an honorable paladin: 

* Defers to the judgment of all lawful good char- 
acters of superior social class, rank, and level. 

e Acknowledges the dignity of all lawful good 
people, regardless of their race, class, or economic 
status, by treating them with courtesy and respect. 

* Accepts all challenges to duel or fight given by 
those of comparable status and power. (A challenge 
from an arrogant youngster or a drunken warrior 
may go unheeded), 

* Dies before compromising his principles, 
betraying his liege or faith, or abandoning a pro- 
tected charge. 

Examples: 

o After a lengthy battle, the king of the lizard men lies 
bleeding at Sir Geffen's feet. “I beg you,” s the 
lizard king, “Let me live.” Sir Geffen reflects. The lizard 
king is old and broken. He can no longer be considered a 
threat. And he has fought honorably. 

Sir Geffen sheathes his sword. He motions for his 
aides to haul the lizard king away. The king will spend 
his remaining years in prison. 

© Sir Geffen has been captured by a cult of evil clerics. 
Bound with chains, Sir Geffen stares into the eyes of a 
cleric who holds a blade to his throat. “Renounce your 
blasphemous faith,” hisses the cleric, “and I will spare 
your life.” 

“Renourice yours, and I will spare you!” says Sir 
Geffen. 


Other Virtues 


Fealty, courtesy, honesty, valor, and honor will 
likely be a part of every paladin’s ethos. Other 
virtues may also be added, subject to the DM’s 
approval. Some possibilities: 

Humility. The paladin remains humble in spirit 
and action. He rejects adulation and declines 
awards. Tributes embarrass him; the knowledge of 
a job well done suffices as thanks. He speaks mod- 


estly of his deeds, if at all, grateful for the opportu- 
nity to fulfill his moral obligations. 

Generosity. The paladin gladly shares his mea- 
ger funds and possessions with anyone in need. If 
he owns two swords and a elderly hunter has none, 
the paladin offers one as a gift. He will give his last 
crust of bread to a hungry child, even if he must go 
without food for the rest of the day. He is also gen- 
erous of spirit, always willing to lend an ear to a 
troubled companion or acknowledge a friend’s 
accomplishments with lavish praise. 

Chastity. The paladin avoids even the appear- 
ance of impropriety, remaining pure in word, deed, 
and thought. 

Celibacy. In addition to remaining chaste, the 
paladin vows never to marry. 

Industry. The paladin engages in productive 
activity at all times. He works diligently and hard 
until he completes the job at hand. When not work- 
ing, he studies, exercises, or practices his combat 
skills. He considers leisure activities, small talk, 
and vacations to be time-wasting folly. 


Code of Ennoblement 


Feudal tradition required newly knighted sol- 
diers to swear allegiance to a set of principles that 
embodied religious ideals and service to the king. 
The oath constituted a sacred promise, securing the 
knight's loyalty to church and state. 

At the DM's option, a paladin may take a similar 
oath, swearing to a “Code of Ennoblement” that 
enumerates the strictures, virtues, and edicts he is 
obliged to uphold. The code defines the paladin’s 
ethos, spelling out exactly what the patron expects 
of him. 

The paladin swears to a Code of Ennoblement 
when he begins his career, usually as part of a formal 
ceremony (see the “Becoming a Paladin” section of 
Chapter 7 for suggestions). Typically, a monarch, 
church official, or mentor administers the code; the 
paladin candidate repeats the words as the official 
recites them. Alternately, the paladin can compose 
his own oath and recite it in private, addressing his 
words to a deity, an ancestor’s memory (“I swear on 
the spirit of my father’) or a universal force (“I 


EEE EEE EEE 


Ethos * 37 


pledge to the glory of the natural world”). 

Because different paladins may not adhere 
to precisely the same principles—they may, for 
instance, follow different edicts—each may swear 
to his own version of the code. Alternately, the DM 
may standardize the code for all paladins in the 
campaign. The exact wording of a code isn’t impor- 
tant, so long as it includes these elements: 

Name and homeland. The paladin should state 
his name and where he’s from. He may also men- 
tion any notable ancestors. (“I, Sharlyn of North- 
moon, daughter of Princess Ahrilla, granddaughter 
of Parvis the Wanderer.”) 

Strictures. At the DM's option, or the player's 
insistence, the code may list every one of the pal- 
adin’s strictures. However, because all paladins 
must follow all strictures, it’s not necessary to recite 
them one by one. A general phrase (“I swear to 
uphold the sacred strictures”) suffices 

Fealty patron. The code should indicate to whom 
(or what) the paladin has sworn allegiance, as 
explained in the Fealty section above. 

Virtues. The five principal virtues—fealty, cour- 
, honesty, valor, and honor—should be men- 
tioned by name, unless the DM has a good reason 
for excluding one or more of them. Add any new 
virtues agreed upon by the DM and the player. It’s 
not necessary to spell out the responsibilities of each 
virtue, so long as both the player and DM have read 
and understand the descriptions in this chapter. 
Any modifications to these descriptions should be 
made clear before the oath is administered. 

Edicts. Recite the relevant sources of edicts, not 
the edicts themselves. Specific edicts may be men- 
tioned at the player’s request or the DM's option. 

Ordinarily, the terms of a paladin’s code never 
change. In extreme circumstances—for instance, if 
economic hardship makes it difficult for 
keep up his tithes—the paladin may pet 
king or church for an exemption. The paladin mus 
seek an audience with whoever originally adminis 
tered the oath (or a suitable substitute), then plead 
his case. 

Exemptions are rarely granted, unless new con- 
ditions make it impossible for the paladin to remain 
true to his ethos (if his church has become evil, the 


___ eee ——————————————— 


38 * Chapter Three 


paladin can’t be expected to continue his tithes). 
Officials may have severe misgivings about a pal- 
adin who even requests for an exemption, and may 
impose a modest penalty to encourage the paladin 
to stop whining and shape up. See the “Minor Vio- 
lations” section below for suitable penalties. 


Sample Code 


Here is a sample Code of Ennoblement to use as 
a template. Feel free to embellish and customize it 
as you see fit. 


1, *, do hereby pledge to honor the strictures of this 
red heritage ** and promise by my faith to be loyal to 
, maintaining my devotion against all persons with- 
out deception or forethought. Further, I vow to promote 
and uphold the principles of **** and to solemnly and 
faithfully follow the edicts of *****. 1 take this pledge 
freely, without coercion or expectation of reward, sworn 
by my hand on this saintly relic ***** and in blessed 


memory of those who have given their lives to this noble 
cause. 


* Insert the paladin’s name and home (“Arlon of 
Shallowbrook.”). 

** This phrase implies allegiance to the strictures 
required of all paladins. It isn’t necessary to recite 
them by name. 

* Insert the paladin’s fealty patrons. In this 
example, Arlon swears fealty to his monarch and 
religion (“King Bronman of Entland and the Holy 
Church of Enlightenment.”). 

**** Insert the five principal virtues. (Arlon will 
adhere to them all, as outlined in this chapter. 
Because of his strict upbringing, he'll also follow 
the virtue of chastity: “Fealty, courtesy, honesty, 
valor, honor, and chastity.”) 

***** Insert the edict sources. (Arlon names his 
fealty patrons, and because he’s promised to obey 
the edicts of his parents, he also mentions his fam- 
ily: “My king, my church, and my family.”) 

**eee" Some ceremonies require the paladin to 
place his hand on a sacred relic, such as a holy text 
or the monarch’s sword. If relics aren't included in 
the paladin’s ceremony, leave out this phrase. 


Violations and Penalties 


When a paladin violates his ethos—that is, when 
he violates any s 
sworn to uphold—he suffers a penalty. This penalty 
is in addition to any punishments required by 
applicable laws or local customs. For instance, if a 
paladin robs a merchant, he suffers an ethos penalty 
and he may also be imprisoned. 

Two methods are provided for determining ethos 
violations and penalties. The Standard Method, 
derived from a strict reading of the Player's Hand- 
book rules, is the easiest to referee, but generates the 
harshest penalties. The Alternative Method is eas- 
ier on the players, but requires more effort from the 
DM. Whichever method you prefer, it’s best to stick 
with it throughout the entire campaign. 

In all cases, the DM has the final word on 
whether a violation has occurred. At the DM's dis- 
cretion, he may allow the paladin to appeal his 
decision. If the paladin argues convincingly that hi 
actions didn’t violate his ethos, the DM may sus- 
pend the penalty. 

If the paladin’s violation isn’t especially severe, 
the DM has the option of letting him off with a 
warning. If the paladin picks up a new magical 
item and already has 10, the DM might remind him 
of the relevant stricture, giving him the chance to 
put the item down before he claims ownership. 
One warning, however, is plenty; if the paladin 
commits the same act a second time, a penalty 
should be applied immediately. 

The DM may bypass both the Standard and 
Alternate Methods, instead considering each ethos 
violation on its own merits and assessing any 


ricture, virtue, or edict he has 


penalty that seems appropriate. A willful and 
deliberate evil action results in the irrevocable loss 
of the paladin’s status. Lesser violations should 
such as the temporary 
loss of one or more of the paladin’s abilities. A suit- 
able quest, the clerical atonement spell, or both may 
be used as penance for lesser violations. 


result in minor penaltie 


Standard Method 


This method weighs the severity of an ethos vio- 
lation purely in terms of alignment. The DM 
decides if a violation is chaotic or evil, and then 
applies the appropriate penalty. 


Chaotic Violations 

Chaotic acts include violations that are inadver- 
tent, impulsive, and relatively benign. The viola- 
tion cannot have directly or indirectly resulted in 
physical harm to any non-evil person. Examples: 

A moment of panic. 

e Opposing the judgment of officials from his 
government or church. If the paladin refuses a just 
edict, the violation becomes evil. 

e Failure to display proper courtesy to an elder 
or peer. 


e Arrogance. 

e Telling a “white lie” or couching the truth. If 
the lie results in harm to another person, the viola- 
tion become evil. 

Penalty: If a paladin knowingly commits any 
chaotic violation of his ethos, he must seek out a 
lawful good cleric of 9th level or higher. A cleric of 
the paladin’s faith is preferable but not mandatory. 
The paladin must locate the cleric as soon as pos 
ble. An undue delay—say, of more than a few 
weeks—changes the violation to an evil one. 

Once the paladin locates a cleric, he must make a 
full confession of his transgression and ask for for- 
giveness. The cleric will prescribe an appropriate 
penance. The paladin must execute the penance 


immediately; failure to do so constitutes a further 
violation. Typical penances include: 

e 1-4 weeks laboring at a monastery or church. 

e A day or two in complete isolation, where the 
paladin does nothing but contemplate the wrong- 
ness of his action. 

* Completion of a modest task (such as retrieving 
a medicinal herb from a mountain top or ridding 
the monastery basement of a snake infestation). 


Evil Violations 
Evil violations include intentional acts of theft, 
treason, cowardice, betrayal, greed, cheating, and 


e 


Ethos * 39 


blasphemy. Any ethos violation resulting in delib- 
erate physical harm to a lawful good character is 
considered evil. 

Penalty: Even a single evil violation results in the 
immediate and irrevocable loss of the paladin’s sta- 
tus. He forfeits all benefits, powers, and privileges 
associated with the paladin class, none of which 
may be restored by magic or any other means. 
From that point on, the character exists as a fighter; 
he keeps the same level and adjusts his experience 
points as necessary. Because he wasn’t a fighter at 
the beginning of his career, he isn’t eligible for 
weapon specialization. 


Magically Influenced Actions 

The DM may excuse chaotic acts performed by 
an enchanted or magically controlled paladin. 
Optionally, he may impose a small penalty, such as 
those in “Self-Administered Penalties,” on p. 43. 

If a paladin commits an evil act while enchanted 
or controlled by magic, he immediately loses his 
paladin status and becomes a fighter as described 
above. However, because the evil act wasn’t inten- 
tional, the status loss is temporary. To regain his 
status, the character must complete a dangerous 
quest or important mission on behalf of his govern- 
ment, church, or mentor. Possibilities include 
recovering an artifact in another plane of existence, 
accumulating enough treasure to build a spectacu- 
lar monastery, or singlehandedly slaying an evil 
dragon. The character acquires no experience 
points as long as he remains a fighter. If the charac- 
ter completes his mission, he becomes a paladin 
again. He has the same level and number of experi- 
ence points that he did when he lost his status. 

A character who doesn’t wish to undertake such 
a grueling mission may abandon his paladinhood 
altogether and remain a fighter. From that point on, 
he acquires experience points and attains new lev- 
els the same as any other fighter. Once he abandons 
his paladinhood, he may never regain it. 


Alternate Method 


This method gives the DM more latitude in 
determining the severity of ethos violations and 


OO ee eee 


40 + Chapter Three 


also allows for a variety of penalties. To determine 
the severity of a violation, the DM must consider 
the paladin’s intention, the consequences of the 
action, and who is affected. 

Ethos violations fall into four general categories 
of increasing severity. Categories 1 and 2 include 
minor violations affecting non-evil characters other 
than the paladin’s peers and superiors. Most viola- 
tions belonging to Categories 1 and 2 are thought- 
less, selfish, and insensitive actions which may not 
be evil in a strict sense. Deliberate or unambigu- 
ously evil actions belong in Categories 3 and 4. 
Additionally, all ethos violations involving an offi- 
cial of the paladin’s government or church, or any 
organization or person to whom he’s pledged 
fealty, belong to Category 3 or 4. 

As these categories are necessarily broad, each 
includes several examples to help the DM make his 
decisions. Several possible penalties are also given. 
The DM should choose a penalty that fits the crime. 
He's also free to make up his own penalties based 
on these samples. 


Category 1: Incidental Violations 

This category includes accidental, inadvertent, 
and careless violations with insignificant conse- 
quences. The paladin doesn’t benefit from this type 
of violation in any way. Nor do these violations 
jeopardize the safety of any non-evil person, either 
directly or indirectly. Examples include: 

e Hesitating before entering a dark room. If the 
paladin is too fearful to enter at all, this becomes at 
least at Category 2 violation (higher, if his reluc- 
tance results in harm to a companion). 

* Failing to return a friendly stranger’s greeting. 
If the paladin’s indiscretion is due to arrogance 
rather than a simple mistake, this becomes a Cate- 
gory 2 violation. Likewise, this belongs to Category 
2 if the stranger takes offense. 

+ Brushing against a stranger's dinner table and 
knocking a pitcher of ale into his lap. 

Sample penalties include: 

* Apologize to anyone slighted by his actions, as 
well as to anyone observing the indiscretion. 

* Champion the slighted person in an upcoming 
tournament. 


Meditate for an hour each night for the next 1-2 
weeks, contemplating the wrongness of the action. 


Category 2: Grave Violations 

This category includes serious violations of trust 
and judgment, including accidental or careless acts 
that might jeopardize the safety of non-evil charac- 
ters. It also includes intentional acts that offend, 
disappoint, or mislead non-evil characters, but 
don’t jeopardize their safety. (Intentional acts that 
jeopardize the safety of others belong to Category 
3). Examples include: 

e Failing to keep armor or weapons in optimum 
condition. 

* Neglecting personal hygiene. 

e Lying to a vendor about the quality of his mer- 
chandise. If the paladin lies to take advantage of 
the vendor—for instance, to make the vendor more 
cooperative or to get a better price—this becomes a 
Category 3 violation. 

e Lose or misplace a small trinket carried for a 
companion. 

Sample penalties include: 

e Seek out a high-level lawful good cleric and 
complete a penance (as described in the “Chaotic 
Violations” section above). 

e Forfeit a small sum to a charity (perhaps 2410 
gp ora day of work). 

e Pay double or triple all tithes for the next 1d4 
months. 

e Temporarily lose the ability to cast spells, 
detect the presence of evil, remain immune to dis- 
ease, radiate an aura of protection, or cure diseases. 
The loss pérsists for 1d4 weeks. 

Earn only half of the normal number of experi- 
ence points for the next 1-10 weeks. 


Category 3: Extreme Violations 

This category covers acts that call into question 
the paladin’s commitment to his ethos, such as 
intentional acts that jeopardize the safety of non- 
evil characters. Examples include: 

* Delaying the execution of an edict, or failing to 
satisfactorily complete an edict. 

e Informing travelers that the road ahead is safe, 
declining to mention the rumors of bandits. 


e Inadvertantly inflicting great harm on the 
patron’s cause, such as failure to protect an artifact 
or important official. 

* Avarice, usury, or preoccupation with worldly 
goods. 

e Failing to aid a dying person. 

e Panicking and retreating from a battle. 

Sample penalties include: 

e Forfeit his stronghold and all other property 
holdings. 

* Permanently lose the ability to cast spells (or 
the spells of a particular sphere) until appropriate 
atonement is made. 

* Permanently lose one of the following abili- 
ties: detect presence of evil, disease immunity, 
aura of protection, or laying on hands to cure dis- 
ease until appropriate atonement is made. 

e The bonded mount leaves, never to return. The 
paladin never acquires a replacement. 


Category 4: Execrable Violations 

This category includes the most intolerable and 
unforgivable ethos violations, the worst deeds a 
paladin can commit. Any direct violation of a stric- 
ture or edict belongs here, as do violations that 
result in physical harm to any lawful good charac- 
ter. This category also includes any violation affect- 
ing an official of the paladin’s government or 
church. Examples include: 

e Refusing or ignoring a just edict. 

e Habitual cowardice. 

e Committing an act of blasphemy. 

e Betrayal of the patron. 

e Concealing funds, hoarding more than 10 mag- 
ical items, or purposely neglecting to tithe. 

There is but one penalty here: 

* The paladin immediately loses his status, as 
described in the “Evil Violations” section above. 
Heinous crimes against the monarch may merit 
execution. Crimes against the church may result in 
a vengeful deity striking the paladin dead with a 
lightning bolt or causing the earth to swallow him 
up. (If in doubt, roll 1d20. On a roll of 1, the deity 
kills the blasphemous paladin; otherwise he is just 
subject to institutional penalties.) 


UTE TEENIE SEES! 


Ethos * 41 


Magically Influenced Actions 

If paladin commits an evil act while enchanted or 
controlled by magic or psionics, the DM deter- 
mines the category of the violation, then applies a 
penalty from Table 15. 


Table 15: Penalties for Enchanted 
Paladins (Alternate Method) 


Violation 

Category Penalty 
Apply normal Category 1 penalty or 
forego penalty entirely 


2 Apply Category 1 penalty 
3 Apply Category 2 penalty 
4 Paladin temporarily becomes a fighter 


(as described in the “Magically Influ- 
enced Actions” section of the Standard 
Method) 


Ceremony of Disgrace 


At the DM's option, a paladin guilty of an ethos 
violation may have to submit to a Ceremony of 
Disgrace in addition to a penalty. Usually, Cere- 
monies of Disgrace accompany punishments for 
heinous crimes involving government or church 
officials (defined as “Evil Violations” in the Stan- 
dard Method, and Category 3 and 4 Violations in 
the Alternate Method), but they may be used for 
lesser violations as well. 

A typical Ceremony of Disgrace requires the 
guilty paladin to appear before one or more repre- 
sentatives of his government or church. The more 
serious the crime, the higher the station of the pre- 
siding official; a low-level bureaucrat may suffice 
for a Category 2 violation, but the king himself may 
choose to oversee the ceremony for a Category 4 
violation. To compound the paladin’s shame, a Cer- 
emony of Disgrace is often held before an audience 
in the town square or other public forum with the 
accused paladin standing on a raised platform for 
all to see. 

The ceremony begins with the presiding official 
declaring the paladin’s crime. The official chastises 
the paladin for betraying his Code of Ennoble- 


e—7erere—————————————————————————————————————————SSSSSSSSSSSSFSSFSSseF 


42 + Chapter Three 


ment, then announces the penalty. For a minor vio- 
lation, the paladin may ask for one of the paladin’s 
non-magical weapons. The official destroys the 
weapon by throwing it into a fire or snapping off 
the blade. 

For a heinous violation, more elaborate humilia- 
tions may be involved. In addition to destroying 
one of the paladin’s weapons, the official may 
demand that the paladin hand over each piece of 
his armor. The official flings each piece into a fire or 
has an aide pound the pieces with a mallet, render- 
ing them useless. The official may then slap the pal- 
adin’s face, douse him with a bucket of offal, or 
roughly shear the hair from his head until only a 
stubble remains. Finally, the official strips the pal- 
adin of his name; the paladin must call himself by a 
new name from that point on. 

Throughout the ceremony, the paladin must 
remain silent. Speaking during a Ceremony of Dis- 
grace may be considered an ethos violation in itself, 
requiring an additional penalty. 


Anti-Paladins 


What better nemesis for a paladin than his 
direct opposite, an “anti-paladin” that embod- 
ies the forces of evil? As the mirror image of a 
normal paladin, an anti-paladin might be able 
to detect the presence of good, generate a aura 
of protection against good creatures, and wield 
an “unholy” sword. 

Though DMs may experiment with any type 
of character they like, we discourage the use of 
anti-paladins. Good and evil are not merely 
mirror images of each other. Just as the forces of 
evil have their unique champions, the paladin 
is intended as a unique champion of good. The 
paladin originates from a tradition of dynamic 
balance, in which the forces of good are few 
and elite and in which forces of evil are numer- 
ous and of lesser quality. Allowing anti-pal- 
adins blurs this basic relationship. 


IN 
Wi 


pb, /) 
K 


Self-Administered Penalties 


Occasionally, a paladin may commit an ethos 
violation that the DM considers irrelevant. The pal- 
adin might think lustful thoughts about an attrac- 
tive hireling, mutter an insult under his breath 
about a hated foe, or accidentally eat a soup con- 
taining chicken broth when he’s vowed to be ve 


tarian. While all of these examples might techni- 
cally be ethos violations, they're so trivial that the 
DM will probably overlook them (assuming he’s 
aware of them in the first place). 

But even when the DM overlooks a trivial viola- 
tion, a truly conscientious paladin player may insist 


on a penalty anyway. In such cases, the paladin is 
free to punish himself and choose his own penalty; 
the DM may veto a penalty he deems too severe. 
Typical self-imposed penalties might include: 

e Apologies to the affected parties, with assur- 
ances the offensive act will never be committed 
again. 

* A vow of silence for the next 1-2 days. 

* Becoming consumed with guilt and self- 
loathing for the next 1-2 days, during which time 
he makes all combat rolls and ability checks at a —1 
penalty. 

e A special tithing, donation, or service for 
which the paladin accepts no return. 


aaaea 


Ethos * 43 


CHAPTER 


Paladin Kits 


Kits are collections of proficiencies, benefits, and 
hindrances that distinguish one character of the 
same class from another. A kit also provides infor- 
mation about the character’s personality, back- 
ground, and roles. It’s not necessary to use kits, but 
they make characters more fun to play and add 
color and depth to a campaign. 


Acquiring Kits 


A player chooses a kit for the paladin as part of 
the character creation process. A paladin may have 
only one kit. 

To create a new paladin, begin by determining 
his ability scores (PH, Chapter 1). Then choose his 
character kit, recording the pertinent information 
on the character sheet. The sheets at the end of this 
book are designed for paladin character kits; per- 
mission is granted to copy these pages for personal 
use. Use the kit information to determine other 
aspects of the character, such as proficiencies (PH, 
Chapter 5, and Chapter 5 of this book) and equip- 
ment (PH, Chapter 6, and Chapter 6 of this book). 

You can incorporate any character kit into an 
existing campaign, provided the DM approves. A 
kit should be compatible with the paladin’s per- 
sonal history, background, and established person- 
ality traits. For example, the Chevalier kit might be 
a logical choice for a paladin who has devoted him- 
self to serving a monarch. However, the Skyrider 
kit would be a poor choice for a paladin who has a 
fear of flying. 


DM Decisions 


Before players create their characters, the DM 
should examine each of the kits and consider the 
following questions: 

Is this kit appropriate to the campaign world? 
The DM may exclude any kit that doesn’t fit into 
the campaign. In a campaign world dominated by 
a single religion, the DM may deem the Votary kit 
inappropriate. The Militarist kit may not be rele- 
vant in a world with few organized armies. Before 
players create their characters, the DM should tell 
them which are forbidden. 


SSS 


44 + Chapter Four 


Do the players need additional information 
about the kit? Any campaign details that may 
influence the choice of a kit should be revealed to 
the players. For example, if the local queen has can- 
celled all privileges for diplomats, a player might 
avoid the Envoy kit. 

Are there changes in any kit? The DM is free to 
make adjustments in the kit descriptions. He may 
decide, for example, that all Divinates must belong ` 
to a particular religion, or that all Wyrmslayers 
must take Blind-fighting as one of their initial pro- 
ficiencies. All changes should be explained to the 
players before they create their characters. 


Kit Subsections 


All paladin kits include the following: 

Description: This section describes the duties, 
cultural background, manner, and appearance of 
characters associated with this kit. 

Requirements: Ability score minimums and 
other special requirements are listed here. Charac- 
ters can’t take the kit if they don’t meet these quali- 
fications. “Standard” means there are no special 
requirements. 

Ministration: This identifies the paladin’s imme- 
diate superiors. There are five possibiliti 

Church. The paladin answers to the elders or dig- 
nitaries of an organized faith. Usually, the paladin’s 
immediate superior is a high-ranking priest. 

Government. The paladin works for a king, 
monarchy, or other government body or official. 
Usually, the paladin’s immediate superior is a mili- 
tary officer, often another paladin of higher level. 

Mentor. The paladin takes orders from a family 
member, teacher, elder, or any other individual not 
formally associated with a government or church. 

Independent. The paladin makes his own deci- 
sions. He answers to his deity or to his own con- 
science. He may choose to follow the tenets of a 
church or promote the causes of a government, but 
since he doesn’t work for them he isn’t required to 
obey their edicts. 

Any. There are no ministration recommendations 
for this kit. The paladin may take orders from 
whatever authority, if any, is appropriate to his cul- 


ture and background. 

Role: The character’s function in society and ina 
campaign is detailed here. His motivations, person- 
ality, and beliefs are examined, along with his rela- 
tionships with other people, his reasons for joining 
an adventuring party, and his function within a 
party. Note that the personality traits don’t neces- 
sarily apply to every character associated with this 
kit. Players may shape the personalities of their 
characters based on these suggestions, or they may 
disregard them entirely and create their own per- 
sonalities. 

Symbol: This section suggests one or more sym- 
bols to represent members of this kit. Some govern- 
ments or religions may require a character to 
display his symbol in a particular fashion, such as 
embroidering it on his clothing or inscribing it on 
his shield. Otherwise, a paladin may display his 
symbol as he wishes, or he may choose not to do 
so. Players are also free to use symbols other than 
those suggested. 

Secondary Skills: If you use the rules for sec- 
ondary skills from Chapter 5 of the Player’s Hand- 
book, the character is restricted to the choice of skills 
listed in this section. 

Weapon Proficiencies: If you use the weapon 
proficiency rules, a kit may specify the character's 
options. Any means he can take any weapon profi- 
ciency he likes (most paladins, regardless of kit, 
will choose proficiencies in the lance and some type 
of sword). In other cases, he may choose from a rec- 
ommended list. Required means that the character 
must take the indicated weapon. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Although non- 
weapon proficiency rules are technically optional, 
they're strongly recommended when using the pal- 
adin kits. If you're using secondary skills, don’t use 
nonweapon proficiencies, and vice versa. 

Some nonweapon proficiencies are listed as 
bonuses. A character gets these proficiencies free of 
charge; they cost no proficiency slots. 

The paladin must take any required proficiencies 
as soon as he can, spending the necessary slots. He 
may also choose from among a list of recommended 
proficiencies. If he takes a recommended profi- 
ciency, he spends the normal number of slots. It’s a 


good idea for a beginning character to spend all or 
most of his initial slots on recommended proficien- 
cies, though he’s not required to do so. 

The character is barred from taking any profi- 
ciencies listed as forbidden. 

An asterisk (*) indicates a new proficiency de- 
scribed in Chapter 5. 

Armor/Equipment: Equipment requirements 
and recommendations are given here. Unless indi- 
cated otherwise, a character must buy the required 
equipment, including weapons, from his initial 
funds. Standard means that the character has no spe- 
cific requirements; see Chapter 7 for suggestions. 

Like all members of the warrior group, a paladin 
begins with 50-200 (5d4x10) gp. He may buy his 
equipment from these funds after he donates 10% 
to his religious institution. If he lacks the funds to 
buy all of his required equipment, he should buy as 
much as he can, then pick up the rest as soon as he 
gets the money. All subsequent income is subject to 
tithing before the remainder can be spent. 

Bonded Mount: The suggested species of bonded 
mount is given here. 

Special Benefits: Many kits grant special bene- 
fits. Typical benefits include improved abilities, 
rights in particular situations, and reaction bonuses. 
All benefits are received free of charge, and don’t 
count against the normal limitations of the paladin 
class. 

Special Hindrances: To balance their special 
benefits, kits also carry special hindrances. Hin- 
drances include reaction penalties, cultural restric- 
tions, or ability limitations. All special hindrances 
are in addition to disadvantages normally associ- 
ated with the paladin class. 


Reaction Adjustment Reminder 


Many of the special benefits and hindrances are 
given as reaction adjustments. A reaction bonus is 
expressed as a plus, such as +1. A reaction penalty 
is expressed as a minus, like -2. When rolling for 
encounter reactions (on Table 59 in the DMG), make 
sure to subtract the bonuses and add the penalties. 
For example, if a character has a +1 reaction bonus, 
subtract 1 from the 2410 roll—don’t add it. 


aaasta 


Paladin Kits * 45 


List of Kits 


True Paladin 


Description: This is the typical paladin described 
in the Player's Handbook. An embodiment of lawful 
good, he represents the loftiest standards of hero- 
ism and righteousness. He is a superb rider, a 
master of mounted combat, and a fearless fighter. 
The True Paladin lives to promote his ideals; he 
seeks to join others who share his commitment to 
good. 

Note: Because the True Paladin has few back- 
ground requirements and special rules, this kit 
makes a good choice for players who want to create 
paladin characters with a minimum of fuss. The 
True Paladin can serve as a standard archetype for 
virtually any campaign. 

Requirements: Standard. 

Ministration: Any. To simplify the character cre- 
ation process, it’s recommended that a lawful good 
deity serve as patron, and that he has few, if any, 
formal ties to a government or organized church. 
The True Paladin may be an orphan whose abilities 
were granted by a benevolent deity. Alternately, he 
may be of humble origin, trained by a Mentor who 
later died or disappeared. 

Role: The True Paladin is pious and forthright, 
sworn to uphold a just code of behavior and deter- 
mined to rid the world of evil. He serves as the con- 
science of his party, setting an example of high 
moral standards and nudging them back on track 
when they stray from their mission. He respects all 
lawful good authorities and defers to the elders of 
his faith. 

Symbol: Any. 

Secondary Skills: Armorer, Farmer, Groom, 
Hunter, Leather Worker, Scribe, Trapper /Furrier, 
Weaponsmith, Woodworker / Carpenter. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Required: Lance (any). 
Recommended: Sword (any), dagger, battle axe, 
horseman’s flail, horseman’s mace, horseman’s 
pick, war hammer. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: The True 
Paladin must have the Land-based Riding profi- 
ciency by 4th level. Recommended: Armorer, En- 


a ———————— SSS 


46 * Chapter Four 


durance, Etiquette, Heraldry, Jousting*, Law*, Local 
History, Oratory*, Weaponsmithing. 

Armor/Equipment: Required: Weapon (any), 
shield (any), and armor (at least chain; must up- 
grade to plate as soon as he can afford it). A paladin 
without a horse and tack should acquire them as 
soon as is practical. 

Bonded Mount: Any war horse. 

Special Benefits: None. 

Special Hindrances: None. 


Chevalier 


Description: A gentleman warrior, the Chevalier 
epitomizes honor, courage, and loyalty. Modeled 
on the knights of the feudal age, the Chevalier 
serves his king (or other ruler) as a soldier in the 
royal military of a powerful kingdom. While pri- 
marily a fighting man, the Chevalier also performs 
ceremonial duties, household chores, and any other 
functions necessary to promote the liege’s interests 
and secure the welfare of the state. 

Requirements: In addition to the standard pal- 
adin qualifications, a Chevalier must meet at least 
one of the following requirements: 

+ He must be the son of a Chevalier, nobleman, 
or aristocrat. 

e He must be wealthy enough to “buy” his way 
into paladinhood by turning over a valuable prop- 
erty or large treasure to his church or state. 

+ He must have an ability score of 15 or more in 
Strength, Constitution, or Wisdom. 

Ministration: Government. In a theocracy, a 
Chevalier may take orders from the church. 

Role: A Chevalier’s training begins at childhood 
and continues throughout his career. He acquires 
new duties and responsibilities as he rises through 
the ranks. Typically, a Chevalier begins as an aide 
to a more experienced paladin, undertakes mis- 
sions for his liege as he grows in stature, and even- 
tually aquires a stronghold of his own. 

Because Chevaliers of all ranks are considered 
part of the aristocracy, they command the respect 
afforded other members of the noble class. Tradi- 
tion demands that Chevaliers remain apart from 
‘onsequently, Chevaliers seldom socialize 


society 


with anyone other than paladins. Fully aware of 
their privileged status, Chevaliers carry themselves 
with pride. They maintain an immaculate appear- 
ance, are unfailingly courteous, and behave with 
dignity in all situations 

A Chevalier of any level may join an adventuring 
party, assuming the party‘s goals agree with those 
of the state. The Chevalier’s companions will find 
him the consummate professional. As a friend, 


Chevalier Ranks 


Here is a typical career path for the Chevalier. 
The ranks are for game purposes only and don’t 
necessary correspond to any historical defini- 
tions. 

Page. At 0 level, a Chevalier candidate becomes 
a servant on his liege’s staff. He lives in the liege’s 
stronghold or the stronghold of a military officer 
or noble, The page learns academic fundamentals 
(including history, etiquette, and religion), along 
with basic hunting and riding skills. 

Valet. At 1st level, the page becomes a valet, 
assigned as an apprentice to a high-ranking pal- 
adin (usually, a Chevalier of at least 5th level). 
The valet acts as personal aide both on the battle- 
field and at home. He studies combat techniques, 
advanced riding skills, and theology. Should he 
decide to permanently assume the role of an aide, 
he becomes a Squire (see the Squire kit for details). 

Stronghold Knight. Also known as a household 
knight, the valet assumes this position at 2nd 
level. He works primarily in his liege’s strong- 
hold, performing guard duty, custodial chores, 
and occasional staff supervision. He may go to 
war or undertake quests and missions on his 
liege’s behalf. 

Protector. A Chevalier reaches this rank at 3rd 
level, when he gains the power to turn undead. 
The protector may be sent into the field more fre- 
quently, though he still lives in his liege’s strong- 
hold and his superiors still closely monitor his 
actions. 

Warder. At 4th level, the Chevalier becomes a 


however, he may leave much to be desired; a Cheva- 
lier often impresses others as vain and pretentious. 
More comfortable with taking orders than giving 
them, a Chevalier rarely volunteers for leadership 
roles, though he dutifully assumes command if 
asked or assigned. 

Symbol: The Chevalier employs the same sym- 
bol as his liege, often a crown, an animal associated 
with royalty (such as a lion or eagle), or a military 


warder. His liege becomes increasingly comfort- 
able sending him on missions to distant lands, 
Supervision continues to decrease. 

Guardian, At 5th level, the Chevalier becomes a 
guardian, experienced enough to supervise a 
valet. 

Grand Knight. A Chevalier attains this rank at 
6th level and may represent his liege on diplo- 
matic missions. While still technically a member 
of the liege’s stronghold, a grand knight is rou- 
tinely granted permission to leave the stronghold 
for long periods of time. 

Bachelor. To qualify for this rank, the Chevalier 
must have reached 7th level and have acquired a 
plot of land large enough for a stronghold. At this 
rank, the Chevalier becomes eligible to maintain a 
small home outside his liege’s stronghold. Usu- 
ally, a Chevalier must be at bachelor level to 
receive permission to marry. 

Banneret. The Chevalier must be at least 9th 
level and must have established his own strong- 
hold. The stronghold serves as the banneret’s 
home base. He may maintain a small staff of his 
own by this point. 

Lord. This is a royal title awarded by the liege to 
a Chevalier of at least 10th level who has success- 
fully maintained a stronghold for a long period 
(typically, 5-10 years). In most cases, the strong- 
hold must be profitable (thus benefiting his liege 
through taxes or levies), have withstood at least 
one enemy assault (to demonstrate the Cheva- 
lier’s leadership skills), and employ at least 10 
staff members and soldiers (to demonstrate the 
Chevalier’s management skills). 


Paladin Kits * 47 


emblem (crossed lances or a fist clutching a sword). 
Secondary Skills: Armorer, Groom, Weapon- 
smith. 


Weapon Proficiencies: Required: Sword (any) and 
lance (any). Recommended: Dagger, battle axe, horse- 
man’s flail, horseman’s mace, horseman’s pick, war 
hammer. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Recommended: Armorer, 
Blind-fighting, Bureaucracy*, Etiquette, Heraldry, 
Jousting*, Languages (Ancient or Modern), Law*, 
Local History, Oratory*, Weaponsmithing. 

Armor/Equipment: Usually, a Chevalier must 
buy his own equipment. At a minimum, he must 
purchase a mount (at least a riding horse, until he 
acquires a bonded mount), sword, lance, and 
armor (no less than chain mail). On occasion, a 
liege supplies this equipment for free; in such 
cases, the liege often charges a monthly mainte- 
nance fee (1-4 gp). 

Bonded Mount: Any war horse. Airborne 
mounts are possible but uncommon. 

Special Benefits: 

Chain of Command: Chevaliers adhere to rigid 
chains of command. Any high-level Chevalier can 
give commands to lower-level Chevaliers from the 
same kingdom. The lower-level Chevaliers must 
follow these orders as if they were given by the 
liege. Typical commands include loaning weapons 
and mounts, delivering messages, and securing 
supplies. 

Sanctuary: A Chevalier may request sanctuary in 
any stronghold in his kingdom, or in any lawful 
good kingdom with diplomatic or political ties to 
the Chevalier’s kingdom. By custom, the owner of 
the stronghold must provide the Chevalier with 
shelter, food, and water for up to three days; the 
offer extends to a number of companions equal to 
the Chevalier’s level (a 4th-level Chevalier may 
request sanctuary for himself and four others). 

Special Hindrances: 

Chain of Command: The chain of command works 
both ways. A low-level Chevalier must execute all 
of the commands of a higher-level Chevalier, as 
described in the Special Benefits section. 

Extra Responsibilities: As part of a complex 
bureaucracy, the Chevalier has more responsibili- 


—oo—— aaaaaaaaaaaaaassssssssħÃħ 


48 * Chapter Four 


ties than most other paladins. He must attend state 
functions, participate in royal festivals, and repre- 
sent his liege at tournaments. He may be required 
to train young warriors, file monthly reports of his 
activities, and officiate at dubbing ceremonies for 
new Chevaliers. In general, the larger the kingdom, 
the more demands on the Chevalier. 

State Enemies: A liege makes many enemies over 
the course of his career. By definition, enemies of 
the liege are also enemies of his Chevaliers. A 
Chevalier may be subject to kidnapping and assas- 
sination attempts by foes he’s never met, who 
attack the Chevalier to avenge themselves against 
the liege. 


Divinate 


Description: Devoutly religious, Divinates serve 
as the military branch of their church and consider 
themselves soldiers of their gods. Their religious 
discipline imbues them with a clear sense of pur- 
pose; promoting the principles of their faith is not 
only morally correct, but a sacred duty. 

Requirements: Standard. A Divinate must be a 
member of an organized religion. Usually, the 
church elders raise and train the Divinate from 
childhood. 

Ministration: Church. 

Role: Divinates were originally responsible for 
accompanying disciples of the church on religious 
pilgrimages, fighting off bandits and monsters that 
lay in wait. In time, church elders decided that all 
evils were potential threats to their disciples, and 
sent Divinates into the world to eliminate them. To 
a Divinate, evil is an affront to his faith; destroying 
an agent of evil is a holy act. 

Though the Divinate becomes a raging avenger 
when confronting evil, he is otherwise thoughtful 
and compassionate. He sees himself as an advocate 
of the common man, a source of solace to the down- 
trodden and disadvantaged. A Divinate may insist 
that the party share its treasure with destitute fami- 
lies and impoverished communities. He may offer 
temporary employment to a pauper too proud to 
accept charity. He conducts impromptu prayer ser- 
vices in makeshift chapels, and officiates at the 


christenings and burials of peasants. Though com- 
pletely devoted to his faith, a Divinate respects all 
lawful good religions and has little interest in pros- 
elytizing. 

Symbol: A Divinate proudly displays the sym- 
bol of his church on his shield, coat of arms, mount 
barding, and clothing. Typical symbols include a 
rising sun, holy symbol, blooming flower, star, or 
the like, often with weapons below or behind the 
symbol. 

Secondary Skills: Leather Worker, Mason, Scribe 
Tailor/Weaver, Weaponsmith, Woodworker /Carver. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: Religion. 
Recommended: Artistic Ability, Etiquette, Healing, 
Languages (Ancient and Modern), Reading /Writ- 
ing, Poetry. 

Armor/Equipment: Standard. 

Bonded Mount: Any. 

Special Benefits: 

Extra Sphere: In addition to the Combat, Divina- 
tion, Healing, and Protective spheres, a Divinate 
may also learn spells from one of the following 
spheres: Charm, Guardian, or Sun. He chooses this 
sphere at Ist level; once chosen, the extra sphere 
never changes. The extra sphere has no effect on 
the number or level of spells he can learn. 

Religious Stronghold: If a Divinate chooses to 
build a stronghold, it must be a monastery or other 
religious edifice. If the Divinate has faithfully 
served his church and has never committed a seri- 
ous ethos violation, the church elders may offi- 
cially sanction his stronghold, contributing 
resources and labor to reduce construction costs to 
half the normal price (the Divinate is still responsi- 
ble for purchasing or otherwise obtaining the 
land). Typically, official sanction is not given to a 
Divinate until he reaches 12th level, so as not to 
offend the clerics who also seek sanctions for their 
strongholds. 

Special Hindrances: 

Extra Tithes: A Divinate must donate 20% of all 
income to his church. Additionally, his church 
requires a minimum monthly contribution, usually 
1-10 gp (as determined by the DM). Therefore, 
every month he must donate either 20% of his 


income or his minimum contribution, whichever is 
greater. Failure to do so is considered an ethos vio- 
lation of his tithing stricture. 

Meditation: A Divinate must mediate for one full 
hour every day to cleanse his spirit, preferably 
when he rises or just before he goes to sleep. If he is 
interrupted or distracted for more than two consec- 
utive rounds, he must start over. A Divinate who 
neglects to meditate cannot cast spells the follow- 
ing day. 


Envoy 


Description: Skilled in diplomacy as well as 
combat, an Envoy serves as an official representa- 
tive of his government in other countries. Though 
he uses force when necessary to achieve his goals, 
he prefers compromise to hostility. He seeks 
friendly alliances with good-aligned governments, 
common ground with neutral societies, and a quick 
and efficient end to evil cultures. 

Requirements: An Envoy must have a minimum 
Intelligence score of 12. 

Ministration: Government. 

Role: An envoy’s duties range from the routine 
to the life-threatening. One month, he may be 
asked to deliver a banquet invitation to a friendly 
monarch. The next, he may be required to open 
hostage negotiations with a tribe of cannibals. He 
represents his country in treaty discussions, files 
reports about foreign military activities, and ven- 
tures into unexplored territories to scout for new 
trade routes. Although an Envoy rarely has the 
authority to make decisions on his own, his superi- 
ors take his recommendations seriously. 

The Envoy prides himself on his sensible, practi- 
cal approach to problems. He is thoughtful, analyt- 
ical, and appeasing, the logical choice for negotiator 
in an adventuring party. He is the voice of reason, 
hesitant to engage in drawn-out, bloody wars 
before exploring less extreme options. Rather than 
engaging an evil regime on the battlefield, an 
Envoy prefers to work behind the scenes, perhaps 
engineering a political revolution or quietly dis- 
patching the tyrannical leaders. 

Symbol: Owl, raven, scales of justice, scepter. 


e 


Paladin Kits + 49 


Secondary Skills: Groom, Limner/Painter, Scribe, 
Trader /Barterer. 

Weapon Proficiencies: An Envoy spends less 
time practicing weapons than he does learning 
other skills. He may have only two weapon profi- 
ciencies in his entire career. He acquires his profi- 
ciencies at 1st level, choosing any weapons he likes. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Etiquette. 
Required: Bureaucracy*. Recommended: Artistic Abil- 
ity, Dancing, Gaming, Heraldry, Law*, Local His- 
tory, Oratory*, Reading/Writing. 

Armor/Equipment: Standard. Because an Envoy 
comes in regular contact with dignitaries and offi- 
cials, it’s important that he make a good impres- 
sion. He must purchase all of the formal attire 
listed in the Clothing and Special Items section of 
Chapter 6 as soon as he can afford them. 

Bonded Mount: Any. 

Special Benefits: 

Reaction Bonus: A master of persuasion, an Envoy 
receives a +2 modifier on reaction rolls from all 
NPCs, including those of evil alignment. 

Diplomatic Privileges: An Envoy enjoys all of the 
following privileges in any country with which his 
government has established diplomatic relations: 

e The host country must provide food and shel- 
ter for the Envoy as long as necessary for him to 
complete official business. The host country is not 
required to extend this privilege to any of the 
Envoy's companions other than his immediate 
family, though many host countries will do so as a 
matter of courtesy. If the Envoy is merely passing 
through the host country and has no official busi- 
ness there,*the host country is not obliged to pro- 
vide food and shelter; but again, many will do so 
out of courtesy. 

e The host country must guarantee the Envoy’s 
safety in time of war, or provide a military escort to 
return the paladin to his homeland. 

eè The Envoy is usually immune to arrest and 
prosecution. However, should the paladin commit 
a crime, he may be asked to leave the host country. 
In extreme situations, the host country may sever 
diplomatic ties with the Envoy's homeland, likely 
resulting in dire consequences for the Envoy when 
he reports to his unhappy superiors. 


rr EEO oOo 


50 + Chapter Four 


+ The Envoy may not be taxed by the host coun- 
try, regardless of how long he stays. 

* The Envoy has complete freedom to practice 
his religion. 

O of the host country may not demand 
to see the Envoy’s private correspondence with his 
homeland. 

Special Hindrances: 

A Envoy’s position and responsibilities often 
puts his life at risk. He makes a tempting target for 
assassins and kidnappers from rival governments, 
and a likely hostage in times of war. Even the most 
innocuous insult or slightest breach of protocol 
may be considered a grievous offense, punishable 
by both the affronted government and the Envoy's 
own superiors. As a gesture of good faith, an 
Envoy may be required to enter a hostile village 
alone and unarmed. Rather than eliminate an evil 
NPC, an Envoy may be asked to arrest him un- 
harmed, then return him to the proper authorities 
for prosecution, 


Equerry 


Description: The Equerry is a master horseman 
with a natural affinity for mounts of all species. She 
and her steed are inseparable companions, their 
special bond transcending mere friendship. 

Requirements: An Equerry must have a mini- 
mum Wisdom score of 14. 

Ministration: Any. 

Role: An Equerry often serves as a cavalryman, 
scout, or guide. Whatever her duties, she remains 
with her mount; she’s reluctant to enter under- 
ground passages or any other site that her mount 
can’t easily traverse. She prefers to sleep near her 
mount, staying in an inn or hospice only if no alter- 
native is available. The mount’s life means more to 
the Equerry than her own; without a second 
thought, she would give the mount her last drop of 
water or her last crumbs of food. 

Because an Equerry spends so much time with 
her mount, her companions may perceive her as 
shy or humorless. But an Equerry enjoys human 
company too; with a little coaxing, she’s usually 
open to conversation and recreation. An aggres- 


sive fighter and shrewd tactician, the Equerry 
makes a valuable addition to any adventuring 
party. 

Symbol: Any symbol suggesting a horse or other 
mount. 

Secondary Skills: Groom, Hunter. 

Weapon Proficiencies: An Equerry begins with 
only three weapon proficiency slots. One of these 
slots must be assigned to lance (any). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: Riding 
(either Airborne or Land-based, depending on her 
choice of bonded mount). Recommended: Animal 
Handling, Animal Training, Hunting. 

Armor/Equipment: Standard. As soon as she can 
afford it, the Equerry should buy full barding for 
her mount (preferably leather). 

Bonded Mount: An Equerry can choose the 
species of mount he prefers. Although a male 
Equerry can’t choose a unicorn, he can choose vir- 
tually any other type of mount within reason. 

Two options are open to the Equerry: 

1. She may choose her mount at the beginning of 
her career, if the mount has 4 HD or less. She 
acquires the mount under the conditions described 
in Chapter 2; unlike other paladins, the Equerry 
may receive her bonded mount at Ist level. 

2. If she prefers a mount with more than 4 HD, 
she may set aside up to half of her assigned experi- 
ence points (XP) until she’s saved a number of 
points equal to the amount required in Table 16. 
For instance, if the Equerry wants a griffon mount, 
she must set aside 64,000 XP. When she’s saved 
64,000 XP, she can seek or call for a griffon under 
the conditions described in Chapter 2. 


Table 16: XP for Equerry Bonded Mount 


Mount’s Hit Dice XP Equivalent THACO 
1 0 19 
d 2,000 19 
s 4,000 17 
4 8,000 17 
5 16,000 15 
6 32,000 15 
7 64,000 13 
8 125,000 13 
9 250,000 11 

10 500,000 11 
11 750,000 9 
12 1,000,000 9 
13 1,250,000 A 
14 1,500,000 7 
15 1,750,000 5 
16 2,000,000 5 


Improved Mount Abilities. Regardless of the 
species of her mount, the Equerry can improve the 
mount's abilities by assigning it up to half of her 
earned experienced points. As shown on Table 16, 
as the mount receives XP from the Equerry, it gains 
new Hit Dice. For example, assume the Equerry 
has received a light war horse (2 HD) as her bonded 
mount. The first 2,000 XP added to the horse don’t 
affect its abilities. When the total added reaches 
4,000 XP, the horse gains an additional Hit Die, 
becoming, in effect, a 3 HD creature. 

Asa bonded mount's HD increase, its abilities 
improve in the following ways: 

e When the mount gains its first bonus die, it 
becomes lawful good. Its Intelligence score is also 
permanently boosted by +2. 

e The mount fights on the Monster Attack 
Table as a monster equal to its Hit Dice. Table 16 
reproduces this information from the DUNGEON 
MASTER™ Guide. 

A mount can gain a total of 10 HD over its start- 
ing total, up to a maximum of 16 HD. Investing 
1,000,000 XP in a light war horse raises it to a maxi- 
mum of 12 HD; investing 2,000,000 XP in a griffon 
raises it to 16 HD. Should the mount be killed, the 
assigned XP are lost; note, however, that wishes and 


Paladin Kits * 51 


similar powerful magic can revive slain mounts. 

Saving Throw Bonus. The mount makes saving 
throws as a fighter of a level equal to its current hit 
dice; that is, it uses the unmodified numbers on 
Table 5 in Chapter 1 of this book (a light war horse 
raised to 12 HD needs to roll a 7 or better to avoid 
the effects of paralyzation): When the Equerry rides 
the mount, however, the mount receives the pal- 
adin’s standard +2 bonus (a mounted 12 HD war 
horse saves at 5 or better against paralyzation). 
Further, if a spell or other magical attack would 
affect both the mount and the Equerry, the mount 
automatically saves if the rider saves. 

Special Benefits: 

Inspection. An Equerry can recognize the relative 
value of all horses, pegasi, griffons, and other 
mounts. If an Equerry spends at least 5 rounds visu- 
ally inspecting a mount and makes a successful Wis- 
dom check, she can determine if it has low value 
(one-third or fewer than the mount’s maximum pos- 
sible hit points), average value (half the maximum 
possible hit points), or high value (two-thirds or bet- 
ter of the maximum possible hit points). Any mount 
an Equerry selects will have +2 hit points per hit die 
(up to the maximum number of hit points available). 

Special Hindrances: 

Ethos Violations. An Equerry violates her ethos if 
she allows mistreatment of any kind to befall a 
creature of the same species as her bonded mount. 

The Equerry also violates her ethos if she becomes 
separated from her bonded mount, voluntarily or 
involuntarily, for more than a week. In addition to 
applicable ethos violation penalties, the Equerry 
suffers a -2 penalty to all of her attack rolls, saving 
throws, and proficiency checks until she reunites 
with her mount. 

Selling or willfully slaying the bonded mount 
constitutes an evil act, resulting in the permanent 
loss of the Equerry status, along with all special kit 
and paladin abilities. 

Mourning. If her mount dies for any reason other 
than natural causes, the Equerry suffers a -2 penalty 
to all attack rolls, saving throws, and proficiency 
checks for a minimum of one week. These penalties 
persist until the Equerry completes a quest (deter- 
mined by the DM) to avenge the mounts death. 


————————————————————————eEEESSSSESESESESESeMe 


52 + Chapter Four 


Errant 


Description: The Errant is an independent war- 
rior who roams the countryside searching for 
adventure and offering his assistance to any good 
beings in need. Though he technically owes fealty 
to a government or church, he has few, if any, for- 
mal obligations. His superiors have granted him an 
indefinite leave of absence to pursue his own inter- 
ests and make his own way. 

An Errant may be granted independence because 
his government no longer has a need for a standing 
army, or because his church elders have encouraged 
him to explore the world outside their jurisdiction 
and report what he discovers. Most often, however, 
governments and churches grant independence for 
economic reasons. An Errant assumes responsibility 
for his own equipment and funds, freeing, official 
treasuries for more pressing expenditures. 

Requirements: Standard. 

Ministration: Although he may have pledged 
fealty to a government or a church, an Errant essen- 
tially functions as an independent fighter. 

Role: An Errant is often amiable, cooperative, 
and eager to ally himself with any party or individ- 
ual of lawful good intention. His destiny, he be- 
lieves, is with the gods, and he readily agrees to 
undertake all good missions that come his way, 
providing they promise adventure and don’t com- 
promise his principles. 

Between adventures, an Errant is preoccupied 
with earning a living. Tournaments provide the 
best opportunities for income. Because an Errant 
doesn’t depend on government or church sponsor- 
ship, he can keep his winnings for training (aside 
from his tithe). 

When tournaments are scarce, an Errant may 
work as a mercenary for any lawful good govern- 
ment or church. The Errant receives no benefits 
from this arrangement, other than those specified 
in his contract. A typical contract includes the fol- 
lowing terms: 

* Length of service. This is often defined in quar- 
ter-year periods. Typically, an Errant serves no less 
than six months, and no more than a year. The 
Errant pledges temporary fealty to his employer 


Paladin Kits * 53 


during this time; all obligations to the employer 
end when the contract expires. 

* Salary. An Errant is usually paid every quarter- 
year period, with the first period’s payment made 
in advance. He usually earns 30-50 gp per period, 
depending on his experience, reputation, and spe- 
cial skills. Without the backing of a government or 
church, an Errant commands less of a salary than 
other mercenary paladins (see Chapter 8). 

* Theater of operations. An Errant is not required 
to fight for his employer outside of a specified area. 

e Financial obligations. An Errant furnishes all of 
his own equipment and assumes responsibility for 
his own food and supples. The employer arranges 
transportation to and from the battlefield if the 
Errant has no mount of his own. An Errant is not 
allowed to use a loaned mount in battle, unless he 
agrees in advance to make restitution in case the 
wounded or killed. 
on of spoils. All hostages, weapons, land, 
and other spoils of war claimed by the Errant be- 
come the property of the employer. A benevolent 
employer may give the Errant a monetary bonus 
for such spoils, though the employer is under no 
obligation to do so. 

e Loaning of ser s. While under contract, the 
employer may loan the services of an Errant to 
another lawful good liege, a church, or an adven- 
turing party. The employer claims 50% of all trea- 
sure or salary obtained by the loaned Errant 
(because the Errant must also tithe from this money, 
he forfeits a total of 60% of his income). 

Symbol: An Errant displays the same symbol as 
his churchor government, or he can design a 
unique, personal one. Personal symbols might in- 
clude his initials, a profile of a favorite animal, or a 
numeral (the age a parent died, the number of sib- 
lings in his family, or the day of his birth). 

Secondary Skills: Farmer, Fisher, Groom, 
Hunter, Trapper /Furrier. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Bonus: The Errant re- 
ceives a free specialization in the jousting lance. 
Required: Sword (any). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Jousting*. Rec- 
ommended: Animal Handling, Bowyer/Fletcher, 
Endurance, Etiquette, Fire-building, Fishing, Hunt- 


aaa 


54 + Chapter Four 


ing, Mountaineering, Riding (Airborne and Land- 
based), Survival. 

Armor/Equipment: At the outset of his career, an 
Errant receives only 25-100 (5d4x5) gp. In addition 
to his weapons, armor, and mount, an Errant must 
also buy a jousting lance or a lance cup (see Chap- 
ter 6) as soon as possible. 

Bonded Mount: Any. 

Special Benefits: 

Usually, an Errant continues to follow the laws of 
his government and the tenets of his faith. How- 
ever, his superiors rarely issue any direct edicts, 
allowing the Errant to choose his own allies, go 
where he pleases, and make his own decisions. He 
seldom has to fight wars, attend state functions, or 
train novice warriors. 

An Errant’s superiors expect him to make reports 
of his activities once a year or so, but this require- 
ment is flexible. An Errant may miss his report date 
by several months before his superiors consider 
penalizing him, and even then, the penalty may be 
suspended if the Errant offers a reasonable excuse. 

Special Hindrances: 

Although an Errant has few of the responsibili- 
ties of fealty, neither does he have any of the advan- 
tages. He must be totally self-supporting, supply- 
ing his own mounts, weapons, shelter, and cloth- 
ing. He can’t count on his church or government 
for emergency funds, nor can he ask for body- 
guards or troops. For a stronghold, he must acquire 
land through conquest or purchase, as grants, char- 
ters, and benefices aren't available. 


Expatriate 


Description: Like the Errant, the Expatriate has 
no permanent home, wandering from place to 
place in search of adventure and acceptance. How- 
ever, the Expatriate is a nomad by circumstance, 
not choice. A warrior in exile, the Expatriate has 
renounced his allegiance to the officials or institu- 
tion that originally granted him his paladinhood. 
His government or church may have become cor- 
rupt, his superiors may have betrayed their com- 
mitment to lawful good principles, or he have may 
have been dismissed for political reasons. In any 


case, his disillusionment is complete. He now 
makes his own decisior 

There are two points in his career when a paladin 
may become an Expatriate: 

1. He may become an Expatriate at Ist level, tak- 
ing this kit just as he would any other. Presumably, 
the character was unaware of the corrupt nature of 
his government or church while being trained, di: 
covering the truth shortly after taking his Oath of 
Ennoblement. Alternately, a political coup may 
have occurred early in the character’s career, 
replacing a lawful good regime with an evil one. 

2. A character with another paladin kit may 
abandon it when his superiors betray him or some 
other dramatic event occurs that prompts him to 
renounce his fealty. The character may either be- 
come a standard paladin (described in the “Aban- 
doning Kits” section later in this chapter) or—with 
the DM's approval—he may become an Expatriate, 
retaining his current level (a 3rd-level Errant who 
renounces his fealty becomes a 3rd-level Expatri- 
ate). The new Expatriate keeps all of his equipment 
and proficiencies, but drops the Special Benefits 
and Hindrances associated with his previous kit; he 
acquires the Special Benefits and Hindrances of the 
patriate kit instead. 

Requirements: Standard. 

Ministration: Independent. 

Role: Though still lawful good, an Expatriate 
distrusts most formal institutions, including lawful 
good governments and organized religions. He 
obeys the dictates of his conscience and his deity 
only, remaining skeptical of all self-proclaimed and 
elected authorities. Though courteous and respect- 
ful, he no longer automatically follows the orders 
those holding positions of power. He weighs each 
request against his own principles, agreeing to a 
mission or favor only if completely convinced of its 
merit. 

Expatriates are often moody, cynical, and bitter. 
An Expatriate may feel his good name has been 
permanently tarnished, a condition he struggles to 
correct by volunteering for demanding, even dan- 
gerous, missions. He remains loyal to his lawful 
good comrades but resists close friendships. He has 
little patience with most neutral characters, finding 


their lack of commitment insipid and contemptible. 
He crushes his enemies without remorse. 

Few governments or churches trust Expatriates 
enough to hire them as mercenaries. Therefore, 
Expatriates must rely on treasure or tournament 
winnings to make a living. 

Symbol: If an Expatriate carries a symbol of his 
former government or church, he defaces it with 
slashes or scratches to proclaim his independence. 

Secondary Skills: Armorer, Farmer, Fisher, 
Forester, Groom, Hunter, Leather Worker, Miner, 
Scribe, Trapper/Furrier, Weaponsmith, Wood- 
worker/Carver. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Any. 

Armor/Equipment: Standard. 

Bonded Mount: Any. 

Special Benefits: 

Self-Reliance: An 
pleases, subservient to no one. He has no ed 
follow, other than those imposed by his deity or his 
own principles. 

Reaction Bonus: An Expatriate remains a hero to 
the peasants and other oppressed people of his 
homeland, who admire him for his integrity and 
sterling character; from all those not associated 
with the officials of his former government or 
church, he receives a +2 modifier to his reaction 
rolls. To commoners of other lands familiar with his 
reputation, he also receives a +2 reaction modifier. 
Additionally, he will be given food and shelter 
from all commoners whose modified reaction is 
Friendly. This courtesy extends to any companions, 
so long as he vouches for them. 

Special Hindrances: 

Self-Reliance: Independence also has its draw- 
backs. As with the Errant, the Expatriate has no 
government or church to provide loans, supplies, 
or support. He may build a stronghold if he saves 
enough money, but he isn’t eligible for property 
grants, charters, or benefices. 

Reaction Penalty: Elite NPCs are reluctant to asso- 
ciate too closely with an Expatriate, fearing they 
might invite the wrath of the Expatriate’s former 
government or church. Therefore, sensing the 
Expatriate’s discomfort and distrust, all characters 


xpatriate comes and goes as he 


ue 


Paladin Kits + 55 


in positions of power suffer a -2 modifier to their 
reaction rolls. 

Fugitive Status: Officials of the Expatriate’s origi- 
nal government or church consider him an embar- 
rassment at best, a traitor at worst. An Expatriate is 
constantly hunted and harassed by his ex-employ- 
ers, who may seek to punish, arrest, or even exe- 
cute him. 


Ghosthunter 


Description: The Ghosthunter is obsessed with 
finding and destroying evil undead, including 
ghosts, spectres, liches, and vampires. To further 
his goals, the Ghosthunter’s deity has provided 
him with special powers to vanquish his nemeses 
and resist their evil magic. 

Requirements: Standard. 

Ministration: Any; Independent most common. 

Role: A Ghosthunter allies with any acceptable 
adventuring party that seems likely to encounter 
his hated foes. Given the opportunity, a Ghost- 
hunter will explore every crypt, cemetery, and 
abandoned castle to search for undead, attacking 
relentlessly until the last of them fall or the party 
leader orders him to withdraw. While a Ghost- 
hunter shares all paladins’ hatred of evil, destroy- 
ing undead is his primary objective. 

A singleminded Ghosthunter may try the 
patience of his most sympathetic companion. Often 
withdrawn and grim, he prefers solitude to social- 
izing. His reticence makes him a poor leader, as he 
often has difficulty focusing on the party’s overall 
mission. A Ghosthunter may resist following orders 
if he disagrees with his party’s strategy (if he can so 
do without violating his ethos) and strike out on 
his own ceaseless hunt for undead. 

Symbol: Gravestone, broken scythe. 

Secondary Skills: Hunter, Mason, Miner, Scribe, 
Weaponsmith. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Recommended: Ancient 
History, Blind-fighting, Languages (Ancient), Local 
History, Spellcraft, Tracking. 

Armor/Equipment: Standard. 

Bonded Mount: Any. 


ESSE 


56 + Chapter Four 


Special Benefits: 

Dispel Evil: At 5th level, a Ghosthunter acquires 
the innate ability to cast dispel evil once per day. The 
spell requires no components, but otherwise oper- 
ates the same as the Sth-level priest spell of that 
name. The number of times he can cast this spell 
increases as he advances in level (see Table 17). 

Paralysis Immunity: Ghosthunters of all levels 
have a 95% immunity to paralysis caused by 
undead. Additionally, all Ghosthunters have the 
innate ability to cast remove paralysis. The spell 
requires no components, but is otherwise identical 
to the 3rd-level priest spell of the same name. The 
number of times he can cast this spell increases as 
he advances in level (see Table 17). 


Table 17: Ghosthunter Abilities 


Level Dispel Evil* Remove Paralysis* 


14 = 3 
5-9 1 4 
10-14 2 5 
15-19 3 6 
20+ 4 if 
* Times per day. 


Improved Ability to Turn Undead: A Ghosthunter 
turns undead as a cleric of the same level (as shown 
in Table 18). 

Holy Sword Availability: The Ghosthunter’s deity 
might give the Ghosthunter an opportunity to 
acquire a sword +3 Purifier (see Chapter 6) at some 
point before he reaches 6th level. The DM deter- 
mines the circumstances, as per the guidelines in 
Chapter 2; remember that availability does not 
guarantee acquisition. 

Special Hindrances: 

The Ghosthunter has fewer of the special abilities 
normally associated with paladins (described in 
Chapter 2): 

* He can’t restore hit points by laying on hands. 

e He can’t learn or cast priest spells. 

e He has no magical immunity to diseases. 

e He can’t cure diseases in others. 


Table 18: Turning Undead (Ghosthunter) 


Ghosthunter Category of Undead 

Level 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 11 1213 
1 10.13.16 19:20 - - > =- -p == 
2 7 10 13 16 1920 == - -=-= = = 
3 4 71013161920 = - = - ~ = 
4 T 4 71013161920 - - = = = 
5 TT 4 71018161920 - = = = 
6 DT T 4 7 10/13:1649 -= = 
7 DDT T 4 71013161920 - - 
8 D'D DT T 4 71013 16 19 20 - 
9 D*D'D D T T 4 7 10 13 16 1920 
10-11 D*D*D*D D T T 4 7 10 13 1619 
12-13 D*D*D*D*D DT T 4 7101316 
14+ D*D*D*D*D*D D T T 4 7 1013 


Key to Undead Categories 
1: Skeleton (or 1 HD undead) 
2: Zombie 

Ghoul (or 2 HD undead) 

Shadow (or 4 HD undead) 

: Wight (or 5 HD undead) 

y: Ghast 

: Wraith (or 6 HD undead) 

Mummy (or 7 HD undead) 

9: Spectre (or 8 HD undead) 

10: Vampire (or 9 HD undead) 

11: Ghost (or 10 HD undead) 

12: Lich (or 11+ HD undead) 

13: Special undead, including one-of-a-kind crea- 
tures, free-willed undead of the Negative 
Plane, outer planes undead, and certain Greater 
and Lésser powers (baatezu, tanar’ri, etc.). 


* An additional 2d4 creatures of this type are 
turned. 


Inquisitor 


Description: The Inquisitor has devoted his life 
to finding and eliminating practitioners of evil 
magic. A scholar as well as a warrior, he is unyield- 
ing in his efforts to thwart the clerics and wizards 
who have aligned with the forces of darkness. 

Requirements: An Inquisitor must have a mini- 


mum Intelligence score of 11. 

Ministration: Any. 

Role: To an Inquisitor, magic is a sacred force, 
and he detests those who use it for evil. An evil 
spellcaster who refuses to renounce his corrupt 
ways invites the Inquisitor’s wrath. 

The typical Inquisitor is intense and analytical, 
more interested in quiet reflection than small talk. 
Though private by nature, an Inquisitor establishes 
deep friendship in those he comes to trust, particu- 
larly good-aligned wizards and clerics. 

Symbol: Open book, candle, flaming brazier. 

Secondary Skills: Groom, Limner/Painter, Scribe, 
Weaponsmith, Woodworker/Carpenter. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: Spellcraft, 
Religion. Recommended: Astrology, Languages 
(Ancient and Modern), Reading/Writing. 

Armor/Equipment: Standard. 

Bonded Mount: Any. 

Special Benefit: 

Detect Evil Magic: An Inquisitor can detect magic 
radiating from any being, object, or location en- 
chanted by an evil being. This ability functions at 
will, subject to the same limitations and restrictions 
as his ability to detect evil intent, described in Chap- 
ter 2. He may also perceive the intensity of the 
magic (faint, moderate, strong, overwhelming); the 
sensations are like those listed in Table 11 in Chap- 
ter 2. A protective spell cast by an evil necromancer 
upon himself could be detected in this manner, as 
could a magical trap set by an evil priest. 

Dispel Evil Magic: At 3rd level, an Inquisitor 
acquires the ability to cast dispel magic. The spell 
requires no verbal or somatic components, but 
affects only evil spells and spell-like effects. The 
spell has a base success chance of 100% and is cast 
at the level of the Inquisitor. Aside from these quali- 
fications, it operates exactly like the third-level 
priest spell. The number of times he can cast this 
spell increases as he advances in level (see Table 19). 

Immunity to Illusions: An Inquisitor has an 80% 
plus 1%/level immunity to illusion spells of all lev- 
els. This immunity has a limit of 95%. (A 12th-level 
Inquisitor as a 92% immunity; a 16th-level Inquisi- 
tor has a 95% immunity.) 


el 


Paladin Kits + 57 


Table 19: Frequency of Dispel Evil Magic 


Level Dispel Evil Magic* 
1-2 
3-5 
6-8 
9-11 

12-14 

15-17 

18+ 


DANkwnas 


* Times per day. 


Immunity to Possession and Mental Control: Inquisi- 
tors of all levels have a 90% immunity to all posses- 
sion and mental-control spells, including charm, 
domination, hold person, hypnotism, magic jar, and 
suggestion. 

Special Hindrances: 

An Inquisitor has fewer of the special abilities 
normally associated with paladins (described in 
Chapter 2): 

e He can’t restore hit points by laying on hands. 

e He can’t ever learn or cast priest spells. 

e He can’t turn undead. 

* He can’t cure diseases in others, though he 
himself is immune to all forms of disease. 


Medician 


Description: The Medician seeks to treat the sick, 
alleviate suffering, and save lives. Much of her 
training has been devoted to medical arts, and she 
follows a religion whose deities promote healing 
and compassion. On the battlefield, she is as likely 
to be found comforting a wounded comrade as 
engaging an enemy in swordplay. Though as much 
an enemy of evil as any paladin, the Medician has 
decided that she can best uphold her principles by 
fighting injury and disease. 

Requirements: The Medician must have an Intel- 
ligence score of at least 10. 

Ministration: Any. 

Role: A Medician candidate undergoes rigorous 
training in a variety of demanding courses, includ- 
ing herbalism, anatomy, and diagnostics. After 


—SSSSSSESeSESEeseM 


58 * Chapter Four 


completing her academic studies, she must spend at 
least a year as an apprentice to an experienced med- 
ical practitioner. Because of the length of her train- 
ing, a candidate rarely becomes a Ist-level Medician 
before she reaches her early-to-mid twenties. 

A Medician assumes the role of healer whether at 
home or in the field with an adventuring party. She 
brews antidotes for poisons, sets broken bones, 
applies poultices to festering wounds, and stays up 
all night with ailing mounts. In her free time, the 
Medician experiments with new treatments, devel- 
ops new diagnostic techniques, and compiles notes 
of past cases to share with other healers. 

A Medician will never abandon or neglect 
wounded, diseased, or suffering lawful good char- 
acters (or creatures). Should no lawful good patients 
require attention, most Medicians will apply their 
skills to neutral characters and creatures. However, 
only in extraordinary circumstances will a Medician 
knowingly treat an evil character or creature. 

Symbol: A holy symbol with a heart, open hand, 
silhouette of an infant, cross, or drop of blood. 

Secondary Skills: Farmer, Groom, Scribe. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Medician spends so 
much time with academic studies that her combat 
skills invariably suffer. Therefore, the Medician has 
only one weapon proficiency at 1st level; this slot 
must be spent on either lance (any), battle axe, or 
sword (any). She receives a second weapon profi- 
ciency at 3rd level and a third at 6th level; she 
receives a total of three weapon proficiencies for 
her entire career. She may chose any weapon to fill 
her second and third slots. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Diagnostics*, 
Healing. Limit: Because her mastery of the healing 
arts comes at the expense of other skills, a Medician 
may acquire no more than three proficiencies be- 
yond her bonuses. She has only a single proficiency 
slot to spend at 1st level, another at 3rd level, and a 
final slot at 6th level. Recommended: Ancient History, 
Animal Handling, Animal Lore, Animal Training, 
Heraldry, Herbalism, Languages (Ancient or Mod- 
ern), Reading/Writing, Religion, Riding (Airborne 
or Land-based). Forbidden: Blind-fighting, Bowyer/ 
Fletcher, Jousting*, Weaponsmithing. 

Armor/Equipment: In addition to her standard 


equipment, the Medician must purchase and main- 
tain a set of healing equipment. A typical set in- 
cludes needles for stitching wounds, cloth ban- 
dages, tourniquets, splints, sterilizing ointments, 
and a selection of non-magical potions and herbs 
(for soothing headaches, settling stomaches, and 
reducing fevers; these items don’t heal damage). 
The initial cost of a kit is 50 gp. At least once a 
month, the Medician must replenish her kit either 
by buying new supplies (1-4 gp) or scavenging 
them (which takes 1-4 days). Until the Medician 
replenishes her kit, she can’t take advantage of any 
of the proficiency bonuses listed in the Special Ben- 
efits section. The kit weighs 1 Ib. 

Bonded Mount: Any. 

Special Benefits: 

A Medician has all of the following proficiency 
bonuses: 

¢ A +1 bonus to all Diagnostics proficiency 
checks. (If the Medician acquires the Herbalism 
proficiency, she has an additional +3 bonus; this 
brings the total Diagnostics bonus to +4. See Chap- 
ter 5 for the Diagnostics proficiency.) 

© A +1 bonus for all Healing proficiency checks. 
A successful check enables her to restore 1d4 points 
of damage if applied within three rounds of wound- 
ing (instead of 1-3 points within one round). 

e If under the care of a Medician, a patient recov- 
ers 1 additional hit point per day (2 points per day 
if the patient travels, and 4 points per day if the 
patient rests). 

e If a Medician spends five consecutive rounds 
caring for a poisoned patient, the patient receives a 
+4 bonus tő his saving throw (made at the end of 
five rounds). If the care is interrupted, the patient 
saves normally. 

Special Hindrances: 

Once per year, a Medician must suspend all nor- 
mal activities and spend 2-5 (1d4+1) consecutive 
weeks at a university, hospital, monastery, or any 
other lawful good institution that offers both reli- 
gious and medical training. During this period, the 
Medician refreshes her skills through prayer and 
study. Failure to comply results in the loss of all 
proficiency bonuses listed in the Special Benefits 
section. As a punishment from her deity, the Medi- 


cian also loses her disease immunity and the ability 
to heal by laying on hands. She regains all benefits 
and special abilities as soon as she completes a 2-5 
week stay. 


Militarist 


Description: The Militarist is a battlefield virtu- 
oso. War is a sacred act, he believes, and a chance 
for spiritual redemption. By defeating enemies in 
combat, he pays tribute to his gods and secures his 
place in the afterlife. 

Requirements: A Militarist must have a mini- 
mum score of 12 in both Dexterity and Constitu- 
tion. 

Ministration: Government or Church. 

Role: Typically, a Militarist serves as an officer in 
an army or other military organization. In wartime, 
he commands forces in the field, or engages in spe- 
cialized operations, involving reconnaissance, res- 
cue, or sabotage. He works alone or with a select 
group of elite soldiers. In peacetime, he protects his 
liege’s stronghold, supervises training of recruits, 
and sharpens his fighting skills. He stands ready to 
travel to any part of the world to defend the inter- 
ests of his government or church. 

A Militarist commands the respect of nobles and 
peasants alike. Often, his reputation approaches 
legendary status; citizens line the streets and cheer 
when a renowned Militarist passes through their 
village. Militarists tend to bask in such adulation, 
pausing to exchange a few words with starstruck 
adolescents or kiss the hands of swooning maid- 
ens. They also enjoy the trappings of their station, 
eager to accept awards for military excellence and 
rarely refusing invitations to royal affairs. 

In combat, the Militarist naturally assumes a 
leadership role. His companions will find him to be 
a shrewd and fearless commander who relishes 
every opportunity to engage the enemy. Off the 
battlefield, the Militarist tends to withdraw, main- 
taining a professional but distant relationship with 
his comrades. He has little interest in non-military 
activities, spending most of his free time discussing 
strategy and tactics with like-minded warriors, or 
brushing up on his combat techniques. 


el 


Paladin Kits * 59 


Symbol: Any symbol with military connotations, 
such as a weapon or a clenched fist. 

Secondary Skills: Armorer, Weaponsmith. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Militarist must select 
one of the following to be called his preferred 
weapon: sword (any), lance (any), battle axe, horse- 
man’s flail, horseman’s mace, horseman’s pick. Rec- 
ommended: Any sword, any lance, battle axe, dagger, 
horseman’s flail, horseman’s mace, horseman’s 
pick. Because Militarists prefer mounted combat, 
they rarely become proficient with bows, slings, 
and other missile weapons difficult to use on horse- 
back. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Because the Militarist 
concentrates on military skills, he can substitute 
weapon proficiencies for nonweapon proficiencies 
(but not vice versa). He must expend half of his 
nonweapon proficiencies in this fashion. Bonus: 
Land-based Riding. Recommended: Armorer, Blind- 
fighting, Endurance, Jousting*, Weaponsmithing. 

Armor/Equipment: Standard. A Militarist prefers 
plate armor, but will settle for chain mail if that’s all 
he can afford. However, as soon as his economic 
condition improves, he must buy plate armor. A 
Militarist proudly displays all military ribbons, 
medals, and commendations on his clothing and 
shield. 

Bonded Mount: Any war horse. 

Special Benefits: 

Mounted Combat Bonus: A superb rider, a mounted 
Militarist makes attacks as if he were one level 
higher; a 3rd-level Militarist, for instance, attacks as 
if he were 4th level. He attacks as if two levels 
higher when riding his bonded mount. At 19th 
level, he attacks at one level higher regardless of his 
mount. A 20th-level Militarist isn’t eligible for 
these bonuses. 

When making an attack with his preferred 
weapon, the Militarist has a +1 damage bonus. 
Damage bonuses don’t apply in jousts or other tour- 
nament competitions where the intent is to dis- 
mount or disarm, not inflict damage. They do apply 
to nonlethal attempts to subdue an opponent. 

Reaction Bonus: The Militarist receives a +2 reac- 
tion roll from all good and neutral characters of his 
own culture. Evil characters respond normally. 


Č 


60 * Chapter Four 


Honors: As he advances in level, the Militarist 
receives the honors listed in Table 20. The honors 
presume loyal service and no significant ethos vio- 
lations. The DM may withhold any honor he feels 
the Militarist doesn’t deserve. 


Table 20: Militarist Honors 


Level Honor 
2 Ceremonial banquet in Militarist’s honor 
3 Receives a special crest for his helmet (see 
Chapter 6) 


5 Receives a ceremonial coif (see Chapter 6) 

z Eligible to receive interest-free loans of up 
to 500 gp from his government or church 
(the DM may adjust the loan amount) 

9 Land grant from his church of government 
(size and location determined by the DM) 

10 Church or government officials screen Mil- 

itarist’s potential hirelings; all such em- 
ployees are guaranteed lawful good (the 
Militarist retains the option to hire; he 
must also negotiate salaries and other con- 
ditions of employment) 


Special Hindrances: 

Regular Training: The Militarist must spend at 
least one hour per day practicing his combat and 
riding skills. If he neglects to practice, he loses his 
mounted combat bonuses (see Special Benefits) for 
the following day. The DM may exempt the Mili- 
tarist from this training requirement if he’s spent 
an hour that day (60 rounds) in actual combat. 

Regular Reports. A Militarist must return to his 
home base at least once every six months to report 
to his government or church officials. The report 
includes the status of current military operations, 
observations of enemy activity, and any informa- 
tion requested by his superiors. The Militarist may 
be excused from making a report if he makes prior 
arrangements. Otherwise, failure to report consti- 
tutes an ethos violation. 


Skyrider 


Description: The Skyrider is a warrior of the air. 
Carried by his airborne mount, he soars through 
the clouds with the grace of an eagle and the preci- 
sion of an arrow in flight. He serves as a defender 
of both the skyways and the earth. 

The Skyrider owes his skills to his unusual rela- 
tionship with his mount. In certain wilderness soci- 
eties, tribal elders select the brightest and strongest 
children to be Skyrider candidates. The elders 
match each child with a young flying mount. The 
child and mount are encouraged to share much 
time training, playing, even sleeping together. 
Within a few years, their bond is so strong that the 
mount responds to the rider almost intuitively. 

Requirements: Standard. Most Skyriders come 
from wilderness areas where flying mounts are 
more practical than land mounts. Flying mounts 
can monitor stretches of open countryside easier 
than ground mounts, and have less trouble navi- 
gating mountains and other hostile terrain. 

Ministration: Any, with Mentor and Indepen- 
dent the most common. 

Role: Though Skyriders make excellent scouts 
and explorers, they’re particularly useful as sol- 
diers. Their flying mounts enable them to move 
quickly to distant locations, irrespective of rivers, 
chasms, or other obstacles. They can target enemies 
on the ground, breech stronghold walls, and swoop 
around enemy forces to attack from behind. They 
can undertake reconnaissance missions to deter- 
mine the size of enemy armies and monitor their 
movement. ` 

In peacetime, a Skyrider can take advantage of 
his bird’s-eye view to look for virgin farmland and 
new trade routes. He can also watch for natural dis- 
asters, such as forest fires and floods. Some teach 
themselves to track tornadoes and hurricanes, 
warning those in a storm’s path to take shelter. A 
Skyrider can deliver supplies to isolated villages, 
rescue trapped explorers, and visit distant islands 
without a ship. 

A Skyrider fulfills many of these same functions 
in an adventuring party, scouting ahead for signs of 
trouble, attacking enemies from the air, and cross- 


ing hostile terrain to deliver messages and goods. 
Because a Skyrider often prefers the company of 
his mount to that of other people, his companions 
may find him cold and aloof. 

Symbol: Any symbol that suggests flight, such 
as a pair of wings or the profile of a bird. 

Secondary Skills: Farmer, Forester, Hunter. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any. Because Skyriders 
don’t suffer the normal mounted missile fire penal- 
ties (see the Special Benefits section below), many 
choose proficiencies in the longbow, crossbow, or 
sling. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Airborne Rid- 
ing. Recommended: Direction Sense, Hunting, Track- 
ing, Weather Sense. Forbidden: Jousting*. 

Armor/Equipment: Standard. Usually, the Sky- 
rider must purchase high-quality, customized tack 
for his flying mount to ensure maximum comfort 
and maneuverability. Depending on the size and 
species of the mount, customized tack (including 
bit, bridle, halter, and saddles) costs 20-40 gp. The 
Skyrider should also consider full barding for his 
mount (preferably leather). 

Bonded Mount: Griffon, giant eagle, pegasus, 
hippogriff, or any other type of flying mount 
indigenous to the Skyrider’s homeland. The Sky- 
rider acquires his bonded mount at Ist level. 

Special Benefits: 

Combat and Proficiency Bonuses: When airborne, 
all nonmissile attacks made by either the bonded 
mount or the Skyrider receive a +1 modifier to hit. 
This includes attacks made against ground or air- 
borne targets, along with all situations covered in 
the Aerial Combat rules in Chapter 9 of the DMG. 
For missile combat, use the modifiers in Table 21. 


Table 21: Skyrider Mounted Missile Fire 


Mount’s Current Movement Modifier 
Hovering, less than 1/2 normal rate +1 
1/2 to 3/4 normal rate 0 
Greater than 3/4 normal rate -2 


Additionally, the Skyrider receives a +2 bonus to 
Airborne Riding proficiency checks for feats involv- 
ing his bonded mount. 


Paladin Kits * 61 


Longer Relationship: Under normal conditions, a 
bonded mount remains with its Skyrider for 15 
years. 

Faster Training: The Skyrider can teach his bonded 
mount a trick in 2-5 (1d4+1) days, a task in 1-2 
weeks. Like other bonded mounts, the Skyrider’s 
mount can learn 9-20 tricks and tasks, in any com- 
bination. 

Telepathic Communication: When the Skyrider 
reaches 12th level, he gains the ability to communi- 
cate telepathically with his bonded mount, sending 
and receiving mental messages at will. This abil- 
ity’s range is 10 times the Skyrider’s level, in feet. 

Special Hindrances: 

Mourning: When the Skyrider loses his bonded 
mount, he feels the loss intensely. If the bonded 
mount was lost because of the Skyrider’s actions— 
for instance, the Skyrider’s carelessness resulted in 
the mount’s death, or the mount left because the 
Skyrider was stripped of his paladinhood—the 
Skyrider mourns for 2-5 (1d4+1) months. If the 
bonded mount served its full 15 years, or the Sky- 
rider voluntarily releases it, the Skyrider mourns 
for 2d4 weeks. During the mourning period, the 
Skyrider suffers a -2 penalty to all attack, ability, 
and proficiency rolls. 


Squire 


Description: Historically, a Squire functioned as 
an apprentice, serving his master both at home and 
on the battlefield while honing his skills. When his 
training ended, the Squire became a paladin him- 
self, sometimes continuing the cycle by taking on a 
Squire of his own. 

Occasionally, however, Squires made a career of 
service. By choice or circumstance, the Squire has 
spent his life as an aide to a high-ranking paladin, 
an elder of his church, or a government official. Al- 
though never quite attaining the status of other pal- 
adins, the career Squire—the type described in this 
kit—commands respect for his loyalty and devo- 
tion to duty. 

Requirements: There are no rigid requirements 
for a Squire, but the player should consider why 
the character would opt for this kit, which offers 


—— aaaaaaaaamaaaammmsmsħÃŐ— 


62 * Chapter Four 


less status than a full paladin but demands the 
same adherence to an ethos. Some possibilities 
include: 

* The character doesn’t want all the responsibili- 
ties associated with a full paladin. 

e The character lacks the noble blood required of 
full paladins in his culture. 

e The character’s paladin ancestor committed an 
ethos violation so severe that his descendents were 
forbidden to become full paladins. 

The player may also name the master his Squire 
will serve. The master is usually a high-level pal- 
adin, but can also be an aristocrat, a military officer, 
or a church dignitary. The master may be another 
PC, but this isn’t recommended, as complications 
may arise if the PC master is unavailable for a par- 
ticular adventure or drops out of the campaign. 

Preferably, the player should select an NPC pal- 
adin to be the Squire’s master, approved of and 
controlled by the DM. For convenience and expedi- 
ency, the NPC operates “offstage’’—that is, he 
rarely, if ever, makes an actual appearance in the 
campaign. The master may be infirm, permanently 
confined to bed in his stronghold, or perhaps his 
duties have indefinitely taken him to the other side 
of the world. Squire and master communicate 
through messengers or intermediaries, or they may 
arrange meetings between adventures. Alternately, 
the master may be dead; rather than finding a new 
master, the Squire dedicates the rest of his career to 
the master’s memory. In any case, the Squire carries 
out the master’s wishes, looks after his interests, 
and represents him in quests and adventures. 

Ministration: A Squire takes orders from his 
master. If the master is dead, the Squire obeys the 
master’s heir. 

Role: A Squire performs household chores, cares 
for horses, and maintains weapons. If he has the 
appropriate skills, he may also cook meals, repair 
clothing, or do leatherwork. These functions may 
be part of his regular duties, or he may take it upon 
himself to help out; Squires are eager to pitch in 
when there’s work to be done. 

Despite their reputation for dedication and hard 
work, Squires lack the stature of other paladins. 
They are rarely invited to state banquets or other 


formal functions, except as waiters or chefs. They 
never become high-ranking military officers, nor 
are they eligible for the honors available to other 
paladins. (If a Chevalier and a Squire are equally 
responsible for defeating an enemy army, the 
Chevalier may receive a festival in his honor and a 
gift of a golden spurs; the Squire may have to settle 
for a pat on the back.) While commoners respect 
the Squire, open admiration is rare; unfairly or not, 
many believe that career Squires have some defi- 
ciency that prevents them from becoming full- 
fledged paladins. 

A Squire's party finds him a tireless worker and 
supportive companion. He graciously volunteers 
his aid to whomever needs it; he’s always willing 
to repair a torn tunic for a comrade who can’t sew, 
groom the horse of a friend who's too tired to do it 
himself, or teach a novice the way to hold a shield. 
He avoids leadership roles, deferring to those in 
authority positions, but follows orders to the letter. 
No job is too menial, no request too trivial. 

Symbol: The Squire adopts the same symbol as 
his master. 

Secondary Skills: Armorer, Groom, Tailor/ 
Weaver, Weaponsmith, Woodworker/Carpenter. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Recommended: 
Armorer, Blacksmithing, Brewing, Carpentry, Cob- 
bling, Cooking, Etiquette, Leatherworking, Seam- 
stress/Tailor, Weaponsmithing, Weaving. 

Armor/Equipment: Standard. The master will 
usually supply all basic equipment at no charge, 
including a suit of chain mail, a short sword, a 
lance, a dagger, a mount (usually a riding horse or 
light war horse), and tack. Unless the Squire loses 
equipment through carelessness or ineptitude, the 
master will also supply replacements. 

Bonded Mount: Mounts of higher intelligence, 
such as unicorns or pegasi, are rarely drawn to 
Squires, nor are unusually strong war horses, such 
as greater or standard paladin mounts. Medium 
war horses, light war horses, and riding horses are 
the most likely mounts. 

Special Benefits: 

Punishment Buffer: Technically, the master is 
responsible for the Squire’s actions. Therefore, if a 


Squire commits a crime or some other indiscretion, 
the master may share the punishment or speak on 
the Squire’s behalf to have the punishment sus- 
pended. In game terms, the DM has the option of 
reducing or setting aside punishments when the 
Squire commits minor ethos violations. For instance, 
if the Squire accidently insults an aristocrat, the 
DM may let him off with a warning rather than 
have him perform a penance (offstage, the master 
has taken the punishment for the Squire, apolo- 
gized on his behalf, or bargained for a reduced 
punishment). The Squire takes full responsibility 
for all serious ethos violations; the master can’t—or 
won’t—help him. 

Economic Advantages: The master not only sup- 
plies his Squire with basic equipment, he also pays 
him a regular stipend, typically 5-10 gp per month. 
(The Squire must tithe from this stipend as he 
would any other income.) The master may also be 
able to supply other needed equipment for free or 
at a reduced cost, and loan money with little or no 
interest. 

Special Hindrances: 

No Privileged Relationships. A Squire has no spe- 
cial access to officials, sages, and other elite charac- 
ters, unless his master paves the way. 

Subservience: A Squire can’t marry, undertake a 
long trip, or make any other major decision with- 
out his master’s permission. The master decides 
where the Squire’s tithes go, how much treasure he 
may keep, and if a particular mission is worth the 
Squire's time. If the master is dead, the Squire must 
pray to the master’s spirit; the master’s answer will 
come in a dream, or as decided by the DM. 

The Squire may also be required to meet regu- 
larly with the master—say, at least once a year. Fail- 
ure to show up constitutes an ethos violation. If the 
master is dead, the Squire must visit his grave and 
commune with his spirit. 

Additionally, a Squire must obey the orders of all 
paladins, not just his master, including those whose 
levels are lower than his. 

No Strongholds. In most cultures, law and tradi- 
tion prevent Squires from building strongholds or 
holding real estate. The DM may make an excep- 
tion for a high-level Squire (at least 15th level) who 


Paladin Kits * 63 


demonstrates outstanding service (he saves the 
king’s life or rescues a kidnapped prince). Even 
then, a Squire is most likely to be a trustee or 
regent. 


Votary 


Description: Like Divinates, the devoutly reli- 
gious Votaries function as soldiers of their church. 
But Votaries are far more militant, considering 
devotees of “false” religions as the epitome of 
evil. Additionally, Votaries follow an unusually 
strict ethos that includes vows of poverty and 
chastity. 

Requirements: Standard. 

Ministration: Church. A Votary rarely pledges 
fealty to a government, unless the government is 
subservient to her church. 

Role: The typical Votary is grim, self-obsessed, 
and quick to judge. She believes her church is the 
only true one and is suspicious of all other reli- 
gions. She behaves with stony civility to priests of 
other lawful faiths and open skepticism to priests 
of neutral faiths. Followers of evil faiths, she be- 
lieves fervently, deserve nothing less than death. 

The Votary maintains an ascetic, ordered life. She 
owns few personal possessions, avoids strong 
drink, and even declines to eat heavily seasoned 
food. She disapproves of gaming, dancing, and 
other entertainment as childish distractions. Con- 
cern for personal grooming is a distasteful affecta- 
tion (and not a requirement of the Votary’s ethos). 
Some votaries leave their hair uncombed and 
beards shaggy “as the deity intended,” devoting 
only as much effort to personal hygiene as neces- 
sary for good health and minimal courtesy. 
Whereas a Votary is as susceptible to courtly love 
as any other paladin (see Chapter 7), she would 
never consider approaching the person she desires; 
her passion would likely manifest as guilt and 
shame. 

Many commoners admire the Votary for her ded- 
ication and discipline, but some see her as an intim- 
idating, even frightening, fanatic. Her humorless 
outlook and self-righteousness attitude tend to dis- 
courage close friendships. 


Symbol: A Votary displays the holy symbol of 
her church only on her shield. She never carries a 
flag or banner except on official business, nor will 
she attach her symbol to her armor, mount barding, 
or other possessions; she considers such displays 
gaudy and vulgar. 

Secondary Skills: Groom, Hunter, Scribe. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Recommended: Ancient 
History, Endurance, Healing, Languages (Ancient 
and Modern), Religion, Tracking. Forbidden: Brew- 
ing, Cooking, Dancing, Etiquette*, Gaming, Joust- 
ing*, Musical Instrument, Poetry*, Pottery, Singing. 

Armor/Equipment: A Votary owns no posses- 
sions aside from her weapons, armor, and the mini- 
mal gear and supplies necessary to carry out her 
missions. She never purchases the formal attire 
described in the Clothing and Special Items section 
of Chapter 6, nor will she decorate her armor or 
clothing with jewels, gold trim, or ornaments. 

Bonded Mount: Any. 

Special Benefits: 

More Spells: Because of her intense devotion to 
his deity, the Votary has more spells than other pal- 
adins and learns them when she reaches 6th level. 
Table 22 details the spell progression. 


Table 22 : Votary Spell Progression 


Votary Casting 
Level Level 
6 t 


Priest Spell Levels 


w 
wowowo NoUu e wN 
PLL RR RR ROKONNE m 
PRR RR RONNNNNE! 
PRWWWNNNNEE 


RwWWNeEHEE 


Paladin Kits * 65 


Hated Faith: The Votary earns a combat bonus 
when fighting enemies of a particular evil faith. 
The evil faith must be designated at the outset of 
her career; only a single faith may designated, and 
once chosen it will never change. Acceptable choices 
include faiths of a particular being (such as an ogre 
religion) or region (a religion indigenous to a par- 
ticular jungle or mountain range). A Votary earn a 
+4 bonus to her attack rolls when fighting priests or 
followers of the hated faith. The Votary must recog- 
nize the priests and followers of the hated faith in 
order to receive the bonus, identifying them by 
symbols, gestures, garb, or rituals. 

Special Hindrances: 

Reaction Penalty: A Votary displays obvious 
enmity toward priests of other faiths. Lawful good 
priests of faiths other than the Votary’s suffer a -2 
penalty to their reaction rolls; their reaction can be 
no better than Indifferent. Neutral priests suffer a 
-4 penalty; their reaction can be no better than 
Cautious. 
extra Tithes: A Votary must donate 50% of all 
income to her church. 

Celibacy: The Votary must incorporate a vow of 
celibacy into her ethos. 

No Strongholds or Hirelings: By choice, a Votary 
never builds a stronghold; instead, she lives in a 
church, monastery, or temple. Nor does she 
henchmen or other hirelings, a wasteful expense. 


Wyrmslayer 


Description: The Wyrmslayer is the sworn 
enemy of evil dragons and has devoted his life to 
their destruction. Battle-hardened and fiercely 
determined, the Wyrmslayer roams the world in 
search of the hated creatures. Even the mightiest 
evil dragons tremble at the approach of a Wyrm- 
slayer, as few humans pose a greater threat. 

Only a select few qualify to become Wyrmslayers, 
with the final choice up to the gods. If a candidate 
meets the basic physical requirements, he declares 
his intention to become a Wyrmslayer before he 
takes his Oath of Ennoblement. As part of his oath, 
he pledges to destroy all evil dragons, singling out a 
particular species as his principal foe. The principal 


—————eeSSSSSSSSSFSFSFeSseF 


66 * Chapter Four 


foe can be a black, blue, green, red, white, or any 
other evil species prominent in the campaign world. 
Once a candidate names his principal foe, it remains 
the same for the rest of his career. 

After completing his oath, the candidate becomes 
a standard Ist-level paladin (as described in the 
PH). That night, a lawful good deity appears to him 
in a vision, giving him a quest to demonstrate his 
courage. Typical quests include: 

+ Retrieving an egg from the nest of a principal 
foe. 

e Finding and destroying the lair of a principal 
foe. 

e Singlehandedly defending a village from an 
attack by a principal foe. 

The quest must be completed within a specified 
time limit, usually 1-2 years. If the paladin fails to 
complete the quest, he remains a standard paladin 
forever after; he can never become a Wyrmslayer, 
nor may he choose another kit. If he completes the 
quest, the deity grants him the special attributes 
described below; the paladin is then a Wyrmslayer. 
The Wyrmslayer retains the same level he had as a 
standard paladin; that is, if the paladin had risen to 
2nd level before completing his quest, he becomes 
a 2nd-level Wyrmslayer. 

Requirements: A Wyrmslayer must have a mini- 
mum Strength of 14, Dexterity of 10, and Constitu- 
tion of 10. 

Ministration: Any. 

Role: Just as the Ghosthunter is obsessed with 
destroying undead, so is the Wyrmslayer obsessed 
with killing evil dragons. Nomadic and restless, the 
Wyrmslayer spends most of his time searching for 
his nemeses. Even Wyrmslayers formally affiliated 
with governments or churches have unusual free- 
dom of movement; their superiors know that Wyrm- 
slayers function best when left alone. 

Though preferring to operate by themselves, 
Wyrmslayers will join adventuring parties if their 
travels take them through dragon territory. A 
Wyrmslayer fulfills his fealty obligations as well as 
any paladin, yet he may withdraw and brood if he 
goes too long without engaging his principal 
enemy. His eagerness to battle evil dragons im- 
presses some as courageous, others as foolhardy. 


No one, however, doubts his resolve. 

Symbol: Dragon profile, skull, claw, or wing; 
crossed lances. 

Secondary Skills: Armorer, Forester, Hunter, 
Weaponsmith. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Any one of the 
weapons from the restricted list. Restricted: A 
Wyrmslayer may be proficient in the following 
weapons only, all of which inflict high damage to 
large targets: heavy horse lance, medium horse 
lance, awl pike, bardiche, glaive-guisarme, spetum, 
long sword, two-handed sword, trident. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Animal Lore 
(only as applied to his principal foe; he cannot imi- 
tate its call; if the Wyrmslayer spends a slot, he 
acquires the Animal Lore proficiency described in 
the PH). Recommended: Armorer, Direction Sense, 
Endurance, Healing, Hunting, Mountaineering, 
Riding (Airborne or Land-based), Survival, Track- 
ing, Weaponsmithing. 

Armor/Equipment: A Wyrmslayer must have at 
least plate mail armor, preferably full plate. He 
must also have a shield, at least medium in s 

When a paladin completes his quest and becomes 
a full-fledged Wyrmslayer, his deity enchants | 
shield to magically protect the Wyrmslayer against 
dragon breath. If the Wyrmslayer makes a success- 
ful saving throw vs. breath weapon, the breath 
weapon causes no damage. If the throw fails, the 
Wyrmslayer suffers half damage. The magic func- 
tions only when the Wyrmslayer wields that shield; 
it functions as a normal shield when wielded by 
other characters. The enchanted shield counts 
against the Wyrmslayer’s magical item limit. 

Bonded Mount: Either a standard paladin war 
horse or a flying mount. 

Special Benefits: 

Dragon Languages: A Wyrmslayer can speak and 
understand the languages of all evil dragons. 

Fear Immunity: A Wyrmslayer is immune to the 
fear aura of his principal foe. He gains a +4 bonus to 
his saving throws to avoid the effects of fear from 
all other species of evil dragons. His bonded mount 
shares this immunity, but normal mounts do not. 

Damage Bonus: When a Wyrmslayer makes a suc- 
cessful weapon attack against his principal foe, he 


receives a damage bonus equal to his level. For 
example, if a 6th-level Wyrmslayer hits his princi- 
pal foe with a long sword, the foe suffers 1d12+6 
points of damage. If a Wyrmslayer makes a suc- 
cessful attack against an evil dragon other than his 
principal foe, he receives a +1 damage bonus. A 


bonded mount inflicts double damage against the 
Wyrmslayer’s principal foe and receives a +1 dam- 
age bonus against evil dragons other than the prin- 
cipal foe. 

Special Reward: lf the Wyrmslayer is primarily 
responsible for killing, banishing, or otherwise elim- 
inating a principal foe of Wyrm or Greater Wyrm 
level, his deity arranges for him to receive a special 
reward. The DM determines if the Wyrmslayer is eli- 
gible for the reward; for instance, the Wyrmslayer 
may earn the reward if he inflicted most of the dam- 
age leading to the foe's death, or if he tricked the foe 


into entering another plane of existence from which 
return is impossible. Typical rewards: 

1. A grant of land large enough for a stronghold, 

2. Donation of all labor and materials to build a 
stronghold. 

3. Revelation of the principal foe’s s 
horde, containing a fortune in gold and gems 
(which, of course, the Wyrmslayer donates to a 
charitable institution). 

4. A magical gift, such as: 

e Immunity to the spells of his principal foe. If 
the Wyrmslayer makes a successful saving throw, 
he suffers no damage from these spells. If he fails 
his throw, he suffers half damage. 

* Transformation of a normal sword into a holy 
sword. 

* Permanent access to an extra priest spell sphere. 
The Wyrmslayer picks the sphere of his choice, or 
the DM provides options. The extra access doesn’t 
affect the number or level of spells the Wyrmslayer 
can learn. 

* Permanent transformation of the bonded 
mount into a young silver dragon (or any lawful 
good dragon of the DM’s choice; the DM may also 
determine the dragon's age). The silver dragon 
serves out the rest of the mount’s term; if the origi- 
nal mount had served seven years, the dragon will 
serve three more. The dragon follows all the rules 


cret treasure 


—— el 


Paladin Kits + 67 


for bonded mounts described in Chapter 2. How- 
ever, it’s not necessary to train the dragon, as it car- 
ries out instructions with the same facility as any 
loyal, intelligent follower. 

Special Hindrances: 

Reaction Penalty. Because he is unable to conceal 
his hatred, the Wyrmslayer suffers a -4 penalty to 
all encounter reactions with his principal foe. 

Combat Compulsion. The Wyrmslayer seeks out his 
principal foe in combat situations, choosing it as the 
target of his attacks in preference all other potential 
opponents. If the party encounters a horde of gob- 
lins and a black dragon, and the dragon is the 
Wyrmslayer’s principal foe, the Wyrmslayer attacks 
the dragon and leaves the goblins to his comrades. 
If the Wyrmslayer spots his foe’s prints in the mud 
or hears rumors of his foe in a nearby forest, he feels 
compelled to track it down unless his companions 
forcibly restrain him or convince him of the inap- 
propriateness of his actions. 

The Wyrmslayer’s compulsion doesn’t necessar- 
ily interfere with his good judgment or responsibil- 
ities to his companions. If his principal foe tumbles 
into a fiery chasm, the Wyrmslayer won't leap in. If 
a comrade needs him, the Wyrmslayer interrupts 
his combat with the principal foe to help out, 
resuming his attacks against the principal foe when 
his comrade is safe. 

Inability to Turn Undead. The Wyrmslayer has no 
power over any undead beings. 


Abandoning Kits 


A characfer must stay with the same kit for his 
entire career; he can’t exchange it for a different 
one. However, he can abandon the kit at any time, 
continuing as a standard paladin described in the 
PH without any of the benefits or hindrances asso- 
ciated with a particular kit. 

There are many reasons why a player might 
want to abandon a kit. Maybe he feels limited by 
the kit restrictions (he wants more freedom than is 
allowed by the Squire). Or perhaps recent cam- 
paign events make the kit less fun to play (the king 
wants all his Chevaliers to stay home for the rest of 
the year to guard the castle). Whatever the reason, 


c aaaaaaaamaamamamammmmmħIĂ 


68 * Chapter Four 


the DM should honor a player’s request to aban- 
don his kit. If the DM wants to work the abandon- 
ment into an adventure, the change may occur 
gradually. If the change doesn’t significantly affect 
the campaign’s storyline, the change may occur 
immediately. 

When a character abandons a kit, he loses all of 
the kit’s bonuses, benefits, penalties, and hin- 
drances. The nonweapon proficiencies associated 
with the kit, including requirements and recom- 
mendations, no longer apply. Bonus proficiencies, 
however, aren't forfeited. Instead, they are set aside 
(written down but not used) until the character 
acquires new nonweapon proficiency slots. The 
new slots must be spent paying for the former 
bonus proficiencies; the player may buy these pro- 
ficiencies in any order. The player must pay for all 
former bonus proficiencies before he can choose 
any new nonweapon proficiencies. 

Should the character acquire new weapon profi- 
ciency slots, they may be spent on weapon profi- 
ciencies of the player’s choice. The character may 
use any weapons normally available to the paladin. 


Creating New Kits 


Ambitious players may design entirely new kits, 
using the examples in this chapter as guidelines. 
Before going to the trouble of designing a kit from 
scratch, check the exiting kits and see if any can be 
modified to fit the type you have in mind. If not, 
copy the Paladin Kit Record Sheet in the back of 
this book, fill out the description, then write down 
all the information needed in each section. Refer to 
the Kit Subsections descriptions at the beginning of 
this chapter if necessary. 

When you've finished with the Record Sheet, let 
your DM look it over. He may veto some ideas or 
suggest different ones to make sure that charac- 
ters taking the new kit aren’t too powerful or that 
the kit doesn’t duplicate concepts from existing 
kits. The DM may make additional adjustments 
after he sees how the kit works in the context of a 
campaign. 

Need some ideas? Consider these: 

Almsman. A treasure hunter and philanthropist, 


he acquires money for needy charities and distrib- 
utes funds to the underprivileged. 

Cursed Paladin. This unfortunate must wrestle 
with the consequences of a vile curse or hex placed 
upon his family, ever seeking a way to break it with 
the least harm to others. 

Elemental Paladin. Instead of acquiring a 
bonded mount, he can summon a free-willed ele- 
mental once per week for an hour. 

Foreteller. He has an uncanny knack of seeing 
into the future and better access to spells of the 
Divination Sphere. 

Gallant. A charming aesthete who finds truth 
and beauty in poetry, art, and romance. 

Outlander. One of the few surviving paladins of a 
lost kingdom, he attempts to pursue a life of service 
in a world that neither understands nor trusts him. 

Pacifist. He opposes war and violence in all 
forms, and advocates peaceful solutions to con- 
flicts. He seeks alternatives to killing evil characters 
and creatures. 

Seaguard. A ship-riding paladin, he is a defender 
of the sea and all its inhabitants. Seaguards often 
lead units of marines. 


Demihumans as Demipaladins 


According to the PH, only humans can be pal- 
adins. But, using the rules in this book, a DM may 
allow paladin-like characters of other races in an 
AD&D® campaign. Lacking the necessary qualities 
to become paladins in the truest sense, these other 
races are subject to specific limitations and are 
known as demipaladins. 

A demipaladin is a fighter/cleric who gains pal- 
adin-like powers from his deity after completing 
special quests for his church. A demipaladin may 
be a dwarf, gnome, elf, half-elf, or halfling. Any 
character desiring to become a demipaladin must 
be lawful good from the character’s generation and 
have all the ability-score requirements of paladins. 
The character is allowed to gain a 10% bonus on 
experience in his fighter or cleric class if his 
Strength or Wisdom score (respectively) is 16 or 
better (Charisma, of course, must be 17 or better). 
The character must also adhere to all ethos require- 


ments, such as strictures, edicts, and so on, from 
the start of play. 

The character attacks as per his fighter level, 
makes saving throws as either a fighter or cleric 
(whichever class produces the better score), and 
gains weapon and nonweapon proficiency slots for 
both of his classes as he gains levels. Experience is 
divided between the fighter and cleric classes as 
per the usual rules. Cleric spells are gained as nor- 
mal, though the spells the demipaladin may use are 
restricted to those listed in this supplement. A 
demipaladin turns undead as per his cleric level. 
The level limits for demihuman fighter and cleric 
classes are as given in the DMG, pages 14-15 (see 
Table 7 therein), so a demipaladin has definite dis- 
advantages at higher levels compared to a human 
paladin. 

Each demipaladin must take a kit as described 
in this text. The DM should rule on the appropri- 
ateness of each kit to the campaign setting and 
available equipment and mounts (e.g., a halfling 
could be a skyrider if a very small pegasus is 
found, but not a wyrmslayer if no dragons are in 
the area). New kits, as noted later, may be created 
and taken. 

The power-gaining quests given to the demipal- 
adin must be undertaken immediately whenever 
the character gains the ability to cast spells from a 
clerical level above the first—e.g., at 3rd level when 
second-level spells are gained, at 5th level when 
third-level spells are gained, etc. The nature of each 
quest must be determined by the DM, but each 
should be challenging and full of peril. Some 
quests may require the demipaladin to complete 
the tasks unaided or else assume a major leader- 
ship or combat role if helped by other adventuring 
companions. Such companions must be lawful 
good, though not necessarily of the demipaladin’s 
race and religion. 

If a quest is successfully completed, the demipal- 
adin gains a single paladin-like power of the DM’s 
choice, taken from the following: ability to use pal- 
adin magical items (such as holy swords); detection 
of evil intent; +2 saving-throw bonus; immunity to 
disease; ability to cure disease; ability to lay on 
hands; aura of protection; bonded mount. Racial 


Paladin Kits * 69 


Ne 


level limits will restrict the number of special pow- 
ers gained; e.g., halfling demipaladins, who can 
achieve only the 8th level of ability as clerics, 
would thus gain only three such special powers (at 
3rd, 5th, and 7th levels). 


70 * Chapter Four 


New demipaladin kits, specifically tailored to the 
natures of demihumans, may be designed. Some 
suggestions include: 

Elven Trooper: A mounted guardsman, the 
trooper accompanies elven royalty on fairy rades— 
solemn processions made through elven territory— 
as well as patrolling the kingdom’s boundaries by 
himself or undertaking royal quests. 

Half-Elven Herald: This is the official messenger 
of a human or elven government (often to a coun- 
try of the other race), usually delivering documents 
to dignitaries, issuing public decrees, and locating 
recruits for royal quests. 

Halfling Sheriff: The sheriff is a law-enforce- 
ment agent with authority to make arrests, pass 
sentences, and otherwise ensure the safety of a 
halfling settlement. 

Dwarven Forgelighter: A forgelighter devotes 
his life to taking back dwarven kingdoms and cities 
that were lost to other races (e.g., humans, orcs, 
derro, ete.) by warfare or treachery, re-establishing 
the colonies and defending them until they are self- 
sustaining again. 


Dual-Classed Paladins 


Paladins may be dual-classed. They have access 
to any character kit the DM allows in the campaign. 
To change from a paladin to another class, the pal- 
adin must have a minimum score of 15 in Strength, 
Constitution, and Wisdom (he already has an 
acceptably high Charisma score). He must have a 
score of 17 or better in the prime requisites of the 
new class. 

Note that a paladin wishing to become dual- 
classed can’t dual-class with any of the warrior 
classes, nor with thieves (due to alignment restric- 
tions) or wizards (wizards can’t wear armor). In 
most cases, the cleric is the only viable option for a 
dual-classed paladin. 


A character from another class who wants to 
convert to a paladin must have a minimum score of 
15 in the prime requisites and a score of 17 or better 
in Strength, Dexterity, Wisdom, and Charisma. A 
character of any lawful good class other than a 
warrior may convert to a paladin. 


Proficiencies 


We strongly recommend using nonweapon profi- Gaming* 1 Cha 0 
ciencies in your campaign, particularly if you're Healing* 2 Wis -2 
incorporating the character kits from Chapter 4. Heraldry 1 Int 0 
This chapter lists all of the paladin’s nonweapon Herbalism 2 Int -2 
proficiencies from the PH, describes a few new pro- Hunting* 1 Wis -1 
ficiencies, and clarifies some old ones. Jousting 1 Dex +2 

Languages, Ancient 1 Int 0 
Compiled Proficiencies Tanguay Modern 1 Int : 0 
aw 1 Wis 0 

All of the nonweapon proficiencies associated Leatherworking 1 Int 0 
with the Warrior, Priest, and General groups are Local History 1 Cha 0 
available to the paladin. Table 23 compiles these Mining 2 Wis -3 
proficiencies, along with the new paladin proficien- Mountaineering 1 NA NA 
cies discussed in this chapter. Table 23 also lists the Musical Instrument 1 Dex -1 
slot costs for each proficiency. Paladins may acquire Navigation 1 Int -2 
proficiencies from the Wizard and Rogue groups Oratory 1 Cha 0 
by spending one slot beyond the listed cost. Poetry 1 Int -2 

Pottery 1 Dex -2 
Table 23: Nonweapon Proficiencies Reading Wettig i ie ie 
Proficiency Slots Rel. Ability Mod. 2 Wis -2 
Agriculture 1 Int 0 I 1 Wis +3 
Ancient History 1 Int = Rope Use 1 Dex 0 
Animal Handling* 1 Wis -1 Running 1 Con -6 
Animal Lore* 1 Int 0 Seamanship 1 Dex + 
Animal Training* 1 Wis 0 Seamstress/Tailor 1 Dex -1 
Armorer* 2 Int -2 Set Snares 1 Dex =} 
Artistic Ability 1 Wis 0 Singing 1 Cha 0 
Astrology 2 Int 0 Spellcraft 1 Int -2 
Blacksmithing 1 Str 0 Stonemasonry 1 Str -2 
Blind-fighting 2 NA NA Survival 4 Int 0 
Bowyer/Fletcher 1 Dex -1 Swimming 1 Str 0 
Brewing* 1 Int 0 Tracking 2 Wis 0 
Bureaucracy 2 Int 0 Weaponsmithing 3 Int -3 
Carpentry 1 Str 0 Weather Sense 1 Wis -l 
Charioteering 1 Dex +2 Weaving 1 Int -1 
Cobbling 1 Dex 0 
Cooking 1 Int 0 * These proficiencies have special applications 
Dancing 1 Dex 0 for paladins, explained in the “Clarifications and 
Diagnostics 1 Wis -1 Modifications” section. 
Direction Sense 1 Wis +1 Bold-faced entries indicate new proficiencies. 
Endurance 2 Con 0 d proficiencies require the player to select 
Engineering 2 Int -3 a specific area of specialization. For instance, a 
Etiquette 1 Cha 0 character with the Musical Instrument proficiency 
Fire-building 1 Wis -1 must specialize in one particular instrument. Each 
Fishing* 1 Wis z. additional slot spent enables him to specialize in 


ee 


Proficiencies * 71 


another instrument. 
NA = Not applicable. 


Clarifications and Modifications 


The following information supplements the pro- 
ficiency descriptions given in Chapter 5 of the PH. 
Whenever a proficiency bonus is indicated, the 
bonus is added to the normal check modifier. For 
example, when a paladin receives a +2 bonus for 
using the animal training proficiency to train his 
bonded mount, the modifier is increased from the 
normal 0 to +2. 

Animal Handling: As explained in Chapter 2, a 
paladin can soothe his bonded mount automati- 
cally; the Animal Handling proficiency isn’t neces- 
sary. The proficiency may be used normally to calm 
other animals of the same species as the bonded 
mount, as well as other pack animals and beasts of 
burden. 

Animal Lore: Although this proficiency allows a 
character to imitate animal sounds, this ability nei- 
ther helps nor hinders the paladin when summon- 
ing his bonded mount. 

Animal Training: A paladin doesn’t need the 
Animal Training proficiency to teach tricks and 
tasks to his bonded mount. However, if he has this 
proficiency in the same species as the bonded 
mount, he earns a +2 bonus to his checks when 
training the bonded mount. The bonus applies to 
the bonded mount only, not to other animals of the 
same species. Should the paladin acquire a differ- 
ent bonded mount, he earns the bonus only if he 
has the Animal Training proficiency in the same 
species as the new mount. 

Armorer: This proficiency also allows characters 
to construct barding for mounts, presuming the 
availability of materials and facilities. Table 24 
gives the time required to make barding for war 
horses, and mounts of comparable size. For smaller 
or larger mounts, the DM should adjust the times 
accordingly. Elephant barding might require an 
extra week or two; barding for a small mule might 
take a week less. Subtract two weeks for all types of 
half barding. 


l aaaaaaaaaaaaaasasasasasasasassssssmsmsiÃõ 


72 * Chapter Five 


Table 24: 
Barding Construction Times 


Barding Type AC Time (weeks)* 
Leather, Padded 6 4 
Scale, Brigandine, 5 8 
Ring, Studded Leather 
Chain 4 10 
Banded, Splint 3 14 
Plate 2 16 
Field Plate 1 18 
Full Plate 0 20 


As with character armor, barding may be flawed. 
After creating the barding, the DM secretly makes a 
proficiency check. If the check fails but is within 4 
of a successful result, the character believes the 
armor is normal, until in combat it functions as 1 
AC worse (flawed chain barding has an effective 
AC of 5). Flawed armor breaks on a natural roll of 
19 or 20 in melee combat; the animal’s AC then 
worsens by 4, though it can’t be reduced below AC 
10 (if flawed leather barding breaks, it has an effec- 
tive AC of 9). As long as a mount wears broken 
armor, its movement rate is halved, and it suffers a 
—4 penalty to its attack rolls. A character can remove 
broken armor from a mount in 2-8 (2d4) rounds. 

Because barding must be fitted exactly, a set of 
barding styled for one mount won’t work for any 
other animal, even of the same species. 

Brewing: A paladin whose ethos forbids partak- 
ing of strong drink isn’t likely to have this profi- 
ciency. A paladin with a more liberal ethos may use 
this proficiency to prepare drinks for others, even if 
he declines to partake himself. 

Fishing: A paladin whose ethos demands rever- 
ence for life in all forms should refrain from fishing 
for recreation. However, he may still fish for food. 

Healing: A paladin’s ability to heal by laying on 
hands (see Chapter 2) operates independently of 
this proficiency. A paladin with the Healing profi- 
ciency may use it instead of or in addition to laying 
hands on a damaged character. For example, a 2nd- 
level paladin with the healing proficiency could lay 
on hands to heal 4 points of damage, then use his 
healing proficiency to heal an additional 1d3 points. 


NOCD WNN 


Hunting: A paladin whose ethos restricts any type 
of unnecessary killing will refuse to hunt merely for 
sport. Unless he has religious or cultural objections to 
eating meat, he hunts for food. Further, he stalks and 
kills dangerous animals that pose a threat to himself, 
his companions, or other innocent people. 

Gaming: A paladin whose ethos includes moral 
objections to gambling will not engage in games of 
chance. Using this proficiency to cheat is a serious 
ethos violation. 

Riding, Airborne and Land-based: When riding 
his bonded mount, a paladin automatically has all of 
the benefits of the relevant Riding proficiency; he 
doesn’t need the proficiency itself (see Chapter 3). 
But if he has the Riding profi 
bonus when making all associated checks with his 
mount. For instance, if he has a war horse bonded 
mount and the Land-based Riding proficiency, he 
earns a +2 bonus when attempting to vault into the 
saddle when the mount is moving. If he has a pega 
sus bonded mount and the Airborne Riding profi- 
ciency, he suffers a -2 penalty (instead of 4) when 


iency, he gains a +2 


making checks to see if he falls from his saddle after 
suffering damage. The bonuses apply only when 
riding the bonded mount. When riding a creature of 
the same species as the bonded mount, use the nor- 
mal Riding proficiency rules. 


New Proficiencies 


All paladins are eligible to acquire these profi- 
ciencies, regardless of their character kits, provid- 
ing they spend the points listed on Table 23. Char- 
acters belonging to the Crossover Groups listed at 
the end of each description may buy the profi- 
ciency at the indicated cost. Groups not listed may 
buy the proficiency by spending one additional 
point beyond the listed cost. All of these are non- 
weapon proficiencies except Jousting. 


Bureaucracy 


This proficiency encompasses a working knowl- 
edge of governmental protocol and the skills neces- 


i 


Proficiencies * 73 


sary to navigate bureaucratic organizations. A 
character with this proficiency knows which ofi 
cial to approach and the best time to approach him 
(a tax collector’s aide may have better access to 
information than the tax collector himself; a city 
clerk may be less harried and more helpful at the 
beginning of the month than at the end). He knows 
where government records are kept and the proce- 
dures for examining them. He knows how to cir- 
cumvent sluggish or uncooperative bureaucrats. 
He obtains permits and other government docu- 
mentation in half the normal time. No proficiency 
checks are needed for any of these functions. 

A character can also use Bureaucracy to turn the 
system against someone else. A successful profi- 
ciency check doubles the amount of time to make a 
government decision, causes a permit to be i 
under the wrong name, or temporary misplac 
important document. A paladin must be careful 
with this ability, to avoid breaking the law and vio- 
lating his ethos. 

The Bureaucracy proficiency covers the govern- 
mental organizations in a particular region, usually 
the character’s homeland. He may spend addi- 
tional slots to expand the proficiency to other 
regions. Official organizations include government 
councils, regulatory boards, and church hierar- 
chies. The proficiency is only effective when deal- 
ing with organizations of 10 or more members. 

Crossover Groups: Priest, Rogue. 


1ed 
san 


Diagnostics 


Both the Healing and Diagnostics proficiencies 
aid victims of trauma and disease. But while the 
Healing proficiency can be used to restore lost hit 
points, Diagnostics is mainly concerned with deter- 
mining the cause of the damage and the prognos 
Diagnostics alone will not heal damage. 

With a successful proficiency check, a character 
becomes aware all of the following information 
applicable to a particular patient: 

¢ If the patient has suffered physical damage, the 
character can determine the extent of the damage, 
though he may not be able to ascertain the exact 
cause (if a victim was attacked by a tiger, the char- 


eee — 


74 © Chapter Five 


acter will know that the victim was clawed by a 
large animal, but not necessarily the species). The 
character can recommend treatments and offer 
prognoses, as with victims of diseases. 

e If the patient has been poisoned, the character 
knows the antidote (if one exists) and how to pre- 
pare it. Note that even if the character knows how 
to prepare an antidote, he may not have access to 
the necessary ingredients. 

* The character knows the name of the disease, 
its cause, how long the patient has had it, and the 
optimum treatment. If the patient is treated as spec- 
ified, he suffers the mildest form of the disease and 
its shortest duration. If the patient declines treat- 
ment, or the treatment doesn’t work, the character 
can determine the patient's prognosis with reason- 
able accuracy. (“The patient will recover by the end 
of the month.” “The patient will become perma- 
nently blind if not treated within a year.”) The char- 
acter may diagnose both natural and magical 
diseases. 

* When examining a corpse, the character can 
determine how the victim died and approximately 
how long it’s been dead. If the victim died of 
unnatural causes, the character will only be able to 
determine the general circumstances of the death. 
For example, if an evil wizard incinerated the vic- 
tim with a fireball, a successful diagnostics check 
might reveal that the victim burned to death very 
rapidly as a result of some type of magic, but not 
that it was affected by a fireball. 

A character with this proficiency may diagnose 
himself or any other character, or animals, except 
for supernatural creatures (such as a ghost or skele- 
ton) and creatures from another plane of existence 
(like a xorn or aerial servant). He may attempt to 
diagnose an individual or creature only once. 

If a character also has the Healing proficiency, he 
may modify all Diagnostic checks by +1. 

Crossover Groups: Priest. 


Jousting 


This proficiency includes the combat skills neces- 
sary for a successful joust, as well as the manners, 
behavior, and flair needed to impress an audience. 


To take this proficiency, a character must first have 
a weapon specialization in the jousting lance. 

A character with this proficiency modifi 
attack rolls in a jousting match by +2 (see the “Rou- 
tine Activities” section of Chapter 7 for jousting 
rules), The use of this proficiency presumes that the 
character has an adequate lance, shield, and mount. 

Should a character win a match, his sty 
formance favorbly impresses the audience. Audi- 
ence members with a special interest in the match 
(such as royalty, gamblers, or potential paramours) 
who later encounter the jouster modify their rea 
tion rolls by +2. If he wins several matches in a 
tournament, the bonus doesn’t rise above +2. If he 
later loses a match or two in the same tournament, 
he still earns the bonus. However, if the jouster has 
an especially disastrous day—say, if he follows a 
winning joust with a long string of losses—the 
audience may dismiss the win as a fluke, and the 
DM may cancel the bonus. 

Crossover Groups: Warrior. 


Law 


A character with this proficiency is thoroughly 
familiar with the legal system of his homeland (or 
any other region of his choice). He knows which 
laws are rigorously enforced (illegal gambling may 
be tolerated in one region, aggre 
in another), and routine legal procedures (such as 
how to file suit against a debtor). Understanding 
nuances of the law, such as interpreting fine points 
of a contract, require proficiency checks. 

A succeSsful proficiency check also allows the 
character to conduct a strong defense when he or a 
companion stands accused of a crime. If the judge 
is fair-minded and the evidence of the crime is 
ambiguous, a successful check will sway the ver- 
dict in the defendant's favor; either he receives the 
smallest possible sentence or fine, or is completely 
vindicated. However, if the evidence clearly calls 
for a conviction or the judge is corrupt, a successful 
proficiency check won't help. 

A character may spend additional slots to know 
the legal systems of other regions. Alternately, he 
may spend slots to acquire expertise in a particular 


ively prosecuted 


area of the law, such as tax codes or property rights. 
Expertise assumes a broad understanding of the 
chosen area, requiring checks only in extreme 
in: 


ances. 
Crossover Groups: Warrior, Priest. 


Law and Paladins 


A paladin with the Law proficiency won't 
defend anyone he believes to be guilty, includ- 
ing his own companions. Though a paladin 
won't knowingly break the law, he may take 
advantage of this proficiency to defend himself 
if wrongly accused of a crime; a failed defense 
may result in his conviction. 


Oratory 


Through inspiring speech and sheer force of per- 
sonality, a character with this proficiency can influ- 
ence the opinion of a crowd. Any crowd may be 
influenced, so long as they speak the same language 
as the orator, and can see and hear him clearly. 

To use this proficiency, the orator must address 
the crowd on one specific topic. For instance, he may 
attempt to persuade them to rise up against a local 
despot, leave town because of an impending danger 
(a monster on the outskirts of town, an advancing 
evil army), or help search for a missing child. 

Before the orator speaks, the DM must determine 
the size of the crowd, their level, and their general 
attitude toward the orator and the topic he’s ad- 
dressing. For small crowds—say, less than five 
members—determine levels and attitudes individ- 
ually. Break larger crowds into groups; decide an 
average level and attitude for each group. Use 
Table 59 in Chapter 11 of the DMG to access atti- 
tudes about the topic; the crowd may be Friendly, 
Indifferent, Cautious, Threatened, or Hostile. 

Before any rolls are made, or the orator begins 
speaking, the player tells the DM if the orator will 
be attempting to adjust the crowd’s opinion one 
level up or down on Table 59. The orator then 
speaks to the crowd; he must speak uninterrupted 
for at least 10 rounds. 


eee 


Proficiencies * 75 


When the orator finishes speaking, roll the Ora- 
tory proficiency check. If the check succeeds, make 
an Intelligence check for each individual in a small 
crowd, or for each small group in a large crowd. 
Modify these rolls by a -1 penalty for each 1 by 
which the orator made the Oratory check. For 
instance, if the Orator needed a 10 to succeed and 
rolled a 5, each Intelligence check takes a -5 penalty. 

Individuals or small groups who fail their throws 
have their opinions about the topic adjusted one 
level on Table 59 in the DMG. An Indifferent opin- 
ion may become Friendly or Cautious, a Cautious 
opinion may become Indifferent or Threatening. 
However, all audience members who fail their rolls 
have their opinions adjusted the same way. The 
opinions of those who succeed in their rolls remain 
unchanged by the character’s Oratory; however, 
practically speaking, peer pressure can produce the 
same results. The DM may override any die roll 
that produces inappropriate results; for example, 
an NPC in the crowd who has a long-standing feud 
with the orator may be unswayed, regardless of the 
orator’s eloquence. 

A character may use this proficiency only once 
on a given crowd. Should the composition of the 
crowd change to include many new members, the 
character may make another oratory attempt, pro- 
viding he speaks on a different topic. 

Note that this proficiency elicits only modest 
changes in attitude. If a crowd feels Indifferent 
towards a despot, an orator may be able to stir up 
some ambiguous feelings about him, but he won't 
be able to convince them to immediately storm the 
despot's castle. If the crowd is suspicious of a par- 
ticular religion, the orator may persuade them to be 
more tolerant, but he shouldn't expect any sponta- 
neous conversions. 

Crossover Groups: Warrior, Priest. 


Poetry 


A character taking this proficiency specializes in 
either lyric or narrative poetry. Lyric poetry ex- 
presses thoughts and feelings, and includes bal- 
lads, sonnets, odes, and hymns. Narrative poetry 
tells stories in verse, some true, some fictional. A 


76 * Chapter Five 


character spending two slots may specialize in both 
forms. 

The proficiency enables the character to judge 
the quality of poetry in his specialty. He also knows 
a sizeable repertoire of poems and can recite them 
with spellbinding skill. No proficiency checks are 
required for these applications. 

The character can also compose poems in his 
speciality; a successful check means the poem is of 
exceptional quality. If the character has the Read- 
ing/ Writing proficiency, he can record his poems. 

Crossover Groups: General. 


Poetry for Paladins 


With permission from the DM, a paladin 
with the Poetry proficiency may offer a compo- 
sition to his church (or other designated recipi- 
ent) instead of a tithe. The paladin must inform 
the church a month in advance if he intends to 
offer a composition; either lyric or narrative 
poetry is acceptable. If the church (that is, the 
DM) disapproves, the paladin must pay his 
normal tithe. If the church approves, the pal- 
adin may present a composition when his tithe 
is normally due. 

The composition must be presented at the 
church or to a church official at a pre-arranged 
location. The paladin then makes a Poetry profi- 
ciency check. If the check fails, the composition 
is deemed unworthy; the normal tithe must be 
paid immediately. If the check succeeds, the DM 
determines the value of the composition; the 
value is equal to 3420 gp. If the value is greater 
than or equal to the normal tithe, no tithe is 
required that month. The paladin doesn’t 
receive any “change” if the value is more than 
his tithe; the excess value is forfeited, 

If the value is less than the tithe, the paladin 
subtracts the value from the tithe, then pays the 
difference (if the paladin owes 20 gp and the 
value of the composition is 15 gp, he must pay 


5 gp). A paladin may exercise this option as 


often as he likes. 


Paladins take their equipment seriously, and 
seek to own the best that money can buy. Not only 
does their equipment reflect the honor of their sta- 
tion; for some it symbolizes their principles. 

e The shield represents the paladin’s vow to up- 
hold his ethos. 

e The sword represents the two constituencies 
he’s sworn to defend—one edge of the sword rep- 
resents the privileged class, the other the common 
people. 

* Armor represents loyalty to the state. Just as 
his armor protects his body, so must he protect his 
monarch. 

e The helmet represents loyalty to the religion. 
Just as his helmet protects his head, so must he pro- 
tect his church. 

e Clothing, well-crafted and immaculately clean, 
represents purity of spirit. 


Standard Equipment 


Following is a list of standard equipment owned 
(or at least desired) by most paladins. Usually, pal- 
adins purchase this equipment with their own 
funds. A frugal paladin tries to maintain his pos- 
sessions in top condition so he seldom has to invest 
in replacements. 


Armor 


All types of armor are available to the paladin. 
Given a choice, most prefer the protection and pres- 
tige of full plate. However, because of the expense 
of plate armor, some opt for banded or splint, while 
others settle for the cheaper and readily available 
chain mail. Leather, studded leather, and padded— 
including magical versions—are generally avoided, 
as these armor types tend to be associated with 
characters of lesser status. A discriminating paladin 
may prefer to wear ordinary scale mail rather stud- 
ded leather +2. 

In a typical medieval campaign world, paladins 
favor three armor types: hauberk/helmet combina- 
tions, chain, and plate. 

Hauberk and helmet. Destitute paladins, those 
from primitive cultures, or those just beginning 


CHAPTER 


Equipment 


their careers sometimes wear only a chain mail 
hauberk (a single piece that covers the chest) and a 
helmet. The paladin often supervises the construc- 
tion of the hauberk or makes it himself, coiling 
wire around a rod, then cutting it down the side to 
make rings. He flattens the rings with a hammer, 
them rivets them together in the shape of a knee- 
length coat with a hood to cover the head. The hel- 
met is usually round or cone-shaped, open in the 
front. The hauberk-helmet combination is cheaper 
than chain mail, but less protective, with an Armor 
Class of 7. 

Chain mail. A hauberk supplemented with leg- 
gings and arm coverings becomes a complete set of 
chain mail (AC 5). A visor may be added to the hel- 
met to protect the face. While inexpensive and rela- 
tively light, chain mail has its drawbacks. The 
weight of chain mail is distributed unevenly on the 
body, straining the shoulders in particular. Even 
the strongest paladin will feel fatigued after wear- 
ing chain mail for more than a day. At the DM’s 
option, any character wearing chain mail for more 
than 24 hours straight suffers a -2 penalty to all 
attack rolls until he removes it and rests for a few 
hours. 

At least once a week, iron chain mail must be 
oiled and polished, a process that can take the bet- 
ter part of an afternoon. Failure to properly care for 
chain mail results in rust (and a reduction of one 
level of AC for each month of neglect). 

Plate. Plate mail (AC 3) adds a breast plate, back 
plate, and strips of metal to areas of the body 
underprotected by chain mail, such as the knees 
and elbows. Metal sheets called pauldrons protect 
the spaces between the arms and the chest. Epaulieres 
(shoulder guards) protect the upper body; gauntlets 
(metal gloves) protect the hands. 

High-level paladins occasionally decorate plate 
mail with gold or silver trim and fasten small jew- 
els to the helmet or the backs of the gauntlets. These 
extravagances are generally compatible with the 
paladin’s ethos, so long as they're intended to re- 
flect the paladin’s station and aren’t used to flaunt 
wealth. Heraldic symbols may be etched or painted 
on any section of the armor. 

Plate mail requires polishing and oiling, but 


e 


Equipment * 77 


because it consists of solid sections rather than tiny 
rings, it’s more resistant to rust. Though heavier 
than chain mail, plate mail fits better and is more 
comfortable, making fatigue less a factor. The illus- 
tration in this chapter identifies various pieces of a 
paladin’s plate mail armor, along with the basic 
pieces of mount barding. 


Shield 


Most paladins carry medium shields, which offer 
maximum protection against front and flank attacks 
and are light enough to be carried on horseback. 
Made of wood and covered in thick leather, the 
shield is shaped like a triangle with a round top 
and pointed bottom. Its surface curves inward. The 
shield extends about 4-5 feet from top to bottom 
and hangs from the paladin’s neck by a strap. He 
grips it in in his left hand (or right hand, if he’s left- 
handed) with a second strap secured to the shield’s 
inner surface. 

Some paladins carry oblong, rectangular, round 
or even pentagonal shields, Shields may be deco- 
rated with gold or silver trim, dotted with precious 
jewels, emblazoned with heraldic symbols, or 
painted in bright colors. 


Weapons 


A paladin may master any weapon, but most feel 
unarmed without a sword (long, two-handed, bas- 
tard, or short, in that order of preference), a lance 
(medium or heavy, depending on the size of the 
mount), and a dagger. A paladin typically keeps his 
sword in a wooden scabbard covered in leather, 
strapped to the left side of his belt (or to the right 
side if left-handed). The dagger hangs from his belt 
on the opposite side of his scabbard. 

Other weapons favored by paladins include the 
horseman’s flail, horseman’s mace, horseman’s 
pick, battle axe, and scimitar. Paladins tend to 
avoid using missile weapons, as they’re difficult to 
use effectively on horseback. 

A jousting lance, though desirable, may be too 
expensive. Instead, a paladin may opt for a lance 
cup, a blunted cap of wood that fits over the end of 


— OO 


78 * Chapter Six 


an ordinary lance, making it suitable for tourna- 
ments. Lance cups, however, are notoriously unde- 
pendable; there is a 5% chance per joust (roll 1 on 
1d20) that the cup will detach and fall off. When 
this occurs, the officials interrupt the joust and the 
contestants must start over. A jouster who repeat- 
edly loses his lance cup may risk disqualification 
from the tournament. 


Clothing and Special Items 


When choosing clothes, the paladin strives for 
both utility and elegance. He favors bold colors 
(blue, red, green and violet) and, when he can 
afford them, rich fabrics (silk and velvet in particu- 
lar). Because a paladin is often judged by his 
appearance, spending money on formal attire usu- 
ally isn’t considered an ethos violation, 

An ideal wardrobe, which may be acquired a 
piece at a time over the course of a paladin’s career, 
cor s of the following: 

* Two loose-fitting silk or linen shirts with full 
sleeves. 

* Two pairs breeches or trousers, made of wool, 
cotton, or linen, tailored to fit tightly to the legs 
(loose-fitting breeches tend to be associated with 


peasants and commoners). The breeches are usu- 
ally ankle-length and brightly colored. 

+ Armor lining (made of soft leather or padded 
fabric, worn beneath chain mail to prevent chafing. 

e Two pairs of cotton undergarments. 

e Two pairs of silken hose and garters. 

e A pair of riding boots. 

e A pair of leather shoes, usually pointed at the 
toes and fastened at the ankle with straps and 
buckles. 

e Two knee-length tunics, usually sleeveless, 
slipped over the head. Tunics may be decorated 
with colorful patterns of stripes and circles, and 
possibly feathers or small gems. 

e A surcoat (outer tunic), either sleeveless or 
head. The surcoat is usually lined with rabbit, 
squirrel, or other light fur, and padded at the shoul- 
ders. Tassels, ribbons, and brocade are common. 

+ A lightweight mantle (a sleeveless coat made 
from an oval piece of cloth) for the spring and sum- 


mer, made of cotton or silk. The garment is rectangu- 
lar or semicircular in shape, wrapped around the 
body, and secured at the neck with a chain or buckle. 

e A heavy winter mantle lined with beaver, fox, 
or other thick fur. 

e A full cape made of wool, cotton, or lambskin, 
fastened around the neck with a chain or leather 
strap. High-level paladins may prefer a silken cape 
in black, blue, red, or violet, lined with red or black 
velvet. 

A wide leather belt with a metal buckle. 

* A wool, cotton, or felt cap. 

e A ceremonial coif (a tight-fitting cap covering, 
the hair and ears, tied beneath the chin) made of 
linen or silk, and decorated with embroidery, feath- 
ers, or golden lace. A ceremonial coif is often 
required for state banquets and other formal occ 
sions. The equivalent for females is called a wimple. 

A cons 
including the following items as part of his stan- 
dard gear. These are in addition to lanterns, rope, 


ientious paladin should also consider 


and other equipment necessary for long trips or 
specific quests. 

* Two cotton or woolen towels (one for washing, 
one to use as a mat for eating). 

e Formal dinnerware, including eating utensils, 
a cup, a plate, and a goblet. Because paladins may 
have to furnish their own service at formal events, 
they should buy quality items made of silver, crys 
tal, and porcelain. 

e Complete tack for the mount, including bit, 
bridle, harness, horseshoes, saddle, and full bard- 
ing. 

e Two heavy blankets, one used for a bed, the 
other to cover the mount at night. 

e A mirror (necessary for grooming). 


Formal Attire for Female Paladins 


Female paladins are free to wear all of the above 
clothing (assuming no cultural reasons to the con- 
trary). For formal occasions, a female paladin may 
instead wear a floor-length tunic called a kirtle, 
which fits snugly above the hips and billows 
around the legs. A surcoat and cloak may be worn 
as outer garments. Females may also wear hose 


above the knee, secured by garters or tied with rib- 
bons. Footwear is similar for males and females, 
though the kirtles conceal all but the toes. 


Badges, Standards, and Crests 


Paladins often embellish their armor, clothing, 
weapons, and shields to identify them on the bat- 
tlefield, indicate rank, or symbolize allegiance to a 
king or church. Monarchs sometime present em- 
bellishments to recognize outstanding military ser- 
vice. Embellishments representing the family name 
may be handed down from parent to child. As a 
rule, embellishments can’t be purchased; they must 
be awarded or earned. Some example: 

Badge. This is an emblem representing the pal- 
adin’s homeland, family, or order (see Chapter 9). 
A badge may be a physical object, such as pin or a 
medal, or it may be a small design embroidered in 
a tunic or engraved on a shield. Typical badge sym- 
bols include humans with animal heads, a flower 
or plant with a crown, or a weapon with wings. 

Standard. A standard is a flag with a Y-shaped 
end, attached to a pole or staff. The standard bears 
the colors, heraldic symbols, or insignia of the pal- 
adin’s government or church. A standard becomes 
a banner when the end is cut off to form a square. A 
smaller version of the standard, called a pennon, 
may be attached to the end of a lance. 

Crest. A crest may be a bundle of short leather 
strips, one or more feathers, a wooden carving, a 
tassel, or any other small object attached to a pal- 
adin’s helmet. The crest is usually the same color as 
the paladin’s shield. Crests are often worn in tour- 
naments to help observers tell one paladin from 
another, though many paladins wear their crests all 
the time. A crest may also be added to the halter of 
a war horse. An abstraction of the crest may be dis- 
played on a shield or standard. 


Additional Equipment 


Canon. The canon is the sacred text of the charac- 
ter’s faith. It included prayers, guidelines for behav- 
ior, historical summaries, expectations of the deity, 
and other theological material. A canon is not a spell 


a 


Equipment * 79 


book, nor does it possess any magical qualities. 

Because a canon can be very expensive, charac- 
ters can sometimes make arrangements with their 
church to purchase a copy on installment, adding a 
few extra gold pieces to their monthly tithe to pay 
it off. Generous churches may loan their followers a 
copy of the canon indefinitely. However, should the 
canon become lost or destroyed, the character may 
be responsible for the replacement cost. 

Coat of arms. This term usually refers to the 
shield bearing the paladin’s heraldic symbols, or to 
the symbols alone. But it’s also the name for a spe- 
cific article of clothing. A coat of arms is a white 
tunic worn over the armor, emblazoned with the 
paladin’s insignia. The coat identifies the paladin 
and also protects him from the heat of the sun, 
which can be unbearable when wearing uncovered 
armor, 

Cosmetic kit. Helpful when preparing for formal 
affairs, a typical cosmetic kit includes a vial of 
sheep fat to make the skin glisten, powdered rouges 
to tint the cheeks white or pink, lightly perfumed 
talc for the body, and a depilatory salve to smooth 
the face. 

Horse grooming kit. For efficient and thorough 
horse grooming, the kit includes a currycomb (a 
brush with stiff bristles to remove dirt from the 
coat), a shedding blade (a flexible, serrated blade to 
remove loose body hair), a body brush (for dirt 
removal from the legs, fetlocks, and other areas 
where a currycomb is inappropriate), hoof picks (to 
remove pebbles and debris from the hooves), and a 
mane and tail comb (to clean and tease the hair). 

Similar kits exist for griffons and other mounts. 

Mantling. Resembling tufts of feathers or fans of 
leaves, mantling consists of cotton or linen strips 
lined with thin layers of metal. Mantling attaches to 
the sides of a helmet and shields the wearer’s eyes 
from the bright sun. It also prevents rust and helps 
deflect weapon attacks. (If an opponent attempts a 
called shot against a character wearing a mantling, 
he suffers a -5 penalty to his attack roll instead of a 
—4 penalty; see Chapter 9 in the DMG for more 
about called shots.) Mantling is often painted the 
same color as the wearer’s shield. 

Sachet. This is a small bag containing a mixture 


80 + Chapter Six 


of flower petals, herbs, and spices that adds a pleas- 
ant scent to a character’s clothing (nice when no 
deodorant is around). A sachet can be placed in a 
closet or trunk, or carried in a pocket. 

Spurs. With spurs, the rider can control his 
mount with less effort and give commands with a 
slight motion of his foot. The best spurs—those that 
avoid damage to the horse—have blunt, wheel- 
shaped rowels instead of points. Dressage spurs have 
sharp, curved points, slightly angled toward the 
rider to prevent accidental scrapes. Spurs with gold 
or silver plating are available at 5-10 times the 
listed price. 


Table 25: Miscellaneous Equipment 


Item Cost Weight (Ib.) 
Armor lining 5 gp 5 
Canon* 50-500 gp 1-5 
Cape 

Wool 7sp 4 

Silk and velvet 50 gp 2 
Chain mail 50 gp 35 

(hauberk and helmet only) 
Coat of arms 8sp . 
Coif, ceremonial 2gp isi 
Cosmetics kit 7 sp ” 
Dinnerware, formal*** 15 gp 
Horse grooming kit 1gp 1 
Mantle 

Spring 1gp sis 

Winter* 10-30 gp 1-5 
Mantling 2sp on 
Lance cup Isp ee 
Sachet* 1-3 gp * 
Spurs 1gp ial 
Surcoat, fur* 20-40 gp 5-10 


* Canon prices and weights depend on the book’s 
size and binding. Garment prices and weights vary 
according to the type of fur used. Sachet prices 
depend on the contents; exotic mixtures are more 
expensive. 

** Weight is inconsequential (a few ounces). 

*** Includes silver-plated utensils, a crystal gob- 
let, and a porcelain plate with gold trim. 


Equipment * 81 


New Magical Equipment 


Barding of aerial excellence: This resembles a 
normal set of chain barding for a horse, elephant, 
or other species of land mount. When worn by a 
bonded mount, the barding sprouts metallic wings 
approximately twice as long as the length of the 
mount; a command word from the bonded mount’s 
paladin triggers this effect. The metal wings enable 
the mount to fly at a speed equal to its normal 
ground speed, at Maneuverability Class C. Further, 
the barding of aerial excellence imbues the mount 
with the necessary flying skill; it can fly as if the 
wings were part of its body. 

A paladin without the airborne riding profi- 
ciency makes attacks at a -2 penalty when riding a 
mount with the barding of aerial excellence. To avoid 
being unseated, he must make Dexterity checks as 
determined by the DM. A paladin with the air- 
borne riding proficiency makes normal attacks. 

The wings last for 1-4 hours; the mount senses 
when the wings are about to disappear, giving it 
time to safely land. The barding of aerial excellence 
can sprout wings once per day; otherwise, it func- 
tions as normal barding. It also functions as normal 
barding on animals other than bonded mour 

Bridle of calming: This leather bridle, designed 
to fit a specific species of mount, makes the mount 
immune to all types of magical fear. For morale 
purposes, the bridle of calming gives the mount a 
effective moral rating of Fearless (19-20). A bridle of 
calming may be used on both bonded and normal 
mounts. 

Crest of summoning: When attached to the pal- 
adin’s helmet. the crest of summoning enables the 
paladin to mentally summon his bonded mount at 
a radius equal to 10 miles per level of the paladin (a 
6th-level paladin can summon his bonded mount 
within a 60-mile radius). If the bonded mount has 
been captured or is disabled, the crest causes a dull 
throb behind the paladin’s eyes, indicating that the 
mount is unable to respond; however, the crest 
won't indicate the location of the mount. 

Oil of tempering: When this oil is applied to 
entire suit of chain or other metallic armor, the 
armor’s AC is improved by 1 for 24 hours; for 


—eeSSSSSSSGSeM 


82 * Chapter Six 


example, chain mail armor (AC 5) will have an 
effective AC of 4. The AC can’t be improved beyond 
AC 0. It takes 1-2 hours to completely coat a suit of 
armor with oil of tempering. 

Sheath of security: Less than a foot long, this 
leather sheath appears to the perfect size for a dag- 
ger. In fact, a pointed weapon of any size—such as 
sword, spear, or lance—may be carried in the sheath 
of security. When the tip of the weapon is placed in 
the sheath, the entire weapon shrinks to the size of 
a normal dagger. The sheath holds the shrunken 
weapon tightly; the weapon can only be removed 
when a command word is spoken, or when affected 
by knock or a similar spell. The weapon retains its 
shrunken size until the tip leaves the sheath. It then 
expands to its normal size. 

Tithing bag: This is a small purse made of black 
velvet, closed with a drawstring. Any coins, gems, 
or treasure placed in the bag are instantaneously 
teleported to the character’s church or other chari- 
table institution. The character keeps a small chip 
of stone, wood, or glass from the designated insti- 
tution in the bottom of the bag to indicate the desti- 
nation. It otherwise has a capacity of 20 gp. A 
tithing bag functions for lawful good characters 
only. 

Tunic of comfort: This light cloth garment may 
be worn over chain mail or other uncomfortable 
armor. The tunic of comfort distributes the weight of 
the armor evenly over the body, enabling the char- 
acter to wear his armor indefinitely without chaf- 
ing or fatigue. 


Holy Swords 


Each of these holy swords has all the special char- 
acteristics discussed in Chapter 2, in addition to the 
specific benefits given in their individual descrip- 
tions. The bonuses (+3, +4, and so on) apply to both 
attack and damage rolls. In the hands of any char- 
acter other than a paladin, all of these holy swords 
perform as swords +. 

Sword +3 purifier. When a paladin holds this 
weapon in front of him, he turns undead as a cleric 
of equal level; a 3rd-level paladin turns undead 
with the same effectiveness as a 3rd-level cleric (use 


fis RAN YY 
"As 


| rere ton 


‘a 


Table 19 in Chapter 4). The paladin must be of 3rd 
level or higher to turn undead, with or without this 
sword. Ghosthunters receive no turning bonus. 

The sword provides two benefits to paladins of 
all levels: a +5 bonus against all undead; and +2 
bonus to saving throws against undead magical 
attacks, including a ghoul’s paralyzing touch and a 
vampire’s charm. 

Sword +4 divine protector. This sword alerts the 
paladin to the presence of evil by generating a soft 
hum that only he can hear. The sword detects evil 
within a 60-foot-radius of the paladin, but does not 
indicate the direction or intensity of the source. The 
hum is automatic, so long as the sword remains on 
the paladin’s person. The hum is loud enough to 
awaken the paladin from a normal sleep, alert him 
to an ambush, or warn him of an evil character 
behind his back. Otherwise, the sword has all of the 
benefits and limitations of the paladin’s detect evil 
intent ability, described in Chapter 2. 

Additionally, if the paladin spends one full 
round swinging this sword over his head, all evil 


creatures and characters within a 60-foot-radius 
hear a disturbing sirenlike sound, audible only to 
them. Any affected creature or character who fails 
to save vs. paralyzation will continue to hear the 
siren ringing in his ears for the next 2-5 (1d4+1) 
rounds, with similar effects as a deafness spell (un- 
able to hear any sounds, -1 penalty to surprise 
rolls, and a 20% chance of miscasting spells with 


verbal components). 

Sword +4 invigorator. If the paladin heals a 
damaged creature or character by laying on hands, 
then touches him with this sword, the amount of 
recovered hit points increases by half. For instance, 
if a 6th-level paladin has just restored 12 hit points 
by laying on hands, the sword restores an addi- 
tional 6 points. 

Sword +5 hallowed redeemer. Not only does 
this sword project a 10-foot-diameter circle of 
power, it also causes all evil characters and crea- 
tures within the area of effect to succumb to the 
effects of a fear spell. The fear effects may be avoided 
by a successful saving throw vs. spell. 


ee 


Equipment * 83 


Role-Playing 


What is a paladin like as a person? His statistics 
and special abilities distinguish him from other 
characters, but are his feelings and motivations dif- 
ferent? What does he do with his time? Where does 
he get his money? And how do you get to be a pal- 
adin, anyway? 

Because no two paladins are alike, there are no 
fixed answers to these questions, just as there are 
no fixed rules for designing personalities. As you 
look over the topics in this chapter, consider how 
they apply to your paladin character. Think about 
where he came from and what he wants from life, 
what makes him happy or miserable. Focus on the 
basics, and don’t worry too much about details. 
Remember that a paladin’s personality isn’t set in 
concrete, but will grow and change as he responds 
to new experiences. 


Demographics 


It’s fair to say that most campaigns have fewer 
paladins than any other character class. In part, this 
is due to the character generation rules. Unless the 
DM allows players to use Table 2 in Chapter 1, it’s 
difficult to roll up the ability requirement numbers 
in the first place; it’s hard enough to roll a 17 for 
Charisma, let alone the minimums for Strength, 
Constitution, and Wisdom. But remember, there’s a 
reason for those numbers. Only the strongest, wis- 
est, and most committed persons meet the demands 
of paladinhood, and the dice automatically weed 
out unqualified candidates. 

The paladin’s rigid ethos also keeps the popula- 
tion down: Where other characters may commit 
questionable acts without penalty, even a single vio- 
lation of his ethos can cost the paladin his identity; 
one careless act, and he’s back to fighter status. (To 
emphasize this point, the DM might arrange for a 
novice paladin to meet a fighter NPC who's suffered 
just such an indignity.) And let’s not forget paladins’ 
high mortality rate. Any character whose morals 
compel him to accept all challenges, fight to the last 
opponent, and die for a principle is unlikely to live 
toa ripe old age. In fact, many regard an elderly pal- 
adin as a curiosity; either he’s an exceptionally 
skilled warrior or he’s been extremely lucky. 


—_oo——— 


84 + Chapter Seven 


A conscientious DM, then, should restrict the 
number of paladins in his campaign, both as PCs 
and NPCs. Most parties can handle one or two pal- 
adins without compromising realism or play bal- 
ance. Encounters with NPC paladins will probably 
be rare, limited to tournaments, royal gatherings, 
and war zones in most adventures. If the party reg- 
ularly meets, say, twice as many paladins as rangers 
or druids, reconsider the cast of characters. 

Parties comprised of nothing but paladins are 
possible if the DM is comfortable with high-level 
encounters (with so many special abilities, a party 
of paladins requires tougher-than-usual chal- 
lenges), and if he comes up with a plausible reason 
for bringing so many PC paladins together. An 
emergency meeting of The Most Ancient and 
Revered Order of the Thorn or some other order 
(see Chapter 9) makes a good starting point for an 
all-paladin campaign and may also suggest spring- 
boards for adventures. (An order member has com- 
mitted an evil act and the PC paladins must bring 
him to justice; the order sends the PCs to a distant 
land to retrieve medicinal herbs for an dying High 
Officer.) 


Homeland 


Most paladins come from urban areas large 
enough to sustain an organized military, support a 
large church, or serve as a government base. As a 
matter of convenience, governments and churches 
seeking new paladins tend to draw from the imme- 
diate area rather than recruit in the hinterlands. 

A candidate with an outstanding reputation 
inevitably comes to the attention of a recruiter, 
regardless of where he lives. Still, unfamiliarity 
with government protocol and discomfort in for- 
mal situations generally excludes candidates from 
rural areas. More likely, residents of remote areas 
who wish to become paladins will seek out men- 
tors or small independent churches, often becom- 
ing Errants or Skyriders instead of Chevaliers or 
Divinates. 

Once a character becomes a paladin, he won't 
necessarily remain in his own country. Unless he’s 
assigned to the kingdom’s standing army or ap- 


pointed to a permanent bureaucratic position, he 
probably spends a good deal of his time in distant 
lands, representing his superiors on various quests 
and missions. A paladin’s ties to his homeland may 
diminish as his career progresses; as he increases in 
level and experience, his superiors feel less of a 
need to monitor his activities. Paladins able to 
build strongholds often declare their independence 
by settling far from their old homes. 


Age 

Paladins have a lot to learn. They usually begin 
to train in childhood, well before age 10. A typical 
Ist-level paladin is 16-18 years old (see, however, 
the Medician, page 58). 

Because their ethos requirements channel them 
into lives of conflict and danger, paladins die 
young. Paladins over 30 are rare, and it’s nearly 
impossible to find one in his 40s. Paladins who 
reach 50 or 60 usually retire—some because of fam- 
ily obligations, others to attend to their strong- 
holds. Often they retire at the insistence of their 
superiors, who find aging paladins more useful as 
teachers or administrators than soldiers. 


Social Background 


Most paladins have an aristocratic or noble back- 
ground, coming from the upper ranks of their 
homeland’s social class. A paladin’s parents tend to 
be accomplished scholars, decorated soldiers, or 
respected bureaucrats, usually well-connected and 
affluent. Because of their educational and cultural 
advantages, children of privileged citizens best rep- 
resent their government and church. 

In practical terms, upper class candidates can 
better meet the economic demands of paladinhood. 
In many cases, new paladins must provide their 
own horses, armor, and weapons. These expenses, 
added to maintenance costs and tithing require- 
ments, are often beyond the means of middle and 
lower class candidates. Would-be paladins of lesser 
resources must usually find patrons to foot the 
bills, or secure sponsorship from their governments 
or churches. 


Regardless of his background, a candidate is typ- 
ically treated as a member of the nobility once he 
becomes a paladin. The general populace respects 
him as a symbol of society's highest ideals. The 
aristocracy regards him as an honored colleague, if 
not quite an equal. 


Women as Paladins 


Even in the historical feudal era, women fulfilled 
some of the knight's military functions (see p. 86). 
In service of their king or church, women often 
donned armor and wielded swords. They fought 
with the skill of the best male soldiers, defending 
their strongholds from siege, even leading troops 
on the battlefield. Female paladins may be uncom- 
mon, but they’re not unknown. 


Marriage 


Relatively few paladins marry. Because of their 
fealty responsibilities, most postpone marriage 
until their mid-to-late 20s, an age few of them actu- 
ally reach. Financial obligations also make them 
hesitate. It’s difficult to raise a family with so many 
demands on their already meager resources; how 
can a paladin choose between tithing and feeding a 
hungry child? Finally, some religions forbid mar- 
riage outright, demanding that celibacy be included 
as part of their paladins’ ethos. For these reasons, 
rarely do more than 10-20% of the paladins in any 
campaign world ever take a spouse. 

Though paladins are generally free to choose 
their mates from any social class, there are advan- 
tages to marrying into the aristocracy. A mate from 
the upper class solidifies the paladin’s reputation 
in the eyes of both the general public and the power 
elite. A privileged marriage increases the paladin’s 
access to rulers and officials, making them more 
likely to lend money and grant favors. A marriage 
of partners from different countries can strengthen 
the political bonds between their governments. 
And there may be practical advantages—an afflu- 
ent spouse often comes with a sizeable dowry, 
which can give a considerable boost to the pal- 
adin’s stronghold fund. 


a 


Role-Playing * 85 


Marrying an aristocrat, however, is not without 
drawbacks. The paladin may be obligated to his 
spouse's family in addition to his own. Periodically, 
he may have to serve in the military of his spouse's 
government. Many times, a paladin is required to 
turn over a dower to his spouse, amounting to a 
third or more of his holdings. Though the spouse 
doesn’t formally acquire the dower until the pal- 
adin’s death, the spouse still claims it; the paladin 
can’t sell, rent or improve any part of the dower 
without the spouse’s permis 

Because a marriage vow is a promise, a paladin 
won't consider divorce, nor will most churches 
consider granting one. However, if the spouse is 
guilty of committing evil acts, the spous 
ally required to divorce, as associating, with an evil 


ion. 


s usu- 


character—even a husband or wife—is an ethos 
violation. 


Becoming a Paladin 


Becoming a paladin requires intense training, 
strict discipline, and total commitment. Though 
most paladins acquire their skills under the aus- 
pices of their government or church, there are no 
established career paths or mandatory instructional 
techniques. Following are some of the most com- 
mon ways to become a paladin, along with a few 
kits typically associated with them. 


Religious Patronage 


Churches secure paladin candidates at an early 
age, usually 8-10 years old. High-level clerics, 
trained as recruiters, quietly observe their congre- 
gations, looking for vigorous and intelligent chil- 
dren from pious families. When the recruiters agree 


— 


Historical Role of Women 


Women had it rough in feudal times. They 
could own land and hold administrative posi- 
tions, but for the most part women lived in total 
subservience to men. Unmarried women were 
not allowed to travel without their fathers’ per- 
missions, and were chaperoned even on routine 
shopping trips. If an unmarried woman’s father 
died, she often became a ward of the state. Her 
legal guardian, appointed by the king, assumed 
control of the woman’s property, using her live- 
stock and other personal possessions as he saw fit 
until she married. 

Custom demanded that married women re- 
main submissive to their husbands, with their 
responsibilities confined to household supervi- 
sion and raising children. A married woman 
could not sell property without her husband’s 
consent, nor could she be heard in a court of law 
unless her husband accompanied her. Widows 
were often required to return home and live with 
their parents. In especially harsh monarchies, a 
widow could be forced to remarry, with the king's 
court choosing the groom. 


Though upper-class women had about the same 
access to education as men, the subject matter 
fered significantly. Where men received training in 
hunting, economics, and horsemanship, women 
studied poetry, languages, and needlework. 
Daughters of high-ranking officials were often sent 
to convents for their education, remaining there for 
the rest of their lives if they didn’t marry. 

Most women, regardless of class or status, mar- 
ried in their early teens. They had children as 
soon and as often as possible, irrespective of the 
considerable risk associated with childbirth. 
Women were often grandmothers by age 30. 

Women married to knights had more authority 
and a bit more respect than most of their peers, 
particularly if their husbands owned strongholds. 
When duty called the knight away, his wife took 
over the daily operations of the stronghold, mak- 
ing all decisions regarding finances, staff, and 
maintenance. A knight's wife could also petition 
to speak to the highest officials of the government 
or church. An audience was usually granted, if 
only as a courtesy to the husband. Tradition and 
law limited the wife’s influence, however, and 
she was rarely taken as seriously as a man. 


_-eeeeeeee——— 


86 * Chapter Seven 


on a potential candidate, they approach the parents 
and request that they relinquish custody of their 
child to the church. If the parents decline, the 
recruiters pass on the candidate and continue their 
search. While some churches may override the par- 
ents’ decision, most abide by the family’s wishes, 
believing that effective training is impossible with- 
out the parents’ support. 

If the family agrees—most do, as they consider 
the offer a high honor—the child becomes a ward 
of the church. The candidate moves into a dormi- 
tory of a church-operated school, frequently lo- 
cated ina distant, isolated region to minimize 
distraction. Paladin candidates are often taught 
side by side with clerical acolytes, studying reli- 
gious history, and ethical philosophy along with 
such fundamentals as reading, writing, and eti- 
quette. Candidates also engage in rigorous exercise 
and weapon practice. 

Within a few years, the students are separated, 
with paladin candidates focusing on horsemanship 
and combat skills, and the clerical acolytes concen- 
trating on spellcasting and church doctrine. Pal- 
adin candidates may also receive advanced training 
in medicine, language, and other academic sub- 
jects. Somewhere between the age of 15 and 17, 
depending on his progress and aptitude, a candi- 
date is subjected to a series of tests, ranging from 
oral exams to evaluate his understanding of the 
paladin’s ethos, to confrontations with undead op- 
ponents to display his courage and combat skills. A 
candidate who passes all his tests is then eligible to 
become a full paladin. 

Suggestéd Kits: Divinate, Inquisitor, Medician, 
Votary. 


Divine Intervention 


The gods may choose a mortal to become a pal- 
adin for reasons of their own. Alternately, a qualified 
mortal may petition the gods for paladin status. A 
suitable candidate must meet all of the physical and 
mental requirements for paladinhood, and must also 
demonstrate unshakable faith. Neither age nor 
social status is critical, though younger candidates of 
underprivileged classes are generally preferred. The 


gods will guide the candidate through a long series 
of quests and training exercises to ensure that he 
develops the necessary skills. On occasion, the gods 
may grant paladin powers to the candidate directly, 
foregoing training of any kind. 

Suggested Kits: Errant, Ghosthunter, Inquisitor, 
Wyrmslayer. 


Government Sponsorship 


Recruiters representing large monarchies are 
constantly on the lookout for young paladin candi- 
dates, needed to replace retiring paladins or pal- 
adins killed in action. The recruiters largely depend 
on referrals from their contacts in the aristocracy, 
but also consider petitions from upper and middle 
class families without formal ties to the govern- 
ment. Because recruits must begin their training at 
an early age, candidates may be as young as five or 
six years old. 

The recruiters thoroughly investigate the back- 
ground of all potential candidates, conducting 
extensive interviews with the candidates’ friends 
and family, and observing the candidates at work 
and play. Candidates must be physically sound, 
emotionally stable, intuitive, and well-behaved, 
qualities that an experienced recruiter can recog- 
nize even in the youngest child. For every hundred 
candidates evaluated, no more than two or three 
make the grade. 

A candidate's initial training begins at home. 
With supervision and support from government 
tutors, the candidate learns to read and write, and 
receives basic instruction in etiquette and religion. 
He exercises for several hours each day, and learns 
to ride and care for a small horse. 

Atage 7 or 8, the candidate moves into the house- 
hold of a nobleman, lord, or retired paladin where 
his training proceeds in earnest. He perfects his rid- 
ing skills, learns to use weapons (practicing with 
undersized wooden replicas), and plays chess and 
other simple war games that teach strategy. He 
attends formal state functions to learn protocol, and 
is taught to respect and obey his superiors. Occa- 
sionally he joins soldiers on routine military excur- 
sions, helping to care for their horses and observing 


Meena NE EEE 


Role-Playing * 87 


how they conduct themselves in the field. 

In his early teenage years, the candidate becomes a 
full-time squire to a practicing paladin. To mark the 
occasion, the candidate is sometimes awarded spurs 
in the same design as the master’s; the candidate's 
spurs are silver, the master’s are plated in gold. 
Under the master’s supervision, the candidate learns 
swordsmanship and mounted combat techniques. 
The master provides daily instruction on ethics and 
philosophy, detailing every nuance of the paladin’s 
ethos. He may also send the candidate on a quest to 
test his character, such as plucking a feather from a 
harpy or retrieving a scale from a dragon turtle. 

Most importantly, the candidate accompanies his 
master on the battlefield and fights at his side. 
Despite his inexperience, a candidate is expected to 
hold to the same standards as a regular paladin, 
sacrificing his life if necessary to protect his master 
or defend his monarch. Consequently, many candi- 
dates fail to survive their apprenticeship. Those 
who persevere for three to five years are eligible to 
become full paladins. 

Suggested Kits: Chevalier, Envoy, Militarist, 


Squire. 


Supportive Mentor 


Characters without connections to churches or 
governments may seek out mentors to teach them 
the skills of a paladin. Suitable mentors include 
benevolent sages, reclusive clerics, and elderly pal- 
adins. Most live solitary lives on the fringes of soci- 
ety, free of obligations to the church or state. Many 
have deviséd unique philosophies that substitute 
for formal religions. A potential student is probably 
expected to learn and follow the mentor’s faith, no 
matter how arcane. 

Because a mentor seldom accepts more than one 
student at a time, the neophyte paladin benefits 
from individualized attention, often completing 
training within four or five years. Despite its 
brevity, the training period is intense and demand- 
ing, concentrating on weapon mastery, horseman- 
ship, and ethics. The student must also swear 
allegiance to the mentor’s values, which duplicate 
the essential components of a paladin’s ethos. The 


TT — —  — —— — ——— 


88 + Chapter Seven 


mentor declares the student ready for paladinhood 
when he completes a final test, which may require 
the student to defeat the mentor in mock combat or 
fulfill a quest that the mentor himself was never 
able to complete. 

Suggested Kits: Errant, Inquisitor, Skyrider, 
Wyrmslayer. 


Inherited Title 


In some cultures, a lawful good child of a paladin 
is automatically eligible to become a paladin him- 
self. The child’s consent is usually irrelevant; a 
dutiful offspring follows his parent's wishes with- 
out much fuss. The parent oversees the child’s 
training, which begins in the family stronghold. 
The child learns manners and discipline by tending 
to livestock, serving meals, and assisting the staff. 
Later, the parent teaches the child to ride and wield 
a lance, with supplementary instruction in swords- 
manship, etiquette, and religion. He may also 
enroll the child at a royal academy or church school 
to complete his education. Should the parent die 
before the child becomes eligible for paladinhood, 
the church or government assumes responsibility 
for continuing the child’s training, a gesture made 
in appreciation of the parent's lifetime of service. 

Suggested Kits: Chevalier, Divinate, Squire, 
Votary. 


Confirmation Ceremony 


When a candidate is ready to assume the role of a 
paladin, the momentous occasion is usually marked 
by a formal ceremony. The administering official 
may be a government representative, a church dig- 
nitary, the candidate’s mentor or parent, or an 
avatar of the gods. As dictated by tradition and the 
paladin’s preference, a ceremony may be public, 
held before a large audience in the town square, or 
private, performed in an official’s chamber or a 
remote outdoor locale. Most ceremonies incorpo- 
rate the paladin’s Code of Ennoblement, discussed 
in Chapter 3. Other details are up to the DM; he is 
free to adapt or modify any of the ceremonies 
described below, or make up his own. 


Confirmation ceremonies can also make good 
springboards for adventures. The DM might con- 
sider enlivening a ceremony with one or more of 
the following events: 

e The administering official fails to show up. 
(Has he been kidnapped or worse?) 

e An evil wizard stages a destructive intrusion. 

e An old friend of the candidate makes a sur- 
prise appearance, bringing an urgent message (an 
uprising in a neighboring kingdom, the discovery 
of an ancient civilization). 

e A cleric’s incantation, the manipulation of an 
ancient artifact, or the shadow of an eclipse opens a 
portal to another plane of existence. 

Ordainment by Dubbing; The simplest confir- 
mation ceremony requires the candidate to kneel 
before the administering official, who holds a cere- 
monial sword over the candidate’s head. After the 
candidate recites his Code of Ennoblement, the offi- 
cial taps the sword on the candidate’s neck or 
shoulders, then pronounces him a paladin. The 
new paladin rises, embraces the official, then qui- 
etly departs. 

Sacrament of the Sword: On the day of the cere- 
mony, the candidate rises before dawn and bathes 
in a stream, cleansing his body and, symbolically, 
his spirit. He dons a white robe, representing his 
piousness, tied tightly at the waste with a thin sash, 
a reminder of the discomfort all agents of faith 
must endure. Surrounded by his family, invited 
guests, and representatives of his church and gov- 
ernment, the candidate faces the rising sun and 
recites his Code of Ennoblement. The administer- 
ing official presents him with a sword made of 
crystal or glass, symbolizing the fragile boundary 
separating good from evil. The official then slaps 
the new paladin on both sides of his face or strikes 
a blow against his chest, an emphatic reminder 
always to follow his oath. 

Feast Day: Associated with paladins who are 
trained by the church, the Feast Day ceremony 
begins two days before the actual confirmation. 
The candidate spends 48 hours alone in a dark 
chapel, offering prayers to her deity and subsisting 
on nothing but bread and water. At the end of this 
period, the administering official opens the doors 


and windows to bathe the chapel in sunshine. 

One by one, the candidate’s teachers, family 
members, and guests file inside. The candidate 
greets them individually, thanking them for their 
support during her training. After all have arrived, 
the candidate takes a seat in front of the congrega- 
tion. The official gives a sermon about the signifi- 
cance of this great day, then the candidate kneels 
before him and swears to the Code of Ennoble- 
ment. The official touches the candidate's shoul- 
ders with a ceremonial sword and kisses her fore- 
head. The new paladin leaves the church to the 
sound of applause, then rides through the town so 
that everyone can see her. The day climaxes with a 
great feast, filled with songs, dances, and games. 

Rite of the Seven Lambs: The candidate joi x 
paladins in an open meadow. The paladins bring 
seven lambs, all of them sick or wounded through 
natural causes. One of the paladins, serving as the 
administering official, reads prayers and leads the 
candidate through his Code of Ennoblement. Each 
paladin then lays hands on one of the lambs, healing 
it. The new paladin lays hands on the final lamb. 
Clippings from the healthy lambs are placed in a 
cloth bag, which is given to the new paladin to com- 
memorate the occasion. 

Convocation of the Blessed Waters: Prior to the 
ceremony, the administrating official obtains a suit 
of armor from a paladin who died in battle. The 
official retains the helmet, then submerges the rest 
of the armor into a stream or lake, symbolically 
imbuing the water with the spirit of the deceased 
paladin. The candidate washes her ceremonial cos- 
tume in the blessed stream; a typical costume con- 
sists of a linen shirt, a crimson or purple tunic, silk 
stockings, leather shoes with silver ornaments, and 
a golden robe embroidered with images of eagles 
and lions. The candidate allows the wet costume to 
dry in the sun. 

On the day of the ceremony, the candidate dons 
the costume and meets the official near the blessed 
stream. The official and the candidate stand on a 
velvet carpet, surrounded by dignitaries and in- 
vited guests. After reciting the Oath of Ennoble- 
ment, the candidate kneels and drinks from the 
stream. The official presents the candidate with the 


ee LUE UE EEUU EEE ESE 


Role-Playing * 89 


helmet of the deceased paladin, completing the cer- 
emony. The new paladin joins her guests for a mod- 
est meal under the open sky. 


Routine Activities 


Even when a paladin isn’t fulfilling an edict, 
waging war, or embarking on a quest, he still has 
plenty to keep him busy. Some common activities 
are described below. Of course, not all paladins 
engage in all of these activities. A Chevalier proba- 
bly spends more time enforcing laws than an Errant. 
A Votary may set aside several days a week to ri 
cruit new members to his church, whereas Di 
inates may be forbidden by their faith to engage in 
any type of proselytizing. 

Although neither the player nor the DM is obliged 
to keep track of a paladin’s activities between cam- 
paigns, some of his routine duties may lead to 
adventures. While on a reconnaissance patrol, the 
paladin might discover a meeting of ogres, prepar- 
ing to join forces to storm the king’s stronghold. A 
paladin’s desire to improve his riding skills could 
lead to a search for a legendary horseman. A prose- 
lytizing expedition may stir up trouble with a rival 
church. Victory at a tournament could result in the 
defeated opponent seeking a deadly revenge. 


Enforce Laws 


Obliged to eliminate evil, a paladin is always on 
the lookout for lawbreakers, intervening whenever 
he sees a crime in progress. Overtly evil acts often 
meet with swift retribution; the paladin simply 
slays the culprit outright. In societies where even 
the vilest crimes must be tried in a court of law, pal- 
adins refrain from taking justice into their own 
hands, instead turning the suspect over to the 
proper authorities for prosecution. 

Law enforcement involves more than thwarting 
criminals. A paladin breaks up rowdy crowds be- 
fore riots ensue and escorts drunks to their homes. 
She disposes of illegal weapons and other contra- 
band. She intercepts spooked horses, treats accident 
victims, and reunites lost children with their par- 
ents. She may even clean up illegally dumped trash. 


_ 


90 * Chapter Seven 


While most paladins enforce the law as a matter 
of principle, some are formally deputized by their 
lieges to serve as local police. Deputized paladins 
are assigned regular patrol hours, usually after 
dark when most crimes occur. The paladins patrol 
designated areas on foot or horseback, monitoring 
strangers, questioning suspicious characters, and 
keeping an eye out for trouble. They may be autho- 
rized to make arrests, levy fines, or even perform 
on-the-spot executions. Deputized paladins usually 
have jurisdiction only within the borders of their 
community or kingdom, though they may demand 
extradition of wanted criminals who have sought 
refuge in other lands. 


Encourage Morality 


A paladin takes advantage of every opportunity 
to encourage and promote ethical behavior, He 
reinforces lawful good behavior by acknowledging 
the good deeds of ordinary citizens, expressing, his 
appreciation in private meetings or public cere- 
monies. He gives lectures, participates in debates, 
and organizes discussion groups, all meant to per- 
suade others of the benefits of a moral life. He pre- 
sents himself as a role model to youngsters, daz- 
zling them with stories of his exploits and expound- 
ing on the glories of a career spent in service to the 
government or church. A paladin also makes him- 
self available for counseling, offering advice to the 
troubled and guidance to the confused. 


Training 


A paladin continuously trains his mind and 
body, focusing on military skills. He jousts against 
stuffed dummies using a technique called quintain 
(see the illustration on page 92). He duels against 
multiple opponents with swords wrapped in cloth. 
He familiarizes himself with all types of weapons, 
including those improvised from rocks, branches, 
and other natural items; with practice, a paladin 
can construct a usable sling from a length of cloth 
and a leather strip in a matter of minutes. 

Most paladins undergo a daily routine of physi- 
cal exercise. Wearing full armor, a paladin may hike 


up a mountainside while carrying a sheep or calf. 
With a weight secured to his back, he may attempt 
to swim the length of a lake. He scales walls, climbs 
ropes, wrestles other warriors, and stages cross- 
country races. 

His regimen also includes mental exercise. He 
may memorize lengthy passages from sacred scrip- 
tures or translate poetry into different languages. 
He may dissect animal cadavers to study anatomy 
or raise a garden to learn botany. A friendly ranger 
may teach him how to track animal; an experienced 
seaman may teach him how to navigate a ship. 


Maintenance 


A paladin maintains her equipment in first-class 
condition. She keeps her shield and armor polished 
and free of corrosion. Dents are tapped out, scratches 
are buffed clean, tarnishes are refinished. Blades are 
straightened, hardened by fire, then resharpened on 
grindstones. Clothing, too, receives meticulous 
attention. A paladin usually hand-washes her gar- 
ments in cold water, squeezing (rather than wring- 
ing) them out before hanging them in the sun to dry. 
She soaks her undergarments and shirts in a barrel 
filled with soda and wood ash, then pounds them 
ona rock. Coats and capes may be freshened with 
steam by placing them in an enclosed room contain- 
ing a pot of boiling water. Saddles, boots, belts, and 
other leather items must be oiled and polished. 


Courtly Duties 


A paladin’s impeccable manners, striking ap- 
pearance, and sterling reputation makes him a 
highly desirable guest for banquets, receptions, 
and other formal functions. Some accept as many 
invitations as their schedules allow, particularly 
those from colleagues and dignitaries. Refusal 
might be interpreted as an insult. 

Often, his attendance amounts to little more than 
window dressing, his superiors taking advantage 
of the occasion to display him like a trophy. A pal- 
adin endures these events with grace, retelling his 
war stories to pampered lords and ladies while lis- 
tening to their dreary comments. 


A paladin often represents his superiors at func- 
tions in other lands. He gives eulogies at funerals 
and witnesses christenings. He attends the wed- 
dings, birthday parties, and confirmation cere- 
monies of foreign aristocrats. He may also deliver 


documents and mess 
trust to heralds. 


ges that are too important to 


Military Duties 


Even when not at war, a paladin with military 
responsibilities has a lot to do. If occupying a strong- 
hold, he must prepare for enemy attacks by fortify- 
ing the walls with metal braces, widening moats, 
and digging trenches. Ample supplies of food, 
water, ammunition, and medicine must be secured. 
He may conduct drills to ensure that his troops 
respond swiftly and in a coordinated fashion to sur- 
prise assaults. He consults with engineers and tacti- 
cians to determine which sides of the stronghold are 
most vulnerable. He rehearses bowmen to fire 
arrows blindly, in case of an attack made under 
cover of fog or during a moonless night. 

In the field, the paladin conducts reconnaissance 
patrols into enemy territory to gather information. 
He leads his troops on practice exercises to get 
them used to moving through swamps, deserts, 
and other hostile terrain. He may also conduct mil- 
itary experiments with animals, using cooperative 
elephants as pack animals, trained banderlogs as 
infantrymen, and charmed bulettes as assault 
weapons. 


Tournaments 


A tournament a series of formal games that gives 
paladins and other warriors the chance to practice 
their combat skills, impress the citizenry (therby 
boosting their reputation), and perhaps even earn a 
little money. Though designed as entertainment, 
tournaments are not without risk. A bad perfor- 
mance may cost the paladin her honor. A disas- 
trous performance may cost her life. 

Rulers and affluent landowners sponsor tourna- 
ments to amuse their colleagues and raise commu- 
nity morale. Tournaments also give them the chance 


re 


Role-Playing * 91 


to flaunt their wealth in a socially acceptable man- 
ner. Messengers and heralds are hired to spread the 
word about upcoming tournaments, which often 
attract participants from hundreds of miles away. 
A carnival-like atmosphere prevails on the day of 
a tournament. Colorful banners flutter over sprawl- 
ing bleachers packed with spectators. Soldiers 
stroll the grounds in gleaming armor. The aroma of 
roast pork and steaming vegetables wafts through 
the air. Merchants peddle paladin dolls and other 
gaudy mementos. Grandmothers gossip, children 
frolic, and gamblers place discrete wagers. 
Tournament events include sword duels, archery 
contests, and—always of primary interest—joust- 
ing matches. In a typical joust, two paladins mount 
their horses on opposite ends of an open field, then 
raise their shields and lances. On a trumpet blast 
from the referee, they charge. Each attempts to dis- 
lodge the other from his horse. If neither succeeds, 
they return to their starting positions and try again. 
The winner faces another opponent in the next 
round. Whoever fells the most opponents during 


eee ee 


92 * Chapter Seven 


< 
[hi NG 
MIS 


the day wins the contest. 

Victory brings honor to both the paladin and the 
liege he represents. The paladin may also win a 
modest prize. Defeat, however, means disgrace, and 
a deliberately poor performance is considered an 
ethos violation. If the paladin has chosen a lady or 
other person to champion, victory ensures a favor- 
able impression (modify the reaction roll by at least 
+1). Defeat brings humiliation, and the championed 
person may shun the paladin forever after (modify 
the reaction roll by at least -1; in any case, the reac- 
tion won't be better than Indifferent). If a poor per- 
formance insults the championed person, this might 
be considered an ethos violation. 

Though contestants use blunted lances and are 
advised to behave like gentlemen, jousts often result 
in serious and sometimes fatal damage. Even a 
blunted lance can strike a deadly blow, particularly 
when delivered by a paladin on a war horse charg- 
ing at top speed. Occasionally, a paladin knocked 
from his mount will catch his spur in a stirrup; the 
confused mount may drag the hapless paladin to his 


death. A losing contestant may not take defeat 
gracefully, attacking the winner with a sword or 
club. Such attacks have been known to trigger full- 
scale riots, resulting in dozens of casualties before 
soldiers manage to disperse the crowd. 


A Day in the Life 


Here’s what a typical day might be like for two 
different paladins: a Chevalier named Sir Jounville, 
who works in his king’s stronghold, and Madeline 
of Blackfern, a Divinate who lives in a monastery. 


Sir Jounville (Stronghold Paladin) 


Sir Jounville rises about an hour before dawn, 
awakening in his private quarters in the stronghold 
cellar. He washes in a ceramic basin of cold water, 
then dresses in a waist-length tunic with full sleeves, 
a short-sleeved tunic lined with fox fur, a loose 
mantle secured at the neck with a silver chain, linen 
hosiery, and leather boots. He visits the stronghold 
chapel for the morning prayer, then stops at the 
kitchen for a quick breakfast of bread and ale. 

Jounville reports to the steward’s quarters fora 
brief meeting to review the events of the day ahead. 
The steward reminds him of an important banquet 
that evening, a birthday celebration for the king's 
niece. Jounville assures the steward that he'll be 
prompt. 

Jounville joins three companions in the bailey for 
morning exercise, focusing today on weight lifting 
and archery practice. Meanwhile, other residents of 
the stronghold have risen and are beginning to fill 
the bailey. Maidens embroider tablecloths for the 
royal family, cooks roast mutton for the evening 
feast, and children play noisily with horseshoes 
and tops. 

After two hours of exercise, Jounville walks to 
the stables to see if the groomsman has fitted his 
horse with new shoes. With winter approaching, 
Jounville wants to make sure the shoes have calkins, 
metallic points that enable the horse to grip the 
frozen ground. The groomsman has finished the 
work, and Jounville examines each shoe carefully, 
checking for rough edges, proper weight, and tight 


nail heads. Satisfied, Jounville thanks the grooms- 
man for a job well done. 

The time approaches for Jounville’s guard duty. 
He returns to his quarters to don his chain mail 
armor and retrieve his shield, sword, longbow, and 
arrows. At the kitchen, he picks up a herring pie fla- 
vored with pepper and cinnamon that he'll eat later. 

He climbs the ladder to the bastion tower and 
settles behind a narrow arrow slit. He peers through 
the slit, surveying the wide field that borders the 
stronghold’s north wall. All is quiet. Sir Northram, 
whom Jounville is relieving, reports no distur- 
bances on his watch. 

For the next eight hours, Jounville stares silently 
through the slit, bow in hand, pausing only briefly 
in mid-afternoon to eat his herring pie. His watch is 
uneventful. 

At five o'clock, Sir Inniss arrives to relieve 
Jounville. Jounville visits the chapel for an after- 
noon prayer, then goes back to his quarters to pre- 
pare for the banquet. He puts on fresh tunics and 
hosiery, powders his mantle with talc, and buffs his 
shoes. He also polishes his shield and sword; the 
king likes for his paladins to bring their combat 
gear to impress the guests. 

The banquet begins exactly at seven. About 70 
guests are present, including the king and his ret- 
inue, various aristocrats and clergymen, and six of 
the king’s paladins, including Jounville. Jounville 
takes his seat at the furthest end of the table; guests 
of high status, such as the king’s family and church 
dignitaries, sit near the center. A servant brings 
Jounville his table service, consisting of iron table- 
ware, a manchet (a slab of stale bread, used as a 
plate), a glass goblet, and a mazer (a soup bowl 
trimmed in silver). 

Following a benediction and introduction of the 
guests of honor, servants bring platters heaped with 
food. The main course includes blankmanger (chicken 
and rice seasoned with sugar and almonds), 
mortrews (dumplings made of fish, bread crumbs, 
and eggs), glazed onions and peas, mustard and 
wine sauces, and stewed fruit. Jounville follows 
meticulous rules of etiquette, careful to wipe his 
spoon after each use and to take small portions. 

The meal lasts for two hours. Servants bring 


a 


Role-Playing * 93 


water bowls for the guests to wash their hands, 
then clear the tables. The guests retire to the ball- 
room for entertainment. Bards and jesters sing 
songs and tell stories, while the younger guests join 
hands and dance in a circle. Elder guests play 


backgammon or chess and catch up on local gossip. 
Jounville circulates, engaging in polite small talk. 
Near the end of the evening, Jounville recites a 
poem composed especially for the occasion, accom- 
panied by a bard who plays the lute. 

The entertainment will last until the early hours 
of the morning. But at 11 o'clock, Jounville ap- 
proaches an aide and requests permission to be 
excused. Jounville retires to his quarters, offering a 
final evening prayer before settling into bed. 


Madeline of Blackfern (Church Paladin) 


Madeline of Blackfern, a paladin-in-residence at 
the Heart’s Hope Monastery, begins her daily rou- 
tine at midnight when she’s awakened by the peal 
of bells from the prayer tower. Madeline rises, puts 
on a cloth mantle, leather slippers, and a prayer 
cap, then joins her fellow paladins in the chapel. 
Madeline recites a long prayer, then goes to the sta- 
bles to feed and water the monastery’s horses, part 
of her assigned duties. Except for the prayer, Made- 
line is expected to observe total silence. 

Her chores complete, Madeline returns to bed. 
The bells awaken her again at five. She dresses 
again, walks silently to the chapel, and listens to the 
morning sermon. She fills the next two hours with 
exercise, meditation, and household tasks. A bell 
signals breakfast, the main meal of the day. Made- 
line provides her own dishes and tableware, as do 
all residents of the monastery. Breakfast consists of 
beef, mutton, bread, and fruit, simply prepared. 
Leftovers are distributed to poor families in the area. 

After breakfast, Madeline receives her orders for 
the day. Madeline will spend two hours kneading 
bread dough in the main kitchen, two hours assist- 
ing the monastery’s blacksmith to forge horse- 
shoes, and the remaining daylight hours patrolling 
the grounds on foot. Prayer services will be given 
approximately every three hours, as signaled by 
the bells. Except for emergencies or pre-approved 


ere 


94 © Chapter Seven 


communications, Madeline is expected to remain 
silent all day. 

At eight o’clock, Madeline eats an evening meal 
of bread and vegetables in the dining hall. She 
feeds and waters the horses again, then meets with 
her superior to confess any sins she may have com- 
mitted during the previous 24 hours. She admits to 
coveting her friend’s new sandals. For penance, the 
superior orders her to help her friend sweep the 
stables. Madeline returns to her quarters, kneels at 
her bed for a final prayer, then catches a few hours 
of sleep before the bells awaken her at midnight. 


Courtly Love 


Some poets and philosophers of the feudal era 
believed that true romance (or “courtly love”) 
could only exist outside the bonds of matrimony. 
Marriage, they felt, substituted obligation and duty 
for honest emotion. (A DM’s campaign, however, 
can allow for romance and marriage to go hand-in- 
hand.) For the paladin, courtly love may be defined 
as a yearning of the spirit, a passion that is never 
fulfilled. 

The object of a paladin’s courtly love (whom 
we'll call the beloved) represents all that is good 
and pure. She is less a person than a romantic ideal, 
like a character in a poem or a dream. Often, the 
beloved is an unobtainable, unapproachable per- 
son, such as the spouse of a friend or the offspring 
of a monarch. The paladin may have never even 
met her, merely watched her from afar. 

Whether the beloved returns the paladin’s affec- 
tion, or even knows of it, is irrelevant. Often, the 
paladin keeps his feelings a secret, believing him- 
self spiritually inferior to his beloved and unwill- 
ing to burden her with his wretched attentions. In 
any case, the paladin remains utterly devoted to 
the beloved, pledging eternal fidelity and shunning 
all others. 


Rules for Courtly Love 


A DM may permit PC paladins to experience 
courtly love. Courtly love adds a dimension of 
romantic tragedy to the paladin’s life, consuming 


him with the exquisite agony of unfulfilled passion. 
Any paladin PC may succumb to courtly love. A 
paladin typically fixates on his beloved early in his 
career, say, any time before he reaches 5th level. He 
usually remains true to his beloved for the rest of 
his life. 
Courtly love persi 


regardless of changes in the 
paladin’s circumstances or those of the beloved. He 
stays in love with her even if he marries (if courtly 
love transcends marriage, which might otherwise 
be seen as an ethos violation), the beloved marries 


(which can actually enhance courtly love's tragic 
overtones), or the beloved dies (courtly love for the 
truly inaccessible is perhaps the “purest” love of 
all). A paladin will never have more than a single 
beloved at the same time, nor will he ever abandon 
one beloved for another. 

The paladin’s beloved can be any attractive NPC 
of the opposite gender, preferably of high Charisma 
(at least 15 or so) and lawful good alignment. Ideal 
beloveds include characters of high social or eco- 
nomic status (aristocrats, government officials, 
high-level paladins, and affluent landowners), 
princes and princesses, celebrities (renowned poets, 
scholars, and mages), and the spouses of kings and 
queens (a situation not without peril, as Sir Gala- 
had learned too late). 

Courtly love should arise naturally from the 
events in the campaign. The paladin may first lay 
eyes on his beloved across the room at a formal 
banquet or spot her in the audience at a jousting 
tournament. She may be among the survivors he 
rescues from a sinking ship. Or she may simply 
approach Him for directions to the nearest inn, 
smile in thanks, then mount her horse and ride 
away. A fleeting glance or a chance meeting is all 
that’s required for the paladin to become hope- 
lessly smitten. 

A paladin himself may choose his own beloved 
and declare his love. This declaration is equivalent 
to an ethos vow; the paladin must remain true to his 
beloved from that moment onward. Alternately, the 
DM may force the issue by observing the paladin’s 
behavior. If the paladin seems unusually attracted 
to a particular NPC—asking about her, staring long- 
ingly at her, fawning over her—the DM should 


point out that the paladin is exhibiting early signs of 
courtly love. If the paladin persists, the DM may 
declare that the NPC has become the paladin’s 
beloved. If he likes, the DM may require the paladin 
to make a Charisma check. If the check fails, courtly 
love e: . If the check succeeds, the paladin has 
resisted courtly love for the time being. If the pal- 
adin continues to fawn over the NPC, the DM may 
require another Charisma check at a later time. 
Behavior: Courtly love involves the beloved only 
indirectly. Rarely will a paladin confront his beloved 
with his feelings. For the most part, he keeps his 
obsession to himself, resigned to worshipping his 
beloved from afar. He expresses his devotion sym- 
bolically, tries to learn as much about her as he can, 
and luxuriates in any opportunity to bask in her 
presence. In a campaign, a paladin might demon- 
strate courtly love in any of the following ways: 
songs and poems in the beloved’s 


* He composes 


honor. 

* He champions the beloved at a tournament. 

He arranges for anonymous gifts to be deliv- 
ered to the beloved. 

e He attaches a lock of the beloved’s hair to his 
shield, or places a scrap of material from her dress 
under his armor, next to his heart. 

e If he hears anyone speak dishonorably about 
his beloved, he challenges them to retract the state- 
ment or fight a duel to the death. 

e He arranges for an invitation to a banquet or 
party where his beloved will be. (And most likely, 
he spends the night on the opposite side of the 
room, too embarrassed to speak to her or even go 
near her.) 

e He interviews at length anyone who has infor- 
mation about his beloved, no matter how trivial. 

e He goes out of his way to visit places of signifi- 
cance to his beloved (the town of her birth, her 
school, a favorite lake). 

Penalties and bonuses: Although expressions of 
courtly love mainly involve role-playing, the DM 
may wish to impose penalties and bonuses in cer- 
tain situations. For instance, any of the following 
circumstance may fuel the paladin with so much 
joy that he benefits from a +1 or +2 bonus to ability 
checks, attack rolls, or damage rolls, for anywhere 


ee 


Role-Playing * 95 


from a few hours to a few days. The DM decides 
the nature of the bonuses and their duration, 
depending on the intensity of the circumstance that 
triggered them. 

* The beloved innocently smiles at the paladin 
from across a room. 

+ The beloved sends a thank-you note for a gift. 

* The beloved congratulates the paladin on an 
outstanding performance at a tournament. 

e Ata party or banquet, the beloved approaches 
the paladin and engages him in a brief conversa- 
tion about nothing in particular. 

e The beloved gives the paladin her handker- 
chief or glove. 

Conversely, a painful experience may result in 
overwhelming heartbreak, longing, or despair, per- 
sisting for a few hours or several days, as deter- 
mined by the DM. During that time, the paladin 
may suffer penalties of -1 or -2 to ability checks, 
attack rolls, or damage rolls. Triggering situations 
may include: 

* A lock of hair, a scrap of cloth, or other memento 
of the beloved is lost or stolen. 

* The beloved spurns or ignores the paladin at a 
banquet or party. 

+ The paladin champions the beloved at a tour- 
nament, but loses his match. 

e The beloved announces her engagement to 
someone else. 

¢ The beloved is injured or becomes ill. 

Ethos penalties: A vow of courtly love is as 
binding as any component of a paladin’s ethos. 
Should a paladin betray his beloved by speaking 
badly of her, breaking a promise to her, snubbing, 
her gestures of friendship, or—worst of all—suc- 
cumbing to the charms of another, he has commit- 
ted an ethos violation. The DM should select an 
appropriate punishment from the suggestions in 
Chapter 3. 

Covert romance: On occasion, the beloved may 
reciprocate the paladin’s affections. If so, the couple 
may embark on a romance. They may express their 
love openly, but more likely, they'll choose to keep 
their relationship secret. Covert lovers take pains to 
arrange clandestine meetings, avoid signing letters 
to each other, and exchange nondescript gifts so as 


V—V————————————————————————SSSSeSeSeSeSESESsSse 


96 * Chapter Seven 


not to attract attention. 

The discovery of an illicit romance may result in 
severe consequences for both the beloved and the 
paladin. The beloved’s family might object to their 
affair, or differences in their status make their 
romance socially unacceptable. To keep the couple 
apart, the beloved’s family may relocate to a distant 
land. The family may demand restitution to com- 
pensate for their humiliation. A secret affair may 
constitute an ethos violation for the paladin, partic- 
ularly if he’s covering up his activities or romanc- 
ing a person engaged to someone else (the paladin’s 
feelings may be so strong that he’s willing to suffer 
an ethos penalty just to be near his beloved). 

Should the paladin wed his beloved, all benefits, 
penalties, and other conditions associated with 
courtly love will gradually disappear, replaced 
with the more stable and less volatile feelings asso- 
ciated with marriage. The reappearance of courtly 
love for a married paladin can be considered a 
major ethos violation. 


Economics 


Many paladins live in a state of near poverty. 
Their ethos limits the amount of money they can 
save, while living expenses, church tithings, and 
stronghold costs put heavy demands on whatever 
meager funds they manage to acquire. Most pal- 
adins have neither the time, resources, nor aptitude 
to make a living as craftsmen or merchants. Busi- 
ness ventures, other than those associated with 
their strongholds, are often impractical or forbid- 
den. Paladins from affluent backgrounds rarely 
benefit from their families’ wealth; their ethos 
restricts them from accepting large allowances or 
handouts, and strict inheritance laws usually turn 
most of the holdings over to the state when the par- 
ents die. Adding to their difficulties, most govern- 
ments and churches require paladins to buy and 
maintain their own mounts and equipment, believ- 
ing they'll take better care of these items if they 
owns them outright. 

So where does a paladin get his money? Aside 
from treasure and rewards, here are a few of the 
most common sources: 


Stipend 


Though paladins are expected to serve their gov- 
ernment out of loyalty rather than an expectation 
of financial reward, many monarchies give their 
paladins a small monthly stipend, rarely exceeding 
10 gp per month. The paladin is expected to buy all 
of his equipment, clothing, and supplies, though 
the government may provide him food and a place 
to live. As fhe paladin becomes more experienced, 
the stipend may increase modestly, perhaps 1-2 gp 
per level. In most cases, the stipend ends when the 
paladin builds his own stronghold. 

Stipends generally aren't available to free-lance 
paladins, paladins who have pledged fealty to men- 
tors instead of governments, or paladins who work 
primarily or exclusively for churches. Churches 
may provide room and board, but give cash only in 
emergencies. Cash given by a church usually works 
as a loan, which the paladin is expected to repay as 
soon as possible. 


Mercenary 


When his government or church is at peace, a 
paladin may hire out as a mercenary to friendly 
monarchies or other employers. The paladin’s 
superiors negotiate the terms, including the length 
of service, expected duties, and remuneration. Iron- 
ically, a paladin can earn much more as a merce- 
nary than as a soldier on salary to his government; 
monthly wages in excess of 100 gp are common. 
However, the paladin may be obliged to pay as 
much as 90% of his wage to his superiors, in recom- 
pense for the loan of his services. 


Mortgage 


A paladin may raise money by securing a loan 
from his government or church, using his strong- 
hold or other property as collateral. Collateral 
requirements and repayment terms are usually 
strict. The required collateral may be as much as 100 
times the amount of the loan. Monthly payments 


pe 


Role-Playing * 97 


may be equal to 10-20% of the amount loaned, paid 
for a minimum of one year. A paladin may also 
secure a loan based on a pledge of future service as 
a soldier, teacher, or laborer. Moneylenders are usu- 
ally agreeable to such arrangements, knowing that a 


paladin always keeps his word. 


Hostage Ransom 


In times of war, a paladin may capture enemy 
soldiers or dignitaries, then demand ransom for 
their return. Hostage footsoldiers or household 
staff seldom bring high ransoms—if any—but a 
dignitary or other important person can command 
a fortune (a “king's ransom”). If he works for a 
government or church, the paladin’s superiors usu- 
ally demand a large portion of all ransoms. Ran- 
soming prisoners is not considered an ethos viola- 
tion, so long as the prisoners are of good or neutral 
alignment; evil-aligned prisoners are usually slain 
or turned over to the authorities for disposition. 


Tournament Ransom 


In addition to winning small monetary awards in 
tournaments, paladins may earn money by ransom- 
ing their opponents. Certain tournaments require 
defeated opponents to flee the field, taking refuge in 
nearby forests or mountains. The victors may pur- 
sue. If the victors locate and capture the losers 
within an allotted time period (say, by sunset), the 
losers must pay the victors a ransom for their release. 
A typical ransom ranges from 1-10 gp, though ran- 
soms for high-level opponents may be two or three 
times that amount. A paladin’s superiors usually 
skim off a high percentage of all ransoms. 


The Paladin’s Personality 


The defining characteristic, a single word that 
summarizes a character's personality, describes 
the essential nature of the character and how he 
comes across to others. A character’s personality 
comprises many elements, but the defining char- 
acteristic is the dominant trait from which all 
other personality components arise. A defining 


SSM 


98 + Chapter Seven 


characteristic can be chosen for paladins (or any 
other character, for that matter). Several possibili- 
ties listed below should get you started. 

How to choose a defining characteristic? There’s 
no best way, but you'll know you're on the right 
track if a particular characteristic fits your concep- 
tion of the character. For instance, if you picture 
your paladin charging boldly into battle, slaughter- 
ing his enemies without remorse, his defining char- 
acteristic could be Vengeful. If you see him as 
withdrawn and brooding, he might be Tormented. 
The descriptions below are intentionally vague to 
encourage personal interpretation, 

You may also select secondary traits to compli- 
ment the defining characteristic. Each entry below 
lists a number of options. Choose one or two that 
appeal to you, or make up your own. Any sec- 
ondary traits are fine, so long as they don’t contra- 
dict the defining characteristic; a Vengeful paladin 
might be Brutal but he’s unlikely to be Shy. 

Defining characteristics work with some kits bet- 
ter than others. Each entry lists a few suggestions, 
but don’t feel restricted by them. Use any defining 
characteristic with any kit that feels right to you. 
You can also mix and match the various corollary 
characteristics, or ignore them altogether. 

Previous volumes in the Complete Handbook 
series include lists of archetypes drawn from liter- 
ature, film, and other fictional and mythological 
sources. Many of these archetypes can be adapted 
to paladin characters. The Complete Bard's Hand- 
book features a series of tables to determine per- 
sonality traits randomly for bards or any other 
character. 


Defining Characteristics 


Aggressive 

The aggressive paladin speaks with his sword. 
Uneasy in social situations and impatient with 
negotiation, he is most comfortable on the battle- 
field. He relishes combat, particularly hand-to- 
hand encounters with enemies formidable enough 
to put up a good fight. A forceful personality who 
often wears his emotions on his sleeve, he makes a 
spirited companion and a dangerous opponent. 


Secondary Traits: Heroic, impulsive, haughty, 
wise-cracking, abrasive, inspiring. 

Suggested Kits: Chevalier, Inquisitor, Militarist, 
Wyrmslayer. 


Cynical 

While as devoted to her ethos as any other pal- 
adin, the cynical paladin sees the pursuit of justice as 
admirable but ultimately futile. Greed, selfishness, 
and hatred seem to predominate in the world. Com- 
passion and selflessness are hard to find. Advocates 
of good are hopelessly outnumbered. The cynical 
paladin fights tirelessly for her principles, but can’t 
shake the feeling that her work may be in vain. To 
her, optimism is touching but naive, despondency a 
perfectly understandable reaction to a callous world. 

Secondary Traits: Angry, quick-witted, reflective, 
soft-hearted, brooding, helpful. 

Suggested Kits: Expatriate, Ghosthunter, Votary, 
Wyrmslayer. 


Genteel 

The genteel paladin is a man of taste, more at 
home at a formal ball than a bloody battlefield. 
While his military skills are has finely honed as 
those of any paladin, he views combat as an un- 
pleasant necessity; enemies should be dispatched 
as quickly as possible, preferably with flair and 
style. He owns the finest clothes and equipment he 
can afford, and spends as much time on personal 
grooming as others do practicing weapon skills. He 
is preoccupied with courtly etiquette and elegant 
living, looking forward to the day when he can 
retire to his’stronghold and live out the remainder 
of his life as a proper gentleman. 

Secondary Traits: Conceited, prudish, romantic, 
intellectual, precise, opinionated. 

Suggested Kits: Chevalier, Envoy, Equerry, Squire. 


Inquisitive 

The inquisitive paladin has an unquenchable 
thirst for knowledge. Outgoing and amiable, his 
interests know no limits; he’s as fascinated by the 
rice-growing techniques of elven farmers as the 
mating rituals of ankhegs. His curiosity often frus- 
trates his companions, who may be eager to resume 


their travels while he lingers behind, discussing 
doctrine with a local priest or engrossed by a new- 
born bluebird pecking its way from its shell, 
Secondary Traits: Carefree, shallow, talkative, 
wise, distracted, warm, studious. 
Suggested Kits: Divinate, Envoy, Errant, Squire. 


Optimistic 

Relentlessly cheerful and unflaggingly confident, 
the optimistic paladin could not imagine a better 
life for herself. She is utterly convinced of the right- 
eousness of her cause, and looks forward to each 
day as a new opportunity to bring more goodness 
into the world. She delights in the companionship 
of others. Her comrades find her a source of inspi- 
ration and a beacon of hope in times of despair. 

Secondary Traits: Nurturing, compassionate, ex- 
troverted, compliant, humorous, relaxed, warm. 

Suggested Kits: Errant, Inquisitor, Skyrider, 
Squire. 


Philosophic 

The philosophic paladin is drawn to the plea- 
sures of the mind, preferring a poetry reading to a 
jousting match, a science text to a glass of fine wine. 
He enjoys scholarly debates on religion and history, 
and is fascinated by new cultures. His aptitude for 
intellectual analysis makes him an excellent tacti- 
cian and valued advisor. Rarely impulsive, his 
actions are measured and deliberate, born of logic 
rather than emotion. 

Secondary Traits: Thoughtful, cold, hesitant, dis- 
passionate, meticulous, curious. 

Suggested Kits: Chevalier, Divinate, Errant, Medi- 
cian. 


Prudent 

The prudent paladin acts with deliberation and 
foresight, believing that fortune smiles on the cau- 
. He weighs his words before speaking and is 
loathe to undertake a mission without careful plan- 
ning. He is impressed by logic, unmoved by emo- 
tion. His rational, dispassionate approach to prob- 
lem-solving makes him a superb tactician and arbi- 
trator, though some find him cold, even calculat- 
ing. His level head tempers his private affairs; he 


el 


Role-Playing * 99 


manages his stronghold well, avoids debt, and 
rarely succumbs to temptation. 

Secondary Traits: Shrewd, insightful, unfriendly, 
arrogant, keen-witted, reflective. 

Suggested Kits: Ghosthunter, Inquisitor, Militarist, 
Wyrmslayer. 


Secretive 

For reasons of his own, the secretive paladin 
reveals little about his background, motivations, or 
personality, even to his closest companions. He 
may wear a hood or visor at all times to conceal his 
features, dress in black or other dark colors, and 
cover or remove any heraldic symbols from his 
equipment. He keeps to himself, seldom speaking 
unless absolutely necessary; he may even wear a 
scarf around his mouth to muffle his voice. Though 
he faithfully fulfills his obligations to his party, he 
keeps his companions at arm’s length. There are 
many possible reasons for his behavior. He may be 
a fugitive from the law, unjustly accused of a crime, 
or a renegade from a government allied with evil. 
He may be doing penance for an ethos violation. Or 
“he” may be a woman, compelled to hide her sex 
because of social customs that restrict females from 
becoming paladins. 

Secondary Traits: Quiet, studious, eccentric, 
impulsive, threatening, nervous. 

Suggested Kits: Expatriate, Ghosthunter, Inquisi- 
tor, Wyrmslayer. 


Tormented 

The tormented paladin lives in the shadow of 
insecurity“and self-doubt. She holds herself to 
impossibly high standards, sometimes measuring 
her deeds against those of renowned paladins of 
history or legend, never considering that those 
deeds may have been fictional or exaggerated. At 
her core, the tormented paladin feels unworthy to 
serve her government or church, this despite her 
unimpeachable ethics and flawless performance on 
the battlefield. She scoffs at praise, resists assurance 
from her friends, and continually berates herself for 
perceived mistakes. 

Secondary Traits: Kind, sullen, analytical, shy, 
humble, sorrowful 


a aaaaaaaaaaaasaasasasasasasasasasasasassssts 


100 + Chapter Seven 


Suggested Kits: Chevalier, Divinate, Expatriate, 
Divinate, Squire. 


Vengeful 

A passionate hatred of evil fuels the vengeful 
paladin, who crushes his opponents with savage 
fury. Often, he’s motivated by revenge; perhaps he 
saw his parents slaughtered by drunken ogres, or 
his village burned to the ground by an evil war- 
lord. In any case, he seems intent on singlehand- 
edly eliminating evil from the face of the planet. 

Secondary Traits: Unapproachable, moody, bitter, 
bold, inspiring, violent. 

Suggested Kits: Chevalier, Expatriate, Ghost- 
hunter, Skyrider, Wyrmslayer. 


Strongholds 


Like fighters and rangers, paladins may establish 
and maintain castles, forts, temples, and other 
types of strongholds. But a paladin’s stronghold is 
more than a residence. It serves as a monument to 
his principles, a tribute to his deity, and a symbol of 
his lifetime of service. It can function as a military 
base, administrative office, religious sanctuary, 
prison, treasure house, or training center. It may 
also generate a modest income from agricultural 
products, taxes, or rents. 

A paladin may acquire land at any point in his 
career, but he must be at least 9th level before he 
can establish a stronghold. Paladins of lower levels 
lack reputation and contacts, and rarely have the 
monetary resources needed for construction costs 
and upkeep. 

Even at 9th level, however, a paladin should pro- 
ceed with caution. A stronghold requires an enor- 
mous commitment of time and money. Often, a 
paladin must oversee a staff of workers and a garri- 
son of soldiers, most of them expecting regular 
salaries. A paladin may face staggering costs for 
routine maintenance, which he dare not neglect—a 
shabby building reflects badly on his reputation 
and may also be a punishable violation of his ethos 
(see Chapter 3). 

If a paladin decides to take the plunge, he must 
determine the location of his intended stronghold, 


its size and design, and its purpose. Will it be his 
main home or an occasional residence? Is the gen- 
eration of income a primary consideration? Will the 
general public have access, or will it be open only 
to a select few? How much can he afford to invest? 
Are the officials of his government and church sup- 
portive or discouraging? Will they help with man- 
power, loans, or supplies? 

There is no fixed procedure for establishing a 
stronghold, but the following steps are usually 
involved. For more information, particularly 
regarding costs and layouts, consult DMGR2 The 
Castle Guide. 


Permission 


If a paladin has strong ties to a government or 
church, he must petition the proper officials for 
permission to build a stronghold. In most cases, the 
officials want to know the paladin’s plans in detail, 
particularly the proposed stronghold’s size, design, 
and function. The officials may demand an account- 
ing of the paladin’s economic status, including his 
net worth, projected income, and current debts. 

If the paladin has a solid reputation and answers 
their questions satisfactorily, the officials usually 
grant permission, contingent on a few conditions. 
For instance, the paladin may have to agree to live 
in the stronghold for a minimum number of months 
per year or pay an annual maintenance tax (in 
addition to his normal tithing requirements). He 
may be held personally responsible for the debts of 
all workers in his employ. Further, the officials may 
demand thé right to use his stronghold for military 
purposes in times of war. Finally, they may insist 
on a signed statement that permanently turns the 
stronghold over to them should the paladin violate 
the conditions of their agreement. 


Land Acquisition 


Paladins usually acquire the land for their strong- 
holds through grants or charters awarded by gov- 
ernment or church officials. A charter allows the 
paladin to administer the land more or less as he 
sees fit, with the officials retaining ownership. 


Chartered land often lies outside the jurisdiction of 
the government or church, meaning that the pal- 
adin may have to defend against ownership chal- 
lenges from other claimants. 

Monarchs sometimes award property in the 
form of a benefice; that is, the paladin manages the 
property as he sees fit in exchange for a promise of 
military service. Though the monarchy technically 
retains ownership of the property, the paladin 
keeps all the money from farming and other profit- 
making endeavors. The charter remains valid as 
long as the paladin meets his military obligations. 
Additionally, the monarchy agrees to provide sol- 
diers to help defend the stronghold, and to refrain 
from interfering in the paladin’s management 
decisions. 

A grant transfers legal ownership directly and 
unequivocally to the paladin. The best grant is an 
outright gift, given to recognize a noteworthy 
career, or as a reward for a military victory or 
some other act of exceptional service. A homestead 
grant gives ownership of a piece of land to the pal- 
adin after he’s lived and worked there for a prede- 
termined period (typically, 5-10 years). When a 
monarch awards a grant, he also specifies what 
will happen to the land when the paladin dies. A 
reversion arrangement returns the property to the 
king (or to whomever the land previously be- 
longed). A perpetuity grant entitles the paladin to 
name an heir to inherit his land, usually his suc- 
cessor. 

In the case of charters and grants, a paladin usu- 
ally takes whatever land he can get. A paladin 
wanting more say in the type and size of his land 
should consider other options. He may, for in- 
stance, petition his liege for ownership of a con- 
quered land; that is, a portion of a territory confis- 
cated from an enemy army or a property liberated 
from a heretical priesthood. Affluent or well-con- 
nected paladins may buy their land or negotiate a 
lease, paying a fixed sum each month that goes 
toward the purchase price. Land values vary wildly, 
but a paladin can expect to pay from 50-200 gold 
pieces per acre for undeveloped property in a good 
climate within reasonable distance of a civilized 
community. 


a 


Role-Playing + 101 


A paladin may also be responsible for a regency 
or trust, a locale that he neither owns nor occupies. 
As directed by his government or church, the pal- 
adin oversees the locale and makes all manage- 
ment decisions, including hiring employees and 
maintaining defenses. 


Site Location 


Paladins should choose the site of their strong- 
holds with an eye towards defensive advantages, 
convenience, and hidden costs. A stronghold in a 
valley is more difficult to defend that one at the top 
of a hill. Access to a river makes a moat easier to fill. 
Forests provide lumber for buildings and fruit for 
nourishment. Land in a city may be more expensive 
than in a small village, but labor and materials may 
be easier to procure. If the paladin wants to farm, or 
if he eventually plans to expand, he should buy as 
much land as he needs at the outset, rather than 
waiting until he builds his stronghold and drives up 
the value of the adjacent property. 

Paladins lacking the resources to buy land or the 
patience to wait for a grant may wish to settle in an 
unclaimed wilderness. If the paladin has strong ties 
to a government or church, he may be required to 
claim such land for his superiors. However, if the 
land is sufficiently remote and has no obvious mili- 
tary or economic value, the claim may just be a for- 
mality; his superiors may let him have it without 
any conditions. Of course, if the paladin has no ties 
to a government or church, he may be eligible to 
claim the land for himself. 

Though wilderness strongholds bring indepen- 
dence, they also bring problems. Should an enemy 
army lay siege, the paladin can’t turn to his govern- 
ment for help. He’s on his own to defend against 
monsters and claim-jumpers. He may have a hard 
time finding medicine, food, and other supplies. 
Damage from forest fires and other natural disas- 
ters may be difficult to contain. 


Design 


Stronghold designs range from small fortresses 
(essentially, fortified houses) to ornate castles with 


-—-e—rere————————————————————————————— 


102 * Chapter Seven 


multiple buildings and elaborate defenses. Bud- 
getary and ethical considerations, however, usually 
restrict paladins to modest layouts. If a paladin 
wants to spend more than 150,000 gp or so ona 
stronghold (see “Time and Money” below), he must 
petition his deity for permission. If the paladin’s 
intentions are honorable—for instance, if the strong- 
hold is intended to honor the deity or to provide 
jobs for destitute peasants—permission will proba- 
bly be granted. Because of his commitment to aus- 
terity (discussed in Chapter 3), a paladin will never 
establish a dominion or empire. 

Whenever practical, a paladin’. 
cludes the following components: 

Bailey. This is an open courtyard surrounded by 
a protective wall. The bailey is usually circular or 
rectangular, although the exact shape depends on 
the terrain. 

Keep. The stronghold’s primary structure, a 
keep is a rectangular or cylindrical building with 
thick stone walls, rising 50-80 feet high. The keep is 
the main residence of the paladin, his family, and 
his closest aides. It also serves as a storage area and 
as emergency housing for workers and soldiers 
should intruders breech the stronghold wall. 

Other stronghold buildings may include ware- 
houses, barracks, barns, and workshops. These 
buildings are made of wood or stone, ranging in 
size from 20 feet x 20 feet to 40 feet x 80 feet. Most 
are ground level; a few may have two stories. The 
buildings may be arranged in small clusters or 
linked by covered passageways to form one contin- 
uous structure. 

Moat. This is a ditch filled with water or mud 
that encircles the stronghold wall. To deter intrud- 
ers, a moat should be at least 10 feet wide and 10 
feet deep. 

Protective Wall. Typically, the outer wall of the 
stronghold is 15-50 feet tall and at least 10 feet 
thick. The wall is made of stone, often reinforced 
with sections of metal or wood. A protruding entry- 
way, called a barbican, consists of two stone towers, 
about 20-30 feet high and spaced 20-40 feet apart. 
A wooden gate reinforced with metal bars sits 
between the towers. A small building called a gate- 
may be positioned next to the gate; gate- 


stronghold in- 


house 


i eS 


Oh 


house guards monitor the comings and goings of 
stronghold visitors. To allow passage over the 
moat, the guards lower a drawbridge, consisting of 
a broad wooden platform connected by chains to a 
crank. The entry may be further protected by a 
sliding metal lattice called a portcullis, raised and 
lowered by pulleys and ropes. 

An open parapet called a battlement rises from 
the outer wall. Defenders of the stronghold stand 
behind the battlement to protect themselves from 
enemy mi 
protective wall, allowing defenders to hurl stones 
or splash hot oil on invaders through holes in the 
floor. 

Temple. Next to the keep, the temple (or shrine, 
cathedral, or church, as appropriate to the pal- 
adin’s faith) is the stronghold’s most imposing 
structure. The temple is usually made of stone, 
cylindrical or rectangular in shape, and adjacent or 
directly attached to the keep. Paladins prefer or 
nate temples, and any surplus funds in the budget 
usually go towards additional furnishings, decora- 


issiles. Some battlements extend over the 


il Ma 


zA 


tions, and architectural flourishes. Rock gardens 
and friezes are typical; statuary, fountains, and 
ornamental roofs are less common but highly 
desirable. 

Towers. Several stone towers stand along the 
walls, each about 30 feet or so tall. Square towers 
are less sturdy and more costly than round towers, 
but are easier to build. Soldiers stand on the tower 
roofs, protected by parapets, and throw spears and 
rocks at invaders. From inside the tower, they fire 
in the walls. 


arrows through narrow 


Time and Money 


Paladin strongholds aren't cheap. The costs of 
three configurations are listed below; the prices 
include labor but exclude the land. 

Small. A fortified tower (which serves as a keep) 
enclosed by a protective wall, along with one or 
two small storage buildings and worker dormito- 
ries. Cost: 40,000-60,000 gp. 

Medium. A modest villa or fort consisting of a 


a 


Role-Playing + 103 


50-foot keep, surrounded by a moat and a protec- 
tive wall, with a small temple, one or two stone 
towers, and a few auxiliary buildings. Cost: 80,000- 
120,000 gp. 

Large. A modest castle, including an 80-foot 
keep, an attached temple, a 50-foot protective wall 
(with a battlement), a moat, three or more towers, 
and several auxiliary buildings (barns, worker dor- 
mitories, storehouses). Cost: 130,000-170,000 gp. 

Ornate designs (including high-quality materials 
or works of art), difficult working conditions (a lack 
of adequate workers or excessive rain), and unex- 
pected setbacks (a wall collapses or a rot mold in- 
fects the local lumber supply) can increase the price 
from 50-100%. On the other hand, a good break can 
lower costs. For instance, a sympathetic monarch 
may donate labor, or a mine owner may make a deal 
on stone purchased in quantity. In any case, the DM 
has the final say on construction costs, as well as any 
circumstances that affect the final price. 

To estimate the number of days required to build 
a stronghold, divide the total cost of the stronghold 
by 1,000 and multiply the result by 144. For exam- 
ple, building a castle costing 100,000 gp takes 100- 
400 days. Keep in mind, however, that a production 
schedule seldom proceeds without interruption. 
Supply shortages, bad weather, sick and injured 
workers, and monster attacks can double or even 
triple the time required. Even a modest castle may 
take several years to complete. 


Staff 


Running even the smallest stronghold requires 
more attention than the paladin alone can supply. 
A loyal staff—composed of workers, soldiers, and a 
few trained specialists—is necessary to handle the 
stronghold’s day-to-day operations and provide a 
strong defense. 

Securing a staff is especially complicated for a 
paladin, since he doesn’t attract a body of followers 
like other fighters. Further, a paladin may hire only 
persons of lawful good alignment, limiting the pool 
of potential hirelings. 

Because of these restrictions, a paladin may be 
tempted to skimp on his staff. But he does so at 


—eeeeeeeeeeee——— 


104 * Chapter Seven 


great risk. The stronghold may fall into disrepair 
without a sufficient number of workers, devaluing 
the property and inviting reprimands from the pal- 
adin’s liege or church. An inadequate defense 
encourages raids from bandits, monsters, and hos- 
tile armies. Without a skilled steward, the paladin 
must supervise the stronghold’s daily routines. 

A paladin may begin his search for employees by 
making inquiries in local inns, posting notices, and 
asking for referrals from other landlords. Though 
interest may be limited at first, the number of 
applicants is likely to increase as word spreads of 
the paladin’s reputation for honesty and generos- 
ity. In general, a suitable candidate for a particular 
job may show up every week or so; a paladin can 
expect to spend at least two or three months to hire 
a staff of 12. 

It’s up to the paladin to screen all applicants, 
weeding out incompetent workers and potential 
troublemakers. Most important, he must ascertain 
each applicant's alignment by asking pointed 
questions (Have you ever been arrested? Have 
you ever been reprimanded by your church?), re- 
questing references (military service records and 
recommendations from previous employers), and 
conducting simple tests of honesty (the paladin 
leaves a gold coin on the floor, then leaves the 
room; will the applicant pocket the coin or return 
it?). If the paladin doubts the applicant's align- 
ment for any reason, it’s in his best interests to 
reject the applicant on the spot. If an employee 
later reveals an alignment other than lawful good, 
the paladin must dismiss him; additionally, the 
paladin may face penalties for violating his ethos 
(see Chapter 3). 

If convinced of the applicant's integrity and 
skills, the paladin then makes a formal offer, spelling 
out the duties of the job, the salary, all benefits, 
opportunities for promotion, and the term of em- 
ployment. If the terms are agreeable to the appli- 
cant, he accepts the job. Alternately, the DM may 
roll secretly for the applicant's reaction on Table 26. 
If the interview went exceptionally well for both 
parties, modify the roll by +1. If the paladin made 
an unusually generous offer, modify the roll by 
another +1. 


Table 26: Job Applicant's Reaction 


D10 
Roll Reaction 

1 The applicant flatly refuses the offer. 

2 The applicant asks for a 1d10 x 10% in- 
crease in the offered salary (or asks for a 
comparable perk). If the paladin declines, 
the applicant turns down the job. If the pal- 
adin agrees, roll again. 

3 The applicant asks for a 1d10 x 10% in- 
crease in the offered salary (or asks for a 
comparable perk). If the paladin refuses, 
the applicant accepts the job anyway. 

4-5 The applicant asks for 1-2 weeks to con- 
sider the offer. If the job remains open after 
this time, roll again. 

6-10 The applicant accepts the offer. 


How big a staff is needed? That depends on the 
size of the stronghold, the type of operation (farm 
workers are needed if the stronghold produces 
crops), and its location (more soldiers may be nec- 
essary in hostile territory). The paladin must also 
consider his financial health; workers won't stick 
around if he can’t meet the monthly payroll. It may 
take a bit of trial and error before the paladin set- 
tles on the optimum size and composition of his 
staff. Table 27 lists suggested staff sizes for small, 
medium, and large strongholds. 


Table 27: Staff Sizes for Strongholds 


Position Small Medium Large 
Chaplain 1 1-2 1-3 
Engineer s 1 1-2 
Guard Captain - 1 1-3 
Soldiers 2-10 10-50 50-70 
Stable Master - 1 1-3 
Steward 1 1 1-2 
Laborers 2-10 10-20 10-50 
Artillerist = 4 1-2 
Chamberlain - a! 1-4 
Physician - - 1-2 
Scribe = - 1-2 
Weaponsmith = 1 1-4 


Following are descriptions for the positions listed 
in Table 27, along with class and level recommenda- 
tions. A suggested monthly salary is also given; the 
paladin must also supply room and board. 

Chaplain. A cleric who shares the paladin’s 
faith, the chaplain takes responsibility for the 
stronghold’s religious needs. He conducts church 
services, consoles the ailing and the distraught, and 
provides spiritual guidance. Some chaplains ensure 
that tithings are collected and properly distributed. 
(3rd- to 5th-level cleric; 100-500 gp, depending on 
experience and duties.) 

Engineer. The engineer handles repairs, super- 
vises new construction, and maintains equipment. 
He anticipates structural problems and suggests 
ways the paladin might improve his property. In 
time, a good engineer should pay for himself. (2nd- 
to 4th-level wizard with Engineering proficiency; 
100-200 gp.) 

Guard captain. This is the commander of the pal- 
adin’s armed forces, usually a combat veteran with 
some administrative experience. Generally, it’s to 
the paladin’s advantage to hire the highest-level 
captain he can afford. However, a paladin with a 
small contingent of soldiers may not need an excep- 
tionally experienced (and expensive) guard cap- 
tain. (3rd- to 5th-level fighter; 300-500 gp.) 

Soldiers. These include archers (0- to 1st-level 
fighters; 4 gp), cavalry men (1st- to 2nd-level fight- 
ers; 5-10 gp), and foot soldiers (0- to 1st-level fight- 
ers; 1-2 gp). Typically, soldiers comprise the bulk of 
a paladin’s paid staff; a minimum of 50 soldiers is 
usually necessary to defend a large castle. 

Stable master. The caretaker of the paladin’s 
horses and stable. He sees that the animals are fed, 
watered, groomed, and exercised. He also cares for 
sick and injured mounts. The paladin still cares for 
his bonded mount personally. (1st- to 2nd-level 
fighter; 10-30 gp.) 

Steward. This is an administrator in charge of 
food preparation, cleaning, and general household 
management. (Wizard, warrior, or cleric of at least 
1st level; 100-200 gp.) 

Laborers. These are workers trained as harvesters, 
herdsmen, gardeners, stonecutters, cooks, seamstres- 
ses, and groundskeepers. (0-level fighters; 1-4 gp.) 


i 


Role-Playing * 105 


The paladin may also wish to consider filling 
the following positions. None of these are vital for 
small strongholds, but may be necessary if the 
paladin operates a large castle or if his holdings 
expand. 

Artillerist. If the stronghold uses siege weapons 
or similarly complex devices for defense, the 


artillerist is responsible for their maintenance and 
operation. (2nd- to 5th-level fighter; 100-400 gp) 

Chamberlain. An assistant to the steward, the 
chamberlain cares for the wardrobe and living 
quarters of the paladin and his closest aides. He 
also sees to the needs of guests and may assist 
with cleaning and food preparation. (0- to 1st- 
level fighter or cleric; 5-20 gp.) 

Physician. A medical practioner who cares for 
wounded and sick employees. (Ist- to 3rd-level 
cleric; 100-200 gp.) 

Scribe. A clerk in charge of the stronghold’s 
bookwork, including accounting and tax logs, 
tithing records, inventories, payrolls, and official 
communications. (1st- or 2nd-level cleric with the 
Reading/Writing proficiency; 10-50 gp.) 

Weaponsmith. This person is responsible for 
the repair and upkeep of the stronghold’s 
weaponry. If the paladin furnishes the necessary 
materials, a weaponsmith can often design and 
forge weapons from scratch. (1st- or 2nd-level 
warrior; 100-200 gp.) 


Privileged Relationships 


Because of their sterling reputations, paladins 
can often get an audience with officials of their 
government and church. Affluent citizens, 
renowned sages, and other influential nonplayer 
characters in the paladin’s territory also extend this 
courtesy, as do elite NPCs the paladin meets on his 
travels. As soon as the paladin requests to see him, 
the influential character usually arranges a meeting 
as soon as possible. A meeting doesn’t guarantee 
that the NPC will help the paladin or even be sym- 
pathetic to his plight. However, the paladin can 
reasonably expect a fair hearing. 

If the paladin is sincere and convincing, an elite 
NPC is inclined to respond positively. At the DM’s 
discretion, paladins earn a +2 bonus when encoun- 
tering good or neutral elite NPCs with whom they 
have an established relationship, and a +1 bonus for 
good and neutral elite NPCs the paladin is meeting 
for the first time. Evil NPCs, likely to be unmoved, 
receive no special bonuses to their reaction rolls. 


Experience 


Chapter 2 of the DMG explains how paladins 
gain experience. Table 28 summarizes these stan- 
dard experience awards. If you'd like experience 
awards to better reflect the guidelines in this book, 
use Table 29 instead. 


Training Rules for Paladins 


A paladin may seek training from a lawful good 
cleric or another paladin. The instructor must be 
at least one level higher the trainee, and skilled in 
the area he’s attempting to teach. The instructor 
must also pass a Wisdom and Charisma check to 
verify his patience, insight, and authority. 

The paladin must pay for his training. The DM 
determines the fee, based on the difficulty of the 
subject and the instructor’s reputation. Fees of 50- 
100 gp per week are typical, but may be raised or 
lowed as the DM sees fit. If the instructor has 
been furnished by the paladin’s government or 


aT 
church, the paladin may be eligible for a reduced 
fee. In some cases, the fee may be waived, or ex- 
changed for a promise of service. 

To determine the training time, subtract the 
instructor’s Wisdom from 19; the result is the 
minimum number of weeks required. At the end 
of this period, the paladin makes an Intelligence 
or Wisdom check (whichever is higher). If he 
passes the check, the training has been successful. 
If he fails the check, he must spend another week 
training. He then makes another check, with a -1 
bonus. He may continue to make checks, with 
each additional week resulting in an additional -1 
bonus. 


c aaaaaaamammħ— 


106 * Chapter Seven 


Table 28: Paladin Experience 


Action XP 
Per hit die of creatures defeated 10/level 
Monster experience Typ* 
Other group experience Typ* 


* Typ = Typical share of experience, as described 
in the DMG. 


Table 29: Optional Experience Awards 


Action XP 
Per spell level cast to overcome 
foes or problems 25 


Per character changed to lawful good alignment 
by paladin’s direct influence* 50/level 

Per hit die of creatures defeated 10/level 

Per spell level cast to further ethos** 50 


Monster experience Typ*** 
Other group experience yp“ 
Accepted as member of an order s500“ 
Becomes High Officer of an order Boo 


* The changed character must have originally 
been lawful neutral, neutral good, true neutral, or 
chaotic good. The paladin must be the primary fac- 
tor in the change. The award for a 0-level character 
is 25 XP. 

** Paladins gain experience for using spells to 


promote their philosophies and principles, just like 
priests. Therefore, a paladin who uses spiritual 
hammer to destroy an ogre would gain this experi- 
ence bonus because he eliminated a source of evil. 

*** Typ = Typical share of experience, as de- 
scribed in the DMG, pp. 45-48. 

**** See Chapter 9, p. 116. These are minimum 
awards, which may be significantly increased for 
membership in high-status orders.’ 


el 


Role-Playing * 107 


All paladins have an abiding faith that serves as 
a moral compass and foundation for their ethical 
principles. Although most follow established reli- 
gions, others draw spiritual sustenance from non- 
traditional philosophies and even natural forces. 
All paladins, however, believe in something: Their 
faith provides them with not only their spells, but 
also their special powers. 

This chapter looks at the medieval relationship 
between paladins and the church, as well as some 
alternatives to the historical model. It also exam- 
ines the paladin’s duties and responsibilities to his 
faith, along with the penalties imposed for violat- 
ing religious edicts. 


Campaign Models 


In an AD&D” campaign, virtually any type of 
relationship between church and state is permitted. 
One kingdom may adhere to the feudal model. In 
another, the church may claim exclusive sover- 
eignty. It’s important for all characters to under- 
stand the balance of power in their world, but it’s 
absolutely vital to the paladin, as it affects his 
behavior, loyalty, and ethos. 

Following are three general types of church-state 
relationships. Each describes the roles of religion 
and government; specifically, who makes and 
enforces the laws of the land, and what role the pal- 
adin assumes in the official hierarchy. The “Fealty 
Notes” section suggests answers to these questions: 

e Ifa paladin comes from this type of society, to 
whom does he pledge fealty? (Chapter 3 discusses 
the general tesponsibilities of fealty.) 

e If the paladin has pledged fealty to both the 
church and state, whom does he obey when reli- 
gious and secular laws conflict? 

The DM has the final decision about which 
avenues of faith are open to the paladin, as well as 
the relationship between the paladin’s faith and his 
government. Some, all, or none of these examples 
may work in a campaign; the DM may develop 
other models equally valid and useful. 


— aaaħõÁ 


108 + Chapter Eight 


Co-Dominant Rule 


A co-dominant society more or less follows the 
feudal model, where government and religion 
share the burden of law enforcement and adminis- 
trative duties. The government handles matters 
pertaining to foreign affairs, economics, and prop- 
erty rights, while the church regulates morality and 
social law. In all cases, however, the monarchy and 
church leaders work closely together to protect 
their mutual interests. Neither institutes a new pol- 
icy without consulting the other. Consequently, 
government and church laws rarely conflict. 

The government reinforces the authority of the 
church by declaring it the official state religion. 
Other faiths may be tolerated, but not sanctioned; 
only the state religion has the power to shape gov- 
ernment policy. The monarchy seeks the opinion of 
the church in all critical decisions, including diplo- 
matic appointments, declarations of war, and terri- 
torial annexations. A high-ranking priest of the 
state church always serves as an official advisor, 
usually in the capacity of Lord Chaplain, Curate, or 
High Patriarch. 

The church, in turn, reinforces the authority of 
the state by promoting the concept of divine right. 
Essentially, this doctrine declares that monarches 
serve at the pleasure of the gods; neither the ap- 
proval nor consent of the citizenry is required. 
Because the monarch in effect answers only to the 
gods, divine right virtually guarantees the loyalty 
of his subjects. 

The church can remove a monarch at will, 
merely by rescinding divine approval. Rescission 
may result from a major policy disagreement, 
immoral behavior, or unlawful activities. Divine 
approval may also be withdrawn to punish an 
arrogant, ailing, or uncooperative king. However, 
the church uses this power only as a last resort. 
Because disruptions often trigger social unrest, 
even civil wars, it is in the best interests of both the 
government and state church to cooperate and 
maintain continuity. 

A paladin from a co-dominant society usually 
serves in the military branch of either the govern- 
ment or church, depending on where he was 


trained and who most needs his services. In the 
government military, he answers to a ranking offi- 
cer, usually a high-level warrior (who may be 
another paladin). In a church military, he usually 
follows the orders of a high-level priest, or a 
higher-level paladin entrusted with the prosecu- 
tion of military affairs. In societies where the 
church and government share a military, a paladin 
typically serves under a high-level warrior, who in 
turn may answer to an administrative board con- 
taining both government and church representa- 
tives. 

Fealty notes: A paladin who serves in a co-domi- 
nant society probably pledges fealty to both gov- 
ernment and church. Because religious and secular 
laws are compatible, he should experience few 
problems with conflicting edicts. A church official 
will never intentionally issue an edict that conflicts 
with government policy, nor will a government 
official purposely give an order that violates church 
doctrine. 

If edicts inadvertently conflict, the paladin can 
usually avoid violating his ethos if he obeys his 
church, even if he declines an order from his gov- 
ernment. For instance, if a government official 
orders a paladin to undertake a military exercise on 
a day the church has set aside for meditation and 
prayer, the paladin may decline the official's order 
without fear of retribution. 


Secularism 


A secular society maintains a strict separation 
between church and state. While religious prac- 
tices may be tolerated, even encouraged, church 
officials have no direct say in government policy. 
The church may serve as an informal advisor to 
the government in matters pertaining to morality 
and behavior, but the government is under no 
obligation to pass such recommendations into law. 
Because a secular government doesn’t need 
endorsement from the church, rulers don’t depend 
on divine right for authority. Secular governments 
range from totalitarianism, where the state exerts 
total control over its people, to democracies, where 
the people elect their representatives. 


Although the church may issue its own edicts, 
these edicts apply only the followers of that partic- 
ular faith. The church may punish its followers for 
violating religions edicts, but only if the punish- 
ments don’t interfere with the rights guaranteed to 
all citizens under the laws of the state. A church, 
for instance, may excommunicate a blasphemous 
follower, but it may not imprison or execute him 
(unless the state has sanctioned such punish- 
ments). 

In some secular societies, the government 
refuses to recognize the church’s power of excom- 
munication. If the gods want to excommunicate 
somebody, they do it themselves instead of relying 
on human intermediaries. A man lives as moral a 
life as he can; after he dies, the gods pass judgment 
on the fate of his spirit. Membership in a church 
has little bearing on the gods’ decision. 

A paladin serving a secular government likely 
works in a military or diplomatic capacity, and 
adheres to a rigid command hierarchy. A high- 
ranking warrior or paladin serves as his immediate 
commander. But as a good soldier and loyal citizen, 
he is expected to follow the orders of all superior 
officers and government officials. 

Fealty notes: A paladin from a secular society 
probably pledges fealty to his government. He 
may also pledge fealty to a church if he likes. How- 
ever, when government and religious policies con- 
flict, he is expected to follow the edicts of his 
government, even if it means disobeying an edict 
from his church. (With two exceptions—a direct 
command from a deity always overrides orders 
from a government; further, a paladin will never 
follow a government edict that conflicts with his 
core principles—his principles always take priority 
over social institutions.). 

If a paladin doesn’t pledge fealty to a church, he 
must pledge fealty to a philosophy or force (see 
“Alternatives to Churches” below). If a command 
from a teacher or mentor conflicts with govern- 
ment policy, he must give priority to the edicts 
from his government. However, a direct command 
from a deity always take precedence over govern- 
ment obligations. 


Neen eee ee UE EEE EEEEEEIEEIEEIEEEIEIIESEEESEEEESEE ERENT 


Faith * 109 


Theocracy 


In a theocratic society, the clergy assumes all 
leadership roles. In essence, the church functions as 
the government, claiming absolute authority in all 
civil, legal, and ethical matters. Laws come directly 
from the gods, interpreted and regulated by the 
priesthood. To maintain order and ensure continu- 
ity, a theocracy recognizes only the state religion. 
Other religions may be driven underground at best, 
declared blasphemous and illegal at worst. 

As in a secular government, paladins serving a 
theocracy probably work as soldiers, though some 
may function as ambassadors, diplomats, or evan- 
gelists. Most theocratic hierarchies consider pal- 
adins to be lay brethren or acolytes, minor religious 
dignitaries with formal responsibilities to the 
church but without the status or authority of offi- 
cial clergymen. 

A paladin serving a theocracy always answers to 
a priest. A novice paladin may be assigned a “shep- 
herd,” a priest of 1st or 2nd level who constantly 
shadows the paladin, monitoring his activities, and 
reporting any discrepancies to his superiors. A 
curate (an administrator of at least 5th level in 
charge of several congregations in a small town or 
city district) oversees low-level paladins, whereas a 
primate (a priest of at least 10th level, responsible 
for a city or section of a kingdom) may supervise 
high-level paladins. 

Fealty notes: A paladin from a theocratic society 
need only pledge fealty to the church; pledging 
fealty to the government isn’t necessary, because 
the church i the government. Pledging fealty to his 
family, a mentor, or other source is allowable, but 
edicts of the church always take priority. (Again, 
direct commands from a deity override orders from 
church officials.) 


Additional Considerations 


The three relationships described above presume 
that both the church and government are of lawful 
good alignment. In no case will a paladin pledge 
fealty to a neutral or evil organization or individual. 
Ina secular society with an evil government, he 


a — 


110 * Chapter Eight 


may pledge fealty to a lawful good religion, but not 
to the government itself. In a neutral theocracy, he 
must either pledge fealty to an underground or ille- 
gal lawful good religion—one independent of the 
theocratic rulers—or he must separate from his soci- 
ety, looking elsewhere for a government to serve. 

Keep in mind, too, that many variants are possi- 
ble within these broad descriptions. While a secular 
government may not officially recognize a church, 
a secular ruler may maintain an informal relation- 
ship with a powerful or highly charismatic reli- 
gious leader. Through friendly persuasion or sheer 
force of personality, the religious leader may coerce 
the secular ruler into passing laws promoting reli- 
gious doctrine. Although the government and state 
church may theoretically exert equal influence in a 
co-dominant society, power struggles among the 
religious elite may render the church impotent, let- 
ting government leaders do as they please. 

A wise paladin keeps abreast of changes in the 
political landscape, lest he inadvertently find him- 
self serving a neutral or evil master. A corrupt offi- 
cial may take over the government of a co-domi- 
nant society; while the state church may remain 
lawful good, the government may become neutral 
or worse. An Errant returning to his theocratic 
homeland from the field may discover that a cadre 
of evil clerics has replaced the lawful good hierar- 
chy of the state church. 


Renouncing Fealty 


Once a paladin discovers that his church or gov- 
ernment has become neutral or evil, he may imme- 
diately renounce his pledge of fealty without 
penalty. From that point on, he is not obligated to 
follow their edicts. He must discard symbols repre- 
senting a renounced church or government. He 
must also give up equipment that the church or 
government has loaned or given to him. 

A paladin who renounces his church must imme- 
diately pledge fealty to one of the following: 

e A new lawful good church. 

e A lawful good philosophy. 

e The set of principles represented by the re- 
nounced church before it became neutral or evil. 


A paladin who renounces his government has 
several options: 

e He may continue serving in the same society. 
However, he is now obligated to obey only the 
edicts of his faith (and any other nongovernmental 
individuals or institutions to which he has pledged 
fealty). 

* He may relocate to a different land, pledging 
fealty to a new lawful good government. 

e He may become an Expatriate (see Chapter 4). 


Alternatives to Churches 


Whereas most paladins pledge fealty to churches, 
others may opt to serve a sect. Like churches, sects 
are religious organizations that worship one or 
more gods, but they tend to be smaller and more 
secretive. 

Most sects usually begin as an outgrowth of an 
established church. A sect leader and his followers 
separate from the church due to disagreements 
with church leaders or because of a contradictory 


interpretation of religion doctrine. If a sect flour- 
ishes and grows, it may eventually become a church 
itself. 

Some sects organize themselves around a single 
leader who has developed his own set of religious 
principles. These may not have any formal ties to 
an organized faith; in fact, some do not recognize 
the authority of other religious leaders. They often 
spring up spontaneously, lasting no more than a 
single generation. 

Some paladins avoid associations with any type 
of organized religion, instead choosing to venerate 
a philosophy, a belief system based on intellectual 
concepts rather than supernatural entities. Any 
philosophy serves as an acceptable alternative to 
an organized religion, so long as it meets these 
qualifications: 

* It presents a logical and self-consistent inter- 
pretation of the universe. 

e It demands lawful good behavior of followers. 

e It’s broad enough to form the basis of the pal- 
adin’s ethos. 

Paladins who follow a philosophy may worship 
privately or in small sects. Meditation may substi- 


tute for prayer. A hill blanketed in violets may 
function as a shrine. A book of poetry may take the 
place of a holy text. 

Regardless of whether a paladin has faith in a 
religion or philosophy all work the same way in the 
context of the game. A paladin’s devotion is suffi- 
ciently intense to attract the magical energy neces- 
sary to cast spells and give him his special powers. 
As with a lawful good religion, a lawful good phi- 
losophy requires strict adherence to a set of lawful 
good principles, characterized by the strictures and 
virtues of the paladin’s ethos. 


Guidelines for Religious Edicts 


Generally, a paladin’s religion (or philosophy) 
imposes more edicts than his government, family, 
or any other sources discussed in Chapter 3. Where- 
as a government may be concerned with defense, 
economics, and order, a religion may be concerned 
with all of these things, plus morality, worship, and 
spiritual salvation. 

To remain true to his ethos, a paladin may have 
to juggle edicts from a variety of sources. Generally, 
edicts from his religion and government take prece- 
dence over those from his family and culture. 
When governmental and religious edicts conflict, 
use “Campaign Models” in this chapter to help pri- 
oritize them. 

Because faith takes many forms, there are no 
fixed rules for determining which religious edicts 
are appropriate for a particular paladin. It’s up to 
DM to make these decisions, based on the preva- 
lence of religion in his campaign, the paladin’s 
background, and the paladin’s kit. 

The DM may use the following guidelines to 
help decide the type, number, and severity of reli- 
gious edicts. Remember, these are generalizations. 
They may not apply to every campaign nor to 
every paladin. 

* More edicts are associated with an organized 
religion than a philosophy. 

e A theocracy issues more religious edicts than a 
co-dominant society. 

e The larger the organization, the more edicts it 
issues. A large church may have officials who do 


REE UEEEEI EEE EEE 


Faith + 111 


nothing but amend old edicts and draft new ones. 
Large churches have more interests to protect, more 
disciples to regulate, and more enemies to fear. 

e A paladin who lives in a monastery or other 
church-owned building has more edicts to follow 
than a paladin who lives in his monarch’s castle or 
his own stronghold. 


Types of Edicts 


Below are three categories of religious edicts, 
along with several representative examples. The 
DM is encouraged to supplement these lists with 
edicts of his own. Though the number of edicts 
varies according to doctrine and circumstance, it’s 
a rare paladin who isn’t required to follow at least 
one or two edicts from each category. 


Expressions of Faith 


Most paladins, regardless of whether they follow 
a religion or philosophy, must perform certain rites 
to affirm their faith, Church officials may establish 
some of them; for instance, a paladin may be re- 
quired to pray before every meal. Others may be 
self-imposed; for instance, a paladin may dedicate 
each battle to the spirit of his murdered brother. 
Other examples: 

Prayer: The most common type of religious 
expression, prayer takes many forms. A prayer 
may be a verbal recitation from a sacred text, sev- 
eral minutes of silent meditation, or a fresh verse 
composed anew each morning. A paladin may be 
required to” pray at a particular time every day (at 
sunrise or before bed), whenever he gets a chance 
(such as once a week), or only when a certain event 
occurs (the death of a companion or a falling star). 

Rituals: A ritual comprises a fixed sequence of 
actions, performed at a specific time (the first day 
of spring, the paladin’s birthday) or to recognize a 
particular event (the defeat of an enemy, the acqui- 
sition of a bonded mount). An endless variety of 
rituals is possible: tossing a gem into a volcano, 
building a shrine with a specific number of stones, 
bathing in a stream with a perfumed soap, immers- 
ing a sword in an enemy’s ashes. 


112 + Chapter Eight 


Proselytizing: Some churches require their pal- 
adins to proselytize, spreading the word about 
their faith and recruiting new converts (an espe- 
cially strict church might impose a recruitment 
quota, requiring a paladin to bring in a minimum 
number of converts every year). Alternately, the 
paladin may invite curious agnostics to attend reli- 
gious services or engage skeptics in philosophic 
dialogues. He may also (in the absence of suitable 
clerics) give religious instruction to acolytes, lead 
prayer services, and assist with sermons. 

Symbol: To demonstrate his devotion, the pal- 
adin may be obliged to display the symbol of his 
faith on his shield, armor, or banner. He may also 
wear a piece of jewelry, such as a ring or pendant, 
inscribed with the symbol. 

Pilgrimage: The paladin may have to make pil- 
grimages to a temple, saint's tomb, mountain peak, 
cemetery, or other sacred location. Once he arrives, 
he may be required to say a prayer, present an of- 
fering, or spend the night in meditation. A pilgrim- 
age may be made on a specific date (a holy holiday 
or the date of a founder’s death) or within a partic- 
ular period (once a year or any time before he 
attains a new level). 


Service 


The paladin may be expected to perform a vari- 
ety of military, ceremonial, and household duties. 
These duties supplement the routine responsibili- 
ties required of all paladins, as described in Chap- 
ter 7. Examples: 

Eliminate enemies of the faith: All paladins are 
expected to defend their faith against the forces of 
evil. As a minimum, the paladin must protect his 
church, monastery, or temple from enemy attacks, 
and must also seek out and destroy all evil charac- 
ters and creatures. 

Beyond these basic requirements, the paladin’s 
responsibilities depend on exactly how his faith 
defines evil. While most faiths accept the standard 
definition (that is, the definition in the PH), some 
define evil more narrowly. It’s possible, for in- 
stance, for a church to condemn a particular neu- 
tral religion as blasphemous, in which case a 


paladin may be obliged to destroy the followers of 
the neutral religion as if they were evil (the Votary, 
described in Chapter 4, is one example). Con- 
versely, a liberal church may require its paladins to 
eliminate only chaotic evil characters and crea- 


Historical Role of the Church 


Compared to his medieval counterpart, the 
knight of the 10th century was almost unrecog- 
nizable. More outlaw than hero, the pre-feudal 
knight gloried in barbarism, ignoring written law 
in favor of vigilantism. The monarchy, weakened 
by infighting and indifference, could do little to 
control them. While peasants came to resent and 
even fear the knights, they lacked the resources to 
impose order. Anarchy loomed. 

Uneasy about the knights’ increasing power, 
the church abdicated its passive status and re- 
solved to take action. This decision was made for 
two reasons. First, the church stood for peace and 
order, principles the knights openly mocked. To 
live up to these sacred ideals, the church had no 
choice but to assert its authority. Second were 
practical considerations. The church depended on 
peasant tithes and rental property for income. For 
its economic survival, the church had to find a 
way to suppress knightly greed. 

The church initiated its ambitious campaign in 
the late 10th century by proclaiming the “Peace of 
God.” Taken literally, the Peace of God renewed 
the church’s commitment to protecting the lives 
and property of all people. Implicit in the procla- 
mation, however, was the notion that those who 
threatened to disrupt the social order were ene- 
mies not only of the state, but of God himself. 
Although no enemies were identified, the procla- 
mation was obviously aimed at the knights. 

To enforce the Peace of God, church dignitaries 
organized a series of ceremonial affirmations. 
Held in public forums to guarantee large audi- 
ences and maximum exposure, the dignitaries 
invited nobles, aristocrats, military officials, and 
the knights themselves to pledge a peace-keeping 
oath. The ceremonies were conducted with much 


tures; other evil adversaries may be destroyed, 
imprisoned, or even tolerated, as decided by the 
individual paladin. 

Healing: In many religions, a paladin’s extraor- 
dinary healing powers are valued not only for their 


pomp and solemnity, including the presentation 
of sacred relics and special prayers to reaffirm 
God’s omnipotence. Further, the church warned 
that anyone who failed to uphold the Peace of 
God would be excommunicated. It was a threat 
not taken lightly. Even the most seditious knights 
feared an afterlife in Purgatory—or worse. 

The church undertook the second phase of its 
campaign in the early 11th century by issuing the 
“Truce of God.” Unlike the previous proclamation, 
the Truce was specifically directed to the knights, 
spelling out in no uncertain terms the behavior 
expected of them in order to remain true to their 
faith. Knights were forbidden to attack the clergy 
under any circumstances, nor were they allowed 
to commit violent acts against peasants. They were 
required to fast on holy days and refrain from 
fighting on the weekends. Fearing divine retribu- 
tion, the knights grudgingly complied. 

By the middle 11th century, the church had 
succeeded in convincing the knights that they 
were soldiers of God. As such, they were duty- 
bound to defend the church and promote its 
interests. Reluctantly but irrevocably, the knights 
adjusted, abandoning their independence for 
their new role as divine servants. They accepted 
special blessings, participated in sacred rituals, 
and distinguished themselves on the field of bat- 
tle. Once scorned, knights were now respected 
and admired. 

But the benefits gained by the knights paled 
before those acquired by the church. Not only had 
the church built an army of loyal warriors, it had 
become a formidable political force. As the church 
grew in wealth and power, the distinctions 
between religion and government gradually 
blurred. Clerical leaders came to influence every 
facet of government. This uneasy alliance per- 
sisted for much of the Middle Ages. 


SS ee 


114 + Chapter Eight 


practical applications, but also for their sacred 
implications. Each healing may be a holy sacra- 
ment, proof of the deity’s compassion. 

As a requirement of such a faith, a paladin may 
have to perform elaborate healing ceremonies. For 
example, the paladin may don a golden ritual 
gown, then lay hands on an ailing peasant while 
priestly acolytes chant and sing. 

In certain primitive religions, priests believe that 
evil spirits cause illness. The mere presence of a 
paladin helps frighten the spirits away. In practice, 
a paladin may stay with an infirm patient for days, 
even weeks, until the illness passes. 

A paladin may also be obliged to assist at the 
beginning and end of life when a cleric isn’t avai 
able. During the delivery of a child, a palad 
words comfort the mother while his touch blesses 
the new baby with good health. When a high-rank- 
ing priest or important member of the congregation 
nears death, the paladin remains at his bedside, act- 
ing as a symbolic escort into the next world. 


Behavior 


Faiths impose behavioral edicts to instill disci- 
pline, address the perceived des 
keep their followers submissive. Some behavioral 
edicts persist merely as tradition, their meaning no 
longer understood. Examples include: 

e No facial hair. Heads must be shaven bald 
(females included) or tonsured. 

e Fast for 1-4 days per month. (The DM may 
impose a -] penalty on all ability checks or combat 
rolls during this time.) 

e Must wear certain clothing (a cap or other head 
covering, sandals instead of boots, a knotted belt, a 
particular color). 

e No violent acts in a church burial ground. 

e Must leave a portion of food remaining on his 
plate and a sip of drink in his cup at the end of a 
meal (to symbolize temperance). 

e May not touch a corpse. 

e Must always sleep in a particular way. 

e May not use curative powers on animals. 

+ May fight on a holy day only in self-defense. 


res of a deity, or 


Faith • 115 


CHAPTER 


Orders are honorary organizations whose mem- 
bers are distinguished by careers of exceptional 
service. As invitations to join are extended only to 
a select few, most paladins view membership as a 
profound privilege and great accolades. 

Whereas some orders exist merely as social clubs, 
providing fellowship in an informal atmosphere, 
others perform a variety of civic activities, such as 
charity drives and educational programs. Regard- 
less of its function, each order maintains its own 
membership qualifications, hierarchies, and bylaws. 

Orders are entirely optional. A DM is never 
required to include a particular order in his cam- 
paign, nor is a paladin character ever obligated to 
join. In any case, treat an invitation as a major 
event. The DM should not devalue the prestige of 
membership by offering invitations casually or as 
prizes for routine performance; typically, a paladin 
receives an invitation only once in his life. 

Several sample orders are described below. A 
campaign may include any, all, or just one of them. 
The DM is free to modify or adapt the descriptions 
as he sees fit, or invent new orders of his own. 

The standard information below applies to all 
orders; the individual entries that follow include 
supplemental material. Additionally, each entry lists 
an emblem and a motto. A candidate repeats the 
motto when he accepts membership; most orders 
recite the motto to open and close their meetings. 


Standard Information 


Requirements 


Generally, a paladin is eligible to become a mem- 
ber of an order regardless of his religion, home- 
land, or kit: However, an order rarely offers mem- 
bership to paladins lower than 9th level (with the 
exception of the Radiant Heart Auxiliary, on page 
117). The higher the level, the better the chance for 
an invitation. 

A paladin may petition a particular order for 
membership, or a current member may extend an 
invitation. In either case, an active member of the 
order must agree to sponsor the candidate. The 
sponsor must be at least one level higher than the 


ooo 


116 * Chapter Nine 


candidate and must be familiar with the candi- 
date’s reputation and achievements. The sponsor 
formally presents the candidate to a meeting of the 
entire membership, who will spend the next full 
year mulling over his petition. During that time, 
active members may observe the candidate in the 
field and interview his superiors. 

At the next annual meeting, the membership 
votes on the candidate. If a majority prevail, he’s 
invited to join. Following an initiation ceremony— 
which may include prayer services, feasts, and con- 
tests—the candidate vows fealty to the order. The 
candidate promises: 

* To uphold the laws of the order and obey the 
dictates of the High Officers. 

* To attend all meetings, unless unavoidably 
detained or his absences are excused in advance. 
Except for emergencies, meetings are held no more 
than once or twice a year, usually in a High Offi- 
cer’s stronghold, a building loaned by a friendly 
monarch, or an open field. 

e To provide aid to any member who asks. 

* To display the order’s emblem on his coat of 
arms, shield, or banner, as determined by the order. 


Organization 


An order consists of a variable number of chap- 
ters. Each chapter elects its own officials (called 
High Officers), sets its own meetings, and estab- 
lishes its own bylaws. The High Officers of all 
chapters hold a special meeting once every two or 
three years to exchange information and review 
policy. The number and titles of the High Officers 
vary from order to order, as do the qualifications 
for holding office. 


Benefits 


When accepted as a member of any order, a pal- 
adin earns a bonus of 500 experience points. This is 
a one-time bonus; should he become a member of 
another order, he doesn’t get an extra 500 points. If 
he becomes a High Officer, he earns another 500 
points (another one-time bonus). 

A member of any order may add an honorific title 


before his name. The DM should choose titles appro- 
priate to his campaign world. Typical titles include 
Sir or Lady, His or Her Excellency, Master or Mis- 
tress, the Most Worthy, and the Most Revered. A 
High Officer may also add the title of his office after 
his name. For instance, a High Officer of the Most 
Noble Order of the Radiant'Heart might be called Sir 
Terran of Homewood, Prelate of the Radiant Heart. 

When displaying his emblem, a member receives 
a +1 bonus to his reaction rolls from all lawful and 
neutral NPCs, familiar with his order. 


Dismissal 


A paladin who violates any of the conditions of 
his vow to the order is immediately and perma- 
nently dismissed. He loses all benefits of the order, 
must turn in his emblem, and may never again 
become a member of that or any other order. At the 
DM’s option, any ethos violation may also qualify 
as grounds for dismissal. 

A paladin may appeal his dismissal to the High 
Officers. If the paladin committed a minor or inad- 
vertent violation, the High Officers may overturn 
the dismissal or suspend his membership for a year 
or two; he loses all benefits of the order during that 
time. When his suspension ends, the High Officers 
review his performance, then submit his application 
to the entire membership. On a majority vote, the 
paladin again becomes an active member. 


Most Noble Order of the 
Radiant. Heart 


The most prestigious of all orders, the Radiant 
Heart commands respect from the highest ranks of 
the aristocracy, who regard its members regarded 
as dignitaries in their own right. The Radiant Heart 
honors not only distinguished service, but what is 
perhaps the most remarkable accomplishment of 
any paladin—a long life. Primarily a social organi- 
zation, the Radiant Heart holds a lavish feast every 
spring, held in the castle of a grateful monarch who 
donates both the labor and the food. In their free 
time, members counsel younger paladins, serve as 
government advisors, and officiate at tournaments. 


Requirements: A candidate must be at least 40 
years old and have the Etiquette proficiency. He 
must have two sponsors: a member of the royalty 
of his homeland and an active member of the order. 

Organization: A chapter has 25 members. The 
order considers a new candidate only when one of 
the members dies or voluntarily steps down. 

A chapter's High Officers consist of three Prelates, 
each of 15th level or higher. A Prelate must also have 
been a member in good standing for no less than 10 
years. The Prelates make decisions by consensus, 
with suggestions from a lieutenant called the Chan- 
cellor (a paladin of at least 12th level, also consid- 
ered a High Officer). When a Prelate dies or retires, 
the Chancellor takes his place. The Prelates then 
appoint a new Chancellor. All High Officers wear a 
tattoo of the order’s emblem on their left wrist. 

Emblem: A stylized outline of a heart. 

Motto: “The courage of one can change the des- 
tiny of many.” 

Benefits: A Radiant Heart member has unlimited 
access to all lawful good government and church 
officials, as well as all lawful good aristocrats, land 
owners, and other elite characters. He receives a +3 
bonus to his reaction rolls from all lawful and neu- 
tral NPCs instead of the normal +1 bonus. When he 
dies, the order assumes financial responsibility for 
his survivors, assuring them a comfortable income 
for the rest of their lives. The order supplies these 
funds from their personal treasuries, or makes 
arrangements with sympathetic monarchs. 

Dismissal: A member who violates his vow to 
the order, or commits an act heinous enough to cost 
him his paladinhood, is beheaded. Should the 
member flee, the order hunts him down. 


Radiant Heart Auxiliary 


This is the junior wing of the Most Noble Order 
of the Radiant Heart, organized to honor outstand- 
ing young paladins. Like the Most Noble Order, the 
Auxiliary is a social organization, though its mem- 
bers may occasionally be called upon to serve or 
assist their sponsors. 

Requirements: A candidate must be at least 4th 
level. He must be sponsored by an active member 


pa 


Orders * 117 


of the Most Noble Order. Two Prelates must ap- 
prove his membership. 

Organization: Each Most Noble Order chapter 
has its own Auxiliary, consisting of no more than 40 
members (15-20 is typical). A Chairman, elected 
from the ranks, conducts the Auxiliary’s meetings; 
the Chairman is not considered a High Officer. 

A paladin serves as a member of the Auxiliary for 
a five-year term. At the end of that period, he may 
renew his membership for another five years with 
the unanimous vote of all current Auxiliary mem- 
bers and the approval of two Prelates. Alternately, 
he may voluntarily retire to make himself eligible for 
another order. If he has achieved 9th level and meets 
the eligibility requirements, he may be considered 
for full membership in the Most Noble Order. A pal- 
adin is not eligible for membership in any order so 
long as he is an active member of the Auxiliary. 

Emblem: A heart symbol, similar to that of the 
Most Noble Order, enclosed in a circle. The symbol 
is embroidered on a sash or painted on a shield. 

Motto: “A loyal heart and a faithful spirit.” 

Benefits: An Auxiliary member does not receive 
the 500 experience point bonus, nor is he allowed 
to add an honorific title before his name; these ben- 
efits are reserved for order members only. How- 
ever, he does receive the +1 bonus to his reaction 
rolls when he displays his emblem. 

Dismissal: Standard. 


Ancient and Revered Order 
of the Thorn 


Second inprestige only to the Order of the Radi- 
ant Heart, the Order of the Thorn recognizes service 
to a church. Membership is extended to those 
demonstrating exemplary courage in defense of reli- 
gious principles or church property. Largely an hon- 
orary organization, members have no responsibili- 
ties other than counseling their congregations and 
helping church leaders interpret religious doctrine. 

Requirements: A candidate must have two 
sponsors: an official of his church (a priest of 8th 
level or higher), and an active member of the order. 
Once accepted into the order, a member must tithe 
an extra 10% of his income to the church that spon- 


eee 


118 * Chapter Nine 


sored him. This in addition to his normal tithe. 

Organization: Each chapter has 12 members, 
and will consider new candidates only when an 
active member dies or steps down. A chapter has a 
single High Officer, called a Rector, nominated by a 
committee of church leaders, then approved by a 
vote of the membership. To acknowledge his posi- 
tion, the Rector wears a velvet sash around his neck 
bearing the order’s symbol. 

Emblem: A long-stemmed rose. 

Motto: “Faith is the mother of duty and the 
father of truth.” 

Benefits: A Thorn member receives a +2 bonus 
to his reaction rolls from all lawful and neutral 
NPCs instead of the normal +1 bonus. Each mem- 
ber has a private prayer cell in his church, used for 
reflection and meditation. When he dies, his hel- 
met, sword, and coat of arms are placed in the cell 
as a memorial. 

Dismissal: Standard. 


Distinguished Order of the 
Crystal Dawn 


An elite organization of land-owners, the Order 
of Crystal Dawn recognizes business acumen and 
successful resource management. It provides 
investment advice and low-interest loans to its 
members, and serves the community with charity 
drives and financial counseling. 

Members of the order, having demonstrated 
financial responsibility throughout their careers, 
are no longer bound by the paladin’s stricture that 
forbids the accumulation of wealth. However, 
members are still expected to use their wealth for 
lawful good purposes, and are not allowed to 
acquire material possessions merely for the plea- 
sure of ownership. 

Requirements: A candidate must have a mini- 
mum Intelligence score of 10. He must also have 
built a stronghold and held it for a decade; the 
stronghold must have generated a profit for no less 
than seven of the 10 years. The value of his strong- 
hold and property must be at least 200,000 gp. 
Finally, he must pay an initiation fee of at least 
5,000 gp; he may pay a higher fee if he likes (the 


higher the fee, the higher his endowment; see 
“Benefits”). A paladin may save money for the fee 
without violating his ethos. 

Organization: A chapter, consisting of 20 to 40 
members, is governed by seven High Officers 
known as Regents. Replacement Regents come 
from the rank and file, elected by a vote of the 
active Regents. To qualify as a Regent, a member 
must have the Law proficiency, and the net worth 
of his stronghold and property must have doubled 
since he joined the order. The oldest Regent, called 
the Senior Regent, chairs the meetings. 

The Regents handle the investment of the initia- 
tion funds and distribute endowment income to eli- 
gible members. They also provide counseling, at no 
charge, to any lawful good person in financial trou- 
ble. Though Regents are forbidden to make loans to 
anyone other than members of the order, they may 
arrange loans with established moneylenders and 
negotiate repayment plans with creditors. 

The Regents also mediate in legal d 
among paladins. Any paladin may petition the 
Regents for a hearing, regardless of whether he’s a 
member of the order. The disputing parties must 
agree in advance to abide by the Regents’ decision. 
The Regents’ decisions are considered legally bind- 
ing by most lawful good governments. 

All Regents have their names inscribed on a com- 
memorative plaque, prominently displayed on the 
stronghold wall of the order’s Senior Regent. 

Emblem: A golden rising sun. 

Motto: “Peace from prosperity.” 

Benefits: By exchanging contacts and informa- 
tion, members can usually find sources of goods 
and services costing 10-50% less than normal. After 
five years in the order, a member becomes eligible 
for an annual endowment, generated from the in- 
vestments of his initiation fee made by the Regents. 
The endowment ranges from 20-50% of the fee 
(1d4+1 times 10%), paid every year. For instance, if 
a member paid a 5,000 gp initiation fee, he earns an 
annual endowment ranging from 1,000 to 2,500 gp. 
The member must tithe from his endowment. Most 
members use the remainder to improve their 
strongholds, add to their property, or make charita- 
ble donations. 


Dismissal: A paladin dismissed from the order 
loses his endowment and forfeits his initiation fee. 


Righteous Order of the 
Iron Dragon 


This order honors outstanding military service. 
Its members have distinguished themselves through 
heroism in combat and gallantry on the battlefield. 
While members have no formal responsibilities, the 
High Officers occasionally rally them to fight as an 
elite force in emergencie: 

Requirements: Paladins of the Militarist kit are 
automatically eligible for membership when they 
reach 9th level. Otherwise. a paladin must have 
demonstrated meritorious military achievement 
beyond the call of duty, such as: 

e Serving in an organized military for at least 10 
consecutive years, fighting in at least two major 
wars during that period. 

e Being responsible for routing or defeating an 
enemy army. 

e Rescuing a hostage king or noble. 

* Dying in battle (membership is awarded post- 
humously unless raise dead was used). 

Organization: A chapter consists of 15 to 50 mem- 
bers, averaging about 30. One Grand Commander 
and three Lieutenant Commanders serve as the High 
Officers. Any member of the chapter can become a 
Lieutenant Commander by issuing a formal chal- 
lenge to a current Lieutenant Commander. A Lieu- 
tenant Commander must accept all such challenges. 
A member can make one challenge each year or at 
each meeting (whichever occurs more frequently). 

The challenge consists of a series of contests, pit- 
ting the Lieutenant against the challenging member. 
The specifics of a challenge vary from chapter to 
chapter, but usually include a jousting match, a rid- 
ing competition (including stunts and races), and a 
duel with blunted swords. If the Lieutenant wins 
the majority of the contests, he retains his position; 
the defeated member can never again make a chal- 
lenge to any Lieutenant. If the challenger wins, he 
becomes a Lieutenant; the Lieutenant becomes a 
regular member of the order. A defeated Lieutenant 
can never again seek an office. 


e 


Orders * 119 


The Grand Commander selects his own succes- 


sor from among his Lieutenants. Should the Grand 
Commander die unexpectedly, the Lieutenants 
engage in a series of round-robin contests to decide 
who becomes the replacement. To replace the pro- 
moted Lieutenant—or to replace a Lieutenant who 
dies or steps down—the Grand Commander pro- 
motes a member from the rank and file, usually the 
eldest or the most experienced member. 

The Grand Commander wears a golden bracelet 
with the order’s emblem. The Lieutenant Comman- 
ders wear similar bracelets made of silver. All mem- 
bers wear blue ribbons emblazoned with the emblem. 
For each year of membership, a red band is added to 
the ribbon. When a member has earned 10 red bands, 
a white ribbon replaces the blue ribbon. Thereafter, a 
member earns a golden band for every year of ser- 
vice. If he receives 10 golden bands, the Grand Com- 
mander presents him with a copper bracelet with the 
order’s emblem, proclaiming him a Senior Member 
(an honorary title, not a High Officer). 

Emblem: The silhouette of a dragon‘s head, col- 
ored dark gray, on a field of red. 

Motto: “Peace through strength.” 

Benefits: The order provides its members with 
personal armor, weapons, and equipment at no 
charge. The order also supplies war horses if neces- 
sary. The DM may veto any excessive requests. 
Magical items usually aren’t available. 

Dismissal: In addition to the standard grounds 
issal, even a single instance of cowardice in 
battle results in immediate expulsion. 


Order of the Divine Hand 


This order recognizes excellence in the medical 
arts. It members are dedicated healers who exploit 
their order’s prestige to elicit contributions from 
wealthy patrons. The members use the funds to 
build and staff hospitals throughout the world, 
particularly in rural areas otherwise lacking in 
medical care. Members oversee these hospitals, 
priding themselves on offering free services to all, 
regardless of social rank or religious orientation. 
The only patients turned away are those of evil 
alignment. 


_ 


120 + Chapter Nine 


Requirements: All paladins of the Medician kit 
are automatically eligible for membership when 
they reach 9th level. Paladins of other kits are eligi- 
ble once they reach 9th level and have acquired 
both the Healing and Diagnostics proficiencies. 

Organization: Chapters include anywhere from 
20 to 80 members, with most having about 30. Each 
chapter has a single High Officer, called the Regis- 
trar, usually the oldest or most experienced mem- 
ber. The entire membership votes on a new Register 
when the old one retires or dies. 

The Registrar's primary responsibility is assigning 
members to the orders various hospitals and strong- 
holds. A member must serve as a consultant to a hos- 
pital for at least one month a year; failure or refusal 
constitutes grounds for dismissal. A typical hospital 
consists of an administrator (usually a priest or pal- 
adin of levels 3-5) and 6-20 healers, nurses, techni- 
cians, and attendants (an assortment of priests, 
fighters, and wizards of lawful good alignment, usu- 
ally of levels 1-3). The Registrar also oversees the 
financial affairs of the hospitals, soliciting funds as 
necessary from benevolent patrons. The Registrar 
wears a white cloak with the order’s emblem. 

Emblem: A serpent coiled around a staff. 

Motto: “There is no kindness more pure than the 
touch of a healer’s hand.” 

Benefits: A member receives all non-magical 
medical supplies (bandages, salves, and so on) at no 
charge. A member also has open access to any of the 
order’s hospitals. Drawing on the hospital’s 
resources and the expertise of other members, he has 
a base 70% chance of finding an antidote for any nat- 
ural poison, providing he spends at least 2-5 (1d4+1) 
days doing research. The DM may adjust the chance 
up to 95% or down to 10%, depending on the sever- 
ity of the affliction and skill of the researcher. 

Dismissal: Standard. 


Although not all characters in the following 
works exactly fit the description of the paladin 
given in this supplement, all of these works pro- 
vide much of interest to those role-playing paladin 
characters in the AD&D” game. 


Traditional Stories 


Bulfinch, Thomas. The Age of Chivalry. See especially 
the stories of Sir Galahad in the King Arthur stories, 
and those of Roland, Oliver, and Olgier the Dane. 

Other tales of interest include Sir Gawaine and the 
Green Knight and the legends of Joan of Arc and El 
Cid. 


Fiction Sources 


Anderson, Poul. Three Hearts and Three Lions. This 
book contains the best model for the paladin class, 
retelling the story of Olgier the Dane (as Holger 
Carlson), and including, a classic battle with a troll. 

Cooper, James Fenimore. The Deerslayer. The 
hero, Natty Bumppo, is an excellent role model for 
paladins. 

Moon, Elizabeth. Deed of Paksenarrion trilogy 
(Sheepfarmer’s Daughter, Divided Alliance, Oath of 
Gold). This presents a fine treatment of the making 
of a paladin-like heroine named Paksenarrion. 

Moorcock, Michael. The Eternal Champion and the 
Runestaff cycle (The Jewel in the Skull, The Mad God's 
Amulet, Sword of the Dawn, The Runestaff). Some of 
the characters in these books serve admirably well 
as paladins, particularly Jonathan Daker, Dorian 
Hawkmoon, and the Knight of Jet and Gold. 

Mundy, Talbot. Tros of Samothrace series (Lud of 
London, Avenging Liafall, The Praetor’s Dungeon) and 
its sequels (The Purple Pirate, Queen Cleopatra). This 
series presents an excellent example of a lawful good 
hero in a Roman world that is neutral at best. 

Novak, Kate, and Jeff Grubb. Finder’s Stone tril- 
ogy (Azure Bonds, The Wyvern's Spur, Song of the 
Saurials). Dragonbait, the paladin hero of this 
AD&D® game-based series, is nonhuman, a lizard- 
like being called a saurial. 

Scott, Sir Walter. Ivanhoe. This is a classic story of 
knighthood. 


Bibliography APPENDIX 


Weis, Margaret, and Tracy Hickman. 
DRAGONLANCE” Chronicles (Dragons of Autumn 
Twilight, Dragons of Winter Night, Dragons of Spring 
Dawning). Though not a true paladin, the hero 
Sturm in this AD&D game-based series had strong 
paladin-like beliefs and characteristics. 


Film and Video 


Among the best movies to watch for information 
on role-playing paladins are the following: 

El Cid (1961), with Charleton Heston and Sophia 
Loren. 

Excalibur (1981), with Nicol Williamson and 
Nigel Terry. 

Joan of Arc (1948), with Ingrid Bergman and Jose 
Ferrer. 

Ivanhoe (1952), with Robert Taylor and Elizabeth 
Taylor. 

The Magic Sword (1962), with Gary Lockwood 
and Basil Rathbone. 

Sleeping Beauty (1959), animated, Walt Disney. 


Bibliography * 121 


APPENDIX 


Class Description 


A paladin character is a fighter sub-class, but 
unlike normal fighters, all paladins must begin as 
lawful good in alignment and always remain lawful 
good or absolutely lose all of the special powers 
given them. They have both fighting abilities and 
limited spell powers (at high levels). To become a 
paladin, a character must be human, have a Strength 
score of at least 12, Intelligence of at least 9, Wisdom 
of at least 13, Constitution of at least 9, and Charisma 
of at least 17. If a paladin has both Strength and Wis- 
dom in excess of 15, he or she adds 10% to the expe- 
rience points awarded by the DM. 

Law and good deeds are the meat and drink of 
paladins. If they ever knowingly perform an act 
which is chaotic in nature, they must seek a high- 
level (7th or above) cleric of lawful good alignment, 
confess the sin, and do penance as prescribed by 
the cleric. If a paladin should ever knowingly and 
willingly perform an evil act, he or she loses the 
status of paladinhood immediately and irrevoca- 
bly. All benefits are then lost, and no deed or magic 
can restore the character to paladinhood. He or she 
is forever after a fighter. 

Table 30 shows the experience points needed for 
each level, along with the associated titles. Table 31 
lists the number of attacks per round a paladin can 
make at various levels. 


Table 30: Experience Levels 
Level XP Needed Hit Dice (d10) Level Title 


1 0 1 Gallant 

2 2,751 2 Keeper 

3 5,501 3 Protector 

4 12,001 4 Defender 

5 24,001 5 Warder 

6 45,001 6 Guardian 

7 95,001 7 Chevalier 

8 175,001 8 Justiciar 

it 350,001 9 Paladin 

10 700,001 943, Paladin 
(10th level) 

11** 1,050,001 9+6 Paladin 
(11th level) 


V————————————————————————SSsSsSsSseseseseHeH_ 


122 * Appendix 


Original AD& D° Game Paladin 


* Paladins gain 3 hit points per level after the 
10th. 

** 350,000 experience points per level for each 
additional level above 11th. 


Table 31: Attacks Per Round 


Level Attacks/Round* 
1-6 1/1 round 
7-12 3/2 rounds 
13+ 2/1 round 


* This applies to any thrusting or striking 
weapon. It excludes melee combat with monsters 
of less than one hit die (d8) and unexceptional (0- 
level) humans and semi-humans—i.e., all creatures 
with less than one eight-sided hit die. All of these 
creatures entitle a fighter to attack once for each of 
his or her experience levels. 


Special Benefits 


A paladin can detect evil at up to 60 feet distant, 
as often as desired, but only when he is concentrat- 
ing on determining the presence of evil and seeking 
to detect it in the right general direction. 

A paladin makes all saving throws with a +2 
bonus. 

A paladin has immunity to all forms of disease. 

By laying on hands, a paladin can heal wounds on 
himself or another character. This ability heals 2 
points of damage per level of experience the pal- 
adin has obtained. Laying on hands can performed 
once per day. 

A paladin can cure diseases of any sort. This can 
be done once per week for each five levels of expe- 
rience the paladin has attained, i.e. at levels 1-5 one 
disease per week, at levels 6-10 two diseases, at lev- 
els 11-15 three diseases, etc. 

Protection from evil continually emanates in a 10- 
foot radius around the paladin. 

At 3rd level, the paladin gains the power to affect 
undead and devils and demons as if he were a 1st- 
level cleric. This power goes upwards with each 
level of experience the paladin gains; so at 4th level 
the effect is that of a 2nd-level cleric, at 5th it is that 


of a 3rd-level cleric, etc. 

At 4th level, or at any time thereafter, the paladin 
may call for his war horse. This creature is an intel- 
ligent heavy war horse, with 5+5 hit dice (5d8 plus 
5 hit points), AC 5, and the speed of a medium war 
horse (18"). It will magically appear, but only one 
such animal is available every 10 years. If the first is 
lost, the paladin must wait until the end of the 
period for another. 

If a paladin has a “holy sword” (a special magi- 
cal sword which your referee is aware of and will 
explain if the opportunity arises), he or she projects 
a circle of power 10 feet in diameter when the 
weapon is unsheathed and held. This power dispels 
magic at the level of magic use equal to the experi- 
ence level of the paladin. 

At 9th level paladins gain the ability to employ 
cleric spells (see Table 32). They many never use 
scrolls of spells, however, except those normally 
usable by fighters. 


Table 32: Spell Progression (1st Edition) 


Paladin 
Level 
9 
10 
n 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20* 


Clerical Spell Level 


WWKWKWWWWNNNN HS 


* Maximum spell ability 


Special Restrictions 


A paladin may never retain more than 10 magi- 
cal items. These may never exceed one suit of 
armor, one shield, four weapons (including dag- 
gers, swords, etc.; such items as magical bows and 


arrows are considered one weapon), and four mis- 
cellaneous items. 

A paladin will never retain wealth, keeping only 
sufficient treasures to support himself in a modest 
manner, pay henchmen, men-at-arms, and servi- 
tors, and to construct or maintain a small castle. 


Excess wealth is given away. 

An immediate tithe (10%) of all income—trea- 
sure, wages, or whatever—must be given to a char- 
itable religious institution (not a clerical player 
character) of lawful good alignment selected by the 
paladin. 

A paladin will have henchmen of lawful good 
alignment and none other. He will associate only 
with characters and creatures of good alignment. A 
paladin may join a company of adventurers that 
contains non-evil neutrals only on a single expedi- 
tion basis, and only if some end which will further 


the cause of good is undertaken. 

If possible, a paladin takes service or form an 
alliance with lawful good characters, whether 
player characters or not, who are clerics or fighters 
of noble status. 

A paladin does not attract a body of men-at-arms 
to service as do regular fighters. 


Original AD&D” Game Paladin + 123 


Paladin Character Record Sheet 


Player Character 
Date Created Kit 


Ability Scores Experience 


STR = Soos (ingot Gatos 


DEX | surprise 1-31n 10 Ability bonus: 


CON | system shock % Kit bonus: 
INT 


wis Max # Loyalty Reaction 
CHA | Henchmen Babe Ajusment 


(Missing entries go in other areas of this record sheet.) Kit penalty: 


Saving Throws Condition 


Unmodiiod 


Paraya Poon Death Mage | 
Rod Satara | 
Porcaro Pomon | 
Brean Weapon | 


Spell 


a 


Hit Points Armor Class Level Changes 


‘Curent Worn 


THACO All 
"i m 
Saves Odd levels 
Proliciencies 3,6, 9, 12, 15, 18 
Spells 9-20 
Cure Diseases 6, 11,16 
— Laying On Hands 
seasons LL) Tum Undead 


surecton 
Toda Suna Bonden Mowat 


‘stom level ~ 1910 + 
10M on = +3 only 


8 Rogenorate 


Target's AC 10 9 8 2-3-4 -5 64 -7 -8 -9 -10 


Attack Number | | 


Weapon Slots O =4+ (1 at3, 6,9, 12, etc.) THACO = 20 (-1 every level past 1st) 


Combat j. Damage Shots Fired 


Weapons = E E 7 


Bonded Mount 


Paladin Character Record Sheet 


Slots 


Wnty 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 


+3+(1.at3, 6,9, 12, etc) 


Proficiency 


@ Secondary Skill: 


Special Benefits 
#1 


#2 


#3 


#4 


Spells per level: 


Spell: 


Sphere: 


Level: 


Range: 


Casting Time: 
Effect: 


Area of Effect: 


Components: 


Duration: 


Saving Throw: 


Reversable?: 


Spells per level: 


2nd 


Sphere: 


Spell: 
Level: 


Range: 


Casting Time: 
Effect: 


Area of Effect: 


Components: 


Duration: 


Saving Throw: 


Reversable?: 


Spells per level: 


2nd 


Spell: 


Sphere: 


Level: 


Range: 


Casting Time: 
Effect: 


Area of Effect: 


Components: 


Duration: 


Saving Throw: 


Reversable?: 


Spells per level: 


2nd 


Spell: 


Sphere: 


Level: 


Range: 


Casting Time: 
Effect: 


Area of Effect: 


Components: 


Duration: 


Saving Throw: 


Reversable?: 


Paladin Character Record Sheet 


Age 


Nawa 


Tna 


Baie Bom 


Middle 


“1 Str & Con; +1 Int & Wis 


Old 


-2 Str & Dex; —1 Con; +1 Wis 


Venerable 


~1 Str & Dex & Con; +1 Int & Wis 


Maximum Age 


Vital Statistics 


Sex 
Height 
Weight 
Hair 
Eyes 
Skin 


Personality Traits 


Turn Undead 


Skeleton/1 HD: 
Zombie: 
Ghoul/2 HD: 


Shadows/3-4 HD: 


Wight/5 HD: 
Ghast: 
Wraith/6 HD: 
Mummy/7 HD: 
Spectre/8 HD: 
Vampire/9 HD: 
Ghost/10 HI 
Lich/11 + HI 
Special: 


Treasure 
(must tithe 10%) 


Magical Items 
(limit of 10) 


Equipment Carried 


Left Side 


FronvBack 


Right Side 


Henvtocaton 


tom Locaton 


emLocation 


VISION wi intravision __ 


ht Source Radus 


Movement Rate 


[encumbrance 


tes.Camed | mv | v [ Attack Penaty ac 


Unene. 


Light mv) 


Mod. ou MV) 


Heavy (MV) 


‘Severe (1) 


use lay ADAD games 


1994 TSR, ne. A nts Rose 


Paladin Kit Sheet 


Character 


Campaign 


Description 


Secondary Skills 


Weapon Proficiencies 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 


Armor/Equipment 


Special Benefits 
#1 


#2 


#3 


#4 


Special Hindrances 


{1004 TSR, ne. Aa ight Resor 


Game 


don't just happen! 


They take imagination, knowledge, and skill. These five AD&D° game 
fundamentals are a “must-own” for your adventuring party. 


AD&D® Player’s Handbook 
It’s the indispensable encyclopedia of adventure gaming, with everything 
pl need to know: how to create characters, differen between 


mapping and combat rules, and more. 
Character Record Sheets Dungeonst Diagons 


Quick! Your hero is face-to-face with a dragon . . . what 

will he do? For faster, more spontaneous play, record 
ability ossessions, background, 
more on the 


Charagter Record 
‘Sheets 


DUNGEON MASTER™ Guide 

The more versatile and knowledgeable the DM™, the livelie: 
the adventure! The DUNGE STER™ Guide is your 
complete source of information on how to be the best leader 
of the game! 

TSR #2100 

Sug, Retail $18.00 


TREN 0-6800 DUNGEON M. 
harts of the DL 
Screen organize all the statistics and figur LAJ 
must have to run a quality AD&D® campaign. Include: 
a 16-page mini-adventure 


DUNGEON MASTER 
Sereen 


Monstrous Manual 

The ultimate monster reference! Descriptions and full 
color illustrations for over 600 monsters, including all the 
creatures from MO ROUS COMPENDIUM® Volumes 1 
and 2, and many more beasties. 


40 
Sug. Retail $24.95 
ISBN 1-56076-619-0 


Available at book, game, and hobby stores everywhere! r } 


an MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM are far i 


The Complete 


Paladin’s 


Handbook 


In the fight against evil, the paladin stands as Good’s 
supreme, undaunted champion. This 128-pages ac- 
cessory helps you play the noblest warriors of the 
AD&D? game. Create or enhance your paladin with 
new proficiencies and equipment, new rules for 
bonded mounts, and paladin kits like the divinate, 
envoy, ghost hunter, skirider, and the indomitable 
wyrmslayer. The Complete Paladin’s Handbook at- 
tends the world’s finest heroes as they achieve their 


lofty ideals. 


2-$78-9209S-L NQST 


TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd. 
201 Sheridan 120 Church End, 
Springs Rd. Cherry Hinton 
Lake Geneva, Cambridge CB1 3LB 
WI 53147 U.S.A u Kingdom 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and AD&D are registered 
trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
The TSR logo is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc. 
©1994 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the USA. 


$18.00 Ls. $23.00 CAN £10.99 LK. 


