PHBR5 2117 
PSIONICS 


The 
Complete 


Psionics 
Handbook 


Advanced 


Dunseons[s$)ragons 


nd L9 
Player's Handbook 2 Edition Rules Supplement 


The 
Complete 


Psionics 
Handbook 


by Steve Winter 


All that is comes from the mind; it is based on the mind, it is fashioned by the mind. 


— The Pali Canon 


CREDITS 


Design: Steve Winter, with monster updates by Blake Mobley 
Editing: Andria Hayday 


Black and white illustrations: Terry Dykstra 
Chapter illustrations: Dee Barnett 
Color photography (used with permission): 
page 1 by Lightscapes, 9The Stock Market 
page 9 by Ken Cooper, ©The Image Bank 
pages 45 and 77 by Steven Hunt, ©The Image Bank 


Graphic design: Stephanie Tabat 
Typography: Gaye O'Keefe 
Production: Dee Barnett, Sarah Feggestad 


Playtest coordination and liberal advice: Jon Pickens 
Playtesters: 
Rich Brewer with Allen Thomas, Mike Miczeko. 
Arthur Collins with Phred Cain, Jason Davis, Jeff Pickett. 
Lee G. Irons with Andy Cohen, Matt Harrop, John Whitmer. 
Alan Grimes with Bob Bellamy, Leo Hallack, Shaun Horner, Jeff 
Kennedy, Mike Leibhart, Sam Orlando, Tim Pontallion, 
Alex West. 
Caroline R. McBride with Brenda A. Floyd, Joe Floyd, R. Keith 
McBride, Sarah McBride, Mary E. Noah, Donnie Wolfgeher. 
Mark Middleton with David Boddorf, Tony Caine, Paul Conway, 
Jerry Harper, Ed Isaacs, Liz Neese, Kip Romine. 
Jim Milan and William Tracy with Gay Milan, Jeff Stevens, Justin 
Stevens, Paul Stevens, Teresa Stevens, Jeff Wherry. 
Norm Ritchie with Linda Bingle, Mary Conczyk, Dewey Frech, Mark 
Hougaard, Jim Moeller, Jay Tummelson. 


TSR, Inc. TSR, Ltd. 
POB 756 YET 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton 
Lake Geneva, WI 53147 Cambridge CB1 3LB 

U.S.A.  pnonucrs oo Yeun imhamanon United Kingdom 


This book is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the 
material contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of TSR Inc. 

Distributed to the book trade in the United States by Random House, Inc. and in Canada by Random House of Canada, Ltd. 
Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors. 

AD&D, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, FORGOTTEN REALMS, DRAGONLANCE and WORLD OF GREYHAWK are 
registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 

RAVENLOFT, SPELLJAMMER, PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
Printed in the United States of America. 


©Copyright 1991, TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 


ISBN 1-56076-054-0 2117 


Table of Contents 


Introduction 254252 osse 6 

What's Changed? .............. 6 

How Does This 

Fit My Campaign? ....... —— 6 

Is Psionics Magical? ........... Z 

Chapter One: 

The Psionicist o oaao 8 

Requirements sso 5.2 «vens 8 
Ability Requirements.......... 8 
Prime Requisites........... —- 


Racial Restrictions ............8 
Multi-class Characters... 


T——————— HE. 


Dual-class Characters ......... ee ere eee 8 
Racial Level Limits.......... ——— € 8 
Alignment ቸም ምችን i eB EXC R Rd 10 
Other Qualifications 165 6% eeneve nio ው 10 
11... 110...... በሸ ም nm mm RR DR S 10 
A Psionics Primer «4. ooo 888 68:9:9:9:8:8:5:8:27:9:5:5:5107 
Psionic Strength Points....... —— .. 10 
Power Scores euassnavkace esseneeonn sad 
Power Checkitesesaass sas ien TT ee ee 11 
Advancement.......... T— sss add 
Gaining Disciplines ................eeees. 12 
Gaining Sciences and Devotions ........... 12 
Advancing Mid-adventure ................ 12 
Raising Psionic Power Scores............. 13 
Psionic Strength Points......... ere E 
Gaining Psionic Strength Points. ........... 13 
Recovering Psionic Strength Points......... 13 
Defense oho —— 55 I4 
Special Abilities............. TENE 5 እዚ 
Maintaining Powers. ....... ሽዎች ...14 
THACO and Saving Throws...............14 
Followers «aus» oessaseexuuceterta res na ለሜ 
Restrictions. sous 8556 sa mee eet eee 15 


WeaponSewuwe»ossssuekeexexeeners osa sii 
AITO tse SS ARS E ንን ን ኬ »ም»0።»።መመ ውች: 
Proficiencies s er rowee stems sve AO 


The Psionicist Group: ሽዝኝም፡.ን ን ከዝ ss IB 


4 * Table of Contents 


Wild Talents ...... PE E ET A EEE SO 
Determining Powers .............. «e... .20 
Strength Foints. í2uamaueuiu a dx brani oov aci i 
The RISES ጅምኀስችምምም፡። SEVA E ..20 


Chapter Two: 
Psionic Combat ......56 24 
Using Powers «ee vvucos ዕል 
Power Checks....... Faaud 22 
Psychic Contests. ጹም መዱ 22 
Psychic Lock ቹቹ ውና 24 
The Combat Round......... M D ,24 
Telepathic Combat. saa raso iis exscr ነና: 
Attack Modes ከስመጵምችችም።። ቸቸ 25 
12፡::፡:.:1.:1..|... 99988 ት 25 
Attack Modifiers: «occa à Cose a RR 26 
::-...:..... ሞም ናቸ ሃም arde 26 
Other Considerations «««.»22 6 ፡ 8:፡::5:95:8:5:5:9፡ okt 
Line of Sight. ea uiorcoareikakakrh x ችማ ባንክ ባቸ 27 
Touch-Attacks መ==6ችቹችም። ምምካር 27 
Combat CES Lea duca aou 43 Ke መን A 27 
Sidebar: 
Understanding Power Descriptions.......... 28 
Chapter Three: 
Clairsentience............ «4428 


Clairsentient Sciences. .........28 
Clairsentient Devotions........33 


Chapter Four: 
Pasche lé i peonman 38 


Psychokinetic Sciences. ..... TT. 
Psychokinetic Devotions.......42 


Chapter Five: 
Psychometabolism. ............ 50 


Psychometabolic Sciences. . .. .. .50 
Psychometabolic Devotions..... 53 


Chapter Six: 

Psychoportation ............ . 64 
Psychoportive Sciences. ........64 
Psychoportive Devotions .......68 


Chapter Seven: 
Telepathy ........ —— o Ó—— Án! 


Telepathic Sciences ............ 74 
Telepathic Devotions...........79 


Chapter Eight: 
Metapsionics ...... — e 


Metapsionic Sciences. ..........93 
Metapsionic Devotions.........97 


Chapter Nine: 
A Psionics Campaign .........106 


Look What I Got! ............106 
Burn Him! sss sss ewseswewssast0 
TSR's Campaign Worlds.......108 
Psionics and Magic ...........109 
Monsters, Villains, and other NPCs.........111 
Living Psionics ቿን ም! 
Knights of the Floating Table...............112 
Related Reading ««vn ansa ren LiÓ 


MONGHEES arsa ss excises swe ቸቸ E OR 114 
|o ——————— cdi 
Brain Mole.......... T — Ü ማማ 115 
Cerebral Parasites........... ሮች T 116 
Intellect Devourer, adult ....... ማም ፲17 
Intellect Devourer, larva (ustilagor) ......... 118 
SHE M P——— ..»..119 
Du MORSIEP. 6.5 6 6:68-8:‹፡ቁ:ይ.28;8:ወ:ሙ:ቁ:3 4 6-6 tih Corre 120 
Thought Eater —— 121 
.......... sas 5 à daa) ROC GRECE FCRC CR e| E .122 
Appendices ........ REREN QE Sx a :818:1879:908 . 123 
Monstrous Compendium Update ......... ..123 
Summary of Psionic Powers ...............125 
Powers Index. 546 6-6-ቁ:5-9:6-6፡9.3::9:5 /— .128 
Tables 
1: Racial Level Limits ........ T—— . 10 
2: Experience Levels ቻም ም — à 
3: Individual Class Awards ................12 
4: Psionic Power Progression. ..............12 
5: Inherent Potential....... TTT E K. 
6: Psionic Strength Recovery. ............. 14 
7: Calculated THACUs. 5:9:8፡5፡8፡98 6 9-4:9:9፡8:9:6፡:9:9:9-አ1፤ 
8: Saving LBEGWS sss d RRRS የን ..15 
9: Armor Penalties «veo otro — ወንን 
10: Proficiency Slots...... TUTTI ችችችማ 7: 
11: Nonweapon Proficiencies ...............18 
12: Wild Devotiolis:«sesasess sas a oec som 
13: WIE Cae ሯዊ a e cac e 


14: Attack vs. Defense Modes...............26 


Table of Contents * 5 


Table of Contents 


Introdüctión ሻም ቸቸ ሚና 6 
What's Changed? 5555556555: 6 

How Does This 
Fit My Campaign? ............. 6 
Is Psionics Magical? ............ 7 

Chapter One: 

The ee ee 8 
Requirements s.e ee sss0995 see 8 
Ability Requirements.......... 8 
Prime Requisites.............. 8 
Racial Restrictions ............ 8 
Multi-class Characters. ............. eese e 8 
DDuabclass CHACIE a 5 cs wees ices vt prd 8 
Racial Level Linits. as ees sasn aseos nto 8 
FN Ease idc “ክሻ E TT IO COLS T ER IET 10 
Other Qualifications sese ን e rer sue 10 
initial Pinte በም ናዊ ን ዓየ CONSER 10 
ARGAE EEIE os eee pair መን as PEN 10 
Psionic Strength Points.............. ees. 10 
POWEPr SCOPES eee TOO DC VOTE VISCIIOSE TY 11 
Fower Checks; 5 2 eqeieoiis ve seva v pie © eie v ad 11 
AVNER UL የጨ ዊዊ OE SUNT ም መ” 11 
Gaining Disciplines ናን ና ም ፲2 
Gaining Sciences and Devotions ........... 12 
Advancing Mid-adventure ....... Sud dre sie 12 
Raising Psionic Power Scores.............. 13 
Psionic Strength Points ...:..0.0.0.0 «eoe emit rtr 13 
Gaining Psionic Strength Points. ........... 13 
Recovering Psionic Strength Points......... 13 
Defense Modes seisnes asaan ys cae s vss 14 
SHON ADCS cola ዓን ውን CER CREME TS ር ያ ር 14 
Maintaining FO Were. «2 «v ን ን 7a0 0» 14 
THACO and Saving Throws............... 14 
Hel CH OOV RSOPE SPOTS IDEO OS CEEY SOOO I T 14 
RestfictioDi. cuo x 410 eei dnoeto 87925 s n a Ia S AN 15 
Cc re ር IO ን Ce 15 
Js 90800) EE UOMO TIE CODED CSL SO: 15 
PYOLICIORCIES PPP SCYSOETEACTS wae CICIEISE TIGE. 16 
The Psionicist Groups seos x 8.6:9:5(ቃ,518:9:9,9:8:5/ 18 


4 * Table of Contents 


Vd ISIERUS ics esu EUVie ጃዊ ne eo a mm ያ 19 
lopteriuning OWES: cue ማናቸ 20 
Sbength PORN C os obe ehe leva narra anra 20 
The Risks soy ays va ed [ws lo non o ve "6 o 20 


Chapter Two: 
Pionie .0/፡...1፡. (ያ sass 22 
ሺ 192019 PoOWers: sees ess aisle m als 22 
Power Checks. ........ Pe መል 
Psychic Contests: neret 22 
Psychic Dock os esses esas 24 
The! Combat Round. seisis isa aadis masoko ara 24 
Telepathic Conmibat.... ግን Ane 25 
Afack Man iV iu ባችን ማው E ት 25 
I9etense MOET cerei ችን ያ ና Geen eee 25 
Attack MOGIBerg... አ oos e 5፡8 linen aes 26 
Tangenis ከስ ያ EVE TUA ETE 26 
Other Considerations ከ 3 7599 9 98:5.8:/5:51ወ:5/9-5/ወ 27 
BAeboESISBE E ሚች ቸር ERE IRI 27 
TOUCH AAEE nera Elvis Ie eS IRRTDORIE AEST ios 27 
Cómbat Cards eseo eri lore la oros ale S oca on 27 
Sidebar: 
Understanding Power Descriptions.......... 28 
Chapter Three: 
Clairsentlénce.. noni titre 28 
Clairsentient Sciences. ......... 28 
Clairsentient Devotions........ 33 
Chapter Four: 
Psychokinesis ................ 38 
Psychokinetic Sciences. ........ 38 
Psychokinetic Devotions....... 42 


Chapter Five: 


Psychometabolism. ............ 50 
Psychometabolic Sciences. . ..... 50 
Psychometabolic Devotions..... 53 
Chapter Six: 

Psychoportation .......... eee 64 
Psychoportive Sciences......... 64 
Psychoportive Devotions ....... 68 


Chapter Seven: 


Telepathy .......... eene 74 
Telepathic Sciences ............ 74 
Telepathic Devotions........... 79 
Chapter Eight: 
Metapsionics ...... eee nnn 93 
Metapsionic Sciences. .........- 93 
Metapsionic Devotions......... 97 
Chapter Nine: 
A Psionics Campaign ......... 106 
Look What I Got! ............ 106 
Burn: Him]... 2v ና lema s 106 
TSR's Campaign Worlds. ...... 108 
Psionics and Magic ........... 109 
Monsters, Villains, and other NPCs......... 111 
Living Psionics ........ eee 111 
Knights of the Floating Table............... 112 
Related Reading ............. err 113 


DARE GEG (5 5-555 91 o trinm S VIE POSPIESITESTSESESIEE IRE 114 
Bakud v ess 6::6/419:4(6,ዉ,6 98.9 6:8. 6:፳:5:8:8)9 N a8 pie 114 
Brain Mole, cose 229 Maa QUAERO ails 115 
Cerebral Parasites............... eee. TS sf. 
Intellect Devourer, adult .............. eee. 117 
Intellect Devourer, larva (ustilagor) ......... 118 
SHE. oves ት vx Piu Lee o MENORES S E 119 
Su-MOBSEeE Loue viste orais eu C [sain TII 120 
Thought Balepe255 ov enano Roc ANS 121 
Vagabond........... sis uiste sedie MS ER P 
Appendices ....... eee ee evo otv erae neas 123 
Monstrous Compendium Update ........... 123 
Summary of Psionic Powers ............... 125 
Powers Index; «5 vvv ም etes m 128 
Tables 
1: Racial Level Limits oew o esio cocco aee «di 
2: Experience Levels ......... 2995519299 878 Rad 11 
3: Individual Class Awards ............. 12 
4: Psionic Power Progression. .............. 12 
5: Inherent Potential........ eee 13 
6: Psionic Strength Recovery.......... vise. 544. 
7: Calculated THACOS ሀወ ያ ያ 15 
8: Saving Throws ......-. eee ternos ^ uses i 
9: Armor Penalties ........... be የዘት ፣ 16 
10: Proficiency Slots... ........ eee eere 16 
11: Nonweapon Proficiencies ........++++++- 18 
12: Wild Devotions. ......... Me COSE AU 
13: Wild Sciences... «eo ni m nibii 6i mio eye: 21 
14: Attack vs. Defense Modes............. 26 


Table of Contents * 5 


Introduction 


"What do you think 1 am, a mind reader?" 

As a matter of fact, you might be, if you're 
an AD&D® game character with the right 
stuff. All you need is brainpower, discipline, 
and The Complete Psionics Handbook. 

Psionics—the practice of extraordinary psy- 
chic powers—was included in the original 
AD&D game. Some players favored psionic 
powers; others found them confusing. Psi- 
onics was not included in the AD&D 2nd Edi- 
tion game. 

Now psionics is back by popular demand, 
and it's better than ever. Powers this great may 
not be for everyone, so psionics is a com- 
pletely optional addition to the AD&D 2nd 
Edition rules. But if you're ready to put mind 
over matter—to test the limits of inner space— 
then this book is for you. 

The Complete Psionics Handbook is not a 
reprint of the old psionics rules; it's a complete 
revision. If you remember the original AD&D 
rules, you'll find much that seems familiar 
here. Beware: old words may have new mean- 
ing. We've kept a lot of the terminology, but 
changed the definitions. Read this book care- 
fully before you assume an old rule still applies 
or jump to conclusions about what certain 
powers can or cannot do. 


What's Changed? 


This book contains five major revisions to 
the original AD&D psionics rules: 

1) The psionicist is a character class. Char- 
acters cannot pick up a psionic power here and 
there just because they have a superior brain. 
Psionicists are extraordinary characters who 
develop their powers through arduous train- 
ing. (While members of other classes may oc- 
casionally boast a psionic power or two, such 
characters are mere shadows of true psioni- 
cists.) An NPC psionicist has the potential to 
stand his own against any other class. As a PC 
in a team of adventurers, the psionicist will 
complement other classes well. Most of the 
psionicist's powers are unique. He advances 


6 * Introduction 


slowly, at a rate somewhere between the 
fighter and mage. At low levels, however, the 
psionicist has the potential to be powerful. 

2) The list of psionic powers is greatly ex- 
panded. Original rules included a menu of 50 
powers. This book has over 150. 

3) Psionic powers are organized differently. 
All psionic powers are grouped into six disci- 
plines: clairsentience (expanded senses), psy- 
chokinesis (moving matter through space), 
psychometabolism (altering the body), psy- 
choportation (psionic travel), telepathy 
(mind-to-mind contact), and metapsionics (an 
advanced discipline). Within each discipline 
are major powers, called “sciences,” and minor 
powers, called “devotions.” Characters can 
only learn powers from the disciplines they 
have access to. At 1st level, a character has ac- 
cess to only one discipline, but with experience 
he gains access to more. 

4) Psionic powers are treated much like pro- 
ficiencies. Psionic powers do not work auto- 
matically. A power is essentially a skill, and 
using it properly requires a power check. 

5) Psionic strength points are not divided 
into attack, defense, and generic batches. All 
of a character's psionic strength points come 
from a single pool. 

Numerous other changes, both major and 
minor, have been made. To avoid confusion, 
players are urged to read this book carefully. 


How Does This Fit My Campaign? 


There's no reason why adding psionics to an 
existing campaign should disrupt anything. As 
a class, psionicists are no more or less power- 
ful than any other. Guidelines on how to intro- 
duce psionics without trauma are given in 
Chapter 9. 

Remember, everything in this book is op- 
tional; none of it is part of the core of the 
AD&D game. If something in here doesn't suit 
a particular campaign, rule it out. 


Is Psionics Magical? 


Many people assume that psionics is just an- 
other type of magic. The AD&D® game al- 
ready has two types of magic—one wielded by 
wizards and the other by clerics. So it is not 
unreasonable to ask, "Does the game need a 
third type of magic?" 

The answer is no, the game probably does 
not need a third kind of magic. But the ques- 
tion is misinformed because psionics is not 
magic. Magic is the ability to shape, control, 
harness, and utilize natural forces 
that infuse the game world and sur- 
round the characters. It is based on 
the principle that, through the use 
of words, gestures, and catalyzing 
materials of unique power, these 
external energies can be controlled. 

The key element of that state- 
ment is external energy. Magical ef- 
fects are produced externally by 
manipulating outside forces. The 
power does not come from inside 
the wizard or priest but from some- 
where else. 

Psionics is the complete opposite 
of this. The psionicist shapes, con- 
trols, harnesses, and utilizes natu- 
ral forces that infuse his own being. 
His effort is focused inward rather 
than outward. He must be com- 
pletely in touch with and aware of 
even the tiniest workings of his 
body and mind. 

This type of knowledge comes 
from long and intense meditation 
coupled with physical extremes. 
The psionicist finds enlightenment 
in both complete exhaustion and 
complete relaxation, in both pain 
and pleasure. The mind and body 
are only parts of a much greater 
unity. Indeed, discussing one with- 
out the other, as so many people 


do, seems nonsensical to a psionicist; they 
cannot be separated. The body produces en- 
ergy and vitality, the mind gives it shape and 
reality. 

Neither does the psionicist study or pray for 
his powers. He carries them with him wherever 
he goes. As long as his mind and body are 
rested—i.e., as long as he has not depleted his 
psionic strength—his powers are available to 
him. 


Animate Shadow: A watchman confronts his dark side, 


Introduction € 7 


CHAPTER 


The Psionicist 


More than a character of any other class, the 
psionicist is self-contained. Unlike the fighter 
and thief, he needs no weapons or tools to 
practice his art. Unlike the priest, he needs no 
deity. Unlike the wizard, he relies on no out- 
side energies. His power comes from within, 
and he alone gives it shape. 

The psionicist strives to unite every aspect 
of his self into a single, powerful whole. He 
looks inward to the essence of his own being, 
and gains control of his subconscious. 
Through extraordinary discipline, contempla- 
tion, and self-awareness, he unlocks the full 
potential of his mind. 


Requirements 


This section describes the requirements all 
characters must meet to become a psionicist, 
including restrictions based on ability scores, 
race, and alignment. The DM may waive these 
requirements in special circumstances, but 
players shouldn't count on it. 


Ability 

Requirements: Constitution 11 
Intelligence 12 
Wisdom 15 

Prime Requisites: Constitution, 
Wisdom 

Races Allowed: human, halfling, dwarf, 


gnome, elf, half-elf 


Ability Requirements: To be eligible for the 
psionicist class, characters must have ability 
scores equal to or greater than those listed 
above for Constitution, Intelligence, and Wis- 
dom. 

Prime Requisites: The pursuit of psionics re- 
quires strict mental and physical discipline, so 
the psionicist has two prime requisites: Wis- 
dom and Constitution. 

Wisdom—the measure of enlightenment 
and willpower—is the psionicist's primary 
mental characteristic, not Intelligence. Rea- 
soning and memory (two hallmarks of Intelli- 


8 * Chapter One 


gence) are indeed crucial to this class. 
However, the essence of psionic ability is the 
understanding and mastery of the inner self. 

Although psionic powers are centered in the 
mind, acquiring and controlling those powers 
demands physical fitness. Meditative study 
places tremendous physical strain on the 
psionicist, not to mention the sheer drain of 
projecting psychic energy out of one's body. 
The psionicist need not be muscular, or even 
exceptionally strong, but he must maintain his 
health and fitness at a high level to fully exer- 
cise his powers. That's why Constitution is 
also a prime requisite for psionicists. 

Racial Restrictions: Humans, halflings, 
dwarves, and gnomes often have a high degree 
of psionic talent. Elves and half-elves also ex- 
hibit some natural psionic ability, but they are 
unable to pursue it to high levels. 

Multi-class Characters: As usual, only demi- 
humans can be multi-class characters. Half- 
lings and dwarves can combine psionics with 
other classes as shown below. Gnomes, elves, 
and half-elves cannot be multi-class psioni- 
cists; characters of these races develop their 
psionic powers at the expense of all others. 


Multi-class Multi-class 
Halflings: Dwarves: 
fighter/psionicist fighter/psionicist 
thief /psionicist thief/psionicist 


Dual-class Characters: Humans can be dual- 
class psionicists within the normal rules and 
restrictions for dual-class characters. (See 
“Multi-class and Dual-class Characters” in 
Chapter 3 of the Player's Handbook.) 

Racial Level Limits: Humans can reach the 
highest possible experience level as psionicists. 
Characters of other races have limits, as 
shown on Table 1. Because of their experience 
limitations, half-elf and elf psionicists are best 
suited as NPCs. Players who don't mind this 
"diminished potential' may still play such 
characters, however. (The DM may amend 
these level restrictions for characters with ex- 


“ረፈ 5 ፤፣ ንዊ “ሙ 2 34 ም - 
, ማጭ n 


ceptionally high Wisdom and Constitution 
scores; see the optional rule under "Exceeding 
Level Limits" in Chapter 2 of the Dungeon 
Master's Guide.) 


Table 1: 
PSIONICIST RACIAL LEVEL LIMITS 
Halflings 10 
Gnomes 9 
Dwarves 8 
Half-elves 7 
Elves 7 


Alignment: Psionicists have only one align- 
ment restriction: they cannot be chaotic. Dis- 
cipline is the foundation of all psionic power. 
A character whose creed is chaos cannot 
achieve the level of self-control that psionicists 
require. 

This restriction applies to a character who 
becomes chaotic for any reason. Such a char- 
acter will quickly lose his psionic powers. 
Every day in which his alignment is chaotic, 
the character must make an ability check 
against one-half of his Wisdom score, rounded 
down. Each time he fails one of these Wisdom 
checks, the character loses access to one of his 
disciplines, selected randomly by the Dungeon 
Master. Furthermore, a chaotic character can- 
not recover psionic strength points. (Disci- 
plines and psionic strength points are 
explained below.) If the character's alignment 
returns to normal—or even to another, non- 
chaotic alignment—he can recover his disci- 
plines, one per day, by successfully making the 
same halved Wisdom check. 

Other Qualifications: If a character meets 
all the requirements above, and the player 
wants to play a psionicist, the PC is assumed 
to exhibit psionic potential. Nothing else is re- 
quired. 


10 * Chapter One 


Initial Funds 


When psionicist characters begin play, they 
have 3d4x10 gold pieces. As usual, skill and 
luck will determine what they make of it. 


A Psionics Primer 


All psionic powers belong to one of six disci- 
plines: clairsentience, psychokinesis, psycho- 
metabolism, psychoportation, telepathy, and 
metapsionics. Within each discipline are ma- 
jor powers, called sciences, and minor 
powers, called devotions. 

9 Clairsentient powers allow characters to 
gain knowledge that is beyond the normal ca- 
pacity of human senses. For example, some 
clairsentients can see and hear events that are 
miles distant, while others can sense poison. 

9 Psychokinetic powers move objects— 
from molecules to missiles—across space. A 
psychokineticist can throw a rock without 
touching it, or agitate molecules in a piece of 
paper until it bursts into flame. 

9 Psychometabolic powers affect the body. 
Biofeedback, healing, and shape-changing are 
just a few of the powers known. 

9 Psychoportive powers move characters 
or creatures from one location to another 
without crossing space. The traveler simply 
ceases to exist in one location, and begins to 
exist somewhere else. He may even travel to 
another plane of existence or to another time. 

9 Telepathic powers involve direct contact 
between two or more minds. Examples include 
mind reading, personality swapping, and psy- 
chic attacks. 

ወ Metapsionic powers amplify, augment, 
or enhance other psionic abilities. This is an 
advanced, demanding discipline. 

Psionic Strength Points: Characters use psi- 
onic powers much like proficiencies, with a 
few significant differences. Every time a 
psionicist uses a psionic devotion or science, 
he must pay its “cost.” This cost is deducted 


from the characters total psionic strength 
points, or PSPs. PSPs are similar to hit points, 
except that the psionicist spends them will- 
ingly, and he can recover them much faster 
than lost hit points. (Psionic strength points 
are explained more fully in a section below.) 

Power Scores: Like a proficiency, every psi- 
onic power that a character knows has a score. 
In other words, a psionic power score repre- 
sents the character's aptitude in using that par- 
ticular power. Power scores are devised 
exactly like proficiency scores. Every psionic 
power is associated with one of the character's 
basic attributes (Strength, Wisdom, etc.). The 
psionic power score equals the character's 
score for that attribute, plus or minus a spe- 
cific amount. For example, a psionic power 
with a score of "Intelligence —3" has a score 
three less than the character's Intelligence. 

Power Checks: When a character wants to 
use a psionic power, the player makes a psi- 
onic power check by rolling 1d20. If the num- 
ber rolled is equal to or less than the power 
score, the character succeeds. (In other words, 
he does what he intended.) The player sub- 
tracts the cost of the power from his charac- 
ter's total pool of psionic strength points. 

If the roll exceeds the psionic power score, it 
means the character tried to use his power, but 
failed. Failure has a price. The player must 
subtract half the cost of the power, rounded 
up, from the character's psionic strength 
points. In most cases, the psionicist can try to 
use the same power again immediately (in the 
next round). For exceptions, see the individual 
power descriptions in this book. 

Like a proficiency check, a psionic power 
check yields specific results on a die roll of 20 
or 1. A "20" always indicates failure. A "1" al- 
ways indicates a minimum level of success, re- 
gardless of the characters power score. In 
other words, even if a character's score has 
been reduced to a negative number by penal- 
ties, a roll of "1" still succeeds. That doesn't 
mean a "1" (or any low number) is the best re- 
sult. A "1" means the power works—but often 


with a quirk or drawback. See the individual 
power descriptions for specifics. 

Players may use the optional "skill score" 
rule for psionic powers, too. If the die roll for 
the power check equals the character's power 
score, special results occur. Chapters 3 
through 8 provide the details. 


Advancement 


Experience Levels and Awards: A psionicist 
earns experience points and advances in level 
just as members of other classes do. Table 2 
outlines a psionicist's advancement. 

The Dungeon Masters Guide includes an 
optional rule for individual experience 
awards. (See DMG Chapter 8.) Table 3 ex- 
pands that rule to include psionicists. 


Table 2: PSIONICIST EXPERIENCE LEVELS 


Psionicist Experience Hit 
Level Points Dice (d6) 

T 0 1 

2 2,200 2 

3 4,400 3 

4 8,800 4 

5 16,500 5 

6 30,000 6 

7 55,000 / 

8 100,000 8 

9 200,000 9 
10 400,000 942 
Zt 600,000 944 
12 800,000 9+6 
13 1,000,000 9+8 
14 1,200,000 9+10 
15 1,500,000 9+12 
16 1,800,000 9 +14 
17 2,100,000 9+16 
18 2,400,000 9+18 
19 2,700,000 9+20 
20 3,000,000 9+22 


The Psionicist @ 11 


Table 3: INDIVIDUAL CLASS AWARDS 


Psionic power used to 


overcome foe or problem 10 XP/PSP 

Psionic power used to 
avoid combat 15 XP/PSP 
Defeat psionic opponent 100 XP/level 
or hit dice 


Create psionic item 500 XP X level 

Gaining Disciplines: Every psionic power 
belongs to one of the six disciplines listed pre- 
viously. Before a character can learn a psionic 
power, he must have access to the appropriate 
discipline. Psionic characters begin play with 
access to only one discipline. As they progress 
to new experience levels, they gain access to 
additional disciplines. Table 4 shows how 
many disciplines a character has access to at 
each experience level. 


Table 4: PSIONIC POWER PROGRESSION 


Exp. Total Total Total Def. 
Level Discipl. Sciences Devotions Modes 
1 1 1 3 1 
2 2 1 5 

3 2 2 7 2 
4 2 2 9 2 
5 2 3 10 3 
6 3 3 11 3 
7 3 4 12 4 
8 3 E 13 4 
9 3 5 14 5 
10 4 5 15 5 
11 4 6 16 5 
12 4 6 17 5 
13 4 7 18 5 
14 5 7 19 5 
15 5 8 20 5 
16 5 8 21 3 
17 5 9 22 5 
18 6 9 23 5 
19 6 10 24 5 
20 6 10 25 5 


12 * Chapter One 


Gaining Sciences and Devotions: Every 
new, first-level psionicist knows four powers 
within a single discipline: one science (major 
power) and three devotions (minor powers). 
With each new experience level, a psionicist 
gains new powers. Sometimes he gains both 
sciences and devotions; at other times, only 
devotions. (See Table 4.) 

A player can select new powers for his charac- 
ter as soon as the psionicist reaches a new experi- 
ence level. These new powers can be chosen 
from any discipline the character can access, in- 
cluding a discipline that was just gained. 

Note: If the optional training rule is in play, 
characters must train with a mentor until they 
reach 7th level. To find the training time in 
weeks, subtract the mentors Wisdom score 
from 21. Beyond 7th level, psionicists can train 
themselves if they pass the necessary checks to 
qualify as instructors. The training time for a 
psionicist instructing himself is doubled. 

Players must follow two simple rules when 
choosing new powers for their characters: 

* Within a single discipline, the number of de- 
votions that a character knows must be at 
least twice the number of sciences. 

* The first discipline chosen is the character's 
primary discipline. A character can never 
learn as many sciences or devotions in an- 
other discipline as he currently knows in his 
primary discipline. 


Example: Lena's primary discipline is clair- 
sentience. She knows three sciences and seven 
devotions in that discipline. This means: a) she 
must learn an eighth clairsentient devotion be- 
fore she can learn a fourth clairsentient sci- 
ence, and b) at her current level, she cannot 
know more than two sciences or six devotions 
in any other single discipline. 

Advancing Mid-adventure: Most Dungeon 
Masters award experience points at the end of 
adventures rather than in the middle, so expe- 
rience levels are rarely gained in mid- 
adventure. In the unusual event that a new 
level is gained in the middle of an adventure, 


however, the character should have to wait at 
least until he has a chance to rest and recuper- 
ate—long enough to recover all his psionic 
strength points—before gaining any new psi- 
onic powers. 

Raising Psionic Power Scores: A character 
can increase a psionic power score when he 
reaches a new experience level by "relearning 
it” (He repeats his studies, and learns some- 
thing new about a familiar power.) Instead of 
learning a new devotion, the character can 
add one point to his power score in a devotion 
he already knows. Similarly, he can exchange 
a new science for a one-point increase in a sci- 
ence he already knows. 


Psionic Strength Points (PSPs) 


Psionic energy comes from within the char- 
acter. This energy is measured in psionic 
strength points, or PSPs. When a character 
uses a psionic power, he expends psionic 
strength points. The exact cost depends on 
which power is used, and how long the charac- 
ter uses it. 

The total number of psionic strength points 
that a character has depends on four factors: 
his Wisdom, Intelligence, and Constitution 
scores, and his experience level. Wisdom, Intel- 
ligence, and Constitution determine the psioni- 
cist'S inherent potential. (Wisdom is the 
primary factor.) Experience determines how 
well the character has developed that potential. 

Follow these steps to calculate a character's 
total PSPs: 

1) Find the character's Wisdom score on Ta- 
ble 5, then get his base score from that. 

2) Add the appropriate ability modifiers for 
the character's Intelligence and Constitution 
scores to his base score. This final adjusted 
number is the character's inherent potential. 

Example: Rowina's ability scores are Wis 
17, Con 16, Int 12. Her inherent potential is 25 
(24 points for her Wisdom score with a +1 
modifier for her Constitution score). At 1st 
level she has 25 PSPs. 


Table 5: INHERENT POTENTIAL 
Ability Base Ability 
Score Score Modifier 
15 20 0 
16 22 +1 
47 24 +2 
18 26 +3 


Gaining Psionic Strength Points: Every time 
a character advances to a new experience 
level, he expands his total pool of psionic 
strength points. To determine how many PSPs 
he gains, find the modifier on Table 5 that cor- 
responds to his Wisdom score. Add this num- 
ber to 10. The result equals the total PSPs 
gained. 

Example: Rowina has just advanced to a 
new level. Her Wisdom is 17. According to Ta- 
ble 5, the modifier for this score 15 +2. Rowina 
can add 12 PSPs (2 + 10) to her total pool. 

Recovering Psionic Strength Points: A 
character who has expended psionic strength 
points can recover those points by “taking it 
easy"—which means engaging in no hard 
physical activity and refraining from using 
psionic powers (i.e., from expending any 
more PSPs). After each hour in which a char- 
acter expends no psionic strength points, 
check Table 6 to determine how many PSPs 
the character recovers. A character can never 
recover more PSPs than he lost. 

A character's rate of recovery depends on 
how much physical exertion he experienced 
during the hour in question. Psionicists re- 
cover the most points when they sleep or med- 
itate for the entire hour of rest. Light activity, 
such as walking or riding, diminishes the 
speed of recovery. Rate each hour according to 
the most strenuous physical activity under- 
taken, even if it lasted only a few minutes. 

Option: DMs may allow characters to re- 
cover points per turn of rest rather than per 
hour. These rates are also listed on Table 6. 


The Psionicist ቆ 13 


Table 6: PSIONIC STRENGTH RECOVERY 


Physical Activity PSPs Recovered 
Hard exertion* none 
Walking, riding 3/hour 


(1 every 2 turns) 
Sitting, resting, 


reading 6/hour (1/turn) 
Rejuvenating" * , 
sleeping 12/hour (2/turn) 


* "Hard exertion" includes fighting, running, 
digging ditches, walking while encumbered, 
climbing a rope, scaling a mountain, exploring 
a dungeon, swimming, and any other activity 
the DM wants to include. 

** This refers to use of the psionicist's Rejuve- 
nation proficiency. 


Defense Modes 


Psionic defense modes are special powers 
which all psionicists acquire naturally in time. 
All defense modes belong to the telepathic disci- 
pline. Psionicists learn these powers automati- 
cally as they gain new experience 
levels—regardless of whether or not they have 
access to the telepathic discipline. Defense 
modes do not count toward the psionicist's max- 
imum number of powers as listed in Table 4. Nor 
are they counted when characters determine the 
relative number of sciences and devotions they 
can acquire within a given discipline. 

There are five psionic defense modes: 

è mind blank 

è thought shield 

è mental barrier 

* tower of iron will 

* intellect fortress 
Each is described in Chapter 7, “Telepathy.” All 
psionicists automatically know one of these 
powers at 1st level (player's choice). They learn 
another defense mode of the player's choice 
every other level—at 3rd, 5th, 7th, and 9th. 


14 * Chapter One 


Special Abilities 


In addition to ordinary psionic powers, 
which are the hallmark of the class, psionicists 
have several special abilities. These include 
their saving throws, THACOs, and psionic 
powers that operate continuously. 

Maintaining Powers: Certain psionic 
powers can operate continuously. (Chapters 3 
through 8 specify which ones do.) Such 
powers can be "switched on" and kept on 
without interruption, until the user decides to 
(or is forced to) "switch them off.” This is 
called maintaining powers. 

Each power that is maintained is handled sep- 
arately. In many cases, maintenance entails ex- 
pending PSPs by the hour or turn rather than 
the melee round (the norm for psionic combat). 
If a psionicist is expending PSPs to maintain a 
power, he cannot recover psionic strength points 
that hour. A character cannot spend PSPs to 
maintain a power when he is sleeping or uncon- 
scious; no continuous power that requires 
strength points can operate during sleep. 

A character can maintain any number of 
powers at one time, but he can “switch on” or 
initiate only one per round. When maintained 
powers are deactivated, the character can 
drop all maintained powers at once, or one per 
round. He cannot drop two or more in one 
round and maintain others. 

THACO and Saving Throws: As shown on 
Table 7, a psionicists THACO advancement 
equals that of a rogue. Table 8 lists saving 
throws. Psionicists gain a * 2 bonus on all sav- 
ing throws vs. enchantment/charm spells and 
the like. This is in addition to their magical de- 
fense adjustment for high Wisdom. 


Followers 


At 9th level (which is sometimes called 
"name" level), a psionicist becomes a contem- 
plative master. He can build a sanctuary (usu- 
ally in an isolated place), and use it as his 


Table 7: PSIONICIST CALCULATED THACOs 


level |— d 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 


10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 


THACO 20 20 19 19 18 18 17 17 16 16 15 15 14 14 13 13 32 32 31 dH 


Table 8: PSIONICIST SAVING THROWS 


Paralyzation, 
Poison, or Rod, Staff, Petrification Breath 
Level Death Magic or Wand or Polymorph’ Weapon’ Spell 
1-4 13 15 10 16 15 
5-8 12 13 9 15 14 
9-12 11 11 8 13 12 
13-16 10 9 7 12 11 
17-20 9 7 6 11 9 
PIE 8 5 5 9 7 


* Excluding polymorph wand attacks. 


* Excluding those which cause petrification or polymorph. 


* Excluding those for which another saving throw type is specified, such as death, petrification, polymorph, etc. 


headquarters. Most importantly, he begins to 
attract followers. 

One neophyte psionicist (1st or 2nd level) 
will arrive each month, coming to study at the 
feet of the master. These neophytes will arrive 
regardless of whether or not the master builds 
a sanctuary. If the master does have a sanctu- 
ary, however, he will attract a maximum num- 
ber of followers equal to his Charisma score. If 
not, the maximum number is halved (rounded 
down). 

These followers want only to learn. They 
will serve in any capacity the master chooses. 
In return, the master must spend at least 10 
hours per week instructing his followers, or 
they will leave. 


Restrictions 


Like members of other classes, psionicists 
must abide by restrictions when choosing 
weapons and armor, and in selecting non- 
weapon proficiencies. 


Weapons: Psionicists tend to disdain weap- 
ons of any sort, given the crudeness and im- 
precision of such tools compared to psychic 
weaponry. Still, a good sidearm is indispensa- 
ble for a last-ditch personal defense, and it's es- 
sential when a display of psionic power would 
be inappropriate. Also, in the rough-and- 
tumble frontier areas where adventurers are 
common, appearing in public without a 
weapon often invites ridicule and trouble. 

Psionicists can use any of the common 
weapons listed below. Essentially, these are 
most small- or medium-sized weapons weigh- 
ing 6 pounds or less. 


short bow throwing axe 
hand crossbow horseman's mace 
light crossbow horseman’s pick 
dagger scimitar 

dirk spear 

knife short sword 
club war hammer 
hand axe 


The Psionicist € 15 


NS, 


[መሠ 


Armor: Psionicists can don armor made of 
padded leather, studded leather, or hide. They 
can also carry a small shield. 

A psionicist can use his powers while wear- 
ing a helmet that is psionically active, or one 
featuring magical enchantments that affect or 
simulate psionic powers. But if the psionicist is 
wearing a normal helmet of any sort, he can- 
not use his powers. Removing a normal hel- 
met won't affect the character's armor class, 
but it may have other effects defined by the 
Dungeon Master. For example, a thief who ap- 
proaches the psionicist from behind may find 
the psionicist easy prey. Or, if the DM allows 
called shots, the character's bare head might 
present a tempting target. 

Optional Rule: A DM may allow psionicists 
to wear any sort of armor, but impose penal- 
ties for heavy armor that's made of metal. (See 
Table 9.) This rule creates an across-the-board 
reduction in psionic power scores when a 
psionicist wears the inappropriate armor. 


Table 9: PSIONICIST ARMOR PENALTIES 


Psionic 
Power Score 
Armor Reduction 
Padded, leather, studded 
leather, hide 0 
Brigandine, ring, scale, 
splint mail =] 
Chain, banded mail -2 
Plate mail -3 
Field plate -5 
Full plate - 
Table 10: 
PSIONICIST PROFICIENCY SLOTS 
Weapon 
Proficiencies 
Group Initial f Levels 
Psionicist 2 5 


16 * Chapter One 


Proficiencies 


Psionic powers function like proficiencies, but 
they do not replace them. Psionicists can learn 
the usual weapon and nonweapon proficiencies 
regardless of their powers. Proficiencies are ac- 
quired at the rate shown on Table 10. 

Psionicists can learn a weapon proficiency 
for any weapon they can use. They can learn 
any nonweapon proficiency from the "Gen- 
eral" group (see proficiency rules in the 
AD&D® 2nd Edition Players Handbook, page 
54, Table 37) or from the Psionicist group, de- 
scribed below. 

If the optional proficiency rules in the Play- 
ers Handbook are in use, psionicists can gain 
extra nonweapon proficiency slots based on 
their Intelligence scores. See Table 4, “Intelli- 
gence” in the Player's Handbook to determine 
these bonus proficiencies (Chapter 5, page 16). 
Characters can use these extra slots for lan- 
guages or nonweapon proficiencies, but never 
additional psionic powers. 

Initial refers to the number of weapon or 
nonweapon proficiency slots received by 
psionicists at 1st level. 

# Levels indicates how many levels a psioni- 
cist must advance before he receives a new 
weapon or nonweapon proficiency. Thus, 
psionicists receive a new weapon proficiency 
every five levels—i.e., at levels 5, 10, 15, 20, etc. 
They receive a new nonweapon proficiency 
every three levels—i.e., at levels 3, 6, 9, 12, etc. 

Penalty is the modifier to a psionicist's at- 
tack rolls when he fights using a weapon he 


Nonweapon 
Proficiencies 
Penalty Initial #Levels 
-4 3 3 


S 
i 
VZ 
TL WE 
ኣ 
፲ 
# 


| 


y 


ሰች 
^ 
2 


Animate Object: Raji turns the tables against his attackers. 


The Psionicist © 17 


isn't proficient with. This penalty is subtracted 
directly from the character's rolls to hit. 

The Psionicist Group: Table 11 lists seven 
nonweapon proficiencies which psionicists 
can easily learn. These proficiencies—the 
"Psionicist group"— are an extension of 
Table 37 in the AD&D® 2nd Edition Player's 
Handbook. 

Table 11: PSIONICIST NONWEAPON 
PROFICIENCIES 


# Slots Relevant 
Proficiency Required Ability 
Gem Cutting 2 Dex -2 
Harness Subconscious 2 Wis -1 
Hypnosis 1 Cha -2 
Rejuvenation 1 Wis —1 
Meditative Focus 1 Wis +1 
Musical Instrument 1 Dex -1 
Reading/Writing 1 Int *1 
Religion 1 Wis *0 


Harness Subconscious: This meditative pro- 
ficiency lets the psionicist temporarily boost 
his total PSPs. In effect, the proficiency lets 
him tap into energy reserves that lie deep in his 
subconscious—reserves which are usually un- 
available to him. It's like enjoying a shot of 
psychic adrenalin. 

Before he can harness subconscious energies, 
the psionicist's PSP total must be at its maxi- 
mum. He then must spend two days (48 consec- 
utive hours) gathering this energy, taking only 
necessary breaks for eating and sleeping. At the 
end of that time, the character makes a profi- 
ciency check. If he passes, he increases his PSP 
total by 20%, rounded up. 

The increase in PSPs lasts 72 hours. At the 
end of that time, the character loses as many 
strength points as he initially gained, regard- 
less of his current total. This loss can never re- 
duce his total below 0 points, however. 

During the 72 hours of heightened strength, 
the character cannot recover PSPs if his cur- 
rent total equals or exceeds his usual maxi- 
mum. Once his current total drops below his 
usual maximum (i.e., once he has spent all bo- 


18 * Chapter One 


nus points), he can begin regaining PSPs nor- 

mally. He cannot recover the lost bonus 

points, however; he can only recover enough 
points to return to his usual maximum. 

Hypnosis: With this proficiency, a psionicist 
can hypnotise another character— placing the 
subject into a relaxed state in which he is very 
susceptible to suggestions. However, hypnosis 
is not possible unless the subject is willing and 
knows he is being hypnotised. 

Psionicists with this proficiency can hypno- 
tize humans and demihumans with ease. Non- 
humans can be hypnotized, too, but the DM 
should assign a penalty to the proficiency 
check. The size of the penalty depends on how 
inhuman the subject is. A half-orc, for exam- 
ple, could be hypnotized with a —2 modifier, 
while a lizard man could be hypnotized only 
with a —8 modifier to the psionicist's profi- 
ciency check. 

The act of hypnotizing someone takes about 
five minutes. The subject is then very relaxed 
and willing to do almost anything that isn't very 
dangerous or against his alignment. Note, how- 
ever, that a hypnotized subject can be easily 
fooled; the subject may be convinced that he's 
doing one thing, while he's actually doing an- 
other. Lawful or good psionicists who trick their 
subjects in this fashion should beware. Psioni- 
cists who use hypnotism to make people do cha- 
otic or evil things may find themselves with 
alignment problems of their own. 

Hypnotism can have the following (or simi- 
lar) effects: 

* A character can be induced to remember 
things he has forgotten by reliving a fright- 
ening or distant event. 

9 A character can be made calm and unafraid 
in the face of a specific situation that he has 
been prepared for. 

* A character can be cured of a bad habit or 
addiction (but not of curses or magical af- 
flictions). 

9 A character can be prepared to impersonate 
someone by thoroughly adopting that indi- 
vidual's personality. 


Hypnotism cannot be used to increase a char- 
acter' attributes, give him powers or abilities he 
does not naturally possess, let him do things that 
are beyond his capabilities, or give him informa- 
tion that he couldn't possibly know. 

Rejuvenation: This proficiency allows a 
character to recover PSPs while he meditates, 
as quickly as if he were sleeping. The character 
achieves a state of deep concentration, in which 
he focuses and regains his energies. He is still 
conscious and aware of his surroundings, so he 
does not suffer any penalties on surprise or ini- 
tiative rolls, and he is not helpless if attacked. 
(He still can't expend PSPs, however.) 

Meditative Focus: Through this proficiency, 
a psionicist can focus his mental energy on one 
particular discipline. As a result, his power 
scores in that discipline temporarily increase, 
while those in other disciplines decline. 

The proficiency requires the character to 
meditate, uninterrupted, for 12 hours. The 
last four hours of this meditation are spent in a 
deep, sleeplike trance. The psionicist can re- 
cover PSPs normally during the entire period. 

When the meditation is complete, the player 
makes a proficiency check. If the character 
passes the check, he has successfully focused 
his mind on one particular discipline (which 
was chosen when the process began). All of 
the character's psionic power scores in that 
discipline are increased by two points for the 
next 24 hours—or until the character's PSPs 
have been reduced to zero, whichever comes 
first. All of his power scores in other disci- 
plines are reduced by one for the same period. 

Gem Cutting, Musical Instrument, Reading/ 
Writing, Religion: See the Player's Handbook 
for a description of these proficiencies. 


Wild Talents 


A wild talent is someone from any other 
character class who has natural, latent psionic 
potential. This potential can be present in any 
character, regardless of class, alignment, or 
race. Wild talents can never approach psioni- 


cists in skill, but they do boast at least one psi- 
onic power—which is known as a “wild 
power” among psionicists. 

Any character can test for wild powers. (The 
character should be forewarned: such efforts are 
not without risk, as explained below.) A charac- 
ter can test for wild powers only at specific 
times: when the character is first created; when 
the characters Wisdom increases to a higher 
point than it has ever been; the first time the 
character goes to a psionicist who can perform 
psychic surgery on him; when psionics is first in- 
troduced to the campaign. 

Every character (and NPC and monster, if 
the DM wishes) has a base chance of 1% to 
possess wild powers. This is modified as 
shown below: 


Each Wis, Con, or Int score of 18 +3 
Each Wis, Con, or Int score of 17 +2 
Each Wis, Con, or Int score of 16 +1 
Character is 5th-8th level +1 
Character is 9th level or higher +2 
Mage, cleric, or nonhuman* X 1/2 


* Round fractions up. Apply this penalty only 
once, even if more than one of these descrip- 
tions fits (e.g., a “nonhuman mage”). 


Once you've determined the character's 
chance to be a wild talent, roll percentile dice. 
Subtract 2 from the roll if the character is un- 
der the guidance of a psychic surgeon (see 
"psychic surgery" in Chapter 8). If the result is 
less than or equal to the modified chance, the 
character has at least one wild power. If the 
number is 97 or higher, the character suffers 
dire consequences. See "The Risks" below. 

Example: Consider a 3rd level dwarf cleric 
with a Wisdom of 17, Intelligence of 9, and 
Constitution of 16. His chance to be a wild tal- 
ent is 1 (base chance) + 2 (Wis 17) + 1 (Con 
16) X 0.5 (because he’s a dwarf). The final re- 
sult equals 2% . The dwarf has a 2% chance of 
being a wild talent. The player rolls a 3 on per- 
centile dice. The dwarf has no talent. 


The Psionicist e 19 


Determining Powers: If a character is a wild 
talent, the player should roll percentile dice 
again and consult Table 12, "Wild Devotions" 
to determine exactly what the character's psi- 
onic powers are. Most wild talents have only 
one power. A lucky few (those with high-roll- 
ing players) boast more than one. Further- 
more, if a character gains any power with a 
prerequisite, he automatically gains the pre- 
requisite, too. For example, if the wild talent 
knows a telepathic power which requires con- 
tact (an important telepathic power), he auto- 
matically knows contact, too. 

Strength Points: Like an actual psionicist, a 
wild talent has psionic strength points. He re- 
ceives the minimum number of PSPs neces- 
sary to use the power (or powers) once. If a 
power can be maintained, he receives enough 
additional points to pay the maintenance cost 
four times. Afterward, the character receives 
four additional PSPs every time he gains a new 
experience level (he receives no bonus for 
levels he already has). 

The Risks: Characters who attempt to un- 
lock their psionic potential are tampering with 
things they cannot begin to understand. If the 
dice roll is 97 or higher, the character suffers 
the following consequences: 


Dice 

Roll Result 

97 Save vs. death or Wisdom reduced by 
1d6 points— permanently 

98 Save vs. death or Intelligence reduced 
by 1d6 points— permanently 

99 Save vs. death or Constitution re- 
duced by 166 points— permanently 

00 Save vs. death with —5 penalty or 
Wisdom, Intelligence, and Constitu- 
tion are all reduced to 3—perma- 
nently. 


20 * Chapter One 


Table 12: WILD DEVOTIONS 
Clairsentient Devotions 

01  Al--Round Vision 

02 Combat Mind 

O4 ኮርዩ] Light 

05  FeelSound 

O06 Hear Light 

07 Know Direction 

08 Know Location 

09 Poison Sense 

10 Radial Navigation 

11  SeeSound 

12 Spirit Sense መመ 
13 Choose any clairsentient devotion above 


14 


Choose any clairsentient devotion above 


Psychokinetic Devotions 


Animate Object 
16 Animate Shadow 
17  Ballistic Attack 
18 Control Body 
19 Control Flames 
20 Control Light 
21 Control Sound 
22 Choose any psychokinetic devotion above 
Psychometabolic Devotions 
23 Absorb ase 
24 Adrenalin Control 
25 Aging 
26 Biofeedback 
27 Body Control 
28 Body Equilibrium 
29 Body We 
30  Catfall 
31 Cause Decay 
32 Cell Adjustment 
33 Chameleon Power 
34 Chemical Simulation 
35 Displacement 
36 Double Pain 
37 Enhanced Strength 
38 Ectoplasmic Form 
39 Expansion 
40 Flesh Armor 
41  Graft Weapon 
42  Heightened Senses 
43  Immovability 
44 Lend Health 
45 Mind Over Body 


46 
47 
48 
49 


Reduction 

Share Strength 

Suspend Animation 

Choose any psychometabolic devotion above 


Telepathic Devotions 


50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 


ቪጆ3)ህ23መ58፳።ው5ጄ5ጄ 


76 
77-78 


Attraction 
Aversion 

Awe 

Conceal Thoughts 
Daydream 


False Sensory Input 
Identity Penetration 
Incarnation Awareness 
Inflict Pain 

Invincible Foes 
Invisibility 

Life Detection 

Mind Bar 

Phobia Amplification 
Post-Hypnotic Suggestion 
Psychic Impersonation 
Psychic Messenger 
Repugnance 

Send Thoughts 

Sight Link 

Sound Link 

Synaptic Static 

Taste Link 
Telempathic Projection 
Truthear 

Choose any telepathic devotion above 


Psychoportive Devotions 


283 


oO 
N 


Ses See 
ብ 


Astral Projection 

Dimensional Door 

Dimension Walk 

Dream Travel 

Time Shift 

Time/Space Anchor 

Choose any psychoportive devotion above 
Roll two times 

Roll three times 

Choose any two devotions 

Roll on Table 13: Sciences 

Choose any devotion. Then roll again and 
consult Table 13. 


Table 13: WILD SCIENCES 


Clairsentient Sciences 


01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-16 


Aura Sight 

Clairaudience 

Clairvoyance 

Object Reading 

Precognition 

Sensitivity to Psychic Impressions 

Choose any clairsentient science or devotion 


Psychokinetic Sciences 


17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-30 


Detonate 

Disintegrate 

Molecular Rearrangement 

Project Force 

Telekinesis 

Choose any psychokinetic science or devotion 


Psychometabolic Sciences 


31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-48 


comes Healing 

Death Field 

Energy Containment 

Life Draining 

Metamorphosis 

Shadow-form 

Choose any psychometabolic science or 
devotion 


Telepathic Sciences 


49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-68 


Domination 


Superior Invisibility 

Switch Personality 

Mindlink 

Choose any telepathic science or devotion 


Psychoportive Sciences 


69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-82 


83-85 


ent 
Probability Travel 
Summon Planar Creature 
Teleport 
Teleport Other 
Choose any psychoportive science or devo- 
tion 
Roll two times 
Roll three times 
Choose any science or devotion 
Choose any science and two devotions 
Choose any science and three devotions 
Choose any two sciences and four devotions 


The Psionicist * 21 


CHAPTER 


Psionic Combat 


Combat featuring psionicists is no more com- 
plicated than a fight between one or more wiz- 
ards. In fact, it's similar. During a battle, 
psionicists and wizards tend to employ the 
same tactics: they avoid enemy hackers and 
slashers, and focus their efforts on the strong- 
est opponent or shore up defenses where 
needed. 

A lone psionicist caught by enemy fighters 
is in serious trouble. Unless he can summon, 
create, dominate, or otherwise garner some 
help, he probably will be overpowered. For 
this reason, psionicists—especially NPCs— 
rarely travel without an escort if they are ex- 
pecting trouble. 


Using Powers 


In general, a character can initiate only one 
psionic power per round. There are two key 
exceptions: 


* Once a power is initiated, a character 
can maintain that power for as long as 
he can continue paying the mainte- 
nance cost. (This assumes that the 
power has a maintenance cost; if no 
such cost is mentioned in the descrip- 
tion, the power cannot be maintained 
beyond its initial duration.) 

€ Psionic defense modes (mind blank, 
thought shield, mental barrier, intellect 
fortress, and tower of iron will) do not 
count against the one-power-per-round 
limit. A character can always use a de- 
fense mode and initiate one other psi- 
onic power in the same round. 


Power Checks 


The power check is fundamental to psionic 
combat. In general, no psionic power func- 
tions unless the character first makes a suc- 
cessful power check. (Chapter 1 explains how 
the check is made.) Modifiers apply for some 


22 * Chapter Two 


powers. Furthermore, several powers require 
an additional power check before they'll yield 
a specific result. Check the individual power 
descriptions in Chapters 3-8 for details. 


Psychic Contests 


Psionic powers often clash “head-on.” For 
example, one psionicist may make a psionic 
attack against a character with an active psi- 
onic defense. Which power prevails? Does the 
attack break through the defense, or bounce 
off? A psychic contest determines the answers. 

Resolving a psychic contest is simple when 
both powers are initiated in the same round. 
The two contestants just compare the die rolls 
for their power checks. The character with the 
higher successful roll wins the contest. If nei- 
ther characters power check succeeds, or if 
both rolls are equal, the defender "wins" by 
default. (In other words, a tie goes to the de- 
fender.) 

Example: An attacker is using ego whip. The 
defender has erected a thought barrier. The at- 
tacker's ego whip power score is 15, and the 
defender's thought barrier score is 12. The ta- 
ble below shows several possible outcomes of 
the psychic contest between these powers. 


Attack Defense 

Roll Roll Result 

11 6 Attacker wins because his 
die roll is higher. 

3 9 Defender wins because 
his die roll is higher. 

4 18 Attacker wins because his 
attack roll succeeded and 
the defender's roll did 
not—in effect, there is no 
defense this round. 

16 10 Defender wins because 
his defense roll succeeded 
and the attacker's failed. 

19 15 Neither power check suc- 


ceeded. The defender 


(table continues...) 


After months of trying, Hosni finally catches Gustafa at home. 


Psionic Combat * 23 


"wins" by default simply 


because the attacker 


didn't. 

Tied rolls. Again, the de- 
fender wins by default be- 
cause the attacker didn't 
beat the defense roll. 

The attacker wins this au- 
tomatically. His power 
check succeeded and his 
roll is higher than the de- 
fenders power score, so 
NO roll will let the de- 


fender win. 


15 — 


Maintained Powers: In the example above, 
powers were initiated in the same round as the 
conflict. Some psychic contests involve a 
power that is being maintained—i.e., a power 
that was initiated in a previous round. In this 
case, the player whose character is maintain- 
ing the power must make a new power check 
strictly to resolve the contest. He gains a *1 
bonus to his power score because the power is 
being maintained. If the contest roll “fails,” it 
doesn't mean the power fails. It's still being 
maintained—just not very well. For the con- 
test, the character ignores the "failed" check 
and instead receives a "successful" result of 1. 

Multiple Conflicts: In the thick of battle, a 
psionicist may be involved in more than one 
psychic contest per round. If he's using more 
than one power, the player must make a sepa- 
rate die roll for each power used that round. 

If he's using a single power against more 
than one opponent, the player can make a sep- 
arate die roll for each opponent. As soon as he 
rolls a number he likes, the player may use 
that result for all remaining psychic contests 
involving that power, in that round. (In other 
words, once he gets a power really well "tuned 
in" during a given round, he can stop "fiddling 
with the dial".) This rule applies to telepathic 
defense modes, as well as other powers. 


pU aM ሱሲ ችሲእሻሚችሽሚችሚችችችማቸችችችችችችችችችችችመመመመአስ LIT ITI] )I LIE LDZZ 


24 * Chapter Two 


Psychic Lock 


In some psychic contests, there is no clear- 
cut defender. For example, two characters 
may try to use psychokinesis on the same ob- 
ject simultaneously. (They do a little psionic 
arm-wrestling.) In such a case, the character 
with the higher successful die roll still wins the 
contest that round. In our example, the winner 
would control the object. 

If the power checks indicate a tie, however, 
the characters are deadlocked—or psychically 
locked. Neither character wins that round. To 
resolve the conflict, both characters should 
maintain the same powers during the next 
round, and engage in a new psychic contest. If 
either character fails to maintain his power (ef- 
fectively giving up), he suffers a backlash and 
loses 4d4 PSPs immediately. 

In any case, victory may be fleeting. If con- 
ditions are right, the loser can challenge the 
winner to a "rematch" in the next round. 


The Combat Round 


Psionic conflicts follow the standard 
AD&D® game combat sequence. All psionic 
powers—excluding defense modes—are used 
in order of initiative. For example, if a psioni- 
cist wants to attack, or plans to teleport to 
safety, he can do so when his normal chance to 
attack comes around. Psionic defenses work 
throughout the entire round, starting at the 
very beginning. Unlike spells, psionic powers 
do not have initiative modifiers. 

Psionic powers require a certain amount of 
concentration. A character who uses one dur- 
ing a combat round can move at only half his 
walking rate. Furthermore, he can be dis- 
rupted like a mage casting a spell. A power 
that is being maintained from a previous 
round cannot be disrupted this way, nor can 
telepathic tangents that were established in 
previous rounds (see below). If a power is dis- 
rupted during a preparatory round, the time 


invested in preparation is lost. No PSPs are ex- 
pended when a power is disrupted. 


Telepathic Combat 


Before a psionicist can use a telepathic 
power, he must establish contact with the re- 
cipient's mind. "Contact" is a telepathic devo- 
tion which paves the way for other telepathic 
powers. Usually, a single use of this devotion 
is all that's required; the psionicist uses contact 
first, then follows up with another telepathic 
power. Beings with little or no psionic talent, 
including wild talents, can be contacted in this 
way. So can psionicists and psionic creatures, 
provided they cooperate. 

The contact devotion never works against a 
psionicist (or psionic creature) who does not 
allow it to work. This is true even when he's 
sleeping or unconscious. Psionicists normally 
have closed minds. Before the contact power 
can work against them, they must intention- 
ally open their minds. They can be selective, 
allowing contact with a friendly power while 
closing their minds to hostile characters or 
strangers. 

When a subject's mind is closed, he can only 
be contacted through telepathic combat. The 
text below describes five telepathic assaults, or 
attack modes, that are used to establish con- 
tact with a closed mind. It also describes five 
telepathic defenses, which can help prevent 
such attacks from succeeding. Lastly, it ex- 
plains what happens when these opposing 
powers clash. 


Telepathic Attack Modes 


There are five attack modes: mind thrust, 
ego whip, id insinuation, psychic crush, and 
psionic blast. (See Chapter 7, “Telepathy,” for a 
complete description of each.) Against a mind 
that is open to contact, each of these powers 
has specific effects. For example, ego whip can 
make a character feel so worthless that he suf- 


fers a penalty to all of this die rolls. None of 
these effects occur unless the subject's mind is 
open to contact, however. If the subject's mind 
is closed, an attack mode only serves to erode 
his resistance. If he is repeatedly struck with 
an attack mode, his mind can be forced to 
open, and contact will be established. (See 
"Tangents" below for details.) 

Learning Attack Modes: A psionicist learns 
attack modes in the same way he learns other 
powers. The character must first have access 
to the telepathy discipline. Then he must allot 
one of his devotion slots to the power (only 
psionic blast is a science). A character could 
devote himself completely to learning the at- 
tack modes, and know all five by 2nd level. Or 
he could learn dozens of telepathic powers 
without ever picking up a single attack mode. 
This is the player's option. 

The One-Two Punch: Attack modes differ 
from most other psionic powers in one key re- 
gard: a character using an attack mode gets 
one bonus attack with that power each round. 
(An attack mode packs a one-two punch.) The 
player rolls two power checks. Each of these 
rolls constitutes a separate attack and, if op- 
posed, is conducted as a separate psychic con- 
test. Both attacks must be directed against the 
same target. The initial cost of an attack mode 
includes this double attack. 


Telepathic Defense Modes 


A character with psionic powers is not de- 
fenseless against telepathic attack modes. Five 
telepathic powers, known as defense modes, 
help protect characters from unwanted con- 
tact. These powers are mind blank, thought 
shield, mental barrier, intellect fortress, and 
tower of iron will. (See Chapter 7 for a de- 
scription of each.) Although these powers be- 
long to the telepathy discipline, they are 
common to all members of the psionicist class. 
Psionicists develop these powers naturally as 
they gain experience levels, regardless of 
whether they have access to the telepathy dis- 


Psionic Combat 925 


cipline. (See "Defense Modes" in Chapter 1 for 
an explanation.) 

When a character activates a telepathic de- 
fense mode, it becomes effective at the begin- 
ning of the round. The character conducts a 
psychic contest against every attack mode 
coming his way. (The initial cost of the defense 
mode covers all attacks in the round.) At any 
point during the round, if he rolls a number he 
likes, he can keep it for the rest of the round. 
Defense modes have no effect against any psi- 
onic powers other than attack modes. 


Attack Modifiers 


Each attack mode is more effective against 
some defense modes than others, and vice 
versa. This is represented by modifiers which 
apply to the attacker's power score. Table 14 
lists these modifiers. 

When an attack mode clashes with a defense 
mode, cross-index the attack with the defense 
on Table 14. The resulting modifier is applied 
to the attacker's power score. Thus, positive 
modifiers are bonuses and negative modifiers 
are penalties. 


Tangents 


Each time an attack mode overcomes a de- 
fense mode (or an attack mode succeeds 
against someone who was not using a defense 
mode), the attacker has established a partial 
contact called a tangent. Three tangents equal 
full contact. Thus, establishing contact with 


Table 14: ATTACK VS. DEFENSE MODES 


Mind Thought Mental 

Blank Shield Barrier 
Mind Thrust +S =2 =4 
Ego Whip +5 0 it, 
Id Insinuation -— +2 +4 
Psychic Crush +1 z3 E 
Psionic Blast +2 +3 0 


26 * Chapter Two 


someone's mind through combat requires 
three successful attacks. (In common par- 
lance, a single tangent is often called "one- 
finger contact" and two tangents "two-finger 
contact.) Remember that an attack mode al- 
lows two attacks per round, so it is possible to 
establish two tangents per round. 

ላ tangent has no direct effects in and of it- 
self, no matter which attack mode helps to es- 
tablish it. It is only a "foot in the door" When 
the door is open—i.e., when three tangents 
have succeeded—full contact is established. 
This contact is the same condition that is 
achieved when the contact power is used suc- 
cessfully against a nonpsionicist. (In other 
words, the three effective attacks simply take 
the place of one successful use of contact.) The 
tangents no longer apply when contact is es- 
tablished. (That's why there's no such thing as 
"three-finger contact") 

When full contact is established, the at- 
tacker can make no more attacks against the 
defender that round. In the next round, he can 
use any telepathic power against the defender 
that he chooses—provided he's within range 
and pays the power cost, of course. Having 
contact does not make the use of another tele- 
pathic power automatic; it only makes it pos- 
sible. Still, the subject is incredibly vulnerable 
once contacted. His only means of protection 
is an overwhelming counterattack (probably a 
nontelepathic attack) or ejection, which is 
quite risky. A contacted mind can be domi- 
nated, mindwiped, affected by any number of 
other telepathic devotions, or crippled by an- 
other assault. 

Maintaining Tan- 
gents: Maintaining 
tangents (one or 
two) costs 1 PSP per 


Intellect Tower of Shag 

Fortress Iron Will round. A ጅች 
i as can maintain tan- 
oy mes gents with only one 
dy Ls mind at any time. 
ie my He can maintain full 
Bes E: contact with any 


number of minds, however. ል tangent is bro- 
ken only when 1) the attacker voluntarily 
breaks it by simply announcing he is doing so; 
2) the attacker fails to pay the maintenance 
cost of 1 PSP per round; 3) the attacker uses an 
attack mode against a different target, or; 4) 
the attacker is incapacitated. 


Other Considerations 


Line of Sight: Unless the description states 
otherwise, psionicists require a line of sight to 
their target when using a psionic power. Clair- 
sentient powers are an obvious exception, as 
are many of the telepathic powers which list 
power score modifiers for targets which are 
outside the psionicist's field of vision. 

Touch Attacks: Psionic powers with a range 
of "touch" can be used in combat, but they re- 
quire a physical attack roll in addition to a 
power check to succeed. 


Combat Cards 


The use of combat cards is optional, but 
strongly recommended. 

A combat card is a 3" X 5" index card (or 
something similar) listing pertinent informa- 
tion for one psionic power. Each player makes 


one card for each power his character knows. 
Pertinent information includes the power 
score, initial cost and maintenance cost, 
range, preparation time, area of effect, and a 
brief description of the power's effect. 

Combat cards serve three purposes. First, 
they're a handy reference collection—a sort of 
"psionic spellbook" for a character. Second, 
they help speed up the game when psionic 
powers are used during combat. And third, 
they make psychic contests more equitable. 

If a character intends to use a psionic power 
during combat, the player thumbs through his 
combat cards until he finds the card for that 
power. Then he places the card in front of him, 
face down on the table. When the power takes 
effect, he flips the card face up. This way, if 
two psionicists do battle, neither psionicist 
can detect what his opponent is doing before 
he chooses his own action. If a character main- 
tains a power from round to round, the card 
remains face up on the table as a reminder. 

Combat cards can also be used to hide psi- 
onic activity from other players. When a psi- 
onic power is put into use, the player can select 
the combat card and show it to the DM only, 
instead of announcing aloud something that 
he may not want everyone to know. 


Psionic Combat e 27 


CHAPTER 


Clairsentience 


Clairsentient Sciences 


Aura Sight 

Power Score: Wis —5 
Initial Cost: 9 
Maintenance Cost: 9/round 
Range: 50 yds. 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


An aura is a glowing halo or envelope of 
colored light which surrounds all living 
things. It is invisible to the naked eye. A crea- 
ture's aura reflects both its alignment and its 
experience level. 

When a psionicist uses this power, he can see 
auras. Interpreting an aura requires some con- 
centration, however. With each use of this 
power, the psionicist can learn only one piece of 
information—either the subject's alignment or 


Understanding Power Descriptions 


፳ Statistics. Each power in Chapters 3 through 8 be- 
gins with the following terms: 

Power Score. This number or less must be rolled on a 
d20 whenever a character makes a power check. (See 
Chapter 1.) A character always makes a power check 
when attempting to activate a power. 

Initial Cost. The number of PSPs expended when the 
power is first used. If a character fails his power check, 
he must expend half this many PSPs. Some telepathic 
powers list "contact" as their initial cost. That means 
the contact power must be established before these 
powers can be used. (See "Contact" in Chapter 7.) 

Maintenance Cost. The number of PSPs expended per 
round (unless another time period is stated) to keep a 
power operating from the previous round. Maintaining a 
power does not require a new power check. If no mainte- 
nance cost is listed, then the power cannot be maintained. 
(A character could reactivate it round after round, how- 
ever, making a new power check each time.) 

Range. The maximum distance from the psionicist 
(psionics user) at which the power can have an effect. 
"Touch" means the psionicist must touch the target. 

Preparation Time. How many rounds a character 
must spend preparing to use a power, before he can ac- 
tually try to use it. For example, if a power has a prepa- 


28 * Chapter Three 


experience level, but not both simultaneously. 

A psionicist can examine up to two auras 
per round. (He must be able to see both sub- 
jects.) Alternately, he can examine the same 
aura twice, to verify his first impression with a 
second reading or to pick up remaining infor- 
mation. In any case, the psionicist must make 
a new power check each time he attempts to 
interpret an aura. 

The psionicist can be reasonably discreet 
when he uses this power. He doesn't have to 
poke at the subject or give him the hairy eye- 
ball. However, he does need to gaze at the sub- 
ject intently. Since the range of this power is 
the range of vision, the psionicist can go unno- 
ticed by maintaining his distance. If he tries to 
sense auras on the people he is conversing 
with, they certainly will notice that he is star- 
ing and probably will be uncomfortable. 

The level of the character being analyzed af- 
fects the psionicist's power check. The higher 


ration time of “1,” the character must spend one full 
round preparing. (He can't initiate other powers during 
that round, but he can still maintain them.) After one 
round of preparation—i.e., in round number two—he 
can make a power check. If that check fails (or is de- 
layed), the character can try to use the power again in 
round three. A power that has been prepared can be 
held ready for just one round; if it isn't used after that, 
preparation time is wasted (no PSP cost). 

Area of Effect. The physical area or number of be- 
ings which the power affects. "Personal" means the 
power only affects the psionicist. 

Prerequisites. Other sciences or devotions which a 
character must know before he can use this power. 
፳ Optional Results: Each power description ends 
with a section marked "Power Score" and another 
marked "20." The former describes what happens if a 
player rolls his character's power score exactly when 
making a power check. The latter describes what hap- 
pens when the player rolls a natural 20 when making a 
power check. Both results are optional. DMs can use 
these results—or devise something similar—to add 
spice and a small element of risk to psionics. 
፳ Psionicists. The power descriptions in this book are 
written with psionicists in mind. Psionic creatures and 
wild talents often use these powers too—just as psioni- 
cists do. 


4 
5 
: -= 
= 
v 
v 
a 
[m 
~ 
5 
y 
X 
*- 
— 
= 
o 
c 
E 
Kd 
56 
ድ 
፻ 
፳ 
Q 
" 
E 
S 
pu 
E 
Ez 
<= 
E 
wy 
g 
3 
< 


we 


fe 
»/, 
ATA 
ሃያ 
/ 
i e 
ኣ | \ 
s hyja 
- ሪሪ 
T E 
Å= > 
=. = / 
ዉ - | ጁ 
: . p H 
= | : 
| = / "P, 
= = 7 
—- " j 
ሪያ 
WU, 
WK 
መሙ My 
P, P 
Af, 
Y 


~ 


S i 
|? 9 Hx X33 eir 
፡ coment d 


; 
ነ8 


2 n, 
| 5 ጫን pE 
] a | j ! 
ብ A | d á / ^R : ~ \ ጨጨ 
" | if 6 | hy ኳ 1 VAN 


Clairsentience e 29 


the subject's experience level, the tougher it is 
to interpret the subject's aura. This translates 
into a —1 penalty for every three levels of the 
subject, rounded down. For example, a psioni- 
cist reading the aura of an 8th level character 
would suffer a —2 penalty. 

If the die roll for the power check is a 1, the 
psionicist's reading is incomplete or slightly in- 
correct. For example, the psionicist may learn 
only the chaotic portion of a chaotic neutral 
alignment. Or he may interpret the character's 
level with an error of one or two levels. 

Power score: The psionicist can examine up 
to four auras per round instead of two. 

20: The initiator can't use this power again 
for 24 hours. 


* Players with the SPELLJAMMER" boxed 
set should note that clairaudience works only 
within a given crystal sphere or plane. 


Using clairaudience does not screen out 
background noise around the psionicist. If 
something in his own neighborhood is raising 
a racket, he may have trouble hearing what is 
happening somewhere else. Clairaudience also 
does not give the psionicist the ability to un- 
derstand a foreign or alien language, nor does 
it help him interpret sounds. For example, if 
the psionicist hears furniture scraping across 
the floor, he can only guess whether it's a chair 
or something else—just as if he heard it while 
blindfolded. 

Power Score: The psionicist automatically 
gains clairvoyance of the area as well. 

20: The psionicist is deaf for 1d12 hours. 


Clairaudience 

Power Score: Wis -3 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: 4/round 
Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: special 
Prerequisites: none 


Clairaudience allows the user to hear 
sounds from a distant area. The psionicist 
picks a spot anywhere within range. He then 
can hear everything that he would be able to 
hear normally if he were standing in that spot. 
If the psionicist has enhanced senses, the 
senses apply to clairaudience as well. 

The farther the "listening spot" is from the 
psionicist, the more difficult it is to use this 
power. The table below gives specifics. 


Range Power Score Modifier 


100 yards 0 

1,000 yards =2 
10 miles -4 
100 miles >6 
1,000 miles -8 
10,000 miles —10 
Interplanetary* —12 


30 * Chapter Three 


Clairvoyance 

Power Score: Wis —4 
Initial Cost: 7 
Maintenance Cost: 4/round 
Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: special 
Prerequisites: none 


Clairvoyance allows the user to see images 
from a distant area. The psionicist picks a 
viewing spot anywhere within range. He can 
then see anything that he could normally see if 
he were standing in that spot. His field of vi- 
sion is no wider than usual, but he can scan the 
area by turning his head. 

Clairvoyance does not replace the charac- 
ter's normal eyesight. The psionicist can still 
"see" what is actually before him, but the dis- 
tant scene is superimposed. For this reason, 
most clairvoyants close their eyes to avoid the 
confusion of images. 

The more distant the viewed area is, the 
more difficult it is to use clairvoyance. The ta- 
ble below shows how the range to a viewed 
area can diminish the psionicist's power score. 


Range Power Score Modifier 
100 yards 0 

1,000 yards ሙሪ 

10 miles -4 

100 miles >6 

1,000 miles -8 

10,000 miles —10 
interplanetary* ማን 


* Players with the SPELLJ'AMMER" boxed 
set should note that clairvoyance works only 
within a given crystal sphere or plane. 

Clairvoyance does nothing to enhance the 
character's vision. Unless some other power or 
magic is at work, he still cannot see objects 
that are invisible, hidden in shadow, or behind 
other objects. This power also provides no 
sound, so the character actually sees a kind of 
silent movie (without subtitles, of course). 

Once the viewing spot is chosen, it is fixed in 
space. To enjoy the view from another loca- 
tion, the psionicist must use this power an- 
other time, and make a new power check. 

The psionicist's clairvoyant presence is un- 
detectable by normal means. It cannot be dis- 
pelled, repelled, or kept away by any form of 
magic. 

Power Score— The psionicist automatically 
gains clairaudience, too, for the duration of 
the clairvoyant vision. 

20— The psionicist is blind for 1d4 hours. 


Object Reading 

Power Score: Wis -5 
Initial Cost: 16 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: touch 
Prerequisites: none 


Object reading is the ability to detect psy- 
chic impressions left on an object by its pre- 
vious owner, including his race, sex, age, and 
alignment. The power can also reveal how the 
owner came to possess the item, as well as how 


he lost it. The amount of information gained 
depends on the result of the power check. If 
the psionicist's power check is successful, he 
learns the information listed beside that result 
in the table below, plus all the information 
listed above it. 


Power Check 
Result Information Gained 
1-2 Last owner's race 
3 Last owner's sex 
4 Last owner's age 
5 Last owner's alignment 
6-7 How last owner gained and 
lost item 
8+ All this information about 
all owners 


An object can be read only once per experi- 
ence level of the psionicist; additional readings 
at that level reveal no additional information. 
When the clairvoyant gains a new experience 
level, hecan try reading the same object again, 
even if his object reading score has not 
changed. 

Power Score— The psionicist automatically 
learns all information on the table above. 

20— The psionicist becomes obsessed with 
the object; he strives to keep it until he can at- 
tempt to read it again. 


Precognition 

Power Score: Wis —5 
Initial Cost: 24 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 5 

Area of Effect: na 
Prerequisites: none 


Precognition enables the psionicist to fore- 
see the probable outcome of a course of 
action. This foresight is limited to the near 
future—no more than several hours from the 
time he uses the power. Furthermore, the char- 
acter must describe the intended course of 


Clairsentience € 31 


action in some detail in order to establish the 
course of events. 

The DM makes the power check secretly. If 
the check fails, the character gains no informa- 
tion. If the roll is 20 exactly, the character sees 
himself meeting his own death in a particu- 
larly nasty and grisly way and must make a 
saving throw vs. petrification. If the character 
fails the save, he is so completely shaken up by 
the vision that all his psionic power scores are 
reduced by three for 1d6 hours. 

If the power check succeeds, the character 
sees the most likely outcome of the actions de- 
scribed. The DM has some liberty in describ- 
ing the scene and should use the d20 roll as a 
guide to how much detail to include. High 
rolls get more detail. 

Even when it's successful, precognition of- 
fers no guarantees. The psionicist sees only 
one possible (albeit likely) outcome to a spe- 
cific course of action. If the characters in- 
volved deviate from the actions the psionicist 
describes, then they are changing the condi- 
tions and the lines of time, thereby making 
other outcomes more likely. Die rolls (particu- 
larly for surprise, initiative, and normal com- 
bat) also play a large part in a precognition's 
inaccuracy. The DM cannot be expected to en- 
gineer die rolls to the players' advantage, and 
even events with 9545 certainty fail to occur 
5% of the time. Anyone who relies on precog- 
nition to the exclusion of caution and common 
sense is asking for trouble. 

Precognition is tiring. Regardless of the out- 
come, a psionicist who has used this power 
must rest for at least one turn before he can use 
any other clairsentient powers (the use of 
other disciplines is not affected). 

Power Score—The psionicist's player may 
reroll three die rolls to maintain the precogni- 
tion's validity. 

20— See above. (Not an optional result.) 


p ሙተ ሱሲ ችችችችሚመመወመመመመመ C: 


32 * Chapter Three 


Sensitivity to Psychic Impressions 


Power Score: Wis —4 
Initial Cost: 12 
Maintenance Cost: 2/round 
Range: 0 

Preparation Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 20-yard radius 
Prerequisites: none 


With this power, a psionicist gains a sense of 
history. He perceives the residue of powerful 
emotions which were experienced in a given 
area. These impressions offer him a picture of 
the location's past. 

Battles and betrayals, marriages and mur- 
ders, childbirth and great pain—only events 
which elicited strong emotional or psychic en- 
ergy leave their impression on an area. Every- 
day occurrences leave no residue for the 
psionicist to detect. 

To determine how far into the past a psioni- 
cist can delve, divide the result of his power 
check by two and round up. This is the num- 
ber of strong events which he can sense. Only 
one event can be noted per round, however, 
beginning with the most recent and proceed- 
ing backward through time. 

The characters understanding of these 
events is vague and shadowy, as if he were 
viewing a dream. The dominant emotion 
involved—anger, hate, fear, love, etc.— 
comes through very clearly. 

Power Score—The character gains an un- 
usually clear understanding of each event. 

20— An angry ghost comes forward and at- 
tempts to use magic jar against the psionicist. 


Clairsentient Devotions 


All-Round Vision 

Power Score: Wis -3 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: 4/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


Danger Sense 

Power Score: Wis -3 
Initial Cost: 4 
Maintenance Cost: 3/turn 
Range: special 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 10 yards 
Prerequisite: none 


When using danger sense, a psionicist will 


This power gives the psionicist “eyes in the 
back of his head" —and in the sides and top, as 
well. (Of course, this is figurative; he does not 
literally sprout eyeballs.) In effect, the charac- 
ter can see in all directions simultaneously. Be- 
sides its obvious application when combined 
with the clairvoyance power, all-round vision 
prevents anyone from sneaking up on the 
character without some sort of concealment. 
On the down side, the psionicist suffers a —4 
penalty against all gaze attacks while using 
this power. 

Power Score—Infravision is also gained. 

20— The psionicist is blind for 1d4 hours. 


Combat Mind 

Power Score: Int “4 
Initial Cost: 5 
Maintenance Cost: 4/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


A character using this power has an unusu- 
ally keen understanding of his enemies and 
their fighting tactics. As a result, the psioni- 
cist's side in combat gains a —1 bonus when 
making initiative die rolls. This is cumulative 
with any other modifiers which may apply. 

Power Score—The psionicist (but not his 
companions) also gains a * 1 AC bonus. 

20— The psionicist and his companions suf- 


fera +1 initiative penalty. 


experience a slight tingling sensation at the 
back of his neck when a hazard or threat is 
near. The DM must make a successful power 
check on the psionicists behalf before the 
character detects the danger. This power does 
not give the psionicist any specific informa- 
tion about the type of danger. He does not 
learn how or when it will strike. However, he 
does learn the general direction of the threat 
(i.e., to the right, left, ahead, or behind). 

The characters power check results deter- 
mine how much warning he gets. If the roll is 12 
or more, he knows whether danger is lurking 
anywhere in the immediate area. If the roll is 8 
or more, he enjoys a full round of warning be- 
fore that danger strikes. If the roll is 7 or less, 
however, the psionicist isn't alerted until mo- 
ments before danger strikes. If the roll is 1 ex- 
actly, he still has several moments' warning but 
the direction is off; e.g., if the attack is coming 
from the left, he thinks it is coming from ahead, 
behind, or the right (DM's option). 

If the psionicist and his companions have 
enough warning, they can do something to 
prepare— getting into defensive positions, pre- 
paring spells, or running away, for example. If 
they have less than one round of warning, the 
DM must decide how much preparation is 
possible. In any case, they always gain a +2 
bonus on their own surprise rolls. 

Power Score— The psionicist learns how far 
away the danger is. 

20— The psionicist cannot sense danger suc- 
cessfully for 1d6 hours. 


Clairsentience ወ 33 


Feel Light 


Power Score: Wis -3 
Initial Cost: 7 
Maintenance Cost: 5/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: special 
Prerequisites: none 


Power Score—The psionicist can detect 
noise like a thief of the same experience level. 

20—For 1d4 rounds, any sound causes 1 
point of damage per round and is garbled. 


This extrasensory power allows the psioni- 
cist to experience light through tactile sensa- 
tions (by touch). His entire body becomes a 
receiver for light waves. In effect, his body re- 
places his eyes; he can see what his eyes would 
normally reveal. (His field of vision does not 
change.) This power does not allow him to see 
in the dark, since there must be light for him to 
feel. Nor does it counter magical darkness, 
which actually destroys or blocks light waves. 
The character gains a +4 bonus when saving 
against gaze attacks. 

Power Score—The character can feel light 
in all directions. 

20—The psionicist becomes overly sensitive 
to light for 1d10 rounds. Exposure to light 
causes 1 point of damage per round, and the 
character cannot see. 


Hear Light 

Power Score: Wis —3 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: 3/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: special 
Prerequisites: none 


This extrasensory power resembles "feel 
light,” but it relies on the character's hearing 
rather than his sense of touch. A character 
who has been blinded, either artificially, natu- 
rally, or by an injury, can "see" with his ears. 
Any light waves which reach him are con- 
verted to sound, and he "hears" the image. The 
image his mind perceives is just like an image 
offered by normal sight, and the character suf- 
fers no penalties for anything requiring vision. 

Power Score—The psionicist can "hear" in 
the dark, as if he had infravision. 

20— Bright light causes deafness, and all 
other light is just a buzz. 


Know Direction 


Feel Sound 

Power Score: Wis —3 
Initial Cost: 5 
Maintenance Cost: 3/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: special 
Prerequisites: none 


This power is almost identical to feeling 
light, but it makes the psionicist's body sensi- 
tive to sound. It allows him to continue hear- 
ing when his ears are disabled. This power 
does not detect sound where there is none, 
however, nor is it effective inside magical si- 
lence. The psionicist gains a +2 bonus against 
sonic attacks or effects, including a siren's 
song. 


Power Score: Int 
Initial Cost: 1 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


The psionicist becomes his own compass. 
By paying 1 PSP and making a successful 
power check, he knows which way is north. 

Power Score—The power is automatically 
maintained for one day. 

20— The psionicist is disoriented; he cannot 
use this power again for 116 hours. 


ፐ፡፡፡፡ ሞም aaO DSDUEOEEEAEEEEESDSDDDDDSDDEUGDDUDEGODEGEDLEQODQCSEZEZEEEEEEEZE)EUIEEECELCLEEgJECELEELECELEÉLECIELLCUCECETIZLETETETELEETELISEEEEEEETITTTZEZZZIZTTZITITILLITTITLEIELTELLIIIIÍÉLÉBÓTITITEEZEETETTIEITTZZLILEEE!E 


34 * Chapter Three 


Object Reading: A wheel spins horrid tale of the past. 


Clairsentience ® 35 


Know Location 


Power Score: Int 
Initial Cost: 10 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 5 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


This power is useful to characters who fre- 
quently travel by using teleportation, gates, or 
via other planes of existence. When it works, 
the power reveals general information about 
the characters location. The information is 
usually no more detailed than the response of 
a simple farmer when asked, "Where am I?” 
Typical answers include "a few miles south- 
west of Waterdeep...as the crow flies,” “in the 
house of Kilgore the taxidermist,” or “adrift on 
the Blood Sea.” 

The higher the result of the power check, the 
more precise the location will be. If the die roll 
is 8 or more, the location is specified within a 
mile or less. If the roll is 7 or less, the location 
is specified within 10 miles. 

The character can get additional informa- 
tion that is less specific than the initial answer 
if his player asks for it. (The psionicist does 
not make another power check.) For example, 
if the DM's first response is "you're in the 
house of Kilgore the Taxidermist,” the player 
might then ask where the house is. The DM 
might answer by saying Kilgore's house is in 
Chendl, in the Kingdom of Furyondy. 

Power Score—The psionicist learns the ex- 
act location he's trying to determine. 

20—Nothing within 100 miles can be lo- 
cated with this power for 24 hours. 


36 * Chapter Three 


Poison Sense 

Power Score: Wis 

Initial Cost: 1 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 1-yard radius 
Prerequisites: none 


This power enables a psionicist to detect the 
presence of poison and identify its location 
within 1 yard of his body (or his presence, if he 
is using clairvoyance or traveling astrally). 
The type of poison is not revealed, only its 
presence. Any poison, including animal 
venom, can be detected. 

Power Score—The psionicist determines the 
exact type of poison. 

20—If poison exists, the sense of it mentally 
overwhelms the psionicist. The effects match 
those of actual exposure to the poison. 


Radial Navigation 

Power Score: Int —3 
Initial Cost: 4 
Maintenance Cost: 7/hour 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


As long as this power is in use, the psionicist 
knows where he is in relation to a fixed start- 
ing point. In other words, no matter how or 
where he moves, he still knows the exact direc- 
tion and distance to his starting point. 

He cannot necessarily tell someone how to 
get back to that starting point, however. If he 
is in a maze or dungeon, for example, he may 
know the starting point is 500 yards north, but 
he cannot retrace his steps through the maze 
automatically. Radial navigation does en- 
hance his ability to do so, however. Every time 
the character comes to a decision point—e.g., 
“should I turn right or left?" —the DM makes a 


power check for him. If the check succeeds, 
the character knows which way he came. If the 
roll fails, he isn't sure. (He can still maintain 
the power normally, however.) 

Radial navigation can be helpful in several 
ways that are not obvious. For example, tele- 
portation and other extraordinary means of 
travel become simpler. Let's say a character 
cannot see a particular location because he's 
blindfolded. He leaves that location, but uses 
radial navigation to get a fix on it. That means 
he can still teleport back there. Furthermore, if 
the character has a fix on a place, he can reach 
it through the astral plane in just seven hours, 
the minimum possible (assuming of course 
that he can travel through the astral plane). 
And he can reach the same location by dimen- 
sion walking (see the psychoportation disci- 
pline) with no chance of getting lost. Radial 
navigation can aid in telepathy, too. If the 
psionicist wants to make telepathic contact, 
and he has a fix on the target's location, he 
doesn't suffer the usual penalties for range. 

If the character stops maintaining this 
power, he loses his fix on the location. He can 
get it back by resuming this power and making 
a successful power check within six hours. Af- 
ter six hours, the location is lost. Only one lo- 
cation can be fixed at a time unless the 
character pays the maintenance cost individu- 
ally for each. 

Power Score—The psionicist can automati- 
cally retrace his steps to the starting point. 

20— The psionicist forgets where he is for 
1d4 rounds. 


See Sound 

Power Score: Wis -3 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: 3/round 
Range: special 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


This power enables a character to perceive 
sound waves visually—with his eyes—by con- 
verting the sound waves to light impulses. (It 
works in much the same way as feel light.) 
Only a character who can see normally can 
use this power. The psionicist can see sound 
even in darkness, because sound waves do not 
require light. The character can still be 
"plinded" by silence, however. 

Power Score—The psionicist can maintain 
this power for 1 PSP per round. 

20—Loud sounds cause “blindness,” and all 
other sounds are as disturbing as bright lights. 


Spirit Sense 

Power Score: Wis —3 
Initial Cost: 10 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 0 

Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 15-yard radius 
Prerequisites: none 


Using this power allows the psionicist to 
sense the presence of "spirits" within 15 
yards— meaning ghosts, banshees, wraiths, 
haunts, heucuvas, and revenants. If a spirit 
frequently haunts the location at hand, the 
psionicist will know it. He will also know 
when a spirit is within 15 yards, but he won't 
be able to pinpoint its location. 

Power Score—The psionicist knows the ex- 
act location of the spirits he senses. 

20— The psionicist has aggravated the spir- 
its (DM determines exact result). 


Clairsentience * 37 


CHAPTER 


Psychokinesis 


Psychokinetic Sciences 


Create Object 

Power Score: Int -4 
Initial Cost: 16 
Maintenance Cost: 3/round 
Range: 20 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: special 
Prerequisites: telekinesis 


A psionicist with this power can assemble 
matter from air and the surrounding area to 
create a solid object. This object remains in ex- 
istence as long as the psionicist pays the 
power's maintenance cost. When he stops 
maintaining it, the object breaks into its con- 
stituent parts. 

An object created this way can have any 
shape, color, and texture the psionicist desires, 
provided it fulfills at least one of the following 
conditions: 

$ Fits entirely within a sphere no more 
than 4 feet in diameter. 

ፄ Fits entirely within a cylinder no 
more than 20 feet long and 1 foot in 
diameter. 

* Fits entirely within a cylinder no 
more than 2 feet high and 6 feet in 
diameter. 

* Weighs no more than 10 pounds. 


Only available materials within 20 yards of 
the psionicist can be used in the construction. 
However, these materials can be rearranged or 
restructured if the psionicist also has the 
power of molecular rearrangement. By com- 
bining these two powers, he could manufac- 
ture diamonds from coal dust or a sword from 
rocks containing iron ore. 

If the power check result is a 1, the item con- 
tains a flaw—e.g., a sword breaks when 
struck, a diamond contains impurities obvious 
to a jeweler, and so on. 


38 * Chapter Four 


Power Score—The object is permanent. No 
cost is expended to maintain it. 

20—The power backfires, and a personal 
belonging (chosen randomly) disintegrates. 


Detonate 

Power Score: Con -3 

Initial Cost: 18 

Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 60 yards 

Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: one item, 8 cu. ft. 

Prerequisites: telekinesis, 
molecular agitation 


Some psionicists can make a bush self- 
destruct, or cause a zombie to explode. With 
the detonate power, latent energy inside plants 
or inanimate objects can be harnessed, fo- 
cused, and released explosively. The power 
even works against animated undead (skele- 
tons and zombies). It does not affect noncor- 
poreal undead, such as ghosts, because they 
aren't material. Furthermore, the science has 
no effect on animals of any sort, including in- 
telligent creatures such as humans, or undead 
with free will. 

The detonation inflicts 1d10 points of dam- 
age upon all vulnerable objects which the 
psionicist chooses to attack, within 10 feet. A 
saving throw vs. breath weapon reduces dam- 
age to half. To determine what percentage of 
the object was destroyed, multiply the result 
of the psionicist's power check by 10. If the 
product is 100 or more—i.e, 100% or more— 
the target has been completely destroyed. 
Anything less means a few significant chunks 
remain. 

No more than 8 cubic feet of material can be 
destroyed with this power. A portion of a wall 
can be blown out, for example, but if the wall 
is 10 inches thick, an opening about 3 feet 
square will appear. 

Power Score—Damage and range double, 
to 2d10 points and 20 feet, respectively. 


7i .- e i 
ኳ 


g 
= 
= 
[: 
E 
2 
= 
= 
n] 
= 
V 
ጄ 
= 
ይ 
rs 
g 
2 
" 
S 
5 
fz 
9 
S 
B-] 
S 
s] 
g 
~ 
u 
ሯ 
S 
ህ 
Q 


Psychokinesis ቆ 39 


20— The air surrounding the initiator deto- 
nates; everyone within 10 feet of him is at- 
tacked. 


Disintegrate 

Power Score: Wis —4 

Initial Cost: 40 

Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 50 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: one item, 8 cu. ft. 
Prerequisites: telekinesis, soften 


The disintegrate science reduces an item or 
creature to microscopic pieces and scatters 
them. Anything is vulnerable unless it is pro- 
tected by magical shielding such as a minor or 
regular globe of invulnerability or by an iner- 
tial barrier. The psionicist chooses his target, 
but he can disintegrate no more than 8 cubic 
feet of material with one use of this power. 

If the target is an inanimate object, it must 
save vs. disintegration; success means it is un- 
affected. If the target is a living creature, char- 
acter, or an undead creature with free will, it 
must make a saving throw vs. death magic. If 
it succeeds, the creature feels only a slight tin- 
gle, but is otherwise unaffected. If the save 
fails, the creature is disintegrated (or 8 cubic 
feet right out of its center, which should be 
enough to kill most anything). 

Power Score—The power affects 16 cubic 
feet and saves are made with a —5 penalty. 

20—The power backfires and it affects the 
initiator (save with +5 bonus). 


Molecular Rearrangement 


Power Score: Int -5 
Initial Cost: 20 
Maintenance Cost: 10 per hour 
Range: 2 yards 
Preparation Time: 2 hours 
Area of Effect: one item 


telekinesis, molecular 
manipulation 


Prerequisite: 


40 * Chapter Four 


Molecular rearrangement is the psionic 
equivalent of alchemy. By toying with an ob- 
ject's molecular structure, the psionicist can 
change its fundamental nature or properties. 
This power cannot create matter or mass from 
nothing, however. Nor can it change a materi- 
al's state from liquid to solid, gas to liquid, and 
so on. It is best suited to converting one sort of 
element into another, but it can also be used 
for more complex operations—neutralizing a 
poison, for example. 

Converting one element to another is usu- 
ally a simple operation, in which one ounce of 
material can be changed each hour. Typical 
conversions of this type include steel to lead, 
or any metal to gold. More complex rear- 
rangement, like changing a metal to glass or 
changing a wooden goblet to a ruby goblet, 
takes four times longer. 

The creation of gold coins from other metals 
is possible, but it's no way to get rich quick. At 
the rate of one ounce per hour, it would take 
16 hours—about two work days—to change 
10 copper pieces into 10 gold pieces, for a net 
profit of 9 gold pieces. 

Molecular rearrangement is often used to 
create superior weapons. A psionically tem- 
pered weapon may receive a +1 on damage 
rolls (see "Weapon Quality" in Chapter 6 of 
the DMG). The process is time-consuming, 
however. For example, a typical short sword 
takes at least 40 hours to temper psionically. 
(The average short sword weighs 3 pounds, or 
48 ounces, most of which is the blade.) A 
psionically tempered weapon does not auto- 
matically offer a +1 attack-roll bonus. In or- 
der to receive that bonus, the psionicist must 
1) have the weaponsmithing proficiency and 
2) make a successful proficiency check when 
he fashions the weapon. 

The psionicist makes his power check when 
the process is complete. If it fails, he did not 
waste all his effort. The difference between the 
character's die roll and his power score, multi- 
plied by 10, equals the percentage of work 
which must be redone. 


If the roll is 1, the item seems perfect but 
contains a hidden flaw which will cause it to 
break, or fail, or simply look wrong when it is 
put to use (the ruby goblet might leak, for ex- 
ample, or the sword might contain a soft por- 
tion which causes it to bend). 

This power has no effect against living crea- 
tures weighing more than one ounce. Crea- 
tures weighing one ounce or less are killed if 
their molecules are rearranged. 

Power Score—The new material is extraor- 
dinary (DM's arbitration). 

20— The item is seriously flawed and utterly 
useless. 


Project Force 


Power Score: Con -2 
Initial Cost: 10 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 200 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: na 
Prerequisites: telekinesis 


Some psionicists can push, shove, and oth- 
erwise bully an opponent from afar. Project 
force allows the psionicist to focus a psycho- 
kinetic "punch" against a target up to 200 
yards away. 

If used offensively, this punch causes dam- 
age equal to 1d6 points plus the target's armor 
class (negative armor classes reduce the dam- 
age). For example, a target with armor class 5 
would suffer 6 to 11 points of damage (1 to 6 
points, plus 5). A successful save vs. breath 
weapon reduces the damage by half. 

This rather unsubtle blow can also be used 
to trigger traps, throw levers, open doors (if 
they aren't locked or latched), break win- 
dows, and the like. 

Power Score— The blow also knocks down 
the target if it is roughly man-sized or smaller. 

20— The blow strikes the initiator. 


Telekinesis 

Power Score: Wis —3 
Initial Cost: 3t 
Maintenance Cost: 1+/round 
Range: 30 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: single item 
Prerequisite: none 


Telekinesis, or “TK” for short, is the ability 
to move objects through space without touch- 
ing them. All telekinetic efforts tend to be 
physically taxing, because they involve real 
work. Moving small, light objects is relatively 
easy. As the objects become more massive, the 
task becomes significantly more difficult. 

The costs above (3 PSPs initially and 1 per 
round of maintenance) assume that the object 
being moved weighs 3 pounds or less. For 
heavier objects, these rules apply: 

è The initial cost equals the object's weight 

in pounds. 

* The maintenance cost is half the initial 
cost, rounded down. 

* The character's power score is decreased 
by one-third of the objects weight in 
pounds, rounded down. 

For example, to telekinetically snatch a 15- 
pound battle axe from a rack, a psionicist must 
pay 15 PSPs and make a power check with a 
—5 modifier to his score. 

A psionicist using TK can move an object up 
to 60 feet per round. The object can serve as a 
weapon. In this case, the character attacks us- 
ing his own THACO score, with a penalty 
equaling the objects weight modifier (one- 
third its weight, rounded down). 

Power Score—The character can lift a sec- 
ond item of equal or lesser weight simultane- 
ously for the same cost. 

20—The psionicist "fumbles" the item, 
knocking it over, etc. 


Psychokinesis * 41 


Psychokinetic Devotions 
Animate Object 


Power Score: Int -3 

Initial Cost: 8 

Maintenance Cost: 3/round 

Range: 50 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 1 object, 100 lbs. 
Prerequisites: telekinesis 


Inanimate objects can be “brought to life” 
with this devotion. The objects are not actu- 
ally alive, but they move under the psionicist's 
control as if they were. For example, chairs 
may walk, trees may dance, and stones may 
waddle around. 

The object being animated must weigh 100 
pounds or less. The material being animated 
affects the difficulty of the task; stronger or 
more brittle materials are harder to animate 
than weak or floppy materials. Once ani- 
mated, however, all materials become flexible 
to some extent. 


Ability Score 
Material Modifier 
Cloth, paper 0 
Live wood, dead animal -7 
Dead wood -2 
Water -3 
Thin metal -4 
Thick metal -5 
Stone = 


Fluid motion is not common. The animated 
item moves more like a puppet. Its move- 
ments are jerky and clumsy, and if the item 
was rigid to begin with, it makes a loud creak- 
ing, groaning, or grating sound. It can move 
60 feet per round (movement rate 6), in any 
direction chosen by the psionicist. It can at- 
tack as a club with a THACO of 20. 

Power Score—Animation is smooth and 
lifelike. 

20—No additional effect. 


LL 


42 * Chapter Four 


Animate Shadow 


Power Score: Wis -3 
Initial Cost: 7 
Maintenance Cost: 3/round 
Range: 40 yards 
Preparation Time: ዐ 

Area of Effect: 100 sq. ft. 
Prerequisites: none 


With this devotion the psionicist can ani- 
mate the shadow cast by anyone or anything 
and make it seem to have life of its own. The 
shadow can even move away from the person 
or thing that cast it. It must, however, remain 
flatly cast along a surface. It can never be 
more than two-dimensional. 

An animated shadow can't really do any- 
thing other than startle or amuse someone. It 
cannot attack or disrupt a mage's concentra- 
tion. In this regard, it is similar to a cantrip's 
effect. It can serve as a diversion by entertain- 
ing someone or attracting a guard's attention. 

Power Score—The range increases to 100 
yards. 

20— The shadow disappears completely for 
one round. 


Ballistic Attack 


Power Score: Con -2 
Initial Cost: 5 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 30 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 1 item, 1 lb. 
Prerequisites: telekinesis 


This power can make any psionicist a 
"David" when he's facing “Goliath.” It's a spe- 
cial variation of the telekinesis science. Instead 
of moving any object relatively slowly, ballistic 
attack allows the character to hurl a small ob- 
ject at a target. The object, no more than 1 
pound in weight, can achieve deadly speeds. 11 
must be within sight of the psionicist and can- 
not be anchored or attached to anything else. 
A rock is the most common weapon. 


The psionicist uses his regular THACO to 
determine whether he hits the target. If he suc- 
ceeds, the missile inflicts 1d6 points of damage 
(assuming, of course, that the character made 
a successful power check in the first place). 

Power Score—Damage increases to 1d12. 

20— Ballistic boomerang. The psionicist be- 
comes the object's target. 


Control Body 

Power Score: Con -2 
Initial Cost: 8 
Maintenance Cost: 8/round 
Range: 80 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: telekinesis 


This science allows psychokinetic control of 
another person's body. In effect, the victim be- 
comes a marionette, He knows that someone 
else is pulling his strings, though, and he's 
probably mad as all get-out. 

Before this science actually works, the 
psionicist must engage in a psychic contest, 
pitting his power score directly against the vic- 
tim's Strength. If the victim wins the contest, 
he breaks free (the psionicist still pays the 
power cost). In a tie, the contest continues into 
the next round, provided the psionicist main- 
tains the power. The victim can't do anything 
else during this contest; all his effort is focused 
on retaining control of his own body. 

If the power works, the psionicist has rudi- 
mentary control over the victim's limbs. He 
can make the victim stand up, sit down, walk, 
turn around, etc. The body can be forced to at- 
tack physically, but with a —6 penalty on at- 
tack rolls (using the victim's own THACO). 
The victim can't be forced to speak. In fact, he 
keeps control over his own voice and can say 
whatever he likes. 

The victim must stay within the 80-yard 
range or the psionicist's control is broken au- 
tomatically. If the body is forced to do some- 
thing obviously suicidal, like walking off a 


cliff or poking at a red dragon, the victim can 
fight another contest with the psionicist to re- 
gain control (the adrenaline rush of imminent 
danger gives him renewed strength). 

Power Score— The psionicist automatically 
wins the initial psychic contest. 

20— The psionicist suffers partial paralysis 
(an arm or leg) for 1d10 turns. 


Control Flames 

Power Score: Wis —1 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: 3/round 
Range: 40 yards 
Preparation Time: ዐ 

Area of Effect: 10 sq. ft 
Prerequisites: telekinesis 


By controlling flames, a psionicist can make 
a normal fire bigger, smaller, hotter, or colder. 
He can even make it move around as if it were 
a living creature. 

A fire's size can be increased by 100% or de- 
creased by 50%. If the fire's heat is increased, 
it causes double damage. If its heat is reduced, 
the damage is halved. This applies to flaming 
torches, burning oil, and other normal fires, 
but not to magical fires such as fireballs or 
burning hands. 

An animated fire can move up to 90 feet per 
round (MR 9). It can be shaped like a person or 
an animal, as long as it covers no more than 10 
square feet of ground. If the fire moves away 
from its fuel, it can survive for only one more 
round, then dies out. 

An animated fire can also attack by engulfing 
an opponent. The psionicist must make an at- 
tack roll using his regular THACO. If successful, 
the attack causes 1d6 points of damage. 

Power Score—Size can increase up to 200% 
or decrease to 0% (the fire is extinguished). 

20— The psionicist burns himself, suffering 
1d4 points of damage. 


Psychokinesis ቆ 43 


Control Light 


Power Score: Int 

Initial Cost: 12 
Maintenance Cost: 4/round 
Range: 25 yards 
Preparation Time: ዐ 

Area of Effect: 400 sq. ft. 
Prerequisites: none 


The psionicist can manipulate existing light 
with this devotion. He cannot create light 
from darkness, but he can create darkness 
from light. This power can accomplish the fol- 
lowing, and anything else the DM allows: 

* Deepen existing shadows, making them 
inky black. A thief hiding in this shadow 
gets a 20% bonus on his ability roll. 

9 Lighten existing shadows, reducing a 
thief's hiding ability by 20%. 

* Brighten a light source until it hurts to 
look at it. This gives everyone exposed to 
the light a —2 penalty on attack rolls. 

* Dim a light source so it resembles twi- 
light. This does not affect anyone's attack 
rolls. 

* Extend shadows into areas that are other- 
wise well lit. Only an existing shadow can 
be extended, but its size can be increased 
by 200% (i.e., its size can be tripled). 

* Extend light into areas that are otherwise 
in shadow. Shadows can be reduced in 
size by 50%. 

Power Score— The maintenance cost is re- 

duced to 1 PSP per round. 

20— The effect is the opposite of what is de- 
sired, and maintenance fails. 


Control Sound 


Power Score: Int -5 
Initial Cost: 5 
Maintenance Cost: 2/round 
Range: 100 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: na 
Prerequisites: none 


em ። 0 ቸቸቸ ኽኽ ቸቸ ። ———————— 


44 * Chapter Four 


This power allows the psionicist to shape and 
alter existing sounds. As a woman speaks, for 
example, the psionicist could change her words 
into a lion's roar, or even into different words. 
Or he could disguise the sound of 20 men 
marching past a guard as falling rain. Sounds 
can also be layered—so that one singing person 
sounds like an entire choir, for example. 

If the character's power check is a 1, some- 
thing about the sound he's altered isn't quite 
right, so it arouses suspicion. If he is trying to 
exactly duplicate another voice, this fault oc- 
curs on a roll of 1 or 2. 

This power can also dampen a sound. The 
player must specify which sound the character 
intends to eliminate; the power has no area of 
effect. For example, the psionicist might quiet 
the sound of a hammer, muffle the words 
from someone's mouth, or eliminate the 
creaking of a door. He could not do all three 
simultaneously, however. 

Power Score— The maintenance cost is re- 
duced to 1 PSP per round. 

20—A loud boom erupts from the psioni- 
cist's location. 


Control Wind 

Power Score: Con -4 
Initial Cost: 16 
Maintenance Cost: 10/round 
Range: 500 yards 
Preparation Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 1,000 yards 
Prerequisites: telekinesis 


The psionicist can gain limited control over 
wind speed and direction with this devotion. 
The speed of any existing wind can be in- 
creased or decreased by 10 miles per hour or 
25%, whichever is greater. The direction of 
the wind can also be changed by up to 90 de- 
grees. 

These changes are temporary, lasting only 
as long as the psionicist pays the maintenance 


cost. The changes occur within moments after 
he wills them, and die out in less than a minute 
when he stops maintaining them. 

Winds above 19 miles per hour prevent any- 
thing smaller than a man or a condor from fly- 
ing and impose 8 —4 modifier on missile fire. 
They also whip up waves on the sea and make 
sailing difficult. Winds gusting at over 32 
miles per hour cause minor damage to ships 
and buildings. These gusts also kick up clouds 
of dust, and prevent all but the largest crea- 
tures from flying. Winds over 55 miles per 
hour prevent all flight, knock down trees and 
wooden buildings, and threaten to swamp 
ships. Winds over 73 miles per hour are hurri- 
cane gales. 

Power Score— The psionicist gains total di- 
rection control and can change speeds by up to 
25 mph or 50%, whichever is greater. 

20—No additional effect. 


Create Sound 

Power Score: Int -7 

Initial Cost: 8 

Maintenance Cost: 3/round 

Range: 100 yards 

Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: na 

Prerequisites: telekinesis, control 
sound 


Unlike the control sound devotion, this 
power allows a psionicist to create sound from 
silence. That means the psionicist can choose 
the source or location of the sound. For exam- 
ple, he can make rocks sing, weapons cast in- 
sults, and trees sound as if a battle is occurring 
inside. The sound can be as soft as a whisper 
or as loud as several people shouting in uni- 
son. Once the sound is created, the psionicist 
can control it without expending additional 
PSPs (other than normal maintenance). 

If the die roll for the character's power check 
is a 1, the sound is not quite true and may 
arouse suspicion in listeners. If a specific hu- 


——— ቢሲ እ  ሲሲችሲየሲሲችችችችችችችሽችሽሚችሚ ሻማ ሻሻ ሻሻመሻመመሚሚመሜመመመ LITILICLE]TTTELLETILETETETIETÍIIIET)EEILEILLIIILIT CIF LTCTITITTTP] CTTTTICZEILL£ELTTIIZILÍLLILSLUCRCRRF 


46 * Chapter Four 


man voice is being mimicked, this happens on 
a roll of 1 or 2. 

Created sounds cannot have any magical ef- 
fect. The psionicist might duplicate a ban- 
shee's wail, for example, but it cannot harm 
anyone. 

Power Score—Sound volume can be up to 
that of a dragon's roar. 

20—A loud boom erupts near the initiator. 


Inertial Barrier 

Power Score: Con “3 
Initial Cost: 7 
Maintenance Cost: 5/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 3-yard diam. 
Prerequisites: telekinesis 


The inertial barrier is a defense. The psioni- 
cist creates a barrier of “elastic” air around 
himself and anyone else within 3 yards. Like 
an unpoppable, semipermeable bubble, this 
barrier helps soften missile blows and can 
shield those inside from many forms of dam- 
age. 

Specifically, the barrier helps protect 
against the following, by absorbing some (or 
with luck all) of the potential damage: 

e Any nonmagical missile weapon. 

9 Any physical missile which was created 

with magic. 

e Any missile with magical pluses. 

e Flames. 

9 Some breath weapon attacks, depending 

on the nature of the breath. 

* Acid. The barrier stops or slows the at- 

tack. This doesn't matter much if the acid 
comes from above, because it just drips 
on the characters. 
Gas. The barrier turns it aside, at least 
partially (depending on the defender's die 
roll), but after a turn it will eventually 
work its way inside and take full effect. 


* Falling. A psionicist with an inertial bar- 
rier in place suffers only one-half damage 
from a fall; the barrier absorbs a lot of the 
impact, but the character still gets banged 
around inside. 

The inertial barrier has no effect against the 

following: 

* Missiles conjured from pure magic. 

* Raw heat or cold. 

* Pure energy or light. 

* Gaze weapons. 

Furthermore, the barrier cannot keep ene- 
mies out, but it does slows them a bit. Anyone 
trying to cross the barrier must stop moving 
when he hits it. He can then cross inside (or 
outside) in the next round. 

Handling Missile Attacks: The inertial bar- 
rier saps energy from missile weapons by tight- 
ening around them as they pass through. If a 
missile strikes its target inside the barrier, the 
attacker rolls damage normally. The defender 
then rolls the same type of die (as the attacker 
just did) to see how much damage the barrier 
absorbed. The defender does not include any 
magical pluses the weapon may have. 

The defender then subtracts the result of his 
die roll from the attackers damage. If any- 
thing is left over, the defender loses that many 
hit points. If the defender's roll equals or ex- 
ceeds the total damage, the weapon falls 
harmlessly to the ground. If the missile is ex- 
plosive, the barrier does prevent damage, but 
not the explosion. 

The barrier does not differentiate the direc- 
tion of travel. If a weapon is fired from the in- 
side, the penalties above still apply. 

Power Score—The barrier blocks an addi- 
tional point per die. 

20— The psionicist creates a bizarre wind- 
pocket that knocks him to the ground. 


Levitation 

Power Score: Wis —3 
Initial Cost: 12 
Maintenance Cost: 2/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: telekinesis 


Levitation allows the user to float. It is the 
use of telekinesis on oneself. 

ል character can lift himself at the rate of 1 
foot per second, or 60 feet per round. The 
character can descend as quickly as he wants 
by simply letting himself fall, then slowing 
down as he nears the ground. 

Levitation is not flying; it doesn't provide 
any horizontal movement. The character can 
hover motionless, and will drift with the wind, 
however. He can also push himself off a wall 
or other fixed object and drift up to 60 feet per 
round in a straight line, but he can't stop until 
he meets another solid object or lowers himself 
to the ground. 

Two other powers—control wind and pro- 
ject force—can help the levitating psionicist 
propel himself forward. Control wind allows 
him to determine the direction in which he 
drifts. Project force allows him to create a 
“wall” wherever it's wanted; movement is up 
to 60 feet per round, in any direction. Each 
change of direction or speed is a distinct use of 
the power, however, and costs PSPs. 

A psionicist can always levitate his own 
weight. Additional weight, however, such as 
equipment or passengers, is a hindrance. 
Every 25 pounds of added weight reduces the 
character's power score by one point. 

Power Score— The rate of levitation is dou- 
bled (to 120 feet/round). 

20— The psionicist doubles his weight for 
one round. If he falls, he suffers an extra dó 
points of damage. 


EE MM UU — ———— 


Psychokinesis * 47 


“ «55 ad 


1 ኣ 


p 


ነ ሠጋ 
SA : F - 
/ // | S 


=> 


Molecular Agitation 

Power Score: Wis 

Initial Cost: 7 
Maintenance Cost: 6/round 
Range: 40 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 1 item, 20 lbs. 


Prerequisites: none 


Molecular agitation enables the user to ex- 
cite the molecules of a substance: paper ig- 
nites, wood smolders, skin blisters, water 
boils, etc. The list below shows what's possi- 
ble, depending on how many rounds the sub- 
stance is agitated. 


1 round: readily flammable materials (e.g., 
paper, dry grass) ignite, skin becomes red 
and tender (1 point of damage), wood be- 
comes dark. 

2 rounds: wood smolders and smokes, metal 
becomes hot to the touch, skin blisters (1d4 
points of damage), hair smolders, paint 
shrivels. 

3 rounds: wood ignites, metal scorches (1d4 
points of damage), skin burns away (106 
points of damage), water boils, lead melts 
(damage does not increase after this round, 
but does continue). 

4 rounds: steel grows soft. 

5 rounds: steel melts. 


Where items are concerned, allow saving 
throws against destruction, but add a +10 
penalty to the saving throw number (this heat 
is quite destructive, coming from inside the 
material rather than outside). 

Power Score— After round one, the rate of 
agitation doubles (3 rounds of damage occurs 
in just 2, 5 rounds of damage occurs in 3). 

20—An item belonging to the psionicist 
(chosen at random) is affected for one round. 


48 * Chapter Four 


Molecular Manipulation 


Power Score: Int -3 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: 5/round 
Range: 15 yards 
Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 2 sq. inches 
Prerequisites: telekinesis 


This power allows the user to weaken the 
molecular bonds within an object or struc- 
ture. When someone stresses the object or 
strikes a blow it, it snaps. 

The psionicist can create a "breaking point" 
of approximately two square inches per 
round. Deterioration occurs across a plane (in 
two dimensions, not three). One round's work 
is enough to fatally weaken most small 
objects—e.g., swords, ropes, saddle straps, 
belts, and bows. Larger objects require more 
time, and DM discretion. 

DMs must decide how vulnerable this 
power makes larger, oddly shaped items like 
shields or doors. They should keep in mind 
that an object need not be in two pieces before 
it's virtually useless. For example, a little boat 
with a cracked hull is unsafe at sea. And a 
shield that is split halfway across offers little 
or no protection; if successive blows don't 
shatter it, they certainly will rattle the holder's 
arm unmercifully. 

Power Score—Weakening occurs at twice 
the rate above. 

20— The item is strengthened. Now it re- 
quires twice the normal effort to weaken. 


Soften 


Power Score: Int 

Initial Cost: 4 

Maintenance Cost: 3/round 
Range: 30 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 1 object, 10 Ibs. 


Prerequisites: none 


This power resembles molecular manipula- 
tion, except that it weakens the entire object 
instead of small area across a single plane. The 
object softens overall, losing its rigidity and 
strength. Specific effects vary, depending on 
the material. 

Metal: For each round of softening, weap- 
ons incur a —1 penalty to attack rolls and 
cause one less point of damage, cumulatively. 
The armor class of metal armor increases one 
point per round of softening. After 10 rounds, 
any metal becomes soft and rubbery, but re- 
tains its shape. 


AA 


Wood: Like metal, weapons with wooden 
shafts or handles suffer a —1 penalty to attack 
rolls and damage per round of softening. Af- 
ter six rounds, wood becomes stringy and rub- 
bery but retains its shape. After 10 rounds, the 
grain can be split easily and a punch can break 
through even the hardest and thickest doors 
or chests. 

Stone: After two rounds, stone becomes 
noticeably soft to the touch. After five 
rounds, it can be worked like stiff clay, but 
this is as soft as it gets. 

Magical Items: Save vs. crushing blow to 
escape the effect entirely. 

Living Tissue: No effect. 


DMs can use their own judgement and the 
examples above to handle other materials. 

Power Score— All effects are doubled. 

20—The item is strengthened, and can't be 
affected again until the psionicist gains one 


level. 
[ [ | VM 


n 


Zw 
A 
= 
Z 


D, 
ረረ 


20 | 
Z 


A githyanki and an intellect devourer go head to head 


Psychokinesis e 49 


Psychometabolic Sciences 
Animal Affinity 


Power Score: Con “4 
Initial Cost: 15 
Maintenance Cost: 4/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


When the psionicist first learns this power, 
he develops an affinity for a particular type of 
animal. He cannot choose the animal; the af- 
finity is dictated by his aura. To determine the 
nature of the affinity, the psionicist's player 
rolls 1d20 and consults the table below. 

From that point on, when the character in- 
vokes this power, he can claim one of the ani- 
mal's attributes as his own—temporarily. He 
can gain the animal's armor class, movement 
rate and mode, attacks and damage, THACO, 
hit points, or any other special ability. Only 
one of these can be used at a time, however. 
The effect lasts as long as the psionicist main- 
tains the power. Switching to a different abil- 
ity means paying the initial cost of the power 
again, and making a new power check. 

The character does undergo a physical 
change when this power is invoked. The ex- 
tent of the change depends on the animal and 
the ability. For example, adopting a hawk's 
movement obviously requires wings, while at- 
tacking like a tiger calls for fangs and claws. 


1 Ape 


Bull 
Crocodile 
Eagle, giant 
Elephant 
Falcon 
Griffon 
Grizzly bear 


Lion 


Hr 039090 ው Ur i WN 


m m 


50 è Chapter Five 


12 Panther (black leopard) 
13 Percheron (draft horse) 
14 Peregrine falcon (hawk) 
15 Rattlesnake 

16 Scorpion, giant 


17 Shark 
18 Stag 
19 Tiger 
20 Wolf 


Power Score—The character gains two abil- 
ities instead of one. 

20— The character's skin takes on the ap- 
pearance of the animal's skin until the power is 
used again successfully (no change in AC). 


Complete Healing 


Power Score: Con 
Initial Cost: 30 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 24 hours 
Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


The psionicist who has mastered this power 
can heal himself completely of all ailments, 
wounds, and normal diseases. He places him- 
self in a trance for 24 hours to accomplish the 
healing. The trance is deep, and cannot be bro- 
ken unless the character loses 5 or more hit 
points. As he uses this power, the psionicist's 
body is repairing itself at an incredible rate. At 
the end of the 24-hour period, the character 
awakes, restored to complete health in every 
regard except for the 30 PSPs he expended to 
use complete healing. 

If the characters power check fails, he 
breaks his trance after only one hour, having 
realized that the power was not working. 
Only 5 PSPs have been expended. 

Power Score—The healing occurs in just 
one hour. 

20— The psionicist awakes after the full 24 
hours to discover that the attempt failed. He 
has expended 5 PSPs. 


Chameleon Power: Leif makes like a tree and fells a goblin. 


Psychometabolism * 5 1 


Death Field 


Power Score: Con -8 
Initial Cost: 40 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 20 yd. rad. 
Prerequisite: none 


A death field is a life-sapping region of neg- 
ative energy. Only psionicists of evil align- 
ment can learn this power without suffering 
side effects. If any other psionicist tries to 
learn the death field, his alignment will gradu- 
ally be twisted toward evil as he explores this 
very dark portion of his psyche. 

A successful death field takes it toll on ev- 
eryone inside it, including the psionicist. Be- 
fore he initiates this power, he must decide 
how many hit points he will sacrifice. If the 
power works, the loss is inevitable; he gets no 
saving throw. Every other living thing within 
the death field must make a saving throw vs. 
death. Those who succeed escape damage. 
Those who fail lose the same number of hit 
points as the psionicist. For the weak, that can 
mean death. 

Power Score— The pionicist loses only half 
the number of hit points he specifies; victims 
who fail their saving throws lose the full 
amount. 

20— The power fails, but the psionicist loses 
the hit points anyway. 


Energy Containment 


Power Score: Con -2 
Initial Cost: 10 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


A psionicist with this power has trained 
himself to safely absorb and assimilate energy 
from electricity, fire, cold, heat, and sound— 


52 * Chapter Five 


energy that would fry, freeze, or otherwise 
harm a normal character. Any physical assault 
based on these energy types can be drawn into 
the psionicist's body. The character transforms 
the energy, and safely releases it as visible radi- 
ance (light). 

In effect, this protects the psionicist against 
energy attacks. If the psionicist makes a suc- 
cessful power check, he can double the result 
of his die roll when saving against an energy 
attack. If the character makes a successful sav- 
ing throw, he suffers no damage from the at- 
tack. If he fails, he suffers only half damage, 
regardless of what the spell description (if ap- 
plicable) states. 

When the character absorbs energy, he radi- 
ates visible light for a number of rounds equal 
to the points of damage he absorbed. If he suf- 
fered half damage, he radiates for that many 
rounds. If he suffered no damage, roll for 
damage anyway to see how long he glows. 
This glow is definitely noticeable, but it is soft, 
and illuminates no more than an area with a 2- 
yard radius. 

Power Score— All saves against energy at- 
tacks automatically succeed during the round 
in which the power is in effect. 

20— The psionicist becomes an energy at- 
tractor for 1 turn. All saves vs. energy attacks 
fail, causing full standard damage. 


Life Draining 


Power Score: Con “3 
Initial Cost: 11 
Maintenance Cost: 5/round 
Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: none 


With this devotion, a psionicist can drain 
hit points from another character and use 
them to recover his own. This transfer occurs 
at the rate of 106 points per round. 

The character can absorb up to 10 more hit 
points than his healthy total, but these bonus 


points last only one hour. After that, if the 
psionicist still has more hit points than he 
should, the excess points vanish. 

Power Score—Rate of drain increases to 
1d20 points per round. 

20—Backfire! Half of the psionicist's re- 
maining hit points are absorbed by the target, 
reversing the power's effects. 


Metamorphosis 

Power Score: Con “ፅ 
Initial Cost: 21 
Maintenance Cost: l/turn 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 5 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


This science resembles polymorphing, but it 
has a much wider application. The psionicist 
can change himself into anything with approx- 
imately the same mass as his body: a wolf, a 
condor, a chair, a rock, a tree. While in this 
form, he retains his own hit points and 
THACO, if possible, but gains the armor class 
the new form. The psionicist also gains all 
physical attacks that form allows, but no mag- 
ical or special abilities. (This all depends on 
the new form; a tree cannot attack, so 
THACOs and attacks are meaningless.) 

Like any massive change of shape, however, 
this causes great physical stress. The psionicist 
must make a system shock roll to survive the 
change. If the roll fails, he does not die, but the 
PSPs are expended and he passes out for 2d6 
turns. 

Power Score—The system shock roll auto- 
matically succeeds, and the new form's mass 
can be up to three times that of the psionicist's 
body. 

20— The psionicist must save vs. paralyza- 
tion. Failure means he changes to the new 
form permanently. 


Shadow-form 

Power Score: Con “6 
Initial Cost: 12 
Maintenance Cost: 3/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


A psionicist using this power actually trans- 
forms himself into living shadow, along with 
his clothing, armor, and up to 20 pounds of 
equipment. He can blend perfectly into any 
other shadow and travel with a movement 
rate of 6. He can only travel through darkness 
and shadow, however. Areas of open light are 
impassable. 

While in shadow-form, the psionicist can be 
detected only by life detection, other types of 
psychic detection, or by a true seeing spell. He 
cannot harm anyone physically, or manipu- 
late any corporeal object, but he can still use 
psionic powers. 

If the psionicist rolls a 1 on his power check, 
he becomes shadow but none of his clothing or 
equipment makes the switch. 

Power Score— The psionicist gains all desir- 
able powers of the "shadow" monster for 1d4 
turns. 

20— The player must roll a save vs. light- 
ning for the psionicist's most valuable item. If 
it fails, the item becomes shadow and drifts 
away, lost forever. 


Psychometabolic Devotions 
Absorb Disease 


Power Score: Con =3 
Initial Cost: 12 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: none 


Psychometabolism ወ 53 


This power lets the psionicist take the disease 
from another characters body, and absorb it 
himself. Presumably, the psionicist will then 
heal himself (using complete healing). This 
power can absorb magical diseases, but not 
curses, such as lycanthropy. 

Power Score—The disease is automatically 
destroyed by the psionicist's immune system. 

20— The disease remains in the victim while 
spreading to the psionicist. 


Adrenalin Control 

Power Score: Con -3 
Initial Cost: 8 
Maintenance Cost: 4/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


Animal Affinity: Two ogres have an eye-opening experience. 


54 * Chapter Five 


By controlling the production and release of 
adrenalin in his system, the psionicist can give 
himself temporary physical boosts on de- 
mand. When he increases his adrenalin, the 
character gains 1d6 points, which he can add 
directly to kis Strength, Dexterity, or Consti- 
tution scores however he chooses. He enjoys 
all the normal bonuses for high physical at- 
tributes while this power is in effect. 

If the psionicist's power check result is a 1, 
he overtaxes his system with this adrenalin. 
He still gets the boost, but he loses twice that 
many hit points, too. 

Power Score—Instead of dividing the dó re- 
sult, the character applies that many points to 
each of the three attributes. 

20— The psionicist must make a successful 
system shock roll or suffer a 5046 loss in cur- 
rent hps and pass out for 1d8 hours. 


Aging 


Power Score: Con -7 
Initial Cost: 15 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: none 


With this power, an evil psionicist can cause 
unnatural aging by touch. (Other psionicists 
can use this power, too, but their alignment 
would begin to twist toward evil.) The victim 
ages 1d4 years instantly and must make a sav- 
ing throw vs. polymorph. Failure means that 
the change was traumatic, and he ages another 
year automatically. 

If the psionicist's power check result was a 1, 
there is a backlash and he, too, ages 1d4 years. 

Power Score—The victim ages 1d20 years. 

20— The psionicist ages 1d10 years. 


Biofeedback 

Power Score: Con —2 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: 3/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


Body Control 

Power Score: Con -4 
Initial Cost: 7 
Maintenance Cost: 5/turn 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


This power allows a psionicist to adapt his 
body to a hostile enviroment. The change 
must be keyed to a specific surrounding: wa- 
ter, acid, extreme heat, extreme cold, an ele- 
mental plane, etc. If the power works, the 
psionicist not only survives, he fits in like a na- 
tive organism. He can breathe and move nor- 
mally, and he takes no damage simply from 
being in that environment. 

An attack in any form does not constitute 
an environment. For example, a character 
who can survive subarctic temperatures is still 
vulnerable to a cone of cold. 

Power Score—The psionicist can adapt 
himself to a new environment while maintain- 
ing the power. 

20— The character becomes even more vul- 
nerable, and the environment causes 1d4 
points of damage per round. (A second use of 
body control halts damage.) 


Biofeedback is the power to control the flow 
of blood through one's own body. This power 
has two key effects. 

First, the psionicist can easily control bleed- 
ing. As a result, he suffers two fewer points of 
damage from every attack against him which 
causes physical injury. 

Second, by flooding key portions of his 
body with blood, the psionicist effectively 
cushions blows against him and reduces their 
effect. The character's armor class is reduced 
by one. 

Power Score— AC is reduced by three. 

20—Excessive blood flow results in scat- 
tered bruises and a 10% hp loss. 


Body Equilibrium 

Power Score: Con “3 
Initial Cost: 2 
Maintenance Cost: 2/round 
Range: ዐ 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


Body equilibrium allows the user to adjust 


the weight of his or her body to correspond 
with the surface he's standing on. Thus he can 
walk on water, quicksand, or even a spider's 
web without sinking or breaking through. If 
the character is falling when he uses this 


Psychometabolism € 55 


Expansion: Yuri will go to any length for a joke. 


power, he will fall 120 feet per round—slow 
enough to escape injury. 

Because of his lightness, the character must 
be wary of wind gusts, which can easily sweep 
him up and blow him away. 

Power Score—The effect lasts up to a day 
without maintenance. 

20— The psionicist's weight instantly rises 
by a factor of 10; he must use body equilib- 
rium to fix the problem. 


Body Weaponry 

Power Score: Con -3 
Initial Cost: 9 
Maintenance Cost: 4/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


Body weaponry allows the psionicist to 
convert one of his arms into a weapon. Virtu- 
ally any sort of weapon can be imitated— 
except a short bow, hand crossbow, light 
crossbow, or any weapon the psionicist can- 
not normally use. The arm actually becomes 
wood and/or metal, and assumes the weap- 
on's form. It behaves in every respect like a 
normal weapon of the chosen type, with a bo- 
nus: it can never be dropped or stolen. 

Power Score—The "armament" gives the 
psionicist a +1 attack bonus (but no damage 
bonus). 

20—The psionicist must make a system 
shock roll or pass out for 1d10 rounds. 


Catfall 

Power Score: Dex -2 
Initial Cost: 4 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


ል character using this power can spring like 8 
cat in the same round, and always land grace- 
fully on his feet. He still suffers damage from 
falling, but the damage is halved. He can jump 
down 30 feet without risking any injury at all. 

Power Score—The psionicist can jump 50 
feet instead of 30 during this single use of the 


power. 

20—No effect. 
Cause Decay 
Power Score: Con -2 
Initial Cost: 4 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 0 
Area of Effect: 60 lbs 
Prerequisite: none 


This power works only against inanimate 
objects. The psionicist's touch causes instant 
decay: metal rusts, wood ages and splits, cloth 
falls to dust. The DM rolls a saving throw vs. 
acid for the item touched. If this fails, the 
item—or a maximum of 60 pounds of it—is 
consumed by decay within one round. 

Power Score—The save automatically fails. 

20—One of the psionicist’s own items de- 
cays (no save)— either the first item touched, 
or an item chosen randomly by the DM. 


Cell Adjustment 


Power Score: Con -3 

Initial Cost: 5 

Maintenance Cost: up to 20/round 
Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: none 


Cell adjustment allows the psionicist to heal 
wounds and cure diseases. Any sort of wound 
can be healed, but only nonmagical diseases 
are affected (e.g., this power cannot heal 
mummy rot, nor can it cure a lycanthropic 
curse). 


Psychometabolism * 57 


The psionicist can cure a disease in one 
round by spending 5 PSPs and making a 
succesful power check. If the die roll equals a 
1, he succeeds but it's doubly taxing (10 PSPs). 
If it equals a 2, he fails because the disease is 
too widespread; he must spend another 5 PSPs 
and try again next round. 

A "cure" doesn't automatically restore hit 
points lost due to illness; it merely arrests the 
disease. However, the psionicist can heal up to 
4 points of damage in each subsequent round 
by spending 5 psionic strength points per hit 
point recovered. He cannot cure the disease 
and restore hit points during the same round. 

Power Score—All disease—or up to 10 
points of damage—is instantly healed at a cost 
of 5 PSPs. 

20— The psionicist suffers 1d10 points of 


light, the character's chameleon power score is 
halved (rounded down). 
Power Score— The psionicist's power score 
gains a +3 bonus during "hiding" checks. 
20— The psionicists colorations strongly 
clash with the background; he sticks out like a 
sore thumb. 


Chemical Simulation 


Power Score: Con -4 
Initial Cost: 9 
Maintenance Cost: 6/round 
Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: varies 
Prerequisite: none 


damage but the patient is unaffected. 


Chameleon Power 


Power Score: Con -1 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: 3/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: ዐ 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


With this devotion, a psionicist can make 
his body simulate the action of acids. The 
character secretes an "acid" through his hand. 
Any item he touches and holds briefly must 
make a saving throw vs. acid or be dissolved. 
If used as a weapon, this acid cannot inflict 
more than two or three points of damage, 
though it can cause considerable pain. 

Power Score—All saves for normal items 
fail; magical items still get a saving throw. 

20— Acid oozes from the psionicist's sweat 
glands; all items touching his skin must save 


The psionicist using this power actually 
changes the coloration of his skin, clothing, 
and equipment to match his background. The 
match is automatic; he does not choose the ap- 
pearance. The change takes several seconds. 
As he moves, the coloration changes and shifts 
to reflect any changes in the surroundings. 

In effect, chameleon power makes a psioni- 
cist very difficult to spot. If the character re- 
mains stationary, he can avoid detection 
simply by making a successful power check. If 
the character moves, his power score is re- 
duced by three when he makes the check. 

This power is most effective in natural sur- 
roundings, where one's coloration would logi- 
cally conceal him. In an urban setting, or in an 
area without natural cover during broad day- 


A E! C€————————— À— 


58 * Chapter Five 


vs. acid. 


Displacement 

Power Score: Con -3 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: 3/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


This power resembles the displacer beast's 
natural ability to make itself appear to be up to 
3 feet from his actual location. The psionicist 
decides where this false image will appear. 
This is a very effective means of protecting 
oneself from attack, giving the psionicist a 


two-point bonus on his armor class (lowering 
it two points). True seeing will reveal the char- 
acter's real location. 
Power Score—The AC bonus is +4. 
20—No effect. 


Double Pain 

Power Score: Con -3 
Initial Cost: 7 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: none 


By touching another person, the psionicist 
greatly lowers that character's pain threshold. 
(Even a little scrape will feel like a serious in- 
jury.) The effect lasts one turn. During that 
time, all damage scored against that character 
is doubled. However, only half of this damage 
is real; the other half represents the amplified 
pain. When the character's total of real dam- 
age and pain reduces his hit points to zero or 
less, he passes out. He will regain conscious- 
ness 1d10 rounds later. At that time he also re- 
gains "fake" hit points—those lost only to 
pain. 

If the victim does not pass out in one turn 
(the duration of this power's effects), damage 
scored against him is no longer doubled. How- 
ever, the points of "pain damage" which he has 
an already incurred will remain in effect for 
another 146 rounds. 

Power Score—The victim must make a sys- 
tem shock roll upon each hit, or pass out due 
to the excrutiating pain. 

20—The power backfires and affects the 
psionicist for one hour. 


Ectoplasmic Form 


Power Score: Con ፦“4 
Initial Cost: 9 
Maintenance Cost: 9/round 
Range: 0 


Preparation Time: 1 
Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


With this power a psionicist converts him- 
self to ectoplasm, (a fine-spun, smoky sub- 
stance). He becomes insubstantial, ghostlike, 
and able to walk through solid material as if it 
didn’t exist. The psionicist is still visible as a 
whispy outline. He moves at his normal move- 
ment rate and in the normal fashion (e.g., if he 
couldn't fly before, he can't now). 

The psionicist can also convert the follow- 
ing to ectoplasm: his clothing, armor, and up 
to 15 pounds of equipment that he's carrying. 

Power Score—The maintenance cost is 3 
PSPs per round. 

20— The psionicist's items become ectoplas- 
mic, but he doesn't. He must use this power 
again (successfully) to retrieve them. 


Enhanced Strength 

Power Score: Wis -3 
Initial Cost: varies 
Maintenance Cost: varies 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


A psionicist can increase his physical 
Strength score to a maximum of 18 through 
this devotion. The PSP cost is twice the num- 
ber of points he adds to his Strength score. (If 
he fails, he loses half this amount; see Chapter 
1.) The maintenance cost per round equals the 
number of Strength points he has added. 

Physical Strength cannot be raised above 18 
psionically. The psionicist does not qualify for 
exceptional Strength bonuses if he raises his 
Strength to 18. 

Power Score—The psionicist can raise his 
strength to 18/00, with each 25% increase 
costing an additional PSP. 

20—The power backfires and lowers 
Strength by 1d6 until arrested by this power. 


Psychometabolism ቁ 59 


Expansion 

Power Score: Con -2 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: 1/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


The psionicist can expand his own body 
proportions in any dimension: height, length, 
width, or thickness. He can increase any or all 
of these proportions by 50% of their original 
size per round. Maximum expansion is four 
times original size. 

This power has no effect on clothing or 
equipment. Ability scores don't increase ei- 
ther. In other words, the character does not 
grow stronger simply because he became 
taller. However, being very big often has other 
advantages. 

Power Score—Maximum expansion be- 
comes 10 times and the rate is 100% per 
round, 

20—The psionicist shrinks by 50% until ar- 
rested by this power. 


Flesh Armor 

Power Score; Con -3 
Initial Cost: 8 
Maintenance Cost: 4/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


The psionicist transforms his own skin into 
armor. No one can see the change, but it's as if 
he had actually acquired some type of armor. 
The type of armor his body mimics depends 
on the result of his power check, as shown in 
the following table: 


60 * Chapter Five 


1 left hand functions as a shield, AC 9 


2 leather, AC 8 
3-4 ring mail, AC 7 
5-6 scale mail, AC 6 
7-8 chain mail, AC 5 


9-10 banded mail, AC 4 
11+ plate mail, AC 3 


Because this armor is part of his body, the 
psionicist can enjoy its benefits without suffer- 
ing any penalty he might have if he were actu- 
ally wearing that type of armor. The armor 
created by this power weighs nothing, has no 
magnetic properties, and in no way encum- 
bers the psionicist. 

Power Score—The psionicist gains a +1 bo- 
nus to the armor class listed above. 

20—The power just grows ugly hair over his 
body, which must be shaved off or he loses 2 
points of Charisma. 


Graft Weapon 

Power Score: Con =5 
Initial Cost: 10 
Maintenance Cost: 1/round 
Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


With this power the psionicist can graft any 
one-handed melee weapon directly onto his 
body. He picks up the weapon, activates this 
power, and the weapon becomes an extension 
of the character's arm. Assuming the character 
is proficient with that type of weapon, he 
gains a * 1 bonus to attack rolls and damage. 
If he is not proficient with the weapon, he suf- 
fers the usual nonproficiency penalties, but 
still gets the +1 bonus. 

Power Score—The +1 bonus for attacks 
and damage increases to +4. 

20—The weapon has been weakened; it will 
break on any attack roll of 1. 


Heightened Senses 


Power Score: Con 
Initial Cost: 5 
Maintenance Cost: 1/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


By means of this devotion the psionicist 
sharpens all five of his normal senses: sight, 
hearing, taste, touch, and smell. This has sev- 
eral effects, which are described below. The 
DM may allow additional applications as he 
sees fit. 

First, the character has a good chance to no- 
tice thieves who are hiding in shadows or 
moving silently. The thiefs skill chance is 
halved when someone with heightened senses 
is observing him. Even if the thief is already 
hidden, he must roll again when a character 
with heightened senses enters the picture. 

Second, the psionicist can track someone 
like a bloodhound. He must make an Intelli- 
gence check every turn to stay on the trail or 
recover the trail if it is lost. His movement rate 
when tracking is 6. The trail can be no more 
than 24 hours old. 

Third, the psionicists ranges for hearing 
and seeing are tripled. He can, for example, 
identify a person (in daylight) at a range of 400 
yards. 

Fourth, the character can taste poisons or 
other impurities in quantities which are much 
too small to cause any harm. 

Fifth, the character can identify almost any- 
thing by touch. He can, for example, tell two 
gold pieces from each other after having previ- 
ously handled just one of them. He can also 
tell if something has been handled in the last 
five minutes simply by handling it himself. 

Power Score—One of the heightened senses 
(chosen randomly) stays with the psionicist 
for a full day. 

20—One of the psionicist's five senses is lost 
for 1d12 hours. 


Immovability 

Power Score: Con -5 
Initial Cost: 9 
Maintenance Cost: 6/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


When a psionicist makes himself immov- 
able, he is exactly that. A tremendous amount 
of force is required to uproot him from his 
spot. 

Moving the psionicist requires a combined 
Strength total that is at least 10 times greater 
than his immovability score (Con —5). If a 
character is pushing the psionicist, and makes 
a successful bend bars roll, that character can 
double the Strength he's contributing to the to- 
tal. Even if a group manages to move the 
psionicist once, they may not be able to move 
him any easier the next time. The psionicist re- 
mains immovable until he stops maintaining 
the power. 

This power has nothing to do with weight. 
A character will not crash through the floor 
because he made himself immovable. He has 
instead attached himself to the fabric of the 
universe, which is considerably more power- 
ful than the strongest castle. He does, how- 
ever, need a horizontal surface as an anchor. 

If the psionicist's power check results in a 1, 
he attaches himself so well that even he can't 
break free simply by shutting off the power. 
He must pay the initial cost again (9 PSPs) to 
free himself. 

Power Score—Moving the psionicist be- 
comes impossible. 

20— The psionicist can't stop the power; he 
maintains it until he runs out of PSPs. 


ፖም ጋ 


Psychometabolism * 61 


Lend Health 


Power Score: Con -1 
Initial Cost: 4 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: none 


Lend health is a power of healing. The 
psionicist who makes a succesful power check 
can transfer his own hit points to someone else 
he is touching. Each hit point transferred heals 
one point of damage. The character can trans- 
fer as many points as he wants to in a single 
round. 

If the psionicist tries to transfer hit points 
when he has fewer than five remaining, he 
must make another power check. If this fails, 
he cannot transfer the points. In any case, he 
cannot transfer hit points if he has only one re- 
maining. 

The beneficiary of this power can never ex- 
ceed his normal, healthy total of hit points. 

Power Score—Every point drained from the 
psionicist heals two hit points in the benefi- 
ciary. 

20— The psionicist suffers all the wounds 
which his target currently has. No one is 


healed. 
Mind Over Body 


Power Score: Wis -3 
Initial Cost: na 
Maintenance Cost: 10/day 
Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: none 


Mind over body allows the user to suppress 
his body's need for food, water, and sleep. In 
exchange for one hour of meditation per day, 
all of the psionicist's physical needs are over- 


62 * Chapter Five 


come. He does not feel hunger, exhaustion, or 
thirst, nor does he suffer any ability reduc- 
tions for privation. 

The psionicist can also suppress the basic 
needs of others while suppressing his own. To 
do so, he must pay an additional 10 PSPs per 
person and spend an additional hour of medi- 
tation per person. Each person being aided 
must be in physical contact with the psionicist 
throughout the entire period of meditation. 
Usually, all the characters hold hands, forming 
a continuous line or circle. 

The psionicist can survive in this fashion for 
a number of days equal to his experience level, 
or five days, whichever is more. At the end of 
that time, he collapses from exhaustion. He 
must then rest one day for every two days 
spent sublimating his body's needs. Or he can 
be restored through 24 hours of complete heal- 
ing. These rules also apply to any characters 
the psionicist has aided. 

Power Score—The psionicist need not rest 
after using this power. 

20— The power fails, but the psionicist col- 
lapses with exhaustion and must rest for 24 
hours. 


Reduction 

Power Score: Con -2 
Initial Cost: varies 
Maintenance Cost: 1/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


This power is the reverse of expansion. The 
psionicist can reduce his body's dimensions 
along any or all axes: height, length, width, or 
thickness. The change amounts to 1 foot per 
PSP spent, until the dimension being affected 
is 1 foot or less. After that, the psionicist can 
halve his dimensions each time he spends a 
PSP. 

For example, let's assume Magnilda (a dual- 
class psionicist and warrior maiden) stands 6 


feet tall. Five strength points reduce her height 
to 1 foot. Three more strength points halve her 
size three times: to 6 inches, then 3 inches, and 
finally to 1.5 inches. 

Now let's assume Magnilda only wants to 
make her arm thin enough to slide through a 
keyhole. At its thickest point, her arm mea- 
sures 4 inches across. Three strength points 
will reduce the thickness of her arm to 1/2 inch 
(from 4 to 2, then to 1, then to 1/2) without al- 
tering its length at all. She can now slide her 
arm through the keyhole and unlock the door 
from the inside. 

Power Score—Each PSP spent results in 
twice the described effect (if desired). 

20—The psionicist doubles in size, and 
stays this big for an hour or until he uses this 
power again successfully. 


Share Strength 

Power Score: Con -4 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: 2/round 
Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: none 


The psionicist can effectively lend his physi- 
cal Strength to another character. The psioni- 
cist sacrifices two of his own Strength points 
(ability points, not PSPs) for every single 
point the recipient gains. This transfer remains 
in effect until the psionicist stops paying the 
devotion's maintenance cost; then all points 
return in one round. If the recipient is killed 
before the psionicist gets his Strength points 
back, the psionicist's Strength score is perma- 
nently reduced. 

If the psionicist's die roll is a 1, he must ex- 
pend three points for each point his pal gains, 
instead of two for one. 

Power Score—The point transfer is 1:1. 

20— The psionicist loses one Strength point 
for a day. If he fails a save vs. paralyzation, the 
loss is permanent. 


Suspend Animation 

Power Score: Con -3 
Initial Cost: 12 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 0/touch 
Preparation Time: 5 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: none 


With this power a psionicist can “play 
dead” —bringing all life functions to a virtual 
halt. Only the most careful examination will 
show that the character is still alive. Even psi- 
onic powers such as life detection and ESP will 
not turn up any evidence of life unless those 
powers are maintained for at least three min- 
utes. Use of the probe power will detect life im- 
mediately. 

The psionicist can remain in suspended ani- 
mation for a number of weeks equal to the re- 
sults of his power check—or less. When he 
wishes to put himself to sleep, he first decides 
when he wants to wake. Then he makes his 
power check. If the number rolled is less than 
the time he hoped to be “suspended,” he 
awakens prematurely. 

Another willing character can also be sus- 
pended for the same PSP cost (not at the same 
time as the psionicist, however). This has a 
preparation time of one hour and a range of 
touch. 

Power Score—The psionicist remains aware 
of his surroundings and can wake at any time 
he chooses. 

20—The psionicist falls unconscious and 
only violent slapping can revive him. 


Heart and Langs. 


Psychometabolism * 63 


CHAPTER 


Psychoportation 


Psychoportive Sciences 


Banishment 

Power Score: Int -1 
Initial Cost: 30 
Maintenance Cost: — 10/round 
Range: 5 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: teleport 


With this power, the psionicist can teleport 
a creature against its will to a pocket dimen- 
sion and hold it there. The creature being ban- 
ished must be extremely close— within 5 
yards. The pocket dimension is a featureless 
area with a benign environment—it may be 
hot or cold, dark or light, but not so much that 
it will cause injury. 

Banishment has a boomerang feature. If the 
psionicist fails to pay the pay the maintenance 
cost, the banished creature automatically re- 
turns to its original location. The creature can- 
not reappear in a location that now contains 
other matter, however (e.g., to a doorway 
that has been closed, or to a spot that now has 
a sharp stakes upon it). If this happens, the 
creature returns to the nearest open space. In 
other words, psionicists cannot rely on the 
boomerang feature to kill or harm a creature. 

As long as the psionicist pays the mainte- 
nance cost, the creature will not automatically 
return. If the creature has access to the astral 
or ethereal planes, or it can teleport between 
planes, it could try to return that way. If the 
banisher is still maintaining the power, how- 
ever, a psychic contest takes place. If the 
banisher wins, the victim is prevented from re- 
turning. 

Power Score—The banished figure cannot 
return of its own accord; it must wait until it is 
allowed to return. 

20—Both the intended victim and the 
psionicist are banished to the same place. The 
other figure bounces back when the psionicist 


64 *eChapter Six 


stops paying the maintenance cost, but the 
psionicist himself must return via some other 
method: teleportation, probability travel, etc. 


Probability Travel 

Power Score: Int 

Initial Cost: 20 
Maintenance Cost: — 8/hour 
Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 2 

Area of Effect: individual + 
Prerequisites: none 


With probability travel, a psionicist can tra- 
verse the astral plane physically as if he's in as- 
tral form. This power has a distinct advantage 
over magical astral travel. When a wizard uses 
the astral spell, he forms an astral body, which 
remains connected to his material body by a 
silvery cord. In contrast, a psionicist using 
probability travel never leaves his physical 
form; he brings it along. He has no cord, so, 
unlike the wizard, he can never die because his 
cord has been severed. (On the other hand, he 
can still be blown to bits.) 

The astral plane boasts nothing that would 
attract tourists, but its two-dimensional color 
pools serve as highways to the outer planes. 
These pools, scattered randomly throughout 
the astral plane, provide connections to all 
surface layers of the outer planes. 

Travel through the astral plane is speedy: 10 
yards per minute per Intelligence point. How- 
ever, distance on the astral plane does not 
equate to distance on other planes. After 
106 + 6 hours of travel, the traveler reaches the 
color pool he sought. There is a flat 75% 
chance that this pool leads to the exact destina- 
tion the character wants. Otherwise, it is at 
least 10 miles off target —maybe more. 

The psionicist can take other persons (as de- 
fined by the charm person spell) along on his 
probability trip. Each passenger costs 12 extra 
PSPs initially, plus 4 extra PSPs per hour, and 
adds one-half hour to the time needed to find 
the correct color pool. Passengers must travel 


z A; 
(5 Kr 


ፖሠ j ወ-ቀቀ 
NU ት / j bd 


ጭቁ 


Dimensional Door: Juan decides not to stay for dinner. 


Psychoportation ቆቅ 65 


voluntarily; this power cannot drag a charac- 
ter into the astral plane against his will. 

Combat on the astral plane is unusual. The 
traveler's physical body cannot affect astral 
bodies in any way. However, psionic powers 
do work against the minds of astral travelers. 
Most magical items do not work in the astral 
plane. Magical items which are keyed to a par- 
ticular plane do function there, often with en- 
hanced effect. 

If the psionicist simply turns off this power 
while in the astral plane, he doesn't leave. In- 
stead, he's stranded, unable to move except by 
physically pushing off of solid objects (which 
are extremely rare in the astral plane). He's 
also stranded if he runs out of PSPs or is 
knocked unconscious on the astral plane. The 
only exit from this plane is a color pool. 

If you'd like to learn more about traveling 
on the astral plane, see the AD&D® handbook 
Manual of the Planes. 

Power Score— The color pool is right where 
the character wants it to be. 

20— The character attracts the attention of 
an astral creature, which may or may not be 
hostile, at the DM's discretion. 


Summon Planar Creature 


Power Score: Int -4 
Initial Cost: 45/90 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 200 yards 
Preparation Time: 12 

Area of Effect: one creature 
Prerequisites: teleport 


This science allows the psionicist to reach 
into another plane, grab whatever creature he 
happens to find there, and teleport it to his 
own plane. The victim will be disoriented for 
one round after arriving; as a result, he suffers 
a two-point penalty on die rolls for initiative, 
attacks, and saving throws. 

A magical summons offers some control 
over a planar creature, and usually returns 
that creature to its home automatically. This 


p ኤጴስ ሚሚሻሽ ሚሜሚችችሽሻመች'ችኸዎማችችችችችችዎችችወ9ወ8መመመ8መመ8መመ8መመመ — — — 


66 * Chapter Six 


psionic power does neither; it merely teleports 
something. To be rid of the creature, the 
psionicist must banish it, teleport it again, kill 
it, or control it somehow. If the creature is in- 
telligent, the psionicist might reason with it, 
However, the creature is almost certain to fly 
into a murderous rage when it discovers its 
plight. 

The psionicist can make the summoned 
creature materialize anywhere within 200 
yards of his present position. This is a tremen- 
dous advantage, since the creature, at least ini- 
tially, has no idea who summoned it. Its anger 
is likely to be vented against the first target it 
finds. However, if the psionicist's power check 
result was a 2, this range is reduced to 50 
yards. If the result was a 1, the creature pops 
in within 10 yards. Obviously, some risk is in- 
volved. 

The psionicist chooses the plane from which 
the creature will come. He does not choose the 
creature, however; that's determined at ran- 
dom. A creature from one of the elemental 
planes usually will be an elemental of the ap- 
propriate type. A creature from an outer plane 
probably will be a native of that particular 
plane, but it could also be a visitor, or even an 
adventurer who happened to be in the wrong 
place at the right time. In contrast, the astral 
or ethereal planes are a cornucopia of crea- 
tures, frequented by beings of every imagina- 
ble description. In any event, the DM decides 
which creature is summoned, drawing from 
the monsters for which he has game statistics. 
This book describes some extraplanar crea- 
tures. Many more are covered in the Manual 
of the Planes and various Monstrous Compen- 
diums, especially the compendium featuring 
outer planar creatures. 

It costs 45 PSPs to summon a creature from 
the astral or ethereal plane. If the psionicist is 
dipping into an inner or outer plane, the cost 
soars to 90 PSPs. 

Power Score—The creature summoned en- 
joys this sort of thing and won't be angry with 
the psionicist. 


20— The psionicist attracts the attention of 
a powerful, extraplanar creature without sum- 
moning it. 


Teleport 

Power Score: Int 
Initial Cost: 10+ 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: infinite 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


Teleport is the essential power within this 
discipline. It allows the psionicist to teleport to 
a familiar spot. The destination must be a 
place that the character knows and can picture 
mentally—even if he's never actually been 
there. For example, a psionicist may still know 
a location that he has seen through a crystal 
ball, via a sight link, or even by scanning 
someone else's mind for the information. 

The psionicist can still teleport to a place 
even if it has somehow changed from the way 
he pictures it. For example, if a room has been 
rearranged, or is currently on fire, such 
changes won't affect the teleport. 

Teleports always take characters to a fixed 
location. For example, if a character tries to 
teleport into a gypsy wagon which is on the 
move, he'll arrive at the wagon's location 
when he last knew it. The wagon itself may be 
miles away by then. Also, if the character was 
picturing the wagonss interior, he will teleport 
to the space corresponding to the wagon's 
interior—which is several feet off the ground! 
Because the wagon itself has moved, the tele- 
porter will fall when he arrives. (Imagine tele- 
porting to a room on the fifth floor of a tower, 
only to discover the tower has been razed by 
marauders since your last visit.) 

Teleportation is instantaneous. The tele- 
porting character simply ceases to exist in his 
previous location and springs into being at the 
destination. There is a slight, audible "pop" at 
both ends, as air rushes into the sudden vac- 


uum or is instantly displaced. 

Restraints do not affect teleportation. A 
character who is tied up, shackled to a wall, or 
buried up to his neck can still teleport. The re- 
straints remain behind. 

Clothing, on the other hand, does accom- 
pany a character who teleports. He may also 
carry small items in his grasp or wear equip- 
ment (e.g., armor) on his person, not exceed- 
ing one-fifth of his own body mass. If he 
doubles the amount of PSPs expended, he can 
carry up to three times his body mass, or take 
along one or two other characters on whom he 
has a firm grasp. 

A character can teleport any distance, but 
as the distance increases, so does the chance of 
failure and the cost in PSPs. Ranges, point 
costs, and power score modifiers are shown 
below. 

If the teleportation die roll is a 1 or 2, the 
character and anyone else with him are mo- 
mentarily disoriented by the jump. They can 
do nothing during the round which immedi- 
ately follows the teleport. After that, they suf- 
fer a 2-point penalty to the following for 14616 
rounds: initiative die rolls, psionic power 
checks, and attack rolls. 


Initial Power Score 


Distance Cost Modifier 
10 yards 20 +1 
100 yards 20 0 
1,000 yards 30 -1 
10 miles 40 -— 
100 miles 50 መን 
1,000 miles 60 -4 
10,000 miles 70 =5 
planet to planet* 100 ^6 


* Players with the SPELLJAMMER™ boxed set 
should note that interplanetary teleports are 
possible only within the same crystal sphere. It 
is impossible to teleport between crystal 
spheres or different planes of existence. 

Power Score—The PSP cost is reduced by 
20 percent, rounded up. 

20—No effect. 


Psychoportation € 67 


Teleport Other 

Power Score: Int -2 
Initial Cost: 20 + 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 10 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: na 
Prerequisites: teleport 


This power is identical to the one listed di- 
rectly above, except it is used to teleport other 
characters. The psionicist stays where he is 
while someone else is teleported. The charac- 
ter must be willing to be teleported, or uncon- 
scious. PSP costs and power score 
modifications are the same as for teleporta- 
tion. (In other words, cost and difficulty in- 
crease with distance.) If the psionicist pays 
twice the usual PSP cost, he can teleport up to 
three characters, provided they are firmly 
grasping one another. 

Power Score—The PSP cost is reduced by 
20 percent, rounded up. 

20— All would-be teleporters are seriously 
disoriented. They cannot cast spells and suffer 
a —4 penalty on all die rolls for 1d4 turns. 


Psychoportive Devotions 


Astral Projection 


Power Score: Int 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: — 2/hour 
Range: na 
Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


Astral projection is similar to probability 
travel, except the traveler is not accompanied 
by his physical body. Instead, an astral body is 
created. This astral body immediately leaps 
into the astral plane. Only creatures or charac- 
ters who are also on the astral plane can see it. 

A silvery cord connects the astral body to 


68 * Chapter Six 


the physical body. Nearly all astral travelers 
have such a cord. It is visible as a translucent 
string which stretches 10 feet from the astral 
body, and then becomes invisible and intangi- 
ble. If the cord is severed, both bodies die (so 
does the character). The silvery cord is nearly 
indestructible, however. Usually it can be sev- 
ered only by the psychic wind at its most pow- 
erful, or by the silver swords of the githyanki. 

Since the astral plane is a highway leading 
to other planes, a character who uses this 
power usually has another destination in 
mind—either a distant point on the prime ma- 
terial plane or an outerplanar locale. When the 
traveler reaches his destination, a temporary 
physical body is formed there. This body re- 
sembles the character's real body in every re- 
spect, and the two are still connected by the 
invisible, silvery cord. 

If either the astral body or the temporary 
physical body is killed, the cord returns to the 
real body. This second physical body is not 
formed if the character travels to another loca- 
tion on the same plane where his real physical 
body is located. He can view that plane in as- 
tral form, but cannot affect it or even enter it 
physically, nor can he direct magical or psi- 
onic powers into it. 

Magical items can be taken into the astral 
plane, but most lose their magical properties 
temporarily while in that plane. 

If you'd like more detail on astral travel and 
the astral plane, see the Manual of the Planes, 
an AD&D® game handbook. 

Power Score—The first color pool found is 
precisely where the psionicist wants it. 

20— The psionicist attracts the attention of 
a powerful creature in the astral plane. 


Dimensional Door 


Power Score: Con “1 
Initial Cost: 4 
Maintenance Cost: — 2/round 
Range: 50 yards + 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: na 
Prerequisites: none 


Like teleportation, a dimensional door takes 
a character from one location to another. The 
similarity stops there, however. With dimen- 
sional door, the psionicist opens a man-sized 
portal which leads to the edge of another di- 
mension. The edge acts as a lightning-quick 
transit system, carrying travelers to a destina- 
tion chosen by the psionicist who uses this 
power. 

When the psionicist uses this devotion, he 
creates a door leading into the alternate di- 
mension. The door is a vaguely outlined por- 
tal, which appears in front of the psionicist. At 
the same time, an identical portal appears 
wherever he wants it, within range (see be- 
low). The door can have whatever orientation 
the psionicist chooses. If someone (including 
the psionicist) steps into either portal, he im- 
mediately steps out of the other. Both doors 
remain in place for as long as the psionicist 
maintains the power. 

The dimension accessed by this power is not 
fully understood. Clearly, it has very different 
qualities of time and space, such that motion is 
greatly accelerated. For many years this tran- 
sit was thought to be instantaneous, but ardu- 
ous experiments by Larue d'jar Azif of 
Dhaztanar have proved that a very tiny bit of 
time does elapse. What this means is still un- 
known. 

Travel via this power is disorienting. Pre- 
sumably, exposure to the alternate dimension 
traumatizes the body in some way. As a result, 
a traveler is dazed and cannot attack or move 
for one round after stepping through a dimen- 
sional skip portal. Quick transit is advisable. 
People who shove only an arm through a por- 


tal suffer intense pain. Fools who poke their 
head through a portal must make a system 
shock roll; failure means they lose 50% of 
their current hit points and pass out. 

Inanimate objects are not affected by expo- 
sure to the dimension's edge. In fact, a charac- 
ter can throw or fire objects through a portal, 
and they'll come out on the other side. Attack- 
ers suffer a —4 penalty on their to-hit rolls 
against targets on the other side of the dimen- 
sion's edge. 

Range: The normal range of this power— 
i.e., the maximum distance between the two 
portals—is 50 yards. The distance can be ex- 
tended only with severe reductions to the 
character's power score, as shown below. In- 
creasing the range does not increase the PSP 
cost, however. 


Distance Power 
Between Score 
Doors Modifier 
50 yards 0 
75 yards - 
100 yards -5 
150 yards -8 
200 yards -12 


Power Score— Transit does not cause disori- 
entation. 

20— The psionicist is momentarily exposed 
to the transit dimension and is disoriented as if 
he had stepped through the portal. 


Dimension Walk 

Power Score: Con -2 
Initial Cost: 8 
Maintenance Cost: — 4/turn 
Range: na 
Preparation Time: 2 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


With dimension walk, a psionicist can 
travel from place to place in his own dimen- 
sion by piercing other dimensions at right an- 
gles. This has two advantages over a 


0006... —— — ——— 


Psychoportation * 69 


dimensional door: 1) a dimension walk is not 
physically traumatizing and 2) the range of 
travel is greater. On the other hand, dimen- 
sion walk only allows the psionicist himself to 
travel, and he can easily get lost. 

The dimension walker opens up a vaguely 
shimmering portal. Only the psionicist who 
opened the portal can enter it. As soon as he 
does, the portal closes behind him. He finds 
himself engulfed by an inky grayness that is 
virtually without features. The effect is one of 
extreme sensory deprivation. 

The psionicist can travel through this gray 
realm at a speed of 7 leagues (21 miles) per 
turn. He cannot see where he is or where he's 
going while in the realm. He has only his in- 
stinct to guide him, and must make a Wisdom 
check every turn. If these checks succeed, he'll 
find himself at his chosen destination when he 
steps out of the realm. If any single Wisdom 
check fails, however, the character will stray 
off course by several miles. When the walker 
steps out of the gray realm, the DM can place 
him in any location, within the maximum dis- 
tance from his starting point (e.g., if the 
psionicist walked for 10 rounds, he must be 
within 21 miles of his origin). It's up to the 
psionicist to figure out his location; this power 
doesn't help him gain his bearings. 

Aside from getting lost, dimension walking 
is completely safe. Apparently anything that 
lives in the other dimensions crossed cannot 
interact with dimensional travelers. (Larue 
d'jar Azif of Dhaztanar postulated that these 
other dimensions teem with life just as much as 
our own, but because the traveler is crossing 
them "against the grain", as it were, they do 
not register on his senses.) The character can 
bring along as much as he can carry, but bags 
of holding and other dimensional storage de- 
vices spill their contents immediately if taken 
into this space. 

Power Score—The psionicist receives a +2 
bonus when making his Wisdom checks. 

20—Overcome with vertigo, the character 
can do nothing but retch for three rounds. 


70 * Chapter Six 


Dream Travel 


Power Score: Wis “4 
Initial Cost: 1/25 miles 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 500 miles 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


Dream travel is a powerful but unreliable 
means of getting from here to there. The trav- 
eler journeys in his dreams, and awakes wher- 
ever his nocturnal wandering carried him. The 
psionicist can even take other characters with 
him, although it's more difficult than traveling 
alone. (See "Passengers" below.) 

To use dream travel, the psionicist must be 
asleep. Once asleep, he begins fashioning a 
dream that involves traveling from his present 
location to his intended destination. At the be- 
ginning of the journey, the DM secretly makes 
a power check for the character. If the check 
succeeds, the psionicist will reach his destina- 
tion. If the check fails, the character will fall 
short 10% for each point that the die roll ex- 
ceeded the power score. 

If the DM wants, this power check is all 
that's required to handle dream travel during a 
game. However, it's far more satisfying to ac- 
tually role-play the dream. The player creates 
the setting and describes his intentions, with 
the DM interrupting to change things arbitrar- 
ily and throw obstacles in the character's path. 
If the player overcomes the obstacles and 
solves problems inventively, the DM is justi- 
fied in giving a bonus to the character's power 
check. If the dream is dull and lifeless, the DM 
can also penalize the power check. 

The DM should remember that this is a 
dream; terrain on the journey may not resem- 
ble actual terrain, the character may be com- 
pletely different, and the world may be 
completely strange. The length of the dream 
journey should be approximately the same as 
the real distance, however, and the final desti- 
nation should be at least similar to the real des- 


7 , M^ 


Dream Travel: Five passengers set sail that day for a three-hour tour... 


Psychoportation € 71 


tination. Such dream adventures should mini- 
mize combat and maximize problems, puzzles, 
and surreal atmosphere. If combat does occur, it 
has no effect on the character physically, but if 
he is killed, he wakes up, right where he started. 
All dream journeys take approximately eight 
hours to complete, successful or not. 

Passengers: The psionicist can bring other 
characters along with him in the dream. His 
power score is reduced by one for each passen- 
ger he carries. Passengers must also be sleep- 
ing. A single power check launches everyone 
on the dream journey. If the check fails, they 
still attempt the dream journey but fall short 
of their target. The psionicist must pay the 
PSP cost of the trip individually for each char- 
acter accompanying him in the dream. 

Intelligent animals can also be drawn into 
the dream, but normal animals (horses, dogs, 
falcons, whatever) are very difficult to bring 
along. The psionicist must make a separate 
power check to draw in each animal and his 
power score is halved, rounded down, when 
making this check. 

When the dream travelers reach their desti- 
nation, they awaken. In the place where they 
lay sleeping, their bodies and any equipment 
carried or worn fades away. At the same time, 
they fade into being at their new location, still 
in sleeping posture, but fully awake. 

Power Score—No additional effect. 

20— The dream is nightmarish. The psioni- 
cist must save vs. paralyzation or appear dead 
until violently struck. 


Teleport Trigger 

Power Score: Int *1 
Initial Cost: 0 
Maintenance Cost: — 2/hour 
Range: infinite 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: teleport 


A teleport trigger is a programmed event 
which causes the psionicist to instantly and re- 


72 ወ Chapter Six 


Hexively teleport to a safe location. After 
making a successful power check, the psioni- 
cist must specify where he intends to go. He 
must also define very specifically what condi- 
tions will trigger the teleportation. These can 
be anything he wants, but the teleport will not 
be triggered unless he is aware that the condi- 
tions have been met. A volcanic eruption 500 
miles away will not trigger teleportation un- 
less the character has some way to know that 
the volcano is erupting. 

For example, here are three typical triggers: 
being reduced to 10 or fewer hit points, seeing 
a mind flayer, and being attacked by a magic 
missile spell. When such predetermined condi- 
tions are fulfilled, the character instantly tele- 
ports to the programmed location. 

When the teleport is triggered, the character 
must have enough PSPs remaining to teleport 
to that location, because he pays the cost just 
as if he were performing a normal teleport. 
(See “teleport.”) He must also make a teleport 
power check, with penalties based on the dis- 
tance traveled. If this power check fails, so 
does the programmed teleport. 

No PSPs are spent when the trigger is de- 
fined, but the character spends two points per 
hour from that time just to maintain the trig- 
ger. The trigger remains in effect until the 
character stops paying the maintenance cost. 

Power Score—The character can ignore 
power score penalties for distance. 

20—No other effect. 


Time Shift 

Power Score: Int 
Initial Cost: 16 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: teleport 


Time shifting allows the psionicist to travel 
up to three rounds into the future and observe 
things until time catches up with him. He sees 


everything frozen around him just as it will be 
when that moment in the future actually ar- 
rives. 

The psionicist enters a different reality when 
he uses this power. No one in the "still life" that 
surrounds him can see or detect him in any 
way. He can move freely through the environ- 
ment, putting himself wherever he wants to be 
when he returns to normal time. But he cannot 
affect anything around him, nor can anything 
affect him. Even two time-shifted characters 
are completely invisible to each other. To the 
people in real time, the character simply van- 
ishes and then reappears sometime later. 

The character does not exist for any normal 
game purpose during the period when he is 
time shifted. If, for example, a fireball spell 
detonates in the room while the character is 
time shifted, the character is completely pro- 
tected against its effects. In fact, unless the 
blast leaves visible effects (charred walls or 
corpses or sulfurous fumes), the character 
won't even know it happened. He sees none of 
the intervening events. 

This power cannot help a character escape 
contact, however. If someone has established 
contact or tangents (see Chapter 2) with the 
time shifter—and continues paying their 
maintenance cost—then the tangents or con- 
tact will still be in effect when the character re- 
turns to normal time. 

Time shifting offers an obvious advantage 
in combat. A psionicist can leap one round 
into the future and maneuver into position for 
an attack. In that case, the shifter receives a 
*4 bonus to his attack roll. With enough 
time, he could even escape. 

How long does a time shift last? If the 
psionicist travels one round forward, then he 
has one round in which to maneuver. If he 
travels two rounds forward, then it takes two 
rounds for reality to catch up. Three rounds is 
the limit. The farther (or longer) the trip, the 
more difficult it is to make, as shown in the ta- 
ble below. 


Psionic Power 
Time Strength Score 
Shifted Cost Modifier 
1 round 3 0 
2 rounds 6 -2 
3 rounds 12 —6 


Power Score—No other effect. 
20—The psionicist is disoriented, and suf- 
fers a —2 penalty on all die rolls for as many 


rounds as he intended to shift. 
Time/Space Anchor 

Power Score: Int 
Initial Cost: 5 
Maintenance Cost: — l/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 3 yards 
Prerequisites: none 


This power protects psionicists against un- 
wanted teleportation. When a time/space an- 
chor is in effect, the psionicist cannot be 
teleported against his will unless he loses a 
psychic contest. 

Anyone and anything else inside the 3-yard 
radius is also protected using the psionicist's 
power score. Items are protected automati- 
cally, but living creatures or characters are 
protected only if the psionicist wants them to 
be. Each additional creature protected costs 
another PSP per round. This power cannot 
prevent someone from teleporting himself 
away; it only prevents teleporting from an 
outside source. 

Power Score—The psionicist receives a +2 
bonus in any resulting psychic contests. 

20— The psionicist is rooted to the spot for 
1dé rounds. During that time his AC is penal- 
ized 5 points. 


Psychoportation € 73 


CHAPTER 


Telepathy 


Telepathic Sciences 


Domination 

Power Score: Wis —4 
Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: ^ varies 
Range: 30 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 


Prerequisites: mindlink, contact 


With domination, a psionicist can project 
signals from his own mind into the mind of 
one other person or creature. As a result, the 
subject is forced to do nearly anything the 
psionicist wishes. The dominated subject 
knows what is happening, but he cannot resist 
the psionicist’s will. Commands are given 
mentally and automatically. 

The victim's abilities are neither diminished 
nor enhanced by this power. The subject can 
be forced to use any power or ability he nor- 
mally can—assuming the psionicist knows 
about it. Domination does not reveal facts or 
secrets about a victim. 

As soon as domination is attempted, the 
victim makes a saving throw vs. spells. If this 
saving throw succeeds, the victim is not domi- 
nated. If it fails, the victim has fallen under the 
psionicist's control. However, if the victim is 
later forced to do something completely ab- 


Abbreviations 


Telepathic attack and defense modes are of- 
ten abbreviated as follows, especially in 
character or creature descriptions. 


Defense Modes 
IF = intellect fortress 
MB = mental barrier 


Attack Modes 

EW = ego whip 

II = id insinuation 

MT = mind thrust M- = mind blank 

PB = psionic blast TS = thought shield 

PsC = psychic crush TW = tower of iron 
will 


74 * Chapter Seven 


horrent (against his alignment), he can make 
another saving throw to regain his free will. 

Domination can exact a high price in PSPs. 
The cost to establish and maintain this power 
equals twice the cost to contact the victim. 

Power Score— The maintenance cost is 
halved. 

20—The victim knows that someone at- 
tempted to dominate him. 


Ejection 


Power Score: Wis —4 
Initial Cost: varies 
Maintenance Cost: na 


Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


Ejection is the final defense against un- 
wanted contact. If one psionicist has forced 
contact with anothers mind, or has been 
granted contact and is now doing things he 
should not be, he can be ejected. 

The cost of ejection is twice the opponent's 
contact power score (even if contact was es- 
tablished through combat). 

Ejection is risky for the user. If the power 
check result is 8 or less, consult the table below 
to see what "side effects" the psionicist suffers. 


1 Lose access to all sciences for 1d10 
hours 

2 Lose access to one discipline, selected 
by the DM, for 1d10 hours 


3  ፒ6% 1910 +10 additional PSPs 

4 Lose 1d10 additional PSPs 

5  Losel point of Constitution 
permanently 


6 Lose 1410 hit points 

7  Severonly one portion of contact (one 
successful attack reestablishes it) 

8  Severonly two portions of contact (two 
successful attacks reestablish it) 


Power Score—Roll 1d6 on the table above. 
The result applies to the ejected being. 

20—Ejection fails, but the psionicist still 
makes a dó roll on the table above. 


Mindlink 

Power Score: Wis —5 
Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 8/round 
Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: contact 


Fate Link 

Power Score: Con -5 
Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 5/turn 
Range: 2 miles 
Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: individual 


Prerequisite: 


mindlink, contact 


This power enables the telepath to inter- 
twine his own fate with that of another crea- 
ture. If either being experiences pain, both feel 
it. When one loses hit points, both lose the 
same amount. If either dies, the other must 
immediately make a saving throw vs. death to 


avoid the same fate. 


Power Score—Range is unlimited. 
20—Social regression. The psionicist loses 
1dé points of Charisma for a day. 


Mass Domination 


Power Score: Wis —6 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: varies 

Range: 40 yards 
Preparation Time: 2 

Area of Effect: up to 5 creatures 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact, 


domination 


This power is identical to domination ex- 
cept the psionicist can control up to five crea- 
tures simultaneously. Each one must be 
contacted and dominated individually. The 
maintenance cost—twice the victim's level or 
hit dice—must be paid for each dominated fig- 
ure. 

Power Score— The range is extended to 100 
yards. 

20— The intended targets are aware of the 
psionicist's efforts. 


Mindlink allows the user to communicate 
wordlessly with any intelligent creature he 
can contact (Intelligence 5 or greater on a hu- 
man scale). This is two-way communication. 
It is not the same as mind-reading because the 
psionicist only receives thoughts which the 
other party wants to send. Language is not a 
barrier. Distance affects the telepath's ability 
to make contact, but it has no other effect (see 
"contact"). 

Power Score—The mindlink allows one 
probing question (see probe). 

20— The psionicist must save vs. petrifica- 
tion or be stunned for 1d4 rounds. 


Mindwipe 

Power Score: Int -“ፅ 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 8/round 

Range: touch 
Preparation Time: jl 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


Mindwiping is a crude form of psychic sur- 
gery which affects the subject's IO. (It's like a 
temporary lobotomy.) The telepath system- 
atically seals off portions of the subject's 
mind, making whatever knowledge was con- 
tained there inaccessible. 

When a mindwipe is attempted, the victim 
saves vs. spells. If he succeeds, the mindwipe 
is thwarted for one round, but next round the 
psionicist can try again. 

Each round of mindwiping has two impor- 
tant, immediate effects. First, it reduces the 
victim's Intelligence and Wisdom scores by 1 


0006609996 የ ኢሲኢችችእሚሚየሚችችችሚሻቸሚማዒዒዒወዒ9ወዒ8ፀ8መፀፀፀመመ ——— 


Telepathy * 75 


point. Second, it reduces his experience level 
or hit dice by 1 point. 

These reductions have considerable impact. 
All characters may lose languages or profi- 
ciencies and their magical defense adjustment. 
Experience level and hit dice losses affect 
everything except hit points. The victim keeps 
all of his hit points regardless of what is wiped 
from his mind. 

Intelligence and Wisdom losses affect wiz- 
ards and clerics as if those losses were perma- 
nent. Clerics lose bonus spells, their chance of 
spell failure rises, and eventually they cannot 
cast spells. Wizards suffer reductions in their 
maximum spell level, their chance to learn 
spells, and their maximum spells per level. 

When the number of available spells at a 
spell-level drops, a character must make an 
ability check before casting a spell of that 
level. Wizards roll an Intelligence check. Cler- 
ics roll a Wisdom check. Both use current 
scores. If the check succeeds, the character can 
cast the spell. If it fails, he has forgotten the 
spell and can't cast any spell that round. 

Mindwipe only seals off information; it 
doesn't erase it. All of a character's lost Wis- 
dom, Intelligence, and experience levels can 
be restored through psychic surgery (q.v.). 

This power has no effect against creatures 
with neither stats nor hit dice. 

Power Score—No saving throw allowed. 

20— The power affects the psionicist instead 
of his intended victim. 


Probe 

Power Score: Wis —5 
Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 9/round 
Range: 2 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: ESP, contact 


A probe is similar to ESP (a telepathic devo- 
tion), but a probe allows psionicists to dig 
much deeper into a subject's subconscious. If 


76 è Chapter Seven 


the subject fails a saving throw vs. spells, then 
all his memories and knowledge are accessible 
to the prober—from memories deep below the 
surface to those still fresh in the subject's 
mind. The information gained is not necessar- 
ily true, but it is true as far as the subject 
knows. 

The telepath can learn the answer to one 
question per round. DMs have some discre- 
tion in determining this rate. If the questions 
(or answers) become too complicated, each 
may take longer than one round to resolve. 

Telepaths can probe a subject who is con- 
scious, as well as one who resists. A probe can 
even be carried out in the midst of melee, pro- 
vided the telepath can get close enough. If a 
probed wizard or cleric tries casting a spell, 
the telepath knows both that a spell is being 
cast and what the general effects of that spell 
are. 

Power Score— Two questions may be asked 
per round. 

20— The subject knows about the probe at- 
tempt and is not pleased. 


Psychic Crush 


Power Score: 
Initial Cost: 
Maintenance Cost: na 


Wis —4 
7 


Range: 50 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: mindlink 


Psychic crush is one of the five telepathic at- 
tacks used to establish contact with another 
psionicist's mind. It is a massive assault upon 
all neurons in the brain, attempting to destroy 
all by a massive overload of signals. 

If this attack is used against any mind that 
the psionicist has contacted, the victim must 
make a saving throw vs. paralyzation. Failure 
costs the target 1d8 hit points. 

Power Score— The save automatically fails. 

20— The victim is immune to further crush- 
es by this psionicist for 24 hours. 


A ES ጋ d 
LI e . 5 . 
. ሣቱ T ግ T | 
= " 
i 1 3 : E . 
J " 
» e ^ 
LI ግ > 5 x 
- . . * 
LI . ^ 
ህ . 
. . > x 1 
» Lj àv ፦ 
" 
i ደ 4 . " 
» " 
» . 
LJ . . * Š À 
LJ z * 
. 
LI . = à 
» $ ፡ 
` 2 . . 
- £ . ና vi 
$ " 
` =- x x ጃ ‹ 
. 
" " > LJ * 
> ° LI ee Ld 
» a 
» V E 
- ሐ” i 
. 
e: 
. . 4 M ሄ 
. . 
| 
» 
Lo d ? 
" r 4 
. P 
. =፥ 
. . 
5 . 
. + ላ 
p 


Superior Invisibility 

Power Score: Int —5 

Initial Cost: contact 

Maintenance Cost: — 5/round/creature 

Range: 100 yards 

Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 

Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 
invisibility 


Superior invisibility is like invisibility (see 
page 86), but it masks the character com- 
pletely. The psionicist makes no sound and 
has no smell, though he can still be felt if 
touched. If he attacks someone physically, he 
automatically breaks contact with that char- 
acter. 

Power Score—Opponents affected by this 
power cannot detect the psionicist even if he 
touches or physically attacks them. 

20— Everyone contacted becomes aware of 
the psionicist and his desire to be invisible. 


Switch Personality 


Power Score: Con —4 


Initial Cost: contact +30 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 3 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


Some psionicists can literally put them- 
selves in another man's (or woman's) shoes. 
This science allows the psionicist to switch his 
own mind with someone else's. In effect, they 
exchange bodies. The other person's mind in- 
habits the psionicist's body, while the psioni- 
cists mind inhabits his subject's body. The 
switch is permanent, and lasts until the psioni- 
cist uses this power to reverse it. 

Each character gains the other's physical at- 
tributes. However, both minds retain all their 
own knowledge and knowledge-based abili- 


78 * Chapter Seven 


ties. For example, a telepath who switches 
minds with a 10th level fighter gains a body 
with that fighter's hit points and physical at- 
tributes (Strength, Constitution, and Dexteri- 
ty). However, he retains his own THACO, 
proficiencies, and so forth. 

The switch takes a turn to complete, and 
the process is quite traumatic. At the end of 
the turn, both characters must make system 
shock saving throws using their new Constitu- 
tion scores. A character who fails this roll 
lapses into a coma for 1-100 hours. 

Bodies that have undergone a personality 
switch tend to degenerate. Both characters 
must make a Constitution ability check every 
day. If a check fails, the character loses one 
point of Constitution. If his Constitution 
drops to zero, he dies. 

This Constitution loss is temporary, but it 
does not reverse itself until the personalities 
are restored to their proper bodies. At that 
point, both bodies recover one point of Con- 
stitution per day. 

The psionicist does not lose his psionic 
powers if his Constitution drops below 11. 
However, if a power score is based on 
Constitution—like this power's score is—the 
score drops accordingly. 

Power Score—System shock rolls automat- 
ically succeed, and the Constitution checks 
are made only once a week. 

20— The psionicist lapses into a coma for 
1d100 hours. 


Tower of Iron Will 


Power Score: Wis -2 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 1 yard 
Prerequisites: none 


Tower of iron will is one of the five telepath- 
ic defenses against unwanted contact. It relies 
only upon the superego to build an unassaila- 
ble haven for the brain. 

Like intellect fortress (a telepathic devo- 
tion), tower of iron will has an area of effect 
beyond the psionicists mind. At 3 feet, it's 
very limited. 

A psionicist can initiate one other psionic 
power during the round in which he uses the 
tower of iron will. 

Power Score—The area of effect increases 
to 10 feet. 

20—The psionicist is “lost inside himself” 
and cannot engage in psionic activity for 1d4 
hours. 


Telepathic Devotions 


Attraction 

Power Score: Wis —4 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 8/round 

Range: 200 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


The opposite of aversion (see below), this 
power creates an overwhelming attraction to 
a particular person or thing—be it an item, 
creature, action, or event. A victim of this 
power will do whatever seems reasonable to 
get close to the object of his attraction. 

The key word is “reasonable.” The victim is 
completely fascinated, but he doesn't suffer 


from blind obsession. He won't leap into a fire 
or over a cliff, for example, or climb into the 
arms of a tarrasque (a bipedal killing ma- 
chine). He can still recognize danger, but he 
will not flee unless the threat is strong and im- 
mediate. And if the danger is not apparent, 
(such as poison in a goblet of wine), the char- 
acter could easily destroy himself in pursuit of 
the attraction. 

Power Score—The effect borders on an ob- 
session; the victim takes serious risks. 

20—No additional effect. 


Aversion 

Power Score: Wis “4 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 8/turn 

Range: 200 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


The victim of this power gains an aversion 
to a particular person, place, action, or event. 
He will do everything he can to avoid the ob- 
ject of his aversion. He will not approach 
within 20 yards, and if he is already within 20 
yards, he will back away at the first opportu- 
nity. 

The aversion is "planted" in the victim's 
brain for one turn. It cannot be maintained for 
another turn unless the psionicist maintains 
contact throughout that turn. 

Power Score—The object of aversion af- 
fects the victim like a fear spell. 

20—No additional effect. 


EEUU ያ አኢ ———— 


Telepathy * 79 


Awe 


Power Score: Cha -2 
Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 4/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 20 yards 


Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 

A psionicist can use this power to make oth- 
ers hold him in awe. Each character contacted 
must make a saving throw vs. spells. Charac- 
ters who fail are mentally cowed; they sense 
the telepath's “awesome might.” They have no 
desire to serve or befriend him, but they won't 
attack him unless forced to do so. (For exam- 
ple, someone says, "You kill him or I'll kill 
you”) They'll do whatever they can to avoid 
angering or upsetting the psionicist. If possi- 
ble, they'll avoid him altogether, and take the 
first opportunity to escape him. 

Power Score—The save automatically fails. 

20—All contacted characters view the 
psionicist as pathetic and ridiculous. 


Conceal Thoughts 

Power Score: Wis 
Initial Cost: 5 
Maintenance Cost: — 3/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 3 yards 
Prerequisite: none 


This defensive devotion protects the psioni- 
cist against psionic or magical ESP, probes, 
mindlink, life detection, and other powers or 
spells which read or detect thoughts. To over- 
come thought concealment, an attacker must 
wage and win a psychic contest. 

Power Score—All related psychic contests 
will automatically be won by the defender. 

20—No additional effect. 


80 ወ Chapter Seven 


Contact 

Power Score: Wis 
Initial Cost: varies 
Maintenance Cost: — l/round 
Range: special 
Preparation Time: — 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: none 


Contact must be established before virtually 
any telepathic power can be used on another 
character or creature. It is just what its name 
implies—contact between the minds of the tel- 
epath and another character or creature. Con- 
tact does not allow communication by itself; it 
is merely the conduit for other telepathic ex- 
changes. 

Many telepathic powers list "contact" as 
their initial cost. That means contact must be 
established in a previous round before those 
powers can be used. As long as contact is 
maintained, the psionicist can use other 
powers which require it, and can even switch 
(using attraction and then mindlink on the 
same subject after contact was established, for 
example). 

A psionicist can maintain contact with more 
than one subject at a time, but he must contact 
each one individually, and pay a maintenance 
cost for each use of the power. For example, if 
a psionicist wishes to inspire awe in two sub- 
jects, he must establish and maintain contact 
with each one separately. 

Once contact is established, it costs 1 PSP 
per round to maintain. The psionicist can per- 
form any other action while maintaining con- 
tact. If he uses another telepathic power on the 
same subject while maintaining contact, the 
contact power is "free." (The cost of maintain- 
ing contact is covered by the other power's 
cost.) 

Establishing Contact: The initial cost of 
contact is based on the target's level or hit dice, 
as shown below. 


1-5 levels or hit dice 3 PSPs/round 
6-10 levels or hit dice 8 PSPs/round 
11-15 levels or hit dice 13 PSPs/round 
16-20 levels or hit dice 18 PSPs/round 


A psionicist cannot contact a subject that he 
knows nothing about. In other words, he can't 
use this power to scan around and "see what's 
out there" He must either have his subject in 
sight or know specifically who or what he is 
looking for. He cannot, for example, try to 
contact any random orc which may or may 
not be standing behind a closed door. How- 
ever, he can try to contact a particular orc 
which he has seen before. 

If a psionicist fails to establish contact, he 
can try again the next round. Failure doesn't 
necessarily mean the target's mind cannot be 
contacted. Rather, it means the target has not 
been found yet. The psionicist can continue 
searching. 

Several factors can make telepathic contact 
difficult to establish: 


* how far the target is (distance) 

* resistance by the target—especially if the 
target is a psionicist 

* whether or not the target is an intelligent 
mammal 

Each factor is described below. 


Distance: The greater the distance between 
the two minds, the more difficult it usually be- 
comes to make contact. If the psionicist can 
see the target—either with normal vision or by 
using psionic powers— distance is not a factor. 
If the psionicist cannot see his target, normal 
range modifiers apply. Simply knowing where 
to look does not constitute "seeing the target.” 


Separation Power Score 
Distance Modifier 
Line-of-sight 0 

1 mile =i 

10 miles T3 

100 miles mS 
1,000 miles -7 
10,000 miles —9 


The maximum range for establishing contact 
is 10,000 miles when a psionicist cannot view 
his subject. Contact can be maintained across 
any distance, however; it is not broken if a 
contacted subject moves out of range. There is 
one exception: contact cannot be extended be- 
yond a crystal sphere. 

Resistance: An untrained character—i.e., a 
nonpsionicist—can actively resist intrusion, 
resulting in a —2 modifier to the psionicist's 
power score. To resist, the character fills his 
mind with a barrage of thoughts and 
emotions—much as a child avoids a lecture by 
plugging his ears and yelling. For example, a 
character might repeat a poem ad nauseam, or 
scream battle cries. However, even these ef- 
forts won't work unless 1) the character is spe- 
cifically resisting psychic intrusion, and 2) 
resisting intrusion is his sole activity. If the 
character tries to fight or cast a spell, for exam- 
ple, his psychic defense has too many "holes" 
to be useful. Unless a wild talent knows a tele- 
pathic defense mode, he is as vulnerable to 
contact as any nonpsionicist. 

Psionicists (and psionic creatures) are much 
better at resisting contact. In fact, this power 
won't work against them unless they inten- 
tionally drop their natural defenses. They 
must allow another psionicist to use contact 
on them, and can exclude some contacts while 
remaining open to others. If a psionicist re- 
sists, contact can only be established through 
mental attacks: psychic crush, ego whip, id in- 
sinuation, mind thrust, or psionic blast. See 
Chapter 2, “Psionic Combat,” for more infor- 
mation. 

Unusual Subjects: Contact can also be es- 
tablished with nonhuman minds, even plants. 
The further the subject is removed from mam- 
mals, the more difficult it becomes to establish 
contact. Modifiers that affect power scores are 
listed on the following page. 


806 ተ ሱሲሲችየችሸሻሚሽሽች ሚሚሽሽሽሜሚችችሚችሽችሽችቕሚሚችሜችችሴቹመመመመችመችችመችመ888;83መ8መመመ 9 


Telepathy ወ 81 


PA (a. i (eti 


pr 


P, 
መ. 


m 


frm 


Probe: We have ways of making you think. 


82 * Chapter Seven 


Contact 


Score 
Life Order Modifier 
Mammal (except marsupial) =3 
Marsupial “2 
Bird =3 
Reptile, amphibian -4 
Fish -—5 
Arachnid, insect =6 
Monster =y 
Plant -8 


These modifiers are in addition to any dis- 
tance modifiers that may apply. That means 
contacting a distant plant or monster is an un- 
certain proposition at best. 

Breaking Contact: Contact is not severed 
until the psionicist breaks it off (fails to main- 
tain it). If the person contacted is a psionicist, 
he may also do something to sever it. A 
psionicist often can eject an unwanted in- 
truder (see “ejection”). 

Optional Rule: The minds of very intelligent 
beings are more difficult to latch onto. Increase 
the cost of contact by adding the creature's "£ of 
Languages, minus two, as shown on Table 4 in 
Chapter 1 of the Players Handbook. For exam- 
ple, a creature with Intelligence 17 knows six 
languages. The cost of contacting this creature's 
mind is increased by four. 

Power Score—The contact is maintained 
for four rounds for free. 

20— Further contact with this mind is im- 
possible at this experience level. 


Daydream 

Power Score: Wis 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 3/round 

Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


By using this power, the telepath causes 
someone's mind to wander. This is only effec- 


tive against characters with Intelligence 14 or 
less who are not concentrating hard on the 
task before them, but are just going about 
their business in a casual, relaxed manner. 

Once affected, the daydreamer pays little 
attention to his surroundings, making it much 
easier for someone to pick his pocket, slip past 
him unobserved, or otherwise escape his no- 
tice. Thieves gain a 20% bonus on their pick 
pockets, move silently, and hide in shadows 
scores. Other characters can perform these 
tasks as an average 4th level thief (pick pock- 
ets, 45%; move silently, 33%; hide in 
shadows, 25%). The DM can assign chances 
for success to other types of skulking and 
skullduggery. 

Power Score—Increase the bonuses to 30% 
for thieves and 5th level for others. 

20— The victim realizes someone is toying 
with his mind. 


Ego Whip 

Power Score: Wis —3 

Initial Cost: 4 

Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 40/80/120 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: mindlink, contact 


Ego whip is one of the five telepathic attacks 
used to establish contact with another psioni- 
cist's mind. (See Chapter 2.) The power assaults 
the victim's ego, leaving him with feelings of in- 
feriority and worthlessness. If used against a 
contacted mind, the target is dazed for 1-4 
rounds, during which all of his die rolls (psionic 
attacks, melee attacks, saving throws, etc.) are 
penalized five points (or 25%) and he cannot 
cast any spells above third level. 

This power has three ranges: short, medi- 
um, and long. At medium range, the psioni- 
cist's power score is reduced by two. At long 
range, it is reduced by five. 

Power Score—No additional effect. 

20—No additional effect. 


800096 ሲሲሲ — —— 


Telepathy * 83 


Empathy 


Power Score: Wis 

Initial Cost: contact (or 1*) 
Maintenance Cost: 1/round 
Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. x 20 ft. 
Prerequisites: contact 


By using empathy, a psionicist can sense the 
basic needs, drives, and/or emotions gener- 
ated by any mind. Thirst, hunger, fear, fa- 
tigue, pain, rage, hatred, uncertainty, 
curiosity, hostility, friendliness, love—all 
these and more can be sensed. 

"When used against nonpsionic targets, 
contact is not required. 

Power Score—The subject of the emotion is 
revealed. 

20— The target senses the attempt. 


ESP 

Power Score: Wis -4 
Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — ó/round 
Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: contact 


Extrasensory perception, or ESP, allows a 
psionicist to read someone else's mind (as the 
power is treated here). The telepath can only 
perceive surface or active thoughts. He cannot 
use ESP to explore someone's memories or 
delve into their subconscious. 

Most intelligent creatures tend to think in 
words, so language is a barrier to understand- 
ing. Unintelligent creatures think in pictures. 
Magical thought, such as a wizard uses in 
casting spells, is also unintelligible. However, 
a telepath can easily recognize such thoughts 
as part of the spell-casting process. 

Power Score—The first round of mainte- 
nance is free. 

20—The psionicist develops a splitting 


84 * Chapter Seven 


headache and suffers a —1 penalty on all tele- 
pathic power scores for one hour. 


False Sensory Input 

Power Score: Int —3 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 4/round 

Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


This devotion allows the psionicist to fal- 
sify someone's sensory input—making the vic- 
tim think that he sees, hears, smells, tastes, or 
feels something other than he really does. The 
falsehoods are somewhat limited. Nothing 
can be completely hidden or made to disap- 
pear, and everything must retain its general 
size and intensity. 

For example, a human could be made to 
look like a dwarf, but not like a parrot. A 
slamming door could be made to sound like a 
thunderclap or a cough, but not like rustling 
paper. Oil could be made to taste like garlic, 
but not like water. 

Power Score— Almost any false perception 
can be achieved. 

20— The psionicist cannot see, hear, or 
otherwise sense the intended victim for 1d4 
rounds, except psionically. 


Id Insinuation 

Power Score: Wis -4 

Initial Cost: 5 

Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 60/120/180 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: mindlink, contact 


Id insinuation is one of the five telepathic 
attack modes.'It seeks to unleash the uncon- 
trolled subconscious of the defender, pitting it 
against his superego. The attack leaves the 
victim in a state of moral uproar. 


Technically speaking, this power drives him 
nuts, at least temporarily. His id—the seat of 
primitive needs, animal drives, cruelty, and fe- 
rocity —seeks to launch him into a rage of vio- 
lence and desire. His superego—the seat of 
moral conscience and the "civilized" part of his 
brain—struggles to maintain the upper hand. If 
this power is used against a contacted mind, 
the target can do nothing for 1d4 rounds. 

Id insinuation has three ranges: short, me- 
dium, and long. At medium range, the tele- 
path's power score is reduced by two. At long 
range, it is reduced by five. 

Power Score— The victim's id overpowers 
his superego and he turns against his allies for 
1d4 rounds. 

20— The psionicist's id is unleashed; the re- 
sulting rage imposes a —1 penalty on all his 
attack rolls and power checks for one turn. 


Identity Penetration 


Power Score: Wis -3 
Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — ó6/round 
Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: contact 


Identity penetration allows the user to de- 
termine the target's true identity in spite of 
polymorphs, illusions, disguises, etc. 

Power Score—No additional effect. 

20—Until he gains another level, the tele- 
path cannot penetrate the identity of the cur- 
rent target. 


Incarnation Awareness 


Power Score: Wis —4 
Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 13/round 
Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: ዐ 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: contact 


By applying this power to another charac- 
ter, the psionicist can gain knowledge about 
past lives. One past life can be explored per 
round, starting with the most powerful per- 
sonalities (usually these are also the most fa- 
mous, but not always). 

The psionicist also knows immediately how 
many times this particular personality has 
been killed and raised from the dead. It is up 
to the players to put this information to use. 

Power Score—All past life information is 
gained in one quick mental blast. 

20—Overwhelmed, the psionicist lapses in- 
to a trance until jolted or slapped—or for 1d4 
hours, whichever comes first. 


inflict Pain 

Power Score: Con “4 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 2/round 

Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


This is a particularly nasty form of torture. 
It causes no actual harm to the subject and 
leaves no marks or scars, but causes excruciat- 
ing pain of any sort the telepath desires. Only 
evil characters can learn this power freely; 
others find their alignments twisting toward 
evil if they wish to inflict pain. 

If the victim is an NPC who is being ques- 
tioned, he must make a saving throw vs. para- 
lyzation to withstand this agony. 

If the psionicist finds a way to use this 
power in combat, the victim must also make a 
saving throw vs. paralyzation. Success means 
he grits his teeth and keeps on fighting. Failure 
means the pain imposes a four-point penalty 
on the character's attack rolls that round, or 
disrupts and ruins a spell. 

Power Score—The pain is so excruciating 
that the victim passes out for 1d10 rounds. 

20— This particular contact is broken. 


— UU a ም ሙከ LSDESEISESEEE 2 pnt 


Telepathy 9 85 


Intellect Fortress 


Power Score: Wis --3 
Initial Cost: 4 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 3-yd. radius 
Prerequisites: none 


Intellect fortress is one of five telepathic de- 
fenses against unwanted contact. It calls forth 
the powers of the ego and superego to stop at- 
tacks. 

Unlike most other defenses, intellect for- 
tress has an area of effect beyond the psioni- 
cist's mind, offering protection to other minds 
within that radius. Every mind within that ar- 
ea defends against telepathic attack with the 
psionicist's intellect fortress power score. 

A psionicist can initiate one other psionic 
power in the same round that he uses intellect 
fortress. 

Power Score—No additional effect. 

20— This defense falters and is not usable 
again for 1d4 rounds. 


Invincible Foes 


Power Score: Wis —3 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 5/round 

Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


The victim of this devotion believes that 
any blow struck against him will cripple or 
kill him. Even if the blow actually causes just 
one point of damage, the victim thinks he's 
dying, and that he can no longer fight. He falls 
to the ground in horrible pain. 

A character who is struck while under the 
effect of this power won't recover until a turn 
later, even if the psionicist stops concentrating 
on him and turns his attention elsewhere. As 
long as the character was under this effect 


86 * Chapter Seven 


when the blow was struck, he's out for 10 
rounds. 

Even if the victim of this power is never ac- 
tually struck, his behavior is likely to change. 
Fully expecting the next blow to kill him, he 
may stop attacking and simply parry, or try to 
flee, or even surrender and beg for quarter. If 
the character has not been struck, however, 
the psionicist must keep renewing the power 
every round; otherwise future blows will af- 
fect him normally. 

"Invincible foes" can also work in reverse. 
In other words, an attacker can be made to be- 
lieve that every blow he strikes is fatal. The 
belief is strong enough to create an illusion: 
even if the attacker barely scratches his foe, he 
sees the "victim" lying down, mortally 
wounded. He will continue to imagine that 
opponent lying on the ground until the oppo- 
nent attacks again (it doesn't matter whom he 
attacks; any attack breaks the illusion). 

This reversal has several consequences. 
Characters who have been "killed"—i.e., 
struck—can simply walk away from the fight, 
leaving their "corpses" behind. Or they can 
move into position and attack again, gaining a 
*2 bonus to hit. After this happens three 
times, the affected character must make a sav- 
ing throw vs. spells. If it fails, he becomes 
convinced that his foes are unkillable and re- 
acts accordingly. (PCs, of course, are free to 
react as they see fit.) 

Power Score—No other effect. 

20—No other effect. 


Invisibility 

Power Score: Int —5 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 2/round/creature 
Range: 100 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


Psionic invisibility differs significantly from 
magical invisibility. To make himself invisible, 


the psionicist must individually contact each 
mind that he wants deceive. Once they are all 
contacted, he makes himself invisible to them 
only. He can still see himself, as can anyone 
who was not contacted. Only characters with- 
in 100 yards of the psionicist can be affected by 
this power. 

Invisibility is a delusion affecting one or 
more select characters, not an illusion affect- 
ing everyone. The only real change occurs in 
the mind of the psionicist's targets. For this 
reason, the psionicist can make anyone invisi- 
ble—not just himself. The "invisible" being 
must be approximately man-sized (or 
smaller), however. 

The psionicist must make a separate power 
check for each delusion, and pay a separate 
maintenance cost for each. In this case, a delu- 
sion is one "invisible" creature or character, as 
perceived by one other character. For exam- 
ple, if the psionicist wants to make two things 
invisible to two people, he must make four 
separate power checks. 

This power affects vision only. Observers 
may still be able to hear or smell "invisible" 
creatures. 

Power Score—The power works like supe- 
rior invisibility (a telepathic science). 

20— All contacts are broken. 


Life Detection 


Power Score: Int.—2 
Initial Cost: 3 
Maintenance Cost: — 3/round 
Range: 100 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: varies 
Prerequisite: none 


A telepath can detect the presence of living, 
thinking creatures within a limited area. He 
must scan like radar. If he is scanning at short 
range, he can cover a large angle. At long 
range, the angle is significantly reduced. He 
can scan through 180 degrees to a range of 40 


yards, 90 degrees to a range of 60 yards, or 30 
degrees to a range of 100 yards. 

One round of scanning will detect humans, 
demihumans, humanoids, mammals, and 
monsters with eight or more hit dice. A sec- 
ond round of scanning will detect birds, rep- 
tiles, amphibians, fish, and monsters with less 
than eight hit dice. In either case the character 
gets an accurate count of the creatures. 

The DM should make this power check and 
keep the result secret from the player. If the 
psionicist doesn't detect anything, the player 
won't know whether that means there's noth- 
ing there, or the power didn't work. If the roll 
is 1, the psionicist gets faulty information. He 
detects what is there, but gets the numbers 
wrong by +/-50%. 

Power Score—The psionicist can instantly 
detect everything within 100 yards, in every 
direction. 

20—The telepath detects 1d6 creatures 
which aren't there. 


Mental Barrier 

Power Score: Wis -2 
Initial Cost: 3 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


Mental barrier is one of five telepathic de- 
fenses against unwanted contact. It is a care- 
fully built wall of thought repetition which 
exposes only one small area of the mind at a 
time. 

A psionicist can initiate one other psionic 
power in the same round that he uses mental 
barrier. 

Power Score—Contact during this round 
and the next is impossible. 

20—The barrier fails, and the mental at- 
tempt disrupts any currently active powers. 


Telepathy * 87 


Mind Bar 


Power Score: Int -2 
Initial Cost: 6 
Maintenance Cost: — 4/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: none 


Mind bar is a magician's bane and the tele- 
path's boon. It gives the psionicist 75% magic 
resistance against charm, confusion, ESP. 
fear, feeblemind, magic jar, sleep, and sugges- 
tion spells. It also offers complete protection 
against possession of any sort. 

In addition, mind bar protects a psionicist 
against all telepathic powers, except the five 
contact-establishing attacks. No telepathic 
power can affect a barred mind unless the tele- 
pathic attack prevails in a psychic contest. 
(The defender uses mind bar.) 

Power Score— The telepath gains a +5 bo- 
nus to his power score when defending in a 
psychic contest. 

20—The telepath's saving throws vs. the 
spells listed above have a —4 penalty for one 
hour. 


Mind Blank 

Power Score: Wis —7 
Initial Cost: 0 
Maintenance Cost: 0 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


Mind blank is one of five telepathic defenses 
against unwanted contact. It attempts to hide 
the mind from attack, making its parts uni- 
dentifiable. This defense is particularly effec- 
tive against a psionic blast and id insinuation. 
(See Chapter 2, “Psionic Combat,” for de- 
tails.) 

Mind blank is unique. Unlike the other four 
defense modes, it costs nothing to maintain. 


88 * Chapter Seven 


In fact, a character can still recover PSPs 
while using this power. That's because mind 
blank is almost instinctual; if a character 
knows it, it's nearly always active, even when 
he's sleeping or meditating. The power is inac- 
tive only if 1) the player announces it, or 2) 
the character uses another defense mode. 

Even though mind blank has no PSP cost, it 
still constitutes psionic activity. If the power is 
active, a character is vulnerable to detection. 
He still may attract psionic feeders, or suffer 
some other unpleasant effect. 

A psionicist can use one other psionic 
power (but not another defense mode) in the 
same round that he uses mind blank. 

Power Score—No other effect. 

20— The character cannot use mind blank 
for 1d4 hours. 


Mind Thrust 

Power Score: Wis -2 

Initial Cost: 2 

Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 30/60/90 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: mindlink, contact 


Mind thrust is one of the five telepathic at- 
tacks used to establish contact with another 
psionicist's mind. It is a stabbing attack which 
seeks to “short” the synapses of the defender. 

If the subject's mind has already been con- 
tacted, and he has psionic powers, then this 
power can do some damage. The subject loses 
the use of one power, chosen randomly, for 
2d6 days. Beyond establishing contact, mind 
thrust has no effect on creatures or characters 
without psionic powers. 

This power has three ranges: short, medi- 
um, and long. At medium range, the psioni- 
cist's power score is reduced by two. At long 
range, it's reduced by five. 

Power Score—No other effect. 

20— The telepath loses all tangents, but not 
contacts. 


Phobia Amplification 

Power Score: Wis “2 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 4/round 

Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


This power allows the psionicist to reach in- 
to someone's mind and discover his greatest 
fear, then amplify it to the point of irrational- 
ity. A victim who fails a saving throw vs. spells 
believes he is imminently threatened by the ob- 
ject of this fear, even if it is completely absurd. 
A character with a fear of falling, for example, 
is convinced he could pitch over a cliff at any 
moment—even while on an endless prairie— 
unless he stands absolutely still. 

The reaction of the frightened character de- 
pends on the fear. He will defend himself if at- 
tacked (unless defending himself is somehow 
tied in to his phobia). A wizard may teleport 
away or use other spells to guarantee his 
safety. Other characters might freeze in place 
or flee for their lives. But all of their actions 
will be geared toward protecting against the 
fearsome object or situation. 

This fear lasts as long as the psionicist main- 
tains the effect. Once he stops, the fear fades 
back to its normal proportions, probably 
leaving the character slightly shaken and 
more than slightly chagrined. 

Power Score—The target's save vs. spells 
automatically fails. 

20— The subject has no detectable phobias. 


Post-Hypnotic Suggestion 


Power Score: Int -3 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 1/level or hit die 
Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Prerequisites: mindlink, contact 


Any creature with an Intelligence between 7 
and 17 can receive a post-hypnotic suggestion. 
(Very dim or very brilliant creatures are not 
susceptible.) The psionicist plants a suggestion 
of some reasonable course of action in the crea- 
tures subconscious, along with the situation 
that will trigger this action. When that situa- 
tion arises, the DM makes a power check 
against the psionicist's post-hypnotic sugges- 
tion score, with a —1 penalty for each day that 
has passed since the suggestion was planted. 

A "reasonable course of action" is one that 
does not violate the creature's alignment or 
class restrictions. It can be something that he 
would not normally do, but if it is too strange, 
he just won't do it. 

The maintenance cost for this power is a 
one-time-only payment, made when the sug- 
gestion is implanted. 

Power Score— The psionicist's power score 
is not reduced for the passage of time. 

20— The intended victim is aware of the at- 
tempt. 


Psionic Blast 

Power Score: Wis —5 

Initial Cost: 10 
Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: 20/40/60 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisites: mindlink 


Psionic blast is a wave of brain force which 
can jolt a subject's mind like shocking news. 
This is one of the five telepathic attacks used 
to establish contact with another psionicist. 
(An illithid's mind blast is not the same.) 

If this power is used against a mind that has 
already been contacted, the subject must save 
vs. death. Failure means he loses 80% of his 
remaining hit points, but only in his mind. 
The hit points are still there; he only thinks 
they're gone. He will pass out when the re- 
maining 20% of his hit points are gone but 
won't die unless all of them are actually lost. 


M — መመመ መ መመመ 


Telepathy ቆ 89 


In any case, this effect wears off after six 
turns. At that time, an unconscious character 
awakens. 

This power has three ranges: short, medi- 
um, and long. At medium range, the psioni- 
cist's power score is reduced by two. At long 
range, it is reduced by five. 

Power Score—A victim who fails his save 
passes out for one turn. 

20—No other effect. 


Psychic Impersonation 


Power Score: Wis 
Initial Cost: 10 
Maintenance Cost: — 3/hour 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: — lturn 
Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: probe 


This power enables a psionicist to mask his 
own aura and thought patterns, and make 
them match someone else's perfectly. To ac- 
complish this, the psionicist must first probe 
the subject he wishes to impersonate. 

Psychic impersonation does not alter any of 
the psionicist's other features. It only changes 
his identity to other creatures with psionic 
powers. Even then, a psychic contest with 
identity penetration or probe can penetrate 
the disguise. 

While psychic impersonation is in effect, all 
of the user's psionic power scores are reduced 
by one. 

Power Score— The disguise cannot be de- 
tected psionically and power scores are not 
decreased. 

20—Until the psionicist reaches a new expe- 
rience level, he cannot impersonate that sub- 
ject. 


ae 


90 ፄ Chapter Seven 


Psychic Messenger 


Power Score: Con “4 
Initial Cost: 4 
Maintenance Cost: — 3/round 
Range: 200 miles 
Preparation Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 1 sq. yd. 
Prerequisite: none 


This power allows a character to create an 
insubstantial, 3-D image of himself, which 
can appear anywhere within 200 miles and de- 
liver a message. Everyone present can see and 
hear the messenger. Communication is one- 
way. The telepath has no idea what is happen- 
ing around his messenger unless he's using 
some other power. 

Power Score—The psionicist can make the 
messenger's appearance differ from his own. 

20—No effect. 


Repugnance 

Power Score: Wis —5 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 8/round 

Range: 200 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


With this power, a psionicist makes 
something—a particular person, place, or 
object—completely repugnant to another 
character. That character is overwhelmed 
with loathing for the “thing,” and he will seek 
to destroy it as completely and quickly as 
possible. 

If this destruction is strongly against the 
character's alignment (such as making a tem- 
ple repugnant to its cleric), the character gets 
to make a saving throw vs. spells to shake off 
the effect. 

Power Score—No save is allowed. 

20—The victim is aware of the attempt. 


Send Thoughts 


Power Score: Int—-1 
Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 2/round 
Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: contact 


This is one-way communication, allowing 
the telepath to send his own thoughts to some- 
one else's mind. The telepath can send infor- 
mation or simply distract the target. 

If the target is a wizard casting a spell, he 
must make a saving throw vs. spells. The wiz- 
ard applies a modifier to the save: the differ- 
ence between his Intelligence and the 
telepath's power score. (If the wizard's Intelli- 
gence is higher, it's a bonus; if it's lower, it's a 
penalty.) If this save fails, the wizard's concen- 
tration is broken and the spell is spoiled. 

If the target being distracted is someone in- 
volved in melee, he has a two-point penalty 
on all attack rolls (but not damage rolls). 

Power Score—Wizards cannot make the 
saving throw. 

20—If the receiver is a friend, he is distract- 


ed. 


Sight Link 

Power Score: Con -3 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 5/turn 

Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


Sight link allows the telepath to tap into an- 
other character's optical system. The telepath 
sees whatever his link sees. (His own vision is 
unaffected.) If the linked creature is subjected 
to a gaze attack, the telepath must make the 
appropriate saving throw or also be affected 
by the gaze. 

Power Score—Sound link is also gained. 

20— The psionicist is blinded for 1d4 hours. 


Sound Link 

Power Score: Con —2 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 4/turn 

Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


By means of a sound link, the telepath taps 
into the auditory system of another person or 
creature. He hears whatever his link hears. If 
the linked creature is subjected to an auditory 
attack (by sirens, shriekers, etc.), the telepath 
must make the appropriate saving throw or 
also be affected. 

Power Score—Sight link is also gained. 

20— The psionicist is deaf for 1d4 hours. 


Synaptic Static 

Power Score: Int 74 
Initial Cost: 15 
Maintenance Cost: — 10/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 20/50/90 yds 
Prerequisite: mindlink 


Synaptic static interferes with all psionic ac- 
tivity within a given area. Even the psionicist 
is affected; when he creates static, he cannot 
use any other power simultaneously. How- 
ever, he may also prevent others from using 
their powers. Anyone who tries to use a psi- 
onic power within the area of effect must fight 
the static's creator in a psychic contest. If an 
opponent succeeds, his power functions nor- 
mally. If not, his power fails. 

Exposure to synaptic static for more than 
five rounds will give anyone a splitting head- 
ache. This has no game effect, but it will make 
NPCs and animals irritable. 

This power has three ranges: short, medi- 
um, and long. At medium range, the charac- 
ter's power score is reduced by two. At long 
range, it is reduced by five. 


oS 


Telepathy e 91 


Power Score—The psionicist receives a +1 
bonus in all psychic contests prompted by the 
current use of static. 

20— The character has injured himself try- 
ing to create static. He immediately loses 1d20 
PSPs and 1d6 hps. 


Taste Link 

Power Score: Con -2 
Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost:  4/turn 
Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: individual 


Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


Could this be a dieter's dream? Taste link al- 
lows the telepath to tap into the flavor senses 
of another person or creature. The psionicist 
tastes whatever his link tastes. 

If the linked creature takes poison orally, 
the telepath must make a saving throw vs. 
poison to avoid passing out and severing the 
link. The psionicist can't actually be poisoned 
this way, however. 

Power Score—Scent link is also gained (not 
a defined power). 

20— The psionicist has a bitter taste in his 
mouth, but no other effect occurs. 


Telempathic Projection 


Power Score: Wis “2 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 4/round 

Range: unlimited 
Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 10 yard diam 
Prerequisite: mindlink, contact 


Telempathic projection allows the user to 
send emotions to everyone who has been con- 
tacted within a common 10-yard diameter. 
This power cannot radically change a charac- 
ters emotional state, however. A character 
who is very angry could be made only slightly 


92 * Chapter Seven 


angry, for example, but not happy. Empathic 
changes are a matter of degrees, no more. 

Power Score—Emotions can be drastically 
altered (love to hatred, etc.) while this power 
is maintained. 

20—All affected characters experience 
strong negative emotions toward the psioni- 
cist for 1d6 rounds. 


Thought Shield 

Power Score: Wis -3 
Initial Cost: 1 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


Thought shield is one of five telepathic de- 
fenses against unwanted contact. It clouds the 
mind so as to hide first one part, then another. 

A psionicist can initiate one other psionic 
power during the same round in which he uses 
thought shield. 

Power Score—No other effect. 

20—No other effect. 


Truthear 

Power Score: Wis 
Initial Cost: 4 
Maintenance Cost: — 2/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: hearing 
Prerequisite: mindlink 


When a psionicist uses truthear, he can tell 
whether other people intentionally lie. He 
does not hear their words translated into 
truth; he merely knows whether or not speak- 
ers believe they are lying. 

Power Score—The psionicist recognizes a 
falsehood even when the speaker does not. 

20— The psionicist can't use this power ef- 
fectively against this subject for 1dó days. 


CHAPTER 


Metapsionics 


Metapsionic Sciences 


Appraise 

Power Score: Int -4 
Initial Cost: 14 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: none 


With this power, a psionicist can determine 
the likelihood that a specific course of action 
will succeed. He focuses on a course of action 
and examines the possibilities. He assigns 
probabilities. Then he mentally processes 
enormous calculations to arrive at an overall 
probability of success. 

In game play, the character must first pass a 
power check. If he does, the DM must reveal 
the percentage chance for the plan or action's 
success. Exact odds may be difficult or impos- 
sible to determine, but the DM should provide 
his most accurate, honest appraisal. 

No one, not even a psionicist, can foresee 
the future with assured accuracy. Like precog- 
nition, the success of this power depends on 
how closely the characters adhere to their 
plans. Do they act as they intended? React as 
they intended? What factors did they fail to 
foresee? Every deviation steers events away 
from the predicted path. If this power is used, 
the DM should give the best answer he can, 
based on information the characters have. 
Factors they don't know about, and therefore 
can't take into account while forming a plan, 
can change things dramatically. 

Power Score—The player is allowed to re- 
roll any three die rolls to help make his charac- 
ter's forecast more accurate. 

20— The psionicist can't use this power suc- 
cessfully again for 1d4 days. 


Aura Alteration 


Power Score: Wis —4 

Initial Cost: 10 

Maintenance Cost: na 

Range: touch 

Preparation Time: 5 

Area of Effect: individual 

Prerequisites: psychic surgery, 
5th level 


With aura alteration, a psionicist can tem- 
porarily disguise a person's alignment, dis- 
guise his level, or remove aura afflictions like 
curses, geases, and quests. 

Disguising a character's alignment or level is 
the easiest to do. The disguise is temporary, 
lasting only 1-6 hours. It has no effect on the 
character's real alignment or class, but a 
psionicist with aura sight will be fooled by the 
fake aura. 

Because curses, geases, and quests are im- 
printed on the character's aura, they can be re- 
moved with this power. A psionicist who tries 
this suffers 8 —6 penalty to his power score 
and must expend 20 PSPs instead of 10. If the 
die roll is 1, the psionicist's patient must make 
a saving throw vs. spells to avoid losing one 
experience level. (A slip of the psychic scalpel 
can close off vital parts of the brain.) 

Power Score—No other effect. 

20— The full PSP cost of the power must be 
paid despite the lack of success, and this 
psionicist cannot alter this aura until he 
achieves a higher experience level. 


Empower 

Power Score: Wis —12 
Initial Cost: varies 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 1 item 
Prerequisites: 10th level 


This is not a tool for weak or inexperienced 
characters. Empower allows a psionicist to im- 


0000096666. — ————Á 


Metapsionics * 93 


bue an item with rudimentary intelligence and 
psionic ability. The process, which requires ex- 
traodinary time and effort, is described below. 

Item Requirements. An item must meet two 
requirements before it can be empowered. 
First, it must be of exceptional quality—worth 
250% to 500% of the normal cost for an item 
of its type. Second, it must be new. The proc- 
ess of empowering must begin within 48 hours 
after the item is manufactured. If it is delayed 
longer, the item cannot be empowered. (If the 
psionicist still tries, he automatically fails Step 
One below, expending 50 PSPs.) If the item 
meets these two requirements, the psionicist 
can begin the empowerment. 

Step One. At the start of each day, the 
psionicist must first prepare the item to receive 
psionic power. This costs 50 PSPs and requires 
a power check. If this check fails, the day is 
wasted; no further progress can be made until 
the next day. 

Step Two. If the item has been prepared, the 
psionicist can give it access to a discipline. It 
can have access to only one discipline, never 
more, and the psionicist himself must have ac- 
cess to it. This step costs 100 PSPs and requires 
a power check. 

Step Three. The psionicist can attempt to 
empower the item with any single power he 
knows within the chosen discipline. (The item 
must have been properly prepared on the same 
day.) The psionicist must make two successful 
power checks: first, a check for the chosen 
power (using the appropriate power score), 
and second, another empower check. If both 
checks succeed, the item has that psionic 
power, with a score two points below the 
psionicists. If Step Three is successful, the 
psionicist expends another 100 PSPs. (Failure 
means he expends half that amount, as usual.) 

Step Four. The psionicist can imbue the item 
with other powers by repeating Step Three. The 
item can acquire one power per day, provided it 
has been properly prepared (see Step One). 

Step Five. When the item has acquired all 
the powers which the psionicist intends to give 


94 * Chapter Eight 


it, the psionicist can seal those powers within 
the item. To do this, he must prepare the item 
one more time (expending 50 PSPs), and make 
an endowment power check one last time. If 
the item is sealed successfully, it can never gain 
any additional powers— but it can't lose them, 
either. An item that has not been sealed will 
lose one power per month until it is just a nor- 
mal object again. 

An empowered object has 8 PSPs per devo- 
tion and 12 per science. It has Intelligence equal 
to its maker's Intelligence minus 1dé points, 
with a minimum of 12. Its ego is 2 points per de- 
votion and 3 points per science. Unless it was 
empowered with another telepathic power, it 
communicates as indicated on Table 113, 
"Weapon Intelligence and Capabilities" in the 
Dungeon Masters Guide (p. 186, A&D® 2nd 
Edition). Its alignment matches its creator's. 
The weapon has its own personality, however, 
and like all intelligent weapons, it will try to as- 
sert its independence at every opportunity. 

The empowering process must be unbro- 
ken. If a day passes in which the psionicist 
does not at least try to prepare the object, it is 
finished as is. He cannot even try to seal the 
powers; they will wear off over the course of 
time. 

Power Score—No other effect. 

20—1f three 20's are rolled during the em- 
powering process, the item is a complete and 
utter failure. 


Psychic Clone 

Power Score: Wis -8 
Initial Cost: 50 
Maintenance Cost: — 5/round 
Range: 60 feet 
Preparation Time: 10 rounds 
Area of Effect: special 
Prerequisites: clairaudience, 


clairvoyance, psychic 
messenger, 5th level 


When this power is initiated, a clone of the 
psionicist steps out of his body. It is in every 


way identical to the original form, except that 
it has no substance. The psionicist can see and 
hear what the clone sees and hears. The clone 
will do anything the psionicist wants it to (as if 
it were actually him). Furthermore, the psioni- 
cist's psyche goes with the clone, thus enabling 
it to perform all of his psionic powers. 

This power has a serious drawback. As long 
as the clone exists, the psionicist himself is 
practically a turnip. He retains only three 
senses: smell, taste, and touch. He cannot 
move, see, or hear. All his psionic powers are 
transferred to the clone. In effect, the immo- 
bile character is no longer a psionicist; not 
even psionic sense will reveal his true nature. 
He can be slain without any combat rolls if an 
opponent wishes to do so. 

The clone can travel up to 60 feet from the 
psionicist. It can go anywhere the psionicist 
himself could go. For example, it can walk 
down a corridor, walk across acid (the clone 
has no substance and cannot be hurt), and 
swim (provided the psionicist can). Because 
the psionicist could walk through an unlocked 
door, so can the clone—although the clone 
passes through like a ghost. However, a clone 
cannot travel through walls or walk on water, 
because the psionicist could not either. 

The clone is impervious to all forms of at- 
tack and damage except psionic or mental at- 
tack (which will affect the psionicist). 

Power Score—The clone can travel through 
walls and other solid objects. 

20—No other effect. 


Psychic Surgery 


Power Score: Wis —5 

Initial Cost: contact 
Maintenance Cost: — 10/turn 

Range: touch 
Preparation Time: 10 

Area of Effect: individual 
Prerequisite: telepathy, contact 


Psychic surgery allows a telepath to repair 
psychic damage. He can even operate on him- 


self if need be, though his power score is re- 
duced by 5 in this case. Phobias, aversions, 
idiocy, comas, seizures—all these psychic ail- 
ments can be treated and cured, as well as 
several others. Curses or magical conditions— 
such as geases and charms— cannot be cured. 

This power cannot cure possession, either. 
However, psychic surgery can confirm that 
the problem really is possession, and can force 
the possessing entity into psionic combat if the 
surgeon desires. This may be risky, since crea- 
tures capable of possession are often quite 
powerful and the psionicist cannot ascertain 
their power beforehand. On the other hand, 
psychic surgery could cure the possession indi- 
rectly by forcing a psionically weak entity to 
flee rather than face combat. 

Most psychic ailments can be cured in one 
turn or less. However, if the psionicist's power 
check result equals 1 or 2, the problem is par- 
ticularly tricky and requires another turn to 
repair. If the power check fails, the problem is 
too great for the psionicist to fix. He can try 
again after gaining another experience level. 

Special Operations: Psychic surgery has 
two special uses. First, the surgeon can use this 
power to help nonpsionicists unleash their 
wild powers. If the psionicist performs this 
kind of operation successfully, the patient 
gains a —2 bonus to his wild talent roll. (See 
Chapter 1.) 

The second operation can make the effect of 
any power in the telepathy discipline perma- 
nent with no maintenance cost. The patient is 
rarely grateful, because the power is not be- 
stowed on the subject, only its effect. In this 
way, a person can be permanently dominated 
or fate-linked, for example. The following re- 
strictions apply: 


1) The power must be maintainable (i.e., it 
must have a maintenance cost). 

2) The power must have a range of other 
than zero. 

3) The surgeon must know the power and 
use it successfully on the patient. 


Metapsionics € 95 


4) A psionicist cannot use this type of sur- 
gery on himself or on another psionicist. 
If he tries, nothing happens. 

5) At most, only one power can made per- 
manent per turn. If the result of the 
power check is 1 or 2, the procedure 
takes two turns instead of one. 

This procedure can also be reversed; i.e., 
psychic surgery can be used to remove a per- 
manently implanted telepathic effect. 

Power Score—The surgery takes only 5 
rounds per "implanted" power. 

20— The surgeon cannot use this power suc- 
cessfully again for 1d4 days. 


Split Personality 

Power Score: Wis -5 

Initial Cost: 40 

Maintenance Cost: — ó/round 

Range: 0 

Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: personal 

Prerequisites: psychic surgery, 
10th level 


This is not a psychosis; it's the power to di- 
vide one's mind into two independent parts. 
Each part functions in complete autonomy, 
like two characters in one body. Both parts 
communicate fully. Both can use psionic 
powers, even at the same time. That means a 
split personality can use twice as many psionic 
powers per round. (The character's total num- 
ber of PSPs remains the same, however, with 
both personalities drawing from it.) Alter- 
nately, one personality can use psionic powers 
while the other does something else—e.g., 
converse, ponder a puzzle, or control the body 
in melee. Thus, split personality allows a char- 
acter to fight physically and psionically at the 
same time. 

Mental attacks directed against the psioni- 
cist affect only half of the mind. Contact must 
be established separately with each half. If one 
half is destroyed, controlled, or subdued 
somehow, the other half can continue fighting 


96 * Chapter Eight 


independently and retains control of the body. 

Before he attempts to make his personality 
whole again, the psionicist must make a sav- 
ing throw vs. paralyzation if any of the fol- 
lowing is true: 1) he does not control both 
portions of his mind, 2) he has unrepaired psy- 
chic damage, or 3) is suffering unwanted con- 
tact. A successful save means that his mind 
returns to complete health and throws off all 
undesired influences. Failure means that the 
afflicted portion of his mind becomes domi- 
nant and he passes out for 1616 turns, but re- 
gains consciousness free of undesired 
influences. 

Power Score—The mind splits into three 
parts instead of two. 

20—The character passes out for 1dó turns. 


Ultrablast 

Power Score: Wis —10 
Initial Cost: 75 
Maintenance Cost: 0 

Range: 0 
Preparation Time: — 3 

Area of Effect: 50' radius 
Prerequisites: 10th level 


A character using psionic ultrablast can 
overwhelm and damage nearby psyches. To 
do this, he casts thought waves in all direc- 
tions. In laymen's terms, the psionicist "grum- 
bles" psychically for three rounds. Then his 
consciousness bursts forth and a horrid, psy- 
chic scream penetrates all minds within 50 
feet. Victims may never be the same again. 

All characters within 50 feet of the psionic 
ultrablast must save vs. paralyzation. Failure 
means they pass out for 216 turns. Those who 
pass out must immediately save vs. paralyza- 
tion again. If they fail a second time, they lose 
all psionic power. Only psychic surgery can 
help them recover this loss. 

Although the blast does not affect the initia- 
tor, the risks are great. If the power check fails, 
he becomes comatose for 1d10 days. Some 
characters may think he's dead. 


Power Score— Creatures of 3 hit dice or less 
die if they fail their save. 

20— The initiator must save vs. paralyza- 
tion or die. If he lives, he loses the use of all his 
psionic powers for 2d6 days. 


Metapsionic Devotions 


Cannibalize 

Power Score: Con 
Initial Cost: 0 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: 5th level 


This power allows the character to canni- 
balize his own body for extra PSPs. When it is 
used, the character can take any number of 
Constitution points and convert them directly 
to PSPs at a ratio of 1:8. (One Constitution 
point becomes eight psionic strength points.) 
The psionicist can use these points anytime, as 
if they were part of his total. 

The Constitution reduction is not perma- 
nent, but it is debilitating and long-lasting. 
The character immediately loses bonus hit 
points. His system shock and resurrection sur- 
vival chances are reduced. Most importantly, 
all of his psionic power scores which are based 
on Constitution are reduced by the appropri- 
ate amount. 

A psionicist can recover one cannibalized 
point of Constitution per week of rest. Rest 
means staying quietly at home (safely in- 
doors). Adventuring is not allowed. 

Power Score— The psionicist gains 8 PSPs 
without reducing his Constitution. 

20— The character loses 1d4 Constitution 
points, but can regain them by resting. 


Convergence 

Power Score: Wis 

Initial Cost: 8 

Maintenance Cost: 0 

Range: 10 yards 

Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 10 yards 

Prerequisites: contact, 
4th level 


When psionicists put their heads together, 
the results can be impressive. Convergence al- 
lows psionicists to link their minds into one 
synergetic being—an entity more powerful 
than the sum of the individual parts. 

There is no limit to the number of psionicists 
who join minds. Each participating psionicist 
must know the convergence power, however, 
and each must make a successful power check 
in the same round. Then they are linked. All 
their PSPs flow into a single pool, from which 
each draws his strength. If one participant 
knows a power, now anyone in the group can 
use it. 

Each participant can use psionic powers at 
the normal rate per turn: one defense and one 
other power per round. If the group is at- 
tacked psionically, the attack must overcome 
every working defense. If it does, the attack 
affects every character in the convergence, or 
as many as possible. 

When the convergence is discontinued, 
PSPs that remain in the pool are evenly di- 
vided among all the participants. Fractions are 
rounded down, and no individual can exceed 
his usual maximum (extra points are lost). 

Power Score—No other effect. 

20— The participant loses 1d20 PSPs. 


Metapsionics € 97 


Enhancement 

Power Score: Wis —3 
Initial Cost: 30 
Maintenance Cost: — 8/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 5 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: 6th level 


This power yields the same results as the 
Meditative Focus proficiency, in less time. 
When a psionicist learns this power, he selects 
one discipline to enhance. As long as he main- 
tains the enhancement power, all of his power 
scores within the chosen discipline are in- 
creased by two. At the same time, all other 
power scores are reduced by one. 

Power Score—Other scores are not re- 
duced. 

20—All power scores in the chosen disci- 
pline are reduced by one for 24 hours. 


Gird 

Power Score: Int -3 

Initial Cost: 0 

Maintenance Cost: — 2X maintenance 
Range: 0 

Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: 3rd level 


Each time a psionicist girds another power, 
he can maintain that power automatically— 
i.e., without mental concentration. Thus, a 
psionicist who is maintaining only girded 
powers can sleep without disrupting those 
powers. 

To use gird, the psionicist must first initiate 
and maintain the power he intends to affect. 
Then he must make a girding power check. If 
he succeeds, he automatically pays twice the 
normal maintenance cost for the girded 
power—or a minimum of 1 PSP per hour. To 
remove the girding, he must consciously de- 


98 * Chapter Eight 


cide to do so (no power check is required). 
Otherwise, the girding remains in place until 
the psionicist runs out of PSPs. That means a 
psionicist who's unconscious or sleeping could 
awaken to find all his psionic strength girded 
away. If the psionicist wishes to reestablish a 
gird that he discontinued, he must make a new 
power check. 

Power Score—No other effect. 

20— The gird attempt disrupts the power. 


Intensify 

Power Score: Affected —3 
Initial Cost: 5/increase 
Maintenance Cost: — l/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: ^ l/increase 
Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: 3rd level 


Intensify allows the psionicist to improve 
either his Constitution, his Intelligence, or his 
Wisdom for psionic applications. To improve 
one—for psionic purposes only—he must 
weaken the other two—for all purposes. Each 
point of increase in the targeted ability de- 
creases the other two abilities by the same 
amount. In addition, each point of increase 
costs 5 PSPs. 

For example, Zenita is a psionicist with Con 
15, Int 16, and Wis 17. She wants to intensify 
her Intelligence by 4 points. To do so, she must 
spend 20 PSPs initially (5 PSPs for each bonus 
point of Intelligence). Her Intelligence is raised 
4 points to 20. Meanwhile, her Constitution 
and Wisdom scores drop 4 points (to 11 and 
13, respectively). The increase in Intelligence 
affects psionic powers only. The drop in Con- 
stitution and Wisdom affects everything appli- 
cable except psionic strength points: psionic 
power scores, hps, system shock rolls, saving 
throws, spell bonuses, spell failure, etc. 

A psionicist can raise an ability score to a 
maximum of 25, provided he has enough PSPs 
and no other score is reduced below zero. 


Metapsionics * 99 


Power Score—The characters ability is 
raised to the level he intended, but the cost of 
this power is reduced to 3 PSPs per increased 
point. 

20—The psionicist must make a system 
shock roll or the ability he intended to boost 
decreases by 1 point for 24 hours. 


Magnify 
Power Score: Wis —5 
Initial Cost: 25 X magnification 


Maintenance Cost: magnification/round 


Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 5 
Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: 6th level 


Magnify allows the psionicist to magnify 
the effects of another power in all conceivable 
ways—e.g., double damage, double range, 
double modifiers, and so on. However, the af- 
fected power's initial cost is proportionately 
magnified, as is its maintenance cost. 

The psionicist initiates the magnify power 
first. At the same time, he must designate 
which power he intends to improve. Unless he 
maintains the magnification, he must immedi- 
ately use the power he wishes to improve (in 
the same round). Otherwise he can maintain 
the magnification until he uses the affected 
power (a costly endeavor). Once the power 
has been performed, magnify must be reini- 
tiated to perform again. 

The amount of magnification depends upon 
the psionicist's level, as follows: 


Levels 6-10 x2 
Levels 11-15 x3 
Levels 16-20 x4 


Power Score—The magnification factor is 
one greater, with no additional cost. 

20— The affected power becomes inopera- 
tive for a day. 


100 * Chapter Eight 


Martial Trance 

Power Score: Wis -3 
Initial Cost: 7 
Maintenance Cost: 0 (free) 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: 3rd level 


In some situations, the psionicist may find it 
useful to enter a trance before engaging in psi- 
onic combat. This trance focuses the charac- 
ter's complete attention on his psionic activity 
and tunes out all other distractions. While in 
the trance, he gains a +1 bonus on all of his 
Telepathy scores (all powers in the discipline). 

The martial trance ends whenever the char- 
acter chooses to end it. It is not deep; the char- 
acter is brought out of it by any blow, shake, 
or slap. His attention is completely occupied, 
so any melee attack against him hits automati- 
cally and causes maximum damage. 

Power Score—He manages to maintain 
enough awareness to dodge melee attacks. 

20—No other effect. 


Prolong 

Power Score: Con -4 
Initial Cost: 5 
Maintenance Cost: — 2/round 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisite: Ath level 


When this power is in effect, the range of all 
powers is increased by 50%, as is the radius of 
their areas of effect. This has no effect on powers 
with a range of zero or individual, nor does it al- 
ter personal, or single-item areas of effect. It 
does alter powers that affect a quantity of stuff; 
prolonged disintegration, for example, destroys 
up to 12 cubic feet of material instead of 8. 

Power Score—The increase is 100%. 

20—All ranges/areas of effect are halved 
for 1d4 hours. 


Psionic Inflation 


Power Score: Wis —5 

Initial Cost: 20 
Maintenance Cost: — 3/round 
Range: 0 

Preparation Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 100-foot radius 
Prerequisites: 3rd level 


When a psionicist invokes this power, he 
sends out a powerful ring of psionic noise (ex- 
tending to 100 feet). All psionic activity within 
this area requires twice the normal initial cost 
and maintenance. The initiating psionicist is 
not affected; the noise actually begins about 
an inch beyond his aura, creating a bubble of 
relative quiet around him. 

Other psionicists in the area of effect will 
not realize anything is wrong until they have 
actually used a power. If they are maintaining 
a power, they discover the inflated rate after 
paying twice the normal maintenance cost. 

If two psionicists initiate psionic inflation in 
the same area, the psionicists must conduct a 
psychic contest. The loser’s psionic inflation 
ceases. If both characters fail, then both cease 
their power maintenance. Reroll ties. 

Power Score— All psionic activity within 
the area requires three times the normal initial 
cost and maintenance. 

20— The psionicist cannot recover PSPs for 
two hours. 


Psionic Sense 

Power Score: Wis -3 

Initial Cost: 4 

Maintenance Cost: — l/round 
Range: 0 

Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 200-yard radius 
Prerequisites: telepathy 


With psionic sense, a character can detect 
psionic activity anywhere within 200 yards. 
Any expenditure of PSPs constitutes psionic 


activity, even if it is only to maintain a power. 
Use of the mind blank power is psionic activ- 
ity, too, even though it expends no PSPs. 

When the character makes his first success- 
ful power check, he learns whether or not 
someone—or something—is psionically active 
within range. If the psionicist makes a another 
successful power check in the following 
round, he also learns 1) how many PSPs are 
being spent, and 2) where the psionic activity 
is occuring (direction and distance). If psionic 
activity is occurring in more than one place, 
the psionicist gets a fix on all of it within 200 
yards. 

Power Score—Second-round information is 
gained in the first round. 

20— This power cannot be used effectively 
for one turn. 


Psychic Drain 


Power Score: Wis —6 

Initial Cost: 10/person + contact 
Maintenance Cost: none 

Range: 30 yards 

Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: up to 6 minds 
Prerequisites: telepathy, contact, 


6th level 


Psychic drain enables the psionicist to tap 
into the personal, psychic energy of other peo- 
ple to augment his own psionic strength. Up to 
six people can be tapped at one time. 

Each subject, who is often called a host, 
must first be asleep. Next, the psionicist must 
make contact with the person's mind. Then he 
expends another 10 PSPs and makes a psychic 
drain power check. If he succeeds, the host 
falls into a trance which lasts 4-9 (106 +3) 
hours. The character can be awakened with 
some difficulty before then, but he'll be groggy 
and disoriented for another hour. 

While the host is in the trance, the psionicist 
can siphon psychic energy. Just as a vampire 
draws blood to grow strong, the psionicist 


Metapsionics ® 101 


drains Wisdom, Intelligence, and Constitution 
points. He can drain as much as he desires. For 
every ability point the psionicist drains, he 
gains 10 PSPs. 

Any PSPs gained cannot be banked (added 
to the psionicist's total). They cannot be si- 
phoned any faster than they are used. In other 
words, when the psionicist expends PSPs, he 
automatically draws these points from his 
host(s)—unless he specifies otherwise. The 
psionicist must remain within range of the en- 
tranced characters in order to draw strength 
points from them. 

If he exercises moderation, the psionicist 
does not harm his hosts. A host only begins to 
suffer ill effects when he loses more than 50% 
of his psionic potential. (Potential equals Wis- 
dom, Intelligence, and Constitution com- 
bined, minus 30 points. See "Psionic Strength 
Points" in Chapter 1.) The table below shows 
the effects of excessive depletion. Psychic sur- 
gery can correct these problems. 


Potential 

Lost Effect on host 

51-60% Temporary amnesia (2-12 weeks) 

61-70% Permanent amnesia 

71-80% Intelligence reduced to 4 

81-90% Intelligence reduced to 4; put in 
coma for 1-12 days, must make 
system shock roll every day or 
die 

91-100% Save vs. death or die; if subject 


lives, Intelligence, Wisdom, and 
Constitution each reduced to 3, 
permanently 


Power Score—The psionicist does not harm 
the subject(s) this time, regardless of how 
much he drains. 

20—Contact broken. 


102 * Chapter Eight 


Receptacle 

Power Score: Wis -5 

Initial Cost: 0 

Maintenance Cost: 0 

Range: touch 

Preparation Time: 1 round/point 

Area of Effect: one item 

Prerequisites: empower or valuable 
gem 


This power allows a psionicist to store psi- 
onic energy in a special receptacle. The psioni- 
cist can draw upon the energy later to fuel his 
other psionic powers. He cannot use these 
points when his total pool of psionic strength 
is at its maximum. However, he can keep the 
stored PSPs on hand until he's running low on 
psionic energy, and then use them immedi- 
ately. (It's like storing a pint of your own blood 
at a hospital. With a little time, your body re- 
places the pint. Later, if you should lose blood 
in an accident or operation, you can use the 
stored blood to recover the loss quickly.) 

Before powers can be stored, a receptacle 
must be prepared. Two types of containers are 
appropriate: a vessel prepared with empower 
(a metapsionic science), or a valuable gem that 
has been specially prepared using the recepta- 
cle power. 

Empowered Vessel. Any vessel can serve as 
a receptacle for psionic energy if it is empow- 
ered first. The psionicist must perform the ini- 
tial preparation and final sealing described 
earlier under “empower.” He does not do any- 
thing further; the vessel needs no additional 
powers. It can hold PSPs equal to his psionic 
potential, multiplied by his experience level. 

Valuable Gem. A gem can hold 1 PSP for 
every 100 gold pieces of its worth, rounded 
down. For example, a gem worth 650 gold 
pieces can hold 6 PSPs, and a gem worth 1,000 
gold pieces can hold 10 PSPs. The gem still re- 
quires preparation, however. To do this, the 
psionicist must slowly fill the gem with 
PSPs—1 per turn—until the gem reaches max- 
imum capacity (1/100 of its value). The psioni- 


cist can do nothing else while filling the gem. 
When the task is complete, the psionicist must 
make a power check. If he fails, only one-half 
of the gem's capacity is useable. 

Storing Points. Using his receptacle power, 
he can automatically place 1 PSP into a prop- 
erly prepared container per round. When he is 
finished, the psionicist must make a receptacle 
power check. If it succeeds, all is well; if it 
fails, only half the points he expended are 
stored in the receptacle, while the rest are 
merely spent. 

Using Stored Points. The psionicist can re- 
trieve stored points automatically. The recep- 
tacle must be in contact with his flesh. He can 
never retrieve more points than the receptacle 
currently holds, nor can he retrieve so many 
that it raises his current psionic point total 
above his maximum. No matter how many re- 
ceptacles he has, a psionicist can never store 
more PSPs than his maximum total. (For ex- 
ample, if his usual maximum is 100 PSPs, he 
can store no more than 100.) Only the psioni- 
cist who placed the points in the item can use 
them. 

The danger of this power is receptacle loss. 
If the receptacle is damaged or destroyed, its 
contents (PSPs) are instantly subtracted from 
the psionicist's total possible points. This loss 
is temporary, but until the psionicist is once 
again back up to his full PSP score he recovers 
PSPs only half as fast as normal. 

Power Score—No other effect. 

20—No other effect. 


Retrospection 

Power Score: Wis —4 
Initial Cost: 120 
Maintenance Cost: na 
Range: 0 
Preparation Time: 10 

Area of Effect: personal 


Prerequisites: convergence, 7th level 


Retrospection is a kind of psionic seance. It 
allows psionicists to delve into the past and lo- 


cate memories that have been loosed from 
other minds. A psionicist must join at least 
two other psionicists in a convergence before 
he can use this power. He—or one of the other 
participants in the convergence—then poses a 
question regarding a specific event in the past. 
To find the answer, the psionicist must make a 
successful power check. 

When retrospection succeeds, the charac- 
ters tap into a universal, pervasive memory. 
They have access to any information that ever 
existed in anyone's memory regarding the inci- 
dent they are investigating. The amount of de- 


tail that comes to mind depends on power 
check results: 


1 extremely vague and fragmentary 
2  vagueor incomplete 

3-5 complete but not very specific 

6+ reasonably complete and specific 


Memories bear the mark of the personalities 
who created them. The DM should role-play 
the memories accordingly, not just recite infor- 
mation. If the psionicists' alignments differ 
significantly from the memories' alignments, 
reaction rolls are in order. Memories can be 
polite and helpful, or they can be cantanker- 
ous and downright rude. Memories which 
have lain undisturbed for centuries may be an- 
gered by the intrusion, or they may be de- 
lighted for the chance to air themselves out 
and bring the truth to light. 

Power Score—No other effect. 

20—No other effect. 


Splice 

Power Score: Int -(2 X # spliced) 
Initial Cost: 5X # spliced 
Maintenance Cost: # spliced/round 
Range: ዐ 

Preparation Time:  # spliced 

Area of Effect: personal 
Prerequisites: 2 + level (see below) 


Splicing psionic powers is tremendously 
useful. In effect, the psionicist is splicing to- 


Metapsionics * 103 


gether two or more separate powers into one 
psionic release. This is very difficult, however, 
and it requires great precision. The more 
powers the psionicist attempts to splice, the 
more likely he is to fail. 

First, the character must make a successful 
splice check. His power score is decreased 2 
points for each power being spliced. For exam- 
ple, if he is splicing two powers, his score 
equals Intelligence —4. The initial cost of this 
endeavor is 5 PSPs for every power being 
spliced. 

If the character passes this first power 
check, he must then initiate each spliced 
power in succession— without interruption. 
He does not have to make a separate splicing 
check for each of these powers, but he still 
pays their initial costs. Furthermore, each 
spliced power has absolutely no effect at this 
time. 

Once all the powers have been initiated, the 
psionicist must make a second splice check. 
(His power score is still reduced two points for 
each power being spliced.) If he fails this 
check, all his efforts are lost; the PSPs he spent 
are gone, and none of the powers works. If the 
power check succeeds, the psionicist can 
maintain the splice by expending 1 PSP per 
spliced power per round. 

At any later time (during which the splice 
has been maintained), the psionicist can un- 
leash the spliced series of powers. In effect, he 
performs all of the spliced powers simultane- 
ously—or with split second separations if de- 
sired. Success is not automatic. The psionicist 
must perform the individual power checks for 
these spliced powers when he releases them. 
He does not have to pay their initial costs 
again, however. 

The maximum number of powers that a 
psionicist can splice equals his experience 
level. For example, a 2nd level psionicist can 
splice up to two powers, and a 3rd level psioni- 
cist can splice up to three. A complex splice is a 
long shot at best, however. As noted above, a 
psionicists power score decreases two points 


104 * Chapter Eight 


for every power he attempts to splice. That 
means a character who attempts a five-power 
splice has a score of Int —10. 

Many psionicists use splice to combine just 
two powers: contact, and another power that 
requires contact. This is the most common 
combination. 

Power Score— The character receives a +2 
bonus on power checks when unleashing the 
spliced powers. 

20—No other effect. 


Stasis Field 

Power Score: Con -3 

Initial Cost: 20 

Maintenance Cost: — 20/round or 1/round 
Range: 0 

Preparation Time: — 3 

Area of Effect: max. 1 yard/level 
Prerequisites: 8th level 


A stasis field is a region in which time slows 
to a crawl and energy is reduced to a meaning- 
less fizzle. When created, the stasis field sur- 
rounds the psionicist like a bubble. It can have 
any radius he desires, up to a maximum of 1 
yard per each level of his experience. For ex- 
ample, a 10th level psionicist can create a field 
with up to a 10-yard radius. 

From the outside, the stasis field looks like a 
slightly shimmering, completely smooth silver 
globe. When something presses against the 
edge, it gives slight resistance, but the object 
passes through. 

Inside the field, all is murky and dim. Light 
filters through from the outside, but it turns 
gray. A light source inside is only about one- 
fourth as bright as usual. 

Time is 60 times slower in a stasis field. That 
is, for every round (or minute) that passes in- 
side, an hour elapses outside. (This dilation is 
not apparent to those inside the field, how- 
ever.) Each round the psionicist spends inside, 
he must pay 20 points to maintain the stasis 
field. 


Energy and motion also change inside a sta- 
sis field. Energy magicks—e.g., fireball, magic 
missile, cone of cold, and flamestrike—have 
no effect; the spells appear and then fizzle in 
midair. Movement is slowed down visibly, 
and swift objects are affected more than slow 
objects. Character and creature movement 
rates are halved. A dagger can easily be 
pushed through someone, but a lightninglike 
slash with a sword is slowed to a graceful arc, 
almost like slow motion. A missile weapon is 
useless; the missile drifts lazily through the air, 
only to bounce off an unwary target or be 
dodged by a target who's looking. 

If the psionicist keeps the stasis field cen- 
tered on himself, it moves with him. He can 
transfer the focal point of the field to anything 
he touches, however. Then he can move freely 
within the field, or even leave it. If he does 
leave the field, the cost to maintain it is re- 
duced to 1 point per round. (From one per- 
spective, this is actually an increase in cost, 
since it equals 60 points for every round which 
passes inside. Remember, one hour outside 
equals one round inside.) While outside the 
field, the psionicist can roam up to 100 yards 
from it and still maintain the field. However, 
he cannot move the field from the outside. To 
move it again, he must re-enter it. 

Power Score—No other effect. 

20— The psionicist pays the full initial PSP 
cost. 


Wrench 

Power Score: Wis —4 
Initial Cost: 15 
Maintenance Cost: — 8/round 
Range: 30 yards 
Preparation Time: 0 

Area of Effect: 1 undead 
Prerequisites: none 


This power affects only creatures which ex- 
ist simultaneously on the Prime Material and 
another plane of existence. This includes most 


undead, and others as noted in the Monstrous 
Compendium. It specifically excludes gods, 
demigods, and avatars. When such a creature 
is wrenched, it is forced entirely into one plane 
or the other, at the psionicist's option. 

If the creature is forced out of the Prime Ma- 
terial plane, it is trapped in the other plane for 
206 turns. It can return to the Prime Material 
when that time has elapsed. 

If the creature is wrenched entirely into the 
Prime Material plane, it is trapped only as 
long as the psionicist continues paying the 
maintenance cost. As soon as he stops, the 
creature's dual existence is immediately rees- 
tablished. 

Except where contradicted by the Mon- 
strous Compendium, a creature wrenched 
onto the Prime Material plane suffers any or 
all of the following effects, at the DM's option: 


* [ts armor class is penalized 106 points. 
* Undead lose the ability to drain life en- 


ergy. 

* Magical pluses required to hit the crea- 
ture are reduced by 1. 

ወ The creature is killed permanently if it 
loses all of its hit points. 


The DM should impose any other penalties 
which seem appropriate, considering the crea- 
ture and the other plane involved. 

Power Score— The creature is momentarily 
dazed. It hasa —2 initiative penalty in the first 
subsequent round. 

20— No other effect. 


Metapsionics € 105 


CHAPTER 


A Psionics Campaign 


This chapter explains how to bring psionics 
into your AD&D® games. It examines the role 
of psionics in a campaign, the attitudes of 
NPCs toward psionicists, and the relationship 
between psionics and magic. It offers the DM 
advice for handling psionic villains and mon- 
sters. Finally, you'll find out what it's like to 
experience psionic power. 


Look What I Got! 


When something new and exciting comes 
along, the natural impulse is to rush back to 
the gaming group, toss it on the table, and let 
everyone rip into it with full vigor. But that's 
the wrong way to bring something as powerful 
as psionics into an existing AD&D campaign. 
Players are likely to react in one of two ways. 
First, everyone will want to play a psionicist. 
The whole atmosphere of the game will sud- 
denly change—so much that players may 
eventually say, “This isn't like it used to be.” 
The second reaction is that everyone will be 
skeptical about making a big change, so no 
one will want to play a psionicist. Either way, 
enthusiasm fizzles. 

Like any new source of power, psionics 
should be approached with common sense and 
a bit of caution—especially by the DM. No 
matter how much experience the DM has, this 
material is completely new, and there's a lot of 
it. The DM who dives in with both feet may 
find himself drowning in details. If play bogs 
down every time a psionicist tries to do some- 
thing because the DM must flip through this 
book, players will quickly lose interest in the 
class. It's best to start in the shallow end of psi- 
onics and advance slowly, rather than swamp- 
ing players with the whole package at once. 

An NPC psionicist is the perfect way to in- 
troduce psionics gradually. If the NPC is a 
hireling, a follower, or an ally, he might not 
even reveal his psionic powers right away— 
especially if he's a dual-class character. The 
DM can introduce as much or as little psionics 
as he wants, developing a feel for the powers 


106 *Chapter Nine 


and how they mesh with other elements of the 
game. A particularly sly DM might not even 
mention that psionics is involved, but instead 
let the players try to puzzle out the unex- 
plained events around them. (For example, 
some people currently believe that poltergeists 
are not troublesome spirits, but manifesta- 
tions of untrained and often unconscious psy- 
chokinetic ability. An NPC with such powers 
could "haunt" players for along time.) Once 
the DM is satisfied and comfortable with his 
psionic NPC, the class can be opened to player 
characters. 

Of course, in some games, secrecy may not 
be appropriate. Many DMs allow players to 
help develop the campaign background, and 
routinely discuss the game's direction with 
them. If you're that kind of DM, then your 
players should take part in the introduction of 
psionics. Slow and steady is still the best ap- 
proach. Let one player have a psionic charac- 
ter. Debrief the player after each game session; 
get his reactions to both the rules and the way 
psionics is being used in the campaign. Ask 
other players for their opinions, too. When 
you and the players feel you have the bugs 
worked out, the class can be opened up in gen- 
eral. 


How do NPCs and society in general react 
to psionicists? The answer covers the gamut of 
emotions. A DM should choose whatever atti- 
tudes best suit his campaign. Some possibili- 
ties are as follows: 


ወ Psionics is viewed no differently than 
magic. It is a tool, as good or as bad as 
the psionicist who wields it. 

* Psionics is misunderstood by those 
who don't practice it, who generally 
believe it is magic and the psionicist is 
just another sort of wizard. 

* Psionicists are feared and reviled, as 
witches were in medieval times. 


Control Wind: Omar takes the enemy by storm. 


A Psionics Campaign *107 


€ The practice of psionics is outlawed or 
restricted to officially sanctioned court 
practitioners. 

è Psionicists are treated as a separate 
race entirely. They maintain their own 
small communities within the larger 
community. 

* Psionicists have been driven under- 
ground. They maintain secret societies 
for their own preservation. 


It is quite reasonable to mix these attitudes 
in a single campaign; viewpoints can vary 
from country to country or even town to 
town. When choosing a social attitude, how- 
ever, keep several points in mind. Many fan- 
tasy novels involving psionics have a common 
thread: psionicists are segregated from the rest 
of society, often by choice, sometimes by 
force. There are several good reasons for this. 

To most people, the heart of psionics is te- 
lepathy, and telepathy equals mind reading. 
Tapping directly into someone else's thoughts 
is the ultimate invasion of privacy, the ulti- 
mate violation of intimacy. Worst of all, the 
subject has no way to know when it is happen- 
ing or how to prevent it from happening. He is 
not only invaded, but helpless. 

Psionics lends itself to secrecy. Its use has no 
outward sign. Wizards must utter incanta- 
tions, wave their hands through the air, and 
fling bits of dust and bone into sulfurous 
smoke to cast their spells. Clerics must pray 
and invoke their deities. All of these things 
clearly tip off the potential victim that some- 
thing is about to happen, that a supernatural 
force is about to be released. The psionicist re- 
veals nothing. His powers require no verbal, 
material, or somatic components. When psi- 
onic powers are used, anyone nearby could be 
the source, and sometimes even distance is not 
a restriction. 

Nor does the psionicist's appearance reveal 
his nature. His pockets and purse do not bulge 
with strange concoctions. His fingers and 
sleeves are not stained with ink and chemicals. 


108 * Chapter Nine 


He does not wear the robes or symbols of a 
holy order. Psionic characters who are careful 
can conceal their nature for a long time. 

What this means to the common man is that 
anyone, even a friend or relative, could be 
reading your mind at any time— could, in fact, 
be influencing your actions, delving into your 
most intimate secrets, entering your home 
without leaving a trace. Who can be trusted 
with this sort of power, if power truly cor- 
rupts? 

The answer, as far as the suspicious farmer 
or merchant is concerned, is no one. And if no 
one can be trusted with it, then anyone who 
has it should be controlled, or at least pre- 
vented from living among decent, normal 
folks. 

This, of course, is the attitude among people 
with no real knowledge or experience of psi- 
onics. An enlightened populace or one that 
has benefitted from benevolent use of psionics 
would view psionicists in a positive light. 


TSR's Campaign Worlds 


The overall attitude toward and prevalence 
of psionics in each of TSR's published cam- 
paign worlds is described below. Bear in mind 
that these are general trends, and can vary sig- 
nificantly from region to region. 

FORGOTTEN REALMS® game setting. 
Prior to the Time of Troubles, psionics were 
extremely rare in the Realms. The incidence of 
psionic abilities is now on the rise and the 
powers themselves seem to have become more 
stable. Most people have never heard of psi- 
onics or psionicists; those who have tend to 
confuse it with magic. 

WORLD OF GREYHAWK® game setting. 
Psionics is an old and established facet of life 
on Oerth. Presumably it was brought there 
when an illithid spacecraft crashed on the 
planet ages ago. Psionicists are by no means 
common, but most people are at least aware of 
the existence of psionics and often consider it 
to be just another mystical pursuit, little dif- 


ferent from magic. Psionic guilds and secret 
associations can be found in major cities. 

Krynn, a DRAGONLANCE® game setting. 
No natives of Krynn exhibit any psionic po- 
tential whatsoever. What few psionicists live 
on that world undoubtedly came from some- 
where else (via spelljamming vessels or other 
magical travel) or are the descendants of 
psionically-able ancestors who came from an- 
other world. Only the most widely-read sages 
and wizards will have any knowledge of psi- 
onics. 

RAVENLOFT" game setting. Psionics is 
known in Ravenloft. However, the nature of 
the Demiplane of Dread restricts the effective- 
ness of some psionic powers: 

* No psionic power can breach the Mist. A 
character can teleport, travel through dimen- 
sions, travel through dreams, or travel any 
other way he chooses, but he will almost al- 
ways emerge in the same domain. In those few 
cases where he emerges somewhere else, it will 
be in a bank of Mist which will lead him who 
knows where. The DM determines the exact 
location. 

* No psionic power can bring another char- 
acter into Ravenloft from outside. Some magi- 
cal spells can do this; psionics cannot. 

* All of the demiplane is so suffused with 
evil that it encroaches on everyone's aura. Ex- 
amining a person's aura can reveal the charac- 
ter's alignment only so far as law and chaos are 
concerned, but not good or evil. Aura altera- 
tion cannot change a character's alignment 
with regard to good or evil. 

* Any psionic power that gives the charac- 
ter access to remote or extrasensory informa- 
tion (primarily via clairsentient or telepathic 
powers) also creates a shadow presence of that 
character. This shadow presence can be de- 
tected by rolling the subject's level or hit dice 
or less on 1d20. Roll only once and use the 
level or hit dice of the most powerful creature 
or character begin affected. 

SPELLJAMMER" campaign setting. Psi- 
onic powers function normally in wildspace 


and the phlogiston. Psionics is not magic, 
however, and cannot power a spelljamming 
helm. 


Psionics and Magic 


Psionics and magic are completely separate 
forces. Some of their effects overlap, as might 
be expected, since some effects are so useful 
that everyone who can get them probably will 
try. For example, both psionicists and magic- 
users have a means of becoming invisible, 
traveling instantaneously, and controlling 
other people or creatures. But in their basic 
makeup, magic and psionics are like oil and 
water; they do not mix. The text below offers 
some general guidelines and specific rules for 
the interaction magic and psionics. 


General Guidelines 


è The essences of magic and psionics are 
wholly different. A wizard or cleric who can 
detect magic will never detect psionics. Nor 
will a psionicist who scans for psionic activity 
ever detect spell-casting. This holds true even 
if the effect of a particular magical and psionic 
skill is identical, or nearly identical. For exam- 
ple, a wizard can use hold portal to hold a 
door shut. In his own way, using psychokine- 
sis, so can a psionicist. If a psionicist is holding 
a door shut, and a wizard casts detect magic 
on the door, the wizard will find nothing unu- 
sual about it. If the wizard casts dispel magic, 
the door will not open. No magical forces are 
at work on the door. 

Exceptions do exist, but they're fairly easy 
to determine. For example, a wizard who casts 
a detect invisibility spell will see a character 
using psionic invisibility because the spell de- 
scription states specifically that the spell does 
not discriminate between types of invisibility. 

* Magic is capable of duplicating psionic 
effects like ESP. clairvoyance, clairaudience, 
teleportation, and levitation, among others. 


A Psionics Campaign * 109 


Again, however, the energy involved is magi- 
cal, not psionic. So normal psionic powers do 
not detect these magicks. 

* Magical images and illusions manipulate 
light, sound, and scent. That means they can 
affect psionic powers which rely on or expand 
the normal senses: clairvoyance, clairaudi- 
ence, all-round vision, feel light, etc. Using 
any psychometabolic, psychokinetic, tele- 
pathic, or psychoportive power against a 
magical illusion automatically gives the 
psionicist cause to make a saving throw vs. 
spells. Depending on the situation, the DM 
may rule that the use of such a power pene- 
trates an illusion automatically. 

* Magical phantasms, on the other hand, 
operate entirely in the mind of the viewer. A 
psionicist using any power against a phantasm 
automatically gets to make a saving throw vs. 
spells to penetrate the phantasm. (The psioni- 
cist is too tuned into his own mind to be easily 
fooled this way.) 


Spells and Psionics 


Anti-Magic Shell. This spell has no effect 
against psionics. 

Detect Charm. This will detect telepathic 
control such as domination. 

Detect Invisibility. This spell is effective 
against psionic invisibility, astral travelers, 
shadow form, and ethereal characters. It is not 
effective against characters in other dimen- 
sions. 

Detect Magic. This never detects psionic ac- 
tivity. 

Detect Scrying. When this spell is used 
against a clairvoyant psionicist, he must make 
a saving throw vs. spells. If successful, the 
clairvoyant avoids detection. 

ESP. A psionicist always gets a saving throw 
against this spell with a +2 bonus. Success ne- 
gates the spell. 

False Vision. The psionicist is allowed a sav- 
ing throw vs. spells to negate the effect of this 
spell. 


110 * Chapter Nine 


Forbiddance. None of the teleportation or 
metabolic powers can breach this spell. 

Free Action. This spell overcomes all psy- 
chokinetic effects against the subject's body, 
plus domination. 

Globe of Invulnerability. Psionics are unaf- 
fected by globes. 

Magic Jar. The psionicist uses his combined 
Wisdom and Constitution scores when deter- 
mining the differential modifier. 

Magic Missile. This spell has no effect inside 
a stasis field. 

Mind Blank. The psionicist is allowed a sav- 
ing throw vs. spells to overcome this spell. 

Minor Globe of Invulnerability. Psionics 
are unaffected by globes. 

Misdirection. This spell affects magical de- 
tection only. 

Mislead. Any psionicist who tries to contact 
the wizard's mind will realize the deception 
immediately. That first contact attempt will 
fail automatically, however. 

Nondetection. This spell is fully effective 
against psionic sensing. 

Otiluke'’s Resilient Sphere. Psionic powers 
cannot penetrate this spell's protection. 

Protection From Evil. All telepathic powers 
used against someone protected from evil 
have their power scores reduced by 2. Addi- 
tionally, the spell prevents mental control such 
as domination. 

Protection from Evil, 10' Radius. Same as 
protection from evil. 

Reincarnation. Unless the new incarnation 
is allowable in the psionicist class, all psionic 
powers are lost. 

Spell Immunity. This has no effect against 
psionic powers. 

Telekinesis. If this spell is opposed by psy- 
chokinesis, conduct a psychic contest between 
the psionicist's power score and the wizard's 
experience level. 

Trap the Soul. A psionicist trapped via this 
spell cannot use any of his psionic powers. 
(Although the characters body is trapped 
along with his soul, it is stored in a radically 


altered, magical form. Thus the psionicist is 
denied access to the physical energy which is 
the basis for all his powers.) 

Note: As stated in Chapter 1, all psionicists 
gain a +2 bonus when making a saving throw 
vs. any enchantment/charm spell. 


Magical Items 


The same guidelines which apply to spells 
also apply to magical items, their effects, and 
the interplay between them and psionics. One 
item in particular, however, deserves special 
mention—the philosophers stone. 

For reasons that are unknown, a philoso- 
pher's stone aids a psionicist in shaping energy. 
As long as the stone is in contact with the 
psionicist's flesh, all psionic power scores in 
his primary discipline are increased by one. ፲፻ 
the stone is of the rare, crystalline salt variety, 
it increases his power scores in his primary dis- 
cipline and one other discipline of the charac- 
ter's choice. If it is the extremely rare white 
powder stone, it boosts his power scores in his 
primary discipline and allows him to recover 
psionic strength points at twice the normal 
rate. 


Monsters, Villains, and Other 
NPCs 


Most of the common-sense rules that apply 
to regular monsters, villains, and NPCs apply 
equally to psionic figures. It never hurts to re- 
view, however, so some pointers follow. 

Psionic NPCs make excellent major villains. 
But like any powerful, single entity—a vam- 
pire, a dragon, a lich, a beholder—they are 
much less effective in isolation than they are at 
the center of a web of minions. For this reason, 
most psionic villains will have numerous 
slaves, followers, mercenaries, and other vas- 
sals at their beck and call. Some of these may 
be minor psionicists in their own right. As well 
as acting as the master's eyes, ears, and go- 


fers, they serve to wear down attackers before 
the final confrontation. (Or they buy time for 
the psionicist to escape if the opposition is 
overwhelming.) 

Psionic monsters, on the other hand, tend to 
be solitary creatures. Many of them hunt by 
keying in on mental activity, or even on purely 
psionic activity. (They detect and track psionic 
activity the way a hound picks up the scent of 
a fox and mercilessly hunts it down.) A crowd 
of thinking beings tends to create interference 
(i.e., “jam the airwaves”), making it more dif- 
ficult to notice an actual psionicist (or choice 
victim) who wanders into range. 

Because they operate alone or in small 
groups, psionic creatures tend to strike 
quickly, inflict as much damage as possible, 
and then melt away before the victims can or- 
ganize a counterattack. An excellent tactic, for 
example, is to teleport into a group, grab 
someone at random, and teleport away imme- 
diately. Suddenly, that one person can be dealt 
with alone, rather than in the midst of his com- 
rades. Tactics like this can cause far more fear 
and destruction than a glance at the creature's 
statistics might inspire. 

Even when they're friendly, NPCs with psi- 
onic powers tend to keep their those powers to 
themselves. Secrecy is always the best policy. 
Unless there is a good social or employment 
reason for it, never reveal that an NPC is a 
psionicist; let the players figure it out for 
themselves. 


Living Psionics 


Psionics—the harnessing and shaping of 
personal, internal energies—is a unique expe- 
rience. Much like Zen, its essence cannot be 
described; it must be felt. At the heart of psi- 
onics is a tautology: only understanding 
brings understanding. Still, for the curious, 
what follows is an attempt to describe the psi- 
onic experience. 

The first thing a psionicist learns is how to 
recognize internal energy. Everyone is filled 


A Psionics Campaign ወ 111 


with it, but most people are completely un- 
aware of it. It suffuses our being 24 hours a 
day, building up during times of rest and 
draining away during times of exertion or 
stress. The psionicist learns to turn his aware- 
ness inward and search for this energy. Gradu- 
ally, he gathers it together, drawing it toward 
some spot. The notion of drawing is key, be- 
cause this energy cannot be pushed or forced; 
it must be enticed to accumulate. An experi- 
enced psionicist can gather his energies contin- 
uously and unconsciously. For a beginner, 
however, this is the first and most important 
breakthrough. 

Once an amount of energy has been gath- 
ered, the psionicist can begin shaping it. The 
closest description for this bundle of energy is 
a "warm spot" at the gathering point. Initially, 
warm spots are easiest to form at the front of 
the brain. As the budding psionicist practices, 
he learns to move it around. Eventually, he 
can gather energy anywhere: his head, his 
hand, his shoulder, his back. The precise loca- 
tion is important when using some powers, 
but not all. 

The energy is not shaped in the normal sense 
of that word. Instead, primed may be a better 
label. The psionicist visualizes the effect he 
wants. The stronger the visualization, the 
more likely it is to succeed. When the gather- 
ing reaches its peak, the energy is usually real- 
ized in a single, explosive release. 

Many psionicists describe this release as an 
instantaneous increase in the apparent temper- 
ature of the warm spot, accompanied by a 
"beat" sensation—as if the warm spot had 
fired spikes of energy in a radial pattern 
through the psionicist's body. This sensation is 
strongest when the psionicist is directing en- 
ergy outward in an aggressive fashion—when 
moving an object, for example. If the power 
being used is directional, the spikes are strong- 
est in that direction, and very minor in others. 
If power's effects continue for more than a few 
moments, the beat also continues, but at much 
lower intensity. 


112 * Chapter Nine 


Contact, a common and vital power, has 
another physical manifestation. Rather than a 
warm spot, subjects describe the sensation of 
contact as a "thick spot" or a "heavy spot" 
somewhere in the mind. They usually have 
trouble locating it precisely (front, back, left, 
right), but feel nonetheless that it is a definite 
place. Forcible contact (as in telepathic com- 
bat) is similar, but much more extreme. Each 
tangent arrives "like a gallstone in the mind,” 
according to Bezelar Mujarif, a prominent 
psionicist now residing in Calimshan. When 
contact finally comes, he adds, it feels "like a 
tiger has unsheathed its claws in your head.” 

Clairvoyant powers tend to operate one of 
two ways. Either the power simply layers over 
the psionicist's normal senses (clairaudience, 
clairvoyance) or brings information in 
snatches and bursts of insight (object reading, 
precognition). 

Nonpsionicists often imagine that a telepath 
can “eavesdrop” on their thoughts. That not's 
quite true. If a psionicist uses telepathy, the 
target's thoughts do not flood into his mind, 
masquerading as his own thoughts, or inter- 
fering with them. Instead, the thoughts come 
forth as simple knowledge. The psionicist 
knows what the target is thinking, as if some- 
one had told him hours before and he just now 
remembered. 


Knights of the Floating Table 


Most AD&D® game campaigns follow me- 
dieval themes and cultures, both historical 
and legendary. Players can easily find models 
for most character classes, from wizards to 
knights. But psionics is more often thought of 
as the property of science fiction and the fu- 
ture rather than the past. Historical examples 
are hard to find. Svengali is one possibility, in 
an evil vein. Modern figures like Kreskin and 
Uri Geller provide examples of extrasensory 
powers (allegedly), but these characters are 
thoroughly unmedieval. 


To find models for the psionicist, one can 
delve into Indian and Asian folk tales. These 
contain many characters with abilities that 
mirror psionics, largely because Eastern mys- 
ticism emphasizes meditation and the harness- 
ing of internal energy. Fantasy fiction also 
offers some good examples. The bibliography 
below includes several good sources which 
deal with psionics. Players with an interest in 
the subject are strongly urged to read some of 
these books for inspiration. 


Related Reading 
Fiction 


Bester, Alfred; The Demolished Man, The 
Stars My Destination. 

Bradley, Marion Zimmer; Darkover series: 
The Bloody Sun, Children of Hastur, 
Darkover Landfall, The Forbidden Tower, 
Hawkmistress!, The Heritage of Hastur, 
The Keepers Price, The Planet Savers, 
Sharra's Exile, The Shattered Chain, The 
Spell Sword, Star of Danger, Stormqueen!, 
The Sword of Aldones, Thendara House, 
Two to Conquer, The Winds of Darkover, 
The World Wreckers. 

Brunner, John; The Whole Man. 

Del Rey, Lester; Pstalemate. 

Henderson, Zenna; The People, The People: 
No Different, Holding Wonder. 

Foster, Alan Dean; Flinx series. 

King, Stephen; The Dead Zone. 

Kurtz, Katherine; Deryni Rising, Deryni 
Checkmate, High Deryni. 


May, Julian; Saga of the Pliocene Exile series: 
The Many-Colored Land, The Golden Torc, 
The Non-Born King, The Adversary. 

Nourse, Alan E.; Psi High and Others. 

Pohl, Frederik; Drunkard's Walk. 

Russell, Eric Frank; The Mindwarpers. 

Robinson, Frank M.; The Power. 

Schmitz, James H.; The Universe Against Her, 
The Lion Game, stories. 

Simmons, Dan; Carrion Comfort. 

Sturgeon, Theodore; The Synthetic Man. 

Tucker, Wilson; Wild Talent. 

Van Vogt, A.E.; Slan. 

Zelazny, Roger; Creatures of Light and Dark- 
ness, The Dream Master, Lord of Light, Isle 
of the Dead, This Immortal, To Die in 
Italbar. 


Nonfiction 


Brookesmith, Peter (ed.); Strange Talents, 
from the series "The Unexplained: Mys- 
teries of Mind, Space, and Time;" Orbis 
Publishing, London, 1983. 

Index of Possibilities: Energy and Power; Pan- 
theon Books/Random House, New York, 
New York, 1974. 

Mind Over Matter, Powers of Healing, Psy- 
chic Powers, Psychic Voyages, from the se- 
ries "Mysteries of the Unknown;" Time-Life 
Books, Alexandria, Virginia, 1987. 

Puharich, Andrija; Beyond Telepathy; An- 
chor Press/Doubleday, Garden City, New 
York, 1973. 

Rhine, J.B.; The Reach of the Mind; William 
Sloane Associates, New York, New York, 
1947. 


A Psionics Campaign * 113 


Baku 


PHBRS 


CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Semitropical/Forests 
FREQUENCY: Very rare 
ORGANIZATION: Solitary (or group) 
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Daytime 

DIET: Herbivore 
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional to Genius (15-18) 
TREASURE: See below 
ALIGNMENT: Neutral (Any, See below) 
NO. APPEARING: 1 (1d4 +1) 

ARMOR CLASS: — 

MOVEMENT: 21 

HIT DICE: 12412 

THACO: 7 

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d6/2d6/2d6 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Psionics, magical items, trumpet 
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Psionics, invisibility 
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20% 

SIZE: L (as 9' elephant) 
MORALE: Elite (13-14) 

XP VALUE: 15,000 


A baku looks like a strange elephant with a lizard's tail. It has an 
elephantine head, complete with trunk, but its trunk is rarely 
longer than 4 feet. Two upward thrusting tusks jut out from the 
creature's lower jaws, curving slightly. Its stout forelegs have a 
rhino-tough hide. The front feet are like an elephant's, but the 
rear feet have leonine pads equipped with claws. Dragonlike 
scales cover a baku's back and thick tail. On male baku, the scales 
continue over the back of the head. 


Combat: Despite its size and bulk, a baku can move rapidly, at- 
tacking with a goring butt and two foreleg stomps. The stomp is 
used only against man-sized opponents, or those less than 6 feet 
tall. A baku can hold simple devices such as weapons or wands in 
its trunk, so a baku will often have some magical weapon or de- 
vice when attacking. 

Baku can use psionics to become invisible at will (see below). 
They expend no PSPs for this, and the power check always suc- 
ceeds. Baku also boast a trumpeting roar, which affects creatures 
of certain alignments. Any vulnerable creature within 40 feet of a 
roaring baku suffers 1d8 points of damage; it must also make a 
successful save vs. paralyzation or flee in panic as if affected by 
fear (as cast by a 12th level wizard). Baku can trumpet once every 
four rounds. Neutral good baku affect only evil creatures, dark 
(evil) baku affect good creatures, and holy baku can affect either 
good and/or evil creatures at their discretion. 

Neutral good baku are usually timid, peace-loving creatures, 
but they eagerly do battle with evil and malicious monsters. 


Psionics Summary: 
Level Dis/Sci/Dev Attack/Defense Score PSPs 
12 4/6/17 MT,PsC/All = Int 200 


Common Disciplines/Sciences/Devotions: 
* Clairvoyance - Sciences: Aura Sight". Devotions; compre- 
hend writing, danger sense. 


* Psychometabolism - Sciences: animal affinity*, metamor- 
phosis*. Devotions: absorb disease, cell adjustment", ectoplas- 
mic form", lend health*, reduction*. 

* Telepathy - Sciences: psychic crush*, superior invisibility*. 
Devotions: awe, conceal thoughts, contact", invisibility (no 
cost)*, mindlink, mind thrust, telempathic projection, truthear. 

* Psychoportation - Sciences: probability travel*. Devotions: 
dream travel, astral projection". 


* All baku have these psionic powers. 


Habitat/Society: All baku come from the Concordant Opposition 
(an outer plane). They are seldom seen in desolate settings, and 
prefer to move invisibly among mankind. 

Most baku (80%) are creatures of good will. They secretly 
dwell among humankind to serve its interests. Good baku favor 
societies in semitropical forests. 

About 15% of all baku are of evil alignment. These baku, 
called "The Dark Ones" by their brethren, also move amongst hu- 
mankind. However, they attempt to thwart the plans of their 
good brothers as well as cause general mayhem and suffering 
wherever they go. 

The remaining 5% of baku are true neutral. Among other 
baku, they are known as “The Great Ones" or "The Holy Ones.” 
Although they have no discernible abilities to set them apart from 
their brethren, they are reverently obeyed by other baku. These 
holy baku always have an Intelligence of at least 18. 


Ecology: Baku tusks are worth 200 gp each. However, this trea- 
sure is greatly overshadowed by the magical item which a baku 
usually carries in its trunk. 


Brain Mole 


PHBRS5 


CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Below ground 
FREQUENCY: Very rare 
ORGANIZATION: Family 
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night 

DIET: Psionic energy 
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1) 
TREASURE: Nil 
ALIGNMENT: Neutral 

NO. APPEARING: 1-3 

ARMOR CLASS: 9 
MOVEMENT: 1, Br3 

HIT DICE: 1 hp 

THACO: Nil 

NO. OF ATTACKS: Nil 
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Psionic 
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Psionic 
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil 

SIZE: T (3" long) 
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7) 
XP VALUE: 35 


These small, furry animals are nearly blind, and they look like 
normal moles. Brain moles are seldom seen, however. They live 
in underground tunnels, burrowing through rock as well as dirt. 
Usually, the only discernible evidence of a brain mole's presence 
is the network of blistered stone or mounded dirt above ground, 
which marks the tunnel complex. These creatures damage more 
than a landscape, however. Brain moles feed on psionic activity. 
From the protection of their tunnels, they can psionically burrow 
into a victim's brain, and drain his psionic energy. 


Combat: A brain mole commonly attacks its victim in forests or 
underground; in either case, the creature is usually out of sight in 
a tunnel. The mole either waits for a psionically endowed being 
to appear above it, or burrows in search of prey. 

A brain mole has an innate form of psionic sense; it can auto- 
matically detect psionic activity of any sort within 200 yards. 
However, it can only feed upon psionic energy when its victim 
nearby— within 30 yards if the victim is a psionicist or psionic 
creature, or within 30 feet if the victim is a wild talent. The mole 
can't get a fix upon its prey until the victim actually uses a psionic 
power. 

Once it locates a victim, the brain mole attempts to establish 
contact, If contact is made, it will attempt to feed upon psionic 
energy. If the victim is a wild talent, feeding is accomplished us- 
ing mindwipe. If the victim is a psionicist (or psionic creature), 
feeding is accomplished with amplification. 

A brain mole does not attack maliciously. It must feed at least 
once a week or it will die. 


Psionics Summary: 
Level Dis/Sci/Dev Attack/Defense Score PSPs 
6 2/1/4 MT/M- 12 100 


è Telepathy - Sciences: mindlink, mindwipe' Devotions: con- 
tact, mind thrust 

è Metapsionics - Devotions: psychic drain’ (no cost), psionic 
sense 

' A brain mole can perform mindwipe up to a range of 30 feet. 

* Strangely enough, a brain mole must establish contact before 
using psychic drain. Furthermore, it can only perform psychic 
drain upon psionicists or psionic creatures. However, it does not 
have to put them into a trance or sleep first. It just starts siphon- 
ing away psionic energy. 


Habitat/Society: Brain moles live in family units that include one 
male, one female, and 16 young (one of which may be old 
enough to feed by itself). Large brain mole towns of up to 3d6 
family units have been reported. Of course, these only occur in 
places frequently traveled by the psionically endowed. 


Ecology: Though brain moles can be dangerous to some, while 
others keep them as pets. The moles are rather friendly, and easi- 
ly tamed. They are favored by royalty, who enjoy the special 
protection which only brain moles can provide. Some sages 
claim that even a dead brain mole can offer protection from psi- 
onic attacks, provided the carcass is worn about one's neck as a 
medallion. Sometimes, nobles who have been harassed by a par- 
ticular psionicist will send heroes out on quests for these little 
furry rodents. 

On the open market, adult brain moles sell for 50 gp. Young- 
sters sell for 5 gp each. 


Cerebral Parasite 


PHBRS 


CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Any 
FREQUENCY: Rare 
ORGANIZATION: Infestation 
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any 

DIET: Psionic Energy 
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0) 
TREASURE: Nil 
ALIGNMENT: Neutral 

NO. APPEARING: 3d4 
ARMOR CLASS: Nil 
MOVEMENT: Nil 

HIT DICE: Nil 

THACO: Nil 

NO. OF ATTACKS: 0 
DAMAGE/ATTACK: ዐ 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Psionic 
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Only affected by cure disease 
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil 

SIZE: T (flea-sized) 
MORALE: Nil 

XP VALUE: 35 


These tiny psionic parasites float about in the air. Colorless and 
nearly transparent, they cannot be seen by the human eye. They 
drift in the wind until they come across a psionic being. Then they 
attach themselves to the host's aura, and slowly drain psionic 
strength. 


Combat: A cerebral parasite's attack is so subtle that a victim may 
not notice it for some time. When a psionically endowed individ- 
ual comes within 1 foot of a parasite, the creature is mysteriously 
drawn to the character's (or monster's) aura, and attaches itself. 
This initial "attack" usually will go completely unnoticed. 

Only a few psionic powers can detect cerebral parasites: aura 
sight, life detection, and psionic sense. Magical spells which de- 
tect invisible or hidden objects are also effective. Of course, the 
infested host may realize that something is wrong when he uses 
his psionic powers. 

Each time the victim uses a psionic power, the power costs 1 ex- 
tra PSP for each parasite infesting an individual's aura. The 
power still works normally, but the parasite absorbs the extra 
PSP. After a particular parasite has absorbed 6 psionic points in 
this fashion, it can reproduce by splitting in two. Of course, both 
parasites will now feed, and the process continues. Eventually the 
victim may not have enough PSPs to feed the parasites when us- 
ing a given power; in that case, the power fails. 

Only two methods can rid a victim of cerebral parasites: 1) a 
cure disease spell or 2) refraining from spending PSPs until the 
threat of starvation forces the parasites to leave. Each day the vic- 
tim refrains from spending PSPs, there is a 1 % cumulative chance 
(95% maximum) that each parasite will detach itself. Since this 
check is made individually for each parasite, a heavily infested 
victim is not likely to shake all the pests unless he refrains from 
using his powers for three or four months. 


Psionics Summary: 
Level Dis/Sci/Dev Attack/Defense Score PSPs 
1 2/1/2 Nil/Nil 18 unlimited 


Only has: 

* Psychometabolism - Devotions: ectoplasmic form, immova- 
bility. 

* Psychoportation - Sciences: probability travel. 


Habitat/Society: Psionic parasites, as these infestations are often 
called, have existed ever since psionicists have been around. 
Sages claim that an ancient sect of wizards created the parasites to 
rid the planes of "false mages” —i.e., psionicists. Of course, this 
tale is very popular even today among most wizards, but its va- 
lidity is uncertain. The parasites' ability to enter the astral and 
ethereal planes does lend credence to this theory, however. (En- 
tering the ethereal plane is an innate ability. They use probability 
travel to enter the astral plane.) 

Every 15 years, a plague of cerebral parasites infests the prime 
material plane. Their frequency becomes common and 4d8 will 
be encountered at once. Psionicists dread this time, and call it "the 
year of weakness.” 


Ecology: Cerebral parasites, if captured, make a wonderful 
weapon to use against psionicists. The only problem is that they 
can eventually escape even the most tightly sealed jar. Each has a 
1% cumulative chance of leaving the jar per day. Within several 
months, few if any will remain. Of course, this is because most of 
them will have left to search for food. Still, even a month of two 
of security is enough to prompt many to search the winds for 
these little clear specks. 


Intellect Devourer, Adult 


PHBR5 


CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Subterranean or dark areas 

FREQUENCY: Very rare 

ORGANIZATION: Solitary 

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any (if dark) 

DIET: Minds 

INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12) 

TREASURE: D 

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil 

NO. APPEARING: 1-2 

ARMOR CLASS: 4 

MOVEMENT: 15 

HIT DICE: 6*6 

THACO: 13 

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4/1d4/1d4/1d4 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Psionics, stalk prey 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Psionics, +3 weapon needed to 
hit 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below 

SIZE: S (brain sized) 

MORALE: Fanatic (17-18) 

XP VALUE: 6,000 


The term "intellect devourer" only applies to the adult form of 
this species. (The larval stage, or ustilagor, is covered on a sepa- 
rate page.) An intellect devourer looks like a large human brain 
standing on four legs. The “brain” has a crusty protective cover- 
ing. The legs are bony and double-jointed. Each appendage ends 
in a foot with three great, stubby talons. 


Combat: Intellect devourers are surprisingly capable in melee. 
Only magical weapons with a +3 bonus or greater can harm 
them. Even then, the weapons cause only a single point of dam- 
age per attack. Furthermore, these creatures can strike back with 
all four of their clawed legs simultaneously if they wish. To do 
this, they spring onto their opponent and rake. 

However, the primary offensive of an intellect devourer is psi- 
onics. They hunt for psionic creatures and characters using a spe- 
cial version of psionic sense (60' range, no cost). If they locate a 
potential victim, they proceed to stalk him, waiting until they 
can attack with surprise. This attack is doubly potent if the crea- 
ture uses split personality. With that power in action, the intellect 
devourer can rake a victim with its claws at the same time it at- 
tacks psionically. 

The intellect devourer's most gruesome attack occurs just after 
it has killed a victim. Using reduction, an intellect devourer can 
enter a dead body. Then it will proceed to either devour the vic- 
tim's brain, or control his body (using a special form of domina- 
tion). In this fashion, the creature can seek opportunities to 
attack and devour other victim's brains. 


Psionics Summary: 


Level Dis/Sci/Dev 
6 4/4/13 


Attack/Defense 
EW,II/M-, TS, +1 


Score PSPs 
= Int 200 


| 


x 


" 


—~ ኳ 


Intellect devourers always have the following powers: 

* Psychometabolism - Sciences: energy containment '. Devo- 
tions: body equilibrium, chameleon power, ectoplasmic form, 
expansion, chemical simulation, reduction. 

ወ Metapsionics - Sciences: split personality. Devotions: psi- 
onic sense (only 60' range, no cost), psychic drain. 

* Telepathy - Sciences: domination (even on dead, intact 
minds). Devotions: contact, ego whip, ESP, id insinuation, te- 
lempathic projection. 

* Psychoportation - Devotion: astral projection. 


* An intellect devourer's energy containment is superior to the 
one listed in this book. It is always "on"— without penalty or 
maintenance cost. Furthermore, even if the check fails against an 
attack, only one point of damage will be taken per die instead of 
half damage as is listed. The only exceptions are death spell, 
which has a 25% chance of success; powerword kill, which will 
slay the creature; and protection from evil, which keeps it at bay. 


Habitat/Society: Intellect devourers dwell deep beneath the 
ground or in dark and dismal lairs in the wilderness, They rarely 
protect their young, and may even devour them. This race is so 
solitary that even the young ustilagor rarely stay together. How- 
ever, occasionally up to two intellect devourers or three ustilagor 
will be found together. 


Ecology: Adult intellect devourers are favored pets of mind flay- 
ers (illithids). They serve as watch dogs. 


Intellect Devourer, Larva (Ustilagor) 


PHBRS5 


CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Dark, moist areas 
FREQUENCY: Rare 
ORGANIZATION: Solitary 
ACTIVITY CYCLE: During Darkness 
DIET: Emotions 
INTELLIGENCE: Not ratable 
TREASURE: Q (x1d20) 
ALIGNMENT: Neutral (evil) 
NO. APPEARING: 1-3 

ARMOR CLASS: 5 

MOVEMENT: 9 

HIT DICE: 3+3 

THACO: 17 

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 *1 (save vs. poison or double) 
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Psionics 
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Psionics 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil (See below) 
SIZE: T (Brain sized) 
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7) 
XP VALUE: 650 


Ustilagor are the larval form of intellect devourers. Like their par- 
ents, they look like brains with four legs. However, they are 
much smaller, and their bodies are soft and moist, They lack the 
hard covering which they will eventually gain as adults. Ustilagor 
also have a 3-foot tendril which is very flexible and agile. Unlike 
their parents, they have coral-like legs with no feet, so they travel 
slowly (MV 9). Even so, they can jump and dart with amazing 
agility. (That's why their armor class is 5.) 


Combat: Ustilagor can attack by striking an opponent with their 
tendril while performing their own version of chemical simula- 
tion. They never fail when using this power and expend only 1 
PSP per attack. Moreover, the acid is so caustic that the victim 
must save vs. poison or suffer additional damage the next round 
(1d4 +1), 

Of course, this is not a highly effective form of attack, and the 
ustilagor prefers to use either id insinuation or its advanced te- 
lempathic projection power. Using the latter, it can force its vic- 
tims into one of five states of mind during a round: hate for 
associates, distrust of associates, fear of fungi, loathing of area, 
or uncertainty. These projected emotions cause attack, bickering, 
desertion, or dithering, accordingly. Note that adult intellect de- 
vourers lose this enhanced power, and are only able to perform 
telempathic projection. 

Though they are psionically endowed, ustilagor seem to have 
no intelligence as defined by humans. Thus, attacks that affect 
minds (psionically or magically) do not function upon them, with 
the exception of psionic blast. Due to an unusual fungal growth 
(see "Habitat/Society"), they are immune to fungal attacks and 
any attack that affects an aura. 

Finally, ustilagor use their energy containment power to pro- 
tect themselves from spells and other applicable forms of attack. 
A ustilagor does not have the advanced form of energy contain- 
ment associated with their adult form. 


All ustilagor are attracted to gems. No one knows why for 
sure, but it is suspected that ustilagor use the gems for energy con- 
tainment. These creatures will attack a being who's carrying gems 
before they attack any others. 


Psionics Summary: 

Level Dis/SciDev Attack/Defense Score PSPs 
S 2/1/4 II/M- 10 150 
Only have: 


6 Psychometabolism - Sciences: energy containment. Devo- 
tion: chemical simulation (see above). 

e Telepathy - Devotions: contact, id insinuation, telempathic 
projection (see above). 


Habitat/Society: Ustilagor are so moist that fungi usually grow 
upon them. It's a symbiotic relationship. The fungi prevent the 
ustilagor from drying out, and they also mask the creature's psi- 
onic aura. Thus, no power that affects an aura will work against a 
ustilagor covered with fungi. Cerebral parasites cannot penetrate 
this layer of protection, either. 

No one knows when or how the ustilagor become intellect de- 
vourers, but it no doubt has something to do with minds and psi- 
onics. Sages theorize that fungi also plays a role. 


Ecology: Mind flayers (illithids) view ustilagors as culinary de- 
lights. If they survive the encounter, adventurers view them as 
treasure troves. As noted above, ustilagors like to collect gems. 


PHBR5 


Lesser Greater 
CLIMATE/TERRAIN — Any (prefer hot)/ Any open region— 
FREQUENCY: Rare Very rare 
ORGANIZATION Herd Herd Leader 
ACTIVITY CYCLE: — Hot part of the day— 
DIET: Herbivore Herbivore 
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16) Genius (17- 18) 
TREASURE: G Nil 
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good Lawful good 
NO. APPEARING: 2d4 1-2 
ARMOR CLASS: 4 2 
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 24 (C) 15, Fl 30 (B) 
HIT DICE: 949 14 *14 
THACO: 11 5 
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 2 
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6/1d6 3d6/3d6 
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Psionics Psionics 
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Psionics Psionics, invis- 

ibility 
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25% 50% 
SIZE: L (as a mule) L (as a draft horse) 
MORALE: Champion (15-16) Fearless 
(19- 20) 

XP VALUE: 8,000 15,000 


A shedu is a pegasus native to hot, arid climates. It has a power- 
ful, stocky equine body with short but powerful feathered wings. 
Upon its short, thick neck is a large humanoid head. The face is 
rather dwarven in appearance, and it always has a beard and 
mustache, A shedu's hair is very bristly, and curls into tight waves 
or bands. 

All shedu wear a simple headband made of braided cloth or 
rope, with a single button for adornment. The button is centered 
on the forehead, and its material represents the bearer's status. 
From the lowest rank to the highest, a button may be made of sil- 
ver, gold, platinum, sapphire, ruby, or diamond. A lesser shedu 
almost never has a button above the platinum level. A greater 
shedu almost never wears one below sapphire status. 

Shedu wander the prime material, astral, and ethereal planes. 
They further the cause of law and goodness, help allied creatures 
in need, and combat evil. Greater shedu typically lead herds of six 
or more lesser shedu. 


Combat: All shedu attack with powerful front hooves. However, 
both forms of shedu prefer to use their psionic powers where ap- 
plicable. 


LESSER SHEDU 


Languages: Lesser shedu speak shedu, lamia, lammasu, and most 
human tongues (although not common). Of course, they can al- 
ways use their empathy power (a limited form of telepathy, see 
below). 


Psionics Summary: 
Level Dis/Sci/Dev Attack/Defense Score PSPs 
9 4/4/13 All/All =Int 100 


Lesser shedu always have the five powers listed below (within 
three disciplines), and they can use them without expending 
PSPs. In addition to these powers, a lesser shedu knows any three 
sciences and five devotions desired (from these disciplines, or oth- 
ers). Each creature tends to specialize in a particular discipline to 


complement the herd (each takes a different discipline). 
* Psychometabolism - Devotions: ectoplasmic form. 
* Telepathy - Devotions: contact, empathy, mindlink. 
* Psychoportation - Devotions: astral projection. 


GREATER SHEDU 
Greater shedu radiate protection from evil—10' radius. 


Languages: Greater shedu speak shedu, lamia, lammasu, com- 
mon, and root languages (i.e., most human tongues). However, 
they can always rely upon their telepathy power, which they have 
mastered so well that rudimentary contact can be made even with 
plants. 


Psionics Summary: 
Level Dis/Sci/Dev Attack/Defense Score PSPs 
14 5/12/15 AIl/All =Int 200 


Common powers (* denotes powers they always have, ' denotes 
powers which require no point expenditure); 

* Defense - mind bar* 

* Clairvoyance - Sciences: aura sight, clairaudience, clairvoy- 
ance, object reading, precognition Devotions: danger sense, sen- 
sitivity to psychic impressions 

* Psychometabolism - Sciences: energy containment, meta- 
morphosis Devotions: body control, ectoplasmic form*' 

* Psychokinesis - Sciences: telekinesis Devotions: molecular 
agitation, molecular manipulation 

* Telepathy - Sciences: domination, mass domination, 
mindlink*' Devotions: contact*, invisibility*’, post-hypnotic 
suggestion 

* Psychoportation - Sciences: probability travel"', teleport*' 
Devotions: dimensional door, dimension walk*' 


Thought Eater 


PHBRS 


CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Ethereal Plane 

FREQUENCY: Rare 

ORGANIZATION: Solitary 

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any 

DIET: Mental Energy 

INTELLIGENCE: Not ratable 

TREASURE: Nil 

ALIGNMENT: Neutral 

NO. APPEARING: 1-3 

ARMOR CLASS: 9 

MOVEMENT: 6 (ethereal plane only) 

HIT DICE: 3 

THACO: Nil 

NO. OF ATTACKS: 0 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Psionics, absorb: psionics, spells, 
and Intelligence 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Ethereal existence 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: absorb (See below) 

SIZE: S (3' long) 

MORALE: Unsteady (5-7) 

XP VALUE: 1,400 


Thought eaters are natives of the Border Ethereal, and they only 
survive in ethereal form. They appear as a sickly gray skeletal 
body with an oversized platypus head (to those who can observe 
it). They have webbed skeletal paws, suited to swimming through 
the ether. 

A thought eater has only one desire in its existence, and that is 
to avoid death. For some reason, they die almost instantly on the 
prime material plane. Fortunately for them, they have several psi- 
onic powers which help prevent this from occurring. 


Combat: Thought eaters have no combat abilities except their psi- 
onic powers, even on the Border Ethereal. Thus, they can be 
quickly and easily slain if encountered ethereally. 

They are not harmless, however. Thought eaters are unique. 
Although they cannot survive outside the Border Ethereal, their 
psionic powers can extend into the prime material plane. This is 
the only known case of such a cross-over. 

Thought eaters always have psionic sense operating. Because 
of their unique nature, they can sense psionic activity in the prime 
material plane, as well as the Border Ethereal. When they detect 
psionic activity of any kind, they proceed to the area (ethereally, 
of course). 

Their only “attack” is to absorb psionic energy. (This is an in- 
nate ability.) They can perform this function when within 60 feet 
of a true psionicist (or psionic creature), or within 10 feet of a wild 
talent. They drain 10 psionic points per round. They can also ab- 
sorb any spell cast in the area as well as memorized spells (they 
get 5 points per spell level). Finally, they can feed upon Intelli- 
gence, with each point converted to 10 PSPs which they absorb. 
They will thus feed until all victims die or escape, or until sated. 
They are sated at a number of points equal to their PSP maxi- 
mum. 

Although they feed on brain power, thought eaters are essen- 
tially stupid. Because they lack intelligence, they are immune to 
all telepathic attacks and controls (psionic or otherwise). They al- 
ways feed in this order of preference, even if it's illogical: 1) psi- 
onic points being expended (causes power to fail), 2) magical 
energy being expended (causes spell to fail), 3) PSPs, 4) memo- 


rized spells, 5) Intelligence. Note that if a thought eater eats all of 
someone's Intelligence, they will become a vegetable (effectively 
dead). Also, the Intelligence loss is permanent, unless it is relieved 
by restore or psychic surgery. Spells can be rememorized, and 
drained PSPs can be recovered naturally. 

All this feeding has the sole purpose of keeping thought eaters 
in the ether. Their bodies process PSPs the way people process 
food, at a rate of 3 PSPs/hour. If they ever run out of points, they 
drop out of the ether into the prime material plane and instantly 
die. 

Note that ethereal beings are invisible to creatures on the prime 
material plane, so it is likely that the thought eater will attack un- 
contested until sated, or until its victims out-distance it. Although 
it only has a movement rate of 6, this is ethereal movement, al- 
lowing it to move through walls, trees, etc. as if they didn't exist. 

Any defense mode except those with a 0 maintenance cost will 
prevent the thought eaters from feeding. This includes spells such 
as mind blank, and magical devices which thwart psionic attacks. 


Psionics Summary: Thought eaters have 141100 +100 (101-200) 
PSPs. Their score is 18. They boast a special form of psionic sense 
(in a metapsionic power), which operates continuously with no 
PSP cost. They also absorb PSPs, as described under “combat.” 


Habitat/Society: Little is known about thought eaters, except that 
they exist solely in the ethereal plane and are very solitary beings. 
Magical research has indicated that they aren't malevolent; they 
simply desire to keep existing. Some claim that this is the fate of 
all psionicists once they die. 


Ecology: Thought eaters carry no treasure. When one dies, it au- 
tomatically drops out of the ether and materializes on the prime 
material plane. Of course, they are usually dismissed as a platy- 
pus which died from starvation. 


Su-Monster 


PHBRS 


CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Dark areas/Wilderness and sub- 
terranean 

FREQUENCY: Uncommon 

ORGANIZATION: Family/Clan 

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Dawn and Sunset 

DIET: Omnivorous 

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) 

TREASURE: C. Y 

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic (evil) 

NO. APPEARING: 1d12 

ARMOR CLASS: 6 

MOVEMENT: 9 

HIT DICE: 5+5 

THACO: 15 

NO. OF ATTACKS: 5 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4/1d4/1d4/1d4/2d4 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Psionic, ambush 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Psionic 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil 

SIZE: M (large ape) 

MORALE: Average (8-10) 

XP VALUE: 650 


Su-monsters look like big gray monkeys, 4 to 5 feet tall. They 
have large bones and muscular limbs, but they always look a bit 
underfed, because their ribs and vertebrae show prominently. 
Their long, prehensile tails can easily support their weight. Their 
hands and feet are virtually alike, each having three long, thick 
fingers and an opposable thumb, all equipped with claws. Like 
the tail, their hands and feet are very strong, allowing them to 
hang by one limb for several hours. 

Short, dirty gray fur covers most of their body. Their face and 
tail are black, while their paws are always bloody red (making 
them look like they just finished killing something, which is the 
case more often than not). They frequently grin, but this is usu- 
ally a sharp-toothed threat rather than a gesture of friendliness. 


Combat: Su-monsters attack with all four legs when possible, 
raking their extremely sharp nails across their victim. They can 
also deliver a powerful bite with their canine-like mouth. 

These creatures like to hunt in small packs (1d12 members). 
Their favorite hunting ground is a well-traveled trail through the 
jungle/forest. They search for sturdy branches that overhang the 
trail, and then perch in the trees, waiting patiently. When a poten- 
tial victim passes into the midst of them, they all swing down, us- 
ing their tails as anchors. This way they can attack with all four 
claws plus the bite. Victims of this kind of ambush suffer a —4 
penalty to their surprise rolls. 

What really makes these beings ferocious is their tribal protec- 
tiveness. Half the time (50% chance), the entire family takes part 
in the hunt: male, female, and two young. If the young are at- 
tacked or threatened, the females fight as if under a haste spell 
(i.e., double movement and number of attacks). Likewise, if the 
females are attacked, the males appear to fight with haste. A 
surge of adrenaline accounts for this ferocity. Females can main- 
tain the effect for up to 6 turns (an hour), and males can maintain 
it for up to 4 turns. 

Psionically, these creatures can be deadly. They know three at- 
tack modes. They are also impervious to telepathic attacks (that's 
why they have no defense modes). When su-monsters are using 
their enhancement power, they can attack both psionically and 
physically if they choose (instead of enjoying a double attack 
rate). 


Level Dis/SciDev 
2 3/1/3(2/5) 


Attack/Defense Score PSPs 
PsC,MT,PB/Nil =Int 120 


Su-monsters always know the following powers, and there is a 
10% chance that they will have one more science and two more 
devotions in the psychometabolic discipline. 

* Psychometabolism - Devotions: enhancement (no cost, see 
above). 

* Metapsionics - Devotions: psionic sense (always on, no 
cost). 

* Telepathy - Sciences: psychic crush. Devotions: mind thrust, 
psionic blast. 


Habitat/Society: A su-monster family is composed of two parents 
(adult male and female) and two young. When two or more fami- 
lies live together, they form a clan. Su-monsters are very territo- 
rial and have a particular hatred for the psionically endowed. 

According to legend, su-monsters were created by a powerful 
evil cleric or mage, who wished to guard his forest from intruders 
(especially psionic ones). The creatures do make a formidable at- 
tack force, which tends to support this theory. According to some 
sages (who point to the creatures high Intelligence as proof), the 
creatures are magical hybrid made from humanoids and apes. In 
any event, many evil wizards and priests employ su-monsters as 
forest guards today. 


Ecology: Su-monsters keep their valuables well hidden high in the 
trees of their territory. They have no food value, since their meat 
is mildly poisonous. Characters who eat su-monster meat must 
save vs. poison or become ill, and no natural healing is possible 
for 1 week. 


Vagabond 


PHBRS 


ር As host 
FREQUENCY: Very rare 
ORGANIZATION: Solitary 

ACTIVITY CYCLE: As host 

DIET: As host 
INTELLIGENCE: Genius to Supra-genius (17-20) 
TREASURE: As host * special 
ALIGNMENT: Neutral (any) 

NO. APPEARING: 1 

ARMOR CLASS: As host 
MOVEMENT: As host 

HIT DICE: As host 

THACO: As host 

NO. OF ATTACKS: As host 
DAMAGE/ATTACK: As host 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: As host, psionics 
SPECIAL DEFENSES: As host, psionics 
MAGIC RESISTANCE: As host, immune to mental spells 
SIZE: As host 

MORALE: Steady (11-12) 

XP VALUE: As host * 4 Hit Dice 


It is difficult to say what a vagabond really looks like, because 
they can mimic countless other creatures in form. They are an 
alien life force of unknown origin. They are always encountered 
in the form of an intelligent, corporeal creature indigenous to the 
area (a creature with at least animal intelligence). 

Vagabonds can assume such forms in one of three ways. First, 
they can simply form the body with their unusual powers. When 
this occurs, the vagabond looks like a small blob of ink which ap- 
pears on the ground, then quickly enlarges into three dimensions, 
filling out, then forming the finer details. Such a change can be 
tremendously terrifying if the chosen form is something like a 
wolfwere. Secondly, vagabonds can take over a freshly dead 
body, curing it of all ailments. Lastly, they can inhabit a living 
body. In this last form, they are like back-seat drivers who make 
strong suggestions; they cannot do anything which the host life 
force does not want them to do. Thus, a possessed horse wouldn't 
jump off a cliff unless it felt safe or confident about the jump. As 
noted above, vagabonds take the form of any creature with at 
least animal intelligence. They rarely inhabit forms of higher in- 
telligence, however, such as player character races. 

Once they have assumed a form, vagabonds are locked into it 
and cannot leave, except with the typical psionic powers such as 
switch personality (which is one of their favorites). 

If they are communicated with, it will soon become apparent 
that something is amiss, for they have none of their form's knowl- 
edge as to speech, behavior, customs, or expectations, However, 
they are able to use all of its attack and defense forms as well as 
movement and essential functions. Of course, many of these will 
be performed in strange and unique ways. 


Combat: Vagabonds fight with the same skills as their form has. 
They are also completely immune to all forms of mental attacks 
and control which are not strictly psionic. Besides these adjust- 
ments, all vagabonds are psionically endowed. If their host body 
is slain, they will depart, never to return. 


Psionics Summary: 
Level Dis/SciDev Attack/Defense Score PSPs 
12 4/6/19 See below/All = Int 1d100+200 


Vagabonds never have psychokinetic powers. They have a partic- 
ular affinity for these: 

9 Clairsentience - Any power which lets them learn things. 

9 Psychometabolism - Any power which allows them to 
change form or travel in difficult terrain. 

© Metapsionics - They are masters of this discipline, having ac- 
cess to all its powers without regard to their total number of disci- 
plines, science, and devotions. 

e Telepathy - The creature can use any telepathic power to 
communicate or gain information, plus enough attack forms to 
psionically defend themselves. 

9 Psychoportation - Any which allows them to travel. 


Habitat/Society: Habitat matches the form they assume. Society 
either matches the form, or the creature is a solitary wanderer. 
Vagabonds are never encountered together, and no one has ever 
heard of this occurring. All vagabonds can detect each other's 
presence up to a mile. At this point, they will separate if feasible. 


Ecology: Vagabonds seem to have come to the prime material 
plane to gain information. They are extremely curious and in- 
quisitive, often about mundane or personal details. If given the 
chance to adventure with the party, they are 90% likely to join. In 
exchange, they will use their considerable power to the party's 
benefit. 

It can be great fun to have a vagabond secretly posses a PC's 
war dog or war horse (most of these will be true neutral). Evil and 
good vagabonds tend to side with forces of similar alignment, 
both aiding them and learning of their ways. 


A Monstrous Update 


Many creatures in the AD&D® Monstrous Compendium 
series boast psionic powers. The text below brings those 
monsters up to date with the rules presented in this book. 
The creatures appear in alphabetical order. (Creatures 
from the Outer Planes are listed separately.) Each entry is 
organized as follows: 

Level—How tough the monster is, in terms of a psioni- 
cist's experience level. 

Dis/Sci/Dev—How many disciplines the creature can ac- 
cess, followed by the total number of sciences and devo- 
tions the creature knows (in all accessible disciplines). 

Attack/Defense— Telepathic attack and defense modes 
the creature can use. (Defense modes are not included in the 
total number of powers the creature knows.) Abbrevia- 
tions are as follows: 


Attack Modes Defense Mode 

PB = Psionic Blast M- = Mind Blank 

MT = Mind Thrust TS = Thought Shield 
EW = Ego Whip MB = Mental Barrier 

II 7 10 Insinuation IF = Intellect Fortress 
PsC = Psychic Crush TW = Tower of Iron Will 


Power Score: The creature's typical score when using a 
power that is not automatically successful. 

PSPs: The creature's total pool of psionic strength points 
(the maximum available to it). 

Type: The general type of powers the creature can use. 
Powers listed after this entry (if any) are representative; the 
list is not necessarily complete. 

* Creatures always knows a power that is distinguished 
by an asterisk. 


Dis/Sci/ Attack/ Power 
Level Dev Defense Score PSP s 
Aboleth 
EW, IL, 
PsC, +1/ 
8 3/5/16 TS,IRFTW = Int 250 


Type: Powers which control others or manipulate minds. 
Telepathy: false sensory input", mindlink*, mass domi- 
nation*. 


Couatl 

9 4/5/18 Any/All = Int 1d100 +110 
Type: Powers that allow them to gain information, travel, 
or disguise themselves. 


Clairsentience: aura sight*, all-round vision, see sound. 
Psychometabolism: metamorphosis*, chemical simula- 
tion, ectoplasmic form*. 

Psychoportation: teleport, time shift. 

Telepathy: mindlink*, ESP*, invisibility*. 


Dis/Sci/ Attack/ Power 
Level Dev Defense Score PSP s 
Dwarf, Duergar 
MT,EW,II/ 
= HD  perlevel M-,TS,MB = Int 12X Mult 


Type: Powers of defense, escape, and underground move- 
ment. 
Clairsentience: feel sound, poison sense". 
Psychokinesis: molecular agitation*, molecular manipu- 
lation. 
Psychometabolism: energy containment, expansion", 
reduction*. 
Telepathy: identity penetration", invisibility". 


Grey Ooze (only those creatures with over 20 hps) 
1 2/1/1 PsC/M- 13 14100 +20 


Type: Creatures have only those powers listed below. 
Telepathy: psychic crush”. 
Metapsionics: psionic sense” (only to 60’, no cost). 


Ki-rin 
9 4/5/18 All/All = Int 200 


Type: Control of the nonliving, travel, mind reading. 
Psychokinesis: create object", control flames, control 
wind. 

Psychometabolism: shadow-form*, body equilibrium, 
ectoplasmic form”. 

Psychoportation: banishment, probability travel”. 
Telepathy: mindlink*, ESP*, false sensory input*. 


Mind Flayer (Illithid) 


MT/M-, 
TS,MB, *1 


Type: Attack, mind control, travel. 
Psychokinesis: detonate, control body”, levitation* 
Psychometabolism: body equilibrium” (their only psy- 
chometabolic power). 
Psychoportation: probability travel", teleport*, astral 
projection”. 
Telepathy: domination", awe, ESP*, post-hypnotic sug- 
gestion*. 


7 3/5/14 = Int 1d100 +250 


Tarrasque 


These creatures are totally immune to all psionics. 


A Monstrous Update ® 123 


Dis/Sci/ Attack/ Power 
Level Dev Defense Score PSP 5 
Yellow Mold 
II/Nil 
1 2/0/2 (special) 15 1d10x5 


Only sentient yellow molds (1 in 6 chance) have psionic 
powers. Such creatures are also immune to psionic attacks 
unless the attacker is being aided by one who can commu- 
nicate with plants. 
Type: Sentient yellow molds only have the powers listed 
below. 

Telepathy: mindwipe, id insinuation. 

Metapsionics: psionic sense (1d100 + 20' range, no cost). 


Yuan ti 


MT,II/ 
HD-2 M-,IE TW 


Type: Related to snakes (see below). 

Clairsentience: danger sense, feel sound, poison sense”. 
Psychometabolism: animal affinity* (snake), metamor- 
phosis (snake), chameleon power*, chemical simula- 
tion*, flesh armor. 

Telepathy: attraction (to snakes), aversion* (to snakes), 
false sensory input, inflict pain, invincible foes, life de- 
tection, phobia amplification", post-hypnotic sugges- 
tion, repugnance (to snakes), taste link*. 


3/level 7 [nt 15x Mult 


Creatures from Outer Planes 


All outer-planar creatures will be 1st level or greater when 
encountered. Telepathic attack and defense modes are list- 
ed in the order in which the creatures usually gain them. 
DMs should tailor an individual creature's repertoire of 
powers to its actual level, as desired. 


Aasimon (only the 3 listed) 
= HD  perlevel 


* Solar - All/All; 354 PSPs. 
* Astral Deva - PB,MT,EW,PsC/M-, TS, MB; 210 PSPs. 
* Planetar - All/All; 288 PSPs. 

Type: Wide variety (nonhostile, except for control types). 


see below = [nt see below 


Baatezu (all 4 greater) 
HD-1  perlevel 


è Amnizu - MLII/M-, TS, MB; 121 PSPs. 

è Cornugon - MIEW/M-, TS, MB; 113 PSPs. 

* Gelugon - EW,II/M-, TS, MB; 166 PSPs. 

* Pit Fiend - PB,EW,PsC/TS,MB,II; 213 PSPs. 
Type: Powers of control and cruelty. 


see below 7 [nt see below 


Dis/Sci/ Attack/ Power 
Level Dev Defense Score PSPs 
Gith 
= HD  perlevel AIAI =Int 1d100+150 


Type: Insubstantial (travel, energy), not mind- controlling 
powers. 


Morti 


20 All/All/All ልቨ/ልቨ 20,500 


Tanar'ri 
(Greater: babau; Lesser: succubus; True: all but vrock) 


HD-3 per level = Int 


è Babau - PB,PsC,EW/M-,MB,TW; 130 PSPs. 
* Succubus - 11/፲5,1፻;100 PSPs. 
è Nalfeshnee - PB,EW,PsC/M-,TS,MB; 125 PSPs. 
* Marilith - PB,PsC/M-,TS,MB; 175 PSPs. 
è Balor - PB,MT,EW,PsC/M-, TS, MB; 250 PSPs. 
è Glabrezu - II, EW,MT/M-,MB; 150 PSPs. 
è Hezrou - ILMT/M-,IF; 100 PSPs. 
Type: Powers of fire control, torture, shape change. 


see below see below 


Titans 
MT.EWII, 
HD*1 per level PsC/Nil = |nt 1d100+100 
Type: All types of powers. 
Note: Titans are immune to psionic attacks. 
Yugoloth (only Arcanaloth) 
13 5/7/24 All/All = Int 1d100 +200 


Type: Powers of travel, combat. 

Note: Lycanthropes never have psionic powers (except, 
possibly, in the Ravenloft“ campaign setting). Anyone 
contracting lycanthropy loses all psionic powers. 


p——— , MÓÓaaaOdoUUAUIIANEE EM መመ 


124 * A Monstrous Update 


Score ር MC Range 
Clairsentlence 
Sciences 
Aura Sight, p. 28 

Wis -5 9 9/rnd. 50 yds 
Clairaudience, p. 30 

Wis -3 6 4/rnd. unlim 
Clairvoyance, p. 30 

Wis “4 7 4/rnd. unlim 
Object Reading, p. 31 

Wis -5 16 na 0 
Precognition, p. 31 

Wis -5 24 na 0 
Sensitivity to Psychic Impressions, p. 32 

Wis —4 12 2/rnd. 0 
Devotions 
All-Round Vision, p. 33 

Wis —3 6 4/rnd. 0 
Combat Mind, p. 33 

Int “4 5 4/rnd. 0 
Danger Sense, p. 33 

Wis “3 4 3/turn special 
Feel Light, p. 34 

Wis “3 7 5/rnd. ዕ 
Feel Sound, p. 34 

Wis -3 5 3/rnd. 0 
Hear Light, p. 34 

Wis ፦3 6 3/rnd. 0 
Know Direction, p. 34 

Int 1 na 0 
Know Location, p. 36 

Int 10 na 0 
Poison Sense, p. 36 

Wis 1 na ዕ 
Radial Navigation, p. 36 

Int ፦3 B 7/ከዬ ዕ 
See Sound, p. 37 

Wis -3 6 3/rnd. special 
Spirit Sense, p. 37 

Wis -3 10 na 0 
Psychokinesis 
Sciences 
Create Object, p. 38 

Int “4 16  3/rnd. 20 yds 
Detonate, p. 38 

Con -3 18 na 60 yds 
Disintegrate, p. 40 

Wis “4 40 na 50 yds. 
Molecular Rearrangement, p. 40 

Int -5 20 10/ከር 2 yds. 
Project Force, p. 41 

Con -2 10 na 200 yds. 
Telekinesis, p. 41 

Wis “3 ot 1+/rnd. 30 yds 


o o o 


o o o o o o 


A. of E. 


Summary of Powers 


Score ር MC 
Devotions 
Animate Object, p. 42 

Int -3 8 3/rnd. 
Animate Shadow, p. 42 

Wis ፦3 7 3/rnd. 
Ballistic Attack, p. 42 

Con -2 5 na 
Control Body, p. 43 

Con -2 8 8/rnd. 
Control Flames, p. 43 

Wis -1 6 3/rnd. 
Control Light, p. 44 

Int 12  4/rnd. 
Control Sound, p. 44 

Int -5 5 2/rnd. 
Control Wind, p. 44 

Con -4 16 —10/md. 
Create Sound, p. 46 

Int -2 8 3/rnd. 
Inertial Barrier, p. 46 

Con -3 7 5/rnd. 
Levitation, p. 47 

Wis -3 12 2/rnd. 
Molecular Agitation, p. 48 

Wis 7 6/rnd. 
Molecular Manipulation, p. 49 

Int ፦3 6 5/rnd. 
Soften, p. 50 

Int 4 3/rnd. 
Psychometabolism 
Sciences 
Animal Affinity, p. 50 

Con “4 15  4/md. 
Complete Healing, p. 50 

Con 30 na 
Death Field, p. 52 

Con -8 40 na 
Energy Containment, p. 52 

Con -2 10 na 
Life Draining, p. 52 

Con -3 11 5/rnd. 
Metamorphosis, p. 53 

Con -6 21 l/turn 
Shadow-form, p. 53 

Con -6 12 3/rnd. 
Devotions 
Absorb Disease, p. 53 

Con “3 12 na 
Adrenalin Control, p. 54 

Con -3 B 4/rnd. 
Aging, p. 55 

Con -5 10 na 
Biofeedback, p. 55 

Con -2 6 3/rnd. 
Body Control, p. 55 

Con -4 7 5/turn 


15 yds. 
30 yds. 


Prep. A. of E. 

0 1 object, 
100 Ibs. 

0 100 sq. ft. 

0 litem, 1 15. 

0 individ. 

ዐ 10 sq. ft 

O  400sq.ft. 

0 na 

2 100 yds. 

0 83 

0 yd. 
diam. 

0 individ. 

0 litem, 
20 Ibs. 

1. 259.8. 

ዐ 1 object, 
10 Ibs. 

0 personal 

hrs. personal 

3 20-yd. rad 

ዐ personal 

0 individ 

5 personal 

0 personal 

0 individ. 

0 personal 

0 individ. 

0 personal 

0 personal 


Summary of Powers ወ 125 


Score IC MC 
Body Equilibrium, p. 55 


Con -3 2 2/rnd. 
Body Weaponry, p. 57 

Con “3 9 4/rnd. 
Catfall, p. 57 

Dex -2 - na 
Cause Decay, p. 57 

Con -2 E na 
Cell Adjustment, p. 57 

Con -3 5 up to 

20/rnd. 

Chameleon Power, p. 58 

Con -1 6 3/rnd, 
Chemical Simulation, p. 58 

Con -4 9 6/rnd. 
Displacement, p. 58 

Con -3 6 3/rnd. 
Double Pain, p. 59 

Con -3 7 na 
Ectoplasmic Form, p. 59 

Con -4 3 9/rnd. 


Enhanced Strength, p. 59 


Wis -3 varies varies 
Expansion, p. 60 

Con -2 6 1/፲80. 
Flesh Armor, p. 60 

Con “3 8 4/፲84. 
Graft Weapon, p. 60 

Con “5 10  1/rnd. 
Heightened Senses, p. 61 

Con 5 l/rnd. 
Immovability, p. 61 

Con “5 9 6/rnd. 
Lend Health, p. 62 

Con -1 4 na 
Mind Over Body, p. 62 

Wis -3 na 10/day 
Reduction, p. 62 

Con -2 varies 1/፻ቪ40. 
Share Strength, p. 63 

Con -4 6 2/rnd. 
Suspend Animation, p. 63 

Con -3 12 na 
Psychoportation 
Sciences 
Banishment, p. 64 

Int 71 30 10/rnd. 
Probability Travel, p. 64 

Int 20 8/hr. 
Summon Planar Creature, p. 66 

Int “4 45/90 na 
Teleport, p. 67 

Int 10* na 
Teleport Other, p. 68 

Int -2 20* na 
Devotions 
Astral Projection, p. 68 

Int 6 2/hr. 
Dimensional Door, p. 69 

Con -1 4 2/rnd. 
Dimension Walk, p. 69 

Con -2 8 A/turn 


touch 
touch 
0 


touch 


ዐ/!ዕህርከ 


5 ሃ65. 


unlim. 
200 yds. 
infinite 


10 yds. 


na 


S0 yds. * 


na 


126 * Summary of Powers 


A. of E. 
personal 
personal 
personal 
60 Ibs. 


individ. 


personal 
varies 
personal 
individ. 
personal 
personal 


personal 
individ. 
individ. 
personal 
individ. 
individ. 


individ. 


individ. + 


' 1 creature 


personal 


na 


Score ር MC 
Dream Travel, p. 70 

Wis -4 1/25 mi. na 
Teleport Trigger, p. 72 

Int *1 0 2/hr. 
Time Shift, p. 72 

Int 16 na 
Time/Space Anchor, p. 73 

Int 5 l/rnd. 
Telepathy 
Sciences 
Domination, p. 74 

Wis -4 contact varies 
Ejection, p. 74 

Wis —4 varies na 
Fate Link, p. 75 

Con -5 contact S/turn 


Mass Domination, p. 75 


Wis —6 contact varies 
Mindlink, p. 75 

Wis —5 contact 8/rnd. 
Mindwipe, p. 75 

Int -6 contact 8/rnd. 
Probe, p. 76 

Wis -5 contact 9/rnd. 
Psionic Blast, p. 76 

Wis -5 10 na 


Superior Invisibility, p. 78 


Int -5 contact 5/rnd./ 
creature 

Switch Personality, p. 78 

Con -4 contact na 

*30 

Tower of Iron Will, p. 79 

Wis -2 6 na 
Devotions 
Attraction, p. 79 

Wis —4 contact 8/rnd. 
Aversion, p. 79 

Wis -4 contact 8/turn 
Awe, p. 80 

Cha -2 contact 4/rnd. 
Conceal Thoughts, p. 80 

Wis 5 3/rnd. 
Contact, p. 80 

Wis varies 1/፲በ4. 
Daydream, p. 83 

Wis contact 3/rnd. 
Ego Whip, p. 83 

Wis -3 4 na 
Empathy, p. 84 

Wis contact 1/rnd, 

(or 1) 

ESP, p. 84 

Wis “4 contact 6/rnd. 


False Sensory Input, p. 84 


Int 73 contact 4/rnd. 
Id Insinuation, p. 84 
Wis —4 5 na 


200 yds. 


unlim, 


40/80/120 
yds. 


unlim. 


ወ o o o 


individ. 
personal 
individ. 


up to 5 
creatures 


individ. 
individ. 
individ. 
individ. 


personal 


individ. 


1 yd. 


individ. 


Score ዚር MC 
Identity Penetration, p. 85 

Wis “3 . contact 6/md. 
Incarnation Awareness, p. 85 


Wis “4 contact 13/rnd. 
Inflict Pain, p. 85 

Con -4 contact 2/rnd. 
Intellect Fortress, p. 86 

Wis -3 4 na 
Invincible Foes, p. 86 

Wis -3 contact S/rnd. 
Invisibility, p. 86 

Int “5 contact 2/rnd./ 

creature 

Life Detection, p. 87 

Int “2 3 3/rnd. 
Mental Barrier, p. 87 

Wis “2 3 na 
Mind Bar, p. 88 

Int “2 6 4/rnd. 
Mind Blank, p. 88 

Wis -7 0 0 
Mind Thrust, p. 88 

Wis “2 2 na 


Phobia Amplification, p. 89 
Wis —2 contact 4/rnd. 
Post-Hypnotic Suggestion, p. 89 
Int “3 contact 1/level 
or hit die 
Psychic Crush, p. 89 
Wis —4 7 na 
Psychic Impersonation, p. 90 
Wis 10 3/hr. 
Psychic Messenger, p. 90 
Con -4 4 3/rnd. 
Repugnance, p. 90 
Wis “5 contact 
Send Thoughts, p. 91 
Int “3 contact 
Sight Link, p. 91 
Con -3 contact 
Sound Link, p. 91 
Con -2 contact 
Synaptic Static, p. 91 
Int “4 15 


8/rnd. 
2/rnd. 
5/turn 
4/turn 
10/rnd. 
Taste Link, p. 92 

Con -2 contact 4/turn 
Telempathic Projection, p. 92 

Wis “2 contact 4/rnd. 


Thought Shield, p. 92 


Wis “3 1 na 
Truthear, p. 92 

Wis 4 2/፻84. 
Metapsionics 
Sciences 
Appraise, p. 93 

Int “4 14 na 
Aura Alteration, p. 93 

Wis “4 10 na 


unlim. 


touch 


Prep. 


A. of E. 
individ. 
individ. 
individ. 
3-yd rad. 
individ. 


individ. 


varies 

personal 
personal 
personal 


individ. 


individ. 


1 creature 


individ. 
personal 
1 sq. yd. 
individ. 
individ. 
individ. 
individ. 


20/50/90 
yds. 


individ. 


10-yd. 
diam 


personal 
hearing 


individ. 


Score 
Empower, p. 93 

Wis -12 varies na 
Psychic Clone, p. 94 

Wis —8 50 


IC MC 


5/rnd. 


Psychic Surgery, p. 95 


Wis -5 contact 10/turn 
Split Personality, p. 96 

Wis -5 40 — 6/rnd. 
Ultrablast, p. 96 

Wis —10 79 :0 
Devotions 
Cannibalize, p. 97 

Con 0 na 
Convergence, p. 97 

Wis 8 
Enhancement, p. 98 

Wis -3 30  8/md. 
Gird, p. 98 

Int -3 0 2X maint. 
Intensify, p. 98 

Affected 5/ 1/ጠፈ 

=3 increase 
Magnify, p. 100 

Wis —5 25 X  mag./rnd 

mag. 

Martial Trance, p. 100 

Wis -3 7 ዐ 
Prolong, p. 100 

Con -4 5 2/rnd. 
Psionic Inflation, p. 101 

Wis —5 20  3/rnd. 
Psionic Sense, p. 101 

Wis -3 4 1/rnd. 


Psychic Drain, p. 101 


Wis -6 10/person none 
* contact 
Receptacle, p. 102 
Wis -5 0 ዕ 
Retrospection, p. 103 
Wis “4 120 ከ8 
Splice, p. 103 
Int -(2 
x# 5X4 #spliced/ 
spliced) spliced rnd. 
Stasis Field, p. 104 
Con -3 20  20/rmd. or 
1/rnd. 
Wrench, p. 105 
Wis —4 15. 8/ጠፈ 


o o ወ Q 


30 yds. 


touch 


Prep. A. of E. 
0 1 item 
10 rnds. special 
10 individ. 
1 personal 
3 50 ft. rad. 
0 personal 
1  10yds 
5 personal 
0 personal 
1/increase personal 
5 personal 
1 personal 
0 personal 
1 101 ft. rad 
0  200yd 
rad. 
0 up to 
6 minds 
lrnd./ litem 
point 
10 personal 
# spliced personal 
3 max. 1 
yd. /level 
0 1 undead 


Summary of Powers * 127 


Powers Index 


A 


Absorb Disease, Psychometabolic Dev... .53 
Adrenalin Control, Psychometabolic Dev. .54 
Aging, Psychometabolic Dev. ........... 55 
All-Round Vision, Clairsentient Dev...... 33 
Animal Affinity, Psychometabolic Sci... . .50 
Animate Object, Psychokinetic Dev. ..... 42 
Animate Shadow, Psychokinetic Dev. ... . 42 


Appraise. Metapsionic Sci............... 93 
Astral Projection, Psychoportive Dev..... 68 
Attraction, Telepathic Dev. ............. 79 
Aura Alteration, Metapsionic Sci. ....... 93 
Aura Sight, Clairsentient Sci. ,.......... 28 
Aversion, Telepathic Dev. .............. 79 
Awe, Telepathic Dev. ,.......,,........ 80 
B 
Ballistic Attack, Psychokinetic Dev....... 42 
Banishment, Psychoportive Sci. ......... 64 
Biofeedback, Psychometabolic Dev....... 55 
Body Control, Psychometabolic Dev. ....55 


Body Equilibrium, Psychometabolic Dev. . .55 
Body Weaponry, Psychometabolic Dev. ..57 


c 
Cannibalize, Metapsionic Dev. .......... 97 
Catfall, Psychometabolic Dev. .......... 57 
Cause Decay, Psychometabolic Dev. ..... 57 


Cell Adjustment, Psychometabolic Dev. . .57 
Chameleon Power, Psychometabolic Dev. .58 
Chemical Simulation, 


Psychometabolic Dev. :.::55::606....... 58 
Clairaudience, Clairsentient Sci. ......... 30 
Clairvoyance, Clairsentient Sci. ......... 30 
Combat Mind, Clairsentient Dev......... 33 
Complete Healing, Psychometabolic Sci.. .50 
Conceal Thoughts, Telepathic Dev. ...... 80 
Contact, Telepathic Dev. .... 6... 2.00455 80 
Control Body, Psychokinetic Dev. ....... 43 
Control Flames, Psychokinetic Dev....... 43 
Control Light, Psychokinetic Dev. ....... 44 
Control Sound, Psychokinetic Dev. ...... 44 
Control Wind, Psychokinetic Dev. ....... 44 
Convergence, Metapsionic Dev. ......... 97 
Create Object, Psychokinetic Sci. ........ 38 
Create Sound, Psychokinetic Dev. ....... 46 
D 
Danger Sense, Clairsentient Dev. ........ 33 
Daydream, Telepathic Dev. ............. 83 
Death Field, Psychometabolic Sci. ....... 52 
Detonate, Psychokinetic Sci. ............ 38 


Dimension Walk, Psychoportive Dev. .. .. 69 
Dimensional Door, Psychoportive Dev... .69 


Disintegrate, Psychokinetic Sci. ......... 40 
Displacement, Psychometabolic Dev...... 58 
Domination, Telepathic Sci.............. 74 
Double Pain, Psychometabolic Dev. ..... 59 
Dream Travel, Psychoportive Dev........ 70 
E 
Ectoplasmic Form, Psychometabolic Dev. . .59 
Ego Whip, Telepathic Dev............... 83 
Ejection, Telepathic Sci. ................. 74 


128 * Powers Index 


Empathy, Telepathic Dev............. eni 84 
Empower, Metapsionic Sci. ............. 93 
Energy Containment, Psychometabolic Sci. 52 
Enhanced Strength, Psychometabolic Dev. .59 


Enhancement, Metapsionic Dev.......... 98 
,55፻ Telepathic Dev. ................. 1 84 
Expansion, Psychometabolic Dev. ....... 60 
F 
False Sensory Input, Telepathic Dev. ..... 84 
Fate Link, Telepathic Sci. ............... 75 
Feel Light, Clairsentient Dev.. ........... 34 
Feel Sound, Clairsentient Dev. .......... 34 
Flesh Armor, Psychometabolic Dev....... 60 
G 
Gird, Metapsionic Dev. ...ኀ::5......... 98 
Graft Weapon, Psychometabolic Dev. . . . . 60 
H 
Hear Light, Clairsentient Dev............ 34 
Heightened Senses, Psychometabolic Dev. .61 
i 
Id Insinuation, Telepathic Dev. .......... 84 
Identity Penetration, Telepathic Dev... ... 85 
Immovability, Psychometabolic Dev..... . 61 
Incarnation Awareness, Telepathic Dev. . .85 
Inertial Barrier, Psychokinetic Dev. ...... 46 
Inflict Pain, Telepathic Dev.............. 85 
Intellect Fortress, Telepathic Dev. ........ 86 
Intensify, Metapsionic Dev. ............- 98 
Invincible Foes, Telepathic Dev. ......... 86 
Invisibility, Telepathic Dev. ............. 86 
K 
Know Direction, Clairsentient Dev. ...... 34 
Know Location, Clairsentient Dev.. ...... 36 
L 
Lend Health, Psychometabolic Dev... .... 62 
Levitation, Psychokinetic Dev. .......... 47 
Life Detection, Telepathic Dev. .......... 87 
Life Draining, Psychometabolic Sci....... 52 
M 
Magnify, Metapsionic Dev. ............ 100 
Martial Trance, Metapsionic Dev........ 100 
Mass Domination, Telepathic Sci......... 75 
Mental Barrier, Telepathic Dev.......... 87 
Metamorphosis, Psychometabolic Sci. . , . .53 
Mind Bar, Telepathic Dev. .........5...... 88 
Mind Blank, Telepathic Dev. ............ Re 

Mindlink, Telepathic Sci. ............... 
Mind Over Body, Psychometabolic Dev.. $e 
Mind Thrust, Telepathic Dev. ........... = 
Mindwipe, Telepathic Sci. ....---..55++. 
Molecular Agitation, Psychokinetic Dev. . aa 
Molecular Manipulation...............- 48 
Molecular Rearrangement, 

Psychokinetic Sci... .:2... cc eee 40 

0 
Object Reading, Clairsentient Sci......... 31 


” 
Phobia Amplification, Telepathic Dev... . .89 
Poison Sense, Clairsentient Dev.......... 36 
Post-Hypnotic Suggestion, Telepathic Dev. .89 
Precognition, Clairsentient Sci........... 31 
Probability Travel, Psychoportive Sci... . . 64 
Probe, Telepathic 561.::5:.:...,.,........ 76 
Project Force, Psychokinetic Sci.. ........ 41 
Prolong, Metapsionic Dev. ...........- 100 
Psionic Blast, Telepathic Sci. ............ 76 
Psionic Inflation, Metapsionic Dev. ..... 101 
Psionic Sense, Metapsionic Dev......... 101 
Psychic Clone, Metapsionic Sci. ......... 94 
Psychic Crush, Telepathic Dev........... 89 
Psychic Drain, Metapsionic Dev. ....... 101 
Psychic Impersonation, Telepathic Dev... .90 
Psychic Messenger, Telepathic Dev. ...... 90 
Psychic Surgery, Metapsionic Sci... ...... 95 
R 
Radial Navigation, Clairsentient Dev. .... 36 
Receptacle, Metapsionic Dev. .......... 102 
Reduction, Psychometabolic Dev. ....... 62 
Repugnance, Telepathic Dev............. 90 
Retrospection, Metapsionic Dev. ....... 103 
5 
See Sound, Clairsentient Dev............ 37 
Send Thoughts, Telepathic Dev. ......... 91 
Sensitivity to Psychic Impressions, 
Ciaicentent Se... isc OOOO Nas 
Shadow-form, Psychometabolic Sci. ..... 53 
Share Strength, Psychometabolic Dev. . . .63 
Sight Link, Telepathic Dev. ............. 91 
Soften, Psychokinetic Dev. .......... ...49 
Sound Link, Telepathic Dev. ............ 91 
Spirit Sense, Clairsentient Dev........... 37 
Splice, Metapsionic Dev. .............. 103 
Split Personality, Metapsionic Sci. ....... 96 
Stasis Field, Metapsionic Dev........... 104 
Summon Planar Creature, 
Psychoportive Sci...................... 66 
Superior Invisibility, Telepathic Sci. ...... 78 
Suspend Animation, 
Psychometabolic Dev. .:::.:::::........ 63 
Switch Personality, Telepathic Sci. ....... 78 
Synaptic Static, Telepathic Dev. ......... 91 
T 
Taste Link, Telepathic Dev. ............. 92 
Telekinesis, Psychokinetic Sci............ 41 
Telempathic Projection, Telepathic Dev. ..92 
Telepathic Devotions. ........ sese 79 
Teleport Other, Psychoportive Sci........ 68 
Teleport, Psychoportive Sci. ............ 67 
Teleport Trigger, Psychoportive Dev. ..... 72 
Thought Shield, Telepathic Dev.......... 92 
Time Shift, Psychoportive Dev. ......... 72 
Time/Space Anchor, Psychoportive Dev. . .73 
Tower of Iron Will, Telepathic 5ር1........ 79 
Truthear, Telepathic Dev. ......... usse 92 
u 
Ultrablast, Metapsionic Sci.............. 96 
w 
Wrench, Metapsionic Dev.............. 105 


Advanced Dungeons{Dragons} 


Players Handbook / Rules Supplement 


The 
Complete 


Psionics 
Handbook 


Are you ready for the mind-blowing potential of the 
psyche? This handbook describes over 150 
paranormal powers—telepathy, ESP, clairvoy- 
ance, psychokinesis, biofeedback, out-of-body 
travel—plus many amazing talents never before 
revealed. The psionicist is a completely new 
character class for AD&D® games, both for 
player characters and NPCs. Explore inner space! 
Now you can really put mind over matter with 
The Complete Psionics Handbook. 


$15.00 U.S. 1-56076-054-0 


POB 756 TSR, Inc 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, Cherry Hinton 


WI 53147 Cambridge CB1 315 
U.S.A United Kingdom 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS &. DRAGONS, AD&D, and the TSR. 
17 7 logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
©1991 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the US. A. 


| TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd 
1 


o ""46563"02 


